ONE e ere
Rosey We rera ten}
ark


Peters? ia es
ek


a
reer
i


nt

Rte erates

Rita ae
SL


yb eo
ey tarekre er Si)
Rewrees t a i Lak
Nasa Fv
Pata tava vs
Ape,


sania a,
Peat aie
Bare a1} eet: 3
ake ‘
ve
< i Sie es yi if emesis bbe
ee ; AE ok
Naar
SSTERSEA ALS
ER A


BRR ti
CEE hae
A ha ts
SOA ae te debe Dh hdd Can ab
eI TINT etna dee
iW Me We ue dy ah aN aN Abd
pen y hay Ae te Nie Mey rhe he
ead te fee da ve do ty Db 8s ee De ikas he N
Me did te Be I de te th dy te By dh Bs a aS
WS ded dh We tat da dh 6 Bud tds dh tes do de
ADE ae ye aad tate dh da dh dh dah A
ae sh a diet A ne
ated ted he tbe eK be
MAK tet eat DAK ee *,
ta by He di Piya We i i te dh andy ey ay
MK ih thy aR a hts ILae ds ay Ak te As Perineal
nas ey dee de ta tnt By fs ha ALY Sent ak ah dk eth a Doe
WRG bh Dede Wee Wie nlite adn dy
Te DOr 4 ‘ no ede
ON ea a 4: PCR aa A Wan Neh ae
ny eae eieivs DD WD rere Sera hae teak ah
ERK 6d Wd de Ma dy ah be Pt nde Dy 0 dt ah AN nS Peery MONTY LSS *
Pah ee ea en. Pe ae as Dik ANN ree erates ab 2h
ea aa a a8) hana mie i Nak ACO rN See A
id bb odes x peak te dh th 1h 2A fo dh eas POOLS Ua PRONG Yat SULT TN a
dA ded ty Wino POI Ve HY ERIE CRE Fay SO in iN Ok STR eek oN
URIS iat Mi eihan htan ik by fh Doak th Pas ALA AND OT ayn Sy de Neen
RAE EAD Ls A tt Maik dant da ha dual sO MU ANAS LEY Oe
ide th te Ade AW Te Waseca it x
vy yas Wn Ka wee i eis ak Feds di Twit
CHL TAL Dh te HH, EERE OD OD AD LL, a ek Ie ae 2 WC aie
en ha ORY ny, Cee)
Yeni te Bn dh


bt kd ey eres wae
Gi RN a A BAS Dh ees de th ho
ie ie i thas Bs dn th bs aka kD Wenig)
vis We IN
Pre ye o Rite YORI
rere


ae tod Loa
TOES ia Wain Ae in
db DD MK eee RAD ER ERE A A ak as a oe Exe
Pray ee Was te dk Eee eaein hte Uy th ty fh Cav ce IS DD DD
EN EK Ot, BA i ie adi, eas nik ah es
CER ted de bh Le Tbs OMS et ah we dy a dk de de dd ty bth Thy
MIEN AA te 8 fk bd NE Wide a
RET Pe ere Te PTI

Meth tt Ter a Viv where ere re 1)

Vane aN de ah 1 dds A
wee WDD Dds be ede de Hi te db ude BN Oy De a Aa
Ra be ih hh be Pee we NIV NOR RRL oes We Dee UE IN A Dek NAN a oe

BB NN a hy i de Bete A DAD DIT tag
FE riety a tds dete De Ape a dds aS Te ly
RAR AMT OO DN
A os te DL : rf
° Aye a ey
Veneer RPL
RRL ROR IS


RA Bd
wa NRA
CTA te Ad He He sh dh
CMe Ade OE N io
ODA BAD AN Tete de
DON ie AT
Seok ye


DA LKB be Ade i
‘ vO)
Want ha Ke A it tlh 2S


nes
Te Wieiv ies
ont ais
CROAT


Oris
Fe ea an dh Ue ae\ fo ode Pate de AN AY Sebi oy
PO Nia ck th Mh th dads D2 AON UN Twierarel
ie AO NTS WEA IN a LAN AD
NARADA DAA BANS VEAP OY RLEL aba
OA ns ae iN o. Pare Tae Cee LY
Wve Ana KAD
Sy aka
Pe Ve WL LS


Sah be dea dade Be Ah A A
Te eee
ead A dy
Os ry reyes
et dy RU Be dh fe Bd ds
ee IE wt ee ER aad Li Kah Teds Ae Me Ss
Bt be hd Bo ee ah ah dad Le tN oe Mh DTA MATE aly
Me he hh Eee te de fe th 2 da Li Mh dM Da aN Eg aa Oo
RRS Diy OES IO PERT SOR TLS IR Ra Nye Sued th Dads ak Ah ate Ah AN Ly
iy rere Ra Hea a a fs dh a atin ay Za de levi de Za de BN LEER GL 1 ih
eS aN de Un is NB by Bed de Hh ae ik dah th dated Ms Lh fh
rs Ta did dea Sa Aa ds He tell SM, WA as ahh
Md te , ean Ah eth te ee TL
anaes Me ah a te A PI be Uh rk a “ awh a db ak rw
Ne RL KD de Md PRN aS SAN ROA
ate Wee ae 9 Y Reet
SP Tary Wie Wwe ees
BAA nh vk Th eA tau ah Ae
oe NA de 0h AAAS
Ey fate tatty
ten aha Pht Te dh ah AN ssh ALOE TN IND
Si rkuk ih dh


“th dads dab ds 8


ak 4h
Oa tA Uh ln he te By dB AS
ne ht teks Me de th Sah Ae
CEG i bh CN ete a th dite te te Bs dy AD,
MN il ua tds dhe hy OA AMS B
ak wh the He a db
NEY WLS eS ak ade


ie
See tO 0 bok
Len ih Re OND ty
hd, MK alah hh Any
Oia eias at nn KAA AUD (enn hk tew
ena ene eee ai dts by th sd O25 0 04 th tt OAD IN HO 1 8,
aes ne ah yaw See run acacia MDE ALN Re
Rd bb hth pede dB. 3 SN Rs tata eth te date WMV Hf ny ST A iy rh ck sha A
Bee eh Weds fate Ss bs OTA OU ey aie BEN tian a ch NN He The A ‘ate Na ia ak
SLA ae ty Was tale Be te cen Nun Kaas OHO ni ie Sn URE RNS ae)
A Flite ae Wk th Ih J th di dh Ah a A Bh “ iat a ak Te Weve hak Th Oh "
Al iia tele fd A td dh nh aK, Mee eG snd aK Ye nek a Oh eke
Calta tak an as te th KM, dh ds BAO Oe lacie ty Th tags Se nn Aah A WA RN NN tN na shh aN TNR ONAN ee
Tela BD th fi LB Be DN OR LO, Men clita tad tity an ns That ie A a DEIN SAN NaCl aG uy tu i eee tn rece ahah AIRC AN A antenna Rk ak
MN 1 aD We ae a A 6B Een an hs ta ty te AG A Ocak Mh fe tka ig aa ch viento ah dail an ac bok Re RRO SN
eae es Le eile ati th th A BN AA Malas eas a ah y paraiess ere saat ny oak BA
ete aan Ne LN ay tt da fh ah BAS A BAI 8 n peeOy, ‘i SNC irc ob ou oka ih
Pe ae Ie NEWLY MORONS Me en ih a fh A DAN TL Sa Yasin va th NY a) et ak aah ek sk
. CA Ne eee Yee hata Bil A ieee hits id “hes do 2 saath A rae t
Cees te ty 1 hs OR AN Oe eg ete at Bide oy ye li als a ede nwt ners Parra) * : <
eee MRM Th de ta Lad adh TAN a Bh PN Ua elt ae int Teh LINES IA, AED A Se itis sh view ak
eA kita ds Mah kil Salida Re ti dad ee nth ts RNA BBN nYss NAS maw ik
a a a See RNS CA eth Ailey aa fiih fede feds fe LL A Ie Re tA Na KL RN ee
ee At i atte te I sil Me A Oe Ne sei ae ied ‘ud aa fh ea Wray ee ATCA A aes
ee tiated ay te STS Se ta 2 in AEA SIRS
ena ae tn iil edb Bete Ona NU A a ne ian A weak fe
OO RAR NII RL BALD Ne iin aah Ni Dil in dai 0 Ke te DS POY VAL STEN
Te ee asa th a be th dh th RS, SOR UE Tony Te ay Re NIN TI ara harO nw Te ae SER An ak teh DA th ATA AA
ip A ted AN a de Sete EN Oa Rn a etary te ea AOL ERS ara Eee Oe Nr RNA
PY AS ee ine A eae aa att etal a NOAA Sie Neila uth ta ot Ay We ay ea CAA
eee ae ted 8B dhe tate te hed fea ek ite Nk eh Da AN MC ak dusk ak fase am ANIC moh
CPRER ADL DOK Be, Pein is RAD ae MAS eet De Ta Ad th Tesh Tait IN Se HAN
carve Tes i neh i Kas to 5 TN Cake Ase ANA hah SY a
NOR La SES OUI a th ak NAN SORA IRA HS ah tN i na hi Te ek BAL I NAA
oe: 5 a Cen ata an Aa A 6 ny, nae ae ree,
ante kta de A Stain nak TN
AA
COC


pea ak


ayes


|


|


|


ve
REET RE
oe es
Maan ne
Aa,
Py wae Te wT ORG AN
ith eh fot tt deh Pa WTY IW SECIS
RADDA OK BAD Af Shah At AA
wry are ihn KAW A we yviw a
PN eee RIC Kn eh AD NN ae ICI Te fH aN te
Wine tA Cnn Ot aa as Ih A de Th Dh DA OIA
* Paar ts x AA te ad ty
. ong LAA
a AA te Pure wre
" “sk ah oo AA 3k
ne e
eee ees
‘ Rane Wee PCRS
ten


Vie we ae)
NE heh De

ras
Onn
LEE


|


SOREN aa


ll


|


ids ‘
NG a a
ae Ka 6K 4
as Chik 2s 4)
yea rear
REBORN ADEE
PY ION


if


|


Oa ae he tits Ds by Kd de

Re. ey eee RN
Ne Ea ta ha ta bs be Ste Be Ai he D, RK &

en te ef Bh de Oy be yey)

Tey Rat Ren has > aN es

a tn, ory Vw 8

Me ds A Rie AA AK

nie erat bce

Nea ear a ROSE LS

‘ age eel ead TE ORY


Per
ee INS
a wae ees


NU


|


WR ANA N 4


|


Mat tre Ce CR
Raa wy. Oe WT SS
Reeder ert wi eee oa
yA ae feed abeAThaa gE
wa


fa ho AC





<3)


The Library


of the
School of Theology
at Claremont


1325 North College Avenue
Claremont, CA 91711














THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


BOOK OF LAMENTATIONS


THE PREACHER'S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


OLD TESTAMENT


ON AN ORIGINAL PLAN


WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES,
INDEXES, ETC., ETC.


By VARIOUS AUTHORS


In Tweniy-One Volumes





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


Pie tha a


a A HOMILETIC
~ COMMENTARY


ON THE BOOK OF .


LAMENTATIONS


BY THE
REV. GEO. BARLOW


Author of ‘“‘Homiletic Commentary on the Books of Kings,’’ etc.





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


Printed in the United States





PREFACE.


PREACHERS appear to have shunned the Boox or Lamentations, as if it lacked
suggestiveness for homiletic purposes; and there are comparatively few sermons
based on texts selected from this portion of Holy Writ. It may be that the
undertone of melancholy, that runs so sadly through the five elegies of which the
book is composed, has created the impression that the theme is too monotonous
to admit of the freshness and variety expected from the pulpit of the present day.
A little patient study of the book in detail will correct that impression. The
predominating subject is indeed a story of desolation and sorrow; but it is told
with a marveilous versatility of poetic imagery and with exquisite pathos.

The Lamentations are more than the lamentations of Jeremiah—more than the
lamentations of the Jews, who were the immediate and principal sufferers in the
disasters narrated: they are typical of a sorrow that is as universal as humanity.
Individuals or nations, brooding over conscious unfaithfulness and sin, and
smitten with the conviction that the misery in which they are whelmed is the
just and bitter fruit of their own reckless disobedience, will find in the Lamenta-
tions, as they cannot elsewhere, the most appropriate words in which to voice
their grief. We cannot conceive of any possible phase of human misery that
may not be fittingly expressed in some portion of this remarkable book, and that
will not find some relief in being thus expressed. Trouble fills a large space in
our experience of life, and the homilete will find in the study of this tragic poem
the many varied forms in which the sufferer may give utterance to his distress,
whether in an individual or a collective capacity.

This Commentary contains 161 outlines, brief or more extended, of which 136
are original: the remaining 25 bear the names of their respective authors.

The comprehensive and lncid IntRopuction to this work is written by the Rev.
D. G. Wart, M.A. The Lxegetical Notes at the head of each chapter are also
supplied by the same writer, and will be found not only a faithful exposition of
the text, but also, if studied in connection with each homiletic paragraph, a
suggestive help to the thoughtful sermoniser.

Great care has been exercised in the selection of the 262 InLusTrations, and
it is believed that these will be regarded as not the least valuable feature in the
Commentary. .

The Book or Lamentations is not the poem of despair. There is nothing more
dismally depressing than the monotone of unmitigated grief. Throughout the
eloquent wail of the Poet-Prophet the spiritualised ear detects the recurring notes
of a growing hope—timidly expressed at first, but gradually gaining strength and
confidence. The darkest period is not without shimmerings of coming light.
The morning of rescue dawns: despair gives place to hope, and defeat is followed


with the joy of triumph.
GEO. BARLOW.


Kernpat, July 1891.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


ON


THE LAMENTATIONS.


INTRODUCTION.


Namoe.—All literatures—Hebrew, English, and the rest—bear witness to the
forces with which sorrowful emotions press for utterance. Hence comes the ancient
and widespread custom of making public recognition of the decease of famous or
beloved persons ; of the disasters of cities and countries. Speeches or orations
more or less eloquent, poems more or less deep-toned, are handed along the cen-
turies, and remind the readers that man’s state in every land is shadowed by
clouds of dark and mournful hue. The Hebrew people were exposed to many
such sad and sunless times, perhaps more awful than have overtaken any other
people, and the ‘“‘almost unalloyed expression of unrestrained anguish and utter
inconsolable desolation” given by this book may be taken as proof thereof. No
wonder that it is commonly called “The Lamentations.” It is not classified in
ordinary Hebrew Bibles by this term. There it is denominated Aicah, the
Hebrew equivalent to ‘‘ How,” which is the first word of the book. Rabbinical
writers have styled it Qinoth. That is the word which denotes the ode com-
posed by David on the death of Saul and Jonathan (2 Sam. i. 17), as also similar
compositions elsewhere in the Old Testament. It is also employed in 2 Chron,
xxxv. 25, where itis recorded, And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah; and all the
singing men and singing women spake of Josiah in their lamentations (qinoth)
unto this day ; and they made them an ordinance in Israel: and, behold they are
written in the lamentations (qinoth). Some expositors hold that the five elegies
collected in this book are those lamentations on Josiah’s death. Others, seeing
the unlikelihood of this, aver that the fourth chapter is identical with the dirges
of Jeremiah. Against this stands the fact that that event, instead of being the
refrain of the elegy, receives but the slightest allusion, if it is an allusion at all
(chap. iv. 20). It seems more reasonable to suppose that the lamentations of the
prophet and singers over Josiah’s death have not been transmitted to us, as othe
portions of ancient Hebrew literature have not. For, assuredly, the references o
this elegiac collection are to casualties far more painful and depressing than thi
removal of the noblest of kings, and truly fit to give the name to this book during
succeeding centuries.

Form.—The book is poetical and unusually technical in its framework. In
other Biblical poetical books the usual division into chapters and verses is not
always made according to the structure, and sometimes even breaks into the sense of
apassage. In Lamentations there are no untoward separations. Its five chapters
are five distinct odes or elegies, and each ode is divided into twenty-two parts

] 4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





regulated by the number of letters in the Hebrew alphabet, the verses of the first
four chapters following, on the whole, the order of the alphabet. Thus :—

Chap. i. Each verse, while beginning with a word which has a letter of the
alphabet in its grammatical order, is constituted of three double clauses.

Chap. ii. Constructed similarly to chap i., except that the letter seventeenth in —
the normal order is placed before the sixteenth—a course which is kept up in the
two succeeding chapters,

Chap. iii. Differs from the two preceding in having three double clauses, each
of which is made a verse in our English versions, beginning with the same letter
of the alphabet.

Chap. iv. Takes a structure-like that of chap. ii., with the exception of having
only two doubls clauses in every verse.

Chap. v. Is divided as the others into twenty-two verses, but the verses do not
put their initial words in the order of the alphabet.

No satisfactory explanation has been suggested for the variation of the order of
the alphabet in chapters ii., iii, and iv. Difference from that order is found also
in Psalms xxxiv. and exlv.

The technicality or artificiality of the form is plain. And it is as plain that it
would be next to impossible to present that formal structure in a translation, and
at the same time do justice to the original. Merely as an illustration of the form
of the book, the first two verses of chapter iii. are appended :—


1, Affliction, by the rod of His wrath, I am the man that hath seen.
And He hath led me, caused me to walk in darkness, not in light,
Against me surely He turneth His hand, again and again all the dag,


9. Broken my bones hath He, and made old my flesh and skin.
Builded against me hath He, and compassed me with gall and travail.
By dark places hath He made me to dwell, as those that have been ever dead.


Certain suggestions made to account for this technical form are hardly %o be
entertained, ¢.g., that it is a sign of a simulated grief: a product of later and de-
generated taste or of a declining art: the resource of a poet who is inferior in
spiritual feeling : a means of joining in sentences thoughts which are only loosely
related to each other. Is it not rather the token that a grief, which had benumbed
the faculty of expression, has passed the emotional stage and begins to traverse
the reflective? There, in the effort to express itself in a peculiar form, it finds a
counteractive to its masterful depression. Why should we ascribe this to unreal
emotion, or to decadence of art, or to inferiority of faculty, any more than we
should ascribe the peculiar form of “In Memoriam” t) either of these influences!
May not the intensest feelings find utterance in an elegy which employs the order
of an alphabet in the beginning of its lines, as well as in an ode of Horace which
uses long and short syllables in unvarying succession, or as in a sonnet of
Shakspere employing words of the same sound at the end of certain lines{
Surely.a deep sorrow can find a distraction in putting its phases into special.
verbal form, whether that form shows itself at the end of lines, as in English, or
all through the lines, as in Latin, or at the beginning of lines, as in this and other
specimens of Hebrew literature. ‘Tersely and vividly, thought after thought
shaped itself round each letter of the alphabet im order, while in the effort the .
writer found relief for his anguish.” Se

Contents.—The Jewish historian Josephus makes the statement that “Jeremiah —
composed a dirge for Josiah’s funeral, which remains unto this day.” Does this
prove that he identified that dirge with this series of dirges? It is, to say the
least, doubtful. If it is a valid proof, there can be little hesitation in regarding
sosephus as mistaken. Each chapter of the Lamentations might be adduced in
evidence that it was penned under the pressure of grief, not for a deceased
sovereign, but for a prostrated kingdom—for an utterly ruined metropolis; for tne

2


_ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.








covenant peopie disgraced, outraged, captives, in despair, Again and again are tue
wretched conditions sketched in the most sombre colours, and, to the eyes of a
‘distant age, with a sort of monotony tending to irksomeness, For “sorrow is
distasteful to those who are not suffering it,” A cursory giance at the several
chapters is all that is needed here.

In the first the lamentation is chiefly over the desolated city, and the people
plundered, starved, and carried into captivity amid the taunts and brutality of
the enemy.

In the second it is the wrath of Jehovah, taking vengeance upon the persistent
sins of His people, which is depicted. Herein the sweeping away of means of
worship, the terrible anguish of men and women, mothers and their little children,
the hopelessness of all human effort, and the imperious need of pleading the mercy
of the Lord, are pourtrayed.

In the third the form of the subject-matter is diverse from that of the other
chapters. A thoughtful reader will notice a characteristic feature, the bearing of
which he will desire to understand. It is that the writer seems to speak largely
of his own personal experiences, occasionally sinking his own under those of others.
He begins with the outburst, J am the man that has seen affliction by the rod oy
His wrath, and continues in the same manner to the verge of despair. Then, as
in a more illustrious case, he realises that when he is weak he is really strong,
and for a moment there is hope, and a vision of a wider area: It ts of the Lord’s
mercies that we are not consumed. His own case is again referred to (ver. 24),
only, however, as a momentary step towards embracing the Israel of God who
trust on Him (vers. 25-39). Here the impersonal is left, and again (vers. 40-47)
the associated community makes known its aims and hardships: Let us search
and try our ways. Once more, to the end of the chapter, it is the individual who
laments and implores recompense. How is this interchange of persons to be
accounted for, here as also in certain portions of other poetical parts of the Scrip-
tures? Assuredly by the supposition that the consciousness of the writer testifies
to him that his sufferings are representative of his nation’s sufferings, or, as Cheyne
says, ‘of those of the pious believers who formed the kernel of the Israelitish
people.” Accepting this representativeness, we perceive why the expressions of
sadness and dismay are such as go beyond mere individual experience, or are such
as can be predicted only of an individual who felt as if the whole burden of the
tribulation was laid upon himself. It is ever thus with hearts that are sensitive
to the visitations of trouble which they share in common with others, and it
becomes hard to distinguish the personal from the collective sorrows and pains.

In the fourth gruesome details of the calamities which had overtaken all classes
—matrons and young children, princes and nobles, prophets and priests—are ont
lined : outlines which show the hand of an eyewitness. It concludes with ar
appeal to and a denunciation of Edom, the age-long, bitter adversary of Judah.

The jifth begins with a prayer, and then proceeds to draw up something like
a list of the errors and outrages which had characterised the national history.
It closes with a hesitating call upon Jehovah to turn the people to Himself and
restore their ancient glory.

From such a view of the contents Keil suggests one may “readily perceive in
these poems a well-cogitated plan in the treatment of the material common to the
whole, and a distinct progress in the execution of this plan.” This may be open
to donbts. If earlier expositors failed to affix the contents of the different elegies
to the different leading features of the Chaldean invasion—the siege, the capture,
the desolation of the Temple, city, and land—the attempt of Keil, or any other,
also fails to make clear a definite plan and progression moulding the whole.
Whatever be the connection of one chapter with another, it is the connection of
a common subject rather than a connection formed by the order of thought.
Besides that there seems no other clue needed to thread our way. The tees


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


rr


must be the exposition of separate poems; at any rate not of a drama with five
acts, as the imagination of Ewald makes out the contents to form. i

In contrast with opinions already referred to, regarding the poetical vigour of
this book, that of one who cannot be ranked as a poor judge of poetry—the late
Dean of St. Paul’s, Milman—may be cited. In his “History of the Jews” he.
gays, “Never was ruined city lamented in lar guage so exquisitely pathetic.
Jerusalem is, as it were, personified, and bewailal with the passionate sorrow of
private and domestic attachment. While the more general pictures .. . are
successively drawn with all the life and reality of an eyewitness.” It may be
interesting to present a specimen of the manner iu which the Dean translates the
original (from chap. v.).


“ Remember, Lord, what hath befallea,
Look down on our reproach :
Our heritage is given to strangers,
Our home to foreigners,
Our water have we drank for money ;
Our fuel hath its price,


Princes were hung up by the hand,
and age had no respect.

Young men are grinding at the mill,
Boys faint ‘neath loads of wood.
The elders from the gate have ceazed,
The young men trom their music.


The crown is fallen from our head,
Woe! woe! that we have sinned.
*Tia therefore that our hearts are faimé,
Therefore our eyes are dim,
For Zion’s mountain desolate 3

Foxes walk on it.”


Author.—The name of no author is attached to the book, or to any of its
separate elegies. In Hebrew MSS. and Bibles the book generally appears in the
third division of the canonical books of the Old Testament called K’thubim,
between Ruth and Ecclesiastes. This is no criterion as to its authorship; for
“the Lamentations, as being lyrical poetry, are classed, not with prophecies, but
with the Psalms and Proverbs,” according to the understood arrangement of the
eanon by the Jews. It is an old and concurrent tradition to name the prophet

Jeremiah as the sole author. This tradition is formulated by the Septuagint
translator. He prefaces the book with words which are not found in any extant
Hebrew MS., And tt came to pass, after Israel had been carried captive and Jeru-
salem was desolated, Jeremiah sat weeping, and lamented with this lamentation over
Jerusalem and said, How, &c. Whatever be the historical worth of this state-
ment, the ascription to Jeremiah is backed up by Josephus and the Talmudical
writers. Such testimonies have been accepted by subsequent students until a
comparatively recent period. Indeed, it is only within the present century that
anything like material objections have been made to the traditional belief. The
gravity of these objections may be measured by the consideration that it is prin-
cipally derived from the words and style of the poems. And the operations of
such attempts are far from uniform. ‘The absence of certain specific Jere-
mianic peculiarities,” which Schrader adduces, is counterbalanced by his own
acknowledgment of its affinity in contents, spirit, tone, and language with Jere-
miah’s prophecies. Keil represents Naegelsbach, in Lange’s series, as having,
“with the help of the concordance, prepared a table of those words and forms of
words found in Lamentations, but not occurring in the prophecies of Jeremiah,”
and so concluding against the authorship of the prophet. On the other hand, Dr.
Hornblower, translator of Naegelsbach, and Keil present the evidence of passagea


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





in contradiction of Naegelsbach’s conclusion. Attributing the book to Ezekiel
may be looked on as an exhibition of ingenuity and not of convincing effect.
Besides this, there is extreme diversity of opinion regarding the composition of the
separate odes, Ewald maintains that “every competent judge will ascribe [these
five sac to only one poet.” Thenius assures us that chaps. ii. and iv. are
“undeniably from Jeremiah,” chaps. i. and iii. from some unknown resident in
Judea, and chap. v. from the leader of a band of wanderers seeking an asylum.
Cheyne is sure that the first, second, and fourth chapters are not the productions
of Jeremiah ; that the third chapter is by a different author from these, probably
by one who was acquainted with Jeremiah’s prophecies; and the fifth chapter
“very certainly not by the author of any of the foregoing Lamentations,” though
he regards it as probable that “Jeremiah was the favourite book of these poets
{next to the Psalter, so far as this book was in existence).’’

To pronouncements on such precarious evidence there can be but one fair atti-
tude—that of suspense, until more definite contingents than those represented by
words and style are forthcoming. For this sort of evidence is by no means con-
clusivé either for or against the genuineness of any writings. It may or may not
be important, as it is related to other conditions. It may betoken different
authors, or it may be the same author in altered circumstances of thought and
life. His age, new events, the limitations of his subject, his purpose in writing
—each one of these will be a modifying element in his choice and allocation of
words. It is therefore unwise and hazardous to assert positively whether Jere-
mish was the author or not, unless we can decide, approximately at any rate, how
he and his style would be affected by the points just referred to. This has not
been done, and, until something of this kind is done, the tradition that Jeremiah
is the author of all or chief part of the Lamentations is entitled to preference. It
is indeed little matter who the writer or writers might be when they are moved
by the Spirit of God.

There is one topic yet unnoticed which may be a difficulty in the way of accept-
ing the traditional belief, and it is raised by that artificial form of the Lamenta-
tions already described. Could that form have been given them so close to the
occurrence of the fearful calamities as Jeremiah must have been? Could he,
with his intense sensitiveness to the sins and miseries of his fellow-countrymen,
have sat, as tradition reports, among the ruinous heaps of Jerusalem, and, in sight
of the fiery ordeal through which his ill-treated people were passing, busied
himself with the technicalities of poetic art? Must not the condition for the
composition of such poems be not that of perturbation but of reflectiveness? Are
not the mitigations of time requisite, has not the emotion already parted with
its overwhelming vehemence, before downcast men will care to express their grief
in peculiar forms$ ‘We are recovering from love or grief or any other passion
when we are able to rhyme on it with elegance” (Daly News, in review of
“Poems of Afghanistan”). This may be true; but there is another view. In
poignant trouble a short time may appear long, and the words, Wherefore dost
thou forsake us so long time? (ch. v. 20), are not so decisive as to settle the
question whether a longer or shorter period had intervened between the desolation
of Jerusalem and the production of the elegies, ‘We should count time by
heart-throbs.” In reference to this Cheyne quotes from “The Dream of
Gerontius ” :—

ss, , . time is not a common property ;
But what is long is short, and swift is slow,
And near is distant as received and grasped


By this mind and by that, and every one
Is standard of his own chronology.”


Thus the element of time brings no ingredient to solve the riddle of authorship.
It cannot eliminate the claim of Jeremiah. He could have written the five poems
3


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : LAMENTATIONS.








so far as his intense sorrow was concerned. There is much force in a remark
made by Riehm: “In lyric poetry proper the employment of this artificial form
is naturally and intrinsically justified only when a single fundamental strain, tha*
fills the whole soul of the poet,—deep, strong, and sustained—seeks to die away
in many different forms of chords.”

Date.—There is no chronological record as to the time of composition except
that which is involved in the fact that the awfulness of the desolation was fresh
in the writer's mind. And if he was not Jeremiah, he, or they who wrote, may be
supposed to have written under the impulse of ‘a great lyric movement,” which
Ewald conceives took place ‘among the conquered Jews, as well those in Babylon
as those who remained in their much-loved home.” And he believes the Lamen-
tations came into their existing form coincident with that movement. But beyond
all such considerations it is to be remembered that the thought which the writer
or writers wanted to present was in no sense dependent on a date.

The structure and contents of the Lamentations are seen to be unique. No one
of the collection of documents containing record of the unfolding of God’s will to
His servants during centuries can be compared with it. It makes infinitesimal
additions to history, and contributes next to nothing to dogmatics. It is at the
apex of the literature of sorrow, and reverberates with the thought that sins against
the living holy Lord bring condign punishment. The diverse peculiarities suggest
two questions which are not irrelevant, and may be considered briefly.

1. Why should a composition, so obviously technical, be a factor in the revela-
tion of God and His will? Or it may be put thus, Why should holy men of God,
moved by the Holy Spirit, trammel or order their emotions by the demands of an
alphabet and metre? It was an old Greek and Roman belief that, ‘“‘ When the
gods spoke they spoke in verse” (Hatch). Why should not the only true God
make use of men who were born poets? If the susceptibility to, and expression
in poetic forms be an endowment He has bestowed; if there are abounding
materials in nature and the life of humanity fitted for such forms; if the rudest
tribes and the most cultured nations appreciate them, as affecting the mind for
good and evil, for pleasure and pain, is it to be credited that He who made all
these capacities will refuse to employ them as a vehicle for the transmission of the
sublime truths of eternal righteousness and love? Surely the presentation of tb
data requisite to poetic form will solve the question propounded,

Moreover, poetry, with its measured rhythm, is more likely to be remembered
than prosaic expression. With reference especially to the Jewish people it has
been said, “The obvious advantages of the poetic style and of a metrical struc-
ture are—the adaptation of both to the tastes and culture of the people; and
especially the adaptation of the latter to the purpose of storing those compositions
in the memory from infancy upward. Thus it was that the minds of this—indeed
favoured though afflicted—people were richly furnished with religious and moral
sentiments, and thus was meditative thought nourished and suggested and
directed, and was made conducive to the momentous purposes of the individual
and of the domestic spiritual life. Too little do we now take account, in our
Biblical readings and criticisms, of this deep-going purpose of Hebrew poetic
Scriptures which, through centuries of national weal and woe, have nourished
millions on millions of souls ‘ unto life eternal.’” (Isaac Taylor.)

2. Cheyne remarks, “ We cannot fail to see in this short elegaic book that
peculiar quality which, in all its degrees of manifestation, the Jewish Doctors
agree with us in describing as inspiration.” Granted. But are not inspiration and
the limitations of an alphabet and definite numbers mutually exclusive, or restrictive
at least? Was the soul of an inspired man but “ as a flute through which the
breath of God flowed in Divine music”? Or had that soul power over itself, and,
as a boat whose sails are filled with a breeze, could take any course except dead
egainst the breath of God? Various solutions of the perplexity have been

6


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY » LAMENTATIONS.
TD
attempted, but no one altogether satisfactory has been formulated, and the dis
cussions still carried on prove that the premises for sufficient conclusions are yet
unsettled. It would help to the acauisition of such premises if, on all sides,
preconceived ideas of inspiration were resolutely thrown off, and the somewhat
obscure indications in the Bible itself were cleared up and harmonised so far as
could be. How did the Lord speak to men of old? How was it that a prophet
could know that it was His word which was in his heart, as it were a burning fire
shut up in his bones? What is it to speak from God, being moved by the Holy
Spirit? What are the criteria of being im the Spirit? Such inquiries suggest
further questions. Was the realm of inspiration by the Spirit of the Lord so
closely interlinked with the region of His operations in the new birth that it
could not be known whence the afflatus came or whither it went? If a prophet
was speaking in the old Church of Corinth, and one sitting by the speaker had a
revelation, what was it which enabled the others to discriminate that a fresh inspira-
tion had been vouchsafed and the first speaker was to keep silence? Is that dis-
criminating power withdrawn wholly? Are there not subtle tokens by which
a man in Christ even now may discern inspiration in himself and in another
brother? The answer to those inquiries may never be definite, there is so much
unknown, but qualified research and devout patience may be taught, as God will,
to see some undetected aspects of inspiration, even if it be impossible to embrace
in one formula all the facts. So we may need to rest contented with the truth
that to one member of the body of Christ is given the discerning of spirits in the
one Spirit, but also be convinced that there is a wider range in which he that 1s
spiritual judgeth ali the things of the Spirit of God. In that conviction we may
feel that the “quality” of inspiration is present throughout the technical con-
struction of the Lamentations, as also we can find in the form of a servant, Christ,
in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hidden.

Purport.—The elegies issue out of the preceding history of the Jewish people,
and thus stand related to other portions of the sacred Scriptures, even if the points
of contact appear to us under a haze. They are resonant with chords formed by
the claims of God, who makes judgment the line and righteousness the plummet
in His dealings with men. They signify that moral decadence is in closest alliance
with religious compromises ; that rueful calamities seize on a nation which swerves
from its normal position; that if a people favoured by God, Creator and King,
stand in the way of the knowledge of His saving health among all nations, down
that people must go, no matter what it has been in His procedure hitherto. This
result would be promoted by the repetitions of ideas and even expressions which
are frequent throughout the book. Such a feature certainly detracts from its
literary finish, but we must suppose that the author did not give heed to that.
He might have managed to improve its symmetry if he had tried. Obviously he
did not try. He had an end in view, which a finished literary form would not
have brought him to so well as the redundant form he has adopted. And, if we
dare define what his aim was, we should say that he wanted to portray an im-
pressive picture of a country, people, worship, God-forsaken because God-forsaking.
The unusual structure of the book also would tend to deepen this impression.
Thus an enduring symbol was erected of that long course of scatterings and
wanderings, of insults and oppressions, which was to be trod by the Jewish tribes.
At any rate the Great Revealer was opening up, by these outbursts of grief, some
fresh aspect of His character and purpose ; intimating that He had brought to
a further stage the discipline and development of Israel, with whom He had
entered into covenant, and wes forging a new link, into which another link in
due course would be welded, so as to extend the outstretch of that chain which
should lift the world into a wider life. Thea, when the fulness of the time came,
Jesus Christ, who searched the Scriptures, as He directed others to do, found His
sympathy stirred in unison with these Lamentations: When He saw igs He


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS,


re Oo seer





wept over tt, because its enemies should not leave one stone upon anothes, snd
because it knew not the time of its visitation.

The prophecies of Ezekiel, nota few of which must have been contemporaneous
with the publication of the Lamentations, have one ever-recurring refrain, And
they shall know that I am Jehovah. Since that was the goal towards which all
the changes of that time were leading men, and as this book pointed in the same
direction, we may have a valid presentiment that it helped towards the formation
of the new spirit which pervaded the Jews when the Lord turned again the cap-
tivity of Zion. They had voiced their laments here, their prayers in such a Psalm
as the seventy-fourth, and then followed their praise: The Lord hath done great
things for us, whereof we are glad.

Liturgical Use-—Jewish synagogues have recognised the bearing of the Lamen-
tations by appointing that they should be read on the anniversary day commemo-
rating the destruction of the first and second Temple. In the Christian Church
also their importance has been regarded. The Roman Catholic Church assigns
three portions of the book to be read as part of the ritual of each of the three last
days of Passion-week. In the German United Evangelical Church, adaptations
are made for liturgical use. In the revised Prayer Book of the Episcopal Church
of England, “portions are ordered to be read on the Monday, Tuesday, and
“Wednesday in Holy-week.” The reasons for such use of these elegies may have
peen (1) that a homeless nation and desolated city suggested the condition of
mankind far from God, and of a soul doomed to die in the bondage of sin; and
(2) that the sorrows of the representative of the suffering people suggested the
Lamb of God who bears away the sin of the world, and of whom we cannot but
think as enduring a sorrow like unto no other sorrow.

What one and another portion of the Lamentations has been for the expression
of emotion to the tried and troubled of many a country and age, none but God,
the all-knowing, can declare. Assuredly they still will be so used, even until the
Lord Jehovah shall wipe away the tears from of all faces, and the reproach of His
people shall He take away from off all the earth,


Norz.—In the translation I have generally adhered to the Revised Version
I have deviated from it where I aimed to express more literally what I consider
the representation of the Hebrew original. I offer ro apology for always using
our time-honoured word Jehovah instead of the pedantic Yahveb


D. G. W.


HOMILETIVU COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. OHAP. 1.
SS SY a Ss SSE SNS


CHAPTER 1.
THE MISERIES OF JERUSALEM.


Exxcetioat Novzs.—This elegy may be divided into two chief parta. The first, vers. 1-11,
exhibits the mournful condition of an unnamed city, overtaken by various calamities, with a
break, at vers. 9 and 11, by an ejaculatory appeal to Jehovah. The second, vers. 12-22, con-
tains a bitter complaint from the city herself, or rather from the city personifie* by a sufferer,

Vers. 1 and 2 present the city as she is in sharp contrast with what she was, ane as an object
of deep distress, on account of her sins and their penalties. The verses have a pict, vial illus-
tration in the medal struck by the Roman Emperor Titus in commemoration of the capéure of
Jerusalem (A.D. 71).

(8) Ver, 1. How, not in interrogation, but in surprise and pain. This particle is unnecessarily
inserted twice in the Authorised Version. It is not again employed in the Hebrew of the book,
except in chaps. ii. 1 and iv. 1, 2, sitteth alone, in a posture of overpowering sorrow rather than
of utter isolation, like Nehemiah, who, when he heard of the doleful state of Jerusalem, sat down
and wept and mourned (i. 4), the city = Jerusalem, as following verses prove. The fact that
the Chaldean captain left of the poor of the people, which had nothing, in the land of Judah (Jer.
xxxix, 10) suggests that a few waifs and.strays might be still hanging round the ruined city,
while the reference (chap. ii. 10) to the elders of the daughter of Zion may intimate that some
of better means were also with them; that was full of people. No known criterion exists by
which to estimate the population of ancient Jerusalem. An approximate guess even cannot be
made from the perfunctory census taken in David’s reign. She is become as a widow, forsaken
and under the reproach of widowhood, seeing that she is not in communion with the Lord, her
Maker; but still she is not quite a widow; there is to be a restoration, because for a small
moment have I forsaken thee . . . saith the Lord thy Redeemer (Isaiah liv. 6); that was great
among the nations, respected and powerful; a princess over the provinces, The dominion
centered in Jerusalein is illustrated by the letter of Artaxerxes to his subordinates, There have
been mighty kings over Jerusalem, which have ruled over all the country beyond the river; and
tribute, custom, and toll was paid unto them (Ezra iv. 20). This jurisdiction over dependent
peoples was at its height in the reigns of David and Solomon, though after them there were
also kings whose rule embraced others beside the Jews. In sad contrast she is become a
vassal, generally shown by taskwork, not so often by money-payment, and expressing entire
subservience,

(3) Ver. 2. Intense grief overwhelms her, She weeps bitterly in the night; no temporary
oblivion comes to her ; the silent hours pass with her tears on her cheeks, For her there is
no comforter among all her lovers; all her friends, or neighbours, have dealt treacherously
with her. Zhe Babylonians and all the Chaldeans, Pekod and Shoa and Koa, and all the
Assyrians with them (Ezek. xxiii, 23), were alienated from her, while Egypt, Ammon, Edom,
Moab, disowned their alliance with her: they are become her enemies, and gloat over her
downfall (2 Kings xxiv. 2).

(3) Ver. 8. Judah, the population of the whole territory, with that of Jerusalem, is taken
into exile, a subjugated, impoverished remnant being left. From affliction, the same expres-
sion occurs in Exod, iii. 17 and Ps, eviii. 4, and from much servitude, not, as might seem inti-
mated by the Authorised Version and Revised Version, that the Jews were led into captivity
because of the manumitted Hebrew servants being again subjected to bondage by their richer
brethren (v. Jer. xxxiv. 8-12); not that the Jews fled as voluntary emigrants to escape the
oppression of conquerors; but that, from the low depth of misery into which they had been
brought by the invasions and exactions of foreign powers, from monthe of faction and coercion
and famine, they were taken into the lower depth of being made captives. In Babylon, in the
centre of old world civilisati<n, with its traffic and magnificence, she has not found rest.
Nebuchadnezzar employed *-them upon those large works of irrigation and the building of
cities, for which his ambition required labourers, just where they were forced to share and con-
tribute to Babylonian life.” Zhou didst show them no mercy; upon the aged hast thew very
heavily laid thy yoke (Isa. xlviii. 6). All her pursuers have overtaken her between the
straits; they laid affliction upon her when she was already pressed in by trouble; hit her when
she was down.

(1) Ver. 4 introduces another view personifying the religious condition: not the banished
people, not the fallem city, but the dwelling-place of the Holy One of Israel is forsaken and
overthrown. The ways of Zion, not the streets in Jerusalem leading up to the Temple, but
the roads from all quarters of the land, which found their termini in the Holy hill, are
mournful, for they are entirely deserted ; being without those who go to a solemn assembly,
none come to appear before the Lord in His courts at set times, as He had enjoined His wor-
shippers to do; all her gates, which Jehovah loveth, are desolate, broken down ; no one goes
ap to or lingers about them. The Temple has lost its sanctity and is open to all intruders,
The glory has departed from it: her priests are sighing; her virgins are afflicted. ‘‘The
reason trhy the priests and the virgins are here conjoined is that lamentation is made over the


9


OHAP, I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





cessation of the religious feasts. The virgins are here considered as those who enlivened the
national festivals by playing, singing, and dancing (Ps. Ixviii. 26 ; Jer. xxxi. 18)” (Keil). And
she is in bitterness herself, as if all was lost religiously as well as politically.

(n) Ver. 5. Her adversaries are become the head, as was threatened if unfaithful to the
Lord (Deut. xxviii. 44); her enemies prosper, are in peace, and rest secure, knowing that all
resistance is over, so completely has she been crushed. This was brought about not by their
might, but because Jehovah has afflicted her for the greatness of her tramsgressions; and
the sufferings befall the most innocent also; her young children have gone captives, the most
ominous of all her disasters, driven like a band of the enslaved in Africa, before the adversary.

()) Ver. 6. She has not only been harried of her most precious and tender charges, also from
the daughter of Zion is departed all her beauty. God Himself, whose Shechinah made Zion
the perfection of beauty, nc longer shined there; no longer was there a worship of Him in the
beauty of holiness, and even her princes are become like harts that do not find pasture ;
enfeebled by the scanty diet of the close siege, they have lost vigour, and go without strength
when chased before the pursuer, so as to be easily caught. This is in evident allusion to the
flight and capture of the King and his men of war, within a few miles from Jerusalem, when it
was besieged by the Chaldean army (2 Kings xxv. 3-5).

(t) Ver. 7. Again a change of aspect is presented. Already the city ruined, the people exiled,
the holy mountain desecrated have been regarded. Now the poet gives the name of the city,
which he shrank from pronouncing before, and uses it as @ generic, all-embracing term, Jeru-
salem remembers, adding an item of pungency to her deep sufferings, in the days of her
affliction and—a probable meaning of the following word is wanderings, asin margin of Revised
Version here, In chap, iii. 19, where the same word is again employed, the margin gives outcast
state as afresh rendering, That of the Speaker’s Commentary is to be preferred—homelessness,
describing the state of the Jews cast out of their homes and driven into banishment ; all her
pleasant things which were from the days of old. By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat
down, yea, we wept when we remembered Zion. “Sorrow’s crown of sorrow is remembering
happier things.” When her peeple fell into the hand of the adversary, and there is no
helper to her; the adversaries see her, they sneer at her cessations (desolations in Revised
Version), This last Hebrew word occurs only here. Its root means to cease, and so this
derivative is applied, as by Plumptre, to “the enforced Sabbaths of untilled land, and the
Sabbaths conspicuous for the absence of any religious rites.” This seems far-fetched, except
as to the latter part, and this should be considered as but a portion of the Jewish customs
which had been discontinued. If Romans derided the Jews for cessation from work on the
seventh day of the week, Babylonians would not. They may have mocked at the faith of Israel
in the supremacy of Jehovah, seeing they regarded Him as a subjugated national deity ; but
“it was no subject of wonder to the Babylonians that the Jews celebrated a weekly day of reat,
as they had one of their own (sabbatw)’’—(Cheyne).

(Fi) Ver. 8. Jerusalem has sinned a sin, has broken the law of her God with determinate

will, and bears the natural penalty ; therefore she is become as an unclean one; not as one
who has been removed (Authorised Version) as a captive from her native place, but as one set
aside because of impurity. All who honoured her despise her, for they see her nakedness ; her
evil is laid bare; the very peoples who had respected her, and who had far less knowledge of
what was right and true than she, are now alive to the real character of her procedure, and
count it shamefully bad. Even Nebuzar-adan, captain of the Babylonian guard, could say, after
her overthrow, Because ye have sinned against Jehovah and have not obeyed His voice, therefore
this thing 18 come upon you (Jer. xl. 3). There was still a sensitiveness of conscience in the
ideal Jerusalem; Yea, she sighs and turns backward, moaning, as if couscious of spectators
and mortified by her open shame, she is fain to screen herself, “as those in such case would do
that have any shamefacedness or spark of ingenuity at all in them.”

(0) Ver, 9. Her evil is very obvious, her defilement is in her skirts, not below, but manifest
on her long flowing robe ; she remembers not her latter end; as she continued sinning, she paid
no regard to the issue of it all, and, in consequence of this want of forethought, she is come
down wonderfully, down to the lowest depth of misery, an astonishment to herself, and to all
around her; there is no comforter for her. Her conviction of sin, and shame, and sorrow
impels her to go to her God, and she cries, See, O Jehovah, my affliction, for the enemy doth
magnify himself, the appeal is supported on two bases: (1) Her humiliation; and, (2) The
arrogant pretensions of her foes ; surely with some vague hope like that of the. Psalm-writer,
Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou wilt revive me; thou shalt stretch forth thine hand
against the wrath of thine enemies, and thy right hand shall save me (cxxxviii. 7).

(9) Ver. 10, His hand the adversary stretches out upon all her pleasant things, treasures
of all sorts. thus described by Isaiah (lxiv. 11, 12), Thy holy cities are become a wilderness,
Zion is become a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation. Our holy and beautiful house, where our
fathers praised thee, is burned with fire, and all our pleasant things are laid waste. The plunder-
ing of the Temple was the most aggravating of all, for she has seen the nations enter her
sanctuary, whom thou didst command that they should not enter into thine assembly;
heathens, who were not admissible even into the congregation of the Lord—into religious com-
munion with Israel—had trod the courts which were most holy to Jewish worshippers, and


10


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; LAMENTATIONS. OHAP. I.


eee


where only priests could legitimately go, and they had pillaged the pleasant vessels of the house
of Jehovah, therewith to adorn the shrines of their idol deities,

_ (3) Ver. 11. In ver. 4 the priests sigh ; in ver. 8 Jerusalem sighs, and here one and all, hecause
in addition to the religious collapse, a terrible bodily hunger is universally felt, so all her people
are sighing, are seeking bread. This use of participles signifies that both the past and present
condition of the people is regarded by the writer. He saw that the scanty meals to which they
were reduced when beleaguered by the Chaldean army had not ended after the Temple had been
desecrated and despoiled ; they had parted and were parting with ornaments, jewellery, every
one of their valuables, merely to keep body and soul together ; they give their pleasant things
for food ; after a close siege of eighteen months, preceded by the overrunning of the country,
food-supplies must have been all but exhausted; to restore their soul, to bring back life, to
those who are drawn unto death (1 Kings xvii. 21), and spiritually to restore the soul (Ps. xix. 8).
There is bread of which if any man eat he shall live for ever, given by Him who gave His flesh
for the life of the world. Was there any undefinable longing for such bread in the following
appeal, similar to that of ver. 9, but somewhat intensified ? See, O Jehovah, and behold, for
Iam become despised! Wonld He take away her reproach? Thus a transition is made to
the lamentation and supplication of Jerusalem herself in the following half of this elegy.

Vers, 12-22. These verses form the second section of the poem. The city is represented as
complaining of its harassed condition, 12-16, and then as acknowledging her persistent sin in
sight of her righteous Lord, who will deal out justice to all transgressors, 17-22.

(5) Ver. 12. The curtness of the opening Hebrew phrase causes doubt as to its proper
explanation. Hence by some it is taken as an address to the wayfarers, and is paraphrased in
words like, ‘*I pray all you,” or “Oh, that my cry might reach all you.” By others it is taken
ag a question, and more reasonably : so they explain it by words like, “Does not my misery
come to you?” or “Do you not observe what has befallen me?” In either case it conveys a
call, as from the weeping, solitary woman, sitting on the ground, to all travellers to consider
her deplorable state, and our English Versions have caught the right tone. Is it nothing to
you, all ye passers by the way? Is there nothing in my condition to produce seriousness in
you instead of indifference or levity? Nothing to warn you? Nothing to call forth your
sympathy? Behold and see if there is sorrow like my sorrow. The feeling of a troubled
present tends to make it loom before the sufferer as if there never was the like before, which is
done to me whom Jehovah has afflicted in the day of the heat of his anger.

The ascription, in religious addresses, which has been often made of this verse to the
sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ, is far from commendable. In a very real sense His
sorrows were unparalleled, but innocent of sin though He was, He made no attempt to call
attention to Himself as peculiarly afflicted. His thought was for others’ sufferings. Weep not
for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children.

(1D) Ver. 13, Here begin references to various events which had contributed to her unequalled
sorrow. Fire, a net, sickness and a yoke are set forth. The figure presented in the last clause
of the preceding verse is now more fully traced. From on high he sent fire, Upon the wicked
He shall rain fire (Ps. xi. 6), into my bones, where pain is supposed to be most keenly felt.
She recognises that the cause, which is behind all visible causes, of her pain is in the spiritual
realm, and that in the face of the Eternal Righteousness her bones must be shrivelled up; and
it overpowered them. The next figure is, He spread a net for my feet; he turned me
back. So entangled, she could not go away and escape capture. The third figure is sickness.
He made me desolate, all the day faint. The light of her life was quenched, and she was
constantly exhausted.

(3) Ver. 14. There follows a figure from agricultural pursuits. A yoke [formed] of my
transgressions is bound by his hand. The Hebrew verb here is of uncertain meaning, and
there is no rendering preferable to that which is given. She has made thongs or cords for the
yoke with her sins; they are twisted together. Her misdoings have acted and reacted that
they are knit together, so as to constitute a thraldom which cannot be thrown off; so inter-
twined they have come up upon my neck. A consequence of this enthralment by the knotted
yoke is, it has made my strength to fail, literally to stumble, 7.¢., to stagger from the weakness
and exhaustion incident to such a fearful yoke, The yoke of transgression is hard; the yoke
of Christ is easy. The conviction is now expressed that the Divine Ruler is at work, and a new
phase rises in the lamentation. The Lord has given me into the hands [of those that are
against me]. Iam not able to stand up. She can do nothing but yield. Consciousness of
transgression paralyses body and mind. Note that it is the general, not the covenant name of
her God which she utters. This title occurs fourteen times by itself in this book, while in the
Prophecies of Jeremiah only along with the covenant name. The reason for this usage of Lord,
and of refraining from Jehovah has yet to be found. To say that the people, in their punish-
ment, felt the Lordship of the Deity more, and His covenant love to them less, is a statement
which is not confirmed by an examination of the passages in the Lamentations where each nama
is found, : é

(D) Ver. 15. Inability to resist is associated with other fatal experiences. He has set at
naught all my strong ones; not on an open battlefield, not in a struggle to hold an important
post, is it that her able-bodied men are counted for nothing before the Chaldean ee logse.


HAP, I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





they might have had, “the bubble reputation” attached to them, but not when cooped up in
the city, in the midst of me. He has convoked a solemn assembly against me; it is the
word used of the annual and other religious festivals, as in ver. 4, and intimates that to the
enemies of Jerusalem a call had been issued to gather at an appointed time and have such joy
as might be found in the ability to crush my young men, those who promised to be the
strength of the nation in the generation following. And, to make the overthrow complete, the
maidens, who had been carefully guarded from violence, the Lord has trodden as in a wine-
press the virgin daughter of Judah. The treading of the grapes in a wine-press, as illustra-
tive of the execution of divine judgment, is not unusual in the Scriptures (Isa. lxiii. 5 ; Rev.
xiv. 19), and signifies both suffering and good results from suffering rightly borme—


“Still hope and trust, it sang; the rod
Must fall, the wine-press must be trod.”


(Y) Ver. 16. Having shown by the events how terrible her sorrow could not but be, Jerusalem
reiterates her complaint with a flood of tears. Because of these things I weep; mine eye,
mine eye runs down with water, so great is her trouble and so unalleviated, for far from me
is the comforter, the restorer of my soul. My children are become desolate, and cannot
cheer me, for the enemy has prevailed.

(B) Ver. 17. The sobs of the weeper stifle her utterance. In the pause the poet himself
seems to take up the word, something like the part of the chorus in Greek tragedies, and
describes the state of the three personified objects—the Temple, the people, the city, He sees
that Zion, representing the house of prayer for all nations, stretches out her hands, as praying
in a land where no water is, but in suspense; there is no comforter for her. He sees that
Jehovah, her covenant God, has commanded concerning Jacob, representing the people whom
He chose for His heritage, that those round about him, the neighbouring nations, should be
his adversaries. He sees that Jerusalem, representing the government and national aspira-
tions, has become as an unclean one among them (ver. 8).

(¥) Ver. 18. During her pause the weeper has received new thoughts. Like the younger
son when feeding on husks, she has come to herself so far that she is ready to own the justice of
Jehovah in her sufferings. He is righteous, Jehovah, for I have disobeyed his voice, rejected
the words of His mouth. Yet she sorely wants human pity, and cries to them, Hear, I pray;
all ye peoples, and see my sorrow; the flower of her youth has gone into captivity.

(D) Ver. 19. She addresses Jehovah, and tells how her appeals to the friends of her prosperous
days have proved futile ; I called to my lovers ; they have deceived me, disappointed my hopes ;
and not only they have failed; my priests and my elders have expired in the city, where they
had been high in position, the medium between God and His worshippers, and leaders in the
state, when they sought food for themselves to restore their souls, they were starving, like
the common people in the closely invested city, and made a strenuous quest for some means to
keep themselves alive in famine,

(1) Ver. 20. Again she refers to Jehovah as to her forlornness and aggravated sin. See, 0
Jehovah, for I am in distress, and this distress is felt: (1) Internally. ‘ly bowels are troubled,
my heart is turned within me; agitation and anguish excite her, even her vital parts, as it
were, change their position, The reason therefor is not ascribed to man’s neglect and in-
humanity to her, but, (2) to her disregard of God, for, she confesses, I have grievously dis-
obeyed. The penalty she undergoes is calamitous indeed ; abroad the sword bereaveth, she
is rendered a mourner because of slaughter in the open country and in the streets; at home is
like death, as if nothing but the dead were in the houses—so overpowering was the exhaustion
from starvation and diseases. This somewhat halting explanation may be compared with the
free rendering of the Septuagint translator—at least there is no extant authority in the Hebrew
for an equivalent reading—Outside the sword made me childless as death in the house.

(w) Ver. 21. A transition is made from unfaithful friends to open enemies, and they too are
denounced. The sounds of her grief have echoed far off among persons unnamed, they have
heard that I sigh; again the refrain of this chapter is repeated, there is no comforter for me.
The frequent allusions to a personal comforter, vers. 2, 9,16, 17, 21, are worthy of consideration,
as if there was a feeling after a higher gift not yet distinctly perceived. All my enemies have
heard of my evil, and understand something of the unseen influences which produced it ; they
rejoice that thou hast done it. From Jer. xl. 2, 3, it appears that even foes recognised that
the calamitous state of the Jews proceeded from their disobedience to Jehovah, though their
joy may have been more because of her fall than for the confirmation given to the truth of the
Lord. Nevertheless, vengeance for their misdeeds was coming on. The Lord has announced
a day of judgment on the heathen as well as on Judah, and the cup of wrath shall be drunk
from ; thou bringest the day thou hast announced, and they shall become like me in suffer-
img their penalties,

(N) Ver. 22. Jerusalem further formulates the wish that the retribution due to their guilty
actions should not be put aside; Let all their evil come before thee, and do unto them as
thou hast done unto me, for all my transgressions. The first natural cry of those that are
punished in for justice allround. “If I suffer for every wrong, make every other wrongdoer

=


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. OHAP. 1,
eee


suffer equally with me!” In this desire there appears the consciousness that Jehovah must
pass judgment upon every form of sin, and rightly, for He és of purer eyes than to behold iniquity ;
and also a grim expectation of revenge, under which Edom, Moab, Babylon, &c., disappeared.
We may say that confession of her own transgressions should have been accompanied with
sympathy and pity for other sinners; but the time for that love of enemies did not arrive for
many a day. Her own sad state again moves her, For my sighs are many, and my heart ia


faint. | So Jeremiah felt (viii. 18). “With these words the sound of this lamentation dies
away.


HOMILETICS.
Grier ror a RuInep City.
(Verses 1, 2.)


There is a fine piece of statuary representing the figure of a Hebrew female in
a sitting posture, the head and shoulders slightly bent forward, the hair escaping
in disordered tresses from the neatly plaited fillets, the arms, carelessly crossed
over each other, resting helplessly in her lap, the eyes, moistened with tears, gazing
wistfully on the ground, and the face expressing in every feature the tenderest
pathos of sorrow. The whole figure seems to quiver with irrepressible emotion.
Every part is moulded with voluptuous grace, and is susceptible of the deepest
passion, but it is the passion of an inconsolable grief! The genius of the artist
has thus sought to idealise unhappy Judah weeping amid the scattered fragments
of national ruin. It is a reproduction, by the art of the nineteenth century, of
the same sad image that appeared on the well-known medal of Titus, struck to
celebrate his triumph over Jerusalem—a woman sitting weeping beneath a palm-
tree, and below is inscribed the legend Judea capta. It is startling to observe
how exactly the heathen conqueror copied the poetic description by Jeremiah of
the forlorn condition to which his beloved country was reduced. These words
describe a pathetic picture of grief for a ruined city.

I. Because of its utter desolation. ‘ How doth the city sit solitary that was
full of people” (ver. 1) There is a tradition that Jeremiah wrote these elegies in
a grotto that is still shown, situated in the face of a rocky hill on the western side
of Jerusalem ; and there is a freshness and versatility in the images employed, as
if every time he glanced at the ruins of the ill-fated city, full in his view, he was
unable to repress a new outburst of grief. He had seen Jerusalem in prosperity,
its Temple thronged with worshippers, its commerce flourishing, its people content
and joyous; but now all is changed ; the market-place is empty, the streets silent,
the princes and people in exile, and the Temple, which the Jew fondly dreamed
invulnerable, was a heap of ruins. Such desolation was unparalleled in the history
of the nation and in the experience of the prophet, and his heart was riven with
anguish, We may read about the decay of great cities without emotion ; but tc
witness the demolition of our own city is a different matter.

II. Because of the loss of its beloved chief. ‘How is she become as a
widow!” (ver. 1). A city is often described as the mother of its inhabitants, the
king as husband, the princes as children. When the king is gone, and not even
a representative is left, the city is widowed and orphaned indeed. The condition
of an Eastern widow is pitiable. Her hair is cut short, she strips off all her
ornaments, eats the coarsest food, fasts often, and is all but an outcast in the
family of her late husband. The image employed by the prophet would therefore
be painfully suggestive to the Jewish mind.

III. Because of its humiliating subjection. ‘She that was great among the
nations and princess among the provinces, how is she become tributary #” (ver. 1).
The older meaning of the word tributary refers not to a money-payment, but to
personal labour (Josh. xvi. 10). The city that ruled from the Nile to the
Euphrates is now reduced to slavery, and the few inhabitants who are left must


render bond-service to a heathen potentate. It is galling to a once proud ard
13


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





prosperous people to be thus humiliated. They who will not serve God faithfully
must be compelled to serve their enemies,

IV. Because of its being cruelly betrayed. ‘‘ Among all her lovers she hath
none to comfort her. All her friends have dealt treacherously with her; they
have become her enemies ” (ver. 2). Her allies, who made great protestations of
attachment when all was prosperous, not only forsake her when adversity comes,
but unite with her enemies in completing her destruction. It is a bitter irony of
human professions when love turns to enmity and friendship to treachery. “A
loose tooth and a fickle friend are two evils.” The sooner we are clear of them
the better; but who likes the wrench? If we lose the comfort of God, we are not
likely to find help in man. We can trust in no one if we cannot trust in God.

V. Is expressed with irresistible pathos. ‘She weepeth sore in the night,
and her tears are on her cheeks” (ver. 2). It was a fine touch of poetic genius
when the prophet selected a sorrowful woman as an emblem of a disconsolate city.
Woman is never so fascinating, so tender, so bewitchingly irresistible in com-
manding sympathy as when she is in tears! The hardest heart is melted, the
sternest enemy subdued. The sorrow of Judah was overwhelming because the
ruin was so unexpected and unparalleled. No city has been wept over like Jeru-
salem. The melancholy wail has been prolonged through the centuries, and is
reproduced to-day. The Lamentations are still read yearly by the Jews to com-
memorate the burning of the Temple. Every Friday, Israelites young and old, of
both sexes, gather at the wailing-place in Jerusalem, where a few of the old stones
of the Temple still remain in the wall, and, amid tears, recite these sad verses
and suitable psalms, as they fervently kiss the stones. On the 9th of the
month Ab, nearly our July, this dirge, composed about 600 years before Christ,
is read aloud in every synagogue over the world. Weeping is not repentance ;
but the tears of the contrite do not flow in vain. They are noted in heaven, and
God will help.

Lessons.—1. The ruin of a once prosperous city is a sad and suggestive
spectacle. 2. The miseries of others should rouse our compassion. 3. The greatest
grief finds reltef in tears.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 1. “ How doth the city sit soli-
tary that was full of people.” A popu-
lous city. 1. A busy scene of activity,


reverses of fortune. 1. The ruler
becomes the ruled. 2. The free are the
conquered. 3. Wealth exchanged for


gaiety, sin, sorrow, and complicated
experiences. 2. Produces a strange
sensation upon the belated visitor when
it is hushed in the silence of sleep.
3. Its ruin a subject of profound sorrow
and suggestive reflections to one who
has known it in the flood-tide of its
prosperity.

— ‘How has she become as a widow,
she that was great among the nations.”
Widowhood. 1. Suggestive of loss—
loss of happiness, solace, guardianship,
affection. 2. Implies loneliness, dejec-
tion, sorrow. 3. A painful experience
when contrasted with a former state of
affluence and grandeur.

— ‘‘Princes among the provinces, how
is she nesene tributary.” The strange

4


poverty. 4. Life dependent on abject
submission to those who were once our
inferiors.

Ver. 2. ‘‘She weepeth sore in the
night, and her tears are on her cheeks.”
The pathos of tears. 1. A sublime
spectacle in the ideal woman. 2. An
evidence of profound sorrow. 3. Gathers
its significance from the character of
the calamity it bewails 4. A merciful
relief to an intensely sensitive nature.

— ‘All her friends have dealt trea-
cherously with her ; they are become her
enemies.” The fickleness of human
friendships. I. Genuine friends are.
rare. They may usually be counted on
a thumb and finger ; the one is the wife
or husband, the other is the mother,


HOMILETIC COMMENTAR Y: LAMENTATIONS.


OHAP. i


eee


who is father, mother, and a great deal
more, ‘There is no folly so fanatical as
that which flings away a real friend.
II. Friends are plentiful when we do not
need their help. They depend on us
more than ever we had occasion to
depend on them. While we can help
them, their friendship is effusive and
their vows of fealty emphatic. When
our power declines, so does their attach-
ment: when our circumstances alter, so
do they. They are swallow friends,
fluttering merrily about usin the summer-
time of prosperity, but suddenly become
invisible when the winter of adversity
sets in. III. Jt 18 a sad proof of the
perversity of human nature when a friend
is transformed into an enemy. The
enmity is often the more rancorous
because of the intimacy of a former
friendship. The secrets confided in a
moment of familiarity are used against
us with a studied ingenuity of irritating
spitefulness. It is a painful shock to
an unsophisticated youth, and leaves a
wound that time cannot heal, when he
discovers for the first time the base
treachery of a pretended friend,


ItLustRaTions.—Mutual sympathy
in sorrow. When Henry VII. heard
of the sudden death of his son Prince
Arthur at Ludlow Castle in 1502, he
said, ‘‘Send some one for the Queen;
let me bear this grief with her.” She
came and did her best to comfort him.
She then retired to her own room, was
overwhelmed with sorrow, and swooned
away. It was now his turn to cheer
and comfort. On both sides it was,
“Let me bear this grief with her,” and,
“Let me bear this grief with him.”
And thus in their retreat at Green-
wich the King and Queen of England
mourned in silence for the loss of their
first-born son.

—It is the weeping cloud that
blesses the earth.

Grief useless that does not lead to
active help. We are sorry (for the
English are a kind-hearted people) for
the victims of our luxury and neglect ;
sorry for the thousands whom we iet
die every year by preventible diseases,
because we are either too busy or too


comfortable to save their lives; sorry
for the savages whom we exterminate
by no deliberate intent, but by the
mere weight of our heavy footstep ;
sorry for the thousands who are used
up yearly in certain trades in minister-
ing to our comfort, even to our very
luxuries and frivolities; sorry for the
Sheffield grinders, who go to work as
to certain death; sorry for the people
whose lower jaws decay away in lucifer-
match factories; sorry for the d?seases
of artificial flower-makers; sorry for
the boys working in glass-houses whole
days and nights on end without rest,
“labouring in the very fire, and weary-
ing themselves with weary vanity.”
We are sorry for them all, as the giant
is for the worm on which he treads.
Alas! poor worm. But the giant
must walk on. He is necessary to the
universe, and the worm is not. So we
are sorry, for half an hour, and glad too
(for we are a kind-hearted people) to
hear that charitable persons or the
Government are going to do something
towards alleviating these miseries. And
then we return, too many of us, each
to his own ambition, comforting our-
selves with the thought that we did not
make the world, and we are not re-
sponsible for it.—C. Kingsley.

The All-seeing God and the lonely.
God sees you always. There is no
moment when He does not see you,
night or day, waking or sleeping, alome
or in company. It is told of Linneus,
the famous naturalist, that he was
greatly impressed with this thought,
and that it told upon his conversation,
his writings, and his conduct. He felt
the importance of this so much, that he
wrote over the door of his study the
Latin words, Innocui vivite; Numen
ad est. ‘‘ Live innocently ; God is here!”

Christianity relieves the miseries
of great cities. Look at those noble
buildings which the generosity of our
fellow-countrymen have erected in all
our great cities. You may truly find
in them sermons in stones; sermons
for rich and poor alike. They preach
to the rich, these hospitals, that the
sick-bed levels all alike; that they are
the equals and brothers of the poor in

15


OHAP. ¥.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





the terrible liability to suffer. They
preach to the poor that they are, through
Christianity, the equals of the rich in
their means and opportunities of cure.
Whether the founders so intended or
not, these hospitals bear direct witness
for Christ. They do this, and would
do it even if—which God forbid !—
the name of Christ was never mentioned
within their walls) That may seem a
paradox, but it is none; for it is a
historic fact that hospitals are the crea-
tion of Christian times and of Christian
men. The heathen knew them not.
In the great city of ancient Rome, as
far as I have been able to discover,
there was not a single hospital, not even
a single charitable institution. Fearful
thought! A city of a million and a
half inhabitants, the centre of human
civilisation, and not an hospital there!
The Roman Dives paid his physician ;
the Roman Lazarus literally lay at his
gates full of sores, till he died the
death of the street dogs which licked
those sores, and was carried forth to be
thrust under ground awhile, till the
same dogs came to quarrel over his
bones. The misery and helplessness of
the lower classes in the great city of the
Roman Empire, till the Church of Christ
arose literally with healing in its wings,
cannot, I believe, be exaggerated.—C.
Kingsley.

— When you hear a man praising
“the good old times,” ask him how the
peasantry were then sheltered and fed.

The power of tears. A young lady
once visited a lunatic asylum, and was
led into a room where there was but
one patient, a young girl of the same
age as herself. She was standing in
the corner of the room, her face almost
touching the wall. In stony hopeless-
ness she stood. She neither looked nor
spoke, She might have been dead but


that she still stood on. It was a pathetic
sight, ‘ Will you speak to her?” asked
the doctor; “we can do nothing with
her. She has been thus for days; but
one like yourself might move her.”
The young lady stepped forward, and,
with an upward cry for Divine help,
laid her hand gently on the shoulder of
the listless form, and with tears in her
eyes spoke one sentence of yearning
sympathy and compassion. The spell
was broken. The poor patient turned,
gazed for a moment on the face of the
weeping visitor, and then burst into
tears! The doctor exclaimed, “ Thank
God, she may now be saved!” The
visitor could never recall the words she
had used; but, with the voice softened
with tears, they had done their work.
The still and cold indifference of the
patient gave way before the warmth of
a pitying heart and the magic touch of
a hand stretched out to help. The elo-
quence of tears is irresistible.

The friends of youth: Where are
they ?


**T sought you, friends of youth, in sun and
shade,
By home and hearth; but no! ye were
not there.
Where are ye gone, beloved ones, where?
I said.
I listened, and an echo answered, Where?


Then silence fell around: upon a tomb
I sat me down, dismayed at death, and
wept ;
Over my senses fell a cloud of gloom ;
They sank before the mystery, and I slept.


Islept, and then before my eyes there pressed
Faces that showed a bliss unknown before;
The loved whom I in life had once possessed
Came one by one, till all were there once
more. :


A light of nobler worlds was round their
head ;
A glow of better actions made them fair.
‘The dead are there,’ triumphantly I said ;
Triumphantly the echo answered, ‘There’ !”’
—Clive.


HOMILETICS.


THE JUDGMENT OF OPPRESSION.
(Verse 3.)


I. The oppressor is in turn oppressed.


“ Judah is gone into captivity because


of affliction and because of great servitude.” The prophet would probably have


16


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS, CHAP. &


rr,


in view the circumstances narrated in Jer. xxxiv., where the Jewish princes and
people were threatened with captivity, because, in violation of the law, they with-
drew the grant of liberty made to their servants, and reduced them to their formet
servitude, aggravated with increased exactions. It is an oft-repeated charge against
the Jews that they robbed and oppressed their own countrymen; and the day
came when they were robbed and oppressed by their powerful conquerors. It is
a cruel abuse of power when it is used to injure the helpless. Every act of wrong-
doing carries within it the germ of future recompense. The boomerang rebounds
towards the man who threw it.

II. The judgment is constant. ‘She dwelleth among the heathen; she findeth
no rest.” The endless and impossible tasks imposed on others are now allotted
to the oppressors. There is no prospect of release—they dwell among the heathen ;
no prospect of abatement—they find no rest. Judgment knows nothing of pity:
while the sinner remains obdurate, its mission is to punish. There is no change
in the punishment until there is a moral change in the offender. Divine mercy
alone can break the entail of suffering, and that can be effected only by satisfying
the claims of justice P

III. The judgment cannot be evaded by flight. ‘All her persecutors over-
took her between the straits.” Zedekiah and the princes of Judah strove to escape
from besieged Jerusalem, but the wary Chaldeans pursued and captured them
(Jer. lii. 7, 8). The people fled to the mountain passes, but they were there con-
fronted by the enemy, and flight was impossible. Like hunted deer, whichever
way they turned, they found themselves within the toils of the invaders. The
conquerors held them as in a grip of steel. The day came when the Chaldeans
were similarly helpless in the hands of a superior force. Judgment perpetually
dogs the heel of the oppressor, and every possible avenue of escape is carefully
guarded. Oppression is the attempt of an imperious will to have its own way,
and it does not answer. ‘Not thy will but mine be done,” changed Paradise into
a desert. ‘‘ Not My will but Thine be done,” changed the desert into Paradise,
and made Gethsemane the gate of glory.

Lzssons.—1. Oppression is a short-sighted policy. 2. The spoils gained by
oppression are worthless, 3. The law of retribution ts always at work,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES,


Ver. 3. “ Judah is gone into captivity
because of affliction and great servitude.”
A time of trouble. 1. Should induce
careful self-examination. 2. Should
lead us to reflect whether we have caused
trouble to others.
pentance and moral reform.

— “She dwelleth among the heathen,
she findeth no rest.’”’? The changes of
life. 1. Often bring us into the midst
of strange, unfriendly associations,
2. Interfere with growth in personal
piety. 3, Disturb the soul’s peace.

— ‘All her persecutors overtook her
between the straits.” The spirit of
persecution. 1. Instigated by hatred
to the good. 2. Is vigilant and active
in its cruel pursuits. 3. Takes advan-
tage of the helplessness of its victims.

17


8. Is a call to re-


ILLUSTRATIONS.—The oppressor pun-
ished. There is an Eastern fable that
a wicked and oppressive king was once
kissed on either shoulder by the Evil
One. Immediately there sprang there-
from two serpents, who, furious with
hunger, attacked the man and strove to
eat into his brain. The terrified king
tried to tear them away and cast them
from him, when, to his horror, he found
they had become part of himself. So
is it with those who yield to anger or
any other evil passion, The man who
tyrannises over others becomes by and
by the victim of his own tyrannical
temper, and all efforts to deliver him-
self are in vain; it has become a part
of himself. Wrong-doing carries with
it its own punishment. In its earlier

B


OHAP. L


stages we fancy it will be easy at any
time to do right; but when we try, we
are helpless.

The oppressor a selfish man.
“ He pours no cordial in the wounds of pain ;
Unlocks no prison, and unclasps no chain.
His heart is like the rock, where sun nor dew
Can rear one plant, or flower of heavenly hue.
No thought of mercy there may have its birth,
For helpless misery or suffering worth.
The end of all his life is paltry pelf,
And all his thoughts are centred on himself.
The wretch of both worlds ; for s0 mean a sum,
First starved in this, then damned in that to

come |”


A time of trouble. If God brings
us into difficulties, we may be sure He
will bring us out again; but no such
confidence should be ours if we bring
ourselves into them.

Trouble and the way out. An ex-
pedition started from Buenos Ayres to
explore the Pilcomayo River, South
America, with the view of establishing
a water communication between the
Argentine Republic and Bolivia. For
the first fortnight the explorers made
fair progress, but after that the naviga-
tion was difficult and slow, it being
necessary to construct dams across the
river below their vessel and wait till
the water accumulated sufficiently to
float it. At length they could proceed
no farther, and remained in the same
position for months. Having exhausted
all their provisions, and their efforts
at foraging proving unsuccessful, they
daily expected the arrival of a relief
party, and were daily disappointed.
When they were wasting with famine
and had given up all hope, they were
surprised one morning by hearing a
bugle blast, and knew they were saved.
Only those who have been in extremity
can realise how exquisite is the joy of
sudden and unexpected rescue.-—The
Scottish Pulpit.

The changes of life. A mill-owner
was obliged to dismiss several of his
hands. Among them was a man whose
faith and trust in God always led him
to say, “The Lord will provide.” One
day when he had eaten his last morsel
of food, and his faith was tried to the
utmost, some street-boys, opening his
door, flung in a dead raven, shouting

18


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


mockingly, “The Lord will provide”
He quietly took up the dead bird and
tenderly stroked its plumage. Suddenly
he felt something hard in the crop of
the bird, and wondering what it was,
he took a knife and opened it. To his
amazement he found there a gold chain.
He felt here was God providing for him
and his family. He went straight toa
jeweller, telling his story, and asked if
he would buy it. The jeweller saw it
to be a chain of great value, with initials
on it, and said, “If you could learn the
name of the owner, would you return
it?” “Certainly,” replied the work-
man. “ Well then,” said the jeweller,
“it belongs to your late master.” Hear-
ing that, the man set off without delay
and put the chain into his master’s
hands, who received it with great joy,
as he had on missing it accused one of
his servants of theft. Greatly struck
with his workman’s honesty, he told
him he wished him to return to his
employment, as he could not part with
so honest a man. In the most trying
changes of life it is best to do what is
right.

Persecution. A sensation was caused
in Hungary by a certain Count, a large
landed proprietor, giving orders that
thenceforth no Protestant was to be
engaged in the service of his estate, and
that Protestants already employed were
disqualified from any further promotion.
Any officials who married Protestants
were to be at once dismissed. This
high-handed procedure was the more
remarkable as religious toleration was
recognised as a supreme political and
social principle, there being already
eight different Christian denominations.
Persecution and bigotry are weeds diffi
cult to eradicate, and there is no know-
ing into what eccentric and tyrannical
forms they may develop.—The Scottish
Pulpit.

God the Helper of the persecuted.
Have faith, O you who suffer for the
noble cause, the apostles of a truth
which the world of to-day comprehends
not, warriors in the sacred fight whom
it yet stigmatises with the name of
rebels.. To-morrow victory will bless
the banner of your crusade. Walk ip


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS,


OHAP. L





faith and fear not. That which Christ
has done, humanity may do. Believe,
and you will conquer. Action is the
word of God; thought alone is but His
shadow. They who disjoin thought
and action seek to divide Deity, and
deny the Eternal unity. They who are
not ready to bear witness to their faith
with their blood are no true believers.
From your cross of sorrow and persecu-
tion proclaim the religion of the epoch.
Soon shall it receive the consecration
of faith. From our cross of misery and
persecution we men of exile, the repre-
sentatives of heart and faith of the
enslaved races, of millions of men con-
strained to silence, will respond to your
appeal, and say to our brothers, The
alliance is founded. Answer your perse-
cutors with the formula, God and the
people. They may rebel and blaspheme
against it for a while, but it will be
accepted and worshipped by the peoples.
—Mazzini.

The spirit of persecution inexorable.
A poor Anabaptist, guilty of no crime
but his fellowship with a persecuted
sect, had been condemned to death.
He had made his escape, closely pur-


sued by an officer of justice, across a
frozen lake. It was late in the winter,
and the ice had become unsound. It
trembled and cracked beneath his foot-
steps, but he reached the shore in safety
The officer was not so fortunate. The
ice gave way beneath him, and he sank
into the lake uttering a cry for succour.
There were none to hear him except the
fugitive whom he had been hunting.
Dirk Willemzoon, for so was the Ana-
baptist called, instinctively obeyed the
dictates of a generous nature, returned,
crossed the quaking and dangerous ice
at the peril of his life, extended his
hand to the enemy, and saved him
from certain death, Unfortunately for
human nature, it cannot be added that
the generosity of the action was met by
a corresponding heroism. The officer
was desirous, it is true, of avoiding the
responsibility of sacrificing the preserve
of his life, but the burgomaster of
Asperen sternly reminded him to re-
member his oath. He accordingly
arrested the fugitive, who, in the month
of May following, was burned to death
under the most lingering tortures. —
Motley’s “ Dutch Republie.”


HOMILETICS.
LAMENTATION OVER A FORSAKEN SANCTUARY.


(Verse 4.)


L Because its thoroughfares are no longer thronged with worshippers.
“The ways of Zion do mourn, because none come to the solemn feasts ; all her
gates are desolate.” Those were happy days when the roads leading up to Jeru-
salem were crowded with eager worshippers, coming to the three great annual
festivals—the Passover, Pentecost, and Feast of Tabernacles. The city was
jubilant in song, and full to overflowing with life and movement. Now the very
roads are represented as mourning, as if they missed the tread of the pilgrims’
feet; and the gates look in vain for the travellers they had so often welcomed.
“¢ All her gates are desolate.” 3

It is a dispiriting spectacle to see a closed sanctuary, with weeds and grasses
growing about the entrance; the more so when we have seen the same sanctuary
filled with delighted worshippers. When men forsake the house of God, God
forsakes it too, and it is then desolate indeed.

IL Because the office of the ministry is obsolete. “‘ Her priests sigh ”—sigh
not only for want of bread, because the offerings, which were their means of
livelihood, fail; but because their life-work is useless, because the people lapse
into ignorance and sin, because the worship of Jehovah is neglected and dis-
honoured. ‘The true minister is wholly consecrated to his sacred calling; it is


the theme of his earnest prayers, his constant study, and exercises his ren
pa)


OHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





Life to him is bereft of its holiest motive, its sweetest relish, when it is baulked
of its loftiest purpose. ‘It is time to sigh when the priests, the Lord’s ministers,
sigh.”

: III. Because the training of the young is neglected. ‘Her virgins are
afflicted.” The virgins are mentioned because they took a prominent part in all
religious festivals (Jer. xxxi. 13; Exod. xv. 20; Ps. Ixviii. 25); and therefore
special notice is taken of the educative loss to them occasioned by disused ordi-
nances. Neglect in the religious training of the young means grave peril to the
moral stamina of the community. Religion is the mightiest force in the formation
of youthful character. The men and women of the future will be what the Church
makes them in their younger years. It has been said—‘“ People fancy that we
cannot become wise without becoming old also; but in truth, as years accumulate,
it is hard to keep as wise as we were. Man becomes, in the different stages of
his life, a different being, but he cannot say that he will surely be better as he
grows onwards. In certain matters he is as likely to be right in his twentieth
as in his sixtieth year.” The young will carry with them through life the
influences for good or evil that have been brought to bear upon them in their
early days.

IV. Because the city is deprived of religious ordinances. ‘‘And she is in
bitterness.” It is a beautiful and touching conception to impersonate the metro-
polis of Judah as a disconsolate female, troubled with the evident cessation of
Divine worship and the universal neglect of religious duties. As is the Church,
so will be the city; as is the state of religion, so will be the people. The glory of
a city is gone when religious ordinances are abandoned. No Joss should be
lamented more bitterly than the loss of religion.

Lussons.—1. A closed temple anywhere 13 a pitiable sight. 2. Where religious
privileges are withdrawn the people suffer. 3. Love of worship will always crowd
the sanctuary.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 4. “Her priests sigh, her vir-
gins are afflicted.” A dispirited mini-
stry. 1. Because the sanctuary is
destroyed. 2. Because the worshippers
are scattered and uncared for. 3. Be-
cause its maintenance is withdrawn.
4. Because the joyous song of the young
is turnet to sorrow. “ Her virgins are
afflicted ” 5. Because of conscious im-
perfections and unfaithfulness.


crew. When found, only one member
of the crew was able to work. The
captain, the first mate, the steward,
and a seaman had died. Five men
were lying helpless, though still alive,
and the boatswain had gone mad from
the want of proper attention, The
“Guiding Star” was towed to Batavia,
where the survivors were placed under
medical treatment. Are there not


— “She is in bitterness.” A city in
sorrow. 1. Because its reputation is
dishonoured. 2. Because its resources
are crippled, its people dispersed, its
commerce interrupted, its institutions
destroved. 3. Because the public wor-
ship of God is abandoned. 4. Because
its future seems hopeless.


InLustRatTions. — Dead and dying
Churches. A barque on her voyage
from Hong-Kong fell in with a British
ship, the “Guiding Star,” helplessly
floating about with a fever-stricken


Churches to-day that are morally in
a similar plight—drifting hospitals,
officered with the dead and dying? It
will be a mercy if they are spiritually
rescued before they become sepulchres,
entombing the hopelessly dead.—The
Scottish Pulpit.

The true man superior to his sur-
roundings.—The scientist, while ad-
mitting the influence of geographical
surroundings in shaping the history and
character of nations, admits that nothing
would be more erroneous than to.sup-
pose that Nature alone acts in determin


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


OHAP. L


Sr eye)


ing the conditions of life and of races,
Man’s activity must be associated with
Nature. A country may be prominent
and fertile, and yet occupied by a race
of men utterly unfit to develop its re-
sources. After all, man is greater than
Nature, and it is his lofty mission to
subdue it. The energy of the Nether-
lands turned a swamp into a garden,
while their Spanish oppressors, with
inexhaustible resources in soil and
mineral, sank into decay. We are apt
to lay too much stress upon the opera-
tion of the law of environment, and to
ignore individual responsibility. Plant
within man the vital principles of Chris-
tianity, and he will soon change his en-
vironment.—The Scottish Pulpit.

Ministers not only finger-posts, but
guides. There ought to be no hiatus
between our declarations and our spiri-
tual conduct. We must not only be
finger-posts, but guides, ‘‘ Lest having
preached to others, we ourselves become
castaways.”


“The love of Christ and His Apostles twelve
He taught, but first he followed it himself.”


If we are the channels of good to our
fellows, it behoves us to clear away all
that might impede the flowing, and
defile the purity, of the stream of truth
from God.

Youth needs instruction. Narcissus,
a beautiful youth, though he would not
love them that loved him, yet after-
wards fell in love with his own shadow.
Ah! how many young men in these
days, who were once lovely and hopeful,
are now fallen in love with their own
and others’ shadows, with high, empty,
airy notions, and with strange, mon-
strous speculations, to their own dam-
nation. A youth deprived of instruc-
tion and left to his natural development
is a pitiable object, and is menaced by
many perils.

Work a remedy for misery. Nothing
is more remarkable in the Apostles than
their unbroken mental health. The
histories of religious communities are
full of instances of ecstasies and hys-
terical delusions ; but never do we find
among our Lord’s followers anything
approaching to a spiritual craze. This


health of theirs came in great measure
from their being constantly employed
about matters of which their hearts
were full. The busy man has neither
time nor inclination to nurse delusive
fancies. Hard, honest, practical work
is a panacea for many ills. Underneath
a fresco of the 13th century discovered
at Cortona, in Italy, is inscribed the
motto, Swm misero nisi tencam ligonem
—I am miserable unless I hold a spade,
—The Scottish Pulpit.
The uses of suffering.
“Through long days did Anguish,
And sad nights did Pain


Forge my shield, Endurance,
Bright and free from stain.


Doubt in misty caverns,
*Mid dark horrors sought,

Till my peerless jewel,
Faith, to me she brought,


Sorrow that I wearied
Should remain so long,
Wreathed my starry glory,

The bright crown of song.


Strife, that racked my spirit
Without hope or rest,
Left the blooming flower,
Patience, in my breast.”
—Proctor.


Love in sorrow. Always through
the darkest part of every life there runs,
though we may sometimes fail to see it,
the golden thread of love, so that even
the worst man on earth is not wholly
cut off from God, since He will, by
some means or other, eternally try to
draw him out of death into lifee We
are astounded now and then to read
that some cold-blooded murderer, some
man guilty of a hideous crime, will ask
in his last moments to see a child who
loved him devotedly, and whom he also
loved. We are astonished just because
we do not understand the untiring heart
of the Almighty Father, who in His
goodness often gives to the vilest sinner
the love of a pure-hearted woman or
child. So true is the beautiful old
Latin saying, Mergere nos patitur, sed
non submergere Christus—Christ lets
us sink, may be, but not drown.— Edna
Lyall.

A city in sorrow. In 1576 Antwerp
was stormed by the Spaniards with fire
and sword. Never was there a more

21


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





monstrous massacre, even in the blood-
stained annals of the Netherlands. In
the course of three days eight thousand
human beings were murdered. The
Spaniards seemed to cast off even the
vizard of humanity. Hell seemed
emptied of its fiends. Night fell upon
the scene before the soldiers were
masters of the city; but worse horrors
began after the contest was ended.
This army of brigands had come thither
with a definite, practical purpose, for it
was not blood thirst, nor lust, nor re-
venge which impelled them, but greedi-
ness for gold. Torture was employed


to discover hidden treasure ; and, after
all had been given, if the sum seemed
too little, the proprietors were brutally
punished for their poverty or their sup-
posed dissimulation. Women, children,
and old men were killed in countless
numbers, and still, through all this
havoc, directly over the heads of the
struggling throng, suspended in mid-air
above the din and smoke of the conflict,
there sounded, every half-quarter of
every hour, as if in gentle mockery,
from the belfry of the cathedral, the
tender and melodious chimes. —Motley’s
“ Dutch Republic.”


HOMILETICS.
Tar TANTALISING INDIFFERENCE OF THE ENEMIES OF THE CHURCH.
(Verses 5-7.)


I. They contentedly enjoy the fruits of their conquest. ‘ Her adversaries
are the chief; her enemies prosper.” Her joes have become her masters; her
enemies enjoy quiet prosperity—Geikie (ver. 5). Judea has become so utterly
crushed that her conquerors revel in their spoils without fear of resistance, or any
attempt at reprisals on the part of the vanquished. If we allow our vices to
become our masters, we have the chagrin of seeing them rioting in indulgence
while we are powerless to interpose.

IL They have no concern to know the cause of the Church’s calamities.
“For the Lord hath afflicted her for the multitude of her transgressions ” (ver. 5).
What of that? It is no concern of theirs to pry into moral causes. The in-
vaders wish to strike a blow at imperious Egypt. Judah stands in the way, and,
becoming troublesome, must be crushed. They knew not, nor did they care to
know, that they were but instruments in the hands of a Higher Power to punish a
nation for its sins. It was brought home to Judah that her disasters were pro-
voked by her manifold transgressions, and it was an aggravation of her sufferings
that her enemies were utterly regardless and apparently ignorant of all this. Had
they understood it, they might have shown more pity.

Til. They are indifferent to the sufferings they inflict. ‘Her children are
gone into captivity. Her princes have become like harts . . . without strength
before the pursuer” (vers. 5, 6). The young children are driven before the adver-
sary, not as a flock of lambs which follow the shepherd, but for sale as slaves.
The princes are hunted down to exhaustion. In the ancient sculptures nothing is
more affecting than the mournful processions so often depicted of tender women
and young children driven in gangs as captives before their heartless conquerors,
In olden times the treatment of prisoners of war was characterised by the most
brutal cruelty, They were regarded as an encumbrance, and were often butchered
wholesale to save further trouble. They were subjected to degradations from
which death would have been a merciful relief.

IV. They make no allowance for the feelings of the conquered regarding
their losses. “From the daughter of Zion all her beauty is departed. Jerusalem
remembered all her pleasant things that she had in the days of old” (vers. 6, 7),
In the midst of her distress Jerusalem remembered the happiness of former days,

22





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. OHAP. ¥.





when the Temple stood out in all the beauty of its architecture, and as the symbol
of holiest worship; when the throne was the centre of imperial power and mag-
nificence ; when the land was prosperous, and the people united and content.
Now the Temple is shattered past recognition, the most distinguished citizens are
in exile, the land is desolate, and the people plunged in misery. But all this is
nothing to her enemies; they heed not what their victims have lost; they are
more interested in what their conquests have gained.

V. They make sport of the Church’s utter discomfiture. “The adversaries
saw her, and did mock at her Sabbaths,” her calamities, her ruined circumstances
(Geihie ; Henderson). The more literal meaning is her Sabbatisms, Foreigners
ridiculed the custom of the Jews in ceasing from labour every seventh day, and
attributed their ruin to what appeared to them a strange, fanatical practice. Oh,
had those Sabbaths been as faithfully observed in spirit as they were in form,


how different would have been ‘the career of Judah |!


the scoffs of unbelievers.


The Church is familiar with


While she is true to God, they are powerless to harm.


It is when she is conscious of unfaithfulness that they begin to irritate.
Lussons.—1. It is a hard time for the Church when her enemies triumph. 2.


God 1s the refuge of the Church in time of trouble.


sufferings.


He is never indifferent to her


3. The Church should learn to make the best of prosperous times,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 5, ‘“‘Her adversaries are the
chief; her enemies prosper.” New
masters: 1. Soon make evident their
newly-acquired superiority. 2. Rule
with severity when actuated by a spirit
of enmity. 3. Enjoy without com-
punction the prosperity secured by the
ruin of others.

— “The Lord afflicted her for the
multitude of her transgressions.” Sin:
1. Is a transgression of the law of God.
2. Has a tendency to multiply itself.
3. Is a prolific source of trouble. 4.
Is punished by the Being against whom
it is committed.

Vers. 5,6. National disaster. I. In-
wolves the suffering of innocent children.
‘Her children are gone into captivity
before the enemy” (ver. 5). II.
Quenches the splendour of its reputa-
tion. ‘From the daughter of Zion all
her beauty is departed” (ver. 6). III.
Degrades and harasses its most illus-
trious rulers. ‘Her princes are be-
come like harts that find no pasture,
and they are gone without strength be-
fore the pursuer” (ver. 6).

Ver. 7. Sad memories. 1. When con-
trasting present miseries with former
joys. 2. When reflecting on the sud-
denness and completeness of our caia-
mities. 3. When mingled with the


heartless mockery of the authors of our
misfortunes,


Iu.ustrations.—Lessons from the
world’s treatment. Three men are my
friends, He that loves me, he that hates
me, and he that is indifferent to me.
Who loves me teaches me tenderness ,
who hates me teaches me caution ; who
is indifferent to me teaches me self-
reliance.

Loose talk leads to loose conduct.
Indulgence in verbal vices soon en-
courages corresponding vices in conduct.
Let any one talk about any mean or
vile practice with familiar tone, and do
you suppose, when jthe opportunity
occurs for committing the mean or vile
act, he will be as strong against it as
before? Itis by no means an unknown
thing that men of correct lives talk
themselves into sensuality, crime, and
perdition. Bad language easily runs
into bad deeds. Select any iniquity
you piease, suffer yourself to converse
in its dialect, to use its slang, to speak
in tre character of one who relishes it,
end i need not tell you how soon your
moral sense will lower down to its leve1.
Becoming intimate with it, you lose
your horror of it. To be too much with
bad men and in bad places is not only

23


OHAP. L.


——


unwholesome to man’s morality, but
unfavourable to his faith and trust in
God. It is not every man who could
live as Lot did in Sodom, and then be
fit to go out of it under God’s convoy.—
The Christian Commonwealth.

New masters: Tyranny not perma-
nent. By the volcanic eruption among
the Tonga group in 1885, a new island
was formed. When it was visited a
few years after, the soil below the
surface was still hot, the temperature
at a depth of seven feet being 100°
Fahr., while at the surface it was only
74°. With the exception of two young
cocoa-nut trees, which seemed not very
hardy, there was no vegetation but a
few bunches of grass, and a moth and
small sandpiper constituted the animal
population. It is thought the island
will disappear in a few years, as the
waves are rapidly wearing the shore-line
away. Such has been the history of
many a vaunted human tyranny. Its
policy was inaugurated with noise and
heat, and threatened to revolutionise
the existing order. But when it had
spent its force and cooled down, it
revealed its barrenness, and, worn away
with the ever-active waves of time, it
at length disappeared.—The Scottish
Pulpit.

Sin a poison. What poison one fang
of the old serpent will throw into our
moral system! Look around and see
how many have been poisoned with the
desire for strong drink, with lust, with
avarice, with pride, with anger, with
unbelief. Fiery serpents are among us,
and many die of their venom. If we
tolerate the least sin, it is a burning drop
in the veins of the soul. One touch of
the fangs of this serpent will work im-
measurable sorrow, even if the soul be
saved from death. It is only the power
of God that keeps us from being de-
stroyed by this viper. Had he his will,
he is a spirit so malignant that no heir
of heaven would survive. O God, keep
Thine own! Deliver us from the evil
one !—C. H. Spurgeon.

Sin defies law. A woman named
Guerin, in a rage of jealousy, murdered
her unfaithful husband. Going to a
villa where she learnt he was living

24





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS,





with another woman, she stood at the
door and called his name. Hearing
her voice, he went out to speak to her,
and had scarcely crossed the threshold
when she stabbed him in the abdomen.
He staggered back into the house, and
after a few minutes crawled to the
window and said in a feeble voice,
‘‘Kiss our child, for all is over.” The
recital of this incident in the court in
Paris, told as a woman could tell it,
and she a principal actor in the scene,
and the evidence adduced that Madame
Guerin had borne an_ irreproachable
character and was an excellent mother,
so moved the jury that they acquitted
her without a moment’s hesitation, amid
a storm of applause from the public in
court. A gush of sentiment disarmed
the rigour of the law and choked the
voice of vengeance. One wrong does
not justify another. But sin defies
law and justice, and spreads con-
fusion wherever it reigns. —The Scottish
Pulpit.

Avoid the example of the bad I
would desire all young men often to
remember the saying of Lactantius,
“He who imitates the bad cannot be
good.” Young men, in these professing
times, stand between good and bad
examples, as Hercules in his dream
stood between virtue and vice, solicited
by both. Choose you must who to
follow. Oh, that you were all so wise
as to follow the best! Life, heaven,
happiness, eternity, hang upon it.

Sad memories. A small boat was
picked up one morning on the north
shore at Troon. It had the appearance
of having broken away from a vessel
during a great gale in the Clyde, It is
a dangerous moment when a young man
breaks away from the happy associa-
tions of his early life, whether in church
or home. Chafing under restraint, he
plunges heedlessly into the wide world
in search of a larger liberty. Unac-
customed to self-control, he is swayed
by every varying current, drifts out
to sea, and is ultimately picked up a
partial wreck on some far-off shore.
Then it is that he is tormented with
painful memories ; he sees his folly, and
laments his reckless severance from


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


OMAP, L





the moral restrictions of a happier time.
“Tt is good for a man that he bear
the yoke in his youth."—7The Scottish
Pulpit.

Memory and music. Music touches
every key of memory, and stirs all the
hidden springs of sorrow and joy. We
love it for what it makes us forget, and
for what it makes us remember.

Beware of melancholy. Never give
way to melancholy; resist it steadily,
for the habit will encroach. A lady
was once given two-and-twenty recipes


against melancholy. One was a bright
fire, another to remember all the plea
sant things said to her, another to keep
a box of plums on the mantelpiece and
a kettle simmering on the hob. She
thought this mere trifling at the moment,
but did in after life discover how true
it is that these little pleasures often
banish melancholy better than higher
and more exalted objects, and that no
means ought to be thought too trifling
which can oppose it either in ourselves
or others


HOMILETICS.
Tue TERRIBLE Havoc or Sm.


(Verses 8-11.)


I, In its revolting defilement. “Jerusalem hath grievously sinned, therefore
she is removed. Her filthiness is in her skirts” (vers. 8, 9). The expression
“erievously sinned” gives the idea of persistent continuance in wickedness.
This condition is not reached all at once. It began in trifling with the first
enticements to evil. The entrance to the pathway of sin is gaily decked with
flowers, but they are flowers that wither as soon as they are plucked. It is over-
hung with tempting fruits, but they are fruits that turn to bitter ashes between
the teeth. It is sprinkled with subtle and delicious perfumes, but they are per-
fumes that distil the poison of the deadliest drug. The air around palpitates with
strains of bewitching music, but it is music that lures its charmed victim down
the dizzy slopes of irreparable ruin. The allurement may be presented in the
shape of a book, a picture, or a whispered word, that suggests more of evil than
it actually expresses, and the soul is blotted with a moral stain that rivers of tears
cannot wash away. Every act of sin increases the defilement, and it becomes
the more exposed.

II. In sinking the soul to a state of abject degradation. ‘‘ Therefore she
came down wonderfully ; she had no comforter” (ver. 9). You have seen the
little snowflakes flutter about the railway track like lovely bits of down shook
from angelic wings, and you have seen with what ease the proud locomotive
scatters the fleecy morsels in the early stages of the storm; but the falling atoms
increase with such rapidity and accumulative force, that the panting engine is at
length completely mastered, and, utterly exhausted, lies buried fathoms deep
beneath the crystal drift. So in the early stages of transgression, the soul deems
itself capable of throwing off every little temptation that beguiles, and, when it
is too late, discovers itself so completely bound in their toils that all efforts to
escape are ineffectual. 1. Sin dishonours the svul in the estimation of others.
‘¢ All that honoured her despise her, because they have seen her nakedness” (ver.
8). The first step downwards is to sink in the estimation of others. Their
commendation sustained us and helped us to keep up to a certain standard of
conduct. Others may see the tendency of our sins before we see it ourselves,
When others show their disapproval and despise us for our folly, it is time to
pause and reflect. 2. Sin dishonours the soul in its own estimation. “Yea, she
sigheth and turneth backward” (ver. 8). It is a lower depth when a man sinks
in his own estimation, when he cannot courageously confront others, or even face
up his better self. Sin saps the strength of our manhood. To be ae of


CHAP. L HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


sin and ashamed of it are the first hopeful signs of repentance; but 1f the repent-


ance is not prompt and genuine, the soul is in danger of becoming more thoroughly.


demoralised. Such a critical moment comes in most men’s lives (Ps. lxxiii. 2).

III. In rendering the soul reckless as to consequences. ‘She remembereth
not her last end”—had not thought of the sure end of her sins (ver. 9). The
down grade is steep, and every step increases the momentum of the terrible
descent. One sin leads to another, and that to another in darker and deeper
gradations, until the light of hope is quenched, and the helpless victim gropes
about aimlessly in the ever-deepening gloom of despair. The soul is now and
then haunted with the shadow of a coming reckoning day ; but it seems a great
way off, and may never come. The reckoning day does come.

IV. In its desecration of sacred things (ver. 10). Even the Jew was pro-
hibited from entering the innermost sanctuary, and now the prophet laments that
the heathen conquerors force their way into the holy place and plunder Jehovah’s
Temple, that they may adorn with its sacred vessels the shrines of their false
deities. It was desecration to enter the sanctuary, and high sacrilege to rob it of
its “pleasant things.” Sin knows no respect of persons or places. It obtrudes
with shameless effrontery into the holiest place, and is callous as to the havoc it
works,

V. In reducing a people to distress and want. “ All her people sigh; they
seek bread; they have given their pleasant things for meat to relieve the soul”
(ver. 11). Famine follows in the train of war. A siege lasting a year and a half
exhausted the surrounding country, and the Chaldean army would have difficulty
in supplying its own commissariat. In the hope that the present scarcity will
pass away, the people dispose of the wealth and precious jewels that remain to
them for the merest trifles of food. Sin is the prolific cause of war, famine, and
the acutest forms of personal and national suffering. Money is valueless when it
can purchase nothing in exchange—it cannot prolong the life of the starving.
The best things are capable of the worst abuse. The very abuse may test the
value.


VI. Compels the soul to appeal to the Divine compassion. ‘‘O Lord,
behold my affliction, for the enemy hath magnified himself” (ver. 9). “See, O
Lord, and consider, for I am become vile.”. I am despised (ver. 11). It is not


our vileness that ean form a ground of appeal to the Divine consideration, but
the abject misery into which our vileness has brought us. God does not pity our
sins, but He does pity the distress they occasion, though that distress is the direct
result of our obstinate violation of His laws and disregard of His repeated warn-
ings. Suffering is a severe teacher. It is a mercy when the eyes of the sinner
are at length opened, and, seeing that his sins are the cause of his trouble, he
eries to God for help. Long and patiently does God wait for such a cry; and
then with what gracious speed does He hasten to our rescue !

Lussons.—1l. Sin demoralises wherever it reigns. 2. Is the occasion of wn-
speakable suffering. 3. Can be cured only by Divine remedies,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 8. “She sigheth and turneth
backward.” Conscious sin: 1. A
painful humiliation. 2. The first step
in genuine repentance. 3. Should in-
duce the soul to seek immediate de-
liverance.

Ver. 9. ‘“She remembereth not her
last end.” The course of sin: 1. De-


lusive in its beginning. 2. Hardens
the transgressor into reckless indiffer-
ence. 3. Is certain to endin ruin.

— Sin an implacable foe. I. Drags
down the soul to comfortless depths,
“ Wherefore she came down wonder-
fully; she had no comforter.” IL
Exulis over the misery of tts victima


MS


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


GFAP, 1


ae aaa nae a Os SD


“The enemy hath magnified himself.”
See how proudly the foe deals with me
(Geikie). IIL Convinces the soul that
its only resource is in the Divine pity.
“OQ Lord, behold my affliction.”

Ver. 10. Heathenism a moral obli-
quity. I. Sees no sin in theft. “The
adversary hath spread out his hand
upon all her pleasant things.” II. Has
no scruples im desecrating the holiest
place. ‘The heathen entered into her
sanctuary.” III. Disregards the Divine
laws. ‘Thou didst command that
they should not enter into Thy congre-
gation.”

Ver. 11. The extremities of famine.
I A sorrowful craving for food. ‘ All
her people sigh ; they seek bread.”


Il. Desperate efforts made to retain
life. ‘To relieve the soul”—to keep
them alive. IIL The dearest treasures


readily sacrificed. “They have given
their pleasant things for meat.”


ILtuusTrRaTions.—Sin the danger of
‘great cities. The spiritual destitution
of London is something appalling.
There are 10,000 prostitutes—a pro-
cession a mile long, walking double file
—all somebody’s daughters, There are
20,000 thieves—two miles more of that
dread procession, and there are 100,000
uncared for children, making the pro-
cession ten miles in length. These are
what John Bright called the residuum,
and Dr. Chalmers the lapsed classes.
Jn their abodes every breath is poison ;
they are so crowded together that
morality isimpossible. Such a glimpse
of spiritual destitution ought to arouse
the heart, not only of every Christian,
but of every patriot.

Sin stupifies. Oh, how difficult it is
to awake some men to a sense of danger
or duty. Happening to be lounging in
the market-place of a little seaport town
in France, I saw with some surprise
several men in a café inhaling the
fumes of opium through a tobacco-pipe.
By-and-by the wife of one of these men
called for her husband to return home
in their little market-cart. But he,
being in a poisoned slumber, was un-
conscious of her existence, and oblivious
of things about him. She lifted him


up and shook him, but he would not
awake till the honied-trance stupor was
ended. So some of us are steeped in
the opium-lethargy of sin, and will not
awake. It is not that we cannot; we
will not.

Sin a disease. A minister once met
a man in the street who was afflicted
with heart-disease, and said he could
not sleep, and that the doctor could
do nothing for him. “Ah!” said the
minister, “the worst form of heart-
disease is sin. Yet people go about
with the disease ; they do not know it,
and they sleep quite soundly. Now, it
is my business to tell them how matters
stand, and to try to disturb their sleep,
for I can tell them of a physician who
can cure them. Have ycu been to
Christ with your sins?” The man was
silent, but went away deeply impressed.

Sin and individuality. I remember
as though it were yesterday the moment
when the idea of individual identity
dawned upon my boyish mind. The
thought appalled me, for I had been
looking at a wretched little beggar-boy
with a crutch, a dirty face, and miser-
able rags for garments, and it had just
occurred to me that he was not to him-
self merely an unpleasant object, to be
sent away out of sight with some dole
of pennies or broken fragments of food,
but just the I that I was to myself, as
precious, as important ; and I grew cold
from head to foot, and felt as though I
must do something to alterit all. After
all these years the horror abides with
me yet. I do not know whether others
feel it as keenly, but it is to me worse
than any ghost could be to remember
the wretched people of the world—the
prisoners in their cells, convicts in their
chains, men doomed to die upon the
gallows at dawn, women who sell their
souls for bread or jewels, beggars gnaw-
ing their crusts by the roadsides, suf-
ferers whose every breath is agony,
wives whose hearts are broken by the
cruelty of the husbands who were once
their lovers, men who are plotting mur-
der and men who are committing it,
lepers in the cities of lepers holding out
their mouldering hands for alms as
strangers flee by their gates. To re

2


OMAP. I.


member these, and many, many more,
wicked or accursed, crushed beneath
loads of crime and sorrow too heavy to
be borne, and to know when we clasp
our hands or drop a tear, and say with
a shudder, as we sometimes do, “ And
it might have been I: that it actually
is I to some one!” It is a terrible
thought, and yet we should not set it
aside. Surely nothing could prompt us
so strongly to do all we can for those
who sin or suffer.

Sin a double defect. The verb used
oftenest in the New Testament, sin,
means literally to miss the mark. The
corresponding nouns have, of course,
similar meanings. The idea conveyed
is deviation from a standard at which
men ought to aim, and which they ought
to reach. They may miss it by going
beyond, as well as by falling short. The
moral idea is the same as that of omis-
sion and transgression.—Zhe Scottish
Pulpit.

The course of sin


“We are not worst at once. The course of


evil

Begins so slowly and from such slight source,

An infant’s hand might stem its breach with
clay ;

But let the stream get deeper, and philo-
sophy shall strive in vain

To turn the headlong current.”


Sin a foe, but not invincible. It is
said that the late Lord Ampthill, when
on diplomatic service in Rome, possessed
a boa-constrictor, and interested him-
self in watching its habits. One day
the monster escaped from the box where
he supposed it was asleep, quietly
wound itself around his body, and be-
gan gradually to tighten its folds. His
position became extremely perilous;
but the consummate coolness and self-
possession which had enabled him to
win many a diplomatic triumph be-
friended him in this dangerous emer-
gency. He remembered there was a
bone in the throat of the serpent which,
if he could find and break, he would
save himself. He was aware that either
he or the snake must perish. Not a
moment must be lost in hesitation. He
deliberately seized the head of the ser-
pent, thrust his hand down its throat,

28


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : LAMENTATIONS.


and smashed the vital bone. The coila
were relaxed, the victim fell dead at
his feet, and he was free! So in all
wickedness there is weakness, and it is
a grand thing to discern the vulnerable
spot, and be ready with the exact truth,
fact, or promise which deals death to
the foe. This insight and power are
given to all who prayerfully study God’s
Word.

Heathen worship a performance.
Marcus Varro, the great Roman anti-
quarian, wrote forty-one books on the
Pagan cultus) He speaks of three
orders of gods—the certain gods, the
uncertain gods, and the chief and select
gods. Referring to the worship offered
to these various deities, he arranges his
material under four divisions—who per-
form, where they perform, when they
perform, what they perform. How
true it is that, apart from genuine
spiritual religion, all worship, and espe-
cially heathen worship, is but a scenic,
pantomimic performance !

Light for heathen darkness. The
simile ‘‘dark as a coal-pit” will soon
lose its meaning and become obsolete.
A colliery company has abolished. the
miners lamp and lit up one of their
pits with electric lamps, placed at inter-
vals of fifteen yards apart. Indeed, the
depths of earth and sea are now to be
illuminated. One of the difficulties of
the deep-sea diver has been the com-
parative darkness in which he has had
to go about his work at the bottom
of the ocean. Now a French engineer
has constructed a lamp, supplied with
petroleum, which burns as well under
water as in the open air. By an in-
genious contrivance it can be lighted at
the bottom of the sea, and with the aid.
of its friendly light the diver is enabled
to discover his greatest treasures. So
the earnest missionary penetrates the
dark depths of heathenism, holding the
lamp of Divine truth, flaming with the
burning love of the world’s Redeemer,
and picks up the most degraded victims
of idolatry, who, penetrated and refined
by the same Divine light that first found
them out, shall shine with the lustre of
the finest jewels.—The Scottish Pulpit.

The horrors of famine. The besieged


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS,


OHAP. i





eity of Leyden was at its last gasp.
Bread, malt-cake, horse-flesh, had en-
tirely disappeared ; dogs, cats, rats, and
other vermin were esteemed luxuries,
A small number of cows, kept as long
as possible for their milk, still remained ;
but a few were killed from day to day,
and distributed in minute proportions,
hardly sufficient to support life among
the famishing population. Starving
wretches swarmed daily around the
shambles where these cattle were slaugh-
tered, contending for any morsel which
might fall, and eagerly lapping the
blood as it ran along the pavement,
while the hides, chopped and boiled,
were greedily devoured. Women and
children all day long were seen search-
ing gutters and dunghills for morsels of
food which they disputed fiercely with
the famishing dogs. The green leaves


living herb was converted into human
food, but these expedients could not
avert starvation. The daily mortality
was frightful—infants starved to death
on the maternal breasts which famine
had parched and withered, mothers
dropped dead in the streets with their
dead children in their arms. A dis-
order called the plague, naturally en-
gendered of hardship and famine, now
came, as if in kindness, to abridge the
agony of the people. The pestilence
stalked at noonday through the city,
and the doomed inhabitants fell like
grass beneath its scythe. From six to
eight thousand human beings sank be-
fore this scourge alone; yet the people
resolutely held out, women and men
mutually encouraging each other to
resist the entrance of their foreign foe
—an evil more horrible than pest or


were stripped from the trees, every famine.—WMotley’s “ Dutch Republic.”


HOMILETICS.
A DISTRESSED NATION.
(Verses 12-17.)


I. Utters a piteous appeal for sympathy. ‘Is it nothing to you, all ye that
pass by? Behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow,” &c. (ver.
12). Sorrow craves sympathy. A crumb, an atom, however trifling, is eagerly
seized and fondly cherished. It matters not from what source it comes. It is
welcome from any casual passer-by, from anybody, from anything. The despair-
ing find comfort in a flower as it gracefully bends towards them; in the mute
sympathy of a favourite dog, as it caressingly thrusts its nose into the limp hands.
It is easy to exaggerate our troubles and imagine there is no sorrow like our own ;
but a wider knowledge of the world’s ills helps us to correct our magnified esti-
mate. ‘There is only One—the world’s Redeemer—whose sufferings are unique
and unparalleled.

Il. Painfully conscious of the overwhelming nature of its sufferings (ver.
13-15). 1. In their fierceness. “From above hath He sent fire into my bones,
and it prevaileth against them ”—subdues them (ver. 13). It is no earthly, but
heavenly fire which burns in the bones of Jerusalem (Speaker's Commentary).
It is a fact well established in osteology that inflammation in the bones is not
only extremely painful, but dries them up and renders them brittle and useless
(Henderson). 2. All attempts to escape from them are futile. ‘‘He hath spread
a net for my feet, He hath turned me back: He hath made me desolate and faint
all the day” (ver. 13). Judea, like a hunted animal, endeavours to escape, but
finds every outlet blocked with nets, and recoils from them in terror, and a sense
of utter hopelessness and exhaustion. The only thing to flee from is sin; the
only refuge to flee tois God. There is no relief from suffering till we are divested
of the coils of our sin. 3. They are an unmistakable consequence of sin. “The
yoke of my transgressions is bound by His hand: they are wreathed and come
up upon my neck,” &c. (ver. 14). The metaphor is taken from co lee life.


OHAP, L HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


As the ploughman binds the yoke with cords so knotted and twined together that
they form a bunch upon the neck of the oxen impossible to shake off, so does
God compel Judah to bear the punishment of her sins. The yoke thus imposed
by the hand of God, and securely knotted around the neck of Judah by the
entangled bonds of her own sins, bows down her strength by its weight, and
makes her totter and stumble beneath it. “He hath made my strength to fall”
—to stumble (Speaker's Commentary). Sin by and by becomes an intolerable
burden, and is constantly reasserting its power over us. There is a lake in
Switzerland, shut in by high mountains, a solitary, lonely place, which few
travellers visit, and where few care to linger, so desolate and homeless is the spot.
Here, an old legend says, every night at midnight the watcher may see the ghost
of Pilate come to the shore and try with piteous lamentations to wash from his
hands some red stains that are upon them—the marks of the blood of Jesus. But
as fast as he washes them off they reappear. So is it with all our sins, small and
great. 4. They are an evidence of contemptuous and crushing defeat. “The
Lord hath trodden under foot all my mighty men in the midst of me,” &c. (ver.
15). They had not fallen gloriously in the battlefield, but remained ignominiously
in the city, confessing their inability to fight. Irving once said, “‘ With every
exertion, the best of men can do but a moderate amount of good, but it seems in
the power of the most contemptible individual to do incalculable mischief.” The
governor-general of a Russian province was once mildly remonstrated with by his
secretary regarding a high-handed proceeding, producing at the same time a para-
graph from a state volume proving the illegality of the action. The angry governor
seized the book and sat upon it, shouting, ‘“ Where is the law now?” He then
pointed to his decorated breast, and continued in a pompous strain, “ Here it is;
I am the law!” and the secretary had to beat a prudent retreat. It is very
humiliating to be in the grip of tyranny like this.


III. The most passionate expression of sorrow brings no relief. ‘‘ For these -


things I weep, &c. Zion spreadeth forth her hands, and there is none to comfort
her,” &. (vers. 16, 17). Spreading out the- hands is a token of the deepest dis-
tress. There is no one to comfort—not God, for He is chastening; nor man, for
all the neighbouring nations have become enemies (ver. 2). Tears are a sign of
weakness and helplessness. To give way to grief is not the way to conquer it.
God is the only refuge in distress, and His help, if sincerely sought, is not in vain.
The common cry of the Breton mariner is, ‘‘My God, protect me! my bark is se
small and Thy ocean so vast.”


“Tam so weak, dear Lord, I cannot stand
One moment without Thee:
But oh! the tenderness of Thine enfolding 3
And oh! the faithfulness of Thine upholding 3
And oh! the strength of Thy right hand:
That strength is enough for me.
I am so needy, Lord, and yet I know
All fulness dwells in Thee ;
And hour by hour that never-failing treasure
Supplies and fills, in overflowing measure,
My least, my greatest need; and so
Thy grace is enough for me.”


Lessons.—1l. It is painful to witness distress we are helpless to relieve. 2.
National distress is the fruat of national crime 3. National suffering should
purify the national life.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 12. The sufferings of the classesofthe human family. 2. Unique
world’s Redeemer: 1. Appeal to all in their character and purpose. 3.





a ee eT Ce ee


eee AS


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP. L





Aggravated by the mysterious manifes-
tation of the Divine wrath. 4. The
basis of the world’s salvation. 5.
Should arrest the attention and engage
the prayerful thought of the sinner.
—Is it nothing to you? I. The
sufferings of Christ upon the Cross were
unparalleled. 1, Because of the dignity
of His person. 2. Because of the per-
fect innocence of His character. 3.
Because there was such a conjunction
of griefs. 4. Because they were volun-
tarily undertaken and continued in. 5.
Because those for whom He died thus
voluntarily were His enemies. 6. Be-


cause they were expiatory. II. Zhe.


sufferings of Christ have had a deep
interest in them for many. 1. Mul-
titudes have found in them a cure
for despair. 2. In others they have
wrought a complete transformation of
their lives. 3. Had power on men’s
minds to gird them to heroic deeds. 4.
Men who love the suffering Saviour be-
come patient in their every-day suffer-
ings. 5. They learn to hate sin by
seeing the agonies by which redemption
was obtained. III. What have you
to do with Christ? Write down your
decision whether you will have Christ
or not. A poor, suffering girl, who had
long loved the Saviour, under a feeling
of depression, confessed to her minister
that she had deceived herself, and did
not love Him. The minister walked
to the window and wrote on a piece of
paper, “I do not love the Lord Jesus
Christ,” and said, “Susan, here is a
pencil. Just put your name to that.”
“No, sir,” she said, “‘I could not sign
that.” “Why not?” “I would be
torn to pieces before I would sign it,
sir.” “But why not sign it if it is
true?” “Ah! sir,” she said, “I hope
‘itis not true. I think I do love Him.”—
C. H. Spurgeon.

— Our duty towards the Jewish
people. I. The facts on which the appeal
as founded. The unparalleled sorrow and
sufferings of the Jewish people. Where
is the nation that has been subject to
such universal contempt? All mankind
seems to have conspired to despise the
Jews. They seem under the curse of
Heaven. II. The appeal itself. “Is it


nothing to you?” That the world
should pass by we cannot wonder.
That the heathen or Mohammedax
should neglect the Jew can excite no
surprise. That the mere self-loving
nominal Christian should heed him not,
is all natural; but that the follower of
Christ should pass by may well excite
astonishment. It is an error to suppose
we need not care to labour among the
Jews because the Gospel is a Gentile
dispensation, and that the Jews are
shut out until the fulness of the Gentiles
be come in. The Gospel is as much a
Jewish dispensation as was the Law.
To them it was promised; to them it
was given. By them it was proclaimed
to the Gentiles, and theirs it still is.
Zeal for the honour of Christ should
lead us to direct our first endeavours to
the. Jewish people:-—M‘Caul.

Ver. 13. Divine punishment. I.
Marked by great severity. ‘‘ From
above hath He sent fire into my bones,
and it prevaileth against them.” II.
Admits of no escape from tts toils, “ He
hath spread a net for my feet; He hath
turned me back.” III. Thoroughly
subdues the sufferer. ‘He hath made
me desolate and faint all the day.”

Ver. 14. The galling tyranny of
sin. I. Oppressive. ‘The yoke of my
transgressions is bound by His hand;
they are wreathed and come up upon
my neck.” II. Ewhausting. “ He
hath made my strength to fall.” III.
Reduces the soul to helplessness. “The
Lord hath delivered me into their
hands, from whom I am not able to
rise up.”

— The misery of the penitent. 1.
When conscious of the burden of sin.
2. When realising his increasing help-
lessness. III. When abandoned to
reap the consequences of his transgres-
sions. 4. Can be relieved only by the
pitifulness of the Divine mercy.

Ver. 15. Inglorious defeat. I. The
veteran warriors are captured in the
midst of the city from which they had
not courage to issue forth and defend.
“The Lord hath trodden under foot all
my mighty men in the midst of me.”
Il. The combinations of the foe were too
powerful for the bravery of ae aay to


OHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : LAMENTATIONS.


|


resist. “He hath called an assembly
against me to crush my young men.”
Ili. The defeat of the nation is abject
and complete. ‘The Lord hath trodden
the virgin, the daughter of Judah, as
in a wine-press,”

Vers. 16,17. The helplessness of
despair. I. Tears and entreaties are
in vain. ‘For these things I weep;
mine eye, mine eye runneth down with
water. Zion spreadeth forth her hands,
and there is none to comfort her ” (vers.
16, 17). II. Sin debases a people in
the estimation of God and man. “ Jeru-
salem is as a menstruous woman ”—hath
become a loathing — ‘‘among them”
(ver. 17). IIL. There is no hope of escape.
‘“‘ My children are desolate because the
enemy prevailed” (ver. 16). ‘The
Lord hath commanded concerning
Jacob that his adversaries should be
round about him” (ver. 17).


InLustRaTiIons. — A distressed na-
tion: the havoc of war. When the
French army invaded Russia in 1812,
and penetrated as far as Moscow, Count
Rostopchin, the governor, thinking it
more glorious to destroy the ancient
capital of the Czars than suffer it to
harbour and protect an enemy, caused
it to he burned to the ground. The
most heartrending scenes were wit-
nessed. The people, hastily snatching
up their most precious effects, fled be-
fore the flames. Others, actuated by
the general feelings of nature, saved
only their parents or their infants, who
were closely clasped in their arms.
They were followed by their other
children, running as fast as their little
strength would permit, and, with all the
wildness of childish terror, vociferating
the beloved name of mother! The old
people, borne down by grief more than
by age, had not sufficient power to
follow their families, and expired near
the houses in which they were born.
No ery, no complaint was heard. Both
the conqueror and the conquered were
equally hardened. The fire, whose
ravages could not be restrained, soon
reached the finest parts of the city.
The palaces were enveloped in flames,
Their magnificent fronts, ornamented


32


with bas-reliefs and statues, fell with a
dreadful crash. The churches, with
their steeples resplendent with gold and
silver, were destroyed. The hospitals,
containing more than 12,000 wounded,
began to burn, and almost all the in-
mates perished. .A few who still lin-
gered were seen crawling half burnt
amongst the smoking ruins, and others,
groaning under heaps of dead bodies,
endeavoured in vain to extricate them-
selves from the horrible destruction
which surrounded them. From what-
ever side viewed, nothing was seen but
ruin and flames. The fire raged as if
it were fanned by some invisible power.
The most extensive range of buildings
seemed to kindle, to burn, and to dis-
appear in an instant. The wild pil-
lagers precipitated themselves into the
midst of the flames. They waded in
blood, treading on dead bodies without
remorse, while the burning ruins fell
on their murderous hands. The signal
patriotism of sacrificing the city in order
to subdue the enemy actuated all ranks.
Affliction reveals our sins. So long
as leaves are on the trees and bushes,
you cannot see the bird’s nests; but in
the winter, when all the leaves are off,
then you see them plainly. And so
long as men are in prosperity and have
their leaves on, they do not see what
nests of sin and lust are in their hearts
and lives; but when all their leaves are
off, in the day of their afflictions, then
they see them, and say, “I did not
think I had had such nests of sins and
lusts in my soul and life.” —Bridge.
Whose sorrows are like unto mine!
O thou erring mortal, repine not. Our
Father has some great and wise purpose
in thus afflicting thee, and wilt thou
dare murmur against Him when He
removed the idol that He alone may
reign? Pause and reflect. Examine
well thy conscience, and see if there
were not earthly attractions clinging to
thy soul and leading thee to forget the
Creator in thy love for the creature.
Raise not thy feeble voice against the
Most High, lest He send upon thee a
still greater trial in order to teach thee
submission. Behold His noble example
when persecuted by a whole world,





MG


|





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP, L


———


Imagine Him, the God of the universe,
standing before the Jewish Sanhedrin,
condemned, buffeted, spit upon! One
blazing look of wrathful indignation
would have annihilated that rude
rabble; but, with all the beauty and
grace of self-abnegation, He bowed His
head and prayed, “Father, forgive
them; they know not what they do.”
Wouldst thou find relief for thy suffer-
ings? Contemplate the life of Him
who spake as never man spake. Fol-
low Him through all those years of toil
and suffering. Witness His deeds of
mercy and love, and then—go thou and
do likewise.-—German Reformed Mes-
senger.

Self-sacrifice. An extraordinary ex-
ample of self-sacrifice was witnessed at
Chicago. A member of the brother-
hood of Knight-Templars was operated
upon for cancer, and a wound nearly a
foot square was left. The surgeon de-
clared that if the patient was to recover,
the wound must be covered with new
human skin, At once 132 members of
the brotherhood volunteered to allow a
small strip of skin to be cut from their
arms, so that the pieces thus obtained
might be transferred to the wound of
their comrade. The operation was per-
formed. Several of the brave fellows
fainted, but the majority bore the in-
cision of the surgeon’s knife without
flinching. It is inspiriting to hear of
such heroic self-sacrifice. Much of the
suffering of the Christian worker is
Vicarious; but no number of acts of
suffering on behalf of others can equal
the sublime sacrifice of Him who
suffered and died for the whole race.—
The Scottish Pulpit.

Divine punishment and pessimism.
Noah was a pessimist to the antedilu-
vian world; Moses was a pessimist to
Pharaoh in Egypt; Samuel was a pes-
simist, and his very first prediction
foretold the downfall of the aged Eli
and his godless family. Jeremiah was
a pessimist, constantly foretelling evil
and danger ; Jonah was a pessimist, who
disturbed the peace of the city, crying,
“Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be
overthrown.” Nahum was a pessimist,
crying, ‘Woe to the bloody city!”

33


Micaiah was a pessimist when he fore
told the overthrow of Ahab, the guilty
king, who complained that he never pro-
phesied any good of him. The Saviour
was a pessimist, for He foretold the
destruction of Jerusalem and the cala
mities that were to come upon the
world. The Apostles Peter, James,
John, Jude were all pessimists, for they
were continually foretelling perilous
times, departure from the faith, and
the coming judgment upon the godless
world, The great preachers and poets
of the ages have been pessimists, for
they were ever warning men of present
evil and coming wrath, of predicted
calamities and judgments overhanging
the godless and profane. — Christian
Repository.
Sin a slavery.


‘¢ There is a bondage which is worse to bear

Than his who breathes, by roof and floor
and wall
Pent in, a tyrant’s solitary thrall :
*Tis his who walks about in the open air,
One of a nation who henceforth must wear
Their fetters in their souls,”
— Wordsworth.


Discovery of the destructive work
of sin. The steeple of the Church of
St. Bride, London, originally built by
Christopher Wren, was struck by light-
ning in 1764, and the upper part had
to be rebuilt, when it was lowered eight
feet. It was then discovered that an
old hawk had inhabited the two upper
circles, the open arcades of which were
filled with masses of birds’ bones, chiefly
those of the city pigeons upon which it
had preyed. It would be well if more
frequent discovery could be made of
those wily hawks of society who prey
with such merciless and ingenious greed
upon the simple and unsuspecting,
Their discovery is all the more difficult
when they make the Church of Christ
their hiding-place, and the clean-picked
relics of their numerous victims are all
the more sad to contemplate when one
at length finds out that the work of
plunder has been carried on under the
sacred garb of religion.

The misery of the penitent; how
cured. Five persons were studying
what were the best means for mortifying

G


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





sin. One said, to meditate on death ;
the second, to meditate on judg-
ment; the third, to meditate on the
joys of heaven; the fourth, to medi-
tate on the torments of hell; the fifth,
to meditate on the blood and sutier-
ings of Christ; and certainly the last
is the choicest and strongest motive
of all. If ever we would cast off our
despairing thoughts, we must dwell and
muse much upon and apply this precious
blood to our own souls; so shall sorrow
and mourning flee away.—Brooks.

Remorse. Remorse may disturb the
slumbers of a man who is dabbling with
his first experiences of wrong; and
when the pleasure has been tasted and
is gone, and nothing is left of the crime
but the ruin which it has wrought, then
the Furies take their seats upon the
midnight pillow. But the meridian of
evil is for the most part left unvexed ;
and when a man has chosen his road,
he is left alone to follow it to the end.
—Froude.

Inglorious defeat—The retreat from
Moscow. The annals of ancient and
modern warfare, in the vast catalogue
of woes which they record, do not pre-
sent a parallel to the sufferings of the
French on the retreat from Moscow—
sufferings neither cheered by hope nor
mitigated by the slightest relief. The
army in its retreat had to encamp on
the bare snow in the midst of the
severest winter that even Russia ever
experienced. The soldiers, without
shoes and almost without clothes, were
enfeebled by fatigue and famine. Sit-
tmg on their knapsacks, the cold buried
some in a temporary, but more in an
eternal sleep. Those who were able to
rise from this benumbing posture, only
did it to broil some slices of horse-flesh,
perhaps cut from their favourite charger,
or to melt a few morsels of ice. In the
march it was impossible to keep them
in order, as imperious hunger seduced
them from their colours, and threw their
columns into confusion. Many of the
French women accompanied the army
on foot, with shoes of stuff littie calcu-
lated to defend them from the frozen
snow, and clad in old robes of silk or
the thinnest muslin; and they were


glad to cover themselves with tattered
pieces of military cloaks, torn from the
dead bodies of the soldiers. The cold
was so severe that men were frozen to
death in the ranks, and at every step
were seen the dead bodies of the soldiers
stretched on the snow. Of four hundred
thousand warriors who had crossed the
Niemen at the opening of the campaign,
scarcely twenty thousand repassed it,
Such was the dreadful havoc which a
Russian winter caused to the finest,
best-appointed, and most powerful army
that ever took the field.

Christianity addresses the despair-
ing. Throughout all the ages which
have followed Christ’s word, Christ’s
message has rung in with power upon
men’s lives just in proportion to their
dejection and despair. One of the
earliest attacks upon Christianity was
the censure that it was a word to the
miserable. Such indeed it is. If it
is censurable to move among men when
they are dispisited, when they have
come to the end of a civilisation, when
nothing but blank hopelessness and
no remedy lies in front of them, then
Christianity is censurable, Christ’s mes-
sage is open to reproach. If that be
a fault, it is nut faultless. It stands
condemned. If too you deem it blame-
worthy to go to the individual when he
has sinned, when he has flung away his
life madly, wickedly, passionately, to
stand beside him, nay, to bend over
him with affectionate interest, when he
is lying ragged, beaten, hungry, and
filthy in the far country into which he
has gone, then neither Christianity nor
Christ can escape your blame. They
stand convicted of the crime of re-
ceiving sinners and eating with them,
of laying their hands on lepers who
are unclean, of seeking the society of
the demented and insane.—Rev. 4.
Ross.

Crying to God. Several children of
a family were once playing in a garden
when one fell into a tank. When the
father heard of it, he asked what means
they thought of to rescue their brother
from his perilous situation. Inquiring
of the youngest, he said, “John, what
did you do to rescue your brother?”





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. CHAP, I.
|


The boy answered, “ Father, what cried asloudasI could.” If we cannot
should I do? I am so young that I bring a ladder or rope, all can cry, all
could not do anything, but I stood and can plead with God.


HOMILETICS.
Tue Birrer Fruirs or REBELLION.


(Verses 18-22.)


I. That rebellion is the violation of the law of a righteous God. “The
Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against His commandment” (ver. Ic} rece h
have grievously rebelled” (ver. 20). A man may fight against God’s will and
exalt his own; but he cannot fight against the law by which obedience brings
peace, harmony, and joy to the soul, and disobedience brings unrest, pain, and
deadness. All things in God’s universe proclaim the folly of the man who thinks
to oppose his will to the Infinite. He may to some extent succeed in thwarting
the Divine will; but he cannot prosper. What may seem success will turn into
shame and ruin. The violation of law puts us out of harmony with God, Nature,
and man.

II. That rebellion is the occasion of great national disasters. 1. The young
are enslaved. ‘‘ My virgins and my young men are gone into captivity” (ver. 18).
There is little hope for the future of a nation when its young people are in
degrading bondage. Christianity has created a just appreciation of the worth of
young life. A Japanese woman once came to a Christian lady in Japan with a
girl-baby which had been thrown into a ditch by its father, as thousands were,
because it was ‘‘only a girl.” In begging the Christian lady to take care of the
naked child, covered with mud, the poor woman said, “ Please do take little baby.
Your God is the only God that teaches to be good to little children.” 2. Friend-
ships are demoralised. ‘I called for my lovers, but they deceived me” (ver. 19).
The confusion that springs out of rebellion is a severe strain on the fidelity of
professed friends. Promises made with the utmost solemnity are little regarded.
One brave and truthful action tells more than a million utterances of the mouth.
Genuine friendship is ever frank and true. Simplicity is not the absence of
intricacy, but its solution. The true friend, however much misunderstood in a
time of disorder, comes out scatheless. 3. The nation 1s ravaged by war, famine,

_and death. “ Abroad the sword bereaveth, at home there is as death” (ver. 20).
“‘My priests and mine elders gave up the ghost in the city, while they sought
their meat to relieve their souls” (ver. 29), Those who should have advised and
comforted the people were disabled by starvation, or were lying dead among the
slain. 4. The sufferings of the people are distressingly acute. ‘I am in distress ;
my bowels are troubled ; mine heart is turned within me” (ver. 20). My heart
is so violently agitated that it seems to have changed its position—to be over-
turned. It is difficult to conceive words that could more pathetically describe
the extremity of grief. Much of our trouble is intensified by forebodings as to the
future. God gives us strength to bear each day’s burden as it comes. When we
stagger and fall because our burden has become too heavy, it is because we have
added of our own accord something of the future’s weight to that of the present.
5. The enemies gloat over the national troubles. ‘They have heard that I sigh;
there is none to comfort me. All mine enemies have heard of my trouble. They
are glad that thou hast done it” (ver. 21). Itis the acme of cruelty and obduracy
of heart to chuckle over the miseries of the fallen. How different is the true
Christian spirit. Lord Shaftesbury earned the title of “the good Earl” by his
philanthropic endeavours to raise the most depraved. A costermonger who had
been a most notorious sinner was once asked, ‘“ What did his Lordship say to you

35


OHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





that made you a reformed man?” ‘Oh, he didn’t say much,” was the reply.
“He just sat down by my side and said, ‘Jack, we will make a man of you yet.’”
It was the upward gravitation of Christian manhood that helped Jack, and many
like him.

Ill. That every nation that rebels against God will be certainly punished.
“Thou wilt bring the day that Thou hast called, and they shall be like unto me.
Do unto them as Thou hast done unto me,” &¢. (ver. 21, 22). The prophet, in
terms that seem dictated by a spirit of retaliation, is but expressing in prophecy
what actually happened in the capture of Babylon—the destruction of the Chaldean
empire and of the neighbouring states by which the Jews had been ill-used. He
also expressed the general truth, so often exemplified in history, that the nations


that ignore God come to nought.


Lessons.—l. The greatest troubles of a nation are the result of rebellion. 2. God


is not indifferent to the sufferings of a nation under punishment.


3. Obedience to


God ts the only guarantee of national prosperity.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 18. “The Lord is righteous, for
I have rebelled against His command-
ment.” Divine justice: 1. Is publicly
acknowledged. 2. Must punish rebel-
lion. 3. Is ever mingled with mercy.

— “Hear, I pray you, all people, and
behold my sorrow.” The voice of sor-
row: 1. Has a lesson for all classes.
2. Cannot express all that is felt. 3.
Excites sympathy among the most in-
different. 4. Should lead to inquiry
as to its cause.

— “My virgins and my young men
are gone into captivity.” Young life:
1. The hope and strength ofa nation. 2.
Should be placed in the most favourable
circumstances for development and cul-
ture. 3, Is crushed by the degradation
of slavery.

Ver. 19. “I called for my lovers,
but they deceived me.” Human fickle-
ness: 1. A bitter disappointment when
shown by those we love, and who have
professed to love us. 2. Canvot bear
the strain of a great trial. Fails us
when we most need help. 3. A pure,
unselfish, faithful affection a rarity. 4.
Should teach us to trust alone in God.

Ver. 20. Sincere penitence: I.
Shown in a frank and full confession of
sin. “TI have grievously sinned.” II.
Haperiences the most pungent sorrow for
sin. ‘‘T am in distress: my bowels are
troubled: mine heart is turned within
me.” III. Appeals to God alone for
mercy. ‘Behold, O Lord.”

36


Ver. 21. A spirit of enmity: I. Js
coldly indifferent to the troubles of others,
though cognisant of them. ‘‘ All mine
enemies have heard of my trouble.”
Il. Exhibits a refinement of cruelty in
rejoicing over the distresses of its victims.
“They are glad thou hast done it.”
IIL. Will meet with a day of retribu-
tion. ‘‘Thou wilt bring the day that —
Thou hast called, and they shall be like
unto me.”

Ver. 22. The punishment of Judah
a type of the punishment of all un-
faithful nations. I. Their sins are
fully known to God. ‘‘Let all their
wickedness come before Thee.” II.
They will be punished according to their
actual sins. “Do unto them as Thou
hast done unto me for all my trans-
gressions.” IIT. They shall know what
it is to endure sorrow and exhaustion.
‘For my sighs are many, and my heart
is faint.”


Intustrations. — Rebellion — Dead
Sea fruit.—If Satan ever knows plea-
sure at all, it is of the foulest and most
unsatisfactory kind. Dust is his meat.
There is nothing satisfying in the plea-
sures of rebellion. He remains a (is-
appointed, restless being. The most
cunning error which he invents and
sustains by philosophy is no more than
dust. His whole cause, for which he
has laboured these thousands of ‘years
with a horrible perseverance, will dis


|
:
|


dust.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


OHAP. L


_—_—_ OOOO SSS


solve into dust, and be blown away as
smoke. Still doth he feed himself on
Let those who are servants of
Satan know assuredly that as they are
living in sin they will have to eat at
their father’s table and learn the empti-
ness of all the pleasures of sin, and the
worthlessness of all the treasures of
evil. Everything that sin can bring
you is just so much dust—foul eating,
insufficient, clogging, killing. Though
you hoard up wealth, gold is nothing
but dust toa dying man. Though you
gain all earthly honour, it too dissolves
into dust. This is the misery of that
great spirit who is called the Prince of
Darkness, that he must eat dust all his
days. But what misery it must be to
be only some poor subject in that unhal-
lowed kingdom, and still to be doomed
to the same loathsome fare! Dust
shalt thou eat all the days of thy life.
Note that right well; and may God
deliver you from such feeding !—Spur-
geon.

Fomenting rebellion, a ruinous
policy. The rebellion in the Nether-
lands had already been an expensive
matter to the crown. The Spanish
army numbered more than sixty-two
thousand men. Forty millions of dol-
lars had already been sunk, and it
seemed probable that it would require
nearly the whole annual produce of the
American mines to sustain the war.
The Transatlantic gold and silver, dis-
interred from the depths where they
had been buried for ages, were em-
ployed not to expand the current of a
healthy, life-giving commerce, but to be
melted into blood. The sweat and tor-
tures of the king’s pagan subjects in
the primeval forests of the New World
were made subsidiary to the extermina-
tion vf his Netherland people and the
destruction of an ancient civilisation.
Te this end had Columbus discovered a
hemisphere for Castile and Aragon,
and the new Indies revealed their hid-
den treasures, The military expenses
alone of the Netherlands were more
than seven million dollars yearly, and
the mines of the New World produced
an annual average of only eleven.
There was not a stiver left in the ex-


chequer, nor the means of raising one
Such was the condition to which the
unrelenting tyranny and financial ex-
periments of Alva had reduced the
country.—Motley’s “* Dutch Republic.”

Sorrow does not regenerate. Ona
May day in the French Revolution of
1848, a wretched-looking man was seen
dragging himself along by the help of
a stick, fleeing from the excited and
rushing crowd, till he entered a hall in
the Louvre, where was an exquisite
piece of sculpture, the Venus of Milos.
Before this statue the man broke down,
and bitter tears streamed over his face.
That man was Heinrich Heine, the
seoffing Israelite. This one moment
disclosed a whole world of heartache.
“‘ Deepest misery, thy name is Heine!”
was the passionate cry that escaped his
lips. The source of this misery was
the pleasure of the world. The goddess
before whom he lay prostrate entwined
the poet with the glowing arms of sense.
He had sacrificed all to her—body, soul,
conscience, reason, heart, and harp.
“Once,” he groaned, “JI fancied, with
Hegel, I was a god; now I know I am
a sick, forgotten Jew.”’ Sixteen years,
filled with unexampled pains, followed,
but it was only a transitory glance of
faith to which the poet attained. On
the whole, affliction only excited him
to new blasphemies.— Otto Funcke.

Justice and mercy. Terror is sub-
servient to love. Asa skilful painter
fills the background of his picture with
his darker colours, so God introduces
the black thunder-clouds of Sinai to
give brighter prominence to Jesus, the
Cross of Calvary, and His love to the
chief of sinners.— Guthrie,

Youth. Youth and white paper take
any impression. The young are the
divinely-appointed heirs of the great
past, and the fathers of the sublime
future.

— Perhaps as the Creator looks down
on this world, whose wondrous beauty
beams on us more and more in propor-
tion as our science would take it from
poetry into law, He beholds nothing so
beautiful as the pure heart of a simple,
loving child.—Lytton.

Human fickleness a disappointment,

37


CHAP. I,


Astronomers tell us that temporary stars
attain their maximum brightness only
once and for all. They burst into
brilliance suddenly, come to a point,
continue at that point only for a short
time, and then vanish, either by ex-
ploding or by coming into collision with
another body. It is difficult to see the
reason for their existence at all, except
to show that the steady, dependable
light of the permanent star is of more
service in the heavens than the flashing
brilliance that dazzles only to confuse
and mislead. It is dangerous to be
star of any kind, whether pulpit star,
political star, or social star; but to be
a temporary star is the most provoking
and disappointing of all—The Scottesh
Pulpit.

Human fickleness and its contrast.
At a trial in Anglesey the heroic devo-
tion of a wife and the’ base fickleness
and savagery of a husband were pain-
fully illustrated. The prisoner saved
his neck through the self-forgetful de-
votion of his wife, who sat at his side,
pale and suffering, through the trial. If
it had been known that the third bullet
- fired from his pistol was even then
lodging in the body of his faithful wife,
nothing would have saved his life. It
was only after the miserable man had
been convicted of murder in a minor
degree that did not involve hanging
that she applied to a doctor, confessed
that her husband had shot her, and
that the bullet was still in her hip.
Who can fathom a woman’s love and
devotion? It is often strangely lavished
on those who deserve it least.—Jbid.

Penitence involves confession of sin.
Sometimes a prisoner is advised to plead
not guilty because his advocate has dis-
covered a flaw in the indictment, ora
weak place in the chain of evidence,
and he may get the benefit of the doubt.
Not so in the case of the sinner; there
can be no doubt. The evidence is
cumulative. He is caught red-handed
in the act of sin. His only hope for
mercy is in a full and frank confes-
sion.

How enmity is manufactured.
“Right must right remain,” says the
farmer, and goes to law with his neigh-

38


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS,


bour about a strip of pasture-land a
quarter of a yard wide, and enmity and
hatred exist between the two families


ii


for whole decades, while a thousand —


times the value of the disputed strip is
lost over it. But no matter; “ Right
must right remain,”
among farmers, but among all kinds of
people that such foolish and unhappy
litigation takes place, just because no
one chooses to give way; nay, not even
to submit to the judgment of an um-
pire. “ Right must right remain,” says


A, and passionately disputes in a large —


party with B as to whether the train
which ran two years ago to H in
the evening was an ordinary or an ex
press train; and this wretched stub-
bornness in disputing about trifles
destroys the sociability of men who
ought to have brought light and salt to
each other. “ Right must Fright remain,”
says this respectable man. He was
offended by the harsh words of another,
and has now passed him coldly by for
years. “He must first apologise,” he
says, instead of saying, “Don’t let us
please the devil by hating one another;
here is my hand; we are brethren and
heirs of one heaven.” No! “Right
must right remain.”——Otto Funcke.

Retribution. The certainty that un-
repentant wickedness will be punished
may be argued—l. From the principle
of moral causation. God has established
such a connection between character
and condition that misery must ever
spring from sin, and blessedness from
virtue. Our present grows out of the
past, hence our sins must find us out.
What we morally sowed yesterday we
reap in experience to-day, and so on for
ever. 2. From the operation of moral
memory. Memory recalls sins, places
them before the eye of conscience, and
sets the soul aflame. 3. From the
declarations of Scripture. “The wicked
shall not go unpunished. The wicked
shall be turned into hell, with all the
nations that forget God.” 4. From the
history of mankind. Nations are an
example — the Antediluvians, the
Sodomites, the Jews. Individuals are
an example.—Moses, David, Judas.—
D. Thomas, D.D.





Nor is it only -





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. OHAP. I.
a


CHAPTER II.


THE PUNISHMENT or NATIONAL SIN.


In this second elegy the poet has his attention fixed on something that is beyond Chaldean
and Jew. Hesees, what the eyes of the world do not see, that the hand of the invisible Governor
of all nations is directing both oppressor and oppressed, and is at work to show that no force
and no victory, no disaster and no shame, were aimless happenings. He is to be regarded as
the real agent in producing the various events referred to. His righteous judgments are not
deferred to a future state : they are issued in this life against all wnrighteousness of men, and from
Him alone can relief and instruction be obtained. So throughout the song is heard the refrain
that the Lord Jehovah is supreme over all the forces of the world, and over all that those forces
seem to accomplish. In face of the great Babylonian power, boastful of its victories and material
grandeur, deeming itself at liberty to harry, enslave, kill for its own selfish interests ; in face
of his ruined city and desecrated Temple, of starving children and slaughtered chiefs, the writer
holds up the fact that these are not independent potentates fixing their own terms; that they
are but messengers of the Lord, who doeth according to His will, in the army of heaven and among
the inhabitants of the earth, and who is preparing ways for the triumph of His free mercy and
unstained holiness, ‘This Hebrew was saved from the terrible conclusion that the selfish, cruel
force, which in his day carried all before it, was the highest power in life, simply by believing
righteousness to be more exalted still.” (Smith). very nerve may tingle with pain, everything
dear may be cut down, every step onward may seem to add another misery, but God’s righteous
and loving will shall make all things work together for “the far-off divine” eventualties towards
“which the whole creation” is impelled.

Two principal divisions mark off the poem, The first, ver. 1-10, describes the palpable
effects of the subjugation on things and persons. Ascribing these to the Lord, he passes, in


_ the second section, to mournful utterances over the obvious desolations—harping, as grief is


prone to do, on the same note—and concludes with a call for prayer to the Lord, and the form
which that prayer would take in such dire straits.

(8) Ver. 1. The poet sees nature as if it were in commotion. A storm-cloud piles up over
Jerusalem, shrouding with its gloom even the most commanding summit. But it is not the
swirls of an inanimate force which he perceives, nor yet the rush of human passion in an army
of cruel men, it is the Supreme Ruler who hath His way in the whirlwind, and the storm of anger
and strife, and the clouds of disaster are the dust of His feet. How doth the Lord in His anger;
anger is the acting quality which impresses its aspect on the writer’s mind, as is shown by his
frequent references to it—twice here, and in vers. 3, 6, 21, 22, cf. ver. 2: cover with a cloud
the daughter of Zion. Under this expression, and the similar ones which follow, daughter of
Judah, daughter of Jerusalem, is included inhabitants of all classes; no principle but that of
poetic license apparently regulating the employment of eithername. The storm-cloud has swept


_ across the land which was called the glory of all lands, and He has cast down from heaven


those arrow-like lightnings which have scathed, discomfited, and overthrown unto the earth
the glory of Israel. The election of Israel to be the covenant people of the living God had
given it a position as high above that of all other peoples as the heavens are higher than the earth,
and this position was represented by a visible shrine—the Temple. It was the holy and beauti-
ful house where our fathers praised Thee, and now it was burned up with fire. Nor did He reeall
any past manifestations of His presence to stay His hand from working : He has not remem-
bered His footstool; the footstool of our God is closely associated with the ark of the covenant
(1 Chron. xxviii. 2; Ps. xcix. 1, 5). The Cherubim stood over the cover of the ark, the mercy-
seat, and as God sitteth between the Cherubim, His feet would be on the ark, yet He let this holiest
of holy things be destroyed in the day of His anger—the day which broke amid the sounds of
Divine justice going to punish evil-—the great day of Jehovah, which Zephaniah predicted... @
day of wrath ... a day of wasteness and desolation. . . a day of clouds and thick darkness.
The poet “could not have better expressed to the people the heinousness of their sins than by
laying before them this fact, that God remembered not His footstool in the day of His anger”
Calvin).
(2) ven 2. Faint adumbrations of the concomitants of a storm still flit across the field of
vision. As a sweeping torrent the Lord has swallowed up, and has not spared, all the habita-
tions of Jacob, including all sorts of country residences, and pasture-lands where men like
Jacob may dwell in tents and feed flocks ; all unfortified and unprotected places, as distinguished
from fortresses in following parallel line; He has thrown down in His wrath the strongholds
of the laughter of Judah ; the whole military power has gone under, also the governing power
he has cast to the earth, thus making them lick the dust and be trod upon by passers-by ; He
has profaned the kingdom, the royal house, and its princes : similarly it is said (Ps. lxxxix.
39), Tow hast profaned His crown [casting it] to the ground—the crown of His anointed, whom
he had cast of’ and rejected (ver. 88). The tenor of Bible-teaching is to the effect that men by


. sin affect the materials which they use, and so not only the sinners themselves, but their


dwellings, their goods, their plots of ground, their munitions, their governments, are scourged


OMAP. II. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : LAMENTATIONS.





by the wrath of God, in order to purify them from the pollution which has been infiltrated into
them by human guilt.

(1) Ver. 3. Three forms of disaster are specified. He has cut off in fierce anger every
horn of Israel: the horn being used as a symbol of strength or power, then all that was regarded
as a strength to the life of Israel, whether warlike men or arsenals of offensive and defensive
weapons, has perished. Power of resistance is removed. He has drawn back His right hand
from the face of the enemy ; He does not pluck it out of His bosom to help His people, and to
impede and rout the foes in their attacks, Aidis withheld. And He has burned in Jacob like
a blazing fire, devouring round about: His anger, as it were, kindled a conflagration which
has consumed all it touched. Consequent on strength gone and help refused, there is blank
devastation.

(1) Ver. 4, If a human enemy has wreaked his vengeance on Israel, the Lord Himself has
turned to be their enemy, and fought against them as an armed man. He has bent His bow as
an enemy standing, [as to] His right hand, as an adversary. This ambiguous phrase seems
to convey the idea that the Lord, like a man of war, had taken a hostile attitude and operation,
so that He has slain all that was pleasant to the eye, everything esteemed was deprived of
their qualities to please. On the tent of the daughter of Zion He has poured out as fire His
fury. Jerusalem as the dwelling-place of its inhabitants has been searched and scorched with
the spirit of justice and spirit of burning.

The preceding highly metaphorical expressions are suggestive ; they show that the poet saw,
what the men of his day, what the men of later days have failed to see aright, that the course
of human life is aglow with the devouring fire of the holiness of God. The light of Israel 1s for a
fire and his Holy One for a flame. Jews might have felt that the Chaldeans and others had made
their land as @ desolate wilderness ; we might feel that, when we are worsted in “the struggle
for life,” our “environment” has been unfavourable to us. Our eyes are holden, and we do not
perceive that the righteousness of God is the grand factor in all defeats, all crashes, all panics,
all losses ; using bad things, as fuel is used, to produce a fierce heat which shall eat away all
that is burnable. Not only on the other side of death is the uwnquenchable fire scorching sin ;
that fire is kindled and burning here and now. No screen can ward off the indignation of the
just and holy Lord ; the ashes of ruined fortunes, reputations, impurities, self-seekings, prove
that the breath of the Lord has kindled a fire to run through human society as intense, as over-
whelming as a stream of liquid lava. For our God is a consuming fire.

(71) Ver. 5. Hostilities were continued in other methods. The Lord has become as an
enemy, has swallowed up Israel; the national is submerged. This is indicated by material
evidence; He has swallowed up all her palaces, the great houses of the daughter of Zion; He
has destroyed all His strongholds, the fortified places which had been garrisoned by the people,
and He has multiplied in the daughter of Judah moaning and bemoaning. Two words,
which are derived from the same Hebrew root, and similar in sound, express the manifold and
intense sorrows which had been experienced.

(}) Ver. 6. The dwelling-place of Jehovah on Mount Zion, which He claims as His ow
possession, with all its appointed services, has shared in the tribulations. He has treated
violently, as a garden, His booth. The references in vers. 6 and 7 being to the methods of
Divine worship, the reference here will be to the Temple. He forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh,
the tent which He placed among men, and instead of this, in Salem was His tabernacle = booth,
but it also had come to be only a temporary habitation for the mighty God: that which He had
sanctified had been profaned by the inroads of unsanctified men. As a booth in a@ vineyard is
dismantled when the vintage is ingathered, so the stately Temple was contumeliously broken
down. The Septuagint reading, He tore up His tabernacle as a vine, harmonises with the idea of
the Hebrew phrase, viz., that the House of the Lord was laid waste. Consequent on this, He
has destroyed his [place of] solemn assembly, where He met with His people and blessed
them ; following this came awful manifestations of indifference even to the helps to serving the
Lord. The covenant God Jehovah has caused to be forgotten in Zion solemn assembly and
sabbath; the annual and weekly services were no longer in the minds of His professed people.
The old ritual was unavailable. Communion with one another and communion with God through
established religious forms were altogether in abeyance. They had to be taught that that which
decayeth and waxeth aged is to be replaced by a new covenant in which the service of men, and
the service of God would not be by ordered rules, but by love in the spirit. The persons also
who had been officially prominent in Temple-services were swept off the stage ; He has despised,
set no store by, in the vehemence of His anger, king and priest. The priesthood was indis-
pensable to the Temple-worship till there ariseth another Priest, made not after the law of a carnal
commandment, but after the power of an endless life. The connection of royalty with the Temple
is thus explained by Oehler: “The Israelitish kingdom, especially in David and Solomon,
bears a certain sacerdotal character, inasmuch as the king, at the head of the people and in their
name, pays homage to God and brings back again to the people the blessings of God.” This,
however, is defective in statement. What was done by the king was not done in any priestly
capacity, but as being the chief memper of the sacerdotal people. They were a kingdom of
priests unto Jehovah, Besides, is was done as representative of the Davidic monarchy, with
which the building and continuance of services in the house of the Lord were closely linked


40


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. CHAP, H.





(Jer. xxxiii. 21). Viewed in this light, the lamentation is, that Jehovah has rejected both the
royal family of David and the Levitical priesthood.

(t) Ver. 7. There has been entire desecration of the holy places. The Lord has cast off
his altar, the appointed erection on which burnt-offerings and sacrifices were presented to Him,
and which should come up with acceptance there. There was no standing for such action now.
He had abandoned it—its fires were quenched and cold: he has abhorred his sanctuary, the
whole enclosure of the holy places. But there all is not still; He has put into the hand of her
enemy the walls of her palaces, the crowning buildings of Mount Zion have been delivered
up to hostile people, and they have given voice in the house of the Lord; a victorious multi-
tude made within the glory-hallowed precincts such a jubilant noise as [in] a day of a solemn
assembly, but the clamour was the clamour of ruthless conquerors, not of rejoicing worshippers.

(Fi) Ver. 8. Jeremiah relates (chap. lii. 14) that all the army of the Chaldeans, that were
with the captain of the guard, brake down all the walls of Jerusalem round about. This was from
no mere chance of warfare, no shrewd decision of the commander of the invaders ; it was from
the predetermination of the God of Israel. Jehovah has purposed to destroy the wall of the
daughter of Zion. It was carried out according as He incited or restrained the agents of its
accomplishment ; he has stretched out the [measuring] line, and until His limitations were
reached he has not withdrawn his hand from overthrowing. Every division of the fortifica-
tions has suffered, and he has made the rampart and the wall to lament; they languish
together. All calamities have their methods and boundaries fixed by the All-wise. They do
not form a chaos, brought about by natural forces or human power. They are in an exact order,
and proceed to a verge which He has appointed. They are pregnant with gigantic issues.

(0) Ver. 9. Traces of the best constructed part of the wall have disappeared, covered
with debris. Her gates have sunk into the earth; the very means of fastening them are in
fragments ; he has destroyed and broken her bars. Like that had befallen the political and
religious barriers which separated her from other peoples. Her king and princes are among
the nations, swept away into exile. With the removal of civil authorities self-seeking and
anarchy had supervened. God’s rule of life, which required Temple and altar for its material
symbol, exists no more for the people ; there isnolaw. Still more sad, the proofs of the Lord’s
guidance had been withheld ; even her prophets find no vision from Jehovah to bring help and
comfort. There might be prophets, but they received no burden of the Lord. He will put
aside for a time His means of grace, if they cease to answer Divine ends.

(9) Ver, 10. Two classes, who were exponents of the intelligence and joy of the people,
prostrated like the rest, are no longer capable of acting their parts. They sit on the ground,
are silent, the elders of the daughter of Zion ; they exhibit other profound tokens of over-
whelming sufferings. “Small griefs are eloguent—great ones are dumb.” Also among the
ruins they hang down their heads to the ground, the virgins of Jerusalem ; the song, the
timbrel, the dance, have all been abandoned as vain things.

The retrospect of the poet, which had brought before him one sad scene after another in the
destruction of the Jewish state, and the desperate lot of various classes of its people, produced
a turmoil of emotions in himself, and appeals to men and God to join in his lamentations,

(3) Ver. 11. So exasperating is his misery that he feels as if organic parts of his body were
dismembered. My eyes fail with tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is poured upon
the ground—an effect of terrible grief, showing how body and soul are sympathetic with each
other over the breach of the daughter of my people. This shattered condition was replete
with the harrowing details of suffering, as when the young children and the sucklings faint
in the streets of the city. ;

(5) Ver. 12. His ears heard their piteous cravings, while to their mothers they are saying,
Where is corn and wine, solid and liquid nourishment. Even when listening, his eyes saw the
older children faint as the wounded in the streets of the city, and infants in arms poured
their souls into their mother’s bosom, which could supply no aliment. ; j

(1D) Ver. 13. He is ready, as a servant of the All-merciful and All-wise, to speak on His
behalf, so as to alleviate the clamant wretchedness ; but he feels unable. What shall I testify
to thee? No message is given to him from the Most High, and no resemblance to her condi-
tion is perceptible on the broad surface of past or present human life. What liken to thee, O
daughter of Jerusalem? The case is unparalleled, and there are no lessons applicable. What
shall I compare to thee and comfort thee [with], O virgin daughter of Zion? For great is
thy breach like the sea. Who will heal thee? Ruin had extended as far as to the horizon
of the people’s existence, and to the deep springs of thought. True, there had not been wanting
men who professed to be commissioned by Jehovah to declare that all would be well. They
healed the hurt—the word here translated breach—of the daughter of my people lightly, sayung,
Peace, peace, when there is no peace. f j

(2) Ver. 14. The Book of Jeremiah contains ample evidence as to who those miserable com-
forters were. It shows that, during the period just preceding the overthrow of Juda, there
were a number of persons who were accustomed glibly to say, The burden of Jehovah, but who
were mere pretenders to divine visions, who gave chaff and not wheat. The reason lay in the
character of the people. that formed its own instruments in politics and religion. If a people
prefer to have sensational statesmen, such statesmen will appear. If prophets Pee falsely,


OHAP. IL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





it is because the people love to have it so. They say wnto the prophets, Prophesy not unto us right
thinys, speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits. They got what they wanted. Thy prophets
have seen for thee, and the result is vanity and foolishness, unreal and unreasonable things,
They did not make known the will of God so as to expose the evil ways and doings of the people,
and prepare for amendment. They have not uncovered thine iniquity to turn away thy
captivity. Instead of that, their boasted visions tended to produce burdens of vanity and
causes of banishment. They prophesy a lie unto you, to remove you far from your land, and
that I should drive you out.


(OD) Ver. 15. Casual strangers on their travels felt glad at sight of desolated Jerusalem, ~


They clap their hands at thee, all who pass by the way, and add scorn to gladness ; they —
hiss and wag their head. ‘They use sarcasm, Is this the city which they called the perfec-
tion of beauty, a joy to the whole earth? So the glorying of the Jews is turned into a
reproach and shame.

(©) Ver. 16. A similar but wider view is presented than in the preceding verse. Not
strangers, but all thine enemies, filled with mockery and exultation, have opened their mouth
against thee. There is testimony in the Psalms as to how Orientals can belch out with their
mouth. Abrupt utterances follow, and intimate how excited and impassioned they were. We
have swallowed up. Hah! this is the day which we have expected, have found, have seen.
Now at length we see what we sought, get what we wanted.

(Y) Ver. 17. Whatever are the calamities suffered, whatever the taunts to which the people
are exposed in their ruined condition, they have not come from the onslaught of ruthless foes,
but from God, their own God. That was the final fact of the catastrophe which had over-
whelmed them. It is not the generalisations, called “laws,” which make history what it is,
but the will of ‘the living Lord.” He controls all existences, and His methods with them are
always definite and consistent. Not one faileth. Jehovah has done that which he purposed ;
he has fulfilled his word which he commanded from the days of old. Compare Lev. xxvi.
14 ff; Deut. xxviii. 15 ff. He keeps His word. His order has been faithfully carried out in the
overthrow of Jerusalem, and, giving entire power to boasting destroyers, he has exalted the
horn of thine adversaries. i

(¥) Ver. 18. Their heart cried unto the Lord. The cry is not to the God in covenant
with Israel, but to the ruler over all nations and all matter. Yet the pronoun their cannot
refer to the persons last spoken of. The adversaries were not likely to change their vaunts
into profound sympathy. It is appropriate to suppose that there was a part, at any rate, of the
downtrodden who would tell their heart-aches to the only Helper, and could not subdue the
longing to see all things around them express the tokens of keenest sorrow. O wall of the
daughter of Zion, let tears run down like a torrent day and night. Bold appeals to inani-
mate objects for signs of interest in human affairs are not strange to prophets of Israel, and
the call upon the shattered wall of Jerusalem seems grounded on the idea that it was regarded
as a mother embracing in its arms the city with its blighted hopes. It was not to be stemmed
and have respite; let not the pupil [Heb. daughter] of the eye cease from shedding tears.

(D) Ver. 19. Sleep is to be interrupted in order to weep. Arise, cry loud in the night, and |
as its hours pass on, rouse up at the beginning of the watches into which the night is divided,
Hearts that cried are to cast away all reserve before the Lord. They will have gone a long
way towards receiving help when they recognise that He who “is strong to smite is also strong
to save,” ‘They will take the attitude of prayer, Lift up thy hands to Him, and the first
matter to request will be the life of thy young children, whose sad case is again mentioned,
faint for hunger at the top of every street. Dying and dead little ones at every turn. A
sight for the Creator to consider.

(4) Ver. 20, The prayer is put into words correspondent with the circumstances. See,
Jehovah, and behold to whom thou hast done this, to the city called thine, to the people
whom thou hast chosen to be a name and pratse to thee. How shocking are the consequences !
See if women eat their fruit, the children whom they carried. The last word relates to
that which is spread—as infants on the knees or arms. The Revised Version translates it
dandled in the hands, which, if expressing the idea, is too special, The awful incident was a
punishment threatened (Deut. xxviii. 56, 57 ; Jer. xix.9). See if there are slain in the sanc-
tuary of the Lord priest and prophet His own holy place defiled with blood. If such
spectacles were common, as they were, will God not stay His hand ?

(~) Ver. 21. From the massacre in the Temple to the general slaughter of all ages and
both sexes is another step in the dismal recital. The youth and the oldman . . . my virgins
and choice young men, were killed. It was clear that they had to bear the anger of Jehovah
—that He was not only full of compassion, but in righteousness he doth judge and make war
upon evil.

(N) Ver. 22. Thou hast called as in a day of solemn assembly, summoning, as by
trumpet, all kinds of terrifying agencies—men, famine, fire, sword—my terrors on every ‘side,
and there was none that escaped or remained in the day of Jehovah’s anger. ‘Then, in
motherly anguish, she laments again over the children she had carried and brought up, whom
the enemv had cruelly consumed. So “the poem concludes, like the first, with deep sorrow,
regarding which all attempts at comfort are quite unavailing.”


42


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; LAMENTATIONS. OHAP, It,


a


HOMILETICS.
THE FIERCENESS OF THE DrIvINE ANGER.


(Verses 1-5.)


How wierd and sad is the lonely wail of the night-wind! How depressing
the monotony of the sobbing sea! How heart-rending the ceaseless moan of the
helpless sufferer! All the varying cadences of melancholy seem gathered up and
interpreted in the sorrowful monody of the tender-hearted prophet. It is still the
voice of lamentation that we hear: the strain, like the theme, is the same. From
his elevated rocky grotto Jeremiah overlooked the ruined city, and it seemed im-
possible for him to turn away his gaze from the scene of destruction that fascinated:
while it distressed him. In this chapter he describes, with vivid realism, the
harrowing circumstances connected with the siege and taking of the city. Bya
lofty flight of prophetic imagination he descries the awful form of the Almighty
hovering over Jerusalem, wreaking vengeance on the obstinate and rebellious
citizens. In this paragraph we learn that the jfierceness of the Divine anger—

I. Is a terrifying reality. ‘The Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a
cloud in his anger, and cast down the beauty of Israel” (ver. 1). The darkening
cloud that portends the approaching storm fills the stoutest heart with alarm, and
all nature cowers with fear under the crash of the dreadful thunder. The prophet
sees the Divine anger settling upon Jerusalem like a dark thunder-cloud, and
breaking in a tempest, by which the Temple is levelled to the ground. It is not
the cloud that led the Israelites from bondage to freedom, but a cloud of wrath
sent to punish for the aggravated abuse of that freedom. The cloud no longer
guides and protects ; it is now charged with the thunderbolt of retribution. The
anger of God is all the more terrible when manifested towards those who once
enjoyed His favour and compassion.

II. Is irresistible in its destructiveness (vers. 1-5). The beauty of Israel is
deformed, her pride humbled, her strength paralysed, her city reduced to ashes,
and her strongholds and inhabitants are remorselessly swept away Nothing can
_ withstand the Divine power, and when that power is exerted in anger, it makes
short work of the most formidable opposition. Storm, earthquake, fire, war, and
all the forces of the universe, obey the bidding of the Divine Word. The enemies
of God will be completely overthrown by the fierceness of His anger (Exod. xv. 7 ;
Ps. ii. 2-5, xxi. 8-10, Ixxix. 6; Isa. x. 6; Jer. x. 25; Nah. i. 2; 1 Thess ii. 16).

III. Intensifies the misery of its victims. ‘‘He hath increased in the
daughter of Judah mourning and lamentation” (ver. 5). When our miseries
come upon us from our enemies, we are not surprised; it is what we expected.
When we can trace them as the direct result of our own folly and sin, we know
they are deserved, and we strengthen ourselves to endure them as philosophically
as we can; but when the truth dawns upon us that God is against us, and it ig
His hand that smites us, we are startled at the discovery, and our distress is un
speakably increased. It is a bitter ingredient in the sufferings of the disobedient
to know that he has provoked the anger of the God of love. The suffering Christ
turns away for us the fierceness of the Divine anger.

Lessons.—l. Persistency in wrong-doing rouses the Divine anger. 2. When
the Divine anger is mantfested, it works terrible havoc. 3. Timely repentance averts
the worst consequences of the Divine anger.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 1, 2. The storm of the Divine the Lord covered the daughter of Zion
wrath: I. Overshadows the city wnose with a cloud in his anger” (ver. 1).


sins call for vengeance. “How hath II. Shatters the sanctuary where wor
43


CHAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





ship has been profaned. ‘Cast down
from heaven unto the earth the beauty
of Israel, and remembered not his foot-
stool in the day of his anger” (ver. 1).
III. Destroys the homesteads and for-
tresses of a rebellious people. ‘The
Lord hath swallowed up all the habi-
tations of Jacob. He hath thrown
down in his wrath the strongholds of
the daughter of Judah” (ver. 2). IV.
Dishonours the government that ignores
the claims of righteousness. “ He hath
polluted (profaned, made it common or
unclean) the kingdom and the princes
thereof ”’ (ver. 2).

Ver. 3. The defences of a nation:
I. Exposed to the ravages of the enemy
when the Divine protection ts withdrawn.
“He hath drawn back his right hand
from before the enemy.” II. Deprived
of their strength when assailed by the
Divine anger. ‘‘He hath cut off in
his fierce anger all the horn of Israel.
Ill. Utterly destroyed by the wrath
evoked by national sins. ‘‘He burned
against Jacob like a flaming fire, which
devoureth round about.”

Vers. 4, 5. Jehovah as an enemy:
I. Formidable to all who obstinately
resist him. “He hath bent his bow
like an enemy. He stood with his
right hand as an adversary” (ver. 4).
II. Works terrible destruction. ‘Slew


all that were pleasant to the eye. He
poured out his fury like fire. He hath
swallowed up Israel” (ver. 4,5). IIL.


Means augmented distress to those he
punishes. ‘‘Ue bath increased in the
daughter of Judah mourning and lamen-
tation ” (ver. 5).


ILLUSTRATIONS. — Neglect incurs
wrath. As the mariner takes the first
wind to sail, the merchant the first
opportunity of buying and selling, and
the husbandman the first opportunity
of sowing and reaping, so should young
men take the present season, the pre-
sent day, which is their day, to be
good towards the Lord, to seek Him
and serve Him, and not to put off the
present season, for they know not what
another day, another hour, another
moment may bring forth. That door
of grace that is open to-day may be

44


shut to-morrow ; that golden sceptre of
mercy that is held forth in the Gospel
this day may be taken in the next day ;
that love, that this hour is upon the
bare knee, entreating and beseeching
young men to break off their sins by
repentance, to return to the Lord, to
lay hold on His strength and be at
peace with Him, may the next hour be
turned into wrath.— Brooks.

— Plutarch writes of Hannibal, that
when he could have taken Rome he
would not, and when he would have
taken Rome he could not. Many in
their youthful days, when they might
have mercy, Christ, pardon, peace,
heaven, will not; and when old age
comes on they cannot, they may not.
God seems to say, as Theseus once said,
“Go and tell Creon, Theseus offers thee
a gracious offer. Yet I am pleased to be
friends if thou wilt submit—this is my
first message ; but if this offer prevail
not, look for me to be up in arms,”

— Whatever account you have to
settle with God, settle it now. There
are two “nows” in Scripture which
should never be separated. One stands
out in the brightest rays, the other
retires into deep shadows. ‘“ Now is
the accepted time.” “ Now they are
hid from Thine eyes.”— Vaughan.

Judgment a surprise. There are
sometimes some sad awakenings from
sleep in this world. It is very sad to
dream by night of vanished joys, to
revisit old scenes and dwell once more
among the unforgotten forms of our
loved and lost; to see in the dreamland
the old familiar look, and to hear the
well-remembered tones of a voice long
hushed and still, and then to awake
with the morning light to the aching
sense of our loneliness again. It were
very sad for the poor criminal to wake
from sweet dreams of other and happier
days—days of innocence, hope, and
peace, when kind friends and a happy
home and an honoured or unstained
name were his; to wake in his cell on
the morning of his execution to the
horrible recollection that all is gone
for ever, and that to-day he must die
a felon’s death. But inconceivably
more awful than any awakening which


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


OHAP. I¥,





earthly daybreak has ever brought
shall be the awakening of the self-
deluded soul when it is roused in
horror and surprise from the dream
of life to meet Almighty God in judg-
ment !—J. Caird.

Temporary storms. It is a dark
and cloudy day for you. A storm has
burst upon you; but you remember
how, after the storm, the bow is set in
the cloud for all who look above to the
Hand that smites them. The storm has
come, and now we must look up and
wait and watch in prayer and faith for
the rainbow of promise and comfort.—
Ministering Children.

Prolonged misery. When water
takes its first leap from the top, it is
cool, collected, uninteresting, mathe-
matical; but it is when it finds that it
has got into a scrape, and has further to
go than it thought for, that its character
comes out; it is then that it begins to
writhe and twist, and sweep out zone
after zone in wilder stretchings as it falls,
and to send down the rocket-like, lance-
pointed, whizzing shafts at its sides,
sounding for the bottom.— Ruskin.

There is mercy in every storm.
Every stroke of the rod is but the
muffled voice of love; every billow
bears on its bosom, and every tempest
on its wing, some new and rich blessing
from the better land. If the Lord were
to roll the Red Sea before us and mar-
shal the Egyptians behind us, and thus,
hemming us in on every side, should
yet bid us advance, it would be the
duty and the privilege of faith instantly
to obey, believing that, ere our feet
touched the water, God in our ex-
tremity would divide the sea and take
us dryshod over it. If for a moment
we leave the path, difficulties throng
around us, troubles multiply, the smallest
trials become heavy crosses, the heart
will sicken at disappointment, the
Spirit be grieved, and God disappointed.
— Winslow.

Goodness a nation’s defence. Abi-
jah’s goodness was towards the Lord ;
his goodness faced the Lord; it looked
towards the glory of the Lord, It is
recorded of the Catanenses that they
made a stately monument to two sons


who took their aged parents upon their
backs and carried them through the fire
when their father’s house was all ina
flame. These young men were good
towards their parents; but what is this
to Abijah’s goodness towards the Lord ?
He was good in the house of Jeroboam,
who made all Israel to sin; yet Abijah,
as the fishes which live in the salt sea
are fresh, so, though he lived in a sea
of wickedness, he retained his goodness
towards the Lord. They say roses
grow the sweeter when planted by
garlic. They are sweet and rare Chris-
tians indeed who hold their goodness
and grow in goodness where wicked-
ness sits on the throne. To be wheat
among tares, corn among chaff, and roses
among thorns, is excellent. To be a
Jonathan in Saul’s court, an Obadiah in
Ahab’s court, an Obedmelech in Zede-
kiah’s court, and an Abijah in Jero-
boam’s court, is a wonder, a miracle. To
be a Lot in Sodom, an Abraham in Chal-
dea, a Daniel in Babylon, a Nehemiah
in Damascus, and a Job in the land of
Uz, is to be a saint among devils. The
poets affirm that Venus never appeared
so beautiful as when she sat by black
Vulcan’s side. Gracious souls shine
most clear when they are set by black-
conditioned people. Stephen’s face
never shone so angelically, so gloriously
in the church where all were virtuous,
as before the council where all were very
vicious and malicious. So Abijah was
a bright star, a shining sun in Jero-
boam’s court, which for profaneness and
wickedness was a very hell.

— A substantial fence has been
erected enclosing the relic of the Coven-
anter’s stone on the summit of Duns
Law. On this historic spot the stan-
dard of the Covenanting army under
General Leslie was planted, and on the
stone a copy of the National League
and Covenant signed by the resolute
leaders on the 6th June 1639, At one
time the stone was prominently seen,
but it is now so much reduced by
the chipping and hacking of Vandalic
visitors as to be scarcely visible above
the green sward. Scotland has good
reason to be proud of the brave exploits
of its ancestors, who, whatever their

45


OHAP, II,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS,


failings, were men of earnest purpose,
and fought for those principles of right
and justice which helped to make pos-
sible the national life of to-day. The
records and memorials of their deeds
should be a constant stimulus to imi-
tate their noblest qualities. ‘‘ Remove
not the ancient landmarks which thy
fathers have set.”——The Scottish Pulpit.

Satan an enemy: but what of
Jehovah ? Satan is the enemy of every
saint, and he is an indefatigable enemy.
He never tires in his temptations to
ensnare souls to destroy them. He
“walketh about seeking whom he may
devour.” This denotes his main object


is to ruin the souls of men, and that he
does it in a deliberate, calm, systematic
way. He walks about observing times,
places, circumstances, characters—all
with a view to devour. He does asa
lion, to whom he is compared. Observe
his gentle tread, his fiery, searching
eye, his subtle plans, his secret am-
bushes, his hidden schemes, his con-
cealed name, nature, and character ; and
when he spies one of whom he can
take advantage, see how the lion-nature
is developed in the rush, the pounce,
the seizure, the tearing, the destruction.
But what must it be to the sinner to
find an enemy in Jehovah?


HOMILETICS.
THe WRECK oF RELIGIOUS ORDINANCES,


(Verses 6-9.)


I. The Temple is completely demolished (vers. 6-8). In a city where there
are many temples the destruction of one creates only a temporary inconvenience.
Jerusalem, and indeed the Jewish nation, had but one temple, and it had the
special distinction of being the only temple in the world dedicated to the worship
of Jehovah. It was always in the past, and is to this day, reverently referred to
as the Temple. It was idolised by the Jew, and was regarded as beyond the
reach of possible injury. It was encircled with the rampart of Omnipotence.
When menaced by the enemy, the people rallied round the sacred fane, prepared
to sacrifice everything in :ts defence. Here they made their last stand, and fought
with the fury of fanatics. But their zeal, bravery, and strategy were all in vain.
In their blind infatuation they saw not that the only invincible defence, the pre-
sence of Jehovah, was withdrawn. The Temple was doomed, and was reduced to
ruin with the same reckless indifference as a man would tear down a temporary
shelter in his garden (ver. 6). The gates, walls, palaces, altar, sanctuary, were
abandoned to utter destruction (vers. 7-9). The wreckage of such a temple was
not only a metropolitan, but a national calamity. Everything was gone when the
Temple was gone.

Il. The religious services, formerly observed with uninterrupted regularity,
are now utterly neglected. ‘‘The Lord hath caused the solemn feasts and Sab-
baths to be forgotten in Zion” (ver. 6). The annual and the weekly festivals are
no longer observed. “There is an intensive force in its being no longer Adonai,
but Jehovah, who lets them pass into oblivion. He had once instituted them for
His own honour, now He lets them lie forgotten.” When religion is neglected,
all days are alike; there is nothing to mark off Sabbath-days from week-days,
sacred days from common days. Life is reduced to the dead level of dull mono-
tony, and the days drag on in the weary routine of comfortless and aimless labour.

“ He liveth long who liveth well—
All else is being flung away ;
He liveth longest who can tell
Of true things truly done each day.”


Intellectual pursuits and activity are a poor substitute for genuine religion.
Education not founded on religion is only a varnish. Abolish the Sabbath and
46





%
.


PS ae eee a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. CHAP. I.





the decay of religion begins. A poet calls the Sabbath “ Heaven once a week.”
Day of rest, of days the best.

III. The principal worshippers are in exile. ‘ Her king and her princes are
among the Gentiles” (ver. 9). The prophet has been principally occupied with
the buildings of the city and Temple. Now he turns to the people, and beginning
with their temporary rulers, he laments the sad fate of the king and princes who,
no longer seen taking their part in the Temple service, were, like many of their
people, captives in the hands of the heathen. With the best external aids it is
difficult to maintain the spirituality of worship; but that difficulty is increased
when all external accessories are withdrawn, and man is placed in the midst of
irreligious heathenism. If he does not strive to propagate what religion he has,
he will lose it. To love and worship God we must know Him, and this we can-
not do till He graciously reveals Himself. The astronomer seeking to observe a
star, can do nothing till he directs his telescope towards the star. The dim light
of evening is with him, and by it he sets the telescope and guides it to the proper
point in the heavens. But when he has pointed it to the star, the light of the
star streams into the telescope, lighting it up with a new and brighter illumina-
tion. The soul of man is a telescope by which he is seeking to see and know God.
_ The general illumination of the heart is in the world. All pagans have it. But

when man has adjusted the lenses of the soul, God flashes down it, and produces
an image of Himself in the poor earthly tube.

IV. The Law and the Prophets are discredited. ‘The law is no more; her
prophets also find no vision from the Lord” (ver. 9). The Jewish law, the
Torah, came to an end when it had no longer a local habitation. Its enactments
were essentially those, not of a catholic, but of a national religion, and the restora-
tion of the nation with a material temple was indispensable to its continued exist-
ence. It was only when elevated to be a catholic religion by being made spiritual
that it could do without ark, temple, and a separate people (Jer. ili, 16, xxxi.
31-34). With the Torah the special gift of prophecy also ceased, since both were
peculiar to the theocracy ; but it was not till the establishment of Christianity that
they were finally withdrawn, or rather merged in higher developments of grace,
Jeremiah now laments over the temporary removal of Judah’s special privileges
before they had accomplished their office. At the return from exile they were
for the time restored.—Speaker’s Comm.

It isa grave calamity to church or nation to be deprived of men of insight and
inspiration. These men give direction and character to the best work we are
eapable of doing. Much of the work of the world is done in a perfunctory man-
ner—done to get through with it, done to get it off one’s mind, done to secure the
return which it promises. It is done without enthusiasm, originality, or con-
tagious zeal, The men who give their work character, distinction, perfection, are
the men whose spirit is behind their hands, giving them a new dexterity. There
is no kind of work, from the merest routine to the highest creative activity, which
does not receive all that gives it quality from the spirit in which it is done or
fashioned. ‘The highest and best work is done when the soul receives its “ vision
from the Lord” and is animated by His inspiration.

Lussons.—1l. Religion seeks practical expression in worship and service. 2.
The loss of religious ordinances is a national calamity. 3, The abuse of religious
opportunities is punished by their withdrawal.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 6.‘‘He hath violently takenaway Is but a temporary structure, however
his tabernacle, as if it were of a garden; elaborately built. 2. Is desecrated
He hath destroyed His places of the when a false worship is offered. 3.
assembly.” The earthly temple: 1. When defiled, is suddenly destroyed,

47


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





as a man may tear down in a few mo-
ments a fragile hut erected for his tem-
porary pleasure in a garden, 4. Its
destruction suggests reflections on man’s
unfaithfulness and God's anger.

— Perverted worship; I. Involves the
loss of stated privileges. “The Lord
hath caused the solemn feasts and Sab-
baths to be forgotten in Zion.” II.
Rouses the Divine displeasure. ‘The
indignation of His anger.” III. Entazle
regal and ecclesiastical dishonour. ‘ And
hath despised the king and the priest.”

Ver. 7. A despised sanctuary: I.
Its holiest places rejected with disdain
by an offended Deity. ‘The Lord hath
cut off his altar; he hath abhorred his
sanctuary.” II. Completely abandoned
to destruction. “He hath given up
into the hand of the enemy the walls of
her palaces.” III. The wild shouts of
its destroyers a strange contrast to the
exultant joy of former worshippers.
‘‘They have made a noise in the house
of the Lord, as in the day of a solemn
feast.”

Ver. 8. The implacable destroyer:
I. Works in harmony with a fixed deter-
mination. ‘The Lord hath purposed
to destroy the wall of the daughter
of Zion.” II. Carries out his purpose
with systematic thoroughness. ‘“ He
hath stretched out a line; he hath
not withdrawn his hand from de-
stroying.” III. Lays the strongest de-
fences in lamentable ruin. ‘‘ Therefore
he hath made the rampart and the wall
to lament; they languished together,”

Ver. 9. National ruin complete: IL
When all public buildings are destroyed.
“Her gates are sunk into the ground;
he hath destroyed and broken her bars.”
Il, When the rulers are in exile. ‘‘ Her
king and her princes are among the
Gentiles.” IIL When religious ordin-
ances are suspended. ‘The law is no
more.” IV. When religious teachers
are deprived of Divine inspiration.
“‘Her prophets also find no vision from
the Lord.”


ILLustTRATIONS. — Undercurrents
cause wrecks. A ship was stranded on
the island of Sanda, in the Orkneys. It
was a mystery to the captain how the

48


vessel got there. Being foggy at the
time, he carefully consulted his chart, .
and both he and the mate worked up
the position, their reckonings exactly
agreeing as to latitude, but differing
slightly in longitude. The captain had
navigated the ship for ten years with-
out any misfortune. He attributed the
accident to the force of an undercurrent
which carried him unknowingly out of
his course, and learnt afterwards from
fishermen in the locality that a current
was frequently felt in that sea as far
as sixty miles from land. The sea of
life is intersected with dangerous under-
currents, and the watchful student will
be careful to watch their tendency and
strength, While on the fringe of the
current, it is comparatively easy to
escape, but if we drift into the midst
of the irresistible swirl, we shall be
hurried on to inevitable disaster. You
have seen the tiny snowflakes flutter
about the railway track, like lovely bits
of down shook from angelic wings, and
you have seen with what ease the proud
locomotive scatters the fleecy morsels
in the early stages of the storm; but
the falling atoms increase with such
persistent rapidity and accumulative
force, that the panting engine is at
length completely strangled, and, utterly
exhausted, les buried fathoms deep
beneath the crystal mound.—TZhe Scot- -
tish Pulpit.

Ordinances help religious life. Grace
is like a spark in wet wood, that needs
continual blowing. "Would you have
and keep up ardent desires? Do as
they that would keep in the fire; cherish
the sparks and blow them up to a flame.
There is no man lives under the means
of grace and under the discoveries of
God and religion but has his good
moods and lively motions. The waters
are stirred many times; take hold of
this advantage. Strengthen the things
that remain and are ready to die, and
blow up these sparks into a flame. God
has left us enkindling means—prayer,
meditation, and the Word. Observe
where the bellows blow hardest, and ply
that course. The more supernatural
things are, there needs more diligence
to preserve them. A _ strange plant


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : LAMENTATIONS,


needs more care than a native of the
soil. Worldly desires, like a netile,
breed of their own accord, but spiritual
desires need a great deal of cultivating.
—Manton.

— The Christian is compared to a
merchantman who trades for rich pearls;
he is to go to ordinances as the mer-
chant sails from port to port, not to see
places, but to take in his lading, some
here, some there. A Christian should
be as much ashamed to return empty
from his traffic with ordinances as the
merchant to come home without his
lading. But, alas! how little is this
looked after by many that pass for
great professors, who are like some idle
persons, that come to the market not to
buy provision and carry home what
they want, but to gaze and look upon
what is there to be sold, to no purpose !
O my brethren, take heed of this !—
Gurnall.

The earthly temple and perverted
worship. There is a great difference
between religiousness and_ religion.
Man is a religious animal, he must and
will worship something. But the reli-
gion which the Bible teaches is a total
change of the heart, and of the aim and
purpose of life.—Calthrop.

— Believers are in danger of seduc-
tion into the sin and falsehood of the
world. The world threatens believers
not only with its enmity, but evermore
with its temptations. Believers must
be warned to shun the idols the world
worships, and they are warned against
love to the world, because love in that
way very easily gets associated with
sinful lusts, which are common in the
world. In false prophecy it is shown
that the devil, who was a murderer and
liar from the beginning, threatens the
Church, not only with the deadly
enmity of the world, but also with its
soul-destroying lies. We cannot show
brotherly love to false teachers without
running the risk of making ourselves
partakers in their sins.— Weiss.

. — Means—the table of the Lord, the

pulpit, the pages of the Bible, the family

altar, the closet oratory—are of no value

unless as putting us in communication

with the Spirit of God, and used as the
49


OHAP. I.


kite which the philosopher sends up to
draw down the lightnings of the skies,
or the bucket which the cottager sends
down to draw up water from the well.
Then, powerless as they are in them-
selves, they become the blessed and
mighty instrument of spiritual good ;
the sails that catch the wind and impel
the vessel on; the concave mirror that,
placed before the Sun of Righteousness,
gathers His beams into its burning focus
to warm the coldest and melt the hardest
heart ; eagle-wings to raise our souls to
heaven ; conduits, like the pipes that
bring water to our city from these Pent-
land Hills, to convey streams of grace,
peace, and purity from their fountain
in heaven to our souls on earth,—
Guthrie.

A despised sanctuary. Those that
turn their backs on God’s ordinances
and, in rebellion to His commandments,
live in sins against conscience, can they
wonder that He hides His face from
them when they turn their backs on
Him? When we sin, we turn our backs
upon God and our face to the devil,
the world, and pleasure ; and can men
wonder that God suffers them to melt
and pine away? Let us do as the
flowers do, turn themselves to the sun.
Let us turn ourselves to God in medita-
tion and prayer, striving and wrestling
with Him. Look to Him, eye Him in
His ordinances and promises, and have
communion with Him all the ways we
can. Let our souls open and shut with
Him. When He hides His face, let
us drocp as the flowers do till the sun
comes again. So, when we have not
daily comfort of the Spirit in peace of
conscience, let us never rest seeking
God’s face in His ordinances and by
prayer, and that will cheer a drooping
soul as the sunbeams do the flagging
flowers. —Sibbes.

Retribution implacable. Fatalism
and Atheism are preached constantly
amidst the plaudits of ignorant English-
men. How many politicians deem the
matter a thing of the slightest conse-
quence! Hume would never have set
cities on fire, beheaded or hacked to
pieces human beings, least of all the
refined, the noble, the educated; but

D


CHAP. IL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





he must be reckoned among those who
sneeringly scattered smouldering embers
and bequeathed to others death by the
inevitable conflagration. Seldom has
the logic of events been more complete
than in the great French Revelution.—
Bampton Lecture.

— What a diabolical invention was
the “Virgin’s Kiss,” once used by the
fathers of the Inquisition! The victim
was pushed forward to kiss the image,
when, lo! its arms embraced him in a
deadly embrace, piercing his body with
a hundred hidden knives. The tempt-
ing pleasures of sin offer to the unwary
just such a virgin’s kiss. The sinful
joys of the flesh lead, even in this world,
to results most terrible, while in the
world to come the daggers of remorse
and despair will cut and wound beyond
all remedy.—Spurgeon.

— Crime and punishment grow out
of one stem. Punishment is a fruit
that unsuspected ripens within the
flower of the pleasure that concealed
it.—Hmerson.

National ruin. The whole history
of Christianity shows that she is in
far greater danger of being corrupted
by the alliance of power than of being


treat her as her prototypes treated her
Author, They bow the knee, and spit
upon her; they cry, “Hail!” and
smite her on the cheek; they put a
sceptre in her hand, but it is a fragile
reed ; they crown her, but it is with
thorns; they cover with purple the
wounds which their own hands have
inflicted, and inscribe magnificent let-
ters over the cross on which they have
fixed her, to perish in ignominy and
pain. —Macaulay.

— Human society reposes on religion.
Civilisation without it would be like
the lights that play in the northern
sky—a momentary flash on the face of
darkness ere it again settled into eter-
nal night. Wit and wisdom, sublime
poetry and lofty philosophy, cannot save
a nation, else ancient Greece had never
perished. Valour, law, ambition, can-
not preserve a people, else Rome had
still been mistress of the world. The
nation that loses faith in God and man
loses not only its most precious jewel, >
but its most unifying and conserving
force ; has before it a


‘6 Stygian cave forlorn
Where brooding Darkness spreads his jealous
wings,


crushed by its opposition, Those who


: And the night-raven sings.”
thrust temporal sovereignty upon her 2 3


—Fairbairn,


HOMILETICS.
VOICELESS WOE,


(Verse 10.)


I. Too deep for words. “The elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the
ground and keep silence.” A graphic description of sympathy and sorrow. The
judges and magistrates, accustomed to occupy with dignity the judgment-seats,
the thrones of the house of David, and to discourse eloquently on important points
of law, now sit dejectedly upon the ground, without uttering a word. It was
thus that the friends of the afflicted Job silently expressed their sympathy (Job
ii 13). There is a moment in the swing of a great sorrow when speech seems
impossible—when words, if spoken, would grate upon the ear as a harsh intrusion.
We prefer to be left alone and undisturbed till the pressure of the trial is relieved.
We are distraught, stunned, and want time to come to ourselves. The most
delicate and effectual way in which our kindest friends can help us is to be silent.
No words can express our sorrow. Small griefs are eloquent enough, but great
unes are dumb.

II. Expressed in abject humiliation. ‘They have cast up dust upon their
heads ; they have girded themselves with sackcloth.” They are stripped of.their
robes coe and all their judicial dignities and prestige. They have lost their

0


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. OHAP.





| offices and their wealth. Greatness and prosperity are exchanged for sackcloth
| and ashes. The loss of worldly goods brings sorrow to many. An old Latin
| proverb says, “Genuine are the tears shed over lost property.” Those who have
_ boasted most about their possessions, and carried their heads high in times of
_ plenty, feel most keenly the humiliating straits of poverty. But how crushing
1s the humiliation when we realise we have lost all—our wealth, our friends, our
national status, our religion, our God! Such a woe is voiceless indeed.
| III. Overwhelms the soul with conscious shame. ‘The virgins of Jerusalem
_ hang down their heads to the ground.” ‘Time was when the haughty daughters
_ of Zion courted public admiration as they tripped mincingly along the streets of
_ Jerusalem, decked in richest apparel, and their every movement musical with
_ tinkling ornaments (Isa. iii. 16); but now their pride is humbled, and they are
_ bowed to the earth with conscious shame. And yet it is from this broken and
_ Gejected condition we trace the beginning of better things. It is on crushed
grain that man is fed; it is by bruised plants that he is restored to health. It
| was by broken pitchers that Gideon triumphed ; on broken pieces of the ship that
_ Paul and his companions were saved. It was by the bruised and torn bodies of
_ the saints that the truth was made to triumph. When we examine the process
of moral reform in nations and individuals, we observe how effectually God has
used many broken things in the rebuilding of a shattered character—broken


earthly hopes, broken bodily health, broken fortunes, broken hearts.


“A broken


and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise” (Ps. li, 17, xxxiv. 18).





Lessons.—l. The greatest sorrow is speechless.
personal helplessness.
and gladness.


InLustRrations.- -The loneliness of
woe. You are tried alone, alone you
must pass into the desert, alone you
must be sifted by the world; there are
moments, known only to a man’s own
self, when he sits by the poisoned springs
of existence, “yearning for a morrow
which shall free him from the strife.”
Let life be a life of faith; do not go
timorously about inquiring what others
think, what others believe, and what
others say. God is near you. Throw
yourself fearlessly on Him. Trembling
mortal! there is an unknown might
within your soul which will wake when
you command it. Every son of man
who would attain the true end of his
being must be baptized with fire.-—/.
W. kobertson.

Dejection and despair. The more
sin and corruption grow, and the man
becomes fully conscious of it, the more
does dejection grow also, and this
changes at last into despair, which is a
state of entire hopelessness, where all
possibilities have vanished, all gates
and ways are closed to a man. There
is a despair for a hard fate, and it not


2. A sense of sin is a sense of


3. The grace of God can change the greatest woe into hope


seldom happens that a man, in conse-
quence of a single severe stroke, makes
a sudden leap from his natural state ot
security into a state of despair, be it
that he has lost a beloved human being,
or his means, or in any other misfor-
tune. Against this form of despair
even heathenism had a remedy—re-
signation, submission to the inevitable.
But the deepest despair is when a man
gives up hope, not merely for this or
that which he called his own, but for
himself as a moral being. ‘There is one
sustaining and saving power—faith in
God. Despair may and should become
the transition to salvation, if the man
only despairs of himself, but does not
give up his God. In the expression of
entire inability, of deepest helplessness
—“O wretched man that I am’’—there
is latent a hope of redemption, the hope
that what is impossible with man is
possible with God.— Martensen.

The ravages of suffering. After the
relief of the city of Paris, the strain
and fatigue through which M. had
gone told seriously upon his health.
He could not forget the horrors he had

51





OHAP. IL,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





witnessed. His face began to look worn.
His hair became greyer. He looked
depressed. His usual cheerful and
buoyant energy disappeared, and he
became listless, self-absorbed, and mel-
ancholy.

Depression. Just before George
Moore’s entrance into his palatial house


is he amidst his lovely family! I wom
der whether he has a coffin in any cup
board.”

Solitude oppressive. When Thomas,
the missionary to India, reached Cal-
cutta, he was oppressed with a sense of
loneliness. He put an advertisement
in the newspapers asking if there was


in Cumberland, his wife died. This
brought an almost intolerable sense of
loneliness. One day, going to see an
intimate friend, he said, ‘‘ How blessed


another Christian in the country, and
begging for an interview. But there
was no answer |


HOMILETICS.
THe Utrer EXHAUSTION OF GRIEF.


(Verses 11, 12.)


I. Because of the hopelessness of the desolation endured. “ For the destruc-
tion of the daughter of my people” (ver. 11), The desolation is complete. Every-
thing is destroyed—Temple, home, army, nation, wealth, food, and the very
sapacity to rouse themselves from the torpor of despair. When the light of hope
is quenched it is impossible to put forth effort. Paralysis is destruction.

IJ. Because of the heart-rending spectacle of little children fainting in the
streets and dying in their mothers’ arms, while they vainly moan for food.
“ Because the children and the sucklings swoon in the streets. They say to their
mothers, ‘Where is corn and wine?’ when their soul was poured out into their
mother’s bosom” (vers. 11, 12). The harrowing details here given are the most
affecting that have. yet been depicted by the graphic and versatile pen of the pro-
phet. The cry—an oft-repeated cry, as the tense means—of the children for
food, which the mothers were powerless to supply, only added to the tortures they
already suffered. So completely prostrate were they with their misery, that they
saw their children die with indifference, and could not conceal an unnatural relief
when they heard their last sob. Excessive grief blunts the edge of the finest
natural instincts.

III. Because all the powers for expressing emotion are completely spent.
“Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is poured upon
the earth” (ver. 11). Jeremiah employs the terms in ordinary use, and as they
were popularly understood. As the heart was regarded by the Jews as the seat
of the intellect, so the liver, as the chief of the large viscera classed together under
the name of bowels, was supposed to be the seat of the emotions. By the pouring
out, therefore, of the liver upon the ground was meant that his feelings had
entirely given way under the acuteness of his sorrow, and he could no longer
restrain them.—Speaker’s Comm. The agony of grief was passed. It was quelled
by sheer exhaustion. He wept till he could weep no more. He grieved till he
was incapable of feeling his grief. A tearless sorrow is the most dangerous, and
the most difficult to cure.

Lxessons.—1. There is a limit to the greatest human sorrow. 2. There ts a
moment in the experience of the sufferer when death vtself is welcome. 3. The
greatest sorrow is a painful testimony to the desolating power of sin,


52


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; LAMENTATIONS.


OHAP. Ii,


ee


| ILuustRatTions.—Grief prostrating.
_ Late in the afternoon of a summer day
| I entered a quiet graveyard where slept
| one of my dearest friends. It occupied
_ the brow of a hill, which, with many a
_ knoll and graceful undulation, sloped to
| the green meadow, watered by a wind-
ing stream, now catching, at its repeated
| curves, the rays of the setting sun. On
| the left was a pleasant wood, where the
sturdy pine and fruit-bearing beech
concealed narrow paths to cool caves
and mossy banks. White birches and
the trembling aspen, with the sweet-
_ scented willow, grew upon the right,
_ and from beyond rose the curling smoke
from the cottage-houses. A robin sang
its song of love and praise, a sparrow
passed me bearing food to its little
progeny, and the chirp of the merry
_ grasshopper mingled with the hum of
hundreds of flitting insects, But for
this peace-breathing scene I had no
greeting. The wild storm, thunder,
rain, and darkness had been more wel-
come. Yielding utterly to my grief,
I threw myself upon the sod, and took
no heed of time. There came over me
a sense of utter and hopeless desolation ;
an agony like that of death turned to
bitterness the blessings of my lot.

— Grief is a flower as delicate and
prompt to fade as happiness. Still it
does not wholly die. Like the magic
rose, dried and unrecognisable, a warm
air breathed on it will suffice to renew
its bloom.—De Gasparin.

Misery makes indelible impressions.
The rapidity with which ideas grow old
in our memories is in a direct ratio to
the squares of theirimportance. Their
apparent age runs up miraculously, like
the value of diamonds, as they increase
in magnitude. A great calamity, for
instance, is as old as the trilobites an
hour after it has happened. It stains
backward through all the leaves we
have turned over in the book of life
before its blot of tears or of blood is
dry on the page we are turning. Did
you ever happen to see that most soft-
spoken and velvet-handed steam-engine
at the Mint? The smooth piston slides
backwards and forwards as a lady might
slip her delicate finger in and out of a


ring. The engine lays one of its fingers
calmly but firmly upon a bit of metal ;
it is a coin now, and will remember that
touch, and tell a new race about it,
when the date upon it is crusted over
with twenty centuries. So it is that
a great silent-moving misery puts a new
stamp on us in an hour or a moment—
as sharp an impression as if it had
taken half a lifetime to engrave it.—
Holmes,

Distress exhausting. Distress is
trouble of a mental kind, tending tc
despair. Tribulation may be described
as the “fighting without,” whilst dis-
tress may be described as the “ fears
within.” That kind of trouble is in-
dicated which comes upon a wrestler
when his antagonist has succeeded in
throwing him after a long struggle,
has got his foot on him, is holding
him down, and all seems to be up with
him. Before, when wrestling, he was
troubled, now he is distressed. Thus
we see that the afflictions contemplated
by the terms tribulation and distress
are no light ones ; and it is little wonder
that, under the strain of such untoward
circumstances of outward and inward
trouble, the Christian should lose heart
and fear the worst.

Grief excessivelyindulged. Ebenezer
Adams, an eminent member of the
Society of Friends, on visiting a lady
of rank, whom he found, six months
after the death of her husband, seated
on a sofa covered with black cloth and
in all the dignity of woe, approached her
with great solemnity, and gently taking
her by the hand, thus addressed her:
“So, friend, I see, then, thou hast not
yet forgiven God Almighty.” This
reproof had so great an effect on the
lady, that she immediately laid aside
her violent grief, and again entered on
the discharge of the duties of life.

The cure of excessive sorrow. A
pale mourner stood bending over the
tomb, and his tears fell fast and often.
As he raised his humid eyes to heaven,
he cried, “My brother! O my brother.”
A sage passed that way and said, ‘“ For
whom dost thou mourn?” ‘ One,”
replied he, “ whom I did not sufficiently
love while living, but whose inestimable

53


OHAP. IL


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





worth I now feel.” “ What wouldst
thou do if he were restored to thee?”
The mourner replied that he would
never offend him by an unkind word,
but would take every occasion to show
his friendship, if he could but come
back to his fond embrace. ‘Then,
waste not thy time in useless grief,”
said the sage ; ‘‘ but if thou hast friends,
go and cherish the living, remembering
that they will one day be dead also.”
— Like the passengers through the


tunnelled Alps from the dark, cold,
stifling air, emerging on the broad light-
flooded plains of Lombardy, it is often
by a way which they know not, gloomy
and underground, that the convoy is
carried which God’s Spirit is bringing
to the wealthy place; and your present
grief you will have no reason to regret
if it introduce you to God’s friendship
and to joys which do not perish in the
using. Affliction is God’s message,—
Hamilton.


HOMILETIUVS.


INEXPRESSIBLE RUIN.
(Verse 13.)


I. Is incomparable with any ordinary calamity. ‘‘ What thing shall I take
to witness for thee? What thing shall I liken to thee? What shall I equal to
thee?” Great as may be our distress, it is some comfort, slight though it be, to
know there are others more or less unfortunate. But in this case, the prophet
has no message from Jehovah to afflicted Judah, nor can he offer the ordinary
human consolation of saying that others have had equal or worse sorrow to bear.
The lamentable condition of Jerusalem was unparalleled ; there had been nothing
like it. No city had been so highly privileged with Divine honours: no city
had been so signally punished. “ Behold, and see if there be any sorrow like
unto my sorrow” (chap. i. 12). Jeremiah had exhausted all his powers of
description. Desperate indeed must be the state of Judah when such a master
of similes had to confess his inability to coin an adequate comparison.

II. Is measureless as the illimitable ocean. ‘“ For thy breach is great like
the sea.” In his extremity to find some comparison, the prophet mentions the sea,
which, on account of its vast dimensions, its illimitable depth and breadth, could
alone furnish a fitting emblem of the magnitude of the devastation effected by
the Chaldeans. The indefiniteness of the figure thus used reveals at once the
straits to which the writer was reduced, and the utter ruin in which Judah was
‘ overwhelmed. Thou hast a flood of afflictions, a sea of troubles, an ocean of
miseries.

III. Is beyond the power of human consolation and repair. ‘ What shall
I equal to thee, that I may comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Zion? who can
heal thee?” Human words fail; human help is powerless. There is no comfort
in man, or in any number of men. If there is to be any relief or restoration,
it must come from God. He alone can change ruin into prosperity, misery into
joy, darkness into light. A traveller in Madeira set off one morning to climb the
summit of a lofty mountain to gaze upon the distant scene and enjoy the balmy
air. He had a guide, and they had with difficulty ascended some two thousand
feet, when a thick mist was seen descending upon them, obscuring the heavens,
The traveller thought there was no hope left but to retrace their steps or be lost,
But as the cloud came nearer and darkness enveloped them, the guide stepped on
before, penetrating the mist, calling out every now and then, “Press on, master,
press on; there’s light beyond!” They did press on, and in a few minutes,
emerging from the thick mist, found themselves gazing upon a scene of tran-
scendent beauty. Above, the sky was bright and cloudless; below, the almost
level cloud through which they had passed was silvered with the rays of the sun,

54





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP, I.


ooo sssssssssssssssssSsSsSsS—


there is light beyond!”


| like a field of untrodden snow. In the darkest experiences, if we will but listen,
we may hear the voice of our Divine Guide exclaiming,


“Press on, press on;


Lessons.—l. Great indeed is the calamity that baffles human ingenuity to


describe.


2. The nation is utterly undone when smitten by the hand of God.


3. God alone can repair the damage His righteous anger has inflicted,





ILLustRATIONS. — Drifting to ruin.
Two or three miles above the falls of
Niagara an Indian canoe was one day
observed floating quietly along, with
its paddle on its side. At first it was
supposed to be empty. No one could
imagine a man would expose himself
to such well-known danger ; but a turn
of the current revealed an Indian lying


asleep at the bottom. The spectators


were shocked, and shouted to rouse
him, but in vain. It seemed more like
death than sleep which held him. All
hope of rescue was gone, and they hur-
ried along the shore in alarm to see the
end. It soon came, for the torrent was
now rolling so rapidly that they could
scarcely keep pace with the object of
their interest. At length the roar of the
water, which had been hitherto almost
buried within the high banks below,
by a sudden change of the wind broke
upon them with double violence. This
dreadful noise, with which the Indian
ear was so familiar, did at last arouse
him. He was seen to start up and
snatch his paddle. But it was too late.
The same dinning sound which had
roused him from insensibility told him
at the same time that it was in vain to
seek safety now by paddling, nor indeed
had he time to try. Upright as he stood
he was swept over the awful precipice,
and the boat and its occupant were seen
no more.

Ruin and responsibility. Julian the
Apostate had for his coat of arms on his
escutcheon an eagle struck through the
heart with a shaft feathered from her
own wing, with the motto, “ Our death
flies to us with our own feathers, and
our wings pierce us to the very heart.”
The moral is, that if a man receives
injury, he alone has caused it, and is
alone to blame.


Unutterable ruin. Every man feels,


and not strangely, that there never were
such experiences of life as hisown. No
joy was ever like our joy, no sorrow
ever like our sorrow. Indeed, there is
a kind of indignation excited in us
when one likens our grief to his own.
The soul is jealous of its experiences,
and does not like pride to be humbled
by the thought that they are common.
For though we know that the world
groans and travails in pain, and has
done so for ages, yet a groan heard by
our ear is a very different thing from
a groan uttered by our mouth. The
sorrows of other men seem to us like
clouds of rain that empty themselves in
the distance, and whose long-travelling
thunder comes to us mellowed and sub-
dued ; but our own troubles are like a
storm bursting right overhead and send-
ing down its bolts upon us with direct
plunge.— Beecher.

Ruin the punishment for sin. Fear-
ful it is to consider that sin does not
only drive us into calamity, but it
makes us also impatient, and embitters
our spirit in the sufferance: it cries
aloud for vengeance, and so torments
men before the time with such fearful
outcries and horrid alarms, that their
hell begins before the fire is kindled.
It hinders our prayers, and consequently
makes us hopeless and helpless. It
perpetually affrights the conscience, un-
less by its frequent stripes it brings
a callousness and an insensible damna-
tion upon it. It makes us lose all that
Christ purchased for us—all the bless-
ings of His providence, the comforts of
His Spirit, the aids of His grace, the
light of His countenance, the hopes of
His glory.— Jeremy Taylor.

— The pain, the disappointment, the
dissatisfaction that wait on an evil
course, show that the soul was not
made to be the instrument of sin, but

55


OHAP. I.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





its lofty avenger. The desolated affec-
tions, the haggard countenance, the
pallid and sunken cheek, the sighings
of grief, proclaim that these are ruins
indeed ; but they proclaim that some-
thing noble has fallen into ruin, pro-
claim it by signs mournful yet venerable,
like the desolation of an ancient temple,
like its broken walls and fallen columns,
and the hollow sounds of decay that
sink down heavily among its deserted
recesses.— Dewey.

Helpless ruin appeals to our sym-
pathy. Helplessness appealing to our
pity begets affection. ‘In one of the
cottages of my country parish dwelt a
poor idiot child, horrible to all eyes
but her parents, and so helpless that,
though older than sisters just blooming
into womanhood, she lay, unable either
to walk or speak, a burden on her
mother’s lap almost the whole day long
—a heavy handful to one who had the
cares of a family, and was the wife of
a hard-working man, and a most pain-
ful contrast to the very roses that flung
their bright clusters over the cottage
window, as well as to the lark that,
pleased with a grassy turf, carolled
within its cage. Death, in most in-
stances an unwelcome visitor, came at
length—to her and to their relief. Re-
lief! so I thought ; and when the father
came with an invitation to the funeral,
so I said. Though not roughly, but in-
advertently spoken, the word jarred on
a tender chord; and I was more than


ever taught how helplessness begets
affection in the very measure and pro-
portion of itself, when he burst into
a fit of sorrow, and, speaking of hit
beautiful boys and blooming girls, said,
“Tf it had been God’s will, I would
have parted with any of them rather
than her.”—Guthrie.

No hope but in God. The ninth
capital in the Ducal Palace at Venice
is decorated with figures of the eight
virtues—Faith, Hope, Charity, Justice,
Temperance, Prudence, Humility, and
Fortitude. The virtues of the fourteenth
century are somewhat hard-featured,
with vivid and living expression, and
plain everyday clothes of the time
Charity has her lap full of apples, and
is giving one to a little child, who
stretches his arm for it across a gap
in the leafage of the capital. Fortitude
tears open a lion’s jaws; Faith lays her
hand on her breast as she beholds the
cross; and Hope is praying, while above
is a hand seen emerging from sunbeams
—the hand of God, and the inscription
above is Spes optima in Deo. This de-
sign is rudely imitated by the fifteenth
century workmen : the virtues have lost
their hard features and living expres-
sion; they have now all got Roman
noses, and have had their hair curled,
Their actions and emblems are, how-
ever, preserved until we come to Hope
—she is still praising, but she is prais-
ing to the sun only; the hand of God
is gone!— Ruskin,


HOMILETICS.
Fase PROPHETS.


(Verse 14.)


I. Are self-deluded. “Thy prophets have seen vain and foolish things for
thee.” Thy prophets—they were certainly not God’s prophets. Their authority
was self-assumed, and they ingratiated themselves into the favour of the people by
prophesying only what was agreeable to their hearers, They indulged so lavishly
in lies and deceit, that they almost persuaded themselves that what they uttered
was truth. But they were deluded, and their delusion was self-induced. An
inveterate habit of lying vitiates the moral sense; it becomes difficult to appre-
ciate what is true. A lie poisons the atmosphere wherever it circulates. It has
no legs and eannot stand, but it has wings and can fly far and wide.

II. Have no insight into the real cause of national calamities, and their
teaching is powerless to prevent them. ‘They have not discovered thine

56


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. OHAP. Wi.





Bsiguity, to turn away thy captivity. ” The Syriac renders the words thus: They
|have not disclosed to thee thy sins, that so thou mightest repent, and I might have
‘turned away thy captivity. They were so demoralised by the habitual practice of
‘falsehood, that they were incompetent to judge the cause and drift of the national
‘troubles. They could not see that disobedience to God was at the root of the
_general distress; or, if they did, they saw so little evil in it, or danger from it,
that they did not deem it necessary to alarm the people by any words of warning.
Had they been able to read the signs of the times and to act with promptness
and fidelity in urging the people to repentance, Israel’s chastisement might have
been averted. When responsible leaders are unfaithful, and abuse their “trust by
deceiving others, the misguided nation rushes on to its doom,
IIL. Invent messages full of deceit. ‘‘ But have seen for thee false burdens
and causes of banishment.” The word burdens does not mean here prophecies
of a minatory character, for evidently the false prophets assured the people of
prosperity and deliverance. The word is used in a contemptuous sense. The
burdens, so different from the Divine message laid as a burden on the conscience
_of the genuine prophet, were, in this case, mere pretence, false, empty, and utterly
inadequate to remove ‘the causes of banishment.” The false prophets, in their
attempt to account for the captivity, invented any cause but the real one—the
apostasy of the people. Deceit produces darker shades of deceit. One lie must
be quickly thatched with another, or it will soon rain through. The way of false-
hood is tortuous. A deaf and dumb boy being asked, “ What is truth ?” replied by


thrusting his finger forward in a straight line.
he made a zigzag motion with his finger.
- gration, banishment, a driving out.


When asked, ‘‘ What is falsehood ?”
The result of ae teaching is disinte-


Every lie, great or small, is the “brink of a


precipice, the depth of which nothing but Omniscience can fathom. The poet
Campbell calls it, ‘‘ The torrent’s smoothness, ere it dash below.”

Lessons.—l. The true prophet receives his commission directly from God.
2. While the prophet ts faithful to his Divine calling he ts preserved from error.
3. The false prophet deceives himself as well as others.


Intustrations.—A false prophet.


& The bigot theologian, in minute
. Distinctions skilled, and doctrines unreduced
To practice ; in debate how loud ! how long !
How dexterous ! in Christian love, how cold !
His vain conceits were orthodox alone.
The immutable and heavenly truth revealed
By God was nought to him; he had an art,
A kind of hellish charm, that made the lips
Of truth speak falsehood; to his liking
turned
The meaning of the text ; made trifles seem
The marrow of salvation ;
Proved still his reasoning best, and his belief,
Though propped on fancies wild as mad-
men’s dreams,
Most rational, most Scriptural, most sound ;
With mortal heresy denouncing all
Who in his arguments could see no force.
He proved all creeds false but his own, and


found

At last his own most false—most false,
because

He spent his time to prove all others so.”


— Pollok.


False doctrine. A man _ holding
false and pernicious doctrines preached


at a village chapel, and endeavoured to
convince a large congregation that there
is no punishment after death. At the
close of the discourse he informed the
people he would preach there again in
four weeks, if they wished. A respect-
able merchant rose and said, “Sir, if
your doctrine is true, we do not need
you; and if it is false, we do not want
you.”

False teaching dangerous when
mixed with truth. Falsehood is never
so successful as when she baits her
hook with truth. No opinions so fatally
mislead us as those that are not wholly
wrong, as no watches so effectually
deceive the wearer as those that are
sometimes right.—Colton.

— Error is never so dangerous as
when it is the alloy of truth. Pure
error would be rejected ; but error mixed
with truth makes use of the truth as a
pioneer for it, and gets introduction

57


OAP. Ii.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : LAMENTATIONS.





where otherwise it would have none.
Poison is never so dangerous as when
mixed up with food; error is never so
likely to do mischief as when it comes
to us under the pretensions and patron-
age of that which is true.—Cwmming.
Faith in falsehood disastrous.—
When the English army under Harold,
and the Norman under William the
Conqueror, were set in array for that
fearful conflict which decided the fate
of the two armies and the political des-
tinies of Great Britain, William, per-
ceiving that he could not by a fair
attack move the solid columns of the
English ranks, had recourse to a false
movement in order to gain the victory.
He gave orders that one flank of his
army should feign to be flying from the
field in disorder. The officers of the
English army believed the falsehood,
pursued them, and were cut off. A
second time a false movement was made
in another part of the field. The Eng-
lish again believed, pursued, and were


cut off. By these movements the for.
tunes of the day were determined.
Although the English had the evidenca
of their senses, yet they were led to
believe a falsehood. They acted in
view of it. The consequence was the
destruction of a great part of their
army, and the establishment of the
Norman power in England. It is an
incontrovertible fact that the whole
heathen world, ancient and modern,
have believed in and worshipped un-
holy beings as gods. In consequence
of believing falsehood concerning the
character of God, all heathendom at the
present hour is filled with ignorance,
impurity, and crime.—J. B. Walker.
Falsehood.


*¢ T scorn this hated scene

Of masking and disguise,

Where men on men still gleam
With falseness in their eyes:

Where all is counterfeit,
And truth hath never say ;

Where hearts themselves do cheat,
Concealing hope’s decay.” —Motherweli,


HOMILETICS.
THE HEARTLESS TRIUMPH OF THE SCORNER.


(Verses 15-17.)
I. Expressed in aggravated taunts (ver. 15), The conquerors heap insult


upon insult on the fallen city.
contempt and derision.


They employ all the familiar signs expressive of
They clap their hands, they hiss, they wag their heads,


and with a scornful curl of the lip they ask, ‘Is this the city that men call the


perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole earth?”


world-wide renown.
the envy of surrounding nations.


Jerusalem had acquired a


It was the pride of the Jew, the dread of its subject tribes,
No city had been so signally honoured of


Heaven ; and now that it was prone in the dust, its foes united in a wild chorus
of fiendish jubilation. How vividly does this verse remind us of the scene around
the cross of the world’s Redeemer! (Matt. xxvii, 39-44; Mark xv. 29-32; Luke
xxii. 35-37). It is heartless and wicked to make sport of the miseries of others,
and is a cruel aggravation of those miseries. The triumph of the wicked is short,
Their hollow-ringing laughter is as ‘the crackling of thorns under a pot.” Their
taunts and gibes fall back upon: themselves. Our unkind words come home
to roost.

II. Savagely exults in the havoc that has been ardently desired (ver. 16).
The intensity of the enemy’s exultation is shown by the heaping up of unconnected
words, with each of which its own proper object must be supplied. We have
found what we sought, have seen what we looked for; our hopes and longings are
all fulfilled.—Speaker’s Commentary. The enemies of Zion eagerly watched for
her downfall, they earnestly desired it, they maliciously helped to bring it about ;
and now it had come, their maddened hilarity and scorn knew no bounds. The


truly are never exult over the defeat of their worst foes. They have often been


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; LAMENTATIONS, OHAP. It.


known to weep over the devastation they have themselves created. It is inhuman
to chuckle over the sufferings of others. It is a depth of demoralisation reached
only by the cowardly and craven-hearted.

IIt, The fulfilment of Divine threatenings against national unfaithfulness
(ver. 17). The ruin of Jerusalem, over which her adversaries so savagely rejoiced,
was no accidental or unforeseen event. It was the fulfilment of the Divine
purpose, of which Israel had been so often forewarned from the days of old. It
was distinctly foretold that if Israel forsook Jehovah and lapsed into idolatry,
they would be punished with all the miseries of a siege, ending in national over-
throw (Lev. xxvi. 14-39; Deut. xxviii. 15-68). The contemptuous scorn of
their enemies emphasised their punishment, and testified to the exactness with
which the Divine threatenings against disobedience had been fulfilled. The
Divine word, whether in threat or promise, never fails. God is unchangeably
faithful both in mercy and in judgment.

Lessons.—l. The wicked ever gloat over the downfall of the good. 2. The gibes
of the scorner are a bitter ingredient in the punishment of the unfaithful. 3. The
taunts of the wicked have no power to injure the truly righteous,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 15, 16. The world’s treatment
of its suffering Redeemer: 1. A wild
tempest of unreasoning scorn, hatred,
and exultation, 2. A mournful evi-
dence of the intense acrimony of sin.
3. Does not prevent the unselfish work-
ing out of its sublime redemption.

Ver, 17. The Divine threatenings of
judgment: I. Unaffected by the lapse
of time. ‘He hath fulfilled His word
that He had commanded in the days of
old.” IL Are carried out with relent-
less certainty. ‘‘He hath thrown down
and hath not pitied.” IIL Always yinds
agents willing to execute them. “He
hath caused thine enemy to rejoice over
thee ; He hath set up the horn of thine
adversaries.”


Intustrations. — Triumph prema-
ture. During the reign of Henry
VIIL., the Pope, angry at the English
monarch’s resistance, called a council
in Rome, at which it was resolved that
the Emperor of Germany should invade
England, and that Henry should be
deposed. So rejoiced was the Papal
party, that they illuminated Rome;
cannons were fired, bonfires lighted,
and great bodies of men paraded the
streets shouting, “The Empire and
Spain.” Already, in their eager expec-
tation, England was a second Nether-
lands, a captured province under the


regency of Catherine or Mary. How
bitterly these expectations were over-
thrown history too well declares,
Scorn, not to be dreaded.
‘* Ridicule is a weak weapon when levelled at
& strong mind ;
But common men are cowards, and dread
an empty laugh.
Betray mean terror of ridicule, thou shalt
find fools enough to mock thee ;
But answer thou their laughter with con:


tempt,
And the scofferg will lick thy feet.”
—Tupper.

A scoffer non-plussed. Ona certain
occasion, in the presence of a vast and
brilliant assemblage, a person more
noted for his self-esteem than for his
learning was speaking against the Chris-
tian religion in terms of the severest
scorn and derision. The celebrated Dr.
Belknap, overhearing the orator, stepped
up to him and asked, “ Well, sir, have
you found a religion that is better?”
The scoffer, considerably abashed by
this unlooked-for question, was forced
to acknowledge that thus far he had
not. ‘‘ Well,” responded the Doctor,
“when you have, let me know, and I
will join you in adopting it.” The
rebuke was as wise as it was just.

Sarcasm destroys friendship. Life
is full of paradoxes. There are some
slight causes which will destroy the
strongest friendship. Great causes will

Se)


OHAP., II.


not always impair it. A sarcastic and
disparaging speech made by a friend
concerning his friend in his absence,
and repeated by some mischief-maker,
will invariably disturb friendship; while
an angry altercation, or some injury to
person or to property, will often leave
friendship unharmed, When aliena-
tion begins, it increases at a very rapid
rate. The rust spot multiplies apace.
The mildew spreads quickly. The rift
in the lute becomes longer and longer.
—S. Martin.

The Redeemer’s sufferings unique.
Did Christ then merely suffer as any
other man has done? Suffering is a
question of nature. The educated man
suffers more than the uneducated man ;
the poet probably suffers more than the
mathematician ; the commanding officer
suffers more in a defeat than the com-
mon soldier. The more life the more
suffering, the billows of sorrow being
in proportion to the volume of our
manhood. Now Jesus Christ was not
merely a man. He was man, and by
the very compass of His manhood He
suffered more than any mortal can en-
dure. The storm may pass as fiercely
over the shallow lake as over the At-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


lantic, but by its very volume the latter
is more terribly shaken. No other man
had come with Christ’s ideas; in no
other man was the element of self so
entirely abnegated ; no other man had
offered such opposition to diabolical
tule, All these circumstances combine
to render Christ’s sufferings unique, yet
not one of them puts Christ so far away
as to prevent us finding in His suffering
unfailing solace and strength. — Dr.
Parker.

Divine punishment certain. Those
who made light of the invitation to the
supper mentioned in the Gospel were
shut out. The sceptical Pilate ended a
miserable, hopeless life by suicide. The
rich man went on living splendidly,
giving banquets, pampering his body,
until one day he died and was buried,
and awoke in torment to know its
reality at last. The people in Noah’s
days lived securely and indifferent,
“until the flood came and took them
all away.” On the inhabitants of
Sodom the sun was shining when Lot
went out of the city; but the same day
it rained fire and brimstone, and de-
stroyed them all,


HOMILETICS.
A CALL To PRAYER.
(Verses 18, 19.)


L Addressed to a city suffering the miseries of a desolating siege. ‘Their
heart cried unto the Lord, O wall of the daughter of Zion!” (ver. 18). It sounds
strange thus to appeal to the wall of Zion—to pray so passionately that tears may
run down like a river. But this is quite after the manner of Jeremiah and other
sacred writers (comp. ver. 8; Isa. xiv. 31; Jer. xxii. 29; Hab. ii. 11; Luke xix.
40). Carried away with an outburst of sorrow, “the prophet suddenly addresses
the wall, which had so long been their shelter and defence, and bids it, as the
representative of the people who had dwelt secure under its protection, to shed
floods of tears on their behalf. Broken up by the enemy, it could be their guar-
dian no longer, but by its ruins it might still cry unto the Lord in their behalf.”
However great may be our distress, it is always wise to promptly obey the sum-
mons to pray. Prayer brings moral strength and brightens the hope of rescue.

IL. To be mingled with much weeping. ‘Let tears run down like a river
day and night; give thyself no rest; let not the apple of thine eye cease” (ver.
18). Like a river, a brook, or torrent, rushing along furiously at one time and +
afterwards dried up. In the nature of things weeping cannot be incessant. Like
a torrent, it gushes out in floods of tears, and, though ceasing at intervals, it is in
this instance to be often reneated. Reasons for frequent weeping will be found

60


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. CHAP, 11.





in the prolonged continuance of the misery. Suffering is apt to stupify and
harden, if the heart is not softened with tears. Prayer is the more genuine when
accompanied with godly sorrow.

III. To be expressed with loud cries throughout the night-watches.
“ Arise, cry out in the night; in the beginning of the watches pour out thine
heart like water before the face of the Lord” (ver. 19). At the beginning of
each night-watch means all the night through. There are crises in life, times of
trouble and peril, when the time usually devoted to sleep may be fitly employed
in earnest, agonising prayer. Such a time had come in the history of Judah;
such a time comes to most. There is a pathetic tenderness of sorrow in the
night-moanings and cries of the soul, and it is then we are often conscious of the
special nearness of Divine help. >


** Hours spent with pain and Thee
Lost hours have never seemed 3
No! those are lost which but might be
From earth for heaven redeemed,


For weeping, wakeful eyes
Instinctive look above,

And catch, through openings in the skies,
Thy beams, unslumbering Love!”


IV. To be offered especially on behalf of perishing children. “Lift up thy
hands towards Him for the life of thy young children that faint for hunger at the
top of every street” (ver. 19). Among the most heart-rending miseries of the
siege was the spectacle of little children prostrate in the streets slowly dying of
starvation. You cannot enter a street in any part of the city but this sad sight
meets the eye. The lifting up of the hands is not only the attitude and symbol
of prayer, but indicates earnestness in supplication. The sufferings of helpless
children appeal to the hardest heart, and when it is impossible to render any
other help, we are called upon to pray for them. When our children are in ex-
tremity, so are we. Prayer is the only refuge, apart from which there is nothing
but wretchedness and despair.

Lussons.—1. Our daily necessities are a constant call to prayer. 2. Misery
Jinds relief in prayer. 3. The young should ever be the subject of earnest prayer.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 19. A night of prayer: 1.
Necessary in circumstances of special
peril. 2. Often characterised by in-
tense earnestness. 3. Familiar to many
an anxious mother pleading for the
salvation of her child.

— Watch-Night service. I. Jt 18
never too soon to pray. ‘There is no
reason why you should delay to the
morning light. “In the beginning of
the night-watches pour out thine heart
like water before the face of the Lord.”
How many young persons imagine that
religion is a thing for age, or at least
for maturity! They do not want their
young shoulders galled with an early
burden; they do not think it is true
that “it is good for a man to hear the


yoke in his youth;” and they forget
that that “yoke is easy” and that
“ burden is light.” God hears children.
He called Samuel when he was but a
child. We have had our Josiahs, we
have had our Timothys ; we have seen
those in early youth brought to the
Saviour. Young man, it is not too
soon. II. It ts not too late to cry to
the Lord. If the sun be set and the
watches of the night have commenced
their round, the mercy-seat is open.
No shop is open so late as the House of
Mercy. The devil has two tricks with
men. Sometimes he puts their clock a
little backward, and says, “Stop! there
is time enough yet;” and when that
does not answer, he turns the hands on,
6]


OBAP. Il,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





and cries out, “Too late! too late!”
Within another fifteen minutes another
year shall have come ; but if the Spirit
of God calls you this year, He will not
call you too late in the year. If to the
last second you should live, if God the
Holy Ghost calls you then, He will not
have called you too late. The darkness
of night is gathering; it is coming on,
and you are near death. Arise, sleeper,
arise! Thou art now taking the last
nap of death.” III. We cannot pray
too vehemently. ‘* Cry out in the night.”
God loves earnest prayers. He loves
impetuous prayers, vehement prayers.
Let a man preach, if he dare, coldly
and slowly, but never let him pray so.
Those who cry with weak voices, who
do not cry aloud, must not expect
to get a blessing. When you go to
Mercy’s gate, do not give a gentle tap
like a lady, do not give a single knock
like a beggar, but take the knocker and
rap hard till the very door seems to
shake. Rap with all your might, and
recollect that God loveth those who
knock hard at Mercy’s gate. IV. We
cannot pray too simply. ‘Pour out
your hearts before Him.” Not pour
out your fine words, not pour out your
beautiful periods, but pour out your
hearts. ‘1 dare not,”
is black stuff in my heart.” Out with
it, then; it is better out thanin, “TI
cannot pray as I could wish,” says
another; “my crying out is a feeble
one.” When you pour out water, it
does not make much noise. So you
can “pour out your heart like water,”
and it will run away, and you can
scarcely know it. There is many a
prayer_uttered in a garret, down in a
cellar, or in some lonely place where
the cobbler sits mending his shoes be-
neath a window, which the world does
not hear, but the Lord hears it. Pour
out your heart like water by confessing
your sins, by begging the Lord to have
mercy on you for Christ’s sake. And
when it is all poured out, He will come
and fill it again. Listen for one mo-
ment to the ticking of that clock. It
is the beating of the pulse of eternity ;
it is the footstep of death pursuing you.
Time is precious, and when we havo
62


says one ; “there -


little of it, it is more precious, You
will soon enter another year. This
year will have gone in a few seconds,
Where will the next year be spent }—
C. H. Spurgeon.


ILLuUsTRATIONS.—A mute summons
to prayer. Venice may well call upon
us to note with reverence, that of all
the towers which are still seen rising
like a branchless forest from her islands,
there is but one whose office was other
than that of summoning to prayer, and
that one was a watch-tower only.—
— Ruskin.

Tearful intercession irresistible.
Miss Gratz—supposed to have been the
original of Rebecca in “ Ivanhoe ”—was
nursing her grandfather in his last ill-
ness. Calling her to him one day, he
said, “‘ What can I do for you, my dear
child?” Turning upon him her beau-
tiful eyes filled with tears, she said in
a tone of earnest entreaty, ‘“ Grand-
father, forgive Aunt Shinah.” This
was a daughter who had been long
estranged because of her marriage with
a Gentile. The old man sought his
grand-daughter’s hand, pressed it, and,
after a silence, said in a broken voice,
“Send for her.” In due course the
lady came, received her father’s forgive-
ness and blessing, and when, a few
days later, he breathed his last, the
arms of his long-estranged child were
about him, while Rebecca Gratr sat
silently at his side.

Prayer necessary for service. Bees
suffer sadly from famine dumng the
dry years which occasionally occur in
the southern and middle portions of
California. If the rainfall amounts
only to three or four inches, instead of
from twelve to twenty, as in ordinary
seasons, then sheep and cattle die in
thousands, and so do these small winged
cattle, unless they are carefully fed or
removed to other pastures. No flowers,
no honey ; no rain, no food. They who
teach others must themselves feed on
the truths they declare. Failure to
commune with God will give the
poverty-stroke to our endeavours to
bless man.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


OHaP, I


—————————s eeeESSSeSSSSSSSSSSSSSSsMMMMMMMMMSsmMMMMssssssseseFeseF


Sorrow drives men to prayer.


** «There is no God,’ the foolish saith,
But none ‘ There is no sorrow ;’
And Nature oft the cry of faith
In bitter need will borrow :
Eyes which the preacher could not school,
By wayside graves are raised,
And lips say ‘God be pitiful, ’
Who ne’er said ‘ God be praised !’
Be pitiful, O God!”
—Mrs. Browning.
« Jesus, pitying Saviour, hear me;
raw Thou near me;
Turn Thee, Lord, in grace to me;
For Thou knowest all my sorrow ;
Night and morrow
Doth my cry go up to Thee,


Peace I cannot find: O take me,
Lord, and make me
From the yoke of evil free ;
Calm this longing never-sleeping,
Still my weeping,
Grant me hope once more in Thee.”
—Tersteegen.


Sympathy with youth. George
Moore, merchant and philanthropist,
was the constant resort of young men
wanting situations. If he could not
provide for them in his own warehouse,
he endeavoured to find situations for
them amongst his friends. He took
no end of trouble about this business,
After his young friends had obtained


employment, he continued to look after-


them. He took down their names and
addresses in a special red book kept
for the purpose, and repeatedly asked
them to dine with him on Sunday after-
noons. He usually requested that they
should go to some church or chapel in
the evening,


A mother’s prayer. After Augus-
tine had lost faith in Manichzism, he
found himself in the same situation as
he was ten years before. There was
the same longing after truth, but linked
now with a feeling of desolation, a
bitter sense of deception, and a large
measure of scepticism. He was no
longer at ease in Carthage, and resolved
on a journey to Rome, where he ven-
tured to hope for a more brilliant and
profitable career as a rhetorician. His
mother wished either to prevent his
going, or to go with him. While she
spent a night in the Church of the
Martyr, praying and wrestling with
God in tears to prevent the voyage,
Augustine sailed for the coast of Italy,
and his deceived mother found herself
the next morning alone on the sea-shore.
She had learned, however, the heavenly
art of forgiving, and believing also
where she could not see. In quiet,
resignation she returned to the city, and
continued to pray for the salvation of
her son. Though meaning well, she
this time erred in her prayer, for the
journey of Augustine was the means
of his salvation. The denial of the
prayer was, in fact, the answering of it.
Instead of the husk, God granted rather
the substance of her petition in the con-
version of her son. “Therefore,” says
he, ‘“‘hadst Thou, O God, regard to the
aim and essence of her desires, and
didst not do what she then prayed for,
that Thou mightest do for me what she
continually implored.”—Schaff.


HOMILETICS.


A PRAYER FOR DIVINE COMPASSION.
(Verses 20-22.)


I. Reminding Jehovah of His former favour to the sufferers. ‘‘ Behold, O
Lord, and consider to whom Thou hast done this” (ver. 20). The prophet seems
to feel that if God would only look and recall to mind who they were who were
suffering, He would surely have pity. They are not the heathen, but His own
people, the seed of Abraham, whom He raised from obscurity and endowed with
unexampled blessings. Their present misery was all the more painful to endure
when contrasted with their former affluence and power, and would surely move
the compassion of Him who had so often interposed on their behalf. It is a great
help in prayer to remind God of His former loving-kindness. Every blessing we
receive from God increases His interest in our welfare. Every act of disobedience
is a sin against Infinite Love, x


OBAP, IZ. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ;: LAMENTATIONS.





IL Uttered from the midst of appalling distress (vers. 20, 21). In these
verses we have a vivid description of the suffering and desolation occasioned by
the siege. In the extreme exigencies of famine the most horrible cannibalism
was practised: the pangs of hunger devoured maternal affection, and mothers
devoured their newly-born infants. Even this had been predicted as the fruit of
disobedience (Deut. xxviii. 53). How little do we appreciate the great goodness
of God in providing daily food for ourselves and our children! Everywhere in
the city were visible the most ghastly scenes of indiscriminate massacre—“ priest
and prophet, young and old, virgins and young men,’’ lay in promiscuous heaps
of the slain. If prayer can reach heaven, it must surely be when ascending from
the midst of anguish like this. The greater the distress we are in, the more urgent
and importunate should be our prayers.

III. Wrung from a people terrified with startling proofs of the Divine
anger. ‘ Thou hast called as in a solemn day my terrors round about, so that in
the day of the Lord’s anger none escaped or remained” (ver. 22). Jeremiah had
often threatened the terrors of God’s wrath in the destruction of the nation, if the
people persisted in idolatry ; but they heeded not. They made jests of his warn-
ings, and their earnest repetition only increased their ridicule. But'when they saw
Jerusalem hemmed round by the victorious Chaldeans, and the utter ruin that
followed, they then saw the portentous meaning of “ the terrors” that had been
so often threatened and so recklessly despised. The anger of the Lord became
to them a solemn reality, and, overwhelmed with confusion and fear, they cry for
help. Whatever impels the soul to pray is a blessing. The beginning of prayer
may rise from our fears ; but as we persevere, it will be actuated by nobler motives.
All that prayer can do is to bring our case before God. We must then leave it
there with Him, and say, “ Thy will be done.”

Lxssons.—l. The final appeal of the helpless is to God. 2. When distress
induces prayer, deliverance is at hand. 3. Jehovah ts graciously moved to help by
human entreaty.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 20. “‘ Behold, O Lord, and con- soaring eagle mounting upward in its


sider to whom Thou hast done this.”
The Divine pity: 1. EHarnestly im-
plored by a suffering people. 2. In-
voked on the ground of former kind-
nesses, which, it is acknowledged, have
been abused. 3. Is never appealed to
in vain,

Ver. 22. The tyranny of fear: 1.
Realised when beset by a powerful
enemy. 2. When the enemy is sum-
moned and directed by One whom we
have consciously offended. 3. When
we are witnesses of cruelties we are
powerless to prevent.


ILLUSTRATIONS.—Prayer. It is help-
lessness casting itself on power. It
is infirmity leaning on strength, and
misery wooing bliss. It is the flight of
the soul to the bosom of God, and the
spirit soaring upward and claiming
nativity beyond the stars. It is the

64


flight, and with steady gaze pursuing
the track till lost to all below. It is
the roving wanderer looking towards
his abiding-place, where are all his
treasures and his gold. It is the
prisoner pleading for release. It is the
mariner of a dangerous sea, upon the
reeling topmast, descrying the broad
and quiet haven of repose. It is the
soul, oppressed by earthly soarings,
escaping to a broader and purer sphere,
and bathing its plumes in the ethereal
and eternal.— Wells,

Yearning for God.— When my blood
flows like wine, when all is ease and
prosperity, when the sky is blue and
birds sing and flowers blossom, and
my life is an anthem moving in time
and tune, then this world’s joy and
affection suffice. But when a change
comes, when I am weary and disap-
pointed, when the skies lower into a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS,


CHAP. HL


———_————


sombre night, when there is no song of
bird, and the perfume of flowers is but
their dying breath, when all is sun-
setting and autumn, then I yearn for
Him who sits with the summer of love
in His soul, and feel that all earthly
affection is but a glow-worm light com-
pared to that which blazes with such
effulgence in the heart of God. —
Beecher.

Divine compassion. We often suffer
more on account of other’s troubles than
they themselves do in those troubles,
for both love and sorrow take their
measure ag much from the capacity of
the nature that experiences them as
from the power of the externally ex-
citing cause. How much one suffers
with or for another does not depend
altogether upon how much that other
is suffering, but upon how much that
nature which sympathises has with
which to suffer. God feels with us,
so that our experiences throw their
waves upon the shore of His soul. He
carries us so near to His heart that all
our feelings which are of any moment
produce their effects in some degree in
His bosom. It seems very strange that
the Maker of all the earth should per
mit Himself to be a participant in all
the petty experiences that belong to any
human life. No man would have dared
to conceive such an idea of God, and to
have believed any such thing as that,
if it had not been revealed in unequi-
vocal terms.

The compassion of Jesus. Luther
said, ‘‘I would run into the arms of
Christ if He stood with a drawn sword
in His hands.” John Butterworth,
reading this, resolved to do likewise,
and found, as every venturing sinner
does, no sword in the hands of Jesus,
but open arms and a hearty welcome.
Christ’s proclamation, for ever sounding
forth to every burdened heart, is “ Come
unto Me, all ye that labour and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest.”
He demonstrated His marvellous com-
passion by dying for us. He will not
now repulse the approach or disregard
the cry of the needy.

The influence of fear. There is a
virtuous fear, which is the effect of


faith ; and there is a vicious fear, which
is the product of doubt. The former
leads to hope, as relying on God, in
whom we believe; the latter inclines
to despair, as not relying on God, in
whom we do not believe. Persons of
the one character fear to lose God ;_per-
sons of the other character fear to find
Him.— Pascal.

Slavish and filial fear. There are
two kinds of fear—one full of suspicious
watchfulness, of anxious apprehension,
of trepidation, terror, and dismay; the
other such as can dwell in the same
heart with confidence and love, and is
but another form of reverence. Filial
fear of God is a duty; slavish and ser-
vile dread of Himisasin. Filia] fear
shrinks from sin ; servile fear only from
the smart of punishment. Filial fear
keeps men from departing from the
living God, servile fear drives them
from Him. By filial fear men are made
like the man Christ Jesus; by servile
fear they may be scared from iniquity,
as the wolf from the sheepfold by the
shepherd’s gun; but it does no more to
make them holy than the fright does
to destroy the wolf’s ferocity. Filial
fear animates us to avoid whatever
would be offensive to our Heavenly
Father, and, if the expression may be
allowed, to consult His feelings and
desires; but servile fear, as it springs
from selfishness, causes us only to care
for ourselves, and at best makes us not
better, but only a little more prudent
than the devil.—Bertram.

The greatest fear. When a city is
compassed round about with a wall that
is impregnable, it will be opened still
towards heaven, and therefore cannot
be out of danger if God be an enerry.
For all their walls and bars, God could
rain fire and brimstone upon the Sodo-
mites out of heaven. Alexander asked
the Scythians what they were most
afraid of, thinking they would say of
himself, who was so victorious every-
where. But they answered scoffingly
they were most afraid lest heaven should
fall upon them. We, indeed, need not
fear anything but this only, lest the
heaven should fall upon us, lest God
should be our ensmy.—J. Stoughton.

g


OWAP. IT, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





CHAPTER III.


AN IpEAL REPRESENTATION OF NatTionaL Sorrow.


The middle elegy is, not only in structure but also in tone, readily distinguished from the
ether four, An element of personality is manifest in it which is notin them. The poet con-
centrates in himself all forms of the calamities which he laments. Some. of these seem toe
sharp and heavy to be experienced by a single individual, and the doubt is turned into a cer-
tainty when he associates himself once and again with others. He is a member of a body. In
this feature a significant proof is indicated of that unfolding form of prophecy in which the
whole community of Israel, or an undefined part of it, is regarded as represented by a special
person—the Servant whose experiences are hardly so much bis own as those of his people. He
stands apart from them by the peculiarities of his condition, but he draws to himself all their
sorrows and pains, and that burden impels him to act as an advocate on their behalf before
Jehovah. As we read such things we are reminded of the resemblance which they bear to the
course of the prophet Jeremiah. He was “separated” from his nation, but became a partici-
pant of the terrible doom he announced. He would not stand off from his people when he
might have gone with the Babylonian Captain of the Guard. It was his pure conscience and
sensitive heart which realised the fierce anger of the Lord against the sins which had corrupted
the conscience and heart of his fellow-countrymen. It was for their sakes, he said,’ My heart ts
faint within me... . For the hurt of the daughter of my people am I hurt; I am black. Hia
position was a forecast of that mightier Servant who came not to be served but to serve, and to
give His life a ransom for many.

The progress of the poem presents a strange tumult of thought. There is arraignment of
God’s dealings and acknowledgment of His mercies ; impatience at his sufferings, which does
not crowd out his patience ; wonder why the Lord should send such punishments, and confes-
sion of sins with little hope that it would pave the way for pardon. Yet is not this a true
portrait of each soul that is striving against sin in himself and others! Without fighting, within

cars.

The first part of the chapter sets forth the soul-sufferings of the godly in their cheerless
and hopeless misery (vers. 1-18); then it ascends to hope by meditation on the compassion of
God (vers. 19-39) ; next is the recognition of God’s justice in the punishment, but the intensity
of which, through the malice of enemies, the Lord cannot pass by (vers. 40-54); and last,
prayer that He would send help and take vengeance on the enemy (vers. 55-66).

(S) Ver. 1. The author writes as if his own person was the object on which all the troubles
had been inflicted. Iam the man that hath seen affliction by the rod of his wrath. The
repression of the name of the wielder of the rod is remarkable in view of its reiteration in
Chapter II. That here it was of set purpose seems proved by the persistent omission till ver,
18, and is probably to be accounted for by the poet’s wish to indicate a sort of climax to a soul-
struggle in which he could not take the name of Jehovah till all appeared lost. The rod signifies
the means by which the affliction was produced, and is illustrated by the phrase, The Assyrian
ts the vod of mine anger (Isa. x. 5).

Ver. 2. The unnamed had accumulated affliction. He has led and caused me to walk in
darkness and not in light, in perplexity as well as misery.

Ver. 3. And it was continuously carried on, Surely against me he turns his hand again
and again all the day.

(2) Ver, 4. Details as to how the writer suffered. My flesh and my skin he has worn out,
he has broken my bones. Bodily exhaustion and racking pains consume the vital forces.

Ver. 5. Obstruction is placed so that I may not find a change. He has builded against me,
shut mein as if He was besieging me behind and before with hurting and wearying obstacles,
gall and travail.

Ver. 6. Darkness was added. He has made me to dwell in dark places, dismal and with-
out hope, as those in which lay the for ever dead, those who had gone into Sheol, and for
whom there is no way of return.

(3) Ver. 7. Freedom is taken away by close confinement and a heavy chain.

Ver. 8. Prisoner though I am, I can make entreaties for relief. I cry and call for help,
but no response is given; he shutteth out my prayer; he had used means to prevent the peti-
tions reaching him, as if the barriers were not fabricated by the sins of the petitioner !

Ver. 9. Asa traveller, Iam brought to a standstill. He has fenced up my ways with hewn
stone, and there is a necessity to turn aside to crooked paths, which lead to and fro without

urpose.
(1) Ver. 10. Difficulties had been embarrassing, but dangers were also added. In the crooked
paths the bear and the lion lurked, and he is there, like them, lying in wait for me.

Ver. 11. I wandered aimlessly. He has led me ‘astray and then he has torn me in pieces,
has made me desolate, left me mangled and alone.

Ver. 12. Not only such rending as that by beasts of prey has distressed me, but alse mab

66


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. OBAP, AI,


ee


treatment by men. I have been treated as the quarry of a hunter. He set me as a mark for
the arrow. 5

(1) Ver. 13. There is no miss when God aims at a-mark. He has made the sons of his
quiver to enter into my reins; the central points of vital action were sore wounded.

Ver. 14. The figure is hardly changed. Perhaps a laughing-stock to all my people, their
song all the day, may be regarded as the shaft which went to the quick. Jeremiah calls a
deceiving tongue a deadly arrow (ix, 8). They who should have stood by him, as partaking of
the aame afflictions, hurled at him bolts of ridicule in jaunty songs. Another reading ascribes
the mocking to all peoples, not to his fellow-countrymen.

Ver. 15. The nutriment and comfort which I needed were replaced by adversities which I
endured to the utmost extent bearable. He has filled me with bitternesses—different kinds
of sufferings—and sated me with wormwood.

(1) Ver. 16. In respect to means of nourishment, I have been still further exasperated. Also
he has broken my teeth with gravel; either that which was chewed was full of gritty sand,
or for bread he had stones given him. A strange work for the Father! He has covered me
with ashes, I am one who mourneth in bitterness.

Ver. 17. Notwithstanding all my afflictions, I might have been calm and hopeful, but the
culminating point of all I have to sustain is the conviction that I am put far from God. Is it
not a piteous condition which may extort complaint of Thyself? Thou hast cast off my soul
from peace. So dense is this outer darkness, that any recollection of ever being in comfort has
faded away, I forget good.

Ver. 18. This reads like an account of the climax to the trials undergone. I said, as if
talking to myself, My strength is perished, and my expectation from Jehovah. The future
is void of good. I am unable to look for anything from Him. Jn Jah Jehovah is everlasting
strength, but I do not perceive it. I have lost the direction towards Him.

This recalling of the name at last seems to turn the current of thought. I must not let go
trust in Him. I must tell Him the desires of my heart.

The sorrow according to God is a product of His wisdom and love. “Sorrow is God’s last
message to man; it is God speaking in emphasis. He who abuses it shows that he can shut
his ears when God speaks loudest. Therefore heartlessness or impenitence after sorrow is more
dangerous than intemperance in joy; its results are always more tragic. . . . God’s wrath is
an ennobling, not a stupefying doctrine” (Smith). Nor is it discouraging to leal-hearted men,
though menacing. ‘

(t) Vers, 19-21. The name of Jehovah is as a rallying-call to reject the rash expression of
despair just heard, and stirs up thought- sf what God’s character is. The author begins to feel
that he can have recourse to a prayer t be remembered, and so these verses mark the passage
from hopeless bafflings with no small storm to the hopeful sound of a favouring breeze.

Ver. 19. Remember my affliction and my homelessness, the wormwood and the gall;
@ reminiscence of salient points in the sufferings he had passed through, and which might evoke
the compassion and power of the All-merciful.

Ver, 20. The correct translation of this verse is uncertain, and preference is given to this,
Remembering, thou wilt remember all those things; also [that] my soul is cast down in
me. I am heavy laden. Ihave no might. Either I shall be overwhelmed and sink into deep
mire where there 1s no standing, or else out of weakness be made strong by Thee. It would be
like Thee to make haste to help me.

Ver. 21. This I will bring back to my heart, this thought, that Thou wilt not be always
wroth, for the spirit would fail before Thee and the souls which thou hast made, has taken full
possession uf my inner man; therefore I will hope. There must be a blessing in store, for
God pities and God rules in exhaustless grace. Out of the darkest depression He can lift toa
light in which I may walk and never be ashamed of my hope.

(M) Ver. 22, The hopefulness which had begun to lift a desponding soul points to the
ground on which it may become secure. Its hazy outlook is seeming to clear, and, as in all
true ideas of human relationship to God, that which is felt as a privilege for the individual is
regarded to be a privilege for all souls also who seek the Lord. One voices the confession of
the remnant of /srael thus: Jehovah’s mercies, not in one form, but in many forms they
affect men, and, whether shown *» individuals or communities, they counteract the wasting
tendencies of evil. A striking prvw of His varied graciousness is manifest in that we are not
consumed. More will tollow. His continuous action is a token that His nature and name is
the All-gracious ; for his compassions fail not. ;

Ver. 23. Every day sees some renewal of them; there is “daily help for daily needs,” as
great is thy faithfulness. God is faithful to all that He has promised in creation and grace,

Ver. 24. This perception that the Lord is gracious, pitying, and trustworthy, leads on, not
merely to verbal profession of the knowledge of God, but to an acceptance of Himself as the
dear and only treasure of the heart. My portion is Jehovah. None in heaven for Him; none
on earth desired with Him,

(0) Ver. 25. Such an acceptance suggests more knowledge. Good is Jehovah to them
that wait for him, to a soul that seeks him. He is ready to respond to those who feel nee |
of Him and foster longings after Himself.


67


OAP. ITI, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





Ver. 26. So when the graciousness of the Lord is perceived, and its proffers yielded to, blessed-
ness is not far off. Good it is both to wait and be silent for the salvation of Jehovah. There
is to be no striving, nor crying, nor causing the voice to be heard in the street. Confidence in
His power to save hushes fears and doubts, and enables us calmly to meet the events of life. He
will in no wise leave or forsake those who wait for Him.

Ver. 27. Good is it for a man to bear a yoke, that is, anything by which he will be trained

for his Owner, and to do his Owner’s work. Teaching may do so; affliction may do so. Both
the one and the other show to a man what he is—ignorant, weak, with more that is bad than
he had believed he had. God speaks in both methods as issues of His love, and to obtain
vessels unto honour, sanctified, meet for the Master's use. The phrase in his youth does not
mean that the poet was still a young man. He might be an aged man, looking back on the
experiences of his life, and conscious of the value of the discipline he had been subjected to
when the dew of youth was upon him. He is blessed who, in earlier years, has been drawn or
driven to look into the face of realities, and to learn something of the afflictions of Christ
before he has been in grip with temptations from the clamant lusts of the flesh and of the
mind,
_ (9) Ver. 28. A yoke is not of itself beneficial ; it must be borne along with desires and
efforts to reach to its purpose. ‘Since it is good for man that he should learn to endure suffer-
ing, let him sit still and bear it patiently; . . . let him sit solitary, as becomes those in sorrow,
and be silent without murmuring when God puts such a burden on him.”—eil. The fogs of
the world, if a man enters into them, may veil the waymarks of God.

Ver. 29. Let him put his mouth in the dust—significant of being humbled under the
mighty hand of God—indulging in no whimpers, framing no self-excuses, making no boasts,
only waiting to hear what God the Lord will speak, and by no means despairing of help for
every time of need. It may be there is hope.

Ver, 30. Let him give his cheek to him that smiteth him, as was similarly enforced in the
Sermon on the Mount (Matt. v. 39), and involving the wider application, when reviled not to
revile again. Exemplified by Job, by the prophetic Servant of Jehovah, by the greatest of all
Sufferers. The gradation is perceptible. ‘‘The sitting alone and in silence is comparatively
the easiest. It is harder to place the mouth in the dust and yet cling to hope; it is most
difficult of all to give the cheek to the smiter, and to satiate oneself with dishonour” (Naegel.),
be filled full with reproaches.

(3) Ver. 31. For this silent waiting on the Lord, amid humiliations and scorn, there is all-
sufficient strength. It is in the Lord Himself, in the belief that He is at work; that, what-
ever our tribulations are, however bitter ingredients we must drain out of our cup, whatever
the moral conflicts and self-condemnations we must pass through, He will not put us away.
The Lord will not cast off for ever; there will be an end of tears and isolation on account of
the absent Friend.

Ver. 32. His providences may distress us. Physical pains, social straits, national demoralisa-
tion, and inward unrest, blame, forebodings, may overwhelm us. These are goads by which
He is thrusting us from a wrong way into a right, but ‘‘it is love that bruises us.” Yet he
will have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies.

Ver. 33. He would rather not produce suffering. His heart is not in doing so. He hasa
distinct end in view to be reached through tribulation. For he afflicts not willingly, nor
grieves the children of men. Child and adult, Israelite and heathen, will meet trouble,
but not one is outside the sympathy of God. We can supplement this from a later teacher,
who tells us that our Father chastises for our profit, that we may be partakers of His holiness.

(5) Vers. 34-36, The Lord does not afflict willingly, yet He is not indifferent to the injustice
of man to man, All the details of human procedure are regarded by Him, and he would have
men to know that He is on the throne judging right, that they may trust Him entirely, and
that there is no evil needing to be grieved over but sin. Such is the intimation in this triad
of verses, the three parts of which depend on the last clause: To trample under his feet—
the feet.of the oppressor—all prisoners of the earth; an allusion to the cruelties of the
Chaldeans. Jews in exile, Jews in prisons, yes, and outraged captives everywhere, are referred
to. He hears the sighing of the prisoner. To turn aside the right of a man, that which is ©
grounded in the far-reaching nature of things formed by the Righteous One, before the face of
the Most High. This phrase is illustrated by the wilderness legislation as to matters of tres-
pass, Zhe cause of both parties shall come before [God] Elohim, he whom Elohim shall condemn,
&c. (Exod, xxii. 9), The phraseology obviously designates judges as acting in place of the
Judge of all the earth, and is found used in later times (Ps. lxxxii. 6). To subvert a man in
his cause, to act unfairly towards another in the ordinary pursuits of life, the Lord approveth
not. wore this translation, Keil renders, Doth not the Lord look [to such doings as
these]?

(0) Ver. 87. The reason for not mentioning any name of God, as in vers. 1-17, is now
wholly dispensed with, and He is presented as conditionating al! events. He observes man’s
dealings with his neighbours, He provides that every transgression and disobedience receive a
just recompense of reward. No injustice is permissible. If a man or nation could devise. and
carry out their own commands, then evil or good would come im spite of God. But who is he


68


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. OHAP. II,
———————————


that saith and it comes to pass, unless the Lord has commanded [it]? His will is supreme.
So it follows :—

Ver. 38. From the mouth of the Most High does not the evil and the good come? It is
a term of the age-lasting problem. He lets evil be done and punishes the evil-doer. He must
work out His will, for He works within us to will and do that which is good. In both good
and evil we are in close contiguity with God.

Ver. 39. The right interpretation partly depends on whether or not we read this verse as
one question. Both the Authorised, Version and the Revised Version take the former course,
The Hebrew renders this doubtful. It would warrant a division. For what should a living
man, one in life’s school, and with all the possibilities of the education he is receiving from the
Lord, complain? Let every one come to a more manly position, and they would see it needful
to sigh over their sins. Sin brings on men the evils really to be lamented, and the space given
should be filled up with repentance,

(3) Ver. 40. The remnant, who were referred to in ver. 22, carry out here the suggestion
just made, that sighing, not over sufferings but over sins, is the becoming utterance for every
one. The sorrows and pains endured were resultants from the sins of all the people, and thus
a joint resolve and confession is made. Only as men see that they have strayed like lost sheep
will they truly say, Let us search and try our ways, yet not delay in that effort, however
genuine it may be, but let us return unto Jehovah, the whole way back, with no halt half-way,
with no reserves for self.

Ver. 41. Such a return merges into soul-moving prayer—prayer that is not only “the motion
of a hidden fire trembling in the breast” or “the upward glancing of an eye,” but also mani-
fests itself by some outwardness. The emotion is the chief element in any suitable external
gesture. Let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto God in the heavens, satisfied that
our help is not sent from any earthly sanctuary, but from within the veil.

Ver. 42. A vision of God throws a white light upon the dark records of past life. In that
light men are forced to pass God’s judgment on themselves, J have brought up children, and
they have rebelled ayainst me. God’s rule and man’s treason are confronted, and man is con-
demned to suffer. As for us, We have transgressed and rebelled; as for Thee, Thou hast
not pardoned ; a phrase which intimates that He would scourge into the way of righteousness,
if no other method avails, and that Israel was then under His chastising rod. He is ready to
pardon, and the withholding pardon is not His desire, but a “natural sequence” of bafiled
instructions and warnings—of a deadened spiritual faculty which turns His grace into a
penalty.

(DB) Ver. 43. Thou hast covered with anger, whether Himself or us is not clear, but as
the next clause, and pursued us, mentions the latter, it may be preferable to regard the people
as wrapped round with a garment woven in the loom of wrath, and which marked them out as
the objects to be chased for punishment.

Ver. 44, There had been cries for relief (ver. 41), but unavailing, for Thou hast covered
Thyself with a cloud; clouds and darkness are round about Him when He displays His royal
righteousness and judgment in burning up His adversaries (Ps. xcvii. 2, 3). That cloud is a
barrier [preventing] prayer from passing through to His mercy-seat.

Ver. 45. Troubles are accumulated upon the nation. Rejected prayers signify condemnation
of their religiousness. It is not the act, but the motive and purpose which determine the rela-
tion of the worshipper to the Worshipped. Ritual may be punctiliously carried out, and hide
God instead of helping to reveal Him. When He hides His face, they are troubled, and, as if
He would exhibit a striking illustration before the world of what will result from disobedience
to His will, Thou hast made us the offscouring and refuse in the midst of the peoples.
Treated as worthless, like Paul and his brethren in Christ (1 Cor. iv. 18), but these were more
than conquerors through Him who loved them.

(B) Vers. 46-48 present significant intimations of their base condition. Enemies making
sport of them, fear and pitfalls surrounding them, and the oft-recurring feeling of utter
destruction instigating tears shed as copiously as rivers of water.

(Y) Ver. 49. The excessive weeping is continuous. Mine eye poureth down tears, and that
without interruption. Nor will the sound of weeping be stanched, except when his under-
current of hope reaches its terminus. f

Ver. 50. Till Jehovah looks down and beholds from heaven. When He sees the bearing
and result of afflictions on His Name’s glory, then He hears the sighing of the prisoner. For
He will not contend for ever, neither will He be always wroth.

Ver. 51. Beyond what the eye shows externally it exerts influence upon the inward part.
Mine eye hurts my soul: not in the rather jejune sense that the flood of tears had made the
eye painful, and that pain was felt in the soul; but the soul was pained because of the eye
beholding the sad lot of the more delicate and defenceless part of the population, the daughters
of my city.

(S) Ver 52. They have hunted me down like a bird is hunted when pursued with the
eagerness of those who are my enemies without cause, and who will not relax efforts till they
catch the quarry. 4

Ver, 58. He was haled to prison by them. They have cut off my lifein the pit. Shut in


69





OHAP. III, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





from all activities and society, he was as a man dead, as in a tomb over which they have cast a
stone on me. Taking such illustrations to be chiefly figurative, yet here the first clause is a
probable allusion to the treatment of Jeremiah (chap. xxxviii. 6), and the second may reter to an
unmentioned incident of the same time, for which corroboration may be found in the case of
Daniel (chap. vi. 17.)

Ver. 54. The peril was aggravated by waters that flowed over my head; the plural
perhaps indicating the influx of a spring and the condensation of vapour in the closeness of ‘a
pit. Ina state so desperate to the eyes of flesh, I said, I am cut off as a man that has no help
(Ps. lxxxviii. 4), as He was who became sin for us (Isa. liii. 8).

The remaining verses of the chapter take the form of prayer, as at the close of Chapters I.
and II. In it there are thanksgivings for relief (vers. 55-58), an appeal because of the evil
which enemies had done and were doing (vers. 59-63), and a call for recompense therefor (vers.
64-66).

(P) Ver. 55. I called upon thy name, O Jehovah, asking with some true idea of what the
words and works of the God of Israel revealed concerning Himself, suggestive, too, of the
manner in which the Lord Jesus would have His friends to pray—Ask the Father in My name
—out of the depths of the pit into which he had been thrown.

Ver. 56. A more true position is secured than that which was held previously (vers. 8 and
44), My voice thou heardest at that time when I besought thee with my spirit and voice,
Hide not—close not—thine ear at my breathing—my sighing for relief—at my cry. It is
questionable if the rendering, Hide not thine ear for my ery for relief, is not rather an explana-
tion than a fair version.

Ver. 57. Thou drewest near in the day I called upon thee. Only spiritual apprehension
of God as He who is behind all events and plenteous in mercy can bring a conviction ef accepted
prayer. The heart is then in a state to hear His comforting words, Thou saidst, Fear net.

(0) Ver. 58. There were rights to be maintained, wrongs to be redressed, and in both help
was received from a present God. Thou, O Jehovah, hast pleaded—contended for—the
causes of my soul. One thing had hurt his soul (ver. 51), but others also saddened and
weakened thought and effort, and the Lord had counteracted them. He had also interfered
when hope of living was cut off, Thou hast redeemed my life by Thy power over all.

Ver. 59, Trials are not things of the past only. Under their continuous pressure endurance
is sought for in the truth that the eye and ear of the Lord are ever open for all sights and
sounds, Thou, O Jehovah, hast seen my wrong, that which is done to me, and that sight
forms a plea for the righteous sentence of Him who sttteth on the throne judging right.

Ver. 60. There was the keenest of vengeance in the treatment to which the Lord’s servant
was subjected, and there were devices against me; but it was a certain fact that the All-
seeing One had observed every secret or open scheme.

(W) Ver. 61. The revengeful, bad feeling expressed itself in reviling words. Thou hast
heard their reproach, O Jehovah, and ali the evil machinations they framed against me.

Ver. 62 is a variant expression of the idea of the former verse, Thou hast heard the words
of the lips of those that rose up against me, and their meditation, which occupied their
minds all the day.

Ver. 63. Their downsitting and their uprising behold thou, all their proceedings when at
rest, and when they get up to do what they resolve. In hilarious and scornful mood they taunt
and deride me; Iam their song. It was not a momentary outburst of passion, not one hour’s
lapse into jocoseness, but the tenor of the life which was manifested.

(N) Ver. 64. The evil life cannot pass without condemnation. Thou wilt render a recom-
pense to them, O Jehovah. A man may pray that revilings and machinations may be
thwarted, not from a desire for personal revenge, but from the knowledge that striving with the
Maker incurs guilt and fixes the destiny of the striver according to the work of their hands,
reaping what they sow (2 Tim. iv. 14).

Ver. 65. Thou wilt give them blindness [Heb. a covering] of heart, that which is turned
into a veil (2 Cor. iii, 14) by their not becoming sons of the light, by their walking in darkness
into the ditch. Thy curse to them. Cursed be the man who maketh flesh his arm. ;

Ver. 66, Evil shall slay the wicked. Thou wilt pursue them in anger and destroy them, so
that the wicked may be no more in Thy dominion under the heavens of Jehovah. So let thine
enemies perish, O Jehovah, and thy will be done, as in heaven so on earth.


HOMILETICS.


Tue MAN oF AFFLICTION.
(Verses 1-3.)


It is given to some men to catch and idealise the poetie instinct of a nation,
to gather to a focus the ideas that have been dimly floating in the national mind,
79


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. OHAP. III,
a


and, in words of burning passion, to express what all have been vaguely feeling,
but none have been able hitherto to clothe in fitting speech. Another class of
men represent the chivalric and military characteristics of a nation; another the
judicial and ruling types. Jeremiah, distinguished as poet, prophet, and patriot,
acquired immortal distinction in the annals of the Hebrew nation as the Man of
Sorrow. In him the unparalleled sufferings of Judea seemed concentrated and
individualised. His mournful dirge, sung in the minor key, gave voice, with
lavish variety of imagery and felicity of phrase, to the overwhelming anguish of a
distracted and ruined people. In this sublime elegy the poet-prophet touches the
deepest woe of the sufferer in all ages, and provides it with adequate expression.
Ewald justly remarks ;: “ Very probably the prophet draws much of what he says
from his own experience, but the whole that he sets forth is more than his own
personality ; it is the type and pattern of every individual. And here, therefore,
is the summit and turning-point of the whole Book of Lamentations.” When the
soul finds words in which to breathe out its sorrow, the oppression is already re-
lieved. The hope of deliverance begins to dawn. Observe in this paragraph—

I. That the man of affliction regards his sufferings as the result of the
Divine anger. “Iam the man that hath seen affliction by the rod of His wrath”
(ver. 1). It is the rod of His anger to chastise and correct, not the sword to
utterly destroy. Even in the manifestation of His wrath God seeks to restore the
sinner. The last stroke of His anger must be painful, alarming, crushing ; the
more so that it is felt to be so just. Behind the dark frown of the Almighty the
light of mercy shines. “He doth not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of
men.” The most hopeful feature of affliction is the moment when the sufferer
recognises the hand of God in it ; when he acknowledges it as the fruit of personal
sin. Then it is that wrath gives place to mercy: punishment is disarmed by
pardon. Sin is antagonism to God, and merits nothing but wrath. A genuine
repentance is the open door of escape.

II. That the man of affliction is plunged into bewildering gloom. “He
hath led me and brought me into darkness, but not into light” (ver. 2). The
darkness of suffering had a realistic meaning for Jeremiah, as he remembered the
miseries of his incarceration in the dungeon (Jer. xxxvii. 15, 16; xxxviii. 6, 10-
13). But the language is a metaphorical description of afflictions in general, and
is frequently employed in Scripture. In the most graphic and explicit terms the
prophet foretold the experience he here describes (Jer. xiii. 15, 16). Suffering
is a dark enigma that baffles the wisest to solve. It is an aggravation of suffering
when it has to be endured in darkness, We have heard of a strong man who had
braved all kinds of dangers by land and sea, who was absolutely afraid of being
alone in the dark: he had no fear of anything he could see, but was in mortal
dread of the unseen. Darkness overawes the most volatile. A party of courtiers
of Louis XV. were once gathered round Cassini to witness an eclipse from the
terrace of the Paris observatory, and were laughing at the populace, whose cries
were heard as the light began to fade, when, as the unnatural gloom came quickly
on, silence fell on them too, the panic-terror striking through their laughter. There
is nothing so distressing, so oppressive, so bewildering, so hopeless to contend
with, as darkness. ae

III. That the man of affliction is smitten with repeated strokes of the Divine
Hand. “Surely against me is He turned ; He turneth His hand against me all
the day” (ver. 3). It is not one stroke of affliction, but many, and these
frequently repeated. Trouble never comes alone; it is often attended with a
crowd of ills. Before we can recover from one calamity we are stricken with
another. It may be difficult to find the kind heart behind the strong hand ; but
it is there. Not one blow more than is necessary will be permitted to fall.
The most prolonged and reiterated suffering will cease as soon as its purpose is
answered. While it continues there should be prayerful searchings of ey





OBAP. III,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





Lzssons.—1l. The fact of suffering testifies to the fact of sin.
suffering occasioned by witnessing the sufferings of others.


ing when it brings us nearer to God.


2. Much of our
3. Suffering ts @ bless-


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 1. Ecce homo. I. Consider
the generality of affliction in the nature
thereof. We met all generally in the
first treason against ourselves in Adam’s
rebellion ; and we met all, too, in the
second treason—the treason against
Jesus Christ. All our sins were upon
His shoulders. All the evils and mis-
chiefs of life come for the most part
from this—that we think to enjoy those
things which God hath given us only
to use. III. Consider affliction as bear-
ing on man. “Iam the man that hath
seen affliction.” It was that man that is
denoted and signified in that name that
hath lain under affliction, and therefore
no kind of man was likely to escape.
Man carries the spawn and seed and
eggs of affliction in his own flesh, and
his own thoughts make haste to hatch
them and bring them up. We make
all our worms snakes, all our snakes
vipers, all our vipers dragons by our
murmuring. III. Consider affliction in
its special application to one man. That
man the prophet Jeremiah, one of the
best of men. As he was submitted to
these extraordinary afflictions, we see
that no man is so necessary to God as
that God cannot come to His ends with-
out that man. God can lack and leave
out any man in His service. The best
of our wages is adversity, because that
gives us a true fast, and a right value
of our prosperity. Jeremy had it; the
best of his rank must. No man is ex-
cused of subsequent afflictions by prece-
dent, nor of falling into more by having
borne some already. Our afflictions
are as beggars; they tell others, and
send more after them. When the hand
of God was upon Jeremiah he declared
God’s handwriting ; not only to his own
conscience by acknowledging that all
these afflictions were for his own sins,
but by acknowledging to the world that
God had laid such and such afflictions
upon him. St. Ambrose, in a journey
from Milan to Rome, passed some time


73


one evening with his host, who bragged
he had never had any cross in his life.
Ambrose at once removed to another
house, protesting that either the man
was very unthankful to God that would
not take knowledge of His corrections,
or that God’s measure was by this time
full, and would surely, soundly, and
suddenly pour.down all together. IV.
Consider the weight and vehemence of
afflictions. 1. They are aggravated in
that they are the Lord’s. They are in-
evitable ; they cannot be avoided ; they
are just, and cannot be pleaded against ;
nor can we ease ourselves with any ima-
gination of our innocency, as though
they were undeserved. 2. They are in
His rod. Our murmuring makes a rod
a staff, and a staff a sword, and that
which God presented for physic, poison.
3. They are inflicted by the rod of His
wrath. Though there be properly no
anger in God, yet God is said to do a
thing in anger when He does it so as
an angry man would do it. It is the
highest extent of affliction that we take
God to be angrier than He is. V.
Consider the comforts we have in afflic-
tions. ‘I am the man that hath seen
affliction.” 1. That we see our afflic-
tions, we understand, consider them.
We see that affliction comes from God,
and that it is sent that we may see and
taste the goodness of God. 2. That,
though afflicted, we still retain our
manhood. God may mend thee in
marring thee ; He may build thee up in
dejecting thee ; He may infuse another
manhood into thee, so that thou canst
say, ‘“‘I am that Christian man; I am
the man that cannot despair since
Christ is the remedy.” 3. That the rod
of God’s wrath is also the rod of His
comfort and strength (Micah vii. 14;
Ps. xlv. 6; Ps. xxiii. 4).—Donne,

— God and human suffering: 1.
Often brought into strange relationship,
2. Suffering is a significant revelation
of how God views human sin. 8. Suf-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS,


OHAP. Til,


a


fering may draw man nearer to, or drive
him farther from, God.
Vers. 2, 3. The mystery of suffer-


ing. I. Impossible to solve by human
speculations. ‘Into darkness, but not


inte light.” II. Increased by the difi-
culty of accounting for the part God
takes in tt. “He hath led me and
brought me into darkness, but not
into light” (ver. 2). III. Intensified by
the apparent persistency of the Divine
severity. “Surely against me is He
turned ; He turneth His hand against
me all the day ” (ver. 3).


ILLUSTRATIONS.—God’s anger man’s
heaviest affliction, God’s anger exerts
itself by embittering afflictions. Every
affliction is of itself a grievance, and a
breach made upon our happiness; but
there is sometimes a secret energy that
so edges and quickens its afflictive opera-
tion that a blow levelled at the body
shall enter into the very soul. What
is the reason that David is sometimes
so courageous that ‘‘though he walks
through the valley of the shadow of
death, he fears no evil;” and, at another
time, God no sooner “hides His face,
but he is troubled”? What is the cause
that a man sometimes breaks through a
greater calamity, and at another time
the same person fails and desponds under
a loss of the same nature? Whence can
this be, but that God infuses some more
grains of His wrath into the one than
into the other 1—Souwth.

— The Divine anger. Anger is the
whetstone of strength; in an equality
of other terms, it will make a man pre-
vail. Nothing is able to stand before
a fire which is once enraged ; so is it
when the fire of the Lord’s revenge
breaks forth upon the enemies of His
Son. Add hereunto our disposition and
preparedness for the wrath of God. Far
easier is it to make a print in wax than
in an adamant; to kindle a fire in dry
stubble than in green wood. Wicked
men have fitted themselves for wrath,
and are procurers and artificers of their
own destruction.—Bishop Reynolds.
Darkness and danger. Sailing once
along a coast where a friend had suffered
shipwreck, the scene which recalled his


danger filled us with no fear; because,
while his ship, cn the night she ran
ashore, was cutting her way through
the densest fog, we were ploughing the
waters of a silver sea, where noble head-
lands, pillared cliffs, scattered islands,
and surf-beaten reefs stood bathed in
the brightest moonshine. There was
no danger just because there was no
darkness.— Guthrie.

Darkness precedes light. The Lora
ofttimes makes everything as dark as it
can become, just that presently the light
may shine more brilliantly. Ishmael
faints before Hagar finds the well.
Joseph is left in prison and oblivion
before being raised to dignity. The
Assyrian host surrounds Jerusalem ere
they are smitten by the angel. Jere-
miah sinks into the pit before he is
placed on a rock. Violent persecution
of the Christians preceded the triumph
of the Gospel. Mediaeval darkness pre-
ceded the dawn of the Reformation.—
Oosterzee.

Affliction ripens character. There
is a certain mellowness which affliction
sheds upon the character, a softening
that it effects of all the rougher and
more repulsive asperities of our nature,
a delicacy of temperament into which it
often melts and refines the most un-
gainly spirit. It is not the pride of
aspiring talent that we carry to heaven
with us; it is not the lustre of a super-
iority which dazzles and commands that
we bear with us there. It is not the
eminence of any public distinction or
the fame of lofty and successful enter-
prise ; and should these give undue con-
fidence to man or throw an aspect of
conscious and complacent energy over
him, he wears not yet the complexion
of Paradise ; and should God select him
as His own, He will send some special
affliction that may chasten him out of
all which is uncongenial with the place
of blessedness, and at length reduce him
to its unmingled love and its adoring
humility. The character is purified by
the simple process of passing through
the fire. ‘And when He has tried me,
I shall come forth as gold.”— Chalmers.

Suffering a mystery. As the Egyp-
tian who carried something wound up


OHAP, It,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





in his napkin answered him who de-
manded what it was, that he covered it
to the end that no man should see it;
g0 likewise must we learn that if there


pose kept from us, to the end that we
should not be too curious to inquire
after it; that it is far better to de
utterly ignorant herein than to have al


be anything hidden and laid up in the
works and dealings of God, it is of pur-


the knowledge thereof that may be.—
Cawdray.


HOMILETICS.
THE BEWILDERMENT OF GRIEF,


(Verses 4-9.)


L Is accompanied with intense physical suffering. ‘‘My flesh and my skin
hath He made old ; He hath broken my bones” (ver. 4). The skin is wrinkled
and worn, in this case not with age, but with excessive grief; and the suffering
which in the preceding verses was represented as a slow wasting of strength, has
now reached the stage of acute pain, such as is caused by the breaking of bones.
It is a pitiable sight to see a nation or an individual growing prematurely old.
This is not done by hard, honest, healthy work, but by sorrow and suffering.
The strongest and most beautiful physical form rapidly shrinks and withers under
the stroke of a great and overwhelming grief. A sudden calamity has been known
to turn the hair grey in a single night, and to impose the wreck of years on the
bewildered and moaning sufferer.

II. Is as of one immured in prison, from which all efforts to ascape are
futile (vers. 5, 7,9). The prisoner is enclosed and fenced in with a soiid wall as .
of hewn stone, but it is a wall of bitterness and weariness, There are paths, dark
and tortuous, and as he gropes along them with the dim hope of finding an outlet,
he finds himself in a maze which brings him back, after long and weary wandering,
to the place whence he started. Like Byron’s Prisoner of Chillon—


“Tt was liberty to stride
Along my cell from side to side,
And up and down, and then athwart,
And tread it over every part ;
And round the pillars one by one,
Returning where my walk begun.”


Grief fetters the soul as with a heavy chain. It may chafe and fret and tug to
very weariness in the effort to obtain release; but in vain: the bondage remains,
If we walk in the crooked paths of sin, we shall ultimately find ourselves enclosed
within the crooked paths of sorrow, from which we shall be powerless to escape.

III. Is as of one buried in a dismal sepulchre. ‘He hath set me in dark
places, as they that be dead of old” (ver. 6). Grief has worn down the sufferer to
the semblance of a skeleton, and he regards himself as a corpse laid in the dark
chambers of the grave—dead, buried, and forgotten.


“ For all was blank and bleak and gray,
It was not night, it was not day,
It was not even the dungeon-light,
So hateful to my heavy sight,
But vacancy absorbing space,
And fixedness without a place ;
There were no stars, no earth, no time,
No check, no change, no good, no crime 3
But silence and a stirless breath,
Which neither was of life nor death ;
A sea of stagnant idleness,
Blind, boundless, mute, and motionless !"— Byren,


74


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. OHAP. Ii,








Excessive grief darkens and dulls every faculty, and robs life of all its charm
There are some sorrows from which death is a merciful release.

IV. The loudest calls for help are disregarded. ‘Also when I ery and
shout, he shutteth out my prayer” (ver. 8). The walls of his prison are so thick
that the loudest cries cannot pierce them; they are unheard and unheeded, It
intensifies the bewilderment of grief when the most earnest cries for help bring
no relief. A short time ago the dead body of a stalwart Scotch shepherd was
found buried in the snow on the Ayrshire hills, within a short distance of his
own home. Two days before, when walking homewards, he was overtaken with
a snowstorm, and it is supposed must have been dazed by the fury of the tempest,
and lost his way. It is distressing to think of his desperate struggles for life and
his exhausting shouts for help, but all in vain. It is a painful phase in the
mystery of suffering when God seems so indifferent to our prayers, and so slow to
help. But even in this we are led by-and-bye to recognise the Divine justice and


mercy.


Lrssons.—1. The body sympathises with the sufferings of the soul. 2. Much
of the suffering of life must be borne alone.


3. It is the bitterest ingredient in


sufjering when there 18 no prospect of relief.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 4-6. The ravages of sorrow:
I. Destroy the freshness and bloom of
youth. ‘My flesh and my skin hath
He made old.” II. Inflict acutest pain.
‘He hath broken my bones” (ver. 4).
Ill. Oppress the soul with bitterness and
toil. ‘He hath builded against me,
and compassed me with gall and travel”
(ver. 5). IV. Overshadow the individual
life with the gloom of the grave. ‘He
hath set me in dark places, as they that
be dead of old” (ver. 6).

Vers. 7-9. A bafiled sufferer: I.
He is enclosed and fettered. ‘‘ He hath
hedged me about that I cannot get out ;
He hath made my chain heavy ” (ver.
7). IL. His cries for help are unavail-
ing. ‘Also when I cry and shout, He
shutteth out my prayer” (ver. 8). III.
He is in a maze of tortuous paths, from
which there 1s no outlet. “He hath in-
closed my ways with hewn stone, He
hath made my paths crooked” (ver. 9).


InLustrations. — Causes of grief.
We fancy that all our afflictions are
sent us directly from above; sometimes
we think it in piety and contrition, but
oftener in moroseness and discontent.
It would be well, however, if we at-
tempted to trace the causes of them;
we should probably find their origin
in some region of the heart which we
never hal well explored, or in which


we had secretly deposited our worst
indulgences. The clouds that intercept
the heavens from us come not from the
heavens, but from the earth.—Landor.

A great sorrow. Henry I, on his
return from Normandy, was accom-
panied by a crowd of nobles and his
son William, The White Ship, in which
the prince embarked, lingered behind
the rest of the royal fleet, while the
young nobles, excited with wine, hung
over the-ship’s side taunting the priest
who came to give the customary bene-
diction. At last the guards of the
king’s treasure pressed the vessel’s de-
parture, and, driven by the arms of
fifty rowers, it swept swiftly out to sea.
All at once the ship’s side struck on a
rock at the mouth of the harbour, and
in an instant it sank beneath the waves.
One terrible cry, ringing through the
stillness of the night, was heard by the
royal fleet, but it was not till the morn-
ing that the fatal news reached the
king. He fell unconscious to the
ground, and rose never to smile again /

Secret grief. If the internal griefs
of every man could be read, written on
his forehead, how many who now excite
envy would appear to be objects of
pity !—Metastasio.

Grief irksome, but needful. A friend
was asked concerning a beautiful horse
feeding on the pasture with a clog on

75


OWAP. IT.


—_—


its foot, ““Why do you clog such a
noble animal?” The reply was, “I
would a great deal sooner clog him than
lose him; he is given to leap hedges.”
That is why God clogs His people. He
would rather clog them than lose them ;
for if He did not, they would leap and
be gone.—Spurgeon.

The sufferer baffled by temptation.
A time of affliction is a time of tempta-
tion. Satan will not be wanting in
any opportunity or advantage of setting
upon the soul. When Pharaoh heard
that the people were entangled in the
wilderness, he pursued them; and
when Satan sees a soul entangled with
its distresses and troubles, he thinks it
his time and hour to assault it. He
seeks to winnow, and comes when the
corn is under the flail. Reckon, there-
fore, that, when trouble cometh, the
prince of this world comethalso. Then
is the time to take the shield of faith,
that we may be able to quench his fiery
darts. If they be neglected, they will
inflame the soul.—John Owen.

Grief, its uses. What! would you
choose that you alone may fare better
than all God’s saints? that God should
strew carpets for your nice feet only, to
walk into your heaven, and make that
way smooth for you which all patriarchs,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : LAMENTATIONS.





prophets, evangelists, confessors, Christ
Himself, have found rugged and bloody !
Away with this self-love, and come
down, you ambitious sons of Zebedee,
and, ere you think of sitting near the
throne, be content to be called unto the
cross. Now is your trial. Let your
Saviour see how much of His bitter
portion you can pledge. Then shall
you see how much of His glory He can
afford you. Be content to drink of His
vinegar and gall, and you shall drink
new wine with Him in His kingdom.—
Bishop Hall.

— As snow is of itself cold, yet
warms and refreshes the earth, so afflic-
tions, though in themselves grievous,
yet keep the soul of the Christian warm
and make it fruitful. Let the most
afflicted know and remember that it is
better to be preserved in brine than to
rot in honey.—Sailter.

— After a forest fire has raged
furiously, it has been found that many
pine cones have had their seeds released
by the heat, which ordinarily would
have remained unsown. The future
forest sprang from the ashes of the
former. Some Christian graces, such as
humility, patience, sympathy, have been
evolved from the sufferings of the saints.
The furnace has been used to fructify.


HOMILETICS.
JEHOVAH AS A For,


(Verses 10-13.)


I. Is aware of every effort to escape out of His power. “He was unto me
ag a bear lying in wait, and as a lion in secret places” (ver. 10). The afflicted
one compares himself to a fugitive striving to escape from his miseries, but baffled
at every turn, Finding his way blocked up by a solid wall, he plunges into the
uncertain paths of the forest, only to find himself exposed to the rapacity of beasts
of prey. In every direction he is menaced with enemies; to turn back is as
dangerous as to press forward. Exhausted and bewildered, he is ready to sink
with terror and despair. Woe to the man who has made an enemy of Jehovah!
His most frantic efforts to escape are in vain. He is everywhere threatened by
the law he has violated, and its penalties lie about his path like wild beasts, ready
to seize him as their victim.

IJ. Alarms by the suddenness and violence of His attack. “He hath
turned aside my ways, and pulled me in pieces. He hath made me desolate”
(ver. 11). The figure of the lion is still maintained. Aware of its presence, the
startled fugitive turns aside, only to find himself suddenly pounced upon and tern
in Pee so that, stupified with terror and pain, he is powerless to flee, ‘“ He

6


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. OHAP, Til.





hath made me desolate,” a favourite word with Jeremiah, occurring more than forty
times in his Prophecy, and five times in Lamentations (ch. i. 4, 13,16; iv. 5; v
18), The root meaning of the word is appalled, astonied, stupified, struck
dumb with terror. The impenitent wicked are every moment in imminent peril.
The doom of destruction is already declared against the workers of iniquity, and
that destruction shall come ‘“ unawares, as a whirlwind, suddenly and swiftly ” (cf.
Ps, xxxv. 8; Prov. i. 27, x. 29, xxi. 15; 1 Thess. v. 3; 2 Pet. ii. 1). Christ
is the refuge of the sinner, immediately accessible, and in Him there is invulner-
able security.

Ill. Is an unerring marksman. ‘‘He hath bent His bow, and set me asa
mark for the arrow” (ver. 12). The simile of the lion naturally suggests that of
the hunter. When the smitten fugitive is under the paw of the lion, the hunter
comes, but not to deliver him. It is not the beast of prey, but the poor mangled
victim which is the mark for his arrows. The Mohammedan Caliph Aaly was
once asked, ‘“‘If the heavens were a bow and the earth the cord thereof, if cala-
mities were arrows, man the butt for those arrows, and the holy blessed God the
unerring marksman, where could the sons of Adam flee for succour?” The Caliph
replied, “The children of Adam must flee unto the Lord.” This was the state of
unhappy Judah ; this is the state of the man who wickedly defies God. There is
no escape but by a penitert return to Him whose bow is already bent to punish,
and whose arrow reaches its mark with unerring precision.

IV. Can inflict acutest pain. ‘‘ He hath caused the arrows of His quiver to
enter into my reins”—my heart (ver. 13). God has many arrows; they are swift
in their passage, unerring in their aim, and pierce deep. None can wound as God
can. In the region where the greatest sin against Him has been committed—in
the heart—there the arrows of His judgment penetrate and produce the keenest
anguish. ‘These immediate blows of God upon the soul seem to be those things
called in Psalm xxxviii. 2 God’s arrows; they are strange, sudden, invincible
amazements upon the spirit, leaving such a damp upon it as defies the faint and
weak cordials of all creature enjoyments. The wounds which God Himself makes
none but God Himself can cure.”

Lessons.—l. Jt is vain for the sinner to defy Jehovah. 2. Sin cannot evade
either detection or punishment. 3. The only hope of the sinner és to penitently
implore the mercy of Jehovah.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 10, 11. The dangers of a sinful
life. I. The agents of punishment are
always at hand. ‘‘He was unto me as
a bear lying in wait, and as a lion in
secret places” (ver. 10). II. There is
no escape from punishment for sin.
“He hath turned aside my ways and
pulled me in pieces” (ver. 11). II.
The punishment for sin is sudden and
appalling. ‘‘He hath made me deso-
late ” (ver. 11).

Vers. 12, 13. The certainty of punish-
ment. I. Because God is just. Il. Be-
cause God is unerring in His treatment
of sin. ‘He hath bent His bow and
set me as a mark for the arrow” (ver.
12). III. The punishment will be pain-
fully realised. ‘‘He hath caused the


arrows of His quiver to enter into my
reins ” (ver. 13).


ILLUsTRATIONS.—Jehoyvah a foe to
all sin. God Himself, we have always
understood, hates sin with a most au-
thentic, celestial, and eternal hatred—a
hatred, a hostility inexorable, unappeas-
able, which blasts the scoundrel, and all
scoundrels ultimately, into black anni-
hilation and disappearance from the
sum of things. The path of it is the
path of a flaming sword. He that has
eyes may see it walking, inexorable,
divinely beautiful and divinely terrible,
through the chaotic gulf of human his
tory, and everywhere burning, as with
unquenchable fire, the false and the

77


OHAP. ITI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


eR


deadworthy from the true and _life-
worthy, making all human history and
the biography of every man a God’s
cosmos in place of a devil’s chaos. So
it is in the end; even so to every man
who is a man, and not a mutinous beast,
and has eyes to see.—Carlyle.

The dangers of sin. The favourite
sport of Canada in winter is tobogan-
ning. Some of the slides are very steep
and look very dangerous, and the sensa-
tion of rushing down the hill on the
thin strips of basswood is one never to
be forgotten. “How do you like it?”
asked a Canadian girl of an American
visitor, whom she had steered down
the steepest slide. ‘Oh, I would not
have missed it for a hundred dollars!”
“ You'll try it again, won’t you?” “ Not
for a thousand dollars!”

— Mr. Ruskin speaks in his ‘‘ Love’s
Meinie ” of the little crake, a bird which
lays her eggs on an inartificially con-
structed platform of decayed leaves
or stalks of marsh plants, slightly ele-
vated above the water. “How ele-
vated I cannot find proper account ;
that is to say, whether it is hung
to the stems of growing reeds or built
on hillocks of soil; but the bird is
always liable to have its nest overflown
by floods.”

The degradation of sin. When the
followers of Ulysses degraded them-
selves by the misuse of pleasures until
they fell to the level of the brutes, it is
said that Circe, touching them with her


brought to the surfacethe inner ugliness,
revealed the animal that ruled within.

The bitterness of sin. There is
more bitterness following upon sin’s end-
ing than ever there was sweetness flow-
ing from sin’s acting. You that see
nothing but well in its commission will
suffer nothing but woe in its conclusion.
You that sin for your profits will never
profit by your sins.—Dyer.

Divine judgment a painful reality.
That which comes immediately from
God has most of God in it. As the
sun when he darts his beams in a direct
perpendicular line does it most forcibly
because most immediately, there are
terrors upon the mind which flow im-
mediately from God, and are not weak-
ened or refracted by passing through
the instrumental conveyance of a second
cause, for that which passes through a
thing is contracted according to the
narrowness of its passage. The terrors
here spoken of, not being inflicted by
the intermediate help of anything, but
being darted forth from God Himself,
are by this incomparably more strong
and piercing. When God wounds a
man by the loss of an estate, of his
health, of a relation, the smart is but
commensurate to the thing which ie
lost, poor and finite. But when He
Himself employs His whole omnipo
tence, and is Himself both the archer
and the arrow, there is as much differ.
ence between this and the former ag
when a house lets fall a cobweb and


wand, turned them into swine. She when it falls itself upon a man.—Sough.


; HOMILETICS.
ComMpPLEX PHASES OF DISTRESS.
(Verses 14-17.)


L The sufferer is the subject of ridicule. ‘I was a derision to all my
people, and their song all the day ” (ver. 14). Dropping the use of metaphor for
the nonce, the prophet plainly indicates in these words what the arrows were that
pierced him to the quick. They were the darts of ridicule, sharpened with envy
and poisoned with rancour—a ridicule all the keener as coming from his own
people, and revealing the base treachery that had been all along cherished under
the mask of professed friendship. It is a deep wound to a sensitive heart to
discover the fickleness of perverse human nature. The very people who smile
upon and flatter us in our prosperity are the first to curl the liy of scorn and to
join those who make sport over our misfortunes. The idol of the crowd to-day

8


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. OHAP. Itt.





may be the execration of the crowd to-morrow. It is a part of the suffering of
the unfaithful to have to endure the contempt of God and man, and the sting of
the distress is the consciousness that it is self-induced and richly deserved.
Where shall he look for sympathy and help? Not from man. His only refuge
is in God.

IL The sufferer is satiated with pain and sunk in abject humiliation.
“He hath filled me with bitterness, He hath made me drunken with wormwood.
He hath also broken my teeth with gravel stones, He hath covered me with
ashes” (vers. 15, 16). He is as one glutted with bitter food and stupified with
nauseous drinks. An Arabic poet describes a man grievously afflicted as “a
pounder of wormwood.” His food is so mingled with the grit of the ashes in
which it is baked that his teeth are broken in eating it, and he is himself smothered
with the ashes into the midst of which he has been thrown down. To the
Oriental mind this is a graphic description of acute suffering and shame. Vanity,
pride, and disobedience end in humiliation and trouble. ‘“ It seems appointed,”
says Lange, “that much of the highest instruction should come to us, even in the
Bible, through the sufferings and struggles of individual men.” The anguish of
the prophet was a type of the sufferings of a rebellious nation.

III. The sufferer is robbed of happiness. “ Thou hast removed my soul far
off from peace” (ver. 17). Peace in Hebrew has the wider signification of wel-
fare, happiness. Hence it was their salutation in life, ‘ Peace be to thee,” and
in death was engraved upon their sepulchres, “In peace.” Peace with God is the
source of permanent and overflowing. happiness, and its possession is conditioned
on the obedience of faith, for ‘‘ being justified by faith, we have peace with God,
and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.” How great is the loss when our peace
is gone and our happiness takes wing! It is the loss of that we most highly
prize and diligently seek after, for happiness is the object of universal search.
Rob a man of his peace, and what is there left to live for? The soul, unloosed
from her old moorings, is tossed about like a helpless ship in the troubled sea
which cannot rest. Life is an intolerable burden, and, swung in a whirl of black
despair, the soul cries out with the distracted patriarch, “Oh, that I might have
my request,” &. (Job vi. 8-10).

IV. The sufferer loses the very idea of good. “I forgot prosperity”
(ver. 17). I forgot what good is, lost the very idea of what it means. There is
no enjoyment in the present; there is no hope in the future. It is impossible to
conceive a more pitiable and forlorn condition. The prophet has surely reached
the bottom of his despair; there is no lower depth. This is the fate of the man
who tries to live without God. His views of right and wrong, of liberty and
bondage, of prosperity and adversity, are utterly confounded. It is a dangerous
experiment for any man to try. Christ is the Hope of humanity. To be without
Him is to be without God, and to be in the condition of the Ephesians of a former
age, “ Having no hope and without God in the world” (Eph. ii. 12).

Lussons.—l. Jt is a painful experience to meet with scorn where we expected
sympathy. 2. There is always something to modify the happiness of life. 3. It
is one of the saddest results of suffering when the soul loses faith in goodness,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 14, 15. Ridicule: 1. Is hard Ver. 17. The loss of happiness: I.
to bear when coming from our enemies. Is the loss of peace. IL. Is the loss of
II. Has a special aggravation when itis true notions of yoodness. III. 1s the
exultingly employed against us by those fate of the obstinately unbelieving.
we had loved and trusted. III. Over-
whelms its victim by its bitterness and ILLUSTRATIONS.—Triumph over ridi-
ceaseless outflow. cule. A pious poor man ee much


OHAP. Iii.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





ridiculed on account of his religion.
Being asked if these daily persecutions
did not make him ready to give up
his profession, he replied, “No! Our
minister once said in his sermon that if
we were so foolish as to permit such
people to laugh us out of religion till at
last we dropped into hell, they could
not laugh us out again.”

— What would the nightingale care
if the toad despised her singing? She
would still sing on, and leave the cold
toad to his dank shadows, And what
care I for the sneers of men who grovel
upon earth? I will still sing on in the
ear and bosom of God.—Beecher.

Treachery has no pity. Sir Anthony
Kingston, the provost-marshal of the
Protector, the Earl of Hertford, sent
word to the mayor of Bodmin that he
would dine with him. He had a man
to hang too, he said, and a stout gallows
must be ready. The dinner was duly
eaten and the gallows prepared. ‘‘ Think
you,” said Kingston as they stood look-
ing at it, “think you is it strong
enough?” ‘ Yea, sir,” quoth the mayor,
“it is.’ ‘ Well, then,” said Sir An-
thony, “get up; it is for you.” The
mayor, greatly abashed, exclaimed and
protested. “Sir,” said Kingston,
“there is no remedy; ye have been a
busy rebel, and this is appointed for
your reward ;” and so, without respite
or stay, the mayor was hanged.

Suffering and its compensations.
Should the Empress determine to banish
me, let her banish me; “ The earth is
the Lord’s and the fulness thereof.” If
she will cast me into the sea, let her
cast me into the sea; I will remember
Yonah, If she will throw me into a


burning fiery furnace, the three children
were there before me. If she will throw
me to the wild beasts, I will remember
that Daniel was in the den of lions. If
she will condemn me to be stoned, I
shall be an associate of Stephen, the
proto-martyr. If she will have me be-
headed, the Baptist has submitted to
the same punishment. If she will take
away my substance, “naked came I out
of my mother’s womb, and naked shall
I return to it.”—Chrysastom.

The best work comes out of distress,
The people of Verona, when they saw
Dante in the streets, used to say, ‘‘ See,
there is the man that was in hell!”
Ah yes! he had been in hell—in hell
enough, in long severe sorrow and
struggle, as the like of him is pretty
sure to have been. Commedias that
come out divine are not accomplished
otherwise. Thought, true labour of
any kind, highest virtue itself, is it
not the daughter of pain? Born as out
of the black whirlwind ; true effort, in
fact, as of a captive struggling to free
himself: that is thought. In all ways
we are to become perfect through
suffering.—Carlyle.

Happiness depends on God. Solon
said, “‘ No man ought to be called happy
till he dies, because he knows not what
his life is to be.” But the Christian
may always call himself. happy here
because wherever his tent is carried, he
need never pitch it where the cloud
does not move and where ‘the is not
surrounded by a wall of fire, ‘TI will
be a wall of fire round about them, and
their glory in the midst.” They cannot
dwell where God is not householder,
warder, and bulwark of salvation.


HOMILETICS.


THe Dawn or Hops.
(Verses 18-21.)


I. Begins to appear when the soul has reached the verge of despair. “I
said, My strength and my hope is perished from the Lord” (ver. 18). When things
get to the worst they begin to mend. For some time the affairs of the prophet
had been sinking into ever-deepening gloom. His peace and happiness had departed,
the memory that they ever existed had perished, and now dark doubts about the


Tivine goodness had finished the degenerating procass.


80


It was a critical moment.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


LS


CmaP. IN,


The soul oscillated between utter collapse and the beginning of recovery. It is a
mercy the soul is not left to itself in its weakest moments. Help was at hand,
and hope began to dawn. All the time the soul was expressing the utmost
despondency, it was struggling against despair, and feeling for some ground of con-
fidence and hope. It begins to appear that, after all, trouble is God’s method of
making known His righteousness and love. A way out of the dungeon is opening.

II. Indicated by the prayer of the soul for the Divine pity. “Remem-
bering mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall” (ver. 19).
Remember, It is a prayer to Jehovah, beseeching compassion for the soul that
has supped its fill of misery, which it has found as bitter as wormwood and gall.
There is hope for man, for the worst of men, when he begins to pray. It is the
first step upward in the pathway of deliverance. It may seem a cry of despair,
but it is a cry that appeals to the Divine pity, and not in vain, The powers of
Omnipotence are put into operation for the soul’s rescue.

III. Evident by the fact of the soul’s voluntary humiliation ‘My soui
hath them still in remembrance and is humbled in me” (ver. 20). It is borne in
upon the sufferer that his extraordinary afilictions are the consequences of sin.
The mind oppressed and crippled by a morbid contemplation of its miseries is now
transferred to a consideration of their cause, and reflection upon its transgressions
bows the soul in conscious shame, A change of theme is a relief to the mentally
distressed. The moment the soul becomes concerned about its sins, it becomes
anxious about their removal. This anxiety is the dawn of hope.

IV. Strengthened by the recollection that prayer and penitence are the
conditions of deliverance. ‘‘This I recall to my mind, therefore have I hope”
(ver. 21), He has seen his error in murmuring against the bitterness of his
adversity. Complaints only increased his misery, but did nothing towards remov-
ing it. He now recalls how a sight of his sins had humbled him, and led him to
pray for mercy, and knowing that God hears the cry of the sincerely penitent, he
begins to cherish the hope of pardon and deliverance. It is in this way that God
deals with the sinners of to-day. While men concentrate their thoughts upou
their misfortunes, and rail against the Providence whose laws they have so reck-
lessly broken, they shut themselves off from God and from hope; but when they
acknowledge and grieve over their sins, and pray to God for the mercy provided
for all men in Christ Jesus, they receive not only the hope, but the assurance of
salvation.

Lessons.—1. Hope ts the last link between sanity and utter mental collapse.
2. The greatest sufferer ts never wholly without hope. 3. All true reform must


begin in hope,
GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 18,19. Lost hope restored. I. hope. Memory is very often the ser-


Hope has its highest realisation in God.
II. When sin divorces the soul from
God, its hope perishes. III. Only as the
soul returns to God is its hope restored.

Vers. 20, 21. The office of memory:
I, Plays an important part in our men-
tal and spiritual history. II. Helps us
to realise the nature and aggravation of
our sins. III. Should lead us to a
wise and timely humiliation on account
of sin. IV. Prepares the way for a
brighter and more hopeful future,

Ver, 21. Memory, the handmaid of

81


vant of despondency. She stands like
a handmaiden, clothed in sackcloth,
presenting to her master a cup of
mingled gall and wormwood. Like
Mercury, she hastes with winged heel
to gather fresh thorns with which to fill
the uneasy pillow, and to bind fresh
rods with which to scourge the already
bleeding heart. There is, however, no
necessity for this, Wisdom will trans-
form memory into an angel of comfort.
She need not wear a crown of iron; she
may encircle her brow with a fillet of
v


OHAP. IXI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : LAMENTATIONS.





gold, all spangled with stars. We lay
it down as a general principle, that if
we would exercise our memories we
might, in our darkest distress, strike
a match which would instantaneously
kindle the lamp of comfort. I. Apply
this principle to the believer in deep
trouble. The chapter contains a list
of matters the recollection of which
brought comfort to Jeremiah. 1. The
fact that, however deep our affliction, tt ts
of the Lord’s mercy we are not consumed.
When you are kindling your household
fire, before which you hope to sit down
with comfort, you do not expect first to
kindle the lumps of coal, but you set
some lighter fuel in a blaze, and soon
the more solid material yields a genial
glow ; so this thought, which may seem
so light to you, may be as the kindling
of a heavenly fire of comfort to you who
are now shivering in your grief. 2.
His compassions fail not. This again is
not a very high step, but still it is a
little in advance of the other, and the
weakest may readily reach it 3.
The Lord is my portion. One of our
kings, high and haughty in temper, had
a quarrel with the citizens of London,
and thought to alarm them by a dread-
ful threat that would cow the spirits of
the bold burghers, for if they did not
mind what they were at, he would remove
his court from Westminster. Where-
upon the doughty Lord Mayor begged
to inquire whether his Majesty meant
to take the Thames away, for so long
as the river remained, his majesty might
take himself where he pleased. Even
so the world warns us, you cannot hold
out, you cannot rejoice; this trouble
shall come and that adversity shall be-
fall. We reply, So long as you cannot
take our Lord away, we will not com-
plain. We have now advanced to some
degree of hope, but there are other steps
to ascend. 4. The Lord is good unto
them that wait for Him, to the soul that
seeketh Him. Let Him smite never
so hard, yet if we can maintain the
heavenly posture of prayer, we may
rest assured that He will turn from
blows to kisses yet. Bunyan tells
us that when the city of Mansoul
was besieged, it was the depth of
82


winter and the roads were very bad;
but even then prayer could travel them.
No enemy can barricade the road to the
King. We are getting into deeper
water of joy ;.let us take another step.
5. It is good that a man should bear the
yoke in his youth. Why should I dread
to descend the shaft of affliction if it
leads me to the gold mine of spiritual
experience? Why should I ery out if
the sun of my prosperity goes down, if
in the darkness of my adversity I shall
be the better able to count the starry
promises with which my faithful God
has been pleased to gem the sky. Many
a promise is written in sympathetic
ink, which you cannot read till the
fire of trouble brings out the charac-
ters. One step more, and surely we
shall then have good ground to rejoice.
6. The Lord will not cast off for ever.
Who told thee that the night would
never end in day? Who told thee that
the sea would ebb out till there should
be nothing left but a vast tract of mud
and sand? Who told thee that the
winter would proceed from frost to frost,
from snow, and ice, and hail, to deeper
snow and yet more heavy tempest4
Knowest thou not that day follows
night, that flood comes after ebb, the
spring and summer succeed to winter?
Hope thou then! Hope thou ever, for
God fails thee not. Thus memory may
be, as Coleridge calls it, “the bosom-
spring of joy.” II. To the doubting
Christian who has lost his evidences
of salvation: 1. Call to remembrance
matters of the past. At the south of
Africa the sea was generally so stormy
when the frail barks of the Portuguese
went sailing south that they named it
the Cape of Storms; but after that cape
had been well rounded by bolder navi-
gators, they named it the Cape of Good
Hope. In your experience you had
many a Cape of Storms, but you have
weathered them all, and now let them
be a Cape of Good Hope to you. 2.
Recall the fact that others have found the
Lord true to them. 3. Remember that
uf you look within you will see some faint
traces of the Holy Spirit’s hand. The
complete picture of Christ is not there,
but cannot you see the crayon sketch,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


OHAP. II


Ss nee?


the outline, the charcoal marks? Where
* God the Holy Ghost has done as much
as that, He will do more. 4. Recollect
that Jesus Christ came into the world to
save sinners. If I am not a saint, lam
a sinner; and if I may not go to the


throne of grace as a child, I will go as’


asinner. III. A few words to seekers.
Oh, that I had a voice like the trumpet
of God that shall wake the dead at last !
If I might only have it to utter one
sentence, it would be this one, “In
Christ is your help found.” As for
you, there never can be found anything
hopeful in your human nature. It is
death itself, it is rottenness and corrup-
tion. Turn, turn away your eyes from
this despairing mass of black depravity
and look to Christ.—C. H. Spurgeon.


ILLUsTRATIONS.—The misery of hope-
lessness. Abraham Lincoln, when a
young man, was subject to terrible fits
of depression. In one of his letters he
writes: “I am now the most miser-
able being living. If what I feel were
equally distributed to the whole human
family, there would not be one cheerful
face on earth. Whether I shall ever
be better I cannot tell; I awfully for-
bode I shall not. To remain as I am
is impossible; I must die or be better.”

Hope presupposes faith. They can-
not exist apart. Hope is the balloon of
the soul, soaring majestically into the
heavens, scanning scenes of beauty and
grandeur never beheld by our earth-
bound senses, and faithfully reporting
to the soul the state of affairs in the
skies; but it is a captive balloon, and
the connecting cords are firmly held in
the hand of faith. The loftiest flights
and the swing of what may seem the
most eccentric gyrations of hope are
held in check by the friendly, the sym-
pathetic, and unswerving grasp of faith.
“6 My doar Hope,” says Faith, “it is very


nice for you to be up there basking in
the cloudless sunshine and drinking in
the melody of the ascending lark as it
ripples up the heights ; and I like you
to be there. I could never get there
myself; and you tell me of things I
should never otherwise know, and they
do me good. But remember, I cannot
let you go. We are necessary to each
other, and cannot do without each other.
If you were to break away from me, you
would vanish like vapour into space, and
I should be left forlorn and powerless.”

Hope clings to us to the last. When
John Knox lay dying, one of the friends
around his death-bed asked the ques-
tion, ‘‘ Hast thou hope?” The veteran
reformer was too weak to speak—the
moment for speech was gone; but the
expiring saint raised his finger and
pointed upwards, and so passed triumph-
antly to the skies,

Prayer a preparation for conflict.
A soldier in the Confederate army was
once asked what was the secret of Stone-
wall Jackson’s influence over his men.
“Does your general abuse you, swear
at you to make you march?” “Swear!”
answered the soldier ‘* No; Ewell
does the swearing ; Stonewall does the
praying! When Stonewall wants us to
march, he looks at us soberly, just as if
he were sorry for us, and says, ‘ Men,
we've got to make a long march.’ We
always know when there is going to be
a long march and right smart fighting,
for old Jack is powerful on prayer just
before a big fight.’

Memory of victory inspiring. Dur-
ing the last days of William IV. the
amniversary of the battle of Waterloo
vecurred. Rousing himself upon re-
membrance of it, the dying King
requested that some of the French
standards taken there should be brougnt
to him, which when he looked at and
handled he said, “I feel much better.”


AOMILETICS.
Tee Divine FAITHFULNESS,
(Vera. 22-24.)


I. Evidenced in our preservation in the midst of the greatest afflictions, “It
ls of the Lord’s mercies that we are not consumed” (ver. 22). The same Divine


= 92


OHAP, Il, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





power that called us into being is exerted every moment to sustain that being.
The enemies of our life threaten us every moment. We walk in the niidst of ©
secret and unsuspected dangers. A whiff of subtle and mysterious vapour, and
the throb of life is for ever stilled; the crumbling of a few inches of shale
beneath our feet, and we are precipitated into the abyss of death; the slightest
overbalance on the slippery deck, and we are immersed in a watery grave; the
accidental divergence of the knife or firing of the rifle, and we receive our death-
wound ; the horse stumbles, and the rider lies dead at its feet; the lightning
flashes, and the unsuspecting passer-by is stricken into a livid corpse ; the careering
locomotive leaves the metals, and many homes are darkened with desolation and
sorrow ; the volcano opens its treacherous side, and thousands are swallowed into
the depths of its burning lava. How unfathomable is the mercy and how un-
deviating the faithfulness that have spared us to this hour! ‘One shall be taken
and another left;” but how is it that others are taken and we are left? How is
it that we have been to so many funerals, and no one has yet been to ours #

II. Revealed in its greatness by the daily renewal of the Divine mercies.
“They are new every morning ; great is thy faithfulness” (ver. 23). Our wants
are constant; so is the Divine provision. The arrest in the outflow of Divine
mercies for a single day would mean unspeakable suffering to millions. The
Divine supply is ever ahead of our daily needs. Every Divine blessing has the
freshness and the fragrance of the morning about it. “They are new every
morning ’—unfailing as the morning dawn, bright and joyous as the morning
sunshine, brilliant and sparkling as the morning dew, sweet and invigorating as
the morning air. Every new day, as it pours its cornucopia of gifts upon the
world, is an infallible witness to the Divine faithfulness.

III. Is the assured foundation of the soul's hope. ‘The Lord is my portion,
therefore will I hope in Him” (ver. 24). The hope of the prophet began to dawn
amidst the deepest gloom when he remembered that God answered prayer (ver.
21); but now it is strengthened and confirmed when he is assured of the con-
stancy of the Divine mercy. Israel’s hope of help from Egypt, or from any of
her professed allies, was shattered, that she might be taught to seek refuge alone
in God. Amid the wreckage of all earthly hopes the soul finds a sure foundation
for hope and confidence in the unchangeable mercy and faithfulness of God.

Lzssons.—1. Affliction which reveals the fickleness of earthly things also reveals
the unchanging faithfulness of God. 2, Daily mercies are constant reminders of
the Divine faithfulness, 3. The Divine faithfulness ts at once the hope and eatie-
faction of the soul.


GEM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 22, 23. The views of a saint
in his afflictions. He contemplates—

1. The lightness of his affliction in
comparison of his deserts.

2. The multitude of the mercies yet
continued to him.

3. The unchangeableness of God under
all His dispensations.

4, The beauty of religion as displayed
in these views,

They compose the mind, elevate the
soul, and honour God.—Szmeon.

Ver. 23. Dayspring mercies. 1,
These words seem to speak of the in-
sxhaustible wealth of Gou’s forgiveness.

&4


But for the daily renewal of God's
mercy to His people they would have
been utterly cut off. His faithfulness
to the covenant was great beyond all
human parallel No new day would
ever brighten and glow over the cowed,
comfortless, half-relenting remnant of
the holy seed, but for God’s readiness
to forgive. They had sinned away
their covenant birthright, but God’s
compassion hovered near to restore it
again, And is it not ever so with
God's people? In times of chastise-
ment and in times of prosperity alike
they need to be ever encircled by God's


‘HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS,
Ce a ee ae


forgiving grace. Close by one of the
great cities of the East there is a large
stretch of grass that is always green.
Sometimes the showers are rare and
scanty, and the thermometer mounts to
an appalling height, and one wonders
to see the grass green and lush as
though it were growing in some English
meadow. It is kept so by a heavy dew
that never fails to fall in the night-
time. And so with our life of conse-
cration. There is no dawn without
the dew of abounding love and com-
passion descending to keep it green.
II These words seem to suggest the
rescurcefulaes: of Divine Providence.
The mercy that is ever fresh to pardon
is ever fresh to guide and shape the
circumstances in the midst of which
the pardoned life is spent. The text is
in direct conflict with the clock-work
theory of the universe. Providence
glories in freshness and originality—it
abhors unintelligent routine. The tied-
up helm and the sail square-set to the
wind are no types of God’s providential
methods of dealing with us. Life is
full of bends and rapids and shallows
and whirlpools, and an automatic pro-
vidence will not meet the terrific emer-
gencies of its swiftly passing moments.
Sail and helm alike are in His hand,
and answer to His touch through every
flashing second. Astronomers at one
time puzzled themselves over a problem
in solar physics. How was the heat of
the sun maintained? It seemed a
natural inference that, as it was always
giving off heat in stupendous volumes,
ultimate exhaustion must one day come.
Within recent times the suggestion has
found wide acceptance that the sun is
constantly drawing meteors, asteroids,
and comets to itself, and that the heat
is maintained by the impact of these
bodies as they fall into the sun. Things
come to us from time to time that seem
out of all accord with the harmonies
around us. Strange difficulties, stum-
bling-blocks, tribulations, start up in
the path of our daily life. These things
are drawn into the circle of God’s con-
trol and government for their solution,
and it is in this way wnat ‘the very
glory of God’s providence is maintained.


- OBAP, im,





III. These words seem to suggest the
unfailing truth and faithfulness of God
in His relation to His people. God’s
renewed mercies are linked with the
morning because the return of the day
is one of the most perfect and intel-
ligible symbols of constancy to be found
in the economy of Nature, The rains
may come and go upon a system to
which science has found no clue.
Winter sometimes pushes itself far on
into the spring. A late spring and an
early autumn may squeeze out the sum-
mer, A flood may quite change the
face of a country. Islands have been
known to disappear in some of the con-
vulsions of Nature. The mariner has
looked for his landmark, and it is gone.
Empires may rise and perish with na
hope of a resurrection other than an
ignoble disinterment at the hands of
the archeologist. But no ill chance can
befall the day-spring. And as infallibly
as the welcome day-dawn steals at its
own hour into our homes, so infallibly
do the Divine compassions arise upon
the lowly and the contrite. God
reflects the benignity of His own face
into the flush of dawn, and makes it
the parable of a faithfulness upon which
you can always count. IV. These
words suggest the unfailing promptnesa
of God’s ministrations. ‘’ His mercies
are new every morning;” that is, just
as soon as, or even before, we begin to
need them. We receive our salvation,
guidance, and defence, not of our own
work, but of His free love. If it were
of our own work, we must needs wait
for the nightfall before we could receive
any recompense. Wages are paid at
sunset. But it is all His gift. So the
mercy in which we rejoice comes to us
with the dawn, before we have done a
solitary stroke of work. The regula-
tions of the court at Pekin are so framed
as to give to the Chinese Empire an
example of promptness and despatch.
The emperor always receives his cabinet
ministers and councillors at three or
four o’clock in the morning—long before
day-dawn. And so God awaits His
servants with new pardons, new coun-
gels, new honours in His kingdom,


rong before the daydawn. Aa in-
pT.


OBAP. Il. -





genious botanist, by watching the hours
at which certain flowers opened, hit
upon the pretty conceit of constructing
what he called a flower-clock. God’s
matchless mercies, like circles of thick-
set bloom that break into splendour
with a rhythm that never halts, are
measuring out the successive hours of
our life. No winter comes to blast the
flowers, and the clock is never behind
time. V. These words suggest the per-
petual freshness of the Divine Nature.
God’s compassions are unceasingly new
because they well, pure and fair, out
of the stainless and infinite depths of
His Fatherhood. They have the ever-
renewed and living sweetness of His
own spring-like nature in them. His
daily mercies come to us clothed with
the enkindled grace of His own match-
less smile, and full of the light of an
immortal May-time. He cannot give
or do without putting the buoyancy of
His own untiring and eternal youth
into each boon and act.—Z’. G. Selby.


Ver. 24. (Compared with Deut.
xxxii. 9). Choice portions. I. The
Lord’s portion is His people. 1. The


Church of God 1s the Lord’s own peculiar
and special property. As a king may
have ample possessions, to all of which
he has undoubted right, but still has
royal demesnes and crown-lands which
are in a very special sense his own, so
hath the Lord of all a peculiar interest
in His saints, They are His by sove-
reign choice, by purchase and by con-
quest. 2. The saints are the objects of
the Lord’s especial care. The Lord is
the eternal watcher of the universe and
never sleeps; yet in a very distinct
sense He is the guardian of His Church.
3, The Church is the object of the Lord’s
special joy. I do not read that God
delighteth in the cloud-capped moun-
tains or in the sparkling stars, but I do
read that He delighteth in the habitable
parts of the earth, and His delights are
with the sons of men. 4. God’s people
are His everlasting possession. He will
never sel] His people at any price, nor,
if He could have better people instead,
would He change them. They are His
for ever. II, The Lord is my portion.
lL. True believers have the Lord as their
86


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : LAMENTATIONS.





sole portion. St. Augustine was wont
very often to pray, “‘ Lord, Give me
thyself.” A less portion than this
would be unsatisfactory. 2. As God ts
our only portion, so He 18 our own por-
tion. Do not be satisfied with generals ;
come to particulars. . Men go to hell
in bundles, but they go to heaven
separately. 3. The Lord is to Hia
people an inherited portion. We owe
it to the fact of our birth—a child of
God by being born in the image of His
son, 4. This heritage ts ours by choice.
We have chosen God to be our portion.
Better to have Christ and a fiery faggot
than to lose Him and wear a royal
robe. 5. God is His people’s settled
portion. The covenant of day and
night may be broken, the waters may
again cover the earth, sooner than the
decrees of grace be frustrated. The
Lord 1s my all-suficient portion. God
fills Himself. If He is all-sufficient in
Himself, He must be all-sufficient for
us.—C. H. Spurgeon.


InLusTRations, — Divine — faithful-
mess. Visiting a dying Christian
woman, Dr. John Brown once said
to her, ‘What would you say, Janet,
if, after God has done so much for
you, He shculd let you drop into hell ?”
She calmly replied, “ K’en as He likes;
but He’ll lose more than I will.”

— You may be faint and weary, but
my God cannot. I may fluctuate and
alter as to my frames and feelings, but
my Redeemer is unchangeably the same,
I might utterly fail and come to nothing
if left to myself; but I cannot be so
left to myself, for the Spirit of Truth
hath said, “I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee.” He will renew my
strength, either by changing my weak-
ness into strength, or by enduing me
with His own power. He is wise to
foresee and provide for all my dangers.
He is rich to relieve and succour me in
all my wants. He is faithful to perfect
and perform all His promises. —Ambrose
Serle.

Divine Providence. It is the fault
of the present day to think and to act
as if man could do everything, and to
forget God’s special providence. Hence


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


OHAP, Ti


—_—— eee"


that busybodiness which distinguishes
the religious world, and prevents that
depth of piety which is the result of
sober, calm reflection, and which shows
itself in doing calmly and unostenta-
tiously, not what seems likely to be
attended with the greatest results, but
simply the duty our hand findeth to
do.— Dean Hook,

— Those believers who watch provi-
dences will never lack providences to
watch. — Flavell.

Divine supply in emergencies. St.
Cuthbert of Lindisfarne was often in


served God faithfully,” he would say
when night found them supperless in
the waste. ‘Look at the eagle over-
head! God can feed us through him,
if He will!”—and once, at least, he
owed his meal to a large fish that the
scared bird let fall.

Want anticipated. The wood-
piercing bee will make a tunnel in a
tree-trunk twelve or fifteen inches long
and half an inch wide, which is divided
into ten or twelve cells. An egg with
a store of pollen and honey is deposited
in each cell, so that as soon as the


great pcverty and pinched for food.


young bee is born it has its dinner
“Never did man die of hunger who


awaiting it !—Ruskin,


HOMILETICS.
THREE GRADES OF GOODNESS.
(Vers, 25-27.)


I, There is the goodness of Jehovah to those who cling to Him. “The
Lord is good unto them that wait for Him, to the soul that seeketh Him ” (ver.
25). God is absolutely and supremely good—good in Himself, good in all things,
good at all times. If He is good to all, then He must be especially so to those
who wait on Him in conscious dependence and earnestly supplicate His help.
There are mysteries about the Divine procedure which we cannot fathom, and
we are sometimes tempted to question the goodness of God. But clearer light
dispels our doubts, and the more completely we trust in Him the more real and
tender and potent does His goodness become. We never know God aright till we
trust Him fully.

II. There is the goodness of patient and uncomplaining waiting for God’s
time of deliverance. ‘It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait
for the salvation of the Lord” (ver. 26). To indulge in querulous complaints
only increases the irritation of our sufferings. Murmuring begets murmuring,
and we are apt to blame every one but ourselves, The more we grumble, the
farther are we away from goodness, It is only when we are silent and abstain
from complaining that we begin to see that our deliverance must come from God,
and that it is our wisdom to bide His time and humbly submit to His method.
The soul attains goodness by exercising an active and larger faith in the Divine
goodness. A clearer appreliension of goodness in God begets a corresponding
goodness in the soul that sees it.

III. There is the goodness of being accustomed to the burden of suffering
early in life. ‘It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth” (ver.
27). Youth is the period of enjoyment, and it has a pleasure all its own, with
its bright and gay romancing, its poetic dreams of beauty and delight, its relish-
able love of work, its daring enterprise and bold ambitions, its soaring hopes and
confident prophecies, its sparkling wit and brimming fun—brilliant and harmless
as tropical lightning; buoyant, radiant, joyous youth-time, when every sense is
steeped in the intoxicating nectar of innocent rapture, when the whole world
shines with the golden glory of perpetuai summer, and when life is one long,
sweet poem, set to the enchanting movements of exquisite music. But se has

' 8


OMAP. ITT.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





also its burdens and responsibilities, and its happiness is not destroyed but inten-
sified when it learns to bear with bravery the disappointments and afflictions of


life.
realities of ordinary life.
strength.


The youth who has known little of suffering is ill prepared for the stern
Early sorrow brings early comfort and peace and
The best that is in man is tested and perfected by misfortune.


Lassons.—l. God is good in Himself inherently and essentially. 2. Man %
good only in the degree in which he receives Divine grace and submits to the Divine


discipline.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 25. The Divine goodness. 1.
A grand reality. 2. Continually mani-
fested. 3. Specially revealed to the
earnest seeker.

Ver. 26. The advantages of a state
of expectation. 1. It seems implied
that our incapacity of looking into the
future has much to do with the produc-
tion cf disquietude and unhappiness.
2. And yet the possession of this power
of anticipating the future would be in-
calculably more detrimental. 3. Our
ignorance of what shall happen stimu-
lates exertion. We are so constituted
that to deprive us of hope would be to
make us inactive and wretched. 4. It
is for our advantage that salvation, in-
stead of being a thing of certainty and
present possession, must be hoped and
quietly waited for. 5. If true believers
were withdrawn from earth at the mo-
ment of their becoming such, the in-
fluences of piety which now make
themselves felt through the mass of a
population would be altogether de-
stroyed, and the world deprived of
that salt which alone preserves it from
total decomposition. 6. No fair ex-
planation can be given of the text
unless you bring into the account the
difference in the portions to be assigned
hereafter to the righteous. 7. The
continuance of the justified on earth
affords them opportunity of rising
higher in the scale of future blessed-
ness, 8. Being compelled to hope and
to wait is a good moral discipline, so
that the exercises prescribed are cal-
culated to promote holiness and ensure
happiness. 9. It is good as affording
time in which to glorify God. 10.
Religion gives a character to hope of
which otherwise it is altogether desti-
tute. Hope is a beautiful meteor ; but

88


nevertheless this meteor, like the rain-
bow, is not only lovely because of its
seven rich and radiant stripes; itis the
memorial of a covenant between man
and his Maker, telling us that we are
born for immortality, destined, unless
we sepulchre our greatness, to the
highest honour and noblest happiness.
—Henry Meiville.

Hope and patience. I. What is
meant by the salvation of the Lord?
God’s salvation is used very frequently
in the Bible for His interposition to
save the soul of man_from sin. It is
not this salvation which is here spokea
of, for though a man may be encouraged
to hope, he cannot be urged quietly to
wait for it. The language of the chapter
is not that of a man ignorant of God.
It is the salvation which a man needs
in any crisis of life, where he suffers
under trial, or is threatened with it.
Our strength and resources, all possible
expedients, have been brought into
exercise. The last reserve has been
thrown into the battle, and yet it goes
against us. It is then the case rises
distinctly into the salvation of the Lord.
A man who has faith only in worldly
resources is powerless here. He must
give up in despair, or cast himself on a
blind chance. But, for a believing
man, there is still a duty and a stay.
When he cannot take a step farther in
human effort, there is a pathway to the
skies, and his heart can travel it. IL
What 1s meant by these exercises of the
soul towards God’s salvation—to hope
and quietly wait? 1. The foundation
of hope lies in desire. But desire may
pursue things that can never be objects
of hope to us. We can only hope for
that which is felt to be possible and
reasonable. The next element is faith.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP. Hi.


a ee


But we believe in many things in
regard to which we do not hope. Hope
is faith with desire pointing out the
objects. A third element to make our
hope strong is imagination. While sin
has made this world a charnel-house of
corruption or a storehouse of vanities,
purity can fill its treasury with divine
aspirations which are as grand as they
are transcendently real. II. Quiet wait-
ing. It is termed in the Bible patience.
It is the part of hope to seek the
future; it is the duty of patience to
rest calmly in the present, exercising
faith, and giving calm attention to
duties. The tamest and most insignifi-
cant of daily duties may be made noble
and divine when the thought of God
and the will of Christ are carried into
them. III. Consider the benejit of unit-
tng these—both to hope and quietly wait.
1. The one is needful to save the other
from sinking into sin. 2. To raise the
other to its full strength. 3. It is good
now in the depth of the soul, in the
sonscious assurance that it is better to
rest in the hardest of God's ways than
to wander at willinourow. 4. It is
good in the enhancement ol every bles-
sing for which we have to wait. Be-
tween your use of the means and the
result which you desire there is still a
gulf of separation, on the brink of
which Patience must sit and look
across, waiting God’s time and way to
pass it.—John Ker, D.D.

Ver. 27. Youth the proper season of
discipline. J. In the principles of
true religion. II. In the arts of honest
industry.—Berriman.

The best burden for young shoul-
ders, The bullocks have to bear the
yoke. They go in pairs, and the yoke
is borne upon their shoulders, If the
bullock is not broken in when young,
it will never make a good ploughing
ox. So it is good for us when young
to learn obedience, to acquire know-
ledge, and to encounter difficulties and
troubles, I. Jt 1s good to be a Christian
while you are young. 1. The man whose
heart is conquered by Divine grace
eariy is made happy soon, 2. Is saved
from a thousand snares. 3. Is saved from
faving his shoulders galled with the


devil’s yoke. 4. Gives him longer time —
in which to serve God. 5. Enables
him to be well established in Divine
things, II. It 1s good for young Chris-
tians that they bear the yoke of Jesus.
1. They render to Jesus complete obe-
dience from the very first. 2. They
attain clear instruction in Divine truth.
3. They serve Christ early, 4. It is
good to meet with difficulties and per-
secution in youth. ILI. Practically we
are all of us in our youth. 1, Bearing
the yoke, the old Adam is kept in
check. 2. We are helpful to others
who have known afiliction. 3. Will
make heaven all the sweeter.—Spurgeon.


InLustRations. — The goodness of
God experienced. A German just con-
verted was greatly surprised at the
goodness of God to him, which he now
realised, One day he was overheard in
prayer saying, “‘O Lord Jesus! I did
not know Thou wert so good!” How
general is this ignorance !

Patience conquers. Twenty -five
years ago the founder of a college for
negroes in America was hunted like a
wild beast through the region where
his name is now spoken by men of all
parties with reverence. Lloyd Garrison
was nearly murdered by an infuriated
mob for championing the emancipation
of the slaves, and years afterwards, in
the same city, was made the recipient
of its highest honours. Time fights
against every tyranny, and in favour
of the tyrannised. To endure is to
conquer.

Fellow-suffering silences complaints.
During one of the campaigns in the
American civil war, when the winter
weather was very severe, some of Stone-
wall Jackson’s men, having crawled
out in the morning from their snow-
laden blankets, half-frozen, began to
abuse him as the cause of their suffer-
ings. He lay close by under a tree,
himself covered with snow, and heard
all this; but, without noticing it, pre-
sently crawled out too, and, shaking
off the snow, made some jocular remark
to the nearest men, who had no idea
he had ridden up in the night and lain
down amongst them! The zeae


CHAP, IZ


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


RES


ran through the army in a few hours,
and reconciled his followers to all the
hardships of the expedition, and fully
re-established his popularity.

Skill acquired in youth. Livy says
that at the siege of Samé one hundred
slingers were brought from Algeum,
Patra, and Dymax. These men, accord-
ing to the practice of that nation, were
exercised from their childhood in throw-
ing with a sling into the open sea the
round pebbles which strew the shore,
Being accustomed to drive their missiles
through circular marks of small circum-
ference placed at a great distance, they
not only hit the enemy’s heads, but
any part of their faces they aimed at.
These slings checked the Sameans from
sallying out either so frequently or


so boldly, insomuch that they would
sometimes from the walls beseech the
Acheans to retire for a while and be
quiet spectators of their fight with the
Roman guards.

A brave youth, William Hunter, a
London apprentice, was in 1555 ordered
by a priest to attend mass. He refused,
and one day was found reading the
Bible in Brentwood Church. He fled.
His father was seized, and to release
him the boy returned and surrendered.
He was imprisoned for nine months,
then offered a bribe by Bishop Bonner
if he would recant. To all he opposed
a courageous resistance, and was burned
at the stake in his native village, re-
taining to the last his religious sturdi-
ness and bravery.


HOMILETICS.
RESIGNATION,


(Vers. 28-30.)


I. Should be borne in silence, recognising the hand of God im affliction.
“He sitteth alone and keepeth silence, because He hath borne it upon Him”


(ver. 28).


silence in any kind of circumstances,


It is difficult for an active spirit to settle down contentedly and in
We cannot rid ourselves of the idea that
something is to be done, and we must do it.


If our misfortunes come as the


result of our own folly, we feel we must do something to repair the damage, little


dreaming how utterly useless are all our endeavours.


When at length the truth


dawns upon us that God is at work in connection with our sufferings, the scul is


at once subdued into silence and patiently waits the issue.


Something like this


was once the experience of the Psalmist (Ps. xxxix. 9).
II. Should be borne with reverential humility, knowing there is hope of


deliverance.
(ver. 29).


“He putteth his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope”
The putting the mouth in the dust indicates how completely the soul
is prostrated before God in humility and reverential silence.


The soul can bear


any burden when it knows that the hand of God imposes it, and that He has still


hold of it.


While we are conscious God is in touch with our burden, there is


always hope of its removal. It is when God leaves us to our fate that hope


dies.


Resignation is no evidence of hopelessness, but rather an evidence how


firmly our hope is grounded. We could not so completely cease from all personal
effort were we not so fully assured of Divine deliverance.
III. Should be borne without resentment, not shrinking from the bitterest


dregs of the cup.
full with reproach” (ver. 30).
missive, but not apathetic.
us by our enemies,
handle of scorn.


“He giveth his cheek to him that smiteth him ; he is filled
We are to be resigned, but not insensible 3 sub-
We are keenly alive to the reproaches heaped upon
Our very resignation is offensive to them, and is made a
It is hard to bear the jeers of others without retaliation. When


our sufferings come through our fellow-men, it is but human to resent their attacka
with indignation—to meet scorn with scorn, But when we are sensible our
troubles come from God, we can more readily submit, and we have grace given to


|


|


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : LAMENTATIONS.


OBHAP. IT,





bear, seilioae resentment, all that it may please Him to impose upon us. Behind
the divine severity there is unspeakable gentleness.
Lussons.—1l. The greatest sorrow must be borne alone and in silence. 2. Mur-


muring and resentment will increase, but not relieve our sufferings,


3. A spirit of


humble resignation secures the Divine compassion and help.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers, 28-30. Silent suffering. IL
Not the less acute because endured in
silence (ver. 28). II. Is bearable when
the soul has a glimmering of hope (ver.
29). III. Shows that the sufferer has
exhausted every possible ground for
complaint (ver. 30).

Ver, 28. Retirement and silence.


“What then should be a sinner’s course?
Silence to all save himself and his God.
And so also our Lord ‘became dumb ;’
He still waited upon his Father ;
He made as if He had nothing to say.
How much more should we be silent in our
guilt !
Thou hast sinned in company,
Learn to do without company at all.
Thou hast dealt rudely with thy God,
Be content to be rudely dealt with.
Thou hast forsaken Him,
Be content to be forsaken.
Thou hast sinned in talk,
Be content to keep silence.
Thou hast sinned in selfish ways,
Be content, nay be glad, to be overlooked,
To be disappointed—forgotten.
The less thou art able to retire at fixed times,
Be the more watchful to do so at occasional
times.
Thou hast sinned in boasting,
Be sometimes silent, even from good words.
Thou hast sinned by cowardice,
Force thyself to speak—in truthfulness to
confess,
Accept bereavements, separations, estn wnge-
ments,
As opportunities of penance assignid by
im.
That He may open thy mouth at last,
To shew forth His praise,
And nothing but His praise.”
—Keble.


ILLustTRaTIons.—Resignation to the
will of God. A remarkable instance of
Christian resignation was discovered on
one particular occasion in the conduct
of Archbishop Fenélon. When his
illustrious and hopeful pupil, the Duke
of Burgundy, lay dead in his coffin, and
the nobles of his court, in all the pomp
of silent sadness, stood around, the


Archbishop came into the apartment,
and having fixed his eyes for some time
on the corpse, broke out at length in
words to this effect—‘ There lies my
beloved prince, for whom my affections
were equal to the tenderest regard of
the tenderest parents, Nor were my
affections lost ; he loved me in return
with all the ardour of a son. There he
lies, and all my worldly happiness lies
dead with him. But if the turning of
a straw would call him back to life, 1
would not for ten thousand worlds be
the turner of that straw in opposition
to the will of God.”

Soul-growth aided by silence. Some
of the best and most beautiful works
are perfected in silence. In the making
of plate-glass the process of pouring the
melted material is so delicate, requiring
such care and steadiness, that the men,
impressed with the great danger of
carelessness, usually preserve silence
during the process.

Humility a help to knowledge.
When the recent military expedition
went to Lower Egypt, it was found that
only the smallest boats could go great
distances up the Nile. There are some
truths that are only revealed to those
who grow in loneliness and _ self-for-
getfulness—secret teachings which are
reserved for those who are intensely
childlike in spirit. ‘ Blessed are the
poor in spirit.”

Heroic endurance. One of the
secrets of Victor Hugo’s power over the
French people was their memory of the
following. When the disasters of the
Franco-German war were falling thickly,
and the iron band was closing round
Paris, word came that Victor Hugo was
coming to the city. He came at the
very moment that the investment was
complete, with the last train, the last
breath of free air. On the way he had

91


CHAP. III.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





seen the Bavarians, seen villages burned
with petroleum, and he came to im-
prison himself in Paris, A memorable


ovation was given him by the people,
and they never forgot his voluntary
sharing of their sufferings.


HOMILETICS.
THE TENDERNESS OF GOD.


(Vers. 31-33.)


I. Seen im tho limitation of punishment. ‘For the Lerd will not cast off
for ever” (ver. 31). God has no delight in inflicting punishment. His righteous-
ness imposes on Him the necessity of punishing sin. But punishment has its
limits; and when those limits are exceeded, justice degenerates into cruelty.
The tenderness of God is a universal safeguard against unduly prolonged punish-
ment (Ps. lxxvii. 7-9).

II. Seen in the abundant manifestation of mercy. ‘‘But though He cause
grief, yet will He have compassion according to the multitude of His mercies”
(ver, 32). Even in chastisement mercy triumphs over justice. Mercy provides
a means of escape, not from justice, but from the worst consequences of trans-
gression, ‘All the souls that were, were forfeit once; and He that might the
vantage best have took found out the remedy.” “God be merciful to me a sinner,”
is the leading idea of inscriptions on thousands of gravestones in the stately
cathedral and the village churchyard, and bear silent testimony to the deepest
convictions of mankind. The mercy of God will be conspicuous to the universe,
and the theme of endless adoration.

III. Seen in the reluctance with which He inflicts chastisement. ‘“ For
He doth not afflict willingly nor grieve the children of men” (ver. 33). God
never afflicts willingly—lit., from his heart. The heart of God is love, and love
has no pleasure in the sufferings of others, and is not eager to impose suffering.
That God afflicts at all, and that He does it with so much reluctance, should
intensify the conviction that, not only is chastisement necessary, but that it is
evidently intended to lead to a greater good. The prophet dwells on the tender
ness of God to enforce complete resignation to the Divine arrangements.

Lessons.—1. God never punishes beyond the absolute necessity of the case.
2. He sympathises with the sufferer His justice compels Him to chastise. 3. He
is ever slow to wrath,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 31-36. Comfort for the sor-
rowful. I. A cheering assurance given.
1. That God’s abandonment of His
people is only temporary. “For the
Lord will not cast off for ever.” 2,
That the favour with which He will
visit them will be signal and abundant.
“But though He cause grief, yet will
He have compassion according to the


multitude of His mercies.” II. An
important reason adduced. “For He
doth not afflict willingly.” This may


be inferred: 1. From His character. He
isa God of love, 2. From the relation-
92


ship He sustains to His people. He is
their father. An earthly parent has to
chastise his offspring, but He does it
with reluctance. 3. Their sufferings
are attended with many alleviations,
Had He any pleasure in punishing us,
so much mercy would not be mingled
with judgment. 4, The object He has
in view in afflicting His children: it
is for their profit, that they may be
partakers of His holiness. 5. His
readiness to remove His chastening
hand when the visitation has answered
the end intended. IIL A gracious


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; LAMENTATIONB


OMAP, 153,


SSS


limitation subjoined. Whenever God
afflicts, it is: 1. Within the bounds of
moderation. To “crush” expresses
what is extreme and destructive (Isa.
xxvii. 8; Jer. x. 24, xlvi. 28). 2. Never
in violation of the principles of equity.
“To subvert @ man in his cause the
Lord approveth not.” He is the
righteous Lord, who loveth righteous-
ness, and all He doeth is in accordance
therewith.—Zxpository Outlines.

Vers, 31-33. Afflictions not acci-
dental. This apparent contradiction
between the Divine compassion and
our human griefs, between what we
desire and need and what we feel to be
real, is to-day what it has been from
the beginning, the standing problem,
the bitter tragedy of human life. It
has but one solution. There is a mis-
chief in man’s nature producing discord
in his condition, begetting the necessity
and the mercy of a Divine chastening ;
and this, both in the end it contem-
plates and in the methods it employs,
is a providence of compassion. I. The
fact that grief ts the heritage of man.
Life is still the natural history of sor-
row—man’s life the bitterest of all.
There are troubles that belong to the
lot of individual man, and in this form
they are the impartial inheritance of
the race. There are troubles which
afflict the community, which fall upon
the mass in its aggregation of families,
neighbourhoods, communities, and na-
tious. The great and good, the beau-
tiful and the wise, the aged and the
young, all races and all conditions of
men, have gone down under this terrible
Euroclydon of grief. These facts are a
difficulty to the Christian philosopher,
but they are equally so to the sceptic.
II. Divine compassion in its relation to
suffering. 1, All human suffering comes
within the foreknowledge and is under
the control of God. 2. Many of our
troubles, probably most of them, have
their causes in ourselves. 3, There are
troubles and afflictions, and these not
few, which we must consider only as
the punishment of sin. Strife is
the essence of sin. It is self-will
pitted in avowed antagonism to God.
God will not vacate His sovereignty


because man rebels. He cannot be de:
feated or bribed, or bought off from His
purpose, even by prayer. The bitter,
bitter cup must be drunk; the chas-
tisement must come, But with all this,
there comes also the presence of an
infinite compassion. He succours His
children while the law oppresses them.
He delivers them speedily when its
mission is accomplished.—J. Burton.
Vers, 32, 33. God the consolation
of the afflicted. I. A revealed fact.
“God doth not willingly afflict the
children of men.” This fact rests upon
another fact—the teaching of Scripture
regarding the providence of God. A
particular and special providence is the
sole ground of prayer; prayer being the
basis of all true religion. When the
mind dwells upon the special ~rovidence
of God, it learns the more difficult task
of submitting to all afflictive dispensa-
tions with thanksgiving. II. The pas-
sage appears to stand opposed to the
omnipotence of God. God is Almighty,
but He has willed to set limits to the
exercise of His omnipotence. He abides
by the laws He has himself enacted.
The law connects life and happiness
with obedience. But the law would
cease to exist if life and happiness were
dispensed also to the disobedient, The
law was magnified when God Himself,
in the person of His Son, yielded
obedience to it. God will not by His
omnipotence overrule or supersede the
freedom of the human will. If we be
not true to ourselves, He will at length,
after trial, leave us to our own devices.
It is an awful thought that a man may
outlive the day of grace. He may re-
main a thing upon earth to subserve
some purpose in the providence of God,
but asa person his trial may have ceased.
Tf one of the purposes of affliction is to
correct and amend us, one of the means
of avoiding affliction must be to en-
deavour to shape our lives according to
the law of God. When afflictions do
come, it is an ineffable consolation to
be assured all things are ordered by
God for our good. III. The histories
of good men illustrate the truth of the
teat, We learn why afflictions were
imposed upon them. mS lives


OHAP. Il,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





of Jacob, Joseph, David, Job, and
Christ.— W. F. Hook, D.D.


Inustrations. —Chastisement a
proof of God’s tenderness. It is true
to be struck once in anger is fearful.
God’s displeasure is more than His
blow. Fear not; these stripes are the
tokens of His love. He is no son that
is not beaten, yea, till he smart and cry,
if not till he bleed. No parent corrects
another’s child; and he is no good
parent that corrects not his own. O rod
worthy to be kissed, that assures us of
His love, of our adoption !—Bp. Hail.
“Heaven is not always angry when He

strikes,


But most chastises those whom most He
likes,” —Pomfret.


Affliction God’s messenger. Luther
used to say there were many of the


Psalms he could never understand till
he had been afflicted. Rutherford
declared he had got a new Bible through
the furnace. Hard weather tries what
health we have; afflictions try what
sap we have, what grace we have.
Withered leaves soon fall off in windy
weather; rotten boughs quickly break
with heavy weights.

Afflictions overruled. Artists and
composers have often been helped in
their studies by their physical infir-
mities. Bach’s blindness, Beethoven’s
deafness, making society and social
distractions almost impossible, drove
them in upon their own genius, and
compelled them to listen to the voice
of God within them. Some beauties
of character and achievement can only
be secured by retirement and solitude,
and affliction often compels to this.


HOMILEFICS.
Gop aND Human Wrona
(Vers. 34-36.)


I. God approves not wanton cruelty towards prisoners of war.
under His feet all the prisoners of the earth” (ver. 34). Jeremiah was probably
a daily witness of cruelties suffered by the captives. One of the greatest horrors
of ancient warfare was the inhuman treatment of prisoners. Any exception to
this, history does not. fail to record as a remarkable example of clemency and
forbearance. Few men can be trusted with unrestricted power. Where there is
no fear of immediate consequences to himself, man rapidly develops into a
monster of cruelty. The helplessness of captives appeals to the pity of the
ert Every act of inhumanity God not only disapproves, but will certainly

nish,

II. God approves not the base attempt to procure an unjust sentence
before any legal tribunal. ‘To turn aside the right of a man before the face of
the Most High” (ver. 35), of a superior, or before a legal tribunal acting in the
name of God (Exod, xxi. 6; xxii. 8, 9). An oppressor who would hesitate to
commit an act of cruelty in public does not scruple to stoop to the basest arts in
secret to pervert the course of justice. Happy is the nation where the judgment-
seat is beyond the reach of corruption.

III. God approves not the perversion of justice in any case, or in any
degree, “To subvert a man in his cause, the Lord approveth not” (ver. 36).
No act of wrong, whether open or secret, can escape the All-seeing Jehovah, nor
_ ean it escape punishment. Tyranny is not supreme, and its reign is always short-
lived. God is the implacable foe of all injustice; and the oppressed everywhere
are sure to be relieved and vindicated.

Lussons.—1l. Man’s inhumanity to man makes countless thousands mourn,
2. God ts not an indifferent spectator of the wrong inflicted by one maw upon
ied ; 3. God will certainly interfere ta redress all human wrongs.


“To crush


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


OHAP, It


2


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 34-36. The Divine character.
1. Gives dignity and significance to
every legal tribunal. 2. Is a perpetual
protest against every act of cruelty and
injustice. 3. Is a guarantee that justice
will be ultimately triumphant.


InLusTRatTions.—The beginning of
wrong. An old writer says, “A man
who goes to law finds the court full of
invisible hooks. First his cloak, then
the skirts of his coat, then his sleeves,
till everything is torn from him, and,
like a gypsy, he escapes because there
is no further hold upon him,” The
youth who crosses the threshold of the
court of vice will find those invisible
hooks sharper and in greater abundance
than in courts of law. Once caught,
he will be hooked in every direction.
One tempter will succeed another, each
handing him over to the next. Thus
snared and dragged from vice to vice,
until denuded of every virtue, he will
at last, in all probability, perish in un-
utterable woe.—Dr. Wise.

Justice expedited. Juvenalis, a
widow, complained to Theodoric, king
of the Romans, that a suit of hers had
been in court three years. The king
being informed who were her judges,
gave orders that they should give all
expedition to the poor woman’s cause,
and in two days it was decided to her
satisfaction. Theodoric then sum-
moned the judges before him, and in-
quired how it was that they had done


in two days what they had delayed for
three years. “ When I put you in
office,” said the king, “did J] not con-
sign all pleas and proceedings to you
You deserve death for having delayed
that justice for three years which two
days could accomplish.” He commanded
them to be beheaded.

Injustice and anger. There is an
anger that is damnable: it is the anger
of selfishness. There is an anger that
is majestic as the frown of Jehovah’s
brow: it is the anger of truth and love.
If man meets with injustice, it is not
required that he shall not be roused to
meet it; but if he is angry after he has
had time to think upon it, that is sin-
ful. The flame is not wrong, but the
coals are.— Beecher.

Suffering preferred to injustice.
While Athens was ruled by the thirty
tyrants, Socrates was summoned to the
senate-house and ordered to go with
some other persons to seize one Leon,
aman of rank and fortune, whom they
determined to put out of the way that
they might enjoy his estate. The com-
mission Socrates flatly refused, and, not
satisfied therewith, added also his
reasons for such refusal. “I will never
willingly,” said he, “assist in an un-
just act.” Cherides sharply replied,
“Dost thou think, Socrates, to talk
always in this style and not to suffer ?”
“Far from it,” added he, ‘‘I expect to
suffer a thousand ills, but none go great
as to do unjustly.”


HOMILETICS.


Tue Divine RoLe ABSOLUTE AND UNIVERSAL
(Vers. 37-39.)


L That nothing happens without the Divine knowledge and sanction.
“ Who is he that saith and it cometh to pass when the Lord commandeth it not?”
(ver. 37). The curse causeless does not come. Somehow, somewhere, and for
some purpose, there is running all through the seething mass of what appears to
us little else than a complex of sorrowful accidents, the activity of a prescient
foreknowledge, a permissive providence, a governing will. “ We see only results.
To God, the beginning, with its antecedents all hidden and remote, is a presence.
The wildest: freaks of chance, as they seem, the most exorbitant sare in


OHAP, Mi, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





nature, the slightest incidents in the constitution of mind or matter, sterm,
earthquake and fires, the shoot of an avalanche, the dropping of a leaf, the
wanderings of a comet, the birth, life, history, and death of a man, all come
within the foreknowledge and are beneath the sovereign sweep of the purposes
of God.”

II. That the mingling of adversity and prosperity is in harmony with the
administration of infinite wisdom. ‘Out of the mouth of the Most High
proceedeth not evil and good?” (ver. 38). If the life of man was an uninter-
rupted geries of calamities, we might gravely question the wisdom and goodness
of the Great Ruier; but the evil and the good are so nicely balanced one over
against the other, that when God has finished His work there shall be no just
ground for complaint (Eccles. vii. 14). The old divines used %o say, ‘‘God is too
wise to err, too good to be unkind.”

ITI. That, while life is continued, man should not murmur over his
punishment, but repent of the sins which made that punishment necessary.
“Wherefore doth a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins?”
(ver. 39). The word living is emphatic, and implies that while God spares man’s
life he has no room to murmur. Life is a boon that transcends in significance
any amount of temporary suffering. Life is a grand opportunity for repentance,
reform, and the accomplishment of noblest purposes. Every moment in life
spent in complaining is worse than wasted. When we understand how com-
pletely the Divine mind is governing everything, we begin to grasp the true


significance of life.


Lessons.—1. The government of the world ts in the hands of a wise and
woving God. 2. Afiction when used aright may be an unspeakable blessing. 3.
Life te @ gift fraught with great moral tssues,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERS.2s.


Ver. 39. Complaint under affliction.
I. Some complaints allowable. 1. It is
lawful to express what we feel and
suffer i1 those ways Nature prompts us.
2. May complain to friends, relations,
and acquaintances. 3. To God as well
as to men. II. Complaints prompted
by impatience with God’s dealings con-
demned.. 1. Itis long before God takes
the rod in hand to correct. 2. He is
soon prevailed with to lay it aside. 3.
He lays no more on us than our sins
deserve. 4. We enjoy many mercies
in the meantime by which the bitter-
ness of affliction is allayed. 5. God
has a sovereignty of power and do-
minion to deal with us as He pleaseth,
III. Complaints may be silenced: 1.
By keeping alive in your heart a sense
of God’s love in every dispensation.
2. By labouring to have a fresh re-
membrance of your sins. 3. By con-
sidering the extreme danger of quar-
relling with and opposing God.—
Conant.


IuLusrrations. — Spiritual insight
into the Divine rule. There seems to
be in religious men a prophetic faculty
of insight into the true bearings of
outward things—an insight which puts
to shame the sagacity of statesmen, and
claims for the sons of God, and only
for them, the wisdom even of the
world. Those only read the world’s
future truly who have faith in principle
as opposed to faith in human dexterity;
who feel that in human things there
lies truly and really a spiritual nature, a
spiritual connection, aspiritual tendency,
which the wisdom of the serpent cannot
alter and scarcely can affect.— Froude,

Submission to God’s will Stone-
wall Jackson was once asked, “Sup-
pose, in addition to blindness, you were
condemned to be bedridden and racked
with pain for life; you would hardly
call yourself happy then?” He paused,
and said with great deliberateness,
“Yes, I think I could. My faith in
the Almighty wisdom is absolute, and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


OHAP, II.


a eeeeeeSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSMMsees


why should this accident change it?”
Touching him upon a tender point—
his impatience of anything bordering
on dependence—the test was pushed
further. “If, in addition to blindness
and incurable infirmity and pain, you
had to receive grudging charity from
those on whom you had no claim, what
then?” There was a strange reverence
in his lifted eye, and an exalted ex-
pression over his whole face, as he
replied with slow deliberateness, “If
it was God’s will, I think I could lie
there content a hundred years!”

Evil overruled. Henry the Eighth’s
divorce of Queen Catherine, and the
refusal of the Pope to sanction it, led
indirectly to the English Reformation
and to the flinging off of the Papal
temporal ecclesiastical power.


A life well lived. Tyndale’s work
was done. He lived to see the Bible
no longer carried by stealth into his
country, where the possession of it was
a crime, but borne in by the solemn
will of the king—solemnly recognised
as the Word of the Most High God
And then his occupation in this eartk
was gone. His eyes saw the salvation
for which he had longed, and he might
depart to his place. He was denounced
to the Regent of Flanders; he was en-
ticed by the suborned treachery of a
miserable English fanatic beyond the
town under whose liberties he had been
secured ; and, with the reward which
has been held fitting by human justice
for the earth’s great ones, he passed
away in smoke and flame to his rest.
—Froude,


HOMILETICS.


REPENTANCE.
(Vers, 40-42.)


I. Begins in strict self-examination.
The discovery of ourselves is the discovery of sin.
how sinful we are till we thoroughly investigate our own hearts.


(ver. 40).


“Let us search and try our ways”
We never know
The more we


search, the more we see, and the conviction of our sin becomes an intolerable


reality.
Il. Involves a turning to God.


“ And turn again to the Lord” (ver. 40).


The preposition is forcible, implying ‘‘ Let us go back; not half way, but the


whole.”


Sorrow for sin is but a symptom of repentance.
immediate and active moral reformation.


brings us back to Him.


III. Is accompanied with earnest prayer.
our hands unto God in the heavens” (ver. 41).
is the expression of the feeling of the heart.


A repentance that spends itself in emotions and tears is ineffective.


Genuine repentance prompts to
Sin drives us from God: repentance


“Let us lift up our heart with
In real prayer the outward form
The heart lifts up the hands, and


then with them rises in prayer to God. Deep emotion will find its own way of


expression.
the expression of that need.
IV. Includes confession of sin.


Repentance reveals the need of help and forgiveness, and prayer is


“We have transgressed and have rebelled”


(ver. 42). The spell of hardness with which the soul was bound is broken when


it is brought to the point of full and free confession of sin.


There is often much


humbling to be done before this point is reached. Confession of sin is an
important proof of the genuineness of repentance, especially when attended with
the other signs referred to.

V. Must be genuine and complete to secure forgiveness. ‘‘Thou hast not
pardoned” (ver. 42). Why? Not because God is not merciful; not because He
is unwilling to forgive ; not because the opportunity is inappropriate: but because
there is a lack of reality and sincerity in the penitent. The prescription of
repentance is a revelation of forgiveness. God does not mock the sinner by

97 G


OHAP. III.


urging to repentance and then withholding forgiveness.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : LAMENTATIONS.


If there is no eagerness


for forgiveness, it is because there is something radically defective in the


repentance.


Lzssons.—l. Suffering should lead to reflection.


can merit forgiveness.
penitence, but for His mercy’s sake,


2. No amount of repentance


3. God pardons only the penitent, not because of their


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 40. The duty of self-reflec-
tion. I. Its usefulness. 1. Teaches
us to know ourselves, 2. We discover
our sins. 3, Provides good company
and comfortable employment. IL Its
neglect mischievous. 1. Hardens the
heart. 2. A daily increase of sin. 3.
Renders a man the more unwilling to
reckon with himself. III. Demands
diligence. 1. There is a natural reluc-
tance to attend to the duty. 2. Many
sins not easily discovered, unless dili-
gent search is made. 3. A convenient
time should be set apart for the work.
4, Affliction a time for heart-searching.
5. Let not the difficulty of the work
discourage you. 6. A work that must
be often repeated. IV. Leads to re-
pentance. ‘‘Turn again to the Lord.”
Sin is an aversion and turning away
from God ; repentance is a returning to
Him. 1. Repentance must be speedy.
2. Thorough. 3. Resolute and stead-
fast. —Conant.

Ver. 41. The sublimity of devotion.
The finest and most sublime sensations
of which the soul is susceptible are con-
nected with the principle of devotion.
I. The sublimest books existing are those
from which we learn our faith. The
writings of the inspired penmen abound
with passages for which no parallel
ean be found in the productions of
mere genius. Rousseau once exclaimed,
“The majesty of the Scriptures fills
me with astonishment; the holiness of
the Gospel speaks to my very heart.
Behold the books of the philosophers,
with all their pomp, how little are they
in comparison! Is it possible that a
book at once so wise and so sublime
should have been the production of
mere men?” II. Some of the situatiuns
of real life prove the intimate connection
between devotion and the sources of sub-
lime feeling. 1. In studying the char-


acter of God and the works of Nature.
2. In the changing circumstances of
life, in adversity or yosperity, the pro-
per operativa of religious thought is to
call up sublime and fervent feelings,
IIL. Consider the subject of adoration—
God, whether worshipped in private or
in public. If it be objected that in
such an account of the effects of devout
feeling, we place religion too much
under the dominion of the imagination,
it may be answered that though the
abuse of a thing is dangerous, we are
not therefore to relinquish its use. It
is the soul that truly feels; imagination
is the effort of the soul to rise above
mortality. Imagination as well as
reason is frequently appealed to in
Scripture.—Nares,


ILLUSTRATIONS. — Repentance and
confession.


Father, I scarcely dare to pray,
So clear I see, now it is done,
That I have wasted half my day,
And left my work but just begum 1


So clear I see that things T thought
‘Were right or harmiess were a sing

So clear I see that I have sought,
Unconscious, selfish ats tr win:


So clear I see that I have hurt

The souls I might have helped to save ;
That I have slothful been, inert,

Deaf to the calls Thy leaders gave,


In outskirts of Thy kingdom vast,
Father, the humblest spot give me

Set me the lowliest task Thou hast,
Let me, repentant, work for Thee,


Repentance and forgiveness. No
repentance is acceptable with God, but
what is built or leans on the faith of
forgiveness. We have a cloud of wit-
nesses to this truth in the Scripture.
Many there have been, many are re-
corded, who have been convinced of
sin, perplexed about it, sorry for it,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


OHAP. ItL


ere


who have made open confession and
acknowledgment of it, who, under the
present sense of it, have cried out even
to God for deliverance, and have yet
come short of mercy, pardon, and ac-
eeptance with God. The cases of Cain,
Pharaoh, Saul, Ahab, Judas, and others
might be insisted upon.—John Owen.
Death-bed repentance. The English
proverb says, “The river past and God
forgotten,” to express with how mourn-
ful a frequency He whose assistance
was invoked—it may have been ear-


nestly—in the moment of peril, is re-.


membered no more, so soon as by His
help the danger has been surmounted.
And the Italian form of it sounds a
still greater depth of ingratitude : “The
peril past, the saint mocked ”—the
vows made to him in peril remaining
unperformed in safety.—Trench.

— There is one case of death-bed
repentance recorded, that no one should
despair, and only one, that none should
presume.—Augustine.

Repentance must be sincere. Lor-
enzo de’ Medici lies dying in the city
of Florence ; in the terrors of death he
has sent for the one man who had


never yielded to his threats or caresses
—the brave Savonarola. Lorenzo con-
fesses that he has heavy on his soul
three crimes—the cruel sack of Volterra,
the theft of the public dower of young
girls, by which many were driven toa
wicked life, and the blood shed after
the conspiracy of Pazzi. He is greatly
agitated, and Savonarola, to keep him
quiet, keeps repeating, “ God is merci-
ful,” “ God is good.” “ But,” he added,
‘there is need of three things.” ‘ And
what are they, father?” “First, you
must have a great and living faith in
the mercy of God.” ‘This I have, the
greatest.” ‘Second, you must restore
that which you have wrongfully taken,
or require your children to restore it for
you.” Lorenzo looks surprised and
troubled ; but he forces himself to com-
pliance, and nods his head in sign of
assent. Then Savonarola risesto his feet,
and stands over the dying prince. “Last,
you must give back their liberties to
the people of Florence.” Lorenzo, sum-
moning up all his remaining strength,
disdainfully turns his back, and, with- |
out uttering another word, Savonarola
departs without giving him absolution.


HOMILETICS.


THE TENSION OF PROLONGED SUFFERING,
(Verses 43-47.)


I. Fosters exaggerated views of God’s unpitying anger. “Thou hast
covered with anger and persecuted us ; Thou hast slain, Thou hast not pitied”
(ver. 43). The people had acknowledged their sin and repented; but no relief
came. Not only were they not pardoned, but it seemed as if the Divine wrath
was more relentless than ever. The Chaldeans are still wrecking the holy city,
and the citizens are being ignominiously dragged into captivity. The cloud of
the Divine anger, instead of vanishing, thickens into darker threatenings of ven-
geance. ‘This is one of the unvarying phases of continued suffering—every afflic-
tion is magnified into disproportionate dimensions.

II. Induces the hasty conclusion that prayer is useless. ‘‘Thou hast
covered Thyself with a cloud, that our prayer should not pass through” (ver. 44).
A deity so densely veiled is unapproachable. The veil is a cloud of wrath, and
the suffering suppliant is stricken with terror and dismay. Prayer can never
pierce so dense a cloud, and it is useless to try. The tension of prolonged suffer-
ing is apt to shake one’s confidence in the utility of prayer, and suggest the doubt
whether God is after all a prayer-hearing God. It is a great calamity when the
soul restrains prayer.

III. Creates the impression that the sufferer is utterly despised and
scorned. ‘Thou hast made us as the off-scouring and refuse in the midst of the

99


OHAP, III. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





people. All our enemies have opened their mouths against us” (vers. 45, 46).
There is nothing so depressing as suffering, and the sufferer is often the prey of
self-depreciation and false imaginings, haunted with the idea that he is the sport
and laughing-stock of others. It is the effect of sin to lower us in our own
estimation, and it is a part of its punishment that we sink in the estimation of
others.

IV. Intensifies the feeling of hopeless ruin. ‘ Fear and a snare is come upon
us, desolation and destruction” (ver. 47). The light of hope, that flickered for a
moment (ver. 21), is extinguished, and the sufferer relapses into dull, dead hope-
lessness (ver. 11). The enemy has completely hemmed in the city with his forces ;
his grip tightens, strategy and bravery succeed, the city falls, and is abandoned


to riot and destruction.


The protection of Jehovah is withdrawn, and, what is
the most disheartening revelation of all, He now appears as an angry foe.


Hope


perishes when we discover that God is against us.
Lessons.—l. Excessive suffering 1s apt to impair the moral vision. 2. It isa


calamity to lose faith in prayer when we most need its solace.


3. The outlook ts


not always so desperate as it appears to the despondent sufferer.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 43-47. The pitilessness of the
Divine anger: I. As it appears to the
abject sufferer (ver. 47). II. Seen in
its relentless persecution (ver. 43). III.
In its apparent indifference to human
entreaty (ver. 44). IV. In abandoning
its victims to the contempt and derision
of others (vers. 45, 46).


ILLUSTRATIONS.—Anger restrained
more terrible. Writing upon the
symbolical carvings of the ducal palace
at Venice, Mr. Ruskin remarks that
there is a figure of Anger represented
by a woman tearing open her dress at
her breast. Giotto represents this vice
under the same symbol, but it is the
weakest of all the figures in the Arena
Chapel. The Wrath of Spencer rides
upon a lion, brandishing a firebrand, his
garments stained with blood. Rage, or
Furor, occurs subordinately in other
places. It occurs to me very strange
that neither Giotto nor Spencer should
have given any representation of the
restrained anger which is infinitely the
most terrible; both of them make him
violent. God’s forbearance of sin is
restrained anger—not therefore leas,
but more terrible. The future retribu-
tion is not less, but more awful, since
it is the wrath of the Lamb. Anger
now restrained will be direr when once
revealed. Long-suffering is a sign of
suppressed indignation.

100


Perverted views of suffering. That
extraordinary sufferings indicated extra-
ordinary sins was contradicted by the
Book of Job, So also consistent Phari-
saism saw in the lowliness of Jesus His
unworthiness, in His defencelessness
His guilt, and after having crucified
Him, in His cross His curse; whilst
Jesus recognises therein His own glori-
fication and the salvation of the world,
The clouds that are the precursors of a
storm do not appear so black to us
when they hang immediately over our
heads as when we see them rising up
at the edge of the horizon. Itis easier
to know the worst than to dread the
worst. All misfortunes appear more
formidable at a distance than when we
actually come to grapple with them.

Unjustifiable depression. In a fit
of dejection Dean Hook once wrote—
‘“* My life has been a failure. I have
done many things tolerably, but no-
thing well, As a parish priest, as a
preacher, and now as a writer, I am
quite aware that I have failed, and the
more so because my friends contradict
the assertion.”

God does hear prayer. There is no
such thing in the long history of God’s
kingdom as an unanswered prayer.
Every true desire from a child’s heart
finds some true answer in the heart of
God. Most certain it is that the prayer
af the Church of God since creation has


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. OHAP, It,
ee ee


not been the cry of orphans in an empty


1 He spoken in ignorance of God or of
home without a Father to hear or an-


His brethren when He says, “‘ Ask and


swer. Jesus Christ did not pray in receive, that your joy may be full”—
vain or to an unknown God, nor has Norman Macleod.
HOMILETICS.


A SympatHetic NATuRE.
(Verses 48-51.)


I, Is pained by the evidences of national distress everywhere visible.
“Mine eye affecteth mine heart because of all the daughters of my city” (ver.
51). WhatIsee I feel. I see nothing but misery, and I feel nothing but pain.
Amid the general suffering, the tender heart of the prophet mourned over the cruel
fate of the Jewish maidens. This is a subject to which he often refers (ch. i. 4,
18; ii 10, 21; v.11). “Jeremiah suffered not in his own person, being under
the protection of the Divine Being; but though he dwelt securely from the hand
of mortality, yet he was filled with the bowels of sympathy. Though he wrote
of the Jews’ desolations, yet he named them Jeremiah’s Lamentations.”

II. Is aggravated in its grief because God, who sees the calamity, does not
at once remove it. “Till the Lord look down and behold from heaven ” (ver.
50). While the Lord looks down. He sees all this suffering ; every feature of
it is fully known to Him. Why does He not interfere? How can He be so in-
different to the agonies of His people? The prophet’s heart is breaking, and it is
a mystery and an addition to his pain that Jehovah does not haste to the rescue.
Sympathy is not always wise. Our emotions are apt to swamp our judgment.
God knows infallibly how much suffering is necessary, and when the right moment
is come for Him to interpose.

III. Expresses its sorrow in a copious outflow of tears. ‘Mine eye runneth
down with rivers of water, without any intermission ” (vers. 48, 49). The measure
of our being is our capacity for sorrow or joy. A certain traveller states that the
shadow cast by Mount Hermon at some periods is as much as seventy miles long.
A sensitive nature is susceptible of great sorrow, and has manifold ways of express-
ing the same. While the cause of sorrow remains, the sympathetic heart will
mourn.

Lrssons.—l. Callous indeed is the heart that can witness suffering without
emotion. 2. The heart that loves intensely suffers intensely. 3. A sympathetic
nature finds @ merciful relief in tears.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 51. Sin the cause of suffering: Gifts from the hand are silver and gold ;


I. To the patriot, as he sees its effect
upon the nation. II. To the philan-
thropist, as he observes the mischief
it works in the world. III. To the in-
dividual believer, as he is conscious of
its presence in his own heart.


ILLUSTRATIONS.—The power of sym-
pathy. Happy is the man who has
that in his soul which acts upon the
dejected as April airs upor violet roots.


but the heart gives that which neither
silver nor gold can buy. To be full of
goodness, full of cheerfulness, full of
sympathy, full of helpful hope, causes a
man to carry blessings of which he is
himself as unconscious as a lamp of its
ewn shining. Such an one moves on
human life as stars move on dark seas
to bewildered mariners; as the sun
wheels, bringing all the seasons with
him from the south. —Beecher.
101


OHAP, IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





Grief leaves its mark. Sir Walter
Scott says of himself after a sore be-
reavement, “I was broken-hearted for
two years; and though handsomely
pieced again, the crack will remain to
my dying day”

Practical sympathy. When St.
Remy was preaching before King Clovis
of France, telling with passionate pathos
the story of Christ’s suffering and death,
the monarch suddenly sprang from his


“Had I been there with my brave
Franks, I would have avenged Hia
wrongs.”

The relief of tears. A maniac while
listening to a thrilling recital was moved
to tears. Lifting her withered finger
she exclaimed, “ Do you see that tear!
It is the first tear that I have shed
for seven years, and it will relieve
my poor burning head. I have often
wished that I could weep, but I could


throne, and, grasping his spear, cried, not.”


HOMILETICS.
A FAITHFUL PROPHET IN TROUBLE.


(Verses 52-58.)


I. Cruelly treated by his enemies. “Mine enemies chased me sore like a
bird, without cause: I am cut off” (vers. 52-54). In these verses, and to the
end of the chapter, Jeremiah deals with his own personal afflictions. Without
the least provocation, he was treated with the most malignant enmity. He was
harassed, as a bird is tired out, and at length run down by continuous pursuit.
He is overwhelmed with trouble, and is as one imprisoned in a dungeon, shut off
from the current of active life. He acknowledged the righteousness of the Divine
dealings, but he was keenly alive to the unrighteousness and undeserved cruelty
of his persecutors. Had he been the aggressor, he might have expected retalia-
tion, but he was oppressed without cause. His enemies were actuated by sheer
hatred. His only fault was his faithfulness to God and to his own conscience.
Simple goodness often rouses the wanton animosity of the wicked.

II. Seeks refuge in prayer. ‘‘I called upon Thy name, O Lord; hide not
Thine ear at my cry” (vers. 55, 56). It is a relief to turn from the cruelty of
man to the compassion and power of God. The soul is never so helpless but that
it can pray. When we can do nothing else, we can pray. Prayer is the language
of need, and we are comforted with the assurance that God will hear, and not only
hear but help. It seemed at one time that prayer was useless (ver. 44); but better
thoughts prevailed, and the soul discovered that the cry for help was not in vain.
“Prayer is the breath of the new man, sucking in the air of mercy in petitions
and returning it in praises; it is both the evidence and the maintenance of the
spiritual life.”

III. Rescued by Divine aid. ‘Thou drewest near in the day that I called
upon Thee ; Thou saidst, Fear not. O Lord, Thou hast pleaded the causes of my
soul; Thou has redeemed my life” (vers. 57, 58). When we draw near to God
in prayer, He draws near to us. Our troubles are overwhelming when God is
absent and we are left to ourselves. With His manifested presence our troubles
vanish, and we are inspired with strength to endure and to triumph.

Lrssons.—l. Pidelity makes many enemies. 2. The nation that ill-uses its
best men courts its own ruin. 3. The Lord is ever on the side of the faithful.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers, 54-57, The efficacy of prayer. spondency. II. The remedy open to
I. These words show to what a state them. Prayer expressed in cries,
God’s most favoured servants may be groans, breathings, sighs. III. The


reduced—extreme suffering, tears, de-


efficacy of that remedy whenever it is
102


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS,


OHAF IK


—_——————————————————


applied. “Thou drewest near in the
day that I called upon Thee; Thou
eaidst, Fear not.” In these words we
hear the consolatory voice. of God.
Marvellous condescension ; certainty of
help and deliverance.—Simeon.

Ver. 57. A wonder explained by
greater wonders, I. An explanation
of this wonder. God doth draw near
to men. 1. Men have ever been in the


thoughts of God. 2. God came tenderly —


near in nature. 3. The Lord Jesus was
specially near in the days of His life on
earth. 4, He came still nearer to us
in His death. 5. In heaven He is per-
petually near us. 6. Jesus may well
come near to His people, for there is a
mystical union which ensures it. II.
Consider the wonder itself. 1. By no
means is this wonder at all contrary to
expectation. 2. God draws near by
strengthening us to bear up under pres-
sure. 3. By vouchsafing a doubly
vivid sense of His love. 4. By grant-
ing a sensible assurance of His sym-
pathy. 5. By speedy and remarkable
deliverance out of trouble. 6. The
text indicates surprise concerning the
memorable graciousness of God. 7, The
promptness of God. 8. The extreme
tenderness of God.—C. H. Spurgeon.
Ver. 58. God pleading for saints
and saints pleading for God. I. Zhe
Dwine pleading. 1. The Lord pleads


our cause in the court of Providence by -


silencing enemies and by raising up
friends for His people. 2. He pleads
for them in the court of Divine law.
3. In the court of conscience, 4, In
the court of heaven. 5. And at the
last great day of judgment. II. Jf
the Lord hath pleaded the causes of our
soul, we should plead His cause while we
have breath to pray. 1. This is the
life-work of the Christian. 2. Should
be done in witnessing for Christ by our
consistency of conduct. 3. We canall
plead for Christ in a private way. Be
it mine to weep for the sins of the
time and prophesy against them. Be
it yours in your own private walk and
conversation to rebuke private sin, and
by your loving earnestness to make
Jesus Christ dear to many souls |—C.
H. Spurgeon.


InLustRations. — Faithfulness in
service. If you and I show that we
attach importance to the solemn per-
formance of even the slightest duty
connected with our dear Master’s ser-
vice ; that we consider even the office
of doorkeeper in His house an office of
honour; that, convinced of His pre-
sence, we are as devout in offering the
prayers when only two or three are
present as when there are two or three
hundred—vwe shall find His blessing at-
tending us, and we shali be the means
of converting others.—Dean Hook.

— A carpenter was once asked,
Why he troubled to finish off a certain
magistrate’s bench so carefully? His
reply was, “I can’t do otherwise ; be-
sides, I may have to sit on it one of
these days.”

Faithful to death, When Commo-
dore Joseph Smith saw by the first
despatch that reached Washington from
Fortress Monroe that the Congress, on
which his son was commander, had
shown the white flag, he said, “ Then
Joe’s dead.” It was so.

Prayer an ever-open refuge. St.
Cuthbert was once in a snowstorm that
drove his boat on the coast of Fife.
“The snowstorm closes the road along
the shore,” mourned his comrades ;


. “the storm bars our way over the sea,”


“ There is still the way of heaven ; that
lies open,” said the devoted saint.

Divine aid works a marvellous
change. Probably there is nowhere on
the globe so marked a climatic boun-
dary as that of the Cascade Mountains in
both Washington Territory and Oregon.
West of this boundary the winters
are mild and the summers cvol and
showery; east of it the winters are
sharp and dry and the summers very
hot. On one side are gigantic firs and
cedars, while on the other all are of
poor size and condition. Even the
flowers are of new species, and all the
atmospheric conditions are changed.
The line that lies between the unsaved
and the saved, once crossed, what changes
are manifest! “If any man be in
Jesus Christ, he is a new creation ; old
things have passed away ; lo, all things
have become new.”

103


CHAP, III, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS,





HOMILETICS.
A CONFIDENT APPEAL TO DIVINE JUSTICE.


(Verses 59--66.)


IL That Jehovah recognises the wrongs suffered by His servants. ‘‘O Lord,
Thou has seen my wrong; judge Thou my cause” (ver. 59). It seemed at times
as if the chosen people were forgotten and left to the mercy of their oppressors.
Years passed away, and still there was no prospect of rescue. The valiant stand
made by the prophet involved him in great and unjust suffering, and it seemed as
if Heaven was indifferent to the issue. But things are not what they seem. All
the time the eye of Jehovah was watching the struggle and noting every act of
injustice and wrong. Every pang of suffering is faithfully registered. When the
soul is conscious that Jehovah is cognisant of its distress, it is nerved with courage
and patiently waits God’s time of deliverance.

II. That Jehovah infallibly observes the cruel plottings and malicious
reproaches of His people’s enemies, ‘‘Thou hast seen all their vengeance. Thou
hast heard their reproach, O Lord, and all their imaginations against me,” &e.
(vers. 60-63). Not a single movement, not a word of scorn of His enemies
escapes the eye and the ear of Jehovah. How vain and foolish their opposition
appears to Him! Their cleverest combinations are but the work of helpless
imbecili.y ; their wildest rage is but a momentary flash of aimless malignity. In
a moment their schemes are shattered and their revilings for ever silenced. God
is so strong in conscious righteousness that He can afford to bide His time, It is
a mistake to regard His long-suffering patience as a sign of apathy.

IIL. That Jehovah will vindicate the wrongs of His servants by punishing
their oppressors. “Render unto them a recompense, O Lord, according to the
work of their hands,” &c. (vers. 64-66). The imprecatory form of these words
are uttered by Jeremiah in his prophetical character. He calls for the vengeance
upon his enemies which their iniquities have deserved, and which Divine Justice
is certain to render. The versions and the Targum all render these verses not as
imperatives, but as futures—Thou shalt render unto them a recompense, &c. It
is an unalterable principle of the Divine government to punish all evil-doers.
The sufferings they have inflicted on others shall be meted out to them with swift
and terrible retribution, ‘ Under the heavens of the Lord” there is no place of
escape for the workers of iniquity. The wrongs of God’s servants shall be re-
dressed, and His honour and justice universally vindicated.

Lussons.—l. The Divine patience with evil-doers must not be construed as
meaning indifference. 2, It is an aggravation of suffering when we know it is
unjust, 3. Vengeance ayainst all workers of iniquity may be safely left in the
hands of God.

GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 59-63. The Divine slowness
to punish. I. Does not arise from in-
difference to human wrongs. ‘Thou
has seen my wrong” (ver. 59). II. Is
not from want of knowledge of all the
actions of the wicked (vers. 60-63).
Ill. Indicates that God ts so strong
and man is 80 weak. IV. Affords every
opportunity for the exercise of mercy to
the truly penitent.

Ver. 63. A godly life the music of
society. I. Like music, a godly life
ts harmonious. 1. It is in harmony


104


with God, A pure manhood is in har-
mony with all that is Godlike in thought
and sentiment, and with all that is
Christly in character and work. It is
in harmony with the works of God, with
all that is beautiful in nature. It is
in harmony with the providence of God,
with all that is happy or sad in the
discipline of life; and supremely it is
in harmony with the inspired truth of
God as reveaied in hisvory, character,
and precept. 2. It is in harmony with
itself. All the truer sympathies of a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





devout heart, all the higher faculties of
& pure mind exist in a condition of self-
narmony. Living in communion with
the Supreme Being, the good man ob-
fains true concord in the exercise of
prayer. And thus attuned by devo-
tion, every power of his soul joins
in the hymn of life. 3. It is in har-
mony with the highest good of the
race, A godly man is ever the foremost
to aid any philanthropic enterprise
for the real welfare of others. All
the strongest impulses of his nature
prompt him to sympathetic action for
the unfortunate. Consequently his
time, money, and influence are made sub-
servient to the common good of men.
IL. Ltke music, a godly life is cheer-
ing. When we have been oppressed
with care, when the great mystery of
life has come heavily upon our souls,
what hope and comfort have been im-
parted by contact with a happy, pious
spirit. III. Lvke music, a godly life
ts inspiring. When men would have
given up the conflict of life in despair,
how often has the word and life of a
Christian filled them with new courage ;
and how frequently are careless souls
awakened to a sense of duty by the
moral earnestness of the godly around
them. IV. Like music, a godly life is
calming. What a quieting influence
has the life of a good man upon
those around him, His presence sub-
dues anger; by his smile the deepest
unrest is removed. He calms the
passions of the unholy and soothes the
sorrow of the troubled. V. Ave our
vives morally musical? Are they in
harmony with God and all His works 4
Are our dispositions in the home, in
business, and in the varied scenes of life
kindly? If so, then are we the joy, the
inspiration, and the quietude of many
lives around us that might otherwise be
sad, monotonous, and unpeaceful.— The
Lay Preacher.

Vers. 64-66. Divine punishment :
I. Is proportioned to human sin, “A


recompense according to the work of,


their hands” (ver. 64). IL. Afficts the
chief instrument of human sin. “ Give
them sorrow of heart” (ver. 65)—blind-
ness of heart, obstinacy, hardness.


OHA. WL





HII. Is an appalling reality. “ Perse.
cute and destroy them in anger” (ver.
66).

Ver. 65. God can entangle the head
that thinks itself clearest, and sink the
heart that thinks itself stoutest.


It.usrrations.—It is best always
to do justly. Writing on the question
of just treatment between the Southern
and Northern States of America, and
especially of the black race, G. W. Cable
said; “‘ But it is sometimes said, Will not
this tend eventually to amalgamation 4
Idle question! Will it help the matter
towithholdmen’smanifestrights? What
can we do better for the remotest future
than to be just in the present, and leave
the rest to the Divine Rewarder of
nations that walk uprightly ?”

Justice between man and man. The
doctrine which bases all the relations of
employer and employed upon self-in-
terest is a doctrine of the pit; it has
been bringing hell to earth in large in-
stalments for a great many years. You
can have hell in your factory, or you can
have heaven there, just as you please.
If it is hell that you want, build your
business on the law of hell, which is—
Every man for himself and the devil
take the hindmost. Out of that will
come fightings perennial and unrelent-
ing. If it is heaven that you want,
then build your business on the law
of the kingdom of heaven, which is—
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.
That will put you in the path of peace,

Religion and justice. In the year
813 the Doge Angelo Participazio took
vigorous means for the enlargement of
the small group of buildings which were
to be the nucleus of the future Venice.
For the offices of religion he built the
church of St. Mark, and on or near the
spot where the Ducal Palace now stands
he built a palace for the administration
of justice. Observe that piety towards
God and justice towards man have been
at least the nominal purposes of every
act and institution of ancient Venice.
—Luskin.

Wrong-doing brings its own retri-
bution. Cosimo I., of Florence, was §
ferocjous, cruel tyrant, murdering his

105


OHAP, IIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





»wn son in the presence of his mother.
After a few years he married a wicked
but beautiful woman, who had been
a former partner in sin with him,
and in his last days, broken with
decrepitude, was helpless in her des-
potic hands. For two years after
the palsy had deprived him of speech
or movement, he lay dying, bereft of
everything but a torturing memory of
his cruelty and wickedness.

— The Jews have a tradition that
Cain was doomed to carry Abel’s corpse
for a hundred years.

The just and the unjust. Such
being our unjust man, let us place by
his side a man of true simplicity and
nobleness, resolved, as Aischylus says,
not to seem, but to be good. We must
certainly take away the seeming; for
if he be thought to be a just man, he
will have honours and gifts on the
strength of this reputation, so that it
will be uncertain whether it is for jus-
tice’s sake or for the sake of the gifts
and honours that he is what he is,
Yes, we must strip him bare of every-
thing but justice, and make his case
the reverse of the former. Without
being guilty of one unjust act, let him
have the worst reputation for injustice,
so that his virtue may be thoroughly
tested and shown to be proof against
infamy and all its consequences ; and
let him go on to the day of his death
steadfast in his justice, but with a life-


long reputation for injustice. They
who prefer injustice above justice will
say that in such a situation the just
man will be scourged, racked, fettered,
will have his eyes burnt out, and at
last, after suffering every kind of tor-
ture, will be crucified; and thus learn
that it is best to resolve, not to be, but
to seem just.—Plato’s Republic.

Injustice not to be hastily resented.
When Aristides, the Athenian general,
sat to arbitrate a difference between two
persons, one of them said, “ This fellow
accused thee at such atime.” To whom
Aristides answered, “I sit not to hear
what he has done against me, but
against thee.” That was a noble reply
of Philip the Good when urged by his
courtiers to punish a prelate who had
done him great injustice, he declined,
saying, ‘‘It is a fine thing to have
revenge in one’s power; but it is a finer
thing not to use it.”

God frustrates the schemes of the
wicked. All the plots and contrivances
of wicked men, all their turning of
things upside down, are treated as the
potter’s clay ; for when they think they
have brought all to maturity, ripeness,
and perfection, when they look upon
their business as good as done, on a
sudden all their labour is lost ; for God,
who stands by all the while and looks
on, will, with one small touch, with the
least breath of His mouth, blast and
break all in pieces.—Edlin,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS, OHAP, IV.
ee re


CHAPTER IV.


Zion’s PitiruL Estate.


TuE first half of this chapter is occupied with details connected with the ruthless overthrow
and harrowing incidents in the conquest of Jerusalem, Distinct and vigorous expression is
thereafter given to the intense conviction that the terrific disasters were traceable to the
iniquities of the people, and especially of the ruling classes. They suffered from the anger of
the Lord ; but He would not contend for ever. There is hope that, after meting out justice
to oppressors, He would arise and have mercy upon Zion, for the time to favour her: yea, the
set time had come. The shadows of the night were very dense, but streaks across them betoken
to the spiritual eye that day is breaking, the day of restoration. :

(&) Ver. 1. How is the gold dimmed. Nota mere diminution of its brightness, but a tarnish-
ing which lowered the estimate of the ore. The most pure gold changed; something more
than an alteration in the appearance of the purified metal is observed. The alteration is not in
its substance, but in its depreciated value. The stones of the sanctuary—not only were
precious stones worn on the garments of the High Priest, but the Temple also was garnished for
beauty with them—are poured out at the head of every street. If this is regarded as having
reference to the costly stones of the House of the Lord, the objection naturally arises that no
enemy would be so reckless as to strew such precious material all over the city. Rather the
whole verse is to be considered as a figurative representation of the sad lot of Jerusalem, not of
its buildings but of its inhabitants, which will be told of in some verses following. A similar
comparison is made by the prophet Zechariah, who foretells that the sons of Zion shall be as the
stones of a crown, only not cast down, as here, but lifted on high (Zech. ix. 16).

(2). Ver. 2 defines the objects of which the preceding verse was an illustration, The
precious sons of Zion, grouping all the people together, a kingdom of priests, an holy nation,
comparable to, weighed in one scale against fine gold in the other, he is astonished to see as
in utter contrast with what they were. Three varieties of gold are mentioned—gold, pure gold,
fine gold—as if the sons of Zion were precious beyond the most precious things ; but the contrast
between the high estimate and the degraded reality, between what the Lord formed them to be
and foes had reduced them to, forces out the cry, How are they reckoned as earthen pitchers,
made from ignoble materials by human hands, and easily broken to pieces (Jer. xix. 11),

Their humiliating condition is evidenced in children, adults, nobles, and mothers.

(3). Ver. 3. Beasts of prey show affection for their brood. Even the jackals draw out—
present—the breast; a familiar fact, testifying that they were true to their instincts, they
suckle their whelps; but in miserable contrariety to this, the daughter of my people has
become otherwise ; unwilling to give nourishment to their babes, they show themselves cruel,
like ostriches in the desert. This arraignment of the wild birds is according to ideas current
at the time, and reported in the Book of Job. She leaveth her eggs on the earth... she is
hardened against her young ones, as if they were not hers (chap. xxxix. 14, 16). Later observa-
tions require some modification of this account of the habits of the ostrich; but the writers
of the Sacred Scriptures had not a knowledge of Nature beyond their times.

This fearful, unnatural result of the extreme trials of the Israelites had its correlated feature.

(4). Ver. 4. The tongue of the sucking child cleaveth to the roof of his mouth, because
of getting no milk. The young children ask bread, and no one divides to them the cakes ix
which form it was made.

(7) Ver. 5. Adults also are distressed. They that did feed delicately, in the fastidiousness
of luxury, are desolate in the streets, with no one to serve them, with no means to satisfy
hunger, perishing. They that were brought up in scarlet, those of the wealthy classes,
accustomed to use the most expensive cloth, lay themselves, in sheer despair, on the dirt-heaps
which have accumulated in the ruined city. Like Dives, clothed in purple and fine linen, faring
sumptuously every day, they too are in darkness—only they in the visible, he in the invisible
world.

(1) Ver. 6. Those awful distresses were due to the way in which the people had lived. The
crying wickedness of Sodom is again and again denounced by prophets as a warning to the
Israelites. Here that wickedness is minified, and, from the long drawn out sufferings of the
latter, it is implied that the iniquity—not the punishment of the iniquity, a translation which
has not been established from the usage of the two corresponding Hebrew words elsewhere—of
the daughter of my people is greater than the sin of Sodom. The Cities of the Plain had
not the advantage which the Jews had, who were intrusted with the oracles of God, and their guilt
was less. The supreme authority of Jesus Christ stands behind the declaration that it would
be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for those who refused
the light of life. Moreover, Sodom was destroyed by a sudden stroke—no protracted sufferings,
no starved, wailing children, no mothers eating their own infants, overthrown as in a moment,
and by forces in which no human agency had any part; hands did not encircle her. No
enemies brandished their swords against her inhabitants, investing her on every side, God
tan neralyse all industries and destroy a community without man’s aid. The ground of this


107


OAP, IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS,





preference of Sodom is that a trouble direct from God is more bearable than one inflicted by
man, and was expressed by King David, Let me fall into the hand of Jehovah... let me wai
fall into the hand of man (1 Chron, xxi. 18).

{}) Ver. 7. Men under religious vows could not have been so numerous as to form a con
spicuous element in the population. Nor is there any reason to suppose that they were noted
for a fine physique. Besides, the Hebrew word is not confined to those who are professed
Nazarites, but applies to such as were distinguished from others. So Joseph, in Jacob’s dying
forecasts, is described as him that was nazin, separate from [marg. that is prince among] his
brethren (Gen. xlix. 26). Her nobles were purer than snow, &c. Still another feature char-
acterised them, they were more ruddy in body than rubies. ‘‘ The white and red are to be
understood as mixed, and shading into one another, as our popular poetry speaks of cheeks
which ‘like milk and purple shine’”’ (Delitzsch) ; My deloved ts white and ruddy (Cant. v. 10);
“My love is like the red, red rose” (Scottish song). Sapphire was their polishing [lit.
figure]. The comparison, however, can only be with the brilliancy of the gem, not with its
shape. The appearance of the nobles, as here described, indicates that their faces were not
bronzed and seamed by exposure to all kinds of weather; no engrained dust from toiling day
after day darkened their complexion, They looked as those who live delicately in king’s courts.
But now—

(i) Ver. 8. Darker than blackness is their visage; they are not recognised in the
streets as members of the aristocracy ; nothing marks them off from the labouring classes,
Their skin cleaveth to their bones, they are emaciated and shrivelled through hunger and
anguish, and the skin is become dry as wood.

(0) Ver. 9. One melancholy contrast suggests another, ¢.¢., between those who are dead and
those who are tortured by want. Better are the slain by the sword than the slain by hunger.
The next clause is more descriptive of the condition of the former than of the latter. The
advantage of less prolonged and gnawing pains is with those who pine away [lit. flow away,
as sinking from loss of blood gushing from ghastly wounds], pierced through at a time when
there was no lack of food from the fruits of the field.

(9) Ver. 10. A more dreadful fact is related in regard to the little ones than that in vers.
3 and 4. The hands of tender-hearted women—not servants or hirelings, but themselves—
have boiled their own children; they became meat for them in that climax of sufferings, the
destruction of the daughter of my people. Moral duty is sacrificed, and unnatural crimes
committed at the shrine of physical cravings,

(3) Ver. 11 is aconclusion from the immediately preceding verses, as ver. 6 is from those pre-
ceding it. Jehovah has accomplished, z.e., has put forth a full measure of, His fury ; has poured
cut the fierceness of His anger, and one method of its action is He has kindled a fire in Zion,
and has devoured her foundations. The scenes of horror which have been depicted show the
meeting-place of Zion’s guilt and its Divine punisher. God’s fierce wrath is the blast which
consumes flagrant iniquities. The entire demolition of the former principles dominating the
Israelites is thus symbolised, and so signifies that room is made for the new spirit which shall
possess the restored captivity when they lay again the foundations of the House of the Lord.

A change of features is to be presented now by sketching, not so much the disasters on
classes of the people, as the causes by which they were produced, and the bafiled hopes ensuing,

(5) Ver. 12. The kings of the earth—men who might be considered experts—believed not,
neither all the inhabitants of the world—men who were moved by appearances and common
hearsay—that an adversary ... should enter into the gates of Jerusalem. This belief
cannot be merely ‘‘a deep subjective conviction.” Whether or not the city was previously
taken is a matter of no importance. What is stated is a general opinion. The unverified belief
would be grounded on the knowledge of the strong situation and careful fortifications of
Jerusalem, which, with the means of siege then at command, might be considered almost im-
possible of capture. It was invested a year and a half before capture by the greatest warrior
of the age. Besides this, there may well have been, since the remarkable repulse of Sennacherib,
a wide-spread supposition, as when the tribes eLierged from the desert, that the God of Israel
was very mighty in the defence of His worshippers, and would not let His sacred city be
subjugated,

(2) Ver. 18. It is needful to connect this verse with the last by words like, This incredible
thing came to pass, because of the sins of her prophets, the iniquities of her priests—the
position which these two classes assumed in the polity of Jerusalem is indicated in various
strong terms by Jeremiah, the prophet of this period, and especially in his references to the
treatment which he himself received at their hands (chap. xxvi.)—who shed in her midst the
blood of the righteous. They are branded as instigators and leaders of the evil, and, like
other occupiers of usurped power, their jealousy and anger at those who crossed them in any
way urge them to the extreme measure of dooming to death the faithful witnesses for God. In
thus declaring the causes of the calamity to Judah, there is once more uplifted the moral stan-
dard which has made the Bible to be the impulse to all ethical revivals, the rebuker of wrong
by whomsoever committed, the unswerving asserter of the rights of God in the face of man’s
injury to man. ?

(J 0) Vers. 14 and 15 seem annlicable to the condition of prophets and priests after the city

Vag


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS, CHAP, FY,
rn


had been taken. They were panicstricken. They staggered [as] blind men in the streets 3 an
effect accounted for in other parts of Scripture as a punishment of sin. They make haste to shed
innocent blood .. . therefore we grope for the wall like the blind, yea, we grope as they that have
no eyes (Isa. lix. 7 and 10). Their sin found them out; its marks were palpable ; they were
defiled with blood when the command to go into exile arrested them. So they were avoided ;
[men] could not touch their garments: In their blood-stained aspect they were met with the
shout which was enjoined upon leprous persons, That it was the leper who was to cry unclean
is of little consequence where “ poetical license” is exercised. Away unclean one [men], cried
to them, away, away; and so such as had, in spiritual pride, said, Come not near me, I am
holier than thou, are abhorred by the people they contemned. The just judgment of God was
manifest, so that, as proscribed offenders, When they fled away and stagzered blindly as before
in the city, they found that, even in other places where they sought ease and rest for the soles of
their feet, the natives would not allow them to stay; [men] said among the nations, They
shall no longer sojourn [among us]. These references, in all probability, are made to real
occurrences.

(B) Ver. 16. The circumstances of those fugitives are ascribable to Jehovah. Wherever they
went, the face of Jehovah had not disappeared ; in anger, not in grace, lifted up upon them, it
has scattered them, and will no more regard them. This fact was verified on their treat-
ment by the peoples to whom they had gone. There no respect was paid, no favour shown, on
account of office, occupation, or age.

(Y) Ver. 17 refers to the persons remaining in the city, who, notwithstanding that God’s
righteous judgments had so afflicted prophets and priests, yet thought longingly of human
defences ; Still our eyes failed [looking] for vain help. This is explained in the succeeding
clause, We eagerly. watched for a nation that could not save, trusting that Egypt, that broken
reed, or perhaps some other equally unsatisfactory auxiliary, would appear to rescue them,

(8) Ver. 18. Whatever their expectations might be, they were under constant pressure from
the besieging army. They hunted our steps; every movement was closely watohed,-so that
we could not go in our streets, there, liable to be laid hold on at every turn, all seemed to be
over. The final cessation of their independence was but the question of an hour, our end is
come, our rational life extinguished.

(P) Ver. 19. Flight from the city was of no benefit. Fugitives were promptly and hotly
followed, whether they betook themselves to the cavernous retreats of the everlasting hills, or to
waste and lonely places. Swifter were our pursuers than the eagles of heaven; on the
mountains they chased us, in the desert they laid wait for us. So the deportation to Babylon
is prepared for, and proof given of the complete break-up of the organised community of Israel,

(4) Ver. 20. The crowning evidence of the collapse was the seizure of the head of the State,
who is considered to have been, not King Josiah but Zedekiah, by most commentators. The
breath of our nostrils, the token of our life, is the monarch. An idea like this was prevalent
among ancient peoples, and a noticeable confirmation of it is quoted from Seneca, De Clementia:
“ He (the sovereign) is the vital breath which so many thousands (of citizens) draw.” In his
life the nation views the representative of its life. ‘God made David king, and his posterity,
for this end that the life of the people might, in a manner, reside in him ;” and so long as he
was among them, there seemed to be a pledge of the favour of God, and so of their continued
existence as a separated natien. Zedekiah might be irresolute and weak, but it ig not personal
character, it is office which is regarded—the anointed of Jehovah. ‘‘ We must observe that
these high terms properly belong to Christ only, for David was not the life of the people except
2s he was a type of and represented His person ... and hence we learn that the Church is
dead when separated from its Head” (Calvin).. The representative of this earthly life of the
nation had disappeared, was taken, “like a wild animal driven into a pitfall,” in their pits.
His capture by the hostile forces is related in Jer. lii. 7-11, and was achieved about a month
prior to the sack of Jerusalem. It was the prelude to the conviction that their last hopes were
being crushed. Of whom we said, Under his shadow we will live among the nations. Asa
captive to Babylon, there was not the ghost of a chance to rally round him, and no sort of pro-
spect of existing as a semi-independent people in any foreign land. The end had come.

(W) Ver. 21. The children of Edom had exulted over the destruction of Jerusalem, and
urgently called for its completeness, They said, Rase it, rase tt, even to the foundations
thereof (Ps. cxxxvii. 7). Now they are addressed in bitter irony, Rejoice and be glad,
daughter of Edom, take a full measure of your malicious joy, but with all that your triumphing
will be short ; you cannot escape pungent woes, however extended your territory may be, that
dwellest in the land of Uz, a district of country bordering on Edom’s land, and which seems
to have been overrun by Edomites. To thee also shall the cup pass, the cup of the wine of the
wrath of God which is mingled in His anger.

The strong feelings of indignation, which were almost hereditary among the Israelites,
against the Edomites, may be partly accounted for from the idea that variance with one’s own
kith and kin is often expressed by more bitter terms than variance with strangers, and partly
by the consciousness which Israel had of ifs spiritual calling which the “profane” nature of
Esau’s descendants tended to render inoperative,

(Ml) Ver. 22. No hint marks the transition from the grim scenes of calamity in which the


109


OMAP, IV, HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS





)

Jews had been involved to this glimpse of light and renewal. The abruptness must be due to
the conviction that, as Israel is the people with whom Jehovah has entered into covenant, all
cannot be over with them, however they are pressed down by adversity. If they forsake Him,
they will be chastised till they acknowledge and repent of their apostasy. Then He will have
pity for His name’s sake. Punishment will come to a termination ; Ended is thine iniquity,
daughter of Zion. The consequences following an evil procedure would, as it were, drain to
the dregs the cup of wrath and grace would begin to appear. “A Messianic hope” is created,
He will no more carry thee into captivity, by the Chaldeans, at any rate. This promise is
dependent for its fulfilment upon the righteous state of Israel. Avoiding the sins which had
brought the present term of punishment, they would not be subjected to such punishment
again, The exiles who returned from Babylon were greatly purified and elevated by the trials
which had been passed through, and if there had been due progress in spiritual things, as the
prophet Malachi declares there was not, no further casting out of the land of promise would
have taken place. But they crucified the Lord of glory. Their house is left unto them desolate,
and they are scattered over the earth till they turn again to the Lord. The allotment to Edom
is a contrast ; He visits thine iniquities, daughter of Edom ; He discovers thy sins. He sees
they are persisted in, and shame and woe follow the exposure. “God covers sin when He
forgives it (Ps, xxxii. 1-5). He discovers or reveals it when He punishes it” (Job xx. 27).
The safety of God’s people connotes the destruction of His enemies (Rev. xxix, and xx.)


HOMILETICS.
Mora DEGRADATION.


(Verses 1, 2.)


The destruction of Jerusalem was an event so unexpected, so unparalleled, so
astounding, that it seemed as if it could not be sufficiently lamented. The grief of
the prophet is not yet exhausted. Once more he looks upon the fated city as it
gradually but inevitably collapses in the tightening grasp of the relentless besiegers,
and as he sees the miseries of his countrymen in their direful extremity, he renews
his doleful elegy. He reiterates the doctrine that the sufferings of Judah are the
just punishment of her sins, and not until the chastisement has had its proper
effect is there any hope of her restoration. These verses describe the moral
degradation and wretchedness of the sufferers, and suggest the following re-
flections.

I. That moral degradation is the more evident when compared with a
former condition of superior excellence. The people of God are called “the
precious sons of Zion,” and their moral excellence is compared to “the most fine
gold,” and to the hallowed “stones of the sanctuary.” Judah was a chosen and
consecrated nation, and enjoyed unexampled privileges. She was raised not only
into temporal affluence and splendour, but was intended to represent the lofty
type of a moral and spiritual commonwealth. She was the custodian and teacher
of spiritual blessings that were to enrich the world. She was the medium through
which Jehovah sought to express His gracious purpose of salvation to the whole
human race, No nation had been so exalted and so honoured. While she
remained faithful to her calling, Judah was supreme and invulnerable among the
nations. She shone with the lustre of the most fine gold, and her position was as
secure as that of an impregnable fortress, But when she sinned she fell, and.
her fall was the more notable when contrasted with her former greatness and
grandeur.

II. That moral degradation is a loss of character and stability. The moral
reputation of Judah was tarnished—the gold was dimmed, the most fine gold
changed. Three kinds of gold are mentioned in these verses—gold, most fine
gold, and fine (or solid) gold. The precious metal not only lost its brilliancy but
also its massiveness: it became thin and hollow. The religious character of God’s
people, which was compact and strong as the solid building of the sanctuary, is
shattered, and lies in a heap of ruins, bke the stones of the demolished Temple

110


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS, OHAP. IV,
AD


that now block the streets of Jerusalem. Its moral value is destroyed. It is
now of no more worth than a piece of brittle earthenware, which the swift hands
of the potter can easily put together and as easily break. Sin is a great dis-
integrator of character. The external form may appear unchanged long after
decay has set in; but the mischief is slowly and surely working, and the final
collapse is inevitable. Nothing is safe where righteousness is ignored, whether
in individuals or in nations.

Ill. That moral degradation is the occasion of painful lamentation. “ How
is the gold become dim! How is the most fine gold changed! How are they
esteemed as earthen pitchers” (vers. 1, 2). Even the most callous are sometimes
moved to pity as they witness the downfall of excellence which they often envied
and could not reach. Misfortune softens the hard-hearted. But who can sound
the depths of anguish of the soul that realises the greatness of the disaster occa-
sioned by the fall of morality and religion! It is the loss of personal righteous-
ness, happiness, and peace; the loss of national prestige; the loss of all the
safeguards of social life; the loss of untold blessing to the world; and, greatest
of all, the loss of the favour and smile of God! In the midst of moral wreckage
and ruin, it is a hopeful sign when even one is left who sincerely mourns and
laments the catastrophe. The tears of such an one shine with the lustre of the
goodness whose loss he deplores,

Lxrssons.—l. Religion only can make a nation truly illustrious. 2. When
religion declines, the glory of the nation is obscured. 3. The loss of religion should
be not only lamented, but should lead to diligent search after its recovery.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.
Vers. 1, 2. Moral character: I. Is the arts. Character tells on skill


the basis of individual worth. IL Gives
reputation and stability to individual
life. ILI. Needs to be carefully guarded.


IuLustRaTions. —Lack of moral
pense. It is no exaggeration to assert
that Napoleon I., strangely called the
Great, had no moral sense. Carlyle
tells the story of a German emperor
who, when corrected for a mistake he
made in Latin, replied, “I am King
of the Romans, and above grammar.”


Napoleon’s arrogance was _ infinitely
greater. He thought himself above


morality, and really seems to have be-
lieved that he had a perfect right to
commit any crime, political or personal,
that would advance his interests by an
iota ; and indeed he did commit so many
it is almost impossible to recount them.

Moral degradation affects work.
The corrupted Papacy of the fifteenth
century so injuriously affected the art
world, that from that time there was a
serious decline in all the arts of paint-
ing, sculpture, and architecture. The
degradation of religion first touched
public morality, and then spread to all


Where the heart declines, the hand
will soon disclose it. The “work of
our hands” is only established as “the
beauty of the Lord is upon us.” — Ruskin.

Degeneration. In the Central Park
Museum, at New York, there is the
skeleton of a huge bird, now extinct.
It is 14 feet in height ; and by its side
is a stuffed specimen of another bird
not more than 14 inches. The latter
is the nearest living representative of
the former, which once abounded in
New Zealand.

Degeneration of character. Rarely
does a successful merchant who comes
to New Orleans as a young man from
the cooler latitudes leave a son who
inherits the father’s energy. One gene-
ration is enough to change character.
A city that lies below the level of the
river which washes its wharves, and
only a few feet above the poisonous
swamps surrounding it, and which has
six sweltering summer months, must
always continue to draw upon the
north for new men to carry on its
larger business activities. —Smalley.

Moral degradation of drink. It is

1k1


GAP. IV.


in the spiritual realm that the ravages
of strong drink are most terrible. Many
a mother observes, with a heart that
grows heavier day by day, the signs of
moral decay in the character of her son.
It is not the flushed face and heavy
eyes that trouble her the most; it is
the evidence that his mind is becoming
duller and fouler, his sensibilities less
acute, his sense of honour less com-
manding. She discovers that his loyalty
to truth is somewhat impaired, that he
deceives her frequently without com-
punction. Coupled with this loss of
truthfulness is the weakening of the
will, which always accompanies chronic
alcoholism. Then comes the loss of self-
respect, the lowering of ambition, and
the fading out of hope. It is a mourn-
ful spectacle—that of the brave, the
ingenuous, high-spirited man sinking
steadily down to the degradation of
inebriety; but how many such spec-
tacles are visible all over the land !

A good character a blessing. When
Peter Cooper, the New York Philan-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


thropist, held a reception at the Women’s
Art School shortly before his death, a
most impressive testimony was given of
the high regard in which his character
was held. It was interesting to note
the various manners of the crowd who
approached him. ‘Mr. Cooper, we
must put our little boy’s hand in
yours,” said a young couple, with a
child five or six years old at their side.
Then a group of boys would come along
and stand curiously regarding him from
a short distance. ‘ That’s Mr. Cooper,”
they whispered in an undertone. And
so the evening wore away, and ten
thousand people had come and gone
through the great bright halls and
schoolrooms, and Mr. Cooper’s presence
had put a good thought or feeling into
everybody’s heart. I can see him now,
with his smiling face and interested
look, and his soft white hair waving
over his shoulders, amid flowers, lights,
and cheerful music, whilst his presence
brooded like a benediction over the
swaying and surging crowd,


HOMILETICS.
THe EXTREMITY OF SUFFERING.


(Verses 3-10.)
I. Deadens natural affection (vers. 3, 4). Maternal instincts are demoralised


in the straitness of the siege.


Little children are left to perish, without any
effort to relieve their wants or soothe their sufferings.
bread ; no attempt is made to allay their hunger and thirst.


In vain they ask for
Absorbed in their


own intolerable miseries, the wretched mothers sink below the instincts of the
wild beasts, for even the jackals suckle their young. They are become like the
cruel crocodile, which, after laying its eggs in the sand, abandons them without
further care. The infants pine to death, unheeded and unmourned. Excessive
suffering denaturalises man and woman.

Il. Drags down all classes to one level (ver. 5). The wealthy are now even
as the poor. They who fared sumptuously, and whose tastes were pampered with
the most delicate viands, are now sullenly starving to death with the crowd.
They who were clothed in scarlet, and accustomed to every refinement from their
infancy, are now content to stretch themselves on the dirt-heaps of the city, and
eager to devour any offal they may pick up amid the general scramble for food.
All men find a universal communism in suffering. Human extremity knows no
distinction in ranks and titles. Hunger drags every one to the same level.

Ill. Prefers a swift to a lingering punishment (ver. 6). The destruction of
Sodom, which filled a large space in the Jewish mind as an example of the
terrible judgment of Heaven on extreme iniquity, was regarded as light com
pared with the sufferings of Jerusalem. The punishment of Sodom was sudden, and
came direct from God; but the punisnment of Judah was by the hands of the

112


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.
$$$ eeeeeeeeeeeeSSSSSSeSeSSSSSSSSSsMshssese


Chaldeans, and was slow and lingering. David preferred to be dealt with
directly from God, and chose pestilence rather than injuries inflicted by human
hands (2 Sam. xxiv. 14). But the iniquity of Judah was greater than the sin of
Sodom, and the punishment was therefore more severe. There is a point in
suffering when we yearn for a speedy release; when death is welcome.

IV. Reduces the healthiest from beauty to hideousness (vers. 7, 8). The
Nazarites, because of their temperance, were remarkable for health and personal
beauty, and were held in veneration because of their religious devotion (comp.
Num. vi.). Their complexion was ruddy as coral, and the beauty of their physical
form was as exact and faultless as is the cutting of a sapphire. But the most
distinguished of the population, whether Nazarites or of the aristocracy, are
involved in the general calamity, and suffer with the rest. Their rosebud com-
plexion is turned to blackness, their frame is shrunk and distorted, and their skin
is shrivelled and dry. Famine plays havoc with beauty, and brings the strongest
down to helplessness.

V. Recoils not from the most horrible means of appeasing the irresistible
pangs of hunger (vers. 9, 10). Such were the sufferings of the famished, that they
who were slain with the sword were deemed happier tian those who were pierced
with the dart of unappeased hunger. So extreme was the famine, that cannibalism
became common, and women who were known as tender-hearted mothers actually
boiled and ate their own children (comp. 2 Kings vi. 28, 29; Lev. xxvi. 29;
Deut. xxviii. 56, 57; Josephus’s “ Wars,” cap. x. 9). It is a fearful experience
when the animal in human nature gains the mastery over every other instinct.

Lzssons.—1. Extremity makes strange revelations of human nature. 2. The
restraints of civilisation are very superficial. 3. Sin acquaints the soul with the
lowest depths of degradation.


OHA? LV.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers, 3-10. The rigour of war.
I. Demoralises maternal affection (ver.
1), IL Involves innocent children in
suffering (ver. 2). III. Reduces all
classes to poverty and distress (vers. 5,
7, 8). IV. Prolongs the misery of its
victims (ver. 6). V. Is attended with
the worst results of famine (vers. 9, 10).

Ver. 6. Graduated punishment. L
Is proportioned to the character and
degree of the sin committed. II. Its
severity implies the enormity of the
offence. III. Cannot be charged with
injustice.

Vers. 7-10. The horrors of famine.
L Changes strength into feebleness and
beauty into deformity (vers. 7, 8). II.
Is more cruel than the sword (ver. 9).
III. Debases the most refined into can-
nibals (v. 10).


ILLustTRaTIONSs.—Degradation. Is it
not wonderful that base desires should
so extinguish in men the sense of their
own excellency, as to make them willing
that their souls should be like to the

113


souls of beasts, mortal and corruptible
with their bodies !— Hooker.
There have been those—

“ Who, in the dark dissolving human heart,
And hallowed secrets of this microcosm,
Dabbling, with shameless jest, a shameful

band,
Encarnalised their spirits.”


Importance of food. Temperature
has less influence in inciting the migra-
tion of birds than failure of food; fora
few even of the regular migrants will
linger throughout the winter at sheltered
localities, where food remains accessible,
safely daring the severest cold. Hunger
means loss of heat and life, and it
is this the birds primarily flee. No
attraction to Christians like spiritual
food. ‘‘Tie them up by the teeth,” as
Mr. Spurgeon says.

Necessity a teacher. “Life and
the necessities of life are the best philo-
sophers, if we will only listen honestly
to what they say to us; and dislike the
lesson as we may, it is cowardice which
refuses to hear it.”—F'roude.

a


OHAP, IV.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





— The wife of a certain chieftain who
had fallen upon idle habits, one day
lifted the dish-cover at dinner, and re-
vealed a pair of spurs; a sign that he
must ride and hunt for his next meal.

Help in extremity. Inthe Magdalen
Islands, off the Newfoundland coast, the
means of livelihood is almost entirely
found in the fisheries, and if these fail,
life becomes a burden. In 1883 a
famine occurred which came near to
decimating the population. The fish-
eries failed; the ship which was ex-
pected to bring the winter’s supply
before the ice formed foundered in a
storm. By the time spring came, star-
vation stared the people in the face,


Many must have died had not a large
ship filled with produce been wrecked
off Coffin Island. The news spread
like wildfire, The population turned
out, and from the cargo of a shipwrecked
vessel drew a new lease of life.

Man’s extremity is God’s oppor-
tunity. It is a current saying, “That
the darkest cloud precedes the dawn,”
and that ‘“ Every dark cloud has a silver
lining.” Early risers tell us that the
lowest temperature immediately pre-
cedes the sun-rising. These things serve
to illustrate God’s kingdom of grace.
“Before honour is humility.” ‘Thou
has lifted me up and cast me down.”
“‘ How long, O Lord, how long #”


HOMILETICS.
Tot DESTRUCTION oF ZION.
(Verses 11, 12.)


I. Was thorough and complete. ‘The Lord kindled a fire in Zion, and it
devoured the foundations thereof” (ver. 11). The holy city, the pride of the
Jews and the envy of their enemies, was utterly overthrown. Not only-were its
walls, towers, palaces, and Temple demolished, but its very foundations were dug
up and scattered: one stone was not left upon another. It was degraded and
spurned by the resolute destroyers as a heap of useless rubbish. It was im-
possible for the rage of man to make a more complete ruin. In the intention of
the irate Chaldeans it was destroyed for ever. And yet the Divine Guardian of
the holy city allowed all this!

II. Was undeniable evidence of the reality of the Divine anger. “The
Lord hath accomplished His fury: He hath poured out His fierce anger” (ver. 11).
There was more of the righteous anger of Jehovah against the obstinate sin of His
people in the destruction of Jerusalem, than there were skill and ferocity in the
Chaldean army. The enemy would have been powerless to pierce the city bul-
warks if the people had remained true to Jehovah, and sheltered themselves in
humble trust beneath His all-powerful defence. But the wrath of God was
provoked beyond the limit of further endurance, and the Chaldeans were used as
the instruments of His vengeance, Surely the eyes of the suffering people were
at last opened to see in the utter destruction of their beloved city that Jehovah
was indeed angry with them.

IIL Was a result deemed incredible by the nations, ‘The kings of the
earth, and all the inhabitants of the world, would not have believed that the
adversary should have entered into the gates of Jerusalem ” (ver. 12). Jerusalem
was so strongly fortified, not only by massive walls and bulwarks, but by the
strength and heroism of its inhabitants, that it was deemed impregnable to all
warlike forces of that day. Moreover, it was regarded as the dwelling-place of
the Great King, who had hitherto baffled all attempts to capture it. The recent
defeat of Sennacherib, one of the greatest warriors of the age, was fresh in the
memory of the people. The belief gained general currency that the city could
not be taken. It was invested for a year and a half by the Chaldean forces,
apes with the most powerful engines of assault, before it was actually

14


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


OHAP. FF.





captured. Its fall was the amazement of the world. What was believed


impossible had come to pass.


Others saw, what the Jews were slow to acknow-


ledge, that their God had deserted them and given them up to the destroyer.


Lessons.—1. The holiest place may be polluted by sin.


2. Persistent stn


provokes Divine vengeance. 3, Divine wrath ts not poured out till every oppor-


tunity 18 given for repentance.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. ll. The Divineanger. 1. Will
accomplish all it threatens. 2. Is ter-
rible in its active manifestation, 3.
May well be dreaded by the impenitent.

Ver. 12. A world’s wonder. 1.
That a divinely guarded city should
fall. 2. That it should fall by the
hands of the godless, 3. That some
great sin must have been committed to
make such a catastrophe possible.


IntusTRaTIoNs.—Terrible destruc-
tion. One of the officers at Fredericks-
burg says :—“ Howard, who was with
me, says I exclaimed, ‘Oh, great God,
see how our men, our poor fellows, are
falling!’ I remember that the whole
plain was covered with men prostrate
and falling. I had never before seen
fighting like that—nothing approaching
it in terrible uproar and destruction.
As they charged, the artillery fire would
break up their formation, and they
would get mixed; then they would
close up, go forward, receive the wither-
ing infantry fire, and those who were
able would run to their houses and do
all they could; then the next brigade
coming up in succession would do their
duty, and melt. It was like the snow
coming down and melting on warm
ground.”

Concentration of power destroys.


In the eighteenth century an immense
burning-glass was constructed in France,
in which all the heat falling on a great
lens was then concentrated on a smaller
one, till at the focus such was the heat
that iron, gold, and other metals ran
like melted butter. Another one, made
in England by Parker, fused the most
refractory substances, and diamonds
were by it reduced to vapour.

The Divine sovereignty. ‘‘God ie
free because no causes external to Him-
self have power over Him; and as
good men are most free when most a
law to themselves, so it is no infringe-
ment on God’s freedom to say that He
must have acted as He acted ; but rather
He is absolutely free because absolutely
a law Himself to Himself.” — Froude.

The curse of sin. It is the Trojan
horse; it hath sword and famine and
pestilence in the belly of it. Sin is a
coal that not only blacks, but burns.
Sin creates all our troubles; it puts
gravel in our bread, wormwood in our
cup. Sin rots the name, consumes the
estates, buries relations. Sin shoots
the flying roll of God’s curses into a
family and kingdom (Zech. v. 4). It
is reported of Phocas, having built a
wall of mighty strength about his city,
there was a voice heard, “ Sin is in the
city, and that will throw down the wall.”


HOMILETICS.


UNFAITHFUL RELIGIOUS LEADERS,
(Verses 13-16.)


I. Ignore the sacred duties of their high office. “The sins of her prophets
and the iniquities of her priests” (ver. 13). The leaders, whose first duty it was
to explain and enforce the Word of God, were the prime movers in the attempt to
silence that Word. ‘Their utter derefiction of duty, and the bitter rancour with
which they were actuated, were evident in their repeated efforts to put : ane to


OHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





death, the only man who had the courage to lift up his voice for Jehovah amid
the general defection. Had they rallied round the faithful prophet and round their
king, who was more weak than vicious, they might have saved the city and the
nation from ruin. When the servants of the Lord and the religious guides of the
people are falre to their sacred vows, the nation is grievously misled, and disaster
will follow.

II. Become intoxicated with slaughter. ‘That have shed the blood of the
just in the midst of her; they have wandered (reeled) as blind men in the streets ;
they have polluted themselves with blood” (ver. 13, 14). They have lost the art
of persuasion, even to do wrong, and, like all baffled tyrants, adopt the bloody
policy of the sword. The people are coerced into rebellion against God and their
best interests by brute force. Having once tasted blood, they revel in it, and reel
through the city blinded by their insatiable lust of slaughter. They who ought
to be holy, as God’s ministers consecrated to His service, are defiled with blood,
and that the blood not of enemies, but of their own countrymen. There is no
fury so maddening and ungovernable as the thirst for blood.

III. Are shunned and abhorred by God and man (vers. 15, 16). They are
denounced by the people they had oppressed, and hounded out of the city only to
find themselves abhorred by the heathen to whom they fled for shelter. They
were hated at home and abroad. ‘The anger of the Lord divided them,” scat
tered them, and wherever they wandered, the people despised and shunned them.
They were outcasts of God and men. They had sown to the wind, and they
reaped the whirlwind. Such is the fate of the faithless and cruel. There is no
punishment too severe for unfaithful ministers of God’s Word.

Lussons.—l. False teachers are the curse of any community. 2. They are
utterly reckless both as to what they say and do. 3. They involve the people in
much suffering.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers, 13-16. False ministers of
God. 1. Are the authors of the vilest
sins (ver. 13). 2. Are capable of the


an unknown Spirit, and preach a state
of holiness and fellowship with Christ,
and a glory and a blessedness which are


most revolting cruelty in accomplishing
their wicked ends (vers. 13, 14), 3.
Are the execration of the people they
oppress (ver. 15), 4. Are divinely pun-
ished (ver. 16). :

Vers. 15, 16. The tactics of the
wicked. 1. Recoil upon themselves.
2. Render them the abhorrence of all
classes. 3. Are defeated and punished
by the vengeance of Heaven.


ILLUSTRATIONS, — Unqualified
ministers. It is the great wide-spread
evil of the Church that it has unrenewed
and inexperienced pastors; that so
many become preachers before they be-
come Christians, and are consecrated as
priests at the altar of God before they
are made holy to Christ by the offering
of the heart to Him; and thus they
worship an unknown God and proclaim
an unknown Christ, and pray through

116


wholly unknown to them, and perhaps
will remain unknown through all eter-
nity. He must indeed be a heartless
preacher who has not himself in his
own heart the Christ and the grace that
he declares. Alas! that all scholars in
our universities might well ponder this,
— Baxter.

Unbelief and ministerial inefii-
ciency. There are dangerous signs at
the present day of a relaxation of moral
tone in the literature of free-thinking.
There is a tendency to palliate the
offences of vicious characters and to
treat every sin as atoned for by intel-
lectual brilliancy. But it would be in
the highest degree unjust to throw the
whole blame of his error upon every
individual who may happen to be the
victim of unbelief. We are all bound
up together in this matter; and the
sins, the unfaithfulness, the lack of


AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


OHAP, IV.





moral energy among Christians them-
selves contribute, to a great extent, to
weaken the testimony to our faith.
The ministers of God’s Word must bear
their share in this responsibility. So
far as they fail to exhibit the moral
truth and spiritual force of that Word,
so far as they harden it, or obscure it,
or misrepresent it, they contribute to
weaken its appeal to the hearte and con-
sciences of their fellows, and the result
is seen in many an indirect and distant
injury to faith. It is the mission of
the Church and its ministers to carry
on the work of the Apostles by bearing
witness to certain truths and revela-
tions; and if that witness be in any
instance unworthily delivered, the force
with which the truth appeals to the
soul of man is proportionately weakened.
Wace: Bampton Lectures.

Priestcraft. The whole system is
one of Church instead of Christ ; priest
instead of Gospel ; concealment of truth
instead of manifestation of truth ; igno-
rant superstition instead of enlightened
faith ; bondage where we are promised
liberty—all tending to load us with
whatever is odious in the worst meaning
of priestcraft, instead of the free, affec-


tionate, enlarging, elevating, and cheer-
ful liberty of the children of God.
Bishop M‘Ilwaine.

Penalty of murder. Thales Milesius,
one of the wise men of Greece, being
asked what was the most difficult thingin
life, answered, “ Fora tyrant tolive to old
age.” The application may be extended
to the cruel, bloodthirsty, and murderers,

The triumph of the wicked. The
triumph of the wicked is always short.
When they feel themselves secure from
evil and begin to boast of their triumph,
then judgment overwhelms them. So
it was with Belshazzar, Herod, and the
fool of the Gospel. How soon Abel’s
blood called for vengeance of Cain!
We cannot sin so quickly but God seeth
us as quickly. How many have been
stricken while the oath had been in
their mouths, as Jeroboam was stricken
while he spoke, that they might see they
were stricken. Though a man sin often,
and steal his sins as it were without
punishment, yet at last he is taken nap-
ping, even while the wickedness is in his
hand, and his day is set when he shall
pay for all, whether it be twelve months
or twelve years, When it cometh, it
will be soon.”


HOMILETICS.


Toe Last Hours or A Doomgep PEOPLE.
(Verses 17-20.)


I. Every hope of rescue is disappointed. ‘Our eyes failed for our vain
help: we have watched for a nation that could not save us” (ver. 17). Israel
had been prone to rely on the help of Egypt, and was often bitterly deceived. In
this instance the deluded inhabitants looked eagerly, till their eyes were weary, for
the coming of a relief force from Egypt, but in vain. That treacherous kingdom,
which had failed them so often before, again failed them in their extremity.
Whatever aid they might expect from the neighbouring kingdoms with which
Judah had been in friendly alliance, it did not come. When the soul is alienated
from God, every reliable source of help is cut off. When God will not help us,
man cannot.

II. Every avenue of escape is closely guarded. “They hunt our steps, that
we cannot go in our streets, Our persecutors are swifter than the eagles ; they
pursued us, they laid wait for us” (vers. 18,19). The enemy was drawing his
lines more firmly round the city; the investment was complete, and slowly but
surely he was gaining the mastery over the city. Impatient with the little pro-
gress made and enraged with the stubborn resistance of the besieged, the Chaldeans
missed no opportunity to do damage. Every stray wanderer in the erry was a


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





mark for their arrows, and those who attempted to escape from the festering city
were at once seized. :

IIL There is a deepening conviction that the end is near. “ Our end ia
near ; our days are fulfilled, for our end is come” (ver. 18), The sight of the
towers erected by the besiegers advancing in height filled the citizens with terror,
Weakened with famine and disease, distracted with divisions among themselves,
and alarmed with the steady encroachments of the enemy, they felt that further
resistance was useless ; they waited in sullen helplessness for the end. The end
soon came, :

IV. The last vestige of hope is destroyed in the capture of their king.
“The anointed of the Lord was taken in their pits” (ver. 20). Feeble as Zedekiah
was, he was still their king, “‘the anointed of the Lord.” ‘‘And now that the
state was falling, he was the very breath of life to the fugitives, who would have
no rallying-point without him; whereas if he escaped, they might with him
have found a refuge among some of the neighbouring nations, and as long as they
had a king of David’s line all hope of prolonging their national existence would
not seem lost.” But the seizure of Zedekiah in his desperate attempt to escape,
and the cruelty of his infuriated captors in putting out both his eyes, quenched
the last lingering hope of the doomed people. Their king was a sightless, helpless
prisoner, and all was over. The national life was extinguished. We cannot but
admire the dogged bravery of the people in their resolute defence of king and
country ; but it was the bravery of desperation and despair. The fiat of destruc-
tion had gone forth, and it was now fulfilled in every detail.

Lussons.—1l. The nation that rebels against God is defenceless. 2. The
threatenings of God against disobedience are not meaningless. 3. Between the
threatening of doom and its accomplishment there is ample opportunity for repent-
ance and reform.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 17. The weary watcher. 1.
Eagerly longs for much-needed help,
2. Impairs his eyesight with the in-


for many years a desire to see that city.
‘In the city of Genoa he was seized with
paralysis, was unable to proceed farther,


tensity of his vigil. 3. Is bitterly dis-
appointed when he looks for help in
vain.

Vers. 18, 19. The helplessly baffled.
I. Are everywhere menaced with danger.
“They hunt our steps, that we cannot
go in our streets” (ver. 18). II. Re-
treat is cut off in every direction. “ Our
persecutors are swifter than the eagles ’’
(ver. 19). III. Sullenly submit to the
inevitable. ‘Our days are fulfilled, for
our end is come” (ver. 18).

Ver. 20. Royalty. 1. Is the symbol
of government and protection. 2. Is
the representative of national life and
character. 3. Its degradation involves
national disaster.


ILLUSTRATIONS. — Disappointment.
When Daniel O’Connell, on account of
his ill-health, was ordered to leave Eng-
land, a Ha for Rome, having had


and died there, never having looked
upon the longed-for sight.

A clever escape. When Mazzini
fled from France, he had to risk. being
seized by the French police at Mar-
seilles. He refused to be hidden as a
stowaway, and when they came to look
for him, they passed without notice a
man in his shirt-sleeves coolly washing
bottles in the cook’s kitchen.

Asadend. Cardinal Pole, suspected
even by Queen Mary, whom he had
liked to serve, was on his death-bed
when she died. Among the last sounds
that fell on his ears must have been the
bells of Westminster ringing the knell
of the cause to which he had sacrificed
his life ; and before the evening he too
had passed away, a blighted, broken-
hearted man, detested by those whom
he had laboured most anxiously to
serve,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


OHAP., 19.


(=e ate Se ee leita ae eet!


Attachment stronger than death.
On the 18th of December 1851, Turner
the painter died in the front room of
119 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, fronting
the Thames. To an upper window, no
longer able to paint, too feeble to walk,
he had been wheeled every morning
during those last days, that he might
lose no light of the December sun on
his beloved Thames,


The last parting.


‘* How shall we know it is the last good-bye ?
The skies will not be darkened in that hour,
No sudden blight will fall on leaf and
flower,

No single bird will hush its careless cry,

And you will hold my hands, and smile or
si

Just as before. Perchance the sudden tears

In your dear eyes will answer to my fears ;

But there will come no voice of prophecy ;

No voice to whisper, ‘ Now, and not again,

Space for last words, last kisses, and last
prayer,

For all the wild unmitigated pain

Of those who, parting, clasp hands with
despair.’

‘Who knows ?’ we say ; but doubt and fear
remain.

Would any choose to part thus unaware ?”


A good king a blessing. Speaking
of the reign of Leopold L of Tuscany,


as compared with the despotism of the
Medicis, Mr. Howells says:—“I con
fess that it has a great charm for my
fancy. It is like a long stretch of sun-
light in that lurid, war-clouded landscape
of history, full of repose and genial,
beneficent growth. For twenty-six
years, apparently, the good prince got
up at six o’clock in the morning and
dried the tears of his people. In his
time, ten years passed in which no drop
of blood was shed on the scaffold. The
hospitals that he founded, the order and
propriety in which he kept them, justly
entitled him to the name of Father of
the Poor. He was happy because he
saw his people were happy. He be-
lieved in God.”


Uncertainty of royal favours.


“Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate ye ;

I feel my heart new opened, Ob, how
wretched

Is that poor man that hangs on prince’s
favours |

There is betwixt that smile we should
aspire to,

That sweet aspéct of princes, and their ruin,

More pangs and fears than wars or women


ave ;
And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer,
Never to hope again.” —Shakespeare,


HOMILETICS.


THE FATE OF THE MALEVOLENT.
(Verses 21, 22.)


I. Their malicious joy over the unfortunate is brief. ‘‘ Rejoice and be glad,
O daughter of Edom” (ver. 21). Edom, though related to Judah, was her most
relentless enemy, It was the enmity of inveterate envy. Judah had outdistanced
Edom, and rose to superior greatness and power. This was the offence Edom could
never forgive. She watched the downfall of Judah with a savage delight, and when
the catastrophe came, which she did her best to accelerate, she gloated over it with
a fiendish joy (Ps. cxxxvii. 7; Jer. xlix. 7-22). The prophet now ironically calls
upon Edom to take her fill of her unnatural merriment, for it would soon be silenced
and changed into a song with a different tune. Having made common cause with
the enemies of God’s people and become their aiders and abettors in oppression, Edom
must share in the calamities that overwhelmed them. Edom is the type of the ene-
mies of the Church in all ages, who, instigated with “envy, hatred, malice, and all
uncharitableness,’’ exult in the misfortunes of God’s people. Whata revelation is
this of the possible wickedness of the human heart! Well might Vianny write,
“The heart of the wicked swarms with sins like an anthill with ants. It is likea
piece of bad meat—full of worms.” But the triumph of the morally bad is short.

Il. They will be certainly punished for their wickedness. 1. Jé will be
a punishment involving suffering and disgrace. ‘The cup also shall pass through
unto tkee: thou shalt be drunken, and shalt make thyself naked a ie 21).


OBAP. IV. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIOLS.





* Thou, too, shalt be drunk with the shame of ruin: thou, too, shalt expose thysel/
to contempt.”—Geikie. The wine-cup of the Divine wrath will by-and-bye bs
placed in the hands of His enemies, and they must drink it—drink it till they are
infatuated with the intoxicating draught, and commit follies and sins that sink
them into utter contempt. Now they know something of the bitterness of the
suffering over which they had gloated when others were the victims, 2. Jt will
be a righteous punishment. ‘He will visit thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom ;
He will discover thy sins” (ver. 22). To uncover and expose sins is equivalent
to punishing them. Edom was punished not arbitrarily and from caprice, but
because of her iniquity. The Divine chastisements are in harmony with the law
of universal righteousness. God knows exactly the time and the measure of pun-
ishment. The cup of His wrath is not passed on to either individual or nation
until it is full. The wicked cannot escape.

III. Their punishment will be intensified by the deliverance of the people
whose miseries they ridiculed. ‘‘The punishment of thine iniquity is accom-
plished, O daughter of Zion: He will no more carry thee away into captivity”
(ver. 22). Judah shall not be exiled again for the iniquity, the guilt of which is
now expiated. It would be unjust to punish twice for the same offence. She
has borne the punishment: it is finished ; and she is now free—free to enter upon
a course of obedience which will secure promised blessing. The tables are now
turned. Judah is free: Edom is the sufferer; and it adds sharpness to the thorns
that now distress her to know that her hated rival is delivered and is again in the
ascendant. Envy gives the soul no rest, and deteriorates its capacity for nobler
feelings.

*§ The cankering rust corrodes the brightest steel 3
The moth frets out your garment, and the worm
Eats its slow way into the solid oak :
But Envy, of all evil things the worst,
The same to-day, to-morrow, and for ever,
Saps and consumes the heart in which it works.”—Cumberland.


We should be careful not to exult over the miseries of others, as we know not
how soon we may be in the same plight, and the memory of our inhuman conduct
will increase our own suffering,

Lessons.—l. Only the wilfully malicious can rejoice over the distresses of
others. 2. Inveterate wickedness is sure to receive its just recompense. 3. Punish-
ment ts concerned only with the guilt already incurred.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 21, 22. Two kinds of joy.


the contents of its mingled cup. Thou
I. The joy of the envious, “ Rejoice


shalt be drunken, and shalt make thy-


and be glad, O daughter of Edom”
(ver. 21). 1. Is full of malice. 2, Is
cruel. &. Is unreal—the dry chuckle
of the scornful. II. The joy of the
free. “The punishment of thine ini-
quity is accomplished, O daughter of
Zion” (ver. 22). 1. Indicates relief
from suffering. 2. Despair has given
place to hope, 3. Has the ring of
grateful reality.

Punishment. I. Discovers and ex-
poses sin. ‘He will visit thine ini-
quity, O daughter of Edom; He will
discover thy sins” (ver. 22). IL
Stuptfies and degrades the victim with

120


self naked” (ver. 21). III. Js sure to
overtake the transgressor. “The cup
also shall pass through unto thee” (ver.
21). IV. Does not cease till tts mis-
sion is fuljilled. ‘The punishment of
thine iniquity is accomplished, O
daughter of Zion” (ver. 22),

Ver. 22. A message from God to
thee. I. Our jirst message 1s one of
comfort. 1. Ajoyous fact. ‘The pun-
ishment of thine iniquity is accom-
plished.” Christ hath for His people
borne all the punishment which they
deserved. 2. To whom this message‘is
sent. To the sinner conscious of his


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


ORAP. IV.


RT


sin. 3. A precious promise. “TI will
no more carry thee away into captivity.”
Thou art in captivity now, sorrowing
on account of sin; but it is the last
thou shalt ever have. In the world to
come there is no captivity for thee.
II. A burden of woe. “He will visit
thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom.”
1. The daughter of Edom dwelt care-
lessly in the land of Uz, as if secure from
danger. 2. Made merriment over the
sorrows of others. 3. Cherished a
vain hope, a self-sufficient confidence,
4, Was very proud. III. Why are
there these different messages? 1. The
reason of the message of mercy is sove-
reign, 2. Of the message of woe,
Divine justice. IV. What claim have
these messages on our faith? To be
devoutly believed, because both mes-
ages are plainly revealed in the Word
of God.—C. H. Spurgeon,


ILLUSTRATIONS. —Malice.


“For malice will with joy the lie receive,
Report, and what it wishes true, believe.”
— Yalden.


Reproof of malice. St. Augustine is
said to have had these two iines in-
scribed on his table to remind his
guests of his wishes—

“ Whoever loves an absent friend to jeer,
May hence depart, no room is for him here.”

A malevolent tongue. The tongue
of the slanderer is a devouring fire,
which tarnishes everything it touches;
which exercises its fury on the good grain
equally as on the chaff, on the profane
as well as on the sacred; which, wher-
ever it passes, leaves only desolation
and ruin; digs even into the bowels
of the earth and fixes itself on things
the most hidden ; turns into vile ashes
what only a moment before had ap-
peared to us so precious and brilliant ;
acts with more violence and danger than
ever in the time when it was apparently
smothered up and almost extinct;
which blackens what it cannot con-
sume, and sometimes sparkles and de-
lights before it destroys.— Massillon.

Wickedness. There have been men
splendidly wicked whose endowments
threw a brightness on their crimes, and


whom scarce any villainy made per-
fectly detestable, because they never
could be wholly divested of their ex-
cellences; but such have been in all
ages the corrupters of the world, and
their resemblance ought no more to be
preserved than the art of murdering
without pain.

— I] have seen men who, I thought,
ought to have a whole conversion for
each one of their faculties. Their natures
were so unmitigatedly wicked that it
cost more for them to be decent than
for other men to be saints.—Beecher.

Sin will find you out. Men’s sins
often find them out, though no visible
sign or token may betray this fact to
the world. All may outwardly stand
fair; there may be no breach in the
worldly prosperity; nay, this may be
ampler, more strongly established than
ever; while yet there may be that
within which forbids to rejoice, which
takes all the joy and gladness out of
life—the memory of that sin which was
nothing when committed, but which
now darkens all—the deadly arrow
poisoning the springs of life, which will
not drop from the side, which no force,
no art of man’s device can withdraw.
To such Dr. Trench’s advice is, to turn
the tables on our sins, to find them out,
and to take them all to God to be con-
demned, pardoned, and subdued ; “‘ con-
demned by Thy righteous judgments, O
Father ; pardoned by the precious blood
of Thy dear Son, and subdued by the
mighty operation of the Holy Ghost.”
This is the good, old-fashioned preach-
ing of Apostles and preachers of the
very oldest times.

The downward career of evil. In
the Rabbinical books of the Jews they
have a curious tradition about the
growth of leprosy, that it began with
the walls of a man’s house ; then, if he
did not repent, entered his garments,
till at last the disease covered his whole
body. And thus it is with the growth
of sin. It begins with neglect of duty ;
it may be of prayer, or the warn-
ing voice of conscience is unheeded.
Habits of sin are formed, till at last the
soul that lets God alone ig iet alone by
God.— Pilkington.

121


OHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





CHAPTER V.
RECAPITULATION OF ZION’S CALAMITIES AND PRAYER.


Tm verses of this chapter are not arranged according to the order of the alphabet, yet their
number corresponds to its number, More distinctly than the preceding chapters this one shows
the “parallelism” of Hebrew poetry, in which one clause of a verse is closely related by senti-
ment and construction to the other. The contents suggest that the circumstances of the writer
impelled him to take a retrospect of what had befallen his fellow-countrymen, and to found, on
the variety and intensity of their sorrows, a hope that their iniquities would be pardoned, and
that they would receive from the Lord’s hand tokens of His restored favour, according to the
days wherein He had afflicted them.

Ver. 1. Remember, O Jehovah, what has happened to us—an application not to one whe
had forgotten, but to One who could consider their ajiliction and pain with a view to forgive alt
their sins and redeem Israel out of all his troubles; a prayer which is not so much an utterance
concurrent with the nature of God, as concurrent with the partial knowledge and felt needs of
the worshipper; behold, and see our reproach, the reproach of Thy servants . . . wherewith
Thine enemies have reproached, O Jehovah, the footsteps of Thine anointed.

Ver. 2 begins to describe the substance of the reproaches. Our inheritance, the land which
was promised to Abraham, and of which his descendants had held possession for generations,
is turned over unto strangers. Indeed, all their property had passed into other hands;
our houses unto aliens. Even if any small houses were left standing, after the Chaldeans had
destroyed every important building in Jerusalem, besides breaking down the city walls, they
were at the disposal of those foreigners.

Ver. 3. No recondite application of the terms of this verse—as that, ‘ We are abandoned by
Thee, our Father”—need be considered. The note of a Targum sufficiently defines them,
‘We are like the most desolate of beings.” We have become orphans, without a father. A
devastating war, a merciless capture of Jerusalem, a banishment to a far country of thousands
of the population, must have caused reports of many among the ‘‘bread-winners” being dead
or missing ; hence it could be said virtually, if not really, Our mothers [are] like widows, the
words being true of other families as well as of those whose head had perished.

Ver, 4. Not only are they orphaned and desolate, but they are cruelly mulcted. Our water
for money we have drunken. The bitterness of the act was that water, perhaps from their
own wells and cisterns, had to be paid for, and similarly to that, Our wood has come for a
price. Held in such durance that they could not get the requisites for personal and domestic
comfort, to which they had free access formerly, unless by bribing their custodians.

Ver. 5. It is best to suppose that the phrase, On our necks we are pursued, means, our
pursuers keep so close as to be, as it were, holding our necks; yet, tired out by such persecu-
tion, no rest is for us.

Ver. 6, Judzea was on the verge of famine through the foragings of the invaders, and, under
the ominous shadow of starvation, To Egypt we have given the hand, ¢.e¢., imploring supplies
of food, as is signified by the parallel clause, to Assyria to be satisfied with bread. The
people appealed to a supposed friendly and to an openly hostile government ; for the Babylonian
empire, even in the height of its power, was occasionally spoken of as Assyria (Jer. ii, 18), into
whose dominion it had entered,

Ver. «. Our fathers have sinned; they are not in the land of the living. The hour of
punishment had not come in their time. The measure of iniquity was not yet full; but the
consequences of their doings, which were not good, had not been buried with them, The dis-
yuption of civil and religious order, by which we have so fearfully suffered, results from the
guilt which was incurred by preceding generations. We have borne their iniquities. This
truth is stated again and again in the Old Testament Scriptures (Exod. xx. 5; Num. xiv. 18; 2
Kings xxiii, 25, 26); it is, however, only half a truth, and becomes an error if understood to say
that the descendants were not also guilty. This other half was beginning to dawn upon Israel.
It ts noted in ver. 16, and was boldly announced by the prophets of this period, Jeremiah (chap.
xxxi, 29, 30) and Ezekiel (chap. xviii). Yet God strikes the sins of forefathers with penal
judgments on their children only when the children persist in sin, as their predecessors did.
But such vicarious suffering placed them in a position like sin-bearers, and becomes ground of
appeal for the exercise of Divine compassion.

Ver. 8, Servants have ruled over us. Who they were may be uncertain, It is a far-
fetched supposition that they were the conquering chiefs, because “the Babylonians in general
might be called slaves in comparison with the kingdom of priests and sons of Jehovah.” The
suggestion rather is that the galling yoke was made doubly galling by the insolence and brutality
of menials, ‘‘ dressed in the brief authority of office,” slaves in Oriental countries often rising to
places of power. A parallel is mentioned by Nehemiah, who says (chap. v. 5), Even their (i.6.,
the governor's) servants bare rule over them ; there was no deliverer from their hands.

Ver. 9. With our lives we get our bread—they jeopardised their lives when going to gather
a scanty harvest, or to take from provisions which had been stowed away—because of the


122


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENYATIONS. OHAP. ¥.


ES


sword of the desert, wielded by the predatory Bedawin, who would plunder and even kill
those who were in possession of food. So Gideon had to get his wheat in secret, lest the
Midianites should seize it (Judges vi. 11); and the ten men who bought their lives from the
robbers and murderers of Gedaliah (Jer. xli, 8) drew from concealed, stores of victuals,

Ver. 10. The bread, which was obtained at the risk of their lives, was not enough in quantity
to nourish them. Our skin is hot like an oven; the feverishness is because of the burning
heat of hunger. “Hunger dries up the pores of the skin, so that it becomes like as if it had
been exposed to the burning heat of the simoom,”

We must not fancy that the several distressing things alluded to befell every one of all
classes. We should rather believe that some troubles were felt by one portion, while another
portion had to bear different troubles. So the author proceeds to record what sufferings were
endured by particular divisions of the population.

Ver. 12. The most gentle were outraged, and princes were hanged up by their hand—not
the hand of the foe is referred to, though by him the cruel deed was perpetrated ; still less ia
the reference to compulsory suicide, as Calvin surmises; but the hand of the princes was the
leverage by which their bodies were lifted up. Whether they were first killed and then sus-
pended, or were tortured by such suspension when every nerve and muscle was vibrating with
life’s waves, is a question to which no sure reply can be given; but probably the latter is hinted
at. The bodies of Saul and his sons were fastened to the wall of Beth-shan (1 Sam. xxxi.
10-12); and more recent commentators refer to “ Records of the Past,” i. 38, in which an in-
scription of Sennacherib is quoted as saying of the people of Ekron, “The chief priests and
noblemen I put to death ; on stakes all round the city I hung their bodies ;” and the practice
seeins to have been not uncommon among Assyrians and Babylonians. Still, impalement after
death does not correspond distinctly to the atrocity mentioned here. The faces—persons—of
elders were not honoured. Not only men high in rank, but also those who held responsible
positions among the people—aged persons are spoken of after this—were treated with indignity
in the insolence of conquesé.

Ver. 18. The choice portion of the nation were forced to be nothing but mere burden-
bearers. Young men bare the mill. They had to carry about, and no doubt to turn, the
hand-mills to grind corn for their military masters, thus doing the work of women or of slaves ;
while the fuel, for cooking and other purposes, was laid on shoulders ill able to bear a load,
Boys stumbled [under] a burden of wood.

Ver. 14. Entire collapse of interest in the common ways of life was shown by the abandon-
ment of public meetings and social pastimes. The elders ceased from [frequenting] the gate.
They had gone thither as to the usual gathering-place ; they adjudicated, advised, had general
intercourse, and received the marks of respect suggested by the law—Thouw shalt rise up before
the hoary head and honour the face of the old man (Lev. xix. 32); but that resort was no longer
theirs, Moreover, the buoyancy of youthful spirits was crushed down. Young men ceased
from their music, accompanied by instruments,

Ver. 15. The iron had entered the soul. Ceased is the joy of our heart, and past pleasures
had become a pain; turned into mourning our dance.

Ver. 16. Fallen is the crown from our head. That which was their honour has gone—the
crown with which the Lord Jehovah had decked His chosen nation. J put... a beautiful
crown upon thine head .. . and thy renown went forth among the nations for thy beauty ; for it
was perfect through my majesty, which I had put wpon thee (Ezek, xvi. 12 and 14). Now it is
in the dust, set at nought by all those who had admired it. So, as if in irrepressible acknow-
ledgment that they themselves were responsible for the dismal change, the exclamation bursts
forth, Woe unto us! for we have sinned—sinned not against a ritual or a code of law, but
against a living Person—Maker, Monarch, Father. This second clause is in correlation with
ver. 7, and expresses the share whick their own iniquities had in the guilt which had drawn
down such condign suffering as they were subjected to. Like their fathers, they had disowned
trvth and righteousness, and addicted themselves to false and unholy practices. This view of
themselves, and confession of its evil nature, opens the eyes of the heart to look for the throne
of e.

en 17. How depressing is the conviction of personal sin. For this our heart has become
faint. Matiy sorrows had surged over them and exhausted the faculty of external and mental
vision. For these things our eyes are darkened. ns ; j

Ver. 18, The depression of heart meets its most striking symbol in that which, once the
glory of the land, is now its reproach. As to Mount Zion—regarded as embracing both the
dwelling-place of Jehovah and the precincts of the sacred city, which is desolate ; jackals
roam init. These animals live in waste places, and avoid man’s presence, so their wandering
upon Zion proves that it has become @ ruinous area, without inhabitant. The place of the
tabernacle of thy glory, the hill and the watch-tower, are turned into dens for wild beasts,

Ver. 19. Nevertheless, whatever be the low estate of His sanctuary and people, the living
God is and reigns. Thou, O Jehovah, abidest for ever. Not only is His continual existence
denoted, but also that Jehovah sitteth as king for ever (Ps. xxix. 10), the same verb being used
in this clause as in the Psalm quoted, and the next clause carries on the thought, Thy throne
from generation to generation. Enemies may destroy the temple made with hands; they


123


OHAP.Y, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





are powerless to injure the kingdom of Him who inhabits eternity. Generations come and gs
with their rises and falls, but Thou art the same, and Thy years shall not fail. :

Ver. 20, The perpetuity of God’s rule, amid all earthly changes, frames an appealing prayer.
Reigning eupreme over the army of heaven, it is impossible that He can renounce authority
over the things of earth and man; then, Why dost Thou forget us for ever, forsakest us for
so long? Is it not time for Thee to pluck Thy right hand out of Thy bosom and bring relief in
the lifetime even of this generation? How bluntly petitioners address God when troubles press
upon them! How ready to suppose His thoughts and ways must be like their own! How
prone to fancy that, because their observation does not perceive His working, God can hardly
care so much for His kingdom’s honour as they do!

Ver. 21. Turn us, O Jehovah, unto Thee, and we shall be turned ; » prayer which proves
that a new heart has been given to those in whose name the writer speaks. Affliction has been
a means of showing the blunders and sins of the past, and that the only remedy for them is in
Jehovah Himself, They see that the reconciling power does not originate with themselves, but
with Him; that He must draw them by a continual influence if they are to walk in the light of
His countenance. We do not consider this request as merely for the restoration of their native
land; we need to put a deeper meaning into it, which will, at least, indicate that they wanted
to become true worshippers of the Lord God of their deliverances, The succeeding clause,
however, seems to imply that they did not expect to attain to their desires unless they were
repossessed with their former national organisation. Renew our days as of old; re-establish
the gracious relations in which thou stoodest to us; let us again have country, city, and temple,
priest, prophet, and king. Cause every man to sit under his vine and under his fig-tree, and none
make them afraid.

Ver. 22. The two initial Hebrew particles of this verse signify that it is not a fact which is
stated, but the elements of a hope, and may be introduced with, This will come to pass, unlesa
Thou hast utterly rejected us; art wroth against us exceedingly. The under-thought is,
But this cannot be the case. Thou wouldst not so disgrace the throne of Thy glory. Thou
wouldst not so falsify the promises made to our fathers. Thou wouldst not always give occasion
for the mocking heathen to say, Where is now your God?

“This conclusion entirely agrees with the character of the Lamentations, in which com-
plaint and supplication continue to the end, not without an element of hope, which, as Gerlach
says, ‘merely glimmers from afar, like the morning star through the clouds, which does not
indeed itself dispel the shadows of the night, though it announces that the rising of the sun is
near, and that it shall obtain the victory’” (Kei),


HOMILETICS.
A Pitreous APPEAL TO JEHOVAH.


(Verse 1.)


Once more, and for the last time, the prophet returns to his sorrowful theme.
There is a fascination in it he cannot resist. Grief, unduly indulged, is apt to
make us selfish, and so to accustom us to a grievance that we never wish to be
without one: we coax and caress our troubles rather than seek to be rid of them.
But the sorrow of the prophet arose from no mere personal distress. He was the
mouthpiece to express the lamentations of the best spirits of his day over a national
and world-wide disaster. His poetic and prophetic insight fitted him the more
clearly to grasp and weigh the magnitude of the calamity. The profound and
passionate grief with which he recited the leading incidents in the national catas-
trophe tended to stamp them with indelible distinctness upon his memory. He
could never forget them, and it would seem as if he could not cease talking about
them. As if with a clinging fondness for the theme and loathe to dismiss it, he
passes in slow and final review the chief features of the siege and capture of Jeru-
salem. ‘Thus wailed the genius of Hebrew poetry over the desolation of Judah
and Jerusalem! Other cities and countries have had their minstrels to lament
their public sorrows, but the national elegies of the Jew alone have spread among
all races of the earth, and remain fresh after twenty-five centuries, Nor are they
even yet without deep and practical interest, recording as they do the catastrophe
that awaits any community, however highly favoured, which forgets that public
and private righteousness alone secures permanent prosperity” (Geiiie). ‘This
fifth mh last elegy begins and ends in prayer It is a hopeful sign when trouble

124


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS, CHAP. ¥.





brings us to our knees. We are then in the way of receiving comfort and deliver-
ing help. This verse is a piteows appeal to Jehovah.

I. Rising from the hearts of a suffering people. ‘‘ Remember, O Lord, what
is come upon us.” ‘The trouble is not simply threatened and approaching : it is
apon us; we are now in the midst of it, and cannot be in a worse plight than we
are in already. Our nation ruined, our city gone, our Temple gone, and the spiked
heel of the oppressor even now presses us in the dust. If Thou canst do anything
for us, O Lord, do it now. The cry of real suffering has an irresistible pathos
about it: there is the sound of tears in it. Such a cry never fails to reach the
ears of Jehovah, and His pitying heart yearns to help the suppliant.

Ii. Is expressed by a people who regard their sufferings as a reproach
“Behold our reproach.” We are sunk from dignity and greatness to abject humi-
liation and shame, from affluence to poverty. We are the people of Jehovah,
chosen by Him and publicly acknowledged by Him before the world. He has
wrought miracles of power on our behalf, and we thought we were lifted above the
possibility of change and decay to which other nations were liable. But now we
are abandoned by our Divine Protector, and have become objects of scorn by our
oppressors. Our calamities reflect upon the name and honour of Him who has
done so much for us: our reproach is His reproach. So they thought; and so
think the privileged in all ages when trouble overtakes them. They are apt to
blame any one but themselves, and are slow to see that their distresses are the
fruits of their own sins.

III. Is uttered with the confidence that His help will be graciously afforded.
‘Remember, consider, behold.” Remember what is past, the sufferings we have
had ; and behold and consider the present, the sufferings under which we at this
moment writhe. Is this nothing to Thee, O God of our fathers? Is it a matter
of indifference to Thee that Thine own children are in such abject woe{ It cannot
be. Our fathers sinned and so have we; but we repent. We are still the heirs
of the promises. Lord have mercy, and fulfil Thy word unto Thy servants. It is
a great help to prayer to believe that God not only sees and commiserates our
miseries, but that He is able and willing to help us.

Lessons.—l. God is not indifferent to the sufferings of His people. 2. The
suffering heart finds relief in prayer. 3. Prayer is the first stage in the process of
religious reform.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


All things that live from God their sus-
tenance wait,
And sun and moon are beggars at His gate.”
—Trensh.


The hopefulness of prayer. 1. When
it is the cry of distress. 2. When it
encourages a humble and reverential
familiarity with God. 3. When it is
an earnest appeal from the weak to the
strong. 4. When it is based on the
assurance that God knows all about our
ease and is willing to succour.


Prayer in trouble. Sinking times
are praying times with the Lord’s ser-
vants. Peter neglected prayer at start-
ing upon his adventurous journey, but
when he began to sink, his danger made
him a suppliant, and his cry, though


— f prayer.
Pie none sno teed of pray late, was not too late. In our hours of


When prayer delights the least, then learn

to say,

Soul, now is greatest need that thou shouldst
pray.

Say what is prayer, when it is prayer indeed?

The mighty utterance of a mighty deed.

The man is praying who doth press with
might

Ont of his darkness into God’s own light.


bodily pain and mental anguish we find
ourselves as naturally driven to prayer
as the wreck is driven upon the shore
by the waves. The fox hies to his hole
for protection, the bird flies to the wood
for shelter, and even s0 the tried be-
Yever hastens to the mercy-seat for
125


OHAP, V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; LAMENTATIONS,





safety. Heaven’s great harbour of
refuge is All-prayer. Thousands of
weather-beaten vessels have found a
aaven there, and the moment a storm
somes on it is wise for us to make for
with all sail.—Spurgeon.

Prayer should be importunate.
Prayer pulls the rope below, and the
great bell rinvs above in the ears of
God. Some scarceiy stir the bell, for they
pray so languidly ; others give but an
occasional pluck at the rope ; but he who
wins with Heaven is the man who grasps
the rope boldly, and pulls continuously
with all his might.—Biblieal Treasury.

God answers prayer. I once saw a
grand procession in which an Oriental
monarch, surrounded by a thousand
life-guards, moved to the sound of all
kinds of music. Some unknown sub-
ject had a request to urge. He knew
the utter impossibility of ever break-
ing through the guards that day and
night surrounded his majesty. That
humble person perhaps had some dear
friend in prison, who, according to
Oriental custom, could never be tried or
freed while the prosecutor’s malice or
purse held out. They have no Habeas
Corpus law among nations without the
Bible. This poor creature took the only
possible way known to one unable to
bribe the officers, and flung his petition
over the heads of the guards, and it fell


at the feet of the sovereign. In a
moment one of the life-guards pierced
it with his bayonet and flung it back
into the crowd. Alas! the proud,
pleasure - loving monarch, amid the
luxuriant splendours of his court,
palace, army, and plans of reaping re-
nown, never so much as dreamed of
noticing the prayer of that broken.
heart and crushed spirit. Not thus
does the King of kings treat the hum-
blest suppliant who seeks His help.—
Van Doren.

— I never was deeply interested in
any object, I never prayed sincerely
and earnestly for anything, but it came ;
at some time, no matter how distant a
day, in some shape, probably the last
I should have devised, it came.—Adon-
ram Judson.

Prayer brings deliverance. Prayer
procures deliverance from trouble just
as Naaman’s dipping himself seven
times in Jordan procured him a deliver-
ance from his leprosy; not by any
virtue in itself adequate to so great an
effect, you may be sure, but from this,
that it was appointed by God as the
condition of his recovery, and so obliged
the power of Him who appointed it to
give force and virtue to His own insti-
tutions beyond what the nature of the
thing itself could otherwise have raised
it to.— South.


HOMILETICS.
Tuer MISERIES OF THE DISINHERITED.


(Verses 2-5.)


I. To see their possessions enjoyed by foreigners. ‘Our inheritance ia
turned to strangers, our houses to aliens” (ver. 2). The land of Canaan was God’s
gift to the Jews. It was promised to them long before they entered into posses-
sion. There was a time when it seemed they would not be permitted even to look
upon their Beulah-land. But God kept His word, and, after long wandering and
many disappointments, the tribes received their allotted inheritance. Im beauty
and fruitfulness they found the land all that it had been represented. For many
happy years they sat under their own vine and fig-tree, none daring to make them
afraid. It was a bitter disappointment to find themselves violently ejected, and
their loved inheritance occupied by their enemies. The possessions of earth are
liable to strange and sudden changes ; but the heavenly inheritance is indefeasible,
and can never be wrested from the faithful.

If. To be reduced to the condition of widows and orphans. ‘ We are
nrphans and fetherless ; our mothers are as widows” (ver. 3). Their misery was

126


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. OHA. Wo


TSS


comparable to the sad and lonely desolation of fatherless orphans and wives just
bereaved of their husbands. The guardian, guide, and support of family life is
taken away, and they are left to battle with the cold, unpitying world, surrounded
with heartless and cruel enemies. It is a painful experience for any fansily to be
reduced by a single stroke from affluence to penury and friendlessness Jf God
did not help the widows and the fatherless, their condition would be unbearabie.
The competition of life is keen enough to the most favoured ; but it is a terrible
struggle to the lonely and friendless. The luxury of former years unfits many for
the fierceness of life’s conflict, and thousands go down into untimely oblivion.

III. To be compelled to pay for the food and fuel produced on their own
property. ‘‘ We have drunken our water for money ; our wood is sold unto us”
(ver. 4). The bitterness of the complaint is intensified in not merely that they
must pay for the necessaries of life, but that it is their own property which they
have to purchase. The water in their own house cisterns is taxed; the wood in
their own forests must be paid for—and they paid dearly for every fagot. ‘The
captives were doubtless closely watched, and not allowed to stray from the place
where they were detained in preparation for their removal to Babylon, and thus
could obtain wood and water only by paying for them” (Speaker's Commentary).
How would they long now for the sticks their little children used to gather for the
fires in which they idolatrously baked cakes for the queen of heaven! (Jer. vii.
18). It is in the hardships of life that we lament the wanton waste of more pros-
perous times.

IV. To be harassed by incessant toil. ‘Our necks are under persecution :
we labour and have no rest” (ver. 5). We were pursued so actively that our ene-
mies seemed ever so close upon us as to be leaning over our necks ready at once
to seize us, We were tired out with being thus chased incessantly, and no oppor-
tunity was allowed us of refreshing our weary frames (Speaker's Commentary).
Labour is necessary for health, for sustenance, for happiness. There is nothing
servile in honest and necessary work, whether by hand or brain. Abraham fed his
own flocks. Moses kept sheep in the desert. Paul stitched canvas tents while
labouring as a pioneer among the Gentiles. The fathers of the Roman Republic
ploughed their own fields, sowed the seed, and reaped their harvests with their own
hands. But there is neither nobility nor pleasure in forced labour, especially in
labour unrelieved by necessary rest. Life becomes one long, weary, monotonous,
and depressing grind. And this is often the fate of the disinherited.

Lussons.—1. It 1s a great hardship to see our rightful inheritance violently
transferred to strangers. 2. The loss of worldly property 1s not always the greatest
calanuty 3. The truly good have an inheritance that ts incorruptible, undefiled,
and that fadeth not away.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 2-5. The sudden reverses of
fortune. 1. From wealth to poverty
(ver. 2). 2. From social happiness to


3. From freedom
4, From


loneliness (ver. 3).
to galling exactions (ver. 4).
ease to excessive toil (ver. 5).

Ver. 2. Property. 1. Knows nothing
of absolute ownership. 2. Is constantly
changing hands, 3. Its loss by robbery
and pillage a great hardship. 4. Its
fickle tenure contrasts with the im-
perishable character of spiritual posses-
sions,


Ver. 3. Bereavement. 1. One of
the great curses of war. 2. The inevit-
able lot of humanity. 3. Brings pun-
gent sorrow to somebody.

Vers. 4, 5. The loss of liberty. I.
Is painfully realised by the tmposttion
of unjust exactions. ‘We have drunken
our water for money ; our wood is sold
unte us” (ver. 4). II. Is followed by
oppression. ‘‘Our necks are under per-
secution” (ver. 5), III. Subjects to the
slavery of incessant labour. ‘‘ We labour
and have no rest” (ver. 5).


127


CRAP. V.


Iuiustrations. — The sadness of
national decline. “Since first the
dominion of men was asserted over the
ocean, three thrones, of mark beyond
all others, have been set upon its sands
—the thrones of Tyre, Venice, and
England. Of the first of these great
powers only the memory remains; of
the second, the ruin; the third, which
inherits their greatness, if it forget their
example, may be led, through prouder
eminence, to less pitied destruction.
The exaltation, the sin, and the punish-
ment of Tyre have been recorded for
us in perhaps the most touching words
ever uttered by the prophets of Israel
against the cities of the stranger. Her
successor, like her in perfection of
beauty, though less in endurance of
dominion, is still left for our beholding
in the final period of her decline, a
ghost upon the sands of the sea, so
weak, so quiet, so bereft of ail but her
loveliness, that we might well doubt,
as we watched her faint reflection in
the mirage of the lagoon, which was
the city and which the shadow.”—
Ruskin.

Bereavement has its consolations.
A little boy once went out in the early
morn, and was greatly delighted with
the little globes formed by the dew on
the brambles. He hastened back, and
led his father out to see these miniature
worlds; but when the father and son
arrived, the sun was up, and had drawn
up in vapour the globes that had hung
on the brambles, and so displeased the
child. The child eried, and said, “The
angry sun has taken them allup.” The
father looked up and saw the beautiful
rainbow on the bosom of the cloud, and
said, ‘‘There, my chiid, the sun has
taken up the bramble globes, and they
help to form that beautiful bow on the
cloud.” Ah! my friends, God has taken
tp some of our friends, and have we
not murmured? But where are they?


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : LAMENTATIONS.





Ah! do they not form the beautiful
bow round the throne of God?

Industry securesindependence. He
that hath a trade hath an estate, and he
that hath a calling hath an office of
profit and honour; but then the trade
must be worked at and the calling
followed. If we are industrious, we
shall never starve, for at the working
man’s house hunger looks in but dares
not enter. Nor will the bailiff or the
constable enter, for industry pays
debts while despair increaseth them.—
Franklin.

Compassion for the needy. King
Oswald of Northumbria accompanied
the monk Aidan in his long missionary
journeys as interpreter. One day, as
he feasted with the monk by his side,
the thegn, a noble of his war-band,
whom he had set to give alms to the
poor at his gate, told him of a multi-
tude that still waited fasting without.
The king at once bade the untasted
meat before him be carried to the poor,
and his silver dish he divided piece-
meal among them. Aidan seized th.
royal hand and blessed it. ‘‘ May this
hand,” he cried, “ never grow old.”

Persecution defeats itself. The
cruelty of Mary’s reign and the lurid
fires of Smithfield had only worked in
Londoners a fiercer conviction of the
error and falsity of the Roman Catholic
religion, and when Elizabeth came to
the throne, the people thronged the
streets and greeted her with acclama-
tion, as though her coming were as the
rising of the sun.

— Speaking of the persecutions and
martyrdoms in the time of Queen Mary,
Mr. Froude says, “‘ Every martyr’s trial
was & battle; every constant death was
a defeat of the common enemy; and
the instinctive consciousness that truth
was asserting itself in suffering con-
verted the natural emotion of horror
into admiring pride,”


HOMILETICS.
HUMILIATING SUBJECTIOR,
(Verses 6-9.)


I. Personal liberty is surrendered for a livelihooa.


“We have given the


hand to the Egyptian and to the Assyrians. to be satisfied with bread” (ver. 6)


128


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. CHAP, Y.





Absolutely it was Babylon that had just destroyed their national existence, but
Jeremiah means that all feelings of patriotism were crushed, and the sole care
that remained was the selfish desire for personal preservation. To secure this the
people would readily have submitted to the yoke either of Egypt or Assyria, the
great powers from which in their past history they had so often suffered (Speaker's
Commentary). Life is sweet, and it is appalling to think how many there are
ready to sell their conscience, their souls, their friends, their country for bread }
The sting of want demoralises the soul. It is matter for unspeakable thankfulness
when men are lifted above the degrading temptations of poverty.

II. The penalty of continuance in sin. ‘Our fathers have sinned, and are
not ; and we have borne their iniquities” (ver. 7). It is a frequent practice of the
unfortunate to blame the past. Here the sufferers complain that their predeces-
sors, who commenced the national apostasy, had died before the punishment began,
and that they are left to bear alone the fatal consequences which previous trans-
gressors had escaped. It was some time before the truth dawned upon their minds
that they had adopted and continued with aggravated obstinacy the sins of their
forefathers, and that there was quite sufficient guilt in their own iniquity to merit
the chastisement they suffered. The course of sin is downward, ever downward,
and plunges its victims into the most humiliating subjection.

III. A painful experience to a high-spirited people when domineered over
by inferiors. ‘Servants have ruled over us: there is none that doth deliver us
out of their hands” (ver. 8). Among the things for which “the earth is dis-
quieted and which it cannot bear,” the proverb saith, “For a servant when he
reigneth” (Prov. xxx. 21, 22). In Oriental countries slaves often rose to high
office, and there were no doubt such in the Chaldean army. The rule of such is
often maintained with unnecessary rigour. They seem to think that they can gain
respect and reverence only by severity. The Jews fretted and chafed under the
petty tyranny of men whom they regarded as in every respect their inferiors except
in their cruel bondage. Virgil has said—

6 Since slaves so insolent are grown,
What may not masters do?”


The Jews had rebelled against the wise and gentle rule of Jehovah and His servants
the prophets. Now they are ruled by the tyranny of their enemies and of their
slaves. The sinner cannot escape the operation of law. He only exchanges rulers.

IV. The victims are compelled to snatch their food at the peril of their
lives. ‘‘ We gat our bread at the peril of our lives, because of the sword of the
wilderness” (ver. 9). Though they were willing to surrender their liberty for
food, its supply was very uncertain and precarious. “This verse apparently refers
to those who were left as delvers and vine-dressers in the land, and who, in gather-
ing in such fruits as remained, were exposed to incursions of the Bedaween, here
called the sword of the desert.” Every morsel of food they ate was snatched as
from the mouths of wild beasts. The next forage for food may cost them, no¢
only their independence, but their lives. They had indeed to eat their bread with
quaking and carefulness, as it had been predicted (Ezek. xii. 18, 19). There is
no advantage in selling our souls for bread ; it is a bad bargain. Honour is more
precious than food, or than life itself.

Lzssons.—1. War imposes great degradations on the conquered. 2. Sin ws at
the root of all humiliation and suffering. 3. Subjection is intolerable to those whe
have tasted the sweets of freedom.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 6, 8, 9. The intense love of freedom for food (ver. 6). 2. Subjects
life: 1. Tempts men to barter their to the oppressive tyranny of inferiors
129 I


CHAP, V.


——-


(ver. 8). 3. Will run great risks in
the struggle for maintenance (ver. 9).

Ver. 7. Sin and punishment: 1. Are
closely linked together. 2. The sins,
like the virtues, of one generation pass
on in their consequence to the next.
3. Suffering on account of others is
taken into account in God’s dealing
with individuals and with nations. 4.
Every offender is punished only accord-
ing to his own sin.


InLustratTions.—Mistaken views of
life. Two old men, amateur naturalists,
who had devoted their whole lives, one
to ferns and the other to orchids, tra-
velled together for many hours. At
the end of their journey he who had
cultivated ferns said to his companion
with a sigh, ‘‘I have wasted my life:
if I had it to live over again, I should
devote it to orchids.”

Life divinely ordered. Our life is
a web woven by the hand of God, the
thread reaching from our birth to our
death. The woof is trouble, but still
runs with it a weft of interwoven com-
forts. — Adams.

Sin in man. In man there will be
a layer of fierce hyena or of timid deer
running through the nature in the most


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





is sensitive to poetry and music, but not
to human suffering. Marcus Aurelius
is tolerant and good to all men but
Christians. The Tlascalans of Mexico
loved, and even worshipped flowers, but
they were cruel to excess, and sacrificed
human victims with savage delight.
The good and the evil lie close together,
the virtues and the vices alternate, so
is human power accumulated ; alter-
nately the metal and the rags, a terrible
voltaic pile. In the well-bred animal
the claw is nicely cushioned ; the old
Adam is presentable.—A. F, Russell.

Humiliation. It is with us as with
the reeds which grow by the river-side ;
when the waters overflow, the reed bows
its head and bends down, and the flood
passes over without breaking it; after
which it uplifts its head and stands
erect in all its vigour, rejoicing in re-
newed life. So is it with us; we also
must sometimes be bowed down to the
earth and humbled, and then arise with
renewed joy and trust.

Submission. Let us not charge God
over-hastily with the untoward inci-
dents of life. In the main we are the
manufacturers of our own life-material.
If you give the weaver none but dark
threads, he can only fashion a sombre


uncertain and tortuous manner. Nero pattern. Halsey.


HOMILETICS.


Tat GaLLING TYRANNY OF CONQUEST.
(Verses 10-13.)


J. There is the physical suffering occasioned by starvation. ‘Our skin ig
black like an oven because of the terrible famine” (ver. 10). The human body
can bear a great deal, but it cannot resist, nor can it survive, the ravages of famine.
The bloom of health fades from the cheek, the eyes shine with an unnatural lustre,
and then lose all expression; the flesh is dried and parched, the skin becomes
‘‘fiery red like an oven, because of the fever-blast’”” of famine, and the whole
frame becomes skeletonised. During one of the famines in Ireland there was a
form of face which came upon the sufferers when their state of misery was far
advanced, and which was a sure signal that their last stage of misery was nearly
run. The mouth would fall and seem to hang, the lips at the two ends of the
mouth would be dragged down, and the lower parts of the cheeks would fall, as
though they had been dragged and pulled. There were no signs of acute agony,
none of the horrid symptoms of gnawing hunger. The look was one of apathy,
desolation, and death. The agony of want was past. Nothing could save.

II. Social purity is outraged. ‘They humbled the women in Zion, and the
maids in the city of Judah” (ver. 11). History records revolting examples of the

130


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. OWAP. V.





excesses committed by a brutal soldiery in the mad delirium of conquest. War
brings in its train worse consequences than wounds and death. There is a fouler
lust than the lust of military glory, The pure and unoffending are dishonoured.
The sanctity of social life is invaded, and its sacred laws violated.

III. Rank and age are treated with indignity. “Princes are hanged up by
their hand: the faces of elders were not honoured” (ver. 12). See exegetical
notes on this verse. It was a barbarity of ancient warfare that the conqueror paid
so little regard to the feelings of the conquered. To the humiliation of defeat was
added whatever could pain and degrade the vanquished. The princes of the royal
blood and magistrates who had grown old in their lengthened term of office were
treated with scant courtesy. The conqueror seemed to glory in parading the most
illustrious of his captives under the most ignominious conditions. There were
noble exceptions to this rule, but they were so rare that history has not failed to
chronicle them.

IV. Young men and children are forced into the performance of the most
menial and exhausting tasks. ‘They took the young men to grind, and the
children fell under the wood” (ver. 13). To grind the corn in the hand-mill was
the work of female slaves. It was a great blow to the self-respect and ambition
of the young men who were of legal-age for military service to be condemned to
this menial work. The little Jewish children, whose tender years should have
been a sufficient protection against such cruelty, staggered under the loads of fire-
wood they were compelled to carry for the Chaldean soldiers, who indulged in
inhuman sport at the brave little fellows as they fell exhausted under their crush-
ing burdens. Many of the children would be crippled for life. It is one of the
praiseworthy features of nineteenth-century civilisation that so much care is shown
in the protection and healthy development of child-life.

Lessons.—l. Woe to the people who fall into the hands of a heartless con-
queror/ 2. There are worse sufferings than the sense of being vanquished. 38. The
tyrant conqueror has no respect for sex, or rank, or age,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 10. The sufferings of famine.
1. Apparent in their ghastly physical
regults. 2. Reduce all ranks to a com-
mon level. 3. Are intensified by con-
scious defeat and humiliation.

Vers. 11-13. The atrocities of war.
1. The pure and defenceless are defiled
(ver. 11). 2. Princes and aged coun-
sellors are treated with contempt and
cruelty (ver. 12). 3. The spirit of the
young is crushed with overpowering
burdens (ver. 13).


ILLUSTRATIONS.—The cause of famine.
For unknown years the Persians have
been cutting off their trees, and dimi-
nishing their rainfall thereby. Nay,
not only has the removal of the forests
decreased the supply, but it has wasted
whatever rain fell, For the roots of
the trees and of all the innumerable
shrubs, bushes, vines and ferns that


' floods and frequent droughts.


thrive in their shadow, kept the ground
open, and held the water in countless
natural wells for the use of the soil in
droughts. But all the undergrowta
dying when its protecting forests were
felled, the scanty showers percolated
into the streams at once, causing rare
The
droughts yielded no harvests, and no
harvests were followed by famine, pes-
tilence, and death.

The fascination of lust. You will
go on in your lust and your sins, de-
spite warnings, despite advice, until
you perish in your guilt. How worse
than children are grown-up men! The
child who goes for a merry slide upon
a pond, if he be told that the ice will
not bear him, starts back affrighted, or,
if he daringly creeps upon it, how soon
he leaves it if he hears but a crack upon
the slender covering of the water! But

131


CHAP. G,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


el


you men have conscience, which tells
you that your sins are vile, and that
they will be your ruin. You hear the
crack of sin as its thin sheet of pleasure
gives way beneath your feet; ay! and
some of you have seen your comrades
sink in the flood and lost, and yet you
go sliding on. Worse than childish,
worse than mad, are you, thus pre-
sumptuously to play with your ever-
lasting state.—Spurgeon,


Age dishonoured.


4‘ I have lived long enough. My way of life
Is fallen into the sere and yellow leaf :
And that which should accompany old age,
As honour, love, obedience, troops of friends,
I must not look to have,” —Shakespeare.


Helplessness appeals to our pity.
Thus was the heart of the rough sailor
touched when, tossing with other cast-
aways in an open boat on the open sea,
he parted with a morsel of food, which,
hidden with more care than misers hide
their gold, he had reserved for his own
last extremity. Around him lay men
and women, some dead, with glassy


eyes, some dying, and these reduced te
ghastly skeletons; but none of these
moved him to peril his own life for
theirs, The object of his noble and not
unrewarded generosity—foras if Heaven
had sent it on purpose to reward the
act, a sail speedily hove in sight—was
a gentle boy, that, with his face turned
on hers, lay dying in a mother’s arms,
and between whose teeth the famished
man put his own last precious morsel,
— Guthrie.

The atrocities of war. I look on
war with a horror which no words can
express. I have long wanted patience
to read of battles. The thought of
man, God’s immortal child, butchered
by his brother, the thought of sea and
land stained with human blood by
human hands, of women and children
buried under the ruins of besieged cities,
of the resources of empires and the
mighty powers of nature all turned by
man’s malignity into engines of torture
and destruction—this thought gives to
earth the semblance of hell. I shudder
as among demons.— Channing.


HOMILETICS.
BUSINESS AND RECREATION,


(Verses 14, 15.)
L Are necessary in all organised communities. Commercial activity and


prosperity lead to a more highly organised condition of social life.


To prevent


the clashing and confusion of the multiplicity of interests generated by an increas-
ing commerce, certain rules are laid down for general observance. — It is only thus
that law and order can be maintained. It is soon recognised that business and
pleasure must be judiciously combined in order to develop a healthy and vigorous
people. Incessant labour would grind down and destroy the force of the national
character, and an uninterrupted round of pleasure would weaken and dissipate its
enterprise and energy. The happy medium in promoting what is best in both
individual and national life is found in the wise alternation of work and recreation.


“* Run if you will, but try to keep your breath ;
Work like a man, but don’t be worked to death.”


II. Are evidences of a happy and contented people. The gate of an Eastern
city is the common rendezvous of the citizens for both business and recreation.
There the venerable counsellors sit in repose and dignity to discuss and settle dis-
putes. There the traders vend their wares. There the young life of the city ex-
presges its exuberant joy in song and dance. Here we have a picture of prosperity,
peace, and happiness. No people will be long content where there is not a thriv-
ing commerce, a reverence for law and age, ample employment and food, and the
opportunity for innocent recreation,


132


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS. OBAP. ¥.


mw WV#?’'"'“—'"“'"'"''-“ OOOO


YI], Their absence a pathetic sign of general desolation. ‘The elders have
ceased from the gate, the young men from their music. The joy of our heart is
ceased ; our dance is turned into mourning” (vers, 14,15). The aged magistrates
no longer frequent the gate, the bazaars of the merchants are deserted, the busy
murmur of buying and selling is hushed, the instruments of music are laid aside
unstrung, the voice of singing is no longer heard, and the spirits of the youthful
dancers are crushed. Business and pleasure alike are abandoned. The joy of


happier times is turned into mourning.


The prophet could give no more graphic


& picture of the desolation and ruin that had settled down upon the land.
Lussons.—1l. The character and condition of a nation may be read in tts


commerce and recreations.
ment of national life,
into decay.


2. Work and play are alike necessary in the develop-
3. When the apring of enterprise is broken, @ nation sinks


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 14, 15. The extinction of
national life: 1. When the wise and
aged are no longer interested in public
affairs. 2. When the voice of mirth is
hushed. 3. When youth has lost its
elasticity and hope. :


IntustrRatTions, — The dignity of
labour. It is time that the opprobrium
of toil were done away. Ashamed of
toil, art thou? Ashamed of thy dingy
workshop or dusty labour-field, of thy
hard hand, scarred with service more
honourable than that of war, of thy
soiled and weather-stained garments, on
which Mother Nature has embroidered,
amidst sun and rain, amidst smoke and
steam, her own heraldic honours?
Ashamed of these tokens and titles, and
envious of the flaunting robes of im-
becile idleness and vanity? Itis treason
to Nature, itisimpiety to Heaven. Toil
—toil either of the brain, of the heart,
or of the hand—is true nobility.

Business not to absorb all our time.
Who gave thee leave, Christian, to over-
lade thyself with the encumbrances of
life? Is not God the Lord of thy time,
as of everything else? He does indeed
allow thee a fair portion for the lower
employments of the body, but did He
ever intend to turn Himself out of all?
This is as if the sailors, who are allowed
by the merchant some small adventure
for themselves, should fill the ship, and
leave no stowage for his goods; or as if
a servant should excuse himself to his
master, when reproved for neglecting
his duty, by saying he could not do it
because he was drunk.—Gurnall.


Business and religion. Piety does
not retreat from business, but it seizes
business, sanctifies it, and makes it
sacred. If I understand religion, it ia
to open a shop, it is to freight ships, it
is to keep accounts, it is to write up
your ledgers, it is to wear an apron till
it be as holy as a bishop’s sleeve, and
to wield a spade as responsibly and
devoutly as a monarch sways a sceptre.
The true characteristic of religion is to
go down into everything, rise up to the
highest, till, like the atmosphere, it em-
braces all in its beneficent and beautiful
folds. —Cumming.

Recreation. Lute-strings sound all
the sweeter for being sometimes let
down; and fields sowed every year be-
come barren. So it is with body and
mind.

— A primitive Christian playing with
birds vindicated his conduct by com-
parison with the bow, which, if con-
stantly bent, becomes useless. Recrea-
tion is a second creation.

Pleasure itself unsatisfying. George
Moore, when a wealthy man, wrote in
his diary—“ After this we kept a great
deal of company. The house was looked
upon as a work of art. All our friends
expected to be invited to see it and
partake of our hospitality. We accord-
ingly gave a large dinner weekly, until
we had exhausted our numerous frienda
and acquaintances. But happiness does
not flow insuch 4 channel. Promiscuous
company takes one’s mind away from
God and His dealings with men; and
there is no lasting pleasure in the ex-
citement.”


133


OHAP V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


CE: a


HOMILETICS.


Tue Loss or Honour.
(Verse 16.)


L Honour is the crown of individual character.


Honour is moral rectitude,
the crown and dignity of the true man.


**Say what is honour? ’Tis the finest sense
Of justice which the human mind can frame,
Intent each lurking frailty to disclaim,

And guard the way of life from all offence
Suffered or done.” — Wordsworth.


Moral rectitude is not a natural possession; it is the gift of Divine grace. It
must be huinbly and penitently sought, gratefully received, and strengthened and
increased by incessant exercise. It is all of grace, and this grace sheds a glory
and lustre upon the soul. As the diamond in the ring, so is grace to the soul. A
heart beautified with grace has the picture of the King of heaven hung in it. It,
is dignified with the reflected splendour of the Divine majesty.

II. When honour is lost, man is discrowned. ‘The crown is fallen from our
head.” Israel not only lost their national king, and with him their national
independence, but they lost their moral kingship, their personal righteousness ;
and this they lost before they were deprived of their earthly king, All that had
given them rank and honour was tumbled in the dust.


* Better to die ten thousand deaths
Than wound my honour.”


“Mine honour is my life; both grow in one;
Take honour from me, and my life is done.”


JII. Honour is lost when righteousness is abandoned. ‘‘ Woe unto us that we
have sinned.” Afflicted Judah is getting clearer light. In the seventh verse they
still cling to the idea that their national calamities were to be ascribed to the sins
of their ancestors. Now they see the enormity of their own sins, and acknow-
ledge that they deserved chastisement. Man is invulnerable to the assaults of the
enemy and to the heaviest blows of misfortune and suffering while he retains his
integrity. He is fenced round with the unconquerable protection of the God in
whom he trusts. It is when he is untrue to himself, to his highest sense of
honour, that he is untrue to God, and, falling away from righteousness, he becomes
discrowned, and sinks into disgrace and misery.

Lxrssons.—1. Righteousness confers dignity. 2. That man suffers unspeakable
loss who does not act up to his holiest impulses. 3. When @ man loses a sense
of honour, he may sink to any depth of infamy.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 16. The degradation of sin:
1. Begins in personal unfaithfulness,
2. It is undignified to sin. 3. The
course of sin ends in misery and in
woe.

A series of woes. ‘‘ Woe unto us
that we have sinned.” 1. The first
woe is the polluting of the soul by sin.
2. The second woe is God’s hatred and

134


abhorrence. 3. The third woe is God’s
leaving us, 4. The fourth woe is all
kinds of punishment—an [liad of evils,
—Bishop Ussher.


ILLUSTRATIONS.—True dignity.
‘* True dignity is never gained by plave,


And never lost when honours are with-
drawn.” —Massinger.


; HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


OHAR VY.


a


‘* Ye proud, ye selfish, ye severe,
How vain your mask of state ;
The good alone have joy sincere,
The good alone are great.” — Beattie.


Fallen greatness.


“T have ventured,

Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,
This many summers in a sea of glory,

But far beyond my depth : my high- blown pride
At length broke under me ; and now has left

me,

Weary and old with service, to the mercy

Of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me,
Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate ye!”

— Wolsey,


Degradation. That which renders
men so unwilling to believe themselves
capable of union with God is but the
sense of their own degradation, I
would gladly be informed whence
this creature, who acknowledges him-
self so weak, obtains the right to
measure and limit the Divine mercy as
his own fancy suggests. Man under-


stands so little the nature of God that
he understands not himself: and yet,
troubled by the contemplation of his
own condition, he boldly pronounces
that it is beyond the power of God
to qualify him for this connection,—
Pascal.

The agony of dishonour. The most
terrible blow that General Grant ever
knew was when the bank in which he
was a partner had suspended payment.
Not only was he ruined, his sons and
daughters penniless by reason of all their
savings invested in it being lost; but
after a few days there came out a
horrible story of craft and guile, and it
was seen that his honoured name had
been used to entice and decoy hosts of
friends, to their own injury and Grant’s
discredit. Imputations were even cast
on the fame that belonged to the coun-
try, and this blow was worst of all: the
shock of battle was less tremendous,
his physical agonies less acute,


HOMILETICS.
Reuicious DrEcLENsIoN,
(Verses 17, 18.)


I. Evident in the desolation of the sanctuary. ‘The mountain of Zion,
which is desolate, the foxes walk upon it” (ver. 18). The foxes or jackals were
very likely attracted to the ruinous site of Zion by the bodies of the slain, which
they devoured for food and, finding how completely the place was deserted, they
remained in undisturbed possession. How different from the time when the
Temple services were in full swing and the city crowded with happy worshippers !
Religion is at a low ebb when the house of God is neglected and its services dis-
regarded ; it ys lower still when the sanctuary is closed and its mouldering stones
are covered with mosses and lichens ; but it has got to the lowest depth when the
building is demolished and scattered in ruins. To this pass had all the pretentious
religionism of Judah now come.

II. Is # reason for depression and sorrow. “For this our heart is faint ; for
these things our eyes are dim” (ver. 17). The Jews of all ranks and classes would
lament ¢he national disasters—the loss of national honour in the fall of their king,
the lc«# of wealth and influence, the loss of independence and liberty ; but the
pious /#ws would lamen* most of all the loss of religion. They sorrowed till their
hearts hecame faint and their eyes grew dim with tears. We may well grieve
over the loss of property and friends, of worldly comforts and necessities, but
the devout heart sorrows most of all over the decline of religion and the cessa-
tion of the worship of God.

III. Should lead to much heart-searching as to its cause. ‘‘ For this—for
these things—because of Zion which is desolate” (vers. 17, 18). To the Jewish
mind the Semple was the residence and throne of Jehovah, the symbol of worship,
the emborjment of the national religious life. The destruction of oa


OHAP, ¥. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; LAMENTATIONS. '





carried with it the doom of religion: no Temple, no religion. It is true that
genuine religion is independent of temples and buildings, but as a matter of fact
it does not exist long without them. Individual piety may flourish without a
material temple, but collective and organised religion can be maintained only by
continued association and intercourse, and the sanctuary becomes a necessity of
associated religious life. Those who talk so grandiosely about worshipping God
in the temple of Nature rarely worship Him at all anywhere. Where there is no
recognised sanctuary there is no rally-point for worshippers, and religion is dis-
organised and depressed. The same result ensues when the house of God is


habitually neglected.


Lessons.—1l. Religious declension 13 at the root of national decay.
people of God should be always deeply concerned tn religious extension.


2, The
3. Religious


declension ts sincerely lamented by the good.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 17, 18. The disasters of the
Church: 1. Create profound concern
in the hearts of the good. 2. Should
be deplored by every member of the
commonwealth. 3. Mean that there
has been gross unfaithfulness some-
where.

Ver. 18. A deserted sanctuary:
1. A pathetic and suggestive sight. 2.
An evidence of indifference and sin.
3. A reproach that should be promptly
wiped away.


InLustRations. — Religious declen-
sion. The consequences which Moses
foretold (Deut. xxix. 24, 25) as the
result of the religious defection of the
people were such as no human wisdom
could foresee or experience suggest.
The practice of idolatry did not prevent
the aggrandisement of ancient Rome,
nor any mere statesman ensure the ac-
complishment of a prophecy that mili-
tary success should always attend the
worship of the one true God, and that
military discomfiture should always
follow idolatry. It is evident that
Moses derived his accurate knowledge
of futurity from immediate inspiration
of God.

Religious sham. A religion that
does not take hold of the life that now
is, is like a cloud that does not rain.
A cloud may roll in grandeur and be an
object of admiration, but if it does not
rain, it is of little account so far as
utility is concerned. And a religion
that consists in the observance of mag-
nificent reremonies, but does not touch


136


the duties of daily life, is a religion of
show and of sham.

Church-going not the end of religion.
I fear there are some who imagine that
church-going is in itself the aim and
end of all religion. No mistake can be
more deplorable or pernicious. It is a
blunder as egregious as it would be for
a visitor to a manufactory to suppose
that the machinery was all set in motion
merely to be gazed at, and to keep em-
ployed the people who are engaged in
tending it. The manufacturer who lays
out his capital in such costly apparatus
would find but an unsatisfactory return
at the end of the year if there had not
been a given quantity of finished goods
for profitable sale in the market. So it
is with church-going. It is wretched
work if the worship of the house of
God begins and ends with the prayers
uttered there.— Hooper.

Mercenary religion. One of the
causes that led to the overthrow of
religion in Ephesus was the growing
wealth attached to the Temple of Diana.
The priesthood established deposit
banks. Kings and private individuals
intrusted their money to the care of
the goddess, and the priests reinvested
this for a profit. But gradually the
idea of religious sanctity gave place to
that of commercial enterprise, and the
temple became fair game for attack and
robbery.

Decay of religion. The most curious
phenomenon in all Venetian history
is the vitality of religion in private
life. and its deadness in public policy,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS,


OHAP, ¥


———— ee


Amidst the enthusiasm, chivalry, or
fanaticism of the other States of Europe,
Venice stands from first to last like a
masked statue; her coldness impene-
trable, her exertion only aroused by
the touches of a secret spring. That
spring was her commercial interests—
this the one motive of all her important
political acts or enduring national ani-
mosities. She could forgive insults to
her honour, but never rivalship in her


commerce. She calculated the glory of
her conquests by their value, and esti-
mated their justice by their facility.
While all Europe around her was wasted
by the fire of its devotion, she first cal-
culated the highest price she could exact
from its piety for the armament she fur-
nished, and then, for the advancement
of her own private interests, at once
broke her faith and betrayed her re-
ligion.— Ruskise,


HOMILETICS.
AN EARNEST PRAYER FOR RESTORATION.
(Verses 19-22.)


I, Acknowledges the eternal sovereignty of Jehovah. “Thou, O Lord,
remainest for ever; Thy throne from generation to generation” (ver. 19). The
throne of Judah is fallen, but not so the throne of God. Egypt, Assyria, Babylon,
Israel, and all the nations of the earth may rise and fall, but God is unchanged.
The fact of the perpetuity of the Divine government of the world forms the basis
of a hope that, however desperate may be the condition of His people, God can
restore them. If the throne of God was like the fickle governments of earth,
there would be no prospect of recovery. All true prayer has the assurance of
being heard and answered in the fact of the righteousness of an unchangeable God.


II. Deprecates the continued absence of the Divine favour. “ Wherefore
dost Thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time?” (ver. 20). If Thy
government is continuous, why are we forgotten and abandoned? If Thy


throne in heaven is immovable, why is Thy throne in our earthly Zion over-
thrown? Thou didst once care for us and love us, and the memory of that
happy time still keeps our hope alive. Thy favour was the joy and the sunshine
of our lives; its absence is at the root of all our misery. Low as we have sunk,
it cannot be that Thou hast utterly and for ever given us up. Cast us not away
from Thy presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from us, Restore unto us the
joy of Thy salvation. The soul that yearns in prayer for the Divine favour is on
the brink of a glorious vision.

ITI. Supplicates the grace of genuine repentance. “Turn Thou us unto
Thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned; renew our days as of old” (ver. 21). Repent-
ance is a turning about. For some time the course of Judah had been in one
direction—wandering from God, and sinking into ever lower depths of sin and
misery. Now there is a thoughtful pause, an arrest of the downward career.
What has brought this about? Prayer; and that prayer becomes more eager and
earnest as it becomes more evident that rescue is at hand. True prayer recognises
that God alone can give repentance and renew the glory of the golden days of
old. When the heart is changed, our outward circumstances soon alter for the
better. When Judah regained the favour of God, she also regained lost temporal
blessings.

Iv. Is urged with the assurance that God cannot utterly rejeet the truly
penitent. ‘But Thou hast utterly rejected us; Thou art very wroth against us.”
Unless Thou hast utterly rejected us, unless Thou art very wroth against us, This
is stated as a virtual impossibility. Geikie translates the verse, “Thou wilt not
surely wholly forget us? Thou wilt not be angry with us beyond measure ?”’
The miserable results of their repudiation by Jehovah become the pi of a

1


HOMILETIC COMMLNTARY: LAMENTATIONS.


cenfident appeal to Him. He heard the prayer, and at the end of seventy years
the Jews were restored to their own land. The Book of Lamentations ends, as it
begins, with a wail; but the concluding wail, unlike the first, has in it a joyous
strain of hope. In many ancient MSS. the twenty-first verse is repeated after
the twenty-second, to make a more agreeable finish when the book was read in
the Synagogue; but Jeremiah did not think this arrangement necessary. He
concludes with the refrain of what had been the burden of his sorrowful mono-


logue, because he is so confident of help and restoration.
to the soul, even in threatenings, is ever in truth one of comfort.”


“The message of God
The darkest


night of suffering and sorrow is followed by the tranquillising hope of the golden


daybreak.


Lessons.—1l. When the Church begins to pray there te hope of revival. 2.


True prayer 18 ever accompanied with repentance.


answers the prayer of the contrite.


3. God not only hears, but


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 19,.20. The unchangeable
God. I. His government 13 in perpetual
activity. ‘Thou remainest for ever,
Thy throne from generation to genera-
tion” (ver. 19). II. He cannot forget
His people. ‘Wherefore dost Thou
forget us for ever?” (ver. 20). III. He
will not for ever stand aloof from His
people, “ Wherefore dost Thou forsake
us for so long time?” (ver. 20).

Vers. 21, 22. A prayer for repent-
ance. I. Recognises that repentance is
a Divine act. “Turn Thou us unto
Thee, O Lord; renew our days as of
old” (ver. 21). II. When God gives
repentance tt 7% effectual. “And we
shall be turned” (ver. 21). IIL When
God gives repentance it ts evident His
wrath is withdrawn, and He again ac-
cepts us. ‘Unless Thou hast utterly
rejected us; unless Thou art very wroth
against us” (ver. 22). But this cannot
be, for He gives repentance, He “re-
news our days as of old.”


ILLustrations.— The eternity of
God. Would you gain some idea of
the eternity past of God’s existence ?
Go to the astronomer and bid him lead
you with him in one of his walks
through space; and as he sweeps out-
ward from object to object, from uni-
verse to universe, remember that the
light from those filmy stains on the
deep pure blue of heaven now falling
on your eye has been travelling space
for a million of years.—JA/ctchell.


138


Prayer the melody of misery.


“Oh, hearts that break and give no sign,

Save whitening lip and fading tressea,

Till death pours out his cordial wine,
Slow-dropped from misery’s crushing

presses :

If singing breath or echoing chord
To every hidden pain were given,

What endless melodies were poured,
As sad as earth, as sweet as heaven |”

—O. W. Holmes.


Sufferlng prompts prayer. A fflic-
tions make us most frequent and fer-
vent in pouring forth our supplications
unto God. In our prosperity we either
utterly neglect this duty, or perform it
carelessly and slothfully ; but when we
are brought into calamities, we flee to
Him by earnest prayer, craving His aid
and help. And as the child, fearing
nothing, is so fond of his play that he
strays and wanders from his mother,
not so much as thinking of her, but if
he be scared or frighted with the sight
or apprehension of some apparent or
approaching danger, presently runs to
her, casts himself into her arms, and
cries out to be saved and shielded by
her, so we, securely enjoying the
childish sports of worldly prosperity,
do so fondly dote on them that we
scarce think of our Heavenly Father;
but when perils approach and are ready
to seize upon us, then we flee to Him and
cast ourselves into the arms of His pro-
tection, crying to Him by earnest prayer
for help in our extremity.—-Downame.

The value of prayer. If the whole


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LAMENTATIONS.





world in which we live is but a con-
tinual temptation, if all around appears
to agree with our inward corruptions to
weaken and seduce us, if riches bribe
and indigence sours, if prosperity ele-
vates and afflictions abase us, if busi-
ness dissipates and rest enervaten if
the sciences exalt and ignorance be-
wilders us, if commerce exposes us too
much and svlitude leaves us too much
x0 ourselves, if pleasure seduce us and
aoly works make us proud, if health
awakens the passions and sickness pro-
duces murmurings—in a word, if since
the fall of man all that surrounds us
and all that is in us is perilous, in so
deplorable a situation, O my God, what
hope of salvation remains for us? If
our sighs do not incessantly ascend
from the depth of our misery towards
‘he throne of Thy merey until Thou


GHA. @.


deignest to assist us and to rescue us
from our fallen state.—Massilion,

God answers prayer. Whea poor
men make requests te us, we usually
answer them as the echo does the
voice—the answer cuts off half the
petition. We shall seldom find among
men Jael’s courtesy, giving milk to
those that ask water, except it be as
this was, an entangling benefit, the
better to introduce a mischief. There
are not many Naamans among us that,
when you beg of them one talent, will
force you to take two. But God’s
answer to our prayers is like a multi-
plying glass, which renders the request
much greater in the answer than it wag
in the prayer.—Bishop Reynolds.

*¢«More things are wrought by prayer


Than the world dreams of.”
—Tennysos


INDEX TO HOMILETICS.


Apvanracss of a state of expectation, 88
Afflicted, God the consolation of the, 93
Affliction, the man of, 70

Afflictions, views of a saint in his, 84
—— not accidental, 93

Anger, the Divine, 115

——- the fierceness of the Divine, 43

—— the pitilessness of the Divine, 109
Appeal to Jehovah, a piteous, 124

— to Divine justice, 104


BAFFLED, the helplessly, 118
Bereavement, 127
Bewilderment of grief, 74
Burden for young shoulders, 89
Business and recreation, 182


Catz to prayer, 60

Character, moral, 111

—— the Divine, 95

Choice porticns, 86

Church, the disasters of the, 136
—— indifference of the enemies of the, 22
City in sorrow, 20

—— a populous, 14

—— grief for a ruined, 18

Comfort for the sorrowful, 92
Complaint under affliction, 96
Conquest, the galling tyranny of, 186


Dancers of a sinful life, 77
Dawn of hope, 80
Dayspring mercies, 84
Declension, religious, 135
Defeat, inglorious, 31
Defences of a nation, 44
Degradation, moral, 110
Despair, the helplessness of, 32
Destroyer, the implacable, 48
Destruction of Zion, 114
Devotion, the sublimity of, 98
Disinherited, the miseries of the, 126
Distress, complex phases of, 78
Divine anger, the, 115
the fierceness of the, 43
the pitilessness of the, 100
—— character, the, 95

compassion, a prayer for the, 69
—— faithfulness, 83
—— goodness, 88
—~— justice, 36
——- a confident appeal to, 104
—— pity, 64
—— punishment, 31, 105
—— rule absolute and universal, 95
—-— slowness to punish, 104
—— threatenings of judgment, 59
—— wrath, the storm of the, 43


140











Duty of self-reflection, 98
—— to the Jewish people, 81


Econ Homo, 72

Enemies of the church, 23
Enemy, Jehovah as an, 44
Evmity, a spirit of, 36
Expectation, advantages of, 88
Extremity of suffering, 112


FaItHFvt prophet in trouble, a, 108
Faithfulness, the Divine, 83

False ministers of God, 116

Famine, the extremities of,

— the horrors of, 113

—— the sufferings of, 131

Fate of the malevolent, 118

Fear, the tyranny of, 64

Fickleness, human, 36

Foe, Jehovan as a, 76

Fortune, the strange reverses of, 14, 127
Friendship, the fickleness of human, 14


Gop and human suffering, 78
wrong, 94

pleading for saints, 103
—— the tenderness of, 92

— the unchangeable, 138
Godly life the music of society, a, 184
Gocdness, the Divine, 88

—— three grades of, 87

Grief for a ruined city, 18

—— the bewilderment of, 74
—— the utter exhaustion of, 88








Happiness, the loss of, 79
Heathenism a moral obliquity,
Hope, the dawn of, 80

—— and patience, 88

Honour, the loss of, 134
Humiliating subjection, 128


INDIFFERENOE of the enemies of the Chureh, 2%
Is it nothing to you? 31


JEHOVAH, a piteous appeal to, 124
— as a foe, 44, 76
Jewish people, our duty towards the, 84
Joy, two kinds of, 120
Judgment of oppression, 16
— the Divine threatenings of, 59
Justice, Divine, 36
a confident appeal to, 104





LAMENTATION over a forsaken sanctuary, 19
Leaders, unfaithful religious, 116

Liberty, the loss of, 127

Life, the intense love of, 129

—— the changes of, 17


INDEX TO HOMILETICS.





Life, the dangers of a sinful, 77
— young, 36

Loss of happiness, 79

— of honour, 134

Lost hope restored, 81


MALEVOLENT, the fate of the, 119
Man of affliction, the, 70
Masters, new, 23

Memories, sad, 23

Memory, the office of, 81

the handmaid of hope, 81
Mercies, dayspring, 84

Message from God to thee, 120
Ministry, a dispirited, 20
Miseries of the disinherited, 128
Misery of the penitent, 31
Moral degradation, 110





NATION, a@ distressed, 29

-—— the defences of a, 44
National disaster, 23

—— life, the extinction of, 188
— ruin, complete, 48

Night of prayer, 61


OPPRESSION, the judgment of, 16
Ordinances, the wreck of religious, 46


PATIENCE, hope and, 88
Penitence, sincere, 36
Penitent, the misery of the, 31
People, iast hours of a doomed, 117
Persecution, the spirit of, 17
Pity, the Divine, 64

Prayer, a call to, 60

— a night of, 61

—— for Divine compassion, 68
— the hopefulness of, 125
— for repentance, 138

—— the efficacy of, 102
Property, 127

Prophets, false, 56
Punishment, Divine, A 105
of Judah a type,

— the certainty of, 77

—— graduated, 118, 120

—— sin and, 130


REBELLION, the bitter fruits of, 35
Recreation, business and, 132
Redeemer, the sufferings of the world’s, 3%}
Religious declension, 135

—— ordinances, the wreck of, 46
Repentance, a prayer for, 97, 138
Resignation, 90

Restoration, an earnest prayer for, 137
Reverses of fortune, the strange, 14
Ridicule, 79

Royalty, 118

Ruin, inexpressible, 54

Rule, the Divine, 95





SANCTUARY, lamentation over a forsaken, 29
—— a despised,





Sanctuary, a deserted, 136

Saints pleading for God, 103
Scorner, the heartless triumph of the, 58
Self-reflection, the duty of, 33
Service, watch-night, 61

Silent suffering, 91

Silence, retirement and, 91

Sin an implacable foe, 26

—— the cause of suffering, 101

— conscious, 26

—— the course of, 26

—— the degradation of, 134

—— the galling tyranny of, 31

—— and punishment, 130

—— the terrible havoc of, 25

Society, a godly life the musio of, 104
Sorrow, a city in, 20

—— the voice of, 36

—— the ravages of, 75

Spirit of persecution, 17

—— of enmity, 36

Subjection, humiliating, 128
Sufferer, a baffled, 75

Suffering, God and human, 73

the mystery of, 73

—— the extremity of, 112

the tension of prolonged, 99
fiufferings of the world’s Redeemer, 86
Sympathetic nature, a, 101








Tzars, the pathos of, 14

Tenderness of God, the, 92

Tension of prolonged suffering, the, 8
Femple, the earthly, 47

Trouble, a faithful prophet in, 108
— 5 ome of, a

Tyranny of sin,

sabi of conquest, 130


UNFAITHFUL religious leaders, 115


ViEws of a saint in his afflictions, 64
Voice of sorrow, 36
Voiceless woe, 50


Wag, the atrocities of, 181

Watcher, the weary, 118

Watch-night service, 61

the rigour of, 113

Wicked, the tactics of the, 116
Widowhood, 14

Woe, voiceless, 50

Woes, a series of, 134

Wonder explained by greater wonders, 103
World’s wonder, a, 115

—— treatment of its suffering Redeemer,
Worship, perverted, 48

Wrath, the storm of the Divine, 48
Wreck of religious ordinances, 46

Wrong, God and human, 94


Youne life, 36
Youth the season of discipline,


Z1ow, the destruction of, 114





14]


INDEX TO ILLUSTRATIONS.


APELICTION reveais our sip, 32

— ripens character, 73

—— God’s messenger, 94

Afflictions overruled, 94

Age dishonoured, 132

Anger, the Divine, 73

—- injustice and, 95

restrained, more terrible, 100
Attachment stronger than death, 119





Bap, avoid the example of the, 24
Bereavement has its consolations, 128
Rest always to do justly, 105
Bitterness of sin, 78

Business not to absorb all our time, 133
—— and religion, 133


OHASTISEMENT a proof of God’s tenderness, 94
QOhristianity addresses the despairing, 34
relieves the miseries of great cities, 15
Church-going not the end of religion, 136
Churches, dead and dying, 20

City in sorrow, a, 21

Cities, sin and danger of great, 27
Compassion, Divine, 65

of Jesus, 65

for the needy, 128

Concentration of power destroys, 115
Conduct, loose talk leads to loose, 23
Orying to God, 34

arse of sin, the, 115











Dancers of sin, 78

Darkness and danger, 73

precedes light, 73

Death-bed repentance, 88

Decay of religion, 136

Defeat, inglorious, 34

Defence, goodness a nation’s, 45
Degeneration, 111

—— of character, 111

Degradation, 113, 135

—— of sin, 78

Dejection and despair, 51
Depression, 52

unjustifiable, 100

Despairing, Christianity addresses the, 34
Dignity, true, 134

Disappointment, 118

Dishonour, the agony of, 135
Distress exhausting, 53

—— the best work comes out of, 80
Divine aid works a marvellous change, 103
—— anger, the, 73

—— compassion, 65

—— faithfulness, 86

—~—— judgment a painful reality, 78
—— providence, 86


142








Divine punishment certain, 60
and pessimism, 33

—— supply in emergencies, 87
Doctrine, false, 57

Drink, moral degradation of, 113





END, a sad, 118

Enmity, how manufactured, 38
Escape, a clever, 118

Example of the bad, avoid the, 24
Evil, the downward career of, 121
overruled, 97





Farra in falsehood disastrous, 68
Faithful to death, 103

Faithfulness, Divine, 86

in service, 103

Falsehood, 58

Famine, the horrors of, 28

—— the cause of, 131

Fear, the influence of, 65

—— slavish and filial, 65

—— the greatest, 65

Fellow-suffering silences complaint, 89
Fickleness a disappointment, 37

— and its contrast, 38

Food, importance of, 113

Friends of youth, where are they? 16
Friendship, sarcasm destroys, 59





Gop the helper of the persecuted, 18

—— yearning for, 64

—— the eternity of, 138

—— answers prayer, 139 _

—— does hear prayer, 1

—— frustrates the schemes of the wicked, 168
God’s anger man’s heaviest affliction, 73
Good character a blessing, 112

—— king a blessing, 119

Goodness a nation’s defence, 45

—— of God experienced, 89

Greatness, fallen, 135

Grief, causes of, 75

—— excessively indulged, 53

—— irksome but needful, 75

—— its uses, 76

—— leaves its mark, 102

—— secret, 75

—— useless that does not lead to help, 18
— prostrating, 53


HAPPINESS depends on God, 80
Heathen worship a performance, 28
—— darkness, light for, 28

Help in extremity, 114

Helplessness appeals to our pity, L#%
Heroio endurance, 91

Hope presupposes faith, 83


INDEX TO ILLUSTRATIONS.
ED A EE


Hope clings to us to the last, 83
—— none but in God, 56

Horrors of famine, 28
Humiliation, 130

Humility a help to knowledge, $3


INDIVIDUALITY, sin and, 27
Industry secures independence, 128
Injustice, suffering preferred to, 9f
—— and anger, 95

not to be hastily resented, 106
Intercession irresistible, 62





JEHOVAH a foe to all sin, 77
Judgment a surprise, 44

a painful reality, 78

Just and the unjust, the, 106
Justice and mercy, 37

—— expedited, 95

—— between man and man, 105





Laxour, the dignity of, 183

Life divinely ordered, 130

—— the changes of, 18

—— mistaken views of, 130
ordinances help religious, 48
—— well lived, 97

Lonely, the All-seeing God and the, 18
Love and sorrow, 21

Luat, the fascination of, 131


Mattos, 121

—— reproof of, 121

Man superior to his surroundings, 20
Man’s extremity God’s opportunity, 114
Melancholy, beware of, 25

Memory and music, 25

Memories, sad, 24

Mercenary religion, 136

Mercy, justice and, 37

—— in every storm, 45

Ministers not only finger-posts but guides, 21
-— unqualified, 116

Misery, work a remedy for, 21
prolonged, 45,

—— makes indelible impressions, 53
—— of hopelessness, 83

Moral sense, lack of, 111
degradation affects work, 111
Moscow, the retreat from, $4
Mother’s prayer, a, 63

Murder, penalty of, 117











NATION, a distressed, 3%

National decline, the sadness of, 12%
—— ruin, 50

Necessity a teacher, 118

Neglect incurs wrath, 44


OPPRESSOR a selfish man, 19
—— punished, 17
Ordinances help religious life, 48


PATIENCE conquers, 89

Parting, the last, 119

Penitence involves confession of sin, $8
Penitent, misery of, how cured, 38
Persecution, 18

—— inexorable, the spirit of, 19
defeats itself, 128

Persecuted, God the helper of the, 18
Pleasure itself unsatisfying, 183
Practical sympathy, 102

Prayer, 64 f

~— a preparation for conflict, 83





Prayer, a mother’s, 63

—— a mute summons to, 63
—— an ever-open refuge, 103
—— brings deliverance, 126
—— God answers, 126

—— in trouble, 125

—— necessary for service, 62
—— should be importunate, 128
sorrow drives men to. 63
the need of, 125

—— the melody of misery, 138
Priestcraft, 117

Prophet, a false, 57
Providence, Divine, 86
Punishment and pessimism, 33
certain, 60











REBELLION, 36

fomenting, 37

Recreation, 133 :
Redeemer’s sufferings unique, the, 6
Religion and justice, 105
Religious declension, 136

sham, 136

Remorse, 34

Repentance and confession, $3
and forgiveness, 98

—— must be sincere, 99
Resignation to the will of God, 91
Retribution, 38

—— implacable, 49

Ridicule, triumph over, 79

Ruin appeals to our sympathy, 56
and responsibility, 55

—— drifting to, 55

-—— the punishment for sin, 55
-—— unutterable, 55

Rule, spiritual insight into the Divine, 98














SANOTUARY, a despised, 49
Sarcasm destroys friendship, 59
Satan an enemy, 46

Scoffer, nonplussed, a, 59

Scorn not to be dreaded, 59
Self-sacrifice, 33

Selfish man, the oppressor a. 18
Sin a disease, 27

—— a double effect, 28

—— and individuality, 27

-—— a foe, 28

——- a poison, 24

—— aslavery, 33

-—— defies law, 24

-—— discovery of, 33

—-~— in man, 130

-—— stupifies, 27

-—— the danger of great cities, 27
——— the bitterness of, 78

-—- the course of, 28

-——- the dangers of, 78

—— the degradation of, 78

—— will find you out, 121

Skill acquired in youth, 98
Solitude oppressive, 52

Sorrow, a great, 75

— acity in, 21

—— does not regenerate, S57
—— drives men to prayer, 63
— love in, 21

—— the cure of excessive, 53
Sorrows, whose like unto mine?
Soul-growth aided by silence, 91
Sovereignty, the Divine, 115
Spirit of persecution inexorable, a


PRD: Y TO ILLUSTRATIONS.





Btorms, temporary, 45
Submission, B30

to God’s will, 96

Sufferer baffled by temptation, 76
Suffering a mystery, 73

— and its compensations, 80
—— perverted views of, 100
—— prompts to prayer, 138
— the ravages of, 51

—— the uses of, 21

Supply in emergencies, 87
Sympathy in sorrow, 15

— the power of, 101

— with youth, 63





TEars, the power of, 16

the relief of, 102

Temple and perverted worship, 49

Terrible destruction, 115

Tongue, a malevolent, 121

Treachery has no pity, 80

Triumph premature, 59

—— over ridicule, 79

Trouble, a time of, 18

Truth, false teaching dangerous when mized
with, 57

Tyvanny not permanent, 24





144





STE TSIS T 5


UNBELIEF and ministerial inefficiency, 118
Uncertainty of royal favours, 119
Undercurrents cause wrecks, 48


VALUE of prayer, 138
Victory, memory of, inspiring, 88


Want anticipated, 87

War, the atrocities of, 132

—— the havoc of, 32

Wicked, the triumph of, 117
Wickedness, 121

Woe, the loneliness of, 51

Work a remedy for misery, 21

World’s treatment, lessons from the, 23
Worship, +he earthly temple and perverted,
Wrath, neglect incurs, 44

Wrecks, undercurrents cause, 48
Wrong, the beginning of, 95
Wrong-doing brings retribution, 105.


YEARNING for God, 64
Youth, 37

—— a brave, 90

~>— needs instructica, 9
skill acquired in, SO
~——=— sympathy with, @8
-—~ tho» friends of,





APP HN DIX


—_-—_


INDEX TO THE BOOK OF LAMENTATIONS.





Afflicted, God the Consolation of the


Affliction ite se es fess
Complaint under ... soe see
The Man of mee con cos

Afflictions— -

Not Accidental ... on coe
Saint, His views im owe oc

Anger—

Divine, Fierceness of the .., ss
» » Pitifulness of the... oes
’ The soe pax

Baffled, The Helplessly ann La

Bereavement.. woe ewe

Business and Recreation eae eee

Call to Prayer, A coe eco one

Character—

Divine, The eco eco eee
Moral tes oes oo 5

Choice Portions as aes see

Christianity —

Addresses the Despairing ...


Relieves the Miseries of Great Cities
Church, Disasters of the _... =e


City—
In Sorrow, A (Antwerp) ... eee
Ruined, Grief for a coe ont
Comfort for the Sorrowful ... oe
Compassion, Divine .. Kee aoe


Complaint under Affiction ... +
Conquest, Galling Tyranny of
Dangers of a Sinful Life, The
Darkness, Light for Heathen eee
Dawn of Hope, The ... ay soe
Declension, Religious ae nae
Defeat, Inglorious...
Degradation, Moral ... ate one
Dejection and Despair
Despair, Helplessness of
Despairing, Christianity Addresses the
Destroyer, The Implacable ..
Discipline, Youth the Proper Season of
Disinherited, Miseries of the nee


ase eee


ooo


Distress, Complex Phases of oo
Divine—

Anger, Fierceness of the ... soe

» » Pitilessness of the... eee

”» 9 The eee cee eee

Character, The... ce eee


Compassion, A Prayer for
Faithfulness, The ... ee ae
Goodness, The


Justice, A Confident it Appeal to a
Pity, The ... oe
Punishment an see ase


Certain wee uae
Rule, Absolute and Universal
Slowness to Punish, The ... Os
Wrath, The Storm ‘of the...


PAGB
94
72, 73
96
70


93
84


43
100


II
II
127
132
60


Duty—

Of Self-reflection, The ..

Our, towards the Jewish People ... see
Ecce Homo
Enemies of the Church, their Tantalis-

ing Indifference .. “ .

Enmity, A Spirit of ...
Panceeesiany Advantages of a State


Faithfulness, The Divine a iad


False Prophets... ee seo wee
Famine—
Horrors of . =o woe eee
Sufferings of. eco


Fate of the Malevolent, | The me
Fear, The Tyranny of... ses ses
Fickleness, Human .. eee


Foe, Tehovah as & ooo ooo
Fortune—
Strange Reverses of rae coe


Sudden Reverses of, The ... oe
Friendship, Sarcasm Destroys oes
Friendships, Fickleness of Human
God—

And Human wee “6 ove


Pleading’ ore Saints, and. Bainte
Pleading for God ob
Tenderness, His...
‘The Consolation of the Afflicted .. cop
Unchangeable, The oes aes
Goodness, Three Grades of ... wes
Grief—
Bewilderment of ...


Useless that Does not “Lead to
Active Help... ars ces
Utter Exhaustion of =r, aoe
Happiness, The Lossof .. ees
Honour, The Loss of ... ace on
Hope—
And Patience nae one aes
Dawn of, The nee Res coe


Lost, Restored ... see me
Memory the Handmaid of oo


Indifference, Tantalising, of the

Enemies of the Church... “re
Jehovah—

As a Foe = seo ose

» an Enemy see ove ose


Piteous Appeal to, A sae
Joy, Two Kinds of _...
Judah, Punishment of, a Type 3 of the
Punishment of all Unfaithful Nations
Judgment of Oppression, The dg
J be hata Divine, A Confident Appeal


Teen cion over & Forsaken n Sane:
tuary tee caw coe


Praca


146





Lamentations, The Book of—
Introduction


Author aes vee «oe
Contents Nes «ee oe
Date ... 5 ~ ves
Form ... one oo
Liturgical Uses owe eos
Name ... tee one woe
Purport we
Leaders, Unfaithful Religions
Liberty, The Loss of .. ar
Life—
Changes of . ci
Godly, the Music of ‘Society, PN EE
Intense Love of ... oth ie
National, Extinction of cae
Sinful, Dangers of a eo coe
Light for Heathen Darkness... 5c
Love in Sorrow ee &
Malevolent, Fate of the oes eee
Man of Affliction, The ees mee
Memory—
Handmaid of Hope, The ... one
Office of, The aoe pee ned
Mercies, Dayspring ... “Be oe
Ministers, False, of God... aes
Moral Degradation oes oe
Nation—
A Distressed a
: Havoc of War
National "Sorrow, An Ideal ee
sentation ..
Nature, A Sympathetic ;
Oppression, Judgment of, The Pe
Oppressor Punished, The . ES
Ordinances—
Help Religious Life ae oes
Religious, The Wreck of ... ese
Patience and Hope coc eos
Penitence, Sincere ee oes
Penitent, Misery of the <a ae


People—
Doomed, Last Hours of a.
Jewish, Our ee towards the ae
Persecution


Pity, Divine... aa BAS oe
Portions, Choice see sue ace
Prayer—
Call to, A ... ke ees
Earnest, for Restoration ee
Efficacy of . Ae ve oe
For Divine Compassion oe con
», Repentance, A Ay
Hopefulness of We eee se
Property a
Prophet, Faithful, sin Trouble, A,J oremiah
Prophets, False A
Punishment . an coe Pa
Certainty of, The iss toe eee
Divine cos eee ry ed
Graduated ... an abe soe
Sinand ... toe cee oo
Rebellion _... os << ae
Bitter Fruits, Its . ao ‘


Recreation, Business and as
Redeemer,The Sufferings of the World's


Religious—

Declension .

Ordinances, The Wreck of
Remorse ee ase ese ss
Repentance ... aus 4)


135


Q7


Repentance, Prayer for
Resignation ... ae Ap
3 to the Will ef God ...


ceo one


coe


Restoration, Earnest Prayer for, An
Retribution ... Re aes ‘
Ridicule Res aes ao a
Royalty ee oon aoe eee
Ruin—

Inexpressible oo AS


National, Complete ec
Rule, Divine, ‘Absolute and Universal
Saint in his Afflictions, The Views of a
Saints Pleading for God, and God


Pleading for Saints
Sanctuary—


Deserted, A na cae axe
Despised, A B00 ve
Forsaken, Lamentation over ra

Sarcasm Destroys Friendship

Scorner, Heartless Triumph of the, The

Self-reflection, Duty of

Self-sacrifice... a

Service, Watch-night ...

Silence and Retirement

Sin—

And Punishment ...


eee


ooo oe


Degradation of ... nee eee
Galling Tyranny of ace aes
National, Its Punishment, als
Terrible Havoc of ... ae cos


The Cause of Suffering... oe
Slowness, Divine, to Punish, The ...
Society, Godly Life the Music of, A
Sorrow—

Cure for Excessive

National, An Ideal Representation of

Ravages of, The ne

aa cena Humiliating
rer, A Baffled ...
Hips aes

Extremity of, The...

Human, God and ...

Mystery of . cee

Silent

Tension of Prolonged The ae
Sufferings of theWorld’s Redeemer, The
Tears, The Power of ... oe
Temple, The Earthly .. Kor.
Tenderness of God, The
War—

Atrocities of coe

Rigour of, The —...
Watch-night Service cs oe
Watcher, Weary, The
Wicked, Tactics of the
Widowhood ....
Woe, A Voiceless
Woes, A Series of Pe
Wonder Explained ne Greater Won-

ders, A (iii. 57) ..
World’s Wonder, A ... =e see
Worship, Perverted ... na a
Wrong, Human, God and... ves
Youth—

Needs Instruction, ...

The Proper Season of Discipline ...
Zicn—

Calamities and Prayer, Herons

tion of its aes vee

Destruction of as ss ch

Its Pitiful Estate ...


ooe


eee


eee


eee


ome


.


PAGE
138
go
91
137
38, 5a
78; 79
118


54
48


39

25%
Io!
104
105


53
66


75
128
75


112
72
73
gI
99
30
16
47
92


131
113
61
118
116
14
50
134


103
115
48
94


21


122
IIq
107


HOMILETICO COMMENTARY


ON THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET


HA i ei


CHAPTERS I.—XI.
By the REV. D. G. WATT. M.A,


CHAPTERS XII.—XXIX.
By the REV. T. Hi. LHALE,


CHAPTERS XXX.-—-XLVIII.
By the REV. GEO. BARLOW.


Printed in the United States


FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK anp LONDON





PREFACE


ee


Tus Commentary is the work of three different authors. The portion
chapters i.-xi. is written by the Rev. D. G. Wart, M.A.; xii.-xxix. by
the Rev. T. H. Leate; xxx.-xlviii. by the Rev. G. Bariow.

The Exegetical Notes contain, in a condensed form, the results of recent
Biblical criticism, and will be found a valuable help in the interpretation
of the text and in furnishing facts of contemporaneous history to elucidate
the prophecies. The Vision of the Temple (chapters xl.-xlviii.) is treated
in its ideal aspect, and, viewed in this light, it becomes full of suggestive-
ness to the practised homilete.

Every available work on this confessedly difficult book has been dili-
gently consulted, and the choicest and most helpful passages of the best
authors are condensed in the body of this Commentary. Of the 390
Homiletic Outlines all are original, except those which bear the names of
their respective authors.

Among other works, the following writers on the Prophecies of Ezekiel
have been carefully scanned: —W. Greenhill, E. Henderson, Patrick Fair-
bairn, Hengstenberg, Keil, M’Farlan, Archbishop Newcombe, Bishop
Horsley, Dean Stanley, Kitto, Dr. Frazer’s ‘‘Synoptical Lectures,’’ Gei-
kie’s ‘‘ Hours with the Bible,’’ Pool’s ‘‘ Annotations,’’ Lightfoot on ‘‘ The
Temple,’’ F. D. Maurice’s ‘‘Prophets and Kings,’’? Guthrie’s ‘‘Gospel in
Ezekiel,’’ and the following Commentaries—The Speaker’s, Lange’s, A.
Clarke’s, Benson’s, Sutcliffe’s, Matthew Henry’s, Trapp’s, and Fausset’s.

Amid the wealth of imagery in the use of which Ezekiel is so lavish,
and the dry facts of history, the aim throughout has been to detect and
develop the great moral truths of which the thoughtful sermoniser is in
constant search in his anxious study of the Word of God.

G. B,


SHEFFIELD, August 1890.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


ON THE


BOOK OF EZEKIEL.





INTRODUCTION


No prophetical book sets the writer, the dates, the places of its contents se
distinctly forth as that of Ezekiel does, It is not only a record of what the
Lord spoke by His prophet, it is also a record of personal experiences during
the period in which he was an organ for special divine pany eaeee The one is
as instructive as the other.

The book shows that Ezekiel was the child of a priestly family, and had
been taken into captivity when the king of Babylon carried away the wealth,
the strength, the skilled industry of Jerusalem. No direct information is com-
municated as to his life before the captivity, or as to the first five years of his
enforced exile. We cannot say that he had ever officiated as a priest in the
Temple of Jerusalem, though his movements show apparent familiarity with
its compartments (chap. viii.). He was one ofa colony of his fellow-exiles who
had been settled—why, he does not say—by the Chebar, somewhere among
“the rivers of Babylon,” and had established a characteristic organisation for
themselves. “The elders” once and again took counsel with Ezekiel in his
own house; for he was a houselioider and married to a woman whom he
warmly loved. He starts his narration from the fifth day of the fourth month
of the fifth year, when the distinguished episode in his life, by which he became
known, was commenced with his first vision of God.

That revelation affected his constitution in a remarkable manner. Mentai
conitigas, of course, would be altered thereby; but bodily affections were
still more palpably influenced. The sensation of eating the roll of writing, of
being lifted up and carried away, of the strong hand of the Lord laid upon him;
the sitting “astonished ”—stunned—seven days, the lengthened duress, the loss
of power of speech, except when authorised by the Lord to utter His messages,
and other physical phenomena, betoken at once the action of God and of a
disorder in Ezekiel’s health. Perhaps his nervous system was one of that highly
sensitive kind whose conditions under excitement cannot be foreseen; and
that it should have been upset could not be regarded as an unlikely thing,
God’s instruments are not always such as man would employ. He chose, for
an apostle, Paul, whose “ bodily presence was weak ;” is it impossible that He
would choose, for a prophet, a man of a peculiarly nervous temperament? If


1


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


——


the “abundance of revelations” given to the former affected his bodily frame,
why should similar revelations not have affected Ezekiel’s physical constitution ?

The symptoms did not disappear at once. Though he had recovered the
power of walking (xii. 3-7), yet the statement that the elders were accustomed
to go to his house to hear his words (viii. 1, xiv. 1, xx. 1), indicates that weak-
ness and physical disability clung to him for a considerable time—perhaps to
the tenth month of the ninth year (xxiv. 1), At that date he was confronted
with something more than physical ailment. He endured the chastisement
whereof all sons are partakers, and learned how “ deep calleth unto deep” as
they cross the sea of life, The wife whom his eyes liked to rest upon was
cast down at his side by a sudden stroke. No open cry of anguish broke
from his lips. Every sign of sorrow and mourning was sternly repressed ; yet
the pathetic reference to what she had been to him suffices to prove how
hard it must have been to say “Thy will be done.”

Under the dark shadow of this sad event his last prophecy concerning the
state of undestroyed Jerusalem was uttered. Then for about three years he
remained dumb, as if his bereavement had aggravated his previous disordered
bodily symptoms. Only when the first part of his commission was fulfilled,
when his position, as the sign of troubles impending over the Holy City, was
no longer teaable, the turning-point of his affliction was reached. The news of
the capture of Jerusalem became the signal for recovery of the free use of his
organs of speech (xxxiii. 22), and no mention is made of any bodily infirmities
when executing the second part of his commission. Thus he passes from view.
Like Moses, like prophets and apostles, “he was buried, and no man knoweth
of his sepulchre unto this day.” Is this significant of a principle of the divine
government, intimating that true conduct not outward appearances, that life
not death, are to be perpetuated in the thoughts of men 4

Ezekiel was profoundly conscious of the dates when he spoke by the Spirit,
and might be said to keep a journal of them. For him “inspiration” was not
merely an ecstasy of his own mind. From the fifth to the twenty-seventh year
of his residence in Chaldea he knew that he was an organ which the Lord used
to sound forth the notes of judgment and mercy.

The sphere of his prophetic activity was not only the captives, but also the
Jews still remaining in Judea. Between the two portions there was no cor-
diality, and we might fancy that the property of the exiles had been some-
what dishonestly or forcibly appropriated by the others (xi. 15). The task of
Ezekiel was hard. He saw that both divisions were oppressed and depressed,
and open to the glitter of flattering prospects presented by unworthy men.
He had to dispel vivid illusions, to expose clamant evils, to render patient
under the hard facts of punishment, to urge unpalatable truths which were no
more agreeable to them than to other people. More than other prophets he
was ordered to watch for souls ; more than to-others the modelling of the future
Israel was intrusted to him. The last fortress of Judaism as it had been is to
be trodden under the feet of the heathen, but out of its ruins anew one is to be
raised, and he has to make a sketch of it. More magnificent and moving symbols
of the glory of the Lord than had been given in the Temple of Jerusalem came
to the exile by the Chebar, and testified that He could preserve there a people
for os His gifts and calling are without repentance, yet he means to


FOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





bring the people to perceive their unfaithfulness, that they had to do with the
living God, that the eternal holiness is unchangeable, and that each soul is
responsible for its own sins, Buried seed does not rot though ungenial weather
may prevent it sprouting for many a day, and out of this period of banishment
were to spring forces for the creation of a new Judaism to which idols and idol-
worship would be altogether abhorrent. A new theocracy would be constituted,
and Ezekiel is the pioneer of this new phase of divine education. He “ was to
point to an inauguration of divine worship far more solemn than was to be
secured by the reconstruction of the city or Temple on its original site in its
original form; to point, in fact, to that dispensation which Temple, city, and
nation were intended to foreshadow and introduce ” (Speaker’s Com.). Thus was
he given one of the highest places among the men of the Old Testament. It is
not absurd to make a comparison between Moses and this prophet. Moses had
visions of God and instructed the tribes of Israel to build a sanctuary according
to the pattern shown to him; he gave details of the services to be rendered
therein ; he set before the congregation life and death ; “he heard the voice of
One speaking unto him from off the mercy-seat, . . . from between the two
cherubims.” Did not Ezekiel hear a voice from above the cherubim? Did he
not stand between the people and the Lord? Did he not prepare them to
sanctify God, and so to be fitted for the future position they were to occupy in
their own land and before all nations? Did he not appear like a lawgiver,
who, in chaps. xl.-xlviii., was authorised to prescribe Temple and worship for
future times, and so place the crown upon his prophetic service?

The manner in which he carried out his service is instructive and stimulating,
All his faculties are put at the call of the Lord~—his eyes, ears, feet, tongue. He
sets forth plainly and amply that which he has been inspired to do and teach.
He goes on to the appointed duty, unheeding what its consequences to himself
may be. He will bear any burden, expose himself to any risks, confront any fear
or the dislike and hatred of his own people, if thus he may promote their welfare
or be exculpated from their woe. If his forehead is “as an adamant, harder
than flint,” it is not from indifference to the moral conduct and disastrous fate
of his countrymen, it is from a burning wish that the divine word should find a
faithful and adequate representation (iii. 9, 10). He is “a spiritual Samson,”
‘of undaunted and audacious courage,” one of


“The dead, but sceptered sovereigna, who still rule
Our spirits from their urns.”


There is another side of his service. He is the most practical of prophets ;
he can cook, draw, dig, calculate, and measure. He is not a recluse; he sits
among his captive countrymen for days and freely receives them into his
house. He is informed as to the history and state of his own nation, and
as to the religions, the politics, the trade of other nations too, Had he
watched the sea and its sailors; looked upon the many articles of commerce
that were found in the busy marts of ancient Tyre? Each of his features
assures us that he was fitted to point the way into a new position in which
men should be required to reconsider and rearrange the practice of their
forefathers,

The style of Ezekiel is clear enough on the whole. At times “a oe


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





tenderness, beauty, melody wholly his own” distinguish it. “Strange com-
binations and grotesque forms are resorted to, when by means of them he can
add to the graphic power and moral force of his delineations, and invest his
imagery with such specific and minute details as are naturally connected with’
a felt and present reality” (Fairbairn). The stir and pomp of Babylonian life
are within his scope, and some of its colossal symbolic figures, which have been
unearthed to the wonder of our generation, show how his thoughts had been
coloured. His parables, proverbs, pictures are all used to present and impress
the truths he had to deliver, and in this view he freely repeats himself, so as to
produce sometimes the feeling that he is too prolix. (Comp. chap. i. with
viii,-xi. ; iii. 16-21 with xxxiii. 1-9 ; vi. with xxxvi. ; xvi. with xxii, and xxiii. ;
xviii. with xxxiii, 10-20.) He has favourite and peculiar expressions: “The
word of the Lord came,” “The hand of the Lord was upon me,” “Thou sor
of man,” “ Thus saith the Lord God ;” and a tendency to sum up with, “So shak
ye, or they, know that I am the Lord.” Individuality and unity mark his
whole work, and help us to perceive what he was whom the Lord moulded into
a vessel fit for that juncture of afiairs in which he lived and acted as a
spiritual force.

A considerable likeness of phraseology is to be noticed between Ezekiel and
Jeremiah, and is an indication, not that one borrowed from the other, but that
a similar mission had made for itself a similar verbal garment. A much more
remarkable parallelism, however, is found between Lev. xvii.—xxvi. and the
early portion of Ezekiel’s prophecies, To account for this by saying that
Ezekiel wrote both, or that some scamp interpolated Ezekiel’s words into the
book of the law in order to give the former or the latter a factitious authority,
is an explanation quite worthy of those who can tell to a line what Isaiah
wrote or did not write; or who can clear out of the Four Gospels the many
words which Jesus of Nazareth did not speak, and actions which He did not
do! I have no skill for such legerdemain. I can do no more than suppose
that Ezekiel had so closely studied the condition of affairs described in Leviticus
that he, perhaps unconsciously, adopted its expressions in reference to a rebel-
lious and gainsaying people.

Scanty justice has been meted out to Ezekiel and his work. Not only was
he treated harshly at the outset of his prophesying, but the Jews of later times,
we are told, at the last revision of the Hebrew canon, disputed as to whether
the Book of Ezekiel should be included therein, and in after-days forbad that
it should be read until thirty years of age had been passed. If it has not fared
quite so badly among Christians, yet Jerome, 1500 years ago, applied epithets
to it which are re-echoed by unnumbered commentators, and do not encourage
its study—Soripturarwm oceanus et mysteriorum Dei labyrinthus, A certain class
of moderns are still less respectful, and therefore less likely than Jerome to
find the spiritual power of the prophet. Preachers of our day say that they
have never taken a text out of it, or but three or four times during the course
of a lengthened ministry. Reuss suggests, as a ground for this neglect, that
“Christian commentators have found less in him than in others of what they
sought for, viz., Hebrew texts, direct relations, true or pretended, with the
facts and ideas of the gospel.” Still there are testimonies of another. kind.
Hengstenberg writes, “ Whoever penetrates into Ezekiel will be deeply stirred

4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





by his earnestness, and . . . if it please God to bring great sifting judgments
upon us, to pull down what He has built up, and to root out what He has
planted, we may gain from him an immovable confidence in the final victory
of the kingdom of God, who kills and makes alive, who wounds and heals, and
who, after He has sent the darkest cloud, at length remembers His covenant
and displays His shining bow.” “What things were written aforetime were
written for our learning, that we through comfort and patience of the Scriptures
might have hope.”

The book is divided into two halves, which have striking parallelisms with
one another. In the first the carnal confidence of Israel in Jerusalem is buried,
in the second a new Temple is built up. The first part embraces chaps. i.—xxiv.,
and treats of the obstinate wickedness of the people and the approaching
overthrow of Jerusalem. The second part embraces chaps. xxxiii.—xlviii, and
treats of the new life to the people and the future modified Temple and its
worship. Between these two parts stand chaps. xxv.—xxxii, which treat of
seven neighbouring heathen peoples, They are warned of the righteous judg-
ment of God against them, and their number, seven, probably conveys the
intimation that the principles applied to them are applicable to all the ungodly
nations,


THE PROPHECIES


———


FIRST MAIN DIVISION.
CuaptTers I.-XXIV.


L—THE DIVINE CALL OF EZEKIEL. Cuaps I-III 15,


OF EZEKIEL.





1. Tae DesIGNATION OF THE PRopHET TO HIS WorK (Chap. i. 1-3).


EXEGETICAL NOTES. —Ver. 1.
‘Now,” the usual Hebrew connective
particle, united to a tense which signi-
fies an action associated with something
which has already transpired. It seems
to have place here, neither because the
Book of Ezekiel is a continuation of that
of Jeremiah, nor because a preceding
portion of Ezekiel’s prophecies has been
lost, but rather because of thoughts
which were in the mind of the writer,
and in succession to which his call came.
“Tn the thirtieth year.” No note is
given to define the point from which
this date takes its origin. It was the
thirtieth from the last jubilee year, or
from the finding of the Book of the
Law in the reign of King Josiah (2
Kings xxii. 8), or from the era fixed by


the father of Nebuchadnezzar as the
commencement of the Chaldean domi-
nion, or from the birth of the prophet—
such are the suggestions made by various
expositors, The first and the last are
the most improbable ; still, it would be
misapplied labour to discuss whether the
third or the fourth is the more likely.
There is no part of the prophecies de-
pending for illustration upon a settle-
ment of the point from which Ezekiel
reckons, No doubt it had some bearing
upon him and his contemporaries; it
seems to have none upon us. “In
the fourth ”—month is omitted in the
Hebrew, as frequently with Ezekiel.
The fourth month of the ecclesiastical
year corresponds to our June-July, when
nature is prolific with storms, ‘In the
5


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





fifth day of the month”—was this a
Sabbath? So it has been affirmed be-
cause seven days after he received a fur-
ther commission (iii. 16), This is too
precarious a footing from which to trace
a parallel to the case of the banished
John (Rev. i. 10). “As I was among
the captives ”—literally, “and I in the
midst of the captivity.” He has not yet
mentioned who he is, so by this silence
he calls special attention to his en-
vironment. He sets forth that he was
amongst, and was one of those Jews
who had been carried away from their
ancestral land, and subjected to the
shame and pain of captivity. He was a
troubled man along with other troubled
men. Not that he was under enforced
servile labour, as the Israelites were in
Egypt, “the house of bondage ;” he
had a considerable amount of personal
liberty ; but he was far from the land
of promise, and oppressed with a sense
of his exile. “By the river of Chebar.”
It is not at all certain to-day where thig
river was. It is not necessary to sup
pose that Ezekiel was beside it, because
the murmur of the water might dispose
to quietude, and prepare his mind for
openness to God. Something less senti-
mental than that took him thither. He
had been located in the district, through
which the water flowed, by the para-
mount power as a district which could
be easily superintended, and in which
there was need of population, Such
wars as Nebuchadnezzar carried on, like
the wars which modern Turks have
waged, could not but have been the
occasion for large parts of his dominions
to fall out of cultivation. It would be
politic to settle an industrial people like
the Jews in such places, and grant them
full permission “to build houses and
dwell in them, and plant gardens, and
eat the fruit of them.” Abundance of
water was needed for such operations,
So the captive Jews were by a river.
All was not pleasant there. Just as the
later Jews were confined to the slums
of Rome on the right bank of the Tiber,
and satirised as T’ranstiberini, so was
acorn heaped upon the earlier captives
by “the rivers of Babylon.” There they
were teased and tormented. ‘They
&


that carried us away captive required of
us a song, saying, Sing us one of the
songs of Zion.” A somewhat truculent
temper was engendered; but God did
not forsake them, and even there did
exceeding abundantly above what they
thought. “The heavens were opened.”
The exile perceived the sky cleft open.
Perhaps it was not materially so, but
only to the eye of faith. Yet as he
speaks of it as an actual fact, it is pre-
ferable to consider the appearance to
have been shown to “eyes open,” as was
that to John the Baptist, to Stephen, to
Peter. “I saw visions of God ”—phe-
nomena produced by God and relating
to His Godhead ; He was at once the
author and the object of them. They
were somewhat differently presented
from those which Ezekiel received after-
wards, which were “im visions” (chaps
viii, 3, xi. 24, xl. 2).

Ver, 2. “The fifth year of King
Jehoiachin’s captivity.” Jehoiachin
had been placed on the throne of Judea
b Nebuchadnezzar ; but, following ad-
vice from the partisans of an Egyptian
alliance, and in defiance of the protesta
tions and threatenings of Jeremiah, he
had pursued a procedure at variance
with the interests of the Babylonian
empire. Nebuchadnezzar soon trampled
down the feeble revolt, and, in little
more than three months of kingship,
Jehoiachin was made captive and carried
away to Babylon with the prophetic de
nunciation ringing in his ears that he
would “die childless”—the last of the
line of David which was traced through
Solomon. His captivity was rigorous
for years. He was kept in confinement
and clothed in prison garments, and that,
with their own troubles, must have made
the thousands of Jews who had been
transported with him to regard the date
of their exile as deeply significant. So
Ezekiel says to them—hiscontemporaries
and hearers—that four years of their
captivity had gone by, and then he was
made cognisant of manifestations of God.
This mode of dating he adheres to in his
succeeding prophecies, never again refer-
ring to the thirtieth year of verse 1.

Ver. 3, “The word of the Lord.”
Anpearances were fortified, 28 so often


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


CHAP. I,





In God’s revelations, by words heard.
“Came expressly.” Ezekiel uses here
a form of Hebrew emphasis, 1.¢., repeat-
ing the same verb. Such a repetition,
in this connection, can scarcely mean
that the word came directly to him, but
rather that it was certainly, verily,
really a divine word which in “coming
came to him.” It needed a special
attestation, and that was given to it.
The same authenticating feature is ex-
hibited in the frequent reiterations and
assertions by Ezekiel that he was acting
under divine impulse and authority.
“Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi.”
The order in the Hebrew, is, ‘‘ Ezekiel,
the son of Buzi the priest.” Of course
Ezekiel was a priest by descent; but
this order of the Hebrew may be in-
tended to signify that, being in captivity,
he had never fulfilled any specific priestly
functions. His name, as usual among
the Jews, has a meaning, and is to be
translated either “God is strong,” or
“ God will strengthen.” Hengstenberg
decides for the former, and says it is to
be explained that ‘Ezekiel was he in
relation to whom God is strong.” Baum-
garten chooses the latter, and says it
signifies “he whose character is a special
confirmation of the strength of God.”
The idea insisted on by Hengstenberg,
following an older commentator, that it


“is not a name he had borne from his
youth, but au official name which he had
assumed at the beginning of his calling,”
appears to be groundless, It is true of
all the prophets, both that God is strong
to fulfil His purpose, and that He will
give strength to His servants for that
part of His work which He has assigned
them. “In the land of the Chaldeans.”
This topographical addition seems to be
intended for a further attestation that it
was the word of the Lord which really
came to Ezekiel. The Chaldee version
interpolates thus, “In the land [of Israel,
and again a second time He spake to
him in the land] of the Chaldeans.” It
is believed that “the Jews had a notion
that the Shechinah could not overshadow
a prophet out of the Holy Land.” Per-
haps @ strain of this notion is to be
heard in the wail of the captives “ by
the rivers of Babylon” when they ask,
‘* How can we sing the Lord’s song in a
strange land?” The notion was to be
eradicated. God could endue a man
with prophetic power even in Chaldea,
and that is further witnessed to by the
words “was there upon him.” “The
hand of the Lord” is a frequent Scrip-
tural expression, and indicates that the
thing which was to be done was done
in submission to the restraining or the
impelling energy of the Lord.


HOMILETICS.


(1.) GenzRaL ConpiTIons oF THE DESIGNATION.


I. The time to receive fuller knowledge of the Lord is uncertain, Who
can tell why the call to Ezekiel came in the fifth year, and not in the first, second,
d&c.? The pain and pressure of exile galled, no doubt, as deeply in the earlier years
as in the later, yet Ezekiel had not seen “ the heavens opened.” What ts uncertain
to men is fixed with God. He is “the only wise God.” He sees the end from
the beginning of all lives. He alone knows where it is best, to lead ss the brook”
across the way of His people, by drinking of which they “will lift up their heads,”
Though uncertain, men are not to be unconcerned. Having no criterion as to the
appropriate time for special unfolding of the will of God, that does not sanction an
utter indifference as to what they would have Him do, They must “wait on the
Lord and keep His way,” ever hoping that He will “exalt” them to see what they
do not yet see of the glorious majesty of His kingdom. Though uncertain, men
should always be on the alert. Waiting for blessing is not real and valid waiting,
except they who wait are sensitive to the approach of the Lord. His word comes
to comfort, strengthen, open up a duty, and those are the good and faithful ser-
vants who honour Him by receiving it, no matter at what time, convenient or
inconvenient to them, He may vouchsafe it. Though uncertain. men must never


CHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. i
Se eS eee


lose faith, However long it be ere a word comes—one year or five years—they
must believe in God. He has not forgotten His people. Let them trust that in
some month He will bestow favour on them and His depressed interests,

II. The place is undistinguished. Jt has no memorable assuciations. The land
of the Chaldeans was devoid of that instructive relation to the Jews which both
Egypt and the mountains of Sinai had. The river of Chebar could not stir their
thoughts as the Jordan could, But God can produce in an obscure or obnoxious
place that which will be a hallowed memory. He can make communications in a
garden as to Adam, in an outlying district of Luz as to Jacob, in a cave of the
desert as to Elijah, in exile as to Ezekiel. He may manifest Himself anywhere—
in ship or customhouse, by road or rail, in a family or alone. Jt has no recog-
nised religtous privileges, The captives could not make yearly pilgrimages to the
City of the Great King; they could not approach to the place where His honour
dwelt, For them there was no treading of His courts, no appearing before Him,
uo burnt-offerings and sacrifices to offer for His acceptance. Their hearts might
thirst and faint for His altars, but they could not be relieved. As Nathanael in
after times, they might have put a question expressive of contempt and unbelief,
Can any good thing be obtained by the rivers of Babylon? They had not yet
learned by experience that the Lord would make “a little sanctuary ” for them in
the place to which He had driven them, and there reveal His justice and His
grace, So when Kzekiel was constituted an organ of new revelations, they were
blessed where they did not look for blessing. Happy is it that the help of God is
for the feeble who cannot, for the charged with duty who must not, for the wan-
derers who may not enter into the assemblies of worshippers, as well as for those
who have all means of grace at their command. “In all places where I record my
name I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.” “Lo, 1 am with you alway,
even unto the end of the world,”

TL The person is inconspicuous. So far as is known, there was nothing to
give prominence to Ezekiel over other members of priestly families, or the general
body of his fellow-captives, ‘There is no respect of persons with God.” He
does not limit His manifestations by any classifications which men may make,
‘‘ Base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen.” The
boy with a good education or the boy without it, children who are taught by
their parents the truth in Jesus from their earliest days, or children who have
learned no more than they learned in a Sunday-school, may equally obtain from
God an entrance into “the secret of His covenant.”

This designation of Ezekiel furthermore suggests—G@od can provide fit agents in
unexpected circumstances, He only knows when and where it is required that He
should make special additions to men’s knowledge of Him and His ways, and He
has the wisdom and the power to select the persons to whom that knowledge can
be given. So He finds Enoch amid gigantic iniquities, Moses in the palace of
Pharaoh, Ezekiel among the captives of Babylon, Paul (Saul) among the fiercest
of persecutors, Luther in a monastery. Lowly places or prominent places cannot
be obstacles in His path of goodness and mercy. He proves that “ His strength
is made perfect in weakness,”

God can bestow great boons on the person He may call. An exile amongst exiles,
with none of the appointed external means of worship, in the face of political dis-
abilities, pressed upon by social troubles, allied to men who had no heart to help
him, yet Ezekiel not only found God near, but, moreover, saw heavenly things, and
was touched by a hand which made him one of the forces of the world. It tells us
that not any circumstances of life, not any conditions of body need to prevent us
from being dignified by a faith in the unseen, and sitting in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus,

God can increase His servant's power by connecting him with an organtsation,
Robinson Crusoe, alone on Juan Fernandes, might have received large favovrs from


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, omar. L


NS


God, but he could not use those faveurs for the welfare of neighbours. Power with
men depends more or less upon the links which bind us to them. There is influ-
ence from a family. When the solitary are set in families it is that they may give
and find help which could not have been otherwise secured. Each member has a
power to affect the rest who are within the same circle. There is influence from a
caste. Commercial, social, intellectual, religious interests bind men to one another,
and that bond enables them to carry out schemes which could not have been ac-
complished individually, eg., guilds, trades’ unions, companies, an aristocracy, an
army, a priesthood, a denomination of Christians, There is influence from @ nation,
The members of a small nation are not so powerfully backed as those of a large.
Civis Romanus sum was a phrase which gave, to the person who could employ it,
greater consideration and security than were given to the citizens of any other state
contemporary with the Roman. The phrase, “I am a Hebrew of the Hebrews,”—
however the speaker of it might have been counted as “the offscouring of all
things,”—-was pregnant with mightier influences than have been wielded by the
nationalities of those who derided him. The use of a nation’s influence cannot be
indifferent to God who loveth righteousness ; and in Ezekiel He designated a man
who had received a certain education and status on account of his priestly origin,
and who, because he was a Jew and could contribute to Hebrew literature, haa
obtained a position which commands the suffrages of the world. ‘ This also is of
the Lord of hosts, who is wonderful in counsel and excellent in working.” Organi-
sations may be hurtful! by checking the fair development of personal life, but they
can also add to personal power.


(2.) Pretiminary Sreps To THE DESIGNATION.


L “Ezekiel, the son of Buzi the priest” (ver. 3).

It is sometimes argued that Ezekiel was trammelled by his connection with the
priestly organisation, that his lineage induced him to weave a sacerdotal element
into his prophecies, that he presents “a Levitical turn of mind, in virtue of which
he sets a high value upon sacred customs.” Attempts to prove this do not appear
eminently successful, When commentators say that his sacerdotalism is shown in
the demands he makes for obedience to the requisitions of the Law, we seem to near
in that statement, not a simple reading of the prophecies, but a reading with inter-
polations from faney or prepossession, Isaiah, Jeremiah make the same Gescands.
and, taking account of the different circumstances of Ezekiel, he exhibits no more
of a sacerdotal tendency than they da It would have been an odd pises in which
to manifest “a genuine priestly turn of mind”—whatever that may mean—the
place where he could not by any means fulfil the special functions of the priest-
hood ; but a very suitable place in which to endeavour to impress the captives
with the conviction that they were still ‘under the law to God,” even though far
from the Temple of Jehovah. It would be as hard to signify where Hzekiel exhibits
“a strong priestly feeling,” marking him off from other prophets, as it would be to
exhibit a strong pastoral and fruit-gathering feeling in Amos (chap. vii. 14), Yet
Fairbairn writes, “In Ezekiel alone of the later prophets does the priestly element
become so peculiarly prominent and prevailing as to give a tone and impress to
the general character of his ministrations, and to render even his prophetical
labours a kind of priestly service” (p. 8). We see—what we expect to see! God
chooses prophets not to unfold their own ancestral or technical habits, but His
true and broad righteousness and love. That Ezekiel, when acting in accordance
with this, should employ imagery borrowed from the Law and worship of Israel
was natural, He did it, however, not as one who would exalt whatever the priests
had to carry out, but as one who had been taught that against the degrading ten-
dencies of Israel there was no barrier, against heathenism there was no power, in
Temple, offerings, or priests, He was taught that there was no preservative in the
evil days of dire captivity save in the latent energy aud imérinsic trath > “the


CHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


lively oracles” given by Moses. So he sets himself, not to do a service for priest-
liness, but for the Law. As a priest he was doubtless one of that kind whose lips
kept knowledge, and as an enforcer of the Law was “the messenger of the Lord of
hosts” (Mal. ii. 7).

It. “Now I was among the captives” (ver. 1).

Ezekiel had been, appareutly, by himself. His mind had been exercised upon
the sad days that were passing over him and his people. He had been laying
himself open to thoughts of the Lord, and then he was called into a nearer
communion than he had ever experienced. Unconsciously he was stepping for-
ward to receive competency to do actions for God. He does not tell how he had
been moving—only that, while so employed, “it came to pass” that God spoke
to him. They who would learn of Christ must: 1. Go alone with Him. Things
pass in secret from Him which no stranger need intermeddle with, and no personal
insufficiency need intercept. 2. Go with all cares, Outer circumstances may be
harassing, associates may be lukewarm or ungodly, prospects may seem utterly
blank, but neither ignore them nor make light of them before Him, for “ He
careth for you.” 3. Go in hope that He will manifest Himself. Unlooked-for
light may be lifted up on you, strength may be infused, faith be increased, and new
scenes in your history be entered on; for ‘‘ He is able to do exceeding abundantly
beyond what you think.”

III. “The heavens were opened ” (ver. 1).

1. dfen have faculties for realising what ts beyond the earth. We dwell on the
borders of the unknown, and can take interest in noticing the traces of what may
be therein. God’s hands have made us and fashioned us so that this is possible.
To use only animal functions, to develop only earthly aims, and to present a muti:
lated nature to all the influences which play upon us, is a spectacle darkened with
criminality in reference to ourselves and our Maker. But to use our faculties for
looking at ‘‘the things unseen and eternal,” that is the part of full and true man-
hood—a token that our life is a life worth living.

2. God adopts methads for acting on those faculties, As light is made to suit the
organ of sight, and sound the organ of hearing, so His Spirit is able to operate
upon us in order that we may discern spiritual things. The person who sees light
or hears a sound cannot prove to another person that he sees or hears. He can only
affirm, witness. So a person, who has “ the eyes of his heart enlightened to know”
what is his inheritance in the heavens, cannot give any demonstration of the
change which he is conscious of, he can only affirm, witness, that he does know
what he did not know. ‘ Whereas I was blind, now I see,” is as applicable to
heavenly as to earthly things. All men do not receive the benefit-of God’s methods,
Some deny their operation, and some their validity. Some acknowledge them only
to neglect them, and some hope that they will see the heavens opened though they
do not go to the only door thereinto. But whatever the reason be for their
deficiency, the light has been opened up to the world, and men are judged for not
believing in it. The Son of God has come from heaven and has again ascended to
His Father: through Him heaven is always open, and open to every one who will
“Set your affections on things above, not on things on the earth.”

IV. “I saw visions of God” (ver. 1).

More is meant than that Ezekiel saw grand and vast visions, His expression
is not to be limited to visions given by the action of God, or to visions notifying
the will of God, but embraces also the marvellousness of revelations of God. He
was made a seer of God in order to be a prophet for God. Observe—

1. Thoughts of heaven must receive their character from views of God. If
we could see into heaven and did not see signs of God there, we should remain in
spiritual darkness. We must pass into the house to perceive the householder.
We are vagrants still, as to all moral progress and undertakings, if we do nat find
Onz who can enlighten and guide and strengthen us. All beliefs of our interest iy

10


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP. I.








the heavens will be blighted unless they are steps on our way to know we have a
living, almighty, perfect Friend.

2. All true views of God are given by God. ‘He dwelleth in light, which no
man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can see.” Human power
cannot make Him manifest Himself. The highest knowledge which men of them-
selves can reach does not embrace one of the secrets of His being. He alone opens
the inward eyes and presents the aspects He wants to reveal, He may open them
through some outward impulse, or by action on the heart, but in either case the
ripple of sensational life is hushed by the flow of a grander life, and the reasoning
faculty stands still, waiting to know what it shall receive. Then, as the light air
comes to a hanging leaf and stirs it, as a father’s love and wisdom come to an
erring child and prompt to confession, so the subject of visions of God knows that
God has affected him—that God alone could accomplish that which has happened
to him. The visions are real, The prophet did see some appearances of God ; and,
whether it were by an external operation or by his own inward rapt attention, he
was prepared to avouch it as confidently as he would a vision obvious merely to
his physical sight. How many He gives! Is there a week, a day passing in which
He does not set forth something of His glory ?

3. Visions of God require a conscious apprehension by men. Men can look
upwards or downwards, outward or inward; but they may shut their eyes, So
they decide whether they will see the things of God or not—whether they will
accept the fuller manifestations of God or not. And the bowed in heart, the
seeker for the truth learns that, back of the material world and its forces, is He
whom they all obey, and whom hearts should believe in, They yield themselves
up, not by the push of a blind necessity, but according to the laws of their own
freedom, and yet they are elevated, guarded, and assured of the reality of their
visions by the supreme Spirit operating.

4, Various aspects of God are presented. No man can see God, and all that is
perceived by the most favoured seer is but the back parts of His goodness and glory.
Parts of His ways are recognised ; “ but how little a portion is heard of Him? but
the thunder of His power who can understand?” He is working in the earth
which He has filled with good; in the heavens which declare His glory; in the
movements of men’s spirits which accuse themselves, repent, trust, love ; in the
prosperous or depressed trade of nations, in their freedom from or subjection to
calamities; in the birth, life, death, resurrection, and exaltation of the Son of His
love who hath declared Him. Wonderful in number and variety are the views
which God has provided for willing hearts. “They are new every morning.” It
is a sign of no reverence or true knowledge when some assume to tell jus* what
God must show of Himself, just what God must do, They forget that He gives
no account of His matters—that “(He dwells in the thick darkness.” It is for men
to be humble before Him, even though He may let them see many a token of His
will, They are to look and wait. “TI will stand upon my watch, and set me upon
the tower, and will watch to see what He will say unto me, For the vision is yet
for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie” (Hab. ii, 1-3).

V. “The word of the Lord came expressly” (ver. 3).

This is an evidence of the fact that the vision and the word were closely allied
in prophetical phenomena. Isaiah “saw the word which he received concerning
Judah and Jerusalem.” Amos begins his book thus, “ Zhe words of Amos which
he saw concerning Israel.” Daniel was overwhelmed by a great vision, “ yet heard
the voice of his words.” Paul had “visions and revelations of the Lord.” John in
Patmos saw one like unto the Son of man, and then listened to what He said,
So was it with Ezekiel now.

Notice: 1. “ God is His own interpreter.” Symbols and scenes are less capable
of definite explanation than words, It is hazardous to take impressions, feelings
&c., as intimating the will of God, in the absence of His Word or of principles

ll


CHAP. 1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


which His Word embraces, So He “ spake in time past in the prophets,” and “in
these last days in His Son.” He can make His visions, manifestations, plain, and
no one who wants to know His will in sincerity can live without having some signs
of what that will really is.

2. There are tests for learning “what God the Lord doth speak.” It has often
perplexed men’s minds how to discern between a suggestion from God and a sug:
gestion from some other source. There is no short and easy method applicable
to all cases. Not the strength of the impression, not mere unhesitating con-
fidence in its divineness, not its apparent conformity to what has been done, not
the memory of words of Scripture which seem to sanction it, can decide the doubt,
Conscience, though willing to do only the will of God, may give different prompt-
ings from those of the Spirit of God. We are left without any infallible guide ; but
surely no one who wants to order his conduct aright will fail to discern, sooner or
later, what is of God or of man, It may be there was for His prophets a special
light in which they saw that they were addressed by God, and so were both made
sure and warranted to say, “ Thus saith the Lord God ;” but it is not likely that
they could have given any explicit information on the point. They kuew His
voice, as the sheep of the Good Shepherd know H%s, yet are unable to explain how
they do so, Let it be believed that God is our Father, and we shall find little
difficulty in granting that He can make His children know He is speaking to them
and that they are not deceived.

3. God’s servants must teach according to the Word of God. They cannot make
truth ; they must receive it “from above.” Their souls should be as a mirror on
which He casts His rays, and which send forth a faithful reflection. They are to
be as a channel through which the water of life may flow unimpeded. Each one
may exhibit his own characteristic qualities of mind, as water takes the tint o. the
rocky bed over which it runs. No prophet is a reproduction of any other prophet.
No apostle is a copy of another apostle. No believing man or woman is exactly
like to any one else among ‘‘the saints of the Most High.” The Lord of all makes
each seed to have its own body, and envelops therein some property which is of
use to other existences, so has He constituted each soul distinct, and each is capable
of acting in behalf of the King of Truth. Therefore should every one strive to grow
by feeding on His Word. Only thus can they teach to profit—only thus can they
expect “the demonstration of the Spirit”—when not the words of man’s wisdom
but the words of the only wise God are declared.

4. We can have access to the Word of God. It is not now a gift bestowed upon
a few selected individuals; it is the endowment of mankind. ‘The Word was
with God, and the Word was God, . . . and the Word was made flesh and dwelt
among us, ... full of grace and truth.” We can come to the Light and Life,
and hear Him at all times, All the history, all the psalms, all the prophecies of
the Old Testament have some more or less portion of the testimony of Jesus,
“‘Search the Scriptures, for they testify of” Him. Come to Him, for “ whosoever
will may come.” We are in a more lofty position than Ezekiel was, and can see
and hear more fully from God and of God than he did. What manner of persons
ought we to be! “ Obeying the truth through the Spirit,” abiding in Christ, and
the word of Christ abiding in us, “Take heed how ye hear.”

VL “The hand of the Lord was there upon him” (ver. 3).

“Hand is equivalent to sovereignty in its fullest meaning, and sovereignty in
that meaning does not admit of degrees” (The Aryan Household). It is a symbol
in Scripture of impulse, power, &c., and capable not only of laying the foundation
of the earth and of spanning the heavens, but also of being laid gently on the heads
of little children as well as on sorrowing, awestruck men, Its touch prepared for
another stage in Ezekiel’s development. It infused strength for seeing and acting
in his new vocation. It sanctified him, set him apart, so that he was constituted
a true and capable prophet to Israel. Observe—


as


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY EZEKIEL, omar. &





1. The real power in serving the Lord: It is contact with Him. Daniel could
not hear the divine messages till a baud touched Him (Dan, x. 10). John could
receive the revelation after the right hand of the Glorified had been laid on
him (Rev. i. 17). Every disciple must be strengthened by the Spirit in the inner
man (Eph, iii, 16), in order “to will aud to do of His good pleasure.” Obstacles
lie in man’s heart which have to be overcome, and the hand of the Lord presses
them down or sweeps them away. When it is laid on us, then we can do all
things; then, whatever may be accomplished, with money, with words, with deeds
for the kingdom of God in the world, owes its success to His giving His hand to
it. “Severed from me, ye can do nothing.” We must have the word of Christ,
and also Christ Himself to dwell in us, else we shall fail in fulfilling the word of
the truth of the gospel. Prayer, reading and hearing the Word, teaching and
preaching it, are ‘‘as tinkling cymbals” if the power of Christ do not rest
on ua.

2. Be at the disposal of the Lord. (1.) Implicitly. Let there be no obstruc-
tions, no reserves, The creature has no claim except in correspondence to that of
his Creator, the bondsman no choice but that of his lord, the ransomed no half-
heartedness towards his deliverer. Whosoever is touched so that he is impelled to
say “It is the Lord,” then no hesitancy, no trouble should be regarded by him in
any light but that of a temptation out of which a way of escape is to be found.
(2.) On the spot. In our own houses or lodgings, in business or worship, in health
or ailments, in agreeable conditions or disagreeable, begin to obey the pressure of
God’s hand there. ‘The one secret of life and development is not to devise and
plan, but to fall in with the forces at work, to do every moment’s duty aright,
that being the part of the process allotted to us; and let come, not what will, for
there is no such thing, but what the Eternal thought wills for each of us, has
intended for each of us from the first” (@. Macdonald). (3.) Confidingly. TDark-
ness may fall, weakness may be experienced, opponents may bar the way, fear not,
He upholds by the right hand of His righteousness, Maintain the thought of a
present Lord, in contact with your spirit, putting you forth but also going before
you, and you will find a force which will more than conquer all against you, It
is no dream, no cunningly devised fable, that Christ Jesus is with us.

3. Trust to receive impulses from the Lord. The life of God in the soul is not
a constantly equal force. It is sometimes hardly distinguishable from the life of
sense, and at other times it is as if it was more than conqueror over the world and
the flesh. Prayer is now easy, but then it isa drag. Here we walk in darkness,
and have no light on the ways of the Lord ; and there we seem enabled to “mount
up on wings as eagles, run and not be weary, walk and not faint.” The God of
all grace will stablish, strengthen, perfect, settle. From ordinary earthly sur-
roundings He can lead so that we shall, first, be made to feel that another world
affects us ; then, that God manifests Himself to us; and afterwards, that He imparts
to us of His own strength. Thus may we be filled with the Spirit.

4. Our ordinary places of sojourn may be made memorable. Not only nations
remember places where events historically important to them have occurred ; not
only cities and towns keep up memories of persons and actions interesting to their
inhabitants ; but also individual believers in God can record of one spot or another
that the Lord met them there. How precious a thought it is that there is no
place whatever but may become a Bethel—a house of God—to any traveller
towards eternity! A private room, a church, a prison, a street, a hillside, a river-
bank will be sacred, as no other place can be sacred, if they have witnessed a
stimulating manifestation of what God can do, Be we where we may, we may be
there with the unseen Christ, and He will be its glory.

Thus Ezekiel was designated. He was not consecrated by any enactment of
the law of Moses, No oil of anointment was poured upon his head to authorise
him to prophesy. No hands of predecessors were laid upon him. He is chosen


13


CAP. I. AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





and set apart by the Lord alone, and he; with all true prophets, is a type of the
coming time when the children should be all taught of the Lord, for the Spirit
would be poured out upon us from on high. We are under this dispensation,
We must guard against supposing that human appointments to ministry for the
Lord are valid if He has not called to it, There is no true ordination but that of
the hand of the Lord, and there is no true service but that which opens out to
more service. Vague longings for God may be turned into real manifestations ;
visions of God may prepare for feeling the hand of God. Such are the ways of
“the God of Israel, who giveth strength and power to His people: blessed be
God!” “Of His fulness have all we received, and grace for grace.”


“T saw visions of God.”


Tre Sources oF Rextiaious SENSIBILITY.


1. Man must consider himself. Let him examine his own nature, look at the
wondarful mechanism which is going on in his own breast, and he will surely awake
to a sense of the high and exalted relations which his existence sustains, But he
lives in the world. Material objects engross and enthral his mind. He converses
not with his own spirit. He considers not what manner of being he is. Let this
thoughtlessness be laid aside, and it will not be strange if he come to a living con-
ception of that mighty Being from whom we all spring, and by whom we all
subsist.

2. He must consider the wonderful works external to himself. The green earth
and its diversities of scenery, the canopy above it, bright with stars and burning
suns, show visions of power, wisdom, goodness transcending his utmost ability to
measure and fathom. Let him think of these, and will he not feel how awful and
stupendous the Author of such prodigies must be ?

3. He must consider how different man ts from what he might have been expected
to be. With eyes to see visions of God, he bends them to the earth. He does not
realise the purposes for which he is made, the character he is to acquire, the destiny
placed within his reach. How much is there in the course of human affairs to
trouble and perplex? Ignorance and superstition brood over a large portion of
the habitable globe. In Christian countries how little is seen of that purity, faith,
and piety which Christ enjoins. But all that need not destroy the conviction that
we are under a wise and merciful God—that it is impossible for Him who has dis-
played in the frame of man, in the constitution of the outer world, in the gospel
of Christ, such tokens of wisdom and love, to exercise other than a government of
perfect benevolence. It is absurd to suppose that we, who are but of yesterday,
should be able to interpret the many mysterious and inscrutable events in human
affairs, though all will be clear when the day shall dispel the midnight vapours.

4, He must consider how God has been trusted in. We know of men who have
been subjected to heavy assaults because they believed in the Word of God—of
Jesus Christ, in despisal and rejection, upheld by communings with His Father ;
and we learn that in duties, harassments, weariness, death, our safety, strength,
consolation will be obtained in those retirements of the soul where our eyes are
opened to see visions of God.—Mapex (condensed).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


Dates.—The Jews, if there is any truth in their history at all, were a journalising people,
. . . The prophets keep a diary of their visions, Everywhere do they record the dates, the
year, the day of the month, the attending chronological circumstances of the burdens and
messages with which, as they allege, they have been commissioned by the Lord. If these dateg
are put in by compilers, long after the times of the prophetic visions, then there is no reason
for it, no meaning init. .. It is an easier theory that every word of the prophetic writings
had been forged. There is but one other supposition : the dates and the visions are from the
saine persons, and these are the prophets themuelyes writing and speaking at the times they

14


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, CHAP. 1,
ie SEES Per de ee ers Meng Rn Mees YS PS ge


profess to write and speak, and in relation to actual existing events that form the subjects of
their warning. The seers, the times, the nation, the national life, it is all one true picture—
in tts paris most truthful and natural ; in its whole suggestive of an extraordinary and difficult
problem. Let any man attempt to explain its natural without bringing in its supernatural,
or some other supernatural—if he can.—Taylor Lewis.

Names.—What is the real historical significance of the deeply religious character of Jewish
names, their strong theistic or rather monotheistic aspect, their continual expression of faith
and hope, their so frequent allusions to the ideas of covenant and redemption ¢ And why too,
may we ask, do so many of these appellations end in El and Jah, ever calling up the two great
divine names with their most holy ideas? Let the reader ponder well the fact, and see if he
can find any other reason for this national seal, this naming after the Lord, as we may call it,
than the great all-explaining fact that they were indeed “ta chosen people,” ‘‘an elect
people,” whom for high and world-wide reasons God had taken as His own “when he
separated the sons of Adam and gave the nations their inheritance.” It is astanding memorial,
handed down from generation to generation, that ‘‘thia was the people whose God,” whose El
or Mighty One, was Jehovah, the God of the Covenant, who had been their fathers’ God, and
who had given them those glorious promises, ineffaceable by the bondage of generations, that
in them and in their seed all the nations of the earth were to be blessed.” —Taylor Lewis,

Visions.—Thankfulness for being made capable of seeing this “burning west” [glorious vision
of Arran], and of being so affected by its beauty, gave place to thankfulness for the spiritual
eye opened in me, by which I saw the Eternal Light and the Eternal Beauty ; thankfulness
that was much mingled with self-condemnation, ag I reflected that... that which my spiritual
eve saw is an ever-present glory, to be seen wherever the eye opens on it; and yet my memories
of it were of what had been seen only at long intervals... in a solemn sense of choice. I
say in a sense of choice, because I do not feel in reality that the opening of the eye that sees
the spiritual, so that the spirit is flooded with its proper light, is so simple a matter, or so
absolutely to be determined by a mere volition, as the opening of the bodily eye. That ‘‘ glory
of God in the face of Jesus Christ” we do not see in its brightness simply by turning to it.
For such vision beyond habitual faith we wait on the Holy Spirit, and have it not in our own
hand. But still we know that he that soweth bountifully reaps bountifully—Macleod Campbell.

Power.—The distinction is always assuming more and more importance to my mind, viz.,
that between the special acting of the Divine Spirit in the revelation of truth not previously
revealed to men, and His acting in enabling us to apprehend that truth, and to advance in its
light and the life which it feeds,. . . No explanation seems adequate which admits not—rather,
assumes not—that God can, and when it seemeth good to Him does give the human spirit to
know His own presence, and His own touch, otherwise than in that highest way which is com-
munion with Himself in the light of life. This . .. the whole record of Revelation seems to
me to teach ag to those great events in the history of intercourse between God and men which
we have been accustomed to receive as ‘‘ Divine Revelation,” viz., a knowledge of being spoken
to by the living God which was not an inference from the nature of that which God spake—
a knowledge common to Balaam and Jonah with Moses and Samuel, and distinct from all
communion in the word that came to them. What this was I] know not, and may never
know. . . . What we seek to know ig, surely, the actual fact as to what God does in the earth,
of which we may not make our own experience the measure ; while we cannot be too thankful
for that clear consciousness of seeing light in God’s light which may be our temptation to do
so.—Macleod Campbell.

Experience of God.—Now and then a great experience comes unexpected and unsought.
Tt touches the greater chords of the soul, and lifts it above the common level of emotion, out-
- rans all former knowledge. ... But what other experience is like that of the personal disclosure
of God in the soul. ... There comes an hour to some, to many, of transfiguration. It may
be in grief; it may be in joy; it may be the opening of the door of sickness; it may be in
active duty ; it may be under the roof or under the sky, where God draws near with such
reality, glory, and power that the soul is filled, amazed, transported. All before was nothing ;
all afterwards will be but a souvenir. ‘hat single vision, that one hour, is worth the whole
of life, and throws back a light on all that went before. It... gives to the soul some such
certainty of invisible, spiritual truths as one has of his own personal identity, When one has
had this hour of divine disclosure, of full and entrancing vision, it never can be retracted, or
effaced, or reasoned against, or forgotten.— Ward Beecher.


2, Tae View GIVEN To EzexieL or ‘‘THE LIKENESS OF THE GLORY
or THE Lorp” (Chap. i. 4-28).


EXEGETICAL NOTES. —Ver. 4. (ii. 11), “came out of the north,” the
The storm-cloud. ‘A whirlwind,” a region from which the Chaldean forcea
tempest such as Job perceived (xxxviii. proceeded, and, in general, to the Jews,
1), or like that which Jonah encountered “the region pregnant with scene


OHAP. L





(Hengst.). ‘A great cloud, and a fire
infolding itself.” Fire in volumes was
mixed up with the cloud, and (Exod.
ix. 24) flashed hither and _ thither,
circling round. “A brightness was
about it,” the cloud, “and out of the
midst thereof,’ of the fire, ‘“‘as the
colour of amber,” or as the eye of
chasmal, The appearance was such as
gave tints, shone, burned like chasmal,
The mild colour of amber does not seem
to express the meaning of this uncertain
word. There was a look like that of ore
glowing from “the midst of the fire.”
Vers. 5-14. The living creatures,
Ver. 5. Out of this same fire came “ the
likeness of four living creatures,” re-
presenting all beings with life (Rev. iv.
6); and, as the best representative of
vital energies, each of the four had “the
likeness of a man.” But not entirely
so, Ver. 7, ‘Their feet,” including
knee and thigh, were of the nature of
“a straight foot ;” they were upright,
not bent, and that part which was next
the ground was “like the sole of a
calf’s foot, and they sparkled like the
eolour,” the eye, the gleam “of bur-
nished,” or shining, “brass” (Rev. i.
15). Their wings proceeded from their
shoulders, for (ver. 8) “they had the
hands of a man under their wings,”
one hand under each of “their four
sides.” Ver. 9. Two “wings” of each
“were joined” to a wing of each of its
nearest neighbours, and as each had four
faces, one of which looked towards a
distinct quarter of the sky, “they
turned not when they went.” So
“they went every one straight for-
ward” in the direction in which any
one of their faces looked, and as a con-
junct whole. Ver. 10. Of the four


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





faces, one was like that of “a man,’
another like that of “a lion,” another
of “an ox,” and the fourth of “an
eagle.” Ver. ll. “Thus were their
faces, and their wings were stretched
upward ;” rather, and their faces and
their wings were separated from above,
t.e, it could be seen that their heads
were distinct and their wings were dis-
tinct, though two wings of one were
in contact with two wings of others,
Ver. 12. They were moved by an irre-
sistible impulse, and, separated as they
were from one another, yet they were
animated by une life-breath. ‘‘ Whither
the spirit was to go, they went.”
Ver. 13. “Their appearance was like
burning coals of fire, like the appear-
ance of lamps,” torches; “it,” the fire,
was separate from, and “went up and
down among the living creatures.”
Ver. 14. The creatures had a motion
which made the impression as of a
“flash” of a meteor, or “the zigzag
course” of “lightning.” *

Vers. 15-21. The wheels. Ver. 15.
‘‘Behold one wheel upon the earth
by the living creatures, with his four
faces,” Ezekiel saw wheels upon the
ground, one in close proximity to each
of the four creatures, and lower than
they. Ver. 16. “They four” wheels
“had one likeness ;” each consisted of
two wheels really, “as it were a wheel
in the middle of a wheel,” set in the
other at right angles. Ver. 17. “They
went upon their four sides;” they
could go in any direction without turn-
ing round. Ver. 18. “As for their
rings,” circumference or felloes, “‘ they
were so high that they were dreadful,”
they had both height and terribleness, and
“full of eyes round about.” Ver. 20,


* The cherubims in Tabernacle and Temple had each one face ; those of Ezekiel have four
faces. We work up in dreams a mixture of things which we have come across in different
places. Did Ezekiel, in his ecstasy, make up his representations of the living creatures witn
objects familiar to those who sojourned in Assyria, the land of his exile? ‘‘ The approaches to
the hall at Nimroud were guarded by pairs of colossal figures. At the chief entrance were
human-headed winged lions, the human shape being continued down to the waist, and furnished
with arms... . Expanded wings spring from the shoulders and spread over the back... . The
entrance on the south was guarded by human-headed winged bulls, whilst the two doorways on
the north were both guarded by winged lions with the heads of men and with human arms....
It will be observed that the four forms (and those only) chosen by Ezekiel to illustrate his
description—the man, the lion, the bull, ana the eagle—are precisely those which are con-
stantly found on Assyrian monuments... They could find no better type of intellect and
knowledge than the head of the man; of strength than the body of the lion; of rapidity of
motion than the wings of a bird.”—Layare.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





o


“The spirit of the living creature was
in the wheels.” ‘The same energy which
actuated the former actuated the latter
also, and they were one in standing,
going, or rising upwards.

Vers, 22-28. The throned one, Ver.


22. Above “the heads of the liv-


ing creatures” Ezekiel saw an expanse
extended, having a colour like that “ of
the terrible crystal,” exciting fear by
its purity and splendour, Ver. 23.
“Under the firmament,” or expanse,
which therefore came between the throne
and the living creatures, “ were their
wings straight, the one toward the
other,” joined to one another, as ver.
11, “and every one had two which
covered ;” there was a wing for each side
of ‘“‘ their bodies.” Ver. 24. When the
living creatures were in movement “ the
noise of their wings was like . . . the
voice of speech,” rather, “ the noise of
tumult, as the noise of an host.” The
sounds were heard only when they were
in motion, for “when they stood they
let down their wings.” Ver. 25. Their
movement or rest was not self-directed,
but was instigated or checked by “a
voice from the firmament that was
over their heads,” from Him who was
on the throne, since, ver. 26, ‘“‘ above
the firmament was the likeness of a
throne, as the appearance of” tle pale-
blue “sapphire stone, and upon the
likeness of the throne,” not the distin-
guishable form of a man, but “the like-
ness as the appearance of a man.”
“No man hath seen God at anytime.”’
This manifestation had three aspects—
ver, 27. (1.) Over the dim form was shed
shining light like to glowing ore, and
the same as in ver. 4, which radiated
“from the appearance of his loins
even upward” (chap. viii. 2). (2.) Upon
the lower part, “from the appearance
of hus loins even downward was as it
were the appearance of fire.” (3.) All
round was a shining light (ver. 28), “as
the appearance of the bow that is in
the cloud in the day of rain.” Those
three aspects were united to frame “ the





OBaP. L





appearance of the likeness of the glory
of the Lord,” The visions of God over-
powered Ezekiel, ‘‘I fell upon my face”
(Rev. i. 17).

The details of this wondrous vision
may be summarised. A furious storm
from the north is seen driving a vast
cloud, pervaded and glowing with rest-
less fires, and surrounded with radiance.
From this fiery cloud four living beings
appear, whose general aspect was that of
man, Each had four different faces and
four wings, and two of the wings were
stretched out in juxtaposition to the
wings of others. One spiritual energy
stirred in the living creatures, and under
its impulse they moved like meteors
shooting across the field of vision and
shining with the brightness of fire. By
the side of each creature was a gigantic
double wheel, not needing to turn when
it changed from one direction to another,
Eyes were set round the outer rims,
and, possessed by the same energy as the
living creatures, the wheels made all move-
ments perfectly simultaneous with theirs,
Above all was an expanse of awful pure-
ness, and on which was the likeness of
an azure throne, Some one in the figure
of a man was seated on this throne—
the upper half of his body shining like
glowing metal, the lower half like fire,
while, girdling round the throne, the hues
of a bright rainbow were displayed. A
voice proceeded from this throne-crowned
expanse, at the sound of which the living
creatures let down their wings in lowly
reverence and silence. Ezekiel also heard
himself addressed by an unseen speaker.

The appearances which accompanied
the designation of Ezekiel, and also the
repetition of their prominent aspects at
other turns of his service, indicate the fact
of a special meaning adhering to them in
view of what was appointed him.*

1. The storm, the cloud, the fire, signify
the wrath of God and the sufferings
which may proceed therefrom. “The
Lord hath His way in the whirlwind .
and in the storm, and the clouds are the
dust of His feet” (Nah. i. 3). Of Israel





# “Tf any one asks whether the vision ig lucid, I confess its obscurity, and that I can scarcely
understand it; but yet into what God has set before us, it is not only lawful and useful, but


necessary to inquire.
a0 small moment.”—Calvin.


We shall perhaps but skim the garface of what God wills, yet this is of


17


OMAP, I,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


a


It is said, “The Lord thy God is a con-
suming fire, even a jealous God” (Deut.
iv. 24). Ezekiel is to prepare himself
to carry a message of judgment and woe
to his people; he is to be invested with
authority and then to inspire them with
terror. But not unmitigated. ‘ The
brightness round about,” which vers.
27 and 28 signify to be that of the
rainbow, warrants the belief that pity
and grace will surround all inflictions,
The false prophets spoke of deliverance
without punishment and without re-
pentance; Ezekiel has to bear down all
such fancies, and proclaim that there will
be scathing trials, but afterwards a new
heart and the outpoured Spirit.

2. The cherubim. In chap. x. 20,
Ezekiel intimates that the living creature
which he saw by the Chebar he was led
to recognise as the cherubims. An im-
portant part is assigned to them in the
Bible. They were placed at the east of
the garden of Eden; they stood over
the Ark of the Covenant in Tabernacle
and Temple. In each case they signified
the divine presence. Hence the familiar
expressions, “ He dwelleth between the
cherubims,” ‘He sitteth between the
cherubims.” Their outstretched wings
form “the chariot of the cherulims.”
While it is also said, ‘‘He rode upon
a cherub,” as a token that He rules all
movements among the forces of nature.
It was an obvious reflection of cherubic
forms which John saw, in his Revela-
tion, “in the midst of the throne.”
What did they signify? In all cases
they signify that God is present, and
belong to His manifestation in living,
organised creatures, in all quarters of
the world. It is to be noted that the
faces of a man, a lion, an ox, and an
eagle on each are emblematical of the
fulness and power of life. The fact
that they were, in Ezekiel, double in
number and more complex in form than
those found in Tabernacle or Temple, is
a fact which goes to prove that they
were not real beings, not even angelic,
but symbolical, and they “at one and
the same time proclaim and veil His
presence. When He is honoured as He
who is enthroned above the cherubim,
He is acknowledged as the God who

18


rules the world on all sides, in power,
wisdom, and omniscience.” They re-
present not God Himself, except as He
is absolute Life, working in living
creatures and moving them to the ends
which He prescribes. In accordance
with those ends, the cherubims had the
appearance which bright burning coals
of fire have, yet the fire was separate
from them, Thus was indicated that
all living creatures could be made to
carry out the righteous judgment of
God with ominous rapidity. So Ezekiel
was prepared to testify that all hopes of
earthly help which Israel might cherish
would be speedily falsified.

3. The wheels, In the Buddhist, and
partially in the Hindu religion, a wheel
“is the symbol of supreme power in the
hands of certain monarchs, who are held
to have exercised universal dominion,
and who are, for this reason, termed
turners of the wheel.” A similar idea
is conveyed here. The wheels represent
the forces of nature as distinct from, but
in working harmony with, living beings.
This distinction appears from chap, x. 13,
where the right interpretation seems to
be that the wheels were called Galgal,
“whirlwind ;” and from chap. x. 6, where
fire was taken from between them. Those
natural energies revolve, along with the
cherubim, under obedience to one and
the same inworking impulse. They are
used when the Spirit will, and go to any
quarter of the heaven that He wills.
One wheel is within another; changes
are complicated, and not in one direc-
tion only. They are full of eyes: “ the
symbol of intelligent life; the living
Spirit’s most peculiar organ and index,”
“Space is everywhere equally present
to them.” They do not move blindly ;
they can perceive that which is opposed
to the interests of God in any quarter;
they can follow up all traces of His
enemies, and carry His terrors wherever
they should strike. Ezekiel must ex-
pect to speak of various trials hanging
over all classes in Israel, and certainty
in their infliction,

4. The appearance of a throned man.

‘Whose faith has centre every where, -
Nor cares to fix itself to form.”


This portion of the vision is seen upen


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


a firmament which presents “visible
poctry, gloriously embossed, and whose
psalms are writ in the rhythm of mo-
tion.” It intimates that ‘the heaveus
do rule,” that all forms of animate and
inanimate existence are under the will
of the God of glory.* Besides, He is
in a human form, which cannot be ade-
quately seen, while the appearance of
brightness and fire, and a rainbow, in-
dicates the holiness and righteousness
and grace which make a glorious unity
in Him, and are possessed in absolute
perfection—a type of the glory and
grace of Him who was made flesh and
dwelt among us. ‘God is the unrepre-
sentable One. He has no similitude;
and yet, without any misgiving or sense
of inconsistency, there are ascribed to
Him acts and appearances which, with-
out the conceptive or imaging faculty,
can have for us neither force nor mean-
ing” (Lewis), The mighty voice and
the movements with the cherubims
point to the truth that He punishes His
enemies and comforts His friends, Thus,
sitting above the cherubims, He does


ORa®. k,





io


the same as in the Temple, yet with
differences. He was about to work in
new methods, and would make known
to exiled Israel, through Ezekiel, that
if their covenant was to “ vanish away,”
He would not go. He would rule the
heathen as well as His chosen seed, and
one day evoke from all quarters the
glorious cry, ‘‘ Hallelujah ! for the Lord
God omnipotent reigneth |”
** One God, one law, one element,
And one far-off Divine event,
To which the whole creation moves.”
—Tennyson.

‘There was nothing accidental or capri-
cious about this vision; all was wisely
adjusted and arranged, so as to convey
beforehand suitable impressions of that
work of God to which Ezekiel was now
called to devote himself. It was sub-
stantially an exhibition by means of
emblematical appearances and actions,
of the same views of the Divine char-
acter and government, which were to be
unfolded in the successive communica-
tions made by Ezekiel to the covenant-
people” (Fairbairn).


HOMILETICS.
(1.) Tae Vision 18 Suagustive Regarpine THE GovERNMENT OF Gop.


L As to its resources.

1. They are manifold. Wind and fire, thunder and lightning, the wisdom of
man, brute force, patient labour, swift movements are significant portions of the
materials which He can gather to execute His purposes. Men live in perpetual
contact with forces which may affect their organs of sight, hearing, taste, touch,
and which can be marshalled in any number, in any strength, and at any moment.
We see wrongly if we do not see that the uniform of God’s servants is worn by all
animate and inanimate creatures.

2. They are mutable. They are restrained and again in motion, now in the
darkness and then in the light, here as a glow and there as a meteoric flash, acting
inertly at one time and intensely after that. Changes continually come up. How
remarkable are the vicissitudes in nations, churches, families. We are settled in
nothing—in nothing but in God.

3. They are inscrutable. “We are but of yesterday and know nothing.”
see little else than an item on the outside of a few of His resources. “ His judg-
ments are a great deep.” ‘His providence walks and works, darkly, deeply,
changeably, wheels about so that mortals cannot tell what conclusions to make” as
to all the causes which bring about changes, or as to all the consequences which


We











* «The cherubim with the living wheels form, so to speak, the chariot, the base for the
living God. All this is the mere forecourt of the divine sphere; the innermost circle is re-
served for God as living Spirit. If we approach from the side of the world, this heavenly
fulness of life may already appear to be the Godhead or God. But when we are in possession
of the Divine Personality, that fulness will be a predicate of God, a mere aubstratum, eo te
aay of His Personality.”—.

19


OHAP. L HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


ee


shall follow. ‘His ways are high above, out of our sight,” with nations, councils,
churches, individuals—in panics, wars, demoralisations. ie fe

4, They are subordinated to one pervading umpulse. — Living or non-living, one
and the same mighty Spirit works in all, The Spirit which brooded over a
chaotie creation “renews the face of the earth” year by year. The Spirit of
understanding and of love is the “Spirit of judgment and of burning.” He
divides to each thing severally as He will; but there is no division in their camp.
They do not fall out by the way. They work together to fulfil His word, There
is no crookedness in their goings when He commands to go “ straight forward.
They run very swiftly in accordance with the might by which He energises them,
No bullet goes so fairly or rapidly to the target as do the manifold resources of
God when stirred by the Spirit of life. Why should men resist Him? Why do
they yield to a spirit of error, of lying, and of whoredoms, except on the ground
that they rebel and vex the Holy Spirit? When will that kingdom which is
righteousness, peace, joy in the Holy Ghost, be permanent on earth? But what-
ever discord may be introduced by men, the Spirit will not be baulked in His
aims. “He maketh the wrath of man to praise Him,” and He will avenge the
dishonour done to His righteousness and grace by means of the pliant resources at
His command. They do not look back, that would have denoted unwillingness ;
nor turn aside, that would have intimated self-will; nor suspend their movements
before their course is completed, that would have spoken of weariness. So should
men follow obediently, unswervingly, persistently Him who guides wanderers into
the way of life, and sustains them therein.

5. They inflict chastisement. Gales, fire, lightning, are disastrous in various
ways to men. The doors of Lebanon open that the fire may devour its cedars.
Snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest rain upon the wicked, and
Ezekiel saw such agencies in action as ominous of calamities which he was to
declare would befall his people. Thus, above Nebuchadnezzar and his desolating
army ; above losses, pains, bereavements ; above wars, depression of trade, lower-
ing of health, we must observe the signs of the Lord condemning untruthfulness,
unrighteousness, formality, pride, selfishness, ‘‘ Who can stand before Him’ when
once He is angry?” Is there not a warning to “cease to do evil, to learn to
do well”?

6. They may be brought from any quarter. Out of the north, as the Assyrians ;
out of the east, as the plague of locusts in Egypt; out of the north-east, as the
Euroclydon in Paul’s sea passage to Rome, God’s resources can be drawn. Men
may boast of their soldiery or navy, of their preparedness for any war, of their
civilization or religiousness, of their worship or their benevolence; but they lay
themselves open to the menacing word, “I the Lord do blow upon it.” In front,
in flank, or in rear assailants may fall upon them, “ Political changes and revolu-
tions are, after all, only the moving of the shadow on the earthly dial-plate, that
marks the mightier motions going forward in the heavens.”—Moore.

7. They radiate with mercy. His resources are not only for punishment. They
are meant to show to men their evil and their need of repentance ; to show that
God is “ not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repent-
ance.” Judgment is His “strange act.” He wants to purify the world, though
the process be slow, just as He is separating the dross from the heart of every
believer in His Son. Even if a deluge of wrath is seat forth in order to sweep off
evil habits from a people, after the floods have lifted up their voice the rainbow
will appear. The covenant of the Lord is sure in faithfulness and mercy. “Once
in the end of the world bath He appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of Him-
self.” God was in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself,”

IL As to the representation of the divine.

1. Jt is supreme, All things are under His feet, He is a Prince upon His
throne. ee stirs or rests, nothing develops or degenerates, nothing pains or


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL Se | Code





soothes apart from His control, It is not a mechanical force which operates the
changes of all creatures, It is Ong who possesses power, wisdom, righteousness,
love— who does His will among the armies of heaven and the inhabitants of this
earth.” What can stand if He will overthrow? Who hinder if He will open the
gates to anxiety, sorrow, shame, death 4

2. It ts closely allied to man, Ezekiel saw “the likeness of the appearance of
aman.” We must not say that God is corporeal and has the figure of a man, but
we can say that He has some striking affinities with human nature—“ For we are
also His offspring”—and these foreshadow the mystery to be presented in the end
of the world, and in which Paul grandly exults. God “was manifest in the flesh,”
Therefore was it possible for the Son of God to pray “ That they all may be one;
as Thou, Father, art in me and I in Thee, that they also may be one in us.”

3. It is beyond our knowledge. ‘* He dwells in the light which no man hath
seen or can see.” He does condescend to our faculties, and by means of the hiero-
glyphics of undefined forms, of clouds, fire, living beings, revolutions, He shows us
what His power and resources are, Our thoughts of Him suggest more riddles
than they can solve. No research can define Him. There is a glory excelling
that which men have beheld. He has never appeared as He really exists; but
“ He has so appeared as to leave no doubt on the minds of His servants as to their
knowing that they have seen God.” If in certain aspects He is “ unknowable,”
yet all doubts as to His character pass away when Jesus reveals Him. “ He that
hath seen me hath seen the Father.”

ItL As to the preparation of a human servant,

1. Reverence. A deep feeling pervades Ezekiel of the holy supremacy of God,
He who is glorious produces another state of mind than that which springs from a
gratified curiosity or an increased knowledge, and the man who is not “ moved
with fear” before the manifested will of the Almighty is a man who will never serve
Him aright. The sight of Christ Jesus, the only-begotten of the Father, will lay us
at His feet, utterly self-emptied by a sense of His spotless glory and our unworthi-
ness, and will be a prelude to His touch and restoration.

2. Weakness, Ezekiel cannot act of himself in co-operation with this all-ruling
God. He has no strength to carry out such arduous duties as are justly required.
But this weakness is his stepping-stone to light and power. When he is weak then
is he strong, for God will bestow sufficient grace. Trust in self is gone that God
may work. Wisdom, energy, faithfulness not his own are open to him.

3. Called. Ezekiel is thrilled by the voice which addresses him. He could not
serve at all till that call of God was heard. Men cannot act for His kingdom by
their own impulses and preparations. It is not colleges or ordination by man which
make fit, but, hearing the voice of the Lord within, they can take up any service
pointed out, in face of their other occupations, of fears, of reluctance. Before
Him all events, however solemn, all duties, however untried, become dwarfed and
feasible. ‘In Christ strengthening me I can do all things.” Between His voice
and yours let no other voice come. You will know the mark to aim at, and reach
“the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.” If we teach or preach
about His kingdom without knowing we are warranted by Him, it is rather sin
than service. His must be the impulse and sustainment.

4. Susceptible, Ezekiel hears; for it is little matter to have the call of God if
we have not ears to hear, We must let that mind be in us which will desire to
recognise and apprehend whatever He will say to us, “If men did consult with
Christ, and do ali upon His warrants, they should never miscarry in their ways, but
proceed farther in the paths of godliness in a few weeks than they did before in
many years."—Greenhill, ‘Though you have no visions of God, unwavering
fealty to His law will secure that He will guide you by His counsel, and afterwards
receive you to glory.”—-Goulty. When the suggestions and motions of God’s Spirit
come on a receptive heart, they subdue carnal reasoninge, stubbornness of will, all


21


omar. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; EZEKIEL,








ehifts and pretences, and frame ‘a vessel unto honour, sanctified and meet for the
Master’s use,” such as Ezekiel became.

“Tt is of much concernment for ministers to see that they have a good and clear
call to their ministry. If they can clear it up that God hath sent them, they may
expect His assistance, His blessing, His protection, and success in their labours.
However things prove, this will be their comfort in the midst of opposition,
reproach, persecution, hazard of liberty and lives; I was called of God, I am in
His work, in His way, He brought me into His vineyard, He will stand by me,
I will go on, let Him do with me what He pleaseth.”— Greenhill.


ILLUSTRATIONS,


God the life of all things.—Nothing exists, subsists, is acted upon or moved
by itself, but by some other being or agent; whence it follows that everything exists,
subsists, is acted upon, and is moved by the First Being, who has no origin from another, but
is in Himself the force which is life.—Swedenborg. God has a world of real forces in Himself.
He bears within Him an inexhaustible spring, by virtue of which He is the Life eternally
streaming forth, but also eternally streaming back into Himself. He neither empties nor
loses Himself in His vital activity. He is asea of self-revolving Life; an infinite fulness of
forces moves, 80 to speak, and undulates therein, —Dorner. In this communication of life, God
gives Himself so unreservedly that creation feels Him as her own, His joy as her joy, His peace
as her peace, His strength as her strength, His personality and independence as her personality
and independence.— W. White.

Foreknowledge.—tThe divine foreknowledge has put a stamp of that which was coming
upon that which went before. This stamp is the basis of figurative language, of analogy,
of typology, of prophecy, yea, of all- knowledge. Every lower thing is a figure, a type, or
prophecy of a higher thing ; every present thing contains a representation of a coming thing,
and every visible thing is more or less the image of things invisible. God’s foreknowledge thus
becomes the great highway of knowledge to man, by which he can traverse not only the earth,
but the universe so far as it is accessible to his inspection.— W. White.

Clouds.—Those war-clouds that gather on the horizon, dragon-crested, tongued with
fire ;—how is their barbed strength bridled? What bits are these they are champing with
their vaporous lips; flinging off flakes of black foam? Leagued leviathans of the sea of
heaven, out of their nostrils goeth smoke, and their eyes are like the eyelids of the morning,
. . . Where ride the captains of their armies? Where are set the measures of their march?
Fierce murmurers, answering each other from morning until evening—what rebuke is this
which has awed them into peace? What hand has reined them back by the way by which they
came? ‘The wondrous works of Him which is perfect in knowledge?” We have too great
veneration for cloudlessness,— Ruskin.

Human ignorance.—There has never been a weak deity worshipped, and it is safe to
say there never will be one. Man is too strong himself not to admire strength, and looks with
pity or contempt upon weakness. And no deity can be pitied or despised and hold his
sovereignty over men’s minds. The heavens must be braced beyond the possibility of fall, or
they who live beneath the dome could never gaze with awe into the overhanging spaces. . . . I
do not expect that any of mortal kind have a correct idea of God. . . . How little do we know
even yet of the qualities and uses of material and finite Nature! For Nature is yet a mystery,
She sits like the veiled prophet in the inner temple of her abode, whose outer walls we in our
groping have at last stumbled against, and upon the panels of whose mighty gates a few of our
most ambitious scientists are beginning to rap. If, then, so little is known of Nature, how
little indeed must we know of the Invisible Spirit, who is so removed from our senses that no
man could look upon His face and live. How flippantly men talk of God! As if they could
understand the measureless reality whose reflection they only behold! The men who say God
must be this or that, must do this or that, are for the most part men who have great intellectual
vanity and great spiritual ignorance. The bowed head, the closed eye, the hand on the mouth
and the mouth in the dust,—these are the evidences of piety, and, I may say, of spiritual
knowledge also.—W. H. Murray.

An infinite unknown.—We are separated from it, not by any anger of storm, not by
any vain and fading vapour, but only by the deep infinity of the thing itself,—Ruskin.
Capable are we of God, both by understanding and will; by understanding, as He is that
sovereign truth which com»rehends the rich treasures of all wisdom; by will, as He is that
sea of goodness whereof whoso tasteth shall thirst no more.—Hooker.

A Seer.—The more I think of it, the more I find this conclusion impressed upon me—
that the greatest thing a human soul ever does in this world is to see something, and tell what
it saw in a plain way. Hundreds of people can talk for one who can think, but thousands
can Snead one who ean see. ‘T'o see clearly is poetry, prophecy, and religion—all in
one.— Ruskin,


Law pat the spiritual.—Laws ave operant im the things of the Spirit as truly as in the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP. 1








things of matter. The forces there are not disorderly, nor do the movements which they
generate start haphazard. They are not impulsive, freakfil, and fickle. They who suppose
that the coming of the Spirit to human consciousness is the result of arbitrary sending and of
periodical ordering, and not the result of a ceaseless and ceaselessly expressed benevolence,
doubtless mistake. . . . The anarchy must be reduced to order; the chaos taught the use and
made to feel the force of law; the imperfect organisations of society be supplanted by the
perfect. .. . The Spirit, through change of custom, law, and habit, and by a gradual transition
of the world from old to new, can, at last, after ages of revolution and growth, accomplish
another structure.—W. H. Murray.

God manifested.—He the Creator, the Governor, became a presence clear and plain
before men’s hearts, He, by the marvellous method of the Incarnation, showed Himself to
man. He stood beside man’s work. He towered above, and folded Himself about, man’s life.
And what then? God in the world must be the standard of the world. Greatness meant
something different when men had seen how great He was. Just suppose that suddenly Omni-
science towered up above our knowledge, and Omnipotence above our strength, and the Infinite
Wisdom stood piercing out of the sight of our ignorant and baffled skill, Must it not crush
the man with an utter insignificance? . . . He would be brought face to face with facts. He
would measure himself against the eternal pillars of the universe. He would learn the blessed
lesson of his own littleness in the way in which it is always learnt most blessediy—by learning
the largeness of larger things. . . . If you could only see God for ever present in your life,
and Jesus dying for your soul, and your soul worth Jesus dying for, and the souls of your
brethren precious in His sight, and the whole universe teeming with work for Him, then must
come the humility of the Christian.— Brooks,

In the divinity of His person there is laid an infinite, eternal, and unchangeable ground
for the most unbounded confidence. If He were a being possessed of nothing higher than the
highest possible endowments of humanity, we might well scruple to place in such an one a con-
fidence stretching through eternity. But being God, in trusting in Him we rely upon a power
that cannot be withstood, upon a wisdom which hath no limits, upon a truth that is infallible,
upon a love that is unchangeable, upon a fidelity that cannot fail.— W. White.

The enduring Word of God.—We are not more unworldly than the patriarchs, more
spiritual than the prophets, more heavenly-minded than the apostles; we are not nearer the
great celestial verities than men of the olden time—at leagt by any philosophy, or science, or
culture of our own that is independent of the study and the grace of the Scriptures; we are not
beyond the Bible either in its letter or its thought. There are ideas there the world has not
yet fathomed ; there are words and figures there whose rich significance interpretation has not
yet exhausted, The scriptural style and the scriptural language are not meant for one age,
but for all ages, Its Orientalisms will grow in the West; its archaisms will be found still young
in the nineteenth century. Science is ever changing, as it is ever unfinished; its language is
ever becoming obsolete. as it is ever superseded ; philosophy is continually presenting some
new phase of its ever-revolving cycles; the political world is ever a dissolving view ; literature
becomes effete, and art decays; ‘‘but the word of our God shall stand for ever.” Not so sure
are the types of nature as even the form and feature of this written word, if it be indeed the
word of God, uttered in humanity, breathed into human souls, informing human emotions,
conceived in human thoughts, made outward in human images, and indissolubly bound, as the
wondrous narrative of the supernatural, in the long chain of human history.—7. 18.

Changes.—We are apt to fret and murmur at the motions of the wheels when they cross
our hopes and interests; but if the Spirit of God be in the wheels and acts them according to
His own pleasure, then all our impatience is groundless and sinful. We should stay and quiet
our minds under all turns and changes in a world for discipline, rebuke, threatening, lamenta-
tion, calling.—M, Meade. , site

Unity.—The prophet, cast into the wide world and feeling himself lost in it, was led by
the Divine Teacher into a region of thought to which the Israelite had been hitherto compara-
tively a stranger—was led to see how each part of the universe, which must have often seemed
to him a storehouse of divided material idols, was pointing when seen by the divine light to a
spiritual unity, as ita explanation and itscentre. . . . It is Spirit only which distinguishes and
unites, which brings each thing forth in its clearness and fulness, and brings all into harmony,
. .. aSpirit which had come from some higher region, There is One, human and divine,
from whom this Spirit has proceeded, in whom it dwells perfectly, Maurice,


8. Tue Commission To Ezexien (Chaps. iiiii, 1-15),


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 1.
“Son of man.” This is the customary
form of address to Ezekiel, and is used
only of him and Daniel among all the
prophets. As both were prophesying in


captivity, the title must have been con-

ditioned by that fact, and would signify

to the exiled prophets, away from the

city which God had chosen to place His

name there that above them He was
23


Omar. kL


who was the God of the spirits of all
flesh, who would communicate with the
souls He owned, and supply all that
would make up for absence from the
land of promise and covenant. The
title hardly could intimate, as is said by
commentators, that Ezekiel was in need
of a continual reminder of his human
origin and frailty and unworthiness, or
that he was to watch against being
pufted up by his visions, or that he was
spoken to familiarly as a special friend
of God. We may listen to the phrase
as expressing both a contrast and a con-
nection between the speaker and the
hearer.

Ver. 2. “The Spirit.” Not the spirit
of Ezekiel, as if he had been altogether


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


i I a





unconscious and his spirit came to him
again; nor scarcely the Holy Spirit, as
operative in prophetic revelation ; but
the Spirit which was in the living crea-
tures, and which, no doubt, was the
Spirit of God.

Ver. 3. “The children of Israel.” The
most common expression used by Ezekiel
for his people, perhaps significant of an
amalgamation already begun of the Jews
with the remnants of the ten tribes for-
merly gone into captivity. ‘ To are-
bellious nation,” or ¢o the nations, the
rebels, They who were children of him
who wrestled with the angel are dete-
riorated, not to the level of a heathen
nation, as in Isaiah i, 4, but to that of
heathen nations.


HOMILETICS.
(1.) RequisirEs ror ExrcutTine THE Commission (ii. 1-8),


L Lively attention. Ezekiel must no longer lie upon his face; he must stand
upon his feet if he is rightly to hear the voice of him that speaks, The call of
God demands of our human faculties a readiness for action, They may be dead
in sins or stunned by some masterful emotion, and the first thing needed is that
they should be raised from such a state; then they will be fitted to hear and to
obey. To be in a condition to do the work of the Lord, so far as that condition
is dependent on a man himself, is to be in an attentive attitude regarding Him,
Are we watching so that the moment in which the Master of the house comes we
will open to Him ?

IL Impulses to secure apprehension. The Lord acts in nature. He pledged
Himself of old that the seasons should not cease while the earth remaineth, and He
sends forth His Spirit in spring and reneweth the face of the earth, He works
thus on man. Spiritual power, understanding, and love are wrought in their
hearts by Him, Supplies suited to all the duties He may impose are forthcoming.
He will bring persons who may be unconscious into consciousness, in darkness
into light, and the hardest position in His kingdom can be occupied when the
Spirit of the living God has entered into the occupant and the words of the
Almighty Speaker are heard. Until he is fitted by the Spirit to hear the voice,
words would be spoken in vain, however adapted to the sins, or weakness, or
ignorance of his soul. But he is quickened. The Spirit enters into him, and the
words which follow profit him, So two factors develop our apprehension of God’s
will—His Spirit in us and His words to us. The efficacy of the words proceeds
from the Spirit ; the words are the means by which the Spirit energises us. Read
the Word of the Lord, preach it, spread it, but never be forgetful that the grasping
it by the understanding and obeying it with the will come from the Spirit whom
Christ sends from the Father.

TIL A clear defining of the evil to be engaged with. God practises no con-
eealment to His servant. He urges him to count the cost, and look, by His light,
on the materials he has to deal with. He is to regard them as God directs. He
is to submerge any tendency to make excuses for his people, and also his wishes
for peace, comfort, honour, remuneration, and hold up to view the solemn and deep-
searching decisions of the Lord. :


1. As evil ts contrariety to God. Israel kad forsaken Him to serve idols, To


HOMILETICO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OHAP. It.
goa eee EE ER BONES Dine ein Nae NS Sh NaS | ng Sede a eee es ae EC


leave Him, to pervert His ordinances, or the mixing up devices of their own with
these is a renunciation of His authority—is rebellion. Departing from the Lord
was the root which sent its sap into each branch, twig, leaf of their conduct before
His sight, and gave character to every false, unjust, selfish, impure thought, word,
or action, with which they were chargeable, In dealing with men on God’s behalf,
His servanis must never blink the fact that it is not mere mistakes, mere misfor-
tune, they have to contend with; but it is with “the minding of the flesh, which is
enmity against God.” Yet they will not refrain from urging-His claims to implicit
submission, and will desire to execute their service in the knowledge that they are
“earthen vessels,” and “the excellency of the power” is with God alone.

2. The evil is hereditary. It does not die out when a generation is dead. It
was operative in the Israel who dwelt in Canaan, and it is operative in the Israel
captive in Babylon. As the fathers resisted the Holy Ghost so did the descendants.
Parents should learn not to continue in sin against God for their children’s sake,
and children learn that a father’s example is not a binding rule as to what to
worship. Not from parentage, not from ancestors, not from mere antiquity must
we learn our duty, but always try our procedure by the revealed will of God,

3. The evil affects both the inner and the outer life. The heart is at one with
the conduct. No chasm, no rotted bridge lies between them and prevents them
from uniting their forces against God. No regrets within hamper the words and
deeds which offend Him, and the sinning men go with unblushing faces in their
own ways. Such is the evil to be dealt with, and “who is sufficient for these
things?” It is not merely perplexing to human strength and wisdom; it is im-
possible for men to encounter it effectively, except the Spirit is given them from
above to know what God is, and what God purposes for salvation.

IV. Support from the authority of God. Any attempts to destroy such
rooted impiety could bring nothing but reproaches, repulses, and defeats, if not
under the authorisation of the Lord the Spirit. That is provided—

1. By positive appointment: “I send thee.” Ezekiel has good ground for the
stand he is required to take. He is an ambassador of the great king—sufficient
warrant for any message of woe or of comfort, and a pledge that all needs will be
supplied. The secret place for receiving true power, knowledge, wisdom, and
adaptation to a service is here. Ido not go to it of myself. Ido not seek my
own things but the things which are Jesus Christ’s, I have behind me all forces,
for He is with me who has “all power in heaven and in earth.”

2. By a full title to use His name. He deputes Ezekiel to stand in His stead.
All that he is to say, so standing, will express the true state of the relations between
God and the people, and will all hold good. His servants are prompted to learn
thoroughly and to utter plainly that which God has revealed. If they are not
able to appeal to any special vision or ordination of the Lord, they can lie open to
His Spirit, be led into all the truth, and declare it with no hesitancy of accent,
They “preach not themselves but Christ Jesus the Lord.” ‘Their word is with
power.”

V. Persevered in through all circumstances.

1. Because fitted for men. A divine message is not dependent for its truth on
any earthly position in which it may be uttered, or on any treatment which it may
receive. Accepted or rejected, it retains its authority and adaptation, Farmers
must prosecute operations in their fields whatever the appearance of the clouds
may be, sure that vivifying rays of the sun will act. So they who are sent with
the truth of God must affirm its declarations, even if to do so be both arduous and
unproductive. Their encouragement and their constancy are to be taken from God,
not from the results which might gratify the mind of the flesh.

2. Because it will not be altogether vain. Should no success, such as teachers
are eager to see, ever come, and people maintain their attitude of disobedience to
God, some end, which He has proposed, shall be sure of accomplishment. He will

25





OMAP. Kit. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,








eos: oo


vindicate His righteousness and love somehow, and present the way of truth se
that men will not be able to plead ignorance of His appeal to them. They shall
know, even though they persist in stubbornness and rebellion, that a prophet—a
man with words of rebuke and impulse—has been among them. “The light is
come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than the light.”

3. Because obstacles are not bound to paralyse efforts, Men who have God on
their side are stronger than all that can be against them. His kingdom never has
attempted an advance except in face of chiding, and adverse reports, and sullen
looks. His servants are not to count such trials as strange things, but set their
faces as a flint and urge His warnings and entreaties unwaveringly. When the
Lord is on their side they need not fear men’s procedure, Like their perfect
Exampler, they should be warranted to say, ‘“ When I would have gathered you,
ye would not.”

VI. Demands implicit submission. To stand before the Lord of hosts, like
Elijah, and be empowered to bear His messages, what stronger force can there be
than that to constrain men, who are loyal to God, to do whatsoever He wishes 4
What if their preaching and teaching seem to be addressed as to a blank wall? That
will not prompt them to falter, to blunt the edge of the sword of the Spirit, or to
compromise the claims of any truth, ‘It is required of stewards that a man be
found faithful.” They are not so to the interests of the kingdom of God, they who
are unwilling to meet evil reports or good reports; to stand in the midst of
calumnies, threats, oppressions; to find in the very obstinacy of their hearers that
which develops a deepening regard for God and a deepening sympathy for men.
For all true-hearted men will be anxious not to be rebellious as others whom they
see to be rebellious, being sure of this, nobody but himself can make him a rebel.
Above all, should preachers and teachers hear the voice of Jesus, so that they shall
speak what He bids them, and never be disheartened by the indifference, the levity,
the contempt, the resistance shown by those who do not take heed how they hear.


(2.) Conscious ACCEPTANCE OF THE Commission (Chaps. ii. 8—iii. 3).
EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 9. eat and fill thy bowels with this roll.”


“Sent unto me ;” rather, put forth unto
me (as in chap. viii. 3). Ver. 10. ‘‘ Writ-
ten within and without,” as indicat-
ing the number of overwhelming afilic-
tions which were to fall upon the rebel-
tious.

Chap. iii ver. 3. “Cause thy belly to


So the eating could not be corporeal ; it,
too, was happening in the visions, and
enjoined Ezekiel to take whatever would
be spoken to him into his inner man,
there to be assimilated with his own
feelings, thoughts, will, and then to be
declared to the people


HOMILETICS.
Dury Accerrep FoR REASONS.


L As the commission issues from a divine source. This is signified—

1. By its direction. A hand carried the symbolic medium of the commission,
and Ezekiel recognised that hand to be His whose mighty voice he heard. God often
appoints to duties by figures which are not unfamiliar to men, Moses saw a bush
burning, Isaiab had a live coal laid upon his lips, Jeremiah’s mouth was touched
by a hand, and Hzekiel is shown a book. And now, when men hear of the cross,
the tomb, the throne, they are told of that which is not revealed by flesh and blood,
but by our Father in heaven. Thus the Christ, who is always with us, directs to
hearts the truth He would have them believe and obey, and what we ought to desire
is not vision but faith. “We walk by faith, not by sight.” ;


2. a its plavnness to the understanding. Ezekiel could not have made anything


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; EZEKIEL, CHAP, Bi.


out of the book unless its Holder had unrolled it and showed its contents, Then
he gets a glimpse of the persons to whom he has to go, and of the prominence he
is to give to threats of coming woes, The Lord would let His servant clearly see
what he has to do. He wishes no vagueiess or obscurity to be in any mind as to
the certain retribution for sin. He wants to convince our intelligence, Mysteries
there cannot but be in His procedure, but He sanctions no blind faith, He gives
us as much light as we can bear for the time, and more will be added. “ He opens
the understanding to understand the Scriptures.” “He gives seed to the sower
and bread to the eater.” The boldest of all followers of Christ the Way will be
those who most clearly see that He is the Light, and that “ whoso believes in Him
shall not abide in darkness, but shall have the light of life.” They have the witness
in themselves, Lighten our darkness, O Lord!

3. By its announcing tribulations to come. God only can tell the sorrows, pains,
and harassment which will be imposed on any sinners; and Ezekiel may see written
on the roll those future sufferings which men could not foresee. The Israelites
did suffer in their native land, and if sin bad been its own punishment, the punish-
ment would assuredly have ended there. But it did not, and they were deported
into foreign countries in order to be visited there also for their rebelliousness, Sin
is not its own avenger, The evils which follow it are signs of God’s rule, He
manifests His righteous character, and His determination to govern the world in
righteousness. In due places and at fit times He will make His utter abhorrence
of wrong to appear. He is never at a loss where to strike, or whom. ‘“‘ We are
sure that the judgment of God is according to truth,” and that all suffering among
the peoples of the world to-day are in accordance with His purposes of old. He
is fulfilling them before our eyes, though we cannot compare them with predic-
tions of them, as Ezekiel and Israel could. ‘“‘The Lord reigneth, let the people
tremble.”

II. As the commission is accompanied with power to fulfil it. The book-
roll was not handed to Ezekiel with the guarantee of priests or church, nor from
the archives of the Temple. It was from the Lord Himself. Ezekiel may gather
from this fact—

1. That there would be new revealings of the rule of the Lord. He had not
exhausted all methods for characterising the proceedings and the destinies of men,
Fresh conditions, such as those in which His chosen people were found, opened up
the occasion by which He could unfold distincter views of His just and good will.
It might be said that all He can show must be already indicated ; but Israel would
not, or could not, read the logical conclusions implied in the law and the prophets.
They needed further teaching, and God is no miser with His knowledge and
wisdom. He freely would impart to all; He never binds Himself to use only
established institutions, and thus does He the more thoroughly bring His word to
the platform from which all classes hear. We expect more light, even with a
knowledge of His will far beyond that which Ezekiel could receive; and in pre-
sence of novel conditions of science, politics, ecclesiastical developments, we should
be on the outlook for further manifestations of Christ, “ who is the power of God
and the wisdom of God.” If it be said that the Book of Revelation is closed now,
it should not be said thav wider and distincter views of Revelation are also shut
out. We must welcome the better things which the Lord will spread before us.

2. That there would be sensitiveness to receive fuller knowledge. Nature had pre-
sented to Ezekiel its storms and lights and animal forms actuated by one controlling
force, and he had been deeply moved ; but no special message was there of which he
could say, ‘‘ This is for me alone.” Now there is, not Ezekiel’s case only, but myriads
of other cases attest that the Spirit of the living God does speak to human consciences
with the old appeal, “Thou art the man!” He will vot let His Word miss its
opportunities, He singles out one and another on the ground of their competence
to obey Him; and if there be ~ single person who has no sense of God being near


27





CHAP, II, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


———e


and bringing something to him personally, it is because he or she is shutting the
ear “lest they should hear with their ears and understand with their hearts.” For
“the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in thy heart.” God opens the
door of faith, and men may enter in and receive that which flesh and blood could
not give, but which He can,

3. That this knowledge would be assimilated to his thoughts and ways. Ezekiel
has to eat the book, It is not that he is merely to learn its meaning, but it is
that he is to make all its words his own. He is to “inwardly digest” them, that
they may obtain a form suitable to his character and environment, The Lord
imparts them so that they shall be turned into bone and muscle for prophetic
tasks. Thus they will be psychologically the prophet’s own representation, and
yet prepared by divine energy to convey an adequate idea of what the people must
hear from the mouth of the Lerd. This power to take and eat the book symbolises
the truth that, without having thus assimilated the words of God, no one ought to
teach and preach. “Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.”
Certainly no one will live for ever who does not eat of the bread of life which
Christ gives. The word of hearing does not profit if not mixed with faith, but
when with the heart man believeth, then will fruit be borne. God knows our need ;
He gives power to the faint, and “in Christ strengthening we can do all things.”
This is “true inspiration, The divine does not remain as a strange element in the
man ; it becomes his own feeling thoroughly, penetrates him entirely, just as food
becomes a part of his bodily frame” (Umbreit).

It. As the commission produces satisfaction with itself. Ezekiel had the
sweet experience that he was called by God to serve Him, and found it eminently
pleasant to ‘‘know no will but His.” This experience follows on complete sub-
mission to all that He gives us to know of Himself. Once taught of God, we
should have no doubts and no reserves. Men’s commissions often disappoint,
because power to carry them out is not welded into them. God never lets His
workers go on their own charges; He is prepared to supply all their need. Let
them but be consecrated to Him, present their bodies as a living sacrifice, take
all the strength and love which Jesus has for them, and they will be enabled to
exclaim, “‘I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, for Christ’s
sake.” To be used for the Lord will be a sweeter experience than we shall find
elsewhere. Even if we have to tell of painful and woful things, we shall do so,
knowing that we are not acting on the promptings of our own temper, not serving
our own desires, but obeying “the Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious, who
will by no means elear the guilty.” Come what may in our life-service, a little or
a great duty, one to which we run or one from which we shrink, we shall surely be
able to say, as Jeremiah did, ‘‘ Thy words were found, and I did eat them ; and thy
word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart; for I am called by Thy
name, O Lord God of hosts,”


(3.) RATIFICATIONS OF THE COMMISSION (Chap. iii. 4-15).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Vers.5, 6.
“Of a strange speech and of an hard
language.” The marginal reading, deep
of lip and heavy of tongue, indicates
that nothing is referred to here about
the characteristics of national languages,
It is the obscurity and embarrassment
of a foreign speech, to a man who cannot
employ them, which are brought to view,
Ezekiel is to speak no tongue but that
of Israel. His sphere is definite and

28


contracted. He will be able to give his
whole attention to the meaning rather
than to the vocal sounds of the words
in which he declares the messages of the
Lord, and must aim that his people tho-
roughly understand the words he uses,
“ They would have hearkened to thee.”
The obstacle meeting the prophet, if he
spoke in the words of the Lord to the
heathen, would be their language. When
he speaks to the Israelites, it is their


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


hardness of heart. Familiarity with reli-
gious words often counteracts their power,

Ver. 9. “As an adamant.” A very
hard stone of some kind. We may
doubt if it be a diamond, as in Jer.
xvii. 1; but it signified to Ezekiel that
he would be made more than a match
for the contumacy of Israel. He would
be neither shamed, nor terrified, nor
put down before his rebellious people.

Ver. 12. “ The Spirit,” the same which
moved in the living creatures, ‘took
me up,” or, as in ver. 14, “lifted me
up.” He had been standing on his feet,
but now there came a feeling as if he
were raised from the ground and about
to be removed from the spot at which
he had seen ‘ewsions of God.” Just
as he was turned, ‘‘I heard behind me
@ voice of a great rushing ”—a sound
of loud and commingled noises, but
not that, as in our Bible, they only
conveyed the cry, “ Blessed be the glory
of the Lord from his place.” Zhe ap-
pearance of the glory of the Lord was
to be withdrawn for a season from the
sight of Ezekiel, but wherever it might
be, resting or moving, he was to know
that matter for praise and honour must
belong to it. It is not said who gave
forth this doxology; but as the only
articulate voice mentioned is (chap, i.
28) that of Him who is on the sapphire
throne, the voice would appear to have
proceeded from thence, and so clearly
that it could be distinguished from the
other accompanying sounds, which Eze-
kiel goes on to specify. Ver. 13. The
sound of great rushing was caused also
by ‘“‘the noise of the wings of the
living creatures” — when flying, the
wings touched one the other, as was
intimated chap. i. 24—“and the noise
of the wheels.”

Ver. 14. “I went in bitterness, in
the heat of my spirit.” He was de-
pressed and also excited. He felt his
own insufficiency, and in a glow of indig-
nation regarding the work he had to do.
He went straight to it, for he was mas-
tered by the mighty hand. His state
was akin to that of Paul (1 Cor. ii. 3,
4), “1 was with you in weakness, and


CHAP. It,





in fear, and in much trembling; and
my speech and my preaching was not
with enticing words of man’s wisdom,
but in demonstration of the Spirit and
of power.” Under the hand of the
Lord Ezekiel went into society,

Ver. 15. Tel-abib, the place near
which, probably, Ezekiel’s home was ;
but instead of living in comparative
seclusion, he was required to lay himself
open to his fellow-exiles. ‘ And I sat
where they sat.” ‘There is a difficulty
in the Hebrew of this clause. The way
of solving it which is taken by the Eng
lish Bible is that suggested by ancient
Jewish critics. The Septuagint has an
other way, by leaving out “and,” and
rendering the other words, “those who
were there.” Some later commentators
prefer a slightly different Hebrew punc-
tuation, and translate, ‘and I saw them
dwelling there ;” while others give this
version, “and where they were dwelling
there”’—a version perhaps the least open
to objections—“I remainedastonished ”
—stunned, Ezra ix, 3, 4, indicates that
Ezekiel’s posture was that of a man
who does not move by reason of his
emotion and infirmity. There follows
continuous silence for “seven days,”
not as a fixed time for mourning, but asa
period of purification and probation for
appointed services (Lev. viii. 33).

This paragraph conveys to Ezekiel
the purport of the order he had carried
out in eating the roll. There are repe-
titions of matters which had already
been communicated to him, but they are
applied to a somewhat altered condition.
The sight of the glory of the Lord, the
summons to serve this God of Glory,
the consent to do as be was instructed,
are followed up by the command to go
and do the service in the allotted sphere.
Thus in later days Andrew, Peter, Philip
followed Jesus of Nazareth before they
were called by Him to become fishers of
men, And in our days it is not enough
to look to Christ and feel inclination to
take up a portion of work for Him ; men
and women need to get the opportunity
which is furnished by the Lord opening
adoor. By this He ratifies His own call.


29


OGAP, TIT. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZERTEL,


ae








HOMILETICS.


L The adaptedness of God’s messages (vers. 4-6),

1. They are transmissible by means of words. Man’s language and thought are
bound to each other by coherent links. Given words will suggest ideas correspon-
dent to them, and so men can understand what the purport of a message is. The
fact that God is on another plane than His creatures is not an obstacle to His com-
municating with them, if He choose to do so, But it is impossible for them to
perceive His method of doing so. Yet it carries a self-evidencing power, and true
men can unhesitatingly say, “Thus saith the Lord.” Mysteriousness does not in-
validate consciousness. We may eat the fruit though we cannot tell how the
tree produced it from soil and atmosphere.

2. They are translatable into every tongue of men. It may be rude or culti-
vated, that of Israel or of a heathen nation, no matter which, all men are His off-
spring and capable of receiving what God wishes to let them know. His children,
scattered abroad over the eartii—Cretans and Arabs, Indians and Negroes—hear in
their own tongues wherein they were born the wonderful works of God, “He
will have all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth.”

3. They suppose competent messengers. A fit messenger will speak in the
language of the people to whom he conveys the words of God. To repeat them in
a dead language, or in a foreign language, or in the hard, unusual terms of a ver-
nacular, is to go against the desire of God that all people should understand His
will Preachers and teachers should aim to employ language which will produce
the clearest and most widespread impression of what God has given for their
hearers. It was a characteristic of our perfect Exampler that “the common people
heard Him gladly.” He should be copied in this, if possible, by all who would
speak for the Father.

4, They do not compel acceptance. It may be no discredit to one who is endea-
vouring to do spiritual good to men that he is not attended to. He may speak
precious truths in vain, and that not because of the unsuitableness of his message,
but because of the state of those who hear. Like his Lord, he may feel grieved
because of the hardness of their hearts. He makes his appeal to those whose
eyes the god of this world has blinded—‘ who love the darkness rather than the
light ”—who are as free to reject as to accept the words of the Lord, But while be-
lieving this, let all who speak His words be sure that they state them as they ought,
and then, if they are not hearkened to, they will be free from blame for their unsuc-
cess—they will sorrow over the sad fact that it is God who is not hearkened to.

5. They are partial in their diffusion. There are tribes and nations which
have not received any special messages regarding the glory and grace of the God
and Father of their spirits. “His ways are past finding out.” It is sometimes
said that if the servants of God had been more devout and enterprising, such a
condition of ignorance as to the true God would not have remained. There is a -
certain-amount of truth in this representation ; but it would be an error if we let
that aspect alone be regarded. We have this also to notice, that behind it there is
the mightier and more mysterious fact that God has not commissioned messengers
to go to certain peoples, who yet, if He had done so, would have embraced His
messages! ‘Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in Thy sight.” We are
dumb with silence. We can only wait, believing that “ He doeth all things well.”

IL Sufficient grace proffered (vers. 7-11).

1. To meet foreshadowed difficulties. ‘The Lord is wishful that His servants
should not be surprised at hindrances. Their first impression generally is, that,
having become obedient to the Almighty One, He will make a clear way for them
to walk in. That impression is not caused by anything He has said or omitted to
say. He knows how the consciences of men will deal with His righteous claims and
turn themselves away from hearing the law ; so He urges His people to count the

30


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OHAP, TE,


ne SS Sasser


cost of serving Him, to expect rebuffs and disappointments. Then, if they fail te
win men, God will have prepared them for just such an event, They need not be
cast down, however painful their trials; they must act on His authority, though
they have to make a hard, determined advance.

2. To enable to stand firm. For all such failures God will bestow surpassing
strength. If the rejecters are obstinate, He will make His servants more tenacious
than they. He will “give a mouth and wisdom, that all their adversaries will not
be able to gainsay or resist.” They go forth with precious promises from “a
faithful Creator.” He does not pledge Himself to give them comforts or converts
—He does pledge Himself to give “ mercy to the faithful.” Jeremiah heard Him
say, “They shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee, for I
am with thee to deliver thee.” Suspicious and angry looks may confront us, but
they will not dismay us, for the Lord is at our right hand, ‘God so wishes some-
times His servants to acquiesce in His government that they should labour even
without any hope of fruit. Therefore let us learn to leave the event in the hand
of God when He enjoins anything upon us. It ought to suffice us that our obedi-
ence is pleasing to Him.”—Calvin.

3. To maintain unbroken communion. His words remain with His people. His
Spirit is ever bringing to their remembrance the things He hath spoken. Ready
to receive Him, they find a spring opened on every parched pathway—something
fitted to sustain them in all duties and discouragements. It will be from their
own negligence, or fear, or unbelief, that they will lose the light of His countenance.
“The same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth and is no lie; and
even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in Him.”

4. To promote conduct correspondent to His assurances, “ He giveth grace upon
grace.” “To him that hath shall be given ;” and intimation is made to Ezekiel
that He expects; (1.) Acknowledgment of His authority. From Him alone is it
derived. No man, no ordinance, no institution can convey the power to receive
God’s words to any person. Every claim to possessing such power is baseless, since
He claims that it belongs to His own inworking, and is communicated to whomso-
ever He chooses. Men can truly speak with a ‘Thus saith the Lord,” but it is
because they have been “called” of God, and have bowed to that call, Such men
may preach boldly, for they will be warranted to believe that they do so through
the power of Christ speaking in them, (2.) Unwavering adherence to His word of
truth, ‘There must be no compromises with selfish and worldly thoughts. Whether
the truth is listened to approvingly or carelessly, whether it is acquiesced in or
utterly rejected, no part of it is to be concealed—“ all my words”—no part is to
be mutilated, for He who speaks is “the Lord God.” The rain cometh down from
heaven and falls on soil which absorbs it, or on flinty rocks which throw it off, so
is the word which proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord. “We preach not
ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord.”

IIL Appointment to labour for God (vers. 12-15),

l. By the energy of the Spirit. He‘ knoweth the deep things of God, and is
able to show where, when, and how His servants must go to speak from His
mouth. It cannot be an impossible duty to be “ filled with the Spirit :” it cannot
be a special duty for a few amongst those who obey the Lord: one in the lowliest
sphere may receive this “unspeakable gift” as assuredly as one in the most
conspicuous sphere ; and, supplied with the Spirit, all believers in Jesus will hear
His voice calling them into His footprints, and act for His glory in all ways.
They will learn to prosecute His interests, and not their own, wherever He leads
them. Not by desire for a position amongst men, not for “ filthy lucre,” not for
success will they be led amongst acquaintances or strangers. They will go to be
“¢a sweet savour of Christ in them that are saved and in them that perish,”
Sanctified by the Holy Spirit, they will speak in His mighty power.

2. In the face of soul-reluctances. ‘Lhe circumstances into which the Spirit lifts

31


owApP, III. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,





the children of God are not always agreeable to them. Nothing promising may
appear, their opportunities may be few and contracted, or the people may be
apathetic and scornful. Not despondency only, but chagrin may infest the hearts of
those whom He has “chosen for Himself, that they might show forth His praise.”
They are disposed to murmur that they are not kindly treated by being appointed
to such a work, or are not qualified to face the difficulties, and, with more pity for
themselves than trust in the Lord, to exclaim, “ Who is sufficient for these things?”
Alas! in such “ bitterness of spirit” there may be the result of misapprehension of
the ways of God and irritation against them. Our only security against mistakes
and disobedience is in obtaining the gift of power—in the hand of the Lord being
strong upon us. Under it we may have a masterful experience like that of Paul,
““T have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart. For I could wish that
myself were accursed from Christ, for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the
flesh.” We shall bear the strain, however we may feel as if we could cry, ‘Send
by whom Thou wilt send, but not by me,”

3. With sufficient upholding. ‘ All the need” of those who have given them-
selves up to the rule of God has a guaranteed supply. Their weakness, fear, and
much trembling do not exhaust it, They will not long falter, and will not retreat,
because they “go in the strength of the Lord God.” They will bear the heat and
burden of their day of labour, because “ greater is He that is for them than all that
can be against them.”

4, Affected by strange hindrances. A wide door and effectual was opened before
Ezekiel, but disablement and silence formed his first experiences upon entrance
thereunto. Peter is to be converted before he can strengthen his brethren. Paul
has to go into Arabia before he is fit to be a chosen vessel unto the Lord. Many a
later Christian has found unexpected obstacles interfering with the service to which
he believed himself called by his Master. Weak health, uncertainty what first to
do, severe temptations and doubts have appeared obstructing his devotedness.
Sometimes he is inclined to give up or let despondency unman him. But no: he
has to hope in God, for he will yet praise Him for the help of His countenance,
He must sow the good seed of the kingdom, if he can; if he cannot, he must wait
till God tells him to go and work in the field. All delay, all pain, all inability to
do what we hoped to do have purposes which will not really hinder “ the end of
the Lord.” ‘All things work together for good to them that love God” and to
the interests of His righteousness and salvation amongst men,


ILLUSTRATIONS.


Communication from God.—He ean have His infinite and, at the same time, His finite
side of being. He has His own eternal thought, and can also think, and does constantly think,
the thoughts of time. He is all-knowing, and, therefore, more intimately present in our souls,
yea, spiritually nearer to us, we may say, than we are to ourselves. He knows us not by
media, by signals outward or interior, not by induction from effects or by foreknowledge
from causes, but by direct and immediate presence, even by spirit-pervading, interpenetrating
spirit. He can think our thoughts as we think them, feel our feelings as we feel them, know
our knowledge as we know it; if He cannot do this, then are there deep places in His universe
of soul unknown to Him as they truly are. If He can do this, then he can make a revelation
in language, in any language, in any actions, signals, symbols, in any outward representations,
in any inward affections of the soul, in any finite way. If God thus comes down to us, we see
reason why He should adopt that style of speech which Js the most outward, the most pheno-
menal, and, therefore, the most universal. It is the language of the Infinite speaking through
media to the human mind, even as one unseen human soul speaks to another human soul
through the outward undulations of the air. The words and images are spevially selected and
specially arranged with reference to the wants of our human race in their peculiar moral history.
The words are not outwardly spoken to the prophet’s ears or televraphically signalled to his
imagining sensorium, They are, psychologically, the prophet’s words, the prophet’s images,
yet still none the less specially designed through the linked media of revelation, as the very
best possible words, the best possible imagery through which such an approximate communica-
tion of the ineffable could be made to human minds, Let us be thankful for every type, for
every metaphor, for every impassioned appeal, for every instance of the divine condescension


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OHAP, HII.








in coming down to us, taking the scale of our thoughts, and speaking to us in our own humap
emotions, our own human conceptions, as well as in our own human words.—Lewis, Ne
man by searching could ever comprehend the glories of a sunrise. Only as the sun, coming
up from behind the hills of the morning, reveals himself, could we know what morning
is. And go only as God, moving up by # law of motion inherent and undiscoverable, lifts
Himself into the horizon of man’s observation, ean man know what God is, All we know of
God, therefore, we know because of revelation made of Himself by Himself.—Murray.
Nearer than ‘‘the next street,” even nigh to our spirits within, and yet above us high aa
heaven is above the earth, is God felt to be when the words of [prophets and] apostles address
themselves “to every man’s conscience in the sight of God.” While not rejecting the thought
of exceptional dealings amounting to the miraculous, my faith acknowledges as normal, and
underlying all hope in preaching as all responsibility in hearing, a true inward divine teaching
in the Spirit, enabling him who is yielded toi, and in the measure in which he is yielded to it,
to understand and welcome revelation.—Macleod Campbell.

The evil religious condition.—In the national spirit and character prevalent in any
age, every member vi the nation without exception has a share. Hvery one contributes to thig
spirit, not only when as a child of the age he is infected, if not by all, yet by one or other of
the sins universally diffused ; but also when, through neglect of energetic protest, admonition,
correction, and punishment, he does not meet it with opposition sufficiently decided. But .
sinful acts, manifold and widely ramified, point back to sinful tendencies, of which they are
manifestations. There is nothing external without an internal counterpart. At the root of
illegal acts lies the illegal condition. . . . God’s eye pierces to the heart, and His lips of
truth describe the sinful tendency as already a sinful act, a transgression of that law of His
which requires obedience of heart and inclination.—PAdippi.

Submission.— What we can help and what we cannot help are on two sides of a line
which separates the sphere of human responsibility from that of the Being who has arranged
and controlled the order of things. ‘The divine foreknowledge is no more in the way of dele-
gated choice than the divine omnipotence is in the way of delegated power. The Infinite can
surely slip the cable of the finite if it choose to do so.—Holmes. It is absolutely necessary that,
in activity as in rest, you should not only support the idea of God, but that it should be
welcome to you; that you should feel the need to blend it with everything; that it should not
disturb but complete your life. If it were not so, God would not be to you what He ought
to be, nor would you be to Him what you ought; in both cases your life would be mutilated,
false, absurd.—Vinet. Every time Jesus had to act or speak He first effaced Himself, then
left it to the Father to will, to think, to act, to be everything in Him. Similarly, when we
act or speak, we must first efface ourselves in presence of Jesus; and after having suppressed
in ourselves, by an act of will, every wish, every thought, every act of our own self, we are
to leave it to Jesus to manifest in us His will, His wisdom, His power. With Jesus the believer
holds direct communication, and through Him alone we find and can possess the living
Pather.—Gode.

Receptiveness to truth.—I must have my spirit brought into contact with the quality
and character and reality of truth, so as to be affected by it in accordance with its proper nature,
All spiritual truth is addressed to the conscience in man, and is understood only by the con-
science; and if the conscience is not in action, the truth is to him like light grasped by the
hand instead of received by the eye. A grammarian or logician is apt to forget that there may
be meaning in the words or reasonings which require the co-operation of another faculty. All
spiritual truth is of inspiration, and speaks to what is of the nature of inspiration within man.
All that God speaks to us through others, or from without, is intended to make us better
apprehend what He is speaking to each in the secret of His being. —rskine.

Prescience of God.—It cannot but seem to us a higher perfection to know all things at
once than gradually to arrive to the knowledge of one thing after another, and so proceed from
the ignorance of some things to the knowledge of them; and that nothing is more certain
than that all possible perfection must agree to God ; so we find His own word asserting to Him
that most perfect knowledge which seems to exclude the possibility of increase. It is not
impossible to assign particular instances of some or other most confessedly wicked actions,
against which God had directed those ordinary means of counselling and dehorting men, and
which yet it is most certain He did foreknow they would do; as Ezekiel was directed to speak
to the revolted Israelites with God’s own words to warn and dehort them from their wicked
ways. —Howe. :

Differing results from truth.—It is from no fault inherent in the earth that it
enables the upas-tree poison to be eliminated from the same soil that gives us the bread of
life. The tree elaborates deadly essences through an organism and chemistry of its own—a
devil in the tree—so the heart of man misuses the good things of God.— W. M. W.

Independence.—Warm your body by healthful exercise, not by cowering over a stove,
Warm your spirit by performing independently noble deeds, not by ignobly seeking the sym-
pathy of your fellows.—Thoreau.

To feel, to think, to do only the holy right,
To yield no step in the awful race, no blow in the fearful fight.—Anon,


@ 33


CHAP. IIL, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,











There is tonic in the things that men do not love to hear, and there is damnation in the
things that wicked men love to hear. Free speech is to a great people what winds are to oceang
and malarial regions, which waft away the elements of disease and bring new elements of
health ; and where free speech is stopped, miasma is bred and death comes fast.— Beecher.
Find, in every stress of spiritual fortane, in every hour of supreme exposure to evil, in every
time of assault from wickedness, find your resources within yourselves ; not of yourselves, but
within yourselves, Too many people have an outside God. What they need, what the world
needs, is, a8 Paul said, “ Christ zn you the hope of glory.”—Murray.

Inspiration.—As the water with which we water the seed sown in the ground does not
create the plant which grows out of it, but stimulates the development of the organs which had
previously been formed in the germ and sets their power in action, go the Holy Spirit does not
substitute Himself for the individuality of the sacred author, He awakens his faculties, He
groups his experiences, He places him in immediate contact with salvation, and by that means
confers upon him a gpecial gift—the distinct intuition of that aspect of gospel truth which
answers most specially to his own character and needs, The pole which attracted the sentiment
or intelligence of each writer was not situated for all at the same point on the sphere of
revelation. —Godet.

Moral government.—Who shall not aim at the same end at which God aims in revealing
the gospel—that end to which creation, providence, laws, precepts, ordinances, grace, reason,
conscience, revelation, everything else is subservient—right moral action in principle and
practice? Who shall not use the same means for this end which God uses—that truth or
system of truth which is imbedded in His perfect moral government—which ever places man in
the attitude of an agent, teaching his dependence on God only as a reason for acting and doing $
Who shall not aim to make the same impression on the human mind which God aims to make
by His commands to act, His exhortations to act, His invitations, His entreaties to act, thus
throwing every iota of responsibility for the issues of eternity on man as an agent—for what he
does, for the deeds done in the body? God’s revealed moral government, the glorious gospel
of the blessed God, is by Him designed and fitted, not to hold a world of moral beings like this
in the slumbers of spiritual death, but to rouse and move and stir them to the instant, the
ceaseless, the joyous activities of that spiritual life which is the only and absolute perfection of
a spiritual being. —TZaylor.

Spirit and matter.—All life, individual as well as universal, has, as its ground of origina-
tion 4nd subsistence, as its root and its link, God’s Aoyos and God’s wvevpa. Everything lives
and moves and subsists, closely united and reciprocally attracted in one element—in Him.
** As an army is organised by its general, and is arranged according to his plan of battle, even
so are banded together the starry hosts and the groups of atoms according to the will of one
Eternal Spirit. This creating and ordaining Spirit pervades every cell, generates and regulates
the flight of every working bee, according to the eternal purpose of the whole. . . . That which
generates the galvanic current in the most opposed elements of the voltaic pile; that which
gives the living weapon of defence to the electric cel, by the contact of moist heterogeneous
parts; that which inclines the magnetie needle to the north—precisely the same creative prin-
ciple orders and controls the whole fabric ef the world, creates and vitalises the organie eell,
arranges the intercourse between spirit and mutter.” Above the material stands the power as
the material of materials; above the power stands life as the power of powers; above life
stands the spirit as the life of life; above all spirits stands God as the Spirit of spirits, and
there is no solution for the enigma of the reciprocal action of all things but this all-effecting
and pervading chief monad, which unites all contraries in itself and through itself —Delitzsch.

Self-sacrifice.—The completest self-sacrifice gives the completest self-possession ; only the
captive soul which has flung her rights away has all her powers free; simply to serve, under
instant orders of the living God, is the highest qualification for command. This is the mean-
ing of that great saying of Cromwell’s, ‘‘One never mounts so high as when one knows not
whither one is going ”—a saying which the wise and prudent scorned as a confession of blind-
ness, but which reveals to simpler minds the deepest truth.—Martineau.

Waiting.—God has so arranged the chronometry of our spirits that there shall be thousanda
of silent moments. between the striking hours.—Martineau., She accepted it all absolutely,
unconditionally, The past never confused the present: her life went on from moment te
moment, from step to step, as naturally as plants grow and flower. She said, ‘“‘I think
es are lighthouses all along our lives, and God knows when it is time to light the lamps.”

non.
Let tongue rest and quiet thy quill be!
Earth ig earth and not heaven, and never will ba
Man’s work is to labour and leaven—
As best he may—earth here with heaven,
"Tis work for work’s sake that he is needing
Let him work on and on as if speeding
Work’s end, but not dream of succeeding 3
Because if success were intended,
Why, heaven would begin ere earth ended. Browning,


34


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL


OHAP, Ei.


SS ae RES a eee


IL—THE ENTRANCE BY EZEKIEL ON THE EXECUTION OF HIS
COMMISSION. Cuaps. III. 16—VIL


Ezekiel had been fully accredited, but did not begin his work as a messenger
ef the Lord when he was sent among the people. He remained in their midst,


silent and astonied—stunned—for a season,


Then came instructions, conveying


distinct intimation of the responsibilities of his position, of the thraldom in which
he would be held, and thereto the first communications for the people followed.


1, Respowsipruitizs Innusrrarep (Chap. iii, 16-21),


EXEGETICAL NOTES. Ver. 16.
“At the end of seven days the word
of the Lord came.” The power to
prophesy is not inherent in man, It is
not produced by his agency. It comes
and goes according to occult influences
which do not obliterate the mental con-
dition of the recipient. Rather they
enter into such correlation with him as
to enhance his susceptibility for what is
divine, and are always in a certain cor-
respondence with constitutional ability,
circumstances, acquirements of the per-
son on whom they operate,

Ver, 17. “I have made ”—given—
“thee a watchman.” This shows to
Ezekiel how he is to think of himself in
the work appointed. He is, as it were,
to cover with his eyes the objects placed
under his view, and to take action in
correspondence with their appearances,
He is to look, search, announce or de-
nounce. The watchman is thus closely
allied to the seer—only this is the pas-
sive state of which the former is the
active. ‘Unto the house of Israel.”
Not as an organic unity, but as made up
of individuals, part of whom are wicked
and part righteous, and the prophet is
to inspect carefully the marks which are
traceable on each so as to impart appro-
priate warnings. “Hear the word at
my mouth.” He is not to produce his
own opinions, or to state that which may
agree with the opinions of the people;
he is to stand in the light of pure truth
and goodness and tell its manifestations.
“Give them warning.” Be not a lec-
turer on history or business; do not sit
as a professor to set forth the doctrines
that are to be accepted as credible;
epend not your time in making up com-


plaints for the people about their dis-
tresses as captives in a foreign land.
Show that the real evil is in themselves,
not in their environment; rouse up a
conviction of danger to them so long as
they cherish any delusion as to external
relationship to the Lord God, if they
are disregarding His laws. The future
is ominous with storms, and they will
be struck down if they follow the ways
of their own heart, “From me.” It
is I who warn. I speak to thee and use
thy capabilities, Take a fearless mes-
sage, for I am with thee, Do not tra-
vesty the sketch I intrust thee with by
inserting colours which I warn thee not
to put there.

Ver. 18. “When I say unto the
wicked.” God comes into personal com-
munication with transgressors when His
servant delivers His message faithfully.
“Thou shalt surely die.” The identical
threat against the first sinner (Gen. ii,
17) is valid throughout all generations,
In every world sin is death as contrasted
with life. ‘ Nor speakest to warn the
wicked from his wicked way.” Once
to give warning is not to fulfil the
charge devolving on the prophet. There
are to be repetitions and perhaps private
appeals, The representations are to
be made, moreover, against both the
man and his doings; for there are sin
and sins—an evil disposition and exhibi-
tions thereof. ‘To save his life.” The
purpose of the Lord in speaking to the
wicked man is to bestow life upon him
—not merely to put a stop to iniquity.
He hath no pleasure in the death of
the wicked. If life is not secured he
“shall die in his iniquity,” in the sins
he has committed; so he will bring the

35


OH AP. Ml.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKISL,





penalty upon himself; “but his blood
will I require at thine hand.” His
blood is typical of his life, and He,
whose are all souls, will take a reckon-
ing for that life towards the loss of which
a guilty negligence has contributed.

Ver. 19. “Yet if... he turn not
from his wickedness, nor from his
wicked way;” if he do not repent—
change his mind and conduct; “thou
hast delivered thy soul:” thou wilt
stand clear of any accusations of having
dealt unfaithfully in thy office. In
later times Paul was able to say, “‘I am
pure from the blood of all men.”

Ver. 20. A parallel case to that of the
wicked is now illustrated, but having
reference to a righteous man. It is sup-
posed that “a righteous man doth turn
from his righteousness.” He does not
show a simple weakness in obeying, but
a disposition to evil. He yields his
members to “commit iniquity, and I
lay—gtve—a stumblingblock before
him.” God tempteth not any man, but
He arranges the circumstances of men
so that an evil heart finds occasion to
assert its power, and to draw from the
paths of righteousness into the ways of
sin. Thus gold and silver (chap. vii.
19), and a regard for sensuous worship
(chap. xiv. 4, 7), affected the Israelites
so that they stumbled, Pharaoh is an


illustration of an individual, under pro.
vidential events, becoming hardened
against the good and holy will of the
Lord (Exod. vii. 3, 22, viii. 15). “ Be-
cause thou hast not given him warn-
ing, he shall die in his sin” The
watchman will be counted guilty of
negligence, but his neglect will not
excuse the sin of the wanderer from
righteousness. That will bring death,
“ And his righteousness,” his external
habits and actions, which, “ touching the
righteousness which is in the law,” were
blameless, “ shall not be remembered,”
they shall be regarded as if they had
never been.

Ver. 21. On the other hand, “if thou
warn the righteous man that the
righteous sin not;” or, if thou warn
the righteous not to sin as a righteous
man, v.¢., a8 professing to have a charac-
ter which is unspotted by iniquity, and
he is confirmed in his right standing by
your words, “thou hast delivered thy
soul.”

Thus Ezekiel learns the principles by
which he is to be moved in carrying on
the office of a watchman. Incidentally
the procedure of the divine government,
in respect to moral character, is indi-
cated, but that is a subject deferred toe
chaps, xviii. and xxxiiii more especi-
ally.


HOMILETICS.


God’s call to service is a trust (vers. 16, 17).


Such a call may be special and capable of being distinctly realised, as by Ezekiel ;
or it may be general and only its principles appreciated, as by those on whom
wishes to do good, vague aspirations, dreams, impressive events have been operating;
but whatever be the method in which the call is made, its character as a trust is
never altered.

L Its features as relating to God show this.

1. The call is conveyed by God. He can act on the human will through any
one of the faculties which affect it, Prepared eyes can see visions of God, as did
Ezekiel, Paul and others; sensitive ears can perceive the sounds of His voice, as
did Isaiah, John, and others. He uses the means for producing clear views of duty,
more or less definite desires and purposes, firm resolves; and whether these tend
towards prophesying, preaching, teaching in families or schools, directing the sickly
or dying, they who experience them should receive them as coming from the Father
of Lights, the Ruler of all events. They may be recognised, so far as they issue
from Him, as sent by Him, though the recipients should not have “heard His
voice at any time or seen His shape.” The labourers go to work in His vineyard


st the eon in which He finds them idle, The child of a godly mother responds


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL, OnaP, Ii,








to His impulse with, “‘O Lord, truly I am thy servant.” An apostle affirms, “A
dispensation of the gospel is committed to me.”

2. It ts concerned with the truth of God. His truth contains knowledge for the
wayfaring man, guidance for the lost, bread for the hungry, healing for the wounded,
life for the dead in sins—who will dare to smother its virtue? Let the methods
of the call be what they may, the work is to be begun and continued in simple
acquiescence to that which He reveals. He will not allow another standard. No
herald, soldier, minister should think of modifying the terms in which a govern-
ment made a declaration of war or a proffer of peace to another government. Less
reasonable is it to affect to modify the terms which the mighty God may instruct His
servants to bear. ‘‘The foolishness of God is wiser than men.” His words are
perfectly and always true. One man’s mind may apprehend them somewhat
differently from that of another man, one speaker proclaim them less vigorously
than another; but, in any case, the truth in Jesus must not be departed from, must
not be tampered with; it must be set forth as His,

3. Its contents are meant for all hearers. Ezekiel is appointed watchman, not
for some individuals or for some sections of his people, but for the whole house of
Israel. The Lord of the spirits of all flesh has teachings for the young and adult,
for poor and rich, for wicked and righteous, and it is not for those whom He calla
to be His messengers to alter or prescribe limitations to the reach of His words,
He may endow one with a gift suited for children, and another with that adapted
to the rough or the cultured, and a third with that fitted for the unconverted or
believers ; each is to use his gift in the distinct understanding that the truth of
God is applied to specific conditions, Underlying this conviction of the adaptation
of God’s word to each person should be the strong living thought that the whole
world lies within the scope of the divine holiness and love. In our own houses,
or outside of them, there are those for whom His food is prepared, and are we not
to distribute it? ‘I am debtor both to the Greeks and to the barbarians, both
to the wise and to the unwise,”

IL Its features in those who are called show this.

1. In reference to the messages they receive, there is to be: (1.) A conststem
dmpressibleness to their power. His servants must stand in living and persistent
regard to God. Creeds, catechisms, systems, churches, and ecclesiastical assemblies
of all kinds, are as likely to interfere now between Him and the single-mindedness
of those whom He sends forth, as was manifested by the old priesthood, of whom it
was said, “Ye have caused many to stumble at the law.” We need to abide with
the Holy Spirit, so that the truths already learned of Christ should retain as fresh
a divine power over us as truths which may have been newly given to us; we
should seek for the ability to link on the one to the other, so as to be “ perfect and
complete in all the will of God” whensoever we speak for Him, (2.) A readiness
to accept more. Ezekiel had seen the glory of the Lord and been lifted up by the
Spirit, but he is to expect further revelations, None have such abundance of light
and impulse for service that they need no more, They have not yet attained.
The glory and grace of the Only-begotten cannot be comprehended in a lifetime.
Our minds must receive the mould which is suited to our Lord’s own promise,
“To him that hath shall be given.”

2. In reference to the responsibility imposed on the messengers. They are required :
(1.) Zo look at things in the light of God. It is sometimes an object of desire to
see the truth of things just as God sees'them. Such desire is worse than foolish,
whether it relate to our sins or duties. But to ask that we may rightly perceive
how either sin or duty stands in view of the Holy One is wise, and fitted to move
us toward conformity to the mind of Christ. Many a sailor can satisfactorily tell
what he must do with his vessel in a storm, and yet is unable to measure the pres-
sure or the velocity of the wind. And the simplest servants of the Lord may so
learn His thoughts and ways as that they shall be practically agreed reed, and

AZ


OmaP. Ki. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZERIEL,.








yet be still far from complete knowledge of Him. Nevertheless, practical walking
in the light of His countenance is to be maintained continually. (2.) To tell
others what is shown of God. The spiritual eye and the heart sensitive to His
presentations respecting man’s procedure and what man should do are not to be
unused. They are to be made means of convincing all and judging of all ungodly
deeds and righteous efforts, Plainness and faithfulness must be brought to the
front. Evasion or compromises are out of place in the service of Him who seeth
not as man seeth. The message is from Him, and will be associated with His
gracious power working in us to will and do, “If a watchman want eyes and
knowledge, how can he discern danger, instruct the ignorant, heal the wounded,
reduce the straying, iift up the fallen, feed the hungry, comfort the feeble, resolve
conscience, and compare things past with things present and future }”—Greenhill.


Postulates for an effective watchman (vers, 18-21).


1. Discrimination in addressing the people. He has to act for all, but the
wicked are to be spoken to as wicked and the righteous as righteous. Human
intelligence may not be capable of distinguishing the inward moral character of
persons ; that inability must not lead to the confounding of wickedness with right-
eousness, The warning has to be uttered with all plainness, in reference to dispo-
sition or action. The application must be somewhat personal—like that of Nathan
to David, “Thou art the man!” The forms of application may be indefinitely
varied, but the gist of it will ever define the separation which discriminates “the
precious from the vile.” The fear or the gentleness which prevents a follower of
Christ from making it clear that sin is death—no matter whether the sinning one
be poor or rich, a so-called worldly man or a so-called Christian—must be counter-
acted by the remembrance that “God cannot be mocked; for whatsoever a man
soweth that shall he also reap.” Preachers and teachers of the gospel may be
deficient in some valuable qualifications ; they must not be deficient in determina-
tion to avoid whatever will lead into a mistake as te moral conduct. They have
nothing to learn from the maxim, “ Live and let live.” They have to hold forth
the word of life to those who may be dead in sins, and to those who may have
been freed from sin but been tempted to go back to their former master, so that
they may know they have not life.

2. Singleness of aim. The purpose of God, in cailing men to receive and
promulgate His messages, is to save from death, He does not want the soul to
revise its past records but to make new records. He does not care so much to
avert punishment as to repress the tendencies to punishable conduct—to turn from
wickedness and wicked ways to righteousness and righteous ways, from death to
life. There may be many pleasant results following our religious efforts, yet the
labourer must not aim at less than saving the souls alive of those for whom he acts.
He is intrusted with that on which depends, not the mere pleasure or comfort or
happiness of men, but their lives, and no consideration should be allowed to divert
the directness of the aim he is appointed to take.

3. Certainty of influence. He who brings the word of the Lord does not work
in vain. It may be that he does see results such as he wishes to see, or results
such as he most earnestly deprecates should not occur; but the Master sees that
he sheds ‘‘a savour of life unto life, or of death unto death.” Still it can never be
matter of indifference to learn what is the influence which is exerted. “When Jesus
beheld the city He wept over it.” ‘‘There is joy in the presence of the angels of
God over one sinner that repenteth.” ‘What is our hope or joy or crown of rejoic-
ing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at His coming ?”
How needful to abide under the seriousness of the conviction that we are affecting,
for weal or for woe, those with whom, as Christ’s servants, we have intercourse, and


seek “ by all means to save some,” “Let us throw the net oft. we may catch fish
in a dead sea,”


38


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OuAP. Ir.
eS





4, Subordination to God. He retains in His own power all decisions as te
death and life, and His messengers are but instruments for declaring the principles
on which He grounds His procedure. He calls them to “be not weary in well-
doing ”—to be “instant in season, out of season ;” but to not one of them does He
give a title to pronounce, over the wicked or righteous man, the sentence, “I con-
demn thee to die. I absolve thee from thy sins.” “Who art thou that judgest
another?” It is arrogancy and boldness to step into Christ’s place, and impose
any laws, decrees, or inventions of men upon the consciences of others, or to judge
the conditions of men, without warrant from Christ and His Word. Prophets may
not do it, much less others. That power is not transferred; the power which He
does confer is to declare that God Himself denounces death on the impenitent, that
He gives life to those who turn to His ways. He who teaches otherwise does not
stand to his appointment as a watchman and travesties the authority which he
might rightly wield.

5. Award according to faithfulness. Office in the kingdom of God does not
screen its holder from the righteous judgment of God if he is negligent in duties.
He will reckon with them, both for what has been let alone or unfaithfully carried
out, and for what has been attended to and faithfully fulfilled, The day will come
when He will announce the reward or woe. Omission of duty may be as fatal as
commission of evil—the negligence which does not extinguish a spark may occasion
a conflagration as destructive as that which intentional malice may cause. How
earnestly is the question to be pondered : Do we watch for souls as they that must
give account, that we may do it with joy and not with grief ?


Laws for judging moral conduct (vers. 18-21).


1. Impartiality will be dealt out. ‘There is no respect of persons with God.”
The righteous man, if he turn to evil, is condemned equally with the wicked man,
and a wicked man, if he turn to righteousness, is saved equally with a righteous
man. They who have served the Lord cannot expect that He will wink at, or take
no account of their transgressions of His Jaw, on the ground that they have been
serving Him, just as they whose hearts have been stout against Him are not to
suppose that He will be indifferent to the repentings which are kindled in them.
They who have begun wrong may turn to righteousness and will be treated as
righteous doers, while they who have done right may turn into a wrong way and
will be treated as wrong. ‘This rule for moral life has to be looked at without
blinking—I am to have sentence passed upon me by the holy God not for what I
profess to be, but for what I do.

2. Judgments proceed according to the direction of conduct. One step aside does
not of itself proclaim that a man has left the way in which he has been walking.
His fixed departure is known by the steps which succeed to the first. Those suc-
cessive steps will result from the disposition of the traveller, and God alone can
judge of that. We can see, however, that a first stumble out of the way of right-
eousness may be the commencement of a new course, which, if followed on, will
bring to the way of wickedness. The man, as he verges away, may still wear some
of the habits he has used hitherto, and may speak in an idiom often different from
that of the country whose frontiers he has crossed over; but he has changed his
direction—the light falls upon his back, and his face is becoming more suffused with
the darkness towards which he is tending, His case calls for the warning that he
has left the right way, and that the end of his movement is death—no matter if he
does retain some resemblance of his former gait. A wicked man abides in death
not because of one sin, or one class of sins, so much as because he goeth on still in
his trespasses— because he “ hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his
deeds should be reproved.”

3. Gusltiness ts not transferable. One’s wicked or righteous doing is from
himself, No scheme is possible to be devised by which we ean transfer He taoral


CHAP. II, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIBL,


conduct so that it shall be no longer ours. There is no escape from the righteous
judgment of God. Circumstances, temters, preachers can never bear the blame of
that which has been perpetrated by our own hearts. We may not have beea
advised or warned by those whose duty it was to advise or warn us; their failure
does not, in any degree, alter the character of the direction we have taken. “ Every
man must bear his own burden.” Ignorance may be a ground for inflicting few
stripes upon a disobedient servant, but cannot destroy his obligation to the master.
“T never was told ” will never be a lever by which we can lift off from ourselves
the unrighteousness and the death which is by sin.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


Readiness to serve.—lIt is infinitely sweet and lovely to be the organ and spokesman
of the Most High. The most painful divine truths have for the spiritual man a gladdening
and quickening side.—H,

To my Master I stand or I fall; what to me is the world’s acclaim?
I hear not its loud applause, I heed not its bitter blame,

I am not bound by the laws of Herod’s judgment-hall,

When it praiseth me, it hath cause ;

Yet what it seeth for flaws

It seeth, nor seeth it all.—Greenwell.


He shall die.—Christ died to save the world from the curse of death under which it ia;
not a future death of misery, but an actual death of worse than misery, a death which involveg
our liking that which is evil, It does not occur to us that to like to be wicked is to be damned.
We say that mere wickedness, mere self-indulgence, merely being alienated from God, is not
worthy to be called death unless there be misery conjoined with it—that suffering is more to
be feared than sinning. In that speaks the death of man. That is death which fears suffering
more than sinning. A sinful state isthe chief of evils; sinning is damnation; self-indulgence
is to be cast into hell; the worm that dieth not and the fire that is not quenched are unbridled
passions. To be damned is not to be miserable but to be bad, and Christ is spoken of as
saving us from sin, from corruption, from vain conversation, from this evil world, never from
pain. It is hard to believe that damnation can be a thing that men like. Corruption is cor-
ruption in man’s view, though worms like it, Is damnation less damnation in God’s view,
though men like it? To be loved by a man whom we treat as an enemy is to have coals of fire
heaped upon our head, ‘To be loved as God loves us, we being such as we are, is to be cast into
a lake of fire. The love of Christ, the sight of God as He truly is, must have power to save
men from sin. They learn that sin is damnation and understand their Maker.—Hinton,

A wrong direction fatal.—


The painful warrior, famoused for fight,

After a thousand victories once foiled,

Is from the books of honour razed quite,

And all the rest forgot for which he toiled.— Shakespeare.


2. Propuetio THRALDoM (vers. 22—27).
EXEGETICAL NOTES.—A fresh


impulse from the Lord impresses upon
Ezekiel another characteristic of his
mission. By eating the roll he was
taught that his words should be those
of the Spirit of God ; by being a watch-
man, that he must speak boldly and
without fear of consequences. Now he
is to learn that there is a time to be


to go to them, now impeis him to go
from them, “ into the plain,” or, better,
valley, as in chap, xxxvii. 1— probably
the same depression of ope as this
near Tel-abib,

Ver. 23. “And behold the glory of
the Lord stood there.” The same
manifestation of majesty, which had
commissioned him, again appears to


silent as well as a time to speak, and
that both are appointed by God.—
Speakers Com.

Yer, 22. “The hand of the Lord was
there upon me.” The people amongst
whom Ezekiel sat had not been altered
by seeing his strange condition, and the
divine power, which had impelled him

40


warrant him to hear, speak, act as His
messenger.

Ver, 24. ‘*Then the Spirit entered
into me,” as the power which enables
men to accept communications from the
Lord, and which fulfilled the pledge of
ver. 22. “And he spake with me, and
said unto me, Go, shut thyself within


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


CHAP, Bi,


eee


thine house.” Ezekiel was to be a sign
unto the people, and here is commanded
to do that which would be a symbol to
teach them. In ver. 15 he had sat
“astonished among them seven days,”
but he is not to do so again. They are
to be taught by the fact that he had
withdrawn into the privacy of his own
house. Thus isolated he preaches to
them through their eyes at any rate,
Ver. 25. “They shall put bands upon
thee.” This shows that the people had
access to the prophet within his house;
but it is not to be taken literally. If
the “they” refer to the captives, the
phrase will express the idea that their
rebelliousness would interfere with the
prophet’s mission and hinder its develop-
ment—as was illustrated in after-times
with respect to the mission of One greater
than Ezekiel; ‘‘ He did not many mighty
works there because of their unbelief.”
But the reference is probably to the pro-
cedure of the Lord Himself, since in chap.
iv. 8 it is said, “I will lay bands upon
thee.” Of what efficacy they will be is
indicated in the words, “and thou shalt
not go out among them.” This is not
merely a result from the binding, it is
rather a command of the Lord. Ezekiel
is not to consider himself free to do as
he likes. He must confine himself strictly
to las house ; on no account to sit where
his people sit, for to do so would be to
obliterate the lesson given by his isolation.
Ver. 26. This lesson is further incul-
cated by enforced silence. “Thou shalt


not be to them a reprover,” a man wha
will endeavour to convict them of their
sins, except so far as and how I direct
thee. They are not always in a state fit
to hear rebukes, “ for they are a rebel-
lious house,” and nothing effective can
be accomplished as yet.

Ver. 27. “When I speak with thee
I will open thy mouth.” The time to
declare the Lord’s mind will come, and
then Ezekiel must openly and boldly
announce what he receives from Him to
communicate, It does not seem that
this temporary restraint hindered varbal
statements about ordinary matters, but
only those which came to him in the
word of the Lord. His silence or his
utterance of the divine message was to
be dependent on the express sanction of
his Lord. Thus when his tongue cleaves
to the roof of his mouth, when he cannot
speak the words given him by God, if
his mouth is opened the words he utters
will appear the more distinctly divine.
“The divine injunction extends over
the whole period which ends in the ful-
filment of the prophecies of threatening
by the destruction of Jerusalem. This
appears especially from this, that in
xxiv. 27 and xxxili, 22 there is an un-
deniable reference to the silence imposed


upon him in our verse, and with reference


to which it is said, that when the mes-
senger should bring back the news of
the fall of Jerusalem, his mouth should
be opened and he should be no longer
dumb.”—Keu.


HOMILETICS.
RESTRAINTS IN SERVING THE LORD.


X They wre often experienced. The whole course of the history of the king-
dom of God, as traced in the Old Testament, may be pointed to as showing that
the godly, whose service is outlined therein, met with recurring impediments to
their efforts, The like feature is observed in the New Testament. Every true
life for Christ, at one step or another, verifies the expression of Paul, “‘ Without are
fightings, within are fears.”

1. The restraints may be in the servants, They may be ready to spread the
gospel, but are forbidden to enter the door which is apparently opened, or are
afflicted with disease and unable to enter, or are prostrated in their energies by
some domestic event and unfit to enter. In such and similar cases they must not
conclude that they have offended the Lord because silence is imposed on them ;
they are not to write bitter things against themselves; they are to bow in acquies
cence and wait till God open their lips. ie


CHAP, IL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





2. The restraints may be from those for whom the service ts required. (1.) They
may become violent against the persons who stand up for the rights of God. A
prophet like Jeremiah was “cursed” by every one, and cast into a miry dungeon ;
an apostle like Paul was mobbed, beaten and imprisoned, and unnumbered injuries
have been committed against less-known followers of Him who was crucified by
wicked hands. (2.) Or the people may be rebellious in heart. It was because of
this their state that Ezekiel was shut up and trammelled. The soil, into which the
seed of the kingdom was to be cast, had not those elements in it which would act
upon and vitalise the germs. The gospel is unproductive in many a sphere, not
because it is not plainly and faithfully set forth, but because men are irresponsive
and unimpressed, They reject the medicine which would bring them health and
cure, Such sad conditions skould not prevent further efforts for the redemption
of souls, though former ones have been made apparently in vain. We must not
repress our longings for a change. We must watch as servauts who wait for
the Lord.

Il. The restraints are under the direction of the Lord. He concerns Him-
self with every matter relating to His kingdom amongst men. The enforced
silence and disablement of the prophet and the “gross” heart of the people are
controlled for His righteous and good ends.

1. Traces of His working are perceptible. Restraints are felt teaching His suf-
fering servants to be patient, vigilant for Him, and so qualifying for future action
and future reward. “If we suffer with Him we are glorified together.” Also by
those restraints the evil which lies in hearts is disclosed. Their enmity to God is
elicited. Their hardness becomes more intense. Blinded thus, they lead the
blind and “ provoke” God to send a famine of His Word. What more deplorable
state can a lost traveller be in than that in which he can be no longer tracked by
the guides who go in search of him? What more painful illustration of their state
can there be than when the wicked and the righteous hear warnings no more?

2. Hopes of His working may be entertained. When men make void His law,
that is a time to ask God to do special work. The restraints which lie in the
prophet’s disablement or the people's sin will not always continue to press. God
will not be served only by silence. He will open a door of utterance, and again
send forth His words to the people that He may prove whether there is yet a heart
in them which will take heed how they hear.

IIL Restraints may be associated with communion between the Lord and
His servants.

This fact is brought to pass—

1. By a fresh consciousness of God in His service. When His faithful followers
are “troubled on every side,” they often realise the power of God and the precious
ness of Christ ; when they are weak, then are they strong through His grace. He
seems to come nearer to them, and they say, “Thou holdest me by my right hand.”

2, By a deepened conviction that He who has led them ts the same for ever.
Ezekiel is not left to remember that he had seen the glory of the Lord; it is
shown to him again. He learns that God is all that He was. The glory of
Christ which we see when He is first revealed in us, the glory which moved us to
consecrate our lives to Him and His work on earth, that glory will be shown
again and again, if we wait for Him. It is not the memory of a first love which
ia to sustain us in suffering and duty ; it is a renewed sight, “day by day.” We
are prostrated before His glory, but we, beholding that glory, shall be changed
into the same image, from glory to glory—from the glory of suffering for Christ
to the glory of reigning with Christ.

3, By the power of the Holy Spirit. He is given to dwell in our body as His
temple. He takes the things that are Christ’s and shows them tous, He teaches
to profit, and we receive power, love, and a sound mind. The efficacy of all true
ee oe on His energy. It is as the servants of the Lord live in the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OMAP. IV.


aS a ee SE
Spirit and walk in the Spirit that they adequately fulfil the mission to which they
are called, And since He is freely and fully promised for the asking—as the gift
of a father to his children—what sorrow and shame may not affect us who might


have received so much of His power and yet have been satisfied with so little!
“Ts the Spirit of the Lord straitened 1, Are these His doings?”


3% First Instguoctions sy Signs AND THEIR INTERPRETATION
(Chaps. iv, 1-v, 17).


EXEGETICAL NOTES,—Exzekiel is
ordered to carry out certain specified
processes. Their purport is expressed
by the words (iv. 3), “This shall be a
sign to the house of Israel.” The use
of such signs is partly to be accounted
for by the circumstances of a prophet
whose dwelling was in a country in
which symbolical figures were striking
and not unusual; partly by the psycho-
logical fact that his actings were to
educate the people while as yet his
tongue cleaved to the roof of his mouth.
It is a mootpoint with students of pro-
phecy whether to regard all actings of
this sort as internal sensations vividly
realised, or as taking form externally.
“No general principle can be laid down
by which to determine how far such
actions pertain to the province of the
external or internal”—Oehler, To say,
that all that was commande} to Ezekiel
is to be accounted for by the vividness
of his mental view, seems to contravene
such statements as that he sat astonied
seven days; that he removed his goods
from one place to another in sight of his
people; that he made no mourning for
his deceased wife. To say, on the other
hand, that ail are to be taken literally
seems to land us amid insurmountable
difficulties, such as that he lay three
hundred and ninety days without turn-
ing, while he is during that period to
make and bake cakes of unprecedented
ingredients; and also that he was to
burn a third portion of his shaved hair
in the midst of Jerusalem, though he
was in Tel-abib, We need not be
troubled at failing to find a satisfactory
decision on this matter. What is of
paramount interest is to find the mean-
ing involved in each symbolical act.
That that meaning will not be agreed in
by every one cannot surprise ua A


large element of indefiniteness exists in
all symbolism, and men of different dis-
positions will create images of unlike
contour through the haze of the inde-
finiteness. Nevertheless, thoughts may
be expanded, and desires for light and
guidance excited and heightened, as well
as deadened, by the very uncertainty.
Act-symbolism exists under similar con-
ditions as word-symbolism. ‘To you it
is given to know the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven, but to others in
parables.” ‘‘ By hearing ye shall hear
and shall not understand, and seeing ye
shall see and shall not perceive.” With
inwrought modesty, and prayers for the
opening of our understanding by the
Holy Spirit, should all Scripture-symbols
be considered.

The four symbolical processes, which
Ezekiel is here required to employ, form
parts of one whole presented in varying
phases. That whole is, Israel given up
to punishment for sins. The coincidence
of this section with Lev, xxvi. is note-
worthy. The most probable explanation
thereof is that Ezekiel had thoroughly
studied the picture drawn in the law
and reproduced its salient features
freely. «

The stege of Jerusalem symbolised (iv.
1-3).
Ver. 1. “Take thee a tile,” or a brick,
shaped in clay and afterwards dried
by the gun or burnt in a fire. Maulti-
tudinous specimens, of the kind which
Ezekiel was to use, may be seen, in
the British Museum, with letters and
also warlike scenes depicted on them.
And pourtray upon it the city,” or
rather a city, which is immediately
specified as the one least likely, ‘ Jeru-
salem.”

Ver. 2. “Build a fort against it.” An
instrument of ancient warfare, so con-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIG&L,





structed as to overtop the walls of the
besieged place, and so to give oppor-
tunity for the besiegers to reach the
defenders with their weapons. “ And
cast & mount against it.” Raise an
embankment from which to attack
advantageously. “And set battering-
rams against it round about.” Beams
suspended so as to be readily driven
against the walls. “At Kouynijik there
is the monument of the siege of an im-
portant city in which no less than seven
battering-rams are employed.”—Layard,
The prophet is to regard himself as doing
that which he pourtrays on the tile.
He acts under commission from God,
and so it is the Lord Himself who
is to be viewed as operating against
Jerusalem by means of the Chaldean
army.

Ver, 3. “Take unto thee an iron pan.”
A common utensil for cooking in the
East. It was to be fixed perpendicularly,
as ‘“‘a wall of iron between thee and
the city.” A separation was thus made
between the prophet and the city, and
the iron pan symbolised the barrier
which had been produced between the
Lord and His unfaithful people. ‘The
decree and the sentence of God against
them would be rigidly carried out, and
God would not hear their prayers and
complaints and bend to them in mercy.
How far they must have degenerated
for Him to deal thus!” ‘And thou
shalt lay siege against it.” The siege
would be in Ezekiel’s lifetime, and by
him as acting for the Lord. So it is
declared that “this shall be a sign to the
house of Israel,” z.¢., to the twelve tribes
scattered abroad, both those in captivity
and the remnant still in their native
land, In the time of Ezekiel the dis-
tinction between the ten tribes and the
two tribes was fast disappearing. A
trace of its existence is still seen in vers,
5 and 6, but rather as a relic trom the
past than a reality of the present. When
the ten tribes were led into captivity
Judah represented all Israel, and in the
course of time the remainders of the
several tribes were amalgamated with
Judah. This event is not dimly pre-
dicted in Jeremiah’s words, “The house
of Judah shall walk with the house of

44


Israel, and they shall come together out
of the land of the north to the land that
I have given for an inheritance unto
your fathers” (iii, 18), All attempts to
show that the lost ten tribes have been
found, or hopes that they may be, must
be dismissed as based on untenable sur-
mises,

The period of punishment symbolised
(iv. 4-8).

Ver. 4, “Lie thou also upon thy left
side.” The posture which Ezekiel has
to assume of lying continuously for a
lengthened time on the same side is a
picture of the low condition of the
people, not only throughout the siege of
Jerusalem, but in the whole period of
chastisement. The prophet becomes
their representative here, not, as in vers.
1-3, that of the Lord, In taking that
unshifting posture, he must be open to
no slight suffering, “and,” so it is added,
“lay the iniquity of the house of Israel
upon it.” He is one of them, and shares
the punishment of their guilty conduct
fortheallotted time—a symbol of penalty,
not of expiation. Thus, too, * thou shalt
bear their iniquity,” is not to be ex-
plained as meaning that his action was
to signify the forbearance of God while
the people were sinning, but the inflic-
tion of chastisement because of sins they
had committed.

Ver. &. “For I have laid upon,” or
I have given, “thee the years of their
iniquity according to the number of the
days.” The Lord had defined the limit
of time beyond which the punishment
of Israel would not go, and He required
the prophet to be subject to the con-
straint of lying on his left side for the
number of days corresponding to the
years during which Israel would bear
their iniquity. A similar posture waa
to be taken for Judah.

Ver. 6. “ Lie again on thy right side,
and thou shalt bear the iniquity of the
house of Judah forty days.” Any ex-
planations, referring the three hundred
and ninety and the forty days to events
which took place before the degradation
of the Israelitish people from their
national position, are forbidden by the
fact that Ezekiel is to exhibit what is
to happen. The children are to bear


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





OHAP. IVT.





stripes for the unfaithfulness of their
fathers. The duration of the puui-b-
ment threatened—four hundied and
thirty years—is obviously related to the
bondage of the chosen people in Egypt
and their wanderings in the wilderness,
The condition into which they would
fall would involve a suffering for their
sins comparable to that “hardship and
discipline which had of old been laid
upon their fathers,” and illustrative of
the Deuteronomic prediction, “The Lord
shall bring thee into Egypt again,” é&c.
(Deut. xxviii. 68). Moreover, as the
ten tribes had forsaken the worship
appointed by their God, in a way that
Judah had not, the period of suffering
to the former is prolonged far beyond
that designated to the latter. But no
satisfactory elucidation of the two dates,
as exact points of chronology, is forth-
coming. It is best, perhaps, to regard
both as symbolical of a lengthened time
of punishment such as might be paral-
leled by the servitude in Egypt, and also
of a brief term of punishment such as
might be compared with the trials of the
sojourn in the desert. And while the
sojourn in the desert was the passage
from slavishness to freedom, from igno-
rance to knowledge of God’s laws, so the
privations and calamities befalling Judah
for forty years would be an education
out of which hope and peace would
come. The captive Israelites would thus
be taught that only in association with
' the captive Jews could they look for
shortened suffering and following bless-
ing. “I have appointed thee each day
for a year.” A reference to the judg-
ment passed upon the tribes of Israel
for their murmurings on account of the
report of the spies. ‘After the number
of the days in which ye searched the
land, even forty days, each day for a
year, shall ye bear your iniquities, even
forty years” (Num. xiv. 34). Thus
past history is used to represent the
future—what God has done in respect
to sins God will do.

Ver. 7. ‘“‘Thine arm shall be un-
covered.” The meaning of this figure,
drawn from ancient habits in war, may
be taken to be that action was to be pro-
ceeded with—that the allotted penalties


were to be now begun, By this gesture
and the preceding actions “thou shalt
proplesy against it,” «¢, Jerusalem,
as represeutative of the whvoie house of
Israel.

Ver. 8. ‘Behold I will lay bands
upon thee” (cf. iii. 25), It was the Lord
who put Ezekiel under constraint, and
he could not act as a reprover till his
mouth was opened by divine sanction.
Was his constraint embodied in some
form of disease, first in his left side and
then in his right? Was it, like Paul’s
thorn in the flesh, an “ infirmity” which
the Lord would not cause to depart?
“ And,” so it is said, ‘thou shalt not
turn thee from one side’ to another.”
There will be no averting of the punish-
ment and no relaxation of it, “ till thou
hast ended the days of thy siege,”
accomplished the full time of being a
sign to Israel,

This paragraph exhibits one of the
characteristics of Ezekiel as a prophet,
viz, his tendency to describe surround-
ing and future circumstances by terms
and events found in the byegone course
of the Lord’s people. The fact of his
exile, and apparently cast out of th-
covenant which carried the destinics of
Israel, moved him to dwell upon the
past dealings of God to such a degree
that he thought and felt about all the
matters which came before him in the
light and forms of preceding times. But
this tendency does not warrant us to be-
lieve that the present and future should
go on in the very grooves in which the
past had left its traces; rather it nelps
us to see that He who had begun His
wise and good work for Israel would
carry it on without change of direction,
Ezekiel is to show that the austere and
stern aspects of God had not been oblite-
rated by the years in which He had
borne the sins of His people patiently,
and that the light of His countenance
had not been forever withdrawn because
of their failures in obedience to His
will. The commentator who would treat
Ezekiel’s prophecies as if they must be
expounded literally and not with great
freedom, is least of all likely to unfold
their true interpretation. ‘‘The eye
that can look through the shell into the

45


CHAP. Iv, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,








kernel may see the future things of image of what is to be, yet its essential
God’s administration mirrored in the character and necessary result.”—Facr
past—not, indeed, the exact copy and barn


HOMILETICS.
Gop’s ACTION AGAINST INIQUITIES IN A PEOPLE.


L It is carried on by various agencies. The cloud, the fire, the implements,
the composite beings of Ezekiel’s inaugurating vision, are all ruled from the
sapphire throne, and Ezekiel is made as a central figure round which their
operations proceed. By him and in him the Lord shows that pains and disabilities,
soldiers and military materials, carry out His will and visit for iniquities. People
professing His name must know that there is no such thing as chance, accident,
human ambition, or forces apart from His directing word. The operator at the
telegraph clock transmits the message which another person hands to him; so
Ezekiel or the’ army of Nebuchadnezzar carries out what the righteous God has
decided on. Whether the earth rejoices or trembles, everything that produces the
one state or the other is “‘ created” by the Lord who reigneth. | For every sin there
is not only an adapted penalty but a suitable agency for inflicting the penalty.
How many a trouble, in State or Church or individuals, would lose its aspect of
incomprehensibleness, if faith would but say, “The Lord is there and He is too wise
to mistake.”

II. It is resolute. No secondary agent which He employs will fail in execut-
img that whereto He has sent it. Ezekiel is laid under unrelaxing bands till he
has fulfilled the time appointed, and the Chaldean forces will be kept persistently
besieging Jerusalem till the sacred city is subjugated. The Lord will not be turned
aside. He will not stop halfway to what He has purposed to effect. ‘ Because
sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, men’s hearts are fully set in
them to do evil;” and should God refrain to strike when His righteousness and
mercy have been set at nought, what would happen but that His people would
become incredulous as to His sincerity in denouncing sin, and be uninstructed as
to its real heinousness in His view? He does not spare the rod because of the
mere crying of His children, since His hatred to sin and regard to holiness never
change—change what else may. Whatsoever His hand and His counsel deter-
mined before to be done against His holy child, Jesus, He will accomplish, even
though it be by wicked hands. (God is faithful.

IIL. It is impartial. All who are involved in the common sin are the objects
of suffering—rich and poor, free and bond, priest and prophet. Israel was His
chosen people, Jerusalem the place where His honour dwelt; but great religious
privileges did not shelter them from God’s “ vengeance” when they neglected and
rejected His ways. From the Churches of Christ, from the families of the godly,
from private rooms and bended knees men have gone into paths of sin, and shall
they escape? No; they shall be overtaken by suffering and woe in some form or
other, as certainly, if not more so, than men who never heard of the Christ of God,
Boast of being perfect in love, of divine right on your side, if you will; but be
sure that no persuasion of sanctity or superiority will avert from you the messen-
gers appointed by God to chastise you for evil yielded to,

IV. It is according to established order. Every generation of His children
must learn that the evil He has hated He will always hate. What God has done
God will do again when the same moral procedure is maintained by men. Our
days of levity and hardness of heart and backslidings take us on to days of dead-
ness and dishonour as indubitably as days of heat lead on to days of cold. We
may see the consequences which shall follow our pride, our wrong companionships,
ovr neglect of the ways of Christ, in the bitter griefs and pangs which befell Israel ;

46


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. CHAP, IV.
ae


she scenery in which we suffer, and the agencies which act there may be utterly
unlike those of ancient Judea or Chaldea, but the Holy One of Israel is our Holy
One. In the old centuries the judgment of God was according to truth: it is so
in modern centuries, “Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever ; a sceptre of
righteousness is the sceptre of Thy kingdom.”

V. It is proportionate, It is the action of the Just One, and takes steps in
proportion to the nature and persistence of the offences against Him. Light
neglected or misused prepares for the greater condemnation. Sodom is under an
easier punishment than Chorazin, Judah than Israel. Ezekiel could not appor-
tion the just time of tribulation—that is ever the prerogative of the Almighty
King—but Ezekiel could be made to state and display His holy sentences, No
doubt He allows excuses where they can be legitimately made; but that is only
another form of saying that He weighs the doings of His people in scales in which
no undue element is present. Then He gives forth His decision for hundreds of
years or for tens—for half a lifetime or for a few weeks. Nota day beyond what
is right and fair will any transgressor be afflicted. What trust and submission
should not be given to the God of all spivits |


Scanty means of subsistence symbolising punishment (chap. iv, 9-17).
EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 9.


The several sorts of vegetable food—the
richest and the poorest in nutritive ele-
ments—being placed “in one vessel,”
signified that all classes of the popula-
tion would be obliged to gather every
particle they could, and then find it
difficult to obtain sufficient provisions,
The “bread” from such a mixture was
to be made by Ezekiel in a quantity
corresponding to “the number of the
days that thou shalt be on thy side,
three hundred and ninety days.” This
is the period of Israel’s punishment as
referred to in ver. 5. It is a sign of the
time during which the ten tribes should
remain in captivity among the Gentiles,
and of the low estate in which they
would be there.

Ver. 10. Of the prescribed food Eze-
kiel was to “eat by weight twenty
shekels a day,” somewhere about ten
ounces of English measure, and a very
scanty portion for ordinary healthful
nourishment; but, as in instances of
shipwreck and sieges, meant to maintain
life as long as possible—‘“‘too much for
dying, too little for living.” “From
time to time shalt thou eat it:” not
to make one poor meal, but to take a
“ration ” at stated intervals.

Ver. 11. So also “thou shalt drink
water by measure, the sixth part ofa
hin ”—abont a pint, and sadly insufficient
for a climate like that of Central Asia,


Ver. 12. The food was to be eaten, as
common “ barley cakes” still are in the
East, after having been baked in hot
ashes; but with a strange peculiarity,
“thou shalt bake it with dung that
cometh out of man” (ef. Isa. xxxii. 12).
The dung was not to be used as an
ingredient of the cakes, as has been
strangely supposed, but of the fuel.
The use of human ordure in fuel was
not practised, and the order to employ it
was meant to indicate “in their sight”
—for clear and deep impression—that
which is stated in

Ver. 13. “‘The Lord said, Even thus
shall the children of Israel eat their
defiled bread among the Gentiles.”
The children of Israel would find them-
selves, during the period of their cap-
tivity, in such a condition that the laws
of Moses in reference to foods could
hardly be kept. They would have to
eat their bread defiled—what their souls
might loathe—and so would become al-
most as the heathen. They would not
be able to boast of their special separate-
ness.

Ver. 14. Ezekiel had submissively
accepted the divine appointments hither-
to—he makes a protest now. “Then said
I, Ah Lord God! behold, my soul hath
not been polluted;” and he goes on to
specify certain kinds of forbidden food
from which he had rigidly abstained.
The vigidness was all the pore appro-

4


CHAP. IV.





priate in that Ezekiel was dwelling in a
heathen country. By means of adhering
to all ritual observances a fence was
planted round Israel against the en-
croachment of conquering heathendom,
and the prophet was a rallying-point for
strength to the exiled people when they
strove to live not as did the heathens,
The observance of legal institutions that
could be observed outside of the Holy
Land was consistently maintained by
Ezekiel, and he argues from the particular
commands in reference to foods to the
general obligation which he acknowledged
in reference to everything by which he
would have been consciously defiled. It
is the appeal of a servant who has gone
far beyond obedience to the mere letter—
who is sensitively alive to being clean in
heart as well as in act—who would shun
the appearance of evil. For he could
not plead any commandment prohibiting
the use of the prescribed fuel ; he could
make a plea only from his own disgust,
which was not simply that of his seuses,
but also of his moral feelings. It is no
sign of priestism in Ezekiel. Peter the
apostle, who was not a priest, showed
something of the same spirit. But the
case of Peter (Acts x. 14), who was not
a captive, is not altogether parallel to
this. The only point of similarity is that
Peter had “not eaten anything common
or unclean.”

Ver. 15, The answer to Ezekiel’s pro-
test is a relaxation of the original order.
“Then he said unto me, Lo I have
given thee cow’s dung for man’s dung.”
Nothing is more usual in those parts of
the East than to observe cow’s dung,
mixed with grass, straw, &c., made up
into fuel for cooking, It is not likely
that Ezekiel, any more than his neigh-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; EZEKIEL,


——


bours, would consider himself polluted
by eating cakes baked with this inodorous
material, and so he makes no objection
to the command, “Thou shalt prepare
thy bread therewith.”

Ver. 16. “I will break the staff of
bread in Jerusalem.” This alludes to
the forty days during which Ezekiel was
to lie on his right side, and signified
that, in the period of Judah’s sufferings
corresponding thereto, a lack of sufficient
nourishment to sustain activities with
energy would be experienced. The bread
would not be polluted, as the bread given
in the wilderness was not polluted, by
the place; but as the natural supply
found there was not sufficient for the
wants of a multitude, so the supplies
for Judah would be marked by scanti-
ness; still the punishment would not
be so severe or so continuous as that of
Israel. It was that of a remnant, and
would be “cut short in righteousness.”
In the besieged city “they shall eat
bread by weight and with care,” as
those who are hard put to and anxious;
“they shall drink water by measure
and with astonishment,” as in perplexed
wonder whether and when the sources
would run dry.

Ver. 17. The Lord had reason for
this procedure. His broken covenant
necessitated that they should feel a
deficiency of “bread and water, and
be astonied,” be in perplexity and
wonder, ‘‘one with another,” each and
all, ‘“‘and consume away,” become
gaunt and offensive, “for their in3-
quity.” Hunger and thirst, sorrow
and dismay, would fall upon the sinners
in Zion, as the ancient book of the law
had threatened (Lev. xxvi. 39).


HOMILETICS.


Gop’s Action against Iyiquitizs AFFECTING His SERVANTS.


1. Servants who know the Lord’s will and do it not sink into destitution and perils


similar to theirs who sit in darkness and have no light


This aggravation of the


misery cannot but be experienced, viz., contrast with the blessings which they have
forfeited by misuse. Israel had rejected its God, had chosen the way of the heathen,
and having thus broken the conditions of its covenant with God, nothing remained


but that it should be treated as the heathen.


The son has left his father’s house,


wasted his substance, fallen into want, and is on the verge of perishing with hunger.


48


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OHAF IV,
ohn RE I GU See


Not the worthiness of godly friends, not the calling ourselves Christians, not obser:
rance of the external rites of worship can hinder from entering into the state of
those who live as without God in the world. A professedly Christian nation may
be largely affected by commercial depression, sorrow, despondency, doubt, and dark
fears for the future, if it is not true to God. The statement is sometimes made
that Christian nations are no better than heathen nations, and the grounds for it,
if we could see clearly, might be perceived in some indifference, neglect, antagonism
to the holy, just, and good law of God. All evil things which transpire prove
that He will not be mocked ; least of all by those to whom He has manifested His
righteousness and love. They must bear the fate of the heathen, whatever be their
surprise and repugnance at what is undergone.

2. Servants who do His will are subjected to trials in common with those by whom
they are surrounded, The bands which bind men into society are not forged so
as to allow an escape, from evils which are rife in the community, for one of its
constituent parts. They who fear the Lord fall into straitness, hunger, become
weakly, if the circumstances in which they dwell are replete with the influences
which produce such effects. Innocent children suffer from famine as well as men
whose actions have contributed to the intensity of the famine; so does the man
who humbly prays for relief as well as the man who curses the hardships he has to
put up with. It is not in freedom from the troubles which stir in their environ-
ment that the sons of God are to find their comfort; it is in the conviction that they
have not gone with a multitude to do evil, and that God writes their names in His
book of remembrance. If they receive good in society from the hand of the Lord,
shali they not receive evil also?

Every one who wants to be where the Supreme Will directs him to be, and to
help the brothers who are within his power to reach, must be ready to encounter
pinchings, disgusts, wearying hopes, anguish as well as sufficient grace. The Christ
must needs “suffer many things” by coming amongst men, and His servants who
would walk in His spirit may look for trials which, in a sense, they do not deserve,
Let them see in Ezekiel one who, like themselves, had neither the mission nor the
resources of Jesus Christ, and be instructed to take up and endure galling burdens
for the welfare of the people in whosé sufferings they are associated. Not in vain
shall they suffer according to the will of God.

“Those periods of tribulation and chastisement, which the prophet here repre-
gents, have they not a voice for other times$... The lukewarm and fruitless
professor—so long as he cleaves to the way of iniquity, and refuses to yield a
hearty surrender to the will of God—is in bondage to the elements of the world,
and therefore can have no part in that good land which floweth with milk and
honey. The doom of Heaven’s condemnation hangs suspended over his head ; and
if not averted by a timely submission to the righteousness of God, and a cordial
entrance into the bond of the covenant, he shall infallibly perish in the wilderness
of sin and death.” — Fairbairn.


SENsITIVENEss TO SprritvaL Evin (Chap. iv. 1215).


Burden-bearing with others, and to any extent for them, may expose to unplea-
gant associations and proceedings, Past habits and confirmed tastes may receive
shocks which are hard to withstand. Yet the duty has to be done for the Lord.
In such difficulties against service we must not accept their darkest aspects. We
must learn to apply our natural shrinking from what is unpleasant to the case before
us, and proceed according to the light which may be given to us, Our sensitive-
ness to anything that we feel unbecoming should inform us—

1. That we have to maintain past faithfulness to duty. Ezekiel did not like the
thought of turning out of the way in which he had hitherto walked and kept him-
self pure, It was no ignoble consistency he was desirous to preserve, Consistency


Da 49


omar, TV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





may be a fault when it weds us to what is unwise and not truly kind. Itis a grand
thing when it impresses the need of being able to hold ourselves in self-respect by
being obedient to what we regard as right and sacred, What more honourable ina
young man than that he will say, “ Ihave not been discredited by low and offensive
habits, and I shrink from them with loathing”? Or for a man, who is known to
profess allegiance to Christ the King, to say, “I have not been contracting the
taints of the spirit of the world; I have not been a cause of reproach to the Blessed
Name by my cold disregard of the interests of the kingdom of Christ, and I shudder
at the idea of doing anything which will seem contrary to my past conduct”?
Yet there may be something more. There may be such a susceptibility to the
appearance of evil that men will deprecate being taken into a course on which
they may have to touch that which is not morally wrong, but which offends their
taste for what is spiritually pure. It is bad to have one string out of tune. In
seeking our own improvement, a book whose suggestions are not altogether true and
holy could be read ; in seeking the best way of helping others we might see unclean
courts and houses, and contact with smutty persons might appear in view. What
man or woman, sensitive to the continuance of their pureness of thought and con-
duct, would not rise up with the cry, ‘‘O my soul ! come not thou into their secrets;
unto their assembly, mine honour, be not thou united”? Bypast separateness from
evil becomes a ground from which to act against approaching, apparently defiling
influences. The man who has lived “ unspotted from the world” will not readily
reconcile himself to step into a place where his garments may become soiled. His
faithfulness heretofore to the requirements of the holy law will impel him to repu-
diate what might seem to defile him now.

How blessed would this earth be if the hearts of all people deprecated every-
thing which would lower the standard of moral taste or shake confidence in the
prosecution of the high prize of a stainless life |

2. That we should regard our inward feelings as well as the external act in
respect to what ts required of us. The inward is not to be sullied. The Master’s deci-
sion has for ever placed the state of men’s hearts in a more important position than
that of their words and deeds, That which comes out of the heart is that which
defiles, and every one who would be as his Master must endeavour to keep the heart
so clean as that no pollution shall mingle in its movements, It is a true stimulus to
struggling believers to hear, from the lips of one of ancient days, such an appeal as
this of the burdened prophet. How it may urge us to guard our acquired sensitiveness
to defiling acts, to keep that which we have already attained, and long to be pre-
vented from all filthiness of the spirit, so as to perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord!

The outward ts not to be accepted without appeal. The hard and irksome
processes appointed for Ezekiel might be entered into by him, but he wanted part
of them to be less unpleasant and trying to his tender conscience. So he sought
for an alteration in the requirement. Thus it seems that what is the present will
of God may not be followed by immediate acquiescence. An attack of disease
does not compel the patient to say, “J must submit, without an effort to get rid
of it.” The disobedient act of a child, which must be punished, does not demand
the parent to inflict that kind of punishment against which the child revolts. The
contents of that cup, in which the venom of the world’s sins was concentrated,
eould not be drank, by Him who came on purpose to drink it, without a cry of
aversion towards the awful task of love. And we are bound to make every
attempt at extrication from external proceedings with which we have to do, if we
are likely to suffer any moral defilement by them. ‘‘It were better for me to die
than that any man should make my glorying void.” But no outer event can hurt
our souls unless our souls turn it to evil.

3. That alleation to our souls will be granted by God. No command of God
to His servants can have an element in it which will really deprave their souls,
Still that fact does not dim His fatherly pity so that He zannot see their shrink.

50


AMOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, ouaP. ¥.





—








Ings, Let a change not disparage His justice, holiness, truth, and He is willing
to alter the conditions of His instructions, and make them less dreadful to the
moral fastidiousness of His own. He has a respect even for their exaggerated
feelings, and in His wisdom and love mitigates that which pains them. He pities
them “like a father.” He does not desire to impose one unnecessary pang upon
them. They may ask Him for whatsoever alleviation might ease their trouble
and revulsions, in the hope that He will relax the stringency of His demands, if
He does not renounce them. We have to do with God, who has tender compassion
for every one who wants to be pure in heart. He does not quench the smoking flax.

‘Let it teach us not to be rigid and stick to our wills, and think it disparage.
ment to abate of our wills and right, and yield to others, when God, who is inf.


nitely above us, can yield to us, and doth so daily, bearing our infirmities,”—
Greenhill.


The last methods of punishment symbolised and interpreted (chap. v. 1-1 7).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—The re-
quirements made of Ezekiel still pro-
ceed in his house. Already he has been
a sign that Jerusalem would undergo a
thorough siege; that specified periods
of stringent suffering should be allotted
to both portions of the house of Israel ;
that hunger, anxiety, and defilement
would be encountered ; and furthermore,
he is to be a sign of the various forms
of penalty which should be incurred as
the closing manifestations of the Lord’s
dealing justly with iniquities. In this
case, as in the preceding three, we ap-
pear necessitated, by the very conditions
of the requirement, to suppose that
Ezekiel could not be expected to carry
on literally the processes assigned to
him. How could he, in the disabled
state to which he must have been re-
duced if he had externally obeyed the
previous requirements, shave his head
and beard with a sword, or burn the
appointed part of hair in Jerusalem
itself? Even if it were certain that he
could do so, it would be unbecoming to
believe that the Lord Himself literally
drew a sword after the third part of
hair which was scattered to the wind.
Notwithstanding these difficulties, we
are sure that the actuality of the things
signified was somehow conveyed to the
minds of his captive countrymen—the
method of doing so being unknown.

Ver. 1. “And thou, son of man,
take thee a sharp knife”—rather sword,
as in the end of ver. 2. He was not,
besides the sword, to ‘‘take a barber’s
razor,” hnt he was to use the sword asa


barber’s razor. A closer rendering of
the Hebrew warrants this explanation.
“ A razor of barber's thou shalt take it” —
t.e,, the sword, as the gender intimates—
“to thee;” “and cause it to pass
upon thine head and thy beard.” In
the hands of an earlier prophet the use
of a razor had already been made signi-
ficant of punishment by the Lord, “In
the same day shall the Lord shave with
a razor that is hired . . . the head and
the hair of the feet; and it shall also
consume the beard” (Isa. vii. 20).
Moreover, in accordance with biblical
representations, shaving off the hair of
the head and beard was one of the signs
of mourning and reproach, and, besides,
it was forbidden to priests (Lev. xxi. 5).
God, enjoining a priest to reverse his
own ritual observance, would give addi-
tional emphasis to the keenness of the
calamity shadowed forth: “then take
thee balances to weigh and divide”
(lit.) “them,” te, the hair, An ap-
portionment of distinct sufferings is to
be carefully measured out, so that all
may feel ‘the judiciary providence of
God.” We modify the words of an
old Latin commentator, and say, “The
sword or razor signifies divine ven-
geance, the head the city, the balances
its equity, and the hair the people to
whom punishments shall be distributed.”
Or, as Theodoret says, ‘The sword in-
dicates avenging power, the shaving of
the beard the removal of grace and
glory, the scales and weights the deter-
mination of divine justice,”

Ver. 2. Ezekiel is commanded to

Al


OHAP. ¥.


arrange the hair in proportionate parts,
and to dispose of each. ‘‘Thou shalt
burn with fire”—in a flame—“ a third
part in the midst of the city ”—in the
midst of the model of the besieged city
which lay before him—“ when the days
of the siege are fulfilled”—when the
days for his symbolical completion of
the siege had come to an end; “and
thou shalt take a third part and
smite about it ”—+.¢., the city—*‘ with
a knife,” or sword, as ver. 1; “and a
third part thou shalt scatter in the
wind.” The rest of the people have
perished ; this third alone survives, It
must, therefore, include within itself
both the poor, who might be left un-
settled in Judea, as well as the numbers
who had been dispersed among other
countries. And there seems no valid
objection against considering that it in-
cluded the people of a more distant
future than that which would be passed
through by the living generation, The
lot of the nation, as a nation, is involved
in the action of the Lord. The next
words show the symbol passing into a
reality, while an intimation of sufferings
in the land of exile is made: “and I
will draw out a sword after them.”
They shall not escape because of change
of locality, By this procedure of Ezekiel
three kinds of punishment are set forth.
One part of the people dies in flames—
ver. 12 interprets this of famine and
disease; a second part dies in flight,
sallies, battles; the surviving part be-
comes “tribe of the wandering foot and
weary breast.” But the people will not
be absorbed or obliterated.

Ver. 3. “Thou shalt also take
thereof”—from that scattered portion
—‘a few in number, and bind them”
—this ‘‘very small remnant” of hairs—
“in thy skirts,” ends of his garment,
God has to fulfil His covenant of mercy;
seed must be preserved as the instru-
ments of His purposes; and Ezekiel is
required to signify, by caring for the
safety of a few, the eternal purpose of
God. But even of this few not all
would be delivered,

Ver. 4. “Then take of them again,
and cast them into the midst of the
fire ””—a different word from that of ver.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


2, and signifying a somewhat diverse
mode of suffering about to befall the
reduced number of people. They were
not all right in heart, the best were
tainted and needed a purgation, a proof
of how deplorable was the spiritual con-
dition of the surviving people. This
infliction would not be confined to the
unfaithful among the gathered ones:
‘“‘thereof”—from this consuming fire—
“shall a fire come forth into all the
house of Israel:” the doom of the few
involves the doom of the whole people
as such. “ Judgment must begin at the
house of God, and what shall the end
be of them that obey not the gospel of
God?” A striking parallel to this de-
claration to Ezekiel is found in Isaiah,
“And if there should yet be a tenth in
it, this shal] again be consumed ; (yet),
as the terebinth and the oak, though
cut down, have their stock remaining,
(even so) a sacred seed (shall be) the
stock thereof” (vi. 13).—Cheyne.

A divine interpretation of his sym-
bolical action is given to Ezekiel. He
hears words describing the guilt of and
the judgments which shall fall upon
Jerusalem and his people; and, first of
all, there is conveyed a meaning which
is to be attached to Jerusalem.

Ver. 5. “Thus saith the Lord God;
This Jerusalem ”—it is unnecessary to
supply #s—“I have set it” her, “in the
midst of the nations and countries
that are round about her.” It has
been common for nations, whose means
of locomotion are neither convenient nor
rapid, to consider their country the cen-
tral point around which other countries
are clustered. Such a notion might have
been accepted by the Jews in reference
to Judea; but it is not with such a
reference that the situation of Jerusalem
is specified here. In explaining this
reference it is not requisite to point out
how the Holy Land stands in relation
to Egypt and Syria, to Assyria and the
Isles of the Gentiles. We decline the
merely local limitations as not expres-
sive of the fact intimated, while we still
perceive, in the then active influences of
the world, certain advantages adhering
to the site which Jerusalem occupied.
The true interpretation is elsewhera


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; EZEKIEL.





It is thus stated by Keil; “ Jerusalem
is described as forming the central point
of the earth, neither in an external,
geographical, nor in a purely typical
sense, as the city that is blessed more
than any other, but in a historical sense,
in so far as ‘God’s people and city actu-
ally stand in the central point of the
God-directed world-development and its
movements ;’ or, in relation to the his-
sory of salvation, as the city in which
God hath set up His throne of grace,
from which shall go forth the law and
the statutes for all nations, in order that
the salvation of the whole world may be
accomplished,”

Ver. 6. “And she hath changed ”—
the ordinary usage of the word changed
refers to murmuring, opposing, rebelling
against, or some such action, and often
with a statement of the object, as here,
against which the act operates — she
rebelled against “my judgments ”—
thongh they were known, yet were they
80 disregarded as to incur the crime of
turning them “into wickedness more
than the nations ”"—to a degree of evil
which even the heathen could not be
charged with, ‘‘and” she rebelled against
“my statutes more than the countries
that are round about her; for they ”—
of this Jerusalem—“ have refused my
judgments ”—with a kind of disdain—
“and my statutes they have not
walked in them.” The penalty of such
a course follows.

Ver. 7. “ Therefore thus saith the
Lord God ;” but before announcing the
doom an emphatic presentation of their
unhallowed conduct is made: ‘‘ Because
ye multiplied” —a somewhat infelicitous
rendering of a difficult term, for which
a translation like “ye raged” is better,
a.e., made a turmoil in acting as rebels—
“more than the nations that are round
about you,” and “have not walked in
my statutes, neither have kept my
Judgments, neither have done accord-
ing to the judgments”—laws and ways
of living and worshipping—“of the
nations that” are “round about you.”
Further on (chap, xi. 12) Ezekiel accuses
the people thus, “ Ye have done alter
the manners (li. judgments) of the
heathen that are round about you.”


CHAR. V





There is no real contradiction between
the two representations. The heathen
pursued courses which were opposed to
Goa’s will, and Israel did the same ; but
the former showed also that the word
of the law was written in their heart,
and, so far as they had obeyed that
transcript, they had done that which
Israel had not done, Israel had resisted
both revealed and natural obligations.
Ver. 8. “Therefore thus saith the
Lord God ”—the suspended threatening
is now pronounced—‘Behold I, even I,
am against thee ”—a solemn assevera-
tion that the covenanted relationship to
the Lord, however boasted of, would not
shield from the punishment due to Israel
for their violation of the covenant. He
would prove that He was not a dead
God—a mere name of power and _holi-
ness—“ and will execute judgments in
the midst of them”—the means of
punishment shall be forthcoming and
effective “in the sight of the” heathen
“nations.” Thus one aspect of retribu-
tive justice is unfolded—it will be public;
the heathen shall know that He is Lord
by the judgment which He executeth.
Another is presented—it is exceptional.
Ver. 9. ‘‘ And I will do in thee that
which I have not done, and whereunto
I will not do any more the like ”—
there would be peculiarities in the woes
which should befall Israel that would be
marked as unique throughout all time.
If acts as shocking as those referred to
in next verse are observed in the dis-
tressed periods of other nations, we must
remember that when a wife or child is
expelled from the home, the calamity,
though similar, is far worse than when a
guest or servant is expelled. Such was
the relation of Israel to God that their
punishment had elements of horror in it
which the same suffering happening to
another people had not. The primary
reference of the threatening is clearly to
the then existing Israel, but seems to be
applied by the Lord Jesus to that genera-
tion of the Jews who were subjected to
terrible calamities when Jerusalem was
besieged and destroyed by the Romans,
“Then the tribulation shall be such as
was not since the beginning of the world,
nor ever shall be” (Matt, xxiv. 21)—
53


OBAP. ¥.


“peeause of all thine abominations ”—
a frequently used word, expressing actions
and habits which, however common and
palliated, were such as the Lord could not
endure to hear and see in His professed
people—each sin had done harm and
each would be reckoned in.

Ver. 10. The punishment will be
characterised by such intensity of suffer-
ing that family ties will be ruthlessly
disrupted. ‘ The fathers shall eat the
sons,” as had been predicted should
come to pass if they would not hearken
to the Lord, but walked contrary to
Him (Lev. xxvi. 29), “and the sons
shall eat their fathers,’ and all who
survive “will I scatter into all the
winds.”

Ver. 11. From this verse to the end
of the chapter the punishment is more
fully announced as from the Lord. The
emphatic “therefore” (Heb.), which is
prefixed to several of the declarations
of this chapter, is here followed by the
solemn oath, “As I live, saith the Lord
God.” I, the Living One, shall die if these
judgments are not executed. This oath
is sustained by His self-existence—that
which is the basis of all truth and reality,
and a guarantee that there will be no
revocation, no reversion: ‘‘ He can swear
by no greater.” ‘Surely because thou
hast defiled my sanctuary.” They had
entered into the place where His honour
tabernacled, and taken a course there
which proved how completely they had
cast off His supremacy. They had not
been restrained by any reverence or
attachment, They had occupied it “with
all thy detestable things and with
all thine abominations ”—wickeduess
of all kinds had been practised, and the
way in which it was carried on is shown
in chap. viii We shall mistake this
accusation if we confine its reference
solely to the employment of the Temple
for idolatrous proceedings. The Temple
was the ideal heart of the theocracy.
All spiritual energy proceeded from it;
all objects of that energy reacted on it,
So that if the people indulged in evil
elsewhere, and came impenitent into the
courts of the Lord’s house, they defiled
the sanctuary, and their ears were made
to tingle with the indignant remonstrance

54


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


a SO


of Isaiah, “ Who hath required this at
your hands to tread my courts?” or
with that of Ezekiel afterwards, ‘“‘ Should
I be inquired of at all by them?” The
glory due unto the name of the Lord
had been polluted, and He will take
steps to clear it. “I will also dimi
nish,” our English version supplies thee.
In comparing Deut. iv. 2, where this
same Hebrew word is employed, “ Ye
shall not add to this word which I com-
mand you and ye shall not diminish
from it,” the expression seems sufficient
without adding thee. As the Israelites
had taken away from the rights of God
to His sanctuary, so He will diminish
the benefits He had hitherto bestowed
on them.

Ver. 12. An explanation is now given
of the symbolical actions prescribed in
ver. 2. From this it is made clear that
the five there is to represent disease
and starvation as among the destructive
agencies affecting the sinful people,

Ver. 13. The menaced penalties being
carried out, “mine anger shall be ac-
complished;” its full force will be brought
to act so as to inflict every item of the
penalties due to such transgressors.
“And I will cause my fury to rest
upon them;” it will find its goal in those
who suffer from it, and there come to an
end: it will have finished “ His strange
work.” “And I will be comforted.”
We might translate, in accordance with
another signification of the Hebrew, J
repent myself. It is preferable to retain
the translation of our version, as better
expressing the idea that the old has
ended and that the ground for a new
procedure will be laid. (Vide Isa. x.
24-27, in reference to Assyria.) This
betokens one mode of the divine life
It is a highly figurative, and, of course,
imperfect token ; but, so far as we can
explain, it shows that the Lord receives
satisfaction in vengeance accomplished,
since the violators of His honour are
fairly punished and His rights are fully
vindicated. A God who could not assert
and maintain, at any cost, His own just
and perfect authority, would be only
an idol-god. Nor is it Himself alone
whom the finished punishment concerns,
“They,” the next verse is proof that it ia


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





other nations who “shall know that I
the Lord have spoken in my zeal,” and
not the prophet in over-eagerness or fac-
tiousness. The words are again repeated
in vers. 15 and 17, and show that Ezekiel
was speaking by direction of the living
God of Israel, who would not allow His
righteous laws tobe trampled under men’s
feet. History has become a guarantee
for the divine origin of the threaten-
ings.

Ver. 14 is a further statement of the
penalty which was to be executed on
the devoted city. “Waste and a re-
proach,” a reproach “‘among the nations
that are round about,” and waste “in
the sight of all that pass by.”

Ver. 15. “So it”—Jerusalem—“ shall
be a reproach,” dc. Inferences of seve-
ral kinds will be drawn from the sad
and ruiued state of the punished people,
and lessons of moral worth become dis-
tincter,

Ver. 16. According to the ground-
text, Deut. xxxii, 23, “the evil arrows ”


GHaF. V.





here are those “of famine,” which shall
be bitter and destructive and accumu-
lative in its horrors: “I will increase
the famine ;” hunger upon hunger wil}
come “‘upon you,”

Ver. 17. Another element of terror is
mentioned for the first time, “ evil
beasts.” We may suppose that they
are to be taken literally ; but it is diffi-
cult to see how they could be a notice-
able ingredient in the cup of misery
which was to be drank by a beleaguered
city, and Hengstenberg is probably right
in referring the phrase to the heathen,
on the ground that the designation of
brutalised men, who have no breath
from God, as beasts is deeply rooted in
the Scriytures. ‘And pestilence and
blood ”’—some terrific diseases—“ shall
pass through thee.” A solemn appeal
to the certainty of the accomplishment
comes in, as already, on the ground of
the Lord being the speaker in reality.
Repetition of the same expression is a
characteristic of Ezekiel’s style.


HOMILETICS.


Waere Moc 1s Given, Muon 1s Requirep (vers. 5-17).


As each stage of a physical process manifests another condition of the materials
which are under the action of forces, so each stage in national affairs expresses a
changed aspect of the relations between the Creator and the creature, the great
King and His subjects, the Holy and the unholy. If the punitive treatment of the
Jews was painfully startling, the presentation of it, which the prophet is com-
missioned to make, is meant to unfold, to the existing and other generations, a
fresh development of the thoughts and ways of God. ‘These verses may be held to
show that the sorest penalties will be a consequence of privileges set at naught.
In them observe—

L The advantages conferred.

1. A favourable position : “Set in the midst of the nations.” It is obvious that
certain countries, certain cities, are distinguished above others by climate, materials
for traffic, openings to surrounding people. In some such beneficial conditions the
ancient Jerusalem was situated ; but above them, and of greater importance still,
was the fact that there was His sanctuary—the place where His honour dwelt,
Both temporal and spiritual benefits come from God, and each advantage should be
regarded as enforcing a higher obligation,

2. The personal interest of God. It is He who condescends to speak to
them, to punish them Himself. He did not treat them on the same lines as
He did the other tribes of men. No nation had God so nigh it as this people.
They were the children of Abraham, His friend. He bare them and curried them
all the days of old. Whosoever touched them touched the apple of His eye. Their
offences were offences against Him—not against some vague “ accusation” of their
own consciences. It is well to come to that position from which we see that God
is with us in a wider sense than Israel surmised, that in Christ He ae the

. 5


CHA, ¥. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,





world unto Himself, that we stand amid the light of that life which is given te
‘ whosoever will.”

3. Opportunity for influencing others. To fancy that this Jewish people was
chosen simply to be the worshippers of the only true God is to suppose that which
would not accord with other manifestations in His realm. His sun exhales vapour
from water, the vapour is turned into showers, the showers fall upon the earth and
make it bring forth and bud. So is it that every person is to contribute to the
good of others, and so His chosen nation was to be instrumental in making known
His way and saving health among the people sitting in darkness. His purposes to
bless that we may be blessings aie not changed. He works to form vessels fit for
His use, and one of the most potent intluences, with souls which have been made
alive to God through Jesus Christ, should be this—the Lord my God supplies me
with grace, aud I shouid live so as to promote His holy and good claims over men.
Alas ! so many do not realise their position as stewards of God, and wany, like the
Jews, cause His name to be blasphemed instead of honoured, Yet much has been
given.

II, The unhallowed disposition cherished by the advantaged. That they
who have known the true God should “change His judgments into wickedness
and should not walk in His statutes,” evidences their disposition to be—

1. Marked with contempt for God. Their own judgments are preferred to His
And even where there might be a formal agreement with His revealed will, it is,
on their part, no submission to Him, but a carrying out of their own desires. They
act as if God were of less consideration than themselves. They will not have Him
to reign over them. They feel at liberty to make that which He intended for good
into a means for doing wickedly. Prayers will be repeated, public worship will be
patronised, and still the heart will continue to cherish its selfish, worldly pursuits,
as if God could be mocked and overcome.

2. More guilty than that of the heathen. The Jews gloated over the ignorance
and low hopes of the uneovenanted peoples, and yet the latter had been more
faithful to their streaks of liyht than the Jews to their dayspring. There is no
monopoly by the Jewish people of this inconsistency. Not a few among Christians
take pleasure in telling of the cruelties, falsehcods, lusts which are observed among
the tribes and people who are not Christian, and turn such sad aspects into a means
of setting off how much purer and better a state is their own. The comparison is
often very unfairly made. And even if it were not—if the sins of heathendom
were gross and numerous beyond those of Christendom—the rules of Christ are
too often toned down and laid aside, both in the practice of Churches and the con-
duct of individuals. Their guilt in tampering with duty is far more offensive than
that of the heathen can be. ‘‘ Woe unto thee, Chorazin ! woe unto thee, Bethsaida !”

Il. The severe punishment which manifests the guiltiness of those whe
have received much. When favoured children go out of the ways of their Holy
Father, they walk upon hard, thorny, desolate tracts, where they perish.

1. In those troubles they are treated by the Lord Himself. “ Behold I, even I,
am against thee.” Secondary agents will be employed, but in poverty or losses,
diseases or hostile actions by other people, are to be recognised weapons wielded
by the Lord against whom we have sinned. He does not abdicate His authority
to things which cause pain and ruin, so that they do their will. We receive evil
from His hand as well as good. Aud emphatically so if we have been living in
open sins against Him, It is always a difficult matter to say what the sins are
which bring about special stripes from the Lord; but there need be no difficulty
in acknowledging that He “will execute judgments in anger and in fury and in
furious rebukes,” and that those judgments need not be the same for the same sing
Dishonesties, untruths, intemperance, will produce misery sooner or later, but the
misery which comes in consequence of such transgressions is very different in its
actions upon the individual sinners and their families, God knows how to deal

56


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, CHAP. Wo








out in perfect wisdom the sufferings appropriate to the several cases, and the
keenest pang of their suffering ought to be this, “My King, my Father, has be
come mine enemy, and fights against me.”

2. The punishment ts intense. “I will do that which I have not done, and
whereunto I will not do any more the like, Neither shall mine eye spare, neither
will I have any pity.” There will not be a grain of excessiveness in the punish-
ment: it will be balanced to a hair’s weight by the amount of sin, The perfect
Judge alone can so accurately poise the scales; but none who know the right will
fail to see that, however unparalleled the severity may seem, it is altogether pro-
portioned to the offences, and will exhibit the magnitude of the guilt incurred.

3. The lesson ts intended to be widely taught. The Lord will not do “His
strange work” in secret. Other souls must be made to hear and fear, and His
judgments shall be shown to “the nations round about in the sight of all that
pass by.” They will be differently affected by the lesson. Some will utter re-
proaches, others will frame taunts, and others will be instructed; but in some sort
of dim form those proceedings against sin will make their principle enter into the
thoughts of men, and contribute to the shaping of that unwritten law, with its
penalty for wrong-doing, which has become established among nations who have
lived in different spheres of growth, Where do we not find the maxim, that the
heavier the punishment, the greater the guilt ?

IV. The continued maintenance of the justice of God’s rule. “I the Lord
have spoken it ””—however unlike it may appear that He should punish so, how-

- ever awful the sufferings inflicted may be. ‘The divine righteousness remains
always equally energetic."—Heng. Ezekiel is a medium for conveying the denun-
ciations, but below those denunciations it is to be believed that righteousness and
truth stand. They will not be moved by the assaults of men, let men beat against
them as they will. And the prophet is a pattern from whom all preachers and
teachers may learn to let the thoughts of God so enter into them, that when they do
tell, as tell they must if they will be faithful servants, of the “‘ weeping and wailing
and gnashing of teeth” which shall be endured by those who make light of the
Son of God, they should do it, not with extravagance or with mitigation, but with
the strictest adherence to the manifestation made of the terror of the Lord. The
gospel enters into no terms with those who forsake the Lord ; it insists on repent-
ance or destruction. If He is “not willing that any should perish,” He would
sooner see them perishing than that they should continue persistently to defile His
holy presence. In Churches and out of them the solemn asseveration holds sway,
“ He that despised Moses’ law died without mercy under two or three witnesses ;
of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy who hath
trodden underfoot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant,
wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done despite to the Spirit
of grace?”


Gop’s Comrort In PunIsHMENT ACHIEVED.


“ T will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be comforted” (ver. 13).


There are conventional ideas about God, just as there are about what is proper
procedure in society. Conventionalisms cannot hold their ground in the latter
when a strong, clear impulse from the realities of life breaks upon them; and, im
the former, superficial conceptions regarding divine procedure will be tested and
remodelled when men, who see visions of God, set forth their impressions of Him
“who ruleth by His power for ever.” Their utterances may sound as if bordering
on what is harsh and untenable, or as if altogether too familiar; but they will lay
open aspects of the Almighty which, from one cause or other, have been dimmed
and disturbed. Thus it might happen that deep convictions of the pity of the
Lord for suffering, and His patience with wrong-doers, would foster a mode of


OHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; EZEKIEL,


speaking of His dealings with people whom He had favoured, as if He could be
nothing but soft and soothing and pleading, as if in His nature there were no
materials for an unflinching resolution to see right done, even though the punish-
ment of the wrong-doers was unexampled. Then a holy man will exclaim, in the
word of the Lord, “I will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear
cometh ;” or, “Ah! I will ease me of mine adversaries.” Lax notions are shaken
off, and we learn to think that “our God is a consuming fire,” who is comforted
when His fury has found a resting-place. Making allowance for the somewhat
figurative turn of these words, we can perceive in them—

I. All punishments are measured. He that maketh the stormy wind to fulfil
His word, that says to the sea, “ Hitherto thou shalt come and no further,” He
says to every consequence of sin, ‘Thou shalt not put a hair’s weight of distress
more than I appoint.” Men may talk of the germs of disease which settle upon a
vine as if they will increase so as to destroy it, unless checked by human appli-
ances ; politicians may speak of armies invading a country as if they would ravage
it till it was made waste, unless human diplomacy intervene. It is not often con-
sidered that behind every disease and every army the Divine Will means to control
each, and exactly fix what it shall do, We are under a Lawgiver whose preroga-
tive can never be contravened, and who claims to define every event by His hidden
or revealed decree. Every sufferer may believe that he bears just what and just
as is suitable to perfect righteousness and wisdom.

IL Right is vindicated. When the evil ways of men have taken them into
woe then the Judge of the earth is satisfied, for they have received the due reward
of their deeds, This means more than is often understood by the expression, ‘‘ Sin
is its own punishment.” If that were all the punishment, then every prosperous
tyrant, every unconfessing murderer, every successful mercantile swindler, every
unabashed liar would have endured all possible suffering. The sin, the very thing
which stands out as the worst of evils to a holy mind, being regarded as an advan-
tageous proceeding by the unholy, could hardly be punished in the actor, since he
delights in it or is unimpressed by its vileness. Thus viewed there would be little
in sin to fear ; it could be made a subject for despisal ; and the moral order would
be abandoned. It is not, however. God’s rule is not so feeble and uncertain in its
operation as to let it be, ‘ He sitteth on the throne judging right,” and He executes
punishments which prove that there are retributions attached to the committal of sin
entirely independent of the thoughts of sinners about their conduct. ‘These retri-
butions will find out their appropriate objects, as a resting-place is found, and will
remain till the just award has been measured off. It is an awful fact for those
who have sinned and have not repented. To neglect its bearing, to refuse to face its
reality may be common, but the sentence against evil will not be annulled. Let those
who reject Christ Jesus realise the solemn contents of the words, ‘‘ He that believeth
not, the wrath of God abideth on him”—His fury rests upon them. Then, when
bitter wrong has been righted, when vengeance has placed its marks upon the
rebellious, when the hideous past has been swept over by an obliterating storm of
justice, then the Holy One sees that right has proved its power to crush wrong and
maintain its supremacy, and He is comforted.

IIL The ground is cleared for a new movement. The Lord is not comforted
merely because He sees the flaunting edifices of wrong utterly in ruins, Withered,
scattered leaves form materials for the growth of a coming spring; the refuse of
fallen buildings becomes a location in which plants and insects make a home, and
the desolation uf a country or the depression of a people gives an opening through
which stirring influences may enter. Gibbon’s statement in “The Decline and
Fall ”—that when “the fierce giants of the North broke in” upon an enervated
people who were but “‘a race of pigmies,” tiey ‘‘ mended the puny brood ”—asserta
this principle. By Ezekiel’s time the Israelites had become boasters, sensual, hypo-
crites ; the covenant God made with their fathers had been shivered into fragments :

58


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, CHaP. Vi.





what good could accrue from the continuance of such a state of things? Abolish
it or suspend it, and @ way will be opened for operating in new methods of right-
eousness, wisdom, and grace. That opening is a comfort to the Lord. He will
enter upon a course from which higher and better results will be attained. The
old has vanished, the new will arrive. So the Lord Jesus refers to Jerusalem and
says, “ Behold, your house is left unto you desolate ”—that is the close of the bad
past—and He goes on to add, “Ye shall not see Me henceforth till ye shail say,
Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord ”—that is the pledge of better
movements,

1, “ The Lord reigneth, let the people tremble.” He “ will execute judgment
upon all, and convince all that are ungodly of all their ungodly deeds which they
have ungodly committed.”

2. “ The Lord reigneth, let the earth rejoice.” However long His will may be
disobeyed, yet a King shall reign in righteousness. ‘“ Also unto Thee, O Lord,
belongeth mercy, for Thou renderest to every man according to his work.” Judg-
ment and mercy shall complete the purposes of Him who inhabiteth eternity, whose
name is Holy.


4. FourtHer Instructions 48 TO THE CONSEQUENCES oF IsRAEL’s
Conpvct (Chap. vi.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—The judg-
ment on places of tdolatry and the wor-
shippers (ver. 1-7). After asserting, in
ver. 1, his renewed consciousness that
he was to speak from the inworking
power of the Lord, Ezekiel unfolds the
procedure which will be taken. Here
he has special reference to the whole
country, as in chaps. iv. and v. the city
Jerusalem was chiefly in view.

Ver. 2. “Son of man, set thy face,”
a frequent command given to the pro-
phet, and intended to impress him with
a vivid sense of the objects he was to
address; “towards the mountains of
Israel and prophesy against them.”
The Lord has a controversy with the
mountains and their prominent physical
features, as if they had ears and faculties
for understanding. He, as it were,
directs His admonitions through them
to the men who had disordered those
features by setting up forbidden idols
and paying open dishonour to His holy
name.

Ver. 3. “And say... Thus saith
the Lord God to the mountains and
to the hills, to the rivers ”—the last
word is used of the beds or channels in
which waters run, and should be trans-
lated here by gorges or ravines ; it thus
forms a more exact parallelism “to the
valleys.” ‘They sacrifice upon the
tops of the mountains. and burn incense


upon the hills, under oaks and poplars
and elms, because the shadow thereof is
good ” (Hosea iv. 13). Cf. ver. 13 below.
“Behold I, even I, will bring a sword
upon you, and I will destroy your high
places.” The Hebrew word for high
places is occasionally employed simply
to signify elevated spots, but more com-
monly refers to them as the shrines for
worship habitually carried on. The
worship in such places was part of that
nature-worship which has prevailed in
many regions of the world, and in which
Baal, the sun-god, had a prominent
share (Num. xxii. 41, Josh. xiii. 17).
From what quarter the Israelites were
influenced towards Baal-worship is doubt-
ful, but they had yielded to it, and
crowned the high places, which lay ex-
posed to the rays of the sun, with
figures of some sort. How far that
worship was alien to the mind of the
living God is illustrated by what the
reforming King Josiah did in his zeal
for the Lord (2 Kings xxiii), and in
what Ezekiel adds.

Ver. 4. All the apparatus belonging
to this idol-worship is doomed to destruc-
tion, “your altars shall be desolate,”
not fit to be resorted to, “and your
images,” in margim, sen -¢mages, but
probably figures of some kind represent-
ing Baal, the god of the sun, and Astarte,
goddess of the moon, “shall be broken,

Bo


OB AP. VI.


and,” directing the address to the people,
“JT will cast down your slain before
your idols.” This is a reference to Lev.
xxvi, 30, though this special word for
idols is found chiefly in Ezekiel, It is
probably connected with a root which
signifies filth, and is a contemptuous
description of them—they are dung, or
refuse-gods,

Ver. 5. “And I will lay the dead
earcases of the children of Israel be-
fore their refuse-gods ”—the gods they
cried to could not defend from death,
and, their nothingness having been
proved, they would be defiled by the
corpses of their unhelped devotees ;
“and I will scatter your bones round
about your altars”—the utmost igno-
miny would be cast upon idolatry by
this utter desecration of its materials
for worship.

Ver. 6. The declaration is made that,
beside the destruction in the high places,
&c., extreme desolation would be pro-
duced wherever population had gathered.
The ground of this extension of punish-
ment is indicated in Isaiah’s words,
*‘ According to the number of thy cities
so are thy gods,” and the end aimed at
is to sweep away every trace of idol-
service, “that your altars may be laid
waste and made desolate.” The Hebrew
word in the preceding portion of this
verse and translated desolate is different


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; EZEKIEL,


from this one, which more appropriately
should be translated be guilty. The
altars are regarded as participating in,
and so held guilty of the sin which they
were used to carry out, A similar sen-
tence was passed by the prophet sent ta
Jeroboam in the word of the Lord.
When the king “stood by the altar to
burn incense” the prophet cried, “O
altar, altar, thus saith the Lord, Behold
. . . upon thee shall Josiah offer the
priests of the high places that burn
incense upon thee, and men’s bones
shall be burnt upon thee.” The refuse-
idols should be done away with and the
sun-pillars be hewn down and a complete
abrogation ensue of all that had been
unfaithfully done. ‘ And your works”
—whatever can be ascribed to men
which they have not taken from the
mouth of God and the commands of His
law ”—“ may be abolished.”

Ver. 7. “And the slain ”—a word in
the singular, as if to show that one mind
had animated the mass of the slain in
practising idolatry—“ shall fall in the
midst of you.” ‘here will be survivors
to see the slaughtered idolaters, and the
eye will affect their heart so that they
shall recognise the action of the al-
mighty, righteous One, “and ye shall
know that I am the Lord.” Thus a
ground is laid for the foliowing pro-
mise.


HOMILETICS.
Creation’s Mareriats I[nstruotine Men (vi. 1-7).


It is common enough for men of all countries, when under the influence of
strong emotions, to appeal to inanimate objects as if they were animated. It isa
natural form of speech, proceeding from the formative hand. ‘He that formed
the ear shall He not hear!” There is a likeness of the Creator in the creature ;
and when the impulse of feeling moves us to speak to sun or stars, to mountains or
glens, as if they could comprehend our meaning, we are imitating Him who made all
things and knows to what uses He can put them all, In His Word prophets and
poets apostrophise created objects as witnesses of the Lord’s doings. Thus Ezekiel
does, and here we may consider—

I There is a life in created objects. ‘ Prophesy against the mountains.”
This susceptibility in creation was signified to Ezekiel in his “visions of God :”
this is signified by Apostle Paul in the words, “ All things have been created for
Christ, and in Him all things consist’”—have their continuance and ‘order,
Each has its post and its purpose in the administration of God; and because it
helps to accomplish His far-reaching will, it may be truly regarded as having'a
portion i that life with which He fills all things, All things may not be called


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP, VI.





—_—_— 7


living, but they are sustained by that life which is present everywhere. They
suffer in man’s bondage to corruption—“ The whole creation groaneth and travaileth
in pain together.” They are abashed and silent when ordered to be so by the Son
of Man—“ He rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a great calm.” Not
as a freak of fancy, but as a suggestive and awful fact, we may look at the materials
of nature and find tokens of the living God, observant of us and interested in us
and our ways. In view of mountains and hills, girded, by ravines and valleys,
we may exclaim, “Thou hast beset me behind and before, and laid Thine hand
upon me!”

IL There is a perversion of created objects. Men who look at and act upon
nature colour it and swathe it with their own thoughts and aims, Advantages of
position, capabilities for the application of human strength and skill to material
things, are turned into means of doing that which pleases men and displeases the
Lord. Mountains and valleys, heaps of stones and carved pillars, are thus associ-
ated with man in man’s sins. They are placed under a sentence of condemnation,
and marked with signs of disorder and destruction. What though they have no
consciousness of good and evil, what though they have no power of action against
the will of man, they are made into his instruments for evil, and must be broken
when he is broken. For God does not abandon His claim over them. Every
creature of His is good, only the dark shadow has fallen on them; their glory is
tarnished ; their tribute to the Maker’s praise is obstructed ; their pollution is as
“a smoke in His nose,” and He “ will make them desolate.” But man is the cause
of all the evil It is his procedure with the forms of things which depraves them ;
the mountain is occupied with the worship of the created sun, the shade of trees
becomes the haunt for immoralities under the sanction of the gods. Thus are the
creatures perverted. In olden times, altars were polluted, oblations were vain,
incense was an abomination ; in modern times, our buildings for public worship,
with their decorations, our church music, with its display or its listlessness, may be
perverted so as to be a condemnation of the worshippers. What need is there to
serve the Lord in the beauty, not of any outward appearance, but of holiness !

III. There are tokens of doom on created objects.

1. In their desolation. “TI will bring a sword upon you [mountains], and will
destroy your high places.” The ruins and the dreariness of spots, in which people
were accustomed to serve their gods, suggest to inspecting eyes that the supremacy
and sanctity of the Most High had been invaded there, and the invasion had been
repelled with unsparing vehemence, Judgments were executed upon them, not
because they could be held guilty, but because they had been the scenes of human
wrong-doing. We are taught the needed lesson that sin is to be abhorred, not
only because it defiles the sinner, but also because it draws the trail of the serpent
over all he uses in his sin. ‘ Every prospect” does not “ please” where “ man is
vile.”

2. In the human sufferings they are made witnesses of. “TI will lay the dead
carcases . . . before their idols.” The very places to which they would flee for
shelter will be turned into shambles; the reed they leaned on shall pierce their
hand. So deserted would the districts become that the bodies would lie unburied,
be made into ghastly skeletons, be bleached and crumble into pieces ; their “bones
would be scattered round about their altars.” The fields of battle, the shores of
surging seas, the ruins of earthquakes, with more or less distinct utterance, declare
in Reason’s ear, We are witnesses of the pains and death inflicted on a world over
whose physical features the dishonour done to God has been imprinted, and we
tell back to hearing ears that that God is holy in all His ways, cannot look upon
sin, and will make good His title to supreme power and righteousness,”


él


OHAP. VI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Vers, 8—
10. A gleam of comfort. Fzekiel has
told. how bitter ruin amd slaughter
should teach the children of Israel that
“God ruleth in Jacob unto the ends of
the earth,” and now he will tell that
that same truth would be learned in
another way. Some of those who have
survived and beeu taken into captivity
shall be moved, by the hard conditions
of their lives, to acknowledge that they
have done very wickedly, and that God
has done righteously.

Ver. 8. “Yet will I leave a rem-
nant that ye may,” or, in that ye shall,
“have some,” because they have been
preserved so as to ‘‘escape the sword
among the nations,’ and who will be
found amongst their fellow-countrymen
“scattered through the countries.”

Ver. 9. In the privations and sorrows
of exile, like the prodigal son in feeding
on husks, they would come to them-
selves, and recall what they had been
and done. “They that escape of you
shall remember me.” The thought et
God Himself would. be brought dis-
tinctly into their hearts, and that would
alter their convictions as to their by-
gone life. They would perceive that
against Him, Him only, they had sinned;
“because I am broken with their
whorish heart.” The “Speaker’s Com-
mentary,” in agreement with others, pro-
poses to translate thus: Because I have
broken thetr whorish heart, which hath
departed from Me, and their eyes, &c.
Hengstenberg, with others also, says,
“The word properly means, ‘I was
broken;’ this stands for, ‘I have
broken for myself;’” a translation which
is equivalent to the former. Both signify


that it was not what their whorish heart
did to Him, but what He did to it, that
is set forth, We cannot acquiesce in
this opinion, The remnant, who re-
membered the Lord, perceived also that
by various methods He had shown how
grieved and provoked and wounded He
was by the people turning away from
His worship—that He was broken by
their unfaithfulness, The expression is
peculiar—is it more so than others in
reference to the Lord? “TI also will
laugh at your calamity, I will mock,”
&c. (Prov. i, 26). “ Wilt thou be alto-
gether unto me as a liar, and as waters
that fail?” (Jer. xv. 18). “Behold I
am pressed under you, as a cart is
pressed that is full of sheaves” (Amos
ii, 13). This pain to God was occa-
sioned, not by the inward only, but also
by the outward proceedings of Israel,
“with their eyes, which go a whoring
after their refuse-idols: and,” in con-
sequence of this remembrance of “the
Lord and the words of His holiness,”
“they shall loathe themselves,” will
look into the face of their past con-
duct with deepest aversion, “because
of all the evils,” &c.

Ver. 10 should be read, “And they
shall know that I the Lord have not
said in vain that I would do this evil
unto them.” The words do not assert
that the remnant should know He was
the living God, but that He was true
to all His warnings about the evil
things which had come to pass among
‘‘a disobedient and gainsaying people.”
“By the correspondence of utterance
and event, they know that He who
spoke by the son of man is Jehovah
—is God in the fullest sense.”


HOMILETICS.


Coxpitions or SpiriruaL KNow epee (vers. 8-10),


Among those indicated by the verses are—

L A specialising action of the Lord. “I will leave a remnant.” Out of the
idolatrous people ; out of their broken-down trust in their land, their Temple, their
covenant with God ; out of their ranks as they were living amidst heathenism, what
hope could there be that one even would receive a new life in his spirit? For
men it might be impossible, but not for God. Jt is His spontaneous action. They
would not have sought Him, They would have continued in sin and sorrow unless
& power external to themselves had moved ugon them. ‘“ Except the Lord of


& -


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OBAP. Vi





hosts had left us a very small remnant,” dc, “We love Him because He first
loved us.” Jt ts an action superior to circumstances. Sins may be still prevailing,
Judgments in course of execution, the moral atmosphere of the places in which the
sinners live apparently repulsive to spiritual health, yet the Lord is able to work
there upon whom He will. He can make His mercy as well as His fury rest where
all circumstances seem unfavourable, He can deliver a soul in Babylon as well as
in Zion, It 18 a mysterious action. We may try to conjure up suppusitious about
reasons why God does not at once do all the evil which He threateus, or why He
bestows on some that which He does not bestow on others; but a duly reverent
heart will rather repeat the words of Jesus, “ Even so, Father, for so it seemed good
in Thy sight.” For not in ourselves can we discover fitness. The acknowledgment
of every sin-conscious soul must be, “I shall perish if He does not save me.” /¢ is
a comforting action. It tells that greater is He that is for us than all that can be
against us; that He is able to redeem souls from death; that however low His
cause may have fallen, as if it were even destroyed, its preservation is with Him.
He will not let it disappear. He will revive it in many or in few.

IL The pressure of tribulations. They did not serve the Lord when they
were in their native land, when the Temple and its ordinances were accessible,
when early and late prophets were addressing them in the Word of the Lord; but
they do so when they are scattered among the nations, when they have seen death
mowing down numbers of their friends, when they are in heaviness because of the
loss of so much which they had formerly possessed, The gods they had trusted
in had utterly failed to protect them, and they were made to feel that their own folly
and wickedness had brought all the evil to pass, and they judged themselves, their
lusts, their corruptions, their unfaithfulness to the Lord. ‘“ When He slew them,
then they sought Him.” Tribulations we may have, but Christ can give His peace.
We may not have relief from them, and yet be taught of God. Cast into beds of
affliction, surrounded by those who regard not the Lord, deprived of the means of
grace, we may find spiritual blessings which a state of worldly comfort had not
brought tous. ‘I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction,” and reconciliation
to God makes up for all trouble in earthly things,

Ii A consciousness of God. “ They shall remember me.” They will recall
His doings, and see how utterly He is different from the creatures they had wor-
shipped ; how they had been fed by His bounty ; how they had heard His words ;
how patiently He had borne with their offences ; how just He is in punishing ; how
good in preserving them from famine, pestilence, and the sword ; how full of gracious
love in acting upon their long-shut hearts, They set the Lord Himself before their
faces. We may desire to be at peace with an armed man who is stronger than we,
and yet not care to live with him; but let penitence kindle at the remembrance of
the strong Lord, and we do not want to think about His pardon only, we want to
live and walk in His presence. “* Because I am broken with thetr whorish hearts,” &e.
They learn truly of God, not because they were under the stripes of His wrath, and
said as Cain, “My punishment is greater than I can bear,” but because they had
produced disappointment and pain to Him, In His light they see light, The
thought that His heart was broken breaks theirs They are humbled before His
wonderful pity. His goodness leads them to repentance,

IV. A deep sense of personal unworthiness. ‘‘ They shall loathe themselves
for the evils,” &c. We find in this—

1. That their hearts were affected. The effect of a consciousness of God was, as
it was with Job, to make them abhor themselves and repent in dust and ashes.
No more palliation of their idolatry, no attempting to lessen the blamableness of
their conduct, could be entertained. From the depths of their souls they heaved
sighs and groans of shame, It was sorrow according to God, and it wrought
revenge, dc. ; ;

2. That they umnaerstood the controverey of God against them. re oe not


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZERIBE,


OHAP, WE.





loathe themselves because of their banishment, their poverty, their bereavements, |
the contempt of the heathen, but because they had done evil, They had left Him,
the fountain of living waters, and hewed out broken cisterns that could hold no
water; they had treated their Lord unkindly, and wounded Him by offending against
His majesty and grace. They saw that He had brought them into grievous sufferings ,
but it was when they saw that they had in sin disobeyed their God that they took
right views of themselves and justified Him. Ah! we shall not escape condem-
nation because we have never worshipped an idol, never perpetrated any open
transgression. Worldliness of temper, unkindness to a brother, formality in the
worship of God, are bitter and abominable things before the Heart-searcher, and
which He rebukes sternly. For such evils He will not need to condemn us; we
shall condemn ourselves.

3. That they made not one reserve. “The evils committed in all their abomi-
nations.” They would not defend any course they had taken. Sins in any place or
with any person, sins in business or religion, sins in secret or in the railway, sins
meant to be done or not looked on as sins, will form part of our confession of the
unworthy conduct for which we loathe ourselves,

Look on your ways, look into your hearts, let the light of Christ shine on them,
and shall ye not be ashamed and confounded for all ye have done? No door
of hope for men can be opened other than that which brings us to God. With
Him we should be blessed with spiritual blessings, and we should act as heralds
to make known His coming to save and reign. ‘‘ When I am weak, then am
I strong.”


Toe Power or THE WorpD oF Gop (ver. 10).


I. Before men are afflicted and humbled for their sin, they refuse and
slight the Word of God. Let prophets preach powerfully, and lay God’s judgments
before the evildoers ; they do not pay heed, but they shall know that their hearts
were stout against God and His truth.

It. A heart under affliction, loathing itself for its sins, will give due honour
to the Word of God. “Then shall they know.” Blows beget brains, and ingrati-
tude and abuse of the threatenings and promises which the Lord had made known
will be acknowledged. The truest penitent doth most abhor himself, and the
more of that self-abhorrence, the more complacency in the faithfulness of God in
His word and His infinite love in Christ.

IIL The Lord will not let His Word be unaccomplished. “I have not said
in vain that I would do this. A word is in vain when it is not fulfilled, ineffica-
ciously fulfilled, or unseasonably fulfilled; but none of these befall the Word of
the Lord. It shall accomplish that which He pleases, and prosper in the thing
whereto He sent it.” —Greenhill (abridged).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Vers. 11-
14. The doom assured. The break in
the dark threatening clouds is but for a
moment. The time is not yet for the
prophet to unfold the bright sunshine
of rich merey. He has pointed to a


Ver, 11. “Smite with thine hand
and stamp with thy foot.” These
gestures do not signify derisicn of the
unhelping refuse-idols or their wor.
shippers; or pain at the sufferings or
revulsion at the iniquities of the people.


blessing among penitent exiles, but cala-
mities are nearer than that is, and once
more he recurs to the sombre and painful
scene which must be the precursor of
blessings. It is, with a few additional
touches of colour, a repetition of former
words.


64


A sharp, almost unconscious, clapping
of the hand and stamping with the foot
is occasionally seen when a thing has
turned out badly, and all hope of ac-
complishing anything by it is at an end,
This is the idea which has been wrapped
up in similar gestures, on the part of


4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIBL,


CHAP. VI,








God or man, which are recorded in the
Scriptures (chaps. xxi. 14, 17, xxii. 13,
xxv. 6; Num. xxiv. 10; Job xxvii. 23).
The gestures are, consequent on the be-
lief that the last scene of the observed
proceedings is played out. To his ges-
tures the prophet adds the exclamation,
“Ah!” and affirms its reference “to all
the evil abominations of the house of
Israel ; for,” because ot the evils, “ they
shall fall by the sword,’ &. The
three great means of punishment for-
merly threatened to the city (chap. iv.
2, 12) shall be applied to the country
also.

Ver, 12. “He that is far off,” out
of the range of the invading Chaldeans,
“shall die of the pestilence, and he
that remaineth, and he that is be-
gieged,” or rather he that is preserved—
as in Isa, xlix. 6, ‘To restore the
preserved of Israel’”’—from pestilence
and sword, “shall die by the famine,”
é&c.

Ver. 13 (comp. vers. 3, 5, 7). A fuller
characterisation of the localities in which
the people had reared idol-shrines is
here given, and shows that ‘‘the land
was full of idols,” and that there should
be an utter desecration of each “ placa


where they did offer sweet savour to
all their refuse-idols.” They were as
eager to gratify, if they could, the in-
animate idols as true worshippers were
to offer what would be acceptable to the
holy God; as Noah when he presented
burnt-offerings for the first time on the
renovated land (Gen. viii. 21).

Ver. 14. “ AndI will stretch out my
hand against them ;” they had placed
idols all over the country, and He, too,
would exert His power so as to “ make
the land desolate utterly, more deso-
late than the wilderness toward Dib-
lath ;” an obscure reference, but prob-
ably applicable to the Moabitish double
city of Diblathaim (Num. xxxiii. 46),
which lay westward from the Arabian
desert. A name, closely allied to this,
is found on the lately discovered Moab-
itish stone as the name of some place,
The thought is expressed that this deso-
lation would be ‘in all their habita-
tions.” No dwelling-house would exist
where the sense of wasteness and loneli-
ness should not be felt. This verse is
ended, as ver. 13 had been begun, witha
declaration that by such inflictions there
would be impressed on the people a
knowledge cf the Eternal, Holy One.


HOMILETICS.
Somz Conciusions as To Sin (vers. 11-14).


L That its results will be a manifest wonder and pain to servants of the
Lord. ‘They will not merely “muse” upon the evils which are presented to them ;
they will at times give way to external expression of feeling. They will clap
with their hands, &.; rivers of water will run down their eyes; they could wish
themselves accursed from Christ. Nowhere should there be such intense interest
in watching the development of individual and national procedure as among those
who believe in God who is light and love,

IL That all sins are considered in the judgments of the Lord. “All the
evil abominations,” And with reason. An inner or outward evil is a violation of
law, and exerts a certain influence in contrariety to the will of God. Each is taken
into His estimate of what He must do when He visits for transgressions,

IIL That various forms of penalty against sin shall be inflicted. Through
disease, violence, hunger, or some other method, every sinner shall become an
object on which holy wrath will fall in greater or less heaviness. What if we do
not understand the meaning of the manifold variety of griefs, pains, hardships,
which beset men on their way to death, is our ignorance a measure by which to
judge of the knowledge and justice of the Lord, or not rather a ground for making
us dumb, not opening our mouth, because He has done it? Multiform sufferings
betoken multiform sins,

IV. That the punishment has a correspondencs to the sin. It oe

&


3HAP. V1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; EZEKIEL,


to the Israelites, Acknowledge the supremacy of idols, and your carcases will defile
the places in which you have worshipped. It is declared to those who may never
have kissed their hands to any images, Indulge your appetites in an illegitimate
way, and your bodies will be infected by the virus of the lust which is specially
gratified ; be insincere or dishonest or proud, and your souls will be cowed and
stagyer before the flashes of truth ; be a professing worshipper of God whose heart
has not taken the way to the Father by Christ, and to you the perfect peace which
He gives shall be altogether a stranger True, it is rarely possible for men to
say why one person should be laid under a different kind of affliction from that
which another bears; but could we see the invisible links which bind the sin and
its own penalty, should we not learn the true source of many sufferings which are
now wholly inexplicable? The Lord’s judgments are a great deep, but in that
deep uniform forces are ever at work,

V. That God alone deals with sin. Germs of disease, invading bands of men,
unpropitious seasons, irreverence and neglect of the means of grace apparently
occasion pains, bereavements, struggles for life, a God who does no mighty work ;
but the apparent factors are His methods of acting. Behind the laws of nature
and the forces which operate througu social man, and which are operating in
punishing wrong-doing, a spiritual mind will perceive the Lord’s hand. Judgment
and mercy come from Him. Understanding this, Jesus Christ, “bearing our sins
in His own body on the tree,” will be accepted and adored as the Son of God who
came to destroy the works of the devil.


THE JUDICIARY ADMINISTRATION OF GoD (vers. 1-14),


God connected Himself with Israel in a manner He never had done with
any nation before, nor would with any other again. In their case the actual
experience of suffering on account of sin must have a certain singularity in it,
so that it is possible to trace the execution of His judgments upon them. Still
there is no caprice in His dealings ; whensoever Israel’s guilt is incurred, there will
infallibly be a renewal of Israel’s doom. The gospel has brought no suspension of
God’s justice, and only after it had been sent and put from them did the wrath
fall upon the Jews to the uttermost, as it will upon similar transgressors, The
reasonableness of the severity exercised may be perceived by glancing at the guilt
and the punishment.

i. The peculiar calling of Israel. They were placed in a region that afforded
obvious and varied facilities for exerting a beneficial and commanding influence on
the mind of ancient heathendom. They were to take advantage of this position
so as to make known the character and extend the worship of Jehovah. ‘Thus
Moses declared, ‘‘ All the people of the earth should see that the Lord had estab-
lished them to be a holy people to Himself and called them by His name.” They
were settled on a high vantage-ground for acting the part of the world’s benefactors,
This calling of Israel in respect to the nations now rests upon the Christian Church ;
ovly owing to dispensational changes the impulse is communicated individually, not
nationally, Besides, the Jewish religion was predominantly of a symbolical char-
acter, and outward prosperity had to play an essential part in its propagation. Vow
the great element of power lies in the truth itself and in its influence exhibited by the
lives of God’s people. With differences as to method of working, the obligation
remains substantially the same. The possession of the world is Christ’s by right,
and He commits it to His peuple to mage good the title. Happy if they doso; but
if not, heavy must be their condemnation.

2. The condemnation of Israel. ‘Lhey did not extend the knowledge of the
glory of the Lord, but adopted the corrupt worships of surrounding nations, and
did worse than they, In the face of all remonstrances and warnings they fell in with
Gentile acess They did so because of their prevailing carnality and corrup-

6


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP, Via.








tion of heart, which the nature-religions of heathenism did nothing to check, but
rather fostered. In those religions every god had its representation in a visible
idol, but the gods themselves were such as the natural heart desires — gods
“whose attributes were pride, revenge, and lust ;” while in Judaism there was, in
the bosom of every service, a spiritual and holy God as the sole object of venera-
tion, and conformity to His will the one great end to be aimed at. With the loss of
a spirit of piety they became unfit for the duties of a pure service and ashamed of
its sanctity, and accepted from their neighbours a more palatable religion. The
same perversity lives in the Christian Church, and in every country in Christendom
Israel’s folly is perpetually repeating itself What is Popery but an accommodation
of the pure spirit of the gospel to the grovelling tendeneies of the flesh? And in
Protestant lands the thoughts and maxims of the world are mixed up with those of
the gospel, so that a compound is formed which the natural man does not quarrel
with or blush for. Hence the spiritual languor, the worldly-mindedness, the
numberless forms of vanity and pollution, which are so commonly seen going hand
in hand with a religious profession, and which rob the Church of her power to con-
quer and bless the world. Nor can she fulfil her destiny or be safe from the rod
of chastisement and rebuke till the foul admixtures are purged out, and in reliance
on the Divine Word, and in unswerving adherence to righteousness and truth, she
goes forth to resist and put down whatever is opposed to the will of Heaven.—
Fairbairn (abridged).


5, LAMENTATION OVER THE DesotaTeD Lanp (Chap. vii.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—In this
chapter we have not so much an addi-
tional prophecy as a re-statement of prin-
ciples and denunciations which had been
already formulated. It affords abundant
illustration of the tendency of Ezekiel
to repeat his messages, and to use even
the same forms of expression. But some
of the repetition here must be, moreover,
accounted for by the highly excited emo-
tions under whose influence he wrote.
That these emotions should take poetical
modes—abrupt utterances, rhythmical
combinations, refrains, and demand ayain
and again an avowal, these are matters
which may receive many eonfirmations
from ancient and modern, from biblical
and secular literatures. Especially might
a prophet, who was abiding under the
shadow of God and was suffering in the
sufferings of His people, give forth the
signs of strong feeling in his words, and
they with appropriateness present hints
of the mighty power which constrained
him—of the divine voice which sounded
in the chambers of his heart. We shall
miss one purport of the message if we
do not find it apprising us of visions
suggesting the nature of the living and
revealing Lord.


Vers, 1-4. The imminence of the land’s
doom.,

Ver. 2. ‘Thus saith the Lord God
unto the land of Israel, An end.” It
seems preferable to read, “ Z'ius sacth
the Lord God, Unto the country of Israel
an end.” By this reading it is more
apparent that the prophet was not to
address the country, but give a message
respecting its impending downfall as a
territory. This end was to be no minor
end, but one in which many a past
penalty culminated: “the end is come
upon the four corners of the land.”
Events in our own generation have shown
that invading armies give birth to out-
rages on persons, waste of stores of
food, outbreaks of pestilent diseases,
The unearthed Assyrian sculptures may
be taken as proofs that all such calami-
ties were still more hideously evolved
by the armies of Chaldea. Once and
again that “bitter and hasty nation”
had launched its hordes across the land
of Israel. They would not spare age
or sex; they would burn up crops and
destroy grain which they could not carry
away; they would leave behind them,
where they did leave any, a depressed,
impoverished population, amongst who

67


CHaP, VIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL.





pestilence would find a wide field for its
ravages, Every quarter of the region
of Israel would have, as it were, come
to its end when the Chaldean soldiers
had made their last inroad, and there
would be nothing more of a monarchy
filled by the house of David.

Ver. 3. “Now the end is upon
thee ;” it is just at hand, and the har-
vest for which that and _ preceding
generations has been sowing will be
immediately reaped. Iniquity was full,
and no more space for confessions and
promises of amendment would be given.
The end would come through the opera-
tions of the Lord: “I will send ”—‘“TI
willjudge” .. . “Iwill recompense”
—give, or lay, &c. ; but His operations
would be instigated by the “ ways”


Ver. 4. The three chief clauses have
been stated before, The first agrees
with chap. v. 11 ; the second with ver.
3, except that the threatenings here in-
timate a closer confection between the
painful consequences to the people and
their doings; “I will lay upon thee
thy ways,” is put for judging ther
according to their ways ; and instead of
laying on them all their abominations,
#8 a burden external to them, “ thine
abominations shall be in the midst of
thee,” affecting from within as well as
from without. The third clause is an-
other repetition of the purpose with
which this terrible end as well as other
moral punishments was carried out,
“Ye shall know that I am the
Lord.”


and “ abominations ” of the people.


HOMILETICS.,


Somm Aspects oF Gop’s GovERNMENT ovER MEx.


Ezekiel, like the Hebrew prophets in general, saw the working of other than
material forces among the inhabitants of the world, and that with a clearness
which cannot be paralleled in any nation’s records. In this short paragraph the
traces of such insight are perceived to be set in no ambiguous phraseology.

I. There is progressive spiritual development in human history. The whole
Bible, when rightly considered, is a witness to this Each part of it is laid as an
organic accretion on that part which went before. Nor is this conclusion to be
referred only to events: it is as certain in regard to principles and truths, Moral
and religious ideas and practices contained in the doctrine of Christ are seen to be
vaguely and inadequately appreciated before they are clearly and more fully per-
ceived. And not a thing of His is stationary. It will, doubtless, take new forms
in the mind of every believer as he passes through the normal stages of growth.
He is first a babe using milk, and he has to go on unto the stature of a perfect
man, As it is with individuals, so is it with a nation and with the race, They
will learn the evil of sin and the obligation of holiness, not by a sudden catastrophe
and revelation, but by slowly evolving processes of loss and pain, of yearning and
hope, The development may seem very often retarded, “the divine event,” in
which the knowledge of the Lord shall cover the earth as the waters cover the sea,
may be far off, nevertheless the end shall come, for which other ends have been
arrived at—the end at which all things shall be seen subjected to Him who is all
in all,

II. There is » signal doom for progressive phases of wrongdoing, The
Israelites had been again and again afflicted “ very sore” because of their iniquities,
but they had continued to possess something like a national life throughout those
calamities. Their chastisement had produced no true amendment, however, and
that judgment which should include in its operation the consequemces of all their
unrighteousness would entirely alter the aspects of the chosen people. They had
been moving on to this catastrophe, and Ezekiel was enlightened to see its near
approach. He understood the signs of his times ; he interpreted their meaning,
and pressed upon the understanding and covaciences of the people the awful guilt

68


°


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP, Vik,








SS ee oe


in which they were involved, by the sins of their fathers as by their own sins, He
declared that there would be no suspension now; the end of Israel as a society,
organised according to forces which had been existing for generations, was reached.
Whatever may be its influence in the world hereafter, it will be exerted under
different conditions from that of its past, The lines over which its future will
move must be projected into new scenery. In signifying this fact the prophet may
be held to propose two principles—

1. All calamities are bound up in preceding events and tendencies, An effect
is nothing but the sequence of causes, However different it appears from them,
not one thing is in it which is not the product of that which has gone before,
There was no weight pressing the Jewish people into the dust which they had not
lifted upon themselves; there was no stripe inflicted but was drawn down by a dis-
obedience. The punishment was only another form of the abomination indulged in,
as the slag is but another form of ingredients in metals which have been exposed
to fire. We are what we are, we suffer what we suffer, not by any chance, but by
reason of what has already happened to us. There is judgment and mercy in
this. We learn what our disposition and conduct lead to. We shall bear our own
burden, whatever it be, because we have first put our shoulder under the yoke
which makes that burden. ©

2. Calamities are specially painful in the last stage of critical changes. Israel
had grossly belied its God, had practised debasing superstitions, had walked amid
the festering swamps of what was lowest and vilest, There was no remedy unless
it might come through a judgment which would fill them with terror and anguish,
By sword, famine, pestilence, the land would be harried. Yet the terribleness
of the inflicted evil was but the incoming of wicked ways and defiling abominations
to roost,

** The wise gods seal our eyes
In our own filth, drop our clear judgments, make us


Adore our errors, laugh at us as we strut
To our confusion.”


The effort to turn unfair privileges into fairness for all, or to make bad laws
into good, is never easy, The discomfiture of interests which are hurtful to the
moral welfare of a people cannot be brought about without serious conflict and
losses. The attempt to promulgate new land laws for Ireland, the struggle with
the slave-power in the United States, the shattering of the ancien regime of
France, the perilous turmoil of the Reformation, thé destruction of feudalism
thronghout Europe, are witnesses that no revolution of thought or practice is pain-
less. In a sense it is sin finding out the sinners, as in this end of Israel.

Such an end, however, introduces a new process. ‘The old passes away never
to reappear. The suffering which characterises the transition prepares for another
condition in which trouble and pain may still be, but which is the foretoken of
richer blessings in coming days.

Ifl. There is a divine will shaping events. Natural or social forces cannot,
when regarded simply as natural agents, light upon the persons who have done
wickedly. They are weapons held in the hands of the righteous Lord. They
strike where He directs them to, and with the weight which He chooses to employ.
It is the tendency of our modern thinking to set forth the external phenomena as
all that requires attention—as if we were to be concerned with the powder which
exploded, and not with the person who had laid it and lighted the match. But it
is the living Ruler who, in the operation of moral laws, gives to them their power
to punish and to improve. Individuals and nations are not atoms vibrating under
unconscious forces and sequences; they are sinners judged for their sins, and
judged if so be they will learn righteousness and turn to Him who smites them.
When He destroys one house it is that He may build another. When He buries the
worm-pierced shell, it is that by its decomposition a more fertile soil may oo


OHAY. VII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIBL,


7


It is thus throughout all generations. The Eternal God manifests no change in
His judgments on right and wrong. All events convey indications of His judg-
ment and of the winding up of earth’s chequered story on the last day ; and they
also convey indications of His gracious purpose to make “the knowledge of the


Lord cover the earth as the waters cover the sea.”


How the judgment and the


mercy will be worked into the changing thoughts of the world is too deep a pro-


blem for us to solve.


But nevertheless we may hold unwaveringly to the principle


that “the counsel of the Lord standeth for ever, the thoughts of His heart to all


generations,”


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Vers. 5-9,
No necessity exists for supposing that
the text of this strophe, on account of
its close resemblance to the preceding
verses, is corrupt. A better interpreta-
tion would make us believe that the
deep feeling of the prophet’s Lord seeks
again to utter itself through the feeling
of the prophet. It is natural to repeat
a cry of anguish or a complaint under
the pressure of that which distresses us,

Ver. 5. “ An evil,” which is placed in
a specially distinct light by the epithet
added, “‘an only evil, behold, is come.”
The calamity about to befall Israel
would be of a singular kind, for which
no parallel could be found (chap. v. 9).
“The Lord will make an utter end;
trouble shall not rise up the second
time” (Nah. i. 9).

Ver. 6. Thisuniqueevil would be folded
up in “an end” of Israel’s state, which,
now inevitable, ‘‘iscome.” It had been
slumbering, but ‘the end watcheth for
thee.” Itis wakeful and observant. It
is, as a pent-up flood, held back by a
sole remaining obstacle, and that also
showing signs of giving way. The
measure of iniquity is full and the con-
demnation will no more linger, ‘Be-
hold, it is come,” and includes in itself
the completion of all that is embraced
in the divine, righteous judgments.

Ver. 7. “The morning.” The Heb-
rew word thus translated is of uncer-
tain import. Besides here and ver. 10,
the only other place in which it occurs
is Isa, xxviii, 5, and there it is trans-
lated by diadem. That meaning cannot
be accepted for this chapter. A prophe-
tical morning is generally applied to the
breaking forth of light, deliverance, &c.,
yet an explanation seems requisite that
is not in accordance with such an idea,
The most favoured conclusion is that


. tains.”


which connects the word with an allied
root indicating that the word here means
something which makes a round or circle,
and is metaphorically interpreted of that
which the revolution of time promotes:
the turn, the fate, that which is destined
“is come unto thee... the day of
trouble is near.” The laws of Hebrew
parallelism suggest that the word trans-
lated trouble is in a relation of contrast
to the next clause of the verse, “and
not the sounding again of the moun-
This, as it stands, is somewhat
unmeaning. To say that the phrase
alludes to the joyous shoutings at
vintage-time, and to understand it as
intimating that there would be no more
the exuberant joy of harvest upon the
mountains, appears to be rather far-
fetched. More probable is it that the
allusion is to idolatrous festivities upon
the mountains of Israel, as was illus-
trated by the prophets of Baal when,
sacrificing to their god upon Mount
Carmel, they made loud and prolonged
sounds. We prefer to translate thus:
The day w near; a tumult—as in a
panic of fugitives from the sword and
famine (cf. vi. 4-6)—and not shouts of
idolaters when worshipping upon the
mountains. The silence of death would
fall upon the scenes where dishonour
was done to the living God.

Ver. 8. The end cannot be retarded.
“Now will I shortly ”—immediately—
“pour out my fury upom thee.” His
judgment will not linger any more. The
course of evil will take Israel into the
woes and horrors produced by their own
sins, The following clauses have been
already presented, with slight verbal
differences ; in ver, 3, and ver, 9 is a
similar repetition of ver. 4. “The
abominations stand in Israel’s midst not
in their alluring, seductive form. but


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OMAP. YY,





with all the woe which comes in their
train” (Haev). The point of definite-
ness which is to be recognised is the un-
changing purpose of all the Lord’s deal-
ings. ‘Ye shall know that I the Lord
smite.” The people were to realise that
it was really not the Chaldeans, but their


Eternal Holy King who was inflicting
the punishment and claiming recognition
and submission. The Lord “the life-
giver, who would die to preserve His
children, but would rather slay them
than they should live the servants of
evil.”


HOMILETICS.
TROUBLE ON TROUBLE FOR SIN (vers. 5-9),


Human experiences have caused the formulating of such proverbs as “It never
rains but it pours,” ‘ Misfortunes never come alone.” If many who use such
words make no reference, when another weight of suffering is laid upon one already
imposed, to the primal power which maintains this course of affairs, there was no
omission in respect to that power among the statements of Hebrew prophets.
They discerned the shadowy movements of a righteous Ruler, producing not only
an isolated trouble, but also clusters of troubles, They were well aware that truth,
if unpalatable, required to be enforced again and again, and that a true lesson,
which might not be learned under the infliction of one pain, might be learned
when pain was followed by pain. The same method was observed in Him who
“spake as never man spake.” The stern repetition of “woe unto you,” which
Jesus deemed it fitting to emit, must have made the ears of scribes and Pharisees
to tingle ; even to-day the awe and dread survive when they are read. It seems
established as a principle of divine procedure that transgressors may learn
righteousness by reiterated judgments. We may receive directions as to a becom-
ing way of regarding repeated trials from our prophet. He suggestsa—

I. That sufferings for sins will be completed. An evil first comes, and after-
wards an evil which will make a singularly deep impression,—“ an only evil.” The
end which utterly condemns the sin is not brought about at once, Stages of pro-
gress towards it are taken. Some of the sinners may repent, or may die before
the last point is reached, but they who do arrive there have passed other stages
previously. The suffering may be so slight that the individuals or nations affected
can afford to make light of it and go on their usual way. It may be so serious
that they stand for days or months in a@ sort of fear of doing wrong, then their
goodness, like the morning cloud or early dew, vanishes away. The end of inflict-
ing the various sufferings will, nevertheless, come. The house whose foundation
has been laid in sand will be touched in successive years by casual floods, but not
till the fatal year, when a dire flood will descend, shall the house be overthrown.
A nation may continue for one century or more to indulge in luxurious living and
to practise ungodly conduct ; but the blows of truth and right will be repeated
until the old evil state falls down. ‘Their feet will slide tn due time.” They will
reap what they have sown and the end of justice will be attained,

IL That sufferings for sins are of varying degrees. Similar sins may be
chargeable against different individuals, but similar sufferings are not endured in
consequence. It is a perplexity in modern days, as it was in the days of Job,
and as insoluble to us as it was to him and his friends. The messages of Ezekiel
threw a streak of light into our perplexity. They indicate that the utmost suffer-
ing—that which will be recognised as greater than any other—comes as a result
of loosening the ties which should hold men to God. Let there be disregard to
divine rights, and sooner or later there will be disregard to human rights, And
when both God and our brethren are sinned against, the penalty for the misdeeds
may well be felt as singular in its intensity, and evoke comments in marts of
business as well as in meetings for religicus objects, Thus the ee eye is


CRAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





trained to sea striking differences in the inflictions befalling men who go in wrong
courses,

IIL That sufferings for sin may be rapidly accelerated in their final stage.
The Babylonian army kept hovering over Judea and now and then swooping down
upon it ; but at length, when that watchful foe came in aggravated wrath, the ruin
of Jerusalem was speedily consummated, and the Jewish nationality was crumpled up
as by a sudden blight. The Babylonian Empire in its turn, after resisting various
shocks, fell to pieces as in a moment: “In that night was Belshazzar the king of
the Chaldeans slain, and Darius the Mede took the kingdom” (Dan. v. 30, 31),
Our generation has seen, in the war between France and Germany, how the Empire
which had been raised by “ gunpowder and glory ” collapsed with startling abrupt-
ness. This event need not be taken to mean that the French Empire was deluding
and wicked beyond all other governments ; yet at least it may be taken to mean
that “a short work on the earth” may be made with communities which allow
themselves to be misled by interested and pretentious designs. They will not
use time to repent till confusion seizes them. Whether that confusion will
become ruinous, as was the case with Babylonia, or whether it will prepare for
new conditions of national existence, as was the case with Israel, cannot be foretold
by merely human perspicacity Any way the contingency is instructive in showing
that it is not wise to make light of troubles which are regarded as inconsiderable.
The moans of the forest-trees presage an approaching hurricane: slight pains prog-
nosticate the attack of a virulent fever; and the temporal and mental sufferings
which come in consequence of sins should ever be taken as warning of an end
that may be destruction. What though you can bear the uneasiness or disregard
it, yet remind yourselves that that brings no pledge of safety from a sad and
fearful aggravation of trouble some day. ‘‘ How are they brought into a desolation
as in a moment! they are utterly consumed with terrors.”

1. It becomes peoples and persons to be earnest in learning the lessons which
are given by repeated disappointments, checks, pains, sorrows, lest evil come upon
them from which they shall not escape.

2, It becomes them to stand in awe of the Invisible Worker whose varying pro-
cesses manifest His will to restrain and to deliver from sin,


RENEWED ASSERTION OF THE APPROACH OF THE CaLamity (vers. 10-18).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver, 10,


their phenomena were already deter-
“ Benold the day, behold it is come.”


mined, “ The [morning] destiny goes


It is remarkabie with what unity the
various prophets speak of the troubles
which they threatened as culminating in
a day. It seems as if they saw in
calamities an ever-recurring omen of
that day in which earth’s story would
be judged of as a whole. If that final
judyement could not distinctly loom
before their gaze, it cast its dark and
troubled shadows across the scene in
respect to which they had to utter the
burden of the Lord. To us, as to them,
all sufferings for wickedness are fore-
tokens of the last great day, when the
fire shall try every man’s work and con-
sume all that is not fit to abide in a
renovated world wherein dwelleth right-
pousness. Those recurring days and


ta


forth, the rod blossoms, pride buddeth”
The reference of these words is not to an
evil which germinated within the terri-
tory of Israel, but to an evil external to
it, which was springing up and would
become an instrument of execution,
The rod is the rod of the Lord’s anger
—the rod of the oppressor, repre-
sented in the Babylonian Nebuchad-
nezzar. Like a shoot his power was
growing, giving signs of vigorous vita-
lity, rapidly taking the form which would
render it fit to strike hard, and to do
sc with a will energised by boasting
pride,

Ver. 11. “Violence rises into a
rod for wickedmess.” The cruelty and
outrages of the Chaldeans, against which


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


ene


the prophets Habakkuk and Jeremiah
deal out strong invectives, would be me-
thods for punishing the wicked doings of
Israel, At the sight Ezekiel becomes too
deeply affected to fill up with verbs the
four following brief sentences, and he
merely prefixes to each a negative. We
might render them literally, in terms of
the English version, ‘not fromthem, and
not from their multitude, and not from
them of them, and not wailing inthem.”
The compression and uncertain allu-
sions make the sense somewhat doubtful,
Besides, the meanings assigned to the
several words are not generally accepted,
as marginal readings testify. The inter-
pretation given in the Speaker’s Com-
mentary is: “The furious Chaldean has
become an instrument of God’s wrath,
endued with power emanating not from
the Jews, or from the multitude of the
Jews, or from any of their children or
people; nay, the destruction shall be so
complete that none shall be left to make
lamentation over them.” Though this
comment scarcely satisfies the demands
of linguistic accuracy, it sufficiently
shows the bearing of the prophet’s utter-
ances, The catastrophe would be such
that no one would be left to resist.
“Stroke will so come upon stroke that
lamentation will be forgotten in despair.
It is the highest degree of pain when the
capacity to complain expires” (Heng.)
The weight of scholarship, however, as
to the last clause, gives for its transla-
tion, and there is no attractiveness in
them ; all that beauty of the Lord their
God which had been upon them shall
be consumed away and utterly disap-
pear.

Ver. 12. In that state of affairs, pro-
perty, upon which such high value is
set, would produce no comfort. “Let
not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller
mourn.” ‘It is natural for the buyer
to rejoice and for the seller to lament,”
but no ground of joy should be found in
that which might seem to be a good
purchase, because it will turn out to be
a source of trouble and pain. There
would be as little ground for grief in
parting with property, The enemy
would seize it all, taking goods, cattie,
houses, land, without distinction of per-





OHa?, WL.


re


sons, “When slavery and captivity
stare you in the face, rejoicing and
mourning are equally absurd” (Jerome).
And no one should be passed by, “ be
cause wrath is upon all its multitude ;”
upon all who dwell in the territory of
Israel whose “end ” is pronounced.
Ver. 13 is to be regarded as a de-
velopment of what was just said con-
cerning the universality of wrath. ‘The
seller” is not to mourn, for he “shall
not return to that which is sold.” He
may have become an exile; the fall in
the value of property may have made it
burdensome to hold; there may have
been forced sales of substance which had
been prized by the seller—he need not
allow one regret. He will never find an
opportunity to get back what he had
thus let go: not “although they were
yet alive,” we. whoever of the sellers
might be counted among the living were
not to cherish any hope that in time
they should recover the property which
they had sold. As parts of the surviv-
ing remnant they would be in a captive
state from which they would have no
restoration, or the waves of Chaldean
rapine would so beat upon the whole
territory as to obliterate every trace of
former arrangements. Life would not
bring back again past enjoyments.
Again Ezekiel emphasises the indiscri-
minateness of the punishment: “ for
the vision ” which he has described as
shadowing forth the imminent evil “is
upon,” has reference to, “all its multi-
tude.” In the words which immediately
follow, the prophet does not intimate a
possible event happening to the multi-
tude, but repeats that which had been
already said of the seller—‘‘he shall
not return.” Yet should any one sup-
pose that, by fraud, violence, or other
immoral way, he would be able to re-
assert his title to the possessions he once
had, he must disabuse his mind of the
folly, “neither shall any strengthen
themselves in the iniquity of his life ;”
or, to put it literally, and a man in the int
quity of his life—they shall not strengthen
themselves. The same movement, viz.,
from a single representative to all the
individuals, which we see in the first
half of the verse, is repeated in this last
73


GAP. VIL





clause, and scope is given for variety of
translation. Keil’s is, and no one will
strengthen himself as to his life through
his iniquity. But whatever order the
words may be put into, the meaning is
conveyed that no one whosoever, so long
as he is alive, will have any ease by his
iniquity ; he will be weak and crippled
still, unable to escape the doom of
wrath,

Many commentators find in these
two verses distinct references to the
continued vigorous usages of the law
for the jubilee year, according to which
land and houses reverted to their
original owners, It is, to say the least,
doubtful if this idea can be sustained.
That the phrases of the prophet are
moulded by principles inherent in the
law of jubilee is not at all unlikely,
but that his popular phraseology should
be held to intimate that the processes
incident to that law were validly main-
tained is more than can be granted. It
is very questionable whether the law
was observed at all in the later periods
of Jewish history, if in the earlier.
The remarkable omission of any satis-
factory indication of its operation, of
course, cannot be pleaded as a proof
that the enactment had become alto-
gether obsolete ; but it may be taken to
show that, like the community of goods
in the primitive Jerusalem Church, the
plan became unworkable in a society
fermenting with the elements of social
changes. With the exception of a very
few indecisive expressions in Isaiah and
Jeremiah, as well as this one here, not
a single prophet has condemned neglect
of jubilee enactments or acknowledged
their fulfilment. Perhaps it should be
regarded as a collateral proof of the law
of jubilee being in abeyance, that that
section of the law, which required
Hebrew bond-servants to be set free in
the jubilee year, was certainly disre-
garded in practice. Jeremiah (chap.
xxxiv.) shows that there had been a
momentary reaction towards obedience
to the aforesaid section; but that un-
brotherliness and greed had soon brought
a return of the prohibited oppression,
Man’s failure to carry out such a iaw
ia not : sign that its principles are

3


OMLLuLIC COMMENTARY: BZEKIBL,





unsound or its practice impossible in
human societies, Both it and the
having all things common in Christian
Churches have these characterising
features, that God’s authority is placed
over all things, and that all men are
brethren. We look for an age in which
these shall be supremely prominent—
the good time coming, when love shall
reign over all the earth, Ezekiel men-
tions the development of the slighted
principles of those old decrees as sure to
appear in that new theocracy, whose
details he will afterwards set forth
(chap. xlvi. 16-18).

Vers, 14,15. A more disastrous re-
sult than the depreciation and aban-
donment of property would be evident
in the unhinged and demoralised spirit
of the people. The biblical history of
the Jews goes to prove that on the
whole they were brave and courageous,
ready both to defend themselves and
attack others) This characteristic would
be lost in the grievous period of the end
so close at hand. “They have blown
the trumpet, and,” with the view “to
make all ready ”—a call to all capable
of bearing arms is sounded, and they
are summoned to stand equipped in
every particular for meeting the foe.
It is in vain; there is no martial re-
sponse. It is not for want of men,
money, weapons. Besides country, pro-
perty, religion, life are at stake, “‘ but
none goeth forth to the battle.” The
consciousness of lying under divine pun-
ishment unmans them: “ for my wrath
is upon all the multitude thereof.”
This would be shown in the fatal
sufferings which they would endure,
They would be cut down in the open
by the sword of the enemy. They
would perish in pent-up streets or closed
houses by hunger and disease. ‘ The
issues of death” would fatally work
upon them,

Ver. 16. Yet the door of mercy
will not be utterly walled up; some
fugitives wiil reach safety through it,
though they may be few. For them it is
provided, and they “shall escape, and
shall be on the mountains like doves
of the valleys.” Those survivors will
seek refuge in elevated, retired districts,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OBAP, Vii,





acting on the idea which was enunciated
at a later day by Jesus of Nazareth,
“Let them which are in Judea flee to
the mountains.” In such a condition of
hardship they will keep together—be
like flocks of pigeons which have been
disturbed in their resorts on the lower
ground, and maintain a continual cooing
among the rocky heights up to which
they have flown for safety—“‘all of
them mourning.” Similar expressions
used by other prophets indicate that the
sound natural to doves was regarded by
the Hebrews as suggestive of sorrow.
Ewald says, “The Arabian poets still
find in cooing the sounds of lamenta-
tion, as if the bird’s notes came from a
feeling of pain.” In English poetry we
find—


** The stockdove only through the forest coos,
Mournfully hoarse.”


This mourning, on the part of all
those who had escaped from the terrors
of death, would be aggravated by an
element for which there was no alleviat-
ing counteractive in earthly means;
“every one for his iniquity.” Each
sees not only that sin had been no
defence, but also that it brings bitter
regrets, and he could complain of its
deceitfulness, This recoil from iniquity
was not an unusual course for the Israel-
ites. Successive eras of their national
history furnish illustration of those words
of Isaiah, “ In trouble have they visited
Thee ; they poured out a prayer when
Thy chastening was upon them.” They
could perceive, in the evils which befell
them, tokens of the wrongs they had
been guilty of, as no other people con-
temporary with them, and perhaps no
people of any period whatever, could do.
The rights of God over them were again
and again brought into distinctness after
seasons of effacement, They then re-


cognised that relief was to be sought
nowhere save in God alone, and they
afflicted their souls before Him. Too
often, with the majority, it was not with
godly sorrow, but with the sorrow of
the world. They grieved over the hard
consequences of sin rather than over
its dishonouring of the Father. They
longed for the removal of its punishment
rather than for deliverance from its
power and guilt.

Vers. 17,18. The weakness and gen-
eral helplessness of the fugitives are
depicted in strong figurative terms,
“All hands, all knees,” as inadequate
for their functions as if their strength
had wholly slipped away—a repetition of
the scene in the wilderness, when the chil-
dren of Israel were smitten by the men
of Ai and ‘‘the hearts of the people
melted and became as water ” (Josh. vii.
5). In addition to this, demonstrative
expressions of defencelessness would be
displayed. The conspicuous parts of
their bodies would be visibly made to
show their utter abandonment to fear
and grief. “Sackcloth ” would “ gird ”
them; “trembling” would ‘“ cover”
them ; tke ‘‘shame” of vexation and
punishment would suffuse itself over
their countenances, and “BALDNESS”
overrun their “HEADS.” The baldness
might be self-inflicted in the manner
narrated by Ezra (ix. 3), when he was
overwhelmed with horror for the trans-
gression of his people. It has been
often said that such baldness was pro-
hibited to Israel, but the reference usually
made for that statemeut (Deut. xiv. 1)
does not prove it. That verse speaks of
taking hair from a certain part of the
head only. At any rate, allusions in
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Amos, Micah signify
that depriving the head of its hair was
not an uncommon procedure in seasons
of deep grief.


HOMILETICS.


How Man’s Destiny 1s Brovaur ABovm.
“ The destiny goes forth, the rod blossoms, pride buddeth, violence rises into a rod


for wickedness” (vers. 10, 11).


These words allude to the Babylonian monarchy as growing in power, and
having in it the destiny to shatter the Jewish atate for its persistent wrong courses


15


omaP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





towards its covenanted Lord. We read them and see how, “to the sprouting of
power which can, corresponds the blossoming of pride which wil/,” be a terror and
destruction. We are furnished with a representation in outline of the methods by
which straying souls are recompensed according to their ways and abominations,

L Their destiny is not a fortuitous event. It is a growth—a product of, it
may be, hidden aud manifold causes, Generally, we cannot tell how we had
become liable to a cold, a fever, a face-ache or heart-palpitation ; but our inability
to trace the movements which culminated in the attack does not make us hesitate
to say that we had come under influences sufficient to produce the indisposition.
It was not arandom blow. We have reason to take the same position in reference to
all personal, to all national fears, losses, defeats. There is no such thing as accident,
chance in human affairs. If we have to pass through fire and through water, they
were in our way. If men ride over our heads, they were mounted on horses spurred
to do so.

IL Destiny is not from the mere fiat of God. He works by law. He begins to
act because of righteousness and truth. He continues to act for righteousness and
truth. The nature of things moves towards the punishing of evil by operations
which may be said to be outside of God, that is, by using forces which the Almighty
One has called into existence. Every decree of His is therefore adapted to antece-
dent conditions. Violence rises up into a rod by no arbitrary will, The moral
government of God may tend to an inevitable fate, but it is a reasonable one.

III. Destiny is accomplished by fitting instruments. I said, in agreement
with the phraseology of the prophet, that destiny is a growth, Each kind of tree in
growing appropriates those elements in the atmosphere and soil which are suited
to its nature. The bread-fruit tree prepares to support the life of man, and the
upas-tree to poison him, And in the moral realm the elaboration of good things
to save man and of evil things to destroy him is always proceeding. When the
time is ripe they arrive at their suitableness for use, and are capable of carrying
out the destined event. But “the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of
the righteous.” Pride will smite pride, violent dealing will be crushed by violence,
When men sin they set briers and thorns against the Lord who is in conflict with
them; but it is only to see that He goes through them, that He burns them up
together. He never stands perplexed because He has no instrument at hand to
execute His holy law,

IV. Destiny is the summing up of previous actions. We say that violeta
are gathered for their sweet perfume and wheat for its nutritious qualities, and we
mean that the different lots which befall them is due to those antecedent chemical
operations which form their properties. We should say the same of every indivi-
dual and every nation on whom scares, and pains, and loss, and ruin spread their
blight. They took a course in which they gathered up certain materials. Whether
those materials were drawn from the external or the internal world, both sorts
became the means of bruising, tearing, killing those who had gathered them.
“ Hast thou not procured this unto thyself ?, .. Thine own wickedness shall correct
thee and thy backslidings shall reprove thee” (Jer. ii, 17, 19). It is foolish to
speak of an evil destiny except as a consequence of foregoing faults.

1, Punishment for sin comes slowly. It is not the result of a force which appears
suddenly on the stage of life. It is no hasty stroke for which there was not suffi-
cient justification, and the incidence of which might cause valid regrets, It is a
growth. The evil-doers may escape for a season, but in due season, sooner or later,
according to the nature of the sin, they shall receive the just award on their deeda,
Let not your hearts be set towards evil because the sentence against it is not exe-
cuted speedily. Use the space given for repentance.

2. Punishment for sin comes surety. Human strength, wisdom, sympathy cannot
stay the reproductive powers of nature, and they cannot annihilate the accumulat-
ing energies of moral evil. The cotton which will form the shroud for some of vou


wa
7%


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL, OHAP. VIL.
ee ee ee ge ONL AEP eG PUR RY eye ea Se


who are enjoying good health is to be plucked off sun-lit fields. The weather which
will bring famine to you, prodigals, has begun its action upon the scenery begirding
you. The disease which will render offensive the debauchee is finding nourishment
in him for its germs, The death which will destroy those who are ungodly is on
their foot-tracks, and will not miss its aim. Inevitable is the woe which will fall
upon the head of the wicked. Nothing can interfere; nothing can save—nothing


except a change of mind ; nothing except submission to the love and power of God
manifested in Jesus Christ our Lord |


Weak Ports In Human Lire (vers, 11-18).


Nature in its various forms—in himself and in what is external to himself—oecu-
pies man’s interest and efforts. He is disposed to rest in its use. He does not
“look through nature up to nature’s God.” But nature is from God, and man
must be taught that in every one of its characteristics it is subjected to the autho-
rity of God’s laws. If used according to His will, it is glorified ; if contrary to His
will, it must be made to appear weak as a prop for life on earth, Observe thia
weakness—

I, In the common fate of men. There is no abiding. We must needs die,
The place that knows us now shall soon know us no more. Our beauty will con-
sume away. Where is “ populous No”? What has become of the Israelites of all
generations? Whatever be the power of the forces which hold the activities of a
single life, or whatever be the forces which go to constitute the life of a puissant
nation, in either case the power is helpless to safeguard its subjects when they do
wickedly. Iniquity, that is the poison which destroys strength, that the traitor
which opens to the rod which brings death, The nature of man succumbs before
the righteous fiat of God.

It. In the precariousness of property. Men make gold their hope, which is
digged out of nature’s reservoirs. ‘They pride themselves when their goods are
increased, They call their lands by their own names, Many are willing to sacri-
fice truth, honesty, peace, so as to get unrighteous gain in buying and selling, But
no: products of nature, however largely estimated and depended on as a security,
can be retained in use. A time comes when they may be counted a burden and
sorrow, and buyers and sellers be equally conscious that the possession of them is
untenable, that they are too evanescent to give help in danger, and must take rank
with the weak things of the world.

III. In the failure of courage. Human nature can furnish proofs of courage
which dignify it, but fears of injury or death can cause the stoutest to lose their
presence of mind, and panics fall upon individuals and bodies of men, Appeals to
honour and patriotism and care for property are vain. The stirring notes of the
trumpet are altogether powerless to incite to conflict, “ None goeth to the battle.”
Before the wrath of God the multitude has no spirit left in it,

IV. In the insecurity of a retreat. The fugitive Israelites who had escaped
sought a safe hiding-place, and that brought experiences which were almost worse
than death. Our bodily nature cannot be hardened or protected against increasing
troubles, nor does one kind of calamity guarantee us freedom from every other kind.
Life may be preserved from extinction by sword or famine or pestilence, but the
circumstances into which it is thrown may be full of fear and grief and torment.
Ah! if men could only get away from all tribulation by fleeing from one form of
it, how different would our natural life appear! But the pains which follow sir
are not voided by any temporary punishment. Our wrongdoing may be seen and
regretted ; that does not avert sure penalty. Youth spent in sensual pleasures
may be deeply and sincerely lamented, but the “ wild oats” then sown leave seeds
on the heart’s soil which are not eradicated even after many a ploughing and harrow-
ing. A ticket-of-leave convict finds his crime, however he may stand om from


OuAP, VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZERIEL





it now, will prevent any confidential employment. And when God rises up te
punish, “ mourning, sackcloth, horror, shame,” go to show that the stripes needed,
therefore just and suitable, will be inflicted “to the utmost lash.” None can hide
so as that God will be deceived.

What repentings should be kindled when we see the helpless character of the
things we are so prone to trust! What fear lest God should be neglected and dis-
obeyed !

It may be doubted whether the next verse should be connected with the pre-
ceding or the following verses. Though the casting away of all valuables would
be a natural act in those who were fleeing for their lives, yet it is as natural in
those who were exposed to death by famine in the siege. However, as reference is
made hereafter to other precious things which had been employed as instruments
of evil, it is preferable to consider that a change occurs here in the line of the


prophet’s thought.
mony with the features of this chapter.


EXEGETICAL NOTES. — Ver.
19. Valuable things will be rajected.
“They shall cast their silver in the
streets.” Retaining it in their houses
would present inducements to the greed
and cruelty of the foemen, and expose
their persons to outrage: it will be put
away: “and their gold shall be dis-
carded, treated as an uncleanness and
not to be touched—more precious than
silver, it will be more vilely cast away.
It is probable that their idols are included
in this rejection if we take an illustration
from Isaiah: “Ye shall defile also the
covering of thy graven images of silver,
and the ornament of thy molten images


of gold ; thou shalt cast them away as a _


menstruous cloth; thou shalt say unto
it, Get thee hence” (xxx. 22). This
utter repudiation of things so highly
prized is grounded on the fact that no
amount or form of the precious metals
will help to safety, or protect from pain,
fears, destruction: “their silver and
their gold shall not be able to deliver
them in the day of the wrath of the
Lord; they shall not satisfy their souls,
neither fill their bowels.” Neither
mental ease nor sufficient food would be
attainable in those closing days of tribu-
lation—“ because it is the stumbling-
block of their iniquity.” They so ap-
plied the substantial wealth entrusted to
them as to gratify their lusts; they made
it into a means of sin, and fell over it
into fearful woes.

It is questionable whether the words
“silver and gold,” when associated in
this manner, are ever applied in the

78


If the change seems abrupt, that is far from being out of har-


Old Testament to money only. We
must not read into its usage a modern
idea. It refers them to money, and
also to plate, ornaments, idol-images,
And this is an indication that Ezekiel
must refer to some other object than
the precious metals in the following
verse.

Ver. 20. Another feature of their
guilt comes into view, “As for the
beauty of his ornament, he set it for
pride.” We do not see in these expres-
sions anything but the signs of wealth
made into a matter for boasting. That
people boast themselves in the multitude
of riches is true; but if the Jews had
some special glory, it is far more likely
that they would pride themselves in that.
And they had. If Canaan was “the
glory of all lands,” assuredly the Temple
at Jerusalem was the summit of that
glory. Ezekiel himself might be quoted
to establish this application of the words,
“TI will profane my sanctuary, the ex-
cellency of your strength” (xxiv. 21),
The thing which was the most glorious
feature in Israel had been made into a
thing for mere brag! “and the images
of their abominations, of their detest-
able things they made therein,” Ex-
amples of this degradation and abjuration
of their most eminent privilege are found
in the next chapter, ‘ therefore I give
it to them as an unclean thing,” the
glory of their ornament is changed into
that which is repulsive and unfit for
the Lord,

Ver, 21, “And I give it into the
hands of the strangers for a prey, &c.,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP. Yi.





and they shall profane it.” The heathen
shall take possession of the city, the
outward tokens of God’s specia! dwelling
with Israel be desecrated, and its glory
be obliterated.

Ver, 22. “And I turn away my face
from them ”—1from the people of Jeru-
salem probably, though reference may
be to the foreigners, for whose doings
He would seem not to care,—“‘and
they profane my secret.” It is unneces-
sary to supply place to the last word,
whose meaning must be that which had
been guarded by the Lord as His and
fenced against all intruders, Hengsten-
berg understands it of their treasures,
“the means of Israel, which are, as it
were, the treasure of the Lurd;” but it
is, surely, more appropriately to be
understood of the Temple with its Holy
of Holies: “and” this shall be brought
about when “the robbers,” lit. those
making breaches, ‘enter into it”—the
city —“ and profane it.” ‘The repeated
references to the profanation of what
had been holy to the Lord signify how
completely Israel had been estranged
from Him, and how all places, even the
holiest, would be open to the unhallowed
presence of the ungodly nations,

Ver. 23. Ezekiel is addressed. The
Lord, as it were, “indignant at the
profanation, commands him to put an
end to the doings of the enemy by
the deportation of those who were left
behind” (Haev.) “ Make the chain,”
that which was the badge of subjuga-
tion and with which the exiled Jews
were fettered. Jeremiah records how
he was let go by Nebuzar-adan from
“being bound in chains among all that
were carried away captive from Jerusalem
and Judah” (xl. 1), City and land had
brought the evil upon themselves, “ for
the land is full of deeds of blood,” not
applied to acts of murder only, but to
all acts which were counted as mortal
sins, “and the city is full of violence.”
The prophet Micah had declared that
Zion should be ploughed as afield because
the Lord withdrew His presence, and
among the causes of that desolation he
puts, “They build up Zion with blood
and Jerusalem with iniquity ” (iii. 10).

Vez, 24. “And I will cause the





evil ones of the nations to come,” the
worst of the heathen, those who were
most notorious among surrounding
peoples for their evil tempers and waya
The expression is similar to that in
ver. 21, “the wicked of the earth,” and
gives an indication of the stroug and
bitter feelings engendered amongst the
Hebrews towards the Chaldeans, in-
stances of which are found in other
prophetical books also, Ewald regarda
such expressions as signifying that at
this time the Babylonian Empire con-
tained in it an element of rude, rough,
and uncultivated warriors, while, at the
same time, there must have been
highly civilised population long settled
in Nineveh or Babylon; “and they
shall possess their houses,” a justifica-
tion of the counsels given in vers. 12 and
13; “and I make the pride of the
strong to cease.” If it is felt that it
would hardly do to regard the Jews as
meriting this description “the strong,”
the reading of the Septuagint, which
finds a confirmation in chap, xxxiii. 28,
suggests an explanation, the pride of
ther strength. This is neither to be
transmuted into strong pride nor into
proud splendour, but to be taken as
intimating that there was that belong-
ing to them which they esteemed their
special strength as a people. That that
was their relation to the Lord God is
confirmed by such phrases as these:
“Thou art the glory of their strength ;”
“The Lord shall send the rod of thy
strength out of Zion.” That men may
take pride in Him whom they do not
obey is testified by the words of Jesus,
“Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do
not the things which I say?” Their
pride in that would fail, “and their holy
places shall be profaned;” their,asif He
would not acknowledge them as His
even nominally.

“Tn these verses a threefold example
is given of the divine lew talionts. ...
The people have abused their wealth by
making idols of gold and silver, and ali
manner of ornaments for vainglorious
display, so that it has become ‘ the
stumbling-block of their iniquity ;” now
it was to be seized as a spoil by the
enemy, and, in respect to their deliver-

79


OHAP. VII.





ance, should be found worthless as the
mire of the streets. They have carried
their abominations into God’s sanctuary
and defiled the secret place of the Most
High ; now the wholeis te he laid open
to the unhallowed feet of the stranger,
and robbers are to be sent to walk at
liberty where saints only should have
been permitted to enter. They, by their
daring wickedness, have made the land
full of violence and blood, therefore
shall they themselves be bound with a
chain by the ungodly heathen, and their
best possessions be turned into the prey
of the lawless and the profane. ‘ Their
holy places shall be defiled,’ as they
have already defiled mine.”—Fairbairn.

Ver. 25. On the existence of the
Temple depended that of the Levitical
priesthood, and when the former was
desecrated, the means of expiation,
which by that was connected with the
priesthood, were withdrawn from Israel.
So we read “destruction comes,” lit.
a cutting of comes. We might trans-
late, with Fairbairn, a close comes, or
with Hengstenberg, who says, “ properly
contraction, in contrast with the expan-
sion that is connected with all joyful
prosperity—the state of restriction and
diminution:” “and they shall seek
peace, and it is not.” Peace—hbardly
with Nebuchadnezzar, but that which
could be attained by the methods re-
ferred to in the next verses,

Ver. 26. The condition will be one
of constant uncertainty and disappoint-
ment. “Mischief shall come upon
mischief, and rumour shall be upon
rumour.” ‘Stroke upon stroke does
the ruin come, and it is intensified
by reports, alarming accounts, which
crowd together and increase the terror”
(Keil) ; “and they shall seek a vision
from the prophet.” They are at their
wits’ end; they do not wait on the
Lord, but endeavour to make solace
or encouragement come from prophets
such as had spoken to them visions out


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


of their own heart; but the propheta
are either dumb, or, if they were told
“Speak unto us smooth things, pro-
phesy deceits,” they failed to present
the visions that were sought fur; “and
the law shall perish from the priest.”
The prophet Malachi makes it appear
as an understood thing that the people
“should seek the law at the priest’s
mouth,” It is an inadequate interpre-
tation whieh would confine “the law”
which was sought from the priest simply
to his reading out of that of Moses. He
was to have reference made to him for
his judgments on the rules which were
given to be guides to right conduct and
worship. Thus Deut, xvii. 10, “ Thou
shalt do according to the sentence
which they shall declare unto thee from
that place which the Lord shall choose.”
The priests gave decisions, by oracle or
otherwise, in the sanctuary as to what
was intended by the law. However,
that function of the priesthood would
altogether pass from it :-“ and counsel
from the elders” shallalso perish ; wis-
dom and experience would not avail for
giving suitable advice,

Ver. 27. All the population in its
three classes would be dealt with in
judgment. “The king shall mourn, and
the prince ”—the chiefs of the tribes and
heads of families—‘‘shall be clothed
with desolation, and the hands of the
people of the land,” 7.¢., the common-
alty as distinguished from the rulers,
“shall be troubled. Iwill do to them
after their way,” lit. from ther way,
t.e., the Lord will take the cue for what
He will do from what they have done;
“and with their judgments I will
judge them, and they shall know that
I am the Lord.” By sufferings which
flow from their own decisions they will
be forced to acknowledge Him as Lord.
“‘ With these words, recurring in Ezekiel
like a refrain, the first cycle of his
prophecies closes,” —Hengstenberg.


HOMILETICS.


THE WITHDRAWAL OF THE LORD'S PRESENCE


To walk with God is man’s highest privilege, to be forsaken by God is man’s
deepest woe ; his history furnishes abundant evidence that he has been the subject


&D


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP. VIX.


es








of both contingencies, Yet a people professing to serve the living God should not
allow it to be doubtful what kind of answer must be returned to the questions,
Is the Lord among us or not? Are-we conducting ourselves so that He lifts up
the light of His countenance upon us, or so that He hides His face from us? For
the response does not relate merely to our comfort or the reverse ; it relates to the
feelings of God and the rights due to God from every faculty and condition of men.
A help to indicate the position at which a true answer may be received is sug-
gested by these closing sentences of Kzekiel’s dirge upon downfallen Israel,

I. We learn what provokes the withdrawal of God’s presence.

1. It is not any arbitrariness on His part. Deep experiences in spiritual
things—experiences which it is to be feared are not so common now as then—led
former generations of God’s servants to coin this phrase, ‘‘ The sovreign withdrawal
of God’s countenance.” It has been handed on to us among the traditions received
from our fathers, but it is a phrase we should be very loath to employ. They
indeed explained it with provisos which sometimes shaded its objectionable
features, but they left enough of it in view to make us feel that it cannot depict
a true idea of God’s action. To say that there are occasions when we cannot
surmise the reasons why He should make us walk in darkness and have no light, is
a very different statement from that which intimates that there is no call in our
proceedings for His righteousness and love to rise up against us. “Thou art clear
when thou judgest.” In ourselves, in the conditions of His kingdom, will always
be the latent if not obvious causes for the hiding of His face—never in any divine
way wardness,

2. It ts incited by unholy demeanour, There were iniquities among the Israelites
of Ezekiel’s time of no insignificant character. We might be disposed to ask,
How could they fancy that, while doing such things, they would still be in the
light of God? The answer comes to us from the true Judge of human ways,
“They come not to the light lest their deeds should be reproved.” But we do not
need to inquire of Ezekiel’s people respecting this inconsistency. Similar facts are
manifest among our own people. (1.) There ts eacessive appreciation of wealth. Before
it the truth and purity of many promising young persons go down into darkness,
The honourableness and the attachment to Christian causes of maturer age have
been discarded. Reports of proceedings in law-courts, less public reports of
dealings in offices, warehouses, shops, go to prove that silver and gold, in some of
their forms of value, lead into not a few “ pernicious ways.” When Mammon is
loved and held to, what must be done with God? (2.) There is immorality. Sina
which are liable to capital punishment, sins which seduce others, sins which stir up
wearied hearts to cry to the Lord God of Sabaoth, “ Do me justice on my adver-
sary,” are narrated day by day in our newspapers. How many more never find a
record in earthly pages! When deeds of violence are rife they prove that the
whole condition of a people is demoralised. When they may not be rife, but when
the guiltless do not condemn unequivocally such as do take place, do not wage
continual war against them, lest they should get themselves into trouble or soil their
hands by the pitch of wickedness, then too is the condition unwholesome and the
words come true, “ Your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and
your sins have hid His face from you” (Isa. jix. 2).

3. It is brought about by trifling with religious belief. (1.) For people to set tt
as a matter for pride is to trifle with wt. They treat it as a thing which adds to
their importance or self-conceit ; they do not humble themselves to it as to their
master ; they drive it from its rightful position, however beautiful they esteem it
to be a8 an ornament. Hear the numbers who boast that they are Christian and
not heathen, Roman Catholics and not Protestants, Church of England and not
Nonconformists, Church-goers and not Sunday-excursionists, and their boast carries
with it this undertone, “ We do not understand the rights of God.” The lonely
glory of His service—presenting aspects which make it excel all other Pea of


GEAP, VIL. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : BZERIEL,





ee)


thought—is veiled and made comparatively trivial when regarded as a matter
for self-glorification. (2.) To adopt unauthorised observances ts to trifle with tt
The Israelites did not turn the Lord out of His Temple. They did abandon
acknowledgment of Him as their God above all. ‘‘ They served the Lord and Baal.”
They made images of abominations and detestable things in the Lord’s house. Such °
a course betokened that they could not seriously accept that which was their dis-
tinguishing knowledge, that the Lord was the only God. They ignored te truth,
that to pay the semblance of worship to idols was rebellion against His claims which
He could not condone by His presence remaining among them. Isaiah represents
His decision thus, “ When ye spread forth your hands I will hide mine eyes from
you; yea, when ye make many prayers I will not hear” (i. 15). He did not want
“vain oblations” then, and He does not want them now. If we use prayers, sacra-
ments, special rites and services which private or churchly judgments institute as
an indispensable addition to the faith on which we act for acceptance with God,
we may not erect an idol-shrine in church or chamber, but we ascribe to the created
a seat of honour along with the Creator, we show that we do not desire really to
know what is His due, and our wilfulness becomes an offence which impels His with-
drawal. In our days, as in former years, His Spirit is grieved, vexed, quenched
by the provoking of those sons and daughters, “who have a name to live and they
are dead,” who have “(a form of godliness and deny the power thereof.” Truly
they are triflers with what is most sacred and walk in darkness,

IL We learn what follows the withdrawal of God’s presence, Ezekiel
depicts the consequences as developed in body, temple, minds. They cannot be
literally applied to other and Christian people, but they hint sufficiently at results —
which are likely to happen.

1. Temporal distress. Because God has turned away His face, money may be
felt as a burden, houses be lost, prostration of physical health or courage unman
us. He is the Lord of the body ; He is the ruler of weather, germs, gases, trade,
and certainly amongst us, as amongst men of old, temporal sufferings are made a
means of showing that we have offended Him, Not that all such troubles are
signs that He has withdrawn from us—Paul’s thorn in the flesh is a proof of some-
thing else—but a painful experience of the first Church in Corinth had its source
in trifling with God’s presence. ‘For this cause many among you are weak and
sickly, and not a few sleep.” “Thou didst hide Thy face and I was troubled.”
What the weight and the extension of the distress may be time only will manifest ;
but the fact that Israel was shaken by panics, obliterated as a nation, the survivors
bound with chains and taken into a strange land, is a solemn warning as to the
dire consequences which come from a withdrawal of God’s gracious presence,

2. Religious degradations, (1.) The worshippers will be counted unworthy to come
before the Lord. The sense of His presence being deadened, their hearts must
become disqualified for His holy service. They may still give thanks at meals,
they may still enter into a place for worship, they may still name themselves by
the name of Christ, but they have lost faith, love, joy, peace, if ever they had one
or other. The duty which might have been pervaded with the holiness of God is
nothing but an engagement carried out really for the doers alone—theirs now, if
formerly His, And what can be a man’s religion when God is left out of it? What
but ‘a delusion and a snare to men—what but a grief and offence to Him? Peace,
they may say, but there is none. Woe be to us when our sanctuaries are nothing
but our sanctuaries!” (2.) Corrupting and destructive influences will dominate them.
“The wicked of the earth, the robbers enter in and profane” the place where His
honour dwelt. “The profanation by the enemy is, alas! always preceded by the
profanation on the part of the friends.” And so has it happened in the Christian
centuries. Churches abounded in Western Asia—enemies possess their heritage.
Old creeds for whose truth men were once content to suffer and die are sneered at
and ueglected. “An unknown God” is not dignified with an altar, but coolly

83


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHs#. VEL


——_





relegated to an unapproachable eloudland, Men who wear the uniform of Christ’s
service decline to place themselves on the hill where His standard waves, and even
supply ammunition to the opposing host. Thus do “those who make breaches ”
pass into the domain where God had professedly reigned. His ostensible religion
is discredited and covered with shame. Holy things are profaned because He is
displeased and hides His face.

3. Collapse of social helpfulness. Secular and spiritual persons will be useless to
one another, We naturally betake ourselves to those persons whom we consider
superior when we are in perplexity, sorrow, pain, accumulating difficulties, Such
resort will be in vain if “the glory of God in the face of Jesus” is not beheld.
Then religious intuition will fail to grasp any inspiration ; theologians be unable to
communicate real instruction, and men of experience sutfer a stagnation of thought.
Preachers, teachers, and tried believers are weak in themselves and powerless upon
others so far as relates to the growth of the divine kingdom when they do not
walk in the light. So it comes to pass that that which should be the religion of
God is trodden under foot of men,

(1.) We should be impressed with fear of the withdrawal of the Lord. When Jesus
is not with His professed people they are in dreary scenery. It is a dry and thirsty
land where no water is, It is the desert in which rest may be sought for but can-
not be found by those who have had deliverance from some unclean spirit, and out
of which place they come to take up with seven other evil spirits, and so the last
state becometh worse than the first. There is cause for fear.

(2.) We should become very watchful. If we perceive little or nothing of the
anguish of our Shepherd as He prays for the lost sheep; if we are so cold or luke-
warm in our affections as hardly ever sacrificing for Christ an earthly pleasure, or
an hour of business, or a sum of money, then it is time for us to listen to the
tender and poignant rebuke, “ What, could ye not watch with me one hour? Watch
and pray that ye enter not into temptation.”


WEALTH UNSERVICEABLE (ver. 19).


L The creatures which promise the most help and raise expectations highes%,
in times of trouble can do little or nothing for us. Judas’s thirty pieces of silver
could not still one throb of his conscience. Herod’s royal robes, sceptre, crown,
greatness could not protect him from the teeth of a few feeble worms. Not all
your wealth can keep the plague out of the city, or secure your lives when it
is come.

IL Men tainted with covetousness lay up for they know not whom—for
their enemies. The Jews had vexed their heads, hearts, and hands to get houses
and vineyards, silver and gold, and now strangers, men their souls hated, must
possess their treasures, This misery is upon all accumulators, that they may spend
twenty or thirty years in gathering that which a Babylonian, a bitter enemy to
God and His people, may possess in an hour.

IIL Abuse of our estates defiles them and brings the wrath of God upon them.
When silver and gold maintain pride, lusts, and other ends than God hath appointed
them, they are wronged and imbondaged, and are as an unclean thing. Therefore
is the curse brought upon allL—Greenhil.


INCREASE OF Evin REALISED (ver. 26).


IL When a people is under divine displeasure there is a succession of evils
for them. Saul and Pharaoh were so treated, and the misery of the wicked is
that they shall perish rather a hundred times over than go unpunished,

IL. God proceeds by degrees and steps to severity of judgments, First come
drops, then sore little streams, after that the strength, “He did not stir up all

8S


OUAP, VIE. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKILE,


a lee ae ee


His wrath ;” but if sin grow God’s anger grows, He begins with « little finger,
if that do good He will stop ; if not, you shall feel His hand, His arm, and weight
of His loins,

III. Truths are not confined to any sort of men. Truths are not the inherit-
ance of priests, prophets, popes, councils, ‘Ile Lord is not tied to any rank, but is
free to be where He pleases, to impart truth to whom He pleases, and to as few as
He pleases, Ubi tres sunt, ecclesia est, said Tertullian, and they may have truth
among them and more given to them. ;

IV. God gives and takes away vision, law, counsel, He creates light and
darkness. If you spurn at any light, any truths of God, you may lose them all,
He sends “strong delusions,” but He says also, “Come ye, and let us walk in the
light of the Lord.”

V. Those who will not do what they know shall not know what to do.
Adam, Saul, and others. Jeremiah bade Zedekiah and the rest go forth and yield
themselves, but they did it not, and quickly after no vision, no law, no counsel,
and they knew not which way to turn.

VL They that will not know God in the way of His mercies shall know
Him in the way of His judgments.—Greenhill,


Til.—FURTHER PROPHETIC ACTION IMPOSED ON EZEKIEL
Cuaps, VIII.—XIX.


Ezekiel has recorded the circumstances in which he received his call to bea
prophet, and then the signs and words by which he was to signify the doom that
awaited the whole of his people, because of their clamunt iniquities. Fourteen
months pass over him, and no other communication from the Lord is related. At
the end of that time the power of God once more affects him, and imparts to him
a succession of experiences, which are all ranged under one date. As in the pre-
ceding, so in this cycle of his prophecies he begins with a vision and ends with a
dirge. ‘‘ Here also he strives against political dreams, represents the destruction
as inevitable, and points to repentance as the only way of safety.” —Hengstenberg.


1, Vision OF THE SINS AND JUDGMENT OF JERUSALEM (Chaps, Viii—xi.)


Here we find not only a symbolical representation of the supreme glory and
power of the God of Israel, but also of the procedure of the people. This is
accomplished by putting Ezekiel in a kind of constraint, and that in the presence
of onlookers, Did this visit of the elders cause an excitement in the sensitive
prophet, and so prepare his mind for impressions from the Divine? Their visit
is a significant fact. It shows that Ezekiel was no mere cipher among the units of
banished Jews. Whatever had been their words and their looks respecting him, he
became too much of a power amongst them to be insulted only. He was observed,
and his confinement to his house was considered not as a result of ailment merely,
but as a condition demanding general interest. | Whether the people realised that
he was “a messenger of the Lord of Hosts,” and the elders came sincerely to
inquire “ what saith the Lord?” may be doubted ; but that this was the case after
a few years is certified (chap, xxxiii. 30).

The constraint imposed on Ezekiel by the action of the Lord was that in
which the external senses are apparently cast into an unsusceptible state. He waa
thus withdrawn from the relation to his house and the elders in which he seemed
to be, and was rendered capable of receiving impressions of things far remote from
his physical environment, Involuntary on his part though his state might be,
there was no abeyance in the action of his chief faculties. He could internally sée,
hear, speak; his spirit is liberated and strengthened instead of clogged. The

84


‘BOMILETIU COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL OMAP, Vixi


—


overruling force directs his attention to the Jews who had not been deported, and
especially to the procedure of the dwellers in Jerusalem.

No indication is given of the length of time passed in his ecstasy. The elders
may not have remained so long as his perception of external things was in sus-
pense; but they may, as visional events proceed more rapidly than external, They
would have seen a rigid and sudden prostration of the prophet’s body, and heard
his ominous cry (chaps. ix. 8, xi. 13), and the phraseology of chap. xi. 25, may
be understood to mean that on his return to consciousness he described to them, as
representing “them of the captivity,” all that had been shown to him. “The
supernatural being once recognised as having a place in the dealing of God with
man, we ought to be open to evidence as to facts in every individual case”
(Campbell), and abide in the light of the messages,


(1.) A Survey or THE Four ABOMINATIONS IN JERUSALEM (Chap. viii..


This experience of Ezekiel could be only an internal one, and was intended ta
make him perceptive of the ungodly ways of his contemporaries who were left in
Judea.


Prelude to a view of the abominations (vers, 1-4).
EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 1.


“And it came to pass in the sixth
year, in the sixth month, in the fifth
day of the month” Since his first
vision, Ezekiel’s time had been divided
into 7 days, 390 days, and 40 days, in
all 437 days. Reckoning up to the
date here given, 14 months had passed,
and, as lunar months, they would make
413 days. Were we to consider that
the prophet lay on his sides for 390 + 40
days in external appearance, we should
be at a loss to explain the discrepancy
between 413 and 430, or else we should
conclude that this ecstasy happened to
Ezekiel while he lay upon his right side
for Judah ; %¢., he would be disturbed in
the process of executing one commis-
sion by the interruption of another. As
this seems improbable, we suppose that
ke had fulfilled his appointment in some
form, but not literally. The next ex-
pression supports that opinion. “TI sat
in my house,” as he had been com-
manded (chap. ili, 24). Keil says that
the verb is ‘used in the more general
sense of staying or living in the house,”
We keep to the more restricted meaning,
because the same verb is employed in
reference to the elders. He and they
were in the same posture in his house.
He was not on his side; and though in
seclusion, yet it was a seclusion which
did not prevent his neighbours from
observing him or conversing with him ;


“and ths elders of Judah were sit-
ting before me ;” the civil organisation,
which existed from the primitive times
of Israel, was kept up among the cap-
tive Jews, The Babylonian government
did not imperil its own quietness by
nullifying the authority of. the elders,
That was allowed—no doubt to the ad
vantage of captor and captive, Some
special motive must have induced these
head men of Judah tu wait seated in
the prophet’s house. Its nature is not
mentioned ; but the communications he
makes to them offer the probable clue ;
‘and the hand of the Lord fell
there upon me:” a sudden and pal-
pable change in Ezekiel’s aspect is
intimated by the word fel/—it is not
used in the other two cases (chap. i. 3,
iii, 22)—one of those symptoms which
are chiefly observed in persons of: a
high-strung, nervous temperament. He
was rapt out of control of himself.
Under this influence the people of Jeru-
salem chiefly became the objects of his
study, and he afterwards communicated
his descriptions and denunciations to
the elders of the captives. It would
seem that tidings of the prophecies of
Ezekiel had reached the city, and pro-
duced in the minds of its inhabitants
a despisal of those who were in exile,
“They were separated from the privi-
leges of worship in the Holy Temple:
they must bear their troubles and not
85


OW AP. VITL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BEEKIEL,





look for a return to their confiscated
property; they should know that pos-
session of the land was secured to the
people remaining in Jerusalem, who
were, in their own esteem, the favoured
of the Lord” (chap. xi. 15). Reports
of some such words had come to the
ears of the captives. They felt aggrieved,
and they presented themselves before
the prophet to learn what he had to say
in reference to that consequence of his
prophecies, and also the course which
should be taken in regard to this cyni-
cal treatment by their brethren. The
answer is conveyed in the vision which
Ezekiel narrates.

Ver. 2. “And I beheld, and, lo,
a likeness as the appearance of fire,”
&c. The Sept. reads man instead of
five. It is a correction which is un-
necessary, and may be regarded as a
mistake. The earlier manifestation
(chap. i, 26, 27) showed indeed the
appearance of a man upon the throne.
That was not visible now. What was
visible was that part which displayed
the fire of the lower members and the
brightness of the upper glowing like ore,
Thus Ezekiel sees at first, “below, to-
wards the earth, the person on the
throne appeared in the glowing ire of
His function as judge and avenger,
above in the pure splendour of His
calm, untroubled heavenly majesty.” —
Ziillig.

Ver. 3. “And He put forth the
form of a hand.” He whose glory was
present to the prophet was not materi-
ally acting—His hand was visionary ;
“and He took me by the front hair of
my head,” as if to give an unimpeded
view to him by holding him so as to
make him look straight before him. It
was not to carry him: another agency
does that; “and a spirit lifted me
up between the earth and the heaven ;”
or, a wind lifted me up, an interpreta-
tion which may be defended on the
ground that the Hebrew word, which
signifies both wind and spirit, is used
with a distinction when Ezekiel tells of
the cessation of his ecstasy (chap. xi. 24),
Like Paul, he could not tell whether he
was out of the body, or in the body.
He knew this, that the power of the

8¢


Mighty One was investing him with
marvellous capabilities which needed no
physical forces to sustain them. It is
interesting to note that while Matthew
reports our Lord as saying, “If I by
the Spirit of God cast out devils, then
is the kingdom of God come upon you,”
Luke reports Him as saying, “If I by
the finger of God cast out,” &., thus
illustrating, as here, the varying aspects
of spiritual influence. That spiritual
domination over Ezekiel placed him
not at his own point of view but at
that of the Lord. He saw the evils of
his people, not by the insight of his
own nature, but by the revealing light
of God, and he condemned them as
from His righteous sentences: “and
brought me to Jerusalem in visions of
God ;” in this rapt condition he seemed
taken to the Temple, and “to the
opening of the gate of the inner
(court) that looks toward the north.”
He was on the northern face of the
Temple, and at that opening which
made a communication between the
outer court, that of the people, and the
inner court, that of the priests, That
entrance to the more sacred part of the
building was in the face of “where is
the seat of the image of jealousy :”
this is meant to define Ezekiel’s stand-
ing-place, not to define the worshipped
object. The reference to it follows in
ver. 5. The position at the north side
is indicative of the quarter from which
both the sin and punishment of Jeru-
salem were chiefly derived, “‘ which pro-
voketh to jealousy.” Idols are an
offence to “the jealous, enervetic God,
who, as such, gives not His, honour to
another, and calls forth His reaction
against the wrong done to His honour”
(Heng.). He cannot renounce His
rights, and shows that He will not,

Ver. 4. In the place He is disho-
noured He gives tokens of His power
and glory: ‘and, behold, there was
the glory of the God of Israel, like
the vision that I saw in the valley.”
The appearance of fire which Ezekiel
saw in his house seems not to have
shown throne or cherubim or wheels.
Now that he is in the Temple, the com-
plete giory becomes manifest to him as


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP, VEE.


he had already seen it in the valley
near Tel-Abib, Its presence is a sign
that the God of Israel will search into
all the secrets of His people’s worship,
and that whatever is inconsistent with
the glory of His power, wisdom, holiness,
love, among those who are left in Judea,
will be laid bare and denounced. It
cannot be said that the practices which
were thus unveiled must have been con-
fined to the precincts of the Temple.
Those various forms of unhallowed wor-
ship could hardly be going on at the
same time and within its comparatively
limited space ; and it may be questioned
if certain of them were ever transacted
therein. The vision is symbolical.
The mere eye of flesh did not see what
was done, but a spiritual imagination


First abomination


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 5.
The prophet, standing by the gate of
the inner court, is commanded, by a
voice from the glorious appearance, to
consider the idolatrous figure confront-
ing him, ‘“ And I lifted up my eyes
- . . and behold northward of the
gate of the altar,” standing in the
outer court so that it was in the way of
all who came in view of, or passed
through that gate which was called the
gate of the altar, probably because it
led to the spot where sacrificial animals
were slain, this image of jealousy at
the entrance. Various conjectures are
made as to the special object repre-
sented by this image — Baal, Moloch,
Astarte. It is preferable to regard it
as a figure which embodied in its shape
the ever-working tendency to associate
the worship of idols with that of the


did. It recognised the Temple as the
centre of the national life—the natural
meeting-place for all Israelitish religious
thought, and a foeus for the abomina-
tions which were committed in the land,
This idea is supported by the words of
Jeremiah (vii. 10), “Ye come and stand
before me in this house, which is called
by my name, and say, We are delivered
to do all these abominations.” And yet
he writes (ver. 17) as if they com-
mitted them elsewhere: “Scest thou
not what they do in the cities of
Judah, and in the streets of Jeru-
salem?” Ezekiel’s vision includes the
four chief manifestations of evil among
the people, in public and in the dark,
and becomes a striking picture of the
apostasy of the house of Israel,


(vers. 5 and 6).


Lord God, and thus to idealise the
opposition which was perceived by Him
among those who trod His courts.

Ver, 6. “‘Seest thou . .. the great
abominations which the house of
Israel are committing here,” they seem
to pay divine homage to images as often
as they pay it to me They may not
purpose the certain result of such pro-
cedure, but it cannot fail to happen,
and that is “in order to be far off from
my sanctuary.” Who is meant—the
people or the Lord? Not the former,
but, what is unspeakably more terrific,
the latter, as was illustrated at the close
of this manifestation (chap. xi, 23).
“My glory I will not give to another ;”
therefore He writes “Ichabod” on His
Temple in Jerusalem: “(and turn again,
thou shalt see great abominations.”


HOMILETICS.
Gon’s Ways MADE Known (vers. 14),


The methods by which the Father of spirits communicates with human hearts


are wrapt in symbol and mystery.


We do not know how the life in plants concura
in their growth; we know that it does by the effects on them.


And a man may


not be able to explain how he has obtained a consciousness of God, yet unhesitat-
ingly premise that he has the witness in himself that God has come to him and


given him power.


L He receives this power amid the ordinary conditions of life; ee the
g


OHAP, Will. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,








walls of his own house, a sufferer under ailments, with a few companions, he
realises that the Lord has visited him. “ He besets us behind and before, and
lays His hand upon us” wheresoever He will. The idea that He may affect us is
sometimes a source of fear and repulsion, This is to discredit God. Why should
not the possibility of His power manifesting itself to us, anywhere and at any time,
be esteemed as one of the highest privileges of our life? His visits may be made:

1. In seasons of trouble. The elders and exiles, flouted by their unbanished
brethren, received good from the Lord by means of His word to Ezekiel. They
learned that though far from their sacred Temple they were not forgotten by its
Lord ; that though despised as outcasts, they knew that His prophet was among
them ; that their iniquities had not taken away His truth and mercy from them.
The needy cried to Him, and He sent from above to alleviate their need just where
they felt it.

2. In personal associations, The power that came to Ezekiel and the elders
came in private. It seems to be the usual course. Prophets and apostles were
specially influenced by the Lord when they were away from ordinary stated
worship. This was not meant to disparage assemblies for public religious services ;
it was rather to signify that, if we are to learn effectively that Christ is the power
of God and the wisdom of God, we must be alone, or with two or three gathered
in His name, God honours not the service but the servants, and while public
means have their own place among the ordinances of His kingdom, they must not
be supposed to secure for us “ power from on high.” From the Lord we must
expect “grace to help in time of need”—not from any mere means even though
called sacred. “ Blessed is he that heareth me, watching daily at my gates, wait-
ing at the posts of my doors.”

IL The Divine Spirit produces new experiences.

1. There are fresh impulses. The common routine of thought is broken
through. The feeling of a new presence touching our inner man becomes definite,
A prophet sees the brightness of a radiating glory ; apostles behold “the glory as
of the Only-begotten of the Father ;” any man who calls Jesus Lord has a reve-
lation within of the light of the knowledge of His glory. All of them feel and
know that they are brought into contact with a strength that is made perfect in
weakness—the impelling of the Holy Spirit.

2. There is an exaltation of heart. Ezekiel felt lifted above the ground by a
spirit, ‘* Between earth and heaven” he sees wider views. He moves amidst rays
from God. When we have a plainer and ampler sight given to us of the gospel of
the glory of the blessed God, how differently we look upon our own needs and the
aeeds of other men. We may sigh, we may lift up longing eyes, we may bend
our heads and knees, but we do so because our hearts testify that they have “the
Presence infinite” which makes its creatures blessed. Self and the world keep our
spiritual life down; but the uplifting of the Holy Spirit enables us to “ mount up
with wings as eagles, to run and not be weary, to walk and not faint.” Evermore
yive us this power.

3. There is a clearer understanding of the religious condition of a people. The
prophet saw the abominations which the house of Israel committed, by the pene-
trating power of the glory of God in the Temple. Nothing like a display of the
character of God to make sin appear, and to make it appear “exceeding sinful.”
Even if we be not addicted to the same iniquities as other men may be, our stand-
ing in the light of God’s countenance will enable us to discover their sins, and so
to speak of them that they shall be convicted in their own consciences that we
speak the truth, that the evils which we portray are their evils, So a motive
may be given for repentance towards God. We learn to cherish:

1. A certitude that God will teach His ways, Faithfulness in little opens a way
for the reception of much which will demand faithfulness, Obedience to many
commandments of Christ prepares for learning commandments that are yet unrecog

88


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAaP. VIII.


—_e————oo oo


nised. They who grow in grace grow in knowledge of Jesus Christ. The variety
of forms which His teaching takes does not weaken but strengthens the conviction
that He will teach. So it comes to pass that multitudes of persons can avow that
He who was once an unknown God is now honoured as a Father; that the Christ
who was once admired is now adored as a Saviour and King; that the persons
with whom they are brought into association are regarded with a heightened and
distinctive sympathy. They have learned from Him who gives rest tu their soul.
and they trust to Him to teach them still, Whereas they were blind now they
see, and they are sure that He who has opened their eyes will point out their way
and inform them of all its dangers and its provisions.

2. A hope of special teaching. Unlooked-for changes, perplexities, difficulties
appear. Does one revelation, does a series of instructions for one’s common way
_ of life, exhaust His supplies$ No; “all things work together for good.” Let all
things be against us, that does not show that God is unable to take us through
them all. It only shows that we must not lose heart and hope; that we must
wait for Him when He is not in view ; that we must trust that the all-sufficiency
of heavenly power and love is acting with steady force, though impalpable for a
time, “ Now we see in a mirror darkly,” but enough to satisfy us that all needed
light will be shed, that human sins will not prevail against the rule of God.


Vain Worsuip (vers. 5 and 6).


The spirit and truth which are needful in serving the Holy One of Israel are
often absent from those who profess to worship Him. Individual worship and
common worship are equally faulty as to this, and call forth the stern appeal from
the great King, ‘ Bring no more vain oblations; incense is an abomination to me.”
He thus repels the worship because—

I. It is divided. The worshippers set up an image in His courts. They
acknowledged Him, but He was not the only one regarded. They mingled up in
what they did for Him a reference to some custom of other people, or some misap-
prehension of their own mind. They did not submit themselves to the inalienable
rights of God. The rite or ceremony may be very attractive to the eye or ear,
generation after generation may have found it agreeable, but the condemnation
stamped on it is “ God alone is not here!” Many prayers which seem earnest are
not answered because they supplicate for gratification to some lust of the flesh or
mind, Many a religious meeting dissolves as a vapour wherein no appearance of
God is traceable, because they have not come to the Father only by Christ. Get
a single eye, purify hearts by faith, search out all doublemindedness in private or
public means of worship, lest God go far off, refusing to accept and hear. ‘“‘ Beside
Him there is no God,” and a divided worship is worthless,

II. It belies His character. He ts supreme. It is impossible for any created
thing to share His sovereign authority, and any kind of worship which reverences
an idol, or a form, or an idea of man’s heart, must, by its very nature, be repu-
diated as an abomination. Who dare presume to ascend the throne of the
Almighty! He ts righteous, Jealousy amongst men is tainted to a greater or less
degree by selfish elements, We cannot bear a thing because it somehow shadows
our contracted range of view, does not let us step easily on to our own comfort,
In God’s jealousy there is no element but what is true, and holy, and kind, He
cannot give up such principles if He is to continue to govern the world. He main-
tains “ the integrity and dignity of His own position in the face of every free being.”
It is the rights of God and with them the rights of every moral being which vibrate
in the words, “ The Lord shall be jealous for His great name ;” and that He should
be provoked by honour given to another is to be true to the claims which human
nature makes upon Him who formed it to be good, He ts accessible. The image
of jealousy stood in the very face of the Lord’s altar, as if He were to - served

8


CHAP, VIII, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; EZEKIEL,





only after an idol had been acknowledged ; as if the first step towards Him must be
tuken by the help of that which is not God. In Christian service we too fre-
quently fancy that if we first pray, or read the Scriptures, or fast, we shall find the
Lord easier of access. Alas for us! if we do not learn that He is nigh to all that
call upon Him, that between the High-priestly Son and them nothing should inter-
vene, that to use any other mediator is to make a movement which tends to put
Him far off, Not that He does not see, does not care for the worshippers He may
forsake; but that they may learn that they have treated Him as if He were a
retired or an absent God. Forms of worship thus become a mere ceremonial,
Darkness and deadness cover the heart, and He cannot but count vain that which
by act takes from His character its authority, justice, and immediate presence.

DIL It is made obvious to God-fearing men. “Son of man, seest thou what
they do?” Dare he consider the abominations? Yes; if in obedience to the Lord.
Ezekiel lifted up his eyes to see the abominations, not because he wanted to lock
on evil, or because he thought his soul strong enough to venture without harm
“among serpents ;” but because the Lord told him to do so. We may look upon
things which offend God—bad books, besotted men and women, unscriptural
practices in worship—but we need to beware of the danger in such procedure.
' Many a youth has committed evil because he wanted to see what it was like,
Many a worshipper has gone to look at forms of worship with which he was not
familiar, and lost his power to distinguish between that mode of service which
leads to Christ and that which draws away from Him—between a fruitful worship
and a vain. And if at times there does not appear sufficient ground for judging
whether or not a certain worship veils the glory of Christ, the true way in which
it can be made clear is to give honest answer to the question, Shall I be obeying
the Lord Jesus Christ in attending on this thing} The weak conscience is defiled,
the strong in the Lord is made able to stand. One goes into the lion’s den and
is safe, for God sends him; many go and are torn in pieces, for their own will
moves them. We touch a great principle for our guidance in worship when we say
that wrong against God is plain to those who fear His great name. Yes; if he
ts to be fit to act as a watchman. Lzekiel looked at the image of jealousy, but it
was that he might say, ‘‘ God will withdraw if that is honoured.” Jesus ate with
publicans and sinners, but it was that He might call them to repentance. And if
we be disposed to observe any unholy thing, it must be with the desire so to know
it that we shall see its offensiveness to God, and shall warn the men who sanction
it that they are sinning against the only true God,


Gop’s DiscLosurE or Sin (vers. 6, 13, 15).


The disclosure shows—

L There are degrees of wickedness—“ greater abominations,” The longer we
look the more we see, There is a sin of ignorance like Paul’s—“TI did it igno-
rantly in unbelief ”—and sins of knowledge like those who “sin wilfully after that
we have received the knowledge of the truth.” Some sins withhold the honour
which is due the Lord in worship; other sins act against His laws of conduct,
and prostitute the powers of manhood and womanhood in brutal license.

IL Knowledge of the degrees of wickedness is not acquired all at once.
“ Thou shalt see greater.” The first conscious sin is no evidence of other sins which
will be committed by ax individual. He begins to court the will to be rich, and
then comes the will to lie, cheat, steal; or the desire for power, and then come
deeds of injustice, oppression, murder; or neglected worship, and then “ they
crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put Him to an open shame,”
The evils in churches are gradually recognised, They may be indulged in by
many, and who discovers at once that the stream is tending to the wrong quarter 4
They ry be kept from honest probing, and how can we test their danger? They


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


CHAP. VII,





may be undetected because we have been accustomed always to see them, and


where is the power to show their offensiveness to the Lord 4
one allowed course in its sinfuluess, we may be brougnt to see others also,


Once brought to see


We


need to have eyes opened that we may see, and we shall find that “‘in the lowest
deep there is a lower deep still threatening to devour.”


III. The light of God alone unveils the amount of wickedness. He has a


time and ways of discovering what is in our hearts, what in our societies.


We


must look by it, walk in it if we are to remember whence we are fallen and not


have our candlestick moved out of its place.


Let us wait on the Lord Jesus Christ,


that in His light we may see the light for our own state and the state of others,
“It is time for Thee to work, for men have made void Thy law.”


Second abomination (vers. 7-12).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 7.
The prophet having turned, he says,
“ He brought me to the opening of the
court ;’ his position being changed, he
must have been taken to some other
door than that mentioned in ver. 3,
most probably to the opening which led
from the outer court into unwalled
space; the worshippers would thus be
less exposed to observation than if they
had to cross the court to the inner gate.
“and I saw and, behold, a hole in the
wall,” but too small for him to pass
through, and a mode of ingress must
be made.

Ver. 8. At the command of the Lord
he dug out part of the wall, as Eastern
robbers do, and, entering by the breach,
“behold an opening” which the wall
concealed, and so was known to the ini-
tiated alone. The seer has the key
which opens it—the word of the Lord.

Ver. 9. “Come and see the wicked
abominations which they are doing
here.” Ezekiel was moving in the
region of symbols. The hole ; the door
walled in; a secret worship by elders ; a
large room, within the Temple-precincts,
having its walls covered with the figures
of various animals representing the visi-
ble powers of nature, are all tokens
that it was not a real sight he was look-
ing on—that it was a representation of
the masked and wide-spread guilt of
the mass of the people.

Ver. 10. “And I came and saw;
and, behold, every form of reptiles
and cattle, abomination, and,” besides
those animal figures, there were repre-
sentatives “of all the refuse idols of
the house of Israel portrayed upon


the wall round about.” Ancient writers,
and tombs opened in recent times, show
how common was the practice in Egypt
of decorating their walls with painted
figures, while the worship of animals in
that country was long the popular form
of worship. It seems as if this promi-
nence given to Egyptian habits had
reference to the leanings towards that
government of many among the leading
men of Jerusalem, and to their efforts to
bring about an alliance offensive and
defensive. Allusions, in the larger pro-
phetical books especially, prove that
there was a political party among the
Jews whose cry was, “Let us go down
to Egypt for help!” Now that the
Babylonian power was in the ascendancy,
that party was obliged to resort to un-
derhand schemes, to secret meetings and
proceedings, with the hope, no doubt,
that they might contrive, with the aid
of Egypt, to get rid of the Chaldean
yoke. The Jewish people were not con-
tented with their compromises with
Egypt, they also adopted other varieties
of idol-worship. The new forms did not
prevail so as to extirpate the old, and
overwhelming superstition spread over
the covenanted land. Thus did created
things become an abomination. Good
in themselves, they were placed by the
people alongside of the Lord God, if not
above Him, and became objects of His
loathing.

Ver. 11. “And seventy men of the
elders of the house of Israel.” The
number is historical (Exod, xxiv. 1;
Num. xi. 16). It is not to be under.
stood here of a standing council of the
people, but of an ideal representation

91


OAP, VIII.





of them as a whole. The contrast be-
tween the present provocation of the
Lord and the honour paid to Him for-
merly by the seventy is also to be con-
sidered. ‘To render the contrast still
more palpable between what was and
what should have been,” it is added,
“and Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan
standing in their midst ;” why he was
so conspicuous is unknown, He was
one of a family of Jewish statesmen,
His father was the patriotic and God-
fearing scribe—chancellor—of King
Josiah during his reforming reign
(2 Kings xxii. 3, gf.) Another son
was Abikam, who, as also zs son Ge-
daliah, nobly stood for Jeremiah (Jer.
xxvi, 24, xxxix. 14). Jaazaniah had
apparently deserted the purer traditions
of his family and become prominent
among the idolatrous and Egyptian
party. It is.asad but not an isolated
spectacle. Righteousness does not run
by a law of heredity. ‘‘ were standing
before them,’ ze. before the figures
drawn on the walls, ““and each man
with his censer in his hand,” thus
assuming a prerogative of priesthood,
and in the posture of performing an act
of worship of the highest kind. “and
a prayer of the cloud of incense was
going up.” The A. V. has ‘a thick
cloud.” The only other place where
the Hebrew word is found gives in its
translation “ suppliants” (Zech. iii. 10),
In biblical language, the ascending in-
cense is symbolic of prayer — “the
twenty-four elders having each one
golden bowl full of incense which are
the prayers of the saints” (Rev. v. 8).
On these grounds we prefer to read here
“‘ prayer.”

Ver. 12, The interpretation comes.
“Hast thou seen, son of man, what
the elders of the house of Israel are
doing in the dark:” that this abomina-
tion was to be sought for in such a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; EZEKIEL,





secrecy, while the others were seen in
the open daylight, supports the idea
that the former was maintained for the
furtherance of occult political aspira-
tions—aspirations which the Providence
of God would not sanction: “ each man
in the chambers of his imagery 1”—
rooms in which images were delineated.
Each of the seventy had such a chamber
for himself—a place in which he in.
stalled his own special favourite objects
of worship. It is indicative of the ad-
diction in private houses to the unhal-
lowed ceremonies which the prophet
beheld in the light of God. Proceed-
ings like these gave practical expression
to the thought, ‘‘ the Lord does not see
us; the Lord has forsaken the land.”
They did not deny the Lord’s existence,
they used His name ; but their conduct
was tantamount to reducing Him toa
nonentity in the world, for it denied
His knowledge and mercy. To put a
fact into the terms of a popular saying
is one of the features of Ezekiel’s style,
and is a mode of intimating that the
thoughts. so embodied in speech were
not mere hasty and transient impres-
sions, but were the outcome of habitual


‘choosing their own ways and forsaking


those of the Lord. When such notions
about Him were cherished, apostasy
from Him was, not probable only, but
certain. Men might live as they liked,
they might despise God, they might
tempt and deceive their fellowmen, no
account would be demanded. God saw
not, They may degrade the worship of
a people, they may corrupt the moral at-
mosphere of a city, they may strive to
promote political ends, both at home and
abroad, which shall be unworthy of a
high-minded people. They allow no
scrupulous afterthoughts to hold them
back. God has forsaken the land—a
nation has no God, no eternally righ-
teous law to obey |


HOMILETICS,


CorRUPTION OF TRUE WorsHIP.


Account for it as philosophers may, the fact is patent that most men will
worship, They are in the abyss of savagery, or they plume themselves on the
92


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, ~ OnAP. VEL.


summit of the highest civilisation of centuries, and at not one stage, from the
lowest to the highest point ot the long slope, is there a belt of which it can be said,
“Worship was never made within its limits,” The object cf such worship as is
rendered may be a fetish, or a Spirit infinite, eternal, and unchangeable; but in
each variation there is anderstood to be the existence of something in which power
resides. The tendency thus universally observed, like all human tendencies, is
susceptible to change of direction. As certain elements in nutritious food are
adapted to build up a healthy body, so there are certain elements required in wor-
ship to meet the wants of a human being as he stands related to the Power which
made him and fashioned him. As food may be used lavishly or sparingly and pro-
duce diseases incident to over-indulgence or insufficiency ; or as good food may
be refused and hurtful taken instead, so worship may be carried out to strengthen
or weaken, to elevate or degrade the soul; or that worship which is right and true
be forsaken for that which is false and destructive. The features of the latter deli-
neated here are—

L It takes a place among purer forms. The Jewish elders, burning incense
before animal figures and other objects, stood within the area of the Temple dedi-
cated to the honour of the only living and true God. They practised their dark
rites under the shadow of a holy fane. The craving for worship seeks its appease-
ment not only in the pure and true, and a past enlightenment does not guarantee it
against a present error. In all the ages during which men have walked among the
revelations of God, some amongst them “have forsaken the fountain of living
waters and hewn out for themselves broken cisterns that can hold no water.” The
churches, taught by men who had been with Jesus and had seen “the power of
His resurrection,’’ included persons who held the teaching of Balaam, ate things
sacrificed to idols, and committed fornication. The present Church of Rome boasts
of its unbroken succession from the simple primitive Church, yet the walls of its
buildings are often covered with pictures, lights are burned at the shrines of saints,
Mary is worshipped more than Jesus, and a frail man is revered as infallible !
Where, too, there has been a practical protest against Papal departures from purer
worship, who dare to say that no heed is paid to seducing spirits, no ‘‘ departure
from the faith” has occurred? Called Christians, counted among those who
profess belief in Jesus, how many have only a name to live ! How many use their
position to do that which is not seemly ! And spiritual worship is made to pro-
vide a room for that which is earthly and sensual.

II, It needs a close search to perceive its obliquity. The hole in the wali
could excite only suspicion, but an investigation made by the breaking through
could expose the corruption which was festering. It is a suggestive omen for
those who would discern the times, and learn the judgment of truth respecting
them. We must wait and watch in the light which Jesus sheds, follow up the
questions which the Holy Spirit may prompt in regard to the meaning of our
forms of worship, There are ‘depths of Satan” into which no sounding-line will
be let down without some impulse; there is a hating of the light of which no
estimate can be made till the Divine word measures it. The external worship of a
church may be associated with for years, and not a fear startle the soul lest there
should not be spirit and truth in its observance. The forms may be appropriate ;
but beneath them there may be no loyalty to the Christ, only a care for personal
satisfaction and comfort. The pens may be filled, and filled with anything but
sheep! Only He who holds the seven stars in His right hand knows and can
reveal the lurking sins which offend Him and hinder the Gospel of His Son. What
right-hearted man will not pray, often and expectingly, “ Lead me to where I can
see, open mine eyes that I may see that which impinges against Thy truth and
holiness and love, no matter by whom or by what numbers the evil thing is com-
mitted ” 4

IIL. It manifests a voracious appetite. Several animals do not satisfy, idols

93


OBAP. VII HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


— =





of other kinds are accepted as objects for worship. As in Jerusalem, so it was in
the days of imperial Rome—a niche was provided for the gods of all nations.
Corruption spreads by its own nature, One step is not much out of the narrow
way, but the line which that step begins to trace will take to far-off regions. The
mystery of lawlessness, with its power and signs and lying wonders, and with all
deceit of unrighteousness, started on its career from the bosom of apostolic churches ;
and the warning-note, needed by all seekers for God’s will, is, “ Be not moved away
from the true worship, lest you go from bad to worse, and weary the Lord.”

IV. It exercises varied influences. Over the higher ranks of society. Their
position and their intelligence do not act as a safeguard against a deteriorated
religiousness, They are most under the claims of worldly fashion, and a fashion
in worship is most likely to be potent amongst them. At any rate, church history
may be adduced to show that it is not the common people but the aristocracy of a
country from whom a change from a simple to a complex and sensuous ritual finds
its chief support. Over the aged. The elders of the house of Israel corrupted the
statutes of the Lord. The lapse of years brings trial and failures. Men get
weary of the God whose command is, “ Be ye holy for I am holy,” who allows no
illegitimate indulgence to the lusts of the flesh and mind, and they go into self-
pieasing causes after a lifetime of hearing a voice behind them continually say,
“This is the way, walk ye in it.” ‘There is no fool like an old fool!” Over
family associations. The chief among the abettors of corrupted worship was a man
of whom it would have been said, ‘ The influences of his family will prevent Him
from going amongst the secret worshippers of idols.” But this saying is superficial
and inconsistent with facts. Our generation has seen not a few out of the families
of evangelical Protestants become enthusiastic Roman Catholics or Ritualists—
ready to stand among them as leaders. ‘hey who should have been_ barriers
against turning out of the way of the Lord go at the head of those who turn from
it, They whose experience should have confirmed the younger in truth, encourage
them to believe in lies. And this lesson is written clear to view, that subjects of
the most religious instruction and the most patriotic procedure will not always
be found to obey the will of God. Thus influential is the corruption of true
worship.

V. It becomes paramount with its adherents. They overcome all scrupulosity
in regard to the Lord’s Temple, and prostitute it to their debasing ceremonies. They
expend money and time in maintaining them. They at length treat the living and
holy God as if He paid no concern to what they did, and, having forsaken Him,
speak as if He had forsaken them. They impute to Him an ignorance and a
heartlessness which, if they did exist, would utterly disqualify Him from being God,
So they are subjected to their own devices ; they are filled with their own ways.

How strange it seems to leave the right way for the wrong! How unreason
able and unlikely it looks! But yet how familiar the case is! And it is so
because men “did not like to retain God in their knowledge.” “They have gone
away backward.” No eyes but God’s can detect the many forms of this apostasy,
and point out the hole in the wall of religious profession which leads to abomina-
tions within hearts and within churches. His ears alone can catch the meaning of
those who serve divers lusts and pleasures, who say virtually, “The Lord seeth
us not.” “I say unto you, Fear Him.”


CHAMBERS oF ]AGERY.


“ Then said He unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen what the ancients of Israel
do in the dark, every man in the chambers of his imagery? For they say, The Lord
seeth us not ; the Lord hath forsaken the earth” (chap. viii, 12).


A hall of imagery! No phrase could better describe the mind of man, and
memory the painter. In colours brigh$ or dark, in the very lineaments of joy or
94


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. CHAP. VIM.





shame or grief, she paints every struggle of the soul; our very wishes and
purposes, though unacted, are all there. We behold all the scenes of the past
fixed immovably on the walls and silently smiling or frowning upon us,

What is upon the walls? Some spaces are blank, condemning our profitless
days. Some, like the dark catacombs of Rome, have scenes of decay and death
portrayed. Here the innocence of childhood is slowly dying; there honesty is
bartered away for gain, or virtue for pleasure. It may be there are chambers in
which are beheld a virtuous youth, a devout age, a divine faith triumphing over
the powers of the world. But at the best there is only a mingled series of pictures, —
Each soul is a temple, each heart an altar, and often the unhallowed rites of another
worship than that of the Lord of heaven are practised there.

We are apt to feel as if what was done in those chambers was unmarked. Dark-
ness and thick walls gave concealment to the ancients of the house of Judah: “The
Lord seeth us not.” Yet the angels were looking in; and to the prophet, his eyes
teuched with spiritual light, all became visible.

In our chambers of imagery there may be other witnesses than we think.
Surely it is not a vain or unreasonable thought, that round us are spiritual beings
to whose spiritual eyes the mind lies open as the scenes of the world lie open to the
bodily eye. Happy if we suffer to abide in our mind only those thoughts and
purposes which these spiritual beings may gladly look upon!

But if there be no other, there is one eye that looks through aii the veils of time
and sense. In the sight of God the mind is the seat and source of all good and
evil, The purpose clothes the act with its own goodness or guilt, The same act
may be disinterested or selfish ; the same forms of worship a mockery or « devo-
tion, according to the purpose, In those chambers is the real life of man, and the
imaginations we indulge in take shape, and the hopes we cherish are audible
prayers before the Lord who seeth, and who has not forsaken the earth.

We may enter those chambers of imagery for correction and improvement.
The time comes when we must enter them for judgment. In that dread hour the
memory must take a conspicuous part. In the midst of the awful congregation of
the risen dead again must we pass through the halls of imagery. The silent walls
shall need no voice—memory and conscience shall affirm the righteous judgment
of God, For that day, when the strong shall bow and the most devout tremble,
may we in mercy be prepared |

Our life is founded on what is past, and every year we live the past becomes
more important in its steady influence ; we live in the midst of its memorials. It
is the home which we build around us day by day, and according to what we make
it will there be liberty or imprisonment. Each day let your deeds and your pur-
poses be such that a new picture shall take a place on the walls that you will be
glad to see. The past is fixed on the walls, we cannot take it down, but we may
correct and alter. The picture of the prodigal’s departure has added to it the
picture of his return and the father’s enduring love. Over scenes of guilt there
may be arched the rainbow of the Divine mercy. Repentance may not efface the
past, but it transfigures it. While bygone sins remind us of our weakness, they
bring us nearer to Him whose strength saves and whose mercy forgives.— Peabody


(abridged).


Third and fourth abomination (vers, 13-18).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Vers. 13,
14. ‘ihe seer is led from the secret
chamber back to the point at which he
had first approached to the precincts of
the Temple (ver. 3). He stands now at
ita northern entrance, not at the entramee


to the inner court as in the former ease,

“and, behold, the women weeping for

Tammuz were sitting there.” Whether

they were without or within the Temple

wails is not stated, but they. were in the

attitude of mourners. Jeremiah beara
95


OHAP, VIII


witness (Jer. vii, 11, r‘iv, 17) to the
activity of women at this period in the
service of idolatry, though he does not
mention their devotion to Tammuz
Nor is it mentioned anywhere else, and
no satisfactory explanation has been
given of it. Conjectures are abundant
—often wide of the mark. They have
too readily accepted this weeping and
that of the Syrians, Greeks, &c., for
Adonis, or the Egyptians for Osiris, as
standing on the same ground. It
might be no forceful objection against
such comparison to say that the rites in
those countries involved rejoicings as
well as lamentations, and that they were
accompanied with ‘‘ unbridled license
and excess.’’ But surely we may be-
lieve that if the women of Jerusalem
indulged in the gross orgies com-
mon to Adoniac worship, Jeremiah was
not the man to have shunned all refer-
ence to their wickedness. Whether the
“¢ Babylonian legend,’’ deciphered from
an ancient tablet, and which tells of ‘‘ a
goddess, widow of Duzi, the ‘Son of
Life,’ descending through the seven
circles ‘ of the Jand of invisibility,’ and
reascending after various vicissitudes, ”’
indicates the quarter from which the
weeping for Tammuz was derived, is of
no consequence as yet. ‘‘ The Speaker’s
Commentary,’? while mentioning the
legend, acknowledges that its purport
and its influence are utterly obscure.
The habit of the Jewish women, some-
how or another, must have demoralized
themselves and those related to them,
and so was regarded as an ‘‘ abomina-
tion.”’

Ver 15. The seer had to observe
great abominations (ver. 6), then great
abominations they were doing (ver. 13),
and now greater abominations than
these he had already seen. His view
had gone from general idol-worship to
secret worship among the magnates of
Jerusalem, afterwards from open de-
basement of the women to utter defi-
ance of God in the priestly portion of
the Temple. The climax of evil in war-
fare is reached when the soldiers become
rebels, when works of darkness are sub-
stituted for the whole attire of light.

Ver. 16. Again Ezekiel is taken fur-

96 4


HOMI“LETIC COMMENTARY ; EZERIEL.


ther, to a point from which he can
inspect the spot “between the porch
and the altar,” a sacred place in the
inner court where the priests gathered
together apparently only in seasons of
extraordinary interest, such as a national
fast (Joel ii. 17). On that hallowed
ground he saw “as it were twenty-five
men.” Fairbairn calls them men “ of
priestly rank, the princes of the sanc-
tuary,” and considers the number was
made up of the High Priest and the
twenty-four heads of the courses of the
priests which had been arranged by
David. He takes them as representing
“the whole priesthood.” Is it not
better to regard the number, as the
Seventy was, as a historical number,
and intended to show nothing more
than that the priesthood even was not
wholly loyal to God? Consecrated for
His worship in the place where He had
chosen to put His name, they were seen
“with their backs towards the tem-
ple of the Lord, and their faces to the
east, and they worshipped the sun
toward the east.” The worship of
the sun, so common in many countries,
had already been practised in Judea,
and was put down in Josiah’s reforming
reign (2 Kings xxiii, 5, 11). It was
too deeply rooted and too attractive to
be overturned by a transient revival of
purer worship; and here it is seen to
have seduced the guardians of that wor-
ship.

Ver. 17. The scenes which had been
unfolded in the seer’s vision were in
palpable contrariety to the worship of
the Lord, but the forms of apostasy he
had observed were of little account, “a
light thing to the house of Judah:”
they would disregard God if they dis-
regarded the rights of their brethren,
“for they filled the land with vio
lence, and returned,” te, gone back
again and again to their evil doings,
“to provoke me to anger, and,” some-
thing especially offensive is singled out
for mention, “lo, they put the branch
to their nose.” ‘Ihe explanations of
this obscure phrase, which refer it to a
rite of heathen worship in which a branch
was carried in the hand, or raised to the
mouth, do not agree with the words:


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL CAP, VIEL
SSS Ea eS PAS SE IGN MEG NI ca ST 2 Be oe ae


Moreover, the context has left the sphere _ feelings of fancied security and insolent
of religion for that of morals, and would scorn.” So he surmises that it must
suggest some action not directly religious have reference to some insulting kind of
—at any rate, some very gratuitous evil proceedings. The result would be a
deed. But there is no tolerable account- correspandence between their conduct
ing for the words, and the conclusion to and +he position which the Lord was
which Fairbairn comes seems reasonable: driven to take—urgent prayers but no
“One would expect the clause to denote ceply (ver. 18). “I will show them the
something that rendered their sinful back, and not the face, in the day of
ways peculiarly obnoxious to God; and their calamity” (Jer. xviii, 17),
nothing would more readily do this than


HOMILETICS,


Emotionat Worsuip (ver. 14).


‘This abomination in worship is not described by Ezekiel, as it has been by many
imterpreters, as gross and licentious, And though, probably, it deserved such
epithets, yet the one term which he employs, “‘ weeping,” suggests a course that
leads far from holiness and love. We see the dominance of the emotions in wor-
ship—

L In sensuous procedure. Weeping at one time, shouting at another, pro-
cessions and extravagant gestures, are specimens of the actions to which the
indulged emotions prompt. That those manifestations might appear when any
feeling is casually and strongly moved need not surprise; but that they should be
made a regular part of the service throws doubt on their genuineness, and brands
them as unworthy of the God who is Spirit and Truth. If the spirit of the pro-
phets is subject to the prophets, why should not the emotions also be ?

IL In the persons chiefly affected. More readily than men, women are stirred
on the emotional side of their nature. Let that side be controlled so as to stand
in due proportion to the other sides, and it will help to fill worship with the tone
befitting One who is loved for His love. But when it is unduly fostered, when
it is fascinated to extravagant assertion of itself, a deteriorating effect must follow.
For then the influence of womanly emotion, which should keep clear our family
life and purify it when muddied, not only loses its efficacy, but tends to render it
turbid and malarious. Women stand ina perilous position when they allow free
scope to their emotions in worship. They make it an offence to God, however
devoted and continuous it may be.

III. In a wrong estimate of the objects. Legends which have no truth, or
so scanty an item of it that prehistoric studies and mythological suggestions are
needed to find it; imaginary evils; a morbid craving for some excitement to break
into the idleness of life, or into the trials which seek for the relief of change, these
‘“‘ beguile women of her tears,” and draw into sentimental and fantastic expressions
of devotion. True, the gross aspects of emotional worship may be little manifested
in modern Christendom ; but emotions still count for something in worship; and
we do well to remind ourselves that however deeply we feel awe in what are called
sacred or holy places, however moved by a dim religious light or music, by prayer
or pathetic preaching, that the worship engendered from such feelings does no
more in the perfect will of God than idol images or clouds of incense. We need
truth to originate and regulate emotions,

“Let Christian women, instead of wasting in sickly and carnal sentimentality
the tender and susceptible natures which God has given them, weep with them
that weep, heal the bruises of the suffering members of the Church, and minister
to those who need temporal or spiritual help. Let them, instead of weeping over
fictitious tales of morbid love and carnal sorrows, consecrate their fine sensibilities

a 97


CHAP. VIII, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





to the active promotion of the glory of Him who is altogether lovely, and whose
bitter sufferings for us should call forth our tears of gratitude and glowing love.
Let them try to resemble Mary, who, in her devotion, when all others were gone,
stood at the sepulchre of her crucified Lord weeping, and so had her tears dried up
by the risen Saviour Himself.”— /ausset.


Witrut Worsuip (ver. 16).


All forms of worship are not equally dishonouring to the only Lord, However
foolish, corrupted, or exaggerated some of them may be, the climax in evil is
assigned to that which springs from the determination of men to turn their backs
upon Him who has revealed Himself to them, Their worship is—

L Against knowledge. The spot at which the twenty-five men carried on
their worship indicated a priestly office. Of that office it was said, “ The priest’s
lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth, for he is
the messenger of the Lord of hosts.” But here were men disowning their highest
functions, doing despite to the law they were appointed to observe, who “loved
darkness rather than the light,” and fell under the condemnation passed upon those
who forsake their own mercies. tis hard ona father that he should be disobeyed
by his child, and the hardest point of such disobedience is when it is done not-
withstanding clear knowledge of his commands.

IL In desecration of the temple. Sun-worship would have been sinful any-
where ; this had its aggravation in that it was conducted in the place where God’s
honour dwelt, They provoked Him to His face. They deliberately polluted with
their abominations that which He ordained to be holy. And though there be no
such sacred place now, yet may we learn that if we take our self-pleasings in where
we and others worship, we erect barriers between us and our Lord. We sin against
Him and sin against our brethren.

Il. In preference of the creature to the Oreator. The altar was the spot
on which God received the signs of homage due to Him. They turned their backs
on it and insulted Him by rendering homage to the sun. The east was more to
them than the threat or the promise of the God of their fathers; the seen more
reverenced than the unseen ; a dead object chosen rather than the living God.
Thus they were guilty of treason, and under the awful ban of those who are with-
out excuse! Alas! a similar procedure may be found still under the shadow of
the Cross. “If we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the
truth ”’—how could professing Christians regard these words as true if it were not
for sad examples to illustrate them? How many preach for self or the world!
How many enter into places of worship rather to be considered respectable, to
please a patron, to acknowledge an unknown God, than to “ rejoice in God through
Jesus Christ the Lord!” Surely we all need to try our ways in worship, to realise
the Light which is ever searching our services, not that it may find fault, but that
it may show our faults, so that we shall repent of our errors and form a pure and
steadfast regard to the Lord alone, Then, when we cease from the creature, we
shall worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness, seeking not our own glory, but the
glory of Him who is greatly to be feared and had in reverence,


RELIGION AND Morauity (ver. 17).


The “ abominations ” were meant to make a deep impression upon the seer as
to the religious condition of his people in their own metropolis. But more was to
be observed, The evils which were seen in the Temple were surpassed throughout
the land ; and he is asked to institute a comparison between worship and conduct,
religion and morality, Among the elements which bring religion and morality inte
comparison are these—

98


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. CHAP, VEL.





I. They are distinguished from each other. Religion has reference to visible
and invisible objects in which some kind of force is supposed to reside, and which
wre rarely men, When they are human beings, real or imaginary, they have
ascribed to them certain attributes which separate them from ordinary men.
Morality has reference to the men whom we think of, speak to, act with or on,
This distinction, however, does not imply separation of the two spheres,

IL They are intimately associated. Religion and morality may be separated
in thought ; they cannot be in practice. This is not to be understood to say that
a religious man cannot exist without some kind of moral conduct, or a moral man
without some friendly or unfriendly attitude towards religion. It is to say that
a man’s religious sentiments have always some influence upon his social actions,
even if image or sun worship could be shown never to have let their rill of religious
thought fiow into the stream of moral requirements. It may be that a man who
worships an idol, or says there is no God, is irreproachable in his morals. Allowing
that there might be no question as to the reality of individual cases, yet are they
rare. ‘They are exceptions to the general rule that a high morality depends upon
a true religion. This is manifest where the God of Israel, the only true God, is
served or disobeyed. His religion is inextricably mingled up with morality. Who-
soever gives due honour to the Lord God accepts every moral obligation, The
love of God and the righteousness of God produce love and rectitude in all rela-
tions, And should it be said that His professed worshippers are often unfaithful,
dishonourable, impure, self-seeking in regard to man, it can be replied that such
persons do not possess the religion pure and undefiled before God and the Father.
If they went out from it, they were not of it. They never knew Jesus the Holy
One or His Father, They swell the instances which show that an irreligious class
or nation must be, on the whole, immoral—a moral class or nation, on the whole,
religious,

III. They are unfairly estimated. The bearing of the question put to the
prophet defines not only a set of opinions which held that it was not an evil thing
to resort to idol-worship, but also that it was even a lighter evil to commit flagrant
injustice towards each other. Both religion and morality were under-estimated ; and
such a course implied that if a man kept up forms of worship, he might bea tyrant,
a cheat, or seducer, and be at ease! Against the notion that morality is of less con-
sequence than religion, this appeal to Ezekiel takes an unfaltering stand. It
signifies that men who supposed that acts of worship allowed them liberty to set at
nought the rights of the poor and needy provoked the Lord deeply. It signifies
that by the former course they had put God far away, had removed the great
restraint against wrong-doings, and in the latter sent violent dealings into every
circle of social life in which they could press their selfish interest. It signifies that
men who were more careful to pay their idolatrous worship than to do justly and
love mercy were preparing for themselves a fearful doom. Whether religion is to
be more highly valued than morality is a vain question. The doctrine of God
our Saviour insists on their interfusion as parts of doing His will. When sects,
churches, societies, speak lightly of a man’s bad conduct because he is a recognised
member; when it is judged more expedient to bend the head or knees, to wave
incense, to weep over fancies or pictures, to say the words of a creed, to make reve-
rence towards the east, to have a form of godliness, than it is to keep evil thoughts
down, or to do fairly.to every man, or to live unspotted from the world; when
there is an attempt to palliate covetousness, misrepresentations, unkindness, en the
ground that they belong to the reign of “‘ mere morality”—then the standard of God
must be lifted up, “‘ Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effemi-
nate, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor railers, nor extortioners shall
inherit the kingdom of God.” On the other hand, when it is maintained that
religion is of no force to form a moral life ; when palliation is made for worldly
and unrighteous conduct on the ground that the doers make no profession of faith





OMAP. IX.








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,


wn the Christian’s God, then we must affirm that the religion of Christ is a religion
of righteousness, and that they who make light of Him will go on in darkness, and


so will reap the fruit of their own ways,


(2.) Taz JuDGMENT UPON THE INHABITANTS OF JERUSALEM
(Chap. ix.)


1. The guards of the city and their work (vers. 1-7).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—This
chapter is closely connected with the
preceding, and carries expressly the
threatening of ver. 18 into immediate
action. Ministers of the Lord, waiting
on Him, are summoned to execute His
purposes.

Ver. 1. The prophet is made a hearer
of the summons. “And He called in
mine ears with a loud voice;” the
mode of speaking is a copy of that in
viii. 18. There is a sense in which God
treats men as they treat Him: “As I
cried and they would not hear, so they
cried and I would not hear.” Moreover,
the minute details as to the ears and
pitch of voice are significant of the real-
istic character of the vision. It was not
» marvellous but shadowy experience
through which Ezekiel was passing. He
accents the fact that the smallest as the
greatest items were well defined ; while
the loudness of the voice is a token
both of the strong emotion of the Lord
and the importance to be attached to
the events about to happen. ‘“‘ Saying,
Come near, ye that have charge of the
city.” The phrase, ye that have charge,
is a translation of a Hebrew word ren-
dered elsewhere office, visitation, over-
sight, and those holding office, officers
(Isa. lx. 17). Accepting this last ren-
dering as applicable here, we have to
think of overseers, watchers, guards
(Dan. iv. 13, x. 20), who attend to the
execution of the sentences of God.
They were armed, “each man with his
instrument of destruction in his hand.”
“No common earthly weapon is suitable
to the hands of such an host.”—Haev.

Ver. 2. At the summons, “six men
eame” from the same quarter as the
glory (chap. i. 4), and from which the
earthly armies were to proceed as instru-
ments of the heavenly powers. The
weapon of each is named differently

100


from the name in ver. 1; here it is “an
instrument of demolition.” Interpre-
tation of the number six—parts of the
city, military Chaldean divisions, &.—
is superfluous, It is immediately shown
that the number of watchers was the
sacred, perfect number. ‘ And one
man in their midst clothed with linen.”
He was not one of the six, but a seventh
man and superior to the others. They
go after him; he marks before they
strike (ver. 5). The material which
clothes him is like that of the various
parts of the high priest’s dress (Lev.
xvi. 4), and is supposed by many to
signify that this seventh man had a
high-priestly function.. This is doubt-
ful, and all that we need ascribe to the
texture of his garments is that it repre-
sented a heavenly messenger of the Lord
specially commissioned. So it is set forth
in Daniel (x. 5 and xii 6), and it may
be that the idea symbolised by linen had
by this time attributed to it a wider
application, preparing for that universal
application which the New Testament
ratifies, ‘‘ The armies which are in
heaven followed, clothed in fine linen,
white and pure.” “It was given unto
her that she should array herself in fine
linen, bright and pure.” The seventb
had not a destroying weapon: he is to
carry out another procedure besides that
of slaughter; so he had “an inkhorn
upon his loins.” “It is still customary
in the East to wear the inkhorn in the
girdle. Scribes wear them constantly in
their girdles, and ministers of state wear
them in the same manner, as symbols
of their office.”"—Xitto. The purport of
these writing materials is, in accordance
with the custom of registering the names
of the Israelites in public rolls, that he
may write certain names in the book of
life—the names of those on whom he is
to place a mark. Who is this distin-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


—





guished watcher? “In Dan. x. 5 we
have the appearance of a man clothed
tn linen, who is manifestly the same as
He whom John describes as the Son of
man clothed with a garment down to his
feet (Rev. i. 13). This One man, then,
was the angel of the covenant, the great
High Priest, superior to those by whom
He was surrounded, receiving direct
communication from the Lord, taking
the coals of vengeance from between the
cherubim (x. 2), but coming with mercy
to the contrite as well as with vengeance
to the impenitent ; who took upon Him
the form of a man... who came to send
fire upon the earth, but also to call sin-
ners to repentance ; who shall lose none
of those whom the Father hath given
Him,.”—Speaker’s Com. “ And they
came and stood beside the brazen
altar ;” they were waiting in reverence
and readiness in the very spot where sin
had reached its worst form (viii. 16), to
fulfil that which would be commanded.

It is by no means to be understood
“that there is a band of seven angels
whose special vocation it is to be the
watchmen and guardians of Jerusalem.
For the number seven is here, as else-
where in the Old Testament, the sign
that a divine operation is being com-
pleted—in this passage the divine judg-
ment, now advancing to its close—and
there is no necessity for having recourse
to the seven planet gods of the Baby-
lonians, &e. . . . The seventh angel, of
special dignity, corresponds to the
horseman who, in the vision of Zech. i.
8, stands among the myrtle trees which
symbolise the covenaut people, and is
evidently the chief over those who run
to and fro through the earth. It is very
remarkable that, as Baumgarten very
justly observes, this angel, in whom is
the name of Jehovah, withdraws from
the history of revelation so long as Israel
is under a visible ruler of the house of
David ; but now, when this visible rule
is abrogated, an invisible Ruler again
appears, and attains a more concrete
form, combined with personal agency,
though at the same time hypostatically
distinguished from God.”—Oehler.

Ver. 3. An ominous symbol appears.


‘And the glory of the God of Israel








rose up from the cherub upon which
it was.” ‘The cherub, corresponding to
living creature (chap. i. 20), is used for
cherubim, These forms over the mercy-
seat constituted the throne of the glory,
the place where His honour dwelt; but
the Temple having been made a scene
on which His glory was given to idols,
He retires “to the threshold.” He
rises up to scatter His enemies, and at
the place of egress from the Temple to
open ground, He issues His commands
for the seven guards in reference to His
sentences on the people,

Ver. 4. A command is given to the
leader, so that mercy should precede
judgment. “And the Lord said to
him, Go through the midst of the city
.-- and mark a mark.” Such a mark-
ing, as a religious and separating sign,
has been customary in various countries,
and is especially conspicuous upon the
foreheads of the Hindus, The mark
may be an honour or a dishonour, accord-
ing as it separates for the living God or
from God. Here it is a token of the
former. The word translated ‘ mark ”
is the name-word of the last letter of the
Hebrew alphabet, taw. The oldest form
of this letter is said to be that of a
cross, [; and from this statement sun-
dry of the fathers and others have drawn,
very unnecessarily, recondite meanings
and pious conclusions, That the mark
would be a definite one is obvious—how
else could the six smiters know whom
to pass by?—but what its shape was
who can specify? It was “ not a mark
to be actually imprinted and seen upon
their persons, but was an indication of
the place they held in the watchful over-
sight and directing agency of God.”—
Fairbairn. ‘‘ upon the foreheads of the
men ;” there it would be distinctly seen
and betoken the character before God.
It separated from the mass of the
people. In Egypt a mark ot blood was
made on the doorposts of the Israelites
—<their deliverance was that of families;
here the mark was on the forehead—the
salvation is that of individuals, The
difference is one of the proofs, which
Ezekiel elsewhere incidentally presents,
that a new principle of God’s dealings
was on the way to establishment. The

101


CHAP. Tk,


HOMILETIC COMMEX”"ARY: EZEKIEL,





individual and not the nation was to be
the point of His operations in the latter
days. In relation to this ‘ mark,” the
“‘ Speaker’s Commentary ” says, “The
sign of the cross in baptism is an out-
ward sign of the designation of God’s
elect, who at the last day shall be ex-
empted from the destruction of the un
godly (Matt, xxiv. 22, 31).” Patristic
legends are apparently not yet extinct !
How different from this inept comment
is that which Keil gives, though he
translates tau by cross : “ There is some-
thing remarkable in this coincidence to
the thoughtful observer of the ways of
God, whose counsel has carefully consi-
dered all beforehand, especially when
we bear in mind that, in the counterpart
to this passage (Rev. vii. 3), the seal
of the living God is stamped upon the
foreheads of the servants of God who
are to be exempted from the judgment,
and that according to Rev. xiv. 1, they
had the name of God written upon their
foreheads.” Very different indeed from
“the sign of the cross!” “that sigh
and that cry for all the abominations
that are done in the midst thereof.”
This is the criterion by which the writer
will know those whom he has to mark.
In secret and in public they grieve over
the evils which are rife in the land.
Vers. 5, 6. A command is given to
the six, ‘Goin the city after him and
smite,” so as to make an utter end,
sparing neither age nor sex. One spe-
cial exception is made. No other class
is recognised but two. Ina testing time
like this there is no possibility of hold-
ing the place of neutrals; “and every
man upon whom is the mark touch
not ;” their tears, and words of prayer
and reproof because of sin, show that
they are on the Lord’s side. He is
pledged to preserve His own ; “ He that
toucheth you toucheth the apple of His
eye.” There is here no guarantee
against all kinds of sorrow and suffer-
ings. Lot is rescued from Sodom, but
he has to incur loss and the pain of dis-
severed family ties Jeremiah had to
pass through deep waters of affliction
102


during the period in which the siz
watchers were cutting down the un-
worthy, The exemption of the marked
ones must be considered as referring
only to direct strokes of punishment,
“The marking secures not against any
share in the divine judgments; this
would not correspond with the nature
of the divine righteousness, as even the
elect are in many ways affected with the
prevailing corruption (comp. Isa. vi. 5):
it secures only against being swept
away with the wicked, against an evil
death, and all that would stand in con-
tradiction with the rule, ‘that all things
work together for good to them that love
God.’ ”—Hengstenberg. “and begin at
my sanctuary,” in it the abominations
had found their normal expression. The
head and front of the offence against
the holy God was exhibited there. It
had lost the reality and must be de
prived of the semblance of holiness,
The watchers inflict their first strokes
in it and beat down the men who stood
with backs to the altar while worship-
ping the creature; “they began with
the men, the elders who were before
the house ;” they were not called elders
(chap. vili. 16), but their representative
position may suggest that they were so ;
and “before the house” will refer not
to the whole Temple, but to that portion
which constituted its germ, as seems
intimated in what follows,

Ver. 7. “And He said unto them,
Defile the house,” by the bodies of the
slain. If to touch a corpse and to wor-
ship without being sprinkled with the
water of separation was to defile the
tabernacle of the Lord (Num. xix. 13),
much more would blood and corpses do
so. But the execution of judyment was
to extend beyond the inner place where
the altar stood: “and fill the courts
with slain.” Scarcely is the edict issued
when it is obeyed, and the further order
is added, “go forth.” ‘“ The expression
has the air of military abruptness,” and
despatches at once from the desecrated
temple: ‘‘and they went forth and
slew in the city.”


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL, OHAP. IX





—


AHOMILETICS.
Frarures or Drvine DiscipLinary GOVERNMENT.


Over all the conditions in which persons or peoples act their parts God is
King and Judge. Whether they worship Him or pay adoration to created things,
whether they act in brotherliness or selfishness, He tests their character and
passes sentences from which they may learn to do righteousness and hate iniquity.
That they do not always learn is no more a proof against the discipline of God,
than the belief of numberless men that the sun moves round the earth is a proof
against the science of the works of God. And just as in the case of astronomy,
He “waited six thousand years for an observer,” and, even since Kepler lived,
myriads have not known the real position of the sun; so in the case of moral dis-
cipline, He has been giving here a little and there a little, and still His moral
government is unrecognised by multitudes who are subjected to it. He is in no
hurry on this account. He waits with patience, teaching as He waits and giving
indications of the modes in which He deals with moral beings, as in this manifes-
tation before Ezekiel. }

I. Divine moral discipline involves the action of latent forces. Such forces
exist. The seer is not aware of the contiguousness of the guards of the city.
They are not within the field of his sight before the call to them is uttered. What
they are, where they are, how they will act when they appear, are questions which
can be answered only by the event. ‘There are forces suitable for disciplinary ends
in air, or earth, or sea, or the regions beyond, and the Lord can make them attend
to His word. Storms, earthquakes, epidemics, armies may be poured forth, as
soldiers from a fortress, to ravage a land and its people, and they will come from
any quarter in which their germs have been stored, and will spread under the
direction of spiritual puwers who obey the God of glory. At the due moment He
will summon them though He may have long time holden His peace.

They are multifold. At one time fiery flying serpents destroy the wandering
Israelites and the plague at another. David is required to make choice of one out
of three punishments for his sin in numbering the people. Ezekiel sees six men
preparing to visit the city, and a seventh in their midst having another duty than
theirs to fulfil in it, One angel may minister to the suffering Jesus, but He could
have twelve legions of them for the asking. We are open at every pore to the
action of the Lord who has made us, and He has a messenger in some occult
garrison who is fitted to enter into the pore He would affect us by. Almightiness
calls just the kind and number needed to execute His will. There is never one
too few or one too many.

They watt at command. The seven watchers of the city appeared from out
their concealment and stood beside the brazen altar. They are ready to receive
and to execute the orders of Him to whose honour the sacrifices offered on the
altar were to be consecrated. And when such divine forces operate, no interven
tion can prevent the mark of approbation which the Lord would give to His
faithful friends from being impressed on them, as no shield is broad enough and
strong enough to ward off the penalty which a course of rebellion ensures to
those who forget God. You are secure if you have the mind that was in Christ
Jesus; you are exposed to incalculable anguish if you make light of Him and go
your way.

They are varied in capability. The weapons and the inkhorn are emblems of
the differing influences which condemn and praise human thoughts and conduct.
There are numberless producers of suffering to mankind. Onlookers cannot tell
whether the trouble causing sin is to be ascribed to the sufferers or their parents ;
but no believer in a righteous Father can doubt tha* overy suffering is giles It is

103


CHAP, Iz. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZERIEL,





a just measure, in view of what men need, that they may learn there is a holy God.
Influences, moreover, proceed from appeals to the mind, Books and letters, ser-
mons and conversations, have induced many souls to grieve over sin and to long
for the grace of God—have brought many into shame and also into peace. Who
can imagine the various features of God’a action upon men? Who can tell from
whence that action will proceed? It is our comfort to know that He has sovereign
authority everywhere ; that no influence acts casually, but each one in due subor-
dination to Him ; that the upshot of all the summonses He sends forth will be to
prove that He is holy, and just, and good; and that men have been treated with
the end of saving them from sin and making them partakers of His holiness.

IL It grounds its procedure upon marked differences in human character.
In God’s moral discipline precedence is given to His saving will. The man clothed
in linen first made the mark of deliverance from death, and then the other six
followed with the blows of their fatal weapons. The righteous are not treated as
the wicked. Mercy is honoured before judgment is executed,

Safety 1s apportioned to those who are of one heart with God. They are seen to
be loyal to His rule. They hate what He hates. They deplore the abominations
which cast a slur upon the Holy One of Israel. They are seen to have sympathy
for men. They do not neglect, despise, denounce the unworthy lives of their
fellow-citizens: they grieve deeply because of them, knowing their own natural
feebleness in the assaults of temptations; they dare not assume the airs of them
that are at ease and the contempt of those that are proud. At the same time they
profess no maudlin charity, and so excuse the sins which are openly committed or
secretly practised in chambers of imagery. It may be that they are comparatively
few—six men to punish and one only to seal with the mark of safety—but they
are not ruled by the popular fashions, They are to serve God and not men. Their
love to God teaches them to love their brother also, and they are conformed to the
image of Him who, on a later day, wept over Jerusalem. This was the character
which secured the sealing on the forehead—this the kind of character which has
the sealing of the Holy Spirit of promise, For the mark is not what they see, but
rather what others see on them. It is not some suggestion which they suppose is
made to themselves, however vivid that suggestion may seem to be, That is no
valid assurance of our being sons of God. Our assurance must come, not from an
inward suggestion, but from proof, evidence, witness, which is of the nature of a
work of the Spirit on the soul, What more effectual, as such a testimony, than a
character which exhibits loyalty to God and sympathy for sinners? which is like
that of Christ Jesus? ‘‘ This is the highest sort of witness which it is possible the
soul should be the subject of: if there were any such thing as a witness of the
Spirit by immediate suggestion or revelation, this would be vastly more noble and
excellent, and as much above that as the heaven is above the earth.” —dwards,
We who hear the Gospel may truly understand that the sealer to our safety is the
Son, to whom all judgment is committed ; whom the armies of heaven follow ;
who has all power in heaven and in earth. He knows His sheep by name. His
care for them is the care of prayer and self-sacrifice He does not go into churches
and mark crowds by water of baptism. He does not pass over one house and into
another so that He may mark a household on their foreheads. He acts upon
individuals and on their hearts. He washes away their sins by His own blood.
He renews their wills, He induces them to follow His example. And because
they are quickened by His Spirit and walk in newness of life, He secures them, and
they shall never perish. Christ does not guarantee His followers against all tribu-
lation, but He does their safety from destruction by calamity. The Chaldeans
might cause distress to, but could not slay, the sorrowing citizens. The enticements
of sinful lusts may harass you again and again; disease may keep you bodily and
spiritually low; you may be bereaved of friends whom you greatly miss ; you may


be injured by the conduct of those with whom you come into association ; your
104


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP, Ix.





sighs and tears may be apparently fruitless; you may see the evils still in full force
around you as if you never had prayed, never had stood up for God against the
workers of iniquity ; yet the mighty power of God preserves you, and the time will
come when you will be removed from the furnace purified like gold, and you will
receive the crown of righteousness which fadeth not away. ‘The divine faithful-
ness still abides sure to the true children of the covenant. . . . Let such, there-
fore, trust in the Lord at all times, and fear not, that it shall be well with the
righteous.” —airbairn.

Death is appointed to those who continue in trespasses, The Lord has no plea-
sure in the death of the sinner, but rather that he turn from his wicked way,
Only, if he will not turn, what remains? He is dead in sins, and a worse fate there
cannot be. The guilt of it should produce unbounded fear, and be a signal to arise
from the dead that Christ may give light. Let all attempts directed by a merciful
God have failed to rouse, then the heavy judgment must fall on the head of every
one thus guilty of hardening their hearts against the Lord. No place is so sacred
as to prevent the execution of the sentence. Let it be temple or church, called
holy or sacred, sin is damnation anywhere. The waters of wrath shall sweep into:
all hiding-places. The very place in which sin is committed may be the place
for punishing sin. No deader is so great as to have immunity from the sentence.
‘The more aged and venerable portion of the worshippers, and those who might
naturally be regarded as occupying the foremost rank among the people at large,”
were slain with impartial severity. They whose Godward privileges are greatest,
when they defile His worship, incur the penalty of those who are chief in wicked-
ness. “So far is the possession of means of grace from saving men from wrath,
that He abhors sin most in those from whom, by reason of their spiritual oppor-
tunities, most good was to have been expected.”—Fausset, As formerly, so now,
the appeal is to be seriously listened to, “ Beware, therefore, lest that come upon you,
which is spoken in the prophets; Behold, ye despisers, and wonder and perish,”
God rules in righteousness,


MovrnNING FOR OTHER Men’s Sins (ver. 4).


Lamenting the sins of the times and places wherein we live is—

L A duty incumbent on us. Our affections of grief and anger cannot be
better employed than for the interest, nor better bestowed than for the service, of
Him who implanted those passions in us. Our natural motions should be ordered
for the God of nature, and spiritual ordered for the God of grace. (1.) This was
the practice of believers in all ages, (2.) It was our Saviour’s practice, (3.)
Angels, as far as they are capable, have their grief for the sins of men.

II. It is an acceptable duty to God. (1.) It is a fulfilling of the whole law
consisting of love to God and love to our neighbours. (2.) It is an imitating
return for God’s affection. (3.) This temper justifies God and His justice. (4.) It
is a sign of such a temper God hath evidenced Himself in Scripture much affected
with. It is both our duty and God’s pleasure.

IIL It is a means of preservation from public judgments. (1.) Sincerity
escapes best in common judgments, and this mourning for public sins is its greatest
note, (2.) This frame clears us from the guilt of common sins, (3.) It is an
endeavour to repair the honour God has lost. (4.) Mourners in Zion are humble,
and humility is preventive of judgments. (5.) They keep covenant with God ; and
(6.) fear His judgments, which is a means of preventing them.

1. We may be reproved if we make sport of sin; if we use mere invectives
against it ; if we look on it rather as a hurt to ourselves than as injury to God;
if we do not truly mourn for our own sins.

2. We may be comforted. God doth not strike at random, and they who are
stamped with Christ’s mark have His wisdow to guard them against at His

1


CHAP. Ik. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,





power against weakness, the Everlasting Father against man, whose breath is in his
nostrils,

The Lord seems to be upon the threshold of the temple, come down already
from the cherubim, and is it not time to bewail our own sins and the common
abominations that have so polluted the place of His habitation? Doth not the
Holy Spirit grieve for the sins of those who play the wantons with the grace of
God (Eph. iv. 30)? Shall we refuse mourning for that which goes to the heart of
the Holy Ghost? Let us sorrow for the sins of the time and place in which we
live. —Charnock.


THE Mark oF DELIVERANCE (vers. 4—6).


When God visits the world, or any part of it, with His desolating judgments,
He usually sets a mark of deliverance on such as are suitably affected with the sina
of their fellow-creatures,

L What is implied in being suitably affected with the sins of our
fellow-creatures? If our fellow-creatures infringe none of our real or supposed
rights, and abstain from such gross vices as evidently disturb the peace of society,
we usually feel little concern respecting their sins against God. Our nearest
neighbours may be of a character remote from that of a Christian, and we show no
uneasiness respecting their dangerous condition. There may indeed be a kind of
pleasure when we contrast their vices and our virtues, and we are encouraged to
hope for impunity in sin. Nor is this surprising. We naturally think little of our
own souls or of our own sins, and he who takes no care to save himself is not likely
to feel concern for the salvation of others, Evidently a great change must take
place in our views and feelings if the conduct of the persons mentioned in our text
is suitable for us. Though they lived in an evil day, when the judgments of God
were falling heavily upon their nation, they appear to have felt more poignant
grief for prevailing sins than for the desolating judgments which they occasioned.
To be rightly affected—

First, We must fear sin more than the punishment of sin; be more grieved to
see God dishonoured, His Son neglected, and immortal souls ruined, than to see
our commerce interrupted, our fellow-citizens divided, and our country invaded.

Second, We must use diligent exertions, by every means in our power, to
reform the sinners. There are many who will readily allow that sins prevail
among us, and confess it is a very melancholy thing, but still they use no means to
counteract or repress the evils which they profess to lament. As it is not sufficient
to confess our own sins without renouncing them, so it is not sufficient to mourn for
the sins of others without attempting their reformation. This attempt must be
made—

1. By example. As the force of example is inconceivably great, every person
is sacredly bound, in times of prevailing degeneracy, to act an open, firm, and
decided part in favour of virtue and religion—avoiding the very appearance of
those evils which are prevalent around him.

2. By exertions to suppress vice and imptety. When the interests of virtue and
religion are fenced round by wholesome laws, every individual is bound to see them
faithfully executed. By conniving at the ains of others we make them our own.
“To him that knoweth to do good and doeth it not, to him it is sin.” A righteous
God will not hold us guiltless if we do not prevent evil which we could have pre-
vented. “If thou forbear to deliver,” &. Those who neither fear God nor
regard man must be taught by their apprehensions not to stalk their vicious pro-
pensities in open day. The task may be disagreeable. Many will mourn in their
closets, but use no exertion in public, pretending that others may more properly
engage in it. We are willing that God should take care of our honour and
mia too often we suffer His laws to be violated with impanity. We


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL, CHAP. TE.





ean thus have no claim to the character mentioned in our text, God will set no
mark on us unless we appear openly and decidedly against the prevalence of sin.

3. By prayers. A regard to order or some similar principle induces to the
suppression of vice; but this is presumptuous and tempting God if we neglect
prayer for divine influence.

Third, We must be deeply affected with our own sins. We shall acknowledge
that our sins have assisted in forming the mass of national guilt. If not guilty of
the same vice as others, it is because of the restraints of grace, and we shall temper
all exertions with pity for the offender while abhorring the offence, He who is
most affected by the sins of others will mourn most sincerely for his own, Thus
have all the good men mentioned in the Bible done.

II. That on such as are thus affected God will set a mark of deliverance
=e those around them are destroyed by His desolating judgments. This is
inferred—

1. From the justice of God. They do not share in the national sins; they
mourn for and oppose them, and justice requires a mark of separation for them.
True, such persons have violated the law of God as individuals; bus they have
not done the wickedness which is chargeable on the community, and they are
spared.

2. From God’s holiness. Such characters love God. It is their love to God
which causes them to mourn over and oppose iniquity. His cause, His honour,
they consider as their own. While God loves holiness He cannot but love them.

3. From His faithfulness. None more highly honour Him than those who appear
openly on His side in opposition to sin, and He will honour them by placing some
mark of distinction on them, Like their Father and their Redeemer they are
grieved with the sins of man, and a strong refuge is provided by Him.

4. From the facts of Scriptzwe. Noah, Job, Elijah, Jeremiah, &. Will it be
said that facts do not always justify the statement of deliverance? We allow that
they do not. But may the professed mourners not partake in common sin, or be
entangled in policy so as not to bear a testimony against the prevailing evil? And
if many righteous have been put to death, the mark of God was on them. Stephen,
Paul, and Silas, martyrs. However this may be, the Son of God, clothed in the
linen garments of His priestly office, has sprinkled them with His blood, sealed
them with the Holy Spirit, written their names in the book of life, and they will
have His Father’s name written in their forehead.

If God should send a messenger to set a mark on all who are suitably affected,
would it appear on thee '\—Payson (abridged).


2. The Prophet Interceding in Vain (vers. 8-11).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 8. mouth in the dust he burst forth into


Ezekiel recovers from a passing sur-
prise while the slaughter in the city was
proceeding, and then realises his soli-
tariness. ‘And remained I,” the fre-
quenters of the Temple all dead, the
only one spared alive there, hisperturbed
mind was found in a temporary oblivion
of what he had heard in reference to such
as were to be marked, and then loomed
before him the obliteration even of the
promised remnant. In intense sym-
pathy for the people ; in fear and sor.
row, “I fell upon my face ;” with his


an appeal for forbearance—speaking not
in name of the exiles, but in name of
the inhabitants of Judea, “and said,
Ah! Lord God, destroyest Thou all
the remnant of Israel,’ as would be
done, “in the pouring out Thy fury
upon Jerusalem?” The captive sin
Assyria and Babylon are undergoing
their punishment: all that is left of
Israel as a nation is here, and therefore
Ezekiel’s cry is to the Lord God for the
latter.

Ver. 9. The answer to his ag is

10


CHAP. IX


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





decisive. “And He said unto me,
The iniquity of the house of Israel
and Judah is great exceedingly.” The
criminality was not all of the same
character: in the landward parts, crimes
of “blood-shedding” were most com-
mon ; in the city, crimes of “ pervert-
ing rights.” Religious declension and
rebelliousness are not mentioned here,
but moral corruption is, as constituting
the evil which is to be severely punished,
And the terms in which the people form
an excuse for their sins correspond with
the predominance of the moral element :
“for they say, The Lord hath for-
saken the earth, and the Lord seeth
not.” The difference between this nd
that in chap. viii. 12, where the reli-
gious aspect was prominent, lies here:
the latter verse puts “seeth us not”
first—religion is primarily a matter be-
tween God and man. The verse now
before us puts “ hath forsaken the earth ”
first—as if the Lord had gone away
from all regard of the conduct of men
to men. They imagine they have free
scope to act as they choose towards each
uther, no one is taking oversight of
them. ‘“ The source of all transgression
is denial of the providence of God.”
Ver. 10. The people had taken the


position that they only had rights, and
yet that position is commanded by
another. “And I also, my eye shall
not spare... their way I put (give)
upon their head.” The path of life
which they are walking on turns up
to smite their head with punishment,
Ezekiel’s appealing question is not di-
rectly answered. The Lord ‘merely vin-
dicates His justice by showing that,
whatever amount of vengeance He
might inflict, it did not exceed their
sin, He would have us humbly acqui-
esce in His judgments, and wait and
trust” (Fausset). The prophet sees
that a people laden with iniquity go to
meet their doom, and he makes no
further ery for consideration of their
case,

Ver. 11. Scarcely had the answer of
the Lord been received when “ behold
the man clothed in linen,” the chief
of the guardians of the city, appearing
by himself seemingly, “ brought word,
saying, I have doneas Thou hast com-
manded me.” The marks have been
affixed on as many as and in the manner
in which he had been commissioned.
Probably the other six were still carry-
ing on their work (chap. xi. 13). ‘ The
counsel of the Lord, it shall stand.”


HOMILETICS,


UnsatisFIED PRAYERS (vers. 8-11).


When God spares His servants at a time during which calamity overtakes others,
or saves them when many go on in the broad way to destruction, they deeply
grieve and earnestly pray for those who are thus overtaken, What they ask for
seems not to be assured. ‘They have prayed and wept in vain, they suppose, and
a sore heart-trouble is produced. They wonder if the Lord has shut up His com-
passions ; if prayer is nothing but a cry. They doubt if they have prayed aright ;
if they have misconceived the ways of the Lord. To such questions Ezekiel’s case
here may suggest direction and solace about unsatisfied prayers.

I. Such prayers may come from true sympathy with misery. Men, who
have learned to love their fellowmen because of love to their Father, do not take
precautions merely for their own safety in the face of impending suffering. If they
are secure themselves they cannot be at ease while their neighbours are in danger
of being swept away as with a flood. The sins, sorrows, deaths of others cast a
heavy burden upon their souls, and they bow down in utter self-abandonment
before God to beseech Him to take pity on the impenitent and doomed, They
place themselves between the living One and the condemned to death, and put
forth the energies which love can command into their supplications, They weep
with them that need to be wept for. .

IL aay prayers may use the most effective grounds of appeal They appeal

08


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; EZEKIEL, CHAP. IX.
oo SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS


to God as God. “Ah, Lord God!” They have no cure in such need, They can
help only by prayers, and they present them to Him who hears prayer as to Him
who alone is able to do what they long for. In weakness and in conscious self-
unworthiness they come boldly to the throne of grace and plead, “ Wilt Thou
act in such severity, Thou who hast made us and fashioned us, and who knowest
our frame? Wilt Thou forget the work of Thine own hands and let it perish ?
Wilt Thou not show thyself to be the Lord mighty to save?” They appeal to His
promises, “‘Israel,”—that was a name to touch the heart of God. For He had
chosen the people, had nourished and brought them up as children, and in them
meant to bless all the families of the earth. Were, then, all to be cut off—men
women, and children? The remnant, to which so much has been pledged, would
it too be discarded? Would He thus suffer His faithfulness and truth to fail?
They appeal to His interests. ‘‘ Jerusalem,”—those who have stood in the area of
His manifested glory, who have been hearers of His word, who are the chief repre-
sentatives of His people in covenant, who seem best adapted to maintain His way
upon earth,—if they are sent down to darkness and death, where will He find a
people to show forth His praise and saving health? His nature, His truth, His
kingdom are grounds of prayer in which man’s selfish pleas have no part. “Do
not disgrace the throne of Thy glory !”

III. Such prayers may be presented in submissiveness. “I fell upon my
face.” God’s ways are beyond even a prophet’s comprehension, They trend too
high and also too deep for us. We are disposed to count that to be confused
which is only farther off than we can define, or to charge that with hardness which
is only covered with a thin crust. Thus when deprecating the sufferings which
befall our persons, our churches, the nations, we may take to questioning God, if
not dictating to Him, Wilt Thou not take other steps? Wilt Thou not have regard
to the prayers of the destitute? Wilt Thou not have respect to Thy great name
whose glory is dearer to Thee than it can be to ust? Weare but of “ yesterday and
know nothing.”

IV. And such prayers may be based on misconceptions of God. As to His
mercy. Sympathising friends think they would show pity, they would spare, when
God does not, and their tendency is to count Him severe. This conclusion is un-
reasonable. When once we grasp the idea that He has no pleasure in the death of
the wicked, we learn that they do not take in all the elements involved in divine
mercy who surmise that the mercy of God is limited to the surveys of sense. We
must rise beyond the range of the earthly for an ampler view of His rule. For
Him, as righteous ruler, to spare those who reject His authority, who will not turn
to Him in spite of all His endeavours, would be to connive at His own eternal
dishonour. They would go on adding sin to sin. They would produce influences
which would shake the loyalty of those who had been faithful to Him. There
could be no mercy in a course which would cause such results,

As to His patience. We would have Him check the process of degeneracy in
individuals, in churches, in states, at the very outset. We would have Him strike
down the man who was leading others into evil as soon as he acquired a bad pre-
eminence. We would not have Him wait till sin is excessive. Therefore do we fancy
He has been too patient, and yet, with strange inconsistency, when He is punishing,
we fall down and urgently ask if He will not stay His hand! We cannot measure
out His patience thus, Both the deferring of punishment and the execution of
punishment are ordered in wisdom and love. They must be, for the Lord reigneth,
and we should stay on Him, let the darkness about Him be what it may.

As to means of carrying out His will. We acknowledge that the law whick
binds penalty to guilt is just and good, and can be nothing if it is not irrefragable.
We grant that the doom should somehow be in correspondence with the sin. But
what will be the wisest and most impressive way of manifestirg the connection
which thus subsists? We are utterly unable to tell, and our aa might be

0


CHAP, IX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZERIEL.








offered against the very method which we would assent to as right and best, if we
knew all. But assuming that there are two chief classes of sins to provide against
—inhumanity and denial of God’s interference with the doings of meu—we should
look for a wonderful variety of treatment according to men’s circumstances and
place in the world’s development. It is for us not only to pray for the mercy we
wish for troubled souls, but also to wait on the Lord so as to see His goings.
“Those who take heed to the signs of the times can hardly but observe the ten-
dency of our age to ignore the God of special providence, saying, ‘Where is the
promise of His coming?’” Nor can we fail to mark a prevalence of dishonesty,
brutality, self-pleasing, which indicate sad disregard of love to man. What may
follow we leave with God while we cry for His grace. Only we do well to remem-
ber that judgment will begin at the house of God, and that the sufferings of
unfaithful Christians will be more awful than those of rebellious Jews. ‘ What
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy living and godliness !”

V. Yet such prayers are answered, but otherwise than directly. We are
too disposed to conclude that many of our prayers are not granted—prayers in
which we had not regard to iniquity but to Christ. It may be, it is true that
often they are not granted in accordance with the express form which we had
hoped for, and we become like thoughtless children who complain that their wishes
for good are not attended to because their father does not give them the very thing
they want and at the time they ask it. We ought to have more eunfidence in
our Heavenly Father than that complaint implies. He who says, “ Call upon me
and I will answer thee,” “ Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name that will I do,” is
true and faithful. What He has said He will do, only it lies with Him to settle
both the form and the season of the answer. He brought the man whe had been
setting a mark upon the mourners in Zion in view of Ezekiel, and that »ppearance
told Ezekiel that his prayer was really answered. He said to Paul, in response to
his thrice-told entreaty, ‘‘ My grace is sufficient for thee; for my power is made
perfect in weakness ;” and though that was not what the Apostle besought for—
the removal of the thorn in the flesh—it was tantamount to that, as the promise
secured him against being overcome by his infliction. Were we able to sew hetter,
we might come to say of many of our apparently uusatisfied prayers, “ Verily God
hath heard me; He hath attended to the voice of my prayer.”

Wait for the unfolding of the sealed book, and then will many rejoice ‘o learn
that they had not prayed in vain when they besought that God would ylorify
Himself by saving men. They died in the sorrow of hopes disappointed ; they
live in the joy of better things than they could conceive, Let us learn to ¢rust
God as revealed in Jesus Christ, His Son, and endeavour to observe more cicsely
how He responds to our prayers,


FAITHFULNESS IN STEWARDSHIP (ver. 11).


In fulfilling any work for the manifestation of the Lord’s will—

IL There should be regard to the Lord who appoints it. A position in His
service is wished for sometimes because it is counted honourable and respectable,
or because it is profitable, or because it is best to take it even if we have no interest
in its duties. All such motives are condemned. The only one which can stand,
in the light is that which prompts us to act because we have been directed by
considerations of His will, and are desirous to please Him to the utmost. ‘ He that
regardeth the day regardeth it unto the Lord.” This is capable of being an ex-
present motive to farth/ulness. It may influence us everywhere, whether weeat or drink,
buy or sell, worship alone or with others, He is always at our right hand where
we are and where we are called to serve, and we can do whatever we do as before
Him. An elastic motive. When we need much power we are moved towards the
treasures of Almightiness ; when we need little, we come to the same Mighty One
who is wise to measure out the adequate supply. He will furnish us for a gentle


110


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP, X,


——





or a stern service, for presenting a reward or a threat, for expressing a sentence of
mercy or of condemnation. We serve not ourselves but Christ Jesus the Lord,
—that will regulate us in our “ daily round,” and in dying for Him if need be.

It. Regard to the manner of obeying. “As Thou hast commanded,” Faith.
fulness is shown not in doing the appointed service with slovenliness, as if any
way of fulfilling it would be sufficient; not in self-regard, as if the way we would
like to do it would be satisfactory ; not with deference to the opinions and habits
of any men, as if they had authority to curtail or enlarge the commands of God;
not with limitations, as if we could stop at any point but the point which the Holy
One has defined. No; the work of the watcher is not done till he has reached,
taught, comforted, saved all whom the Lord has characterised. “ He will have all
men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth.”

Ill. Regard to the account to be rendered. No faithful servant need go in
fear to the tribuual of the Great King. They who obtain mercy to be faithful have
boldness in the day of judgment, are not ashamed before Christ at His coming,
give in their account with joy, and are enabled to say, in reference to the charge
which had been committed to them, “ Lord, it is done as Thou hast commanded.”
He is the pattern of perfect faithfulness who did always that which was pleas-
ing to the Father ; who could say at the close of the day in which he did His work,
““T have glorified Thee on the earth, I have finished the work Thou gavest me to
do,” and who will meet the consummation of all things with the words, “Of all
that Thou hast given me I have lost nothing.” Let us imitate Christ Jesus in
doing the will «f our Father, not negligently, or equivocally, or incompletely, but
so as “to be counted worthy of that world, and to stand before the Son of Man.”
Lei us, in all we do, for the glory of Christ’s name, follow His example, and report
every matter to our God in prayer and supplication.


(3.) THe Serrine Firz To JERUSALEM, WITH THE WITHDRAWAL FROM
THE TEMPLE (Chap. x.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Vers. 1-
8. The sealing of the remnant hae
proved the faithfulness of the Lord
to His covenant; the conflagration
of the city will prove His justice
by the punishment of the violators
of His covenant. But before the
sentence is executed the prophet is
again made specially cognisant of the
truth that the heavens do rule—that
not only was he commissioned by the
God of Israel, but also that he must be
imbued with the profound conviction
that every calamity which befalls the
guilty city proceeds from the agencies
which underlie the sapphire throne of
the everlasting King. ‘“ Four potencies
are engaged in the destruction of the
city—He who sits on the throne, the
man clothed in linen, the fire, and the
cherub who hands it to the angel. The
former two are absolutely ruling, the
latter two absolutely ministering”
(Heng.) The divine glory is manifested
in changing aspects, and, while similar


to the presentation in the plain of Che-
bar, yet shows a few differences in form
and procedure, ‘“ And, to make it more
manifest that the judgment is in vindi
cation of His injured holiness and on
account of the sins which had been com-
mitted against His covenant, the scene
of the judicial action is laid in the
Temple itself” (#air.) Reading vers.
1-3, 6, 7, 13, 15a, 18, 19, we get the
account of what took place; the re-
maining verses give elucidations of the
scene.

Ver. 1. When the watcher ceased to
speak, Ezekiel’s attention was directed
to the change of scenery. “ And I
saw, and, behold, upon the firmament
which was over the head of the che-
rubim,” though the prophet had not
recognised this special organisation till
later on (ver. 20), yet he keeps to the
designation throughout this vision as
he did to that of “living creatures’
throughout his first vision, the reason
for the change of words probably being

lll


OHAP. XK.


the presence of cherubic representation
in the Temple; ‘‘as it were a sapphire
stone, as the appearance of the like-
ness of a throne ;” no rainbow appears
now. Mercy, in a sense, is past—the
marking of the spared ones is com-
pleted, and there is scope for woe only.
Besides, the appearance of the likeness
‘of a man is not noticed here, but it is
indicated by the issuing of a voice.
The King was on the throne, though
invisible to His servant.

Ver. 2. “ And he said unto the man
clothed with linen, Go between the
wheels, to below the cherub ;” to the
space where, not material fire, but the
symbol of destruction, which was in its
consequences to make Jerusalem like
Sodom and Gomorrah, had been seen
(chap. i. 13); and he had a direct act
to do there, ‘fill thy hands with coals
of fire,” putting his two hands together
so as to make a hollow space, “and
scatter over the city ;” the fiery coals
were to destroy Jerusalem, as is illus-
trated by the words of Isaiah (xxxiii. 12,
14), “ And the people shall be as the
burnings of lime; as thorns cut up
shall they be burned in the fire...
The sinners in Zion are afraid ; fearful-
ness hath surprised the hypocrites. Who
among us shall dwell with the devouring
fire? Who among us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings?” ‘And he came
before my eyes.” It is noteworthy that
the man who had put the saving mark
on the foreheads is now commissioned to
be the agent by whom the desolation
of Jerusalem is accomplished. “God
has no class of servants too holy or
sacred to act, if need be, in the execution
of righteous judgments.” Quilt and
fiery doom must be proclaimed as well
as forgiveness and blessedness: yet
punishment will pave the way for sal-
vation, When the Lord washes away
the defilement of the daughter of Zivn,
and purges the blood from Jerusalem
by the spirit of judgment and the spirit
of burning, then shall be a place of
refuge, and a covert from storm and
rain (Isa. iv.)

Ver. 3, The man’s commission is not
performed until the position which is
taken by the divine glory and its accom-

11?


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.








panying phenomena is defined. Eze-
kiel observes that “the cherubim were
standing at the right of the house
when the man came,” «¢, they were
on the south side, ready for moving
away from the Temple. The avengers
had come from the north; they began
to slay at the sanctuary ; the city, which
was about to be laid in ashes, was built
southwards of the temple, and at that
quarter the glory was impelled to depart
from its chosen place; ‘and the cloud
filled the inner court ;” as in the Reve-
lation (chap. xv. 8), “ The Temple waa
filled with smoke from the glory of God
and from His power,” and wrath was
going forth from the sacred place.

Ver.:4. “ And the glory of the Lord
rose, from over the cherub, over the
threshold of the house’”—asimilar move-
ment to that in chap. ix. 3, but with the
signification here that its departure was
now taking place, He leaves a shadow
behind and casts a light before Him:
“and the house was filled with the
cloud ”—with the vehicle for the divine
glory, which, as the pillar of the cloud to
the Egyptians, had a dark aspect in the
house, so we conclude from the con-
text, “‘and the court was filled with
the brightness of the glory of the
Lord.” Conjectural assertions as to
what the cloud portended, and what the
brightness, do not seem to be fruitful
as explanations, All that appears clear
is that the protection and guidance,
which were associated with the presence
of the glory, would no longer be granted
to Jerusalem.

Ver, 5. The movement of the glory of
the Lord was accompanied by the move:
ment of the cherubim. “ And the sound
of the wings of the cherubim was heard
to the outer court,” into which we must
suppose Ezekiel had gone from the inner,
and from which he couid see what took
place. It was a thunderous sound (Ps,
xxix. 3), as in the former vision, expres-
sive of the force with which the strokes
of the wings were propelled, but con-
veying more than Hengstenberg suggests
“If the cherub is the concentration ot
all created life on earth, then its sound is
the concentration of all sound on earth.”

Ver. & Now Ezekiel returns to the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





=?


point he had reached at ver. 2. The
command to the man is again rehearsed,
and it is added, “he came and stood
beside the wheel” (Sing.); not some
specially-appointed wheel, but that one
which happened to be nearest as he
went for the fire,

Vers. 7 and 8, “And the cherub,”
the one next to the wheel beside which
the man was, “stretched forth his
hand from between the cherubim unte
the fire that was between the cherubim,
and lifted and gave into the hands of
the man clothed in linen, and he took
and went out ” towards the doomed
city, not now as the mediator of salva-
tion, but as an executor of judgment.
It is not stated that he scattered the fire
then, Either Ezekiel’s vision was filled
with some other sight, so that he did not
observe the incidence of the destruction,


CHAP, Z,





intervene. The latter seems most pro-
bable. The burning lies beyond the
next chapter, where the glory goes away,
and Ezekiel ceases to see the vision of
Jerusalem. An explanatory remark is
made as to the instrument of action in
the cherubim: “ the likeness of the
hand of a man under their wings :”
the symbol of human agency and acti-
vity is associated with that part of their
bodies by which they could be swift in
fulfilling their prescribed work, and
whose movements were heard far off.
The hand ‘may be naturally regarded
as indicating that human agents should
not be wanting, at the proper time, to
carry into effect the judgment written ”
(Fair.) ‘Those who burned the city
were immediately the Chaldeans, who
are included under the cherubim ; but
behind them stood another” ( Heng.)


or else a space of time was allowed to


HOMILETICS,


UNESTIMATED INFLUENCES ON Human Lis.


A new departure in the development of God’s people was taking effect. Their
exile and slaughter, with the desecration of the most holy place, were events which
did not result merely from Chaldean forces or natural elements, but really from
Him who directs all living and inanimate things, To bring the Israelites out of
the notion that they were secured against evil because of past favours received on
past obedience rendered ; to impress on them the latent truth that the Lord did
not rule His procedure by the external words or acts of men, but by the spirit
which breathed in them; to give indications of a time when He would be to all
people that which He had been to one, these seem to be the grounds for the mani-
festations of this section. In reference to them there is signified—

I. An invisible governor. The spirit of Ezekiel sees tints of the Eternal
Majesty, and becomes aware of words spoken by Him whom he does not name.
In his state is a representation of that which has been experienced by multitudes.
They know that God is within range of their susceptibilities, that He coins im-
pressions from which thought and feeling proceed. They are sure that, whatever
be the persons or things by which they are affected, He is King over each and all.
If any wonder or even mock at the confidence they profess to have in an unseen
Ruler, they reply, “I know whom I have believed ;” for beneath all that is pal-
pable they believe in God who is a Spirit, and who is King for ever and ever.
“ They walk by faith, not by sight.”

IL Manifold agents. Jn their dwersity. A half-unconscious tendency dis-
poses us to refer every good thing to the action of God, every hard, ruinous thing
to the action of some law. It is a trick of our minds. If painful and disastrous
things come out of broken laws, pleasant and helpful things come out of obeyed
laws. And the truth symbolised in man, in cherubim, and in fire, is, that all effects,
brought about by multitudinous agencies, are but the phenomenal forms of the
purposes of he perfect will. The Son of God, the angels of God, men who hurt,
men who suler, coals of fire, hailstones and frost, execute a commission given by


113


owaP. X, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





the Creator of the ends of the earth, Whatever the variety of influences which
affect us, we are still with God.

In their versatility. The fire that comforts can destroy: living beings may
fulfil their ends by running, flying, standing, making sounds, or carrying from place
to place: the Lord Jesus says, “I will draw all men unto me,” and He also says,
‘Depart from me; I never knew you.” All changed conditions, in the action of
natural and spiritual agencies, depend upon changes in the objects acted upon.
The ministry of wrath follows the movements of wrong. They shall dwell with
the devouring fire who sin and do not repent of their ungodliness. They “shall
be salted with fire” who walk righteously and speak uprightly.

In their concurrence. In the order of nature forces are correlated, and in the
moral order joy and ease may be transmuted into sorrow and pains, privileges into
penalties, the honour of God’s dwelling-place into the uncleanness of foul orgies,
Pray, wait, obey, and you will become an organ of the Lord where He will and
how He will; do evil, and His face will be set against you—the light which is in
you will become darkness.

IIL Repeated warnings of danger. The glory moving to the threshold told
of the rupture of the ties which had bound God to His people, while the sound cf
the wings and the taking of fire intimated that the doom of Jerusalem was on the
point of being inflicted. Penalty is preceded by witness-bearing and sentences.
If men neglect the immutable principles of right, if they find in their own ways the
pleasure and service which they ought to find in His, He does not go on at once to
destroy them. He has given them faculties by which they may discern the signs
of the sky that portend a storm, 80 has He qualified them to notice coming evils
in appearances which are passing before their eyes. He lingers that He may correct
them with the words of His mouth and the events of their lives. Thus does He
warn them, and from the manner in which the Bible, prayer, sanctuaries are
regarded, a Christian people can conclude whether the glory has gone from their
midst, and the light and truth are about to consume all despisers. He does not
always force those coming tribulations upon our notice. “The works of God are
done by hidden and secret means, by ways unthought of, by hands under wings.
Invisible virtue hath done more than all visible instruments.” Yet, latent as they
are, it is demanded from us that we watch and be sober under influences which
seem to threaten our welfare, that so we may escape all those things that shall come
to pass, and stand before the Son of Man.


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Vers.
9-22. The description of the cherubim
and of their movements is similar to, but
independent of, that given in chap. i.
Ezekiel is not prostrated as at first, and
seems to see the subordinate details of
the vision more distinctly. On this
occasion the appearances were to be
closely observed, being of great signi-
ficance to the whole house of Israel.
He has to connect that which he saw
in the land of exile with this in the
temple. He has thus a proof that he
is no self-constituted messenger of the
Lord to His people, that the divine
glory shed its lights and shadows over
the captives as well as in Jerusalem, that
a change in the procedure of God was
taking effect, and He would never again

114


associate Himself with the temple-wor-
ship as in days of old. All the energies
of creation fitted to carry out the deter-
minate counsel and foreknowledge of
God were ready to be put in operation.

Vers. 9-12. These four wheels were
so arranged as that one should be beside
each cherub, “and the appearance of
the wheels was as the colour of Tar-
shish stone.” Ver. 11. “When they
went they went toward their four
sides ”—to that one of the four quarters
towards which each wheel was severally
placed—“ for to the place to which the
head turned, after it they went,” this
was noticeable that, though they might
go in any direction, yet they always
moved forward. They did so in accord-
ance with the movement, not of a special


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





wheel which was chief over the other
three, but of that one of the wheels
which happened to face the direction
in which all were to roll, and ever in
harmony with the cherubim. Ver. 12,
“And all their flesh, and their backs,
and their hands, and their wings, and
their wheels were full of eyes round
about ;” obviously the cherubim are
included in this feature as well as the
wheels, and correspond to the aspect of
the living creatures as seen by John
(Rev. iv. 6). This interruption of the
description of the wheels, by a reference
to the cherubim, may have been made
to show how all forces were gifted with
certain similar capabilities, and because
the cherubim—the vital forces— were the
more important: “to the four of them
their wheels” is the literal rendering.
If the Hebrew text is not corrupt, the
phrase can only mean that to cherubim
and wheels eyes were furnished all over.
Ver. 13. Any perplexity found in this
verse may be dissipated by regarding it
as an address to the wheels to get into
motion. “To the wheels—to them
was cried in my ears, Whirl,” or the
whirling. There are two Hebrew words
used which are both rendered in A. V.
by wheel. The distinction between them
can only be maintained by some such
translation as is given here. It is
something like the distinction between
“wheels” and ‘‘the entire machinery
of wheel-work, wheel within wheel, as
visible to Ezekiel and capable of quick,
whirlwind-like movements.” The cry
which the prophet heard, which was to
impress on him the truth that the Lord
was controlling all actions affecting Israel,
signified that the wheels were to verify
their nature by revolving. The result of
this call to them is noted in ver. 15.
Ver. 14. The aspect of the cherubim
is defined preparatory to their rising up.
“ And four faces were to every one.”
Ezekiel goes on to mention, not each of
the four faces, but that face of each
which confronted him: “the face of
the first was the face of the cherub.”
This defines nothing, though the suc-
ceeding clauses do define the face of a
man, of a lion, of an eagle. Some
commentators hold that the Hebrew





CHAP. &


word should be altered into that for
“ox.” This is not to be thought of.
It would be understood to be that by
reference to the former vision (chap. i
10). The definite article prefixed does
not mean that the face of this cherub
was the only cherubic face, but rather,
as Fairbairn suggests, that Ezekiel saw
the whole features of the cherub which
happened to be nearest to him and had
given the fire to the watcher, while in
the cases of the other three he saw one
face only.

Vers. 15-17. The command to whirl
is obeyed by the cherubim asceiiding,
and by the revolution of the wheels in
harmony with their movements. “ And
when the cherubim went, the wheels
went beside them... when these
stood they stood, and when these
rose up they rose up with them.”
They move together if they move at
all, and in perfect unison. All created
energies, whether apparently quiescent
or active, are imbued with the spirit of
life.

Vers. 18, 19. Another movement of
deepest significance was observed. “ And
the glory of the Lord went forth from
above the threshold,” to which it had
gone a short time previously (ver, 4),
“and stood above the cherubim ;” this
return is a stage towards the entire de-
parture of the Lord from His temple,
and indicates that the people might
observe it, if they would not close their
eyes. Having received the glory, “the
cherubim lifted up their wings, and
rose up from the earth before my eyes
in their going forth, and the wheels
beside them, and it,” the whole appear-
ance—the glory, the cherubim, and tlf
wheels—“‘ stood at the opening of the
gate of the Lord’s house, the eastern ;”
by this entrance the covenanted God
would, in symbol, leave the temple, and
by it, at a future period, He would
come again (chap. xliii, 2-4).

Vers. 20-22. Now that the impending
departure is on the verge of becoming
an accomplished fact, that becomes de-
finite to the prophet which he had stated
already (ver. 15) in a parenthetical way.
He has a fuller revelation than before,
and realises the import of the former

115


OHAP. xX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,





vision which had been granted to him
at the Chebar. “This was the living
creature which I saw under the God
of Israel, and I knew that they were
cherubim.” We may be hardly justified
to say that he had doubted whether they
were the cherubim which he had seen,
but, at any rate, he is certain now of
the identity. of appearances in both
visions. The Glory which has enthroned
itself over the living four and hovers
at the gate of the temple, if not in all
points the same in form as the cherubim
over the mercy-seat, are the cherubim


between whom the Lord dwelleth, and
they expressly appeared to him in thts
land of exile. Thus is Ezekiel assured by
the God of Israel that, if He abandons
His chosen seat, He does not abandon
His people—that He is with them in
their captivity to show His ways and
teach His paths, This assurance of
likeness is reiterated: “they are the
same faces which I saw by the river
Chebar—their appearances and them-
selves.” Not merely their external
aspect, but their substance had one
common resemblance,


HOMILETICS.


Gop mv Human Activity (ver. 10).


In this vision, the wings and hands, the wheels and eyes, are parts of a
mystery dark with excess of light. Just as to one who knows not the plan of
a battle, the noise, the clouds of smoke, and the movements of armies confuse
and confound. Yet the clause which tells of a wheel within a wheel, the activity
of a hidden power, may bring a lesson to our bosom and business, The thought
suggested here is this, the Lord God Omnipotent thrusts forth silently and success-
fully His hand into the being and working of every man. Reason and the king-
dom of God will prevail, and not the devil and those who do devilish work. The
wrath of man shall praise God. He, like the engineer with hand on lever, holds
the forces of the world.

By a wheel within a wheel God governs and makes all things work together for
good to those who love Him: all pleasant and all painful things ; all that is mean,
contemptible, slanderous, all that vexes and annoys. So we may put on gladness,
knowing that He overrules each event of life, and while we work He worketh in
us according to His good pleasure.

IL The Scriptures affirm this truth. They are as full of the evidences of it as
the daily press is full of the records of man’s working in individual and national
life. Take the wings of the morning and dwell in the uttermost parts of the
earth, God is there ; or descend into hell, and He is there. The devil is wheeled
about by Him there.

The broad wheel of an evil destiny seemed once to crush Joseph, but he
devoutly and magnanimously said to his brothers, “ Ye thought evil, God meant
it for good.” There was also a wheel at work in the life of Jacob, to whom in a
dark hour celestial comfort came—angels on the ladder ; in the peril of Daniel in
the den, whose heroic fidelity led a pagan king to say, ‘“‘ There is no God like the
God of Daniel;” in the case of David who, in his loss of Absalom, found it good
to be afflicted ; in the alarm of the servant at Dothan, and in the weeping of Peter.
Eyes see clearer washed with tears. Paul could glory in his infirmities, for he saw
even in them that the power of Christ was made glorious. In all the pains and
penalties, the joys and griefs, the thoughts and imaginations of life, God is busy,
out of evil still educing good.

II. History proves this. Never did men meet behind closed doors as in
Masonic secrecy without God seeing them. Every plot and conspiracy is known
to Him. The Gunpowder Plot, the Spanish Armada, the American Rebellion,
were carefully planned, but God overthrew them all. Tkere was a wheel within a
wheel. The Jews were persecuted and peeied, they were ever an easy prey to the

11€


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL, CHaP. 2.





spoiler, now they are the bankers and the traders of the worid, and hold seats of power
among the nations, The Puritans were persecuted, and you know the result, The
thing you intend to accomplish carries with it a score of things you did not intend
to do. Lutherand Columbus accomplished more than ever they dreamed of doing,
because God was in their movements. A poor man said to me, “I’ve failed, I
never was in such a strange, unique position.” Ah! what is failure? Was ever
there such a failure, apparently, as that which Christ made? All men forsook
Him and fied. What is failure? I think of God’s slaughtered saints “on Alpine
summits cold ;” of the thousands who have perished in the Inquisition ; of Jonah
hurled into the sea to save the ship ; of many who fall in battle, while victory
crowns the survivors, and J ask what is failure? God’s word says that, “though
hand join in hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished,” Even “ the stars in their
courses fought against Sisera.” Yes— Snes

IIL The laws of nature illustrate this. Say to the righteous it shall be well
with them, and to the wicked that the wheel of God is working against them. The
thunderstorm is His scavenger, driving off malaria and noxious vapour. The
biting frost, that bent low my flowers, drove the plague from one of our cities, The
earthquake is a safety-valve by which imprisoned gases are set free. Weeds, thistles,
insects are made to work out some good. As Shakespeare says—


“There is some sort of goodness in things evil,
Would men observingly distil it out.”


Remark : .

1. We cannot get along without God. If we choose to rebel against His working,
He will curse and overthrow us. If we lead selfish, prayerless, cruel lives, He will
thwart and destroy. God has punished nations who forgot Him. Go to their
graves to-day. O Judea, whose poets, prophets, and priests were the admiration of
thy nation, why art thou peeled and conquered? ‘ We rejected the Holy One and
would not obey Him.” O fair Greece, the home of orators and philosophers ! and
thou, O stately Rome on thy seven hills! why is Ichabod written on thy temples,
and thy palaces in dust, with men digging among thy ruins? “ We forgot justice,
oppressed the poor, and listened not to the truth.” It may be said to this land in
time to come, O great country, why hast thou fallen? ‘ We hasted to be rich
and turned away from God, our lips being filled with lying and our lives with
injustice.” Men and nations in prosperity often forget God, and, proud of their
might, go forth as Samson did to shake himself when “ he wist not that the Lord
had departed from him.” We live and move in God, and it is true that He lives
and moves in us, Our prayer should be, “ Guide me, O Thou great Jehovah |”

2. Nothing happens which does not help him who loves God. Losses, crosses,
abuse, injury, lead to the growth of patience, watchfulness, and the silent bearing
of sorrow, Burn your own smoke and go on. It is often darkest before dawn.
Our trials help to build up character.

3, The love of God ts emphasized by the truth before us, All the verses of the
Bible end here—in the love of God. He reigns—not sin, not sorrow, not death.
He wipes away every tear. He destroys the last enemy. His Hand guides the
course of nations. Not Victoria, not Kaiser William, not the president of a republic
is at the helm. God is Governor among the people. Trust in Him. Rejoice in
Him. He will lead us, and will lead the world even to the end.—G@allaher.


THE PERFECT ORDER (ver. 13).


We see a subordination of causes, one to another, and all under one Supreme,
L The supreme cause. He has the appearance as of a man, He speaks as
with man’s voice. There is a prefiguration of the incarnation, of the Mediator
ruling His providential kingdom. Infinite power and wisdom are His. If He
117


OHaP, X. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL.





=——


will pull down, who can hold up? If He will suspend His action, who can impel
the curbed forces to move? His ways are high above, out of our sight. We may
see the hand outside, we cannot see the living Spirit within. We are in a world
of changes, in which nothing happens by chance, but each change is subordinated
to the will of Christ.

IL The subordinate causes. Wheels are all things that are moved. They
are absolutely acted on by the word of the Lord. He alone can make them exe-
cute the objects for which they are created, and at the seasons which He knows to
be most fitted for the good and the true amongst men. They rise up to the
highest, they descend to the inferior influences which operate in human societies,
They go straight on to the points to which they are directed, and turn not from the
execution of their commission.

He reigns over all things and persons, His voice fixes the destinies of earth.
He will guide us by His counsel. So all impatience with the dealings of God is
groundless ; all murmuring is sinful, and we should learn to listen to His voice, to
be diligent and persevering in doing His work, to long that one duty or trial should
fit us for the next duty or trial.—//.


Fret anp Wings,


“ When they stood, these stood ; and when they were lifted up, these lifted
up themselves also” (x. 17). [Refer to chap. i. 24.]


Flying creatures have wings for the air and feet for the ground, This touch
of nature is put on God’s cherubim. The prophet intends no special religious
lesson here, but the fact he cites may be used to convey such.

L The subject of Christian experience, what it is and how to be main-
tained. We have faculties of locomotion, feeding, sense, perception, &., by
which we act our parts on foot as it were. We have attributes of faith-perception,
love-appropriation, spiritual imagination, in which we become aérial creatures,
resting suspensively in things above the world. This uplifting produces the tran-
scendent mystery of experience in Christian conversion. We rise by trust in God—
admitting the full revelation of His truth and friendship. When we rest ourselves,
our life and life-character on God, we prove Him, and have the sense of Him
revealed to our immediate knowledge. ‘This faith is not in something about God,
It is the man’s new, self-committing act, by which he puts himself out on trust
and begins to live on God, It isa sublime act of migration upward into the range
of spirit, and all things are new.

Can the soul thus lifted stay in that serene element? It has gravitations which
pull it all the while downward, and settle it on its feet, as the flying creatures fold
their wings when they settle. Let us trace some of the instances and ways in
which it ceases to live by faith.

When.a man of enterprise thinks of independence, how easily, how insensibly
he ceases to hang on Providence as he did. His prayers lose their fervour. God
is far less dear and less consciously present ; and how long will he have the con-
sciousness of His presence at all ?

When there is overdoing the search after evidences of faith. What is the
evidence of faith but faith itself, as we get evidence of warmth by heat which we
cannot find through any inspection? And if evidence to a man is made up, he has
made good his proofs. He is down on his fect.

When the disciple who is on the ground thinks to recover himself by his will
instead of going back to faith. God is forgotten, and the harder throes he makes
the deeper he sinks,

When disciples subside into @ mere routine practice, or observance of times
It is no longer a service of impulse and liberty. They hope there may be some

118


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, CHAP. &


i


good in it, only of a duller sort than it should be. How much better if their
faith had but a one-wing power ; it would lift them a few feet upward now
and then,

When a disciple shortens the distance between himself and the world that he
may shorten the distance between the world and himself, There is the possibility
of an over-austere practice ; but the study of conformities is one in which none but
a man of inflexible tenacity should ever dare to indulge, and only he when he is
high enough lifted by his faith in God to suffer no bent downward. Cultivating
the conformities is a plausible way of being mixed in them. Whoever undertakes to
grade and gauge a ground-surface road will not be ascending into faith at all.

When a disciple thinks to fortify faith by practised investigation and deeper
studies in matters of opinion, Benefits may thus be gained ; but he is likely to seek
his light in questions of the understanding and not by faith ; then he is down upon
the levels of mere nature. We think we touch bottom. We are going to be
floated no more. But our solidity turns out to be a living on deductions, not on
the uplifting grace of God’s inspirations. We thus settle out of grace into formu-
lations of grace, when, of course, our wings are down.

Our conclusion is, that the moment any disciple touches ground with but the
tip of his foot, and begins to rest on earthly props, a mortal weakness takes him,
and he goes down. Only a calm and loving return to his trust will recover him,
and God is faithful enough to be trusted at all times. Let there be this rest by
faith, and he will carry himself more steadily in studies, toils, or engagements.
Sometimes obscurations may occur, but he has only to believe the more strongly
and wait till they be cleared.

Il. Many persons miss ever going above a service on foot, by not conceiv-
ing at all the more ethereal range of experience, into which true faith would lift
them. Sometimes they become reformers or philanthropists. They mean business
in their religion, caring little for the fervours that are not fervoursof work. The
combining and rolling up of great masses of opinion are the means by which they
expect to carry their projects, Censure and storm and fiery denunciation are close
at hand. They, many times, do not conceive that they are disciples because of
their repentances, or their prayers, or sensing of God by their faith, or any other
grace that separates them from the world. They have much to say of love, but
they visibly hate more strongly than they love. They never go above to descend
upon the reform by inspirations there kindled; they keep on their feet, and war
with the evils on the same level with them.

Sometimes they attempt self-culture in the name of religion. They could
mend defects, chasten faults, put themselves in the charities they have learned
from Christ, perhaps, to admire ; but the work is a far more hopeless one than they
imagine, if there is no uplifting help from gracious inspirations. Besides, the work
keeps to a continual self-contemplation which is selfish. Old faults will come back,
and they will have to fight all over again. Vexed, soured, discouraged, the whole
undertaking may be’given up. Oh, if they would go up to Christ, or to God in a
true faith-culture, faults would fall off, as blasted flowers from a tree, by the life-
principle therein. No man finishes a character who does not go above himself,
and take the culture of God’s own Spirit.

Sometimes they settle down to ritualism. We all begin, almost unwittingly,
to have a religion that is manipulated by our senses and sensuous tastes, We are
caught by the forms. All the better that they are so nearly level with our natural
faculties, and just as easy to be used without faith as with! How convenient to
have a religion that lets the faiths and the fervours take care of themselves |
Saying prayers, too—how much easier than to pray and find how to be heard.
Thus a sufficient religion is got below ; but the sad thing is, that instead of giving
the disciple free wing, it keeps him down; so that if he becomes more earnest in
it, it is turned into a superstition.


119


OWAP, XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





Sometimes they suppose they are religious because of a certain patronage they _
give to the Church and the word, Not being in the gift of spiritual discernment,
their tastes will be the better; and as there are always a great many reasons why
a thing should not be done to any single reason why it should, they assume to
be specially qualified critics. They contribute these critical powers, while others,
less gifted, may contribute their prayers! Such negatives do not belong to the
range of the Spirit, but to the nether world of fashion, or opinion, or custom.
The critics have feet but no wings. If they could give themselves over in trust
to the Saviour, instead of giving their opinions and tastes, their contributions
would be of worthier significance.

Sometimes they distrust experiences in religion, divine monitions, answers to
prayer, calls to particular duties and works, They like the level of nature. All
supernatural upliftings and fervours are fantasies that had best be avoided. Inspira-
tions are nothing ; judgments everything. What shall we say of that story which
the Apostle Paul tells the Corinthians? It was his way to be going up into high
regions, so that he was not sure, at times, whether he had a thing by revelation
or not. People called him ‘ mad,” because he did not stay on foot, in their level
of sanity. But was there ever a soul more massive and sublimely steady in its
equilibrium than his?

What is the conclusion of the whole matter? That the Christian idea of
religion is not any mere playing out of nature as its own level; but is the lifting
up of the man above himself in a transformation that makes him new. In so far
as he is a Christian, he becomes the citizen of another kingdom. Whatever dis-
respect he may encounter, he will have evidences in himself that ask no certifica-
tion. He will have learned that the only safe way of living is the highest. Here
his internal jars and discords are laid and a glorious serenity is established, The
earth is not his mother ; if he descends to the ground his strength vanishes.

If we are to make an ascent into this higher plane of experience, the ties which
hold our feet must be effectually cut by habitual self-renunciations. Selfishness
and self-indwigence are no more for us, We must lift up everything we do in
the world and hope from it, into that pure life of sacrifice and trust in which we
abide with the Master. We must be as Noah when the Lord shut him in the
ark, and be severed from every natural trust. Our expectation must be rested
on God, not on pillars of any kind below—pillars are not wanted under wings,—
Bushnell, abridged.


(4.) Tue CaLamiry THREATENED TO JERUSALEM (Chap, xi. 1-13).


EXEGETICALNOTES.—Themove- power at the gate of the temple-court,


ments of the Glory of the Lord are inter-
mitted for a time, During that interval
a new condition is entered into by Eze-
kiel, Hitherto, notwithstanding the un-
folding of so many abominations before
his eyes, and by which his heart must
have been greatly distressed, his lips
have been sealed in regard to any de-
nunciation of them. Now, when the
cherubic throne is hovering over the
east gate, he is led to that spot and is
empowered to utter a severe rebuke
against the representatives of Jerusalem,
and also to declare promises to the
elders who represented the exiled.

Ver. 1. Ezekiel is placed by the spirit-

120


under the Glory, “and, behold, in the
opening of the gate twenty-five men.”
This number makes us think of the
twenty-five men mentioned in chap. viii.
16; but we cannot suppose thein, as
some do, to be the same. Zhey were
worshipping the sun, and we should
conclude that they were slain by the
watchers with the weapon of destruc-
tion. Besides, the standing-place of
the twenty-five of chap. viii. indicated
that they were priests. TZhat is not
indicated here, and we are rather led
to believe, from the position of the
present twenty-five, and from their
characterisation (ver. 3), that they re-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


oo ey





present civil authorities who were con-
sulting with one another on matters
of state; “and I saw in their midst
Jaazaniah the son of Azur,” therefore
not the elders of Israel he had previously
seen (chap. viii. 11), “and Pelatiah the
son of Benaiah, princes of the people.”
It is most likely that the two princes
named were living in Jerusalem at that
time, and noted as being leaders among
the dominant party. Or they may kave
been singled out in order to point to the
inconsistency between their names and
the course they advocated. The Lord
who hears (Jaazaniah) and who helps
(Azur): the Lord who delivers (Pela-
tiah) and builds up (Benaiah) ; and they
were departing from the Lord !

Vers. 2,3. “These are the men that
devise mischief and give evil counsel
in this city ;” they set up an opposition
to God’s messages, and provoke His
wrath. The gist of their opposition is
stated; but the Hebrew construction does
not favour the translation of the A. V.
The curtness of the phraseology renders
the meaning obscure. ‘Who say, Not
in nearness [is] the building of houses,
it [is] the caldron and we [are] the
flesh.” Any interpretation must take
account of this as the evil counsel, and
that it was held to be audaciously
iniquitous. It obviously refers to some
circumstances of that period, and we
may find them indicated in that pro-
phecy of Jeremiah in which he instructed
the captive Jews to build houses, &e,
(chap. xxix. 5), These princes scoffed
at that message thus, “Those who are
far off, in a land of exile, may take, if
they please, the prophet’s advice and
build houses for themselves there. That
does not concern us here—it is too
remote a district from ours. Let Jeru-
salem be a pot, which Jeremiah (chap.
i, 13) declares is to smoke and boil by
the fury of a hostile invasion from the
north, then we shall be the flesh within
it; its strong fortifications and sure
defences shall preserve us against any
flame of war that may kindle around
us. We have no occasion to be terrified
or succumb to warnings.” So they re-
jected the ways of the Lord and trusted
to their own devices; and would such a


OHAP. XI.





defiant spirit, on the part of those whe
were called to honour Him, be met by
the Lord ?

Ver. 5. The impelling might of the
Spirit moves Ezekiel to an utterance,
“Thus saith the Lord, So ye say, 0
house of Israel, and what riseth up in
your spirit, I know it.” Not only is
He cognisant of their overt words and
several plottings, but also of the real
aims and wishes which underlie their
proceedings, and holds them responsible
(ver. 6) for the consequences resulting
therefrom,

Ver. 7. “ Therefore thus saith the
Lord Jehovah, Your slain, whom ye
have placed in the midst of it, they
are the flesh and it is the caldron.”
Your slain are those who had been
cut down through the outrages of the
princes themselves (see chap. xxiv.), and
also those who perished because of the
wicked counsels whose effect had been
to bring the Chaldean army against
Jerusalem. ‘‘ Ezekiel gives them back
their own words, as containing an un-
doubted truth, but in a different sense
from that in which they had used them.”
There will be flesh protected in the
caldron from the fire, but it will repre-
sent those who are slain. A grim satire :
The dead are the safe! ‘And one
shall bring you forth from its midst ;”
the princes and their abettors should
not be defended in the city. They
should be taken out of it to answer for
their crimes,

Ver. 9. “A sword ye have feared,
and a sword will I make to come
upon you, saith the Lord Jehovah.”
They were in apprehension of the
war which had been pressed on by
the king of Babylon, and, contrary to
the urgent representations of Jeremiah,
made a coalition with Egypt ; yet, not
withstanding their schemings, “ the
hand of strangers,” the Chaldean
forces, would perpetrate violent deeds
under the impact of divine impulses,

Vers, 11, 12. The supposed security
would be invaded: the city would not
be a caldron for them; taken away from
it, “on the frontier of Israel will I
judge you;” they would be captives,
and taken to the extremity ot their land
: 21


GBaP. XI,


to undergo punishment. Jeremiah nar-
rates (chap. xxxix. 4, 5) how this threat
was fulfilled in the bloody scenes at
Ribla in Hamath on the northern
border of Israel, and where, as an
Assyrian tablet in the British Museum
tells, the headquarters of Nebuchad-
nezzar were on this expedition. Like
all other tribulations, this had for its
ulterior end to work the conviction that
the Lord was their only real king, “in
whose statutes ye walked not, and
whose judgments ye did not; but ye
did according to the judgments of the
nations round about you:” a differ-
ence from what was stated in chap. v.
7, as to surrounding nations; but evi-
dently referring here to such corrupt
practices of their neighbours as they
copied. The materials, out of which
proceeded the destruction of the then
existing Jewish government, are thus set
forth, and, that destruction being so
distinctly predicted, the people should
learn that it was with the most perfect
reason that God claimed for Himself
the honour of supreme ruler, ‘It is
lamentable if we must gain the know-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; LZEKIEL.





ledge of God by our own destruction,—
if He, in whom we live and move and
are, is first recognised by the strokes
which break our own head” (Heng.)

Ver. 13. A portentous event im-
presses the prophetic words. “ And
it came to pass that as I was pro-
phesying Pelatiah, the son of Benaiah,
died.” Though this incident is still
part of Ezekiel’s ecstasy, it is probable
that one of the chief advisers of Jeru-
salem died about the time in some such
awfully sudden manner and when sur-
rounded by his fellows in the temple.
The effect on the sensitive Seer is great,
and suggests bitter and painful thoughts
as to the slaughter of his people as hap-
pened previously (chap. ix. 8): “and
I fell on my face, and cried with a
loud voice, and said, Ah Lord Je-
hovah, dost Thou make an utter end
of the remnant of Israel?” He speaks
as if he had forgotten all grounds of
hope, and as if the people in the capital
were the real representatives of Israel
in whose mournful fate all Israei would
be overwhelmed and lost. He will learn
that it is otherwise,


HOMILETICS.


REFUGES OF LIES BROKEN UP.


Under the boastings of its leading men the people of Jerusalem were living in
fancied security. They had heard from Jeremiah the prophet announcements of
coming woes ; but they put far from themselves the evil day, and buoyed them-
selves up with the expectation that, even if it did come, they would escape ita
troubles, Theirs is a common state of mind in respect to the truths of God which
are wished not to be true, aud we need to stand in His light that we may be
disabused of our hurtful errors. He aims to help us thereto by a procedure such
as is disclosed in this paragraph. He shows that self-constituted refuges—

L Are based on miscalculations. Men calculate that there is no necessity
immediately to renounce past courses: the judge is not standing before the door ;
the call to watch for the Master’s coming can be trifled with for a while. Thus
many vaguely feel, if they do not positively present excuses as to the incidence of
a season of searching and decisive trial, They may walk on in darkness till that
day overtakes them as a thief. For, as all events are uncertain, to risk the present
space given for repentance is, it may be, to risk the building of a house without
means to finis) it, the being overwhelmed by ruin from which there will be no
opportunity to escape. We can use “now” but not “ then ” to flee,

IL They are abortive before God, He knows all that comes into the heart,
the mouth, the hands, and so is able to test the real character of each. The stand
made by men in self-defence is untenable, Fancies will not shut out afflictions,
spring up when they may. No causes, no secret purposes can be so encrusted
that they will elude the penetration of the eyes that are as a flame of fire. To

122


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZERIEL, CHAP. Bi





$ave


cherish hopes, apart from Christ, that we shall be preserved from future evils, is
to cherish hopes on a quicksand over which the tidal wave is beginning to rise.
Sins make culprits, and the righteous Lord will not let one elude His sentence,
whatever the rank, the numbers, the religious privileges be. Search lest thy
refuge lie open to the flood of divine condemnation.

III. They are open to dislocations. One is from the word of the Lord. It
came by prophets. It has come, in these last days, by a Son. We read, we hear
what He hath spoken, and learn that the entire bearing of that word of the living
God is to convict of sin and to bring to immediate faith in the Saviour from sin.
Again and again were men urged to “‘ Hear the Word of the Lord ;” again and
again are we urged now, “ He that hath ears to hear, let him hear what the Spirit
saith unto the churches.”

Another is from the action of human influences. The sword, captivity, spoiling
of goods affected the contemporaries of Ezekiel: an ailment, an emigration, a
pecuniary loss operate upon us. We shall miss the true reasons for such shakings
of our usual affairs, if we do not trace in them the will of the righteous and loving
Lord, who would show to us that we have been trusting in that which is of the
flesh, who would draw us to plant our feet upon the Rock of ages. ‘I will
search Jerusalem with lamps, and punish the men that are settled on their lees:
that say in their hearts, The Lord will not do good, neither will He do evil”
(Zeph. i. 12).

Thus are records made that the Lord sets His face against our doings that are
not good, and that, whether they are to be classed under unfaithfulness to Him or
unbrotherliness to men, He will expose them to utter collapse. No schemes, no
confidences will be capable of resisting Him, ‘‘The Lord is known by the judg-
ment that He executeth.”

Who will accept the decisions of the Holy One as to their hopes of safety in
coming storms? Who will forsake all and follow Christ? ‘If you would not be
broken by His judgment, do not break His statutes ; if you would secure your
lives, walk in His laws.”


A Vision or Suppzn DerarH (ver. 18).


Painful associations were linked in with the sudden end of Pelatiah’s counsel
and boastings. While the consensus of human testimony proves that such an
immediate cessation of the activities of life is not considered as always stamped
with the brand of punishment, it is always regarded as more or less of a calamity.
Even they who know that the hand of the Good Shepherd is leading them into
the unseen world, yet shrink from this manner of exit from the present world.
The feeling is to be accounted for because of —

I. The general mysteriousness. There are no precise premonitions, no
apparently gradual preparations. For though such a death must have been pre-
ceded by causes adequate to produce it, those causes, whether physical or mental,
have not been credited with the deadly force which they exert. The death appears
to be the bursting forth of a new and poignant energy, and our hearts are awed
by the sad and startling memento which marks its route. Besides, the selection
is utterly incomprehensible. Two men are given equal prominence in the course
taken by Jerusalem, yet one expires in a moment, and the other still breathes the
vital air. One of a family goes in an instant down to the grave, but all the other
members go more or less slowly. We may be surprised at the falling of the lot,
but we have no light as to its movements. Only this can we be sure of, that He
who gave life takes it away in a method that is at once wise and good, “ Blessed
be the name of the Lord !”

IL The utter helplessness. No nursing, no skill can be made the least use
of. We may cry for a parting word, a pressare. a look; but we a Ni no

2





OHAP. EY, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL.
result. We see the living now, in a moment we see they are not, and we can do


nothing for them, we can only look. They pass altogether beyond our aid.
seein still beside us, but they have gone—where 4

III. An indescribable contiguity of solemn spiritual conditions. Pelatiah
is hearing the word of the Lord by Ezekiel, and in the very sound thereof hears
the command of the King of terrors. Mercy and judgment stand hand in hand,
The hearer becomes at once a dweller in “the silent land.” What will be learned
there? The judgment of the All Holy, unaffected by any ignorance, misconcep-
tion, shrinking! What if he be impenitent? What if his tongue be still vibrating
with words in which he gave counsel against good? What if he has not cleansed
his hands from the filth of dishonest gain or the blood of those he has injured?
He is struck powerless. He is in face of iniquity at this step, he is confronted
with its penalty at the next.

IV. A shock to natural feelings,


They


Fear for oneself and pity for another
cannot be restrained. Surprise and awe might have affected Pelatiah’s fellow-
counsellors for a time. The effect was transient. They persisted in their wicked
devices in the city ; they acted in fatal correspondence thereto. Their seasonable
impressions, like the morning cloud and early dew, soon vanished away. On the
other hand men, with the love to God and man which stirred Ezekiel, pray that
such a sudden stroke may not cut down those who are still im their trespasses ;
they ask for sparing mercy that such persons may be moved to work the works of
God before the night cometh in which no man can work. How vain is prayer
when the sinners prayed for will go on in evil ways! “ How sad it is that the
godly should be concerned for the coming doom of transgressors, and yet the
transgressors themselves remain unmoved. Let believers imitate Ezekiel, and
when judgments descend on some, ‘lift up their prayer for the remnant that is


left’” (Fausset).


Wert thou this moment to go through the gates of death, wouldst thou go as
one who had walked or had not walked thereto in the footprints of Jesus? ‘‘ Watch,
for ye know neither the day nor the hour in which the Son of Man cometh.”


(5.) Mercy PROMISED TO THE EXILES, AND CONCLUSION OF THE VISION
(vers, 14-25).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Vers. 14—
21. Ezekiel receives, for answer to his
urgent appeal, an intimation that the
doom of Jerusalem is irrevocable, but
that the Lord’s people will not be for-
saken. Amongst the exiles, who are
contemptuously treated by dwellers in
the capital, are found tokens of the
broken, contrite heart which He does
not despise. He will put an end to
their captivity, and settle them again
in the land of their fathers.

Ver. 15. The utterance of the Lord
must have been unexpected. The pro-
phet supposed that they who remained
in Jerusalem were the real representa-
tives of Israel, and his yearning for their
deliverance was thus intensified. His
mistake springs from a common ten-
dency in regard to the kingdom of God.

124


Men look at its externalities. Those
who have antiquity and ritual on their
side are counted the chosen to good,
while they who suffer and are decried
are regarded as of no account. Yet in
the latter are the germs of mercy from
God laid: “thy brethren, thy breth-
ren,” the twice-told designation empha-
tically indicating that Ezekiel is to find
his true relations in those with whom
he is connected as an exile, however
unfavourable their condition: “men ot
thy kindred ”—a translation which ap-
parently causes a tautology, for brethren
are kindred; but is grounded on the
fact that the Hebrew word refers to the
duties of the goel,—the blood-relation
who tcok up the responsibilities, po-
verty, injuries of his kindred (Lev, xxy,
25, 48). Some propose to employ the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





primary meaning, and translate the
phrase, men of thy redemption, those
whom thou art bound to ransom, or
intercede for to deliver from evil. The
ascription of the duties of goel to
Ezekiel seems far-fetched and forced ;
but is defended for the reason that it
conveys “a peculiar reproach to the
proud Jews who have been so ready to
cast off the claims of blood-relationship,
and at the same time a hope of restora-
tion to those who have been unduly
thrown aside” (Speaker's Com.) The
reading of the LXX is, the men of thy
captwity, obviously translating the same
Hebrew word that is found in ver. 24,
and which differs from that read here
by a single letter: “and all the house
of Israel, all of it,” including in this
title all Israel wheresoever they were
scattered abroad, and who by the phrase
seem counted by God as those who
constituted the whole house of Israel,
“to whom the inhabitants of Jeru-
salem say, Remove far off from the
land ; to us the land is given for a
possession.” Captivity, in the eyes of
the Jerusalemites, was a cutting off
from the covenants and promises ; but
their residence in the city was a par-
ticipation in them. They concluded
that Israel was to be known by external
signs. ‘Thereby they show how in-
experienced they are in the ways of
God, how far they are from having the
heart of true Israelites, how little they
deserve that the prophet should take an
interest in them” (Heng.)

Ver. 16. “Therefore,” seeing that
the inhabitants of Jerusalem treat the
captives as thrust out from the Lord,
He causes His prophet to refer to this
despisal and say, “Though I have re-
moved them far off among the na-
tions, and though I have scattered
them in the lands,” that which their
depreciators say is so far true; but the
exile is not comfortless and irreversible,
“vet I will be to them a sanctuary
for a little while:” they are deprived
of that which was once My sanctuary,
where I manifested My presence, but
they shall have one notwithstanding.
I Myself will be with them for a season,
The AV., by its-translation @ little sanc-


CHAP. XI.





tuary, makes it seem as if the Lord
would give to the captives, in some minor
degree, what He had given in the tem-
ple. No doubt this was the case. But
there is more involved. The exiles
would be comforted with the promise
of a far greater boon than that of enter-
ing within the walls of an earthly tem-
ple, and also with the assurance that
the duration of their banishment from
the temple would be limited. ‘ Canaan
was still the land of the covenant ; and
the presence of the Lord among His
people, at a distance from that land,
could be only a temporary thing.” But
by this dealing with them the captives
were prepared to give weight to the
eternal truth that God dwells not in
temples made with hands, that they
could worship Him acceptably any-
where, and so new advances were taken
towards the coming of Him in whose
resurrection-body was seen the temple
not made with hands, and through
whom all men may come to the Father.

“In what way did the Lord prove
Himself to be the sanctuary of the peo-
ple in their captivity? First of all by
sending the prophet himself,. .. a
preacher of repentance and salvation,
and one so richly endowed. . .. That
which made the temple itself into a
temple, the presence of God, dwelt in
him, Again, He proved this by the
outward protection which He afforded
them, ... by inward consolations, &c.
Every event that transpired,—the ele-
vation of Daniel, the fall of the Baby-
lonian and rise of the Persian power,—
pointed to this end. How different was
the Babylonian exile from that of the
present day! In the latter there are
no signs of the presence of God. The
nation can do nothing but celebrate
memorial feasts and dream of the
future ” (Heng.)

“The dispersion, besides being a
just chastisement on account of sin, and
a salutary discipline to lead the heart of
the people back to God, had an impor-
tant end to accomplish as a preparatory
movement in providence for opening
the way for Messiah’s kingdom. It was
very far from being an unmixed evil,
It was of great service in diffusing

125


OEAP. XI.





the knowledge of God, and providing
materials for the first foundations of the
Christian Church. But it was still more
important and necessary in spiritnalising
the views of the Jews, and training to
the knowledge and service of God
without the help of a material temple.
The devout worshipper at Babylon,
Alexandria, Rome, found himself a par-
taker of God’s presence and blessing.
What a mighty advance did the king-
dom of God thus make toward the pos-
session of the world! And the Lord
manifested His power to overrule a
present evil for the accomplishment of
an ultimate good” (Fairbairn).

Vers, 17, 18. A reply to the asser-
tion of men of Jerusalem that the land
was their exclusive possession. ‘‘ There-
fore say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah,
and,” besides being a sanctuary, “TI
will gather you and give to you the
territory of Israel ; but the restoration
will not be to the state of things which
existed prior to the exile; “and they,”
whom the Lord thus favours, ‘ come
thither and take away all its detest-
able things and all its abominations
therefrom ;” first of all they cease to
do the evil things which had provoked
their Almighty King; they no longer
halt between the Lord and Baalim.
But “that they have eschewed idolatry
ever since their return from Babylon,”
is a statement to be qualified by the
remarks of Hengstenberg. “ That Satan
should drive out Satan, or a refined
system of idolatry (even Jehovah can
become an idol) make war upon one of
a grosser kind, is a matter of no reli-
gious importance. It is also evident
that the outward removal of idols, in
the period immediately following the
restoration and in the time of the Mac-
cabees, is included in the prophecy only
eo far as God Himself was the prinet-
pium movens on those occasions, But
this can be regarded as only a very
small beginning. If the idols had all
been banished from the country along
with the idolatrous images, the people
would have had some ground for charg-
ing God with unfaithfulness in not
performing His promises. The external
removal of the things, by which the

126


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


—


land of the Lord had been defiled, was
thought of by the prophet only so far
as it was the result of the unconditional
surrender of the heart to the Lord.”

Vers. 19, 20. “ And I give them one
heart,” a heart in which will, thought,
feeling are in unison, and which finds
itself in harmony with other hearts.
The method by which this grace will be
brought about is the Lord’s; “and a
new spirit will I put within you,”
“the same for substance, but altered
in the frame, renewed in the qualities
thereof” (Trapp), “and I will take
away the heart of stone from their
flesh, and give them an heart of
flesh.” “There is generally more said
than ought to be said according to God’s
word, that ‘in its natural state man’s
heart’ is ‘hard as astone.’ It becomes
the heart of stone only by hardening. By
nature it is rather ‘an heart of flesh,’
which grace confronts with spirit of
Spirit (John iii. 6), With the fleshy state
of the heart manifold gifts of Godare con-
ceivable, as was the case of Israel from
their fathers (hereditary blessings). The
New Testament interpretation must not,
as a matter of course, be put upon vers.
19 and 20. In comparison with the stony
heart which God’s judgments broke in
pieces, this was to be an heart of flesh ;
but yet it was merely an heart of flesh.
The heart of stone stands in relation to
the idols, so the heart of flesh, the new
spirit, the one heart, stands in relation
to the only true God. The keeping
apart of flesh and stone is as important
as that of flesh and spirit” (Lange).
Israel had gone into a position that was
unnatural to it, but was to return, by
divine working, into that which was
natural, “that they may walk in My
statutes, and keep My judgmenis, and
do them,” &.

Ver. 21. The promise is accompanied
with a dark shadow. Whosoever there
be “ whose heart goes after the heart
of their detestable things and their
abominations,” who continue a devotion
full of interest in the idols which their
evil hearts attach themselves to, they
shall reap the fruit of their own ways,
If the idols represent merely illusions,
vet they exercise a mastering sway over


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP. KE.


— eee


individuals, while the full nature of sin
is manifested by their worship. ‘“ What
power has Mammon now, as a national
god, over Jewish minds, although he is
in himself a mere shadow!” (Heng.)
“ The moral bearings of the Lord’s state-
ment fasten on every man his own re-
sponsibility for his own conduct. Mercy
to a people does not shut off personal
agency.” The promise of a return to
Canaan was not given to the exiles as
an absolute and unconditional good,


what actually was, we find that the
word received but a partial fulfilment,
and Canaan as occupied by the restored
remnant was not a region of holiness.
Still the promise did not fail; the Lord
did provide for Himself a spiritual
offspring from the captivity, and plant
them anew as a seed of blessing in the
land of their fathers—enough to furnish
a pledge that the sum of all promise,
the work of reconciliation in Christ,
would, in due time, be brought to com-


And comparing the promise of what


pletion ” (Fairbairn).
should have been, with the record of


HOMILETICS.
THe APPEAL OF RELIGION TO THE FEELINGS.


There had been a general deterioration in the life of the Jewish people.
Religion was corrupted into superstition, and all that was purifying and rightening
in it got rid of. Then, as a matter of course, their morals became depraved, and
then came political degradation and national ruin. In their hopeless plight as
exiles, what was it that they really needed ?

The answer cannot be far to seek. The spirit of revolt had been stirred up
against the power which dominated them. Of what use had that been? If God
should intervene by some wonderful “ providence,” and with a strong arm bring
them out of Chaldea and restore them to their own land, of what avail could even
that be? If the same people, animated by the same spirit, had been all reinstated
in their properties possessed before, what would have been gained? The one
essential thing of all was for the men and women, the young men and maidens, to
love and choose right and good—be obedient to God, and righteous and loving
toward one another; for, if the inmost character of the people remained
unchanged, the same wretched consequences would once more follow. To try
this experiment over again would simply have been waste of time and waste of
everything. A corrupt and bad nation can never be for long a prosperous nation.
Evil still clings to it, and will produce its own fruits of course. So it would have
been utterly vain to have shown a false compassion to them and brought them
back from captivity just as they were.

The promise of renewed prosperity is here made dependent on renewed right-
ness. The religious promise is the grand and basal one (ver, 20). The people
must become a right people, must have a right heart and a new spirit, or pros-
perity is out of the question. The national character is the main thing to be
looked to if a people-would enjoy national welfare. “ Righteousness exalteth a
nation.” If the love of righteousness be general and strong, that will purge the
eyesiglit of a people, and they will see what they ought to do. All those
members of a nation who sap the robust righteousness of the people; all those
who countenance and promote the neglect of religion, who weaken the faith of
others in God, who lessen reverence and piety, by word or deed or by the power
of example, are helping to undermine the national well-being. While all who
help righteousness, truth, goodness, the fear of God, and the love of men, are doing
best for their country’s stability and progress. In order to the accomplishment
of such a result, there must be a heart renovated by religion. And so we learn
that the very core of this true religion is a power over the heart. ie heart

27


OHAP, XI, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,





stands principally for the feelings, we may say that religion is chiefly having the
feelings right,

Religion is made by many a quite outward affair, one of rites and ceremonies
and observances. With others a correct religious creed is everything, and not a
few weed their creed of all positive statements and reduce it to negatives—to
denying this, and contradicting that, and arguing against the other. These are in
great danger of making religion consist in notions, t.¢., chiefly a matter of intellect.

The intellect and the feelings are often put in opposition ; but it ought not to
be so. The use of the intellect in religion is to help the heart. We want both
brought into the highest condition of health and vigour. It is ever bad to divorce
them, and undesirable to cultivate one at the expense of the other. But if we
were obliged to confine ourselves, then there is no question the heart, the feeling,
must have the vast pre-eminence. The understanding is addressed in Scripture ag
the way to the conscience and the heart. Right knowledge is good even for its
own sake ; but if it be alone, a man may be a devil. Intellect without love is one
definition of the devil.

Why are the feelings of this importance in religion ?

L Because they govern the man. A man may love to flatter himself that he
is governed by his intellect, by pure reason. In ninety-nine cases out of a
hundred he is governed by his feelings, by his inclinations, by his likings, and
then he calls in reason! He employs his intellect to find him useful arguments
by which he may vindicate himself to himself and to others !


“The afterthoughts
Which reagon coins to justify excess
And passion’s disappointment.”


It was the feelings which impelled John and Peter, Martha and Mary, to Christ ;
which made Annas and Caiaphas seek His death; it was a certain class of feel-
ings which urged Judas to betray Him. So now. Some men love the Revealer
and believe in Him; they find the evidences which they ask for satisfactory, and
may be able to give a reason to others. Some do not love that Life which claims
to be divine, it rebukes their life too much; they scan the evidences and find
them insufficient, and are glad to be able to say so. The feelings are seen to be
supreme as the active power in human life. Hence God seeks to enlist them on
the side of righteousness, and has so put Truth—embodied it in a person—as to
make right affections possible and easy. Therefore, “ Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God,” &c. ‘ Lovest thou Me?”

II. Because the feelings form a ground common to all men on which religion
can act. With many the intellect is very feeble, and only the fewest can have a
well-furnished and well-disciplined intellect, But all can have strong feelings,
strong likings and dislikings. Ought not religion to be an affair of that on which
all classes can stand on pretty equal terms? The feelings enlisted, what is too
hard in any rank of life ?

III. Because the feelings decide the character. A man is what his chief
love or liking is, what his allowed and cherished feelings are, As he thinketh in
his heart, so is he. And Christ is the supreme test. For there is, in happiest
proportions, all goodness embodied in His life which has special claims on men.
If the feelings towards Him are those of indifference, unconcern, to say nothing
of opposition, then is the heart a heart of stone indeed ; and the one first and
great need for such a man. is to get rid of his heart of stone and acquire a heart
of flesh.

We see how wisely God has made religion to be primarily an affair of the heart
and not of the intellect. We recognise the pains He hath taken to win the heart
for the right, to awaken and stimulate and direct the feelings. This is to a great
extent the rationale of the Gospel, the logic of Christianity. We are interested tc


HOOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP, XI,








see how the promise of one heart was fultilled to the captives as represented in the
books of Ezra and Nehemiah, Important also to see how the matter bears on us
(2 Cor. vi, 17, vii. 1).

Counsel and promise meet here. We are to get the heart of flesh of ourseives,
God will give it to us. Both needed. He will give; we must concur. If we
prize the promise, we shall do all we can to get rid of one kind of heart and to
obtain the other. How many means are found to be provided ; how many things,
habits, &c., to be sedulously avoided, and others to be sedulously observed, If
you will try honestly to make you a heart of flesh, God will command success, will
secure the result.—H, H. D.


Gop THE SANCTUARY OF THE AFFLICTED (ver. 16).


There is a tendency in nature and providence to keep things in a kind of
equality. There are compensations. In what condition can we be found that
possesses no advantages? Let us consider from this verse—

L The calamity. ‘I have cast them off,” &c. The event serves to display—

1. The agency of God. He asserts His dominion and influence over all the
sufferings of nations, families, and individuals, An irreligious mind is detained
from God by the persons or events which injure Him. A pious man can say, “It
is the Lord.” He acts by the intervention of means. He did not carry away the
Jews by miracle, but by the effect of war; and we are not to conclude that God
has nothing to do in any work because of the vileness of those who are engaged
in it. He makes the very wrath of man to praise Him.

2. Displays the truth of God. The evil had been foretold and threatened by
successive prophets, and the calamity was identified with the Divine veracity—
“ Hath He spoken, and shall He not make it good ?”

3. Displays the holiness of God. The offences of this people were aggravated by
their privileges. Sin is not to be judged of by its grossness, but by its guilt. No
wonder that He punished the Jews.

4. Displays the wisdom of God. By their dispersion they were in “the midst
of many people as a dew from the Lord.”

5. Displays His goodness. He punished not to destroy, but reform, Their
captivity was limited in duration, and He did not leave them comfortless in the
meantime.

II. The alleviation. ‘‘ Yet will I be to them,” &. He engages to be to them
a temple, so that He should be found of them, and they would see His power and
glory. He compensates them for the want of those very things which seem essen-
tial to their welfare.

1. In the loss of outward comforts. He does not require us to be indifferent to
substance, health, friends; but as He is the unchangeabie and all-sufficient, we
have a security independent of the world, diseases, associates. At first we may
murmur when affliction comes, but it is to wean us from creatures and draw to
trust in the living God, How many can bear witness that He has made that
condition comfortable wkich they once deemed insupportable, and that the joy of
salvation and the comforts of the Holy Ghost are effectual substitutes for every
deficiency in creature good !

2. In the want of gracious ordinances. God will never countenance the neglect
of the means of grace; but He will make up for the want of them. When we
eannot follow Him, He can follow us. The superstitious should remember this as
well aa the afflicted. He can meet with His people in any place, and wherever H
bolds communion with them the place becomes sacred.

What a place, then, is heaven! What a xatural world must that he where there
is needed no light of the sun! What a mora/ world, where we can dispense with


129


OHAP, XL








HOMILETI O COMMENTARY ; EZEKIEL,





Sabbaths, with preaching, with temples! ven religion will cease there, and only
the dispositions it formed and the state to which it led remain.


What a being, then, is God !


He enables us to live a life of dependence upon


Him and communion with Him. No want but He can relieve, no hope but He


ean accomplish. He is accessible by Christ.


Let us come to Him, and say, “I


am continually with Thee,” &c.—(Jay, abridged.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Vers.
22, 23. With the promise of good
to the exiled Jews the vision imme-
diately draws to its close, The cheru-
bim and their associated wheels (chap,
x. 16, 17) underneath the divine glory
prepare to move away. “And the
glory of the Lord rose up from the
midst of the city:” it had been rest-
ing at the gate opening to the city
(chap. x. 4)—considered to be its
central point—now it will leave en-
tirely the temple and its precincts, as
also the city, “and make a stand
over the mount, which is to the east
of the city”—the Mount of Olives,
commanding an outlook over all Jeru-
salem. There it waited, betokening
that the city was no longer defended
by the Lord—a defence was no more
upon all the glory—and when Ezekiel
had traced thus far its movements,
he felt himself withdrawn from any
further sight of it. ‘The rabbis,
commenting on this passage, said that
the Shechinah retired eastward to the
Mount of Olives, and there for three
years called in vain to the people with
human voice that they should repent”
(Speaker’s Com.) On this mount Jesus
wept, and predicted the second over-
throw of Jerusalem (see xix. 21;
Matt. xxiv. 3); from it He went up
into heaven (see xxiv. 5 ; Acts i. 12) ;
and Zechariah prophesied (chap. xiv. 4)
that on it the Lord shall stand to fight
against hostile nations, and bring bless-
ings to Hisown, What Ezekiel saw
“was a withdrawal of the divine glory,
and yet a continuance of it in the
neighbourhood.” Jehovah’s external
protection and blessing may have been
withdrawn, but still the invisible power
of the Spirit will remain near them,
and probably manifest itself the more
loriously on that account. It is
kiel who has discerned, set forth,
and described in the most touching
130


manner the quickening and awaken.
ing power of the Spirit of Jehovah on
the whole people (see xxxvii.) In a
similar way Jesus, in whom the divine
glory resides bodily, withdraws Him-
self from the Jews (John viii. 21):
but His standing on the Mount of
Olives, on the east side of Jerusalem,
is a sign that, though invisible, He is
still near to bless them (Acts iii. 26).
— Baumgarten.

Vers, 24 and 25. The same force
which had rapt the seer away brings
him back to a consciousness of the
presence of the elders in his house in
Chaldea. “And I spake to the exiles
all the words of the Lord which He
had made me see.” The elders did
not see the visionary journey on which
Ezekiel had been taken ; but probably
they had observed an “ astonished”
appearance, as if he were absent in
mind, and so they were the more sus-
ceptible to the report he gave of the
revelation in a vision, not of his own
heart, but in a striking degree from
Him with whom all words are acts.
Ezekiel had been called to be a prophet
to the exiles (chap. ii, 5), urged to be
an instructor as to right and wrong
(iii, 17), and under poignant feelings
had taken the place of a mediator
(xi. 15), These several positions had
been defined by visions of a glory in-
finitely surpassing all Levitical sym-
bols, and which assured him that the
Lord was not confined to the locality
of the temple, or worshipped only by
its forms. Thus, though he could not
serve as priest in the ritual of the
temple at Jerusalem, he could do that
which was more than an equivalent ;
he could be the medium of declaring
to the banished Jews that the Holiest
would be present with them ; maintain
intercourse with them without the in-
stituted sacrifices and offerings, not
withstanding that they were in “the


HOMILETIO COMME) TARY: EZEKIEL,


—


CHAP, XI.





wilderness of the nations,” and were
sometimes proud and reviling, some-
times cast down and despairing; and
prepare them for the future constitu-
tion of their life as a community in
the land promised to their fathers, so


as to accomplish the original and pro-
spective vocation of Israel. The exiles,
however, needed much teaching before
they could be fit for their destiny, and
in that teaching the further prophesy-
ing of Ezekiel will hold no little share.


HOMILETICS.
A Departine Gor ‘vers. 22, 23).


The movement of the appearance which Ezekiel had the eyes of his under-
standing opened to see signifies—

L That God is not bound to any place or form of worship. He would
remove from the sacred city to the idolatrous Chaldea; from the prescribed
forms of Levitical service to the free forms of hearts prompted by need. There
is no land, no denomination, no single church, which has a monopoly of His
power and grace. He may have dwelt amongst them so that they beheld His
glory ; but if they forsake His laws they forfeit His presence. They may retain
the name of Christian, keep up cathedrals and chapels, use prayer-book and
hymn-book, acknowledge articles, confessions, declarations, and the glory and
power have gone from them all; and, alas! many of the people never suspect
that so it is,

IL That He does not remove all at once. He may go with His power and
glory to another land, denomination, church, regarded as poor and despised, but
in which souls humble themselves under His mighty hand, and spread His great
goodness, Yet He does not hastily leave the scene where once He had mani-
fested Himself. He goes to the threshold before going out, and when He goes
out, He does not go out of sight. He waits near, within reach of a ery, if so
be that before the night falls, which results from His departure, men may call
and He will answer them.

When God has departed, formality, temptation to go into deeper darkness,
reproach to His name, all follow; and what shall the end of these things be?
‘“‘ Let us see that we do not, by a careless and inconsistent walk, provoke Him
to withdraw His invisible and spiritual presence from us.” In fear of such a
state let us say—


“Take anything Thou wilt away,
But go not Thou away!”


RETURNING FROM THE PRESENCE (vers. 24, 25).


“The vision that I had seen went up from me.” “Jacob seeth a ladder
reaching up to heaven, angels ascending and descending, and the Lord at the
top of the ladder, but this was only for a night; Moses saw the Lord in the
burning bush, but the sight lasted not ; Peter, James, and John saw the trans-
figuration of Christ, but the vision went up from them.” They who strive faith-
fully to follow Jesus come into seasons of a clear shining of His face, They
may not have gone back from His footprints, they may not have lost a sense of
their dependence on Him, and have not failed to recognise His abiding near-
ness ; but seasons arrive in which the vapour and dust hanging over their daily
pathway thin exceedingly. More vivid is their consciousness of the grace and
glory and truth manifested in God in Christ. Fresh hope, joy, peace, vigour,
enter ; they realise that there are possibilities of insight for their spiritual life
transcending all they ask or think. They would not care to say, “ My willing
soul woald stay in such a frame as this,” &c, They do wish to understand the
lessons of such upliftings. ae


\


CHAP, XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,








I. They find them variable. The visions are diverse. Always pervaded by .
Christ, sometimes one of His aspects, sometimes another, is most impressive, yet
His glory illuminates one and all.

They are transitory. They are drinks from the brook in the way. The
sparkle and coolness go, transmuted into recruited strength and hope. We may
often regret that such experiences pass away. Perhaps we charge ourselves
with a fault as having occasioned their disappearance. But that may be an
error. For our hearts are not framed so as to sustain a prolonged unchanging
feeling. That would be insanity. We must calculate on “frames and feelings”
reviving and decaying, on our turning from communion with the Father and His
Son Jesus Christ to communing, it may be, with elders or juniors, with fellow-
sufferers in the conflicts of life, and still, through all our moods, have our feet
set upon a rock and our goings established.

II. They find they have furthered insight. ‘in Thy light we see light.”
The sense of God deepened the sense of sin. The chief who, in days before Christ,
exclaimed, “I have heard of Thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye
seeth Thee, wherefore I abhor myself ;” the apostle who, in the presence of Christ,
cried, “ Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord ;” the seer who, in days
after Christ, fell as one dead at the feet of the manifested living Lord, are
examples of the effect of the realised presence of the All Holy upon the heart
of mankind. We hear then what we had not expected to hear about evil. We
see then the irrefragable penalty inflicted on persistent unrighteousness,

The sense of God inspires hope. His Word declares that He is full of compas-
sion and gracious, that He looks to the man who is of a poor and contrite spirit
and trembles at His word, that a Deliverer comes from Him to turn from
ungodliness, and that after we have suffered for a while we shall be established,
strengthened, settled. A nearer fellowship with the Unseen thus affecting us,
we come away lowlier than before, but more confident that God has prepared
things unspeakable for them that love Him.

III. They find themselves emboldened to act for God. Men lifted by the
Spirit of God see and believe in His thoughts and ways. Then, when their
souls are irradiated and strengthened, they are enabled to tell the things of
death and life without fear and without reserving one needed truth. Such men
will never be feeble servants to their fellow-men. The kind of saplessness
manifested by certain professed Christians, and which has given force to the
somewhat cynical term “ goodiness,” rises out of faulty ways of hearing the
voice of the Son of God. Let us be bold for the truth and love of Jesus, and
we shall be known as having been “ with Jesus.” If truth and love impel us
to shatter the hopes of a life, to fling the solemn accusation, “ ‘Thou art the man,”
to affirm, when the storms of trial are beating down and washing over the
sailors on life’s heaving sea, that there is nothing to fear, nothing really evil
where Christ manifests Himself to be with us, then we must seek grace for each
diverse duty from a clearer sight of the glory and grace of the Christ of God.
He will enable us for whatever ministry He calls us to, we shall declare all that
He shows to us for others, adding nought, subtracting nought, and be qualified
by His presence in a way which no rules and no resoluticns are capable of
accomplishing.

Let Christians be ready for every approach of the Spirit to carry them toa
more conscious apprehension of ‘the ylory of God in the face of Jesus;” then
they will make, and only then, good and faithtul servants, They will returr
from His presence “strengthened with all might in the inner man.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHaP. XI


oe





—





2 FULLER DETAILS RELATING TO THE SINS OF THE PEOPLE AND THEIR
PUNISHMENT (Chaps. xii.—xix).


Intercourse with their countrymen in Jerusalem deeply affected. the views
and hopes of the exiled Jews, as the feelings and expectations in British
colonies are affected by the discussions and decisions in the mother-country.
The kingdom of Judah still maintained its existence, notwithstanding the pro-
phetic threatenings of Jeremiah. That gave apparent denial to his dismal
prediction, and a bold, defiant attitude was assumed respecting them. The
eaptivity took the cue from this, and the vision of the Holy City, its abomina-
tions and departed glory, by which Ezekiel had intimated to his hearers the
utter ruin of the Jewish state, found no belief among them. The training
through which God was taking them required that this state of mind should
be mastered. A true view of their guilt and their dependence on the Law
could not be arrived at except as illusions were dissipated. Ezekiel is therefore
entrusted with further messages, both for Judah and the captivity, exposing
the fatuity of all suppositions that the calamity denounced could be averted.
‘“‘ The prophet is inexhaustible in the announcement of this, as the false patriotism
was inexhaustible in its announcements of salvation.”—Heng.


(1.) SyMBOL AND INTERPRETATION OF THE KING’s FilGuT
(Chap. xii. 1-16).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Vers.
1-3. Ezekiel has to do that which
must excite public attention at Te1-
Abib, but the primary applicati»n of
his action is to Jerusalem, and so
secondarily to the captives. He is not
to scruple to carry out palpable and
strange movements or .o refrain from
prophesying as he h s done before, be-
cause he has to sneak to a people who,
with capacities for learning, are too per-
verse to leary (ver. 3). ‘‘ And thou, son
of man, wnalze thee utensils of capti-
vity,” a phrase found in Jer, xlvi. 19
(r urginal rendering), and there and
ere signifying such few things as could
be taken into the unfriendly and hard
conditions of exile. ‘And remove
{as a captive] by day before their
eyes.” In broad daylight he was to
gather his articles and carry them out
of his house, thus making secure of
the observation of his neighbours.
“And thou shalt remove [as a cap-
tive] from thy place to another place


before their eyes, perhaps they will.


see,” but it is vot likely: their dis-
position evokes the refrain, “for they
are an house of rebelliousness.”

Vers. 4-6. Though the articles were
brought out, they were left while day-
light lasted. At its departure, but


befcve total darkness came on, Ezekiel
was to act again; “and thou shalt
go forth in the evening before their
eyes;” in some way which would
clearly appear to be that of a captive,
“as the goings forth of a captivity.”
He was to proceed furtively, while
they were looking on. “Before their
eyes dig through the wall, and go
forth by it”—by the opening thus
made (ver. 6). In full view of the
people, “upon thy shoulder shalt
thou lift;” but by the time he had
digged through night had fallen, such
as fell over Abram (Gen. xv. 17, cf. 12),
and so “in the darkness thou shal
go forth; thy face thou shalt cover,’
as one who does not wish to be recog
nised, ‘and not see the earth.” Thes
proceedings were intended to repre
sent very ominous incidents, “for a
wonder-sign I give thee to the house of
Israel.” There was nothing in Ezekiel’s
own surroundings which required this
course of action, but it was typical of
the fate of King Zedekiah. As yet pros-
perous, the inhabitants of Jerusalem
rashly assumed that his kingdom would
continue; but events were preparing
which would prove the utter futility
of trusting such a shaken reed.

Vers. 7-16 Ezekiel fulfilled his

133


CHAP. XII.


instructions to the letter, and on the
following morning received, in plain
terms, an explanation of what he had
been doing. He was thus put in a
position to answer the curiosity of the
people as to what was meant, and with
painful distinctness describes the dis-
asters which were to befall the realm
(ver. 10). “Say thou unto them, The
prince is this lifting up in Jerusalem,”
i.¢., this taking up on my shoulder is
a lesson, the prophetic burden which
refers to him who occupies the throne
in Jerusalem—he must remove as a
captive. It refers also “to all the
house of Israel that are among them ;”
both the inhabitants of Jerusalem and
the members of the ten tribes who
have joined themselves to their breth-
ren the Jews will be involved in
the same calamity. By this sign also
the exiled were informed that if they
were envious of the lot of those who
still remained in Judea that was a
eroundless feeling, because the latter
also would suffer exile (ver. 13).
Further details than those found in
the symbolic action are given. ‘And
I spread my net over him ;” the Lord
will, by means of the Chaldean army,
catch the prince in meshes, and his
escape will be prevented; “And I
will bring him to Babylon, to the
land of the Chaldeans;” yet, in a
manner which the event alone can
explain, “he shall not see it though
he shall die there” (2 Kings xxv. 1-7,
and Jer. li, 1-11). Ver. 14. All his
friends, all his forces, “I will scatter
toward every wind of heaven, and a
sword I draw out after them.” They
would not all perish ; “I leave over of
them men of number,’ men who can
be easily counted ; and it is done to
this end, “that they may declare all
their abomixations among the heathen
among whom they come ;” their recitals


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


would explain that it was not weak-
ness on the part of the God of Israel
which had occasioned the distress and
subjection of His people, but their
offences against His holy laws. His
unfaltering purpose is that “they
know that I am the Lord.” Human
foresight might have signified that
the king and people of Jerusalem
would be mastered by the Chaldeans,
but that the king should flee from the
city by night, be caught in his attempt,
be taken to Babylon after his eyes
had been put out, could not have been
forecast by any mere human intelli-
gence, except as the intelligence was
enlightened by the God who seeth all
events that are to come.

Josephus (Antig. x. 7) reports that
an account of this prophetic action and
its explanation was sent to Zedekiah,
but that he, on comparing it with the
danger which Jeremiah had warned
him of, found that the latter said that
he should be carried to Babylon, while
Ezekiel said that he should not see it.
The discrepancy was so glaring in the
king’s view that he concluded, not
that one was right and the other wrong,
but that both were false! “In this
he but showed the captious disposition
of superficial inquirers and shallow
unbelievers of all ages, who no sooner
discover some obvious difficulties on
the surface of Revelation than they
conclude the whole to be a cunningly
devised fable, or treat it as unworthy
of their serious consideration. Would
they but search a little deeper, and
survey, in a spirit of impartiality, the
entire field of Revelation, they would
find that the things which at first
stagger their belief disappear on closer
inspection, or remain only as difficul-
ties inseparable from communications
which bear respect to the character
and purposes of Godhead.”— Fairbairn,


HOMILETICS.


SomE ASPECTS UNDER WHICH GoD COMMUNICATES WITH MEN
(vers. 1-16).


Taking for granted—that which both human history and experience bear
witness to—not only that God is able to communicate with man, but also that


134


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, CHaP. Xn,





man is capable of receiving His communications, we are presented here with
certain features of that process,

I. It is carried on with a clear view of all human eonditions, It could
not be otherwise, because He is God and not man. He has respect (1.) to all
with whom He may enter into communication, The king is not too exalted for His
message; nor are the princes, Soldiers are open to Him and every member
of a quiet habitation. It can be said, “I am poor and needy, yet the Lord
thinketh upon me.” (2.) To their preparedness for His communications, They
have faculties to apprehend all truth that He may impart. Eyes have they to
see, and ears have they to hear, and He wants to bring the faculties for seeing
and hearing into use. He well knows that eyes may be used for selfish interests,
and not for the things that are unseen and eternal, that ears hear the entice-
ments of the flesh and lies of deceiving prophets, but do not listen to the just
and holy and good commandment, giving knowledge of sin and need of the
righteousness of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Thus He estimates the power
of all forces that are favourable or opposed to His aims. (3.) To the possibility
of mastering men’s indisposition. Whatever may be the blindness or deafness
exhibited in regard to the wisdom and truth and love of God’s words, He
still acts in hope of a change. ‘It may be they will consider though they be
a rebellious house.” His graciousness is a perennial spring for parched and
hardened hearts. In New Testament as in Old Testament times, with us as
with. the Jews, He is “long-suffering, not willing that any should perish, but that
all should come to repentance.” The Israelites of Ezekiel’s day are illustrations
of what the Word of the Lord encounters in most of those to whom it is sent;
they are its hearers but not its doers, and punishment is impending over them,
The Lord’s treatment of them is a type of His riches of mercy, which leaves no
means untried, and would hope against hope. “The mirror of human per-
versity is at the same time the mirror of divine grace.”

IL It proceeds by stages. (1.) They are varied in appearance. Actions are
alone at one time; at another they are followed by words. Common and
uncommon things are summoned in order to impress His thoughts and ways.
It would be quite unfair to argue from these grotesque proceedings of Ezekiel,
that any methods, however outlandish, may be pursued in order to secure
men’s attention to spiritual facts. The metnod should be such as will impress a
truth, not such as may excite little else but wonder or amusement or sympathy,
Under such a restriction and by the pressure of divine leading, symbolical
actions may first be used, and instruction follow after them; but it ought ever
to be realised that no action, even though it may be apparently impressive, is
of any worth in God’s judgment unless it end in making men know that He is
Lord. (2.) Constant in progress, So it seems to us, and so it is, only we some-
times conclude that God is in a hurry when He is not. The suffering which
looks as if it had burst suddenly upon a people or an individual is the result
of preceding events which may have been occurring through some, it may
be many, years. The destruction of the plain of Sodom in a morning was
physically the outcome of material forces which had been long in gathering
and pent up, and was, morally, the final consequence of lengthened and high-
handed wickedness. This incident in Ezekiel’s history shows how God lets
the minds of prophet and people simmer till morning over the odd conduct
of the prophet on the day and night before. Then He explained what was
in prospect; but the event, which the action referred to, was not brought to
pass till about six years had gone away. God gives line upon line, precept
upon precept, before the guilty fall backward and are broken and are snared
and taken. The apostle who “ceased not to warn every one night and day
with tears” was a pupil of God, who is full of compassion. Does His goodness
and forbearance lead us to repentance? Have we the love which ey long


!


OBAP, XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZLUKIEL.





and is kind? (2.) Culminating in acknowledgment of Him. As Ruler o~er all He
makes the end of His revelations of Himself to be that “all should know the
Lord, from the least to the greatest.” He has the right to supreme homage, and
He will arrange to spare some of those who have felt the consequences of with-
holding that homage, so that they shall speak of what He has done. They will
make known His deeds among the people, and the heathen shall fear His great
and terrible name. Thus shall His way be known upon earth; His saving
health among all nations.


Tue Trvz or Gop’s CoMMUNICATION I8 WORTHY TO BE NOTED
(ver. 8).


IL Because the coming of the Word of the Lord to us is an important event
in our history. (1.) Sometimes it produces terror and conviction of evil. Moses on
Sinai, Job under the whirlwind, Saul near to Damascus. We are to be brought
to see our need. (2.) Sometimes it is attractive and tender, As to Samuel when
a youth, and to Lydia when Paul preached. (3.) Sometimes it is for consolation.
As the still small voice to Elijah when he was cast down, with its, “ What doest
thou here, Elijah?” And as Christ came to the disciples on the lake with
His, “It is 1.” (4.) Sometimes to unfold and urge to duty. As to Ezekiel here,
and as to Paul when he was praying in the temple in a trance. :

Il Because it comes at a noticeable season. “In the morning.” God
regards the time we have heen under His teachings, what our attitude to Him
has been, and how we have profited, or the reverse. ‘Have I been so long
time with you, and yet hast thou not known me?” (1.) The word may come in
the morning, literally, Give God your first thoughts, meditate early on His
ways; ‘“ My voice shalt thou hear in the morning, O Lord,” and let us say, “I
will hear what God the Lord will speak.” (2.) In the period of youth, Samuel,
Josiah, Timothy. Good to begin well, in hope of ending well. “ Wilt Thou not
cry unto me, My Father, Thou art the guide of my youth?” (3.) After a period
of anxiety and suffering. ‘ Weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in
the morning.” Martha said to Mary, “The Master is come, and calleth for
thee.” “Pay thy vows.” “ Arise, go to Bethel, and make there an altar unto
God, that appeared to thee when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy
brother.”

Let us look for the day when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God and come forth from their graves.


(2.) Tux SymBoL FROM BREAD AND WATER (vers. 17-20).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—The pro-
phet is commanded to take his ordi-
nary meals as a man under great
apprehensions, It is not, as in chap.
iv. 16, that he is thus to indicate
a dreadful scarcity approaching, but
rather the felt pressure of that cala-
mity, as if the evil threatened would
take away all relish for sustenance to
the vody (ver. 18). Ezekiel speaks in
the Word of the Lord “ of the inhabi-

136


tants of Jerusalem, in the country of
Israel ;” a message is to be forwarded
to the people who had not been carried
into captivity, to declare that they
should be affected with anxiety and
surprise, ‘‘ because its land,” ie, feru-
salenis, “becomes desolate from ita
fulness ;” where once were life and
pienty, the supply of population,
animals, grain, &c., would be griev-
ously and surprisingly diminished. -


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL.


OHaP. X13,


ES cas


HOMILETICS.
(Vers. 17—20.)


When the evil consequences of sins have to be encountered then there may


be trouble,
L On men.


1, An apparently foolish course may be appointed by the Lord,
but “the foolishness of God is wiser than men.” 2. : :


Hard service may have to


be undertaken for the gracious Master, but “ most gladly will I glory in infir-
mities if the power of Christ rest upon me.”

IZ. On the necessaries of life. Supplies for the body may become not sources
of comfort but of suffering, Food and drink shall cause a strain and pain, The


bread be bread of affliction.


TIL On population, agriculture, commerce. Depression and decrease ensue,
A nation no more than an individual can escape from the due reward of its


deeds.


(3.) THE FooLisH PRoversB (vers. 21-28).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—The
hearts of the Jerusalem people would
evade any fair application of the omin-
ous action of Ezekiel, and he is in-
cited to aim a blow at the evasion,
which took form in a proverbial say-
ing, ver. 22, ‘* The days are prolonged,
and every vision perisheth,” time is
going by, and not one forecast of good
or evil has come to pass; it has been
a deluding of us. Ver. 23. Against
this sentiment the communication from
the Lord is, “The days are near, and
the word of every vision,” the passing
days are inevitably bringing on the
speedy fulfilment of every word folded
in the imagery which has been per-
ceived by the spiritual vision of the
prophets. Ver. 25. Over against the
merely human prophecies, which had
largely contributed to the formation
of the condemned proverb, the divine
truthfulness would be manifested, and


utterly dislodge the former, “For I,
the Lord, will speak whatever word
I will speak, and it shall come to
pass,” not in some far-off future, but
“in your days, O house of rebellion.”
On the generation of his contempo-
raries would come both the earlier
and the later effects which had been
declared certain.

Vers, 26-28. An emphatic assertion
of the impending accomplishment of
Ezekiel’s own prophetic utterances is
made against the temporising of “the
house of Israel, who say the vision
that he seeth is for many days, and
for far off times he prophesieth.”
They believed his words would come
true, but not in their experience at
any rate. To meet that idea of post-
ponement the Lord said, “‘None of my
words shall be delayed any more;
whatever word I shall speak, it shall
come to pass.”


HOMILETICS.
Men’s EVASION OF THE DIVINE INTERFERENCE IN EVENTS.


God does not only begin, He goes along with the whole development of the
world’s history. He can foretell any portion of that history. By special com-
munication or general providence He proves that all its “ government is upon
His shoulders ;” that ‘He sitteth on the throne judging right,” and working so
that men should cease to do evil and learn to do well. There is that in human
nature which reaches a point at which it resiles from the idea of this imman-
ence, where it finds the absolute rights of God unwelcome to itself. In this


state we observe—
187


OHAP, XII, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; EZEKIEL,





a Ea


I. The power exerted by what is visible. ‘Prophets and preachers are
men like yourselves. Why should you yield up your souls that they may ride
over them with what they assert are messages from an invisible mighty Being?
What palpable proofs can they give that He communicates with them, though
He never does with you? You might accept their statements did you see any
clear fulfilment of the threats of punishment which they plentifully cast forth ;
but in failure of such evidence you have reason to make light of the claims
which they advance for the recognition of the truth of what they say.” How
shall these difficulties be overcome? ‘‘Let what is righteous and true and holy
and good get an honest hearing in your consciences. Let the operation of prin-
ciples, which is so much more slow to become obvious than the operation of the
physical forces, have due time accorded; you will be brought to see that your
craving for what is sensible is « depreciation of that nobler part of your nature
which feels after higher things than it sees. You may be convinced if what is
spiritual commends itself by its close adherence to rectitude, you are wrong in
ignoring or postponing its indications,” How many hearers of the Word of God
will not accept Jesus Christ as Lord, because they expect some more palpable
influences to be brought into action! Do not portions of modern society indi-
cate doubt and even aversion to the demands of the Bible, because they do not
place themselves in the light of what is sinless and just and unbending to
worldly pleasures? Thus space given for repentance is too often turned into
space for hardening the heart against the Unseen and Eternal.

IL Doubts of the efficiency of God. They may acknowledge Him as Maker
of the undeveloped world, but decline to acknowledge the signs that He is act-
ing init now. They see force of one kind or other, and as these forces always
act in uniform lines, what place is there for a holy will behind and before and
upon men in every event? So the thought is, There is no God in the common
acceptation of the term. There may be a power that is unique, but it does not
interfere in human affairs as prophets and preachers maintain. There is no
reality expressed by the words, The God of Abraham and of Israel, of Jesus
Christ and His Church. Is it forgotten by such thinkers that the nature of
God must be expressed in words and acts corresponding to itself; that He must
abide and must operate age after age ; that whatever be the superficial sameness
of society and slumbering of retributions, He has not forgotten the work of His
hands? “TI say the word and will perform it.”

III. Discredit cast upon personal application of divine messages. In this
class it is not said, There is no prospect of the evil threatened ever coming near ;
but rather, There is no likelihood of it touching us. “When the overflowing
scourge shall pass through, it shall not come nigh unto us.” Men who have
committed iniquity for years do so with impunity, nations which have been
selfish and oppressive have not been subjected to penalties, notwithstanding
what men speaking in the name of the Lord say. We may believe that not in
our days are their words to be practically illustrated. Thus is produced a feeling
of security, if not of unbelief. ‘The heart is set towards putting far off the evil
day. It is a token of deepest immersion in spiritual darkness when men take
the apparent absence of a frowning face as proof that God’s servants are not
justified in saying that itis there. It would be seen if darkness did not blind the
eyes. The feeling is widespread. ‘The darkness covered the mass of Israel. It
affects and will affect multitudes in these later days. ‘When the Son of Man
cometh, shall He find faith on the earth?” What need to question all our
spiritual security to see whether it results from trust in God, or from a vague
idea that we shall escape portending ill, that if othery are to be sufferers for sin
we shall not be!

1, Common sayings are not always true sayings. They may pass current
in net shops, meetings, but when they have to stand a cross-examination

38


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. CHAP. XIII,
a


bow many utterly break down and show themselves to be bubbles—baseless and
ollow.

2. God’s sayings are certain. He has spoken them in the constitution of
man and that of the world, as well as also by holy men commissioned to declare
His will. However prolonged the working out of His institutes be, they must
develop fully and finally. He has eternity to act in. See that faith is placed
in Christ Jesus, who gives insight of the thoughts and ways—the love and the
. wrath of God the Holy and True. We receive “a kingdom that cannot be
moved, and serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear.”

3. The preference of man’s sayings may hasten the manifestation of the truth
of God’s sayings. The boldness and mockery of deniers of God’s claims may
make Him to become a swift witness for His veracity and against men’s despisal
of it. Men who taunt Him to “make speed, hasten His word that we may see
it,” may find, in the midst of sorrows, that they have brought upon themselves
swift destruction. Repentance may prevent judgment ; hardening of heart aggra-
vates and expedites it. In the Lord alone is there sufficient to assure us that He
wiil not forget, delay, change.





(4.) Or Fatse PropHEeTs AND PRropHETEssEs (Chap. xili.)
Condemnation of the Prophets (vers. 1-16).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—The de-
elaration in xii. 24 was that unsub-
stantiated and delusive prophecy
should cease by the fulfilment of the
true, and in this chapter a description
and denunciation of the former are
given. The men and women who had
taken upon themselves to announce
“salvation without repentance, grace
without judgment,” were found both
in Judea and among the captive Jews.
The utterance of Ezekiel is akin to
that of Jeremiah (chap. xxiii). Both
indicate that the wishes of the people
framed a mould for conclusions as to
the will of the Lord. They made the
prophets they believed in,

Vers. 1-7 describe the characteristics
of the unauthorised prophets. Ver. 2.
Ezekiel is enjoined to prophecy “to
the prophets of Israel;” they had
popular sympathy and acceptance.
The spirit of the age approved of
them, although they were “ prophets
out of their own hearts.” ‘They
might sincerely hold what they said
as true, but their words were nothing
except the products of their imagina-
tions; anything but the communica-
tions of God. “Hear the word of the
Lord.” That which they had not
within they shall obtain from with-
out, and to their shame. If ‘alse


representations of God are powerful
He will raise up a standard against
them.

Ver. 3. They are threatened. “Woe
to the prophets, fools,” not merely in
going where they were not sent, but
actually godless men (Ps. xiv. 1), and
consequently “who walk after their
own spirit, and that which they have
not seen.” Not by the insight which
the Lord gives (Rev. i. 2, 11, &.) A
twofold aspect of a revelation of God
is presented. Its starting-point. It
begins in an impression made on a
man’s spirit, and is not originated by
his own thoughts and fancies. Its
goal. The statement of truth accor-
dant with God’s justice and love.
The light of the face of God, not the
man’s inner light, is to satisfy the calls
for guidance in right thoughts and
ways. Christ, and not humanity, must
be our test of truth.

Ver. 4. ‘As foxes among ruins thy
prophets, O Israel, are.” Deserted
places are a favourite resort of foxes.
“Because of the mountain of Zion
which is desolate, the foxes walk
upon it” (Lam. v. 18). And those
who were counted messengers of the
Lord found their sphere of profit in
the omens of the desolation of Jeru-
salem,

139


OHAP. XIII.





Ver. 5, Israel by sins had become
exposed to the assaults of divine
penalties; but its favoured prophets
had acted like unpatriotic cowards in
the crisis of danger, “Ye have not
gone up into the breaches, nor made
up a wall about the house of Israel to
stand in the battle in the day of the
Lord.” The moral and spiritual evils
of the people were as gaps in the wall
of Jerusalem; but the prophets had
done nothing by reproof and personal
conduct to urge to repentance and re-
formation. They had nothing of that
self-humiliation and intercession for the
guilty which was manifested by Abra-
ham (Gen, xviii. 23-33), Moses (Ex.
xxxii. 11-13), Paul (Rom. ix. 3).

Ver. 6. All pseudo-prophets might
not be deceiving, but though “the
Lord had not sent them,” yet “they
hoped to establish the word,” i.¢., they
tried to persuade the people that the
unsupported promises made to them
would be fully realised, with this
result alone, that the falsity would
be all the more painfully brought
home.

Vers, 8-16. Announce the conse-
quences of prophesying without divine
impulse. Ver. 8 states that the Lord
is against the prophets; and ver. 9
intimates three calamities which shall
befall them in relation to the new
theocratic regime. They shall neither
be numbered “in the council of my
people,” they will not be members of
the influential and ruling circle; nor
“be written in the register of the
house of Israel,” they will not be
struck out of that roll which has given


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





them a name and place among the
citizens of Israel, but they will not
be entered into the roll of the Israe.
which shall arise from the faithful
remnant; and the portion which is in
exile ‘shall not come into the land
of Israel” (ver. 10). The erring pro-
phets had brought condemnatiwi: upon
themselves, and produced such a state
that “it,” the people, “built & wall,
and behold, they,” the prophets, ‘‘ coat
it with plaster” (or whitewash, Fair.,
who refers to Paul’s indignant charge
on the high priest, “Thou whited
wall!” Acts xxili, 3); ministering
to the deceptive hopes of the people
instead of exposing their worthlessness,
The deluding of the prophets would
not last (ver. 11). “It,” the wall,
daubed “with whited plaster, shall
fall” by means of agencies controlled
by God the Lord: the “rain,” “ hail-
stones,” and “storm,” which should
be launched against it, Ver. 14 applies
the figure to the reality, and threatens
the destruction of those who believed
alie. “TI cast it to the ground, and its
foundation is laid bare and it falls,
and ye are consumed in the midst
of it,” i.e. of Jerusalem (comp. Matt.
vii. 24-27), Ver. 15, Both deceived
and deceivers would be overwhelmed :
“And I will say unto you, The wall
is not, and they who coated it are
not.” Ver. 16. Ezekiel rounds off this
portion of his utterance with a thrust
at “the prophets of Israel” who
affirmed that they saw “a vision of
peace for her,” Jerusalem, ‘and there
is no peace.”


HOMILETICS.
MISLEADING Hopes oF FREEDOM FROM FouturE EvILs.


The Jews entertained delusive hopes regarding the future welfare of their
city and jand, and observation proves that, where the Gospel is preached in
town or country, many hearers indulge in ungrounded trust as to their escape
from the judgment of God against their doings. The reasons which are at —
work to produce this mistake are similar in the present age to those which
operated in the past. They are—

I. Slighting notions as to the evil of sin. People may neglect to follow a
prescribed course of obedience, or may openly take the course which cuts across
it; but they are not humbled for so doing. They make up excuses, “I am

140


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; EZEKIEL, CHAP. XII.


——





‘not like this publican.” “TI have a good heart.” “I have not done things
worthy to suffer destruction.” At the base of all wrong thoughts, at the bage
of all erroneous teachings as to man’s position before God, lies a misconception
of the guilt of secret or presumptuous sins, All unrighteousness is sin and a
gap through which unknown penalty rushes on the guilty.

IL Listening to one’s own wishes. We do not wish to count ourselves
really “miserable sinners,” or to look at the signs which show that we are
moving down the hellward slopes of sin; so we evade the accusations which
the true and faithful witness brings against us. His voice is not heard, or, if
we cannot ignore it, we easily suppose that its warnings must be meant for
others, not for us. How needful to arm ourselves with the mind which will
ask, Am I regulating my convictions by what I wish or by what the Lord
wishes? Are the teachings to which I listen such as I like to have, or are they
based upon the truth and holiness of God?

IIL Influenced by misguiding teachers. This influence is exerted by self.
originated doctrines, They speak from their own heart. They propound and
defend opinions grounded on their views of things, and not on the reality.
They can evolve worlds, form conscience, do away with all necessity of a living
God. They promise smooth things to a people who have a form of godliness.
They hide the present damnation of sin under statements which excuse defec-
tive and immoral conduct, and its future under explanations which impugn
eternal justice. By plausible help. They covered over ugly and dangerous
inlets of evil, and they seemed safe; but the covering was of too flimsy a kind.
It did not show lives lived differently from those of the transgressors. It did
not indicate effectual prayer for the people. It did not denounce sin and warn
of its impending punishment: or it did so in such general terms that none are
convinced that they are the evildoers who are doomed to the overwhelming
wrath of Him before whom evil cannot stand. By their professed authorisation.
They prophesied in the name of the Lord though He knew them not, They
had so far regard to God as to believe that they ought to say only what He
commanded. They may speak what they think; sincerely suppose that they
have right on their side; but they are deceived. They see that which might be
perceived to be a lie, thus they buoy up their hearers with false hopes and do
untold harm to bodies and souls by their errors.

“Some teach men to expect safety from a comparative decency of moral
character; some on account of formal and superstitious observances ; some
because they belong to an orthodox part of the Church and have got some

. notions of certain important doctrines ; some because of their impressions and
enthusiastic reveries; and others even by a direct abuse of the gospel and
making Christ the minister of sin... . All are alike distant from Christ the
true foundation: they build not on Him by a penitent faith that worketh by
love, and produceth obedience ; they either leave out His merits and atonement,
or the work of His new-creating Spirit, or the substantial fruits of righteous-
ness; and in different ways endeavour to varnish, paint and repair the old
building, instead of erecting a new one on a new foundation, for ‘an habitation
of God through the Spirit.’”—W. F.

1. Judgment will come notwithstanding hopes of escaping tt. Nothing of man
can avail to resist it. The daubed wall shall fall and overwhelm misleaders
and misled,

2. Beware lest thou flatier with a trust to hopes of safety which are not drawn
from God's will revealed in Christ. Thou hast the knowledge given of Him. Be
true and faithful to Him only.


14]


OBAP, XIIi,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





CONDEMNATION OF THE PROPHETESSES (vers. 17-23).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—A dis-
position to prophecy was in the air;
s0 women as well as men, in Jeru-
salem and among the exiles, were in-
fluenced by it. Naturally it assumed
different forms in the one from what
it did in the other. Men daub walls,
women sew, make veils, &c. Both
are deceiving, and shall certainly be
set at nought. There seems no weight
to be accorded to the suggestion that
the existence of these prophetesses was
proof of “a fresh instance of declen-
sion into heathen usages.” The gift
of true prophecy came to holy women
in the earlier history of Israel before
Christ and also in the later, and might
be pretended to.

Ver. 18. Ignorance of the practices
alluded to here stands in the way of
clearing up the meaning of this verse.
We can decide only by probabilities.
“Woe unto the women who sew
coverings on every joint of the
hands.” Whether these coverings were
cushions or amulets or other objects,
their use seems to have been to make
an appearance which would impress
the people. So with the following,
‘“‘And who make veils on the head
of every stature ;” under the envelop-
ment of clothing on the head adapted
to their varying size—figure, age, con-
dition—they fitted themselves to act
upon their hearers, “to hunt [as bird-
catcher’s] souls,” and thus ensnare
to their ruin. The verse condemns
sensational methods of divination re-
sorted to by the prophetesses, whether
the method was by gesture or dress
or word. Hence the question of sur-
prise at the infatuation which would
use such means, “The souls of my
people will ye hunt and the souls
of yourselves will ye keep alive?”
Persuading themselves of their own


security, they entered on practices
intended to persuade the Israelites te
the same confidence, while destruction
only would result to them,

Ver. 19. “And will ye profane me
among my people,” by prophesying in
my name, for handfuls of barley and
for pieces of bread, offerings such as
were brought when consulting a seer
(1 Sam. ix. 7,8; 1 Kings xiv. 3; ef.
Mice. iii. 5); and by declaring that ye
speak the words of the Lord when
they are not, the result of such pro-
faning the Lord being “to slay souls
which should not die and to keep alive
souls which should not live, by your
lying to my people, hearers of lying.

Ver, 20. Punishment of the women.
“Behold I [come] to your coverings
with which ye hunt souls as [if they
were] flying [birds], and I tear them
off your arms,” ‘Their snares shall be
spread in vain, “I set free the souls
which ye hunt, the souls” which ye
deal with “as flying [birds].” Ver.
21. “‘AndTI tear your veils and deliver
my people from your hand.” Ye
seduce them by your various artifices,
so as to destroy the people, and I
would expose your pretences so as to
save them. Ver. 22. Because the pro-
phetesses have acted so that false
Impressions of God are produced on
the mind of the righteous and wicked,
disheartening the former in good and
confirming the latter in evil ways,
“Therefore ye shall not see vanity
and shall not divine divinations any
more, and I will deliver my people
out of your hand.” It is with God
they are in conflict, and the utter
failure of their prophecies will so
appear that “ye shall know that I am
the Lord:” knowledge of God is for
the guilty a doom, for the righteous a
security,


HOMILETICS.
WomeEN IN REuIGIous MovEMENTs,


Serious events were about to occur in Israel.


cast over women as well as men.
142


The shadow of them was


Spiritual influence knows no sex. Women


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OHAP, XIV,


-








“show piety at home,” in the more retired ways along which the little ones,
the weak, the downcast of the world make their journey, but the groundswell
of religious emotion rolling over a people impels some of its women into open
and even audacious appearances,

I. The women assume deceptive methods. By dresses, or gestures, or other
devices they pander to the senses so as to attract and impress those who hear
them. If women are naturally more disposed to such methods than men, yet
the warning is of unrestricted interest, that external representations in religion
are of uncertain tendency ; strong to promote error, they are poor allies in
advancing truth,

IL Women are induced to act from unworthy motives. There is desire for

wer. ‘They strive to move and control souls, and thus, as in later days, to
“ glory in the flesh” with their adherents. There is self-regard. They persuade
themselves that things will turn out so as to bring security for themselves, to save
their own souls, even though they shrink from the narrow way of life and endure
no hardness, There is greed. A very trifling present gets them to say that all
is well when all is not well; that that is right which is wrong before God.

IIL They are held responsible for their procedure. They hide the threaten-
ings of the Lord, or pare down their awful meaning. They comfort souls in
sin ; distress souls seeking God. The painful result of their lies is that they
hunt into peril those whom God would rescue; seize and kill souls whom God
would save. Standing thus against God’s love and grace, they are counted out
for condemnation, as the false prophets were. She who sins must suffer loss,


ERROR PREACHED (ver. 22),


L The painful effects of erroneous teachings. The good are disheartened
by scruples, perplexities, fears, and weakened to pursue their journey in the
ways of the Lord: the evil are emboldened to go on the broad road by opiates
to conscience and confirmation to unbelief.

IL. The contrariety to God in them. He is the God of all comfort to those
that fear His name; but this teaching breaks the inflow of His promises. He
would make the dead in trespasses and sins to live through faith in Christ the
Truth; but this teaching prevents faith, and He can do no mighty work of
salvation.

IIL The valid test for them. When high pretensions, dogmatic operations,
fascinating proffers act so as to relax supreme regard to truth, righteousness,
purity, and a true follower of Christ is depressed ; or when hopes are produced
in the mind of those who are not yielding themselves unto God that they will
live, then each class may know that the words they hear are opposed to those
of Him who is the true and living One, and are condemned by Him. \

1. A people professing to know the Lord are not unaffected by the popular erroneous
teaching of their day. 2. They may hope for His interference in their behalf, for He
lays their real interest deeply to heart.


JEHOVAHS REFUSAL TO ALLOW IDOLATERS TO ENQUIRE OF HIM: THE
CERTAINTY OF THE JUDGMENTS DENOUNCED AGAINST THEM (Chap.
xiv.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—The
visit of the elders of the people to the
prophet was the occasion of this word
of God. They were alarmed by the
threatenings which the prophet ut-
tered, but they yet hoped to obtain
from him a more favourable answer.


They make an appeal to God’s mercy,
but are silent concerning the greatness
of their sin or any purpose of repent-
ance. These elders were not the re-
presentatives of the majority of the
exiles who practised the most open
and the boldest forms of idolatry ;
143


OHAP, XIV,


but rather of those who, though they
outwardly feared God, yet inwardly
served the world and the spirit of the
age. ‘These men have set up idols
in their heart” (ver. 3). The prophet’s


THE LorD GIvEs NO ANSWER


Ver. 1. “The elders of Israel.”
‘‘These men were not deputies from
the Israelites in Palestine, but elders
of the exiles among whom Ezekiel had
been labouring” ae Their object
in this visit is not distinctly stated,
but probably it was that they might
know something further concerning
the duration of the captivity, or the
fate of Jerusalem. Unlike the elders
in chap. xx. 1, they had not come
with the definite purpose of inquiring
of the Lord.

Vers. 2 and 3, “These men have
set up their idols in their heart.”
They were not given to the grosser
forms of idolatry, but they were
strangers to the true worship of God.
They hadsetup some object of their own
creation, which they put in the place of
God. They allowed their minds to be
deluded by phantoms. In heart and
spirit they were one with the worst
idolaters around them. ‘And put
the stumbling-block of their iniquity
before their face,” They even refused
to put away idols from their presence.
They sought not to flee from tempta-
tion by removing what would be an
occasion and reminder of sin. “Should
I be enquired of at all by them?”
This question implies a strong negation,

Ver. 4. “I the Lord will answer
him that cometh according to the
multitude of his idols.” ‘The form
of the verb to “answer” gives the
meaning, “I the Lord will answer
him by myself,” instead of by the
prophet. The manner in which the
Lord will answer the idolatry is set
forth in ver. 8. They are to be treated
as all idols should be treated.

Ver. 5. “That I may take the
house of Israel in their heart.” The
Lord will reach the very seat of idola-
try, touch their conscience, and bring
down their heart by judgments.

144


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


—_—_—


answer to their inquiry extends to verse
11. The latter part of the chapter de-
clares that the coming judgments on
Jerusalem will not be averted even for
the sake of the righteous few therein.


TO THE IpOLATERS (vers. 1-11).


Vers. 6-8. Repetition of the threat
already uttered, and also of the sum-
mons to repentance. ‘“ Repent, and
turn yourselves from your idols; and
turn away your faces from all your
abominations.” ‘We have here a
combination of the Kal and Hiphil
conjugations for the sake of emphasis.
Return unreservedly from your abom-
inable idolatries. Be no longer es-
tranged from me, either in heart or
practice. They were neither to han-
ker after in desire, nor look towards
the accursed thing” (Henderson).
“Every one of the house of Israel,
or of the stranger that sojourneth in
Israel.” All who hypocritically ap-
plied to the prophet, whether pro-
selytes or native Jews, were liable to
the same judgments, Strangers were
only permitted to dwell in the land of
Israel on condition of forsaking all
idolatry and all moral abominations,
and worshipping Jehovah alone (Lev.
xx, 2, xvii, 26 oxvil, 10s xe
19), “And will make him a sign
and a proverb.” ‘The expression is
a pregnant one; I make him desolate,
so that he becomes a sign and pro-
verb” (Keil). “An exemplary punish-
ment” (fHeng.)

Vers. 9-11. No prophet is to give
any other answer. “And if the pro-
phet be deceived when he hath
spoken a thing, I the Lord have
deceived that prophet.” He who
delivers any other message, though
he may think that he speaks the word
of the Lord, is not a true prophet,
When God is represented as deceiving
such a prophet, we are to understand
something more than merely a per-
missive sense, as if God allowed it
and did not interfere to prevent the
deception. It was Jehovah who sent
the iying spirit into the prophets of
Ahab, and for this very purpose, that


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





by predieting success to the king they
might secure his fall (1 Kings xxii,
20, &c.) “This persuading of the pro-
phets to the utterance of self-willed
words, which have not been inspired
by God, only takes place in persons
who admit evil into themselves, and is
designed to tempt them and lead them
to decide whether they will endeavour
to resist and conquer the sinful inclina-
tions of their hearts, or will allow them
to shape themselves into outward
deeds, in which case they will become
ripe for judgment. It is in this sense
that God persuades such a prophet,
in order that He may then cut him
off out of His people” (Keil), “If
matters should turn out differently
from what the prophet expected and
foretold, I have so ordered them in
the course of my providence as to
issue in such a result. It is the pre-
rogative of Deity to control the sinful
operations of created minds, without
interfering with free agency” (Hen-
derson). “The punishment of the
prophet shall be even as the punish-
ment of him that seeketh unto him.”
The false prophets and those who in-
quire of them are both alike guilty,


OBAF XIV,





and come into the same condemna
tion. Neither in one nor in the other
was there any desire to learn the
truth, but rather to seek excuse for
their sins and errors even by the dar-
ing impiety of demanding for them
the sanctions of religion. “That the
house of Israel may no more go astray
from me, neither be polluted any more
with all their transgressions.” “It
serves to purify the people of God
For the particular sinful generation it
flows from the principle of retribution ;
but for the whcle community of God
a purpose of mercy lies at the ground
of the exercise of this retribution,
The prophet here clearly opens up
the view to the light which shines
behind the darkness.” (Heng.) ‘It
was to this end that, in the last times
of the kingdom of Judah, God allowed
false prophecy to prevail so mightily,
—namely, that it might accelerate the
process of distinguishing between the
righteous and the wicked; and then,
by means of the judgment which de-
stroyed the wicked, purify His nation
and lead it on to the great end of its
calling” (Keil).


HOMILETICS.
HypocriticaAL INQUIRERS AFTER GoD,


These elders had come as a deputation from among the exiles in order to
consult Ezekiel as a prophet of the Lord. They had come from a distance, and
are to be distinguished from those mentioned in chap. viii. 1 who were already
with the prophet. We are not told expressly what their purpose was. They
may have sought guidance concerning some question which they felt to be a
difficulty. They may have simply waited to hear what seasonable truth the
prophet had still to utter. But from ver. 3 we learn that they certainly did
come in the character of inquirers. And the answer which the Lord gives
through theprophet shows that they were not sincere, but hypocritical inquirers,
We have here the great features of all such.

L They closely imitate the conduct of real inquirers. Hypocrites are
generally described as those who deceive others by making an outward show of
piety. But the sacred writers call those hypocrites not only who deceived others,
but deceived even themselves. These closely imitate the religious actions of
the pious, but they are ignorant of those deep spiritual principles upon which
such conduct is founded. These have no true knowledge of God. They only
know Him by tradition and the customs of religious service and worship. These
elders had some of the qualities of real inquirers after the mind and will of God.
1. They were already stirred by the messace of the prophet. They took alarm at his
threatenings, They were afraid at God’s judgments. 2. They come to the

BR 145


OHAP, XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,





prophet, as an inspired messenger of God, for further counsel. They were the sub-
jects of religious awakening, and professed themselves ready to learn all the will
of God. Men may go as far as this without any true and essential knowledge
of the realities of religion.

IL They lack the proper characteristics of real inquirers. 1. They apply to
religious teachers, not to be instructed in God’s will, but to be confirmed im their own
superstitions and errors. 'They were ready to hear and obey the prophet so long
as he prophesied after their own heart. While religion did not interfere with
their cherished convictions and prospects they were ready to obey its precepts
and ordinances, They did not really believe that the threatened judgments
would come to pass, and they desired a prophet who would confirm them in their
false hopes. Such men feel a certain satisfaction in heaping to themselves
teachers, In some way they feel the necessity of obtaining the sanctions of
religion, But they come to the prophet not to learn, but to be confirmed in the
purpose of their evil heart. They have not learned what it is to surrender the
mind as well as the heart and will to God. 2. They retain sin in their heart,
though they avoid the outward manifestation of it. They abstained from the gross
forms of idolatry which were practised by their countrymen, but “ they set up
their idols in their heart” (ver. 3), The real root-principle of idolatry was still
in them. 3. They take no steps to remove the occasions of sin. “They put the
stumbling-block of their iniquity before their face” (ver. 3). While these out-
ward temptations and means of sin are suffered to remain, it is of no use to seek
first to cleanse the heart. Images must first be destroyed, else there is little
prospect of rooting out idolatry from the land. Religious teachers should testify
against both outward and inward idolatry. If idols are not removed from the eyes
of men the temptation to worship them will remain, however faithful the teaching
may be against the sin of it. The outward forms of superstition should first be
destroyed, else there is little hope of promoting the pure worship of the heart.

IIL They are exposed to terrible judgments. Even though they inquire of
a true prophet and cannot be charged with open transgression, 1. They cannot
hope to deceive God, who sees and knows the heart. God can see into the depths of
the heart, which is the real man. It is the sinful heart within which makes the
outward temptations of the world dangerous, 2. They are left to the action of the
law of retribution. Retribution in kind, “according to the multitude of his idols”
(ver. 4). They trusted in idols; let them have them now. Let them see what
their own refuges can do for them. God refuses to be inquired of them. “He
heareth not sinners” (John ix. 31). The Word of God is taken away from the
despisers of the truth (Acts xiii. 46), There is a time when God gives an
answer, but not as men desire, and there is also a time when He refuses to
answer, In both these modes of treatment He shows His righteous indignation.
Sinners are left without answer or help in order that they might come to the
true knowledge of their sin.

IV. Their only hope for escape is by a thorough repentance 1. The heart
must be turned to God. ‘Repent and turn yourselves from your idols” (ver, 6).
The Lord will not share His glory with another. The heart must be entirely
given up to the service and worship of the only God. 2. The outward occasions
of sin must be removed. ‘Turn your faces from all your abominations” (ver. 6).
They must avoid the outward forms of idolatry lest they should become again a
temptation and a snare. Their repentance must be a complete reformation both
of the outer and of the inner life,


IDOLATRY IN THE HEaRT (ver. 8),


Idolatry is anold sin, The worship of the true God is older; butit was soon
eorrupted, for men “did not like to retain God in their knowledge” (Row. i. 28)
146


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP. XIV,





There may be idolatry in the heart even when idols are abolished from external
worship. God’s commandment is “exceeding broad.” Idols have long been
banished from our land, and therefore the second commandment has in one sense
become obsolete, But all that is essential to the sin of worshipping them may
still be found even in Christian lands, Everything that stands between a man’s
soul and heaven is an idol,—it is that which he trusts in with his whole heart.
For the root-principle of idolatry is the tendency to put something in the place
of God, to allow the mind to be deluded by phantoms. Idols of all kinds are
mere phantoms, they are (as St. Paul tells us) nothing in the world; there is no
reality in them. When God is not truly known to the soul within, the man of
necessity becomes an idolater. Whatever hinders the true knowledge of God is
idolatry. Bacon, the father of modern science, has distinguished certain idols
or phantoms which interfere with human knowledge, These idols he represents
as certain false notions which possess the mind, and which must be dislodged
if men would attain to the truth concerning the knowledge of man and nature.
There are “idols of the éribe,” “of the cave,” “of the market-place,” “of the
theatre,” It will be found that idolatries in religion spring from similar sources,

L Idols of the tribe. By which Bacon means, those errors and false concep-
tions which have their origin in human nature itself. He says that “the human
mind is like a false mirror, which, receiving rays irregularly, distorts and dis-
colours the nature of things by mingling its own nature with it.” Does not thia
speak to us of our natural ignorance of God, which distorts all the indications
He has given us of His character and will? It may assume the form of gross
idolatry, of atheism, of indifference, or of the various forms of superstition where
ignorant fear is substituted for the worship of Him who alone is to be feared.

IL Idols of the cave. Bacon describes these as the sources of error which
belong to individual men. These may arise from the peculiar constitution of our
mind, from our early habits and education, from all those influences which form
our individual characters, ‘‘ Hach man,” says Bacon, “has a den or cave of his
own.” Sometimes it is dark and comfortless, shutting out the light of heaven,
full of doleful things and gloomy fears. Each man has some infirmity of mind
or temper which leads him to judge wrongly of God and of duty. Each man
has his besetting sin, and must bear his own burden, fight against his own
enemies, and seek peace for his own soul.

IIL Idols of the market-place. These are described as false notions or con-
ceptions, which arise from the intercourse of men with each other. It may be that each
man in his own cave—in himself as an individual—is ashamed of the customs
and notions of which men as communities approve. But these are often deemed
respectable and right if only they are adopted by good society, or by common
usage, or by the laws and customs of that particular business or profession to
which the man belongs.

IV. Idols of the theatre. By which are meant those hindrances to the know-
ledge of the truth which have been imported into men’s minds from the various dogmas
of human philosophies. It is certainly a hindrance in all intellectual pursuits that
many ingenious men have gone wrong before us. Hence knowledge is retarded.
Mental power is wasted, for some wiser man must arise to clear away those
errors to which great men of former times have given currency. We have such
idols of the theatre in religion,—each successive system of infidel philosophy,
rationalism, every device for setting aside the revelation which God has given
of Himself to man in Jesus Christ, every attempt to get rid of the supernatural
and divine element in the Scriptures of God. All these have hidden God from
many human souls, They are the peculiar temptations of intellectual men, of
speculative minds. Such are often free trom vulgar temptations, and it would
seem as if in this way their proper measure of the difficulties of probation is
filled up to them, And all idols, whether they spring from that nature which is

147


GHAP. XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





common to mankind, or from each man’s peculiarities of temper and disposition,
or from the customs of human business and conventional moralities, or from
those ingenious speculations which we find in books,—all these are only to be
overcome by the recognition of God in Christ. They are all mere phantoms,
they hide God from the soul, they lead us astray, they have no power to teach
us, they cannot bring us nearer heaven. But God has not left us to wander in
uncertainty. He has given us the true Light. Our blessed Lord said, “He
that hath seen Me hath seen the Father,” “I am the way, the truth, and the
life.” He gives the invitation, “Come unto Me all ye that labour and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest.” He will give us rest from the pursuit of
vanities of all kinds, from empty speculations which weary the soul for no profit.
If we have found the true we cannot worship the false. If we are true wor-
shippers of Christ we must put away all our idols, for He will not share His love
and worship with another. Christ gives us the true idea of God. The sin of
idolatry is not now impossible though idols are removed from the eyes of men.
The Second Commandment may be dead as concerns the letter of it, but the
spirit of it is as potent as ever to convince men of sin. How many professed
worshippers in the Christian Church set up their idols in their heart and then
come to inquire of God! There is a tendency to worship something which is
not God, to deny Him the full devotion of our hearts. Even when men will
scarcely dare entirely to leave His service, they still strive to serve two masters.
All who love pleasure, earthly honours and distinctions, more than they love
God, are idolaters. In short, all are involved in this sin who seek the world
first before the kingdom of God and His righteousness,


THE INQUIRERS OF Fase PRopueEts (vers. 9-11).


L They hope to obtain a more favourable answer. The true prophets do
not speak that which they would like to hear, so they seek teachers after their
own minds. They will undertake to decide for themselves what prophets are
true or false by the correspondence of the message with their own corrupt
wishes, ‘They are willingly deceived.

IL They do not thereby escape God’s judgments. 1. Even false prophets
are by the will of God. “I the Lord have deceived that prophet” (ver. 9).
God permits such men to preach error, as He permits all other evils to prevail
in the worl. He does not suppress them by an act of power. He allows
the tares and the wheat to grow together until the appointed time of judgment.
And we must learn from God’s dealings with mankind the lesson of tolera-
tion. If we attempt to pluck up the tares we run the risk of rooting out the
wheat also. No man has knowledge or skill enough which will serve him to
anticipate God’s final judgment. He who attempts this may, indeed, do some
good, but he will certainly do much harm, 2. God uses and controls evil for the
working out of His purposes. It is true that “God cannot be tempted with evil,
neither tempteth He any man” (James i. 13). But God makes use of the sins
of men in working out His great designs. Thus He allows men to fall into
one sin as a punishment for another. These exiles loved to be deceived, and
they were deceived. They loved darkness, and they were allowed to wander
into greater darkness, A man must either repent, or he must continue in the
sinful path towards his punishment. It is by God’s law that even the germs
of sin are permitted to be planted, to be fostered, and to grow, so that sin shall
attain to its full maturity and bring on its own punishment. God’s Providence
so orders the course of events that men who will not have the truth shall be
brought to ruin by a lie.


I. oh judgments are intended for the benefit of God’s people. 1. Toe
48


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL, OHAP. KIV,


preserve them from transgression (ver. 11). 2. To test their faith. By the flourish-
ing of false prophets their own fidelity and steadfastness would be tried.
The prevalence of error makes manifest the tried and approved children of
truth (1 Cor. xi. 19). 3. To confirm their faith. By witnessing the judgments
of God fulfilled upon others. 4, 'o teach them to realise their relationship to God,
“That they may be my people, and I may be their God” (ver. 11). We can
have no true peace until we know that the Lord is our God. The essence of
relivion consists in the appropriation of God by the soul. 5. To separate between
the righteous and the ungodly. God may use even sin and error to contribute to
this final purpose of His judgment (2 Thess. ii, 10, 11).


(Ver. 9.)


False prophets were both in Judea and in Babylon, and the people had
often recourse unto them. They spake pleasing things. They told them who
were in Judea that Nebuchadnezzar should never subdue and carry them
captives; yea, they told them that those in Babylon should shortly return,
These were vain, false, and deceitful prophecies, and Divine Providence ordered
it so. We have here—

L A supposition. “If the prophet be deceived when he hath spoken a
thing.” The false prophets were deceived in what they spake to the people.
Zedekiah and the rest of the prophets which bade Ahab to go up to Ramoth-
Gilead and prosper, were deceived (1 Kings xxii), Hananiah and Shelemiah
made that people trust in a lie (Jer. xxviii. 15, xxxix. 31), They were
deceived in their prophets, and deceive others.

IL An assertion. ‘I the Lord have deceived that prophet.” These words
sound very harsh, and no man durst have attributed them unto the Lord, had
not He Himself said so. The words, “I have deceived” are to be taken as
a judicial act of God, who, dealing with them as delinquents, punisheth them
with this special judgment of seduction ; they were idolatrous and hypocritical,
and God punished those sins with others, and so accidentally was the efficient
cause of their deception. God finding those men false and forward to deceive,
hearkening to their own hearts, and following their own spirits (Ez. xili. 2, 3),
He gave them up and over to vain visions and lying divinations, which was
one punishment, and to perdition, which was another punishment following
thereupon. Have you a mind to be prophets, to prophesy lies? Ye shall be
so. In Isa. lxiii. 17, we read, “O Lord, why hast thou made us to err from
thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy fear?” God did this in judgment
to the people who affected false prophets, and chose their own ways (Isa. Ixvi.
3), and delighted in their abominations, He in judgment gave them up to
their own ways, and to hardness of heart (Ps. Ixxi. 11, 12).

Ill. A threatening. “I will stretch out my hand upon him.” God would
put forth His power to punish such a prophet. But if God deceived him,
how can He in justice punish or destroy that prophet? We answer, 1. The
false prophet did whatever he did freely. He was not forced by any power or act
of God. His seduction was principally from himself; and it was his own fault
that he was deceived, that he deceived others. 2. 4 man may serve Providence,
and yet sin against the law of God. The secret Providence had ordered it that
this people should be seduced by false prophets, yet God in His word had for-
bidden such (Deut. xiii). And because men are to look at what is written, not
what is secret and hidden, therefore if they violate the law, God may justly
punish thereupon (Acts iv. 27, 28). Herod, Pilate, Judas, and the Jews, they
did to Christ whatsoever God had determined to be done, yet they were not
without sin, nor without punishment, because they transgressed the rule given
them. We make two observations,—(1.) The Lord, in His injimte wisdom and

149





OHAP. XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,





justice, doth make a punishment of sin, and punish one sin with another. Besides
corporal judgments He hath spiritual ; if the prophet be deceived, “I the Lord
have deceived him,” I have laid this judgment upon him, that he should be
deceived, led into errors, and deceive others; this he hath deserved at my
hands, and this punishment in just judgment I inflict upon him, The Scrip-
tures hold out frequently this way of God’s proceedings with sinners, His
punishment of one sin with another ; (2 Chron. xxv. 17-20; Jer. iv. 10; Rom.
i 25, 26; 2 Thess. ii. 10,11). (2.) God will deal severely with false prophets. “1
will stretch out my hand upon him.” He would be made an example to all, as
were Hananiah and Shemaiah (Jer. xxviii, 15, 16; xxix. 31, 32.—@reenhill).

“The great sophister and prince of darkness (God permitting him) can
strangely blindfold our reason and muffle our understanding; and, no doubt,
the chiefest cause that most of the obstinate, besotted sinners of the world are
not sensible that the devil blinds and abuses them is, that he has indeed
actually done so already. For how dreadfully did God consign over the
heathen world to a perpetual slavery to Satan’s deceits? They worshipped
him, they consulted with him, and so absolutely were they sealed up under the
ruling cheat, that they took all his tricks and impostures for Oracle and Justruc-
tion. And the truth is, when men under the powerful preaching of the Gospel
will grow heathens in the viciousness of their practices, it is but just with God
to suffer them (by a very natural transition) to grow heathens, too, in the
grossness of their delusions.” —South.


JUDAH AND JERUSALEM CANNOT CLAIM EXEMPTION FROM JUDGMENTS


BECAUSE OF THE RIGHTEOUS


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Vers.
12, 13. “When the land sinneth
against me by trespassing grievously.”
Their sin is more particularly defined
as “trespass,” the literal expression
being “to trespass a trespass,” #.¢e. to
commit a very great trespass. The
first signification of the Hebrew word
is ‘to cover,” and therefore it is used
to denote acting in any secret or
treacherous manner, especially towards
Jehovah, either by outward or inward
idolatry or by withholding what is
due to Him. Here the treachery
specially pointed out is that of apos-
tasy from God by idolatry.

Ver, 14, “ Though these three men,
Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it.
These men are named as well-known
examples of true righteousness of life,
They were just in their generation.
living that life of obedience which
springs from faith in God. Noah is
so described in Gen. vi. 9; and Job,
in the Book of Job i. 1; and Daniel,
in like manner, is classed with these
ancient men as one who confessed a true
faith by a righteous life. ‘The fact
that Daniel is named before Job does

150


FEW THEREIN (vers, 12—23).


not warrant the conjecture that some
other older Daniel is meant, of whom
nothing is said in the history, and
whose existence is merely postulated.
For the enumeration is not intended
to be chronological, but is arranged
according to the subject-matter; the
order being determined by the nature
of the deliverance experienced by
these men for their righteousness in
the midst of great judgments. Haver-
nick shows we have. a climax here:
Noah saved his family along with
himself; Daniel was able to save his
friends (Dan. ii. 17, 18); but Job,
with his righteousness, was not even
able to save his children” (Keil).

Ver. 15. “If I cause noisome beasts
to pass through the land.” ‘ Beasts”
in the usual sense, or in human form
(ver. 17.)” (Hengstenberg), comp. Ez.
v. 17; Lev. xxvi. 22; 2 Kings xvii.
25.

' Ver. 16. “They shall deliver neither
sons nor daughters.” “In the first
instance, it is simply stated that Noah,
Daniel, and Job would save their
soul, 6.6. their life, by their righteous-
ness; whereas, in the three others, it


AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,


eS


is declared that as truly as the Lord
liveth they would not save either sons
or daughters, but they alone would
be delivered, The difference is not
merely a rhetorical climax or progress
in the address by means of assevera-
tion and antithesis, but indicates a
distinction in the thought. The first
case is only intended to teach that in
the approaching judgment the right-
eous would save their lives, ie. that
God would not sweep away the right-
eous with the ungodly. The three
cases which follow are intended, on
the other hand, to exemplify the truth
that the righteousness of the righteous
will be of no avail to the idolaters and
apostates ; since even such patterns of
righteousness as Noah, Daniel, and
Job would only be able to save their
own lives, and would not be able to
save the lives of others also. This
tallies with the omission of the assevera-
tion in ver, 14. The first declaration,
that God would deliver the righteous
in the coming judgments, needed no
asseveration, inasmuch as this truth
was not called in question ; but it was
required in the case of the declaration
that the righteousness of the righteous
would bring no deliverance to the sin-
ful nation, since this was the hope
which the ungodly cherished, and it
was this hope which was to be taken
from them” (Kei/).

Vers, 17-20. Two more great judg-
ments are threatened. “The four visi-
tations of God, each introduced with
an if, should actually come, as had
been repeatedly predicted, unitedly
upon the degenerate covenant people,
upon the desecrated land of the Lerd.
The transition from the merely hypo-
thetical to the actual follows in ver. 21.
The for at the beginning points to the
ground of the discussion instituted,
shows that it is no mere idle common
place” (Heng.)

Ver. 21. ‘“‘How much more when I
send my four sore judgments upon
Jerusalem.” “How much more must
the general standard of the Divine
judgments manifest itself before all


OHAP. ZIV.





in the servant, who knows his master’s
will, and yet does what is worthy of
stripes! ‘You only have I known of
all the families of the earth ; therefore
I will visit upon you all your iniquities,’
says Amos” (Heng.) “The sword,
and the famine, and the noisome
beast, and the pestilence.” “The
number four may possibly symbolise
the completeness of the judgment, as
one on all sides. Formerly famine
was first; here it is the sword, because
the calamity of war lay immediately
before them. In consequence of it
the other three judgments came one
after another. War brings famine
into the cities; corpses outside, which
attract the beasts; and from all these
follows the pestilence” (Lange).

Ver. 22. “Therein shall be left a
remnant that shall be brought forth.”
“A remnant,” 4¢, persons who have
escaped destruction. These shall be
brought forth, i.¢., led out of Jerusalem
“unto you.” They shall join those
who are already in exile in Babylon.
«Sons and daughters.” ‘These are
called sons and daughters, with an
allusion to vers. 16, 18, and 20, and
consequently we must not take these
words as referring to the younger
generation in contrast to the older”
(Keil). ‘Ye shall be comforted con-
cerning the evil that I have brought
upon Jerusalem” They shall be com-
forted in seeing the justification of the
ways of God,

Ver. 23. “Their ways and their
doings.” “Not those ways by which
they had provoked the Lord to punish
the nation, but the fruits of righteous-
ness—the good works to the practice
of which they had been recovered by
the severe discipline through the course
of which they had been brought. While
they justified God in all the calamities
which He had inflicted upon them,
their being spared was a proof of His
great mercy, and a pledge that, if their
brethren in the captivity followed their
example by renouncing idolatry, they
also should be dealt with in mercy”
(Hend.)


OwAP. XIV HOMILETTC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,








AHOMILETICS.


Tue JUDCMENTS OF GoD UPON NATIONS.


L They usually take the shape of great public calamities. 1. The sowrces
of the national wealth are undermined. “1 will break the staff of the bread thereof,
and will sen? famine upon it” (ver. 13). Bread, the chief food of man, may
well be called “the staff of life.” It is the prop which supports man’s physical
nature, and when it is taken away he sinks exhausted to the ground, Famine
is one of God’s sore judgments, for it seizes upon what is man’s greatest treasure,
his life. Man and beast fail; the means of useful labour and food are cut off.
The very foundations of life are destroyed. 2. The invasion of enemies. “If I
cause noisome beasts to pass through the land” (ver. 15). Man was invested
with dominion over the beasts of the earth. By virtue of the power of his mind,
and not merely by physical force, he retains his sovereignty over them. And
God’s providence wonderfully preserves the balance of power between man and
_ the lower animals, He sets a watch over all His creatures, so that they shall not
pass His commandment, but fulfil His purpose in placing man head over all here
below. But sin interferes with man’s complete dominion; and it is, after all,
but a broken sceptre that he holds in his hand. God, for purposes of judgment,
allows beasts to overcome man, Another enemy to nations is the sword. God
says, “Sword, go through the land” (ver. 17). War is one of the scourges
whick God uses to punish wicked nations, All the evils mentioned in this
section—devouring beasts, pestilence, and famine—follow in its track. 3. Pesté-
lence. “Or, if I send a pestilence into that land” (ver. 19). In famine and
other calamities men of wealth may be able to keep the enemy for a long while
at bay, or even to hold out to the end. But they have no defence against
pestilence. Then does the Angel of Death walk through the land with impartial
step, sparing no age or condition,

II. Though they may be traced to natural causes they are still the work of
God. War, pestilence, and famine, are due to the operation of natural laws.
But it is also true that God sends them; for He is behind all nature, and behind
all human history, whether in justice or in the mysterious march of its events,
The calamities that fall upon nations have deep moral causes, and ultimately
resolve themesives into the wghteous will of God in His manifest indignation
against humansin. 1. Nations, as such, are unaer moral law. This law expresses
the will of Ged in regard to human conduct, 2. The transgression of those laws
involves penalty. History has many sad examples which show how the moral
corruption of a nation may become so great as to bring about its destruction,
Nations can only be judged in this life, for as such they do not exist in another
world, When a land sins against God by “ trespassing grievously,” the calamities
which are visited upon it are seen to come from God by all who believe that
there is a moral Governor of the world,

II. They cannot always be averted by pleading the righteousness of the
few therein. Abraham’s intercession for Sodom establishes that principle of
God’s government by which whole nations are spared great judgments for the
sake of the few righteous among them. The faithful few among many faithless
are as the salt which preserves the whole community from corruption. We are
exhorted and encouraged to pray for others, and even to be so bold as to ask
that the hand of justice might be stayed when it is lifted against the ungodly.
But there are limits to intercession. Even the prayers of Abraham could not
save the devoted cities of the plain. In like manner the iniquity of Jerusalem
had grown so great that the prayers and godly influence of men of such famous
righteousness as Noah, Daniel, and Job, could not save it from the threatened

152


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP, XIV.
ae Se oR ee ed TNE eee OO


doom. The Jews placed great reliance upon the intercession of the saints, and
counted upon it as a refuge from judgment, They are now told that this isa
vain hope, that God’s righteous law must take its course, and that the most holy
men can but save themselves (vers. 14, 16, 18, 20).

IV. The righteousness of God therein will appear unto His people. “And
ye shall be comforted” (ver, 22). This comfort would arise from clearly seeing
the Justification of God’s ways (ver. 23). ‘There was a sufficient cause for all
the evil which was coming upon Jerusalem, and faithful souls should see how
that the ways of the Lord were just. However severe God’s judgments may be
in His dealings with mankind, it is a comfort when we know and believe that
they are righteous. What a lesson for Christian nations! They are governed
by the same great moral principles, but with added light their responsibilities
are greater.


(Ver. 14.)


From this passage we may infer two things—

I That there are seasons when even the intercession of the most eminent
will not avail. There are seasons in which it is unalterably determined to
inflict punishment.

IL That these are so rare and so extraordinary that to declare He will
not turn away for intercession is the strongest token of His fierce indigna-
tion. (1.) If God delights to hear prayer it is most reasonable to believe He will
favourably regard intercessory prayer; for then the supplicant is exercising two
most important virtues at once, piety and benevolence. He is then employed
in fulfilling the whole law, and makes the nearest approach to the divine nature.
(2.) Examples of its success—Abraham, Moses, and Job.—R. Hall,


“Noa, DANIEL, AND JOB.”


Some make great inquiry why these three men should be mentioned rather
than others, and they give in their answer :—l. It is thought that they are
named, for that they could not divert God’s wrath by their holiness and prayers
from the people of their times. Noah could not keep off the flood, nor Job the
sad things which befel him and his, nor Daniel the captivity. 2. Others think
they are named because they freed others in imminent danger in their times.
Noah saved his family from the flood ; Job prayed for his friends, and they were
spared; Daniel preserved the magicians and wise men. But rather they are
named, because they were men of great holiness, exercised with great trials, and
so the more fervent in prayer. And what if these men, who were so acceptable
to me, had so much interest in me and often prevailed with me, should pray for
you, yet they should do nothing for your deliverance by their prayers. These
were men in great afflictions, and affliction is the whetstone of prayer, the
bellows to blow up that fire.—Greenhul.


(Vers, 22, 23.)


1. When God’s judgments are sorest, yet then He shows mercy to some.
2. The Lord will satisfy and comfort tne hearts of His people against the evil
and scandal that comes by any of His judgments. When Jerusaiem was
destroyed, the Jews rooted out and carried to Babylon, what joy was there in
the nations! what reproachings of the Jews! Where is now their God? At
these things the Jews’ hearts in Babylon were yrieved, offended ; therefore the
Lord tells them, they “shall be comforted concerning all the evil He hath brought
upon Jerusalem.” They shall know the greatness of their sins which moved
Him to do so. 8, That the Lord is righteous and just in His judgments, “J

158


GHAR. KV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





have not done without cause all that I have done in Jerusalem.” It is the devil's
design to hurt without cause; therefore saith God, ‘Thou movedst me against
him, to destroy him without cause” (Job ii. 3). But God would not do it;
whatever He doth He hath great cause for. He is the only and infinitely wise
God, and doth all things upon the height of reason. Their sins were such as im-
peached His honour, corrupted His worship, broke the covenant, questioned His
providence, violated justice, and conformed them to the heathen. He had cause
enough to do what He did, namely, to vindicate His honour, worship, covenant,
providence, justice, and to show that His people, if they will sin with the world,
must suffer grevious things for it, 4. Men shall know in due time the equity
of God’s judgments. They are a great depth. Men cannot sound or measure
them (Ps. xxxvi. 6). The causes of them are hidden from the eyes of most.
Job’s friends mistook the cause of God’s dealing so sharply with him, but after-
wards they understood it. They in Babylon, and others, were astonished at the
sore judgments of God, but God let them know the cause of it, and so they were
brought to justify God (1 Kings ix. 7-9). God proclaims the cause of His severe
judgments, so that men may see the equity of them, that “ He is righteous in
all His ways, and holy in all His works” (Ps. cxlv. 17).—Greenhill.


IsRAEL COMPARED TO THE USELESS Woop oF A WILD VINE (Chap. xv.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—In the Ver. 3. Shall the wood be taken


last chapter the prophet had an-
nounced that God would not spare
Jerusalem for the sake of the few
righteous therein. In this chapter he
destroys another refuge in which they
trusted. He shows how His people
Israel have no native superiority over
other nations, no such intrinsic value
as would entitle them to be cousidered
as a special case. They may have
rested secure in the thought that
Israel is compared to a vine (Ps.
Ixxx.), that they could not be rejected
and punished because of their election.
The prophet’s answer to this false con-
fidence is, that Israel is no longer a
true vine, but mere wood, yea, even
the most useless of all wood, and only
fit to serve as fuel for the fire. In
vers. 1-5 the figure is worked out in
the shape of a parable. In vers. 6-8
we have the application of the parable.
God will deal with Jerusalem as men
deal with the wood of the forest vine,
the worthless remains of a barren tree.

Vers. 1 and 2. “What is the vine
tree more than any tree?” It was
a standing figure with the prophets
to compare Israel to a vine or vine-
yard (Isa, v.; Hos. x.; Jer. ii, 21),
and always, with the exception of
Ps. lxxx., to point out its degeneracy.

154


thereof to do any work? It is useless
as a material for making any instru-
ment. ‘For use its diameter even
unfits it; while its appearance is too
paltry for ornament, and it is too weak
to bear anything except fruit” (Lange).

Ver. 4. “Behold, it is cast into the
fire for fuel; the fire devoureth both
the ends of it, and the midst of it is
burned. Is it meet for any work?”
The answer to this question is given
in the next verse, the force of which
is this,—If in its perfect state it can-
not be put to any useful purpose, how
much less when it is partially scorched
and consumed !

Ver. 6. ‘‘So will I give the inhabi-
tants of Jerusalem.” “The Jews
having utterly failed to answer the
divine purpose in selecting them to
be witnesses for Jehovah in the midst
of the heathen, they were to be com-
pletely broken up as a nation, and
punished by severe and fiery trials in
succession, till the dross of their idola-
try was purged away. When a pro-
fessing people act unworthily of their
calling, they are only fit to be rejected”
(Matt. i. 10, v. 13) (Henderson)

Ver. 7. “They shall go out from
ene fire, and another fire shall devour
them.” ‘‘QOut of a fire one must come


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, CHAP, XV,





either burned or scorched. Israe! has is now about to be given up altogether
been in the fire already. It resembles to the fire” (Keil).
a wild vine which has been consumed Ver. 8. “And I will make the land
at both ends by the fire, while the desolate.” Repeating the threat of
middle has been scorched, and which chap. xiv. 13, 15.


HOMILETICS.
THE END oF Man’s EXISTENCE (ver. 2).


The vine-tree is weaker than most trees, so as to be unfit for any work, and
would therefore be very contemptible but for that property it possesses ef bring-
ing forth a valuable and delicious fruit, On this account it is highly prized and
diligently cultivated. But if it fail of producing fruit, the only purpose to which
it can be applied is to turn it to fuel. Such is the figurative representation
which the prophet gives us in this passage of man, considered especially as the
object of divine care and culture, He is naturally capable of yielding a precious
fruit ; in this consists his sole excellency ; this is the sole end of his existence;
and if he fails in this he is of no use but to be destroyed.

I. Man is naturally capable of yielding a most precious fruit: this fruit
consists in living to God. 1. Hes possessed of all the natural powers which are
requisite for that purpose. He is endowed with reason and understanding, enab-
ling him to perceive the proofs of the being of God, and to entertain just, though
inadequate, conceptions of the principal attributes of His nature: His self-
existence, His absolute perfection, His power, His wisdom, His all-sufficiency,
His omnipresence, His holiness, justice, and goodness, Inferior animals do not ;
on which account He is the vine-tree amongst the trees of the wood, inferior in
many properties to some of them, but superior in those particulars which fit
him for this end, and on that account incomparably more valuable. 2. As we
are possessed of natural powers fitting us for the service of God, so He has bestowed
upon us much care and culture, with an express view to this end. The religious
instruction He gave to His ancient people is frequently compared in Scripture
to the cultivation which men bestow upon vines, “My beloved hath a vine-
yard in a very fruitful hill” ie v. 1). ‘For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts
is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah His pleasant plant” (Isa. v. 7).
He gave them His will, His ordinances, His prophets, and separated them from
all nations by peculiar rites, that they might be to Him for a name and a praise
and a peculiar treasure above all nations. He has done much more for us under
the Gospel. None can be ignorant of the intention of God in all these pro-
visions, “ Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed; how, then,
art thou now turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me?” (Jer.
ii, 21).

i This is the only end for which mankind are formed and preserved.
This is the proper fruit of human nature, which admits ot nothing being sub-
stituted in its room. 1. A mere selfish, voluptuous life, cannot be supposed to be the
proper fruit of human nature. He who lives to himself is universally despised
aud condemned. ‘Israel is an empty vine, he bringeth forth fruit to him-
self” (Hos. x. 1). ‘For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of
Gomorrah ; their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter ” (Deut.
xxxii. 32), 2 A life of social benevolence, in which the public good is preserved,
without a supreme regard to God, cannot be this fruit. Can such persons be said to
neglect the end of their existence? Undoubtedly, for the following reasons :
(1.) To do good to our fellow-creatures, without regard to God, ts to forget the principal
relation in which we stand, and, consequently, to neglect the principal duty. A right
behaviour to each other is no proper compensation for the want ware


OHAP. XV HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





regards to God (instanced in pirates and rebels). A regard to God is the root
and origin of all real virtue, (2.) The end of man’s existence cannot, with any pro-
priety, be considered as confined to this world. But the proper end accomplished
by mere social virtues is entirely confined to the present state, (3.) No collective
number of men can be independent of God, more than a single indindual ; therefore
no such collective body has a right to consult their common interest, to the neglect of
God, any more than a single individual to pursue his individual interest. The aggre-
gate of mankind appears something great and imposing in the eyes of men, in
consequence of which a peculiar importance is attached to those actions which
tend to the public good. The magnitude of the general interest imposes a value
on those actions which are adapted to advance so great an object. But, in the
sight of God, all nations are as the “drop of a bucket ;” “He taketh up the
isles as a very little thing.” Suppose all the subjects of a lawful prince were to
agree to stand by each other, and to promote each other’s interests to the utmost,
would this be allowed by the prince as any atonement for a great and persever-
ing rebellion? Or suppose a single individual so disposed, would not the result
be the same? No other can be substituted for this.

Ill. He who answers not the end of his existence is only fit to be
destroyed. He is like a vessel marred in the hands of the potter, proper only
to be broken. The barren vine may be useful as fuel, and to this purpose it is
much applied in eastern countries. Thus wicked men may be useful with asub-
ordinate kind of usefulness, by their destruction. 1. They may thereby become
edifying examples of the just vengeance of God, in order to deter others. That this
will be one of the ends answered by the punishment of the wicked seems inti-
mated in several passages of Scripture, as well as is supported by its analogy to
human government, “And they shall go forth and look upon the carcases of
the men that have transgressed against me ; for their worm shall not die, neither
shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh” (Isa.
Ixvi. 24). 2. They will serve to mantfest those attributes of the great Supreme which
their conduct disowned, and which it seemed virtually to call in question. “What if
God, willing to show His wrath, and to make His power known, endured with
much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction?” (Rom. ix. 22).
This is a subordinate use, not a primary end. It is that for which men fit them-
selves by their presumptuous and impenitent neglect of God, (1.) What total
blindness attaches to those who live in the total neglect of God and religion!
(2.) What little room is there for that confidence which many place in correct-
ness of deportment towards their fellow-creatures, while religion is not even
pretended to be the governing principle of their lives! (3.) What need have
we all to examine ourselves, and seriously to inquire whether we are yielding
that fruit unto God on which we have been insisting! (4.) How ought those
to be alarmed when the result of such examination is that they have been
hitherto utterly without fruit! How strong the obligations on such, after con-
sidering their ways, to turn unto the Lord. And thankful should they be that
space is afforded them for repentance and salvation.—R, Hall.


The Church is not to be a wilderness, but a vineyard; it is not to bear
flowers only, or leaves and twigs merely, but fruit. She is not an apple-tree or
fig-tree, but a vine. Wine cheers, inspirits, enlivens, Outwardly insignificant,
there is the noblest power within. The grace of Christ working through poor
apostles.— A Lapide.


(Ver. 1.)


The Jews, who were the Church of God, resembled the vine. 1. Vines are
few in respect of other trees, so were the Jews in respect of other people (Deut.
156


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP. XV.


_ vii. 7). They were the “fewest of all people.” 2, Vines are planted by hillsides,

by houses, in gardens, orchards, &c., and the Jews were planted in the choicest
land ; “in a pleasant place” (Hos, ix. 13), “in a very fruitful hill” (Isa. v. 1).
The vine was brought out of Egypt; it was a chosen vine, and it was planted
(Ps. Ixxx. 8), but where? in “a good land,” even a land of brooks, fountains,
springs, valleys, hills; in a land flowing with milk and honey, the glory of all
lands (Deut, vili. 7; Ezek. xx. 6). Therefore called a branch of His own plant-
ing, planted with His right hand (Isa. lx. 21; Ps. lxxx.15). 3. Vines are weak,
must have props and supports to uphold them. God dealt so by the Jews.
“In the wilderness the Lord thy God bare thee as a man doth bear his son, in
all the way that ye went” (Deut. i. 31). Children are weak, and must be carried
in the arms; and so God did carry them (Deut. xxxiii. 27). 4. Fruitful; no
tree so fruitful as the vine. It is called the “ fruitful vine,” it is fruitful in
branches, and fruitful in clusters. The Jews were a fruitful nation. ‘Thy
fathers went down into Egypt with threescore and ten persons, and now the
Lord thy God hath made thee as the stars of heaven for multitude” (Deut.
x. 32). 5, It spreads much; so the Jews, who were God’s vine (Ps. lxxx. 9-11).
The psalmist saith there of this vine, that it filled the land, covered the hills
with its shadow, sent out her boughs unto the sea, and her branches unto the
river, and they spread far. 6. It is pleasant and delightful; such were the Jews
(Isa. v. 7). 7. Most pains required about vines of any plants or trees; much
digging, dressing, pruning, supporting, fencing is needful. The Jews had much
pains or cost bestowed npon them (Isa. v. 4). Other trees are little looked after,
but the vine must have special care (John xv. 2). The husbandman observes
every branch, the fruitful and unfruitful (Amos iii. 2).—Greenhill.


THE REAL SECURITY OF CHRISTIANS.


God’s Church is still the same though the outward form of it be changed.
It is governed by the same principles, exposed to the same sources of danger,
and only safe in the same refuge. The Christian Church is God’s Vine, and the
reason of its existence, of its continuance, is exactly the same as in the case of
His Church of old. What is the real security of Christians? Consider—

L What itis not. 1. Not in their high calling. God called the Jews of old
from amongst the heathen to be a separate people, a holy nation. He calls His
Church now out of the world. Yet this is only means to an end, and not the
end itself. He has called His people for a purpose, and if they fail to answer
it they only fall from a higher elevation, and therefore into a worse destruction
than others. 2. Not in their great gifts and endowments. They have the gifts
of the Spirit, the means of grace, prophets and teachers, the written Word.
With them lies the sacred deposit of God’s truth. But these are only the
means and appliances of spiritual education, They are not in themselves
knowledge, for in spiritual things knowledge comes of doing the will of God.
Unless God is seen by the eye of the soul, and enjoyed as a real possession
within, the doctrines and ordinances of religion become to us but barren tradi-
tions, and outward privileges only a temptation for resting in false security. 3.
Not in what God has already done. God has cultivated His vine, the Church,
with great care. But if any of her members stop short, and so fail to reach the
end of God’s gracious design, the good which He hath wrought for them will be
forfeited and will only increase their judgment. From each who hath not any
solid results to show shall be taken away what has already been given, “even
that which he hath.”

Il. What it is. The real security of the Christian Church is its fruitful-
ness, God planted it for this very purpose. 1. God’s honour ts concerned in the
Ghurch’s fruitfulness, The husbandman likes to see and to show the i of his


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





labours. They are his reward, and they commend to others his diligence and
care (St. John xv. 8; St. Matt. v.16), 2. It ts not what we receive, but what
springs up from us into the fruit of good living, that determines our spiritual condition.
God’s gifts are a power entrusted to us to be used for His glory. They are
the seed which is sown in our hearts; but they are entirely wasted if the fruit
does not appear. 3. The end decides the matter. It is in vain to rejoice at
beginning well, and then imagine that all is done. The end alone determines
our state before God. We were made for God’s glory, and if we have not
reached that we have failed. 4. We must not boast of God's gifts of grace as if
they were products of our own nature. No ground for boasting at all, for we have
literally nothing which we have not received. How much more is this true of
God’s gifts of grace! 5. We must not turn God’s benefits into an excuse for sin
ee security lies not in our privileges, but in the good use which we make
of them,


(Ver. 8.)


The sins of the inhabitants bring desolation upon a land. Canaan was a
pleasant and fruitful land, a very paradise, but because they committed a tres-
pass, corrupted God’s worship and oppressed the people, therefore God laid
waste the land, even His own vineyard; He plucked away the fence, broke
down the wall, and let in those wild beasts, bears, boars, and foxes, the
Babylonians, who tore the vine in pieces, and rooted it wholly up, and laid all
desolate. Before they came, the land was as the garden of Eden, but they
left it a desolate wilderness ; and where the vines grew, there were briars and
thorns (Isa. vil. 23, 24; Ps. evii. 3, 4). If we would therefore prevent this,
let us hearken to what is said, Jer. v. 7.—Greenhill,


ISRAEL'S INGRATITUDE, PUNISHMENT, AND, IN THE END, FORGIVENESS.
(Chap. xvi.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—The pro-
phet surveys the entire development
of the nation, past and future. Their
original condition was most wretched,
like that of a miserable infant at its
birth utterly neglected and deprived
of proper attention and care. God
had brought them out of this lowly
estate, had saved them from destruc-
tion, and had fostered them with His
constant love and care until they had
reached to a maturity of vigour and


loveliness, But in their ingratitude
they sinned grievously against Him,
They might rest in their position as
the chosen vine and think themselves
secure, but they are here assured that
they are no better than other nations,
and are liable to be punished and
judged as the heathen around them.
Yet, in the end, God will be mindful
of His covenant, grant them His for-
giveness, and restore them to favour.


ISRAEL'S PasT CONDITION, HELPLESS, UNCLEAN, AND ABOUT TO PERISH.
(Vers, 1, 2.)


Vers. 1, 2. “Cause Jerusalem to
know her abominations.” Jerusalem
is used as the symbolical representa-
tive of the whole Jewish people. Her
sins were greater than those of other
nations; they were “abominations.”
for they were the sins of the covenant

158


people. The main end of this chapter
is to declare these abominations,

Ver. 3. ‘‘ Thy birth and thy nativity
is in the land of Canaan; thy father
was an Amorite, and thy mother an
Hittite.” ‘“ Regarded merely as a city,
Jerusalem was neither of Amoritisk


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: &ZEKIEL,


OHAP. XVI,


a ET aR ee eh ee on ee, Cae


nor Hittite origin, but simply a Jebu-
site city, And it is too obvious to
need any proof that the prophetic
word does not refer to the city as a
city, but that Jerusalem represents
the people of Israel, or the covenant
nation. It was not the mass of houses,
but the population—which was the
foundling — that excited Jehovah’s
compassion, and which He multiplied
into myriads (ver. 7), clothed in
splendour, and chose as the bride
with whom He concluded a marriage
covenant. The descent and _ birth
referred to are not physical, but spiri-
tual descent. Spiritually, Israel sprang
from the land of the Canaanites; and
its father was an Amorite and its
mother a Hittite, in the same sense
in which Jesus said to the Jews, ‘Ye
are of your father the devil’ (St.
John viii. 44). The iniquity of the
Amorites was great even in Abraham’s
time, through not yet full or ripe for
destruction (Gen, xv. 16); and the
daughters of Heth, whom Ksau married,
caused Rebekah great bitterness of
spirit (Gen, xxvil. 46)” (Keil).

Ver. 4. “Thy navel was not cut,
neither wast thou washed in water
to supple thee.” The cutting of the
navel-string is necessary for the inde-
pendent life of the child, and the
washing with water to cleanse it from
the impurities attaching to it. If
these necessary offices are neglected,
the infant must perish.


“Thou wast not salted at all, nor
swaddled at all.” “ After the washing,
the body was rubbed with salt, accord-
ing to a custom very widely spread in
ancient times, and still met with here
and there in the East; and that not
merely for making the skin drier and
firmer, or of cleansing it more tho-
roughly, but probably from regard to
the virtue of salt as a protection from
putrefaction. And, finally, it was
bound with swaddling-clothes. Not
one of these things, so indispensable
to the preservation and strengthening
of the child, was performed in the
case of Israel at the time of its birth
from any feeling of compassionate
love; but it was cast into the field,
i.e. exposed, in order that it might
perish. The day of the birth of Jeru-
salem, i.e. of Israel, was the period of
its sojourn in Egypt, where Israel as
a nation was born, the sons of Jacob
who went down to Egypt having
multiplied into a nation” (Keil).

Ver. 5. “None eye pitied thee, to
do any of these things unto thee.”
“Those who had looked up to Joseph
did not even look down with com-
passion on thee” (Lange). Israel in
Egypt was an object of contempt.
The neglect into which it had fallen
might well be compared to the cruel
desertion of an infant; for Moses, the
type of his people, was actually ex-
posed, and afterwards delivered from
threatened death by God’s providence


HOMILETICS.
MoraL CoRRUPTION IN THE CHURCH.


The prophet is speaking to those who had been brought into covenant with
God, and called to serve Him as His people. He is not speaking of the sins of


mankind generally, but of those of the Church.


are here taught—


L That it ought to be thoroughly brought home to all concerned.


Of this moral corruption we


No half


Jerusalem must “know her abomina-


measures, or delicate hints, will suffice. —
tions” (ver. 2). 1. The knowledge of sin is, before all things, necessary to salvation.
It is not sufficient to make a general admission of our heritage in the sin which
is natural to our race. There must be a real, heart-felt knowledge of sin as
committed by ourselves against God, The sad wounds of our soul must be
probed to the very bottom, a painful yet salutary process. 2. The knowledge of
sin cannot be arrived at by our own unaided powers. However we may lament the


sin that is in the world, we are naturally plind to our own real state. ers the
5


OHAP. XVL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


engaging in the outward services of religion may tend still more to blind us, for
we are tempted to rest satisfied with them, and, it may be, to regard them as an
atonement for our faults and transgressions, And religious people are liable
also to the temptation of pleading the motive of a good intention and purpose
as a defence for what is clearly wrong. They use the light which is given them,
not to shine on the path of duty, but to aid their own wilfulness. The real
knowledge of sin must be brought to such from without. It is necessary that
the inspired prophet should speak. It is the office of the Holy Spirit to con-
vince of sin.

II. It ought to be revealed in all its enormity. 1. As sin against the light.
Those who have church privileges, and yet live ungodly lives, are regarded as
the heathen in the sight of God (Matt. xviii. 17), 2. As sin which brings to a
most miserable condition. Such may be compared to an abandoned infant, ready


to perish (vers. 4, 5),
(Ver. 2.)


1. A people may be guilty of abominations, and not know nor acknowledge
them. ‘They know not to do right” (Amos iii. 10). When men know not
what is right, how can they know what is wrong? They stored up violence
and robbery in their palaces, they got wealth by injustice, oppression, laid it up,
and thought it well gotten. They know not God (Jer. ix. 3). “They know
not the way of the Lord” (Jer. v. 4); therefore their own ways seem good in
their eyes. They were blinded, and as they knew not their abominations, so
they acknowledged them not (Hos. v. 15). They are, therefore, urged to lay
their sin to heart and confess it. 2. There is an unwillingness in sinners to
hear of their sins. “Cause Jerusalem to know,” &c. ; she is against it, but make
her to know them. This people were always averse to hear of their sins or.
duty (Zech vil. 11, 12; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 16). When Stephen told them of their
practices (Acts vii. 51, 52) what followed upon it? “They were cut to the
heart, and they gnashed upon him with their teeth.” And when Christ told
them of their sins they derided Him (Luke xvi. 14), told Him that He had “a
devil” (John viii, 48), And not only wicked men are unwilling to hear of their
sins, but even good men also. When God reproved Jonah, “ Doest thou well to
be angry?” his reply was, ‘‘I do well to be angry, even to death.” He thought
God did evil in reproving him, that he had more cause to be angry than God
had to chide him for his anger. Paul was become an enemy to the Galatians,
because he told them the tiuth, he told them of their sins. Good men do not
easily endure to hear of their faults. 3. What God commands the prophets and
ministers to do, it matters not how it is taken by the people, they are to do it,
It was not for Ezekiel to excuse himself from this service, to object against it,
to say they will mock me, despise me, misuse me, hate me, seek my hurt. God
commanded, and it was his duty to do it carefully, conscientiously, and faith-
fully. He must make known their sins to themselves, to the world, let the event
be what it will (Isa. lviii. 1). The prophet must not whisper, but cry, and that
aloud ; it matters not who hears, he must lift up his voice like'atrumpet. When
men blow trumpets they do it with all their strength, and the sound of it goeth
far; so must the prophets utter the sins of the people, and show them their
transgressions, (1.) That others may take warning, and not do as they have
done (1 Tim. v. 20). (2.) That they may bring the parties to repentance (Jer.
xxxiii, 22), How shall sinners come to repentance if they hear not of their sins,
if they be not convinced of the sinfulness of them by the prophets and ministers
of God? The false prophets hid their sins from them. (3.) That they may
deliver their own souls (Ezek, xxxiii. 8, 9). 4. The sins of people are abomina-
tions in God’s account. Sins are works, but works of iniquity, abominable works,

ud abominable iniquity (Ps. xiv. 1, lili 1),—Greenhill.
160


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP. XVI.





IsRAEL’8s SALVATION FROM HER SHAME AND MISERY IS DUE TO THE LORD
ALONE (vers. 6-14),


Ver. 6. “And when I passed by
thee, and saw thee polluted in thine
own blood.” Some render, “and saw
thee trampled in thy blood.” Israel in
Egypt was a people trampled upon,
utterly despised. “I said unto thee,
when thou wast in thy blood, Live.”
It was sad to be despised, but the
chief danger was that Ji/e was seriously
threatened. From the mouth of God,
the word “ Live” was a word of power,
and was visibly fulfilled in the extra-
ordinary multiplication of Israel.
“ Jehovah here represents Himself as a
traveller who, on passing by, discovers
the unsightly and pitiable object which
had just been described, and interposes
for its rescue. Notwithstanding its
pollution, He takes compassion upon
it, and saves its life. In this miserable
and helpless condition Jehovah found
the Hebrews in the land of bondage.
Extending the principle involved in


the figure beyond the direct teaching -


of the text, it is strikingly descriptive
of the condition of sinners previous to
conversion.” — (Henderson.)


Ver. 7, “I have caused thee to mul-
tiply as the bird of the field.” Ac-
cording to the promise (Ex. i. 7, 12).
“Thou art come to excellent orna-
ments.” Heb., “ Ornament of cheeks,”
describing youthful freshness and
beauty of face, “Thy breasts are
fashioned, and thine hair is grown.”
The Heb. word when applied to the
breasts means to expand, Ji. to raise
oneself up, “The metaphor is still
continued, representing the infant
growing up to womanhood, and exhi-
biting unmistakeable signs of puberty.”
—(Henderson.) ‘Whereas thou wast
naked and bare.” “Naked and bare
are figurative expressions for still
destitute of either clothing or orna-
ments. This implies something more
than the poverty of the people in the
wilderness attached to Egypt. Naked-
ness represents deprivation of all the
blessings of salvation with which the

&


Lord endowed Israel and made it
glorious, after he had adopted it as
the people of his possession in Egypt,
Israel was living in a state of nature,
destitute of the gracious revelations


of God.” —( Keil.)


Ver. 8. “Behold thy time was the
time of love.” ‘I‘his is not intended
merely to convey the idea that she
had arrived at a marriageable age, but
also the further thought that she had
become an object of affection. “I
spread my skirt over thee and covered
thy nakedness.” “The spreading of
the corner of the upper garment and
the covering of the nakedness symbo-
lize in general, that He took the
miserable, helpless one under His
protection, interested Himself in her;
specially, however, with the thought
of conferring the honour of betrothal,
marriage (Ruth ii. 9). This thought
is solemnly carried out in the swearing
and entering into covenant, by means
of which Israel, grown into a nation,
now became the peculiar people of
Jehovah (Hz. xx. 5,6; Ex. xix., xx. 2,
5; Deut. v. 2; Eph. v. 32.”—(Lange.)
“There was nothing in Israel that was
lovely. It was all pure affection on
the part of Jehovah. The advance in
the allegory is now to that of the
espousals.”—(Henderson.) “I sware
unto thee, and entered into a covenaut
with thee.” “An obvious reference
to the solemn transactions at Sinai,
when Jehovah entered into covenant
with the Hebrews, thereby contract-
ing as it were a conjugal relation,
by which He pledged Himself to
love, provide for, and protect them ;
while they came under an obligation
to love, worship, and obey Him to the
exclusion of every rival god. Hence
as it follows in the sequel, and so fre-
quently in the Old Testament, idolatry
is represented as spiritual adultery,
the nation thereby being guilty of a
breach of the marriage covenant,’ —
( Henderson.) ve


CHAP. XVI


Sate ein! eign Sete


Ver. 9. “Then washed I thee with
water; yea I thoroughly washed away
thy blood from thee, and I anointed
thee with oil.” Preparations for the
marriage ceremony, Consisting of puri-
fication, the putting on of ornaments,
and annointing with oil were customary
in the East (Esther ii. 9-12). Before
the Israelites were permitted to enter
into covenant with God they had_to
undergo a thorough purification (Ex.
xix. 14; Jer. ii. 2, 3). “The anoint-
ing with oil indicates the powers of the
Spirit of God, which flowed to Israel
from the divine covenant of grace. —
(Keil.)


Ver. 10. “Broidered work.” Rich
garments of many colours, adorned with
figures wrought in silver and gold.
With such costly garments queens
were accustomed to clothe themselves
(Psa. xlv. 15). “And shod thee with
badger’s skin.” “ ‘This was a kind of
skin used by the Hebrews to make an
over-covering to the tabernacle (Ex.
xxvi. 14); and, as appears from the
present verse, used also for shoes ; but
of what particular animal, has been
disputed. The most probable opinion
is, that the seal is intended.” —
(Henderson.) “And I girded thee
about with fine linen, and I covered
thee with silk.» “The girding with
fine linen refers to the head-band
(iz xxiv, 17 54 Bx. xxix, 95. ev.
vili, 13), and is applied by the Targum
to the headdress of the priests.”—
(Henderson.)


Ver. 12, “And I put a jewel on
thy forehead.” The Hebrew word
here rendered, “jewel” properly
means a “ring,’ and the word
rendered “forehead” (though some-
tines used to denote the countenance
or face in general) signifies strictly
and properly the nose. “ The jewellery


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





included not only armlets, nose-rings,

and earrings, which the daughters of

Israel were generally accustomed to

wear, but also necklaces and a crown,

ag ornaments worn by princesses and
” s

queens.” —( Keil.)


Ver. 13. “Thus wast thou decked
with gold and silver.” ‘This verse
sums up the contents of verses 9-12.
“Thou didst eat fine flour, and honey,
and oil; and thou wast exceeding
beautiful, and thou didst prosper into
akingdom.” “The food is referred to
once more; and the result of the
whole is said to have been, that Jeru-
salem became exceedingly beautiful,
and flourished even to royal dignity.
The latter canuot be taken as referring
simply to the establishment of the
monarchy under David, any more
than merely to the spiritual sovereiguty
for which Israel was chosen from the
very beginning (Ex. xix. 5,6). The
expression includes both, viz., the call
of Israel to be a kingdom of priests,
and the historical realisation of this
call through the Davidic sovereignty ”
(Keil)


Ver. 14. “And thy renown went
forta among the heathen for thy
beauty.” ‘As a kingdom theirs was
distinguishingly flourishing in the days
of David and Solomon, the former of
which monarchs greatly extended its
boundaries and enriched it with the
spoils of his victories. ‘The theocracy
then reached its highest point of glory,
aud was of great celebrity among the
surrounding nations (1 Kings x.). Still
they are reminded that their prosperity
and glory were not owing to any merit
of their own. It was a ‘comeliness’
which Jehovah their covenant-God had
put upon them. To His unmerited
bounty they owedall that they enjoyed ”
(Henderson).


HOMILETICS.


SALVATION IS OF THE LORD,


The salvation and advancement of Israel to position and renown among the
nations has its parallel in the salvation and exaltation of believers. Consiler—
162


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OHAP, XV.
ee a Ree SEE


_ I. The grace of this salvation. Israel is described under the figure of a
miserable infant neglected at its birth, and even cast out and left to perish.
This people on whom God bestowed His grace, were lying in their own
pollutions, and fast sinking into moral death. They were destitute of every
ornament and beauty of goodness (vers. 6, 7). There was nothing in them
to win the love of admiration or affection, but everything to excite loathing
and disgust. When we consider the condition from which Israel was called, we
must feel that the salvation of the people was by grace alone. And what does
God see in man as a sinner but all that is abhorrent to His own holy nature !
. i comes to the help of such it must be by the impulse of a grace which is
vl His own.


II. The glory of this salvation. The glory of it lies in the fact that it is
grace manifested in the most wonderful and excellent way. 1. /¢ had its source
im the love of pity and compassion. There was nothing in the original condition
of Israel to win the love of admiration. It was the love of pity and compassion
that saved them. Such a love is worthy of the broad free benevolence of God.
It is a love which cannot be overtasked by the worst condition of human sin and
misery. The grace of God meets the case of the guilty, and His mercy that of
the miserable ; and the glory of it lies in the fact, that it springs from pure pity
without any merit or claim whatever on the part of its object. 2. It was a
manifestation of that love which desires to give and bless. These are the essential
characteristics of all love which is worthy of that sacred name. “It is more
blessed to give than to receive,” and that blessedness first and above all belongs
to God. He is the only blessed One, for He alone is ever giving and
never receiving. And what is Creation but the love of God expressing
itself in manifold gifts; and what is Redemption but the love of God, as it
brings the undeserved gifts of salvation to the souls of men? God’s love gave
to ancient Israel a restored life; “I said unto thee when thou wast in thy
blood, Live”—gave them an energy of growth and improvement—invested
them with ornaments and beauty (ver. 7). They also had bestowed upon
them by an extraordinary grace the favours of God’s love, for they were taken
into intimate union with Himself (ver. 8). And further, God also gave them
influence among the nations of the earth (ver. 14)—that influence which comes
from righteousness. ‘They had thus bestowed upon them that love which botb
gives and blesses. But in this process by which they were raised from sin to
holiness, the order is, first—forgiveness ; and then the other gifts and blessings
of grace. They are first purified from their pollution, and then are anointed
(ver. 9). For God must pardon before He can heal; and men must be justified
before they can be sanctified. God loves the sinner though vile and miserable
but His favour is only reserved for those who are washed and sanctified.

The first lesson of this passage is, that the infinite love and pity of the heart
of God is the spring and origin of our salvation. Therefore there is no room
for pride or boasting on our part. In this matter of salvation, above all things,
we must give the glory to God alone.


(Ver. 6.)


I. There is nothing in the creature to move God to show mercy. God
saw nothing to incline or move Him to do aught, or bestow aught upon this
infant. But there are several things which move men. 1. arth and progeny.
Royal and noble births have affected many; David was taken with Saul’s
daughter (1 Sam. xviii. 17,18). This moves not God, He poureth contempt upon

rinces (Job xii. 21). He chooseth the poor to be rich in faith (James ii. 5).
elievers are said to be “ born not of blood ” (John i. 13), which some refer to


families of noble and royal blood. ‘* Not many noble are called” (1 va i. 26).


OHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.
SN ee


@. Beauty. Jacob was affected with the beauty of Rachel ; Ahasuerus with the
beauty of Vashti (Esth. i. 11). God is not moved with beauty ; if we had it,
there is nothing in man to affect His eye (Psa. xiv. 3). We are altogether filthy,
and God saw them in their blood. 3. Natural parts prevail with men.
Ahithophel’s counsel took much with David and Absalom ; Joseph, Daniel, had
excellent spirits, great wisdom, and they were advanced thereupon. Learning
is persuasive, and conquers many, but parts and learning can do nothing with |
God (1 Cor. i. 26; Matt. xi. 25). 4. Projitableness, serviceableness. So Paul
persuades Philemon to take Onesimus, because he would be profitable unto him.
Men are taken with men, because they bring in gain unto them. But the Lord
is not profited by the righteousness of men (Job. xxxv. 7) ; He receives nothing
at man’s hands, and when we have done all, we are unprofitable servants.
5. Necessity moves men mightily. It caused Abiathar to give the shew-bread
to David (1 Sam. xxi. 6) ; the necessity of the Church moved the rich to sell their
lands and goods to distribute unto every man as they had need (Acts ii. 45).
his is no motive unto Divine Majesty. 6. Hope of proving well draws forth men
todo much. Men do much for others with the hope that they may become instru-
ments of good. But God will give the gifts of Christ for the rebellious, and dwell
among them (Psa. lxviii. 18). How rebellious was Manasseh ! How did he sin
against heaven and earth, yet God had a gift of life for him. To Mary Magda-
lene and to Zaccheus, Christ said, live, when they were in their blood. He
showed mercy to Paul, and bade him live, when he was a persecutor and an
injurious person. 7. Nothing in the godly moves God, all they do is debt
(Luke xvii. 10). ‘The will and deed are of the Lord (Phil. ii. 18).


II. The Lord shows mercy to men when they are in desperate conditions.
When this infant was cast out, and lay bleeding to death, God said “ Live.”
When Moses, and other Hebrew children were to be drowned, the Lord delivered
them. When in Babylon, all the necks of the Jews were upon the block by
Haman’s plot and power, the Lord showed them mercy, and said, “Live,” The
thief upon the cress met with life in the gates of death.


III. When sinners look not after God, He is pleased to look after and find
out them. God found out and sought the Jews, when they neither sought nor
called ; so it is with the Gentiles (Isa. xv. 1). Both Gentile and Jew had
preventing grace, and were sought out of God before ever they sought God.
Hence Jerusalem had that promise or title, thou shalt be called, “Sought out”
(Isa. lvii. 12).


IV. God hath no need of any people. He passed by, like some great man,
that riding forth, finds a poor distressed infant, and out of compassion takes it
into his family ; not because he needs it, but he will show kindness to it of his
own good pleagure. If He needed people or nations He could create them, raise
them up from the stones. ‘I'he Samaritan had no need of the wounded man,
but be needed the Samaritan’s wine and oil.


V. In bestowing mercies, God is real, This appears from the doubling of
the word—“ Live,” “Live.” When there is a doubling of the same word, there
the intention, reality, and earnestness of the author speaking is held out
(Ez. v. 8; xxxvii. 5,6; Isa. xl. 1).


VI. When God hath done much for a people, and they are degenerate and
ungrateful, the Lord’s way of dealing with them is to set before them their
original condition and his kindness unto them (Micah vi. 2-5: Deut, xxxii. 6):
(Greenhill).


164


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP. XVI.





IspaEL’s APpostacy FRoM Gop (vers. 15-34).


EXEGETICAL NOTES. Its origin
and nature (vers. 15-22); its magni-
tude and extent (vers, 23-34).


Ver. 15. The apostacy of Israel is
described under the image of whore-
dom and adultery. “ Thou didst trust
in thine own beauty,” The gifts of
God, when they ceased to be recoynised
as such, became a snare. Israel
prostituted them in the service of
idolatry. Because ot thy renown.
“ Teaching that the Jews had employed
the renown, which through the Divine
goodness they had acquired, as a
means of seducing neighbouring nations
to commit spiritual fornication.”—
(Henderson).


Ver. 16. The “high places” were
temples erected upon heights by the
side of altars (1 Kings xiii. 32; 2
Kings xvii. 29). In 2 Kings xxiii. 7,
the Jewish women are described as
wearing hangings to adorn the temples
of Astarte. ‘he latter part of the
verse expresses the idea that such gross
abominations in Israel were altogether
unparalleled in the past, as they would
be in the future.


Vers. 17-19. ‘‘Images of Men.”
Heb. “Of a male.” ‘This may de-
scribe idolatry in general, and thus the
word “male” would be used as cor-
responding with the description of
Israel as an adulteress. But some
expositors think that a reference is
made here to a certain abominable
form of idolatry. ‘‘ Scholz and Haver-
nick understand what were worshipped
in the idolatrous service of phallus, or
the membrum virile, which the Egyp-
tians regarded as the emblem of fecun-
dity, and which is still licentiously
worshipped by the Hindoos under the
nawe of lingam.” —(Llenderson).


Vers. 20-22. ‘To cause them to
pass through the fire.’ A clear re-
ference to Moloch-worship in which
children were sacrificed to the idoi by


burning them. “The passing through
was the mode of slaying, and the des
vouring was the consequence of it.
The idols were thought to be present
in the fire.” —(Hengstenberg.)


Vers. 23-27. ‘‘ An eminent place.”
The Heb. may be rendered a brothel,
or place of prostitution. The word
was so understood by the LXX. Thus
figuratively the prophet describes their
unholy passion for idol-worship. “The
natural heights are too far for the
people hungering after idols. They
wish to plant idolatry in the city
thoroughfare, and so build for them-
selves artificial heights. We must dis-
tinguish between the thought and its
clothing. The thought is, that the
objects of idolatry became the prime
impulse of the popular life, by which
is to be understood much less religious
than political adultery, though both
went hand in hand,”—(Hengstenberg.)
“And hast made thy beauty to be
abhorred.” ‘I'he Heb. verb in the P2el
conjugation signifies to abhor, never to
cause to be abhorred. ‘To prostitute
their beauty was to show their con-
tempt for it. By forsaking God and
His Holy worship they showed how
little esteem they had for the national
honour, *‘ And hast opened thy feet to
every one that passed by.” “At an
earlier period Israel stood, by the situa-
tion of their country, which admitted
no isol.tion, in manifold intercourse
with the world ; but in the time which
the prophet has in view they lay in
the middle of the contending world-
powers—the Asiatic and the African—
and were thus in their intervening
territory tempted by the force of cir-
cumstances to adultery with powerful
neighbours.” —(Hengstenberg.) “The
Egyptians, thy neighhours, great of
flesh.” Heb. “The Sons of Egypt.”
Au euphemism to denote the licentious
character of the Fyyptian worship.
“The sous of Eyypt are not its gods,
and therefore the reference is to
political whoredom. Let it be remem-

165


OHAP, XVL


——__





bered hew in express terms intercourse
with Egypt was forbidden to Israel,
how return thither is threatened them
rather as the worst punishment (Deut.
XXvili. 68) ; and let one compare from
the days of Solomon onwards (1 Kings
ill. 1, ix. 16, x. 28; 2 Kings xviii. ;
Isa, xxx, xxxi. 1, xxxvi. 6; Jer. xxxvil.
5, 7).—(Lange). ‘The daughters of the
Philistines which are ashamed of thy
lewd ways.” “The daughters of the
Philistians are the [Philistian states,
corresponding to the representation of
Israel as an adulterous wife. The
Philistians are mentioned as the prin-
cipal foes, because Israel fell completely
into their power at the end of the
period of the Judges (Judges xiii. ;
1 Sam. iv ); and they are referred to
here, for the deeper humiliation of
Israel, as having been ashamed of the
licentious conduct of the Israelites,
because they adhered to their gods,
and did not exchange them for others
as Israel had done (Jer. ii. 10, 11).—
(Keil).


Vers, 28-84, “ Thou hast played the
whore also with the Assyrians, because
thou wast unsatiable.” “Having got
no satisfaction in the African, they
betake themselves now to the Asiatic
world-power. 'They long after it, and
find no satisfaction even when the
longing is realized.” —(Lange). ‘“ Not
satisfied with adopting the idolatories
of Egypt, the Jews practised those of
the more distant Assyrians and Baby-
lonians. They were perfectly insatiable
in their lust. Their idolatry was an


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





amalgamation of all the different forms
which obtained in the countries around
them.”—(/Henderson). “How weak is
thine heart.’’ Some render it, “ Yet
how languishing is thine heart.” In
this sense we are to understand that
sickly craving of lustful desire, which
had grown into a disease. Ewald
designates the expression as “a biting
sarcasm; how great must be the lan-
guishing of love!” Others understand
it more generally of the tendency of
oft-repeated sin to weaken our moral
nature. “The influence of sin on the
soul is to render it morally impotent.
Though it may not deprive it of the
powers which are requisite to consti-
tute man a responsible agent, it weakens
his principle of action, takes possession
of those powers, and forms itself into
habits which the individual allows to
grow upon him, so that he becomes at
last insensible to the operation of the
strongest moral motives.”—(Hender-
son). ‘And the contrary isin thee from
other women in thy whoredons.”’ Israel
gave presents to its lovers, contrary te
the practice of prostitutes in general.
The Jews practised idolatry not from
the mere love of gain, but from the
gratification they found in that sin.
They had arrived at that lowest stage
of depravity when sin is loved merely
for its own sake. ‘ Ezekiel has thus
fulfilled the task appointed him in
ver. 2, to charge Jerusalem with her
abominations. ‘I'he address now turns
to an announcement of the punish-
ment.” —(Keil),


HOMILETICS.


Ispart’s Apostacy : AN ExaMPLe oF Monstrous Intqurry.


I. It was the prostitution of God’s best gifts. “Thou didst trust in thine
own beauty, and playedst the harlot because of thy renown” (ver. 15). They
ceased to recognise their superior endowments as the free and undeserved gifts
of God’s great favour, and therefore these became a snare to them and the
occasion of falling. Their iniquity was beyond that of other nations, because
theirs was the sin of a people taken into special covenant with God. It is
more than common iniquity—it is monstrous to turn God’s gifts into the means


of sin 4 Ah iv.). ‘The sins against the clearest light are the greatest of all.


HOMILETICO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OHAP. XVI.


eee





__ i It took the worst possible forms. 1. They devoted all God’s gifts to
tdols. (1.) The common gifts of Providence. Food of various kinds, represented
by “fine flour, and oil, and honey” (ver. 19). (2.) Luauries, “Jewels of
gold and silver.” With these they made images to be employed in the
most degrading forms of idolatry. (3.) Mven their own children. They gave
them up to Moloch-worship, caused them “to pass through the fire”
(ver. 21). Such was their infatuation with this idolatry, that they silenced
the common instincts of nature, and gave up their own children to the
most cruel forms of death. ‘lhe prophet speaks of their great sins with
the utmost force of language when he calls them “abominations.” 2. They
400k special pains to spread idolatry. They built idol temples close to the
dwellings of the worshippers, so that they might not have to seek them in
distant places. They tempted others with all the wiles and artifices of wicked-
ness, “Thou hast opened thy feet to every one that passed by” (ver. 25).
With a zeal worthy of a better cause they sought out the worst forms of idolatry
among the nations of the earth—The Egyptians (ver. 26), the Assyrians (ver.
28), the Chaldeans (ver. 29), They seemed bent not merely upon imitating,
but even surpassing the worst abominations of the heathen around them.
3. Their lust of idolatry was insatiable. When they had gained their desire,
they refused to be satisfied, and still cried out for more (vers. 28, 29). “ How
weak is thine heart, saith the Lord God!” (ver. 30). Their lust was glutted
until they could feel only the sickly languishing of “an imperious whorish
woman.” 4, Zhey loved the sin of idolatry for its own sake. Not for gain, but
because they had a delight in it (vers. 33, 34). 5. They sinned thus grievously
after due chastisement. God compares himself to a husband who endeavours by
means of chastisement to induce his faithless wife to return. The supply of
food, clothing, and of all the necessaries and comforts of a wife are diminished.
She is even delivered over unto the will of them that hate her (ver. 27). Such
was the discipline by which the Lord sought to bring His ancient people to a
sense of their folly, and to restore to them the privileges of the faithful. He
did not suffer Israel to attain to that glory and power which was their sure
portion had they continued to serve the Lord with a perfect heart. He allowed
their enemies to triumph over them, so that they had not the undisturbed
possession of Canaan. ‘I'o remain unimproved under the chastisements of God,
and not even to feel them, shows a heart in the last stage of hardening. “ Thou
hast stricken them, but they have not grieved ” (Jer. v. 3).


(Vers. 15-19.)

I. Where God bestows choice mercies upon a people, He looks for answerable
returns from them. He gave life to the Israelitish state (ver. 6). He multiplied
it as the bud of the field (ver. 7). He loved this people, entered into covenant
with them, married them unto Himself (ver. 8). He washed away their blood,
and anointed them with oil (ver. 9). He gave them costly apparel, fine flour,
honey and oil, royal dignity, special beauty, great fame and glory (vers. 10-14) ;
and now expected that they should have lived to Him, and improved all for the
honour of His name. “But thou didst trust in thine own beauty,” ete. I
Jooked not for this at thy hands; I looked that thou shouldst have been faithful
and fruitful in all good works, and been as exemplary for holiness and justice to
other nations, as 1 was exemplary in my mercies towards thee above other


nations (Isa. v. 2).


II. Ingratitude in God’s people is a provoking sin, and causes God to upbraid
them for it: - From the beginning of verse 6, to the end of verse 14, which are
but nine” verses, there is “I” seventeen times, and every mention of it is a
matter for upbraiding unto them. When God had made Adam after er image,


CHAP. XVL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEw.


nr





planted him in Paradise, given him dominion over all the creatures, for him
not to obey oue little command was gross ingratitude, provoked the Lord te
upbraid him and punish him for it (Gen. in.) Christ upbraids Chorazin,
Bethsaida, and Capernaum where His mighty works were done, because they
brought not forth fruits answerable, but were impeuitent and ungrateful
(Matt. xi.)

III. We are very apt to trust in, and be proud of, the mercies God bestows
upon us. “Thou did’st trust in thine own beauty.” Those things that I gave
thee to make thee beautiful, thou hast abused and put too much confidence in,
The heart of man is ready to idolize every mercy God gives. There are several
mercies we are apt to trust in. 1. In riches. ‘The rich man confides in wealth
as citizens do in a walled, well fortified, and well built city (Prov. x. 15;
Psa. lii. 7; 1 Tim, vi 17). 2. In princes and great ones (Psa. cxlvi. 3;
Isa. ii. 22; Jer. xvii. 5; Isa. xxx. 3). 3. In your own natural excellencies.
“Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,” etc. (Jer. ix. 23). “ He that
trusteth in his own heart is a fool” (Prov. xxviii. 26) ; the heart is the most
excellent part of man (See also Prov. iii. 5). 4. ln the ordinances and means
of grace (Jer. vii. 4, 14, 15.

1V. Great renown, through man’s corruption, oft proves a snare, occasions
great sins. God made this people above all nations, in praise, in name, in
honour, that they might be a hoe people unto Him (Deut. xxvi. 19). Their
renown should have encouraged them unto holiness, and it was an incentive unto
looseness. Solomon had great renown abrvad in the nations (1 Kings iv. 31) ;
that drew the princes to bestow their daughters upon him. His name made
way for unlawful marriages, and they made way for unlawful gods,


V. The most beautiful and renowned church may degenerate, apostatise,
and become corrupt. This Israelitish woman was the only spouse of God. He
entered into covenant with her, she became His; He put more spiritual beauty
and comeliness upon ber than upon all the nations, and made her renowned
throughout all the world; yet she forsook God, played the harlot, prostituted
herself to every idol and idolater. And now where was the Church of God?
She “ played the harlot with many lovers” (Jer. iii. 1). Here was visible apos-
tacy, visible idolatry, but no true visible Church. Neither was God withont a
true Church at this time. ‘There were some godly ones in secret, who mourned
for the abominations done in the city, temple, and everywhere (Hzek. ix. 4).
But these lay hid, and durst not appear in the ways of worship then amongst
them. So in Elijah’s days. He complained, “'l'he children of Israel have
forsaken thy covenant,” etc. (1 Kings xix. 10); but God had then seven
thousand in secret (ver. 18). ‘The true Church may be brought to such a
paucity, such a lowness, that there may be no public meetings, or view thereof.
The papists say their Church cannot err, especially in things necessary to
salvation ; and why? because it is the spouse of Christ. Was not this Israelitish
Church the spouse of God? And did it not err in the great and weighty things
of salvation? Did it not leave God and fall into idolatry, such practices as
exclude the kingdom of heaven? What privilege hath the Roman Church
more than this had? Whatever papists say or write, their Church hath trusted
in her beauty, been proud of her renown, and played the harlot as notoriously
as ever Jerusalem did.—/(Gizeenhill.)


IsRakL’s PUNISHMENT WILL CorRESPOND wiTH Her Stns. (vers 35-42).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Vers. 35, brass has been lavished.” Brass is
86. “Because thy filthiness was used here to signify money. Israel
es Heb. “Because thy had spent the wealth which God had


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XVI.





given her in the servise of idolatry.
“That the Jews, at least those in the
exile, as well as classic antiquity, had
copper money, follows even from our
passage, and is confirmed by Matt. x.
9, Mark xii, 41, where brass occurs
directly for money. The paramours
are, according to what follows, pre-
emlvently the world-powers tliemselves.
Along with them are named the hea-
then gods, whose worship was a con-
sequence of political dependence.—
(Hengstenberg.) ‘‘ And by the blood
of thy children which thou didst give
unto them.” They were also guilty of
murder in sacrificiug their children to
Moloch (ver. 20.)


Ver. 37. “I will gather all thy
lovers.” Chiefly those of Assyria and
Babylon. * With all themthatthou hast
hated.” These were the surrounding
nations who werealwayslying in wait for
an occasion against Israel. God would
gather friend and foe against Jerusalem
and use them as instruments to execute
His judgments. Israel is to be
punished in kind. She had cultivated
friendship with the heathen and par-
taken of their iniquities, and now she
shall be given up altogether into their
power. “I will even gather them
round about against thee, and will
discover thy nakedness unto them,
that they may see all thy nakedness.”
“The public judgment. First of all,
the assembling of the lovers as_ wit-
nesses. She who has dishonoured and
brought herself to shame becomes now,
by the interposition of God, to the one
party an object of loathing, to the
other an object of mockery. The last
attraction, and what might still have
been an object of regard, vanishes.
Havernick refers to the procedure in
the case of a married woman suspected
of adultery (Num. vy. 18).”—(Lange.)


Ver. 38, ‘And I will judge thee,
as women that break wedlock and
shed blood are judged.” ‘This is the
explanation of the figurative language
employed in the last verse. Israel was
to be punished with the punishment
of adulterers and murderers. “ And


I will give thee blood in fury and
jealousy.” “Thou shalt be turned
into blood, so that nothing but blood
may be left of thee, and that the blood
of fury and jealousy, as the working
of the wrath and jealousy of God
(compare verse 42). ‘I'v this end the
heathen will destroy all the objects of
idolatry, then take from the harlot
both clothes and jewellery, and leave
her naked, ze. plunder Jerusalem and
lay it waste, and, lastly, execute upon
her the punishment of death by stoning
and by sword ; in other words, destroy
both city and kingdom.”—/ Keil.)


Ver. 39. ‘“‘And leave thee naked
and bare.” “ As thou wast before
the Lord had mercy on thee (ver. 7).
The unfaithful use of the vifts of God
inevitably brings on their loss. God
cannot be mocked.” —(Hengstenberg. )


Ver. 40. “They shall also bring
up a company against thee.” “This
may be explained from the ancient
mode of aduiinistering justice, accord-
ing to which the popular assembly
(Prov. v. 14) sat in judgment on cases
of adultery and capital crimes, and
executed the sentence, as the law for
stoning expressly enjoins (Lev. xx. 2 ;
Num. xv. 36; Deut. xxii, 21). But
they are also applicable to the foes,
who would march against Jerusalem ”
(Keil). “ And they shall stone thee
with stones.’ The usual mode of
capital punishment under the Mosaic
law, and which was inflicted for the
crimes of idolatry, adultery, and
murder.” This doom pronounced upon
Jerusalem was accomplished literally,
for she was “stoned” before she was
burned (Jer. xxxiii. 4). ‘“‘ With their
swords.” Slaying with the sword was
a mode of punishment adopted when
there were many criminals to be put
to death. It was also the doom of
those who seduced men to apostacy
(Deut. xiii. 12-15).


Ver. 41. ‘‘ And execute judgments
upon thee in the sight ofmany women.”
“The many women are the many
heathen nations, according to the

169


OHAP. XVL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: &ZEKIEL,


ee ee SS SS


description of Jerusalem or Israel as an
unfaithful wife."—(Keil.) “ As it is
the greatest punishment to an adulte-
rous woman to be exposed in her sin
before the eyes of other women ; 80 will
the severest portion of Israel’s punish-
ment be, that it will stand exposed in
its sin before the eyes of all other na-
tions.” — (Klieforth.) Concerning the
burning of the houses of Jerusalem with
fire, see 2 Kings xxv. 8,9. ‘‘ And thou
also shalt give no hire any more.”
“Because thou wilt have no more
lovers ; wilt, on the whole, after the
dissolution of thy national indepen-
dance, be no more ina condition which
admits of impure intercourse with the
world-powers, ’—({Hengstenberg.)


Ver. 42. “So will I make my fury
toward thee to rest, and my jealousy
shall depart from thee.” “Thejealousy
ceases because it has found its satisfae-
tion in their punishment, and exhausted
itself therein, as the fire ceases when it
has consumed its fuel.”—(Hengsten-
berg.) ‘The Divine justice comes to
an end in its character of jealousy—in
other words, as the injured faithfulness
and love of Israel’s husband. The
departing of the jealousy might, per-
haps, by comparison with Isaiah xi. 13,
show grace in the background ; but the
connection with what follows requires
rather a thought like Hos. ii. 4. Jeho-
vah gives up the adulterous whorish
wife,” —(Lange.)


HOMILETICS.


Toe PuNISHMENT oF APOSTACY.


I. The loathsome nature of the sin is made manifest. The sin which the
children of Israel had committed by their idolatry is called by its right name.
It was the breaking of the sacred marriage-covenant into which God had entered
with His people. All what whoredom and adultery is in the social state, all
what filthiness is in the morals and manners of a people, such was their sin in
the sight of God (ver. 38). Israel was guilty of unfaithfulness of the worst kind.
God had given the nation the privileges of an espoused wife, but she sinned
with many lovers, thus despising the great grace which had called her to such
distinction and honour. God’s punishments sometimes begin by revealing our
sin to us in all its real vileness. The very conviction of sin is a painful wound—
the arrows of the Almighty within our spirit.


II. The very objects of sinful desire are turned into the instruments of
punishment. “TJ will gather all thy lovers with whom thou hast taken pleasure,
and all them that thou hast loved, with all them that thou hast hated ; I will
even gather them round about against thee, and will discover thy nakedness
unto them, that they may see all thy nakedness” (ver. 37). Those who con-
tributed to her sin shall be made the instruments of her punishment. Sinful
love, sooner or later, changes into hate. ‘The boon companions of the profligate
turn out to be his bitterest enemies. They thus become a scourge in the hands
of God to chastise him for his iniquity. There is no true honour amongst
transgressors, for their life is founded upon a falsehood. And as God employed
as a scourge for His people those who once were friends, He will also employ for
chastisement those who were always enemies. “And with them that thou hast
hated.” Those with whom the children of Israel sinned would make common
cause with their enemies for their punishment.


III. The punishment will correspond with the sin, 1. In degree They
were to be punished as murderers and adulterers, for they had sinned “as
women that break wedlock and shed blood” (ver. 38). Stoning was the
punishment of adultery, and this threat was literally fulfilled upon Jerusalem,
for she was stoned before she was burned (Jer. xxxiii, 4). Their sin was great,
and oe ae their punishment, so great that even God’s fury is represented as


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OBAP. XVY.
a eT a Se A 2 ee


being satisfied upon them, and quite brought to a pause (ver. 42), They could
no further go in iniquity, and so God’s fury is represented as ceasing ; by which
we are to understand that it rested upon them. He left them to their fate.
God can bring it about that we shall be able to sin no further. 2. In kind.
Their sin was public, and so their shame and their judgment were public. Their
sin was upfaithfulness towards God, and they are punished by the unfaithfulness
of men. They cast God off, and men cast them off. That law which is true of
individual man is true also of nations, that the very things which they sow they
shall also reap.


(Vers. 39-42).


1. God’s hatred is so great against idolatry and idolators that He will not
endure the places where they have used idolatrous worship. The places where
they sinned must be destroyed, broken, utterly razed and ruined. Hezekiah is
commended for four things ; and the first is for removing the high places ; then
for breaking the images, cutting down the groves, and breaking the brazen
serpent. 2. When we abuse the mercies of God, we give Him cause to take them
away. They decked their high places with their garments (ver. 16); they
made images of their jewels (ver. 17). Here God threatens to take away both
the one and the other. He would give them into their hands who should rob
them of their fair jewels, and strip them of all their clothes (Isa. xlii. 22).
“And leave thee naked and bare.” Before, in ver. 8, it is said, that God
covered her nakedness. He found her naked, and now He would leave her
naked and bare. 3. When God hath showed much kindness to a people, and
they have been ungrateful, He will reduce them to their former condition. God
did much for Ephraim, yet he was ungrateful, forgot God, went out to other
lovers (Hos. ii. 2,3). God had spread His skirt over this Jewish woman, clothed
her with embroidered silk and fine linen, decked her with choice ornaments and
jewels, put His comeliness upon her; but she abused all His bounty and love,
proved ungrateful and whorish, and therefore He would put her into her first
condition, strip her of all, and leave her naked. She came out of captivity, she
should now go into captivity ; she was cast out, and now she should be cast out
again ; she was poor, beggarly, and had nothing, and should be made so again.
4. When judgments are executed upon a backsliding people, then God is at rest
and ts satisfied. When this woman, this Jewish state, feil into the hands or
enemies, was plundered and spoiled, and all her glory laid in the dust ; then
God caused His fury to rest, His jealousy to depart, then He was quiet, and
angry no more. Before judgment be thoroughly executed, God is troubled ana
restless ; but when it is done, He is pacified, comforted, as it is in Ezek. v. 13.
Before Jonah had judgment passed upon him, there was a great wind, and a
mighty tempest in the sea. ‘The Lord’s anger was let out. But when Jonab
was sent, and cast into the sea—justice done—it is said the sea ceased fron
her raging. ‘he Lord first ceased from His fury, He was pacified, and mani-
fested it by stilling of the seas. God would bring the Assyrians upon the Jews
and what then? “The indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their
destruction ” (Isa. x. 25).—(Greenhill.)


-This dire judgment is just; for Israel has not only forgotten God's unde-
served favour to her in her election, but has even surpassed both Samaria
and Sodom in her abominations.


(Vers. 43-52).
EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 43. ties as the just punishment of their
“Hast fretted Me in ali these things,” sin, they raged against the Lord. The


Instead of regarding their calama- judgments that ought Eye led
7


OHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


Oe ee


them to repentance only served to
make them desperate, and to plunge
them into still greater depths of apos-
tacy. ‘And thou shalt not commit
this lewdness above all thine abomina-
tions.’ ‘Lewdness and abomination
are not in themselves different: the
thought is, that the measure of the
lewdness and abomination is now full—
that it is time for the punishment to
enter into the place of sin.”—(Heng-
stenberg.) “We must explain the
words from Lev. xix. 29, where the
toleration by a father of the whoredom
of a daughter is designated as Zimmah.
If we adopt this interpretation, Jeho-
vah says that He has punished the
spiritual whoredom of Israel, in order
that He may not add another act of
wrong to the abominations of Israel, by
allowing such immorality to go un-
punished, If he did not punish, He
would commit Zimm&h Himself,—in
other words, would make himself ac-
cessory to the sins of Israel.”—( Keil.)


Ver. 44. ‘‘Behold every one that
useth proverbs shall use tnis proverb
against thee, saying, as is the mother,
so is her daughter.” ‘‘ Her abominable
life is so conspicuous, that it strikes
every one, and furnishes occasion for
provertial sayings. ‘The daughter is
of course Jerusalem, as the representa-
tive of Israel. The mother is the
Canaanitish race of Hittites and Amo-
rites, whose immoral nature had been


adopted by Israel.” —( Keil.)


Ver. 45. ‘‘ Thou art thy mother's
daughter that loveth her husband and
her children; and thou art the sister
of thy sisters, which loveth their hus-
bands, and their children; your mother
was an Hittite, and your father an
Amorite.” Here Jehovah is represented
as the husband, not only of Israel, but
also of the other nations. In their case,
also idolatry was apostacy from God
who first gave them that knowledge of
Himself which they were not willing to
retain, Keil notes that Theodoret has
explained it correctly in this way: “ He
shows by this, that He is not the God
of Jews only, but of Gentiles also ; for

172


God once gave oracles to them, before
they vhose the abominations of idolatry.
Therefore he says that they also put
away both the husband and the chil-
dren by denying God, and slaying the
children to demons.”


“Thine elder sister is
Samaria . . . thy younger sister is
Sodom.” ‘Samaria and Sodom are
called sisters of Jerusalem, not because
both cities belonged to the same
mother-land of Canaan, tor the origin
of the cities does not come into con-
sideration here at all, and the cities
represent the kingdoms, as the addi-
tional words, “ber danghters,” that
is to say, the cities of a land or king-
dom dependent upon the capital, clearly
prove. Samaria and Sodom, with the
daughter cities belonging to them, are
sisters of Jerusalem in a spiritual
sense, as animated by the same
spirit of idolatry, The Heb. ought
to be rendered, “Thy great sister
is Samaria... . and thy sister,
who is smaller than thou, is Sodom.”
Samaria is called the greater sister
of Jerusalem, and Sodom the smaller
sister. ‘This is not equivalent to the
older and the younger, for Samaria
was not more deeply sunk in idolatry
than Sodom, nor was her idolatry more
ancient than that of Sodom ” (Keil).
The expressions “left hand,” “ right
hand” are employed, because the
Orientals rezarded the East as the
principal point of the heavens, Hence
the left would designate the North,
and the right the South, the direction
in which Sodom had lain.


Ver. 46.


Ver. 47. ‘“‘Thou wast corrupted
more tha they in all thy ways.” Jeru-
salem had greater guilt, because she
was distinguished by greater religious
privileges than these cities. She had
the temple, the sacrifices, Divinely
appointed priests, and the law. In her
midst God was worshipped once in the
beauty of holiness,


Ver. 48. ‘‘Sodom, thy sister hath
notdone-. - . . as thou hast done.”
Compare Sam. iv 6 ; Matt. xi. 24.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; EZEKIEL,





Ver. 49. “‘Pride, fulness of bread
and abundance of idleness was in
her.” Prosperity proves danyverous to
virtue, idleness leads to temptation and
to every sin. Moses had forwarned
Israel against these dangers (Deut. vi.
11, 12 ; compare Hos, xii. 6). Idleness
predisposes men to infidelity (Is. xxxii,
9,11; Jer. xxii. 21), “Neither did
she strengthen the hands of the poor
and needy.” ‘lhe “cry” of the op-
pressed in Sodom was the great reason
for her destruction. Such a cry had
also come forth from Jerusalem.


Ver. 50, “ Therefore I took them
away as I saw good.” Heb., “ Ac-
cording to what I saw.” “'This
points to Gen. xviii. 21. God con-
ducts the inspection by His angels.”
—(LHengstenberg.)


Ver. 51. “And hadst justified thy
sist-rs in all thine abominations.”
“To justify the crimes of others is
a Hebrew mode of speech, denoting,


CHAP XVI,





to make them appear comparatively
innocent by the side of others, accom-
panied with much more agyravating
circumstances.” —/( Henderson.) Jeru-
salem had a longer probation than
Samaria, and had been warned by
the example of Samaria’s punish-
ment, Yet she committed worse
crimes than those which prevailed in
Samaria after Jehu had suppressed
Baal-worship,


Ver. 52. ‘‘ Be thou confounded also,
and bear thy shame, in that thou bast
justified thy sisters.” “Judah had
concurred from the heart in the Divine
judgment on Sodom and Samaria, and
exalted herself above them on this
account, as the Pharisee in the Gospel.
In the condemnation of her sisters she
had condemned herself (Rom. ii. 1).
Jerusalem has “justified ” her sisters,
inasmuch as she has behaved worse
than they, and so retributive punish-
ment must overtake her also,” —
( Hengstenberg).


HOMILETICS.


Gop’s JupGMENTS UPON IsRAEL JUSTIFIED,


God’s judgments for sin will at last be acknowledged as just even by sinners
themselves, But even in this world we can see enough of God’s righteous
dealinvs to assure us that He will be clear when He judges. The prophets of
Israel were concerned that men should know that God’s ways are equal—that
His punishments were not arbitrary, but just. His judgments upon Israel could
be clearly justitied.


I. They sinned against a great and extraordinary grace. The Lord had been
with this nation from its youth up. He had adopted this people, had made
known Himself to them, had «istinguished them above all others by gifts of
knowledge and of privilege. The duties and customs of the pure worship of
Jehovah were made known to them. ‘I'hey had every reason to worship God
alone, for they were in possession of the purest form of religion known to man-
kind, and they ought to have been superior to every temptation to forsake that
religion for the debasing forms of idolatry around them. But they forgot their
high calling. “'I'hou hast not remembered the days of thy youth ” (ver. 43).
‘hey had displeased a personal God who could feel the wrongs done to Him by
His creatures. ‘“ Thou hast fretted me in all these things.”


II. They surpassed other nations in iniquity. Samaria and Sodom were
punished, and they had not sinned against such great light and_privilege.
“Thou wast corrupted more than they in all thy ways” (ver. £7). The people
of Israel would reckon themselves as saints when compared with Sodom and

173


CHAP. XVL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,
gn


Samaria, but how different was God’s judgment! They had been warned
against the sins of Sodom ; yet they had done worse, for more was given to them
and more would be required (Deut. vi. 11, 12; comp. Hos. xiii. 6).


III. They are condemned out of their own mouth. “'I'hou also which hast
judged thy sisters, bear thine own shame for thy sins that thou hast committed
more abominable than they ; they are more righteous than thou : yea, be thou
confounded also, and bear thy shame, in that thou hast justified thy sisters”

ver. 52). In the condemnation of her sisters she had condemned herself.
er had nothing to answer ; for the same judgments upon others, which they
regarded as just, were now visited upon themselves with equal justice (Rom. 01. 1).
Every sinner will be brought, at last, to admit the justice of God in his condem-
nation. He will be confounded,—have literally nothing toanswer. When men
see the awful reality of things they are forced into the terrible silence of
conviction.


(Ver. 49.)


I, When a man is said to be idle. 1. When he doth nothing, is unemployed
(Matt. xx. 3). The Greek word for “idle” means a man without work.
Solomon’s sluggard would not plough by reason of the cold (Prov. xx. 4).
2. When they do not what they should do. He is idle who does not do God’s
work. ‘There is a work of God’s appointment for the day, which you ought to
take notice of, and do. ‘‘There are some among you which work not at all,
but are busy-bodies ” (2 Thess, iii. 11), doing no work, yet working about every-
where. 3. When they do not so much as they ought to do, but are lazy in doing
little. When men put not forth themselves to do what they ought to do in
conscience, and according to right reason, they are justly said to be idle (Rom.
xii. 11; Eccl. ix. 10; Prov. xviii. 9).


II. The evil of this sin. 1. J¢ is against the end of man’s creation. God
made man for labour when he was in a state of innocency (Gen. ii. 15). He
must not be idle there, taking his pleasure in a paradise. And after the Fall,
in the sweat of his face he was to eat bread. It is the end of man’s creation
and birth to be doing. 2. It is a sin against the light of nature, which puis
every thing upon motion. The heavens, with the glorious lights thereof, move
and are constant in their motions (Psa. xix. 5). The ant is a very little
creature, but exceedingly laborious. So the bee is little in bulk, but great in
employment, and wonderfully busy. These creatures, with many others, con-
fute the sluggard daily, preach down idleness and call for action. 3. /é puts
God’s family out of order. The world is God’s family, and he hath appointed
men unto some employment in it. As a wise artist makes no wheel in a clock,
but to move and help on the general work ; and if one wheel stands, it is out of
order and hinders all the rest. Idle persons are disorderly persons (1 Thess. v.
14). 4. Jt sets a man among the dead. An idle man is both unsavoury and
inactive. The poorest and meanest man in the world that follows a calling, and
is laborious in it, is better than the most eminent that doth nothing. One is
living, and the other a dead man. 5. /dleness exposes a man to variety of
temptations. It lays him open to Satan, for a man unemployed is like a city
without walls and gates whither any enemy may easily have entrance (Ez.
xxxvill. 11). An idle man is like a vessel which is empty, any one that comes
to it may put in what he will; so Satan pours into idle persons what liquor he
pleases. ‘I'hose who are out of God’s work are most exercised with the devil’s,
6. Idleness ts the mother and nurse of our most dangerous enemies, viz.: lusts.
Standing waters corrupt soonest. Among the Sodomites was abundance of
ce ae abundance of lusts, which fight and war against the soul, And

7


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


a ee a


what madness is it for a man to harbour and feed the enemies that seek
his life. In doing nothing men learn to do ill. 7. Poverty and beggary are
the issues of idleness. Solomon tells the sluggard that his “ poverty shall come
as one that travelleth, and his want as an armed man” (Prov. vi.11). He lieth
still, but poverty is up and marching towards him. He is without defence, but
that comes armed. ‘The meaning is, poverty will come upon an idle and slothful
person suddenly and irresistibly. “Drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags ”
(Prov. xxiii. 21). 8. Jdleness is such a sin as exempts a man from the protection
of the angels. He shall vive his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy
ways” (Psa. xci. 11). What ways? Those which are according to His will,
which His providence leads unto, not in the ways of sin. A man that is idle is
in the devil’s way, not in God’s way. Idle persons that have no calling go out
from God and the guard of His angels. If these feared God, they would walk in
a calling, and the angels of God would be about them (Psa. xxxiv. 7). Faith is
a working grace, witness Heb. xi.; 1 Tim. v. 8. 9. /dle persons are burden-
some creatures. The fig-tree was a burden to the ground where it stood (Luke
xi. 7). It was a burden to the garden, to the gardener, to the other trees, to
the lord and master of all. “ Why stand ye here all the day idle? You do no
good to ourselves, none to your neighbours, none to the public, none to posterity,
nor bring any glory to God.” 10. /é¢ is a wasting of precious time, a hiding of
our talent. 'Time, that is given us to get grace, to work out our salvation, to
glorify God. 'This the idle person squanders away. Such are not minding the
apostolical rule, “See that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise,
redeeming the time” (Eph. v. 15, 16). The man who had one talent would not
use it, but hid itin the earth. ‘Thou wicked and slothful servant ” (Matt. xxv.
25, 26). ‘Thus wickedness and sloth go together. When Joseph’s brethren came
into Egypt, and were before Pharaoh, the first question he asked them was,
“What is your occupation?” (Gen. xlvii. 3). This was a good question of a
king, when strangers were to come and dwell in his land, to know whether they
had any calling, could get their livings, and not be burdensome to his kingdom
and subjects.—( Greenhill.)


But these terrible punishments are not to be the end of the Lord. He will
remember His ancient Covenant, and bring His people out of misery, so that
they shall attain to the glory which He had promised them. They must
however, reach this through humility for the restoration of Sodom and
Samaria are also announced. Hence all boasting on the part of Israel is
excluded,


OHAP. XVI,


(Vers. 53-63.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.— Ver. 53.
“When I shall bring again their
captivity, the captivity of Sodom and
her daughters, and the captivity of
Samaria and her daughters, then will
I bring again the captivity of thy
captives in the midst of them.” “The
promise commences with an announce-
ment of the restoration, not of Jerusa-
lem, but of Sodom and Samaria. The
two kingdoms, or peoples, upon which
judgment first fell, shall also be the
first to receive mercy ; and it will not
be till after then that Jerusalem, with
the other cities of Judah, will also be


restored to favour, in order that she
may bear her disgrace, and be ashamed
of her sins (ver. 54); that is to say,
not because Sodom and Samaria have
borne their punishment for a longer
time, but to the deeper shaming, the
more complete humiliation of Jerusa-
lem. The Hebrew expression means,
“to turn the captivity,” not “ to bring
back the captives;” and it is here used
in a figurative sense for restitutio in
statum integritatis. No carrying away
took place in the case of Sodom.”—


(Kei! )
175


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





Ver. 54. “In that thou art a
comfort unto them.” “By bearing
disyrace, #.¢., by its endurance of well-
merited and disgraceful punishment,
Jerusalem consoles her sisters, Samaria
and Sodom ; and that not merely by
fellowship in misfortune, but by the
fact that from the punishment en-
dured by Jerusalem, both Samaria
and Sodom can discern the righteous-
ness of the ways of God, and find
‘therein a foundation for their hope,
that the righteous God will bring to
an end the merited punishment as
soon as its object has been attained.”
( Keil.) .


Ver. 55. “‘ When thy sisters, Sodom
and her daughters shall return to
their former estate.” “If Jerusalem,
Samaria, and Sodom, are to be viewed
as symbolical of the surrounding
people whose centre they formed, or
with whom they stood connected, no
difficulty will arise relative to the
restoration of Sodom. If we regard
her as the representative of the Am-
monites and Moabites, the descendants
of Lot, we shall here have only a parallel
prediction to Jer. xlvili. 47; xlix. 6.
However obscure the lights of history
relative either to the captivity or the
restoration of the nations beyond the
Dead Sea, there can be little doubt
that they participated more or less
in the fate of the Jews, to whose
country they lay contiguous. That
most of the ten tribes of which Samaria
had been the capital were restored
under Cyrus, is now generally admitted.
The restoration of all the three classes
of people is here predicted to take place
at the same time.” —/( Henderson. )


Ver. 56. “For thy sister Sodom
was not mentioned by thy mouth in
the day of thy pride.” ‘They took
no heed of the warning of Sodom’s
example. Boasting themselves as “The
Temple of the Lord,” they thought
that they needed it not (Jer. vii. 4).


Ver. 57. “As at the time of thy
reproach of the daughters of Syria.”
“ By the reproach of the cities of Syria,

176


was not meant anything derogatory to
the character of those cities nationally
considered, but the indignity offered
by the Syrians to the Jews, when,
under Rezin, they invaded the land of
Judah (2 Kings xv. 37; Is. vii. 1-9).
That this is the construction to be
put upon the words is evident from
the parallelism, in the corresponding
member of which the manner in which
the Jewshad been treated by the Philis-
tines is mentioned. Compare for the
insults offered by both, Is. ix. 11, 12.
—(Henderson.)


Ver. 58. “Thou hast borne thy
lewdness and thine abominatioas.”
Jerusalem would bear the guilt of these
iniquities, and would know how great
that burden was when she would be
called upon to atone for her wrong-
doing.


Ver. 59. “I will even deal with
thee as thou hast done.” In mercy
Jehovah would “walk contrary unto
them,” so that they might be humbled
and thus brought to repentance.
“Which hast despised the oat in
breaking the covenant.” ‘“ Despising
the oath points back to Deut. xxix.
11, 12, where the renewal of the
covenant concluded at Sinai is de-
scribed as an entrance into the covenant
and oath which the Lord then made
with His people. But even if Israel
has faithless!y broken the covenant,
aud must bear the consequent punish-
ment, the unfaithfulness of man can
never alter the faithfulness of God.
This is the link of connection between
the resumption and further expansion
of the promise in ver. 60 aud the
closing words of ver. 59. ‘The re-
membrance of His covenant is men-
tioned in Lev. xxvi. 42-45 as the only
motive that will induce God to restore
Israel to favour again, when the
humiliation effected by the endurance
of punishment has brought it to a con-
fession of its sins,’—(Keil.)


Ver. 60. ‘‘ Nevertheless I will re-
member My covenant with thee in the
days of thy youth, and I will establish


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XVI,


re


unto thee an everlasting covenant.”
“The covenant which God concluded
with Israel in the day of its youth, i.e.,
when he led it out of Egypt, He will
establish as an everlasting covenant.
Consequently it is not an entirely new
covenaut, but simply the perfecting the
old one for everlasting duration. For
the fact itself, compare Isa. lv. 3, where
the making of the everlasting covenant
is described ag granting the steadfast
mercies of David, 2.¢., as the fulfilment
of the promise given to David (2 Sam.
vii), This promise is called by David
himself an everlasting covenant, which
God had made with him (2 Sam. xxiii.
5). And the assurance of its everlasting
duration was to be found in the fact
that this covenant did not rest upon
the fulfilment of the law, but simply
upon the forgiving grace of God (com-
pare ver. 63 with Jer. xxxi, 31-34).”
—(Keil).


Ver. 61. “Then shalt thou remem-
ber thy ways and be ashamed.” ‘hey
would be ashamed when they saw the
other nations associated with them in


the enjoyment of the same blessings,
“I will give them unto thee for
daughters, but not by thy covenant.”
The covenant to which they assented
at Horeb excluded all other nations
from its benefits (Ex. xxiv. 7). The
blessings which were to come upon all
nations would flow from the earlier
promise which God made to Abraham
(Gal, iii, 13, 14).


Ver. 62. “ And I will establsh My
covenant with thee.” This was the
old covenant made with Abraham,
wherein Christ was promised, who was
to bless all nations, That was a cove-
nant purely of blessing, and in the
form of it entirely unconditional
(Gal. iii. 17).


Ver. 63. “And never open thy
mouth because of thy shame.” ‘This
would be the shame of the penitent,
who is overwhelmed with a sense of
God’s extraordinary goodness, and of
his own foolishuesr and ingratitude
(Rom. iii. 19).


AOMILETICS.
Gop’s Purposz or Mercy towaRps Israrl


YI. It would not be defeated by the greatness of their sin, Israel had sinned
against the clearest light, and in spite of great gifts and priviliges. ‘Their sin
was greater than the common iniquity of the nations around them, for it was
ingratitude and rebellion against the living God. Yet this did not overtask
God’s infinite mercy, or close the door of hope against them for ever, With
Him there is plenteous redemption. The gospel offers salvation to the worst of
sinuers, even to those who like Israel, have sinned against the greatest light.


II, Its strength lay in God’s ancient covenant with them. It was the old
covenant which God would now call to mind that which He made with them
wheu He first chose them asa people destined to accomplish His purpose of
salvation for the world. In the meantime they were punished according to
their works, which was justice. But, in the end, His grace would deal with
them according to His mercy secured by His old covenant (ver. 60). Faith in
God’s unchanging goodness was David’s comfort when he uttered his “ last
words.” He remembered many failures, and how he and his house had fallen
far short of their high calling, but his soul stood firmly upon this rock, ‘“ Yet
He hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure:
for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although He make it not to grow”
(2 Sam, xxiii. 5). Thus David confessed that his house was no suitable home
for Israel’s Great Ruler, but he had stroug faith that grace would prevail over

e 177


OHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.
:





all this unworthiness. And now grace begins the work of reconciliation, of
re-establishment, God had not broken His covenant, and now He will make
the first advance towards its renewal and fulfilment. All would be seen to be
of grace, and not of merit ; and, therefore, there can be no ground of boasting
on the part of Israel. God’s purpose of mercy towards mankind, in Jesus Christ,
is intended to prevail over all their sin. The grace displayed in redemption is
sufficient for the largest designs of mercy.


III. It would be accomplished through their humiliation. 1. They would
be brought to see their own sin in all its magnitude. ''hey would remember
the past with shame, and the sense of God’s infinite merey displayed in their
forgiveness would close their mouths in utter astonishment, ‘They would be
both ashamed and confounded (vers. 61-63). 2. They would be put to shame by
God’s dealings with other nations. The restoration of Sodom and Samaria was
also promised (vers. 58, 54). Nations which they thought were for ever beyond
the reach of Divine mercy were about to be blessed. ‘This great purpose of
restoration is fully accomplished in the Gospel dispensation. God chose from
His people, Israel, the apostles who were to preach the Gospel, ‘Salvation is
of the Jews.” They were the people appointed to spread the glad tidings of
salvation to the heathen. The old Covenant would expand into the large and
unchangeable purpose of God’s mercy in the Gospel. From Jerusalem is to go
forth the word of mercy that is to save the world. ‘Thus in the end, it will be
seen that God’s love is not partial, but contemplates the larger purpose of
bringing the means of salvation within the reach of


(Vers. 53, 54).


But how could a restoration of Sodom and her daughters (Gomorrah, etc.)
be predicted, when the destruction of these cities was accompanied by the
sweeping away of all their inhabitants from off the face of the earth? Many of
the commentators have attempted to remove the difficulty by assuming that
Sodom here stands for the Moabites and Ammonites, who were descendants of
Lot, who escaped from Sodom. But the untenableness of such an explanation
is obvious, from the simple fact that the Ammonites and Moabites were no more
Sodomites than Lot himself. And the view expressed by Origen and Jerome,
that Sodom is a typical name, denoting heathenism generally, is also unsatis-
factory. ‘The way in which Sodom is classed with Samaria and Jerusalem, and
the special reference to the judgment that fell upon Sodom (vers. 49, 50), point
undeniably to the real Sodom. The heathen world comes into consideration
only so far as. this, that the pardon of a heathen city, so deeply degraded as
Sodom, carries with it the assurance that mercy will be extended to all heathen
nations, We must therefore take the words as referring to the literal Sodom.
Yet we certainly cannot for a moment think of any earthly restoration of
Sodom, For even if we could conceive of a restoration of the cities that were
destroyed by fire, and sunk into the depths of the Dead Sea, it is impossible to
form any conception of an earthly and corporeal restoration of the inhabitants
of those cities, who were destroyed at the same time ; and in this connection it
is chiefly to them that the words refer. ‘This does not by any means prove that
the thing itself is impossible, but simply that the realization of the prophecy
must be sought for beyond the present order of things, in one that extends into
the life everlasting.—(Kei/).

Sodom represents the collective heathen world standing in like relations with
her. ‘That great crushing judgments will fall upon the whole heathen world no
less than on Sodom itself is the uniform announcement of the prophets, also of
Ez., in ch, xxv. and xxvi; so that the remark, that “Sodom 1s not a type of
oe on this account, because heathendom does not need to be restored,”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. CHAP. XVL











is not to the point. The representative character of Sodom lies in the nature
of the thing. If God pities the most notorious sinners among the heathen, how
should He not pity all? And it is confirmed by ch. xlvii. 18, where the sea
introduced in place of Sodom is a symbol of the world dead in sins. Sodom
also stands frequently elsewhere in the O.T. as a representative of deep corrup-
tion (Deut. xxxii. 32; Isa. i. 10; Jer. xxiii. 14). But all doubt is excluded by
ver. 61. There the representative character of Sodom is expressly affirmed.
Yet we may not exclude even Sodom itself from salvation. ‘I'he special
references to it are too strong for this (comp. vers. 49, 50) Michaelis says :—
“ As Samaria and Jerusalem, so must Sodom also, it appears, be taken literally.”
As a restoration of the city is not to be thought of, its inhabitants swept away
by the judgment can only be the object of salvation; and we have here an
allusion to a continuance of the arrangements of grace after death for those for
whom on earth salvation did not attain to its highest completion, the O. T.
basis for 1 Pet. iii, 20, 21; iv. 6, especially for the latter passage; also for
Matt. xii. 41, 42, a passage that indeed only indirectly leads to the same result,
—(Hengstenberg).


(Ver. 62). °


“T will establish my covenant with thee.” Men once sensible of breach
with God are not easily induced to believe that God will bestow great mercies
upon them. The Lord, therefore, out of His abundant kindness, doubles the
promise of making and establishing His covenant with Jerusalem, so that her
fears and disputes may cease, and she be ascertained thereof. “Thou shalt
know that I am the Lord.” The Heb. word signifies to know, to acknowledge,
to understand, to be certain, and properly refers to the mind and understanding.
The knowledge here meant is a saving knowledge ; for He speaks not of that
knowledge which arises from afflictions and judgments, of which He had oft spoken
before. Thirteen times the Lord saith, that they should know that He was the
Lord. But this was by His judgments. Here Hespeaks of such knowledge as
springs from a fountain and foundation of mercy. ‘“ ‘hou shalt know Me,” de.
in another manner than thou didst before; thou shalt know Me spiritually,
with a knowledge of faith and salvation (John vii. 17; x. 4). This differs from
a legal and literal knowlege, for—1. [¢ ts a more distinct knowledge of God.
Human knowledge is more mixed, dark, and confused. Every ungodly man’s
light is darkness (Job x. 22). But he who hath light from God in covenant, his
light is clear. “The light of the righteous rejoiceth” (Prov. xiii. 9). If
it were confused and obscure, it would not rejoice. “'I'he wisdom from
above is pure” (James iii. 17); and the more pure, the more clear, the
more distinct. 2. It is a savoury, relishing knowledge, the soul is affected with
it. “Taste and see that the Lord is good.” The true knowledge and taste of
God is as sweet as any gain, as ever manna was. “ His fruit was sweet to my
taste.” His knowledge hath a savour in it (2 Cor. ii, 14). 3. Jt is a deep-
rooted and well-settled knowledge. ‘he Lord puts wisdom in the inward parts,
and gives understanding to the hearts of those with whom He strikes His
covenant (Job xxxviii. 36). “God who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness hath shined in our hearts” (2 Cor. iv. 6). Not in our heads only,
not ov our hearts only, but im our hearts. God puts and writes His law in the
hearts of His people (Jer. xxxi. 33). Wicked men have knowledge and light
in their heads, but darkness in their hearts. 4. J¢ ts distinguishable from other
kinds of knowledge by the effects (1.) It is peaceable. It causeth men to live
peaceably (James iii. 17; Isa. xi. 9). When men know God savingly, they love
peace, and pursue peace ; but when knowledge is literal, they are contertious
and bitter. (2.) /é humbleth much. ‘The more men know God in His holiness,

179


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.
NN


ry, and goodness, the more humble they will be (Ezek. xx. 42, 43). When
ieee a aie and spiritual sight of God, he abhorred himself in dust and
ashes (Job xlii. 5,6). In like manner the prophet Isaiah and Paul (Isa. vi. 5;
1 Cor. xv. &, 9). (3.) Jt és working and powerful Like fire, it consumes the
lusts of men’s hearts, and separates the dross of their spirits. The truth purifies
the soul (1 Pet. i. 22). Divine knowledge keeps under what hinders practice,
and leads out the soul to action (Psa. cix. 84). Men have not the true know-
ledge of God when their lusts overpower them, and make them disobedient.
(4.) Trust and confidence in the Lord. The knowledge we speak of hath
certainty in it, and causeth venturing (Psa. ix 10). ‘They that know God
spiritually, His truths and promises, covenant, faithfulness, will resign up them-
selves to Him and lean upon Him. “In the Lord, Jehovah, is everlasting
strength” (Isa. xxvi. 4). When a man hath the true, real, and clear knowledge
of this he will trust in God, David had the right knowledge. of God when he
said, “He is my refuge and my fortress; my God, in Him will I trust
(Psa. xci. 2).—( Greenhill.)





(Ver. 68).


1. Godly sorrow and shame for sin arises from a right knowledge of God in
the covenant of grace. If the knowledge be spiritual and evangelical, the fruit
of the covenant, men’s repentance will be suitable ; sanctified knowledge will
produce sanctified shame, sorrow, and tears (Zech. x. 10). When men are in
covenant with God, and have the spiritual knowledge of His love and bounty,
in giving Christ to take away sin, and look upon Him in His piercings and
sufferings for their sins, then they will mourn with a great but spiritual
mourning, which is the most kindly and acceptable. 2. Those who rightly know
God in the covenant of grace, will not murmur against Him for any of His
dealings with them. They will be silent and submissive before Him, They
know God is infinitely wise, just, and holy ; that all their afflictions and chas-
tisements are exceeding short of what they deserve; that nothing comes to
pass without His Providence; that He can wrong none; titat He can
use unholy instruments holily, and hath holy ends in all His ways. Job
met with very hard things; but knowing God the right way, he opened
not his mouth against Him but for Him. So David, “I was dumb; [|
opened not my mouth, because Thou didst it” (Psa.xxxix. 9). He was
silent, and patiently submitted unto the hand of God; he neither ac-
cused Ilim, nor excused himself. If I be reproached, persecuted, afflicted
any way, I know it is ‘hy doing, and I will be dumb. Those who have
spiritual knowledge of God, and spiritual sorrow for their sins are most
silent. In whatsoever condition they be cast, they will say with the Church,
“We will bear the indignation of the Lord, because we have sinned against
Him” (Micah vii 9). 3. Sin és such an evil as provokes God. ‘“ When I am
pacified towards thee.” If there were not offence, no place would be found for
pacification, for where this has to be made provocation hath gone before. Sin
provokes God bitterly, and makes him angry every day (Hos. xii. 14; Psa vii.
11). ‘lo kindle His anger, even but a little, is a dangerous thing (Psa ii, 12).
Paul knew it when he said, “Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy; are
we stronger than He?” (1 Cor. x. 22). 4. Though sin do provoke God
greatly and bitterly, yet He is to be pacified. He is not implacable.
“He will not keep His anger for ever.” His mercy endures for ever,
but not His anger; His wrath is momentary, but His kindness is everlasting
(Isa. liv. 8). Aaron made an atonement for the people (Num. xvi. 46).
Phineas turned away his wrath (Num. xxv. 11). Moses prevailed with God, and
pee when he was very angry (Ex. xxxii. 14), And when the people


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OHAP. XVIE.





were full of sin, had greatly trespassed, “ He being full of compassion, forgave
their iniquity, and destroyed them not: yea many a time turned He His anger
away, and did not stir up all His wrath (Psa. Ixxviii. 88). 5. God being pact-
Jjied toward a people is a great mercy. This appears in two things: (1.) AW
that hath offended is passed by and forgiven. “ For all that thou hast done.”
Not for one, or two, or a hundred things done, but for all done; the idolatry,
Oppression, pride, fulness of bread, idleness, neglect of the poor, injustice, pro-
faneness, etc. Here is the greatness of Divine grace; be sins never so great,
old, many, they are all done away. (2.) He is so pacified, that He will not be
angry with them again for those evil deeds. 'N\ie Heb. word denotes such a
covering of their sins, so that they cannot be easily seen again ; an expiation, a
blotting out (Isa. xliii, 25), “The iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and
there shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found” (Jer.
L 20).—(Greenhill),


Tae Huminiation AND ExaLtTatTion oF THE Hovsz or Davin (Chap xvii).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—The word


of prophecy in this chapter is intro-


Israel. The prophet shows that these
hopes are vain. They thought that


duced in the way of a riddle and a
parable (ver. 2). The parable itself
1s told in vers. 1-10. In vers. 11-21,
we have the interpretation of it and
its application to King Zedekiah. In
vers, 22-24, we have the prophecy of
the exaltation of David’s house and its
necessary connection with the glory
of Messiah’s kingdom. By the alliance
of Zedekiah with Egypt, the people
hoped to regain the ancient glory of


God could not fail towards the king
without reversing the promises which
He had made to the house of David.
The prophet announces that Zedekiah
will meet with the due reward of his
deeds; and yet, in a wonderful manner,
God will fulfil His ancient promise to
the chosen people, though to human
observation all seems to be lost. ‘lhe
kingdom of David will assuredly be
exalted in the latter days.


Tur ParaBLe, REPRESENTING THE EmPriNess OF AuL THE Nation’s bAaRrHLy
Hopes oF THE FuTuRE (vers. 1-10).


Vers. 1,2. “Put forth a riddle, and
speak a parable unto the house of
Israel.” “The parable mashal, corre-
sponding exactly to the N.T. rapaPorAy
is called chtdhah, a riddle, because of
the deeper meaning lying beneath the
parabolic shell.—(éed.) As far as it
described the future of the house of
Israel, it was teaching by analogy, and
may, therefore, be regarded in_ the
light of a parable. In its immediate
bearing upon the fate of Zedekiah, it
may be regarded as a riddle.


Ver. 3. “A great cagle with great
wings.” “The symbolism of this
parable has been traced by some to
Babylonian influences working upon
the prophet’s mind, but without any


tenable ground. The figure of the
eagle, or bird of prey, applied to a
conqueror making a rapid descent upon
a country, has as little in it of a speci-
fically Babylonian character as the
comparison of the royal family to a
cedar or vine. Not only is Nebuchad-
nezzar compared to an eagle in Jer.
xlviii 40; xlix 22, as Cyrus is to a
bird of prey in Isa. xlvi. 11 ; but even
Moses has described the paternal
watchfulness of God over His own
people as bearing them upon eagle’s
wings (Ex. xix. 4; Deut. xxxii 11).
The cedar of Lebanon and the vine
are genuine Israelitish figures. The
great eagle is the King Nebuchad-
nezzar (compare ver. 12)’—(Keil.)
The “great wings” are a symbol of
18]


OHAP. XVII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


uy aad eS Ra Re


the vastness of Nebuchadnezzar’s do-
minion, “‘Long-winged, full of fea-
thers, which had divers colours.” The
tong pinions signify his large and well-
disciplined armies; the abundant
“feathers” the numerous populations
over which he reigned, and the “ divers
colours” the variety of races, lan-
guages, etc., which were found in his
empire. ‘‘Come unto Lebanon.” This
ig not a symbol of the Israelitish
land, but of Jerusalem, with its
royal palace so rich in cedar wood.
This was the place where the cedar
was planted (ver. 12). “And took
the highest branch of the cedar.’
The cedar is the Davidic family, and
the “highest branch” of it is King
Jehoiachin (2 Kings xxiv. 12).


Ver. 4 ‘‘The top of his young
twigs.” “The youngest and most
tender member of that family. Jehoia-
chin, to whom reference is here sym-
bolically made, was only eighteen years
of age when he assumed the reins of
government” (2 Kings xxiv. 8).—
Ceca iie ) “Carried it into a
and of traffick; he set it in a city
of merchaats-” ‘Not only was the
country of Babylon famous for its
transport traffic by means of the
Euphrates, but the city itself was
famous for its manufacturing and
mercantile establishments. From the
connection of Babylon with the Persian
Gulf, the commerce carried on between
that city and India must have been im-
mense.”—(/Henderson.) “That which
is intended is rather the Chaldean di-
plomacy, the policy of the interests
that were thus pursued, just as we
speak ef political negotiations aud
international intrigues. From this
policy originated the removal of
Jehoiachin to Babylon. Self-interest
is the point of comparison between
politics and trade. ‘This community
of principle also explains how both
politics and trade are represented in
Scripture under the figure of adultery,
the self-seeking, that conceals itself
under the appearance of love (Rev.
xiv. 8; xvii. 2); the self-seeking
policy (Nah, iti, 4); the trade (Isa,

182





xxiii. 15, etc.). It was, as it were,
a profitable stroke of business, that
Jehoiachin, who was favourable to
Egypt, should be removed to Babylon,
and a creature of the King of Babylon
set up in his stead, whose fidelity he
might count upon, because he had the
legitimate sovereign in his custody,
and could make use of him according
to circumstances.—( Hengstenberg.)


Ver. 5. ‘The seed of the land.
This expression signifies what we mean
by “a son of the soil,” as distinguished
from a foreigner. The Chaldeans ap-
pointed Zedekiah, who was of the old
native royal family (2 Kings xxiv. 17).
“He placed it by great waters.” Heb.
“Many waters.” ‘I'he idea is that of
a fertile situation. Though, politi-
cally, Zedekiah was in a dependent
position, yet he had abundant oppor-
tunity for exercising his gifts and
power asaruler. “Setitas a willow
tree.” This tree is low, and grows near
streams (Isa. xliv. 4), “This means,
that he treated it as a willow tree,
inasmuch as he took it to many waters,
set it in a well-watered soil, 76. in a
suitable place,” —(Kevd).


Ver. 6. “A spreading vine of low
stature, whose branches turned to-
wards him, and the roots thereof were
under him.” “‘ This figure of the vine
is not here in contradiction with that
of the willow. ‘I'he two figures present
different aspects. The new king isavine,
not a cedar, as the earlier independent
family of David. ‘Spreading,’ so that
it grew luxuriantly indeed, but in
breadth, not in height, which is still
more definitely shown by the addition
‘of low stature.’ Its (Zedekiah’s) roots
should be under him—should not be
withdrawn from dependence on the
king of Babylon.” —(Hengstenberg).
“lhe subjection of Zedekiah to Nebu-
chaduezzar is significantly expressed by
his being turned towards him ; while
he continued faithful as his vassal,
though he never rose to any elevation,
yet the affairs of the kingdom went on
peaceably, and the subjects increased
rather than diminished.” —( Henderson)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





Ver. 7. “ Another great eagle with
great wings and many feathers.”
This second eagle lacks the long

inions and divers colours of the first.

t represents the King of Egypt, who,
though he ruled over a widely-spread
and powerful kingdom, was yet in-
ferior to the King of Babylon in
imperial grandeur and_ disciplined
armies. “This vine did bend her
roots toward him, and shot forth her
branches toward him, that he might
water it by the furrows of her plan-
tation.” This vine had water enough
already, so that there was no occasion
for her to stretch out her branches
towards the other eagle. Hereby the
conduct of Zedekiah is condemned,
who, wearied with subjection to the
King of Babylon, applied to the King
of Egypt for help, hoping that by this
means he might establish the indepen-
dence of his throne.


Ver. 8. “It was planted in a good
soil by great waters, that it might
bring forth branches, and that it
might bear fruit, that it might be a
goodly vine.” “If Zedekiah had re-
mained quiet under Nebuchadnezzar,
as a hanging vine, his government
might have continued and prospered.”


—/( Keil.)


OHAP. XVIT.





Ver. 9. “Thus saith the Lord Ged,
shall it prosper?” “The subject is
the King of Babylon. ‘The roots sig-
nify the national existence, the fruit
the produce of the land, or the collec-
tive gain. The vine becomes dry in
all its sprouting leaves. ‘I'hese signify
all that by which a prosperous national
life is displayed. ‘Notby a great arm
or many people will it be taken away
with its roots.’ According to Jer.
xxxiv., Nebuchadnezzar led a numerous
army to Jerusalem, but there was no
need of so great preparations. If a
nation have God for its enemy, one
can chase a thousand of them, and two
can put ten thousand to flight (Deut.
xxxil 30). The Egyptians were quite
passive (comp. ver. 17). ‘The taking
away with the roots signified the total
abolition of the national existence.” —
(Hengstenberg.)


Ver. 10. ‘Shall it not utterly
wither when the east wind toucheth
it?” “The east wind proving noxious
to vegetation in Palestine, is here fitly
employed as a symbol of the Chaldean
army, which came from that quarter.
It was only necessary to bring that
army into contact with the Jewish state
in order to effect its ruin.”—(Hender-
son.) The east wind is the searching
wind of God’s anger (Jonah iv. 8)


HOMILETIOS.
TEACHING BY PARABLES.


1. The form of the discourse here, just as in the case of our Lord, who has
developed the parable into one of His ordinary modes of teaching, is to be ex-
plained chiefly from the object in view,—partly as it was designed for a circle of
hearers, or rather of readers, which, although mixed up in all sorts of ways with
higher interests, is yet to be thought of as living mainly in the world of sense,
aud especially as bound fast in the misery of the exile, and sympathising in the
false and faithless policy prevailing at the time in Jerusalem ; partly as it might
recommend itself to the prophet in the political circumstances by which he was
surrounded. The mashal before us in Ezekiel goes, therefore, far beyond mere
popular illustration. Still less is it to be explained away from the esthetic
stand point, as merely another rhetorical garb for the thought. 2. As in the

arable the emblematic form preponderates over the thought, so also here.
What the prophet is to say to Israel is said by the whole of that mighty array
of figurative expression, for which the animal and vegetable worlds furnish the
figures. But the eagle does what eagles otherwise never do ; and eee


OHAP. XVII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


oe


as a willow grows into a vine; and the vine “is represented as falling in love


with the other eagle.”—(J. D. Mich.)


The contradictory character of such


a representation, and the fact that in the difficulties to be solved (vers. 9, 10 ete.)
the comparison comes to a stand, and the closing Messiani¢ portion in which the
whole culminates, convert the parable into a “riddle.” A trace of irony and
the moral tendency, such as belong to the fable, are not wanting.—{ Lange.)


Tue INTERPRETATION OF THE PARABLE (vers. 11-21).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—From
vers. 12-17 we have the formal inter-
pretation of the parable. In vers.
19-21, the threat contained in the
parable is confirmed and still further
expanded.


Ver. 12. “ Behold the king of Baby-
lon is come to Jerusalem, and hath
taken the king thereof.” ‘I'he account
of the carrying away of the king, ée.,
Jehoiachin, and his princes into Baby-
lon is related in 2 Kings xxiv. 11, ete. ;
Jer. xxiv. 1, and xxix, 2.


Ver. 13. ‘And hath taken of the
king’s seed, and made a covenant
with Him, and hath taken an oath of
Him.” “The king’s seed is Jehoia-
chin’s uncle Mattaniah, whom Nebu-
chadnezzar made king under the name
of Zedekiah (2 Kings xxiv. 17), and
from whom he took an oath of fealty ”
(2 Chron. xxxvi. 13).—( Keil.)


Ver. 14. “That the kingdom might
be base, that might not lift itself up,
but that by keeping of his covenant
it might stand.” ‘I'he design of Nebu-
chaduezzar was to weaken the kingdom
so that it could not revolt against his
authority, but, at the same time, to
protect them if they continued loyal.


Ver. 15. “But he rebelled against
Him in seuding his ambassadors into
Egypt, that they might give him
horses and much people.” ‘Though
we have no account of this mission to
the King of Egypt anywhere else in
the Jewish records we may rest satis-
fied with the testimony of Ezekiel, who
was a contemporary. Hgypt was cele-
brated in ancient times for its herd of
horses. According to Diod. Sic. i. 45,

184


the whole region from Thebes to
Memphis was filled with royal stalls,
and such was the abundance of horses,
that no fewer than twenty thousand
chariots, each having two, could be
furnished in time of war. It was,
therefore, natural for Zedekiah to
turn to that quarter for aid, and
considering the hostile attitude of
the two great empires, he might
reasonably expect that his applica-
tion would not be made in vain.”—
(Henderson.) ‘Shall he escape that
doeth such things? or shall he break
the covenant, and be delivered?”
“Such things,”—perjury—breach of
covenant. Even Pagan nations had
great reverence for an oath, and
looked upon these as among the
highest crimes. When one enquired
of the Delphic oracle whether he
might break his oath, he was told
that for putting so impious a question
he should be punished by the untimely
death of his children.


Ver. 17. “‘Make for him in the
war.” Heb., “ Act with him in war,”
i.é., be of service to him. ‘“‘ Pharaoh
will not render him the expected
powerful aid against the Chaldeans ;
he will leave his protegé in the lurch
when he is hard pressed by his enemies.
That the Chaldeans need no great
military force against Jerusalem, is
manifest here from this, that the
Egyptians, against whom alone it
could be necessary, come not to its aid
withanyforce. Egypt wasalready atthat
time worm-eaten, which the Spirit of
God showed to his prophets, while
the world went no further than the
surface.” —/( Hengstenberg. )


Ver.18. “He had given his hand.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





“To give the hand,” is still in the
East a pledge of agreement, or fidelity
(2 Kings x. 15; Ezra x. 19; Jer. i. 15).
Zedekiah proved faithless to God,
because in pledging his fealty to the
King of Babylon he made a solemn
appeal to the God of the Jews (2 Chron.
XxXxvi. 13). The oath which Zedekiah
swore to the King of Babylon is desig-
nated in ver. 19 as Jehovah’s oath,
and the covenant made with him as
Jehovah’s covenant.


Ver. 20. “And I will spread my
net upon him, and he shall be taken
in my snare, and I will bring him
to Babylon.” ‘ My net” (ch. xii. 19).
Nebuchadnezzar was God’s instrument
to punish this rebellious king. ‘‘ And
will plead with him there for his
trespass.” To “plead” with him
signifies to bring him to submission,
to work conviction in him by means of
suffering (ch. xx. 36). This prophecy
was fulfilled five years afterwards, when


OHAP. XVII.





Zedekiah was carried away captive to
Babylon, where he died in prison
(Jer. lii, 8-11).


Ver. 21. “And all his fugitives
with all his bands shall fall by the
sword, and they that remain shall be
scattered to all winds.” Instead of
fugitives the Chaldee reads, ‘‘ chosen
ones,” “his brave men,” or “ heroes,”
But the ordinary reading yields a
suitable sense, and is the one adopted
by the LXX. and the Vulgate. ‘The
mention of some who remain, and who
are to be scattered towards all the
winds, is not at variance with the
statement that all the fugitives in the
wings of the army are to fall by the
sword. The latter threat simply declares
that no one will escape death by flight.
But there is no necessity to take those
who remain as being simply fighting
men; and the word “all” must not
be taken too literally.” —(Xeid).


HOMILETIOS.


(Vers, 17-21.)


1. Men look for help from an arm of flesh when in straits. Gedekiah ex-
pected that Pharoah’s mighty army, and great company, his chariots aud horses,
should make for him. We are prone to look unto second causes and creature
help more than God’s. Asa, being in distress, did so, “he relied,” saith the
text, “on the king of Syria, and not on the Lord his God,” (2 Chron. xvi. 7) ;
and “in his disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the physicians” (ver. 12).
Confidence in man is a common practice of the sons of men. Ephraim, when
he saw his sickness, went to the Assyrian and sent to Jareb (Hos. v. 18).
Men’s spirits look any way, turn any whither, for relief, rather than to
God. The arm of flesh is more to them than the arm of God. ‘‘ Some
trust in chariots, and some in horses;” Some in riches (Psa. hit, 7);
some in falsehood (Jer. xxiii, 25); some in strongholds (Zech. ix. 3);
some in men (Isa, ii. 22). Butit argues atheism, ignorance, pride, unbelief, that
men look not unto God at such times; yea, it proclaims the baseness of our
spirits, that we fall upon what is visible, weak, unfaithful, at a distance, and
neglect God, who is strong, all-sufficient, near; and all because invisible, not
seen of us. 2. Divine Providence overrules and orders things so, that wicked
men are frustrated and dissappointed of their hopes and expectations. Zedekiah
hoped and expected that Pharaoh with his great forces, should make much for him ;
but “ neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty army and great company make for
him.” It is not kings, armies, counsellors, and counsels, will do it. Pharaoh’s army
came forth of Egypt, raised the seige when Nebuchadnezzar was before Jerusalem
(Jer. xxxvii. 11) ; yet it did not make for him. 'The Chaldeans returned again,
sat down before the city, took it, Zedekiah, the princes and others. gee


CHAP. XVIf. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,








expected much from the counsel and advice of Ahithophel, but God turned it
into foolishness (2 Sam xvii. 14) ; and all the strength he had made not for him
(2 Sam. xviii). He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands
cannot perform their enterprise” (Job. v. 12). Haman could not perform his
enterprize. Herod could not accomplish his design to murder Christ when he slew
the infants (Matt. ii). Kings and people imagine vain things, and the Lord laughs
them to scorn (Psa. ii. 1, 4). He brings “the counsel of the heathen to nought. He
maketh the devices of the people,” princes, armies, “of none effect,” and estab-
lisheth Hig own thoughts and counsels, and that toall generations (Psa. xxxiil. 10,
11). God served His own will upon Pharoah and his army. Zedekiah was frustrated
—he looked for light and met with darkness. He leaned upon Pharoah, a
broken reed, that ran into his hand and pierced him (2 Kings xviii. 21). God’s
providence works in all, by all, and overrules all; and He brings to pass His
own sacred purposes by kings’ armies, by men’s wits, wills, policies, and powers.
3. The Lord takes notice of the circumstances and aggravations of men’s sins,
especially kings’. “‘ He despised the oath by breaking the covenant, when, lo !
he had given his hand” (ver. 18). I saw him, saith God, reach out his hand, give
it as a pawn and pledge of his fidelity to Nebuchadnezzar ; he engaged himself
thereby to be subject and tributary to him. This aggravated his sin
much. It was against the light of nature, special mercy. It was against his
superior, Nebuchadnezzar, the greatest king then on earth. It was against the
good of the whole Jewish state, for it brought war, famine, plague, captivity
upon them all: yea, more than all these, it was a high offence against God and
His attributes, and therefore the Lord saith, “he trespassed avainst me.” God
minds with what circumstances men’s sins are clothed. Solomon’s sin had the
aggravation nailed to it, ‘‘ His heart was turned from the Lord God, which had
appeared unto him twice” (1 Kings xi. 9). 4. Oaths and covenants made with
men are divine things, and not to be slighted. “Mine oath that he hath
despised, and my covenant that he hath broken” (ver. 19). It was made
with a heathen king, an idolator, yet God owns it as made with Himself,
because His sacred and dreadful name was used therein, and judges the
breach and violation thereof as bad as if it had been formally made
with Himself. Oaths made between man and man are called in Scripture
the “oaths of God” (Eccles. viii. 2) ; and the covenant made between Jonathan
and David is called “ the Lord’s oath ” (2 Sam. xxi, 7). Let not man, therefore,
slight covenants and oaths they have made with men, but remember they have
to do with God, who is faithful, performing what He swears, and keeping
covenant for ever. 5. The Lord hath nets and snares to catch and take perfidious
princes and people in. “I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken
m my snare” (ver. 20). There is no evasion when God seeks after sinners. If
He throw the net, it shall encompass the greatest leviathan ; if He set the
snare, it shall take the stoutest lion. God had a net for Pharaoh, and
caught that great leviathan in the sea. An oak was the net He caught
Absalom in (2 Sam. xviii. 9). The earth was his net to take Korah, Datham,
and Abiram. A heap of stones was His net thrown upon Achan. A cave was
the snare He took five kings in (Josh. x. 16-18). The kings of Sodom and Go-
morrah were snared in slime pits (Gen. xiv. 10). Herod could not escape the
worms, they were God’s net and snare to catch him. The Babylonish armies
were His nets and snares to take Hoshea (2 Kings xvii); Manasseh (2 Chron.
xxxill) ; Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, and Zedekiah, who were all kings (2 Chron.
xxxv). Zedekiah had thoughts he should escape, but he did not escape
besieging, taking, carrying into Babylon. When the city was taken, he
fled by night (Jer. xxxix. 4); but God spread His net so, that it fell
upon him and all with him. Let men take heed of offending the great
God of Beaten and earth, for He hath nets and snares to take them


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.
a


with. If once He throws His net and set His snare, He will take
them ; and being taken, you may struggle, but shall never get out. Nets and
snares are hidden things, they catch suddenly, and hold certainly.—(Greenhill.)
Ver. 17. The help of man is of no avail when God means to destroy. God’s
help, on the other hand, avails even against man’s help. Zedekiah with Egypt,
Nebuchadnezzar with Jehovah. Look at the co-partneries for thyself, and
bestow thy confidence accordingly. The latter firm is the more reliable. Cursed
is the man that trusteth in man (Jer. xvii.), Men promise, and break their
promise ; God promises, and does not break His. (Ver. 19). God’s oath as
against Zedekiah’s perjury. God does not swear, and then fail to keep His oath :
that shall be learned by experience by those who swear falsely, or who do not
keep their oath, If thou appealest to God as a witness, thou summonest Him
also as a judge, as an avenger! We have never to do with men alone. (Ver.
20, etc.). Noone can escape God. The enemies’ sword is sharp ; God’s sword
is sharper still. God’s judgments are always meant to lead to the knowledge of
Himself as well, and not merely of ourselves.— (Lange).


CHAP. XVII.


Tue Restoration or Davin’s House (vers. 22-24),


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—The dire
judgments of God which had been
foretold will do their awful work. But
beyond them, the prophet sees God’s
merciful purpose to restore the fallen
House of David, in the person of His
Messiah. The true twig of the stem
of David will spring up and flourish,
under whose shadow the whole family
of man may dwell in safety.


Ver. 22. ‘“‘I also will take of the
highest branch of the highest cedar,
and will set it.” The cedar, as before,
is the House of David. That sprout of
the House of David, Zedekiah, on
account of his rebellion, would lose his
sovereignty and bring destruction upon
the kingdom of Judah, but God’s king-
dom would still be secure. He would
fulfil the promise which He had made
to the seed of David. ‘I willcrop off
from the top of his young twigs a
tender one, and will plant it upon a
high mountain and eminent.” “ As
the highest branch was the furthest
from the roots, the reference is to the
remote descendants of the royal family,
and the tender one beautifully sym-
bolizes the Messiah as the shoot and
the sprout, predicted (Isa. xi. 1). The
“high and eminent mouutain” was
Zion (Psa, ii. 6). It is here described
as the mountain of the height of
Israel, as at chap. xx. 40, im re-


ference to Jerusalem, which at the
time of the Messiah’s advent was to
be what it had been, the centre of all
the tribes, who, restored to their land,
would go up again to the festivals, as
they had done before the revolt. It
derived its chief glory, however, from
its being destined to become the spot
where the spiritual kingdom was to be
established, and whence it was to
extend its blessings throughout the
whole world.” —( Henderson).


Ver. 23. ‘‘In the mountain of the
height of Israel.” This was Mount
Zion regarded as to its spiritual sig-
nificance. In actual height, it was far
behind Lebanon; but it was a symbol
of the kingdom of God, the centre
from which salvation should go forth
(Psa. xlviii. 3; Ixviii. 17). This pro-
phecy reaches it complete fulfilment
in the times of the Messiah (Isa.
ii. 2). The kingdom of God is to be
raised to a supremacy above all the
kingdoms of the world. “And be
a goodly cedar; and under it shall
dwell all fowl of every wing; in the
shadow of the branches thereof shall
they dwell.’ “The Messiah grows
into a cedar in the kingdom founded
by Him, in which all the inhabitants
of the earth will find both food (from
the fruits of the tree) and protection
(under its shadow). For this fignre,

187


CHAP. XVI,





compare Dan. iv. 8, 9. Birds of every
kind of plumage is derived from Gen.
vii. 14, where birds of every kind find
shelter in Noah’s ark. ‘The allusion
is to men from every kind of people
and tribe.”—(Keil.)


Ver. 24. ‘‘I the Lord have brought
down the high tree, have exalted the
low tree.” “By this all the trees of
the field learn that God lowers the
lofty and lifts up the lowly. As the
cedar represents the royal house of
David, the trees of the field can
only be the other kings or royal
families of the earth, not the nations
outside the limits of the covenant. At
the same time, the nations are not to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


of the cedars embraces the idea of the
kingdom, so that the trees of the field
denote the kingdoms of the earth to-
gether with their kings.” —(Kedl.)
‘“And have made the dry tree to
flourish.” The stem of Judah was dry
as regards spiritual promise. The
genealogy of the Messiah is traced
through such names as Tamar, Rahab,
Ruth, and Bathsheba. ‘“ How des-
picable soever the kingdom of Christ
may appear to a worldly mind, and
however small it was at its commence-
ment, it is truly prolific; and while all
the glory of earthly kingdoms fades
and perishes, it affords refuge and
nourishment to man of every colour and
every clime.” —({ Henderson.)


be entirely excluded because the figure
HOMILETICS.


Tur Gtory or Messran’s Krnapom.


I. It is to be erected upon the ruin of the world’s hopes. The prophet
had hitherto spoken only of judgments which were to fall upon nations for
their sins, and chiefly against Israel for her sin against greater light and
privilege. David's crown is cast to the ground, the kingdom of Judah is undone,
all human hope gone. But the prophet now has a brighter vision. He sees
the storm-cloud of judgment pass away, and the rainbow of mercy shows
itself. From the ruins of the kingdom the family of David is to be revived
in the person of the Messiah. It was necessary that there should be a
long time of chastisement, affliction, and sorrow, mm order to prepare the
cho:en nation for the purpose of God. And the same preparation for
the coming of Messiah’s kingdom was equally necessary for the rest of
mankind. Christ was to come in “the fulness of time,” when events were ripe
for His coming. It was necessary that the world should have sufficient time to
make experiments in order to discover whether men could find all help in them-
selves, ‘The world’s pride and confidence had to be broken, so that, in the end,
it might humble itself under the Cross of Christ, and therein behold the power
and the wisdom of God. 7 wo great experiments had to be carried out. The Jew
bad to find out whether righteousness could come by the law, whether the law could
give life, sanctify, and save; or, whether there was not some intractable perversity
in man’s nature which would baffle all such attempts. The same kind of process
had to be carried on in the Jewish nation, which was accomplished in the life of
the individual when Saul, the persecutor, was transformed into Paul, the Apostle.
He had tried all that the law could do for him, and from his failure, from the
wreck of all his hopes he passed into the kingdom of the grace of God. The
Gentile had to make his experiment in order to discover, whether man could un-
fold his own blessedness out of himself; whether art, or philosophy, or political
institutions could completely satisfy all the yearnings of his spiritual nature.
The heathen world had time enough, and opportunity allowed for this experi-
ment. God had raised up among them men of great parts, and gifts; and
strength of will who could attempt this problem, and solve it, had they been
able. ‘ Se world could have been redeemed by such means, these men could


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. CHAP. XVIL


have accomplished its redemption. But all had failed. The histories of the great
nations of old furnish a sad illustration of the truth, that “ the paths of glory lead
but to the grave ”—the grave of political, intellectual, moral conquests and hopes.
The prodigal child, far away from his true home, had come to the husks. ‘The
soul of man was still hungry. All had failed to satisfy. ‘his was that
emptiness of which Christ’s kingdom of grace was the answering fulness. Out
of the wrecks and fragments of the old world was to be built up the new.


II. It is to be an omnipotent kingdom. “Thus saith the Lord God; I will
also take of the highest branch of the high cedar, and will set it.” I, whoam
mightier than the royal eagle of Babylon ; I, who bore Israel from Egypt as
upon eagle’s wings. I will lay hold of the seed of David, and raise up my
Messiah from thence and establish His kingdom. 'That kingdom should, indeed,
advance from weak beginnings, “I will crop off from the top of his young twigs,
a tender one.” But the tree was the planting of the Lord, His omnipotence
would uphold it, and it must stand for ever. Christ is to “fill all things.”
And His Church is to be “ the fulness of Him who filleth all in all” (Eph. i. 28).


III. Its rule is to be marked by tenderness.” “The high cedar.” “A
tender one.” ‘The glory of Lebanon is to be added to the lowly but fruitful
vine. Majesty wedded to meekness; a kingdom of immortal strength, but
founded upon patience (Rev. i. 9). Its victories were to be the victories of the
Lamb. The omnipotence and the love of God were to join hands in the religion
of mercy which was to be founded upon Calvary (Matt. xii. 19-21).


IV. It is to be a wide kingdom. A large fellowship. Under the shadow
of this goodly cedar shall dwell all fowl of every wing. None are to be left out.
It is written of Zion’s King that “He shall be favourable to the simple and
needy, and preserve the souls of the poor.” His kingdom shall embrace heaven
and earth, reconciling all things. Christianity alone has the proper qualities of
an universal .religion.


V. It is to be an eternal kingdom. Being planted by God Himself, this
kingdom could have in it no seeds of decay. It can never be moved, but must
stand as long as the sun and moon endure, and of the increase of it there shall
be no end.


VI. It is to bring abasement to all human pride. “ And all the trees of the
field shall know that I, the Lord, have brought down the high tree, have
exalted the low tree, have dried up the green tree, and have made the
dry tree to flourish.” Such has ever been the process and the end of the Lord
in His dealings with men (1 Sam. ii, 7, 8). The rich tree, boasting and promising
so much, is withered (Psa. xxxvii. 35, 36). ‘The sapless stem shall be revived
(Is. Ixi. 3). It was one of the praises by which the world’s salvation was
greeted. “He hath put down the mighty from their seats, and hath exalted
the humble and meek.” The conquests of David, and the magnificence of
Solomon ended in the humiliation and shame of Zedekiah’s reign. But that royal
family was raised up again in Christ ; and from it sprang Messiah, the King,
whose kingdom was destined to put an end to all those of the world which were
founded upon force, error, and fraud, The kingdom founded upon love would
exalt the good and the true, though in lowly condition ; and debase the proud,
though surrounded by all the glory which the world could give.


Tur TREE CuRiIst, WHICH GoD HAS PREPARED FOR US.


1. As to its nature. 2. As to ats destiny. Summer and winter the cedar is
green, and never loses its leaves or its verdure. ‘The everlastingly green Tree
189


OHAP, XVII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


ee


of Life is Christ. No wood is more durable; so Christ is the indestructible
foundation for our hopes, etc. We are the branches in the cedar of God. Our
fruits are Christ’s, who produces them in us and by us. John and Peter, Paul
and James, what boughs in that Cedar! and the fathers and the Reformers,
and all believers since. Whata'I'ree! What a green, flourishing, fruit-laden
array of branches that which sways around it! What a mighty, densely-foliaged,
far-shadowing-crown ! and in the crown what gales, and zephyrs, and rustlings
of holy life and divine love! Here there is promised to Christ and His cause
nothing less than final triumph over the whole world—the pompous glory of
Babylon, Egypt, Rome, and Athens, where is it to be found ?—(Krummacher.)

1. After grievous judgments threatened, God comforts His people. When
God should root out Zedekiah and his people the kingdom would be laid waste ;
the faithful should suffer much, lose estates, friends, liberty, country, temple,
ordinances, and worship of God. Now for comfort against all these evils, he
tells them of the Messiah. ‘I'he stem of Jesse seemed to be cut down, and the
root of Jesse to be pulled up; but the Lord preserved the root and stem, out
of which he brought a rod and a branch for the comfort of the faithful, suffering
Jews. This promise of the Branch is often mentioned for the purpose of comfort
(Jer. xxiii. 5, 6; xxxiii. 15, 16; Zech. iii. 8; vi. 12, 13).

2. The Lord Christ descended from the highest. “1 will take of the highest
branch,” etc. He came from the loins of Jeconiah, who was King of Judah,
and from fourteen kings before him (Matt. i.). He was the son of nobles, and
born a king (Matt. i, 12). He was the first-born of the kings of Judah, the
right heir to the kingdom which Herod at that time usurped.

3. The beginnings of Christ were mean and low. “I will crop off from the
top of his young twigs a tender one.” Christ, at first, was as a little tender shoot
of a tree set in the earth ; and how weak, mean, low, and inconsiderable is such
a thing. Such were the beginnings of Christ. He took flesh of a poor virgin,
the wife of a carpenter. He was born in a poor village (Mic. v. 2); in a stable,
laid in a manger (Luke ii. 7). He was subject to his parents (Luke ii. 51).
He lay in the dark till thirty years of age (Luke iu. 23); and then He
began with two or three poor fishermen (Matt. iii, 18-22); then some others to
the number of twelve ; and even now, when He seemed to be somebody, He had
not a house or bed for Himself or for them (Luke ix. 58). And for His main-
tenance, it was at the good will of others (Luke viii. 3).

4. The Lord Christ is planted in the Church, and becomes a fruitful and
goodly cedar therein. “1 will plant it upon a high mountain,” etc. Christ was
planted in Zion, there He grew, there He brought forth fruit. With the timber
of this cedar was the Church built, with the fruit of this cedar it is maintained
(Isa. iv. 2). The branch was Christ, and He should be for beauty and glory to
the Church, and the fruit that should come from Him should be excellent. ‘I'he
Church saith, “ His fruit was sweet to my taste.” Wisdom, righteousness, re-
demption, and sanctification are the fruits of this cedar (1 Cor. i. 30); the life of
the world (John vi. 33); the ordinances of the Gospel (Matt. xxviii. 19; 1 Cor,
i, 23) ; “‘exceeding great and precious promises ;” reconciliation (Col. i. 20) ;
the gift of the comforter (John xvi. 7) ; revelation of the counsels of God (John
xv. 15) ; fellowship with the Father and the Son (John xiv. 9; 1 Johni. 3);
“eternal life” (John x. 28). Such was the fruit this cedar bore. In the midst
of the Church He was planted, fruitful, and sang praise to God (Heb ii. 12).
And so high is this cedar grown, that it is now in heaven at the right hand of
God (Eph. i. 20, 21). The mountain of the Lord is on the top of all mountains,
and this cedar on the top of that mountain.

: 5. There is safety under Christ, He will protect His people from all harms,
Under it shall they dwell.” Men will not dwell where there is no safety.
Those ae come under Uhrist’s shadow, His power and government, shall dwell


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OHAP, XVIII,
Fee eee BY INES Ode PN Cae, Sete URE. ss eee te Piro ve


there in safety. He will protect His Church, and tread down the enemies there-
of, whatever their power, politics, and pretences are. He is a cedar in wisdom
(Col. ii. 3) ; a cedar in power (Matt. xxviii. 18) ; a cedar in His providence and
vigilance (Isa. xxviii. 3); hence saith the Church, “I sat under His shadow
with great delight” (Cant. ii. 3), Itis Christ secures from sin, from the wisdom
of the flesh, the storms of the world, temptations of hell, and whatever is
dangerous (Isa. xxv. 4). If you be under the shadow of this cedar, though the
winds blow hard, the floods beat sore, and rain fall with strength, yet you shall
be as safe as the house built upon the rock (Matt. vii. 24, 25).

6. Princes that are haughty and proud, God will bring them down though
they be in flourishing conditions. “1 have brought down the high tree,” ete.
Zedekiah was a high tree; the king of Judah, and his spirit was high; he
hearkened not to the God of Israel, nor to His prophets; he would not keep
covenant and promise with the king of Babylon. But God laid the axe to the
root of this tree and hewed it down. No trees are so high, but the Lord who is
higher than they, can lay them low. Let them be green with boughs, branches,
leaves ; let them have many soldiers, many counsellors, many kingdoms, all can-
not preserve them from ruin, Nebuchadnezzar was a high tree, his top reached
to heaven (Dan. iv. 11); but, “A watcher and a holy one came down from
heaven, cried aloud and said, Hew down the tree, cut off his branches,” ete.
(Dan, iv. 18, 14). There is a watcher who observes the plots and practices
of kings, and hews them down at His pleasure. Pharaoh was a high tree, the
hizhest in all Egypt ; he said, “I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the
spoil ; my lust shall be satisfied upon them ; I will draw my sword, my hand
shall destroy them.” Here was pride and cruelty, which usually go together ;
aud what followed hereupon? ‘Thou did’st blow with thy wind, the sea
covered them; they sank as lead in the mighty waters (Ex. xv. 9,10.) Saul
was a goodly man, a high tree in Israel ; he was proud, cruel, false, disobedient
to God ; and He rejected him, and cut him down by the Philistines and his own
sword (1 Sam. xxxi). So Ahab (1 Kings xxii) ; Herod (Acts xii. 23); Belshazzar
(Dan. v. 5, 22, 23, 30). The Lord hath days and times to reckon with the high
and haughty ones (Isa. x. 33, 34; ii. 12-17).

7. Hew low soever the conditions of kingdoms, families, or persons are, Giod
as able to raise them. “I have exalted the low tree,” etc. he kingdom of
Judah, the house of David, the person of Jeconiah, were very low in Babylon,
like low shrubs, dry trees. But God exalted them, and brought a glorious
kingdom and a church out of those low beginnings. Was not Christ like a low
and dry tree, when He lay in the loins of Jeconiah, a prisoner, a captive ; when
He lay in the womb of the Virgin ; hewed timber, made houses for His living ;
especially when He was cut down and laid in the heart of the earth? Was He
not a dry tree then? But God exalted Him, set Him at His right hand; and
Peter proclaimed it (Acts ii. 33, 36).

8. God will do all these things so eminently that the world shall take notice,
and be filled with the glory thereof. “ And all the trees of the field shall know
that I, the Lord,” ete. Not only the orchard trees, but the field trees, not
domestic alone, but wild ones. Men shall fear and hide themselves, ‘“ for the
glory of His Majesty, when He ariseth to shake terribly the earth” (Isa. ii. 19).
—(Greenhiil.)


Tue Equiry or tHE Divine Justice (chap. xviii.).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Thejudg- ance. But this salutary purpose was
ments announced in chaps. viii, xi, frustrated by the mauner in which these


were intended to bring Israel torepent- judgments wereinterpreted. Thepeople
191


OHAP, XVIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


nn nnn EEE?


considered themselves as innocent chil-
dren suffering for the iniquity of their
fathers, and that, therefore, repentance
was useless. ‘I'he prophet destroys this
refuge by declaring that each man shall


have to bear the punishment of his own
sin. ‘That punishment can only be
averted by repentance (vers. 21-29).
Thus the rule of God’s judgments was
equity.


Tuz UncopLy PRovERB, AND THE DECLARATION THAT IT SHALL BE NO
MORE HEARD IN IsraxEL (Vers. 1-4).


Vers.1,2. “The fathers have eaten
sour grapes, and the children’s teeth
are set on edge.’ The same proverb
is quoted in Jer. xxxi 29, 30, where it
is also condemned as an error. The
meaning of it is sufficiently clear. The
sour grapes which the fathers eat are
their own personal sins which they
commit; the setting of the children’s
teeth on edge is the suffering conse-
quent upon these sins, and which is
visited upon the children.


Ver. 3. “Ye shall not have occa-
sion any more to use this proverb in
Israel.” Heb. “It shall not be to
you.” The meaning is, that it shall
be no longer morally possible for them
to use this proverb ; for they would be
convinced of the justice of God’s ways,
not only by the reason of the thing
itself, but also by the judgments which
would be sent upon them. The equity
of God’s dealings would be vindicated
in so clear a manner, that none would
be bold enough to call it in question.


Ver. 4. ‘“‘All souls are Mine; as
the soul of the father, so also the
soul of the son is Mine.” They are
His by right of creation. They have
come from Him, the Fountain of Life,
the Father of Spirits. “God would
surrender His property if He permitted


souls, whether individuals or whole
generations, to suffer punishment for
the guilt of others. In the likeness
of God, on which the sentence “ All
souls are Mine” rests, liesthe principle
that souls cannot be degraded into
servile instrumeats—that each can only
be treated according to His works,”—
(Hengstenberg). “In this verse God
asserts His universal propriety in His
rational creation. Add the souls, 1.6,
persons—the noblest part of the con-
stituent elements of the human subject
being put for the whole. He had
created them all, and having endowed
them with those powers and faculties
which are necessary to constitute them
subjects of moral government, He had
a sovereign and indisputable right to
deal with them in equity according to
their deserts. In punishing the guilty,
He acts without respect of persons,
The individual culprit is dealt with on
the ground of his own personal deserts.”
—(Henderson). “The soul that sin-
neth, it shall die.” ‘Die, the end of
a process,—the separation of the soul
from its life-source, the Spirit of God
(Deut. xxx. 25 ; Jer. xxi. 8 ; Prov. xi
19). This cannot happen without an
act of God’s retributive justice, so that
the punishment inflicted by God must
correspond to man’s guilt.”—(Lange).


HAONMILETICS.
(Ver. 2).


Two things are to be considered concerning this proverb—


I. The meaning of it.


By “sour grapes,” the Jews understand sin, not sin


simply, but such sing as bring heavy judgments of God upon a land or people,


a8 idolatry, murder, oppression, drunkenness, profaneness, etc.


192


The prophet


\


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP. XVIII.


rrr,


Isaiah warrants this sense of sour grapes, when he calls the sins of Judah
“wild grapes” (Isa. v. 24). God looked that His vineyard should bring forth
grapes, good fruit, justice, righteousness, truth; and it brought forth wild
grapes, Oppression, a cry, covetousness, lasciviousness, drunkenness, pride. Such
sins are called sour or wild grapes, because they wound conscience, are burden-
some unto others, are as distasteful unto God as such grapes are to us. ‘They
provoke Him to lay waste the vine that bears such fruit. By this proverb thus
much is signified, that the fathers had sinned, and the children suffered for
their sin ; the fathers did that which was very offensive unto God, and the
children were punished for it ; they did eat the sour grapes, brought forth the
bitter fruit, and these smarted for it; the children’s teeth were set on edge,
they were punished for what their fathers had done. They thought and said
that their fathers were the cause of all the evils which befeti them. Like unto
this proverb are these: ‘Kings sin, and the people suffer.” “The child
offends, and the servant is beaten.”


II. The occasion. The princes and people going on in the wicked ways of
their fathers, the prophets did threaten them with destruction of their temple,
city and estate. ‘Thereupon they said, “ Our fathers did as we do, and they
were spared; why should we suffer” ? And when the prophets pressed the sins of
Manasseh, as Jer. xv. 3, 4, “I will appoint over them four kinds, saith the Lord ;
the sword to slay, the dogs to tear, the fowls of heaven, the beasts of the earth,
to devour and destroy : and I will cause them to be removed into all kingdoms
of the earth, because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah, king of Judah, for that
which he did in Jerusalem.” When God stirred the prophets to tell them that
for the sins of this king he would lay Jerusalem waste, as he had the ten tribes
for Jeroboam’s sins, they then took up this proverb, and said, ‘‘ The fathers have
eaten sour grapes, and the childrens’ teeth are set on edge.” Ahaz, Manasseh,
Amon, and others of our forefathers, have sinned, and we must suffer! Or thus:
Zedekiah and his counsellors had perfidiously broken covenant with Nebuchad-
nezzar, for which the prophets threatened utter ruin to all: hereupon the people
said, “Our fathers have eaten sour grapes,” etc.; the kings and nobles have
transgressed, and we shall be ruined for it! This proverb was grown common
amongst them, both in Babylon and in Zion, it was tossed up and down and spread.
Ezekiel tells them of it in Babylon, and Jeremiah in Zion (Jer. xxxi. 29). The
evil of this proverb was great, for besides their charging God with injustice and
impartiality, hereby—(1). They discovered their father’s sins and nakedness, and
that without sorrow or repentance for them. (2). Made light of anything the
prophets threatened against them. (3). Obstructed the way against future
repentance, or profiting by the judgments of God which should come upon them.
For being persuaded and possessed with this opinion, that they suffered unjustly
for their father’s sins, not their own, they would never submit, mourn, condemn,
but justify themselves.—(Greenhill).

The cause of the cessation of this proverb is the severity of the Divine judg-
ments. When these appear, the fig-leaves fall off, the slumbering conscience
awakens and cries out. “It is I and my sins!” ‘There is a multitude of
theorems and theological dogmas which are possible only in certain times, and
slink away abashed when the thunders of Divine judgment begin to roll—
(Hengstenberg). ee

Hither a man recognises in judgment—in the self-judgment of a believing
repentance—his guilt before God, or God makes the whole world recognise it
in us, through the judgment which overtakes us, even when we would deny our
guilt. God swears by His life; for where His righteousness is called in question,
His life in this world of sin and death is assailed.—(Lange.)


u 193


CHAP. XVIIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





(Ver. 4).


«The soul that sinneth, it shall die.” Hence—1. God may lay what
punishment Le pleases upon the soul that sins, “ All souls are Mine,” and the
soul that sinneth shall suffer whatever I see good, according to the nature of
its sin. However the words seem to impart an equal punishment for all sins,
yet it is otherwise ; according to the intrinsical nature, circumstances, and
demerit of the sin, shall be the death. God will proportion the one unto the
other; as He rewards men according to their works, so He wil! punish them
according to their sins. God lath variety of deaths, and various degrees of those
deaths, variety of afflictions, and various degrees of the same ; He lays on which
and in what measure He pleases. If states think good to inflict upon delinquents
several punishments, and in high degree as they find men guilty, how much
more may God. He smote Jehoram with incurable and sore diseases (2 Chron.
xxi. 18, 19). He sent fire and brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorrah (Gen. xix),
He did that in Jerusalem which He never did before, nor ever would do the
like (Ez. v. 9,10). Neither these nor any that suffer in what kind soever, do
sufier unjustly ; men may pretend innocency, but if they suffer, and that severely,
God is not cruel, they are not guiltless. 2. Sinisa deadly thing “The soul
that sinneth shall die. Sin is the great murderer, it let death into the world,
and keeps death alive. If there were no sin there would be no death, no
punishment, but if men sin they must suffer. ‘I'he old world sinned and died
for it; Sodomites sinved and died for it; the Bethshemites sinned by looking
into the ark, and fifty thousand of them died for it : Jerusalem sins and is burnt
for it, and her children buried ina Babylonish grave ; Ananias and Sapphira die
for their dissimulation, “The wages of sin is death” (Rom. vi. 23). Let us
then take heed of sin, whereby we offend that God who hath said, “The soul
that sinneth it shall die.” He is a dreadful Majesty and ought greatly to be
feared. ‘Who would not fear Thee, O King of nations? for to Thee doth it
appertain ” (Jer. x. 7). Fear is God’s due, and your duty ; “Stand in awe,”
then, “and sin not” (Psa. iv. 4). If you sin, you must die; death is the
king of fears, and God is the King of death ; He can command it to seize upon
you in a moment.—( Greenhill).


HOMILETICS.


Tue INDIVIDUALITY oF THE SouL


(Ver. 4).


These idolatrous Israelites complained that they were unjustly punished for
the sins of their fathers. The innocent suffered instead of the guilty. “The
fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on edge.” By
nature’s law the man who eats sour grapes, and he alone, will feel the
unpleasant sensation of the acid on his own teeth. They complain that the
dealings of Providence, us expounded by the prophet, are contrary to the equity
and justice of nature. And this complaint is, to a very large extent, founded
upon a truth. Under God’s moral government the innocent do suffer for the
guilty. All generations of men are subject to the stern law of inheritance, so
that the entail of sin and suffering falls to the lot of those who are inuocent of
the original transgression. But the prophet assures his countrymen that,
despite all appearances to the contrary, God’s ways are equal, here is no


hey Noe to any man on account of any complication of bis history with


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OHAP, XVIII.
ee IE Ee SN


that of another, or with that of the human race. “As I live, saith the Lord
God, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this proverb in Israel.” And
the reason given is this :—“ Behold all souls are mine ; as the soul of the
father, so also the soul of the son is mine: the soul that sinneth, it shall die.”
Each individual soul comes from God, who is the fountain of life, is accountable
ultimately to Him alone, and each man will be treated in sole regard to himself
without reference to any other man. He who continues in sin will incur the
penalty of death ; which will be visited upon him for his own sins, and not for
those of his forefathers. This death of the soul is not the loss of existence, but
such death as the soul can suffer, ¢.¢., moral and spiritual death, exclusion from
God’s light and love. Such a man is dead while he liveth. His portion is a
living death. This passage speaks to us of the origin, and of the individuality
of the human soul.


I. The origin of the human soul. “ All souls are mine.” They are God’s
by right of creation, which is the strongest title of ownership. And God said,
“Let us make man in our image, after our likeness” (Gen. i. 26). “'I'he Lord
God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the
breath of life; and man became a living soul” (Gen. ii. 7). God is the
“Father of spirits,” and “we are also His offspring.” ‘Man is from God as
well as to God. He is of the blood-royal of heaven. The Bible itself, what is it
but a biography of the soul?” Its noble and illustrious birth, beautiful childhood,
and its terrible fall ; its long and painful discipline of sorrow through the ages
of history ; the grace of God towards it in the gifts of salvation, the provisions
for its perfect restoration through a Divine Redeemer, a paradise won for it
beyond the grave—these great facts concerning the soul are the main burden of
the Bible. ‘lo know, as a deep and heart-felt conviction, the origin and worth
of the soul is to be a religious man : to live a life founded on that conviction is
to be a Christian.


II. The individuality of the soul. Each soul of man has a separate existence
in eternity as well as in time. When we die we do not become an unconscious
portion of the universal life. We are not absorbed into God, like a drop
which falls into the ocean. We do not perish by infinite diffusion. Such
is the teaching of the Bible. But—1. It is very difficult for us to realise
this truth. The truth we have to consider is—that each and every one of
all who now live, or who have ever lived, is a distinct and independent
being. There are certain facts and circumstances of human lite which
render it difficult for us to realise this truth. ‘l'ake the case of the commander
of a large army. Does such a man realise this truth fully when he sends a large
body of men on some dangerous service? Or, does he not rather regard each
man as one of the springs or wheels of a vast machine? ‘l'o the whole collection
of separate powers ministering to one end he assigns individuality. The only
fact is not present vividly before him, that the real individuality is that of each
single soul, And all men are liable, more or less, to make this false estimate.
We are prone to class men in masses, and to regard them as we do the stones of
a building which derives unity only from its form and from the disposition of
all its parts to the general effect. We deal only with great unities; the
separate portions do not enter into our thought. We have a tendency to treat
abstractions of our own creation as real things. ‘Thus we speak of national
greatness. And what does this mean? It means that multitudes of men who
happen to be living together at one time, and in the same country, are able to
act upon each other and upon the world at large in such a way as to gain im-
portance, power, wealth, and eminence. We regard these multitudes as one great
body, and when one and another dies we do not consider it as the passage of a soul
into the unseen state. Their places are supplied by others: the individual

195


OHAP, XVIII. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





EOL eae


perishes, the nation remains. We think of the nation as still the same in its
vast and energetic life, but we are apt to forget that it is only the component parts
that are the true realities. Consider again, the multitudes of a great city.
. We gain an idea of human energy, of the splendour and magnificence of man’s
works, But what is the real truth? Why, that each man in that city is his
own centre, and all things about him are but mere shades among which
he walks, as “in a vain shadow and disquieteth himself in vain.” Nothing
outside of him can touch his soul or quench his immortality. He must live
with himself for ever. He has an unfathomable depth within him, and an
infinite abyss of existence. 2. We should make an effort to realise this truth.
The truth, that all who have ever lived here and have seen the sun successively
are alive now, each one in his own person ; all those who lived before the Flood
and in the ages since, all who have gained a name in the world, or who have died
without fame—the good, the bad, the wise, the ignorant ; all those whose names
we see written in churches or churchyards, great writers whore works we see
in our libraries, the workmen who have raised those great buildings and monu-
ments which are the wonder of the world: they are all in God’s remembrance,
and before His eye—they still live: ‘I'o see a human being, even by a mere
passing glance, is an act which, in its deep significance, is unlike all other
occurrences in nature. The rain falls, the wind blows ; but showers and storms
have no existence beyond the time when they happened. They are gone, and
are nothing in themselves. But when we have seen a child of Adam, we have
seen the temple of an immortal soul. It lives on; and when here on earth it
is seen no more, it is still somewhere awaiting God. 3. J¢ is as individual
souls that we shall return to God. We must all take that solemn journey
which will bring us face to face with God. We cannot pass on one side of Him,
or in any way avoid Him, but must go straight into His presence. Each man
will feel that he is himself, and not another, and that the eye of God is upon
him. When a few more years have come and gone, there will be no need of
any effort of mind on our part, in order to realise the individuality of the soul.
No need of any effort to realise the nothingness of this vain world when the
world has for us vanished away and we are left alone with God. There is one
Being to whom alone we are ultimately accountable. Strive to say at last in
faith and hope, “ Father, into Thy hands I commit my spirit.” “Lord, Jesus,
receive my spirit.”


(Vers. 5-9.)
EXEGETICAL NOTES. — True


righteousness is described as the ful-
filment of the commandments of God.
Through such righteousness the right-
eous shall live,


precisely depicted, not without a ten-
dency to antithesis.”—Lange.


Ver. 6. “Hath not eaten upon the
mountains.” Mountains where idol
festivals were held (Ezek. vi. 13).
Eating that which was offered in
sacrifice to an idol was supposed to


Ver. 5. “That which is lawful
and right” (Heb.) “Judgment and


righteousness.” ‘I'he deeds must con-
form to the rule of right, and the
motive must be the love of right.
“The first application of the principle
is made to the righteous man. He is
described according to Being and
Doing,—essentially and actually ; in
particular, doing yudgment, in general,
Rane Goad His doing is then more
1


secure the favour of that deity (1 Cor.
x. 20, 21). “ Neither hath lifted up
his eyes to the idols of the house of
Israel.” The “lifting up of the eyes”
denotes the expectation of help
(Psa. cxxi. 1). “Neither hath come
near to amenstruous woman.” Con-
jugal intercourse with a wife while
she was set apart for her uncleanness


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XVIII.


ee


was forbidden by the law of Israel on
pain of death, It was a defilement of
the marriage relation. (Lev. xviii. 19,
xx. 18). “The prohibition of impuri-
ties in the married state is included,
which is directed against unbridled
lust that bows not to the ordinance
of God.”—(Hengstenberg.)


_Ver.7. “Restored to the debtor
his pledge.” This restoration was
commanded by the law, as the things
taken in pledge were considered as
necessary to the existence of the poor
man (Ex. xxii, 25; Deut. xxiv. 6,
10, etc.). ‘‘ His bread to the hungry.”
Not regarding it as his; not saying
with Nabal, “Shall I take my bread
and give it away?” (1 Sam.


Ver. 8. “Given forth upon usury,
neither hath taken any increase.”
The Hebrew word for usury is very
expressive. It literally signifies biting,
and must have originated in the prac-
tice of taking exorbitant interest. The


Jews from taking any interest from
their brethren, but permitted them to
do so from a foreigner (Ex. xxii. 25 ;
Deut. xxili. 19, 20). “ Increase” is
another term expressive of interest or
usury, denoting riches obtained by
lending money at high interest, or by
making exorbitant charges on the
natural productions of the soil.”—
(Henderson). The taking of “in-
crease” on a loan of the necessaries
of life was forbidden to the Israelite
(Lev. xxv. 36, 37). “Hath executed
true judgment between man and man.”
In the special capacity of a judge or
arbiter,


Ver. 9. “He is just.” Really such
—righteousness ascontra-distinguished
from itssemblance. ‘‘ He shall surely
live.” He shall save his soul—shall
live in the fullest, deepest sense of the
word, “The man who was blameless
with respect to all the points here
specified was accounted righteous in
the eye of the law, and entitled to
enjoy the life which the law secured.”


law of Moses absolutely prohibited the —(Henderson.)


HOMILETIOS.
A Piorvre or Ricuteousness (vers, 5-9),


The whole of this paragraph is an expansion of the words, “ If a man be just?
and do that which is lawful and right” (ver. 5). Righteousness consists in the
fulfilment of the commandments of God’s law. It is conformity to a standard
which is not arbitrary, but founded upon the nature of God Himself and His
relations to mankind. But more particularly, righteousness consists—


I. In the proper discharge of religious duties. Those duties which more
nearly concern God and His worship. They are laid down in the first Table of
the Law. In this passage, tliey are described negatively as consisting, in general,
in the avoidance of idolatry. (1) In tts grosser forms. Such as, “eating upon
the mountains ” (ver. 6), 2.¢., observing the sacrificial festivals of the heathen
gods and, therefore, sacrificing to idols (Deut. xii. 2, etc.). This was the chief
transgression by outward acts against the law of Divine worship. There can be
no true righteousness unless God is worshipped in purity and sincerity. But
idolatry is also to be avoided,—(2.) In its more refined forms. Some of the
prophet’s countrymen could not degrade themselves so far as to join in outward
acts of idolatrous worship. But the essential spirit of idolatry was in them,
They “ lifted up their eyes to the idols of the house of Israel” in the expectation
of help from them, thus offering supplication to them and making them an
object of trust. Israel had done this in times past, and was doing so still
(Deut, iv. 19; Ezek. vi. 13). God will have no compromises or ae


OHAP. XVIII HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,
Se ee ee ee eee


in the matter of His worship. He regards the direction of the heart, and we
cannot escape His condemnation by merely avoiding the grosser forms of sin
while we retain the abominable thing itself.


II. In the proper discharge of moral duties. Those which are concerned
with the relations of men to one another. The moral law is the foundation of
the peace and welfare of society—the bond which holds it together. ‘The
following principles underlie the moral duties insisted on here. 1. Zhe principle
of purity. That purity which consists in the proper control of the lusts of the
flesh. “Neither hath defiled his neighbour's wife ” (ver. 6). The marriage re-
lation is to be held sacred. Sins against it tend to destroy the very foundations
of society, make havoc of the peace of families, and are a fruitful source of many
crimes and disorders. Sins of impurity pollute the mind, extinguish the better
instincts of the mind and heart, and tend more than any other to drag a man
down to the level of the brute. This principle of purity is to be observed within
the marriage relation itself, “ Neither hath come near to a menstruous woman ”
(ver. 6). Conjugal intercourse with a wife during menstruation was forbidden
by the law as a defilement of the marriage relation (Lev. xvili. 19; xx. 18).
Marriage was not to be regarded as giving the right to an unbridled licence of
indulgence, but it was to be under the control of wholesome moral laws. 2. The
principle of kindness. The righteous man is to abstain from all oppression, to
spoil none by violence, to withhold the hand from every iniquity done against
another (vers. 7, 8). But there must be also active goodness. “ Hath given his
bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a garment” (ver. 7).
kindness is to be shown towards the unhappy and the unfortunate. We may
claim the right to do what we like with our own, and the law of our nation
may uphold us therein. But there is another law—the law of kindness within
our hearts—that bids us spend our treasure for the good of our fellow men.
We are just as much bound to do good to others as not to rob them, to reach
forth the hand to help them as not to smite them with the fist of
wickedness. God uses the righteous man as the means by which He manifests
His own loving kindness to those who are in distress. And especially is kindness
to be shown towards brethren—those who are of the same commonwealth and
religion as ourselves. The Israelites were forbidden to take usury from their
brethren on a loan of money, or “ increase” on a loan of the necessaries of life.
(Lev. xxv. 36, 37). They were forbidden to exercise their full rights, even
when @ brother through poverty had sold himself into slavery. “Thou shalt
not rule over him with rigour, but shalt fear thy God” (Lev. xxv. 43).
3. The principle of mercy. he proper objects of kindness and pity are the
unhappy and unfortunate: but the objects of mercy are the undeserving.
Mercy is shown towards those who have no claim upon us. “Hath restored _to
the debtor his pledge” (ver. 7). ‘Ihe godly man will not stand upon his rights
to the real injury of another. The debtor has no claim upon us, and is,
therefore, a proper object of our mercy. 4. Zhe principle of justice. “ Hath
executed true judgment between man and man” (ver. 8). In every dispute
the righteous man, when appealed to, will give a judgment which is according
to truth. “No deal truly,” lit. “to do truth,” ¢¢., to act with uprightness and
sincerity (Psa, li, $6; 1 Cor. v. 8; Eph. iv. 21).


UI. In the practical recognition of the truth that all duties have reference te
God. ‘The Bible knows nothing of “independent morality.” “ My statutes,”
“ My judgments” (ver. 9). We are to practise all religious and moral duties
because they are pleasing to God ; they are according to His will. This doctrine
saves religion from being degraded into a mere sentiment. True religion is
devotion to a Living Person. obedience to a Living Will. It also saves morality


1$e


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OHAP. XVI¥








from being regarded as founded solely upon utilitarianism, Weare to love men
and do our duty towards them for God’s sake.


(Ver. 7).


I, Wherein this oppression consists. 1. In outreaching men in buying or
selling. Men must neither sell too dear, nor buy too cheap; which is contrary
to the practice of the world (Lev. xxv. 14). (1.) Zé is oppression when the
buyer will wring a commodity out of his neighbour's or brother's hand, which
he is unwilling to part withal. Ahab will have Naboth’s vineyard (1 Kings
xxii.) (2.) When he makes advantage of the seller’s necessity. And so many
monied men will furnish sellers and needy men with money, upon condition
they may have such wares, such a house, such land, at an easier rate.
Such advantage they made of them who were necessitated to mortgage their
lands, vineyards, and houses for money to buy corn (Neh. v. 3). (3.) When he
disparageth the commodities of the seller (Prov. xx. 14). 2. In withholding
that which is right and due to others (St. James v. 4; St. Luke x. 7;
Lev. xix. 13; Mal. ii. 5). If any withhold the portion of orphans,
legacies given to the poor, the estates and rights of widows, they will
lie under the censure of being oppressors. 3. /n laying too heavy burdens and
tasks upon others. The Egyptians oppressed the Israelites (Ex. 1i.7), Anda
many lay more upon their servants than they can well perform. They must be
up early, fare hard, work hard, and be worn out before their time. And what
is this but oppression in a high degree? Whereas the rule is, “ Masters, give
unto your servants that which is just snd equal; knowing that ye alsu have
a Master in heaven” (Col. iv. 1). 4. In preventing and delaying of justice
and judgment. In this way the petitions and causes of widows, orpbaus and
poor people cannot be heard (Isa. i. 23). ‘The fatherless and widows had no
gifts, no bribes to give them; the rich had, and by that means justice was
perverted, and judgment delayed (Amos vi. 12). And this sin is reckoned
aroongst the mighty ones (Amos v. 12). 5. In imposing upon men's consciences
those things which are doubtful and disputable. When doccrines, worship,
disciplines are imposed upon men’s consciences, which cannot clearly be made
out to them, it is the height of oppression, and the ground-work of persecution.
The Scribes and Pharisees taught for doctrines the commaodments of men (St.
Matt. xv. 9); they laid grievous burdens upon men’s shouiders and hearts (St.
Matt. xxiii. 4). Whatever is done with doubting is of sin (Kom. xiv. 23).


II. The evil of oppressing. 1. J¢ is an unnatural evil. No creatures do
oppress those of their own kind. But men most unnaturally prey upon one
another ; one man is a wolf to another (Hzek. xxii, 27). Lions have spared men
(Dan. vi.) ; ravens fed men (1 Kings xvii.) ; and yet one man seeks to eat up
and devour another. 2. There is little fear of God in the hearts of
those who oppress others. ‘Ye shall not oppress one another; but
thou shalt fear thy God” (Lev. xxv. 17). It is here intimated that,
if they oppress, they do not fear God; if they fear God, they will not
oppress; for “by the fear of the Lord men depart from evil” (Prov.
xvi. 6). The Jews oppressing one another is attributed to their not fearing
God (Neh. v. 9). 3. Jt is against that great and common rule of equity
(St. Matt. vil. 12). St. Jerome calls this sentence of Ghrist ‘‘ the summary of
justice.” 4. It is a sin which greatly provokes God. Dreadiul woes are
denounced against it, and dreadful judgments upon those who are guilty of it
(Micah ii. 12; Hab. ii, 12; Zeph. 11; Jer. xxi. 13; sa. x. 1-3 ; Ex. xxi.
21-24). “ But hath restored to the debtor his pledge,” ete. The Lord ae them


CHAP. XVIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; EZEKIEL,
ee eee en


laws concerning this (Ex. xxii. 26). They might not take the upper millstone,
nor a widow’s garment, for pledges; and what they did take they were faithtully
and speedily to return. Job complains of the wicked that they took the widow's
ox for a pledge, and the garments of the poor (Job. xxiv. 3, 9). “ Hath spoiled
none by violence.” Wicked men are said to “drink the wine of violence.
“hey sleep not except they cause some to fall” (Prov. iv. 16, 17). “He hath
iven his bread to the hungry, hath covered the naked with a garment.” This.
is the ewercise of faith (Eccles. xi. 1). It makes a man to be of good report


(Psa. cxii. 9).


(St. James i. 27).
Job xxix. 13; 2 Tim. i, 16).
lending to the Lord (Prov. xix. 17).
(Acts x.; Heb. xiii. 16).—Greenhill,


It is the special distinction of a good man (Psa. cxii. 1, 9).
feeding of Christ (St. Matt. xxv. 35, 40).
It procures many a prayer and blessing (2 Cor. ix. 10;
It makes like unto God (St. Luke vi. 36).


t is
It is an honour to religion


It is
It is pleasing and acceptable to God


(Vers. 10-20).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Two cases
are here supposed: (1). That of a
righteous father who begets an un-
righteous son. (2). That of a righteous
son who refuses to copy the evil
example of his father. And the
prophet affirms that, in the former
case, the righteousness of the father
will not avail to save the son; and in
the latter, that the son shall not suffer
for the unrighteousness of his father.
One shall not die for the iniquity of
the other. Each man shall save his
own soul by his righteousness.


Vers, 10-13. . “ We have here the
case of an impious son, who, instead
of following the good example of his
pious parent, adopts a course directly
the reverse, and unscrupulously in-
dulges in crimes condemned by the
law. Upon him an unmitigated sen-
tence is pronounced, In the language
of the Orientals, the blood which a
murderer has shed is said to be upon


him, till it be avenged by his punish-
ment.”—( Henderson).


Vers, 14-18. “ This case is likewise
that of a son, not, like the former, ofa
righteous man, but of the unrighteous
person whose character has just been
depicted. This son is supposed to be
shocked at the sight of his father’s
depravity, and to be influenced, by a
due regard to the consequences, to
avoid the sins which his parent had
committed. It is expressly declared
that he should not be punished for
the crimes of his father, but that the
father only, being the guilty party,
should suffer.” —( Henderson).


Ver. 17. “Hath taken off His hand
from the poor.” This is to be under-
stood in a good sense—to turn back
the hand, 2.e., from oppressing the poor.
He withdraws the hand that was
tempted to exact the full legal claim.


Taz Law or tHE UNRIGHTEOUS AND OF THE RicuTEous Son (vers. 10-20).


The two cases here supposed show that—


I. The best examples of righteousness may fail of their prover effects. The


righteous father may have an unrighteous son.


The life of such a father must


have a native power and influence for good. He would study to bring up his
son in the way of righteousness. Yet his exaniple and instruction may altogether
fail. he religious histories of the families of good men afford many a.sad
illustration of the truth that grace does not run in the blood. The power of
evil i stronger than the best influences on the side of good.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZERIEL, OHAP. XVII.
Ee





TI. An evil example may be effectual as a warning. Where a good example
fails, an evil example may succeed in turning another to righteousness, But for
this salutary effect it is necessary—1. That the real evil of the example may
be recognised. “A son that seeth all his father’s sins which he hath done”
(ver. 14) sees them in their vile nature, in their evil consequences, and as sins
against God. ‘hen such evil examples become like a beacon to the voyager.
They act as a warning. The evil of sin must be seen as such in order to be
dreaded and avoided. It is also necessary—2. That the sight of evil examples
should produce serious thought. “ Aud considereth and doeth not such like ”
(ver. 14) In most cases, evil examples act like a contagion. But if we seriously
consider, they reveal to us the sad effects of sin, and we turn our feet to God’s
testimonies. We learn not to do such like things, Thus the sin of another
may instruct us in righteousness,


{II That righteousness is a matter of personal responsibility. The righteous
son shall not be punished for the unrighteousness of his father, nor the righteous
father for the unrighteousness of his son (ver. 20). Righteousness is not like
property, family name or title, the secure and necessary heritage of children. It
1s a matter between the individual soul and God. The exceptions to this law of
God’s righteous dealing are only apparent. Godly men share in the general
calamities sent upon nations, children suffer many evils from the iniquity of
their fathers ; but none of these are on that account deprived of God’s favour.
These judgments in the case of the righteous act as a discipline of piety. Such
afflictions are turned into blessings.


(Ver. 14).


I, The nature of consideration. 1. Jt is an exercise of the understanding,
mind, and heart. 'These are at work in consideration (Psa. cxix. 59). ‘This is
called communing with a man’s own heart (Psa. Ixxvii. 6). 2. Serious. It is
not a‘slight general thinking of a thing, but a serious, settled minding of a
thing ; it notes the sinking down of a thing into our minds, “I considered in
my heart” (Eccl. ix. 1); Hebrew is, I set it to my heart. Consideration is as
setting the heart to a thing, or upon a thing, as a bee sets upon a flower, and
sets her strength to it to draw out the sweet in it. 3. Jt is about things to be
done, or not to be done. Contemplation looks upon things as the eye upon the
object. Judgment discerns the things whether good or bad, right or wrong, and
there leaves them, having pronounced them so. Meditation is a further
inquisition into truth, and comes up nearest to consideration which is in order
to doing or not doing. Men intend this and that, and oft fall upon things
rashly to their prejudice, because they consider not ; now consideration reflects
upon things intended. ‘I'he two sons in the Gospel, one said, I will go, and
went not ; the other said, I will not go,and went. ‘The one’s purpose was to go,
the other’s not to go; but this last, considering of his sinful purpose, intention,
and resolution, repented, and went (St. Matt. xxi.) It is taken up about doing,
or not doing (Prov. xxiii. 1, 2; 1 Sam. xxv. 17; Judg. xviii. 14). David
considered his ways, and, not finding them good, he ceased from walking any
longer in them ; and seeing God’s ways the only good ways, he turned about,
stepped into, and walked in them.


II. Wherein the strength of it lieth. 1. Im searching out the causes, effects,
rising, progress, continuance, and issue of a thing. 2. In comparing things
together and so drawing up that which may be most useful. When all things
are laid together, weighed, scanned over again and again, a man takes that
which is most necessary, seasonablo. suitable, and useful. 3. Jn pone to and


GHAP. XVII © HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.











assisting the soul in acting. When consideration hath drawn up what is to be
done, or not to be done, then it puts upon the conscience as sinful, if not
followed, and directs in the execution. Consideration lays an Injunction upon
men’s wills and consciences to be doing. Did men in these days wisely consider
the Lord’s doings, they would fear, and declare the work of the Lord.


III. The excellency of it. 1. [¢ ¢s that which God Himself doth (Prov. xxiv. 12).
The Lord considers, ponders, and weighs things, according to the language of
Scripture (Ex. xxxiii. 13; Prov. v. 21; Deut. xxxii. 26, 27; Hos. xi. 8, 9).
2. lt differeth a man from brutes. 'Vhey are led by sense, and cannot dis-
tinguish whether an action ought to be done or not. This is man’s privilege
and power. But some are guided only by their senses. ‘“ Every man is brutish
in his knowledge” (Jer. x. 14). Men do not reflect upon their actions and
consider them ; if they did, they would not be so sensual, so sinful (Isa. i. 3).
8. It enables the understanding, completes a man, makes him wise and
prudential (Prov. xvii. 27). He who considers what advantage may be made of
words, and therefore is sparing in speaking, shows the more understanding and
excellency of spirit. Consideration looks inward, looks over the same thing
again and again. We say, second thoughts are best, which implies that con-
sideration ripens and perfects the man and his actions. 4. Jt puts life into
those principles and talents God hath given a man, Like a drum in an army,
that when it beats all stir and march; like a spring in a watch, when that goes
all the wheels go. Did men consider what graces and gifts God hath given
them, they would not let them lie still and fallow, but improve them. Con-
sideration will set other’s graces on work, and much more a man’s own
(Heb. x. 24).—(Greenhiil.)


(Vers. 21-26.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—The ways
of life and death are here for all set
forth. A man’s own sins even, provided
they are forsaken, will not exclude him
from salvation. “The proof that every
one must bear his sin did not contain
an exhaustive reply to the question—
in what relation the righteousness of
God stood to the sin of man? For the
cases supposed in vers. 5-20 took for
granted that there was a constant
persistence in the course once taken,
and overlooked the instances, which
are by no means rare, when a man’s
course of life is entirely changed. It
still remained, therefore, to take notice
of such cases as these, and they are
handled in vers. 21-26. The ungodly
man who repents and turns, shall live ;
and the righteous man, who turns to
the way of sin, shall die.”—/ Keil, )


Ver. 21. “But if the wicked will
turn.” ‘This was the real point of the
controversy. God deals with each man
as one gene is capable of renouncing


evil and choosing good, #.¢., He deals
with each individual as a moral being.


Ver. 22. ‘‘They shall not be men-
tioned unto Him.” hey shall not be
remembered against him (Jer. xxxi. 34),
The guilt is blotted out of remem-
brance, though for the purposes of a
salutary discipline the chastisements
of God may be allowed to continue
(Heb. xii, 10; 2 Sam. xii, 13, 14),
“In his righteousness that he hath
done he shall live.” Not, for his
righteousness, as if that is to be re-
garded as the procuring cause of his
acceptance ; but én it, righteousness
being regarded as the fruit of his true
conversion (Ezek, xx. 11).


Ver. 23. “Have I any pleasure at
all that the wicked should die?”
God had declared even that concern-
ing the sacrificial victims He “had
no pleasure in them.” (Psa. xl, 6).
Hé had no absolute and final pleasure
in them, for they were ordained only


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


CHAP, XVItI.


SST ese-acaeaeeme ee ra


to shadow forth the one sacrifice for
sin. ‘Ihe providing of that sacrifice
would be the highest proof that God
willed not the death of the sinner.
“The motive for the pardon of the re-
penting sinner is here given, in the
declaration that God has no pleasure
in the death of the wicked man, but
desires his conversion, that he may
live. God is therefore not only just,
but merciful and gracious, and punishes
none with death but those who either
will not desist from evil, or will not
persevere in the way of His command-
ments. Consequently the complaint,
that the way of the Lord, #.¢., His con-
duct toward men, is not weighed, #.¢.,
is not just and right, is altogether
unfounded, and recoils upon those
who make it. It is not God’s ways,
but the sinner’s that are wrong.”—
(Keil),


Ver, 24. “In his trespass.” Refer-


ring to his present condition, which
determines his real state. He “hath
trespassed,” and is therefore still “in
his trespass.”


Ver. 25. “Yet ye say, the way of
the Lord is not equal.” ‘I'hey affirmed
that God worked by no regular and
uniform law or method, They repeat
the charge in ver, 2, complaining that
some were punished while others were
spared, and hence they regarded the
way of God as marked by caprice and
not the result of a just law of working.
“Your ways.” The prophet is con-
tinually urging his hearers to reflect
and consider their “‘ own ways ” (Ezek.
xvi, 61; xx. 43; xxxvi. 31),


Ver, 26. “ And dieth in them.” Heb.
“Dieth upon them.” They are the
footing upon which he stands when he
is called to appear before God.


HOMILETICS.
Tur Equity or Gop’s GovERNMENT,


The unbelievers still imprudently contended that God’s ways were not
equal, though the contrary had been declared by the mouth of the prophet.
The equity of God’s dealings is re-asserted, and fresh instances and considera-
tions are given by way of proof.


I. The case of the repentant sinner. He is dealt with not on the score of nis
past transgressions, but on the ground of his new obedience. When the sinner
forsakes his way, the mercy of God steps in and accepts his repentance.
1, Repentance, of itself, has no efficacy to procure pardon. Whatever it
might do to set us right in the future, it could not possibly undo the past.
For that we should still have to reckon, 2. Lepentance is accepted through the
mercy of God. God is willing to forget the past and to receive the sinner.
The pardon of sin is a special revelation, for nature teaches no doctrine of
the forgiveness of sins. We transgress her laws and we are punished. We
are not excused on the ground of ignorance. But God in His mercy accepts a
genuine repentance. He will not punish the righteous man for his father’s sins ;
and will not even remember against a man fs own sins, if he repents. ‘‘Scrip-
ture represents forgiveness as the result, not of repentance, but of the death of
Christ, ‘in whom we have redemption through His blood, even the forgiveness
of our sins,’ repentance being essential, not to the efficacy of His death, but to
the appropriation of the benefits secured by it. Even if repentance, however,
could save us, natural religion is unable to produce it. It is, in the evangelical
true meaning of the term, such sorrow for sin as flows from a sense of the love
and reverence due to God, and of the heinousness of sin against Him. The


sorrow of the world is no such feeling. It is, on the contrary, ce fears


OHAP. XVIIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


Dene Ger Aa ec se ae SO can LE REST





and impressions which make it impossible to love God or draw near to Him.”—=
(Angus).


II. The case of the man, once righteous, who abandons his righteous course.
Such a man in his backsliding will not be supported by his early righteousness.
It can have no merit to weigh against his faults, ‘The integrity of the past
cannot save him. Each man will be judged by himself, and in that state in
which he is found.


III. God’s motive in granting pardon to the repentant transgressor. “Have
I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord God, and not
that he should return from his ways, and live?” (ver. 23). It is the pleasure
of God that man should live and not die. God is not only just, but also
merciful and gracious. He punishes none with death but those who will
not abandon their sins, or who will not persevere in the way of His command-
ments.


IV. God only requires from man what is just and reasonable. Itis surely
just to render Him obedience, and to repent of our sin when we have wronged
Him. We ought to be ready to accept what is offered to us through His
mercy. Thus the complaint of these sinners against God was altogether
unfounded, and only recoiled upon their own heads. And it is only just that
repentance should be thorough. he unrighteous man must forsake “all
his sins (ver. 21), making no reservation in favour of “ heart-idols ” (Ez. xiv. 4).
The will must be subdued “if the wicked man will turn from all his sins,” ete.
Thus it is not God’s ways, but the sinner’s, that are wrong, for God shows, in
all His dealings with man, His abhorrence of sin and His love of righteousness,


REPENTANCE NOT EFFICACIOUS,


We do not know what the whole natural or appointed consequences of vice
are; nor in what way they would follow, if not prevented, and therefore can in
no sort say, whether we could do anything which would be sufficient to prevent
them. Our ignorance being thus manifest, let us recollect the analogy of
Nature or Providence. For though this may be but a slight ground to raise a
positive opinion in this matter, yet it is sufficient to answer a mere arbitrary
assertion, without any kind of evidence, urged by way of objection against a
doctrine, the proof of which is not reason, but revelation. Consider then:
people ruin their fortunes by extravagance ; they bring diseases upon themselves
by excess ; they incur the penalties of civil laws; and surely civil government is
natural ; will sorrow for these follies past, and behaving well for the future, alone
and of itself, prevent the natural consequences of them? On the contrary, men’s
natural abilities of helping themselves are often impaired ; or if not, yet they
are forced to be beholden to the assistance of others, upon several accounts,
and in different ways ; assistance which they would have no occasion for, had it
not been for their misconduct ; but which, in the disadvantageous condition
they have reduced themselves to, is absolutely necessary to their recovery, and
retrieving their affairs, Now, since this is our case, considering ourselves
merely as inhabitants of this world, and as having a temporal interest here,
under the natural government of God, which, however, has a great deal moral
in it ; why is it not supposable that this may be our case also; in our more
important capacity, as under His perfect moral government, and having a more
general and future interest depending? If we have misbehaved in this higher
capacity, and rendered ourselves obnoxious to the future punishment which God


has annexed to vice, it is plainly credible that, behaving well for the time te
204


ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHa?. KVIIL





come may be—not useless; God forbid !—but wholly insufficient, alone and
of itself, to prevent that punishment; or to put us in the condition which
we should have been in had we preserved our innocence. And though the
efficacy of repentance itself alone, to prevent what mankind had rendered
themselves obnoxious to, and recover what they had forfeited, is now
insisted upon, in opposition to Christianity ; yet, by the general prevalence
of propitiatory sacrifices over the heathen world, this notion of repentance
alone being sufficient to expiate guilt, appears to be contrary to the general
sense of mankind. The great doctrines of a future state, the danger of a
course of wickedress, and the efficacy of repentance, are not only confirmed
in the Gospel, but are taught—especially the last is—with a degree of light
to which that of nature is but darkness.—Butler’s Analogy.


(Ver. 25.)


Some may fancy, from some expressions used in this chapter, that the
prophet is laying down a new law of God’s dealings, as though the Almighty
had been acting up to that time upon a certain principle, and now, hence-
forward, He were about to act upon a new and different principle. It is easy
to put the subject in such a light that all difficulty will vanish. This is one
end [ have in view. But I have the further end of drawing from the subject
some useful thoughts with respect to God’s government in the world in these
our days, and our own duties as creatures living under a government which at
present we cannot wholly understand. The Jews complained of the law under
which they lived as unjust; because it spoke of the sins of the father being
visited upon the children: they used this proverb, “ that the fathers have eaten
sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on edge.” The punishment which:
ought to have fallen upon the father fell upon his guiltless children. They
complained that God’s ways were not equal, not fair, not righteous. It was not
as a mere piece of philosophical speculation that they held this language.
There was a practical consequence belonging to the spread of the proverb
of the sour grapes, which was of the highest importance. It was not a
few unbelieving, acute, clever students of the law, who had detected this
injustice in it. Had it been so, probably the prophet Ezekiel would not
have made the discovery the subject of a general address; no, the thing had
passed into a proverb, it was in the mouth of the people at large, and the
practical consequence was that it held back the people from thinking of their
sins which had brought them into trouble; and from repenting of those sins,
Instead of this they would look upon themselves as victims of an unjust law—
as persecuted rather than punished. The good effect of any punishment
depends very much upon the criminal himself feeling and admitting that he is
punished justly. Let a man feel this, and he may be led to sorrow and good
resolutions for the time to come. But if he fancies that the law is in fault
and not himself, that he is an injured man—the victim of cruel legislation—
then punishment may make him sullen and obstinate, but it can never make
him sorry for his fault. This was just the case with the Jews, They were
punished for not keeping God’s law. Ezekiel would have them see in their
punishment the result of their own sins ; would endeavour to lead them to that
“Godly sorrow” which works repentance: but the devil, and those amongst
men who did the devil’s work, had a different version of the history. According
to them, the law which the priests and prophets would fasten upon them was
an unjust law, one which did not deserve their obedience. ‘They would argue
that from its own principles the people were not in need of repentance, for the
law spoke of children suffering for their father’s sins, and who could say but

205


CHAP. XVIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTAKY: EZEKIEL.
SRD Ace a a eae cs ws croc ed OE


that this very chastisement might be the punishment of sins committed long
ago? Who could say but that their teeth were being set on edge, because
their fathers had eaten sour grapes many years before ?

It is clear that the proverb had a very direct bearing upon the conduct of
the people. If the proverb generally found favour in their eyes, then it was of
no use that Ezekiel should talk of sin and its punishment, and the need of
repentance. ‘Therefore Ezekiel protested against the proverb as wicked and
profane ; and he lays down the great truth which should destroy the effect of
the lying proverb, that of the necessary punishment of sin: “the soul that
sinneth it shall die.” That was the truth which God had told man when He
first made him, and the truth of all religion in all times.

Let us see what ground the Jews had to stand upon their proverb. It is
evident that there was something which gave it colour and likelihood. Satan,
as we know, can quote Scripture for his purpose, and Satan might have made a
very good Scriptural defence of this proverb of the sour grapes. “I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate Me, and shew mercy
unto thousands in them that love Me and keep My commandments.”
Now, the Jews might say that their proverb only expressed as much as
this passage. And it is to be observed, that the passage sets forth
the mercy of God, because the three or four generations over which His curse
extends are contrasted with the thousands to which He shews His love. The
Jews might answer that still it did contain the principle of children suffering
for sins which they had not committed, that this was unjust, and that it was no
qualification of the injustice to say that in a vast number of instances children
received rewards for good deeds which not they but their fathers had done.
Now, how is this to be met? It is quite clear that the commandment does
recognise the principle of the proverb, and that the people were smarting under
it. The punishment which fell upon them was the result of a long course ot
national wickedness and idolatry, not the consequence of sins committed ‘in
their time only. How can we meet the objection and vindicate God’s ways ?

There were two mistakes in the view which the Jews took when they used the
proverb. (1.) They took the expressions of God’s law to mean, not that the character
of sin was such that it sometimes extended beyond the actual doer of it, and
brought grief upon others besides himself, but that it brought grief upon others
instead of himself ; as though when Adam sinned he had not brought death upon
himself and his posterity, but had brought it upon his posterity and not upon
himself. ‘They would have it that the chéldren alone suffered for what their
fathers had done. (2.) The other error was this, that they seemed to
have taken for granted that they were fair judges as to who was punished
and who not. They assumed that the fathers had not suffered for the
sour grapes which they had eaten ; whereas they were manifestly not sufficient
judges as to what amount of punishment had been meted out, or would bea
meted out to different men. ‘lhe apparent prosperity of vice, and the apparent
suffering of goodness and virtue, have always been difficult to understand.
David found the difficulty in his day, and could not overcome it until he went
into the sanctuary of God. Then it was that he was able to take a higher view
of God’s dealings with mankind, and so to understand the end of those men
whose prosperity had so much astonished him. Ezekiel did not meet tha
proverb by telling the Jews that in future things should be ordered differently.
He asserts the justice of God’s ways, but he gives them a new truth to reflect
upon, a \truth not inconsistent with the principle asserted in the Second Com-
mandment, but which must needs be borne in mind to guard against the perver-
sion of that principle. Ezekiel asserts the truth which God spoke to Adam’ in


the sit st his purity—“ In the day that thou eatest thou shalt die!” That


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OBAP, XVII
eee


was the great practical truth upon which every human soul stood before God.
God sends us all into the world with a conscience to tell us what is right and
what is wrong, with certain commands to keep, a certain path to walk in ; and
He says to us all, “do these things that your soul may live.” He may say to
us at the same time, do these things that it may be well with you, and with
your children after you; but whether this be said or not, still the responsibility
for his own actions lies on the head of each man: if he sins, he dies ; aud no
wrath which he may bring upon his children can save him from the consequences
of his own sin. God did not say to Adam, if you disobey you will bring death
upon your children ; He only said—“ In the day that thou sinnest, thou shalt
die.” Yet, though the consequence was not threatened the consequence
came, and Adam’s sin, which was to bring death to himself, brought death to his
poy besides. Ezekiel was not introducing any new principle of government,
e was only asserting a principle as old as the creation. What he wished the
people to believe was this—that although it had been held out as a warnin
against disobedience and an encouragement to obedience, that those who anal
were bringing in a curse which would affect others besides themselves, and that
contrariwise those who were holy and good were bringing a blessing down upon
their children, still this was not supposed to be in opposition to the great law of
every man standing or falling by his own deeds, being “judged by the things done
in the body, whether good or bad.” ‘here followed at once this practical
consequence, that when they found themselves suffering under God’s judgments
they were not to speculate as to what sin it was of their fathers which had
brought this grief upon them, but they were to look into their own hearts and
examine their own conduct. Ezekiel would say to them, “Do not look
to your fathers, but look to yourselves: you say that they sinned, and you are
suffering for it; well, but think whether you do not deserve to suffer? Are
you really better than your fathers? Have you no sins to repent of, no idolatry
to forsake, no ungodliness to make you ashamed?” “Indeed,” he might go on
to say, “is not this itself a sufficient proof of the wicked state of your hearts,
that you venture to attribute unrighteousness to God? You say that the
ways of the Lord are not equal, but may it not be that His ways seem unequal
just because your own are not equal themselves? The ways of God seem to
you dark and confused, but may not the defect be in your own eyes?” He
would assure them that, whatever unworthy thoughts Satan might put in their
minds, yet certainly God loved them and had no pleasure in their death.
“Make you a new heart, and a new spirit: for why will ye die, O house of
Israel? For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord
God, wherefore turn yourselves and live ye.” These words would cut through all
the speculative doubts of God’s justice which the devil had raised ; they would
put religion upon the true practical ground of trusting in God’s love, and
therefore obeying His commands; and they would encourage men to walk in
the narrow path of duty, leaving all difficulties to be solved by those wise words
of Abraham, “Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right ?” :
There is something repugnant to our idea of justice in the law that the sins
of the fathers should be visited upon the children, But this principle was not
all peculiar to the Jewish law. It is manifestly the principle upon which the
world is governed. We see numberless instances in which, as a matter of fact,
the son does suffer for what the father has done amiss. We say, “ Of course
it is so, it cannot be otherwise.” Yes; but why of course? Why must it be
so? Why cannot it be otherwise? And how comes it that we are linked
together in such a mysterious manner, that we cannot help being affected by
those over whom we have no control? Do you not see that this is God’s doing ?
We may call it natural, or necessary, but after all it is the Lord’s doing, however
wonderful it may be in our eyes. And yet, when we see this a God’s


OHAP, XVIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


en nnn nn ee UE EE nnIn Ena NEnUE EN RSEEE EEE REE nent!


government we see nothing to surprise us, because we cannot imagine it other-
wise. And we do not find that persons have any difficulty in practice because
they suffer for their parent’s faults. No one thinks it necessary to be idle and
to starve, because his father was idle before him. No one doubts but that he
has his own work to do, his own food to seek, his own soul to save, and that if
his father forgot his duty, that is the very best warning to him not to do
the like. And what follows? why this: that the same way of looking upon our
condition here is to be applied in all cases. God did not put us here to explain
difficulties, but to work out our salvation. God does not require us to shew how
all His doings are the best and wisest that could be, but He requires us to do
His will. Of all things that we have to learn, this is one of the chief and
greatest, that our life here is to be a scene of active work. We are encompassed
with mystery, above, below, and around us, and there is much in this world
which our philosophy can never reach. God’s ways are too deep to fathom, too
large to measure. And who does not conclude that in the meanwhile he has
great positive duties to fulfil, which no speculative difficulties can prevent him
from fulfilling? “The soul that sinneth it shall die,” though it was proved by
the fall of Adam, was still more strikingly proved by the death of the spotless
Lamb of God, the great offering for sin; and the truth that God wills not the
death of a sinner was then proved in the most wonderful manner when God
spared not His only Son that He might be able to pardon those who repent of
their sins. ‘The Old Testament denunciation, “the wages of sin is death,” has
this New Testament addition made to it, “‘but the gift of God is eternal life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.” —Goodwin’s “ Parish Sermons.”


(Vers. 27-32.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 29.
“Are not your waysunequal?” “They
asserted (ver. 25) that the ways of
God were not right—properly, not
weighed in the balance of righteousness
(Job. xxi. 6)—but regulated by caprice.
This assertion proceeded from defective
consciousness of sin, that could find
no other key to suffering than this,
that it was decreed unrighteously, on
account of the sins of the fathers.
The prophet points to this, that the
guilt lies on their side. If they only
sincerely return to God, they will no
more have cause to complain of Him.”
—Hengstenberg.


Ver. 30. “Therefore I will judge
you.” “Therefore, because my way,
and not yours, is right, I will judge
you, every one according to his way.
Repent, therefore, if ye would escape
from death and destruction.”— Keil.


Ver. 31. “ Make you a new heart
and a new spirit.” “ A man cannot,
indeed, create either of these by his
own power ; God alone can give them
(Ezek. xi. 19). But a man can and
should come to God to receive them :
in other words, he can turn to God,
aud let both heart and spirit be
renewed by the spirit of God.”—Keil


HOMILETICS,


Aw Earnest Catt to REPENTANCE (vers. 27-32),


The prophet would not content himself merely with vindicating the ways of


God, and thus silencing his adversaries,
save them. Hence he renews the call to


by several considerations,
208


His design was not to refute, but to
repentance, and strengthens that call


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP. XVIII.





I. A genuine repentance will be accepted. When a man considers and
turns from his evil ways, and practises righteousness, God promises him life
(ver. 27). But—1. The repentance must be complete. Mere outward reforma-
tion will not suffice. There must be no retaining of a few cherished sins. “ All
your transgressions” (ver, 3). 2. Lepentance must have special regard to their
chief sins. hey are to ‘‘ cast away” all their transgressions. This expression
is used because their chief sin was the worship of idols. When the chief sin
is conquered, the victory over the rest is easy.


II. God’s judgment against impenitent sinners is sure. God will not
change, and therefore man must, if he would escape destruction. It is men’s
ways that are unequal. The prophet cuts short the controversy with a “ there-
fore.” For the rule of God is invariable, and, therefore, they must decide
whether it shall operate for, or against them. The sinner who persists in his
impenitence is sure to be brought to ruin (ver. 30).


III. God would supply them with the necessary strength for the life of
righteousness. ‘Make you a new heart and a new spirit” (ver. 31). Such a
command to change themselves into a new nature, coming, as it does, from God,
carries the gift of a new power. For God does not give to man impossible
commands. There is something still for us to do, but the provisions and
strength for our duty are supplied to us. The new man is “created after God’s
likeness,” but believers are commanded to “ put it on” (Eph. iv. 24). When
Jesus called on the paralytic man to “‘ arise and walk ;” and said to the deaf
man, “ Be thou opened,” with the command He gave the power to perform it.


IV. God’s will and purpose are on the side of the repentant sinner. (God is
not a mere judge or monarch whose only care is to see that the law is out-
wardly obeyed, and that transgressors are punished. He is a loving Father,
who mourns over the transgressions of His children and longs for their return
to the privileges of their true home. He has no pleasure in their death. The
sinner must charge himself with his own ruin. Surely the voice of the tenderest
compasssion is in the question, “ For why will ye die, O house of Israel ?”


(Ver. 31).


If anyone feels—I am fallen very low in the world—here all has been so
much against me—my parents were the ruin of me—let him remember this one
word of Ezekiel, “Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die?
saith the Lord God : and not that he should return from his ways and live?”
Let him turn from his father’s evil ways, and do that which is lawful and right,
and then he can say with the Prophet, in answer to all the strokes of fortune
and the miseries of circumstance, “ Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when
I fall I shall arise.” Provided he will remember that God requires of all men
something, which is. to be as good as they can be; then he may remember also
that our Lord Himself says, “‘ Unto to whomsoever much is given, of him shall
much be required.” God’s ways are not unequal. He has one equal, fair, and
just rule for every human being; and that is perfect understanding, perfect
sympathy, perfect goodwill, and therefore perfect Justice and perfect love. And
if any one answers in his heart—these are good words, and all very well, but
they come too late. Iam too far gone. I ate the sour grapes in my youth,
and my teeth must be set on edge for ever and ever. I have been a
bad man, or I have been a foolish woman too many years to mend
now. I am down, and down I must be. I have made my bed, and I
must lie on it, and die on it, too, Whoever you are who says pea unsay

*)


CHAP. XVIIL HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,
RN a NU Ie I rE a leet





it again, for it is not true. Ezekiel tells you that it is not true, and one
greater than Ezekiel—Jesus Christ, your Saviour, your Lord, your God, tells
you that it is not true. For what happens, by God's eternal and unchangeable
laws of retribution, to a whole nation, or a whole family, may happen to you
—to each individual man. They fall by sin; they rise again by repentance
and amendment. They may rise punished by their sins, and punished for a
long time, heavily weighted by the consequences of their own folly,
and heavily weighted for a long time. But they rise—they enter
into their own new life weak and wounded from their own fault.
But they enter in. And from that day things begin to mend—the weather
begins to clear, the soil begins to yield again—punishment gradually
ceases when it has done its work, the weight lightens, the wounds heal, the
weakness strengthens, and by God’s grace within them, and by God’s providence
outside them, they are made men of again, and saved. So you will surely find
it in the experience of life. No doubt, in general, in most cases, “the child is
father of the man” for good and evil. A pious and virtuous youth helps, by
sure laws of God, towards a pious and virtuous old age. And on the other
hand, an ungodly and profligate youth leads, by the same laws, toward
an ungodly and profitable old age. ‘That is the law. But there is
another law which may stop that law—just as the stone falls to the
ground by the natural law of weight; and yet you may stop that law
by using the law of bodily strength, and holding it up im your hand. And
what is the gracious law, which will save you from the terrible law which will
make you go on from worse? It is this—‘‘ When the wicked man turnet!i away
from his wickedness that he hath committed, and doeth that which is lawful and
right, he shall save his soul alive.” It is not said that his soul shall come in a
moment to perfect health and strength. No, There are old, bad habits to be
got rid of, old ties to be broken, old debts (often worse debts than any money
debts) to be paid. But he shall save his soul alive. His soul shall not die of
its disease. It shall be saved. It shall come to life, and gradually mend and
be cured, and grow from strength to strength, ay a sick man mends day-by-day,
after a deadly illness—slowly it may be, but surely: for how can you
fail of being cured if your physician is none other than Jesus Christ
your Lord and your God. If you will but recollect that last word, you
will never despair. How dare any man say—Bad I am, and bad I
must remain—while the God who made heaven and earth offers to make you
good? Who dare say, I cannot amend, when God Himself offers to amend
you? Who dare say, I have no strength to amend, when God offers to give
you strength, strength of His strength, and life of His life, even His Holy
Spirit? Who dare say, God has given me up; He has a grudge against me
which He will not lay by, an anger against me which cannot be appeased, a
score against me which will never be wiped out of His book? Oh foolish and
faint-hearted soul, Look, look at Christ hanging on His cross, and see there
what God’s grudge, God’s anger, God’s score of your sins is like. Love, love
unspeakable, and nothing else. ‘'o wash out your sins, He spared not His only-
begotten Son, but freely gave Him for you, to show you that God, so far
from hating you, has loved you; that so far from being your enemy, He
was your father; that so far from willing the death of a sinner, He willed that
you and every sinner should turn from his wickedness and live. Now, even if
you suffer somewhat in this life for your sins, that suffering is not punishment,
but wholesome chastisement ; as when a father chastens the son in whom he
delighteth, Say not—I must be as 1 am—when Christ died that you should
not be as you are. Say not—there is no hope—when Christ died and- rose
again, and reigns for ever, to give hope to you and all mankind, that when the


wicked fe turns away from the wickeduess that he hath committed, and doeth


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.
SSN NSS Ae eee eee LAE ne renee dS


that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive, and all his trans-
gressions shall not be mentioned unto him, but in his righteousness that he hath
done shall he live.—(“All Saint’s Day and other Sermons,” by OC, Kingsley.)


LAMENTATION FOR THE MIsERABLE Fate AWAITING THE PRINCES AND PEOPLE
OF IsraEL (Chap. xix.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Vers. 1-9.
The prophet foresees the capture and
exile of the Princes into Egypt and
Babylon. This judgment to come on
Israel is described under the parable
of lion’s whelps taken in a pit.


Ver.1. “Alamentation.” “A dirge
or elegy : a species of Hebrew poetry
characteristic of the melancholy fate of
those who are the subject of it, and
the doleful feelings to which it gives
utterance. Sometimes, as in that over
Saul and Jonathan, it is exquisitely
tender and pathetic. The royal per-
sonages here referred to, designated
princes of Israel, were in reality those
of the kingdom of Judah. They are
so called because they were the only
legitimate rulers of the Hebrew people.
Those who had reigned over the ten
tribes were, so far as the theocracy is
concerned, merely usurpers.’—(Hen-
derson. )


Ver.2. ‘Thy mother.” The mother
of the people is Jerusalem (Ezek. xxi.
20; Gal. iv. 25). “A lioness.” “The
people appear as a lioness on the
ground of Gen. xlix. 9, to which pas-
sage the couching in particular refers
(comp. Num. xxiii. 24, xxiv. 9; Isa.
xxix. 1), because it was a royal people,
of equal birth with other independent
and powerful nations, as this royal
nature was historically displayed, espe-
cially in the times of David and
Solomon. The highest development
of this lion-nature, the true verifica-
tion of Gen. xlix. 9, 10, first came to
pass in the future, in the appearance
of the Messiah, the Lion of the tribe
of Judah” (Rev. v. 5).—Hengstenberg.
“She lay down among lions.” ‘These
lions are the other kingdoms of the
world, the Gentile nations. Jerusalem
—the people of Israel—-lay down among


them when she took her place in the
family of nations (2 Sam. vii. 9). “ She
nourished her whelps among young
lions.” ‘The whelps of the mother
are the sons of the King of Israel. The
bringing up of these among lions points
to the fact that the kingdom of Israel
was of equal birth with the mighty
kingdoms of the heathen world.”—
(Hengstenberg).


Ver. 3. “It learned to catch the
prey; it devoured men,” “The
ignoble side of the lion-nature is here
brought to view. ‘The distance, how-
ever, is not very great: there is a
close connection between the two sides.
By the constitution of human nature,
arrogance is inseparably connected with
high rank, and therewith a rude bar-
barity towards all who stand in the
way of self-will, He only who walks
with God can escape this natural con-
sequence ; and the walk of faith is not
the attainment of every man. It
should, however, be the attainment of
every man among the people of God ;
and where it fails, and the corrupt
nature unfolds itself without resistance,
there the vengeance of God takes
effect. Jehoahaz proved to be a bar-
barous tyrant toward his own subjects;
whereas, according to its constitution,
the kingdom of Israel should exhibit
a heroic power against the enemies of
the people of God, For this reason
he was punished.” (Hengstenberg).
“ The thought is the following :—Why
has Israel put itself upon a level with
the heathen nations, and adopted the
rapacious and tyrannical nature of the
powers of the world? ‘The question
involves the reproof that Israel has
struck out a course opposed to its
divine calling, and will now have to
taste the bitter fruits of this assump-
tion of heathen ways,’—-(Keii).

211


OBAP. XIX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


a pe Ie ASTI SO I ee te I es pO eR OE NE EI TEE ene


Ver. 4. ‘‘ And they brought him
with chains unto the land of Egypt.”
The Heb. word means properly hooks,
or rings, which were fastened in the
noses of wild beasts, to which a chain
or cord was attached in order to drag
them about (Ezek. xxix. 4). 'I'his
describes the fate of Jehoahaz, which
is related in 2 Kings xxiii. 31, ete.
The fetters which were fastened upon
him correspond to the ring by which
wild beasts were led about against their
will (2 Kings xix. 28),


Ver. 5. “Now when she saw that
she had waited, and her hope was lost.”
“ While circumstances seemed to hold
out some promise of the restoration of
Jehoahaz, the Jewish people cherished
some hope, but having been disap-
pointed, their hope at last expired.”—
(Henderson). ‘‘Then she took another
of her whelps, and made him a young
lion.” This was Jehoiachin (2 Kings
xxiv. 8, etc.


Ver. 6. ‘And he went up and down
among the lions.” Jehoiachin affected
great magnificence among the kings of
the earth. He was ambitious to be
numbered among the great lions of
the nations (Jer. xxii. 14-15). “And
learned to catch the prey, and de-
voured men.” Jehoiachin, to gratify
his ambition was guilty of oppression
and bloodshed (Jer. xxii. 13-17).


Ver. 7. ‘‘And he knew their deso-
late palaces.” Some adopt the reading,
“and he knew his widows and laid


waste their cities.” “The knowing
denotes the practising of brutalities.
His, that is, the king’s widows, are
the widows whom he, as king, was
bound to protect. His widows are
at the same time their, the people’s,
widows, the wretched and suffering.
The subject is the king as a lion,
as a hard and cruel man. There is
an abridged comparison here: he acts
towards the wretched, whom he was
called on to protect, as one who
injures a widow covfided to his pro-
tection. The fulness of the land is
that which lives and moves in it.
The lion roars when he is about to
rend ; and this rending is to be added
to the roar, as only thus the effect
ascribed to the roar is explained.”
(Hengstenberg). “As in Isa, xiii. 22,
the word in question is used poetically
of widowed palaces, ze, forsaken of
their inhabitants, so here ironically.”
(Lange).


Ver. 8. “The provinces.” “The
provincesare the surrounding countries,
as parts of the Chaldean empire ; comp.
2 Kings xxiv. 2, according to which
the Syrians, Ammonites, and Moabites
were summoned against Jehoiakim, the
fatherof Jehoiachin.”—( Hengstenberg).


Ver. 9. “Brought him to the king
of Babylon.” Jehoiachin was carried
captive to Babylon, where, though a
prisoner, he was treated with kindness
by LEvil-Merodach (2 Kings xxv.
27-30).


HOMILETICS,


LAMENTATION OVER IsRAEL’s FALLEN Royatry,


This lamentation is in the poetical form. Poetry is the natural companion
of man’s spirit through all the heights and depths of life and feeling. The
greatest sorrows and joys must find their truest and highest expression in
poetry. Hence the Book of Psalms retains its place as the hand-book of


devotion for the Church of God.


I. Israel’s kings had a noble origin (Gen. xlix., 9.) Their mother was


Jerusalem—the city of God,


“She lay down amongst the lions,” she took her


place among the family of nations. In King David, God made of Israel a great


212


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP, XIX.
a


name, like unto the name of the great men that are in the earth (2 Sam. vii. 9).
Had the chosen nation continued faithful they would have remained in peace
and prosperity. ‘I'he greatness of the eminence to which they had been raised
by the providence of God, gives a depth of sadness to this lamentation now
made over them.


II, Israel’s kings were corrupted by evil examples. The society of the
great of the earth corrupted them in religion and morals (vers, 6,7). They
learned the worst vices of kings. Monarchs have special temptations arising
from their position, ‘hey have opportunity to inflict the greatest wrongs upon
mankind ; such as tyranny, oppression, ete. They learn to “prey” upon men,
yea, to “devour” them. Men are “devoured” when they are bereft of liberty
and of life by tyrants.


III. The violence and cunning of Israel’s kings provoked the same in
others. The lion had learned to catch the prey, and to affright the nations by
the noise of his roaring. But he was not victorious. He only stirred up
among the nations the same feelings which raged within himself, and provoked
revenge (ver. 8). The most powerful tyrants must reap the reward of their own
doings. The measure they mete shall surely be measured to them again.


IV. The evil examples of Israel’s kings failed to teach the people wisdom.
When they saw that their hope was gone they elected another king. This new
king walked after the manner of the rest (vers. 5-7). The nation suffered also
under him as they must do under all bad kings. His projects were wicked,
violent, and wild, fitly represented by the roaring of the lion. Nations some-
times become so maddened that they repeat those mistakes which, as they ought
to know, must plunge them in ruin.


V. God has ways to punish the most powerful princes. God uses the passions
and inventions of men to punish those who commit wickedness in high places,
He has chains, pits, hunters, nets, and cages for wicked kings. Often by court
intrigues and by the jealousies of nations He brings them to judgment. His
La upon such may be long delayed, but they are sure to come in the
en

“ Though the mills of God grind slowly, yet they grind exceeding small s
Though with patience He stands waiting, with exactness grinds He all.”


_God will bring tyrants toan end. At last the lions’ roaring on the mountains
dies away (ver. 9). Sooner or later, “‘ the wicked cease from troubling.”


(Ver. 9.)


1. The hopes of the wicked are not long-lived. They are soon dashed and
disappointed. “The hope of unjust men perisheth,’ and that easily and
speedily (Prov. xi. 7). It is likened to a spider’s web or house, a little thing ;
a besom sweeps away the house and inhabitant together, and that in a moment:
such is the hope of wicked men, it is suddenly and easily ruined. There is a
difference between the hopes of the righteous and those of the wicked: “ The
hope of the righteous shall be gladness: but the expectation of the wicked shall
perish ” (Prov. x. 28). 2. Corrupt states are so addicted to their princes that
they will set them up to rule over them, though it be to their own ruin.
Jerusalem, the lioness, sets “up another of her whelps, and makes it a young
lion.” She put this whelp into the royal seat, and stirred him up to do lion-
like, such things as did unto himself and Jerusalem also, She learned
nothing by the loss of her former whelp, but proceeds in her old way, and would
have lions, tyrants to be over her, she, being a lioness, very corrupt and wicked,
couples with that Egyptian lion, Pharoah, and brings forth, advances a lion like
themselves. The men of Shechem made Abimelech king, but he proved not
only a bramble to scratch them, but a fierce and fiery lion to oe them,

21


OHAP. XIX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,
ne


States had better consider whom they set over them, lest they become lions
unto them. 3. Such as men live amongst and converse withal, such they prove.
“He went up and down among the lions, and became a lion. Those lions he
conversed with talked of making themselves great, of having their wills,
of ruling by prerogative, and these things, and such like, were soon
learned by this whelp. When Nebuchadnezzar was among beasts, he
became brutish, and did as they did. [Ill company is the Delilah that
bewitches, defiles, and ruins many in their estates, bodies, and souls. David
knew this, therefore he said, “ Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity”
(Psa. vi. 8); and “I am acompanion of them that fear thee ” (Psa. exix. 63).
4. They who converse with wicked ones do not only become wicked, but many times
they prove eminently wicked. ‘hey exceed their teachers. Jehoiachin, by his
converse with lions, became not only a lion to catch the prey, but such an one
as devoured men, defiled widows, made desolate palaces, laid waste cities,
and the land also. He went beyond other tyrants, he was an inventor
of wickedness, and profited above others in his way, and came to a perfection
of iniquity. It is incident to man’s nature to outstrip one the other, if
not in good, yet especially in evil. 5. Zyranny is hateful unto heathens,
“hen the nations set against him on every side.” Jehoiachin was
such a roaring lion that the heathens would not endure him. Doubtless
the princes of the nations were tyrannous themselves, yet this man exceeded so
in his tyrannical practices that he incurred the displeasure and hatred of them
all, ‘Tyrants cease to be men, and become beasts; therefore here are called
lions, and are ranked among wild savage creatures; which none can endure.
When there are wild beasts in a land, all are against them, and often there is
a mutual agreement and concurrence to destroy them. ‘he nations agreed to
hunt and take this lion. 6. God hath times, means, ways to catch lions, to
deal with covetous and cruel men. When Jehoiachin made desolate the
palaces, and wasted the cities and the land; then the Lord stirred up the
nations. They were His net, His pit, His instruments to take this lion
withal. God wants not means to take them; He hath nations at command,
and can call them forth and set them to hunt lions when he pleases (Jer 1.

7. Tyrannical princes are not of long continuance. They are usually short-
lived ; either they lose their power, or their power and lives both. Jehoiachin
roared and played the lion eleven years, and then he was taken in the pit of the
nations and lost his power. So Jehoahaz before him. He tyrannized
months, and then was taken. When potentates oppress and tyrannize, their ruin
is at hand. God hath said, “ Bloody men shall not live out half their days”
(Psa, lv, 23). And He makes it good. ‘“ He cuts off the spirit of princes, and
is terrible to the kings of the earth” (Psa. Ixxvi. 12). 8. God takes away
wicked and tyrannical princes that it may be well with His people, that Zion
may have the benefit of it. Jehoiachin was taken, chained, carried to Babylon,
and put in strongholds, and why ?—“ that his voice should be heard no more
upon the mountains of Israel; ” that the people of God might not be terrrified
with his roarings, nor torn with his teeth, but might enjoy freedom and safety.
God, for the good of His people, destroys or drives out the wild beasts. ‘ No
lion shall be there” (Isa. xxxv. 9).—(Greenhill).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Vers,
10-14. ‘he prophet laments for the
destruction of the kingdom, and ban-
ishment of the people, under the
parable of a wasted vine.


Ver. 10. “Like a vine in thy blood.”
714


The royal vine of Judah was torn up
when Jehoiachin was carried captive
to Babylon. ‘hat vine was planted
afresh in the person of Zedekiah, so
that the life of the whole plant de-
pended upon him. The very sap of
that royal tree was his blvod. Some


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP. XIX,





render, “in thy likeness ;” but this is
forced, and gives no suitable meaning.


Ver. 11, “Strong rods.” “These
represent princes of the royal house,
In her prosperous state, the Jewish
kingdom, so far from resembling one of
those vines which creep upon the
ground, was comparable to one trained
up by the side of a wall, or supported
by a tree. Some of these are carried
to a great height, such as that men-
tioned by Schulz, the stem of which
was a foot and a-half in diameter, and
about thirty feet high, while its
branches formed a tent of upwards
of fifty feet square.”—( Henderson.)
“ Thick branches.” The branches of
forest trees. The once lowly vine now
appears towering above oaks and cedars,
yet is still without fruit (Ezek. xv. 6).


Ver. 12, “* But she was plucked up
in fury, she was cast down to the
ground.” “ Without the intervention
of anything further, there follows its
splendid growth, like a lightning flash
from the clear heavens, the complete
overthrow of the vine, t.¢. of Jerusalem
—Judah, the birth-place of kings, and
therewith the Davidic kingdom. While
vers. 2-9 bewailed the existing kings,
both as bearers of the Davidic royalty,
and at the same time as suggestive, by
their fate, to the actual king; now
Zedekiah, as he with whom the Davidic
kingdom is subverted, becomes tlie sub-
ject of the lament, just as if everything


had already happened.”—( Lange).


Ver. 13. ‘‘ And now she is planted
in the wilderness.” Figuratively de~
scribes the captivity, when David’s
stock was transplanted into the “ wilder-
ness’ of Babylonia (Ezek. xx. 35).


Ver. 14. “‘And fire is gone out of
a rod of her branches, which hath
devoured her fruit.” Zedekiah was
the vain-glorious rod of this vine.
The very rod itself supplied the fire
which burned up the whole tree. “It
was his revolt from Nebuchadnezzar
which caused that monarch to march
his army into Judea, take Jerusalem,
and carry the Jews captive to Babylon.
Thus an end was put to the vine and
its brai.ches—a consummation which
every Jewish patriot must deeply have
bewailed.”—(//enderson.) “This is
for a lamentation, and shall be for a
lamentation.” “The lamentation is
(properly was, with prophetic anticipa-
tion of the future) for a lamentation :
it is not the fancy of a gloomy seer,
but. the prediction of a lamentation,
which will actually flow in a thousand
voices from the mouth of the people.
What Ezekiel here pronounces, the
people will too soon be compelled to
repeat after him. His lamentation is,
as it were, the sowing, out of which a
rich harvest of lamentation grows.
At present the sky is full of joyous
music to the people ; but very soon it
will be said: “ My harp is turned to
mourning, and my flute to the voice of
weeping. —(Hengstenberg.)


HOMILETICS.


LAMENTATION FOR THE Kinqpom oF JUDAH,


Two things concerning the fate of the kingdom of Judah, most of all, sorety


touched the prophet’s mind and heart.


I. It was fallen from a high estate. :
She was the planting of the Lord. Her elevation to


blest above all others.


Judah was once a goodly vine, and


the greatest privileges serves sadly to reveal the depth of her fall.


II. It was doomed to destruction.


The destruction was sudden and over-


whelming. For immediately before she was full of happiness and splendour,


great among the nations, and wielding the rod of power.


Their destruction
215


OHAP. XIX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


was brought about by the wrath of God. “She was plucked up in fury”
(ver. 12). When nations cease to acknowledge God, He turns the glory and
growth of centuries into a desert. National sins spread like fire, and wrap
whole kingdoms in the flames of destruction. 'I'he end of sin is “lamentation”—
for individuals, for nations. Judah’s kingdom fell, like others before and after
it, because it failed to maintain righteousness. There is only one king who
ean deliver the nations and reign over them for everand ever. ‘The Messianic
hope was bound up with the Davidic kingdom, whose subversion is here
illustrated, and its fulfilment is shown in this, that He who appeared in the
world, declared, not without reference to this chapter, ‘I am the true vine’”
(Lange).


(Vers. 10, 11.)


1. States and kingdoms, ruined in times of war and trouble, flourish again in
times of quiet and silence. ''yranny, oppression, wars, pull down, root up,
destroy ; but when there is peace and rest, it is otherwise, ‘“ ‘They built and
prospered,” and why? they had “ rest on every side.” When roaring lions are
taken away, and men of peaceable and quiet spirits succeed, then the vine grows,
then the land prospers, then breaches arerepaired. 2. lt is through the goodness
and blessing of God that wasted kingdoms do become as vines, and flourish again.
“Thy mother is like a vine, fruitful and full of branches by reason of many
waters.” God watered the kingdom with blessings; He gave peace, He gave
the poor strength to labour, He rained upon them, and gave sap to the
vine, that she was fruitful. When God lays waste his vineyards, then
He commands “ the clouds that they rain no rain upon it” (Isa. v. 6);
but when He causes it to flourish, then He calls forth the rain, He
moistens the spirits of men of all sorts, to contribute their help, thoughts
and counsels for the good of the kingdom. He stirs up the spirits of
men to be doing for the public; He gives people planted by Him many
waters, many blessings. 3. When mercies are multiplied, men are apt
to abuse them, and swell with the enjoyment of them. This metaphysical vine,
the kingdom of Judah, had “strong rods her stature was exalted among the
thick branches, and she appeared in her height with the multitude of her
branches.” She grew up again to a height, greatness. She had a multitude
of branches, variety of mercies, and these swelled her so, that she became proud,
insolent, and despised others, Prosperity is a dangerous thing, and hath hazarded
many. ‘I'he Babylonian kingdom was so rich, great, populous, and plentiful that
it was called “the lady of kingdoms,” and she herself said, “I shall be a lady
for ever.” She prided herself in her prosperity (Isa. xlvil. 5, 7), so spiritual
Babylon (Rev. xviii. 7). “I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no
sorrow.” After Hezekiah had received many mercies, “ his heart was lifted up”
(2 Chron. xxxii. 23-25). Rehoboam, when he was strengthend in the kingdom,
“forsook the law of the Lord, and all Israel with him ;” here was a sad effect of
prosperity (2 Chron. xii. i). ‘This people were seldom the better for mercies
and blessings bestowed upon them ; “1 spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, but
thou saidst, [ will not hear. ‘I'his hath been thy manner from thy youth, that
thou obeyest not my voice” (Jer, xxii. 21). She had forgotten the caution the
Lord gave her in the days of her infancy (Deut. viii, 11-14).—(Greenhill),


(Ver. 13).


“ And now she is planted in the wilderness.” This wilderness was Babylon,


which ap a fruitful, pleasant, and well-watered country; the city and land
21


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: &£ZEKI&L. Oiap, X1X,


were the “glory of kingdoms (Isa. xiii. 19). It had variety of rivers (Psa.
exxxvil, 1), Now if this were the nature of the country, how is ‘it here called
a wilderness? It is so called, not in respect of itself, but in reference to the
Jews, who being captives therein, were as in a wilderness, In wilderness, a man
is destitute of all comforts and exposed to many dangers; so were the Jews in
Babylon. 1. Zhey were destitute of comforts. They came naked into Babylon,
where they were amongst a people of a barbarous and unknown tongue, that
knew nothing of God ; there they had no form of a Church or State; they had
no life, but were as dry bones (Ezek. xxxvii. 11). There they were captives ;
Babylon was a prison unto them, and prisons of what kind soever are not pleasing.
Prisoners endure much hunger and thirst, and doubtless so did the Jews in
Babylon. ‘I'hough there were plenty, yet they had little enough, and therefore
it wasa “dry and thirsty land” to them. 2. Zhey were exposed to many
dangers, ‘They were amongst those that mocked and hated them. The Baby-
lonians were “ bitter and hasty, terrible and dreadful” (Hab. i. 6,7). They
were like wild beasts in the wilderness, and sought, upon all occasions, to make
a prey of the poor captive Jews. ‘They got the three children into the fiery
furnace, Daniel into the lion’s den, and Haman attempted the total ruin of
them. “She is planted.” Before (ver. 12), it is said, “the fire consumed
them.” What is consumed in the fire is burnt to ashes, and how can that be
planted? He doth not say the whole vine was burnt, but her “strong rods”
were broken off and burnt ; some were burnt and consumed by famine, some by
the plague, some by the sword (2 Chron, xxxvi. 17). “ ‘The king of the Chaldees
slew their young men with the sword ;” but ‘“ they that escaped the sword he
carried away to Babylon, where they were servants to him and his sons”
(ver. 20). If it should be granted that the whole vine was dried up, withered,
and burnt to ashes, yet these words may bear a good and sound sense, viz.,
thus :—they may be understood of Jehoiachin and those that were with him in
Babylon at that time when they were spoken ; for the words run in the present
tense, “she is planted,” not, she shall be planted, for Zedekiah and those that
escaped the sword were carried after this prophecy to Babylon—(Greenhill.)


Tue Past, PRESENT, AND Future or IsrazL (Chap. xx.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES. — The
date given in ver. 1 applies also to
chap. xx—xxili. (compare chap. xxiv. 1).
These four chapters are bound together
by their contents into one group of
connected words of God, and also by
the threefold repetition of the expres-
sion, “ wilt thou judge ?” (chap. xx. 4;
xxii, 2; xxiii, 36). The prophet is
appointed to judge the people, 7.¢., to
make manifest their sin to them, and
to predict the punishment. In vers.
1-4, we have the date, occasion, and
subject of the prophetical discourse.


Ver. 1. ‘‘In the seventh year, in
the fifth month, the tenth day of the
month.” There is a Jewish tradition
that the tenth day of the fifth month
was the day on which the “ Sentence


of Wandering” was passed (Num. xiv.
29). It is remarkable that this was
also the same day on which the Temple
was burnt both by the Chaldeans (Jer.
lii, 12, 13), and according to the testi-
mony of Josephus, by the Romans.
This chapter (in which Num, xiv. ig
several times referred to) announces a
new and a far heavier “Sentence of
Wandering” (vers. 35-38). “If we
compare the date given in ver. 1 with
chap. viii. 1, we shall find that this
word of God was uttered only eleven
months and five days after the one in
chap. viii. ; two years, one month, and
five days after the call of Ezekiel to be
a prophet (chap. i. 2); and two years
and five months before the blockading
of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans (chap.
xxlv, 1), Consequently it falls almost
217


OHAP. TX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





in the middle of the first section of
Ezekiel’s prophetic work.” — (Kezd).
“To enquire of the Lord.” Heb. “to
seek Jehovah,” «e., to ask, a revelation
from Him,


Ver. 3. “As I live, saith the Lord
God, I will not be enquired of by you.”
“The Lord’s answer is similar to that
in chap. xiv. 3. Instead of giving a
revelation concerning the future,
especially with regard to the termi-
nation of the penal sufferings, which
the elders had, no doubt, come to
solicit, the prophet is to judge
them, @¢., as the following clause
explains, not only in the passage
before us, but alsoin chap. xxii. 3, and
xxii. 36, to hold up before them the
sins and abominations of Israel. It is
in anticipation of the following picture
of the apostacy of the nation from time
immemorial that the sins of the fathers
are mentioned here.”—(Keil). ‘No
reply is given to the sinners, but
chiding for their sins; and He adds
the oath, ‘As | live,’ that the sentence
of refusal may be all the stronger.” —
(Jerome). When Saul “enquired of
the Lord,” we are told that ‘the Lord
answered him not” (1 Sam. xxviii. 6).


Ver. 4. “Wilt thou judge them,
con of man, wilt thou judge them?”
‘he repeated question has the force
of a command, yea, even implies that
® necessity is laid upon the prophet


to pronounce judgment. “The Hebrew
word signifies, not merely to judge, but
also frequently, as here, to conduct a
cause beiore a tribunal by adducing or
hearing such evidence as bears upon
it, and shall lead to the delivery of
a righteous sentence.” (Henderson.)
“The question is repeated in the
liveliness of emotion. It is a question
of impatience, to which things go too
slowly, and show how little right they
have to look for grace, or expect a
pleasing answer. ‘The son of man
cannot go soon enough for the Lord
to the work of judgment and punish-
ment for sin, which is here alone
announced, and is to be executed in
his name. ‘Those who wish to have
another answer, wust repent before-
hand. ‘The summons to make known
to them the sins of their fathers, points
to this, that the evil is deep-seated, and
a radical cure is to be desired, which
can only be effected by a judgment
of inflexible rigour.” —(Hengstenberg.)
“Cause them to know the abomina-
tions of their fathers.” The evil
which called for judgment had entered
the very life of the nation. They
inherited it like a disease—like a bad
name. But the prophet not only
mentions the sins of their fathers in
order to show the magnitude of their
guilt, but also that they might see how
great was the patience and long-
suffering of the Lord.


HOMILETICOS.
True ELDERS BEFORE EZEKIEL


This is a very different result from that which we might have expected. We
might have been inclined to say of the elders, that they could not have inquired
of the Lord once, but they have learned wisdom from adversity, and they are
come to enquire now. And so Ezekiel would also have said to these elders had
they come in the right spirit and temper of mind ; as penitents, with sorrow and
contrition of heart, bemoaning their past obstinacy and rebellion, and beseeching
God te reeeive their cries of earnest sorrow and their promises to do better things
in the future. Had they so come they would have been well received. That
prophet who was commissioned to say, “When the wicked man turneth away
from his wickeduess that he hath committed, and doeth that which is lawful and
right he shall save his soul alive,” and again, “ As I live, saith the Lord, I have
no pleasure in the death of him that dieth,” and the like-~the prophet who was

218


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OHAP, XK.





charged with such messages as these could never have been commissioned tc
drive away with hard reproachful words any true penitent, who came to enquire
of the Lord by him.

This is the point in which the elders failed. There is no evidence of their
ese: They came to enquire of the Lord without first repenting and

ringing forth works meet for repentance. Look at ver. 35, and the great
reason will be seen why the enquirers were rebuffed, “ When ye offer your gifts,
when ye make your sons to pass through the fire, ye pollute yourselves with all
your idols, “even unto this day” —even to this day; you perceive that their
sins were not events of the past, but things going on in full vigour up to this
very time. It was in the midst of these unrepented sins that they were come
to enquire of the Lord; ‘and shall I be enquired of by you, O house of
Israel ?”—so the verse continues—“ As I live, saith the Lord God, I will not be
enquired of by you.” Here you have the repetition of the words of the text.
The prophet is then commissioned to make known the abominations of their
fathers. He shows them that they were as guilty as their fathers, and more
guilty, because they had more teaching, more experience, more examples.’ And
yet without any repentance, they expect that they are to be permitted to
enquire of the Lord acceptably, but no—God will not be mocked ; He will hear
the penitent, but not the self-satisfied sinner.

There was nothing harsh and unreasonable in the answer which Ezekiel gave
to the elders. He did not send the hungry empty away, but only as God’s
ambassador refused to answer those who would not leave their sins behind them
when they entered into the Temple of God. These elders wished to make a
mere convenience of the oracle of God. They might have enquired of God
continually, but they did nothing of the kind. But when they found themselves
in distress, and knew not which way to turn, then they presented themselves
betore God’s prophet. They were brought to enquire of God not by love, not
by a sense of duty, not even by habit, but merely by a desire to find their way
out of difficulties from which they were unable to discover any human means of
escape,

We see, in the first place, that they were not hardly dealt with; and, secondly,
that the whole story may be useful by way of parable to teach people how they
must enquire of God if they would enquire aright. It is well that we should
look into this matter carefully ; for we are apt to give an unlimited interpreta-
tion to what we read of Gud’s mercy in hearing prayer, that we perhaps forget
that there are very important limitations, and that a prayer may sometimes
obtain no answer because there is something amiss in him who makes it. The
parable of the Pharisee and the Publican is an instance. The Pharisee who
went up to the Temple to pray was a very respectable elder apparently, some-
thing much more than respectable if we attend to his own account of himself,
—yet this Pharisee received no answer, was not justified as the Gospel has it.
God would not be enquired of by such. This is an instance of unsuccessful
prayer. Let us consider what the true conditions of successful prayer are—


I. True religion is emphatically a walking with God. It is not a mere
occasional coming to Him. A certain amount of reproach seems to be implied
in the manner in which the day of the visit of the elders is accurately set down;
it was “in the seventh year, in the fifth month, the tenth day of the month.”
These visits of the elders were few and far between, there was no danger of
confounding one with another. In chap. viii., we read, that “in the sixth year,
in the sixth month, in the fifth day of the month,” there was a similar visit to
the prophet, aud there appears to have been none between ; so that nearly a
year separated the one visit from the other. The precise manner in which the
date is given may be taken as conveying a reproof to those who, fa of


OHAP. XX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





making it their constant business to know God’s will, were contented to let a
year elapse between two successive visits to the prophet. Walking with God
is the scripture phrase which well describes that constant nearness to God, that
affinity of heart and affections, which the really religious man strives for. The
notion of life, too, expresses the same thing. Religion is a ife, by which word
we intend to express, that it is not a series of irregular spasmodic efforts, not an
enquiry of God now and then, not a coming to His prophet in the sixth year and
the sixth month, and again in the seventh year and the fifth month, but an
enquiry in all years and all months and all days, a habit of opening our hearts
and consciences to Him, and of guiding our conduct by the answers which we
are able to obtain.


II, We must leave our sins behind us when we come to enquire of God:
The severe answer which the elders received was due to the fact that they came
without first repenting. As a further illustration of this we find, that in their
former visit, their presence at once brought upon the prophet a vision of the
sins of the people. The prophet’s eyes wandered in spirit to Jerusalem, and
there he saw all the abominations of the house of Israel ; there were men offering
their incense to idols, and saying, “ The Lord seeth us not;” there were women
weeping for Tammuz; worse than all, there were men bowing down in worship
to the sun of the creation, not the Creator. These visions rose to Ezekiel’s
prophetic eye when the elders came and sat before him; and because they
contained precisely the explanation of all the misery under which the people
groaned, ‘The elders may come and sit before the prophet and bemoan their
captivity, but of what profit will that be? ‘hat will not cure the disease.
The disease is wnrepented sin, and without a change here there can be no
acceptance, no answer to prayer. Self-examination, earnest efforts to forsake
the evil and to do the good, must ever be the preparations for successful inquiry
of God. Prayer is not a thing which is at our command at any moment,
Sinners can come to Christ, but they must leave their sins. John the Baptist
came as the herald of Christ, and because he did so, his chief text was: ‘‘ Repent
ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.” No other wayis sure but this ; nothing
else can save us from the possibility of such a rebuke as that in the text, ‘“‘ As
I live,” etc. ‘The history brings before us this lesson also, that—


III. Prayer, or coming to God in any way, must not be made a mere
matter of convenience, but must be regarded as a matter of constant spiritual
necessity. These elders came when they thought it would answer their purpose.
They forgot God when all went well, they sought Him when they were at their
wit’s oe ; they did not look upon communion with God as the one great
spiritual need of their souls. ‘I'hey were a type of the mass of mankind. Large
numbers of our fellow creatures do live in utter neglect of God. They live
without prayer, and without the Scriptures—passing a quiet, animal kind of
life, with no cares except those of getting daily bread. And yet many of these
persons will cry to the Lord in trouble; put them upon a sick-bed, and they
will say their prayers, for the most part, vigorously enough. This is no right
use of prayer, but a most unchristian abuse, It was never intended that man should
be cureless while in health, and religious in sickness ; never intended that young
men should be dissipated and only old men sober and chaste ; never intended
that the best of a Cristian’s life and strength should be given to the world, the
flesh, and the devil, and only the dross and refuse to Him who made him and
redeemed him. Prayer was never intended to be made use of as a convenience
when earthly aid fails, but to be the medium of communication with God, the
means of gaining continual aid and daily blessing from Him. “Pray without
ceasing” is the best text to enforce our duty. These did not “ pray without
ceasing.” It was but an occasional work, a remedy resorted to in the last

220


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, CHAP. XX,





extremity, a death-bed cry for help. If'we were independent creatures and
lived by our own strength and energy, then we might be content to make
our approaches to Him rare and exceptional, and only necessary when called for
by special circumstances. But what a false view would this be of our relation
to Him in whom we live and move and have our being, who alone is able to
help us, whom to know is life eternal! And how comforting, how satisfying is
that view which represents God as a Father ever ready to bless us, and to whom,
therefore, if we pray at all, we can scarcely fail to pray without ceasing !—
(Goodwin's “ Parish Sermons.”’)

Ver. 1, It is enough to say merely that they came to inquire, for from the
prophet’s mode of answering them we see that they made no inquiry as to
deliverance and the way of salvation ; they were troubled as to political things,
the duration of the exile, the end of the Babylonish power, the issue of
Zedekiah’s faithlessness. We, too, ask, Watchman, what of the night? rather
than, How shall I find grace? Why are we so concerned about the future? It
will be like our past. We should be deeply concerned on account of our past.
In our approaches to God, humility and reverence should be combined with a
strong and assured faith, which must acquiesce in the authority of the one God,
and yet must not object to hear God speak through his servants. Summon
thyself to the study of the prophets and apostles through whom God has spoken!
God will be inquired of, but still more should His will, which is sufficiently
known to us, be done. ‘To call on God, and yet not to obey Him is an abomina-
tion in His sight. ‘He heareth not sinners” (John ix. 31; Isa. i. 15). Vers,
2, 3. God’s suggestive silence, and His more suggestive answer. God in the
mouth, and idols in the heart, a most critical condition. God speaks not the
smallest word of comfort to hypocrites. For hypocrites there is in the
heart of God, and in the Holy Scriptures, no other counsel but to sincere
repentance (Isa. lv. 7). ‘hus these elders were not in a condition to hear God’s
word, God hides Himself from those who hear His word with their gaze fixed
only on their idols, They have no part in God’s word.—(Lange).


(Ver. 1.)


1. The Lord keeps an exact account of his people's sufferings, Be the time long
or short, He observes, “In the seventh year, fifth month, and tenth day ;” that was
of their captivity. he Lord forgot not how long they had been in Babylon, He
notes how the time of their trouble passes. ‘hey were captives in Babylon, suffered
hard things ; but God took notice of the time, and how the years ran out. It is
not said only that the woman had a spirit of infirmity, but the time is recorded
also, she had it eighteen years (Luke xiii. 11). Also in John v. 5, not only the man
and his infirmity is mentioned, but the time also how long, thirty-eight years. God
tells the years, months, and days that His people endure adversity. Seventy
years were determined that they should be in Babylon (Jer. xxix. 10, 11), and
God gave them to see; He observed as well, yea, better than they, how they
passed. 2. Zhe time of men’s doing some things is specially noted by the Lord.
he time of these elders coming to inquire of the Lord is recorded. See how
the actions of Josiah are observed (2 Chron. xxxiv. 3). When Jeroboam feasted
and sacrificed to the calves he had made, God took notice of the month and day
(1 Kings xii, 32). When the persecution of the Church was, God took notice
of it; “at that time” (Acts viii. 1). 3. Hypocrisy is a close sin, and is
in those ofttimes we little think. It is found where it was not expected,
“in the elders of Israel ;” those who here came to Ezekiel, pretending piety,
sat before him, as if they would hearken to whatsoever the Lord should
say, and do it; yet they intended no such thing, but were resolved to go
on in their own ways, and to be as the Babylonians and heathens (ver. 32), so


that they might enjoy peace and safety. So those who spree Christ


OMAP. XX. HOMILETIVU COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


— OS nO


(Matt. xxii. 16-18), they carried a foul business very smoothly. There are many
who will be found hypocrites at last, who now frequent the assemblies and come
to hear the word of God, but do it not. 4. 70 inquire and ask counsel of the
prophets and man of God, ts of ancient standing and warrantable. 'lheir
coming was not unlawful, but their coming sinfully. {[t was a frequent
practice of old to consult with the prophets (1 Sam. ix. 9; 1 Kings xxii. 15;
2 Kings viii. 8; Jer. xxi, 2; xxxvil. 7); and their coming to them was
coming to the Lord. What though, now there are no prophets nor apostles
immediately inspired and infallible to consult withal, yet there are
pastors and teachers with whom Christ hath promised to be to the end
of the world. 5. The prophets were to give out the Lord’s mind in His
name and words. “Speak unto the elders of Israel, and say, thus saith the
Lord God.” He must not say, thus saith Ezekiel, but, “Thus saith the Lord.”
That which is from the Lord hath a divine stamp upon it, a divine power in it ;
but that which is man’s is like himself, frail and feeble. 6. When men come to
God or His ordinances with hypocritical hearts, they get nothing of Lim.
“Come ye to inquire of me? as | live, I will not be inquired of by you.” Job,
speaking of a hypocrite, saith, “Will God hear his cry when trouble cometh upon
him ?” (Job xxxii. 9). If men’s hearts be not upright, sincere, let them pray and
cry in prayer, let them come to a prophet and ask counsel and wait, God respects
them not, will not answer them. ‘‘ The way of the Lord is strength to the
upright ” (Prov. x. 29). What is the way of the Lord? Prayer, hearing of the
word, asking counsel of His prophets and servants, are the ways of the Lord.
In these He appears, is found, lets out strength ; but itis when men are upright,
not hypocritical. 7. Hypocrites may deceive the prophets and servants of God.
Ezekiel thought that they were goad men, and worthy of a better entertain-
ment at the hands of God, but he was deceived. Simon Magus demeaned him-
self so that he begat a good esteem in the heart of Philip, and was admitted to
baptism (Acts vill. 13). False apostles had got into the church at Ephesus,
and had for a time gained too much upon the angel thereof (Rev. ii. 2).
7. Hypocrites are not to be pleaded for. “ Wilt thou judge them, son of
man, wilt thou judge them? God would not have the prophet to plead
for or excuse them. Hypocrites are not always the greatest of sinners, but they
are ever the worst of sinners. ‘I'he devil is never more devil than when he
transforms himself into av angel of light. The Jews were “a hypocritical
nation” (Isa. x. 6; Jer. vii. 9, 10) ; and, therefore, God forbids Jeremiah to
pray for them (Jer. xiv. 11). And what if they should pray themselves? You

ave an answer in Job. xiii. 16; God tells you that “an hypocrite shall not
come before Him,” that is to have acceptance of His person, or hear any com-
fortable answer from Him. 9. Zhe prophets and servants of God, when they
are inquired of by men, must not proceed according to their desires, but they
must watt for the mind of God and do answerably thereunto. ‘‘ Wilt thou
judge them, son of man? Cause them to know the abominations of their
fathers?” ‘They would have thee inquire of Me for them, but I will not be
inquired of, they shall not have their desires) Go thy ways, lay before them the
abominable things their fathers have done. Not the people’s desires, nor the
prophet’s fancies, must be his direction, when he is to make answer to those
that inquire; but the will of God made known by His word and Spirit.—
(Greenhill.)


(Vers. 5-9.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—The elec- their God. Israel’s ingratitude, though
tion of Israel in Eyypt, where God made the Lord brouglit them out of Egypt
Himself known to them by wonders into a land flowing with milk ‘and
and signs, and promised to become honey.

222


HOOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP. XH.


a rN


Ver. 5. “When I chose Israel.”
God chose them for high purposes, of
His own free grace, and not for any
deserving on their part (Deut. vii. 6, 7 ;
x. 15; viv. 2). “Lifted up mine hand
unto the seed of the house of Jacob.”
The reference is plainly to the lifting
up of the hands, as in the act of
swearing (Gen, xiv. 22). “I am the
Lord your God.” ‘his was God’s
ancient promise renewed to Moses


(Ex. vi. 6-8).


Ver. 6. “Had espied.” “God, as
it were, spied out tiis land for them,
sought it out with the greatest care as
the best.”—(Hengstenberg). ‘‘ The
glory of alllands.” It was a “ goodly
land” (Deut. viii. 7-9), even in its
physical characteristics: but emin-
ently “glorious” (Dan. xi. 16, 41, 45),
because it was the scene where the
glories of the Son of God were dis-
played. It was the land from which
the streams of salvation should flow
all over the earth.


Ver. 7. “* The abominations of His
eyes.” The worship of visible objects
which Israel had substituted for the
invisible God. “‘Defile not yourselves
with the idols of Egypt.” ‘‘ ‘Ihe elec-
tion of the Israelites to be the people
of Jehovah, contained ¢o ipso the com-
mand to give up the idols of Egpyt,
although it was at Sinai that the
worship of other gods was for the first
time expressly prohibited (Ezek. xx. 3),
and Egyptian idolatry is only men-
tioned in Lev. xvii. 7.” —(Keil),


Ver. 8. “Neither did they forsake
the idols of Egypt.” “ History does
not expressly mention such a revolt
of the people in Egypt; yet we are led
indirectly to this by the statements of
the books of Moses concerning the
perpetual tendency of the people in the
wilderness to the customs of Egypt.
To this belongs, ¢g., the making of
the golden calf, in which there is an
imitation of the Egy)tian worship of
the brute; further (Lev. xvii. 17),
according to which Israel in the wilder-
ness served he-goats. ‘lhe worship of


a deity under the form of a he-goat
was peculiar to Egypt (Lev. xviii. 3),
when the people are admonished ,
“After the doings of the land of
Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not
do.” That the Israelites generally
served idols in Egypt is attested by
Josh. xxiv, 14; and this being so, it
is to be expected beforehand that this
inclination would not immediately
cease after the true God had made
Himself known to them. ‘The mur-
muring also of the people in Egypt
again Moses and Aaron (kx. v. 21),
implies an under-current of Egyptian
tendencies.” — (Hengstenberg). The
evidence furnished by Josh. xxiv. 14).
established the fact that the Israelites
practised idolatry in Egypt. Israel
had to be redeemed, not so much from
the bondage of Pharaoh as from “ the
gods of Egypt” (Ex. xii. 12), whom
Pharaoh and his magicians served.
The whole controversy with Pharaoh
turned on the question, would he allow
Israel to serve the Lord ?


Ver. 9. ‘But I wrought for thy
name’s sake, that it should not be
polluted before the heathen among
whom they were.” ‘“'I'he missing ob-
ject explaining what He did, naiely,
abstain from pouring out His wrath,
is to be gathered from what follows :
‘for my name’s sake, that it should
not be polluted before the heathen.’
This would have taken place if God
had destroyed Israel by pouring out
His wrath; in other words, have
allowed them to be destroyed by the
Egyptians, The heathen might then
have said that Jehovah had been un-
able to liberate His people from their
hand and power (Num, xiv. 16;
Ex, xxxii. 12.”)—(Keil). “ Not only
the miserable circumstances of their
external condition, but still more the
state of spiritual degradation into
which the Hebrews had sunk, in-
finitely magnified the Divine mercy
which interposed for their deliverance,
‘ Where sin abounded, grace did much
more abound.’ ‘The glory of this, as
well as of the other attributes of
Jehovah, was the ultimate end which

223


OHAP. XX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,








er


He had in view in bringing them forth The preservation of that name from
from the house of bondage. This is desecration is repeatedly spoken of
described as His name, i.¢., the sum- this chapter (vers. 14, 22, 39).—
total of His known perfections (Rom. (Henderson

ix. 17; 2 Sam. vii. 23 ; Isa. Ixiii. 12).


HAOUILETICS.
IsrAEL’s ELECTION,


I. It was of God’s free choice. “In the day when I chose Israel ” (ver. 5).
This choice had no reference to their merit or special fitness. They were
selected to carry out the special purposes of redemption, because such was the
will of God, who is not obliged to give any account to men of His matters. We
must, however, avoid the error of attributing any caprice to God. He works
not according to mere will, but “after the counsel of His own will” (Eph. i. 11).


II. It implied His willingness to be their God. “Iam the Lord your God”
(ver. 5). ‘I'his includes all that the Creator can give to the creature—every
blessing for time and eternity. Several stages were necessary for the realisation
of this gift. 1. God revealed Himself to them. “ And made myself known
unto them in the land of Egypt.” It is absolutely necessary that the soui
should know Him whom it is to serve, and from whom it is to expect every
blessing. “ He that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He isa
rewarder of them that diligently seek Him” (Heb. xi. 6). But how can
we come to God and have faith in Him unless He makes Himself known to us
as an object worthy of our trust and reverence? We cannot know a person
except he speaks and we cannot know God unless He reveals Himself in
an intelligible voice. ‘Therefore it is that “faith cometh by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God” (Rom. x. 17). 2. God entered into covenant
with them. ‘And lifted up thine hand unto the seed of the house of Jacob”
(ver. 5). God’s communication to His people was a covenant wherein He bound
Himself to bless them, binding them at the same time to certain conditions.
3. God engaged to lead them. ‘To bring them forth of the land of Egypt”
(ver. 6). Hesought out and prepared for them a place of habitation, had espied
for them a land flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands.
Thus when God promises His people to be their God, this promise implies all
that is meant by godliness and its reward—revelation, covenant blessings,
discipline and guidance the peace and rest of the lot of the conquered
inheritance,


III, It demanaed corresponaing auties. By every revelation of Himself, by
every gift of God, man comes under obligation. It was the duty of Israel. 1. To
forsake all false objects of worship (ver. 7). But instead of this they defiled
themselves with the idols of Egypt. 2. Yo yield obedience to God’s commands.
But instead of this, they rebelled against Him. God chooses men not for evil,
but that He might redeem and save them. But they cannot be saved unless
they are obedient to God’s way of salvation. ‘I'he children of Israel were dis-
obedient. They did the very things which were contrary to the purpose for
which they were elected. They were infected by the idolatry of Egypt. Though
they were called out of the world to be a peculiar people, yet the influence of
the world overcame them, ‘They wished to stand well with Egypt, which was
then the world-power,

224


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. CHAP. XK,
ee a AE os LAG BE


Iv. It heightened Israel’s ingratitude. When they sinned against their
high calling their sin was all the greater. 1. Zhe anger of God was provoked,
on will pour out my fury upon them to accomplish my anger against them.”
The Egyptians were the instruments of this vengeance. It was, “in the midst
of the land of Egypt” that God would accomplish His anger. They were
punished by the very people whom they sought to propitiate, Thus God
chastises men by those things in which they most delight. 2. Aven in the
punishment of His people, God has regard to the honour of His name. “ But
I wrought for my name’s sake that it should not be polluted before the heathen
among whom they were, in whose sight I made Myself known to them, in bring-
ing them forth out of the land of Egypt” (ver. 9). “But the revelation which I had
given of Myself before the eyes of the heathen among whom they were was not to
be desecrated before these same eyes, especially before the Egyptians, as if to
wish well to My name were present with Me, but not the power of performance
(regard being had at the same time to the heathen, as Israel was placed in a
peculiar position in regard to humanity as a whole) Comp. Num. xiv. 13,
etc.; Ex, xxxii. 12; Num. xxiii, 19.”"—(Lange). .


(Ver. 6).


1. Old mercies should be remembered. Not only by those they were first
bestowed upon, but also by their posterity. In this, and in the former verse,
God reminds them of old mercies, His choice of them, His professing to be their
God, His bringing them out of Egypt, which were some eight or nine hundred
years before, and His espying out a land for them, which was four hundred years
before that ; for it was in Abraham’s days that God took. notice of that land
(Gen. xii. 1, 7). ‘These old mercies God would have them to mind, though they
were in Babylon, and deprived of the good land God had given them. Let men
be in what condition they will, old mercies should not be forgotten (Psa. xliv. 1, 2;
Judg. vi. 13). And because men are apt to forget former mercies, when they
grow old they grow out of mind, the Lord laid a charge upon the Jews that
they should not forget them (Deut. vi. 10-12). 2. Countries and habitations of
people are appointed by the Lord. He distributes lands and habitations to whom
He thinks meet. “‘I'he earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof” (Psa. xxiv. 1).
He is the sole owner, the true Lord of the soil, and all it brings forth, and
He hath “ given it to the children of men” (Psa. cxv. 16). He hath assigned
them their several portions (Deut. xxxii. 8). ‘lhe most high God, being Lord
paramount, would not have the sons of Adam to live all in one country, but
appointed them several lands to dwell in, and set their bounds and limits,
After the flood, at the building of Babel, God confounded the languages, and
dispersed the posterity of Noah into divers lands, and set them their bounds
(Gen. xi. 9). And so, when He brought the Israelites into the land of Canaan,
He gave them their bounds (Psa. Ixxviii. 55). 3. Zhe Lord provides and bestows
the choicest mercies upon His own people. If there be a.land in the world that
flows with milk and honey, that exceeds all other lands for plenty and pleasantness,
His people shall have it. When God carried Jacob and his family into Egypt,
He provided the good and fat of that land for them (Gen. xlv. 18); yea, they
were placed in “the best of the land” (Gen. xlvii. 11). God fed and filled His
people with “the finest of the wheat” (Psa. cxlvii. 14). Moses mentions seven
things together in Deut. xxxii. 13-15, as “honey out of the rock, oil out of
the flinty rock, butter of kine, milk of sheep, fat of lambs, and rams of the
breed of Bashan, and goats, fat of kidneys of wheat, the pure blood of the
grape ;” these the Lord provided for His people, and they had all an excellency
in them, God bestowed choice mercies upon this people (Ezek. gi es

P


CHAP, XX HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





David acknowledges that he had a “ goodly heritage,” even a “ wealthy place.”
Daniel and the three children were set in eminent places (Dan. ii. ; ti.). 4.
Spiritual mercies make a land glorious. Canaan was the glory of all lands, not so
much for its great plenty as for the spiritual mercies it enjoyed. ‘There was
the Lord’s presence, His prophets, His worship, His oracles, and His ordinances,
and these made it glorious, yea, more than all the nations far or near. “In
Judah is God known: His name is great in Israel. In Salem also is His
tabernacle, and His dwelling-place in Zion” (Psa. Ixxvi. 1, 2). God was not
known in Babylon, in Egypt, in other nations; His tabernacle and dwelling-
place was not amongst them, therefore they were not glorious. “Thou art
more glorious than the mountains of prey”; thou Judah, thou Israel, thou
Salem, thou Zion, that hast spiritual mercies and blessings, art more glorious
than they, whatever their glory be. Have the nations abroad goodly towers ?
thou hast the temple. Have they stately cities? thou hast Jerusalem, the city
of God. Have they wise men? thou hast the prophets. Have they gods of
gold, silver, and stones? thou hast the true living God, Jehovah, to be thy God.
Have they human laws that are good? thou hast divine laws that excel. Have
they temporal excellencies? thou hast spiritual. Have they the glory of the
world ? thou hast the glory of heaven. ‘‘ Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty,
God hath shined ” (Psa. 1. 1, 2). What made Zion so glorious and beautiful ?
It was the presence of God ; if He had not been there, Zion had been like other
mountains, and Canaan like other nations ; but His preseuce was like the sun,
darting out His beams, and making all glorious and beautiful. Spiritual
mercies are beams and rays of that God who is brighter than the sun; by these
He shined in Zion and made it the perfection of beauty. By these He
shined out of Zion, and darkened all the glory of the nations. Where
God and His ordinances are, there is glory; and where these are not,
there is no glory, but Evyptian darkness—a land without the sun. In
Canaan was spiritual light and glory. ‘here were glorious appearances of
God, glorious praisings of God, glorious conversions of sinners unto Cod,
glorious sabbaths and assemblies, and glorious beauties of holiness, glorious
types of Christ, and people who were the glory of God (Isa. iv. 5). There were
glorious truths, ordiuances, and dispensations of God. Plenty of outward things
do not make a land glorious as spiritual mercies do. If God, Christ, Gospel,
and the ordinances of it be in a land they make it glorious above all other
nations. Let us learn to know our true glory, even spiritual mercies, and prize
them highly, though loathed by some, like the manna of old, and pray that such
glory may ever dwell in our land.—( Greenhill. )


(Ver. 9).


God’s name is polluted. (1). When it is not hallowed. Not acknowledged,
or esteemed to be holy and honourable. (2). When it is slighted, and not used
reverently. God’s name is great, glorious, excellent, holy, and ought to be
reverenced (Psa, cxi. 9). (3). When occasion is given to the wicked to speak
evil of God and His ways. David by his sins gave great occasion to the enemies
of God to blaspheme (2 Sam. xii. 14). he Jews by their sinful carriage caused
the name of God to be profaned among the heathen. Had the Lord, then,
destroyed this people in Egypt, according as He purposed, the Egyptians and
other nations would have slighted Him, spoken evil of His doings, blasphemed
His name, and wounded His honour. Therefore, though this people deserved
to die in the way of justice, yet God spared them in the way of mercy for the
honour of His name. “ Before the heathen,” The Hebrew is, “in the eyes of
the ue God would not have them to see or behold anything which might

22


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL OHAP, XX.





occasion them to dishonour Him. He would not slay His people in their
sight, but made Himself known by His word and mighty works unto the Jews,
in the sight of the heathen, so that hereby He was known unto both. 1. The
Lord spares and saves sinners deserving death, even for His name's sake. God's
honour and glory are strong arguments to move Him to show mercy to His
people. ‘I'his the servants of God have known, and made use of, in their straits,
When Jerusalem was in a manner laid desolate, and the jealousy of God burned
like fire, what argument did the Church use then to move God to show mercy
but His “name,” and the glory of it? (Psa. Ixxix. 9). What hurt would it
be to God’s name if He did it not? It would not be glorious, but dishonoured ;
for in the next verse it is said, ‘“‘ Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is
their God?” ‘They trusted in their God, and He is a non-helping God, a non-
delivering God. ‘'lhis was the argument Joshua used when Israel fell before
their enemies, “ Lord, what wilt ‘Thou do unto hy great name?” When the
people forgot the multitude of great mercies they had in Egypt, and provoked
Him at the sea, even at the Red Sea, and deserved to be drowned in it,
what saith the text ? ‘‘ Nevertheless, He saved them for His name’s sake.”
(Psa. evi. 8). 2. God’s sparing of His people is an honouring and sanctifying
of His name. God deals with His people sometimes, not after the ordinary
rule and course of His proceedings, but in a prerogative way ; He spares them,
though their sins be great, because their enemies would be proud, arrogant, and
blasphemous, (Deut. xxxii. 26, 27.)

8. That notwithstanding the sins of God’s people, He shows them kindness
openly, and in the face of their enemies. ''liough the Jews had rebelled against
God, and the Egyptians would have rejoiced in their ruin, yet, in their sight,
God made Himself known unto them, in bringing them forth out of the land of


Egypt.


God would have the Egyptians see that He could be kind to His


people, though they were disobedient unto Him.—(Greenhill.)


(Vers.


EXEGETICAL NOTES.— The sin
of the first generation of Israelites in
the wilderness: yet the Lord did not
make an end of them.


Ver. 11. ‘‘ And I gave them My
statutes, and showed them My judg-
ments.” ‘This was a general expression
for the law which was delivered to
them. “God gave laws at Sinai to
the people whom He had brought out
of Keypt, through which they were
sanctified as His own people, that
they might live before God.”—(Keil.)
“ Which if a man do, he shall even
live in them.” He who obeyed God’s
laws would find them tend “unto life”
(Rom. vii. 10; x. 5). The life which
somes of obedience was not mere exist-
ence, but prosperity and blessedness,
both bodily and spiritual, temporal and
eternal (Deut. iv. 1; Matt. xix. 17;
Ex. xx.12,etc.). The leading through


10-17).


the wilderness served to test their
obedience,


Ver. 12. “I gave them my Sab-
baths.” “God concludes the direc-
tions for His worship by urging upon
the people in the most solemn manner
the observance of His Sabbaths, and
thereby pronounces the keeping of the
Sabbath as the kernel of all divine
worship. And, as in that passage
(Ex. xxxi. 13), we are to understand
by the Sabbaths the actual weekly
Sabbaths, and not the institutions of
worship as a whole, so here we must re-
tain the literal signification of the word.
It is only of the Sabbaths occurring
every week, and not of all the fasts,
that it could be said that it was a sign
between Jehovah and Israel. It was
a sign, not asa token, that they who
observed it were Israelites, but that
they might know that Jehovah was

227


OUAP. XK.


sanctifying them, namely, by the
Sabbath rest—as a refreshing and
elevation of the mind, in which Israel
was to have a foretaste of that blessed
resting from all works to which the
people of God was ultimately to attain.
It is from this deeper signification of
the Sabbath that the prominence given
to the Sabbaths here is to be explained,
and not from the outward circumstance
that in exile, when the sacrificial
worship was necessarily suspended,
the keeping of the Sabbath was the
only bond which united the Israelites,
so far as the worship of God was con-
cerned.”—(Keil). ‘The weekly pause
in the midst of earthly labour was a
“sign” of the spiritual work which God
was performing among His obedient
people; a “sign” also that they were
sanctified, were set apart from all
other nations, as that day was from
the rest of the week.


Ver. 13. “They walked not in My
statutes, and they despised My judg-
ments.” Historical examples of Israel’s
rebellion against God’s commandments
in the wilderness are given in Ex.
xxxil. 1-6; Num. xxv. 1-3; and of
the desecration of the Sabbath in Ex.
xvi. 27; Num. xv. 32. “‘ My Sabbaths
they greatly polluted.” “History re-
cords nothing of an external violation
of the Sabbath during the journey
through the wilderness. Num. xv. 32,
where the man who gathered wood on
the Sabbath was brought before the
congregation, and stoned by them after
formal sentence, is rather a proof that
in this respect they were not wanting
in zeal. But the prophet, in accord-
ance with Isa. lviii. 13, 14, and with
Moses himself, who commanded to
sanctify the Sabbath, to consecrate it
in every respect to God, and withdraw
it wholly from the region of self-
interest, of personal sinful inclination,
according to which the festival cannot
possibly be observed with indolent
repose, forms a deeper and more


228


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


spiritual idea of the Sabbath. ‘Thou
shalt cease from thy doing, that God
may have His work in thee,’ in this
sense the truly God-fearing only can
celebrate the Sabbath; so that all that
in the books of Moses attests the want
of true godliness among the people in
the wilderness, involves at the same
time the charge of desecrating the
Sabbath.” —(//engstenberg).


Ver. 14. “But I wrought for My
name’s sake.” “For His name’s sake
God destroys not the people; but He
excludes the present generation from
the possession of Canaan, in just re-
tribution for that which they have
practised against Him. To this just
retribution points the—‘ And | also’
(ver. 15). It depends on the will of
every ove what position he will take
towards God; but he must be prepared
for this, that his act will be attended
with a corresponding Divine act.”—
( Hengstenberg.)


Ver. 15. “Yet, also, I lifted up
My hand unto them in the wilderness.”
The lifting up of God’s hand signifies
the Divine oath (Num, xiv. 28-30;
Psa. cvi. 26).


Ver. 16. “Their heart went after
their idols.” The idolatries of the
children of Israel during their wander-
ings in the desert are referred to by.
the prophet Amos, and in St. Stephen’s
speech (Amos vy, 25, 26; Acts vii,
42, 43),


Ver. 17. ‘‘Mine eye spared them
from destroying them, neither did I
make an end of them in the wilder-
ness.’ Though the generation that
sinned in the desert perished, yet God
did not give the whole of the people
over to the destruction which they
deserved. The “hand” of righteous
anger was lifted to smite, but the
“eye” of gracious pity restrained it.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP. XX,
Ne EA NE


HOMILETICS.


Taz Sin OF THE FIRST GENERATION OF THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL IN THE
WILpERNEss (Vers. 10-17).


I. It was a sin aggravated in its character. 1. They sinned after a great
deliverance. In Egypt they were persecuted and held in cruel bondage. They
learned to worship the gods of the nation which ruled over them (Josh. xxiv. 14).
But they were brought out of that land by the manifest power of God, and were
thus delivered both from bodily and spiritual slavery. 2. They sinned after
special means had been used to preserve their spiritual character as the
elect of God. (1). They had a clear revelation of God’s law. God had
given them His “‘ statutes,” and showed them His ‘‘judgments.” The observ-
ance of these would have been their peace, happiness, and salvation. (Ver. 11.)
For the law of God tends to “life” (Rom. vii. 20.) It is true that the law
would give the knowledge of sin (Rom. iii. 20), yet that knowledge ought to
have brought them to confess their sins and to seek forgiveness through the
blood of the atonement. They had to render obedience not to a blind power,
making in some way for righteousness, but to a living will,—to the one true
God who was merciful and desired their salvation. (2.) They were placed in
circumstances favourable to the spiritual life. God had brought them out from
the bondage and seductive civilization of Egypt and had led them into the
wilderness (ver. 10). ‘I'he seclusion of the desert was favourable to contempla-
tion,—to seriousness of character. They would have a time to reflect upon
God’s loving kindness in redemption. Obedience would have given them the
means of making a great history (Ex. xix. 3-9). Placed in such outward con-
ditions as would naturally have the effect of leading them to cast themselves
upon God’s care and governance, and delivered from the corrupting influences
ot the world, they had the most favourable opportunity for becoming a spiritual
people. (3.) They had the ordinance of the Sabhath. The Sabbath was given
to them as a “sign” and to promote the holiness of the nation (ver. 12). For
this intermission of earthly work was a pledge of that work which God was carrying
on amongst His obedient people (Ex. xxxi. 13). It was a sign’that God
sanctified the people, that He separated them from the rest of the world, and
that He would bring them, at last, to their quiet inheritance of rest. ‘To keep
the Sabbath with due regard to its spiritual significance was truly to fear and
to serve God. But they rebelled against God in the wilderness, they polluted
His Sabbaths (ver. 13). In the pollution of the Sabbath there was a special
danger to their religious life. For if that sacred day was not piously observed,
it only exposed them the more to strong temptation. If it was not occupied
with thoughts of God, it laid their souls open to the incursions of every evil
thought. Some of the early Christian writers charge the Jews of their time
with spending their Sabbaths in licentiousness. Thus Israel had superior
religious advantages in the wilderness, but idolatry was in the heart of the
people. The corruptions of Egypt clung to them (ver. 16).


II. It was a sin which was visited with a fitting punishment. A punish-
ment, not only in degree, but also in kind. ‘They polluted God’s Sabbaths, and
He would not bring them tio the land of rest. His plan concerning them was
to lead them to the land of their inheritance, where they might dwell in peace
and safety. But all revolt from God must be followed by darkness and disorder,
by a disarrangement of all those good things which He has prepared for us.


III. Their sin did not altogether shut out God’s mercy. They were not all
destroyed in the wilderness as they deserved, God has an “eye” of pity which
arrests His “hand” of righteous anger. Aas


CHAP, Xx, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; EZEKIEL,





(Vers, 15-17).


Here a difficulty ariseth. In ver. 6 it is said that God had lifted up His hand,
and so sworn to bring them out of the land of Egypt into the land of Canaan ;
and here it is said He hath lifted up His hand to the contrary. It seems that
here is one oath against another. And in Num. xiv. 34, God acknowledges His
breach of promise, for He saith, “ Ye shall know my breach of promise.” I have
promised and sworn to bring you into the land of Canaan, but you have so
sinned against and provoked Me that I will not do it, yea, have sworn you shall
not enter into my rest (Psa. xcv. 11). This difficulty is removed by considering
that God did not make His promise or swear to those individual men that were
kept out of Canaan, that they should be brought into it, for if it had been so
God had forsworn Himself; but His promise and oath was that the seed
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob should be brought into it (Gen. xii. 17; xiii. 15 ;
xv. 18; xxiv. 4; 1, 24; Deut. xxxiv. 4); and their seed was brought into the
promised land (Josh. i. 2; iv. 1; xiv. 1; xxiv. 13); and so God’s promise
and oath were kept. Those He swore against were those that murmured
against Him, even all from twenty years old and upwards, except Caleb and
Joshua, whose carcases fell in the wilderness (Josh. v. 6). As for Num. xiv. 34,
God’s breach of promise is, in the original, by frustration: you looked certainly
to have entered into Canaan, but for your murmuring and unbelief I have
frustrated your expectations. Or thus, you think My oath cannot be true,
because of a former oath, and that the words I have uttered will prove false ;
but you shall know whether my words and oath be false or not. [The Revised
Version (1885) has, “ And ye shall know my alienation,” with the rendering in
the margin. “ 7he revoking of my promise.” |

“ Flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands.” - Of these
words hath been spoken largely in ver. 6. They are repeated here to show the
ingratitude of the people, that were not affected with this land, which was a
second Paradise, but despised it, and raised an ill-report upon it; as also to
noe what they lost in being kept out of it, and their folly in preferring Egypt

efore it.

1. Den’s sins disappoint them of choice mercies, Yea, mercies promised,
expected, and near at hand. God had promised them Canaan, they were near
unto it (Num. xiii.), expected to goin and possess it; but God would not bring
them into the land because they despised His judgments,-walked not in His
statutes, but polluted His sabbaths.

In Heb, ii. 19, it is said, “'hey could not enter in because of unbelief ;”
and Psa. cvi. 24, “they despised the pleasant land, they believed not His
word.” It was their sins kept them back from so great, so near, so longed-for
a mercy. Such is the malignity of sin that it drives mercies back when they
are at the door, and blocks up the passage, that none for the future may issue
furth towards us. God can hear and help; “ but your iniquities have separated
between you and your God, aud your sins have hid His face from you, that He
will not hear” (Isa. lix. 1,2); your sins stand like a trap-wall, a mighty
mountain, between Him and you; they have cramped His will, so that though
He can, yet He will neither hear your prayers nor help your persons. It is
sin that keeps mercy from us. (Jer. v. 25).

2. When the heart is carried out after unlawful things, then the ways and
ordinances of God are neglected, slighted, and profaned (ver. 16). Their idols
had stolen away their hearts from God. They had whorish hearts, and whorish
eyes which went after their idols, and made them depart from God. David
advised men not to set their hearts upon riches (Psa. Ixii. 10) ; they will then
be their idols, and make them forget God and His ways. and do those things


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. CHAP. Xx,





@hich will profane His ordinances. Look well to your hearts, and let not them
tarry you away (Job xv. 12).

3. When sinners provoke God into ways of destruction, He doth not atterly
destroy them, but shows some pity and mercy. ‘‘ Nevertheless mine eye spared
them from destroying.” God did destroy many of them in the wilderness ;
three thousand upon their making the calf (Ex. xxxii. 28); twenty-four
thousand upon their committing whoredom with the daughters of Moab (Num.
xxv. 9); much people by fiery serpents upon their murmuring (Num. xxi. 6) ;
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram were swallowed up of the earth, and all theirs,
and the two hundred and fifty men that offered incense were consumed by
fire (Num. xvi. 32-35); fourteen thousand seven hundred were destroyed by
the plague (ver. 49) ; and many by the Amorites in Seir (Deut. i. 44). Yet all
were not destroyed ; God did not make an end of them in the wilderness, He
did not consummate and perfect His wrath upon them. Though men have
sinned much, yet God hath an eye to spare and a heart to pity. If He should
punish and destroy none, He would be thought to be like unto sinners
(Psa. 1. 21); if He should destroy all, He would be thought to be cruel; to
show, therefore, that He is a just God, He cuts off some; and to show He is a
merciful God, he spares some.—/( Greenhill.)


Ver. 18-26.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—The
prophet describes the sins of the
generation that grew up in the desert.


Ver. 18. “But I said unto their
children.” The second generation of
the children of Israel in the wilderness,
“lo the ‘children’ belongs, among
other things, the whole second law-
giving, with its impressive admonitions,
as it was promulgated in Arboth-Moab,
and is recorded in Deuteronomy ”
(Hengstenberg). “ Walk ye not in the
statutes of your fathers.” ‘“ The
‘fathers’ in question are represented
in their constant disobedience to the
laws which Jehovah gave (which even
necessitated their repetition and
renewal in Deuteronomy), as in some
sort law-givers according to their own
ideas and on their own authority.”—
( Lange.)


Ver. 21, “ Notwithstanding the
children rebelled against Me.” ‘The
sons acted like their fathers in the
wilderness. Historical proofs of this
are furnished by the accounts of the
Sabbath-breaker (Nuin. xv. 32, etc.),
of the rebellion of the company of
Korah, and of the murmuring of the
whole congregation against Moses and


Aaron after the destruction of Korah’s
company (Num. xvi. and xvii). In
the last two cases God threatened that
He would destroy the whole congrega-
tion (Num, xvi. 21; xvii. 9, 10), and
on both occasions the Lord drew ba
His hand at the intercession of Mose®;
and his actual intervention (Num. xv
22; xvil. 11), and did not destroy the
whole nation for His name’s sake.
The statements in vers. 21, 22 rest
upon these facts” (Keil.) God’s
justice was slow to punish ; for from
the murmuring at Kadesh (B.0. 1453)
to the date of this chapter (B.0. 593)
was 860 years; being two cycles of
430 years,


Ver, 23. ‘‘Scatter them among the
heathen.” Dispersion among the
heathen is threatened to apostate
Israel (Lev. xxvi. 33; Deut. xxviii. 64).
Nearly nine centuries had elapsed be-
fore this penalty was actually inflicted.


Ver. 24. ‘‘Their father’s idols.”
They had been warned against these
(ver. 18). ‘Ihe vain traditions of their
fathers had more authority with them
than God’s own word (1 Pet. 1. 18.)


Ver. 25. ‘Wherefore I gave them
231


OHAP. XX.


also statutes that were not good, and
judgments whereby they should not
live.” This was a second retribution.
We may compare here Rom. i. 24,
according to which God, in just retri-
bution for their revolt, gave over the
heathen to vile affections ; Acts vil. 42,
where it is traced back to God, that
the heathen served the host of heaven ;
and 2 Thess. ii. 11, where God sends
the apostates strong delusions, Grotius
writes: “I have taken from them the
understanding, that in despising my
laws they maymake for themselves hard
and death-bearing laws.” (//engsten-
berg.) “‘ Various attempts have been
made to get rid of the apparent incon-
eruity of the language hers employed
by the Divine Being. Taken abso-
lutely it would be flatly contradictory
of the purity and rectitude of His
character, as well as that of the laws
which He actually gave to the Israel-
ites (Deut. iv. 8; Neh. ix. 13; Rom.
vii. 12). The solution of the difficulty
proposed by Manesseh Ben Israel, that
the words should be read interrogatively,
is altogether unsupported by the struc-
ture of the sentence, and is otherwise
not borne out by Hebrew usage.

agree with those interpreters who are
of opinion that the reference is to the
idolatrous enactments of the heathen,
and that the language may be best
illustrated by comparison with Ps.
Ixxxi, 12; Hos. viii. 11; Acts vil. 42;
Rom. i. 24; 2 Thess, ii. 11. Because
the Hebrews cherished a propensity to
indulge in idolatrous practices, God in
His holy providence brought them into
circumstances in which this propensity
might be fully gratified, without His
in any way imposing upon them the
statutes of the Pagan ritual. On the
contrary, He did all that was calculated
in the way of moral influence to deter
them from idolatry. Preferring, how-
ever, the rites and ceremonies of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL


heathen to His holy and righteous
ordinances, they experienced not only
that they were not good, but, as the
language by meiosis imports, that they
were most pernicious.” —(Henderson. )


Ver. 26. “And I polluted them in
their own gifts.” “The language of
this verse is quite in accordance with
that of the preceding. The Holy One
did not actually pollute the people ;
He only permitted them to pollute
themselves, and pronounced them
polluted when they had rendered
themselves such. In the language of
the Hebrews, and of the Orientials in
general, God is frequently said to do
that which He permits to be done,” —
(Henderson.) ‘‘They caused to pass
through the fire all that openeth the
womb.” They followed the custom
of the Canaanites in sacrificing their
children to Moloch, in whose fiery
arms they were destroyed. This was
an awful perversion of God’s law
which bade them consecrate their first-
born to Him as “living sacrifices”
(Ex. xiii, 2), so that the whole nation
might thereby be hallowed. ‘They
preferred to serve an imaginary malig-
nant deity, whose commands were
unnatural and cruel, to the one true
God who gave them a righteous law.
This was a sin which brought its own
punishment in doing violence to the
most sacred feelings of human nature.
The repeated prohibition against offer-
ing children through the fire to Moloch
is an evidence that this custom made
its way among the Israelites (Lev.
Xviil. 21; Deut. xviii. 10). “To the
end that they might know that Iam
the Lord.” “By which they might
learn that their paternal God, whom
they set at nought, is God in the full
sense, whom to forsake is at once to
fall into misery.” —( Hengstenberg.)


HOMILETICS,


Toe Suv or tar SzconD GENERATION OF THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL IN THR


WILDERNESS.


(Vers. 18-26.)


I. They sinned after many warning exampies. Their fathers had forsaken
God’s ordinances and turned to their idola, The children are warned against


232


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. CHAP. XX
SS aE Se


their evil example (ver. 18) ; yet though they saw the sad effects of transgression
against God, they sinned after the same manner. ‘They rebelied at Kadesh
N um. xx. 2); by the Gulf of Akaba (Num. xxi. 5); and at Shittim,
(Num, xxv. 2, 3). hey had seen by sad experiment how rebellion against
God must end, and yet they persisted in eating the grapes which had
already set their father’s teeth on edge, They disregarded the lessons of
history. Thus there was less excuse for them than for the first generation.





II. They sinned after renewed precepts. 1. Their relation to God was
restated. “I am the Lord your God” (ver. 19). 2. Obedience was again
commanded. ‘They were ordered to walk in God’s statutes, to keep His judg-
ments, and to observe the ordinance of the Sabbaths (ver. 19).


Ul. Their punishment. They were to be scattered among the heathen, and
dispersed through the countries (ver. 23). A retributive providence was at
work to bring this terrible infliction upon them. 1. God abandoned them to
their own devices, ‘‘ Wherefore I gave them statutes that were not good, and
judgments whereby they should not live” (ver. 25). ‘These were the statutes
of their fathers (ver. 18). The meaning is, that God withdrew His providential
restraint and permitted them to have what they were bent upon (Psa. Ixxi. 12;
Acts vil. 42; Rom. i. 24), ‘The parable of the prodigal son teaches us, that
if a man thinks he can better himself elsewhere, God allows him to make the
choice. It is a sad evil when the sinner is left to his own devices, when he
casts off the authority of God and becomes his own master ; “Lord of himself,
that heritage of woe.” 2. God allowed their inward corruption to show itself.
“And I polluted them in their own gifts” (ver. 26). hey felt that they must offer
gifts to some invisible Power of which they were afraid. For they were conscious of
impurity within; they felt the burden of sin, but they sought relief in will-
worship until they became the victims of that awful infatuation which led them
to offer up the fruit of their body for the sin of their soul (Mic. vi. 16). It is
the saddest punishment when a man’s inward corruption is allowed to spread and
grow unchecked. 3. Yet there was mercy in their punishment :—1.—It was long
delayed. In order that they might have space for repentance. ‘I'hey had been
threatened long before with dispersion among the heathen (Lev. xxvi. 33), but
nearly nine centuries had elapsed before that sentence was act aally inflicted.
2.—It was for a gracious end. “'l'o the end that they might know that I am the
Lord” (ver. 26). In the worst punishments of sinners God has a gracious end
in view. Mercy, at length, rejoices over judgment.


IV. The lessons to be derived from their sin and punishment. 1. That the
standard to which we ought to conform our lives should be the Word of God.
This second generation of Israel in the wilderness forsook the direct commands
of God and followed the vain traditions of their fathers. They received for |
doctrines the commandments of men. ‘I'he truly righteous man looks to his
God alone, and is governed not by human opinion, or by ancient custom, but by
the revealed Word (Psa. cxix. 105). 2. That even Godlessness may become a
law unto men. They had “ statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby
they should not live” (ver. 25). Thus the world and the devil have also their
statutes and ordinances. 3. 7hat God punishes men through the very instru-
ments of their sin. They had copied the heathen around them, had followed
man’s doctrine, and it had brought them no rest or peace, nothing but sorrow
and death. 4. That even the very errors of the heathen show man’s need of a
religion. The fact that Israel sacrificed their children to a malignant deity
shows that they felt the burden of sin and the need of forgiveness. 5. T'hat
the true reform of the Church of God must begin with youth. The law of God

233


OHAP. XX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.








as to His statutes and ordinances was repeated unto “their children in the
wilderness” (ver. 18). When the Church is greatly polluted the only hope lies
in the careful instruction of the younger generation,


(Verses 27-29).


EXEGETICAL NOTES. — Israel
continued to commit these sins in
Canaan also, and still refuses to give
them up. ;


Ver. 27. ‘‘ Yet in this your fathers
have blasphemed Me, in that they
have committed a trespass against
Me.” The prophet is addressing the
people of his own time, and_ boldly
charges them with committing the
same sins as their fathers in the
land of Canaan. ‘The sin of the
children of Israel in Canaan took a
worse form than their sin in the
wilderness. It was a more open
affront to God, for they deliberately
“blasphemed” His name. ‘They re-
jected Him contemptuously when
they left that one place which He
selected “to put his name there,”
aud chose places of their own, offering
sacrifice “on every high hill.” They
did dishonour to.the Holy Place.”


Ver. 28. “They saw every high
hill, and all the thick trees, and they
offered there their sacrifices, and there
they presented the provocation of their
offering: there also they made their
sweet savour, and poured out there
their drink offerings.” The stricter
designation of blasphemy follows in
this verse, after it was designated in


provocation of their offering” the
offerings to idols, whereby they pro-
voked the anger of God ; comp. Deut.
xxxli. 16, 17, ‘‘ They provoked Him to
jealousy with strange (gods); with
abominations they made Him indig-
naat. They sacrificed to lords which
were not God, to gods whom they knew
not.” God says to them in the tone
of reproach (1 Kings ix. 13), “ What
is the high place whereunto ye go?”
(ver. 29): How can ye, instead of
seeking Me in My true sanctuary, turn
to these miserable places, with their
miserable gods? And yet these are
named high places unto this day, in
the sense of sanctuaries, and with the
notion that they have something pecu-
liar about them.”—Hengstenberg. The
repetition of the word “ there” three
times seems to be an echo of Deut. xii,
5-7, “ Unto His habitation . .. .
thither Be. enw thither ee@ee “there”
(ver. 40).


Ver. 29. ‘And the name thereof
is called Bamah unto this day.”
“ Bamah,” a Hebrew word, signifying
High-Place. ‘The tops of high hills
were used by the heathen for idolatrous
worship ; and, in consequence, Moses
interdicted the use of them even for
the worship of the true God (Deut.
xii. 1-5).


general at the close of ver. 27. ‘“‘‘I'he


HOMILETICS.
(Vers. 27-29.)


I. The nature of the sin of blasphemy.
Me” (ver. 27). This was the “trespass” which they committed against
Jehovah. The essence of blasphemy consists in contempt of God; in delibe-
rately disobeying His commands, especially as to worship. For surely God has
the absolute right to lay down the manner in which He shall be approached
served, adored. He appointed the Holy Place for His worship, but Israel


“Your fathers have blasphemed


BOMPLETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP. XK,





—


served their own Gods in places of their own appointing. When once God
has spoken clearly, all mere will-worship is of the nature of blasphemy.


II. Blasphemy is ever the sin of the unregenerate heart. We speak espe-
cially of those who have the advantages of a Divine revelation, and who have
means therefore for knowing the mind and will of God. Those who have no
means of knowing God cannot consciously blaspheme Him. 1. The wnregenerate
heart may recognise the idea of God, and the duty of worship. The Israelites
of the prophet’s time felt that they must worship some divinity. They muet
have a religion. But 2. The unregenerate heart, though it pretends to a
religion, leaves out the true essentials of it. And what are these? A recogni-
tion of God’s supreme authority as a righteous Ruler, a Saviour from sin, and a
Sanctifier. Such men are ready to “ recognize the idea of God,” but under the
pretence of a lofty philosophical religion they practically deny God’s authority,
they destroy the foundations of all truth in belief and worship. Sinful man,
even when he holds by some prime necessity of religion, is ever prone to exalt
his own mind and will. 38. The unregenerate heart has a natural preference
for a burdensome and difficult religion. Israel was not satisfied with
worshipping God in His holy temple, but preferred travelling great distances
and climbing the high hills, Manis ever ready to “do some great thing.”
God’s way is too simple for him. ‘There is something in human nature which
is flattered by difficult demands.


III. The sin of blasphemy especially interferes with God’s gracious pur-
poses for mankind. God chose His ancient people that through them all the
families of the earth should be blessed. Salvation is of the Jews. Israel was
becoming like the heathen, whereas it was God’s purpose that the heathen
should become like Israel. Thus by their idolatry, and even blasphemy, the
chosen people were working against the gracious purposes of the Most High.
Ali manner of blasphemy against God, whether arising from intellectual pride,
or guperstition, or will- worship hinders the progress of His kingdom.


(Ver. 27).


“Tave blasphemed Me.” The Hebrew word signifies, to revile with words,
to reproach, and blaspheme. To blaspheme is to hurt the name or fame of any,
and is a kind of evil speaking, derogating from the glory of God. God’s glory
or name in itself is inviolable, but blasphemy doth what it can to violate it
Blasphemy consists—1. Jn attributing to God what is not congruous to Him.
As to sny, He is the author of sin; He sees not, He hath forsaken the earth
(Ezek. viii. 12) ; He is like unto man (Psa. 1. 21). 2. In detracting from Him
what belongs unto Him, As to deny His providence, His omniscience, His
omnipotence, as, “can He provide a table in the wilderness?” (Psa. Ixxviii, 19) ;
If He should make windows in heaven could this thing be? (2 Kings vii. 2).
8. The doing of such things as cause God’s name to be blasphemed. As, “The
name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you.” As there i:

ractical atheism, so there is practical blasphemy (Tit. i. 16). “In that they
Live committed a trespass against Me.” ‘I'he doubling of the werd in the
Hebrew notes the greatness of tleir sin, and progress in their wickednass. They
sinned not ignorantly, or of common infirmity, but with a iigh baad. They
spake against the trae worship of God, and practised contrary thereunto. Wilful
sinning is a reproaching of God, and provokes Him greatly. “They have com-
mitted a trespass against Me.” They have spoken against My worship, and
run out to other ways which I forbade them. Other sins they have committed
which I could have winked at, but when they sin wilfully, bea ge Me, My


OHAP. XX HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





laws, My worship, they reproach, blaspheme, provoke Me so, that they shall
hear of it. Son of man, go and speak to the house of Israel ; go and tell them
how they have dealt with Me, and how I take it. Such sins deserve death
(Num. xv. 80). ‘The soul that doeth oug'it presumptuously, whether he be
born in the land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth the Lord.” ‘The Hebrew
word here rendered “ reproacheth ” is the same as that rendered “ blasphemed”
in Ez. xx. 27. For he that reproacheth the Lord blasphemes Him, and he that
blasphemes Him reproacheth Him : they are joined together (2 Kings xix. 22).
There was no mercy for those who sinned in that manner (Heb. x. 26, 27).
Many commit such trespasses in these days, by speaking against previdence,
ordinances, Scriptures, angels, Christ, God himself; and so sin away mercy
and their own souls at once. David prayed that God would keep him back
from “ presumptuous sins” (Psa. xix. 13) ; and we have need to do it, for there
is that in our natures which carries us on strongly towards them. Solomon
saith, “Happy is the man that feareth always; but he that hardeneth his
heart ”—that presumeth, that is wilful, pertinacious—“ shall fall into mis-
chief,” into mischievous sins, into mischievous judgments.—(Greendill).


(Verses 30-38.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—The pro- them. ‘Here we have the announce-


phet addresses the men of his, day,
showing that they are equally guilty
with their fathers, They are to receive
just retribution, and to be purified
among the heathen.


Ver. 30. “Are ye polluted after
the manner of your fathers? and
commit ye whoredom, after their
abominations? These interrogations
are intended to imply a strong affirma-
tive.


Ver. 31. “Even unto this day.”
“The note struck in the question of
Ver. 29 is still maintained, not merely
to express astonishment, but still more
to compel self-reflection, I ask, what
further communication you would
have ?”—(Lange.)


Ver. 32, “We will be as the
heathen.” They flattered themselves
that the heavy judgments which the
prophets had threatened would not be
inflicted + that they could accept with-
out molestation the state of the
heathen, and the responsibility of the
heathen. ‘‘ That which cometh into
your mind shall not be atall.” That
wish is declared to be impossible, for
they stood before God on a different
foundation from the heathen around

236


ment of their continued punishment.
The heathen stood under the divine
long-suffering (Rom. iii. 25); not so
Israel, to whom God had so gloriously
made Himself known. Wherein the
heathen may prosper, therein Israel
must decline. The designation of the
heathen gods as wood and stone, alone
sufficient to counteract the strange
notion which attributed a real existence
to the heathen gods, is taken from
Deut. iv. 28 ; xxviii. 36.”—(Hengsten-
berg.)


Ver. 33. Surely with a mighty
hand, and with a stretched-out arm,
and with fury poured out, will I rule
over you.” “ Their thought was, that
they should become like the heathen in
the lands of the earth, to serve wood
and stone; that is to say, we will
become idolators like the heathen, pass
into heathenism. ‘This shall not take
place ; on the contrary, God will rule
over them as King with strong arm
and fury. The words, “ witha mighty
hand, and with a stretched-out arm,”
are a standing expression in the Penta-
teuch for the mighty acts by which
Jehovah liberated His people from the
power of the Egyptians, and led them
out of Egypt (Ex. vi. 1,6; Deut. iy.
84, v. 15, vii. 19, etc.). By the intro-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


duction of the clause, “with,fury poured
out,” the manifestation of the omnipo-
tence of God which Israel experienced
in its dispersion, and which it was still
to experience among the heathen, is
described as an emanation of the divine
wrath, a severe and wrathful judg-
ment.—(Keil). “ For the friendly and
gracious government of God they have
given Him little thanks, and have
wickedly withdrawn from Him. As
God, however, must come to His
sovereign rights, so His sovereignty
now assumes a terrible form.”—(//eng-
stenberg.) .


Ver. 34. “And will gather you out
of the countries wherein ye are scat-
tered.” “ Although Keil explains the
‘leading out’ as neither local nor
‘material, yet we do not understand it
with him of a spiritual separation from
the heathen world (to which they are
immediately brought, ver. 35), ‘lest
they should be absorbed in it,’ etc.,
but of an aggravation of their exiled
condition, a spiritual experience of it,
so that they should know and feel that
they as the people of God were once
more in the wilderness, but not at all
in the same sense as before (Deut. viii.
15, xxxil. 10).”—(Lange.)


Ver. 35. “The wilderness of the
people.” In ancient time, Israel had
been trained and disciplined in the
literal wilderness (Deut. viii. 15, 16);
now God was about to send them to
a new school of affliction, among the
busy, populous world. ‘There they
would be made to feel their isolation
severely, ‘The wilderness is desig-
nated as ‘the wilderness of the peoples’,
in contradistinction to the former wil-
derness, where was only the howling of
wild beasts (Deut. xxxii. 10), lions,
serpents, and the like (Deut. vili. 15;
Isa. xxx. 6). The new wilderness
is one in which Israel is in the
midst of the peoples, and can
therefore be no ordinary wilderness,
for wilderness and peoples exclude one
another. It must rather be a sym-
holic or typical designation of the
tate of punishment and purification.


CHAP. XX.





The interchange of type and thing
is in verse 36 separated. From the
defect of historical notices concerning
the state of the exiles, we cannot show
the fulfilment of this prophetic an-
nouncement. It is natural, however,
to suppose that the part taken by the
exiles in the political intrigues of the
home country brought upon them
also severe sufferings.” —(Hengsten-
berg.) ‘“‘There will I plead with you
face to face.” “ Jehovah threatens to
deal with them as in open court by
clearing those who had repented of
their wickedness, and punishing the
obstinate as He had done their fathers
of old.”—(/enderson).


Ver. 36. “Like as I pleaded with
your fathers in the wilderness of the
land of Fgypt.” “'I'hey were not led
into the wilderness of the peoples as a
punishment ; although on account of
their disobedience it often became a
place of punishment; but the divine
intention was to try them, to prove
them (Dent. viii. 2, etc.), from which
resulted separation of individuals,
purification, which was so strongly
urged upon them in reference to
Egypt, whither they were always
looking back (Num, xx. 5; xxi. 5).”
—(Lange).


Ver. 37. “ And I will cause you to
pass under the rod.” The reference is
to the rod of a shepherd counting his
sheep (Lev. xxvii. 32). ‘A shepherd
lets his sheep pass through under the
rod for the purpose of counting them,
and seeing whether they are in good
condition or not (Jer. xxxiil. 13). ‘The
figure is here applied to God. Like a
shepherd, He will cause His flock, the
Israelites, to pass through under His
rod, 7.é., to take them into His special
care.” —(Keil.) “ And I will bring you
into the bond of the covenant.” “By
this we are not merely to under-
stand covenant punishments, but the
covenant promises must also be in-
cluded. For not only the threats of
the covenant, but also its promises,
are bonds by which God trains His
people. The Hebrew word egg only

387


CHAP. XX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





applied to burdensome and crushing
fetters, but to the bonds of love as well
(Cant. vii. 16).”—(Keil.) The “bonds”
of God’s covenant are those of love
(Hos. xi. 4).


Ver. 38. “The rebels.” Those who
would not have the Lord for their king
(St. Luke xix. 14, 27). “Iwill bring
them forth out of the country where
they sojourn, and they shall not enter
into the land of Israel.” Canaan was
called ‘the land of their pilgrimage ”
(Ex. vi. 4). They had debased the
land which God gave them to dwell in
by their idolatries, and so it became to
them the land of bondage. Therefore
God would bring them out of it, and


send them to wander in the world’s
wilderness. Through unfaithfvlness
they were unable to enter “ into God’s
rest” (Ps. xcv. 11), that rest which
remaineth only for those whose God is
the Lord (Heb. iv. 9). ‘“ The language
here implies that the great body of the
nation should be recovered from idola-
try, and return to their native land, and
that only a portion would continue in a
state of rebellion against Jehovah, and
consequentlyremain in exile” ( Hender-
son.) ‘*‘ And ye shall know that I am
the Lord.” “This is the painful ex-
perience that will sooner or later force
itself upon all those who despise salva-
tion.” —( Hengstenberg.)


HOMILETICS.
\ (Vers. 30-32.)
Gop amrimva Himsetr rrom IsRaEL PROFESSING TO 8EEK Hm


The Elders professed that they had come “ to inquire of the Lord.” But they
came insincerely. That High-place still remained as a witness to their idolatries
(ver. 29). Iv spite of the reformations under Hezekiah and Josiah, and the
frequent warnings of the prophets, they worshipped false gods even in front of
the Lord’s ''emple (1 Kings xi. 7). Hence God’s final refusal, through His
prophet, “I will not be enquired of by you” (ver. 31). Why did God hide
Himself from His people, who, through these Elders, were professing to
seek Him ?


I. Because of their continuance in the sin of idolatry. They were polluted
after the manner of their fathers (Vers. 30, 31). God encourages all who seek
the truth in sincerity, even though it be through ignorance and superstition.
But when the truth we seek is a delusion, which we wilfully follow—a mere idol,
God hides His face from us. 1. Jdolatry obscures man’s natural knowledge of
God. It leads the religious instinct astray, and into all that is debasing and
vile. -Though it may call in the aid of beauty and refinement, yet it has ever a
degrading and downward tendency. 2. Idolatry in the chosen people was
the rankest transgression. ‘'\‘hey were God’s people by vocation, by covenant,
by special providence. ‘This sin was, therefore, the worst that Israel could
possibly commit. And it shewed further,—(1.) Zhe power of bad example.
The corrupting influences of the idolatries around them. (2.) Zhe perils of all
pomp and glaring externals in religion. ‘They were attracted by the outward
and the sensual, which were the characteristics of heathen worship.


II. Because ot the impossibility of their becoming in all respects like the
heathen. They might imitate their customs, worship their idols, and sink
down into their degraded condition ; yet they could not be made to stand on
the same footing before God. 1. They could not get rid of their respansi-
bility. God had made Himself known unto them by revelation. Therefore they

238


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP. Xx,





could not be judged as the heathen, but by a different standard. Men will be
Judged by the highest standard revealed to them, and not by the lowest, which
they have chosen in their sin and folly. 2. God’s long-suffering towards the
heathen did not apply to Israel. 'She patience which God showed towards the
heathen could not be expected towards those who had higher religious advan-
tages. 3, Jt ts impossible so to obliterate the past as though it had never
been. The memory of the past makes our whole life one. We cannot part
from our former selves. However Israel might have sunk into idolatry, the
fact of their glorious privileges in the past still remained. None of those who
dwell ina land visited by the light of God’s Revelation can becowe, in all
respects, like the heathen. We may choose the sins of heathenism, but. we
must be judged as those who have had opportunity for the knowledge of God.


(Vers. 37, 38).


1. The Lord doth distinguish His people from others, “1 will cause you
to pass under the rod.” I will examine which are sheep, and which are goats,
and will sever the one from the other. Christ knew His sheep, His little flock,
from all the goats of the mountains. When the men appeared with weapons
of slaughter in their hands, and execution was to be upon Jerusalem, the Lord
made His people to “ pass under the rod.” He numbered them, and set His
mark upon them, that they might not perish in the common calamity (Ezek. ix),
2. Though God’s people do go out from Him, and violate the covenant, yet He
will not let them so go, but will bring them under His power. ‘These had
transgressed the covenant, broken the bonds, cast off the ways of God, thought
to exempt themselves from His rule over them, but, saith the Lord, “I will
bring you into the bond of the covenant ;” you shall be under my power and
law. ‘Though I suffer Babylonians and other nations to be at their own
disposal, yet it shall not be so with you who are my people with whom I am
in covenant, and to whom I must be faithful whatever you are to me, and will
be known to be your God and Sovereign. I will have account of you, and
make you know that you are under my bonds, and not Babylonish ones.
3. God’s dealings with His people is very different. He brings them ‘‘into the
bunds of the covenant,” to see what they are; if they be goats, wicked, He
punishes them and purges them out; if they be sheep, though they have gone
astray, He pardons them and enables them to yield to covenant obedience. He
purged out the wicked by judgments and death, and preserved the others. The
righteous were jewels, and therefore spared; the wicked were stubble, and
therefore destroyed. 4. Though the wicked be among the godly yet they shall not
always be so. “Iwill purge out from among you the rebels, and them that
transgress against me.” It is God’s method, even here in this world, ofttimes to
separate the wicked from the godly, to fan out the chaff from the wheat,
5. Whatever man’s thoughts are of the world, they are but sojourners therein.
“T will bring them out of the land of their sojournings,” were it Canaan or
Babylon, they were no more than “sojourners.” Wicked men think they are
heirs to, owners and lords of the earth (Psa. xlix. 11). David, though king in
Israel, yet acknowledgeth himself a sojourner, as all his fathers were. They
spent a few days therein, and so passed away, and this was his condition. Let
us look so upon ourselves, and “ pass the time of our sojourning here in fear”
(1 Pet. i 17); and mind that city which hath foundations, out of which, if we
be once possessed, we shall never be removed. 6. When God brings His people
into Canaan, He will shut out the wicked, they shall not enter into the land of
Israel. Others shall be brought in, but as for those who would be as the
world, aa the heathen, as Babylonians, they shall never come Bias Canaan,

9


CHAP. XX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL





Canaan was the type of heaven, and this exclusion of these wicked ones,
represents the exclusion of ungodly ones out of heaven. However, good
and bad are mingled together in this world, and oft in the church, yet when God
brings His people to the heavenly Canaan, no unclean thing shall enter there
(Rev. xxi. 7; 1 Cor. vi. 9). 7. Mercies and judgments make God known
experimentally. ‘Ye shall know that I am the Lord.” God would purge out
the rebels from the obedient ; there was mercy. Keep them out of the land of
Israel ; there was judgment. ‘Ihe rebels should know and acknowledge Him to
be Jehovah, being convinced with the equity of His judgments, and affected
with the severity of them. ‘I'he godly should do it, being convinced and
affected with the nature, greatness, needfulness, and freeness of that mercy.
Judgment upon these rebels was mercy to the godly ; and mercy to the godly
was mercy to the rebels; and both were brought to acknowledge the Lord.
Mercies and judyments work most affectionately and effectually upon the godly ;
for it is said, “ Ye shall know,” ye that are purged, ye that shall come to the
land of Israel.—( Greenhill.)


(Ver. 35).


“ And I will bring you into the wilderness of the people, and there will I
plead with you face to face.” The history of the Jews is a surprising but most
instructive history. ‘These men have been the moral benefactors of the world
by what they have said, by what they have done, by what they have suffered.
Men have been blessed in them, and all generations have reason to call them
blessed. In their prosperity they were the lights of the world; in their
adversity they have been the instructors of it also.

The situation of Judea was remarkably adapted to the moral purposes God
had in view. Placed in the centre of those great continents of the ancient
world, at the head of the Mediterranean, and surrounded by those empires and
dynasties which contended for the sovereignty of the Hast, they were happily
so situated as to convey the light of truth in different directions. They were
in the direct line of intercourse between the Assyrians and Egyptians, and
a prominent object of attention to the Grecians and Romans. It was a place
of great resort though little engaged in commerce. Frequent embassies were
exchanged by the Jewish government and foreign nations, which rendered their
laws and customs, and, above all, their Scriptures known.

But, strange to say, in their adversity they have been quite as useful as in
their prosperity. In prosperity they held the lamp of truth to the view of the
nations ; in adversity they carried it wheresoever they wandered ; a striking
proof that if we will not voluntarily honour God in our enjoyments, He can
make us honour Him in our distresses. In their very captivities they were
made a blessing. ‘They were scattered for their own sins, but God brought a
revenue of glory to Himself and a harvest of blessing to the world from that
very event. God brought them, as the text says, into the wilderness of the
nations. ‘They were scattered into all lands,—many of them never returned,
and the ten tribes still are mixed with the nations,

The subject arising from the text is, The mixed character of Divine
dispensations. Not all judgment, lest we despair; nor all mercy, lest we
presume. Affliction is here traced in its causes, design, consolations,


I. The causes of affiiction. These are to be traced to human sinfulness.
Israel’s sorrows are here traced to Israel’s sins, Though the righteous and
wicked are both involved in the same calamities, yet God hag different ends in
the same dispensation. ‘That which hardens the one, softens and sanctifies the

240


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OAP. XE.


other. The two chief sins of the Jews were—l. The abuse of mercies
(vers. 5-26 ; Hosea ii. 8). ‘Teaching that sins under or after peculiar mercies
are greatly offensive to God, Jesus said, ‘Go thy way, sin no more, lest a
worse thing come upon thee.” It is a remark respecting Solomou’s idolatries
that he fell into them “after the Lord had appeared unto him twice.” The
aggravations of David’s sin (2 Sam. xiii. 7). Sins under or after special mercies
will meet with a severe rebuke. Nothing more distresses the conscience than
the remembrance, in darkness, of abused light ; in desertions, of neglected love.
Great opportunities of service neglected, and great gifts unimproved, involve
guilt, 2. Zhe abuse of trials. his involves guilt, and calls down heavier
afflictions, 'Ihis constitutes the peculiar instruction of their history. They
were now in captivity. The elders of Israel came to Ezekiel in the most
hypocritical manner. They proposed to consult God about their joining the
people of the country, abandoning their religious peculiarities, and conforming
to the customs of the heathen. God would not be consulted, but instructs
Ezekiel to detect and expose their hypocrisy. It seems they had not openly
expressed the sentiment, but it was “in their mind” to say, “ we will be as the
heathen to serve wood and stone.” This calls down the threatening of the
text (vers. 32-35). Religion is the best armour, but not the best cloak.

Guard against taking occasion from your afflictions of plunging into greater
guilt. Many fail to improve their afflictions, but it is awful indeed to be the
worse for them like Ahaz, who, in his distress, sinned yet more. It is a fearful
thing to have hard hearts under softening providences, and to have proud
hearts under humbling ones. We may say of affliction as Paul said of the Law,
“That which was ordained to life, I found to be unto death.” Men’s hearts
are of an anvil temper, made harder by affliction, and reverberate the blow.
Guard agaiust going farther from God under trials, against having recourse to
sinful means and worldly appliances to extricate yourself from calamity, against
despising “the chastening of the Lord, or fainting when thou art rebuked of
Him.” This course will either call down greater judgments, or provoke God to
withhold chastisement altogether: which is the greatest of all judgments, The
wrath of God is then suffered to accumulate, till it breaks down all the fences
and barriers tliat restrained it, and then comes upon us to the uttermost. They
that will not fear shall feel the wrath of heaven. The rods shall be changed
into scorpions. ‘God shall wound the head of His enemies, and the hairy
scalp of such an one as goeth on still in his trespasses” (Psa. lxvili, 21.) ‘The
chapter closes with solemn threatening (Ver. 47.)


II. The design of affliction. God has designs of love in bringing them into
the wilderness. “Then will I plead with you face to face.” He pleads with
them, not against them. 1. With convincing power. He will be justified
when He speaketh. Job complained against his friends, but not against God.
David was “ dumb with silence” when the hand of God was upon him, 2, With
compussionate tenderness (Hosea ii. 14, 15, 19-23). 3. With long forbearance
and condescension.


III. The consolations of which this state is susceptible. 1.:From the Author
of affliction consolation is derived. God brings usinto the wilderness; He neither
drives us there nor leaves us there. Affliction is not casual, but designed by
Him who knows us ‘better than we know ourselves, It “springeth not from
the dust.” God pleads with us there. Better to hear His voice in thunder
than to be deserted by him altogether. Better for Adam to be called from his
hiding place by a voice of terror than to be allowed for ever to separate himself
from God. It is rebuke, not destruction; mercy, not judgment; life, not
death. It is the death of the sin, not the death of the soul. God says, “I
will allure her.” 2. From its design. The design of affliction is “e ean

a


OHAP. XX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





sin, to separate the sin that God hates from the soul that He loves, to improve
the character, to promote spirituality, to prevent greater sufferings, to inspire
sympathy, to further usefulness, to prepare for higher enjoyments. God says,
“JT withheld thee from sinning against Me” (Gen. xx. 6). Paul was kept from
pride, how? by the thorn in the flesh, God prevents us by the blessings of his
goodness. By affliction, God promotes self-knowledge, humbles us aud proves
us to know what isin our heart. ‘I little thought,” says one, “that I was so
proud till I was called to stoop ; or so impatient till required to wait; or so


easily provoked till I met with such an offence ; or so rooted to earth till so


much force was required to detach me from it. port.
“J will never leave thee nor forsake thee.


JT will be with thee in trouble.”
4. From its ascertained issue.


IV. There are some special lessons to be learned. 1,
do not plunge yourself into a wilderness.


3. Lrom its promised support.


Take heed that you
By careless, sinful, inconsistent con-


duct. Self-made troubles are hard to bear. 2. lf you are in scenes of difficulty,


be anxious to converse with Him who brought you there.


Though He “ plead


with you face to face,” do not shun the intercourse, but submit, say, “Show me


wherefore thou contendest with me.”


ness without a shepherd, and without a hope.
4, Rejoice that the permanent home of God’s people is not the
They are there but for a short time on their way to a better


ungodly, ete.
wilderness.
country.


3. Pray for those who are in the wilder-


The heathen, the Jews, the


(From MSS. Sermons by the Rev. S. Thodey.)


(Vers.
EXEGETICAL NOTES.—The pro-


phet now declares the promise for the
future. Israel is to be gathered again,
aud to be converted to the Lord.


Ver. 39. “Go ye, serve ye every
one his idols, and hereafter also if
ye will not hearken unto Me.”
“ Jehovah here utterly disowns all
relationship with the rebels. He would
have idolatrous worship severed from
all connexion with His name. ‘The
tone in which they are addressed is one
of the keenest irony. Compare Rev.
xxii. 11. It is as much as to say,
Well, since you will not listen to Me
and return to My service, you may
take your own course; we henceforth
part company. The expression ‘‘ and
afterwards” is intended to give em-
phasis to the address, and anticipates
the continued apostacy of the rebels.”
—(Henderson.)


Ver. 40. ‘In the mountain of the
height of Israel.” Mount Moriah.
“There shall all the house of Israel,
all of them in the land, serve Me.”

242


39-44.)


Not the former rebellious house of
Israel (ver. 39), but the people now
restored to the practice of true religion.
They should all congregate at the
appointed festivals as of old, at Jeru-
salem, “There wili I accept them,
and there will I require your offerings
and the firstfruits of your oblations,
with all your holy things.” ‘Ihe
Lord will then accept them with
delight, and all their sacrificial gifts
and offerings. This promise implies
the bringing back of Israel from its
banishment,


Ver, 41. “ Your sweet savour.”
Heb., Odour of satisfaction. “This is
the technical expression for the cheer-
ful (well-pleased) acceptance of the
sacrifice, or rather of the feelings of
the worshipper presenting the sacrifice,
which ascends to God in the sacrificial
odour (Gen. viii, 21). The thought
therefore is the following: When God
shall eventually gather His people out
of their dispersion, He will accept
them as a sacrifice well-pleasing to


Him, and direct all His good pleasure


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; EZEKIEL.


towards them.”—(Keil.) ‘‘ AndI will
be sanctified in you before the
heathen.” “The restoration of the
Hebrews from the captivity, and the
re-establishment of their religious ser-
vices, would have the double effect of
procuring honour to Jehovah from the
surrounding nations, and attesting in
their own experience the happiness


OHAP. XK,





scribed ; here we have that inner con-
dition of spirit, that heart of repent-
ance, which alone can make such acta
acceptable to God.


Ver. 44. ‘‘ And ye shall know that
Iam the Lord, when I have wrought
with you for My name’s sake.” “'I'he
gathering of Israel from among the


heathen will be fulfilled in its conver-
sion to Christ, and hitherto it has only
taken place in very small beginnings.
The principal fulfilment is still to come,
when Israel, as a nation, shall be con-
verted to Christ.”—(Keil.)


springing out of the true knowledge of
the Divine character.—( Henderson.)


Ver. 438. “And there shall ye re-
member your ways.” In ver. 40 the
outward acts of the religion are de-


HONILETICS.
IsRAEL’s CONVERSION To THE Lorp.


I. The divine method in their conversion. 1. 7hey were urged to decision.
“Go ye, serve ye every one his idols” (ver. 39). Make your choice, at once;
let there be no double-heartedness. Make full proof of the idols ye have
chosen, “If the Lord be God, follow Him; but if Baal, then follow him”
(1 Kings, xviii. 21). This would have the effect of detecting hypocrites, and
bringing the true servants of the Lord to a full determination. 2. They are
brought to contrition. Contrition for past sins always accompanies true con-
version, Such a condition is produced (1) By a remembrance of sin as a trans-
gression against God. ‘Ye shall remember your ways, and all your doings
wherein ye have been defiled ” ver. 48. Ye shall think of your sins as having
defiled your souls, and therefore were contrary to the nature and will of a God
who is holy, and whose commandment is holy, just, and good. (2.) By self-
loathing. ‘Ye shall loathe yourselves in your own sight for all your evils
which ye have done.” ‘I'he conviction of sin, when brought home to a man,
makes him to see himself in the true light.


II. The results of their conversion. 1. They should be in reality what they
had hitherto been only in name. In ver. 39, they are addressed as, the “ House
of Israel,” though they went after their idols. The name was but a hollow
unreality. They are now the true “ House of Israel” (ver. 40). ‘They should
still worship on the height, but that would be on God’s holy mountain and with a
pure worship (ver. 28). 2. They should render an acceptable worship (ver. 41).
As they were in a right state of heart, their service of worship and offerings
would be well-pleasing unto the Lord. ‘The principle of Divine worship, in
both Testaments, is the same,—‘“ In spirit and in truth.” 3. The penalty of their
sin should be remitted. For their sins they were scattered ; now they are to be
restored (ver. 42). 4. They should give God all the glory. His forbearing mercy.
His forgiving mercy. His mercy so great as not to be restrained by all their
sins from granting the greatest gifts. 5. Their conversion would promoie the
true knowledge of God. (1) Among the nations around them. “I will be
sanctified in you before the heathen.” (ver. 41). The heathen would see that
the God of Israel was holy, just in all His ways; yet merciful, and faithful to
His covenant promises. (2) Among themselves, “ And ye shall know that I
am the Lord.” (ver. 44). And there is a knowledge of God which we jee gain

2


OHAP. XX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





feom the history of His dealings with His ancient people. We see that God
brings His purposes to pass amidst all human opposition and rebellion. We
know that, in the worst times, there has always been an elect remnant of
faithful men to glorify Him. And the history of the past assures us that it
will be thus in the future,


(Ver. 41).


“T will accept you with your sweet savour.” The spirit of the Gospel is
observable under the law. ‘here can be but one way to heaven. David,
Isaiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel were sinners saved by grace as much as Paul, and
Peter, and John. And they were saved by the same Mediator. Let us consider
the blessings promised in the text, and then we shall give some directions for the
attainment and preservation of the enjoyment it reveals.


I, Some remarks upon the blessing promised. These are acceptance with
God through a Redeemer, through His grace and righteousness. His sacrifice
is as a sweet smelling savour, and the worship of His people is as incense
acceptable to Him. Acceptance stands opposed to condemnation, and is enjoyed
through faith in Christ. 1. 7hds blessing is the grand discovery of the gospel.
It is the design and end of all God’s communications with men—“ God in Christ
reconciling the world unto Himself.” 2. J¢ ts always the result of an experience
of the work of grace upon the soul. It puts the life of hope into obedience.
Our persons must be accepted before our works. 3. /¢ secures the true and right
enjoyment of all temporal blessings. To a man who has no sense of God’s
friendship, the best earthly enjoyments lose their charm ; and to a man who has
hope of pardon through Christ, all outward trials lose their sting. 4. Jt és
essential to a victory over death and a joyful eternity.


II. Some directions for the attainment and enjoyment of this blessing®
1. Look carefully to the fact of your own acceptance of Christ, and to the
sincerity of your hearts in their covenant closure with Christ. See that you
take him, with the happiness He has promised, for your All. Take heed of
looking after another felicity, or cherishing other hopes than those of which He
is the Author and object. Christ is the great promise made to faith ; and
faith is the soul’s acceptance of Christ as He is freely promised. ‘To present
Christ before us with all his gifts and blessings is the design of the Gospel ; and
to rest in Christ as the fountain of all our hope and joys is the first act of a
believer. (God prays you to accept Christ: as though God did beseech you by
us, we pray you in Christ’s stead be ye reconciled to God. 2. Cherish habitual
and confiding thoughts of the freeness and riches of G'od’s grace through a
Redeemer. ‘This will greatly kindle that love which brings its own evidence of
its truth. ‘I'his will make God appear more amiable in your eyes, and then
you will love him more abundantly ; and as your conscious love to Him increases
your doubts and apprehensions will give way. So much love, so much comfort.
Those right apprehensions of God also will do much to drive away those terrors
which arise from false apprehensions of Him. Delightful objects draw the heart
after them as the loadstone draws iron. In Christ you see goodness and mercy
in its condescension, and brought nearer to you than the Divine
uature oriviually was, In Christ God is come down into our nature,
and so Infinite Goodness is become incarnate. 3. very day renew
your apprehensions of the truth and value of the promised felicity.
Consider the end of your faith, in order to see the vain and delusive character
of things below. Let not heaven lose with you its attractive force through your
forgetfulness or unbelief. He is the best Christian who knows best why ite is a

244


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. CHAP, XX.
I


Christian. Look upon all present actions and conditions with a remembrance
of their end. Value not earthly things beyond their true worth. Be not
ambitious of that honour which must end in confusion, nor of the favour of
those whom God will call His enemies. 4. Guard against those snares and
temptations which you know to be most hurtful to the life of religion in the soul.
5. Gather up and improve your own past experience of God’s mercy towards
you and others. We do God and ourselves great wrong by forgetting, or not
lmproving, our experience of His goodness. God does not give His mercies only
for present use, but for the future also. What a wrong it is to God in your
next tral to forget His last deliverance! Have not mercies come so un-
expectedly, and in such a wonderful manner, that you have (as it were) the
name of God written on them ? (Judg. xiii. 23), “All my bones shall say, who
is like unto thee.” You may make great use also of the experience of others.


(From MSS. Sermons by the Rev. S. Thodey).


(Ver. 43.)


1. Sense of mercies, rather than of judgments, makes sin bitter, and leads
unto repentance. ‘Their captivity, and the sad things they suffered therein, did
not embitter their sin unto them, and break their hearts ; but God’s kindness
in bringing them out of Babylon into the land of Israel, that prevaileth with
them ; when they had received marvellous kindness from God, then they were
marvellously affected, greatly ashamed of their ways, and loathed themselves.
Mercies in Zion produced that which judgments in Babylon did not. Great
mercies bestowed upon great sinners, do preach the doctrine of repentance most
effectually, convincing them strongly of their unworthy and vile carriages
towards the Lord. David’s kindness brake the heart of Saul, and made him to
weep and say, “ Thou art more righteous than I; for thou hast rewarded me
good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil” (1 Sam. xxiv.) If human favour
hath such influence into a sinful heart, what hath Divine? Moses, by his
strokes, fetched water out of a rock; David, by his kindness. God some-
times by His judgments humbles men, and brings them to repentance, but
mostly by His mercies. The sweet influences of the Gospel have pierced
deeper into sinners’ hearts than the terrors of the law. 2. When the Lord
gathers up His people out of the world, and brings them into nearer relation ta
Himself, into Canaan, and Church order, He looks that they should review their
former ways and be much affected with them, and thoroughly repent for them.
When brought into Canaan, they were not only to eat the milk and honey, to
behold the glory thereof, but they were to remember days of old, their sins in
Babylon, how they had polluted themselves and provoked the Lord; and
thereupon to mourn kindly for their unkindnesses to Him, who hath showed
such marvellous loving-kindness unto them. When God brings man out of the
world now unto Zion, gives them the milk and honey of the gospel, shows them
the glory thereof, then they look back, wonder at their wickedness, and loathe
themselves for it, saying, Who is like unto us in sin and wickedness, and who
is like unto our God in grace and goodness, in pardon and _ forgiveness ?
(Micah vii. 18). When it shall please God to bring the Jews out of that
Babylon they are now in, unto the true Canaan, the Church of Christ, they
will remember their iniquities, their bitter and bloody doings against Christ,
mourn and loathe themselves for the same (Zech. xii. 10; Rev. i. 7).) 3. When
repentance springs from sense of love and kindness, as it is real and deep,
so it is secret and universal. They should, being brought into Canaan, not
only remember their sins, but they should loathe themselves, be displeased so
with themselves, that they should smite and abhor themselves, and that in their

245


OHAP. XX.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





own sight, and for all the evils they had committed ; when no eye saw them,
they would spread all their sins before them, and in the sight and sense of them


be vile in their own eyes.—(Greenhill.)


(Vers, 39-44).


EXEGETICAL NOTES. The de-
struction of Jerusalem under the image
of a forest devoured by fire.

A comparison of these verses with
Ch. xxi. 2-5, shows that they belong
properly to Ch. xxi. They form the
commencement of that chapter in the
Hebrew Bible.


Ver, 46. “Set thy face towards the
south.” “There are three words in
the Hebrew text of this verse to em-
press south, They are merely used
as synonyms for the sake of varying
the expression. The first signifies to
be on the right, honoured with refer-
ence to the position of the quarter of
the heavens when facing the east. The
word is used both for the right hand
and the south. ‘Ihe second word is of
less frequent occurrence, and besides
in our prophet, and once in the Penta-
teuch, is found only in Job and Eccle-
siastes. ‘The third word signifies to be
dry, dried up: hence the south, where
the heat of the sun is most severely
felt. All the three terms specially
apply here to the southern division of
the Holy Land, of which at the time
Jerusalem was the capital.”—(Hender-
son). “Drop thy word.” “ A very
common expression for prophetic dis-
course (Deut. xxxii. 2). It is suggested
by the rain or the dew, and points to
the place of its origin,—above, and
also to the beveficial influence which
it is intended to exert, and is used
even when the discourse does not
contain promises merely, but also
threatening and judgment, as is the
case here exclusively, and to a large
extent also in Deut. xxxii. May it
not also hint at the concise, abrupt
style of composition adopted in this
chapter ?”—(Lange). ‘The forest of
the south field.” Forest is used figura-
tively to denote dense masses of people.
The densely populated country of Judea

246


is intended. Ezekiel here declares the
doom of the Southern kingdom, as
Amos had declared the doom of the
Northern kingdom (Amos vii. 9,
11, 17).


Ver. 47. “Every green tree in thee,
and every dry tree.” The righteous
and the wicked (Ch. xxi. 3,4). Ow
Lord probably refers to this passage in
St. Luke xxiii. 31. ‘“‘ The flaming fire
shall not be quenched.” ‘I'he fierce
flame of God’s jealousy (Cant. vill. 6).
“All faces.” “Every single thing in
the forest, which is caught at once by
the flame. From south to north, z.¢.,
through the whole length of the land.
From the terrible fierceness of the fire,
which cannot be extinguished, every
one will know that God has kindled it,
that it has been sent in judgment.”—
(Keil.)


Ver. 49. ‘‘ They say of Me, doth he
not speak parables?” ‘I'hey wish to
get rid of the application of the pro-
phecy to themselves by describing it
as obscure. ‘They pretend not te
understand it. ‘“ At the same time, it
contains within itself a request that
they may be explained. ‘lis request
is granted ; and the simile is first of
all interpreted in Ch. xxi. 1-7; and
then still further explained in verses 8,
etc.”—(Keil.) “'The riddle is easy to
solve, and the prophet has to do with
a sharp-witted people ; but the hearers
will not understand, because the truth
is unpleasant to them, and retire with
a certain irony behind the difficulty of
the form, and make as if they did not
understand. ‘To take away this miser-
able excuse from them, to punish them
for their ironical hardness of hearing,
he expresses the same in clear and
plain terms in the following passage.”
—(Hengstenberg.,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; EZEKIEL, OHAP. XX.





HOMILETICS.
(Ver. 46.)


“Drop thy word towards the south.” Heb. Drop towards the south. The
word properly signifies the dropping of the clouds, or rain, and is metaphorically
put for prophesying and preaching. ‘These are likened unto rain or the
droppings thereof. 1. ln respect of the flowing and succession of one drop
after another, “'The heavens dropped, the clouds also dropped water”
(Judg. v. 4). Soin prophesying, there is one word, one truth after another.
2. In respect to the influence thereof. The drops soak into the earth ; so words
have influence into men’s ears and hearts (Deut. xxxii. 2). As the rains and
dews insinuate themselves into the grass and ground, so do words into the
heads and hearts of men (Psa. cxix. 130). 8. In respect to the trouble and hurt
that oft rains and droppings produce. “ A continual dropping in a very rainy
day and a contentious woman are alike” (Prov. xxvii. 15), alike grievous,
troublesome, wasting, and wearying ; so prophesying of judgments and destruc-
tion is grievous and troubles much ; it is like great rains and drops (2 Chron.
xxxiv, 25). ‘The Hebrew is, “shall drop upon this place.” There should be a
storm, and such great drops of God’s wrath as should consume it. (Greenhill.)

The word of God is rightly likened to rain. Like rain, it descends from
above, and not according to man’s will ; it is also, like it, useful and beneficial ;
as rain flows down from rocks upon the fields, so the word of God upon the
godless, and, on the other hand, into pious hearts; and, like the rain, it is not
equally acceptable to all. (Fessel.)


Tus Propurcy oF JERUSALEM'S DESTRUCTION.


(Vers. 45-49.)
Consider this prophecy—


I. As to its form. This prophecy is uttered in a poetical form, most wild
and rugged. ‘I'he awful and the terrible, as well as the beautiful and tender,
find their expression in poetry. ‘The imagery here is that of a forest on fire,
and its devouring flame raging beyond the control of man. The boldness of the
image will account for the strange and wild forms of the expressions used, and
the rapid transitions from one thought to another. We can only understand
the style of the Bible, in its prophetic writings, when we consider the intensity
and depth of those feelings which possessed the minds of the prophets.


II. As to its substance. The “ forests” signify multitudes—the great masses
of the population upon whom terrible judgments are about to fall. 1. The
judgments are irresistible. The power of God, which is a righteous power,
would be at work in them. The storms of the Almighty rush over the forest,
and the trees must bend. Moreover, God sends fire, against which nothing can
prevail. “The flaming fire shall not be quenched.” 2. The judgments fall
even upon the righteous. “ And it shall devour every green tree in thee, and
every dry tree.” ‘The “dry tree” would be fuel for the flame, but so great
would be the destruction that even the “green tree” could not escape.
Judgment would come even upon the house of God. Even the people of God
have sins enough to bring upon them great calamities. “I will kindle a fire in
thee,” in Jerusalem, the centre of religious life, of Church privileges. Like a
raging fire, God’s judgments devour all before them. 8. The ungodly are
admonished by the afflictions of the righteous, The prophet dese) warns


CHAP. XX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





the people that, when the great and noble among their countrymen
fall, they cannot possibly escape, “Howl, fir tree, for the cedar is
fallen” (Zech. xi. 2.) ‘This is but another form of the Apostle’s state-
ment; “If judgment first begin at the house of God, what shall
the end be of them that obey not the gospel of Christ?” It is the
very truth which the same apostle puts in the form of a question, “If the
righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?”
When our Lord bids the daughters of Jerusalem to weep for themselves for the
destruction which was about to come upon their devoted city, He adds, “ For
if they do these things in the green tree, what shall be done in the dry ?”
(St. Luke xxiii. 31). When the green tree cannot stand before the flame, how
can the dry tree hope to escape! Christ was righteous, yet He did not escape
the judgments of sin. He suffered for sin. “It pleased the Lord to bruise
Him and to put Him to grief.” “He was numbered with the transgressors.”
We can see how real a thing sin is, and how hateful in the sight of God, when
we reflect how terribly the effects of it were visited upon Jesus Christ, the
Righteous. And God employs judgments to purify His people; yet, even in
their case, these are truly chastisements. God is specially severe in His
judgments upon the chosen people, ‘‘ You only have I known of all the families
of the earth; therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities.” His very
intimacy with them is put forward as a reason for leaving no iniquity
unpunished. In all His dealings with His chosen, God has ever acted upon
this principle. Witness the wanderings and sufferings of the patriarchs—the
dispersions and captivities of Israel—the untimely death of Moses and of Aaron
—the troubles of Eli—the sorrows of David—the present afflictions of the
righteous, If the green trees thus suffer, the dry cannot be spared.

III, As to its reception. The prophecy is objected to as obscure, as a dark
and mysterious saying. “Then said I, Ah, Lord God! they say of me, Doth
he not speak parables?” As if they said, “He is a speaker of parables, a
mere utterer of dark sayings.” There is probably a vein of irony in these
words with which the hearers received the prophet’s message; as if they would
thus speak, “It is a clever saying of things which sound very terrible, if we
could only understand it.” Sinners never want excuses for neglecting the
prophet’s message. Wither the message is too dark and mysterious, or else it
is too simple. If the prophet announces unwelcome truths, and touches their
conscience, they cry out against him. If he threatens God’s judyments, he is
not to their mind. They will have none but those who prophesy smooth
things. Thus men find fault now with God’s revelation. If He says what
we already know, we think it is superfluous: we do not want a revelation
to teach us that. If He says one word beyond what nature or reason
might have taught us, we say it is irrational. One plain declaration of the
Bible we pronounce as inconsistent with probability, another as inconsistent with
some human authority, another as inconsistent with God’s justice, and another
as inconsistent with Christian charity. And in the same way men treat the
proofs and evidences of religion. One does not like miracles, and another
objects to the very idea of prophecy. The one saying, that it is altogether
unworthy of God to suspend His own laws; and the other, tiat it is unworthy
of God to dignify human persons by the prediction of their names and deeds,
Another will hear of nothing but the internal evidence of the truth, the good-
ness of the word spoken, the comfort conveyed to his own heart. And what
each man does not personally like, he casts aside as of no value. Objections of
this kind are often but mere excuses. ‘he real repugi.snce is to the idea of
being taught anything from God or His prophets. Neither the ministry of John
the Baptist nor even of Christ Himself could please the evil generation of their
day. ‘ But wisdom is justified of her children.” ;

248


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XXL


eee


Tue Finz anp Sworp or Divinz Justice ao FoRTH AGAINST HEATHENISED


JERUSALEM,
EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Thepeople


had turned all their hopes towards the
mother country,—the city and king-
dom. The prophet shows this to be a
delusion. ‘he sword of the Lord will
cut off Jerusalem and the land of
Israel, both righteous and wicked.
(ver. 1-17). ‘lhe instrument to be
used is the king of Babylon, who will
draw his sword against Jerusalem and
the ehildren of Ammon, first putting
an end to the kingdom of Judah, and
then destroying tle Ammonites (vers.
18-23). The design is, to withdraw
the people from their delusions, and
to teach them that they must trust
no longer in human policy but rather
in repentance towards God.


Vers. 1-7. The sword of the Lord
is to be drawn against Jerusalem, in
which the people placed all their con-
fidence.


Ver. 2. “The holy places.” “Heb.
sanctuaries. ‘Ihese include not only
the temple with its holy places, but
also the other edifices appropriated in
purer times to Divine worship, and
afterwards called synagogues” (Psa.
Ixxiii.17)—( Henderson). Hengstenberg
refers the plural to the glory of the
one sanctuary, and understands it of
“the spiritual abode of the people.”
Others account for the plural form of
the word by understanding it of the
individual buildings of the temple, its
two or three parts.” “The land of
Israel.” Equivalent to “the forest
of the south field.” (Ezek. xx. 46).


Ver. 3. “My sword.” “The fire
kindled by the Lord is interpreted as
being the sword of the Lord. It is
true that this is a figurative expression ;
but it is commonly used for war, which
brings with it devastation and death,
and would be generally intelligible.”—
(Keil.) ‘Out of his sheath.” The
sword of God had rested in its sheath
for above 400 years. In the days of
David it was suspended over Jerusalem ;


(Chap xxi.).


but the arm of the Destroying Angel
was then “stayed.” David by God’s
direction offered burnt-offerings on the
very place where the temple was after-
wards built ; and the destroying sword
was returned “ into the sheath thereof ”
(1 Chron. xxi. 16, 27; xxii. 1), God’s
forbearance was the sheath in which it
rested so long. Now Israel had become
heathenized, the vile profanation of
God’s altar was no longer to be endured,
and the sword must again leave its


scabbard. ‘The righteous and the
wicked.” “This is not in contradic-
tion with Ch. ix. 4, according to


which the righteous, amidst the im-
pendiny catastrophe, are the object of
the protecting and sustaining activity
of God. For if two suffer the same,
yet it is not the same. ‘'‘I'o those who
love God must all things be for the
best” (Rom. viti. 28).—( //engstenberg. )
“ There is no real contradiction between
the doctrine taught in this passage, and
that vindicated ch. xviii, Though
removed from their native land along
with the wicked, inasmuch as they
were nationally connected with them,
yet the righteous were to be regarded
only as the subjects of corrective disci-
pline, whereas to the idolatrous Jews
the sufferings were unmitigated punish-
ment.” —/( Henderson.)


Ver. 4. ‘‘From the south to the
north.” The whole extent of the
country, from Dan to Beersheba.


“Tt shall not return any
more.” It shall go on to make a full
end. ‘The same idea as in ch. xx. 48,
where it is stated that the fire of God’s
judgments shall not be quenched.


Ver. 5.


Ver. 6. “Sigh, tnerefore, thou son
of man, with the breaking of thy
loins.” The loins are said to be broke
when acute pain robs a man of all
power and strength (Deut. xxxili. 11).
“he more deeply to affect his country-
men with a sense of the dire calamities
which were so soon to overtake them,

249


OHAP, XXI. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.








the prophet is commanded openly to heard’ which is passing into fulfilment;
assume the appearance of a person in therefore his pain. But they shall be
deep distress, clasping his loins with compelled to experience in themselves
his hands, as sadly bruised; and, what they perceive in him. In all,
giving utterance to piteous groans in courage gives place to terror, activity
the bitterness of his spirit, he was to prostration, counsel to perplexity.
to present himself before them.’— No one holds out any longer.”—
(Henderson.) (Lange.) “All knees shall be weak
as water.” They become like water in
Ver. 7. ‘‘For the tidings, because laxity andincoherence. Their strength
it cometh.” ‘“'That which to others is, as it were, dissolved, flows away and
is merely tidings, is to the prophet is scattered in all directions,
already coming, or it is to him a ‘thing


HOMILETICS.


(Vers. 6, 7.)


Such fear should possess them upon the tidings of the Babylunish army’s
apprvaching, as should make their rocky hearts melt as snow before the sun, oF
fat of lambs before the fire; and the hands, spirits, and knees of their stoutest
man to be feeble, faint, and weak; so that they should be inept unto all
services, especially military ones. 1. God will have the prophet to see what
prophetical signs will do, when prophetical threats did nothing. “Sigh, son of
man, with the breaking of thy loins,” &c. ‘I'hese were prophetical sighs, repre-
senting unto them the great evils which were coming upon them ; that so they
might consider, sigh in like manner for their sins, and prevent their
destruction, or else certainly expect the same. God laid a heavy burden upon
the prophet when he is called so to sigh. 2. lll tidings sink the hearts and spirits
of hypocrites and. wicked ones. When they hear of wars and great forces
coming against them, not only doth their mirth cease, but their hearts, hands,
spirits, knees fail them. When Nebuchadnezzar came their hands were upon
their loins, they knew not what to do, whither to go, where to hide themselves.
But in Psa. exii. 7, it is said of a godly man, “ He shall not be afraid of evil
tidings ; his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord.”—(Greenhill.)


(Ver. 1-7.)
Gop’s SworD OF VENGEANCE AGAINST JERUSALEM.


The parabolic character of vers. 45-49 in the last chapter is continued. Then
the destruction by fire was threatened ; now it is the sword. Of this sword of
vengeance against Israel for their sins we learn :—


I. It was lifted against those things in which the people trusted most.
“Toward Jerusalem, the holy places, the land of Israel” (ver. 2). The Jews
turned their faces towards Jerusalem when they prayed in war, or in a foreign
land. ‘The sword of the Lord was to be drawn ayainst all those glories of their


country in which they most prided themselves. ‘he candlestick will be removed
from unfaithful churches.


II. It was manifestly the Sword of the Lord. “My sword” (ver. 8).


Human instruments were to be used, human passions; yet behind all these,
250


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP, XXI,





anil directing them, God was working out his own purposes. The swords were
His, though men bare them. This will teach us to judge rightly of war, wherein
the enmities of nations are so controlled by Providence that they are made to
minister to the moral and intellectual welfare of the human race. God
“maketh the wrath of man to praise Him,” and the “remainder” of that
wrath, which might work but unmixed evil, He restrains from so futile a
purpose. He can punish by whatever instrument He pleases. And because
this judgment coming upon Jerusalem and the land of Israel is described as
the sword of God, it follows that that judgment is a reality. The prophet is
to drop his word of prophecy toward Jerusalem. ‘hat “word” was not a
mere sound; but a sword, a real calamity. With God, words stand for
things which have a real existence. The threatenings against sinners, however
they may be disregarded in the present, will in the future have a terribly real
meaning.


ITI. It was long threatened before it was drawn to smite. “And will draw
forth My sword out of his sheath” (ver. 3). It had lain in the sheath for 400
years, during all their wanderings and rebellions. ‘The sheath in which God’s
sword of vengeance lies unused is His forbearance.


IV. It still hangs over unrighteous nations. “Jt shall not return any
more,” but ‘‘go forth against all flesh” (vers. 4, 5). This was the sword of
the Chaldeans: it was followed by the sword of the Romans. And so the
sword of God will rest not until the last Antichrist and his desolation. Israel
fell beneath the stroke of God for her sins, and who then can escape? Whole
nations have perished for lack of righteousness,


V. The thought of it should produce the greatest terror and alarm. 1. Jn
the prophet who utters the threat of it. “Sigh therefore, thou son of man”
(ver. 6). The sigh is the momentary failure of the heart when suddenly over-
come by the thought of sorrow. It answers to the tongue dumb with silence
at the tidings of some overwhelming calamity. The prophet charged with
the message is to sigh, as if completely overcome. Even God’s people
may well tremble when they think of His judgments (Dan. ix. 4, etc.)
Christ wept over Jerusalem at the thought of her doom, and as if unwilling
to abandon her to her enemies. It is with reluctance that the Almighty Judge
pronounces sentence. Judgment is God’s “strange work.” The preacher who
wishes to affect the feelings of others must feel himself. ‘The thought of God’s
sword of vengeance should produce the greatest terror and alarm,—2. Jn the
people to whom his message is delivered. If the prophet who simply announces
the judgments is bidden to sigh, what must they do on whom the judgments
are to fall! The prophet is to sigh for the tidings, ‘because it cometh.” He
knows that they shall be fulfilled in grim reality. Therefore he announces that
as concerning the people, “ Every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble,
and every spirit shall faint, and all knees shall be weak as water” (ver. 17).
They refused to hear, now they shall be made to feel. Those who were so
insolent in prosperity, and defied God, become, when His judgments fall upon
them, faint-hearted and desolate. ‘‘ Weak as water:” the strength of the
most daring sinners melts away before the righteous anger of God.


EXEGETICAL NOTES. (Verses Ver. 9. “And also furbished.” As
8-17.) The sword is sharpened for if the sword so long unused had rusted
slaying. As they are a people who in its sheath. “The repetition—a
refuse to understand, the judgment is sword, a sword, is not without effect—
announced in the plainest terms. definitely pointing to the destructive


251


CHAP. XXI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; EZEKIEL,





weapon to be employed in the war.
Yo augment the terror which the
announcement was calculated to in-
spire, the sword is described as
sharpened, prepared to do execution,
aud also polished. The glittering of a
highly-polished sword, wielded in the
sun, is truly terrific (Deut. xxxii. 41 ;
Job xx. 25”?).—(/enderson.)


Ver. 10. Itis sharpened to make a
sore slaughter. Heb. That slaying it
may slay.
display, but for its terrible work of
judement. It is furbished that it
may glitter. Heb. Have lightning,
Comp. ver. 28. This is the sword
spoken of in Dent. xxxii. 41, where
the expression, “ My glittering sword ”
is literally “the lightning of My
sword.” Such also is the sword wielded
by the Cherubim (Ezek. i. 18, 14), and
by those who were the avengers of
God’s broken Law. (Exod. xix. 16).
“Should we then make mirth?”
Nothing could be worse-timed than to
make light of these judgments, “ It
contemneth the rod of My son, as
every tree.” ‘‘My son,” is the same
as “My people,” in ver, 12. The
expression, the rod of My son, is the
genitive of object—ie., the instru-
ment employed in punishing My son.
In accordance with this is the render-
ing of the Revised Version, “The rod
of My son, it contemneth every tree.”
The sword of Nebuchadnezzar was the
rod which punished God’s people, and
that rod of the universal conqueror
set at nought all others.


Ver. 11. ‘“‘And He hath given it to
be furbished that it may be handled.”
“He hath given,” used impersonally
for and it is given, according to an
idiom common in Hebrew. ‘The
instrument of destruction was quite
prepared, and only required to be em-
ployed by Jehovah against His apostate
people.” —(//enderson.)


Ver. 12. ‘‘ For it shall he upon My
people.” The object of the Chaldean
expedition is here clearly pointed out.
The Jews were not to delude them-

252


It is made ready not for’


selves with the idea that it was Egypt
or any other neighbouring nation that
was to come under the judgment of
God’s avenging sword. ‘he punish-
ment would fall upon themselves.


Ver. 13. “Because it is a trial.”
“These words point with the utmost
brevity to the character of the impend-
ing time, which presented itself in rosy
hues to the politically excited people.
Trial is a terrible word to a people
that suffers the deepest . calamities.
When the trial comes, nothing remains
undisclosed, nothing unrequited; every
varnish disappears, and all glitter
vanishes.” —(Hengstenberg). ‘* And
what if the sword contemn even the
rod? it shall be no more, saith the
Lord God.” ‘“ With a view to the
sanguine imaginations by which the
people sought to banish the thought
of the hardness of the times, the pro-
phet then asks, ‘ And how ? should the
despising rod (the punishment that
far outstrips all other punishments,
ver. 10) not be?’ And the answer to
this question he gives in the names
of God, which utter a loud no to
these illusions.” —(Hengstenberg.) “If
Nebuchadnezzar should really despise
the resistance made by the Jewish
state, which he did (ver. 10)—what
was to be expected as the consequence?
That state must necessarily come to
an end, ¢é¢ shall not be. Such I regard as
themeaning of this most difficult verse.”
—(Henderson.) The generalideaof the
text is, what if, under this terrible judg-
ment, Judah’s temporal power and
royalty shall cease to exist? And in
ver. 27, we are told that this result
shall certainly come to pass. But the
kingdom shall be restored by One
whose sceptre of righteousness despises
every earthly power.


Ver. 14. “‘And let the sword be
doubled the third time.” “These words
are designed to express the tremendous
size and power of the sword to be em-
ployed. It was no ordinary foe that
was to attack the Jews. All hopes of
escape were vain, It wasa sword that
had been well tried, and proved suc-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,








cessful in many a battle,—the sword
of the slain.” —( Henderson.) ‘ Which
entereth into their privy chambers.”
It will invade the sanctity of their
houses (Deut. xxxii. 25). There may

some reference also to its pene-
trating into their secret “ chambers of
lmagery ” (Ezek. vili. 12),


Ver. 15. “I have set the point of
the sword against all their gates.”
The gates of their city are to be
besieged by the naked sword. ‘And
their ruins be multiplied.” Heb., And
the fallen be numerous in all their gates,
“Wrapped up for the slaughter,”
Rather, made keen, or sharpened, for
the slaughter.


Ver. 16. “Go thee one way or other,
either on the right hand or on the
left, whithersoever thy face is set.”
The address is to the sword, as if it


OHAP, XXI,


SS es


“left” show how wide is the area
over which God shall execute His
judgments ; so wide that it embraces
not only Judea, but a whole group of
peoples. ‘I'he word “ whithersoever ”
seems to imply the idea of direction
by the “living creatures” (Ezek. i,
9, 12).


Ver. 17. ‘I will also smite Mine
hands together.” “By a strong
anthropopathy Jehovah declares He
will do what He had commanded the
prophet to do (ver. 14). Smiting the
hands together is an indication of
violent grief. “I will cause My fury
to rest” signifies, not the forbearing
to pour it out in judgment, but the
full and permanent infliction of it”
(Henderson). The fury of God is said
to “rest” when it reaches its object,
thus abiding upon it. “ Jehovah will
smite His hands together and cool His


were an army. The “right” and wrath upon them” (Keil).


HONUILETICS.


Tue SACRED, TERRIBLE SWORD-SONG,


The prophets doubtless treated politics both on their outward and inward side,
but only the politics of the kingdom of God (ver. 9). God shows us the sword,
and waves it over our heads, so that we should be duly and profitably alarmed.
He can use every creature as His sword; it is always prepared to execute His
command. War as a divine judgment, therefore, for the punishment of evil
doers ; but it ts also a preaching of repentance, when God sharpens the sword
and makes it glitter. He who will not submit to the sword of God’s word
(Heb. iv. 12) will be overtaken by the sword of the enemy. God Himself takes
the offering which men will not give Him voluntarily (ver. 10). There can be
joy amid the deepest sufferings, but not over another’s suffering, especially
when it is punishment for sin. The sin of the people presses the sword into
the hand for war (ver. 11). Sin was also interwoven with the conquering
chaplets of the victors, as the dew upon these chaplets was innumerable tears and
drops of blood. 'lhis must ever be remembered amid songs of triumph! Fortune
of war, as men call it, what asad fortune! God is the judge behind and in the con-
queror. ‘‘ Upon all the princes of Israel” (ver. 12.) Even the great have no privi-
lege to sin. ‘Trial is a terrible word to a people that suffers the deepest calamities,
A tried sword is a dreadful thing when it turns against a people whom God has
given up to judgment. One day an end will be made of all despisers of God
and man. ‘The history of the world as the fulfiment of prophecy (ver. 14).
Symbolical prophecy—the emblems of punishment. Some must prophesy
judgment who would so willingly speak of redemption, and redemption alone ;
men will not have the blessing, and therefore the curse must be exhibited.

263


OHAP, XXL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





God's sword draws not back from human elevation ; it reaches the dwellers
in the valley, and those also who sit on lofty seats. No earthly throne isa
protection from the sword of God ; the history: of the world is filled with proofs
of this. ‘The last mighty pierced-through one is Antichrist, Alas, who can
hide from the wrath of God !—( Lange.)


(Ver. 13).


“ Because it is a trial.” We may consider vers. 12, 13 as thus understood :
There is cause thou shouldst cry, howl, smite upon thy thigh, because the sword
shall be a trial ; and what also if it shall not be a despising rod? If it be a
trying rod, there is cause enough to mourn, but it shall be a despising rod,
and so there is more cause to mourn. If this rod make them not try their
ways, repent, and turn, it shall be a rod to despise the stoutest of them and
to destroy them. 1. That the judgments of God are trials. They discover and
make known what people are. ‘Tlie fire tries the metals, and declares what is
good silver, good gold and what is reprobate. God kept the children of
Israel forty years in the wilderness, to prove them, and know what was in
their hearts (Deut. vil. 8). The hard things they met with there discovered
some to be murmurers, some idolaters, some fornicators, some backsliders.
“Tt shall come to pass that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret
themselves, and curse their king and their God” (Isa. viii. 21). When
evil was upon them, then: their wickedness appeared. So Jehoram said,
‘This evil is of the Lord, why should I wait for the Lord any longer?” His
vileness came out in the time of his distress. When great winds are abroad.
they discover what trees are sound or rotten. 2. God tries before he destroys.
Rods of trial came before rods of destruction. When the sword is drawn, fur-
bished, and whet, the Lord tries men thereby, whether they will consider their
ways, repent and turn to Him, before He cut and destroy therewith. ‘l'idinga
and terrors of the sword precede the strokes of it. God tries His people by
threatenings, by bringing judgments near unto them, by inflicting lesser
judgments upon them, before He makes an utter destruction of them; that
they may learn righteousness, humble themselves, and so either prevent the
judgments, or have them turned into mercies. 3. When rods of trial do us no
good, then follow rods of destruction. When the trying rod hath been despised,
then comes the rod that will not regard high or low, prince or people. At first
God did lightly afflict Zebulun and Napthali, but that being in vain, afterwards
He afflicts them more grievously (Isa. ix. 1). When Dimon profited not by her
first strokes, God laid more upon her (Isa. xv. 9). When smiting the lintel of
the door, and shaking the posts, did not prevail, then did the Lord eut and
slay with the sword (Amos ix. 1). If fear work not, He hath a pit; if that do
it not, He hath a snare (Isa, xxiv. 17, 18). When paternal chastisements profit
not, God hath destroying judgments. He will deal then with men, not as erring
children, but as open enemies.—(Greenhill.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—(Vers.
18-22). The sword of the king of
Babylon will smite Jerusalem, and then
the Ammonites.


“ appoint,” is to draw a symbolic sketch,
to give an ocular demonstration.
Ezekiel is to draw on a table or tablet
a sketch of the siege of Jerusalem.
The Hebrew word rendered “ choose”


Ver, 19. “Appoint thee two ways,
that the sword of the king of Babylon
may come.” ‘The force of this word,

254


in the latter part of the verse has the
primary meaning of to cuz, aud pointa
to the cutting or engraving of 4 repre-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XXL





sentation. “Both twain shall come
forth out of one land.” Or, “ the land
of one, a¢., the land of the Babylouish
king, from which both ways shall
proceed, ‘‘ Choose thou a place, choose
it at the head of the way to the city.”
“he ‘oue land’ whence the two ways
proceeded was that of Babylon, and the
ways ran in a westerly direction ; the
more northerly by Riblah in Syria; and
the more southerly by Tadmor, or
Palmyra, in the desert. ‘The former was
that usually taken from Babylon to
Jerusalem ; the latter from the same
city to Rabbah on the east of the
Jordan, ‘I'he prophet is directed
to choose a place at the head of
the way, or as it is literally, to cut
a@ hand (Ueb. yod, a hand or a
sign), a sign pointing to the direction
in which the Chaldean army was to
proceed. ‘I'his he was to place at the
head or commencement of the way,
where the two roads separated, each
taking its own course; while we are
necessarily to understand its being
made to point towards that which the
King of Babylon was to select, as we
are taught in ver. 21, Our authorised
translators have adopted the secondary
signification of the word to cut, by
rendering it choose. That the hand is
not supposed to have been formed by
sculpture, would appear from the
circumstance that, in case it had been
so, a different Hebrew verb would
have been employed. It may have
been made of wood, just like our
finger-posts, with the representation
of acity cut in it. The word céty is
purposely indefinite, the Article being
left to be supplied by the consciences
of those whom the prophet addressed.”
— Henderson.)


Ver. 20. “That the sword may
come to Rabbah of the Ammonites.”
“It may at first sight appear inap-
propriate that Rabbah, the metropolis
of the country of the Ammonites,
should be mentioned before Jerusalem,
the guilty city against which the
prophet was especially commissioned
to denounce the Divine judgments ;
but, considering to what an extent the


Jews had adopted the idols of the
Ammonites, there was a singular pro-
priety in first taking up the heathen
city, to intimate that as the Jews had
participated in its crimes so they might
expect to share in its punishment.
Labbah of the children of Ammon, so
calied to distinguish it from a city of
the same name in the tribe of Judah,
It was built on the banks of the river
Moret-Amman, which empties itself
into the Jabbok.” (Henderson.) “Judah
in Jerusalem the defenced.” ‘he
royal house of Judah was the special
object of Nebuchadnezzar’s indigna-
tion. ‘The defenced”; same word
as in Deut. xxviii. 52, “thy high and
fenced walls, wherein thou trustedst.”
It was Zedekiah’s trust in the strong
fortifications of Jerusalem that led
him to break faith with his sovereign.
“Tnstead of simply expressing the
name of Jerusalem, the other metro-
polis, that of the inhabitants is prefixed,
to mark them as the guilty objects of
the Divine indignation. The reason why
Jerusalem is here said to be defenced
would seem to be to intimate the vain
confidence which the Jews reposed in
their fortifications.” (Hesderson.)


Ver. 21. ‘‘The King of Babylon
stood at the parting of the way, at the
head of the two ways, to use divina-
tion; he made his arrows bright, he
consulted with images, he looked in
the liver.” ‘“ Nebuchadnezzar is sup-
posed to have marched his army to a
certain point to the west of Babylon,
where the road branched off into the
two referred to. The ‘ parting’
(Heb. the mother of the way), so-
called, not as generally supposed,
because there the road divided, for
that is immediately afterwards de-
scribed as the head of the two ways,
but because it was the principal road.
Here the monarch is represented as
having been at a loss to determine
which of the routes he should take ;
and, in order to decide, as having re-
course to divination. Of this as prac-
tised by the ancients there were dif-
ferent kinds, some of which are here
mentioned. ‘ Made his ee :

2


Heb. he shook the arrows—1i.e., the
helmet, quiver, or whatever else they
were put into. It is most probable
that he caused the name Jerusalem to
be inscribed on one arrow, and
Rabbah on another, and mixing them
with others, determined to march
against the city whose name was first
drawn out. ‘This mode of divining by
arrows was practised by the Arabs till
the time of Mohammed, who strictly
prohibited it in the Koran. Another
species of divination to which the
King of Babylon had recourse, was
that of looking into the liver or the
entrails of a newly-killed sacrifice, and
judging that any undertaking would
be prosperous or otherwise according
as they were found in a healthy or un-
healthy state. ‘This art is mentioned
by Diodorus as practised among the
Chaldeans, Not satisfied with the
use of these two species of divina-
tion, Nebuchadnezzar consulted the
Teruphim, which appear to have been
penates or family gods, from whom it
was thought possible to obtain infor-
mation relative to future events
(Gen. xxxi. 19, 34; Judges xvii. 5;
xviii, 14).”—( Henderson.)


Ver. 22. At his right hand was the
divination for Jerusalem.” The king
with his right hand draws out the arrow
on which was marked the name Jeru-
salem. The omen decides for him, and
he is represented as holding up the
arrow to encourage his army in their
march against Jerusalem. ‘‘To open
the mouth in the slaughter.” ‘“ This
expression cannot well be taken in its
usual signification of murder, but must
be understood, as Gesenius explains,
as an outbreak of the voice; both
terms thus energetically expressing the
horrible war-shout of the Chaldean
soldiers when commencing the attack.”
—(Henderson.) ‘“ The slaughter-cry
of the besiegers is called slaughter,
because the slaughter is virtually con-
tained in it.”—(Aengstenberg).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Vers.
23-27. Though this announcement of
God’s judgments will appear to the

256


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


people of Judea as a deceptive divina-
tion, yet it will surely come to pass,
The prophet, however, sees beyond all
these evils the hope of redemption.
The Messiah is promised, who is to be
the founder and restorer of perfect
right on earth (ver. 27). See also,
Psa. Ixii.; Isa. ix. 6; xlii, 1; Jer.
EX, 55 xxxiti. 17.


Ver. 23. “And it shall be unto them
as a false divination in their sight, to
them that have sworn oaths, but He
will call to remembrance the iniquity.
that they may be taken.” “ 'l'hough
the Jews were prone themselves to
believe in divination, yet they affect
to despise it when it tells ayainst
them. ‘I'he second ‘to them’ may
be understood to refer to the Jews, as
they had come under solemn engage-
ments to be subject to the Babylonians,
but those engagements they had
violated ; and for this, as well as their
other sins, they were now to be
punished. The oaths were those the
Jews had taken to the King of
Babylon. ‘ He will call to remem-
brance,’ refers to Nebuchadnezzar, to
whom the Jews had proved faithless,
and who now should recall to their
mind the crime of perjury, of which
they had‘ been guilty.”—(Henderson).


Ver. 24. “So that in all your doings
your sins do appear.” ‘hey dragged
their old sins into light again by the
new enormities which they committed,
Their rebellion against God is here
spoken of as “your iniquity,” “ trans-
gressions,” “sins.”  ‘I‘hese words are
the same as those mentioned in con-
nection with the offerings on the day
of Atonement, when “ a remembrance
was made of sins” (Lev. xvi; Heb.
x. 8). ‘Then the people confessed their
sins and were forgiven ; but now they
refuse to acknowledge their guilt
(Ezek. xviii. 2), and so their sin is
“discovered,” it stands over for punish-
ment.


Ver. 25. ‘ And thon, profane wicked
prince of Israel.” Zedekiah is pointed
out by name as the prince whose


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZERIEL,


OHAP. XXL.


a


wickedness had desecrated his charac-
ter as the Lord’s anointed. ‘* When
iniquity shall have an end.” Heb.,
In the time of final iniquity. Their
iniquity was now full, when justice can
no longer stay her hand (Gen. xv. 16).
It was the treachery of Zedekiah
towards Nebuchadnezzar that brought
their national affairs to the crisis, to
the time of judgment. In the person
of that wicked prince the temporal
sovereignty of David’s house received
a wound from which it never recovered.
He brought complete destruction upon
the Jewish state.


Ver. 26. “Remove the diadem.”
More accurately, ‘“ the mitre,” Besides
this passage, the word is found only in
Exod, xxviii., xxix, xxxix ; Lev. viii,
xvi.; and it is always used of the
High Priest’s mitre. “The crown.”
The regal crown. This word occurs in
the books of Samuel, Kings, and
Chronicles, but only in the history of
David’s conquest of Rabbah (2 Sam.
xii. 30); 1 Chron, xx. 2), “ Ideally
regarded, the king bears, as the repre-
sentative of the whole people, along
with the crown, the head band, or
priestly cap. ‘The two are closely con-
nected. ‘The crown without the band
is an empty show. The forgiveness of
sins, which was secured by the media-
tion of the high priest, whose dignity
was overthrown with the fall of the
sanctuary forms the foundation of all
the royal blessings of God. In the
Messiah, in whom the kingdom at-
tained to its full reality, a real union
of the kingly and priestly offices is to
take place (Zech. vi.), which were
practically divided under the Old
Testament on account of human weak-
ness.” —( Hengstenberg). ‘This shall
not be the same.”” (Heb.) This is not


this. he meaning is that there shall
be a complete revoiution in the
existing state of things. By a sad


reversal, the hallowed nation is un-
holy ; the mitre which had written on
it, “Holiness to the Lord,” is profaned,
the regal crown disgraced by such
wickedness is laid in the dust. All


things, hitherto sacred, have now be-
come unreal, and must be swept away
by arighteous judgment. ‘‘Exalt him
that is low, and abase him that is
high.” “Ina general overthrow the
low is exalted even by the fact that it
becomes like the high, who are involved
in the same downfall. The people
have in their procedure turned the
lowest into the highest, and in just
retribution the same takes place
in their experience. All is levelled.”
—(Hengstenberg). “This is not to
taken as the enunciation of a
general truth, but it is to be under-
stood specifically of the Messiah and
of Zedekiah. There is a direct
reference to the Messiah in the follow-
ing verse. The two are here placed
in the strongest contrast :—the root
out of the dry ground (Isa. liii. 2),
whom the prophet sees in the future,
and the hauglity monarch immediately
present to his view upon the royal
Jewish throne. ‘he commands given
in this verse are a strong mode of
declaring prophetically that the things
should be done.”—/ Henderson).


Ver. 27. “I will overturn, over-
turn, overturn it.” (Heb.) An over-
throw, overthrow, overthrow, will L[
make it. ‘he threefold repetition is
intensive, conveying the idea that
there shall be overthrow upon over-
throw. ‘*And it shall be no more.”
The words can be rendered, ever this
is no more. The kingdom, though
constituted by God Hunself, should
perish, as though it had never been.
**Until He come, whose right it is;
and I will give it Him.” There is an
evident reference here to Gen. xlix. 10.
Judah’s royalty is taken away, but not
for ever. His inherent dignity persists
through all the wreck of his fortunes
and hopes, until it is assumed by the
Messiah, who has both the right and
the power to rule. ‘The outward
royalty and priesthood must pass
away, but the true King of Israel is
coming, who is also a “Priest upon
His throne.” (Zech. vi. 18; Acts iii.
14; Heb. vii 26; Zech. ix. 9).


257


OHAP. XXI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





“Nowhere is there rest, nowhere
security, all things are in a state of
flux, till the coming of the Great
Restorer and Prince of Peace. He to
whom this right belongs, and to whom
God will give it, is the Messiah, of
whom the prophets from the times of
David onwards have prophesied as the
founder aud restorer of perfect right
on earth (Psa, Ixxii. ; Isa. ix. 6; xlii.
1; Jer. xxiii. 5 ; xxxili. 17).”—/( Keil).
“Tt is not expressly said what was to
be given Him, and should stand
waiting for its proper possessor till He
should come; but the context forbids
us to understand anything less than
what was taken away—the things re-
presented by the priestly mitre and
the royal crown. The true priestly
dignity, and the proper regal glory,
were to be gone for a time into
abeyance; some partial, temporary and
fluctuating possession of them might
be regained, but nothing more; the
adequate and permanent realization
was only to be found in the person of
Messiah, because in Him alone was
there to be a fitting representation of
the Divine righteousness. It is true
that there was something like a
restoration of the standing and
honour of the priesthood after the
return from the Babylonian exile ; and
if the ideas currently entertained upon
the subject were correct, there might
appear in that a failure of the
prophecy, But there was no riglit
restoration of the priestly, any more


than of the regal dignity at the time
specified ; it was but a shadow of the
original glory. For there was no
longer the distinctive prerogative of
the Urim and Thummim, nor the ark
of the covenant, nor the glory over-
shadowing the mercy-seat ; all was in
a depressed and mutilated condition,
and even that subject to many inter-
ferences from the encroachments of
foreign powers. So much only was
given, both in respect to the priesthood
and the kingdom, as to show that the
Lord had not forsaken His people, and
to serve as a pledge of the coming
glory. But it was to the still pro-
spective, rather than the present state
of things, that the eye of faith was
still directed to look for the proper
restoration. And lest any should ex-
pect otherwise, the prophet Zechariah,
after the return from Babylon, took
up the matter, as it were, where
Ezekiel had left it, and intimated in
the plainest manner, that what was
then accomplished was scarcely worth
taking into account; it was, at the
most, but doing in a figure what could
only find its real accomplishment in
the person and work of Messiah (Zech.
vi, 14). Thus the mitre and the
crown were both to meet in Him, and
the temple in its noblest verse be built
and the glory be obtained, such as be-
came the Lord’s Anointed to possess,
Meanwhile, all was but preparatory
and imperfect.”—/( Fairbairn).


HOMILETICS.


(Ver. 27.)


The word “ overturn ” is trebled, to show not only the certainty and evidenca
of the thing, but the gradation and continuance of it; for the kingdom of
Judah by certain degrees fell from its height. After that Zedekiah was deposed,
there was no crown nor king more in Judah. After the captivity there were no
kings, but governors, captains, rulers ; after them the high priests had the power,
in whose hands it continued, even to Hyrcanus, who usurping kingly authority
was miserably slain—Herod, a stranger, succeeding. ‘ Until He come whose
right it is.” The crown shall neither fit, nor be fastened to any head, till He
come that hath the right to it; and that is neither Nebuchadnezzar nor
Zerubbabel; nor Aristobulus, Alexander, or Hyrcanus, who assumed kingly


258


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP. XXI.








dignity to themselves, in time of the Maccabees ; but Christ the Messiah, who
is the true Heir and Successor of David, when He comes, shall raise up the
kingdom of Judah, being miserably afflicted, destitute, and lost to the eye of
the world ; He changing it into a spiritual kingdom, shall restore it to a
higher glory than ever it had. The crown here was reserved and laid up for
the Lord Christ, who was born King of the Jews (Matt. ii. 2); to whom the
angel told Mary that the Lord should give the throne of His father David, and
that He should reign over the house of Jacob for ever (Luke i. 32, 33).
Nathaniel called Him “the King of Israel” (John i. 40). The Father hath
appointed Christ te be king of Israel, gave Him power (Is. ix. 6 ; Micah v. 2).
Christ claimed to be such Himself (John v. 22), “ And I will give it Him.”
Christ, when He comes, shall not be kept off from His rights, ‘Though He
come in a mean and low way, yet He shall be king and reign,


I, The Lord doth lay the glory of crowns and sceptres in the dust when He
pleases, “I will overturn.” There is no crown so sure to any mortal’s head,
no kingdom so stable, but the Lord can pluck away the crown, shake the
kingdom to pieces, throw out the possessors, and dispossess their heirs. Some-
times the Lord doth suddenly overturn empires and kingdoms (Dan. v. 30, 31);
sometimes He proceeds gradually as with the kingdoms of Israel aud Judah.
“T will be unto Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of Judah as rottenness.
A moth eats up a garment by degrees, now it makes one hole in it, and anon
another ; so rottenness enters by degrees into a tree, first into one brauch, then
another, after into the body and root. So God, by degrees, wasted and
consumed these kingdoms, Be it suddenly or gradually, He overturns them
when He pleases. He breaks the staves of the wicked, and the sceptres of the
rulers (Isa. xiv. 5).


II. When God overturns crowns and kingdoms He keeps those in
such a condition while he pleases. “And it shall be no more, until He
come, whose right it is.’ This was near 500 years; for from Zedekiah’s deposal
to the birth of Christ were 492 years, which was a long season for His crown and
kingdom to lie in darkness, and a desolate condition. Hosea told us long since
that the children of Israel should “abide many days without a king and
without a prince ” (Hosea iii, 4). The kingdom of Israel was overturned by
the hand of God above a hundred years before the kingdom of Judah, and lies
overturned to this day ; and so hath been above two thousand years in a sad,
dark, distressed condition. Their sins were great, which caused the Lord to
overturn them, and He lets them lie under the punishment of their iniquity
many years. When kingdoms are down, many may strive to lift them up to
their former dignity, but it cannot be till the Lord’s time come.


III. The Lord Christ; the promised Messiah, was the true King of Judah,
and Prince of Zion. ‘Until He comes whose right it is, and I will give it
Him.” ‘I'he Father had appointed Him to be King, given Him the kingdom,
and made it known long before His coming in the flesh. He was the Shiloh,
the Prosperer, unto whom the gathering of the people should be; He gathered
Jews and Gentiles together. He was spoken of as the “Star of Jacob,” and
the “Sceptre” who “should rise out of Israel” (Num. xxiv, 17), In many
other places of Scripture, the kingdom of Christ, His right thereunto, and
the Father’s donation thereof unto Him are spoken of. The people’s hearts
were towards Him, and they would have made Him a king (John vi. 15).
Wowever He appeared to the world, the Apostles beheld glory and majesty
bn Him (John i. 14; 2 Pet. i. 16); and Pilate wrote over His head, “This is
Jesus. the King of the Jews” (Matt. xxvii. 37), Christ was born a king. died


CHAP. XxI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





a king, He lives and reigns at this day King of Zion, and of all saints
(Rev. xv. 3).


IV. The wisdom and goodness of the Lord towards His people, that when
He tells them of the severest judgment, He mingles some mercy. ‘Though
He threatens their Church and State for a long time, yet He tells them of the
coming of Christ who should be their king, wear the crown, and raise up the
kingdom again. This was a great mercy, in the depth of misery ; if they lost
av earthly kingdom, they should have a spiritual one; if they lost a
profane and temporal king, they should have a king of righteousness, an
eternal king. It is the method of the Lord, when He is bringing in dreadful
judgments upon His people, that have provoked Him bitterly, to lay in some-
thing that may support and comfort those who have served Him faithfully
(Amos ix. 8-11). Here is goodness with severity.


V.- That how contrary soever God’s actings appear, yet He will make good
His promises. The Lord had promised to set up His son Christ to be King in
Zion, the hill of His holiness (Psa. ii. 6); that the Government should be
upon His shoulder (Isa. ix. 6); that He would “cause a Branch of righteous-
ness to grow up unto David, and He shall execute judgment and righteousness
in the land (Jer. xxxiii. 15). What likelihood was there that these things
should be, when the Lord overturns the land, plucks up all by the rocts, and
lays all in a dead condition, and that for many days and years? They might
have thought and said, Surely, this death of the crown, of Church and State,
will be the death of all those and other promises; but it was not so. Though
a sentence of death was upon the land, upon the Jews, yet the living God
kept life in the promises, He remembered them, and said, I will give it to Him,
He shall have this land, the kingdom and the crown, He shall sit upon Zion,
reign and execute judgment. The actings of God sometimes are such, that
to man’s apprehensions they will make void the promises of God. In
Psa, Ixxvii. 7, 8; saith Asaph, ‘‘ Will the Lord cast off for ever? And will
He be favourable no more? Is His mercy clean gone for ever? Doth His
promise fail for evermore? God’s hand was heavy upon him, his soul was
greatly afflicted so that he questioned the truth of God’s promises, and was
ready to despair. But what saith he in the tenth verse, “This was my
infirmity.” There was no infirmity in God; He had not forgotten His promise,
it was not out of His sight, though out of Asaph’s. Man’s faith may fail him
sometimes, but God’s faithfulness never fails Him (Psa, Ixxxix. 33). God’s
operations may have an aspect that way; the devil’s temptations and our
unbelieving hearts may not only make us think so, but persuade us it is so ;
whereas it cannot be so, for the Lord will not suffer it, He will not make a lie
in His truth or faithfulness; so the Hebrew is: He is Truth, and not one of
His promises can fail. This must afford strong consolation unto all that are
under any promise of God.—Greenhill,


JERUSALEM’s FALL AND RIsmNG,


_ The prophet announces the fall of the temporal sovereignty of David’s house
in the person of Zedekiah. He declares his message as the word of the Lord
“Exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high” (ver. 26). his‘may be
considered as the principle upon which God acts in His government of mankind
throughout all ages. When the mother of our Lord thought of the honour


260


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL, CHAP. XXL





which had been bestowed upon her, that one so obscure and lowly should be
chosen to bring forth the Saviour of the world, she broke forth into a song of
praise, saying, “‘ He hath put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted
thei of low degree” (Luke i. 52), Christ taught the general principle,
“Everyone that exalteth himself shall be abased, and he that humbleth himself
shall be exalted” (Luke xvii. 14). Even the great French sceptic, Bayle, says
of these words, that they contain “the abridgment of all human history.”
Such is the law of God’s kingdom. Jerusalem is to fall, but in due time to be
raised to a better and nobler condition, Her true King will come unto her in
the person of the Messiah, Her fall is to be unto rising (ver. 27).


I. Jerusalem’s fall. 1. It is portrayed by an enigmatic representation. The
event 1s now near and the prophet is bidden to portray the judgments which are
to fall upon Jerusalem. He draws a symbolic sketch of the siege of the city,
representing the advance of Nebuchadnezzar towards it from his own country.
The King of Babylon is seen standing on the highway, at a point from which
two roads diverge, one leading to Jerusalem, the other to Rabbah. Which road
shall he take? He determines his course by augury in three of its branches,
employing divination by arrows, by images, and by the appearance of the
entrails of a newly killed sacrifice. ‘Ihe omens all point to Jerusalem as the
first object of attack. Thus Providence so ordered it that judgment must begin
at the house of God. 2. Zhe threat of it is received with irreverent credulity.
When the Jews hear that the King of Balyylon is advancing against Jerusalem
they make light of it. They say that the king has been misled by a false
divination (ver. 23). They forget that they themselves were deluded by vain
divinations and lying prophets (Ezek. xxi. 29; Ex. xiii. 6, 7; xxii. 28). They
despise augury when it is against themselves. In their infatuation they
cannot real the sigus of the times, nor see that their judgment is nigh at hand.
They readily take refuge in any interpretation of events which can lend some
support to their vain hope. They are blind to the sad facts of their own
spiritual condition, which must inevitably draw these judgments upon them.
They have the worst omens against them, their iniquities, transgressions,
sins (ver. 24) ; and, more particularly, their treason and perjury (ver. 23),
And all this was “discovered” sin, it affected the social and political life
of the nation ; it appeared before the eyes of all men (ver. 24). 3. The
instrument which was to bring it about was chosen of God. ‘The human
instrument who was to compass the fall of Jerusalem was the King of
Babylon, who, in this instance, was God’s servant for judgment. ‘Though an
heathen king, and one who consulted augury, he was truly an instrument in
the hands of God for the correction of His people and for working out His
purposes towards mankind. God can guide even men’s appeals to chance, and
overrule them for His own purpose (Prov. xvi. 33). ‘The Magi, who were
worshippers of the hosts of heaven, and who thought that they could read in
them the destinies of nations, were yet led to Christ by a star. Apart from all
his consultation of omens, the King of Babylon had justice on his side. He
was truly a chosen vessel to accomplish God’s righteous will concerning
Jerusalem. 4. The blame must be charged upon the Jews themselves. ‘“ Because
ye have made your iniquity to be remembered” (ver. 24). The King of
Babylon must not be charged with their disasters, nor his resorting to divina-
tion, but to their own treason and perjury they must impute the blame. It
was not their father’s sins but their own that brought destruction upon them.
5. Judgment was inevitable. “Jerusalem the defenced” (ver. 20) must fall.
The measure of her iniquity was full. Justice could forbear no longer. In
Zedekiah the iniquity of the nation culminated (ver. 25). In him thé
sovereignty of David’s house came to an end.


261


OHAP, XEI. HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY ; EZEKIEL.





II, Jerusalem’s rising. In one man Jerusalem fell, but a greater Man shall
restore it, The sovereignty of David’s house came to an end in Zedekiah, but
not for ever. Jerusalem has a future. She shall rise from her ruins in a far
more glorious form than that in which she was lost, even as the “ Jerusalem
which is above, the mother of us all” (Gal. iv. 26). 1. Zhe rising 1s to come
through the Messiah. It is not by a doct:ine, or a truth, but by a person that
God will deliver His people. Zedekiah represented the nation in its fall; Christ
in its rising. The Messiah is the rightful sovereign of men (ver. 27). He is
the true priest, and the true king. All others are but shadows of Him. He
alone has the supreme right and power. Among the Israelites the offices of
priest and king were jealously separated ; but in Ubrist they can be united with
perfect safety, for He is both holy and just. 2. Zhe deliverance through the
Messiah only comes after the complete wreck of the nation’s fortunes. “I will
overturn, overturn, overturn it; and it shall be no more” (ver. 24). This
complete destruction issued in that fulness of time in which the Son of Man
should come. The Messiah appeared upon the wreck of the world’s hopes.
Judah’s royalty had long been laid in the dust, Greece had long ago fallen, and
Rome was fast sinking into decay, when God sent His Son to redeem the world.
Men were permitted to make the sad experiment of trying to live without God,
in order that they might learn their need of a Redeemer who was the “ Desire


of all nations.”


EXEGETICAL NOTES. — Vers
28-32. The overthrow of the
Ammonites. Israel is to rise after
judgment, but Ammon is to be utterly
destroyed,


Ver. 28. ‘‘Concerning the Am-
monites,and concerning their reproach
even say thou, the sword, the sword
is drawn.” “Lest it should be sup-
posed that because Nebuchadnezzar
had taken the route to Jerusalem, and
not that to Rabbah, therefore the
Ammonites should escape being in-
vaded by his army, the prophet is
instructed to denounce judgment
against them also. The reproach
with which the Ammonites are here
charged, was their opprobrious and
iusulting treatment of the Hebrews
at different periods of their history,
and especially when Jerusalem was
taken by the Chaldeans,”—/Hender-
son), “The children of Ammon
represents the world—power hostile
to the kingdom of God. Yet the
representative is not taken acci-
dentally out of the multitude of the
heathen peoples hostile to the kingdom
of God; but the prophet takes
occasion from the circumstances of the
time. Ammon had at that time, no
less than Judah, incurred the auger of


262


the Chaldeans, and so it was natural
to exenplify in him the general truth,
the more natural because the ven-
geance was first to fall on Judah,
while Ammon appeared to come out
of the affair with high shoes, and
mocked Judah, who had to pay the
score. “Their reproval”—the insults
which they heaped upon Judah. ‘I'he
prophet forsees that the Ammonites,
on the approach of danger, will with-
draw from the coalition (Lam. i. 2),
and on the catastrophe of Jerusalem,
give free course to their ancient hatred
against Judah. Judah exchanges the
prophecy that was unfavourable to
him for the divination (ver. 23), and
by this fatal exchange, falls; Ammon
exchanges (ver. 29) the divination
favourable to him, for the prophecy, and
thereby prepares himself at all events,
for the dowufall.”—/ Hengstenberg).


Ver. 29. ‘‘ Whiles they see vauity
unto thee, whiles they divine a lie
unto thee.’ (Heb). Zhey have seen
Salschood for thee, they have divined
Jor thee a lie. The Ammonites also
had those among them who practised
divination. But these had divined a
“lie” for them, promising them peace
and safety when judgment was hard
at hand. ‘‘To bring thee upon the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OHAP. XXL





necks of them that are slain.” The is an unnatural figure—but rather a
Ammonites are to be involved in one blowing which increases the intensity
common ruin with the Jews. of the flame, “ Brutish men, and
5) : _  Skilful to destroy.” “ The word must
Ver. 30. I will judge thee in be explained from Psalm xcii. 7,
the place where thou wast created.” ‘brutish,’ foolish, always bearing in
“The Ammonites were not to be mind that the Hebrew associated the
carried away captives, like the Jews to idea of Godlessness with folly, and
Babylon, but were to perish in their that cruelty naturally follows in its
own land. While the Jews were to he tuain,’’—( Keil)
restored after the captivity had cured
them of idolatry, the Ammouitish Ver. 32. ‘‘Thou shalt be no more
kingdom was to cease for ever, The remembered.” Ammon was to perish
prophecy was fulfilled five years after utterly. For her there was no hope
the destruction of Jerusalem.’’— of restoration, like that held out to
(Llenderson.) Israel in ver. 27. ‘ From the times of
the Maccabees, the Ammonites and
Ver. 31. “I will blow against Moabites have quite disappeared out
thee in the fire of my wrath.” The of history.”—( Hengstenberg.)
idea is not to blow with fire—which


HOMILETIOS.


(Vers, 28, 29).


1. When God brings judgments upon His people for their intquities, then
their enemies take advantage and revile them. She Ammonites were glad that
the calamity of Jerusalem was at hand. They were neighbours of the Jews,
brethren also as coming from the brother of Abraham ; yet they reproached the
Jews and added affliction to affliction (Zeph. ii. 8). ‘I'he rabbies say, that when
the Chaldeans carried the Jews captive, through the land of the Ammonites and
Moabites, the Jews wept, and they reproached them saying, why do ye afilict
yourselves? Why do you weep? Are you not going to your father’s house ?
They meant Chaldea, which was Abraham’s country and habitation. These and
many other reproachful speeches they used against the Jews, when they were
spoiled and led into capitivity, and “magnified themselves against their border.”
They said, now their border—their land—should become theirs. Thus they
reproached and wronged the Jews. So likewise did the Edomites in “the day
of Jerusalem” (Ps. cxxxvii. 7), that was in the day when Nebuchadnezzar’s
force took and plundered it. They cried, “ Rase it, rase it, even to the
foundation.” The adversaries saw Jerusalem, and did mock at her Sabbaths ;
they scoffed at all her festivals, religion, and worship. Where is your God,
whose days you have so religiously observed? Why did He not defend you
from this day of your sufferings? Either He was infirm, and could not, or
unfaithful, and would not. 2. The Lord takes notice of the enemies reproaching
His people. He tells the prophet of the reproachings of the Ammonites,
Ezekiel was in Babylon, and knew nothing of it, but God heard and observed it
(Zeph., ii. 8). God saith in His indignation unto Moab, ‘“‘ Was not Israel a
derision unto Thee?” Deny it, if thou darest. I saw it; I heardit. This is
some comfort to the Church and people of God, that He observes not only the
wrongs wicked men do unto His people, but also the reproaching speeches they
utter against them (Lam. iii. 6.) 3. Reproaching and reviling God’s people,
when they are in affliction, draws judgments upon the veproachers and revilers,


263


OHAP. XXU, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.








The Ammonites reproached the Jews when the Babylonish sword came upon
them, and here the prophet must tell them the sword is drawn and furbished
for slangliter. Reproach of this kind is a provoking sin; God’s name, truth,
ordinances, suffer when His people are reproached for His correcting hand upon
them for their iniquities. Moab for reproaching should be reproached ; yea,
grievously afflicted, yea, utterly destroyed. 4. When the Lord threatens sinful
nations with sore judgments, they have those amongst them which divert them
from the truth, possess them with delusions, and put them upon destructive
practices, he Ammonites were threatened here with the Babylonish sword,
but they neither believed Ezekiel nor Jeremiah, who told them the same thing.
Their false prophets, their diviners, beat them off from it, possessed them with
vanities and lies, put them upon insulting over the Jews when the hand of the
Lord was most heavy upon them, and so brought them to suffer by the same
sword the Jews did. It is just with God to give men and nations over to
believe lies and lying prophets, which shall lead them to destruction, when they
have stopped their ears against the true prophets. Ahab would not believe
Micaiah, but the false prophets who spake words according to his mind ; but
they were vanity, lies and he smarted for it (1 Kings xxi.) 5, Though the
Lord bears lony with sinful nations, yet He hath His days and times of reckon-
ing with them. ‘he day of the Jews was come, and their iniquity had an end.
The day of the Ammonites came, and their iniquity had an end. God punished
them severely for their sins (Ezekiel xxv.) Babylon and its king had a time to
sli and a time to suffer, God stayed many days, yet had His day, and came
at the day appointed (Jer. L 31; li. 13). Babylon was insatiably covetous,
robbing the nations of their riches, but all her wealth could not purchase one
day’s respite from the wrath of God, nor all ler waters preserve her from the
fire of His indignation The fire God sent in His day burnt up their habita-
tions, and licked up the water of Euplirates whereon Babylon sat. God bare
long with us, and the nations about us, but His day is come, He is visiting ;
we, they, have had our times of sinning, and must now have our times of
suffering.—(Greenhill.)


Tne Sus or JervsaLeM AND IsraEL: 'I'az GernERAL CoRRUPTION OF
Propuets, Priests, Princes, AND PEOPLE (Chap. xxii.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—We have
here another description of the sins
of Jerusalem and Israel; and thus the
judgments predicted in the last chapter
are clearly justified. Three words of
God are here, closely connected together
in their substance and design, viz. :
(1) The blood-guiltiness and idolatry
of Jerusalem hastening the coming of
the day of retribution, when the city
will be an object of scorn to all nations
(vers. 1-16). (2) The house of Israel
has become dross, and is doomed to be
melted in the fire of God’s righteous
anger (vers. 17-22). (3) All ranks of
the kingdom—prophets, priests, princes
aud people have become utterly corrupt,
aud therefore the threatened judg-
ments are inevitable.

264


This chapter may be considered as
standing in contrast with Chap. xx.
In this latter, the whole of Israel’s
history was reviewed as revealing a
growing corruption which must of
necessity bring down God’s judgments
upon the people. ‘Ihe present chapter
describes the existing condition of
Jerusalem. In one case the prophet
was commanded to “ Make them to
know the abominations of theirfathers” —
(ch. xx. 4); in the other, he is com-
manded concerning Jerusalem to “ Make
her to know her abominations” (ver. 2).


Ver.2. ‘ Wilt thou judge the bloody
city?” The same expression as in
chap. xx. 4, denoting that the proplet’s
reproof still continues, The question


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,


CHAP, XXII,





implies the idea that judgment can
wait no longer, and the prophet must
be wakened up to realise fully the
great iniquity of his nation.


Ver. 3. ‘The city sheddeth blood
in the midst of it.” “On account of
the murders committed in Jerusalem
and the offering of children in sacri-
fice to Moloch, she might well be de-
nominated ‘ the bloody city.’ In this
respect she rivalled Nineveh (Nah.
iil. 1), and might justly anticipate the
same doom. instead of deriving any
advantage from their idolatries, they
were only involved thereby in ruin”
(Henderson). “That her time may
come.” The limit of her probation—
the crisis of judgment (Isa. xii. 22 ;
Ezek. xxx. 3). “‘Maketh idols against
herself to defile herself.” By her per-
sistence in iniquity still heaping upon
herself moral defilement with all its
consequences,


Ver. 4. “Thou hast caused thy
days to draw near, and art come even
unto thy years.” ‘The full term of
days and years when the limit of
Divine patience shall be reached.
“The Jewish commentators distinguish
between the ‘days’ and the ‘years’
here mentioned, interpreting the former
of the siege and destruction of Jeru-
salem, and the latter of the captivity in
Babylon” (Henderson). “ A reproach
unto the heathen, and a mocking to
all countries.” “Defiled, unclean with
regard to the name, ¢.¢. having forfeited
tle name of a holy city through capital
crimes and other sinful abominations.”


—( Keil.)


Ver, 5. “Those that be near”
(Heb.). “The women that be near.”
he cities of the nations are personified ;
as in Ezek. xxiii. 48. “Infamous and
much vexed” (Heb.). ‘‘ Polluted in
pame, much in vexation.” Her ancient
renown had now descended to the dust.
She that had been once “ great among
nations” (Lam. i. 1) had now only
& pre-eminence in calamity and dis-
grace, “Formerly Jerusalem had been
renowned ag ‘the holy city.’ Now it


had been defiled by every kind of
crime. It was also tumultuous, great
of confusion, from the seditions and
violence which obtained among the
inhabitants. ‘To all, both far and near,
the Jewish metropolis was to be an
object of derision.”—/ 4/enderson. )


Ver. 6. “To their power.” Heb.
“To his own arm.” Each man adopted
the principle that might was right.
With each man the strength of his
cwn arm was his god. “Instead of
reigning according to law and justice,
the princes of Judah, in the most
despotic manner, crushing by the
strong arm of power all who were the
objects of their personal displeasure.”
—/( Henderson), “To shed blood.”
“By the repetition of the refrain, to
shed blood (vers. 6, 9 and 12), the
enumeration is divided into three
groups of sins, which are placed in the
category of blood-guiltiness by the
fact that they are preceded by this
sentence and the repetition of it after
the form of a refrain, The first group
(vers. 6-8) embraces sins which are
committed in daring opposition to ali
the laws of morality. By the princes
of Israel we are to understand pri-
marily the profligate kings who caused
innocent persons to be put to death,
such for exawple, Jehoiakim (2 Kings
xxiv. 4), Manasseh (2 Kings xxi. 16),
and others. In the second group
(verses 9-11), in addition to
slander and idolatry, the crimes of
lewdness and incest are the principal
sins for which the people are reproved,
and here the allusion to Lev. xviii.
and xix. is very obvious, The third
group (ver. 12) is composed of sins of
covetousness, For the first clause,
compare the prohibition in Ex. xxii.
2; for the second, Ezekiel xviii.,
8,13. The reproof finishes with for-
getfulness of God, which is closely
allied to covetousness.—( Keil).


Ver. 9. ‘Men that carry tales to
shed blood.” Heb. “ Men of traflic.”
Describing those who travelled about
for the purposes of trade, such as ped-
lars or wandering merchants. Mep of

265


OHAP. XXIt.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL





this kind would be likely to become
notorious for carrying reports from
place to place. Hence the phrase
came to be used in the sense of tale-
bearers, In the present instance, the
reference is plainly to a class of men
whom, in the present day, we should
call informers. ‘They eat upon the
mountains.” See “ Exegetical Notes,”
(ch, xviii, 6.)


Ver. 10. “‘ Discovered their father’s
nakedness.” Mother, or step-mother ;
(Comp. Lev. xviii. 7, 8; xx. 11; 1 Cor.
ver. 1.) “Set apart for pollution.”
“This suggests the idea of a female
devoted to prostitution, whereas all
that the Hebrew expresses is one that
is unclean by reason of the menstrual
discharge. The character of the Jews,
as here described, is aptly given by
Tacitus: ‘projectissima ad libidinem
gens, alienarum concubitu abstinent,
Inter se vibil illicitum’ (Hist, lib. v.
cap. 5)” (Henderson)


Ver. 11. ‘And one hath commit»
ted abomination with his neighbour’s
wife: and another. . . and another,
&e,” “'There were such cases! Im-
purity in every form. A specimen of
the moral atmosphere as a whole (Ezek.
xXvill, 6 + Ley, xviii, 15. 3hxx. 12 +9
Sam. xiii. 12.”—( Lange.)


Ver. 12. “Taken gifts to shed
blood.” “‘ Gifte,’—-the word is here
used in the sense of bribes. “ Hast
forgotten Me, saith the Lord God.”
“he crowning sin with which the Jews
are charged, and that which is strictly
speaking the source of all sin, is for-
getfulness of God. It is only as God
is kept out of view as the omnipresent,
omniscient, holy and righteousGovernor
of the world, that sin can be indulged
in” ([enderson.) Two of their pro-
phets describe forgetfulness of God as
the root of all their evil (Deut. xxxii.
18; Jer. iii, 21,

266


Ver. 13. “I have smitten Mine
hand at thy dishonest gain” A
gesture figuratively describing God’s
wrathful indignation. ‘“'I'his verse is
closely connected with the preceding.
This serves to explain the fact that
the only sins mentioned as exciting
the wrath of God are coveteousness and
blood-guiltiness” (Kei/).


Ver. 14. “Can thine heart endure,
or can thine hands be strong, in the
days that I shall deal with thee?”
The courage of sinners must fail when
the judgment of God reckons with
them.


Ver. 15. ‘And will consume thy
filthiness out of thee.” “The removal
of the uncleanness of Jerusalem is
effected by the extirpation of the sinful
inhabitants” (Hengstenberg). “'The
object to be attained by the dispersion
of the Jews was their recovery from
idolatry and from the polluting in-
fluences which followed in its train,’”—
(Henderson).


Ver. 16. ‘“ Thou shalt take thine in-
heritance in thyself in the sight of the
heathen.” “'he only translation of
these words, which suits the connection,
is that given in the margin of the com-
mon version: and thou shalt be pro-
JSaned in thyself. The meaning appears
to be: thou shalt be inwardly conscious
of thy polluted condition, and shalt
loathe thyself on account of thy sins,
There, among the heathen, thou shalt
learn to appreciate my character as a
God of holiness, righteousness, and
truth” (Henderson). “Jerusalem has
desecrated the sanctuaries of the Lord
ee 8); therefore shall it also be

esecrated for a requital (ver. 16). It
has wickedly insulted the dignity of
God ; for this it must suffer the loss of
its own dignity. ‘In thee,’ so that
thou must experience in thyself the
desecration ; whereas before thou didst
send it forth from thee. Such thinge
always return to him from whom .they
proceed.” —( Hengstenberg).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ¢ EZEKIEL, CHAP, XXIL
a EE NR ee


HOMILETICS.


Tox CaTALoGuE oF JERUSALEM’S Suva,


I. Consider the sins in detail. The prophet is not now speaking of the sing
of their forefathers, but of those of his own day. They were all “abominations”
in the sight of God (ver. 2), corrupting and daring sins which briny down God’s
picement swiftly upon nations, 1. Blood guiltiness. Jerusalem is called “The

loody city (vers. 3,4, 6, 9,12). ‘To be guilty of another’s blood is the highest
offence which a man can commit against his fellow. When this crime becomes
the characteristic of a nation, that nation sinks into a savage and degraded
condition. 2. Idolatry. ‘“Maketh idols against herself to defile herself”
(ver. 3). In forsaking the worship of the true God they taxed their own powers
of invention, and this was a greater wickedness than merely adopting the errors
and superstitions which had been handed down to them. 3. Destruction of the
fundamental idea of justice. ‘To their power to shed blood” (ver. 6). As the
Heb, has it, to his own arm, i.e., each man made his own strength the rule of
right, made of his arm a god. The notion that might is right destroys the
very foundations of justice. 3. Disregard of parental authority (ver. 7). ‘Che
Family is the oldest institution, the most changeless, and it will outlast all
others. When the essential laws of the Family are disregarded, the Nation
must decay and perish. 4, Oppression of the suffering and defenceless. The
stranger, the fatherless, and the widow (ver. 7). 5. rofanation of God's
ordinances. 'They profaned the sanctuary and the Sabbath (ver. 8). 6. Bear-
ing false witness. “Men that carry tales to shed blood” (ver 9). Base
informers and slanderers who scrupled not for their own wicked ends to swear
men’s lives away. The fact that there were such men in considerable numbers
suggests that there must also have been wicked rulers and judges who encou-
raged such men, 7% Impurity (ver. 10-11). The individual was corrupted,
then the family, and, last of all, the state, God sees such sins when man sees
them not. Vices of this kind impair the physical energy of nations, and if
unchecked must bring them to destruction. 8. Covetousness. This spirit of
covetousness led them to take bribes, to become usurers, and extortioners,
Thus those in authority became corrupted, and the evil spread fast throughout
the whole nation. Jewish tradition ascribes the destruction of Jerusalem to
covetousness, that being regarded as the root of all evil.


II. Consider these sing in their root-principles. 1. Forgetfulness of God,
“ And hast forgotten Me, saith the Lord God ” (ver. 12). Former prophets had
reminded them that this forgetfulness of God was the bitter rout out of which
all their evils grew (Deut, xxxii. 18; Jer. iii. 21). Whatever was good or great
in this people arose from their connection with God, so that by forsaking Hie
worship and service they cut themselves off from a glorious past. They who
forsake God are bound to follow evil. The morality of a nation cannot be
preserved, even by the best rules and resolutions, if the truths of God and
immortality are rejected,


“Truth for truth and good for good! Be good. The true, the pure, the just—
Take the charm for ever from them and they crumble into dust.”
(Tennyson: “Locksley Hall Sixty Years After.’’)


2. Selfishness, Having cast off God, each man made himself the centre of
all interest, the rule of all duty. Hence covetousness, leading to extortion,
oppression, and the taking of bribes, the consequent perversion of justice to the
injury of the poor and defenceless. Hence the deification of force—the
doctrine that might was right. In such a condition of things each man will

267


OHAP. XXIL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL








regard that which is a benefit to himself as right and good. Whatever a man
could get by force would be his, and he would have no right to it longer than
he had strength to defend it. Such a doctrine as this would destroy the
foundations of morality. 3. Sensuality. This was another root-principle of the
nation’s evil. The aniual nature was let loose without restraint, and sins were
committed which sank men lower than the beast. hese sins are described
(ver. 10) by such words as “abomination,” “lewdness,” “defiling” and “humbling”
those whose chastity they weve bound in honour to respect.


III. Consider these sins in their punishment, “TI will scatter thee among
the heathen, and disperse thee in the countries” (ver. 15). This punishment
included many afflictions. 1. 7h sorrows and dangers of exile. They had to
leave their beautiful country with all its hallowed asssociations, their homes,
their kindred, their religious privileges which had made them great. They
would learn to realize the worth of these when once they had lost them. 2.
Abandonment of their own evil principles, They were permitted to carry out
their own evil principles. They had acted like the heathen, and now they shall
learn what heathenism means, in its own proper home. God allows men to work
out such experiments for themselves ; if haply they may come, at length, to the
knowledge of their own helplessness. The discipline of failure prepares the way
for the glory of God’s salvation. The prodigal in the parable thought that he
could better himself elsewhere. He is allowed te make the trial, he gets his
portion and departs. By the smart of the experiment he is brought to a better
mind, Hard experience taught him those lessons which the sober convictions of
duty failed to teach. Those who refuse to learn by God’s precepts shall learn by
His judgments. 3. They would be a reproach among the heathen. The heathen
could only despise them for their folly and inconsistency. They would be “a
mocking to all countries” (ver. 4.) They would witness hew great her fall from
ancient renown, and point at her the finger of scorn when ske had now only the
pre-eminence in calamity. 3. The judgments would be severe and effectual.
“And will consume thy filthiness out of thee” (ver. 15). The trial by fire is the
hardest and most searching of all trials. We can, therefore, only urderstand this
threatening to mean the extinction of Jerusalem’s polluted inhabitants. The
ungodly are to be separated from the righteous. What a suggestion of the
final judgment! 4. No human power could avert the judgment, or covrage
resist it. ‘‘Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong, in the days
that I shall deal with thee?” (ver 14). When sin is committed men imagine
themselves strong and full of courage, but how different their bearing when the
time of judgment comes! When God once rises up in judgment ayainst sinners.
heart and hand, courage and strength fail. There was now no way of escape for
the guilty. He against whom they had sinned had uttered His word, and it
must be fulfilled to the utmost in dire judgment ; “ I the Lord have spoken it,
and will do it” (ver. 14). 5. The agency of man in the judgment. “Son of
man, wilt thou judge the bloody city?” (ver. 2). The prophets of old judged
the world through the word of the Lord, the apostles through the Holy Spirit
convincing the world of sin. St. Paul tells us that “the saints shall judge the
world” (1 Cor. vi. 2); by which we are to understand, not that they shall sit
upon the judgment seat, but rather that they by their righteousness shall con-
demn those who having the same opportunities yet resisted the grace of God.


(Vers. 14-16).


1. Sinners are apt to confide in their wisdom, strength, power, riches, or
friends. Jerusalem thought that she had wherewith to keep off all judgments,
or sufficient to enaole her to wrestle with them if they came. ‘Can thine héart
endure, or can thine hands be strong?” Jerusalem thought so, had confidence

268


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL OHAP. XXII.





that way, else the Lord would not have put these questions to her. “Thou
didst trust in thy beauty ” (Ezek. xvi. 15); in thy wealth, in thy walls, in thy
soldiers, in thy counsellors, in thy temple, in thy mountains, which were thy
beauty. In Jerewiah’s days it is evident that the wise, the rich, and strong
men in Jerusalem did too much confide and glory in their wisdom, their riches,
and strength (Jer. ix. 23), Her confidence was in falsehood (Jer. xiii. 25); that
was in things which proved false and deceitful: one of this kind was the
Egyptian strength (Isa, xxx. 2; Ezek. xvii. 17). It is not good to lean on our
own wisdom, to rest upon our own strength, or strength of others; whoever
makes flesh within, or flesh without, his arm, lies under a curse (Jer. xvii. 5) ;
but he that trusts in the Lord, and in Him only, he hath the blessing (Jer.
xvi. 7). 2. God hath His times to reckon with sinners. To make them smart '
for their evil doings, ‘In the days that I shall deal with thee.” God had His
day to deal with Egypt (Ezek. xxx. 9), with the Midianites (Isa. ix. 4). Ahab
had his day to do wickedly, and God had His day to deal with him (1 Kings xxii.
34, 35). Men sin, and think to hear no more of their sins, but God remembers
them, and hath His days to visit for them (Rom. ii. 6, 9). 8. God’s judgments
discover the vanity and rotienness of human confidences. ‘Can thine heart
endure? can thine hands be strong?” In the days when I shall deal with thee,
when I shall bring the sword, plague and famine, thy heart will be faint and thy
hands feeble. God’s judgments are fires which consume man’s confidences, and
make them see their own weakness, If footmen, horsemen, and the swellings of
Jordan weary and sink men, what will the Lord of Hosts do (Jer. xii. 5)? If
they cannot bear the lesser judgments, how will they bear the greater? If
briars and thorns conceit themselves to be oaks and cedars, can they endure the
fire? ‘They will be burnt to ashes (Isa. xxvii. 4). 4. The word of the Lord
shall take place, whatever men’s thoughts are. They thought Nebuchadnezzar
would not come, or if he did, that they and the Egyptians should be able to
deal with them, and prevent those evils which were threatened by the
rophets; but “I the Lord have spoken it, and will do it.” Neither will the
[ord revoxe what He hath said, and so prevent judgments intended: “ He is
wise, and will bring evil, and will not call back His words” (Isa. xxxi, 2).
Men often speak, threaten, and then after eat their words, call back their
threatenings, saying they were uttered in passion, inconsiderately, and so show
their folly ; but God when He speaks, it is in wisdom, His words shall stand,
and not be removed or called back (Amos vi. 11). Hence it is that the Lord
saith, “'lhey shall know whose word shall stand, mine or theirs” (Jer. xliv. 28),
5. The Lord by His judgment doth purge out of cities and nations the wicked,
and makes them and their wickedness to cease. “I will consume thy filthiness
out of thee,” ¢.¢., thy filthy ones. God brought the sword, famine, and pesti-
lence upon Jerusalem, and by these did cut off and consume the filthy ones
there (Jer. xiv. 15; xvi. 4; Ezek. viii. 14), By His judgments the Lord con-
sumes the filthy out of the city and land, and filthiness out of the saints,
6. The wickedness of God’s people doth disinterest them in God ; it makes God
disown them, and leave them to themselves. ‘They might think and say they
were still the people, the “ inheritance” of God, that they had an interest in
Him; but “thou shalt take thine inheritance in thyself ;” I disclaim thee,
I cast thee off as profane, and look upon thee no otherwise than I do upon
heathens. Israel had cast off the thing that was good, viz., the worship of God
(Hos. viii. 3) ; and, therefore, the prophet said, “ ‘I'hy calf, O Samaria, hath cast
thee off” (Hos. viii. 5); that is, thy false worship hath made Me to cast thee off,
to declare thee to be none of my city, and thy people to be none of mine. The
prophet Jeremiah tells us, that the Jews were once very dear to God, even as dear
as a wife can be to a husband ; but because, like lions, they carried it pou
against God, and cried out against Him and His prophets, therefore ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL





them, and gave them into the hands of the Babylonians ; and because Jerusalem
vac as a “speckled bird” in the eye of God, through her variety of gods, altars,
superstitions and idolatries, therefore God caused the birds of all the nations to
hoot at and hate her, even as birds do a speckled bird, inviting them and all the
beasts of the field to come and devour her. And all this because they dealt
treacherously, they were hypocritical, they were wicked (Jer. xii. 1, 2, 4, 7-9).
The Jews had been a people precious in the sight of God, and hunourable
(Isa. xliii. 4) ; Jerusalem His habitation, and the people of it His inheritance
and His glory, whom He protected (Isa. iv. 5); yet, by their sins they provoked
God, so that He gave “His strength into captivity, and His glory into the
enemy’s hand” (Psa. Ixxvili. 61). 7. That God’s judgments bring people to the
knowledge of God. God would scatter them, consume them, cast them off,
leave them to themselves, and they should know that he is the Lord. “The
Lord is known by executing judgments ” (Psa. ix. 16); His power, His justice,
and sovereignty are known thereby, and so men are made to fear and stand in
awe of Him. When God is silent, and speaks not by His judgments, men think
He is like themselves (Psa. 1. 21); and are emboldened to sin (Eccl. viii. 11) ;
but when God thunders by His judgments, they have other apprehensions of


Him (1 Sam. vi. 19, 20).—(Greenhill).


(Vers.
EXEGETICAL NOTES. —Jerusa-


lem besieged by her enemies is the
furnace in which God will refine His
people Israel,


Ver. 17. “ The word of the Lord
came unto me.” “This second word
of God rests, no doubt, upon the figure
in ver. 15, of the uncleanness or dirt
of sin; but it is not an exposition of
the removal of the dirt as predicted
there. For that was to be effected
through the dispersion of Israel among
the nations, whereas the word of God,
from ver. 17 onwards, represents the
siege awaiting Jerusalem as a melt-
ing process, through which God will
separate the ‘silver ore contained in
Israel from the baser metals mingled
with it.”—( Keil.)


Ver. 18. ‘‘ The house of Israel is
to Me become dross; all they are
brass, and tin, and iron, and lead,
in the midst of the furnace; they are
even the dross of silver.” Some kinds
of silver ore contain a large amount of
copper, iron, and lead, with other
impurities. The inhabitants of Judea
are described as a mass of the baser
metals intermixed with the impure
residue of silver, The good silver had
been drained out of Judah by death

370


17-22.)


or exile, and those who remained
had altogether become a compound of
wickedness,

Ver. 20, “So willI gather you in
Mine anger and in My fury, and I
will leave you there, and melt you.”
“The smelting is treated here simply
asa figurative representation of punish-
ment, and consequently the result of
the smelting, namely, the refining of
the silver by the removal of the baser
ingredients, is not referred to any
further, as is the case in Isa, i, 22, 25;
Jer. vi. 27-30; Mal. iii. 2, 3. This
smelting process was experienced by
Israel in the last siege of Jerusalem by
the Chaldeans.”—(Keil). “In the
spiritual department, the silver may
become altogether dross. The furnace
is Jerusalem, according to its destina-
tion to serve for a smelting pot. Dross
of silver is silver that has become
dross. They are all gathered into
Jerusalem (ver. 19), as the people far
and wide, under the pressure of the
foe, seek refuge in the fortified city,
In the whole section the judgment is
regarded not in the light of purifica-
tion, but in that of destruction, as
Ezekiel usually considers the population
of Jerusalem as an ungodly multi-
tude doomed to be extirpated, ’~
( Hengstenberg ).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





foe ~——


Ver. 22. “As silver is melted in
the midst of the furnace.” “In
modern metallurgy, lead is employed


for the purpose of purifying silver -


from other mineral products. The
alloy is mixed with lead exposed to
fusion upon an earthen vessel, and
submitted to a blast of air. By this
means the dross is consumed. his
process is called the cupelling opera-
tion, with which the description in
Ezek, xxii. 18-22 accurately coincides,
The vessel containing the alloy is
surrounded by the fire, or placed in
the midst of it, and the blowing is not
applied to the fire but to the fused


CHAP. XXII.





and silver, can resist the scorifying
influence. In Jer. vi. 28-30, we have
a perfect description of this process.
If we take silver having the impurities
in it described in the text, namely,
iron, copper and tin, and mix it with
lead, and place it in the fire upon a
cupell, it soon melts; the lead will
oxidize and form a tliick, coarse crust
upon the surface and thus consume
away, but effecting no purifying
influence. The alloy remains, if any-
thing, worse than before. The silver
is not refined because ‘the bellows
were burned,’ there existed nothing
to blow upon it.”—(Smith’s Dict. of


metals. And when this is done,


the Bicle, art. “ Lead”),
nothing but the perfect metals, gold


HOMILETICS.


God has a threefold smelting furnace. 1. Of sin. In which one can become
dross. 2. Of trial. In which furnace the sliver is tested. 38. Of judgment.
In which even the drogs is consumed.—Lange.


1. Churches and states may degenerate from their preciousness and purity,
into vileness and profaneness. “It was full of judgment, and righteousness
lodged in it” (Isa, i, 21-23), but instead of these, now there was oppression and
murder. ‘Thy silver is become dross, thy wine is mixed with water.” Thy
money is counterfeit, and thy wine corrupt. Whatever was pure in thee is now
corrupted, the law is corrupted with false expositions, the worship is corrupted
with idols and human traditions, justice is corrupted with bribery and cruel
oppressions, chastity and sobriety are corrupted with lewd and unclean practices,
Rome was once a golden city for her faith and holiness (Rom. 1. 8 ; xvi. 19) ;
but now is so corrupt in doctrine, worship, and manners, that she is become
“the mother of harlots and abominations ” (Rev. xvii. 5). The Seven Churches
were once golden candlesticks, but through their corruptions and weaknesses,
they soon degenerated into dross. 2. Men professing godliness, and living
ungodlily, are not acceptable to God, nor fit materials of a church. “The house
of Israel is to Me become dross ;” they profess My name, and so judge them-
selves good silver ; but they live wickedly, and to Me they are no better than dross,
than brass, tin, iron and lead, too base materials to make a temple for Me to dwell
in, or a candlestick for Me to set a prophetical light in, Whatever profession they
make, whatever parts or privileges they have, they are no silver, but the dross, the
excrements of silver, which defile, disgrace the name, the Church, the ordinances of
God, and must be separated from the gold and silver (2 Cor. vi. 17). Many that
appear silver unto men will be found dross unto God. Hypocrites and wicked ones
are dross ; only hypocrites are the “dross of silver.” 3. Zhe greatest part of
professors, when they come to the trial, will be found corrupt and naught.
‘All they are brass, and tin, and iron, and lead, in the midst of the furnace.”
The furnace discovered them to be base metal. The number of sincere and
silver-like Christians will be few. 4. Those who degenerate from God and His
ways shall meet with fury and fire from the Lord (ver. 21), When the church
of Ephesus decayed in her first love, that of Pergamos turned iy to the


OBAP XXIL.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


a


doctrines of Balaam and the Nicolaitanes, that of Thyatira to the teachings
and seductions of Jezebel; when Sardis abated in her zeal, and Laodicea
became lukewarm, the Lord threatened them severely, and at last brake the
candlesticks, and put out the lights (Rev. ii. iii). God will put away all the


wicked of the earth from Him like dross (Psa. exix. 119).


5. Melting and


consuming judgments upon a peuple are the wrath of God, whoever be the
executioners thereof. Nebuchadnezzar should besiege Jerusalem, and make it
lika a furnace to melt and consume the Jews, and this the Lord owns to be His
doing (ver. 22). ‘The enemies of Jerusalem were but the vials or vessels by
which the fury of God was poured out.—(Greenhill.)


(Vers, 23-31.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—The cor-
rupt condition of all ranks of the people
as the immediate cause of the destruc-
tion of the kingdom.


Ver. 24. “Thou art the land that is
not cleansed.” The priests, whose office
it was to keep the land free from moral
and ceremonial defilement had neglected
their duty (Lev. xvi. 19). The whole
land had become corrupt, but Jerusalem
was to be regarded as a concentration
of the iniquity of the whole land.
“Nor rained upon in the dayof indig-
nation” Heb. “ that hath not her rain.”
The rain which was her proper portion
which ought to have fallen upon her.
By this rain is signified, the gentle,
sanctifying showers of the prophetic
vord (Deut. xxxii. 2). ‘The blame of
this desolate state of things is imputed
to the prophets who were utterers of
vain speeches and lying visions (ver.
28). “A land that has no rain in the
day of indignation, is a land that in the
outburst of the divine judgment finds
no grace, and simply, as the connection
shows, because its impurity is not re-
moved. ‘Tie rain in the day of indig-
nation would be a benefit, It would
quench the flame of the divine indig-
nation. ‘l'o the indignation, the full
energy of which is here called forth by
the uncleanness, may be applied that
which is said in the Song of Songs
(viii. 7) of the fire of love. ‘ Many
waters cannot quench love, neither can
the rivers drown it.’” —({ Hengstenberg ).


Ver. 25. “A conspiracy of her
prophets.” These professed to be the
messengers of God but they were

272


conspiring against Him. They were
His enemies, even as roaring lions are
the enemies of their prey. ‘The false
prophets are first singled out; on ace
count of the greater influence which
they exerted in seducing the people by
their impious teachings. Not satisfied
with each propagating error within his
own sphere, they had formed a complot
to oppose the messages of the servants
of the Lord. Thus forming a powerful
body, they resembled a roaring lion,
tearing in pieces his prey. Uncon-
cerned about the welfare of the souls
of whom they professedly had the
cure, and intent only upon their own
gain, they had occasioned the death
of those who perished in the war with
the Chaldeans, and thus increased the
number of widows,” —(Henderson.)


Ver. 26. “Her priests have violated
My law, and have profaned Mine holy
things.” ‘The priest’s lips should keep
knowledge, and give it out as from a
pure fountain (Mal. ii. 7). But these
did violence to God’s law, both by
breaking it themselves and making it
void to others by false interpretations.
“They have put no difference between
the holy and profane.” The priests also
knowingly admitted persons to God’s
sacred ordinances, without any regard
or discrimination as to their moral or
spiritual fitness for partaking of them.
They showed utter indifference to all
moral distinctions—right and wrong,
pure and impure. Upon them lies the
woe pronounced upon those who call
evil good, and good evil (Isa. v. 20).
“ Have hid their eyes from My. Sab-.
baths.” They neither observe the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XXII.


—- —_—_——_—————————___—_-- rrr


Sabbath themselves, and shut their
eyes to the desecration of it by others.
Thus they failed to carry out the chief
command and reason of their office,
which (as laid down by Moses) was “to
teach the children of Israel all the
statutes which the Lord had spoken
unto them.” (Lev. x. 11). ‘‘'The law
of the Sabbath is given as an example.
This they rob ot its deep spiritual
import, and limit it to the external
rest, as if it were given for animals,
and not for men, who are to serve God
in spirit. Because they thus let down
the commandments of God to the level
of man, and make them minister to
human inclination, God Himself is
desecrated by them. “Iam profaned
among them.” In place of the dread
and holy God, who visits the iniquity
of the fathers upon the children, ap-
pears a Jax and sin-favouring god, who
creates no one, and is glad if any one
will only acknowledge him, and is
thankful for every bow that is made to
him ”—/( Hengstenberg).


Ver. 27, “Her princes . . « .
like wolves ravening the prey.” The
term “princes” is applied generally
to all the political authorities and
officials, These, in their rapacity are
compared to wolves, which are noted
for their fierceness and cruelty.


Ver. 28. ‘‘Her prophets have daubed
them with untempered morter.”
“Them,” ¢.¢., the princes, These were
prophets who meddled with political
matters, and upheld the princes in their
iniquity. “The false prophets recur
here once more, as abettors of the
nobles, to whom they hold out deliver-
ance, and thereby confirm them in
their shameful course, instead of ve-
hemently testifying against their sins,
and setting before them the judgments
of God. In ch. xiii. 10 we have an
example of the manner in which the
prophets daubed with this untempered
mortar. The building of the wall by
the people denotes the political ac-
tivity whereby they sought to raise
themselves up—the effort made by the


coalition. The false prophets daubed
this wall; they gave to the impious
and the ungodly movement of the
peopie, that was condemned by the
word of the true prophets, the appear-
ance of a higher sanction, and con-
firmed them in it. The wall is a
spiritual one, and so the absurdity
suits it as a spiritual mortar. The
attempt to put, instead of the spiritual,
a material mortar, has arisen only from
the want of capacity in expositors
to understand the interchange of
figure and reality. Nothing can be |
more absurd than to announce safety
to a people living in sin, and to promise
success to counsels that are in open
contradiction to the revealed counsels
of God” (Hengstenberg). These false
prophets assured the princes that the
King of Babylon would not take
Jerusalem, in direct contradiction to


the Word of God.


Ver. 29. “ The people of the land.”
“ Ag placed here immediately after the
classification of persons holding office,
we are to understand the inhabitants
generally without distinction of rank
or office. Corruption had spread down-
wards through the whole mass of the
community (Jer. v. 1-4). They ‘vexed
the poor and needy,” they ‘ oppressed
the stranger wrongfully.’ So far from
encouraging, by their kindness and
holy example, those foreigners who
sojourned among them to devote them-
selves in spirit and truth to the service
of Jehovah, the Jews did everything
that was calculated to alienate them
from His worship.” —( Henderson.)


Ver. 30. “I sought for a man
among them .- - but I found none.”
“ Jeremiah, by his powerful preaching
of repentance, presented himself as
such a public deliverer; but they
despised him, and he could gain no
position. The man alone is nothing.
he position must be added, and the
people must gather around him.”—
ners ) It was expressly for-

idden to Jeremiah to intercede for
them (Jer. xi, 14).

273


CHAF, XXIL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,








Ver. 31. “Their own way have I filled. They are punished for their
recompensed upon their heads.” Thus own personal transgressions, and not
the words of Ezek. xviii. 80 are ful- for those of their fathers.


HOMILETICS.
Tur Corruprion or THE Natron.


I. It was spread through all ranks and classes. 1. Prophets. “They have
devoured souls ; they have taken the treasure and precious things; they have
made her many widows in the midst thereof” (ver. Dy They were tle enemies
of God and of the souls which He had made. By their lying prophecies they
bronght the judgment of the sword upon the city, so that she was rifled of her
treasure and her widows were multiplied. 2. Priests. Her priests violated
God’s law; not only by breaking it themselves, but by putting false interpretae
tions on it for the purpose of their own selfish ends. They were ordained to
promote holiness, but they put no difference between the holy and the profane,
between the unclean and the clean. They destroyed the very foundations of
religion and morality. They profaned the blessed ordinance of the sabbath,
which God bad given to men for rest and worship, and which was wonderfully
suited to nourish the growth of religion by promoting serious thought and
meditation (ver. 26). 3. Aulers. These no longer ruled by righteousness, but
shed blood and destroyed souls to get disl.onest gain. And the prophets were
linked with them, upholding them in their iniquity (ver. 27, 28). 4. People.
These could not be expected to be better than their guides, There was not
a man to be found among them to stand in the gap, and to save the land by
his righteousness (ver. 30). We are reminded how when God sent His son,
He was rejected by all these classes in succession,—by the religious teachers,
then by the rulers, and, last of all, by the people.


II. We can trace the cause and progress of it. The prophets were utterers
of lying visions and spurious oracles. ‘lheir object was only to flatter the civil
authorities for their own aclfish purposes. The priests had lost all sense of
sacredness. 1. The decvy of a nation’s life begins when false doctrines are
promulgated. The history of the children of Israel was the history of religion,
They were what they were because of certain doctrines and ordinances con-
cerning God, and His service, and human duty. ‘These were revealed to them
from heaven. They were bound by solemn obligations to obey them. And
God’s law is violated just as much by putting false interpretations upon it as by
actual transgression. False doctrines are not immaterial. They are not mere
errors of the head,—harmless speculations having no real influence upon life
and duty. For it will be found that what is wrong in doctrine springs from
the fountain of an evil heart. False doctrines are on the side of the passions,
They are human inventions to justify the errors of heart and life. A right life
must have right principles for its foundation, If we examine the errors of
Popery, we find that they have their origin in corrupt human nature. They
have an eye to political ascendancy, to the supremacy of a priestly class, to
gain, to worldly ambitions, and to salve the consciences of men by easy
and convenient methods of dealing with sin. True teaching concerning God and
human duty can alone promote holiness of heart and life, which is the salt of
nations to preserve them from corruption and decay. 2. The decay of a
nation's life also sets in when its rulers are no longer governed by conscience,
When they set aside God’s law of righteousness, and are intent only upon
dishonest gain, then they become oppressors of the poor and defenceless, - and
seruple not to she? innocent blood. 3. The decay of a nation’s life is imminent

274 ¥


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: EZEKIEL, CHAP. XXII.





when priests become mere courtiers. When they flatter those in power, with
the view only of advancing themselves. Corruptions of this kind soon followed
when Rome embraced the Christian religion under Constantine, by which the
clergy acquired political importance. The temptation to worldly ambition was
strong, and they yielded to it. They sought to please princes in order to promote
the temporal interests of the Church and their own wealth and grandeur, And
when princes aud priests are corrupted it is no marvel that the evil influence at
length affects public opinion, When the reigning powers and public cpinion
are on the side of tyranny and wrong, corruption must find its way even to
the seat of justice. Instead of equity we have caprice and irrational and
unjust maxims and practices. And corruption in all these departments soon
spreads into family life, and thus the last retreat of a nation’s strength and
purity is invaded.


III. It brought surejudgment. The dire judgments which fell upon the people
were inevitable. They happened by a moral necessity God had done every-
thing for His vineyard that could be done in it, and there remained nothing
more to be tried. 1. The ministry of the true prophets had failed. 'Yhe people
had been instructed and warned. When Goii’s teaching by the mouth of His
holy prophets does no good, then have the people judged themselves. When
Jerusalem killed the prophets, and stoned them that were sent unto her, then
her house was left unto her desolate. “ Your house,” said our Lord, as much
as to say, DZy house no longer. They had profaned it, and God departed from
His temple. 2. No righteous men were: to be found amongst them (ver. 30).
Abraham’s intercession tor Sodom teaches us that the presence of a few righteous
among a people stays tle hand of justice. When those who fear God decline in
a land, judgment is coming. 3. Jn these judgments God was treating them on
their own terms. They had punishment in kind as well as in necessary degree.
The priests had made no distinction between the holy and the profane. And
thus, by their own admission, they were not “ aholy nation.” Let it be so,
then ; let them be profaned by being treated as such. Holiness was the very
reason of their existence as a nation, and wanting that, there remained only a
looking for judgment. The foundation of their national privileges was thus
destroyed. ‘hey profaned the sanctuary, and they were themselves profaned
among the heathen. They despised God, and they were “lightly esteemed ”
(1 Sam. ii, 30). “ Their own way have I recompensed upon their heads saith
the Lord God” (ver. 81).


(Ver. 28).


1. There are prophets who will flatter wicked princes and rulers én their evil
ways. ‘The princes were ravening wolves, shed blood, destroyed-souls, to get
dishonest gain, and Jerusalem’s prophets daubed them with untempered
mortar. They applauded their practices, justified their dvings, and told them
that God did approve of their ways. It was not the nobles, citizens, but the
prophets of Jerusalem which did this. Princes and great ones want not false
and lying prophets to bolster them up, and to bear them out in their vile and
detestable courses. Ahab was a wicked king, and he had a multitude of flatter-
ing daubing prophets (2 Chron. xviii, 10, 11). ‘There were “ flattering divina-
tions” among the false prophets (Ezek. xti. 24); and with these they bedaubed
the wicked princes, and strengthened the hands of evil-doers (Jer. xxiii. 14).
Flattery is evil in any, but worst of all in prophets, aud especially when they
have to do with wicked princes, whom they harden in their wickedness thereby,
and ripen for destruction. Reproof is a precious balm (Psa. exli. 5); but
flattery is a destructive net (Prov. xxix. 5). Let the true prophets abhor it;
and go speak the truth, that they ae appeal to the consciences of ane and

| 27


OHAP. XXIL HOMILETIC COMME? TARY : EZEKIEL





—=1


small, as Paul doth (1 Thess. ii. 5). 2. What false prophets give out 18 une
savoury, and unsound, weak, and useless. It is uutempered mortar: it may
stick in men’s heads a little, to strengtien them to do wickedly ; but it will
not stick in their hearts, to strengthen them against the day of evil, and to justify
their doings. What is there in vanity and lies which can establish? It is truth,
and divine truth, which establisheth (2 Pet. i. 19); the vain and lying imagina-
tions of men, do deceive and disappoint. Pashur prophesied lies, the things of
his own heart and spirit, which himself and others trusted in; but see how he
ani they who believed him, were deceived and disappointed (Jer. xx. 6). The
scornful rulers which made lies their refuge, and hid themselves under falsehood
saying, “ the over-flowing scourge shall not come unto us” (Isa, xxviii, 14, 15).
But, see what the Lord saith (ver 17). The hail shall sweep away the refuge of
lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding-place, False prophecies, false
opinions, false confidences are all untempered mortar. 8. Zhe subtlety and
impudence of false prophets makes way for their vanity and lies. ‘hey say,
“thus saith the Lord God,” there is their cunning ; and to make God author of
their vanities and lies, there is their impudency. They knew that their dreams,
visions, vanities, and lies would not take with princes or people if not presented
unto them as from God. They did not only abuse wen, but they greatly abused
God. “ They have belied the Lord” (Jer. v, 12), and made that to be the word
of God which was not ; they walked in lies and strengthened the hands of evil-
doers ; which provoked God so bitterly against them, that He saith He would
“feed them with wormwood and make them drink the water of gall” (Jer. xxiii. ,
14, 15). Many prophets amongst us have belied the Lord, m making some
Scriptures speak that to maintain their opinions and tenets which never was the
mind of God.—( Greenhill).


(Vers, 30.)


1. Gods protection of them. He had a special care of them, being His
Church and people, above all others; as the city Jerusalem had a wall about it
(Neh, i. 3), so God was a wall to the citizens thereof, “a wall of fire round about
them ” (Zech. ii. 5; Cant. iv. 12), Lest any should hurt His vineyard, He kept
it night and day, watched over it and preserved it.

2. Consider those things which God had given them to be a hedge or wall unto
them. (1.) Sound doctrine, ‘This was a“ hedge ” to keep out all errors, corrupt
and heathenish opinions, which they were in danger of, having the nations round
about them. But God had given them good doctrine (Prov. iv. 2); right
words (Psa. xxxili. 4) ; lively oracles (Acts vii. 38) ; faithful commands (Psa.
cxix. 86) ; sure testimonies (Ps. xciii, 5) ; such as they were to try all doctrines
and opinions by (Isa. wii. 20). (2.) Pure worship, This was a hedge between
them and the heathen (Deut. vi, 13, 14). God had appointed them a pure way
of worship, which hedged them in from all false ways of worship, from bringing
in aught of their own or of others. (8.) Good laws. No nation under heaven
had such laws to be governed by as the Jews had, and those laws were hedges
against all injustice; they might not wrong one another, nor strangers,
(4.) God had given them good prophets, priesis, and princes, The prophets were
to preserve the doctrine sound, the priests to keep the worship pure, and the
princes to see justice impartially executed, Elijah, a good prophet, was the
horsemen and chariot of Israel (2 Kings ii. 12; xiii. 14); the priests were
mediators between God and the people (Joel ii. 17); the princes were the
strength of the land (Prov. xxix. 4). And more briefly, it was the covenant made
between God and this people ; He had promised to be their God and to protect
them ; oy had promised to be His people, and to walk in His ways. But—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP. EX.
eee





_ 8 The “ hedge” which God had given them was broken, and gaps were made
tmit. (1). The doctrine was corrupted. There was much chaff mingled with
the wheat (Jer. xxiii. 28) ; false prophets gave in that to be divine, which was
from their own hearts and heads (Hzek. xiii. 2, 3); they prophesied lies (Jer
xiv. 14); the providence of God was denied, His justice and omnipresence
(Ezek. viii, 12; xviii. 2, 25), They taught the people to swear by a false God,
even by Baal (Jer. xii. 16). (2). The worship was greatly corrupted. The
sanctuary was defiled with detestable things (Ezek. v.11). hey had brought
images and idols into the temple (fzek. viii), they had high places and altars in
every street (Hzek. xvi.) The statutes of Omri were kept, and the works of the
house of Ahab (Micah vi. 16); and the fear or worship of God was taught by
the precepts of men (Isa. xxix. 13). (3). Vhe laws were wrested and perverted,
80 that there was no justice. ‘They abhor judgment, and pervert all equity
(Micah iti. 9). According to Isaiah, judgment was turned away backward, and
justice stood afar off ; they thrust them out of doors, out of their gates and
cities, and when they pressed hard to come in there was no admission, the doors
and gates were locked and bolted upon them, equity could not enter (Isa. lix.
14) ; only oppression was let in (Isa. v. 7). (4). The men who should have been
as strong stakes to keep up the ‘“‘ hedge” were rotten. The prophets were “lions”
(Jer. xxiii. 14); the priests corrupters and wicked (Lam. iv. 13); the princes
were rebellious, and companions of thieves (Isa. i. 23); and all of them make
covenant with God (Ezek. xvi. 59).

4. How was the “hedge” to be made up? (1.) In public opposing those
corruptions which were crept in, and practised amongst them. When of old the
Jews had broken down the “ hedge” by making a calf, Moses appeared for God
against this wickedess ; he seized upon the calf, burnt it, and ground it into
powder (Ex. xxxii.). When the sons of Levi came to him, he commissioned
them to slay the idolators; and this was the beginning of making up the breach.
So when Josiah began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, the
groves, images, and altars that were therein, then was the “ hedge ” making up
which they had broken down (2 Chron. xxxiv. 8, 4). In Nehemiah’s days, when
the “hedge ” was new-made about them, there were some who began to tread
down the “hedge” and to make a “‘ gap” therein, by doing unlawful things on
the Lord’s day. The zeal of Nehemiah was kindled, so that he contended with
the nobles of Judah, who countenanced them, and did violence to the Sabbath
themselves (Neh. xiii. 15-18). (2.) In mourning for such breaches, and
deprecating the wrath and judgments due for the same. Moses was affected
much with what the people had done, and prays and intercedes for them
(Ex. xxxii. 10). ‘This act was standing in the breach, and making up the
“hedge” (Psa. evi. 23); it kept out the fury of the Lord from breaking in
upon them. ‘The intercession of God’s servants is a strong “hedge” and wall
to prevent judgments. Therefore, when the Lord was resolved upon the
destruction of the Jews, He forbade Jeremiah to pray for them (Jer. vii. 16).
(3.) In putting things into their primitive condition. When Josiah caused the
house of the Lord to be repaired, the covenant with God to be renewed, the law
to be read, and the Passover to be kept according to the institution, and all
things were brought to their primitive condition (2 Chron, xxxiv. ; xxxv.), then
was the “hedge” made up—then was there a man stood in the gap before the
Lord. 80, when Jehoshaphat brought back the people from false doctrine, and
false worship, to the Lord God of their fathers, then was the “ hedge” made up,
and God protected them against their enemies,

5. None were found to make up the “ hedge.” Were there not Jeremiah and
Ezekiel, who interceded with God for this people? Were there not many that
mourned for the abominations that were among them ? (Jer. ix. 1; xiv. 11;
Ezek, ix. 4, 8). It is true Jeremiah did appear for God : he opposed the false

277


OHAP. XXIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





prophets, the perverting of justice, the iniquities of priests, princes, and people ;
but they would not hearken to him (Jer. xliv. 16). They sought to put him
to death, and to cast him into prison. And three times God had forbidden
him to pray for them. He could prevail with none of them towards making
up the “hedge.” As for Ezekiel, he was in Babylon, and the Lord looked for
a man amongst them in Jerusalem. “I looked for a man among them,” not
among you. For the sighers and mourners that were iu Jerusalem they did it
in secret. They had not spirits to contradict the wicked prophets, priests, and
princes; or, if they had, yet they saw there was no good to be done, The
times were exceedingly and desperately wicked ; a man was made an offender
for a word, and a suare was laid for him that reproved in the gate (Isa, xxix. 21).
It was an evil time, and the time for the prudent to keep silence (Amos v.
12, 13). From this subject we learn—(1) That sin makes breaches and gaps.
Their sins brake down the hedge and made those gaps (Isa. xxx. 18). Solomon’s
sins made such a breach therein that ten tribes were rent therefrom and given
to Jeroboam (1 Kings xi. 31). Sin made the breach between them and other
nations, the breach between God and them. Sin makes breaches in churches
(1 Cor. i, 11, 12), in cities (Luke xix. 14), in families (Ezek. xvi. 38), in men’s
names (Prov. vi. 33), in men’s estates (Deut. xxviii. 15, 16), in men’s consciences
(Matt. xxvii. 8,4; Prov, xviii, 14, xv. 4), and between the chiefest friends
(Prov. xvi. 28). ‘There are some sins which make such breaches as shake the
foundations (Psa. Ixxxii. 5). The laws were their foundations, but the iniquity
of the judges moved those foundations out of place, and the state was like a
bowing wall and a tottering feuce (Psa, Ixii. 3). (2). When breaches and gaps
are made by sin, the Lord lets in His judgments thereby. When they made
breaches upon the worship, statutes, and Sabbaths of the Lord, He
resolved to pour out his fury upon them and consume them (Isa. 1,
23, 24). Such is the lesson of the parable (Isa. v. 6). (8). When
the hedge is down, and gaps are made, the Lord looks for some
one to appear, so as to prevent thosé judgments. “1 sought for a man to
make up the hedge,” &. Gud expected that they should have repented, and
some at least to have said, Whit have 1 done? God was displeased, aud now
He looked that one or other should have showed a public spirit, opposed the
sinful practices, and deprecated judgments. He looks in all the gaps round
about, and “ He saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no
intercessor” (Isa. Ixx. 16), none to meet God, to set upon Him by prayer and
strong arguinents to withhold His judgments, (4) Making up the hedge, and
standing in the gap, is the way to save aland from destruction. Let man oppose
the sinful practices in a land and deprecate the judgments of God, then the
Lord will spare a sinful nation, a guilty city (Jer. v. i.) In such a case one
man may do much. Moses stood in the gap, and diverted the wrath of God
(Psa. cvi. 22); Aaron, also (Num. xvi. 47, 48). We, through infinite mercy,
have had some like Moses and Aaron, to make up our hedges, raise up our
foundations, to stop some gaps; but all our gaps are not yet stopped. Are
there not gaps iv the hedge of doctrine? If it were not so, how came in such
erroneous, blasphemous, and wild opinions amongst us? Are there not gaps in
the worship of God? Do not many tread down all churches, all ordinances ;
yea, the yery Scriptures? Are there not gaps in the hedge of justice, through
which the bulls of Bashan enter, which oppress the poor, and crush the needy
(Amos iv. 1)? Are there not gaps in the hedge of love; is not that bond of
perfection broken? Are there not gaps in the hedge of conscience? Is not
the peace broken between God and your souls? Doth not Satan come in often
at the gap and disturb you? (5) Jn times of general corruption in Church and
State, it is hard to find a man of public spirit to oppose those corruptions, and
to seer God for mercy. the Lord “ sought for a man amongst them.”
27


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.
Ne re ee





OHAP. XXIII.





The judges and great ones did oppress the people, and none appeared publicly
for them, to plead their cause aud to reprove their oppressors. Many disliked
the carriage of things, but they had no spirit to oppose; they were “not
valiant for the truth,” as Jeremiah saith (Jer. ix. 3). God doth not say that
there were “none,” but “none to help, none to uphold.” In common corrup-
tions and calamities few have hearts to appear for the public good, against
overspreading evils. Sinful prudence, or fear of crushing, makes them silent
and lie hid (Lccles. iv. 1). The oppressions under the sun were great, the tears
of the oppressed many, but there was no comforter, none pitied them, none
used any means to relieve them (Greenhill).


Tue Sis or Israzt aND JUDAH REPRESENTED UNDER THE FIGURE oF Two


Hak.ots.
EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Samaria


and Jerusalem are the capitals and
representations of the two kingdoms
Israel and Judah. These two cities
are presented under the allegory of
two harlots who are sisters, and who
have practiced whoredom from the
days of Egypt onwards, (Vers. 2-4.)


Vers. 1-4. The two harlot sisters
are briefly described,


Ver. 2. ‘‘ Two women, the daughters
of one mother.” “These two cities
had a common mother—the Hebrew
people ; regard being had to what .they
had become in the possession of that
people.” —( Henderson).


“They committed whore-
doms in Egypt; they committed
whoredoms in their youth.’ The
prophet regards this two-fold divisions
of the people as dating long before
the time of the separation of the
kingdoms. The two kingdoms existed
virtually in Egypt in the tribes of
Ephraim and Judah. ‘The origin of
their idolatry is to be traced to Egypt,
where all the tribes alike fell into that
sin, It was in the very “youth” of
the people that they had become
alienated from God. ‘* There they
bruised the teats of their virginity.”
“ At that time Israel was still unmar-
ried, The marriage with Jehovah
took place when the covenant was
made at Sinai. But she was even at
that time betrothed. ‘This is proved
by what God had done to the Patri-


Ver. 3.


(Chap xxiii.)


archs, and by the circumcision to
which they had submitted ; and hence
their unchaste conduct fell under the
judgment of (Deut. xxii. 23, &c.).
Their business wes to prepare them-
selves as a pure virgin for marriage.”
—/(Hengstenberg). “On account of
the legitimate relation in which the
nation stood to God from its very
origin, namely, of a marriage covenant,
the political and religious departure ot
both kingdoms from the principles laid
down in the law, appears as wanton-
ness (Ezek. xvi. 15). Egypt was the
means of exciting the first carnal im-
pulses of the youthful people to a
heathenish mode of feeling and action,
whereby they were robbed of their
virgin purity.” —( Lange.)


Ver. 4. “ Aholah the elder.” This
name signifies, Her own tent. Thus it
is implied that the worship of the
Samaritans was of their own invention
and was never appointed of Jehovah.
The northern kingdom had erected an
altar of her own will (1 Kings xii. 31-
83). ‘“ Aholibah her sister.” The
meaning of this nawe is, My tent is
in her. Jehovah had ordained the
temple-worship at Jerusalem. He had
chosen Zion for an habitation to set
His name there (Psa, exxxil. 13, 14).


“And they were Mine.” “Previous
to the apostasy under Jeroboam,
Samaria, equally with Jerusalem,


worshipped the true God, Their

inhabitants were sons and daugliters

of the Lord Almighty, He never

renounced His right to the Israelites
279


OHAP. XXIIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEEIEL.








as subjects of theocracy, but sent northern kingdom was the sphere of
prophets to disclose His will to them the special labours of Elijah and
and warn them against idolatry. The Elisha.”—(Henderson).


HOMILETICS.


SprriruaL ADULTERY.


I. It consists in forsaking the Creator to love and serve the creature. The
children of Israel committed whoredoms in Egypt by worshipping itsidols, They
forsook their God, who had called them to love and serve Himself, and to forsake
all other. Idolatry is the perversion of a true religious instinct, as lust is the
perversion of a passion which should inspire the devotion of love and self sacri-
ner The worship and service of the creature is wrauthorised. And it also

ebases,


II. The sin of it is manifest from the nature of the relations in which we
stand to God. “There were two women, the daughters of one mother.” God
was a Father unto Israel. The people were His own peculiar heritage. By
their idolatry they were bringing dishonour upon the name of God. Duties
arise out of our relation to God which cannot be set aside without bringing upon
ourselves the stain and the consequences of transgression,


III. In the youth of a people they are especially exposed to this sin
“They committed whoredoms in their youth.” ‘Ihe allurements of Egyptian
idolatry soon corrupted Israel in the days of her youth. Their feelings were
fresh, their experience small, and the pleasures of Egypt were novel and strange.
Young societies are greatly exposed to the dangerous fascinations of those by
whom they are surrounded, So the early Christian Church was soon corrupted
by false philosophy ; and in a later age, by the seductions of wordly power and
grandeur. Also, in the youth of human life, the lusts and pleasures of the
world are most powerful to seduce.


IV. This sin may be prevalent amidst all the refinements of civilization,
The Israelites found in Egypt an advanced civilization. Yet amidst all this were
to be found the coarsest and most debasing forms of idolatry. How much
grovelling and degrading superstition is still to be found in the midst of the
highest civilization !


V. This sin should be denounced in plain terms. ‘The fleshly sins, which
are here used as a figure of spiritual sins, are described in plain language.
They are set forth in all their naked deformity ; spoken of exactly as they are.
Those who counsel such sins would like (if they hear of them at all) to have
their loathsomeness hidden under the veil of elegant speech. “ Plain speaking
is not attractive ; flowery ambiguities are of the devil ”—(Lange). ‘Those who
blame the prophet for his great plainness of speech should rather concern
themselves with the thought of the baseness of those sins which demanded so
faithful a narration and exposure. The whole of this pa saye teaches us that
true religion leads to fellowship with God, His love and service. And all love
and service inconsistent with this belongs to a class of sins which can best be
described under the images of the worst and most degrading of fleshly lusts.


1. The Lord takes notice where and when those who are in relation to Him
do sin. “In Egypt, and in their youth.” They sinned amidst the grand and
bitter enemies of God, among Egyptians, and then when they were growing up
to be a people. They should have considered what enemies the Egyptians were

280


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL, OHAP. XXII.





to their God and His worship, how odious their ways and worship were to Him.
They should have walked circumspectly, so that they might have kept His name
from being polluted ; and likewise they, being in their youth under bondages,
should have minded God's kindnesses in preserving them, and making them te
prosper. When God is besinning to show kindness to a people in misery, and
raising them up to some height and greatness, and then for them to turn aside to
lewduess, to superstitions, idolatrous, and heathenish practices, this God observes
in a special manner, and it provokes Him greatly (Psa. cvi. 7). When states,
cities, families, degenerate in their youth, it sorely displeases God. 2. Where-
soever a devised worship is brought in, there man’s tabernacle is set up; where
true worship is advanced, there is God's tabernacle. ‘The ten tribes had a
worship of Jereboam’s devising, like unto the worship of Jerusalem in many
things; but this was Aholah, their own tabernacle. God owned it not, He was
not in their assemblies, He accepted not their sacrifices, their incense was a
stink in His nostrils, But Jerusalem was Aholibah, My tabernacle, there God’s
own worship was set up, and so long as His worship was there, He acknow-
ledged His tabernacle to be in her. Where His worship is, there He dwells
(Psa. lxviii. 16); and is to be seen and enquired of (Psa. xxvii. 4).—Gireenhill.


(Vers. 5-10).


EXEGETICAL NOTES. — The
spiritual adultery of Samaria with
Assyria, The instrument of her puni.h-
ment is that very people which she
jee made the object of her impure
ove. .


Ver. 5. The Assyrians her neigh-
bours. The word refers rather to kins-
men, rather than to those dwelling
near, Asshur was brother to Arphaxad,
Abraham’s ancestor (Gen. x. 22, 24;
x1. 16-26).


Ver. 6. Clothed with blue, captains
and rulers, all of them desirable
young men, horsemen riding upon
horses, “ This description giveu of the
Assyrians contains the thought that
Israel, dazzled by Assyria’s splendour,
and overpowered by the might of that
kingdom, had been drawn into inter-
course with the Assyrians, which led
her astray into idolatry. The predicate,
clothed in purple, points to the splen-
dour and glory of this imperial power ;
the other predicates, to the ma-uitude
of its wilitary force.” (Keil). We
have here the ground which tempted
Aholah to become unfaithful to her
God. It lay in this, that the para-
mour Assyria came into her neiglbour-
hood, and placed his grandeur before
her. ‘Therein lay the temptation to
gue for his favour to ward eff injury.


The adultery bas been not s0 much a
religious as a political import. The
paramour, on whose account Israel
forsakes his God, is Assyria itself, not
its god, though they endeavoured, no
doubt from fear of the people, to make


friends of its gods also.” (Heng-
stenberg).
Ver. 8. “Neither left she her


whoredoms brought from Egypt.”
This was the Apis-worship of which
Israel was guilty while in Horeb.
Jeroboam instituted it, thus reviving
the former iniquity of the nation. ‘The
people never wholly got rid of this
source of unfaithfulness brought from
Egypt. Even Jehu tolerated it
(2 Kings x. 31).


Ver, 10. “These discovered her
nakedness.” ‘“ 'I'his denotes the igno-
minious treatment which Israel must
suffer from Assyria, as a punishment for
her revolt to Egypt. Aholah is slain
with the sword : the proper substance
of the people, the men fit for service,
fell in the war, while the weaker portion
was carried intoexile.” (HHengstenberg.)
“Famous among women.” ‘She was
rendered as notorious by her punish-
ment as she had been by her crimes,
She was made an example to which an
appeal could be made by other states”


Henderson.
9Q1


OHAP. XXIII, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


ee LD


HOMILEKETICS.
Tue Sin oF SAMARIA,


I. It showed the basest ingratitude. “Played the harlot when she was Mine.”
God had united her to Himself, she was in living and tender relationship with
Him when she basely deserted His worship and service. She was taught the
true doctrine, and the right way of duty, and was supplied with means to observe
both. Yet she sinned against light and privilege.


II. It showed the dangerous power of the imagination, The military organiza-
tion of Assyria dazzled their imagination. The glory of the world seduces the
worldly mind. ‘Clothed with blue, captains and rulers, all of them desirable
young men, horsemen riding upon horses.” Such was the power and graudeur
of Assyria. In accordance with the figure employed, those things are named
which would be likely to strike the eye of a wordly minded young woman,
Israel admired the political and worldly grandeur of the Assyrians, and so were
seduced into idolatry. They first worshipped the power and maguiticence of the
nation, and then it was an easy matter to adopt the worship of their gods. The
fascinations of the world is still the standing danger to purity in doctrine and
worship. In all sensuous forms of religious worship there lurks this great danger,
that men through admiration of the outward are led to adopt the false doctrines
of which it is the vehicle.


III. It showed how inveterate are old evils. “Brought from Egypt” (ver.
8). The old idolatry which they had learned in Egypt clung to the nation,
every now and then breaking out. ‘I'he nation was never clearly delivered from
it till after their captivity in Babylon.


IV. It was visited with exemplary punishment. 1. Those who had seduced
her by their power and grandeur were made the very instruments of her punish-
ment. She had doted on the Assyrians. and she was delivered into their hands
(ver. 9). 2. She was made a warning example to all. “ Famous among
women.” An example to all the other nations. ‘I‘hey would talk of her ; some
of her abominable wickedness, others of her miseries, previous judgments, and
calamities,


1. When people embrace false worship they are violent and strong in their
affections towards it. Aholah doted upon her lovers, her heart: was fired with
Babylonish gods, and confidences inthem. 2. What evil persons have practised
in their youth that they affect in their age. Aholah had loved the Egyptian
idols in her minority, and after she was grown up, those idols were not out of
her thoughts. Her Egyptian lovers were still in her mind, like harlots that
mind their former lovers long after they are married. What corruption gets in
youth, grows up and abides ; an unclean, idolatrous heart in youth, will be so
in age. 3. Idolatry may continue long tn a nation, but shall at least be severely
punished by the Lord. Aholah had been an idolatress from her youth, and when
sk2 ¥as grown up to some greatness, then she broke out into gross, notorious
ia>'a7y (1 Kings xii.) ; in which she continued for upwards of two hundred and
sixy years, and then the Lord plagued, yea, destroyed her, her sons and
daugliters. It is wisdom to cleave to the Lord and His worship, net to follow
or confide in other nations, or their ways. 4. God makes places and persons
remarkable by the juagments He executeth upon them. Aholah was made famous
among women by those judgments He brought upon her. Aholah was Samaria,
which Shalmaneser besieged three years, and then took it; and afterwards burnt
i¢ (2 Kings xvii. 5, 6).—Greenhill.

282


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XXIX,





(Vers. 11-21.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—The
spiritual adultery of Judah with

ssyria, in which she surpasses
Samaria in her iniquity.


Ver. 11. “She was more corrupt
in her inordinate love.” “Judah went
much further than Samaria. It not
only indulged in sinful intercourse with
Assyria, which led on to idolatry as the
latter had done, but it also allowed
itself to be led astray by the splendour
of Chaldea to form alliances with that
imperial power, and to defile itself
with her idolatry. And when it
became tired of the Chaldeans it formed
impure connections with the Egyptians
as it had done once before during its
sojourn in Egypt” (Keid).


Ver. 12. “‘ Doted upon the Assyrians,
her neighbours.”’ “ ‘I'he reference here
is to the application made by Ahaz to
Tiglath-pileser for his assistance against
the Syrians and Israelites (recorded
2 Kings xvi. 7-9), which led to the
idolatrous transaction at Damascus,
and the introduction of the Syrian
idolatry into Jerusalem (2 Chron.
xxviii. 16)” (LHenderson), ‘“Clothed
most gorgeously.” The word means
perfection, and the thought intended
is, perfect beauty of clothing. ‘The
costume of the Assyrian cavalry may
be seen in the sculptures brought by
Layard from Nineveh, which display
all the wmaguificence of Oriental
finery ” (Henderson).


Ver. 14. ‘‘She saw men portrayed
upon the wall, the images of the
Chaldeans portrayed with vermilion.”
“Tn regard to the Chaldeans, the
relation to them was brought about by
means of likenesses, which Judah saw.
The word means, something engraven
or sketched, painted. These were, pro-
bably, coloured bas-reliefs,in vermilion,
which would be al! the more appropriate
for warriors. ‘The representation here
may probably be the mere drapery uf the
thought, that the bare report of the
military prowess of the Chaldeans had


inflamed the imagination and the senses
of Judah. Owing to the undeniable
intercourse between nations in the Old
World, which certainly obtained be-
tween Palestine and Babylon, it is not
in itself unimaginable that such wall-
pictures of representatives of foreign
nations may have existed in the royal
palaces of Judah.” —( Lange).


Ver. 15. “Exceeding in dyed attire
upon their heads.” The reference is
to the lofty turbans, such as may be
seen on the monuments of ancient
Nineveh,


Ver. 18. “‘My mind was alienated
from her.” “Thethoughtin these verses
(vers. 16-18) is the following :—the
acquaintance made by Israel (Judah)
with the imperial splendour of the
Chaldeans, as exhibited in the sculp-
tures of their palaces, incited Judah to
cultivate political and mercantile inter-
course with this imperial power, which
led to its becoming entangled in the
heathen ways and idolatry of the Chal-
deans. The Chaldeans themselves came
and laid the foundation for an inter-
course which led to the pollution of
Judah with heathenism, and afterwards
filled it with disgust, because it was
brought thereby into dependence upon
the Chaldeans. The consequence of
all this was, that the Lord became
tired of Judah. For instead of return-
ing to the Lord, Judah turned to the
other power of the world, namely, to
Egypt ; and in the time of Zedekiah
renewed its ancient coquetry with that
nation.” (Keil).


Ver. 19. “In calling to remem-
brance the days of her youth.” She
had grown disgusted with Babylon ;
yet she repented not, but turned back
again to the old ways which she had
learned in Egypt (2 Kings xxiii, 29-35).


Ver. 20. ‘Whose flesh is as the
flesh of asses, and whose issue is like
the issue of horses.” ‘This representa-
tion is sufficiently explained by tke

283


OHAP. XXIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL





particularly lecherous character of the
animals mentioned, and describes the
obscene character of the Egyptians
(Hzek. xvi. 26).”—( Lange.)


Ver. 21. ‘‘Calledst to remembrance
the lewdness of thy youth” (Heb.).


is paid to that which ought to be hated
and avoided, ‘The words, ‘When a
man of Egypt handled,’ etc., refer to
the attempt of the Eyyptians to draw
the people in their first beginnings
into the Evyptian unity, and so to
nationalize them—an attempt to which


“ And thou didst visit the lewdness of
thy youth.” ‘The falling back into
the old sin is, as it were, a visit which


the youth of the people furnished the
occasion.” —( Hengstenberg.)


HOMILETICS.
Taz Sin oF JUDAH.


The sin of Judah was one of special aggravation. Her sin surpassed that
of Samaria, ‘She was more corrupt in her inordinate love than she, and in
her whoredoms more than her sister in her whoredoms.” 1. She had greater
privileges. A purer knowledge of the true way of worship. Greater grace to
resist temptation, and to keep in the right way. 2. She had the warning
example of Samaria’s punishment. She saw how God punished them by the
very instruments of their inordinate love, and yet took not warning. “They
both took one way,” not reflecting that they who take the same way also reach
the same end. 3. She used special devices to increase her sinful desires. “She
increased her whoredoms.” She stimulated her lustful imagination by pictures
and representations of forbidden objects. The sight of these would set her
longing after the seductive idolatry of the nations, and draw her away from her
lawful love and home. ‘'I'ke lust of the eye is one of the great dangers of the
world. She also suffered herself to be ensnared by the memory of her old sins
(vers. 19, 21). It is sad when nations and individuals go back again to the
sins of their early life. 4. She brought sad judgment upon herself, yet repented
not. When she had obtained her desire and embraced the idolatry of Babylon,
she was still unsatisfied and even learned to loathe that which she once so
eagerly sought. “ Her mind was alienated from them.” Israel could not find
_ rest in the idolatry of the nations, for she still retained some memory of better .
things. he people could not become as the heathen in all respects, for their
glorious past was still a fact and could not be separated from their history.
The idolatry of Babylon could not satisfy the sinful longings of the chosen
people. All impure lust, when it has spent its passion, becomes hatred. For
all such lust is selfish and will turn, at length, into aversion to its object.
Fellowship with sin must only be of short duration. ‘Ihere is no true binding
principle in it. But it was the shame and misery of Israel that the judgments
of God, and her disgust of Babylon, failed to bring her to repentance.


1. When God executes severe judgments upon cities He looks that others should
take warning thereby. God destroyed Samaria for her idolatry and confederating
with heathenish nations. When Jerusalem saw this she reformed not, but was
more corrupt. God expected that Jerusalem should hereupon have purged out
all idolatry, and cleaved wholly to Him, so that she might have been spared,
but she made no good use of His dealings with Samaria. 2. Progress in
the same sins, after judgments executed upon others is a fearful aggravation of
svn.“ When she saw this she was more corrupt.” When God’s hand is lifted,
Judgment executed, men should fear and learn righteousness ; but to go on in
wickedness is a horrible slighting, yea, despising of God and cis judgments,
a. Sinful cities usually grow worse whatever judgments they see executed upon

284


FIOM. ILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP. XXIn.





others. Jerusalem was more corrupt than Samaria. So corrupt is the nature
of man that it is not only worse after mercies but even after judgments.
4. The eyes are instruments and occasions of great evil. When she saw the
images of the Chaldeans in their dresses, with their belts and aspects,she was taken
with them. The images affected her eyes, and they conveyed corruption to her
heart, or that which stirred the corruption pre-existent in her heart, Adulteryand
idolatry have their chief entrance by the eye, and many other sins likewise.
What a sad thing was it, that Jerusalem’s eyes should be taken with the painted
images of Babylonians! Some confess there is danger by gazing upon living
objects, the beauties of men and women, but they fear none from dead objects ;
but Achan saw a wedge of gold and a Babylonish garment, and they snared
him; Aholibah here saw Babylonish pictures, and they ensnared him. 5. For
God's people to admit any part of Babylonish worship is to defile the bed of love.
Ged is a jealous God, His worship must be pure, and the heart must be pure.
If the worship be mixed, or heart lean upon an arm of flesh, the bed of love is
defiled. In His worship and ordinances God lets out His love to the soul,
When they are pure, by the heart being pure and confiding in God, He lets out
Himself and His love. Let us look to our hearts, that they may be disengaged
from all creature confidences, and to our worship that it be according to God,
and then we shall have communion with and comfort from our Beloved.
6. Wickedness is inconstant. ‘“ Her mind was alienated from them.” She was
taken with the very images of the Babylonians ; now she cares not for the men
themselves, her soul is disjointed from them; but it was to fall in with some
others, and they were the Egyptians (ver. 19). But she held not there long ;
which made the Lord to say, “ Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy
way ? thou also shalt be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wert ashamed of Assyria ”
(Jer. ii. 36). 7. Impudence and open sinning cause God to disown and renounce
them that do so. Aholibah discovered her whoredoms and nakedness ; she talked
openly what she had done with the Babylonians, she set up altars and idols in every
street, was openly and impudently wicked, prostituting herself to all in the streets.
Now it being so, saith the Lord, “then my mind was alienated from her,” seeing
she is become so audaciously wicked, I can affect her no longer. Jerusalem’s
wickedness alienated God’s heart from her, made Him renounce her for a harlot.
It is sad when God renounces (Hos. i. 9). If we would not have God’s heart
alienated from us, and so be disowned, renounced by Him, let us take heed of all
gins, especially of impudency in any sin. 8. Fresh sins bring to mind former old
sins. Aholibah’s latter trucking with the Egyptians minded God of her primitive
whoredoms and abominations, when she lived in Egypt, which was one thousand
years before: there she had her lovers; there she defiled herself “with the idols
of Evypt ” (Exek. xx. 17); and her affection now to Egypt, and Egypt’s paramours,
caused God to mind those sins of her youth, He had no pleasure in doing so,
but Aholibah called them to remembrance, by acting the same or the like things
again, she called them out of darkness, and presented them to the view of God.
(Greenhill),


(Verses 22-35.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES. — The Chaldeans, and Assyrians, and further
transgression of Jerusalem is followed that Pekod is used by Jeremiah (ch. 1,
by her punishment. 21) as a descriptive name of Babylon,

it may be inferred that all three are to

Ver, 23. ‘“Pekod, and Shoa, and _ be so interpreted in this place. No
Koa.” “From the circumstance that such geographical names as Shoa and
these names occur in immediate con- Koa occur either in sacred or profane
nection with the Babylonians, the writers. The former, bores signify-


OHAP. XXIII.





ing wealth or opulence, and the latter,
princely, noble, are aptly descriptive of
the state of Babylon in the days of her
prosperity, as Pekod, is of her antici-
pated punishment.” (Henderson).


Ver. 24. ‘‘ Buckler, and shield, and
helmet.” These are all defensive ar-
mour. The Chaldeans had only to
lay siege to the city and bide their
time. God’s arrows would do the
rest. “‘And they shall judge thee
according to theirjudgment:.” Israel
was to be judged on the ground of
natural justice. The unfaithful city
was condemned by man for an offence
against human law. Their judgments
were brought about by God’s righteous
law of retribution, though Nebuchad-
nezzar was the instrument raised up to
administer it.


Ver. 25. ‘They shall take away
thy nose and thine ears.” “ What
nose and ears are for a woman, that
for a people is their military strength,
the bloom of the nation. When this
is annihilated, a people has lost its
beauty. That the words must refer to
this is shown by those immediately
adjoining, and giving the explanation,
«hy remnant shall fall by the sword.”
Zion has various forms of existence,
and, therefore, a manifold remnant.
The first remnant refers to the fighting
men, who, so to speak, shall fall by the
sword to the last man—the falling of
the remnant pre-supposes the falling
of all the rest; the second remnant
refers to Zion as a city, the houses, all
of which shall be destroyed by fire”
(Hengstenberg).  “ Punishment by
cutting off the nose and ears was
inflicted for adultery, not only the
Chaldeans, but also among the
Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans. It
was, therefore, to represent that
which adulterous Judah was to suffer
under the image of such ignominious
and cruel treatment. They were also
to be stripped of what lewd females
set most value upon—their rich dresses
and costly jewels, by which they attract
the notice of their paramours” (ver. 26).
— Henderson.

206


EOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL


—


Ver. 27. “Thus will I make thy
lewdness to cease from thee.’ Tne
punishment inflicted by the Chaldeans
would be effectual in curing them of
idolatry. After the captivity the Jews
never fell again into this sin.


Ver. 29, ‘Shall take away all thy
labour.” They were to be deprived of
the fruits of their labours, ‘ The naked-
ness of thy whoredoms shall be dis-
covered.” ‘As long as all went well


this nakedness was covered. ‘The
shamefulness of her conduct did not
come to the light. In that which she
suffers, what she has done will be mani-
fest to all the world.”—Hengstenberg.


Ver, 32. “Thou shalt drink of thy
sisters cup deep and large.” “ 'I'his
cup is the figure of the destiny. ‘The
mockery of large measure corresponds
to the cup of wide compass, the great-
ness of the mockery to the greatness of
the calamity, that called forth the
mockery so much the more, the greater
the pretensions of the Jews, who con-
ducted themselves as the people to
whom was secured the universal supre-
macy, who had always in their mouth
the saying, ‘My enemies shall fall, but
I shall tread on their high places.’”
—(Hengstenberg). ‘By a change of
metaphor the judgments to be inflicted
uponJudah are represented as the con-
tents of a cup which she was to drink.
This metaphor is of frequent occurrence
both in the Old and New Testaments
(Psa. Ixxv.8; Jer. xxv. 15; Rev. xiv. 10;
xvi, 19; xviii. 6.) The force of the
metaphor lies in the idea that the in-
gredients were nauseous and deleterious.
Judah was to be treated as Israel had
been, only more severely in proportion
to the greater guilt she had contracted,
—(/Tenderson).


Ver. 34. “And thou shalt break the
sherds thereof, and pluck off thine
own breasts.’ This expresses most
forcibly the desperation to which the
Jews should be reduced, when com-
pelled to undergo the extreme inflic-
tion of their punishment. By a bold
hyperbole, not satisfied with having


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZERIEL,


CHAP, XXIii,


a


sucked out the last drop that was in
the cup, they are represented as
crunching the very sherds of it with
their teeth, and tearing their breasts
which they had prostituted in adul-


means of the sherd-fragments. Or it
may have been done in frenzy by her
own nails. We find a historical illus-
tration of this in the treatment they
gave Gedaliah, the Chaldean governor,


tery” (Henderson). “The tearing of
the breasts is placed beside the break-
ing of the sherds as if it were done by


for which they were compelled to
suffer (Jer. xli.)’ (Lange).


HOMILETIO’,
(Verses 22-35.)


Tur PUNISHMENT OF JERUSALEM.


I, The people are to be punished by those with whom they sinned. “ Be-
hold I will raise up thy lovers against thee” (ver. 22), Those with whom
she had pleasurable sin, by a natural retribution become the instruments of
her chastisement. Thus sinners are punished by means of other sinners. What-
ever pleasures may have been found in sin when it was followed, the memory of
it, at last, will bear a sting.


II, The people are to be punished in the ordinary course of human justice.
“ And they shall judge thee according to their judgments” (ver. 24). ‘They had
offended against the sense of natural justice which was found among the nations.
And they are punished by men for an offence against human law. Yet, though
men were the instruments, they were punished by God, ‘The punishment of sin
in human society is natural, yet it is surely the moral law of God taking effect
as far as is possible in this present life. ‘“ From the natural course of things,
vicious actions are, to a great degree, actually punished as mischievous to society ;
and besides punishment actually inflicted upon this account, there is also the
fear and apprehension of it in those persons whose crimes have rendered them
obnoxious to it, in case of a discovery; this state of fear itself often a very
considerable punishment. The natural fear and apprehension of it, too, which
restrains from such crimes, is a declaration of Nature against them. It is
necessary to the very being of society, that vices destructive to it should
be punished as being so; the vices of falsehood, injustice, cruelty: which
punishment therefore ig as natural as society; and so is an instance of
a kind of moral government, naturally established, and actually taking
place. And, since the certain natural course of things is the conduct of
Providence or the government of God, though carried on by the instrumentality
of men; the observation here made amounts to this, that mankind find them-
selves placed by him in such circumstances, as that they are unavoidably
accountable tor their behaviour, and are often punished, and sometimes
rewarded under his government, in the view of their being mischievous, or
eminently beneficial to society. The Author of Nature has as truly directed
that vicious actions, considered as mischievous to society, should be punished,
and put mankind under a necessity of thus punishing them ; as He has directed
and necessitated us to preserve our lives by food” (Butler’s Analogy, Part I,
Chap. III). The gooduess and patience of God had failed to briug Jerusalem
to repentance, and the people, therefore, were given up to punishment by means
of man.


III. The people are to be punished by the violent taking away of that
which led them into the snares of sin. “ 'I'hey shall deal furiously with thee:
they shall take away thy nose and thine ears” (ver. 25). ‘‘ They shall also

287


OHAP. XXIIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





strip thee of thy clothes, and take away thy fair jewels” (ver. ey Personal
attractions, beautiful garments, adornments and jewellery make lewd wumen
attractive, and lead them into snares. God will remove from His people, even
by means of the wrath of a strange nation, all those things which tempted
their hearts from Him. They had left their first and lawful love, and they
are to have the punishment of adulterers.


IV. The punishment was to be terrible. 1. A complete exposure of their
iniquity. ‘The nakedness of thy whoredoms shall be discovered, both thy
lewdness and thy whoredoms” (ver. 29). Punishment exposes. Their moral
loathesomeness would be laid bare before the sight of all. 2. The rich heritage
of the past was to be wasted. ‘They shall deal with thee hatefully, and shall
take away all thy labour ” (ver. 29). All the results of their labour in the past
under the guidance of God. How often, among nations, is destroyed, as in a
moment, the slow work of long ages,—the precious heritage of the past! “The
city where David dwelt ” (Isa. xxix. 1), and all which in their history led up to
David and from him, is doomed to be destroyed. 8. They would have to drink of a
bitter cup. Their cup was to be “ filled with drunkeness and sorrow,” the “cup of
astonishment and desolation” (ver. 33). And the very greatness of their sorrow,
their abject humiliation would occasion derision among their enemies, “‘I'heu
shalt be laughed to scorn, and had in derision; it containeth much” (ver. 32).
The nations would look upon them swallowing the nauseous draught, and make
merriment over their sorrow. They would have to drain this cup of sorrow
to the last drop, “Thou shalt even drink of it and suck it out, and
thou shalt break the sherds thereof” (ver. 84). 4. They would be driven to the
frenzy of madness. “ And pluck off thine own breasts” (ver. 34). Jerusalem
is represented as a woman seized with madness in her great suffering, who
gnaws the very sherds of the earthen cup and tears out her own breasts. Her
insatiable lust. which had gone to the length of mad desire, is now met by a
punishment which is furious, and which drives her to madness. How often are
sinners punished in those members of the body in which they have sinned !


V. This punishment would prove an effectual remedy for their sin. ‘Thus
will I make thy lewdness to cease from thee, and thy whoredom brought from
the land of Egypt” (ver. 27). By the afflictions which they suffered in Babylon
they were completely cured of idolatry. They never fell into that evil after
the Captivity. This was an old-rooted sin, but it was entirely plucked from
them. So God educates nations, and brings home to them, at last, the lessons
of His providence and grace, And it is often necessary that, as with individual
men, they should be educated through punishment. It took along time to
deliver Israel entirely from Egypt, their house of bondage. ‘Their physical
slavery was soon destroyed, but their spiritual slavery still held them to Egypt
thiough many ages of their history.


1. God makes them instruments of woe and misery with whom we have sinned,
The Babylonians, Chaldeans, the Assyrians, her lovers, were to be brought
against her. Jerusalem had doted upon and trusted in them, and by them
would God plague Jerusalem. She had often sinned by her confidence in
Egypt (Isa. xxx. 2; xxxi. 1); and God by the Egyptians scourged her
(2 Chron. xxxvi. 3). Parents dote upon their children, and oft God makes
them rods to whip them, yea, clubs to break their hearts and bones. 2. When
people go from God to false worship, and put confidence in arms of flesh, God
will deal severely by them. God would put Aholibah into the Babylonian
hands. He would set His jealousy against her, thrust her out of doors; and
what then? The Babylonian would deal furiously with her, abuse her body,
destroy her children, burn her habitation, strip her of her vestments and jewels,
take aye all she had gotten, lay open her shame, and do hatefully by her ;

2


ROMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL OHAP. Xxm.








she should be punished with the same punishments Aholah was. 3. Judgments
and afflictions are cups which the Lord gives sinners to drink of, some more
some less. Sometimes God’s judgments are called a “cup of trembling”
(Isa. li. 22); sometimes a “cup of fury ” (Jer. xxv. 15), and sometimes “a cup of
astonishment,”’as here. And Aholibah had all these cups given her to drink; they
were “deep, large,” containing much, and she was made to drink them all off,
yea to the very dregs. As men fill up the measure of their sins, so God fills up
the cups of His judgments. “ Fillto her double ” (Rev. xviii. 6). Babylon’s sins
were come to the full, and the cup of the Lord’s fury was full. 4, Neglect and
contempt of God, and His word, causes Him to execute judgment. ‘“‘ Because
_ thou hast forgotten Me, and cast Me behind thy back.” Thou hast made Me
bear thy sins, and thou shalt bear My punishments. As the fear of God is
the beginning of wisdom, so the forgetting of God is the beginning of folly and
all evil, Then God is out of sight, behind the back ; and what will not men
do when no awe of God or His word is upon them? Then, like Abolibah, they
will commit any lewdness. God had done much for Abolibah, dealt by her like
a loving husband ; but she slighted Him, went out a whoring from Him, did
those things which greatly dishonoured Him, and so provoked Him to mind
her that forgot Him. He fell upon her with His judgments, and destroyed her.
And so will the Lord do by all that forget Him (Psa. ix. 17). Whatever sins
the nations commit, they are comprehended in their forgetting God, that is the
root of all evil._—/( Greenhill),


(Vers, 36-49).


EXEGETICAL NOTES. — Judah
and Samaria are considered as joined
together in their sin and punishment.


Ver. 37. “They have committed
adultery, and blood is in their hands.”
“The actual subject matter of these
verses is closely connected with ver. 16,
more especially in the designation of
the sins as adultery and bloodshed
(compare vers. 37 and 45 with Ch.
xvi. 388). They committed adultery
with the idols, thus placing the idols
on a par with Jehovah as the husband
of Israel (compare Jer. iii. 8 and 11. 27.
For the Moloch-worship compare Ch,
xvi, 20, 21, and Ch. xx. 31 ”),—Keil.


Ver. 39. ‘Then they came the same
day into My sanctuary to profane it.”
“So callous and daring were the Jews
in their idolatry that on the very day
ou which they had burned their
children to Moloch in the valley of
Gehenna, they hypocritically presented
themselves as worshippers in the temple


of Jehovah. Compare Jer. vii. 9, 10.”,


(Henderson). The profanation con-
sisted, not simply in_ idol-worship
considered by itself, but in worshipping


the true God in connection with their
idols, Thus they placed Jehovah on
a par with Moloch.


Ver. 40. “ Ye have sent for men to
come from far.” The Heb. verb
being in the imperfect tense shows
that the action was continuous. Not
that they merely sent once and again,
but that they were wont to do so.
“For whom thou didst wash thyself,
paintedst thy eyes, and deckedst thy-
self with ornaments.” “ They spread
fine paint of a black colour on the
eyelids so as to produce a_ black
margin, and thus make the white of
the eye look more beautiful and
seducing. It is a custom still practised
by Oriental females. Jerusalem is
represented. as so doing to entice her
lovers. She left nothing untried by
which this might be effected” (Hen-
derson). “The eyelashes and eyebrows
were stained with a powder, so as to
make the glance of the eye more
brilliant.”—Lange.


Ver. 41. “Satest upon a stately
bed, and a table prepared before it.’
“She seated herself upon a cushion (not

289


CHAP. XXII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





lay down upon a bed), and in front of
this there was a table, spread with
different kinds of food, upon which
she placed incense and oil.”—/( Keil.)
“The board or table is furnished with
meats and drinks. Eating and drink-
ing play an important part ia adultery,
either in the usual or in the spiritual
sense.” —(Hengstenberg). “ Where-
upon thou hast set Mine incense and
Mine oil.” The force of this charge
lies in the fact, that she devoted the
offerings which belonged to Jehovah
to the gratification of her lovers.
‘Religious ceremonies are not here
spoken of. We find ourselves in the
region of political idolatry, which in
the latest times of the people, from
the days of Ahaz and Hezekiah, far
outweighed that of religion. The cor-
responding reality consists in the rich
gifts by which Judah endeavoured to
purchase the favour of the heathen
sovereigns (Isa, xxx. 6).”—(Hengs-
tenberg.) Some understand this pass-
age as describing the lascivious worship
of the Babylonish Mylitta. The wan-
ton Israel is described as preparing
herself for one of the high festivals of
this goddess, and as abandoning her-
self to strangers like the young women
of Babylon.


Ver. 42, “A voice of a multitude
being at ease was with her.” They are
at ease, in careless, undisturbed pros-
peritv. “Sabeans from the Wilder-
ness.” ‘Instead of receiving the
warnings given them by the prophets,
and humbling themselves on account
of their idolatries, the inhabitants of
Jerusalem indulged in rioting and
drunkenness—bringing even the vulgar
Arabs from the desert to keep them
company.” —{ Henderson.) The phrase
“from the desert,” cannot indicate the
home of these men, but simply the
place from which they came to Judah,
namely, from the desert of Syria and
Arabia, which separated Palestine from
Babylon, These peoples decorated the
arms of the barlots with clasps, and
their heads with splendid wreaths
(crowns). The thought is simply that
Samaria and Judah had attained to

290


wealth and earthly glory through their
intercourse with these nations; the
very gifts with which, according to
Ch. xvi. 11, &c., Jehovah Himself had
adorned His people.” —(Keil )


Ver. 43, “‘Oldin adulteries.” Zit.
who was debilitated for adultery.
“The Heb. word does not indicate the
means by which the strength has been
exhausted, but is an accusation of
direction or reference, debilitated with
regard to adultery, so as no longer to
be capable of practising it.”—/( Keil.)
‘Will they now, commit whoredoms
with her?” “ Disgusting as was her
character as an old adulteress, Jerusa-
lem found those who encouraged her
in her wickedness. Taken in connec-
tion with the next verse, the two
sisters are again presented to view,
though Aholibah is specially singled
out, being the more guilty of the
two.” —( Henderson.)


Ver. 45. ‘“‘The righteous men.”
Men who had the right on their side.
Such were the Chaldeans, who were
the instruments of God’s righteous
anger. “ ‘I'he Chaldeans are righteous
according to their mission as ministers
of the Divine vengeance. The heathen
tyrant also, in Isa. xlix. 24, is desig-
nated as righteous.”—( Hengstenberg.)
“A moral comparison between the
Chaldeans and tle Jews is not in-
tended, nor are prophets and righteous
men among the people themselves to
be imagined.” —/( Lange.)


Ver. 46. “I willbring up a company
upon them.” “Here the prophet is
first addressed. What shall happen is,
as it were, wrought by him, as the power
which gave the prophecy produces also
the fulfilment; in the prophecy also,
ideally considered, the fulfilment is
already present. The community de-
notes usually the congregation of
Israel. As this has failed to do its
duty, reacting against the crime, as
once happened in the war against


Benjamin (Judg. xx.), so stands here


the community of the heathen, which
God summons to execute His ven-
geance.”—(Hengstenberg.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; EZEKIEL.


OHAP. XXIII.


rr ee


Ver. 48. “All women.” All the
nations, to whom Israel would serve as
& warulng and deterring example.


Ver. 49. “They shall recompense
your lewdness upon you.” “'The
punishment is announced to both the
women, Israel and Judah, as still in
the future, although Aholah (Samaria)
had been overtaken by the judgment
a considerable time before. The ex-
planation of this is to be found in the
allegory itself, in which both kingdoms


are represented as being sisters of one
mother ; and it may also be defended
on the ground that the approachiug
destruction of Jerusalem and the
kingdom of Judah affected the rem-
nants of the kingdom of the ten tribes,
which were still to be found in Pales-
tine ; whilst, on the other hand, the
judgment was not restricted to the
destruction of the two kingdoms, but
also embraced the latter judgments
which fell upon the entire nation.”—
(Keil.)


HOMILIETICS.


ANoTHER SUMMARY OF THE SINS AND PuNISHMENT OF JUDAH AND SAMARIA


I. Their Sins. 1. Idolatry. “With their idols have they committed
adultery ” (ver. 37). Jehovah wasto Israel asahusband, To serve other gods
was to forsake aud forfeit His favour and protection. It was a fearful crime,
such as adultery would be in the judgment of all nations. 2. Cruelty.
“ Blood isin their hands,” They offered their children to the cruelties of
Moloch worship. Idolatry leads to perverted and unnatural views of human
duty and of the requirements of religion. Hence the cruelty of its rites.
3. /mpurity. She sought to make herself attractive to her lovers, using every
art to pander to her lust (ver, 41, 42). Israel made herself attractive to the
surrounding nations, ‘ For whom thou didst wash thyself, paintedst thy eyes,
and deckedst thyself with ornaments.” ‘They washed themselves before men,
but were unclean before God—the way of hypocrites. Israel sought for
occasions of sin, ‘“ Ye have sent for men” (ver. 40). ‘hey tried to excite a
jaded appetite (ver. 43). They were old and worn out in the service of sin,
but tried hard to awaken the impulses of it, to stir up the embers of a
smouldering fire. Even in Christian lands, how many serve such impure and
cruel gods and even use infamous arts to plunge into the lowest depths of
iniquity! ‘He who serves Venus and Bacchus offers to them also his
children.”—( Lange). And how many, also, become more shameless as they
grow old in sin! 4. Profunity. They profaned the Sabbath and the sanctury
(ver. 38). They employed in the service of idolatry the “ incense ” and “oil,”
God’s own property, which He had reserved for sacred uses (Hxod, xxx. 23-33).
More than this, they dared to combine the service of Jehovah with that of
idols, thus adding to their sins the boldest and most wicked bypocracy. After
they had indulged in the most cruel rites of idolatry, they came “in the same
day” into God’s sanctuary to defile it, “To run from the harlot-house to
God’s house, from murder to the place of prayer, from sin to sinning, is not
pleasing to God.”—Lange.


II. Their punishm nt. 1. It would be felt to be just even by the heathen
nation who inflicted it. “And the righteous men, they shall judge them.”
(ver. 45). ‘The Chaldeans had right on their side. They were the righteous
instruments of God to execute His vengeance. Even heathen nations looked
upon perjury and breach of covenant as fearful crimes. (Ezek. xvii. 15, 16).
2. It would be a severe, and yet a most fitting punishment. (vers. 46, 47). The
Judgment hour had come, and God’s army was ready. “They ot stone

T2 29


\


CHaP XXII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,





them with stones,”—the punishment of those who commit adultery and shed
blood (St. John viii. 5). 3. Jé would be effectual. The punishment would
completely cure the evil (ver. 48). It would be a warning example to all
(ver, 48). It would bring them to the true knowledge of God (ver. 49). The
whole of this chapter illustrates the words of St. Paul, that “the Law entered
that the offence might abound” (Rom. v. 20). It would seem as if the
presence of God’s holy Law served to stir up the proud will of the chosen
people to more desperate self-assertion. They sought those sinful alliances
with the powers of the world, which seemed to have all the more attraction
because they were forbidden. “Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not
that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will
be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.” (St. James iv. 4).


(Verses 36-44.)


1. Sinners make litile or no conscience of horrible sins, or holy duties ; they
pass from one to the other immediately. When they had slain their children
to their idols, that same day they came into the Sanctuary. From shedding of
blood and sacrificing to idols, they step into the temple and worship of God.
Had not their consciences been seared, they would have accused them and told
them that they were unclean, not fit to meddle with holy things. But they
go boldly and impudently into God’s presence. So Jeremiah tells us, they did,
steal, murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, burn incense to Baal, walk after
other gods, and then come presently and stand before Him in His house, and
say: “ Weare delivered.” (Jer. vil. 9, 10.) They passed from wicked practices
to holy duties, making no conscience of the one or the other. 2. 7he Lord
takes notice how men draw near to Him in the duties of His worship. They
thrust themselves into the temple worship and into the presence of God, as if
they had been innocent and as acceptable to God as any. Men may deceive
others and themselves, but they cannot deceive the Lord. He sees their spirits,
and whether they come unprepared in the guilt of former or present sins. 3.
Profaning of holy things is wronging God. “This have they done unto Me.
Lo, thus have they done in the midst of Mine house.” God had
instituted their worship, and had stamped holiness upon them; and
therefore the defiling and profaning of them He counted the defiling and
profaning of His name and of Himself. Three ways, especially, are holy
things defiled, profaned : (1.) When men come in thetr sins, without purging
themselves. (St. James, iv. 8.) If men draw near to God without cleansing
their hands, and purifying their hearts, God will not draw near them. He will not
touch unclean things. (2.) When we mingle aught of us therewith. Additions of
human things are pollutions of divine things. When they brought aught into the
Temple which God appointed not, then was God’s worship defiled. When
Nadab and Abihu put strange fire into the censers, they defiled God’s worship
and provoked Him to their destruction (Lev. x.) ; and when they set their
threshold with God’s threshold, they defiled His name and worship (Ezek. xliii,
7, 8). 3. When holy things are handled irreverently. 'VYhe Bethshemites in
a rude manner peeped into the ark and profaned it, which caused the Lord to
smite them with sudden death (1 Sam. vi. 19). Solomon gives counsel that
men should keep their feet when they go into the house of God (Eccl. v. 1).
For if they look not well to their affections, they will play the fool, and profane
those holy things, and procure a curse instead of a blessing. 4. Sinners will
show great activity in drawing others to themselves and their wicked ways.
These harlots sent to Assyria, to Egypt, and to others to come unto them.
They trimmed and decked themselves, they spared not for any cost whereby

292


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL. OHAP. XxIV,





they might please and satisfy them. Thus did the harlot (Prov. vii.). She
ames her bed, trims up herself, goes forth, and diligently seeks, finds, and

rings in the prey. Some compass sea and land to make proselytes. Shall
wicked ones and wickedness be active, expensive to draw and ruin others, and
shall not godly ones and godliness be as active and expensive to win and save
sinners? 5. Those who are given to corporeal or spiritual uncleanness are
seldom recovered, but go on and grow old in those sins. These womeu had
many reproofs and threatenings, but none prevailed (ver. 44). Such sins are
. bewitching, and hold men captive. ‘“ None that go unto her return again ” (Prov,
i. 19). 6. The Lord takes notice of sinners, as to the beginning, progress, and
continuance of their sin. He observed when Aholah began her whoredoms,
when the calves were set up at Dan and Bethel, how she grew up and grew old
in adulteries. God’s eye goes along with sinners, from the beginning to the end.
7. God's judgments are teaching things. He brought these judgments upon
the two harlots, that ail women might be taught thereby. Gideon by thorns
and briars taught the men of Succoth (Judg. viii. 16). ‘There is no judgment
of God upon any city, nation, or people, but it speaks and teaches: “‘ Hear ye
the rod” (Micah. vi. 9); it hath a voice, a teaching voice. 1. It teaches ail
who are guilty of the same sins, and not visited with the same judgments to
admire the goodness and! long suffering of God towards them. 2. It teaches
those who are guilty of such sins to repent and turn to the Lord, lest the Lord,
being now in the way of judgment, should break out also upon them, and make
them examples of His justice. 3. It teaches others to fear and to flee from such
practices, as being such destructive judgments. When Samaria and Jerusalem
shall be destroyed for their confidence in the arm of flesh, will not every other
city learn what is the reward of wickedness, and fear to do the like? 8. God's
ways with sinners in judging them righteously brings them to acknowledge the
equity of His dealing with them. When the just punishment of your lewdness
and idolatry shall be upon you, “ye shall know that I am the Lord,” who
observed all your ways, who waited long for your repentance, who have dealt
justly with you in all the evils I have brought upon you; you cannot but
justify Me, and condemn yourselves.—(Greenhill).


Tux CompLete DesTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM PREDICTED, BOTH IN PARABLE
anD By Sian (Chap. xxiv).


(Vers. 1, 2).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—“ On the
day on which the King of Babylon
commenced the siege and blockade of
Jerusalem, this event was revealed by
God to Ezekiel on the Chaboras (vers.
1. 2); and he was commanded to
predict to the people through the
medium of a parable the fate of the
city and its inhabitauts (vers, 3—14).
God then foretold to him the death of
his own wife, and commanded him to
show no sign of mourning on account
of it. His wife died the following
evening, and he did as he was com-
manded. When he was asked by the
people the reason of this he explained


to them that what he was doing was
symbolical of the way in which they
were to act when Jerusalem fell (vers.
15—24). The fall would be announced
to the prophet by a fugitive, and then
le would no longer remain mute, but
would speak to the people again (vers.
25—27). Apart, therefore, from the
last three verses, this chapter contains
the words of God, the first of which
unfolds in a parable the approaching
calamities, and the result of the siege
of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans (vers.
1—14) ; whilst the second typifies by
means of a sign the pain and mourn-
ing of Israel, namely, of tee at


SHAP. KXIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,





the destruction of the city with its
sanctuary and its inhabitants. These
two words of God, being connected
together by their contents, were ad-
dressed to the prophet on the same
day, and that, as the introduction
(vers. 1, 2) expressly observes, the day
on which the siege of Jerusalem by the
King of Babylon began.” —( Keil.)


Ver. 1. “The ninth year.” The
dateistaken from the commencement of
of Jehoiachin’s captivity, which would
fix the time when the word of the
Lord came to the prophet as B.c. 590.”
‘In the tenth month, in the tenth day
ofthe month.” This day was after-
wards kept as a fast, and is still
observed as such by the synagogue.


Ver. 2. “Write thee the name of
the day.’ “The prophet is to write
down the day, as a man does with
remarkable days, in order not to
forget the date. The object, to make
use of this afterwards in proof of his
prophetic office, needed to be more


write down the particular day on
which he delivered his message, and
to announce it as that on which
Nebuchadnezzar had commenced his
attack on Jerusalem. As he was at
the time at the distance of more than
four hundred miles from that city,
it was not to be supposed that the
intelligence could have reached him
by any human means. When, there-
fore, the captives afterwards received
the information, they had, on com-
paring the dates, an infallible proof of
the Divine inspiration of the prophet.”
—(Henderson), “Set himself against
Jerusalem.” The Hebrew word signi-
fies to lie hard upon (Psa. 1xxxvii. 7).
It is sometimes used to describe the
investing of a city with an army. In
the afflictions of the righteous God
is said to lay on a heavy hand
(Psa. xxxui. 4), The sacrificer laid
his hand upon the victim (Exodus
xxix. 19); and the witnesses were
ordered to lay their hand on a
blasphemer before he was stoned
(Lev. xxiv. 4), so in great judgments


definitely noticed.”—(Hengstenberg). God lays on His hand,
“The prophet is specially charged to
AOMILETICS.


Tar Last WaRNING OF JUDGMENT.


Ezekiel had uttered many warnings before, and he still goes on speaking up


to the very moment of judgment.


I. The Prophet's faithfulness.


This illustrates :-—


Amidst every discouragement he is still
resolved to deliver the message of God.
though it comes too late to arrest judgment.


He will utter God’s last word,
The true prophet must speak


the word which is given him, and leave the results with Him who sent him,


II. The Prophet’s inspiration. Ezekiel was four hundred miles from
Jerusalem, and yet he tells his feilow-captives that the siege was begun at
that very moment at which he was speaking. This was a clear proof that
the prophet’s mind was enlightened by that Sovereign Intelligence which sees
and knows all things. He could not possibly know thisevent by human means,
Therefore his assertion, that the siege was then commencing while he was
speaking, must have been the result of supernatural knowledge. If any one
maintains that this was a prophecy after the event, he must be prepared to
accept the conclusion that both Ezekiel’s prophetic and moral characters fall to
the ground,

296


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; EZEKIEL, CHAP. XXIV.





III. The solemnity of the prophet’s last word- In this chapter he takes
his farewell of his nation. We are reminded of Our Lord’s parting words to
Jerusalem, “ Behold your house is left unto you desolate” (St. Matt. xxiii. 38),
Wien the prophets of God speak no more to nations, or to individual men,
then the day of their visitation is over and the time of judgment has come.


IV. The solemn importance of God's notes of time, in the life of nations,
and ofmen-. There are times and events in the lives of nations which historians
may note down as the most important. But what different rates of importance
are to be assigned to these as God views them! And so it is in regard to the
lives of individual men. How different would be the calendar of our lives if
we marked the times and events of it at God’s bidding! “ We are generally
ignorant of the real significance of events, which we think we understand,
Aimost every person can recollect one or more instances, where the whole after-
current of his life was turned by some single word, or some incident so trivial
as scarcely to fix his notice at the time. On the other hand, many great crises
of danger, many high and stirring occasions, in which, at the time, his total
being was absorbed, have passed by, leaving no trace of effect on his permanent
interests, and have wellnigh vanished from his memory. The conversation of
the stage-coach is often preparing results which the solemn assembly and the
most imposing and eloquent rites will fail to produce. What countryman,
knowing the dairyman’s daughter, could have suspected that she was living to
a mightier purpose and result than almost any person in the church of God,
however eminent? ‘The outward of occasions and duties is, in fact, almost no
index of their importance ; and our judgments concerning what is great and
small are without any certain validity. ‘These terms, as we use them, are, in


fact, only words of outward description, not words of definite measurement,”—
(Bushwell).


1. The Lord can make knoun what men do, to whom He pleases and at
what distance socver. Nebuchadnezzar and his forces were in Judea, sitting
down before Jerusalem, and this the Lord revealed to Ezekiel, being in Babylon.
It was declared to Elisha, whither the king of Syria would march, and where
he would pitch his camp. (2 Kings, vi. 9, 10.) The death of Herod, in Judea,
was discovered to Joseph, being in Egypt. (St. Matt. ii. 19, 20.) And when
Moses was in Midian, the Lord told him that all the men were dead in Egypt,
which sought his life. (Exod. iv. 19.) 2. There are some things and times
the Lord would have his people take special notice of, and keep the chronology
thereof. Ezekiel must write the year, the month, and day of Jerusalem’s
beseiging. When God hath been upon executing great Judgments, or showing
great mercies, the days and months have been recorded. The day and month
of Noah’s entrance into the ark, and of his coming out again, are mentioned.
(Gen. vii. 11, viii. 14, 16.) The time of the Jews going out of Egypt you have
punctually set down. (Exod. xii. 41, 42); so the time of their passing over
Jordan (Josh. iv. 19); of Solomon’s building the temple (2 Chron. iii 2); of
Haman’s plot to destroy the Jews (sth. iii. 8,13.) This shows that these
events were not casual, that the wisdom and power of God were interested in
them, whoever were the instruments.” —( Greenhill.)


(Verses 3-14.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES. — The therein choice pieces of meat (vera
prophet illustrates the destruction of el Then he follows with an
Jerusalem by the allegory of acauldron application of the allegory to Jeru-
which he was to set on the fire, and salem, as describing her irrevocable
having put water into it, to boii doom. 295


CHAP. XXIV.





Ver. 3. ‘Utter a parable.” “The
contents of these verses are called a
proverb or parable, It follows from
this that the ensuing act which the
prophet is commanded to perform is
not to be regarded as a symbolical act
which he really carried out, but that
the act forms the substance of the
parable—in other words, belongs to
the parable itself; consequently the
interpretation of the parable (ver.
10, etc.) is clothed in the form of a
thing actually done” (Keil.) “Set
onapot .. . pour water into it.”
The repeated demand expresses urgent
haste. ‘he pot is Jerusalem, which
had become so foul as to poison all
meats which were put into it.


Ver. 4. ‘The pieces.” The pieces
represent the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
By the “thigh, the shoulder, choice
bones,” we are to understand the
wealthy, the nobles, and chiefs of the


people,


Ver. § “Burn also the bones
under it, and make it boil well.”
‘“‘The bones that had been stripped of
their flesh were to be used for fuel:
those to which it still adhered were
to be thrown into the pot, that it
might be boiled ” (//enderson). “The
fire with which they are boiled is the
fire of war, and the setting of the pot
upon the fire is the commencement of
the siege, by which the population of
the city is to be boiled away like the
flesh and bones in a pot.” —Keil.


Ver. 6. “Whose scum is therein.”
“We are not to understand such scum
as gathers on the surface of the con-
- tents of a pot, but the rust or verdigris
contracted by copper. The moral
impurity of the city is intended. The
prophet begins here to give the
explanation of the parable. The Jews,
indeed, could be at little loss to know
what was intended by it. They had
already themselves bandied the
metaplior about as a tauut, boasting
that they should dwell securely in
Jerusalem.”—/( Henderson). ‘ Piece by
piece.” The pieces were the various

296


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


Sd





members of the body corporate. They
were all to be brought out, no favour
was to be shown, but all without dis-
crimination were to be put into the
cauldron. ‘ Let no lot fall upon it.”
No lot was to be cast in order to
decide what part should be taken, and
what should be spared (Nahum iii. 10).
All are doomed to be carried off, by
death or by captivity.


Ver. 7. ‘She set it upon the top of
arock.’’ “ Here we have the cause of
this judgment: deeds of murder are
done in Jerusalem boldly and without
abhorrence, by which we are to under-
stand the numerous judicial murders
which were perpetrated by the party
who had at that time seized the helm
of the state, the party of the external
alliances, against which all were
indignant, who in the name of the
God of Israel raised a protest against
thisadulterous movement. An example
of such judicial murder is the prophet
Urijah (Jer. xxvi. 20. &.)” (Heng-
stenberg). ‘Poured it not upon the
ground.” It was commanded in the
Law, that the blood of animals slain
for food should be poured on the earth
and covered up with dust (Lev. xvii.
13). Idolatrous Jerusalem recklessly
poured out even human blood under
the open sky, and covered it not up.
She sinned shamelessly, and before the
face of all. ‘Therefore the Lord will
not cover up her sin, but her blood
shall be ruthlessly poured out in the
sight of all nations,


Ver. 8. ‘‘ Upon the top of a rock.”
“The Hebrew word signifies a sunny
rock, the highest part of a bare rock
exposed to the rays of the sun. In
just retribution, Jehovah declares that
He would expose them with equal
publicity, that tha blood might call
for vengeance.”—/( [/enderson).


Ver. 10. “Spice it well.” ‘There
are differences of opinion as to the
meaning of this word, ‘The rendering
sometimes given, namely ‘to spice,’
is at all events unsuitable, and can-
not be sustained by the usage of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL


OHAP. XXIV


SSINRESGNTSRSRS erceceenresarereene ers a ee


language. It is true that in Ex, xxx,
25, &c., the verb is used for the pre-
paration of the anointing oil, but it is
not the mixing of. the different in-
gredients that is referred to, but in all
probavility the thorough boiling of the
spices, for the purpose of extracting
their essence, so that ‘thorough
boiling’ is no doubt the true meaning
of the word,”—(Keil).


Ver. 11. “That the filthiness of iv
may be molteninit.” The unclean-
ness of the pot is the rust upon it,
The impurity and rust of the pot
itself must be consumed by the fire.
Thus when the guilty inhabitants are
slain, the city itself will be destroyed.
In the Old Testament, impurity is
considered as being attached to things
as well as persons (Lev. xviii. 25;
XXvii. 28). Leprosy not only polluted
men, but clothes also and houses,


Thus God’s judgments fel: not upon
men only, butalso upon cities and lands.


Ver. 12. ‘She wearied herself
with lies.” The idea is, that the pot
wearied and exhausted men in their
exertions to cleanse it. All the
labours spent upon the devoted city
were of no avail.


Ver. 14. “I will not go back,
neither will I spare, neither will I
repent.” “The impurity of the in-
habitants of Jerusalem was of the
most atrocious character. It was
crime, deliberate wickedness. Jehovah
had used a variety of means, both
physical and moral, to restore them
to purity, but they had produced no
effect. It remained now only for the
Chaldeans to do their work, The
decree was irrevocable, and the execu-
tion inevitable.” —( Henderson).


HOMILETIOS.
Tae Finat JupamMents oF Gop vuPON JERUSALEM.


1. They would be severe. The judgments coming upon Jerusalem are set
forth under the parable of a boiling pot, filled with flesh and bones and set over
a fierce fire. Not only are the contents to be completely destroyed by fire, but
also the rust of the pot itself. This declares that God’s purpose is te destroy
Jerusalem itself as well as the guilty inhabitants (ver. 11). They are to be
burned well until the whole is consumed (ver. 10). The blood Jerusalem had
shed must now be avenged upon her before the eyes of all nations (ver. 8).


II. They would be a just retribution. For corruption had spread to all
rauks and conditions of the people (ver. 4). Sin, like rust, had eaten into the
very substance of the nation. The “scum” had cleaved to the vessel (ver. 6).
So universal was the corruption that there was no need for the “lot” to be cast in
order to decide what part should be taken for destruction, and what spared. Ad/
were doomed to be carried off, by death, or by captivity. Nor were these judgmente
a sudden thought, or expedient—a desperate remedy applied at the last moment.
They had often Leen warned and corrected before. God by the ministry ot His
prophets had effected some reformations, but the effect of these soon wore off
and the nation refused to be purged of her iniquity (ver. 13). Holy men were
wearied with toil to clearse the sinful city, but their labours were in vain
(ver. 12). She had sinned in the most open and shamless manner, had done
nothing to cover her sin, had shown no signs of repentance, and had resisted
all the instruments which God had used to restore her. ‘There was nothing
arbitrary or vindictive in her punishment, which was but a just recompense for
her sin, The city with her sinful population were left to share the inevitable


consequences whick arise from the persistent breach of moral laws. ‘‘ Accord-
297


OHAP. XXIV. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL


pe SS,


ing to thy ways, and according to thy doings, shall they judge thee, saith the
Lord God ” (ver. 14). The judgments were to fall upon the city itself as well as
upon the inhabitants. The works of man are turned by his sin into the instru-
ments of his punishment. The blood of Christ was shed at Jerusalem, and
retribution came, at length, when Titus burned the city. Divine grace abused
will bring sure vengeance. Sin must be put away out of God’s sight, either
by cleansing it away, or by overwhelming it under His dire judgments.
When God Himself has done all that could be done, consistent with man’s
moral liberty, then judgment must take it course. “Thus also it was not


cleansed by Christ, who had wearied Himself in labours for Jerusalem even
to hot tears.” —(Jerome).


III. They would be irrevocable. The Lord had spoken, and He would
not repent of His word (ver. 14). Their time of grace had run out.


“As to the principle of dealing, there is no essential difference between
what God did then with Israel, and what He still does with those who stand in
a similar relation to Him, and pursue a similar course. Where there is the
profession of a belief in God’s word, and a regard to God’s authority, though
intermingled with much that is false in sentiment, or unrighteous in conduct,
there must still be dealings of severity and rebuke, to bring the professor, if
possible, to a sense of his sinfulness, and lead him to renounce it; but, failing
this, to vindicate concerning him the righteousness of God, and leave him
without excuse if iniquity should prove his ruin. In the case of sincere, God-
fearing people, the severity exercised will always be attended with salutary
results ; for they have the root of the matter in them, and are sure to profit by
the chastening of the Lord. But with those who have the profession only,
without the principle of true godliness, the iniquity is clung to in spite of all
the severity that is exercised, until the wrath falls on them to the uttermost.
There may be signs of the Divine displeasure sufficient to startle the tender
conscience, and call for deep humiliation of spirit, while nothing appears out-
wardly wrong, and all may even wear a smiling aspect as far as regards social
and public relations. Should there be a restraining of Divine grace within, an
absence of spiritual refreshment, a felt discomfort of mind, or an obvious with-
drawal of spiritual privileges, there is beyond doubt the commencement of a
work of judgment ; and if such marks of God’s displeasure are slighted, otners
of a more severe and alarming kind may assuredly be looked for. But as men’s
tempers and circumstances in life are infinitely varied, so there is a correspond-
ing variety in the methods employed by God to check the risings of sin, and
expel its poison from the heart. And it is the part of spiritual wisdom to seek
for the waketul ear and the discerning eye, which may enable one to catch even
the earliest intimations of God’s displeasure, and:so improve these as to render
unnecessary the heavier visitations of wrath.”—(Lairbairn.)


(Vers. 15-27.)
EXEGETICAL NOTES.—“ With a


view to affect more deeply the minds
of his fellow-captives Ezekiel had an-
nounced to him the disseverance of
the tenderest of all earthly ties—the
removal of her on whom he had ever
been accustomed to look with affection
and delight. This removal of his be-
298


loved wife was to be effected bya stroke,
i.é., in so sudden and striking a manuer
as to show that it was an immediate
visitation of God. Distressing, how-
ever, as this event would be, the
prophet is commanded to exhibit no


tokens of grief on the occasion,”—
(Tenderson.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL


OHAP. XXIV,


a


Ver. 16. “The desire of thine eyes.”
Heb. “ The delight of thine eyes,”—
thus describing the prophet’s wife, A
stroke. A sudden death inflicted by
God. The word is the same as that
which is rendered “plague” (Num.
xiv. 37 ; xvii. 13 ; 2 Sam, xxiv. 21, 25).


Ver. 17. ‘‘Forbear to cry.” Heb.
“Be silent.” The prophet was to
check the emotions which he would
naturally feel. They are to be re-
pred by a solemn sense of God’s
iaving interposed (Lev. x. 7; xxi. 10,
12 ; Psa. xxxix. 9). “ Make no mourn-
ing for the dead.” “Though the
High Priest was interdicted mourning
for any person whatever (Lev. xxi. 10),
the ordinary priests were permitted to
mourn for near relatives (Lev. xxi. 2,
3). Ezekiel, therefore, though of
priestly descent, would have been
under no restriction in this respect.
He was, however, on the present occa-
sion, though of the most trying nature,
to appear as usual, not laying aside
his turban and instead of it casting
ashes on his head, nor going barefooted,
nor covering the upper lip together
with its moustachio (Lev. xiii, 45;
Mic. iti. 7). Neither was he to par-
take xf the food which it was customary
for friends to bring in token of their
sympathy with the mourners. This
in the original is called bread of men,
4.¢., what men usually furnish on such
occasions.” —( Henderson.) “By the
bread of men is meant that bread
which the people were accustomed to
seud to the house of mourning in cases
of death, to manifest their sympathy
and to consoleand refresh the mourners,
a custom which gave rise in the course
of time to that of formal funeral meals.
These are not mentioned in the Old
Testament ; but the sending of bread
or food to the house of mourning is
clearly referred to in Deut. xxvi. 14 ;
Hos. ix. 4; Jer. xvi. 7.—(Keil.)


Ver. 18. “I did in the morning as
I was commanded,” On the morning
following the death of his wife.


Ver. “TI will profane My


21.


sanctuary.” The profanation of the
temple would be accomplished by
its destruction, ‘The excellency of
your strength.” “Israel based its
might and strength upon the temple
as the scene of the gracious presence
of God, living in the hope that the
Lord would not give up his sanctuary
to the heathen to be destroyed, but
would defend the temple, and there-
with Jerusalem and its inhabitants
(Jer. vii. 4)” (Keil). “Your sons and
your daughters.” “Many parents
might, when they were carried away
from Jerusalem, have been under the
necessity of leaving their children of
tender age behind them. These the
Chaldeans should mercilessly put to
the sword.” —Henderson.


Ver. 23. “Ye shall pine away for
your iniquities.”” The thought of
their personal guilt would swallow up
all the sorrows of bereavement. They
would be made to feel that their own
sins had brought all this overwhelming
trouble upon them. ‘ Mourn one
toward another.” “Though prevented,
by the circumstances in which they
were placed in the land of their
conquerors, from making any public
manifestation of their sorrow, they
would privately one to another give
expression to their feelings of grief.”
—/enderson.


Ver. 24. “Thus Ezekiel is a sign
unto you.” “It is not an unexampled
thing for the sacred writers to intro-
duce their own names into their

roductions (Ex. ii, 11; Num. xii. 3;
ie xx. 8; Dan. viii. 27). Ezekiel was
a sign or significant typical representa-
tion, foreshadowing what was to take
place in the experience of his country-
men, When the thing signified should
happen, it would be an indubitable
proof that Jehovah had revealed the
event beforehand to his servant.”—
(Henderson).


Ver, 25. Their strength. The
word means rather “stronghold” or
“fortress.” This was the temple in

299


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; EZEKIEL.


or


OHAP, XXIV.


which they trusted, forgetting their
true “ fortress-rock ” (Is. xvii. 10).


Ver. 26. “In that day.” This, like
the expression “in the day,” in ver. 25,
refers to that day in which the temple
was destroyed and the fuyitive made


on which the fugitive arrived at the
Chebar with the melancholy news,
Srom the time of the temple’s actual
destruction until this messenger should
arrive the prophet ceased from his
public labours, meanwhile leaving his
predictions to produce their natural


effect ; but then he was again to stand

forth, and pointedly appeal to the
“In that day shall thy issue in proof of bis divine com-
mission.” —( Llenderson).


his escape.


Ver. 27.
mouth be opened to him which is
escaped.” ‘The day is referred to


HOMILETIOS.


JERUSALEM’S DESTRUCTION TYPIFIED BY THE DEATH oF EZEKIEL'’s WIFE.


Ezekiel himself is now to be a “sign” unto them by his personal calamities
and sorrows. He was a highly gifted man, and called to an honourable office,
but corresponding to this height of privilege isa depth of sorrow. ‘lhe chosen
symbol of Jerusalem’s destruction was to be the occasion of pain and grief to
him. But he is taught to set the claims of his duty and of his office higher
than those of natural affection. His bereavement is here regarded rather in
its bearing on public utility than on his domestic happiness. It is as a man of

‘ sorrows that he shall accomplish his prophetic mission. In his deepest afflictions
he shall be powerful, as never before, to arouse the people to repentance. His
ministry, like that of a greater Prophet, exemplifies the power of the Cross,
ae death of Ezekiel’s wife is here regarded as a type of the destruction of
the city.


J. It would be a manifest visitation of God. ‘Son of man, behold IJ take
away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke ” (ver. 16.) The hand
of God was to be specially evident. “A stroke,” implying an action directed
by an intelligent will ; a calamity also sudden, like that of the pestilence which
walketh in darkness, “In the day” (ver. 25), the time of judgment was
fixed, ‘he destruction of the devoted city would be brought about, not by
the accidents of history as men count them, but by the evident working of
God’s will. ‘I'he prophet had long known of the Divine purpose. For five
years he had prophesied in dumb show, by parable, and by allegory of the final
destruction of Jerusalem. Everything possible had been done to show the
hand of God plainly revealed in this solemn work of judgment. ‘Thus all will
be forced at leugth to acknowledge the prophet’s Divine wission.


II. It would be an overwhelming sorrow. “Neither shalt thou mourn nor
weep, neither shall thy tears run down” (ver. 16). ‘Ihe prophet is also
forbidden to observe the sad customs of the house of mourning es 17). ‘The
“sign” was to be the most solemn and expressive of all,—the sign of a silent
sorrow. ‘I'he grief would prove too deep for tears, too serious for the outward
trappings of woe. It is a common saying, that “there is no sorrow like a dry
sorrow. It is saddest of all when the burden of the heart can find no relief
in tears.


II. It would bring home to them the greatness of their sin. The prophet’s
silent sorrow was a type of the fact that his guilty nation would be brought
300


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL, CHAP. XXIV.








solemnly to acknowledge that God had interposed. When His hand is made
bare in judgment, the confession must be, “I was dumb, I opened not my
mouth ; because Thou didst it” (Pes. xxxix. 9). The inhabitants of the city
would be overcome with suck a sense of guilt that it would swallow up every
thought of bereavement (ver. 23). ‘They would now begin to receive the
prophet’s message seriously, asking the question in solemn earnestness, “ Wilt
thou not tell us what these things are to us?” (ver. 19). They now begin to
learn that the prophet isa “sign” unto them. Not only his words, but the
stern realities of his life bear witness for God. The ruin of their city, now
plainly seen to be a just judgment of God, would be an all-absorbing topic of .
conversation. They would be able to talk of nothing else, but “mourn one
towards another” (ver. 23). They would believe a human messenger when he
comes to tell them a disastrous piece of news (ver. 26). Thus they are
compelled by stern facts to accept the prophet’s message, though they had long
refused to believe him.


IV. It would bring them to the true knowledge of God (ver. 27). The
prophet had revealed the mind and will of God, but he was not believed. Now
he shall speak with a power of instant conviction, for the messenger of evil
tidings has arrived with news of the judgments which he had so long threatened
in vain, He had laid before them the principles of righteousness, but now
these are wrought out in stern facts to which they must listen. His words are
now corroborated by a human mes-enger (ver. 27). Thus the solemn realities
of things, the solemnities of judgment must, sooner or later, be brought home
to impenitent sinners, “ Thou shalt be a sign unto them, and they shall know
that I am the Lord.”


(Vers, 19—24.)


1. The resting in holy things, causes God to remove them, how dear soever
they be unto us. ‘I will profane My sanctuary.” You confide in the outward
means, you aré taken with the outward splendour of the ceremonies and pomp
of the Temple, but the spiritual true worship ye mind not. The temple, city
and state are dearer to youthanI am. Why is the ‘'emple, and not Mycelt,
“the excellency of your strength?” Why is that “the desire of your eyes,”
and not Myself, who fill the Temple with My glory? Why are you troubled
that it should be laid in the dust, and care not that My honour, My glory, My
name are profaned amongst you! 2. DMen’s sins sometimes bring them into such
straits that though they have lost their dearest comforts, yet they dare not
outwardly manifest sorrow for them. It was sad to lose their dearest comforts,
and more sad that they might not ease their hearts by tears or sighings, and
most sad that they must show no respect to their dead friends by any funeral
rites. Jeremiah had predicted this sad condition (Jer. xvi. 6,7). 3. God may
put [lis own faithful servants upon hard and unwonted things, thereby to declure
what shall be the condition of the wicked, ‘“‘Thus Ezekiel is unto you a sign.”
He hath not been suffered to mourn or weep; and why so? that he may bea
sign unto you. You would not be taught by his doctrine, now you must be taught
by his example; “ according to all that he hath done shall ye do.” The things
are harsh aud unnatural that I (Ezekiel) have done, but it is for your sakes
that I am put upon them; and ye shall do as I have done. Thus Isaiah was
a sign (Isa. xx, 3). 4, Signs accomplished convince men of the truth and just
proceedings of God. By the fulfilling of this sign foretold, ye shall be so
convinced as to acknowledge Ezekiel was a true sign, made so by Me, and that
I have dealt justly with you for your iniquities, in bringing you into such
straits, as not to dare to mourn openly for your miseries, If have

1


OHAP. XXV.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


nothing to object against Me, from whom, being innocent, I took away the
desire of his eyes, and forbade him to mourn for her; what can you object
against Me, being so guilty as none more, if I send away your desirable things,
and hem you about with my judgments and enemies, that you shall not dare


to mourn ?(—Greenhill.


PREDICTIONS OF JUDGMENTS UPON THE
PHILISTINES,


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—In chs.
XXV.-xxxii, we come to a new group
of prophecies. ‘They are predictions of
judgment upon the heathen nations,

“While the prophet’s mouth was
to be mute to Israel, the Lord directed
him to speak against the heathen
nations, and to foretell to them the
judgment of destruction, that they
mivht not be lifted up by the fall of
the people and kingdom of God, but
might recognise in the judgment upon
Israel a work of the Omnipotence and
righteousness of the Lord, the Judge of
the whole earth. There are seven
heathen nations whose destruction
Ezekiel foretells in this section of his
book, viz., (1) Ammon ; (2) Moab ; (3)
Edom ; (4) the Philistines (ch. xxv) ;
(5) Tyre ; (6) Sidon (ch, xxvi.-xxviii) ;
and (7) Egypt (ch. xxix.-xxxii). These
prophecies are divided into thirteen
words of God by the introductory
formula, ‘the word of Jehovah came
4o me, the utterances against Ammon,
Moab, Edom, and the Philistines,
being all comprehended in one word
of God whereas there are four separate
words of God directed against Tyre,
one against Sidon, and seven against
Egypt. In the seven nations
and the seven words of God directed
against Egypt we cannot fail to dis-
cover an allusion to the symbolical
significance of the number. And in
order to make it the more apparent
that the number has been chosen on
account of its significance, Ezekiel
divides his announcement of the
judgment upou the seventh people
into seven words of God. On the
busis of Gen. i., seven is the number
deneting the compietion of the works
of God. When therefore, Ezekiel

302


Ammonites, Moasrrss, EpoMItTss, AND
(Chap. xxv.)


selects seven nations and utters seven
words of God concerning the principal
nation, namely Egypt, he evidently
intends to indicate thereby that the
judgment predicted will be executed
and completed upon the heathen
world and its peoples through the
word and acts of God.”—( Keil).


(Vers. 1-17).


Ver. 3. “The Ammonites .. .
Because thou saidst, Aha, against My
sanctuary, when it was profaned,” ete.
“They were the descendants of Lot,
and occupied the territory to the east
of the Jordan, beyond that pertaining
to the tribes of Reuben and Gad.
They formed one of the most powerful
of the minor neighbouring states,
and were frequently at war with the
Hebrews. They were gross idolaters,
and had for their national God Moloch
or Milcom. On the fall of Jerusalem,
to which as auxiliaries they contri-
buted, and the transportation of the
inhabitants of Judea to Babylon, they
insolently triumphed over them, on
which account the present threaten-
ing is denounced against them,”—
—/( Henderson).


Ver. 4, “I will deliver thee to the
men of the East for a possession.” “The
men of the Hast are the inhabitants of
Arabia Deserta, east of the territories
immediately bordering on the Jordan
and the Dead Sea. On the destruction
of the Jewish state by Nebuchadnezzar,
the country was to be taken possession
of by the nomadic tribes, who should
there form their encampments and
dwell in their tents, leading the same
pastoral life to which they had


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XXV,


—$—$ $$ $<


been accustomed.” — (Henderson.)
“Palaces.” The Heb. word never
means “palaces,” but only “ villages,”
or ‘‘folds.” These were nomadic
encampments, surrounded by mud
walls, as is common in the East.
“Thy fruit . . . thy milk.” Besides
the produce of the soil, the milk is
also mentioned as one of the products
of a pastoral life, and the principal
food of nomads,


Ver. 5. “Rabbah.” This was the
metropolis of the Ammonites. It is
elsewhere called Rabbah of Ammon
to distinguish it from a city of that
name in the tribe of Judah. Ptolemy
rebuilt it and gave it the name of
Philadelphia. “A stable for camels.”
The city rebuilt by Ptolemy was in
ruins in the fourteenth century. These
have been visited by modern travellers,
who have found remains of a palace, a
mausoleum, an ampitheatre, a temple,
s church, and a castle, but they could
not discover a single inhabited dwell-
ing. Burckhardt found a party of
Arabs there, who had stabled their
camels among the ruins.


Ver. 7. “Iwill cause thee to perish
out of the countries: I will destroy
thee.” “This desolate state of Rabbah
must be referred to the three hundred
years which intervened between the
destruction of Jerusalem and the time
of Ptolemy Philadelphus, after which
it became celebrated among the
Greeks and Romans, by whom, no
donbt, the splendid buildings, the ruins
of which still remain, were erected.”
—( Henderson.)


Ver. 8. “Moab and Seir do say,
Behold the house of Judah is like unto
all the heathen.” They bad forgotten
that nine centuries before this a king
of Moab had been told by a Gentile
seer, that Israel should “dwell alone,
and not be reckoned among the
nations.” (Num. xxiii. 9.)


Ver. 9. “I will open the side of
Moab.” The mountain passes would be
eleared, which were otherwise closed and


fortified. ‘Thus the enemy could easily
enter the country and take possession.


Ver. 12. “ Revenged himself upon
them.” “The old spirit of revenge,
in which he had acted from the olden
time, still keeps by his side. While
in the more distant relationship of
Ammon and Moab, malignant joy is
the expression of hostile feeling, with
Edom, in his much nearer relationship,
the same feeling vents itself in actions
of revenge. Hence the charge of
sinful procedure as the incurring of
guilt.”—/( Lange.)


Ver. 15. “Because the Philistines
have dealt by revenge.” ‘The Phil-
istines are in ver. 15 joined by Edom
on the side of their doing (ver. 12, &c.);
to Ammon-Moab on account of their
contempt of the people of God. ‘The
latter was the inmost feeling, hostility
the impelling force, wherein the dis-
tinction from Edom lay. “To destroy
it for the old hatred.” This is the
design, the abiding tendency. The
everlasting enmity reached back to
the earliest days. A perpetually en-
during war is the standing feature of
the relation, while fixed hostility was
the root of it.”—(Lange.)


Ver. 16. “I will cut off the Chere-
thims.” “The name Philistines sig-
nifies probably the emigrants, in
accordance with the accounts of the
books of Moses concerning their mi-
gration from the regions on the Black
Sea. By the side of this name goes,
of substantially like signification for
the same people, Kerethim, extirpated
—those who were forced to leave their
nativeland. These Kerethim are now
become Kerethim a second time ; their
name shall verify itself anew. The
destruction of the reninant points to
this, that they shall be destroyed to
the last man, as in fact the Philistines ,
have utterly disappeared. It is the
great privilege of the people of God,
that how heavy soever the judgments
of God may be upon them, never will
it be said of them, I will destroy the
remnant.’—( Hengstenberg. } re


GHAP. XXV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


{


re


HOMILETICS.
Tne PROPHECIES AGAINST HzearHen Nations.


I, Heathen nations formed the dark background to Israel In the
spiritual darkness in which they dwelt, we may trace different shades, Ammon,
Moab, Edom, in their order, represent increasing blackness of darkness,
until we come to the full depths of it in the Philistines. These heathen
nations were a source of continual danger to the people of God. The Church
of God is ever surrounded by the world ; a world which exhibits every grada-
tion of evil, coarse, refined ; the devil rough and blustering, or as an angel o
light. In the case of the tliee first nations mentioned by the prophet, their
guilt was enhanced by their relationship to Israel. “The people of God must
undergo the experience which the man of God undergoes (Matt. x. 36, Mic.
vii. 6). Out of his blood-relationships there springs a hostility even to blood.
While this revolves around the Spirit that wrought in Israel, it could not but
finally array itself against the Messiah, as He has Himself said that we shall be
hated for His name’s sake,” —( Lange).


II. Heathen nations had sinned against Israel. Ammon, by profane mock-
ing at their culamities (vers. 3-6). Joab, by a false estimate of Israel’s
spiritual position. ‘The house of Israel is like unto all the heathen” (ver. 8).
They could not understand that it was impossible that Israel should ever
become as the heathen (Ez. xx, 32). Israel would have more r. sponsibility
than the rest of the nations, as she would sin against the light. <Adom, “ by
taking vengeance” (ver. 12). Zhe Philistines, by an old and deeply-rooted
hatred towards Israel (ver 15).


III. Heathen nations have responsibilities towards God. They were not
held so strictly responsible as those who had more light and privilege, yet they
were not in such total and unrelieved darkness as to render them inexcusable.
1. They were capable of hearing and receiving God's message. ‘Hear the word
of the Lord” (ver. 3). They had some knowledge of what righteousness was.
They had a conscience to which an appeal might be made, 2. They were
capable of forming judgments on the subject of religion. We mean religion in
the sense of Godliness, and including all duty. The heathen nations knew that
Israel was punished for her sins against God. They rejoiced over her fall
(ver. 3). They thought that all these calamities disproved their claim to be
the people of God. A Gentile seer (probably of Edomite extraction) was, long
ago, struck with the conviction that the nation was holy (Num. xxiii. 10).
The surrounding heathen nations felt that they were not as Israel when Israel
was right with God. 3. Zhey were capable of the knowledge of God. “ And
they shall know that I aw the Lord” (ver. 17). They would be made to know
God through His manifest judgments.


IV. God’s treatment of heathen nations shows His purpose of salvation
concerning ali mankind. [t was no true victory that the heathen nations
obtained over Israel. ‘Though to all outward seeming Israel was about to be
numbered with dead empires, yet she would rise again in a more glorious form,
aud become the life and light of the nations. Her disasters and failures would
serve but to prepare the way for God’s kingdom. The Gentile nations would,
in the course of Providence, be made to see that the chosen people were
preserved for the salvation of the world.

304


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XXVI.





Tae Fact or Tyre. (Chap, xxvi.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—“ In four
sections, commencing with the formula,
‘Thus saith the Lord,’ Tyre, the mis-
tress of the sea is threatened with
destruction. In the first strophe
(vers. 2-6) there is a general threat of
its destruction by a host of nations.
In the second (vers, 7-14), the enemy
is mentioned by name, and designated
as a powerful one; and the conquest
and destruction emanating from him
are circumstantially described. In the
third (vers, 15-18), the impression
which this event would produce upon
the inhabitants of the islands and
coast-lands is depicted. And in the
fourth (vers, 19-21), the threat is
repeated in an energetic manner, and
the prophecy is thereby rounded off.”
—/( Keil).


Ver. 1, “In the eleventh year, in
the first day of the month.” The
- year is that of Jerusalem’s capture,
B.c. 588. The month is not named.
Probably it was the woeful “ fourth”
month (2 Kings xxv. 3; Hzek. iii, 15).


Ver, 2. “The gates of the people.”

e plural noun denotes one gate, as
the verb isin the singular. Jerusalem
was named “the gate of the peoples”
on account of the many nations which
would flow into it (Isa. i. 2; Mice. iv.
1). Jerusalem was also to Tyre the
gate of communication with the East.
“She is turned unto me.” ‘The ren-
dering should be, ‘it is turned unto
me,” «¢@., the gate of the peoples.
“l'vre considers herself the heiress of
Jerusalem. ‘I'he fall of the spiritual
centre presents to view the enhanced
importance of the secular.”—(//eng-
stenberg.)


_ Ver. 3. “As the sea causeth his
waves.” ‘Tyre suffered from succes-
sive waves of invasion, chiefly those
of Nebuchadnezzar and Alexander, the
Crusaders and the Saracens. It was
not finally overthrown till the thir-
teenth century, yet it never recovered
from the blow which the King of
Babylon inflicted upon it.


Ver. 4. “I will also scrape the
dust from her.” “The destruction
here referred to was that of the
towers, walls, and other edifices,
destroyed by the besiegers. Not a
vestige was to remain. In place of
splendid edifices and impregnable
bulwarks nothing was to be seen but
bare rocks, fit only for fishermen to
spread their nets on.”—/( //enderson.)


Ver. 5. “The spreading of nets.”
According to Dr. Robinson, the.
southern side of the rock of T'yre is
still used by fishermen for this pur-
pose.


Ver. 6. “Her daughters.” Her
daughter-cities, such as Gebal, Bey-
rout, &c. ‘‘ By the ‘field’ we are to
understand the open country, #.¢., the
towns and villages dependent upon
her and lying back from and along
the coast. These were to be involved
in the same catastrophe with the
mother-city, their fate was bound up
in hers.” —( Henderson.)


Ver. 8. “The buckler.” “ Here ob-
viously denotes the ¢estudo, or vaulted
roof of large united shields employed
by an attacking enemy for protection
in siege-operations,”— Henderson.


Ver. 11. “Strong garrisons.” The
proper meaning of the word is “ pillars,”
such as were erected in honour of the
idol-gods. In the temple of Melkarth
at Tyre, there were two famous pillars;
one of topaz, the other of emerald.


Ver. 14. “Thou shalt be built no
more.” “This was literally fulfilled
with respect to the continental city.
That part which lay on the island
recovered itself after the lapse of
seventy years, as predicted by the
prophet Isaiah (Ch. xxiii. 17, 18), and
wasin a very flourishing condition inthe
time of Alexander, by whom a causeway
was constructed between the shore and
it, by means of which he reached the
city, and took it by storm after a siege
of seven months.”—Henderson.

305


OHAP XXVL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,





Ver, 15. “Theisles.” “This term
is frequently used so as to embrace
the coast lands of the Mediterranean
Sea; we have therefore to understand
it here as applied to the Phoenician
colonies on the islands and coasts of
that sea.”’—(Keil). Her numerous
maritime colonies looked up to Tyre
as the mother city. Even Carthage
sent her @ yearly offering,


Ver. 16. “ The princes of the sea.”
“These are not kings of the islands,
but, according to Isa, xxiii. 8, the
merchants presiding over the colonies
of Tyre, who resembled princes.
‘Their thrones,’ not royal thrones,
but chairs, as in 1 Sam. iv. 13, etc.
The pisture of their mourning recalls
the description in Jonah iii. 6. The
antithesis introduced isa very striking
one: clothing themselves in terrors,
putting on terrors in the place of the
robes of state which they have laid
aside. The thought is rendered still
more forcible by the closing sentences
of the verse. They tremble ‘by
moments, 7@¢, as the moments
return — actually, therefore, ‘every
moment’ (Isa. xxvii. 3).”—( Keil).


Ver. 17%. “Strong in the sea.”
“ This feature of the description must
be referred to the insular part of the
city, which had been strongly fortified
as the port for the protection of the


warehouses and the shipping. The
concluding clause is descriptive of the
despotic rule which the merchant-
rinces of ‘Tyre exercised over the
inhabitants, whether regular citizens
or those who were there temporarily
on business, ’— Henderson.


Ver. 20. “ With them that descend
into the pit.” “The disappearance
of Tyre is compared to that of the
dead, who, placed in their sepulchre,
are no more seen among the living.
While this was to be the fate of that
renowned city, Jehovah promises to
set glory in the land of the living.
Some refer this to the restoration
of the Jewish polity. And if this is
meant to include the Messiah and
His spiritual kingdom, for whose
introduction that restoration was
designed to be preparatory, the inter-
pretation may readily be admitted.”—
Henderson.


Ver. 21. “I will make thee a terror,
and thou shalt be no more.” “The
desolation of Tyre was to be so com-
plete that it should be an object of
terror to all who approached the spot
where it had stood. Nota vestige of it
was to remain: a prophecy which was
literally fulfilled, for though insular
Tyre afterwards rose into notice, the
ancient continental city neverrecovered
from her ruin.”—Henderson


HOMILETICS.
TYRE THREATENED WITH JUDGMENT.


Tyre rose to her greatest eminence under the reign of Hiram, the friend of
David and of Solomon. The time, therefore, of her highest prosperity cor-
responded with that of Jerusalem. If each of these two cities had been faith-
ful to its high calling, the issue would have been glorious, The Bride of the
Messiah would have been worthy of her Lord, and the daughter of Tyre would
have brought her gifts sincere and acceptable. But both cities fell, Jerusalem
by aspiring after worldly splendour, and Tyre by pride gendered by her com-
mercial greatness. In this Chapter, the overthrow of Tyre is foretold, and in
the two following chapters, her world-wide commerce and the nature of her sin
are more particularly described. As described in this chapter, we consider :—


1, Her crowning sin. The judgment of Tyre was the result of many forms
of sin, Pe phere were two leading sins on which the prophet here dwells. 1. The


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP. XXVI,





sin of insulting the chosen people. Tyre rejoiced over the fall of Jerusalem,
instead of reading the lessons of a warning example. 2. The sin of intense
selfishness. Tyre glories in the prospect of becoming great through the down-
fail of Jerusalem, “I shall be replenished, now she is laid waste” (verse 2). To
feast upon the prospect of becoming rich through the ruin of others, is the
vilest form of selfishness,


II. Her judgment. God was against Tyre (ver. 8), and whatsoever He
opposes must come to nought. Mark the special features of her judgment.
1. She is taken at her own word. Tyre expected that the nations would come
to her, now that the gateway of her communication with the East is thrown
open. But they shall, indeed, come to her, yet in a way im which she least
expected. “I will cause many nations to come up against thee” (ver. 8).
2. That in which she most trusted becomes the chief source of her terror. The
sea was the great source of her wealth, and to it she looked for her future
stability and prosperity. Yet on the sea would God work His wonders of
judgment for her destruction (vers, 5, 14). 8. The judgment on her
would be awful im its completeness. Tyre would become like the bare
rock upon which nothing was left (vers. 4, 5), like dead cities and nations
of the earth (ver. 20). She was to be “no more,” but the memory of her
would be a “terror” to after ages (ver. 21). Her destruction would not be
the work of one sharp moment, but would be like the successive waves of
the sea, slow but irresistible, which would be a lengthening of her calamity
(ver. 3). Tyre had mocked Jerusalem, but she herself shall be mocked in
turn (ver. 17). God’s retribution is visited often in kind as well as in degree,
Her goods are to be destroyed, and her pleasures, and all her glory laid in the
dust (vers. 12, 13). What a picture of the end of all things on earth! The
believer has the enduring substance, which cannot be taken by the spoiler
nor corroded by the tooth of time. 4. The instrument of the judgment.
Nebuchadnezzar, who for this purpose was the servant of God. And God can
use what instruments He pleases in His works of judgment or of mercy.
5. Yet God would bring glory out of the judgment. “I shall set glory in
the land of the living” (ver. 20). ‘The “beauty” of Tyre should disappear
like that of Moab (Ezek. xxv. 9), like that of ancient Israel (Ezek. xx. 6, 15),
like that of Babylon (Isa. xiii. 19); yet from their ashes a higher and a better
life should spring. The Redeemer of the world came upon the wreck of the -
world’s hopes. Human history is a continued example of growth out of
corruption and decay. When pagan Rome was destroyed, then Christian
Rome arose ; and when Christian Rome became corrupt, then God raised His
church out of it, once more investing her with the glory of that liberty
wherewith Christ hath made her free.


(Vers. 15-21.)


1. God, by His destructive judgments upon great states makes others to
tremble that were secure. When the Lord drowned the Egyptians in the Red
Sea, it caused the nations to fear. (Ex. xv. 14), And when he brought
destruction upon Babylon, it made all hearts melt, and they were full of fears
and pains, a8 a woman in travail, (Isa. xiii. 6-8.) 2. Great cities have their
periods, they abide not for ever. As they have a time to come into the world,
so @ time to go out of it; as they have a time to get up on high, so a time to
descend low. Tyre had her day to fall, her day of departure (ver. 18), she
descended into the pit with the people of old time (ver. 20.) Babylor had
its time to begin (Gen. xi. 8), and its time to cease (Isa, xiv. 4.) a ye may

U2


CHAP. XXVIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,





read of Nineveh’s raising (Gen. x. 11.), and of her desolation (Nah. iii. 7;
Zeph. ii. 18.) Hence we may see the instability of human things, Learn not
to trust in strong holds, neither think it any great privilege to be citizens.
of such perishing cities, but labour to be citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem,
which is the city prepared of God, and hath foundations which shall never be
razed (Heb. xi. 10—16). 3. Glod’s people are glorivis, and the glory of the
land. They are His glory (Isa. iv. 5; Zech. ii, 8). The godly ones were the
glory of Zion (Isa. vi. 13). The saints are a holy seed, the substance and the
glory of any nation. 4. There is a difference of lands in the world, all are not
alike. There is “‘the land of the living.” In Canaan there were the living
waters, the ordinances and means of grace and salvation which other lands had
not. David judged himself even among the dead when he was shut out from
the people, the worship, and the ordinances of God; his soul fainted and he
was almost gone (Psa. Ixxxiv. 2). 5. God’s people may be deprived of their
privileges and comforts for a season, but He will in due time restore them to
the enjoyment of the same. “I shall set glory in the land of the living.”
God’s glory, His people were in Babylon, but He would nos lose nor leave His
glory there, He brought them back again, and ‘“‘set them in the land of the
living.” He gave them another temple, all those ordinances and privileges
they liad before. ‘I will place salvation in Zion for Israel my glory” (Isa.
xlvi, 13).—(Greenhill, )


Tyrr’s ForMER GREATNESS, SUGGESTING A LAMENTATION OVER HEB
Sap DownraLu (Chap. xxvii.).


EXEGETICAL NOTES. — “The
lamentation coimences with a picture:
of the glory of the city of Tyre, its
situation, its architectural beauty, its
military strength and defences (vers,
3-11), and its wide commercial rela-
tions (vers. 12-25); and then passes
into mournful lamentation over the
ruin of all this glory (vers, 26-36),”—


porium of the peoples of many sea
coasts, both from the East and from
the West. Thus Isaiah describes her
as, “a mart of nations” (Isa, xxiii. 3).


Ver. 5. “They have made all thy
ship boards of fir trees.” In vers. 4-8,
Tyre is described as a stately ship built
of the best material, manned with the


Keil. best marines and most. skilful pilots.
; The allegory is broken off in the middle
Vers. 1-11. Introduction and des- 5 rar :
oes : of ver. 9, but it is resumed in ver. 26,
ae of the glory and might of where this noble ship so well furnished
es aud managed by able hands is at last
Ver. 3. “At the entry of the sea.” wrvoked th soubes OCunucan


This shsud be rendered, “by the
entrances of the sea.”’ The description
is that of insular Tyre with her two
harbours, one on the north and the
other on the south. The former was
called the Sidonian harbour, because
it was on the Sidonian side ; and the
latter the Egyptian, because of the
direction in which it pointed. “A
merchant of the people for many isles.”
Rather, “the peoples unto.”  ‘'I'yre is
thus described as the mercantile em-


Ver. 7. “ Broidered work.” Deviceg
were worked in the sails, so that they
served also for the purpose of ensigns.


Ver. 10. “ They set forth thy come-
liness.” The meaning is, that Tyre
must feel herself honoured in having
so many nations to supply her with
hired soldiers. 'lhe commercial great-
ness of the city rested upon a military
basia, ;


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; EZEKIEL,


OHAP, XXVIL.





Vers, 12-25. A description of the
commerce of Tyre with all nations
who delivered their productions in
the market of this metropolis of the
commerce of the world, and received
the wares and manufactures of this
city in return.


Ver. 12, “Tarshish.” This was
“Tartessus,” in Spain, famed for its
various metals, which were mostly
exported to 'I'yre. It is probable that
most of the “tin” was conveyed by
the Phoenicians from Cornwall to
Tarshish. ‘‘ The enumeration of the
different peoples, lands, and cities
which carried on trade with Tyre
commences with ‘T'arshish in the
extreme west, then turns to the north,
passes through the different lands of
Anterior Asia and the Mediterranean
to the remotest north-east, and ends
by mentioning Tarshish again, to
round off the list.”— Keel,


Ver. 18. “Traded in the persons
of men.” They were addicted to the
slave-trade. ‘l'o this day the Turkish
harems are supplied with female slaves
from Circassia aud Georgia, such being
remarkable for their beauty. Com-
pare Joel. iii. 6.


Ver. 14. “House of Togarmah.”
“The northern Armenians, who call
themselves the house of Zorgom, and
claim 'l'orgom, or Togarmah, the son
of Gomer, as their founder. (Gen.
x. 8; I. Chron. i. 6.) They inhabit
the rough mountainous regions on the
south side of the Caucasus. ‘The
country was celebrated for its breed
of horses, which were in great request
by the Persian kings.” —(Henderson).


Ver. 15. “Denda.” “An island,
or commercial town in the Persian
Gulf, established by the Tyrians to
secure the trade of India, which
abounded in ivory. The tusks re-
sembling horns will account for the
term being here employed.” “ Ebony.”
“ Gesenius thinks the reason why this
word is plural in the Hebrew, is that


it was obtained only in planks split
into pieces for transportation. Its
great hardness made it an article of
value.” —/{ Henderson.)


Ver. 25. “The ships of Tarshish.”
“The prophet now returns from his
enumeration of the various articles of
commerce with which Tyre enriched
herself, and the various countries with
which she traded, to commemorate
her fall, But just before entering
upon that part of his subject, he
stops for a moment to advert to her
navy, by which her wares were con-
veyed to Spain and other coasts of
the Mediterranean. The ships of
Tfarshish were, comparatively speak-
ing, like our old Indiamen. They are
called the walls of Tyre, for the same
reason that we speak of our ships of
war as the wooden walls of Old
England. They were the glory
and defence of the merchant city.”
—( Henderson).


Ver. 26. “The east wind hath
broken thee in the midst of the seas.’
This wind, blowing from the direction
of Lebanon, is the most violent of all
in the Mediterranean (Psa. xlviii. 8)
Nebuchadnezzar is represented under
this figure.


Ver. 31. “They shall make them-
selves utterly bald for thee.” Alluding
to the Pheenician custom in mourning,
which, on account of its connection
with heathenish superstitions, was for-
bidden to Israel (Deut. xiv. 1).


Ver. 32. “In the midst of the sea.”
Thus showing that the prophecy is to
be understood of insular Tyre.


Ver. 33. “Thou didst enrich the
kings of the earth.” The custom
dues levied on her wares were a
source of wealth to the surrounding
nations.


Ver. 36. ‘“‘ The people shall hiss at
thee.” With the hiss of astonishment,
as in 1 Kings ix. 8.


OMAP, XXVIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,





HOMILETICOS,
(Vers. 1-10).


When Tyre rejoices over Jerusalem, then the prophet rejoices over Tyre :
this is the recompense of the pious. If we must not repay evil with evil, there
still is with God a recompensing of evil with evil. All human and earthly
things go out at last in lamentation. This is the lamentation of the spirit, that
the world sows to the flesh, and of che flesh reaps corruption. With kettle-
drums and flutes the world begins, but it ends with wailing and misery. “‘ We
must profoundly know the gloria mundi, if we are to take to heart the ste
transit gloria mundi.” —( Hengstenberg). Let no one boast of his strength or
worldly elevation ; how soon can the Lord, if His judgment should break forth,
bring all to the dust of desolation! (Vers. 3, 4; Jer. ix. 23, 25). There is
a perfection of beauty which is nothing else thau ripeness for judgment.
Beauty is a transient splendour, but the knowledge of the eternal, leads
from glory to glory. In boasting one sees what things the heart is full of.
Mark the contrast between Tyre and the daughter of the king, who is all
beautiful within (Psa. xlv.). The security is very different : one is of faith,
since we know that we are reconciled through Christ, and, even if the world
should fall in ruin, can remain in peace; the other proceeds from unbelief,
which has respect to men, walls, etc., and relies upon these. The buildings of
men, and the building of God, namely, His church, against which not even the
gates of hell can prevail. When people once surrender themselves to pride,
pomp, and dissipation, they can hardly lay them aside again; nay, they often
know not, from inconsideration and wantonness, what they should do (Deut.
xxxil. 15, etc.). Every land has its peculiar gift from God, and the gifts of
God must thus shamefully minister to the vanity of men. It is quite right to
take into one’s service and pay qualified persons, but woe to him who makes
flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord !


(Vers. 12-25),


Men run through the wide world for the sake of merchandise, while the word
of God, which makes rich without trouble, and imparts treasure which neither
moth nor rust corrupts, nor can thieves steal, is so near us! The one pearl of
great price 'l'yre did not make an article of traffic. What advantages it to gain
the whole world if the soul suffers damage. Oh, how many gifts of God are in
the service of sin? Great merchant-cities, great cities of sin. How often, and
how many ways are men’s souls the objects of buying and selling (ver. 13).
With things perfectly beautiful man was certainly to occupy himself. But
where are they to be found inthe earthly sphere? (Col. iii. 2). That Tyre was
so full and honoured, while Zion became always poorer and poorer, and sunk
miserable—this formed a stuinbling-block to the people of God, But what has
become of all the fulness and glory of Tyre? Zion, on the other hand, has
gloriously blossomed anew.


(Vers. 26-36).


The glory of the earth shall become dust and ashes. The higher we reach, so
much the more precipitous, and so much the deeper will be the fall. The
element of our security can so easily become the element of our misery: here
the sea, elsewhere gold, one’s position, &c. A person of high estate when cast

310


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL. GAAP, XXVIIL





down is lower than one who has always been in a humble position. The wind
does not always fill our sails; it often also, and suddenly, tears them short and
small. In prosperity men so rarely consider how vain it is, that in adversity
they cry out the more loudly; but, alas! only upon the vanity of earthly
things, and not upon the vanity of their earthly hearts. Remember that thou
art dust, and bethink thyself that thou hast a soul. Fear is salutary, but there
ts also a fear which we again shake off, and which we do not suffer to warn us.
The loss of earthly things gives such trouble and for the loss of heavenly things
men will laugh! A Christian should not so mourn, but should smite his breast
alike in prosperity and in adversity. Michael and Tyre (ver. 32). Who is as
thou? This it is proper to say only of God in reference to glory. In respect
to nothingness, on the other hand, one of us is as another. Mournful times
should be times of repentance.—The holy sense of the nil mirart. From ver,
34 we learn, the end of earthly things, their scale value, and true estimation,


All this world is nothing ; how surely must there be what is something!


But


faith cries out of the depths to God. Contrast the glory of the children of God


with the world’s glory.—( Lange).


PRopHETICAL DinGE oN THE Kina oF Tykez, AS THE EMBODIMENT OF THE


Sprrit oF CaRNAL PRIDE AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY OF THE WHOLE STATE.
Moruer-Ciry.


Fatt oF ZIDON, THE


THR
Tue RESTORATION OF ISRAEL IN


Contrast with Tyre and Zion (Chap. xxviii.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—“ In this
chapter we have a sublime threnody
on the prince of Tyre, couched in
language of the keenest irony. His
fall is first of all traced to his in-
sufferable pride, which is described in
the most glowing terms (vers. 2-6).
His merited punishment is next
announced (7-10). The prophet, in
obedience to the divine command,
then proceeds to deliver the funeral
dirge, exaggerating the dignity and
magnificence of the fallen monarch,
with which he contrasts his utter
degradation (11-19). Then follows a
prediction announcing the fall of the
mother-city, Zidon (20-23). And the
chapter concludes with promises of
deliverance to the Jews, and their
restoration to prosperity in their own
land.” —Henderson.


Ver, 2, “The prince of Tyrus.”
The monarch of Tyre, at the time of
Fzckiel’s prophecy, was Ithbaal II.
The latter part of this compound
name implies his close connection with
Baal, the Phcenician supreme God,
whose representative he was. “I am
a God, I sit in the seat of God.” “The


seat of God is a seat which, in its
absolute inaccessibleness, is like the
seat of God in heaven. He sets or
makes his mind like the mind of God;
he has so pushed himself into the
height that m his folly he arrogates
to himself what God claims to Himselt
by right. It belongs to the nature of
God, to be and to have all from Him-
self ; to the nature of man, to derive
all from the fulness of God. If man
imagines himself to subsist as God in
himself, this is the greatest of all
perversities, which cannot remain un-
punished, because God does not give
His glory to another. The funda-
mental passage is Isa. xiv. 14, where
the king of Babylon compares himself
with the Most High. The general
divine name, Elohim, the Godhead,
stands as usual, where there is a con-
trast of man and God, of earth and
heaven.” —( Hengstenberg.)


Ver. 3. “Wiser than Daniel.”
Daniel had, at this time (B.c. 588),
been chief of the wise men of Babylon
for about fourteen years. “ Daniel’s
wisdom must have been generally
kuown and acknowledged, especially

811


CHAP. XXVIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIE®,





among the Jews in the Chaldean exile ;
for Ezekiel presupposes that the King
of Tyre knew of Daniel, and certainly
as one whom no other but himself
excelled in wisdom; so that Daniel
can be no mere Jewish celebrity, but
must have proved his wisdom on the
theatre of the world. To Daniel is
ascribed not merely wisdom, but even
a special kind of it, that to which
nothing hidden was dark, The King
of Babyion says of Daniel in ch. iv.
6, ‘‘I know that the spirit of the holy
gods is in thee, and no secret troubleth
thee.” Daniel had appeared as one
from whom no secret was hidden in the
very beginning of his career, and
thereby laid the foundation of his
prominent position.” —( Hengstenberg.)


Ver. 7. “The terrible of the
nations.” The foreigners, barbarians,
the terrible ones of the nations. These
were the Chaldean foreigners, noted for
their ferocity (Isa. i. 11, xxv. 2; Ezek.
Xxxi. 12).


Ver. 8. “‘ Thou shalt die the
deaths.” ‘ Deaths, a peculiar form in
the plural, to indicate emphatically
the most violent death. ‘The death of
the king of Tyre is compared to that
of those slain in a sea-engagement,
and cast into the deep.” —/( Henderson).
“The plural here and Jer. xvi. 4. is a
plurals exaggerativus, a death so
painful as to be equivalent to dying
many times,”—/ Keil).


Ver. 12. “Thou sealest up the
sum.” ‘I'he literal rendering is, “ Thou
art the one sealing the sun of perfec-
tion.” Seals were used for the purpose
of authenticating or securing anything,
When it is said, therefore, that the
King was the seal of perfection, the
meaning is, that he could not be sur-

assed in riches, splendour, or power.

he sum-total of all that was il-
lustrious concentrated in him. He
vindicated to himself all that mortal
could pretend to.”’—( Henderson).


Ver. 13. ‘‘ Thou hast been in Eden,
the garden of God.” ‘The prophet
312


places the monarch in the primitive
abode of man, with which was associated
every idea of pleasure and delight.
It is quite a lowering of the subject
to suggest with Michaelis that he
might have had a summer residence
in the beautiful valley of the cedars
of Lebanon, whither he retired during
the hot season of the year. Eden
was called the garden of God because
it was of His plantation, and formed
the delightful scene of His Divine
manifestations to the first pair To
have been there conveys the idea of
the most distinguished honour and
felicity. Taking occasion from his
reference to Eden, with which the
Bible history counects the existence
of bdellium and onyx-stones, Ezekiel,
with his usual minuteness, gives a
detailed account of the precious gems
which adorned the regal state. The
nine precious stones here specified
correspond to those with the same
names in the description of the high
priest’s breastplate (Ex. xxxix. 10—18).”
—Henderson.


Ver. 14. “The anointed cherub
that covereth.” Ezekiel, as a priest,
employs imagery drawn from the
Jewish temple. Like the cherubim
overshadowing the mercy seat, the
King of Tyre—a demi-god in his own
esteem—spread his protecting wings
over his dominions. “The holy
mountain of God.” “To this his
illimitable ambition aspired. In
imagination he occupied Mount Zion,
the dwelling place of the Most High.”
—/ Henderson), “Thou hast walked
up and down.” As priest (1 Sam.
ii. 30, 35).


Ver. 15, “Thou wast perfect in thy
ways -- - till iniquity was found
in thee.” “The rectitude with which
the monarch commenced his reign
may be illustrated by a reference to
the history of Hiram (1 Kings v. 7);
but having in process of time become
corrupt through the uninterrupted
commercial prosperity of the Tyrian
state, he indulged in unscrupulous
acts of injustice and cruelty, on


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ;: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XXVIii.





account of which merited punishment
is here denounced.” —( Henderson).


Ver. 18. “Thy sanctuaries.” The
king is said to possess sanctuaries in
regard to the ideal position ascribed to
him (ver. 14). “Any greatness con-
secrated by God, any glory imparted
by Him. may be regarded as a sanc-
tuary, the desecration of which by the
foeffee is followed by desecration by
the feudal lord. The idea of the
sauctuary is that of separation from
the world, which exerts all its destruc-
tive powers in vain against the gift
imparted by God, so long as the
possessor remains in the right posi-
tion towards God.”—/(//engstenberg.)
“From the midst of thee.” ‘lhe king
is here regarded as comprehending in
himself the city and the people.


Ver. 20. « Against Zidon.” * Zidon


was a very ancient Phoenician city,


otherwise famous for its fishery, (hence
its name from Zud ‘to fish’), and
afterwards for its extended and flourish-
ing commerce both by sea and land.
It became so noted for the manufacture
of glass and other articles of luxury,
that the epithet Sidonia ars was used
by the ancients to denote whatever was
elegant or magnificent, According to
Strabo, the Zidonians were celebrated
for their skill in astronomy, philosophy,
navigation, and all the liberal arts.
Zidon was founded by the first-born of
Cavaan (Gen. x, 15); and was situated,
according to Straco, two hundred


stadia to the north of Tyre. Favoured
by its position on the coast of the
Mediterranean, it early became
celebrated for its commerce. In the
time of Jacob, itis mentioned in con-
nexion with shipping (Gen. xlix. 13);
and in that of Joshua, it is celebrated
as a ‘Great’ city (Josh. xi. 8; xix. 28).
It lay within the boundary of the land
assigned to the tribe of Asher; but was
never conquered by the Israelites
(Judg. i. 31). At the present day, the
town of Saida, a little to the west;
occupies its site. It has a fine old
ruined tower projecting far into the
sea, with a bridge of many arches that
was built to reach it. In Matt. xi. 22,
Tyre and Zidon are coupled together.”
(Henderson).


Ver. 24. “A pricking.” The word
occurs elsewhere only in Lev. xiii. 51,
52; xiv. 44, and is used of the
“fretting leprosy.” The Sidonian
briar had wounded Israel.


Ver. 25. “And shall be sanctified
in them in the sight of the heathen.”
“ These cities, which had been a con-
stant source of annoyance to their
neighbours, and to none more than to
the Jews, being rendered powerless,
the people of God, restored from
Babylon to their own land, should
enjoy all their ancient privileges, and
all around them be compelled to
ascribe to Jehovah, as their covenant
God, the glory due to His name,”—
(Ldenderson.)


HOMILETICS.


Ver. 1-19.


Tue Kina oF TYRE.


Consider the prophet’s description of this King.


{. Asthe incar: ation of earthly pride and self-sufficiency. The pride and vain
glory of the nation, the history of its prosperity and of the corruptions that
led to its fall, are, by the imagination of the prophet, supposed to be embodied
in an ideal Prince of Tyre. ‘This prince is regarded as the incarnation of the
carnal pride, self-sufficiency, and wickedness of the whole state. He is the sum-
total of the wickedness of the entire nation, but his chief offence is pride; or


313


CHAP. XXVIIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL





rather pride is the spring and fountain of all his iniquities. His pride mani-
fested itself in two forms :—1. In assuming to be God. “ Thou hast said, 1 am
God, I sit in the seat of God” (ver. 2). Beyond this, it is not possible for
human arrogance to go, Not content with adopting the title of God, he must
needs seize upon the functions of the Divine government. Many will not state
this pretence in words, but they act asif neither God nor man had a right to
say anything to them. Not to acknowledge God’s rights over us is to throw
off His authority, and to become a God unto ourselves. In such a spirit as
this to sit in judgment on His dealings, as if we could correct Him, is
to commit a daring iniquity, It is “to snatch from His hand the balance and
the rod.” His pride also showed itself :—2. In the conceit of wisdom. (ver. 3).
As he thought that he possessed all wisdom in himself, so he would pray for
none. In his own imagination he was wiser than Daniel, who was the wisest
man of whose fame he had heard. The Chaldeans confessed Daniel’s wisdom
(Dan. ii. 10, 11). He had done what they admitted was beyond human
power, He stood upon the highest stage of wisdom attainable by man. For
this prince to declare himself wiser than Daniel was to transcead the stage
of humanity, and to make himself equal with God. And further, Daniel
had predicted the coming of God’s universal kingdom (Dan. ii. 44). This
prince proudly thought that he could convict Daniel of error, seeing he had
established himself as the God of this world. The prophet ascribes to Daniel
a special kind of wisdom,—that to which nothing was dark or hidden (Dan. iv. 9).
“There is no secret that they can hide from thee,” says the prophet when
interpreting the thoughts of this proud prince (ver. 8). The prince of Tyre
also boasted of his wisdom to get riches,—of that practical wisdom which
can show material results that dazzle and impress the minds of men (vers. 5, 6).
And Daniel also was remarkable for this kind of wisdom. He was a great
public man, and not merely a solitary thinker. He was the statesman among
the prophets. But we are not to regard the prophet as merely making a
comparison between one wise man and another, as this world counts wisdom.
Daniel ascribed all Ais wisdom to God above. Therefore the wisdom of these
two men could not be compared by the same scale (Dan. ii. 20, 28, 29, 30, 45).


II. His punishment. 1. Great humiliation. The Chaldean foreigners,
noted for their great ferocity, would descend upon the nation (ver. 7). Ali the
beautiful possessions acquired by this prince’s boasted wisdom would be
spoiled. The obiivion and dishonour of the grave would be the fittest natural
image of his humiliation. ‘They shall bring thee down to the pit” (ver. 8).
He would die many “deaths,” for as the king he would die in each of his slain
subjects. 2. His great pretentions would not save him from destruction.
“ Wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thee, I am God?” (ver. 9). The
hope that he cherished in the day of his prosperity will fail him before the
enemy. Then will it be manifest that he is man and not God. In the day of
adversity he shall have to learn another language. 38. He shall have pumish-
ment i kind. He defiled the nation by his pride, and now he is desecrated in
turn, His “brightness ” was to be “defiled,” his person to be profaned (ver. 9).
(‘The second “slayeth ” in this verse should be rendered “ profaneth.”] 4. Ais
Gedy demands a sad lamentation. Cuvnsider what he once was. He was
nighly endowed (ver 12). He enjoyedas it were, a glory like unto the first man
in Paradise (ver. 13). He once had the beauty of youth, and was in a state of
comparative innocence (ver. 15). Nations degenerate towards their old age,
Now he had gone the way of old-world nations, who were all wrecked by pride
(ver. 17). It was sad to think of all his labours and pains coming to nought.
All that exalts itself against God is nothing, and will come to nothing: Ha
only a dveth the will of God abideth for ever.

4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL, OHAP. XXVIII.





Consider this Prince of Tyre :—


III. As a prelude of Antichrist. Antichrist is one who being only man
clams to be God. The King of Tyre was a type of this man of sin
(2 Thes. ii. 3, 4). In our own age there are various forms of this spirit
of Antichrist. 1. Zhe spirit of lawlessness. St. Paul speaks of this in
2 Thess. 7, 8, where “the mystery of iniquity” is literally “the mystery of
lawlessness,” and “that Wicked,’ that lawless one. The growing spirit ot
disregard to all authority, human and divine, is an instance of this apostacy.
It is a state of things in which every man is a law unto himself. 2. “ The
religion of humanity.” This age in its pride of knowledge has produced
some bold enough to make the blasphemous assertion that there is no God
save humanity. And Unitarianism also has a natural tendency to drift into
the same form of blasphemy. It shrinks from saying “‘ Christ is God,” yet
cannot rest in this denial, but boldly says “Man is God.” 38. Popery.
When men lost their faith in Christ as the real, though invisible Head of
His Church; when the God-man, because he could be no longer seen or
touched or handled, appeared to be far off, they yearned for a substitute.
They lent questionable honours and ambiguous titles to a Pope. They
invested with the powers of Christ the man who had placed himself in the
seat of Christ. All such blasphemies as these spring from one bitter root in
human nature—the tendency in man to yield to the tyranny of the visible.
The truth is forgotten, that “the Head of every man is Christ.” Wherever
by the speculations or actions of men Christ is dethroned, there will not
fail many to arise to claim the vacant seat.


(Verses 20-23.)
Tur PROPHECY AGAINST ZIDON.


1. God’s aim in His judgments. It is to make Himself known what a
dreadful, just, and holy God He is, and that He may be declared by men to be
so. God would destroy Zidon by pestilence and war, that He might be
glorified and sanctified in her. She would not give glory to God before; the
Lord would therefore fetch His glory out of her by His judgments, and make
others see the same, so that they might confess Him to be a God of power,
justice, and holiness, (Ps. ix. 16.) 2. Zé ts the Lord that sends judgments
upon cities and persons. “I will send into her pestilence, and blood into her
streets.” Itis the Lord gives commissions as to the prophets to prophecy
judgments against a city, so to the judgments themselves, to come to and upon
them. Let none stumble by looking at the instruments, they are the sword in
God’s hand, He causes it to wound and to kill.—(Greenhi.)


(Ver. 24),


I. Some general observations from hence, that wicked men are thorns.
1. Their acquaintance is not desirable. Familiarity with them is dangerous
(Prov. xxiv. 1). They may be honourable or eminent, yet we should neither
envy them nor affect their company: and why? ‘For their heart studieth
destruction, and their lips talk of mischief.” They are the “seed of the
serpent,” and cannot cordially close with the “seed of the a rai ig

1


OHAP. XXVIIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





enmity between their seeds, “The best of them is as a briar; the most upright
is sharper than a thorn hedge.” 2. Answerable fruit ts to be expected from
them. Thorns and briers must bring forth fruit suitable for their natures. A
corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Wickedness proceeds from the
wicked, it is natural to them to do wickedly, and nothing else: fire comes out
of brambles, and devours the cedars of Lebanon (Jud. ix. 15). The Lord's
servants should see to it, that briers and brambles overrun not all the field and
vineyard of God. They do grow high, great, spread, and are like to endanger
much if they be not dealt with. There are thorns and briers in all places ;
there are state brambles, city thorns, aud church briers: such were in the church
of Galatia, which Paul wisheth were cut off (Gal. v. 12), because they scratched
and troubled them: and David’s resolution was, to thrust away as thorns all
the sons of Belial who troubled the state and city of Jerusalem (2 Sam. xxiii. 6).
And in Psa. ci. 8, he saith, “I will early destroy all the wicked of the Land ;
that I may cut off all wicked doers from the city of the Lord.” Here was a
man after God’s own heart, that would not suffer pricking thorns and grieving
briers.


II. Some more general observations from the words of the verse. 1. 7he
church and people of God live amongst thorns. The church is a lily among
thorns (Cant. ii. 2). Jerusalem was amidst heathenish nations. Christ and
His apostles were among scribes and Pharisees, whose spirits were thorny.
Hence we ought to infer—(1.) 7hat God’s people ought to take heed how they
walk. Men who live and walk among briers and thorns had need have their
eyes in their heads; they may otherwise be entangled in the briers and
miserably scratched. (2.) Then tt is not strange if God's people be scratched
sometimes by wicked men. ‘They will tear and rend their names, states,
comforts, peace, privileges. (3.) Zhen see a reason why God’s people cannot
carry on His work with more speed. When thorns are in the way, things
move slowly. When good seed was sown, the thorns hindered the growth
of it. When Joshua went about taking Ai, there was Achan, a great thorn,
in the way; when Nehemiah was in the work of the Temple, Tobias and
Sanballat were thorns in the way. 2. The church and people of God shail not
always be among briers and-thorns. They shall have a time of freedom.
“There shall be no more a pricking brier and a piercing thorn.” This was
made good to the Jews in the letter after their return. ‘I'he nations which
had been thorns to them the Lord destroyed. 'This promise refers also to the
Gospel times ; the Lord is making way for it now. This should draw out our
spirits in prayer unto the Lord to hasten the time, and that He would make
good what le hath promised (Isa. lv. 13). 8. Wicked men have ill thoughts
of God’s people. They slight them. The briers and thorns round about the
house of Israel despised them and scorned them (Ps, lxxix. 4).—Greenhill,


(Ver. 25).


The Jews were scattered into the Eastern countries, over several provinces of
the King of Babylon, and here the Lord promiseth to gather them out thereof,
and to return them to their own land. 1. God’s people have no fixed, certain
habitation in this world, but are subject to scatterings. The Church was “scat-
tered throughout all the regions of Judea and Samaria” (Acts viii. 1; Heb.
xi. 87). 2. God hatha care of ilis scattered people. He will sanctify His
name in bringing them into a safe and happy condition. They shall be brought
into Canaan, that is into the Church, which Canaan represents. As the Jews
were gathered out of Babylon, and the provinces thereof, into their own land,

816


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, @uar. xxix,





so shall all the elect be brought into the Church of God, where is peace, safety,
and confidence, where they shall find God a habitation, a vineyard. (Isa. xi. 10).
The Lord Christ was a great gatherer (Luke xi. 23; xiv. 16, 17, 21, 23). 3.
God's end in head His people. That they may sancti!y Him, and that He
may be sanctitied by them. God’s power, faithfulnes, and goodness, appear in
His gathering them aud bringing them out of their enemies’ hands; and so
way is made for His praise and honour, and that before their enemies.—
(Greenhill).


(Vers, 24-26.)


God’s judgments on the ungodly tend to the good of His Church. God
sets His own free at length. The promise has been fully made good through
Christ, as Zacharias says, that we are “redeemed from the hand of our enemies
to serve Him without fear.” (Luke i. 74.) Then do believers first come to
their true and perfect rest, when all their bodily and spiritual enemies have


been rooted out.


the true seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.


his prophecy is fulfilled in the Caristian Church, which is


Those born under the Old


Covemant were in bondage, while believers under the New Testament are free,


—(Lange.)


Tue First or Four Cuapters Direcrep Acatnst Ecypr (Chap. xxix,


EXEGETICAL NOTES. —
“Pharaoh, a monarch with whom
the Hebrews were frequently in con-
tact, is represented as vaunting in the
security of his position, when the
prophet is commissioned to announce
the Divine interposition to effect the
desolation of his couutry throughout
its whole extent (vers. 1-12). ‘Though
after the lapse of forty years the
Eyyptian people were to be restored
to their country, the kingdom was
never to emerge from that state of
degradation to which it should be re-
duced (13-16). The following verses
(17-20), distinctly announce the
conquest of the country by Nebu-
chadnezzar; and the chapter concludes
with a promise of future prosperity to
the Jews (ver. 21).” —( Henderson).


Ver. 3. ‘Pharaoh .... the great
dragon,” ‘“ Pharaoh was a general
name of the kings of Egypt down to
the time of the Persian conquest. A
more appropriate emblem of these
kings could not have been selected
than that of the Heb. word tanim, by
which we are to understand the
crocodils, the terrible sea-monster in-
habiting the Nile, whose usual size is
about eighteen or twenty feet in


length, but sometimes from thirty te
forty. This animal occurs on Roman
coins as emblematical of Egypt. The
‘rivers’ were the branches into which
the Nile was divided, and to which
the country was indebted for its fer-
tility.” —( Henderson.)


Ver. 4. “I will put hooks in thy
taws,” According to Herodotus croco-
diles were taken with hooks (Job xii.
1, 2). In the Assyrian sculptures
prisoners are represented with a hook
in the under lip, and a cord from it
held by the king. “ All the fish of
thy rivers shall stick unto thy scales,”
“If the Nile denotes the prosperity of
Egypt, the fish are its inhabitants
living in prosperity, that feel them-
selves as fish when they are in the
water, but now are placed on the dry
ground. They are drawn out with
the dragon ; the subjects fall with the
king, and in consequence of his fall.” —
Hengstenberg.


Ver. 5. “Iwill have thee thrown
into the wilderness.” ‘The wilder-
ness, in contrast with the Nile,
denotes the state of weakness without
help or means. 'The contrast is taken

B17


CHAP, XXIX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





from the natural conditions of Egypt,
where the waste, awful wilderness
borders on the fertile banks of the Nile.
The ‘ field’ is the open field, in con-
trast with the splendid mausoleums in
which the Egyptian Pharaohs were
buried in the times of their glory. He
comes down so low, that he does not
even receive an honourable burial.
Who would trust in a deliverer, and
make him an idol, who cannot provide
this for himself, who is destined to feed
the ravens, and will very soon be
carrion! ‘The king is, so to speak, an
ideal person, who comprises in himself
a great numerical multiplicity. Thus
the statement is appropriate: ‘Thou
shalt not be brought together, nor
gathered.’ Each of his deceased sub-
jects was, asit were, a part of Pharaoh,
as in the retreatfrom Moscow Napoleon
was seen in every dead Frenchman.”
—(Hengstenberg.)


Ver. 6. “A staff of reed to the
house of Israel.” There is an allusion
to the reeds on the banks of the Nile,
which broke if one attempted to lean
upon them. (Isa, xxxvi. 6.) Israel
had trusted in Egypt, in many alli-
ances, but found to her sorrow that
she had leaned upon a breken reed.


Ver. 7. “Ata stand.” This describes
the contraction of the muscles by the
sudden pain. “It pierced through
their shoulders, and made these, by
injuring their muscles, ligaments, and
joints, stiff and rigid, so that they
could but stand and move no more.
So fared it with the kingdom of the
ten tribes under Hosea in connection
with Egypt, and likewise with the
kingdom of Judah under Zedekiah,”—
Lange.


Ver. 10. ‘From the tower of Syene,”
Some translate, ‘From Migdol to
Syene.” Migdol signifies a “ fortress,”
and was the name of a city lying to
the north of Suz. Syene was situated
in the remote south,


Ver. 11. “No foot ofman... neither
shall cy in inhabited forty years.


There would be no settled inhabitants.
It this period began the year after the
capture of Tyre, B. C. 572, it would
eud in thefifth yearof Cyrus (B, 0.532)
Jerome remarks, the number forty 1s
one often connected with affliction and
judyment. The rains of the Flood in
forty days brought destruction on the
world. Moses, Elias, and the Saviour
fasted forty days. The interval between
Egypt’s overthrow by Nebuchadnezzar,
aud the deliverance by Cyrus, was about
forty years. This prophecy is not to be
understood to mean that literally no
foot of man nor beast should pass
through the land. The meaning
rather is, that for forty years the land
would be in the wilderness - state
of social and political degradation
(Isa. xix. 2, 11).


Ver. 14. “Pathros.” Upper Egypt,
being the oldest part of Egypt, and
from whence civilization and the arts
had sprung. “A base kingdom.” It
was to remain in a state of vassalage.
Amasis made it dependent on Babylon,
and under Cambyses it was humbled
still more.


Ver. 16. “Which bringeth their
iniquity to remembrance.” ‘The
offered help of Egypt was a tempta-
tion which developed the iniquity of
Israel, and made it manifest before
the world. ‘ Whosoever beguiles into
iniquity, brings iniquity to remem-
brance, or to the knowledge of him to
whom the iniquity refers. For existing
iniquity cannot remain unmarked or
unpunished by the ‘Judge of all the
earth.’ ”—/( Hengstenberg.)


Ver, 17. “In the seven and twen-
tieth year.” There is a departure here
from strict chronogical order. This is
the last of Ezekiel’s prophecies, and is
dated two years later than the vision
in Ch. xl. It would thus appear that
the prophecies concerning foreign na-
tions are grouped together in order to
secure greater unity of subject.


Ver. 18. ‘‘ Every head was made
bald, and ever shoulder was peeled.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL.


—__.








With carrying baskets of earth and
stones for the siege-works, ‘‘ Yet had
he no wages.” He failed to secure
results in proportion to the time and
labour which he expended on the siege
of Tyre. The Tyrians had carried
away the greater part of their treasures
in ships, so that little was left for the


invader, The siege lasted thirteen
years,
Ver. 19. “It shall be the wages


for his army.” “ Jehovah, whose work
he had performed, here promises to
recompense him with the conquest of
Eyypt. On breaking up from ‘l'yre he
proceeded to that country, which he
found so distracted by internal com-
motions, that he easily devastated and


OHAP, XXTX.





made himself master of the whole
land.” —( Henderson).


Ver. 20, “For Me.” Nebuchad-
nezzar was the servant of God, uncon-
sciously carrying out the purposes of
the Divine will (Jer. xxv. 9).


Ver, 21. “The opening of the
mouth in the midst of them.” “While
Egypt was subject to eastern rule, the
Jews were to be restored to their own
land, and full liberty was to be given
to the prophet to exercise his ministry
among them. Sacred history is silent
relative to the last days of Ezekiel, but
there is nothing that militates against
the supposition that he returned with
his fellow-countrymen from Babylon ”


—( Henderson.)


HAOMILETIOS,


(Vers. 17—20.)


1. Men in misery keep account exactly of their sufferings. Ezekiel was in
captivity, and many other Jews, who diligently heeded how the years passed.
“In the seven and twentieth year,” that was of the captivity. Men are best
chronologers in adversity, 2. When God is about todo great things, [He usually
makes His purpose known unto some of His servants. When He was upon
destroying Sudom, He made it known unto Abraham (Gen. xviii, 17); when
about to destroy Eli’s house, He revealed it to Samuel (1 Sam, iii, 11, 12) ;
the strange things which befel the King of Babylon were revealed to Daniel
(Dan. iv.) ; and the Lord showed John things to come (Rev. i. 1). And here
He hides not His purpose from Ezekiel. ‘This was so frequent of old, that
Amos said, “Surely the Lord will do nothing, but He revealeth His secret to
His servants the prophets” (Amos iii. 17). 3. Heathenish soldiers have
hazarded their lives to please their heathenish commanders, and all for a
temporal reward. The King of Babylon’s army served a great service thirteen
years together ; to lie before a city was hard, their heads were made bald, their
shoulders were peeled, they laboured hard, carried heavy burdens, they
watched, they suffered heat and cold, and all this for hope of good plunder in
Tyre. If heathens would do and endure so much for their commander, who
was an idolator, an enemy to God and His people, how much more should
Christians do and endure anything for Christ, their King, and heavenly
Commander. If He say Go, we should go; if Come, we should come. If He
calls us to endure affliction, and suffer hard things, wa should not stick at them,
no, though it be the jeoparding of our lives, knowing He hath a spiritual and
eternal reward for us, 4. Armies may serve long and suffer hard things, and
after all be disappointed of their expectations. ‘Lhe King of Babylon and his
army had no “ wages.” ‘They expected great matters in Tyrus, which was so
rich, and full of all sorts of commodities, but found nothing considerable,
nothing answering their expectation, or sufficient to recompeuse their charge
and suffering. 5. Nations, lands, kingdoms, are the Lord's, and He disposes of

319


CHAP, XXIX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





them to whom Le pleases. “I will give the land of Egypt,” etc. (ver. 19).
He would take it from Pharaoh and give it to another, Neither did the Lord
do any wrong unto Pharaoh, because he was tenant at will, and held upon these
terms to be king while he carried himself well; but he grew proud, insolent.
and like a dragon lay in the midst of his rivers, saying, “‘ My river is mine, and
I have made it for myself.” God therefore took his kingdom from him,
6. God, in His holy and wise providence, makes use of any instruments to do
His work. he King of Babylon and his army were working for God. They
were His servants, though they knew it not. God can make use of the worst
of men as well as of the best. He can promote his interests by an army of
heathens, as well as by an army of Christians. It is good, therefore, not to
stick upon the instruments which work ; but to consider in whose hands they
are, and who revulates them. 7. The Lord suffers not any to labour for Him
im vain. No even heathens and infidels. He gave the land of Eyypt to
Nebuchadnezzar and his army, who were the worst of the heathen (Ez. vii. 24),
because they served and wrought for Him. When the midwives would not
destroy the male children of the Jews, but save them alive, because they feared
God, He dealt with them and gave them houses (Ex. i. 17—21). Jehn was
wicked, yet because he did the work of the Lord in rooting out Ahab’s family,
in destroying Baal with all his priests aud temple, therefore the Lord largely
rewarded him (2 Kings, x. 30). If heathens shall not labour for God in vain,
much less shall Christians, who know how to act from a right principle, in a
right manner, and for aright end. If they meet with hardship in His service,
He will remember and reward it fully, not with a temporal kingdom, but with
an eternal. ‘lhe Kingdom of Heaven shall be given to them (Luke xii. 32). A
cup of cold water, two mites cast into the treasury, a sigh, a tear, laid out for
God and His interest shall not be forgotten. He deals bountifully with His
servants (Psa. cvi. 7.—(Greenhill.) ;


(Ver. 21).


“T will give thee the opening of the movth in the midst of them.” Ezekiel
had been silent and dumb twice before (Ez, iii, 24; xxiv. 27). And here, God
would give Him the opening of the mouth; by which we are to understand. —
1. Lreedom of speech. Thou speakest things darkly now, with a trembling
voice, but when these prophecies are fulfilled, and the horn of the house of Israel
begins to bud, then shalt thou have more freedom of speech, and be troubled
no more with the false prophets, which sought to disparage thee. 2. Matter of
speaking. When Jeconiah, or Jehoiachin, should have his prison garments
changed, and be set above other princes, some freedom granted to the Jews;
here would be matter for praise and rejoicing. 3. Opportunity for speaking.
When an occasion is given unto man to speak, the rabbins call that the opening
of the mouth. Thou shalt come openly into the assemblies, having matter,
freedom, and opportunity to praise Me. ‘They shall know that I am the
Lord.” “They” refers not only to the house of Israel, but to the Babylonians
also ; when they should see the things prophesied come to pass, then they
should acknowledge the Lord. The horn of Israel budded in the midst of the
Babylonians, and the prophet’s mouth was opened in the midst of them.
Therefore they should know the Lord as well as the Jews. (1.) How low, weak,
afflicted soever the Church be, God is able to raise it up and to bring tt to a
flourishing condition, The house of Israel was low, the horn of it weak and
hardly visible ; yet God caused the horn thereof bud. When we look upon
some beasts, they have no horns; but in a short time their heads do bud and
bring eh horng, which are their strength ; so God in a little time would cause

2


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, CHAP, XXX.





Israel to put forth strength and be once more prosperous. (2.) However
much the Church suffers from the calumny of others, God can raise up efficient
advocates from the midst of His own people. Israel shall not be for ever crushed
by the heel of the oppressor, or lashed by the tongue of the slanderer. She
shall have power to plead her own cause. The sense of former injustice from
her enemies and the knowledge that God is helping her will fill her mouth
with eloquence. God opens the mouths of His servants that they may comfort
His people, give praise to His name, and make Him known to the nations,


THe Doom or Eayrt. (Chap. xxx.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES. — This Ver. 9. “ Messengers go forth from
chapter contains two distinct mes- Me in ships to make the careless
sages: vers. 1-19 being an extension, Ethiopians afraid.” The cataracts on
with more life-like detail, of the pro- the Nile interposing between them and
phecy announced in chap. xxix. 1-16 Egypt shall be no barrier, Il] news
relating to Egypt; the second mes- travels fast when the feet of the mes-
sage, vers. 20-26, referring directly to sengers are quickened with the fear of
Pharaoh and the downfall of his Divinely outpoured vengeance.
dynasty.

is Ver, 13. “I will destroy the idols of

Ver. 1, “Woe worth the day!” wNoph” Memphis, the capital of Middle
Alas for the day | Egypt and the chief seat of idol-wor-
ship. “ Pathros "—Upper Egypt, with
No, or Thebes, its capital, famed for its
magnificent buildings, of which colos-


Ver. 2. “The time of the heathen.”
Wherein they shall be punished. The


judgment on Egypt is the beginning  ,) yyins still remain, in antithesis to


of a world-wide judgment on all the goan or Tanis. a chief city in Lower
heathen enemies of God (Joel i 15; ete en te Dielta


ii, 1, 2; iii, ; Obad. 15).
Ver. 15. “Sin, the strength of
Ver. 4. “ Her foundations shall be peypt.” Pelusium, the frontier for-
broken down. Referring to thestate tress on the north-east, called by
under the figure of a house destroyed irting the Lock of Egypt, and by


from the foundation — government, gyidas the Key of Evypt.
laws, strongholds, and all the defences ~~ J SYP


es eth Ver. 17, “Aven”—meaning vanity or


, miguity, The famous Heliopolis, or

Ver. 5. “Ethiopia, Libya,and Lydia.” City of the Sun—the religious centre,
Cush, Phut, and Lud, allies of the the spiritual capital. “ Phi-beseth ”—
Egyptians mentioned Jer, xlvi. 9. Buybastis in Lower Egypt, near the
“The mingled people.” Hired soldiers Pelusiac branch of the Nile, a chief
of various nationalities, “Chub.” This place of idolatry, and notorious for the


is the only place in the Old Testament Qgt-worship established there.
where this people is named. Sup-


posed to be the Kufa mentioned on

the monuments—a nation north of Ver. 18. “Tehaphnehes.” The same
Palestine, “Men of the land in as Daphne, near Pelusium, a royal re-
league.” Not only the Jews—the  sidence of the Pharaohs (Jer. xliii. 7,
people of the covenant—resident in 9). Called Hanes (Isa, xxx. 4). It
Egypt, but all the confederates who was said that with its capture the pride
entered into a league with the Egyp- or glory of Egypt’s strength would
tian king. cease. “The yokes of Egypt.” The

x $21


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





sceptres —the tyrannical supremacy
exercised over other nations, Nebu-
chadnezzar broke the sceptre of Egypt
when he confirmed the kingdom to
Amasis, who rebelled against Apries


(Pharaoh-Hophra).


Ver. 21. “I have broken the arm of
Pharaoh.” Alluding to the defeat of
Pharaoh-Hophra at Carchemish. By
this battle the fate of Egypt was de-
cided for ever. It never rallied from
the defeat there sustained: it was the
yeginning of the end. The practical
design of the prophecy was to extin-
guish all hope of any aid from Egypt,
and to direct the expectation of the
exiles to God alone for succour.


Ver, 22. “And will break his arms,
the strong, and that which was
broken.” The military and govern-
mental power of Pharaoh shall be
shattered. The one arm of Egypt
already broken was all the region from
the Nile to the Euphrates which Ne-


him (2 Kings xxiv. 7); the arm still
strong, but soon to be broken, was
Egypt proper, over which he still held
a resemblance of authority.


Ver. 25. “I will strengthen the arms
of the king of Babylon.” The Lord
seizes the arms of tiie king of Babylon,
and they are thereby kept strong, as
it is said of Joseph in Gen, xlix, 24,
“Strong are the arms of his hands by
the hands of the mighty God of Jacob,”
while the arms of the king of Egypt,
left to himself, hang down powerless.


Ver. 26. “I will scatter the Egyp-
tians.” Several fled with Apries to
Upper Egypt, and when Nebuchad-
nezzar wasted the country he carried
many of them to Babylon. As Israel
and Judah had been scattered among
the nations, owing to the corrupting
influence of Egypt, which brought God’s
wrath upon the elect nation, so the
Egyptians themselves, in righteous re-
tribution, were to be scattered among


buchadnezzar had already taken from the nations,


HOMILETICS.
Toe OVERTHROW oF A GREAT NATION,
(Vers, 1-19.)


There is a fine piece of military music that represents the movements of a
battalion in the distance ; faintly but unmistakably the strains fall upon the ear,
growing more distinct and loud in the steady advance, until, having reached the
scene of action and begun operations, the music breaks into a crash of wild,
stirring melody, that strangely mingles with the noise and confusion of the
dreadful conflict. Similar to this is the voice of the prophet which, in the pre-
ceding chapter faintly indicates the approach of calamity, rises in the present
chapter into shrill, piercing tones of agony, as if already in the midst of the
destruction he prophesies, In this paragraph we learn that the overthrow of a
great nation—


I, Is the occasion of widespread suffering and sorrow (vers. 1-4). Egypt,
which had grown into the magnificence of a first-rate power and become renowned
in commerce, art, literature, and science, was doomed to fall. It was to experi-
ence the crushing vengeance of the Divine power it had so often resisted and
defied, and to suffer for its cruel treatment of the people of Jehovah, whom it
had so often deceived and oppressed. Great was the consternation of its proud
rulers, and loud and heartrending the wails of its stricken people, as the
sword of the destroyer passed through the land. It was indeed “a cloudy
day ;” the dreariness of havoc and desolation was intensified by the darkness

322


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. CHPA, XXX,





of despair that filled the minds of the routed sufferers. It was worse than that
night of horror in the past history of Egypt when the first-born were slain and
when “there was not a house where there was not one dead.” It is a painful
humiliation to a great people to see how suddenly their power is crushed,
government disorganised, institutions scattered, buildings, the slow growth of
generations, prone in ruins, and the unsuspecting citizens one day lulled into a
false security, the next paralysed with fear. The refinement and luxury to
which they were accustomed render their privations and distresses the more
acute.


IL Involves the ruin of its allies and abettors (vers. 5-9.) “Ethiopia,
Libya, Lydia, all the mingled people, and Chub,” represented smaller nation-
alities who had been either conquered by Egypt, or who, while retaining their
nationality and a certain degree of autonomy, linked their fortunes with Egypt
and contributed to her advancement and aggrandisement. In return for their
support they claimed the protection of the overshadowing power. But when
Egypt fell, they fell. When the volcano shatters the mountain, all the little
knolls and rocks that cling to it are buried in the general ruin, When the hurricane
uproots the giant tree, the parasites that fed and lived upon it are hurled to
the dust. The adulators who fan the national pride with their fulsome flattery,
and the shameless debauchees who employ their vilest ingenuities in augment-
ing the national wickedness, will be inevitably involved in the righteous judy-
ment which is sure to come.


III. Is accomplished by an agent specially equipped for the work (vers.
10-12). The power that was to crush Egypt was already hovering over the
fated nation, The vast populations of the Nile were to be opposed by a multi-
tude of strangers whose warlike exploits had made them “ the terrible of the
nations ;” the military genius of Pharaoh-Hophra was to come into conflict
with Nebuchadnezzar, a still more able and victorious warrior. It was not the
first time the great Babylonish monarch had come in contact with the arms of
Egypt. Before his accession, while Crown Prince, he had fought the great
battle of Carchemish, which expelled Pharaoh-Necho from Western Asia.
During the siege of Jerusalem he had been disturbed by the attempt of
Pharaoh-Necho to relieve that city, and during the siege of Troy, Evypt again
interfered to help the Phoenicians. Nebuchadnezzar chafed under these annoy-
ances ; the proud prestige and pretensions of Egypt roused his envy and wrath,
and he vowed to be revenge? All the time Jehovah was preparing him to be
the agent to punish Ecypt, and a rebellion against Pharaoh-Hophra by Amasis,
one ot his officere, presented a favourable opportunity. Gathering his army of
veterans, inured to warfare and flushed with recent victories, Nebuchadnezzar
invaded Egypt and utterly subdued it from Migdol to Syene, the extreme
frontiers of the kingdom, creating a horrible devastation, from which it did not
recover for forty years. The Babylonish king knew not that he was simply
the instrument of Jehovah in inflicting well-merited punishment, and thus
fulfilling the words of the Divinely-inspired prophet. Whenever a nation
reaches the crisis of its infamy, Divine justice fails not to provide the means of
adequate retribution.


IV. May be traced to the enervating influence of its idolatry (vers. 13-18).
The prime offence of Egypt was its idolatry. This was the ground of its
indictment before High Heaven. Not only had it debased its own people, but
it had invaded the land of the chosen people and destroyed their loyalty to
Jehovah by the introduction of idolatrous rites. Idolatry is not only a foe to
virtue, but a supreme insult to the One only true God, whose nature cannot

323


CHAP. XXX. HOOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


tolerate a rival. Where idolatry predominates the formation of a robust moral
character is impossible; it is the canker at the root of national life, and can
only end in disintegration and decay. It is significant that the places men-
tioned in these verses—Noph, Pathros, Zoan, No, Sin, Tehaphnehes—the cities
where idolatry was most gross and rampant, are especially singled out for
punishment. No nation can maintain itself in the front rank where God is
persistently ignored.


V. Is the expression of the Divine judgment on its iniquities. ‘Thus will
I execute judgments, and they shall know that I am the Lord” (ver. 19). The
history of the downfall of great nations is the voice of God speaking to the
nations of to-day, and saying that sin shall not go unpunished. “The time of
the heathen” (ver. 3) plainly indicates that a period comes in the history of
sipful nations when the forbearance of God is withdrawn and wrong-doing is
allowed to reap its legitimate harvest. Hardened indeed 18 the heart that
is insensible to the enormity of sin until it is smitten with the thunderbolt of


Divine wrath.


It is wise, before it be too late, to turn in penitence to Him


who “retaineth not His anger for ever, because He delighteth in mercy ”


Lessons.—l. National greainess is an opportunity for maintaining the right.


2. The greatest nation, if unfaithful to God, 1s doomed to fall.


all nations is in the hands of God.


3. The destiny of


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 2. “Woe worth the day!”
A Pathetic Lament, as uttered—1. By
one who foresees the nearness and
awfulness of the calamity. 2. By the
patriot distressed for the humiliation
and ruin of his country. 3. By the
sufferers themselves in the wild tumult
of their agony. 4, By neighbouring
nations left defenceless by the fall of
their powerful patron. 5, By those
who have obstinately neglected the
day of salvation.


Ver. 3. “The day is near.” “In some
two years you shall be miserably routed
in the deserts of Libya; immediately
after, the civil war for eleven years
together shall waste you, and then
Nebuchadnezzar’s forces will be upon
you. So that, whereas there may be
sixteen or eighteen years between the
prophecy and its. fulfilling, here are
thirteen or fourteen of them taken
up with sorrows and afflictions, fore-
runners of the rest.”—Matthew Pool.

—‘ The time of the heathen.” Ven-
geance on idolatry. 1. Is mercifully
delayed to give space for repentance
aad reform. 2. Will be inflicted with

B24


unerring certainty. 3% Will fill the
victims with terror and dismay—“a
cloudy day—the day shall be dark-
ened” (vers. 3, 18). 4. Will be com
plete and universal (compare Ps. Ixxix
with exezetical note on this verse).


Vers. 4-18. The Horrors of War. 1.
Revolting scenes of human carnage. ‘‘ The
sword shall take away her multitude”
(ver. 4); ‘* All helpers destroyed”
(ver. 8); “ Fill the land with the
slain” (ver. 11). II. Unspeakable physi-
cal and mental suffering. ‘“ Great pain
—distresses daily” (vers. 4, 9, 16);
“To make the careless afraid—I will
put fear in the land” (vers. 9, 13).
III. Reckless waste and destruction.
“Countries desolate—cities wasted ”
Wa 7); “A fire in Egypt—all helpers

estroyed” (vers, 8, 14, 16); “I will
make rivers dry and the land waste”
(ver. 12). IV. Loss and degradation
of youthful life. “The young men
fall by the sword—daughters go into
captivity” (vers. 17, 18). V. The
overthrow of established government.
‘Her foundations shall be broken
down” (ver. 4); ‘There shall be no


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





more a prince of the land” (ver. 13);
‘“*T shall break the yokes (sceptres) of
Egypt” (ver. 18). Lessons.—War,
1. Unjustifiable when it is a mere thirst
for conquest. 2. May be a scourge to
punish national sins. 3. Arouses the
worst human passions.


Ver. 5. Unholy Confederacies. 1.
May seem formidable in numbers and
strength. 2. Have no principle of
cohesion to ensure permanency. 3.
Are involved in general ruin. 4. Their
fate a beacon-warning to the good.


Ver. 6. “See the justice of God:
Egypt pretended to uphold Jerusalem
when that was tottering, but proved a
deceitful reed ; and now they that pre-
tend to uphold Egypt shall prove no
better. Those that deceive others are


commonly paid in their own coin ; they .


are themselves deceived.”—M. Henry.


Ver. 8, “As sinners perversely re-
fuse to know God as a God of love,
they shall know Him as a God that
hates sin and takes vengeance on the
sinner for all unatoned guilt. Severe
as were the temporal judgments on
Pharaoh and his people, what are they
when compared with the eternal judg-
ments which shall descend on the
lost ?””—Fausset.:


Vers. 10-12. “God punishes one
knave by the other, who does not
escape His judgment, but is only re-
served for the same; as in Jer, xxv.,
the king of Babylon has no other
advantage over those punished by him
but this, that he drinks Jast. Wicked-
ness and judgment go hand in hand.
Power can only be given to the wicked
for a short time.”—Hengstenberg.


Vers, 11, 12. “ They are the terrible
of the nations both in respect of force
and of fierceness, and being terrible,
shall make terrible work. They are
the wicked, who will not be restrained
by reason and conscience, the laws of
nature, or the laws of nations, for they
are without law. They are strangers,
who therefore shall show no compas-


CHAP, XK.





sion for old-acquaintance’ sake.”—M.


Henry.


Ver. 13. The Delusiveness of Idola-
try. 1. Its temples and worship a
standing insult to the only true God.
2. Debases its votaries. 3, Powerless
to help in the day of trouble.

— “The wrath of God is especially
directed against the idols of a land,
of whatever kind they be, whether
they be images directly worshipped
as gods, or riches which steal away
from God the hearts of those who
would repudiate the charge of idola-
try, though guilty of it before the
God who calls covetousness idola-
try. As the Egyptian On, the seat
of the idolatrous sun-worship, was
doomed by God to become Aven, or
vanity, so all creature-confidences shall
at last prove vain to those who have
trusted in them rather than in God.”—
Fausset.

— “There shall be no more a
prince of the land of Egypt ”—no
native or independent prince, ruling
the whole country. The dynasties of
Egypt had subsisted from Menes, her
first king, who is said to have reigned
in the year of the world 2251, to the
destruction of the Pharaohs by Nebu-
chadnezzar, which terminated the reign
of the Egyptian princes, and showed
the fulfilment of prophecy and the
judgments of God upon the oppressors
of His people.


Ver. 19.: comp. ver. 8, “ And they
shall know that 1am the Lord.” God
revealed in Judgment. 1. When all
other modes of revelation are per-
sistently ignored. 2. Shows He is
not indifferent to the sufferings of the
oppressed. 3. Cruelty and injustice
shall not go unpunished, 4. The im-
partial justice of the Divine procedures
shall be universally acknowledged and
adored.

— “The true God, whom they do
not mean to worship willingly, must
come to His rights in the punishment
inflicted on them. This is not merely
an alarming but also a comforting
point of view. The most comfortlesa

825


CHAP, XXX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,








=——4


of all thoughts is to have no part in sword in the conviction that by the
God. How many transgressors have punishment they come to have a part
joyfully devoted themselves to the in God!”—Hengstenberg.


HOMILETICS.
A Proup MonarcH HUMBLED,
(Vers, 20-26.)


Pharaoh-Hophra, the king of Egypt referred to in this paragraph, was
a man of considerable capacity and enterprise. He displayed great military
genius and activity. During the first years of his reiga he subdued the island
of Cyprus, besieged the city of Sidon by land and sea, and took it and made
himself master of Phoenicia and Palestine. Elated with success, his pride knew
no bounds, and he insanely boasted that it was not in the power of the gods to
dethrone him. His illusions were destined to receive a rude awakening. Libya,
harassed by the Greeks, appealed to Hophra for assistance. He despatched
an army for their deliverance, but the Egyptians were disastrously defeated,
and very few of the soldiers returned to their native land. The sight of the
straggling and wretched survivors filled the land with mourning, and indigna-
tion against Hophra was loud and threatening. It was whispered he had sent
the Egyptian army into Libya to destroy it, and by surrounding himself with
Greek mercenaries, for whom he showed great partiality, he was seeking to rule
Egypt as a tyrant. His subjects rose in rebellion. Hophra sent Amasis, one
of his officers, to quell the revolt ; but the soldiers crowned him with a helmet
and made him king. He accepted the honour, and made common cause with
the mutineers, Exasperated with the news, Hophra sent Patarbemis, another
of his great officers and one of the principal lords of his court, to arrest Amasis ;
and returning unsuccessful, the angry king caused the nose and ears of Patar-
bemis to be cut off. So barbarous an outrage, committed upon a person of
such high distinction, roused the Evyptians into more violent opposition, and
the insurrection became general. Hophra was compelled to retire into Upper
Egypt, where he defended himself for some years, and Amasis made himself
master of the rest of his dominions. The army of Nebuchadnezzar, taking
advantage of these intestine troubles, swept down upon Egypt and wrecked it
from end to end. Egypt was made tributary to Babylon, and Nebuchadnezzar,
having appointed Amasis as his viceroy, returned to his capital laden with the
spoils of victory. As soon as the great king had departed Hophra emerged
from his obscurity, and gathering an army of 30,000 mercenaries, made war
against Amasis, The royal army was routed, Hophra taken prisoner, and shut
up in his royal palace at Sais. This, however, would not satisfy the excited
populace. They clamoured for the unfortunate king to be given up to them.
and gaining their wish, they immediately strangled him. In this paragraph
the prophet presents us with a graphic description of a proud monarch humbled—


I. By the partial loss of his dominion. ‘I have broken the arm of Pharaoh,”
(ver, 21), The loss of distant dependencies is often the precursor of national
downfall: it is a sign of weakness at the centre of power. It is a loss of
prestige and influence. It is a deep wound to a proud monarch deluded with
the notion that he is everywhere invincible. The bitterness of his resentment
blinds iim to the lessons that the curtailment of his Empire should suggest.


Il. By provoking the active opposition of Jehovah. ‘“ Thus saith the Lora
God, Behold, I am against Pharaoh. But I will strengthen the arms of the
326


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP, XXX.





king of Babylon” (vers. 22, 25), Behind the might of Nebuchadnezzar was
the invincible power of Jehovah, who had determined to punish Pharaoh for
his iniquity. The strongest monarch is powerless before the vengeance of
Heaven ; the justice he has outraged ensures his humiliation and pain. In
Retzch’s illustrations of Goethe’s “Faust” is one plate where angels are repre-
sented as dropping roses upon the demons who are contending for the soul of
Faust. Every rose falls like molten metal, burning and blistering where it touches.
So is it that justice acts upon those who have wilfully abused its claims. It
bewilders where it ought to guide; it scorches where it ought to soothe and
comfort. When God is against us we must be prepared for the worst.


Ill. By shattering his military strength. ‘And will break his arms, the
strong ”—the portion of the army still remaining faithful to him—*and that
which was broken” —the portion already in revolt. “And the arms of
Pharaoh shall fall down ”—he shall be deprived of the resources for making
war (vers. 22, 25). Pharaoh had boasted of his army and exulted in its
brave exploits. Now he is cast down by the power in which he had trusted.
Shorn of his military aggrandisement he is utterly defenceless and weak. “ All
they that take the sword shall perish with the sword” (Matt. xxvi. 52). No
nation is secure when the military is in the ascendant. Gibbon traces one of
_ the potent causes for the decline of the Roman Empire to the overwhelming
influence of the army.


IV. By the total dismemberment of his kingdom. “I will scatter the
Egyptians among the nations, and disperse them through the countries” (vers,
23, 26). The kingdom was torn in pieces by civil war, and though Hophra
made a brave and resolute stand for some years, he was compelled to yield, and
he himself perished by the hands of his enraged subjects. The process of
humbling a proud spirit is sometimes slow, but every successive defeat intensi-
fies the suffering, until there is nothing left but the wild helplessness of mad
despair.


V. By making him utterly dispirited. ‘‘He shall groan with the groan-
ings of a deadly wounded man” (ver. 24). There is a defeat that involves no
loss of dignity and may be borne with fortitude. In the Franco-German war,
after the loss of Sedan, a French officer came up to the then Crown Prince and
exclaimed, “Ah, sir! what a defeat! what a misfortune! I am ashamed of
being a prisoner. I have lost everything.” “No, indeed,” was the magnani-
mous reply; “after you have fought like a brave soldier, you have not lost
your honour.” But there is a defeat that is wholly ignoble and demoralis-
ing. It has been courted by a proud self-confidence and precipitated by an
unreasoning recklessness. Self-induced, it is the bitterest drop in the cup of
the vanquished that the ruin in the midst of which he moans is his own rash
handiwork. “The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity, but a wounded
spirit who can bear?” (Proy. xviii. 14).


Lessons.—l. Pride is the swre precursor of a fall. 2. Military genius and the
strength of armies are impotent when opposed to Divine vengeance. 3. Humble trust
in God gives dignity and strength to the kingly office even in disaster.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.
Ver. 21. The Lessons of Suffering. our suffering has been brought on by


1. Should lead us to reflect how far our wilful sinfulness, 2. Should induce
327


OMAP. XXX,


us to examine the principles on which
our conduct has been based. 3. May
lead to salutary repentance. 4. Are un-
noticed by the soui blinded with pride.

— “It is in vain that men try to
bind up and heal the wound that God
inflicts. Stroke shall fall upon stroke
in rapid succession whensoever God is
against men, The very weakest in-
struments are sufficient, when strength-
ened by Him, to execute God’s ven
geance ; and He has at His disposal all
the powers that are in heaven and
earth. How foolish, then, it is for any
to remain in a state of enmity with
God !”—Fausset,


Ver. 22. “Thus saith the Lord God,
Behold, I am against Pharaoh.” The
Opposition of Jehovah. 1. Is terribly
real and active. 2. Must convince
us we are wrong, and that we must
change our attitude towards Him. 3,
Cannot be successfully resisted by the
mightiest human combinations, 4. Can
be propitiated only by humble and
penitent submission.


Vers. 23, 26. National Unity. 1.
Unreal when based only on kingly
and military supremacy. 2. Must be
founded in the righteousness of the
individual life. 3. Is broken into
fragments and scattered when God is
ignored and openly defied.


Vers. 24, 25. “I will strengthen the
arms of the king of Babylon.” The
Agent of Divine Vengeance. 1. Is pre-
pared and strengthened for the work.
2. May be unconscious of the signifi-
cance of the punishment he inflicts,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





3. Can do no more than he is per
mitted, 4. May himself become the
victim of a similar vengeance.


Ver, 24, “He shall groan with the
groanings of a deadly wounded man.”
The Moan of the Defeated 1. A


familiar experience of baftled huma-—


nity. 2. Those who are most elated in
the pride of prosperity are most abject
and disheartened in adversity. 3, Ap-
peals to the compassion of the sternest
conqueror.


Ver. 26. “The true God, despised
by Evypt from ancient times, is thereby
to come by His rights regarding them.
If He be the true Jehovah, the per-
sonal Being, the absolute Essence, He
must necessarily be glorified, if not by
their action, yet by their passion,”—


. Hengstenberg.


— “They would hardly believe it,
and therefore are so oft assured it” (cf.
ver. 23).—Trapp. _

— “We are here struck with the
exact accomplishment of the prophecies
against Evypt, against its cities and its
princes, by the wars of Assyria and sur-
rounding nations. When the measure
was full the visitation came. Therefore
Isaiah, Nahum, Jeremiah, and Eze-
kiel must have been inspired by Him


to whom futurity is without a veil, —


What instruction, then, should the
ruins of ancient cities, where powerful
kings once reigned, suggest to the
flourishing cities of Europe who imi-
tate them in every species of crime
and forget the Lord, who does what
He pleases in the heavens above and
in the earth below ?”-—Sutcliffe.


THe DESTRUCTION OF ASSYRIA A TYPE OF THE DESTRUCTION OF


Eaypt,


(Vers


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 1.
“Tn the eleventh year, in the third
month.” Two months later than the
prophecy delivered in chap. xxx. 2°,


Ver, 2. “Whom art thou like in thy
328


(Chap. xxxi.)
1-18.)


greatness ?” The already accomplished
fall of Assyria is held before the eyes
of the king of Egypt as a mirror of his
future. Twenty-four years before the
delivery of this prophecy the Assyrian
Empire was destroyed by Nebuchad-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP, XXXL





nezzar, who twenty years later was to
conquer Egypt. The practical purpose
is the same as in previous prophecies,
to quench any lingering hope in Judah
of help from doomed Egypt.


Ver. 3. “Behold the Assyrian was
s cedar in Lebanon.” Ewald translates
the word Asshur as meaning the high-
est cedar ; but Hitgig shows that this
is a mistake, and that the prophet
speaks of Assyria, Smend and M‘Far-
lan apply the passage to Egypt, but
without sufficient grounds. The total
destruction of Assyria depicted in this
chapter was not true with regard to
Egypt. The phrase is an answer to
the question in ver. 2, “Whom art
thou like in thy greatness?” Thou
art like the haughty king of Assyria,
The cedar in Lebanon was often eighty
feet high, and the diameter of the space
covered by its boughs still greater, the
symmetry perfect (cf. the similar image,
chap. xvil. 3; Dan. iv. 20-22). “His
top was among the thick boughs”
—“‘among the clouds” (Hengstenberg).
“The top, or topmost shoot, represents
the king; the thick boughs the large
resources of the empire.”—Fausset.


Ver. 4. “The waters made him great”
—the deep sent out her little rivers. “The
Tigris, with its branches and rivulets, or
conduits for irrigation, was the source
of Assyria’s fertility. The deep is the
overflowing water, never dry. Meta-
phorically, for Assyria’s resources, as the
conduits are her colonies,”—Fausset.


Ver. 8. “The cedars in the garden
of God could not hide him ”—could not
out-top him. “ No other king eclipsed
him. The total of the great men of
she earth Ezekiel denotes as the gar-
den of God, in which he regards them
as the counterpart of the garden which
God once planted in Eden—of Paradise
with its glorious trees, The compari-
son is the more suitable because, as
Paradise was planted by God, so all
human greatness has its origin from
God.”—Hens stenberg.


Ver. 10. “Because thou hast lifted


up thyself in height.” The greatness
bestowed by God, being abused, is the
cause of his fall.


Ver, 11. “He shall surely deal with
him ”—according to his own pleasure
and according to the Assyrian’s desert.
“The last Assyrian king has been ascer-
tained by the inscriptions to have been
Asshur-ebid-ilut, the second in succes-
sion from Sennacherib’s son Esar-had-
don, who planted the settlement in
Samaria from Babylon, Cuthah, Ava,
Hamath, and Sepharvaim (2 Kings
xvii, 24). The final destruction of
Nineveh was by the Medo-Babylonian
army under Cyaxeres and Nabopolas-
gar. To either of these the expression
‘the mighty one of the heathen’ refers,
The destroyer of Nineveh is called
‘the mighty one’ (El, a name of God),
because he was God’s representative and
instrument of judgment.” — Fausseé.
“For his wickedness ”—the pride and
the conduct flowing from it. “Where
pride has first occupied the heart,
there all divine and human rights are
trampled under foot.”—Hengstenberg.


Ver. 12. “All the people are gone
down under his shadow.” ‘They had
formerly, like birds, perched upon the
branches of the tree in its shade
(ver. 5).


Ver. 13. “Upon his ruin.” “The ruin
stands for the fallen tree, as if it were
s living ruin. The fowls of heaven
and the beasts of the field, the wild
beasts that formerly sought protection
under this tree, assemble now for an-
other object—to peck and gnaw and
take what they please of its fruits.”—
Hengstenberg.


Ver, 14. “That none of the trees
exalt themselves”—that the nations
should not proudly be elated because
of their greatness and abundant re-
sources. “ Neither their trees stand up
in their height, all that drink water”
—‘ ‘that no drinkers of water may stand
upon their own greatness” (Fairbairn).
‘“Forthey are all delivered unto death”
= “those proud trees, the grandees of

329


OMAP, XXXE,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


i TT


the earth, who were tempted to haugh-
tiness by their greatness, go down into
the kingdom of the dead, where they
are nothing else than ordinary sons of
men (cf, Job. iii. 9).”"—Hengstenberg.


solation to the wretched to have com-
panions in misery.”—Fausset.


Ver. 17. “They that were his arm”
—his auxiliavies, the helpers or tools


Pa


of his tyranny.
Ver. 15. “I caused a mourning.”
The deep was darkened, the babble of
the streams was hushed, Lebanon was
saddened, and the trees of the field
were faintness itself. In the fall of
Assyria the former grandees of the
earth once more went through the
sorrow of their own fall.


Ver. 18. “Thou shalt lie in the
midst of the uncircumcised.” ‘As cir-
cumcision was an object of mocking to
thee, thou shalt lie in the midst of the
uncircumcised, slain by their sword.” —
Grotius. ‘This is Pharaoh.” ‘ Pha-
raoh’s end shall be the same humiliating
one as I have depicted the Assyrian’s
to have been. This is demonstrative,
as if he were pointing with the finger
to Pharaoh lying prostrate, a spectacle
to all.’"—Fausset, “And all his multi-
tude.” His tumult—the noisy mur-
mur of multitudinous life is for ever
stilled.


Ver. 16. “I cast him down to hell”
—Sheol, or Hades, the unseen world.
I cast him into oblivion (cf. Isa. xiv.
9-11). “All the trees of Eden shall
be comforted” —because so great a king
as the Assyrian is brought down to a
level with them, “ It is a kind of con-


HOMILETICS.
NATIONAL GREATNESS NO GUARANTEE OF PERMANENOE,
(Vers, 1-18.)


In this chapter we have an example of the dramatie genius of Ezekiel, the
Aischylus of the Hebrews, and of the luxuriousness of his puetic fancy. Seizing
upon the similitude of the cedar, in its stately magnificence, its many resources,
its pre-eminence in stature and beauty over all other trees, and the calamity
occasioned by its fall, the prophet describes the overshadowing greatness and
ignominious downfall of Assyria, and with one vivid master-stroke applies the
whole to the fate of Egypt. From the whole prophecy we learn—


I. The prominent features of national greatness (vers. 1-9.) 1. Pre
eminence over all other nations. ‘Of an high stature—exalted above all the trees
of the field” (vers. 3, 5.) Assyria, though more recent in civilisation and more
rapid in its growth, yet outstripped Egypt in extent of dominion and brilliance
of career. Ninas, its most illustrious monarch, subdued Media, Babylonia, and
several other kingdoms, and united them under one sceptre, Nineveh, its
capital, built on the banks of the Tigris, was one of the most celebrated cities
of antiquity. In the height of its prosperity Assyria overshadowed in greatness
and power every other contemporary nation, as the cedar overtopped every
other tree of the forest. 2. Enormous resources. ‘The waters made him great
—his root was by great waters” (vers. 4, 5, 7), Its argosies and war-boats
crowded the Tigris and Euphrates, wealth flowed into its coffers in a perpetual
stream, trade and commerce assumed gigantic proportions, its mineral and
agricultural products were illimitable, its public works were on a scale of un-
surpassed grandeur, its arms were everywhere triumphant. 3. The strength ana
protection of other nations. “ His top was among the thick boughs—all the fowls
of heaven made their nesta in his boughs—under his shadow dwelt all great

330


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. CHAP, EXXL


i ,


nations” (vers. 3-6.) The nations conquered by Assyria dreaded while they
_ hated its power, and neighbouring kingdoms were proud to be its allies. They
felt secure under the guardianship of its shield, and shone in the reflected
splendour of its greatness and prestige. 4. The envy of less favoured nations,
“The cedars in the garden of God could not hide him—all the trees envied
him ” (ver. 8, 9.) For warlike courage and prowess, for majesty of bearing, for
vigour of government, for symmetry and beauty of national unity, for opulence
and display, Assyria was the admiration and envy of all nationalities. It out-
distanced all competitors ; it stood alone in the shining brilliance of its own
star-like splendour.


II. The unmistakable symptoms of national decay (vers. 10-17). 1.
Vaunting pride. ‘ Because thou hast lifted up thyself” (ver. 10). It is difficult
to be at once great and humble, and yet greatness is stable only as it rests ona
firm foundation of humility. ‘The greatest man,” says Seneca, “is he whe
chooses right with the most invincible resolution, who resists the sorest temp-
tations from within and without, who bears the heaviest burdens cheerfully,
who is calmest in storms and most fearless under menaces and frowns, whose ©
reliance on truth, on virtue, and on God is most unfaltering.” Prosperity
breeds self-confidence, self-confidence pride, pride recklessness, and recklessness
ruin, The greatest peril to the individual or the nation is found at the highest
point in the delirium of success. When pride overleaps sound judgment just
government receives its death-blow, decay sets in, and the end is not far off.
2. Prevailing vice. “I have driven him out for his wickedness” (ver. 11),
The ancient monarchies—Sodom, the Hittites, Canaanites, Amalekites, &c,.—
were ruined by their iniquities. So was it with Assyria. Amid the glitter of a
refined civilisation we detect the dark destructive elements of immorality and
vice. ‘ Righteousness exalteth a nation; but sin is a reproach to any people”
(Prov. xiv. 34). ‘The seeds of our own punishment,” says Hesiod, “are sown
at the same time we commit sin.” 3. Loss of allegiance and territory. ‘Strangers
have cut him off—upon the mountains and in the valleys his branches are
fallen—the people have left him” (vers. 12, 13, 17). The break-up of a
great empire may be gradual, but it is not less evident and certain. Distant
dependencies are quick to discover the weakening of the power that so long
overawed them, and eagerly watch for the opportunity to fling off their allegi-
ance. The rebellion of one province is the signal for a general revolt, and the
mighty empire that has filled so large a space in the history of the world
crumbles into ruins. 4. Sorrow and consternation. ‘In the day he went down I
caused a mourning—the nations shake at the sound of his fall” (vers. 15, 16).
The struggle for freedom of revolted states and the desperate efforts of the
ruling power to retain the broken remnants of authority is the occasion of
wide suffering and misery. The fall of a throne that seemed impregnable fills
neighbouring nations with grief and alarm. If the mighty Assyria is over-
thrown, what throne can be secure? The foundations of national life are
upheaved, and the confidence of the most astute rulers is shaken.


III. That national greatness is no guarantee of permanence (vers. 2, 14, 18)
This was the solemn and emphatic lesson the prophet sought to enforce, ft
Assyria, the magnificent, was destroyed, there was no hope that Egypt would
escape a similar fate. After having ruled for more than 600 years, with great
tyranny and violence, from the Caucasus and the Caspian to the Persian Gulf,
and from beyond the Tigris to Asia Minor and Egypt, the Assyrian Empire
vanished like a dream, and the very site of its vast capital was a doubtful
question for twenty-four centuries, There have been greater nations than
Assyria, but their greatness did not save them from extinction. They have
331


OMAP. XXXL HOMILETIC COMMENYVARY: EZEKIEL,


——<—<< << 00COEOCOP]O30”


been overbalanced and crushed by the weight of their own immensity. Cen-
turies slowly crept along, and it seemed as if they would endure for ever;
but the catastrophe came, and filled the world with horrified wonder. The
mightiest and proudest nation has no room to boast. The loftier its eminence
the more ignominious its fall. The true greatness of a nation consists not in
material prosperity, but in the virtue and uprightness of its people. Genuine
religion alone can give permanence to a throne, and only so long as its genuine-
ness is maintained.


Lessons.—l. The rise and fall of nations a suggestive study. 2. Moral great-


ness not always commensurate with material prosperity. 3, Kingly authority may be
abused to a nation’s, ruin,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 2. “ Whom art thou like in thy
‘ greatness?” The Perils of Greatness.
1. Apt to breed a proud, self-suffi-
ciency. 2. May use power tyrannically,
3. Under-estimates the significance of
events which threaten to undermine
the foundation on which it rests. 4.
May grow beyond the control of the
most success{ul


Vers. 3, 6. “‘His top was among the
thick boughs —the fowls of heaven
made their nests in his boughs—under
his shadow dwelt all great nations.”
The Inter-dependence of Nations. 1. A
great nation protects the lesser, and
they in turn strengthen and increase
their protector, 2. A strong nation
is an amalgam of many nationalities,
3. Nations help each other, not by
jealousies and strife, but by commerce
and friendly intercourse, 4, No nation
can long remain independent that does
not cultivate the patriotic spirit.


Ver. 6. ‘‘ How different the security
afforded by the Gospel-tree! The
Gospel-kingdom gathers all under its
saving covert for their present and
eternal good, and for the glory of God,
and not for self-aggrandisement and to
the hurt of men, as is the way of the
kingdoms ct this world, Therefore it
shall never fall, nor shall those who trust
in its shadow (chap. xvii, 23; Matt,
xill, 32) ever be confounded, for tt ia a
kingdom that is established on the ever-
lasting principles of the Divine truth,
righteousness, and love,” —Fausset,

332


Vers. 4, 7. “‘The waters made him
great—his root was by great waters.’’
The River the natural source of Em-
pire. 1. Affording a bulwark of pro-
tection, 2. A necessary element of su»
tenance. 3, An important highway of
commerce. 4, Giving fertility to the
soil, 5, Favourable for the massing
together of great populations,


Ver. 4. “Little rivers.” “Beneficence,
justice, protection, encouragements
that subjects need and good princes
disperse among them. So the deep
filled this king, and he sent out his
streams to all his subjects in his king-
dom.”—Pool.


Ver. 9. “Envy has an aspect in which
it may be regarded as a good for him
whom it affects. Let us only reflect
on the proverb, ‘Better envied than
pitied.’””— Hengstenberg.

— “The tallest trees are weakest
in the tops, and envy always aimeth
at the highest.”—Trapp.


Vers. 10-15. Fallen Greatness. 1 Oc-
casioned by the indulgence of an arrogant
spirit, “ Beeause thou hast lifted u
thyself in height” (ver. 10). 2. The
inevitable result of a life of iniquity. ‘I
have driven him out for his wicked-
ness” (ver. 11). 3. The victim of forces
whose growing power was unnoticed or
despised. ‘‘1 have delivered him into
the hand of the mighty one of the
heathen—atrangers, the terrible of the
nations, have cut him off” (vers. 11,12).
4. Abandoned alike by allies and depen


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





gents. ‘All the people of the earth are
gone down from his shadow, and have
left him” (ver. 12). 5, An object of
insulting ridicule by those who had been
benefited in better days. ‘Upon his
ruin shall all the fowls of the heaven
remain, and all the beasts of the field
shall be upon his branches ” (ver. 13,
compared with vers. 6,18). 6. 4 sug-
gestwe warning to the proud of all nations.
“To the end that none of all the trees
exait themselves for their height”
(ver. 14, comp. ver. 16). 7. A subject
jor profound and widespread grief. “I
caused a mourning—covered the deep
—all the trees fainted for him” (ver. 15.)


Ver. 11. “He shall surely deal with
him.” “ Heb., ‘In doing he shall do
for him—he shall do what he list with
him,’ as Tamerlane since did with Ba-
jazet, whom he carried about in an iron
cage, using him on festival days for a
footstool, and feeding him like a dog
with crumbs fallen from his table.
All which Tamerlane did, not so much
for hatred to the man, says the his-





torian, as to manifest the just judg-
ment of God against the arrogant folly
of the proud.”—Trapp.


Ver. 14. “To the end that none of
all the trees.” ‘This is the use men
should make of God’s heavy judgments
upon others, This man’s forefather,
Sennacherib, had a statue set up in
Egypt, says Herodotus, with this in-
inscription, ‘Let him that looketh upon
my misery learn to be modest and to
fear God.’”—Trapp.

— “Genuine humility brings to ele-
vation its only corrective. It fixes the
eye on the lowliness which in all human
greatness is present with the great-
ness.” — Hengstenberg.


Ver. 18 “Thou shalt lie in the
midst of the uncircumcised.” Death—
1. Reduces all ranks to the same level.
2. Is indifferent to the contempt of
fancied superiority, 3. Reveals the
artificiality of social distinctions, 4.
Its uncertainty should lead to a moral
preparedness,


“ Transferred to the king of Assyria, whom the cedar represented, this para-
bolical history tells us in the first instance of his unparalleled greatness, He
was the head and centre of a vast monarchy which was fed by the tributary
streams of surrounding nations, and gathered within its ample bosom the
resources of the civilised world, But its peerless grandeur proved the occasion
of its overthrow, for it only served to nurse into fatal maturity that pride which
goeth before a fall How thoroughly the loftiness of spirit in the head of that
monarchy kept pace with the growth and magnitude of his dominion may be
seen from the Heaven-daring language of Sennacherib to Hezekiah, when,
before the gates of Jerusalem, his servants openly blasphemed and defied the
God of Israel. Most truly was his heart lifted up in his greatness, and the
hand of a righteous God must cast him down. In an amazingly brief period
the mighty fabric of Assyrian glory fell, an irrevocable ruin, It was a lesson,
on a gigantic scale, to the world that then was, how God in His providence
abases the proud and scatters the mighty from their seats; how all power and
glory that is of the world is destined to vanish away as a dream of the night.
And connected as it here is with the guilt and the doom of Pharaoh, it was
to him, and to those who knew the will of God concerning him, an instructive
warning and example of that which certainly awaited him !”—Fairbairn.

“ How dreadfully do the wicked scourge one another! Israel must be the first
to fall; then Egypt, her ally; then Babylon, then Persia, then Greece, and
lastly the iron power of Rome. These empires sank in succession, like the
mighty swells of the ocean, and but faintly left their traces behind. They fell
by the overflowing scourge which came suddenly upon them and involved the
rich and the poor in one common ruin. But the poor who may sg hg have


CAIAY. XXX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





some resources in the labour of their hands.


Lay not up, then, O my soul,


thy treasures in earthly banks; build not thy mansion on the sand. Blessed
is the man who has the Lord for his rock and trusts alone in His salvation.”—


Sutcliffe.


PropHEtTio DiraEs oveR Eaypr’s Farin. (Chap. xxxii.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 1.
“In the twelfth year "—in the twelfth
year from the carrying away of Jehoia-
kin; Jerusalem was by this time over-
thrown, and Amasis was beginning to
revolt against Pharaoh-Hophra.


Ver. 2. “Like a young lion and as
a whale ”—any monster of the waters;
here the crocodile of the Nile. As a
lion on dry land and a crocodile in the
waters, Pharaoh is terrible alike by
land and sea.


Ver. 3. “I will spread my net "—
the Chaldeans (chap, xxix. 3, 4; Hos,
vii. 12.) “Jehovah spreads His net in
the congregation of many nations, and
gives it over to them that they may
draw it out.”—Hengstenberg.


Ver, 4. “Then I will leave thee
upon the land ”"—it will fare no better
with thee than with a fish, which must
perish miserably because it is taken
out of its element.


Ver. 5. “I will fill the valleys with
thy height "—“ thy hugeness” (Fair-
bairn). “The multitude of thy forces,
on which thou pridest thyself, shall
only be a great heap of corpses to fill
the valleys up to the sides of the
mountains.” —Fausset,


Vers. 7, 8. “I will put thee ont "—
extinguish thy light in the political sky.
In great political catastrophes and
the endless woe connected with them,
the heavenly luminaries appear to be
extinguished (Isa. xiii. 10; Amos viii,
9,10; Matt. xxiv. 29; Rev. vi. 12).


Ver. 9. “ When I shall bring thy
destruction among the nations "—
“the tidings of thy destruction (break-
age) carried by captive and disversed
Egyptiansamong the nations” (Grotius);

ga4


or, “ When I bring thy ruins among
the nations—thy broken people, re-
sembling one great fracture, the ruins
of what they had been,”—-Fairbairn.


Ver. 14. “Then will I make their
waters deep ”"—“to subside into the
deep, to sink, or decrease ” ee Miees,
‘To settle and grow clear. The Nile
fertilises Egypt by its black mud,
whence it is called ‘the black.’ Eze-
kiel poetically saw it become a clear-
flowing stream in the Messianic times.”
—Geikie. “Their rivers to run like
oil”"—their canals flow like oil—em-
blem of quietness, or sluggish action.


Ver, 16. “This is the lamentation
wherewith they shall lament her ”"—
frequently repeated. ‘This is a pro-
phetical lamentation ; yet so shall it
come to pass.”—Grotius,


Ver. 18. “The daughters of the
famous nations ”"—the glorious nations
themselves, some of whom are enume-
rated in the succeeding verses. They
were as virgins, or daughters, once
splendid in the bloom of youth, lovely
to behold.


Ver. 19. “ Whom dost thou pass in
beauty?” ‘Beyond whom art thou
lovely §”—Hengstenberg.—“ Art thou
any fairer than others!”—CGeikie. “Go
down”—to Sheol, the under-world,
where all beauty is speedily marred,


Ver, 20. “Draw her and all her
multitudes”— to the shades of the
grave, ye powers of the under-world,
As if addressing her executioners—
drag her forth to death.


Ver. 21. “The strong among the
mighty shall speak to him ”—with a
taunting welcome, aa now one of them-
selves,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OMAP. XXRII.


ee ee


Ver, 22. “ Asshur is there. and all
ber company—his graves are about
him.” “Tne abrupt change of gender
is because Ezekiel has in view at one
time the kingdom (feminine), at an-
other the monarch. Assyria is placed
first in punishment as being first in
guilt.”—Fausset. “The brightest ex-
ample of greatness going to destruc-
tion.” —Hengstenberg.


Ver. 23. “Whose graves are set in
the sides of the pit.” ‘In the depths
of Sheol.”—Geikie. ‘ Deepest in guilt,
they occupy the lowest depths.”—Fair-
bairn. “The grave is deep even if,
materially taken, it be only a few feet,
as a stream is very deep if it be only
six feet. The grave is deep enough to
cover all glory.”—Hengstenberg.


Ver. 24, “There is Elam.” ‘“ Placed
next as having been the auxiliary of
Assyria, Its territory lay in Persia.
In Abraham’s time an independent
kingdom (Gen. xiv. 1). Famous for
its bowmen (Isa. xxii. 6).”—Fausset.


Ver. 25. ‘Slain by the sword.” The
very monotony of the same phraseo-
logy so often repeated gives to the
dirge an awe-inspiring effect.


Ver. 26. “ Meshech, Tubal, and her
multitude ”—the Moschi and Tibareni
on the Pontic Mountains, between the
Black and Caspian Seas.


Ver. 27. “With their weapons of
war.” “The custom, regarded as signi-
ticant by the prophet, prevailed among
them, to bury their fallen warriors
with their death-weapons, in which
they have their misdeeds with them,
so that guilt and punishment are united
in the grave.”—Hengstenberg. ‘ But
their iniquities shall be upon their
bones.” ‘Their iniquities shall come
upon their very bones,”—Geikie. Their
swor 's buried with them bear witness


of their violence, and of the retribu-
tive cause of their own humiliation.


Ver, 29. ‘‘Edom and all her princes.”
Edom was uot only governed by kings,
but by subordinate princes or dukes
(Gen, xxxvii. 40). This people had
shown a malicious joy in the downfall
of Judah. ‘They shall lie with the un-
circumcised.” Though Edom was cir-
cumcised, being descended from Isaac,
he shall lie with the uncircumcised.


Ver. 30. “There be the princes of
the north.” “Syria, which is still
called by the Arabs the north; or the
Tyrians, north of Palestine, conquered
by Nebuchadnezzar (chaps. xxvi.—
xxvill.) "—Grotius, ‘And all the Zi-
donians ”—who shared the fate of Tyre
(chap. xxviii. 21).


Ver. 31. “Pharaoh shall be com-
forted.” “ Hesighs, is troubled. Others
explain, He comforts himself. But
Pharaoh could so much the less derive
comfort from the view of the others, as
they had been not his foes but his con-
federates on earth, and their defeat
was at the same time his own,”—
Hengstenberg. Pharaoh’s comfort was
but a sigh.


Ver. 32. “T have caused my terrors.”
Pharaoh was a long time terrible, not
by his own power, but by the opera-
tion of God, who made use of him as
His instrument. The terror he had
been to others shall be experienced by
himself and his people. ‘He shall be
laid in the midst of the uncircum-
cised.” ‘Used up, Pharaoh is now de-
stroyed by the same power which em.
ployed him before for its own ends,
He has in the time of the power vouch-
safed to him proved himself unclean
and uncireunicised, and hence must
share the fave of the uncircumcised,”—
Kangstenberg.


CmaP. XXXII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.








HOMILETICS.
Tue TERRIBLENESS OF THE DIVINE VENGEANOZ


(Vers. 1-16.)


I. Provoked by the reckless abuse of power (ver. 2). Egypt is here
represented as a young lion, or enraged crocodile working havoc by land and
sea in sheer wantonness and prodigality of strength. The needs and enjoy-
ments, the rights and privileges, of others are utterly disregarded in the reck-
less and excessive exercise of absolute power, Egypt had oppressed the people
of God, and this was not forgotten. It had aiready measured its strength
against the Asiatic forces, and had been checked in its ambitious projects. Its
defeat abroad tended to intensify its tyranny at home, until its oppression
and viciousness became unbearable. The day of retribution was at hand. It
had roused the righteous anger of Heaven, and the fiat had gone forth—“ Shall
I not visit for these things? saith the Lord; shall not My soul be avenged on
such a nation as this?” (Jer. v. 9).


II. Seen in the utter ruin of a mighty nation. 1. Its power to harm others
shall be crippled (vers. 3-6.) In the graphic style of Ezekiel, Egypt is repre-
sented as a huge crocodile caught in a net, dragged from the waters, slung out
upon the open field, and left stranded in the valley, its vast bulk spreading on
the mountain-sides, the land soaked and the torrent-beds filled with the gushing:
out of its blood, the birds and beasts of prey gorging themselves on its distended
carcass, The great tyrant is now powerless to oppress, and is in the death-grip
of the avenger. 2, Its glory is quenched (ver. 7, 8). The sun is veiled with
clouds and the moon gives no light, the stars and all the shining lights of
heaven become black, and darkness is poured over the land. The plague of
darkness in a former age (Exod, x. 21-23), filling the people with awe while ii
lasted, was temporary ; but the dense gloom that now settled upon the nation
meant the permanent extinction of its brilliant career. 3. Its desolation és com-
plete (vers. 11-15). The sword of the mighty will beat down the proud pomp
of Egypt and destroy its people. The cattle that browsed beside its rivers
shall be swept away, so that no foot of man or hoof of beast shall trouble these
waters more. The waters shall then settle and grow clear and the canals flow
like oil ; no longer shall they descend violently, as the overflowing Nile, on other
countries, but shall become still and sluggish in political action. The land shall
be stripped of its abundance—“ destitute of that whereof it was full”—and
desolation shall reign supreme.


III. Fills surrounding nations with dread (vers. 9, 10). The rehearsal of
Egypt’s tragic fate shall paralyse the people of other lands with fear. Kings
shall shake with terror and tremble continually, as if apprehensive that a
similar punishment is impending over them. It shall then be evident that
Egypt had a greater foe than Nebuchadnezzar, and one who could not be insulted
and ignored with impunity. “Then shall they know that I am the Lord”
(ver. 15). The desolating weapon was the sword of Babylon; but it was bran-
dished by the arm of the invisible Jehovah. If men will not seek to know
God in the tenderness of His mercy, they shall know Him in the severity of
His judgment. “Let all the earth fear the Lord: let all the inhabitants of the
world stand in awe of Him. He bringeth the counsel of the heathen to nought;
He maketh the devices of the people of none effect” (Ps. xxxiii. 8, 10).

336


HOMILETIO QOMMENTARY : EZEKIEL, CHAP. XXXIL,
A

IV. Is the occasion of national sorrow. “This is the lamentation that they
will raise ; the daughters of the nations shall chant it: they will sing this dirge
for Egypt and for all her multitude” (ver. 16).—Geibie. London witnessed the
other day a remarkable military pageant, when the remains of Field-Marshal Lord
Napier of Magdala, the hero of many a fierce battle fought for his country, were
borne in funeral procession to their last resting-place in St. Paul’s Cathedral.
The packed masses of the people in the streets silently and sorrowfully saluting
the coffin as it passed ; the solemn, melting music of the Grenadiers and Scots
Greys, the best musicians of the British army, playing the funeral march ; the
long lines of Guards in soldierly array, and the softened sunshine occasionally
brightening the scene, made up a wonderfully imposing and impressive spec-
tacle. In the presence of royalty and the highest magnates of the realm, and
amid the tears of an appreciative people, the body of the great warrior was
reverently placed alongside the tombs of heroes who had won distinction in
many a hard-fought battle by land and sea, A nation may well mourn the
loss of its brave defenders ; but who can fathom the depths of grief of a people
wildly lamenting over national disaster—the throne overturned, government
disorganised, homes wrecked, the land ravaged by the ruthless destroyer, and
chaos everywhere !


Lessons.—1. Divine vengeance is never inflicted without ample warning. 2. Is
based on the highest principles of justice and equity. 3, Will be a terrible awakening
to the impenitent wicked.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES,


Vers. 2-16. “With the Chaldean ness (vers. 7, 8). 4. Conquered difi-


conquest the political ascendancy of
Egypt began finally to decline; the
arm of its power was for ever broken ;
its monarch could no more move about
as he pleased and trouble the nations ;
he was henceforth to reside in com-
paratively still and peaceful waters,
himself on every hand restrained and
hemmed in by superior force, and all
his pride and glory, as the head of
empire, reduced to perpetual desola-
tion. Itis Egypt’s doom asa kingdom,
not the mere condition of its soil and
surface, that the prophet throughout
has in view.” —Fatrbairn,


Vers. 2-10. Difficulties and their
Conquest. 1. Dificulties terrify the
weak and indolent, “Like a young lion
—as a whale in the seas” (ver. 2). 2.
Difficulties are resolutely encountered by
the brave and strong. “1 will spread
My net over thee” (ver. 3). 3. Great
difficulties are not conquered without great
hawoc, (1.) Their hugeness evident
in their ruins (vers. 4-6). (2.) Their
dazzling glamour quenched in dark-


culties the admiration and the fear of
others.


Ver. 2. “Take up a lamentation.”
“ Ministers that would affect others
with the things of God must make
it appear that they are themselves
affected with the miseries that sinners
bring upon themselves by their sins.
It becomes us to weep and tremble for
those that will not weep and tremble
for themselves, to try if thereby we
may set them weeping, set them a
trembling."—M. Henry.

— “Like a young lion and crocodile”
—‘‘for pride, fierceness, and cruelty.
Thou domineerest over sea and land,
far and wide; thou playest rex.”—
Trapp.

— “Troubledst the waters.” “A
great deal of disquiet is often given to
the world by the restless ambition
and implacable resentments of proud
princes. Ahab is he that troubles
Israel, and not Elijah. The princes
and conquerors of this earth, who, like
Pharaoh, gain a great name by aggres-


OHAP, XXXII.


sion amd violence, are no better in
God’s eyes than beasts which live by
making the weaker their prey, or
monsters of the deep which ‘trouble
the waters and foul the rivers’ in pur-
suit of their victims.”—Fausset.


Ver. 3. “A large, long, and wide net
drawn out to full extent, with which
both lions and crocodiles might be
taken, and in which this lion and
crocodile should certainly be taken,
for God, whose hand never errs, will
spread the net. In brief, war by land
and sea, by a confederacy of many
people against Hophra, shall be God’s
net, wherein he shall be taken, kept
a prisoner as he was, and at last
strangled.”—Pool.

— “He will repay them in their
own coin. ‘All they that take the
sword shall perish with the sword’
(Matt. xxvi. 22). As they had spread
their net over weaker peoples, with
a company of many peoples, so God
will spread out His net over them
with a company of stronger people, the
Chaldeans, who should bring them up
as fishes caught in His net (Hab. i
14-17).”—Fausset.


Vers. 7, 8. Darkness. 1. A symbol of
destruction and mourning, 2. A proof
of the awfulness and completeness of
the destruction. 3. Suggests how all
the forces of nature are subservient to
the purpose of an avenging Deity.

— “As a torch is extinguished. A
description of great sorrows, fears,
troubles, and perplexities. Or it may
intimate particularly the total ruin of
the whole kingdom, in which the best,
greatest, and noblest parts are: for
heaven suppose the government, the
sun the king, the moon the queen, the
stars the princes and nobles, the bright
lights the most eminent of the subjects
for wisdom and understanding, and the
land the common people. All shall be
covered with clouds and darkness of
misery and sorrow.”—Pool.


Ver. 8. I will involve thee, thy house,
thy people, and the whole land in
desolation and woe.


338


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL.





Ver. 10. Reasons for Fear. 1
When conscious of personal sin. 4%.
When the sword of vengeance is bran-
dished before our eyes. 3. When we
witness the fall of the proud and great.
4, When in trembling uncertainty as
to the nearness and manner of our
approaching fate.

— “All they who had admired
the grandeur and power of Egypt
when the tidings of her destruc-
tion should be brought, would be
‘amazed and horribly afraid.’ The
kings, whosoever were conscious of
similar sins to those of Pharaoh, would
‘tremble, every man for his own life,
when the Lord should brandish His
sword before them.’ Those who ad-
mire the pomp of worldly greatness
shall necessarily be astonished at its
downfall, and shall tremble for them-
selves as involved in the same con-
demnation as the world which they
love. But the fall of earthly things
will not take by surprise nor alarm
the children of God, whose portion is
not in this world, and who know its
real emptiness.” —Faussel,


Ver. 12. “Spoil the pomp.” —“ Break
her strength, rob her treasures, sack
her cities, captivate her people, make
the kingdom tributary, and so stain
all her glory.”—Pool.


Vers, 11-16. The Desolation of the
Sword. 1. The occasion of savage
delight to the warlike. 2. Silences
the proud boaster. 3. Depreciates the
value of human life. 4. The foe of
commerce and national prosperity. 5.
Is the theme of bitter lamentation
among the suffering survivors,


Vers. 11, 12. “Those that delight in
war and are on all occasions entering
into contention may expect some time
or other to be engaged with those who
may prove too hard for them. Pharaoh
had been forward to quarrel with his
neighbours, and to come forth with
his rivers—his armies. God will now
give him enough of it."—M. Henry.


Ver. 13. “There should be so few
men left in Egypt that they should


tee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP, XXXIL


A A


not, as formerly, disturb the waters by
digging, swimming, or rowing on them;
or no more trouble the waters with the
passing of mighty armies over them to
invade their neighbours; so few horses
or cows that they should not at water-
ing times, or in the heat of the day,
foul the waters by running into them
and stamping or trampling in them;
but the waters should continue pure
and undisvurbed.”— Pool.


Ver. 15. “God can soon empty those
of this world’s goods that have the
greatest fulness of those things and
are full of them ; that enjoy most, and
have their hearts set upon those en-
joyments, The Egyptians were full of
their pleasant and plentiful country


that talked with them might perceive
how much it filled them. But God
can soon make their country ‘ destitute
of that whereof it is full,’ It is, there-
fore, our wisdom to be full of treasures
in heaven.”—M. Henry.

— ‘Then shall they know that I
am the Lord.” “The awful and de-
structive visitation shall be sanctified
to those that survive; it shall yield
them important instruction, and they
shall give glory to My power and
justice, while a sensible conviction of
the vanity of the world, and of the
fading and perishing nature of all
things in it, shall draw their affections
from it and from all that it contains,
and induce them to seek an acquaint-
ance with Me as their portion and


and its rich productions. Every one happiness,” —Benson.


HOMILETICS.
A FunreraL CHANT OVER THE GRAVES OF FALLEN Nationa
(Vers. 17-32.)


In this paragraph Ezekiel, the prophet of the captivity, foresees the approach-
ing downfall of the great monarchies who had oppressed and were then op-
pressing his beloved Israel. He sees them marching to the grave in slow and
solemn funeral pomp, and as if standing by the huge sepulchre into which they
disappear, chanted over'them a sad, pathetic dirge which rises here and there
into strains of the wildest and weirdest character. ‘The seers of Judah,”
writes Milman, ‘uttered their sublime funeral anthems over the greatness of
each independent tribe or monarchy as it was swallowed up, first in the empire
of Assyria, and then Chaldea. They were like the tragic chorus of the awful
drama which was unfolding itself to the Eastern world.” This funeral chant of
Ezekiel’s has in it more of sorrow than exultation, The old-world kingdoms,
with all their tyranny and oppression, are not allowed to pass away without a
sigh. He is friendless indeed who does not leave behind a solitary mourner.
Observe—


I. That the grave brings the proudest nationalities to a common level
Egypt, with her sedate antiquity and stately pride; Assyria, with her vast
empire and riches; Elam, with her strong-armed bowmen; Edom, with her
fierce highlanders; and the princes and kinglets of the North—Meshech, Tubal,
and the Zidonians—are all buried in the same earth over which their mighty
armies tramped. The clash of arms, the flutter of banners, the noisy pomp of
regal magnificence, the shout of triumph, and the groan of defeat are alike
unheard and unheeded. The rules of etiquette, the rights of precedence and
supremacy, about which so many bloody battles were fought, are now utterly
meaningless.


IL hat the grave knows no distinction of persons. Prince and peasant,
839


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





the general and the humblest soldier, the great in wisdom, wealth, and power,
lie side by side with the common multitude; rich and poor, circumcised and
uncircumcised, are huddled together in the same capacious sepulchre. The
Egyptian, with his fastidious notions of cleanliness, shrank from the contamina-
tion of the uncircumcised, but the grave effectually cured all such scruples. The
reflective Cyrus, the great Persian conqueror, saw how completely the grave
would strip him of his imperial glory when he ordered this inscription to be
engraven on his tomb—“O man! whatsoever thou art, and whencesoever thou
comest, I know that thou wilt come to the same condition in which I now am.
I am Cyrus, who brought the empire to the Persians: do not envy me, I
beseech thee, this little piece of ground which covereth my body!”


III. That the grave reveals the vanity of national strife and ambition.
Questions of boundaries, official privilege, insulted honour, or tarnished fame
dwindle into utter insignificance. Great warriors have cherished to the last
the memory of their victories and parted reluctantly with the trophies of their
ambition, A king of Prussia, conscious of the near approach of death, desired
to see his army defile before him for the last time, and his couch was moved to
a window where by reflection in a mirror he was able to take a last adieu of his
troops as they marched past; and it is said that Napoleon Bonaparte ordered
himself to be seated on his deathbed and arrayed in military dress that he
might meet the King of Terrors as he had been accustomed to meet his mortal
foes, In the grave all military glory is for ever quenched. Philip ILI. of Spain,
who strove to do his duty as king, once said he would rather lose his kingdom
than willingly offend God. Convinced of the vanity of all imperial ambitions
in comparison with the claims of religion, he broke forth with the lament—
“ Would to God I had never reigned! Oh that those years I have spent in
my kingdom I had lived a solitary life in the wilderness! Oh that I had lived
a life alone with God! What doth all my glory profit, but that I have so much
the more torment in my death!”


IV. That it is but meagre comfort to the fallen that in the grave they
share the same fate as those who have been as great as they” (ver. 31). Yet
this is all the comfort some will have: it was all that proud Egypt found. It
is no satisfaction and but little relief to the sufferer to know that many others
suffer with him. In this verse there is a clear indication of a@ consciousness after


death, This indestructible consciousness will be the vehicle of future joy or
sorrow.


Lxessons.—1. National reverses evoke sympathy. 2. The grave suggests many


salutary reflections. 3. The highest and best work we do survives the tragedy of the
grave.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vera, 17-32. “Thus closes the
Divine word against Pharaoh and
his kingdom; they go down to the
land of forgetfulness in common with
all the surrounding heathen who stood
in a position of rivalry or antagonism
to Israel. Throughout the whole
series of the predictions we find the
one grand point of difference between


the two parties steadily kept in view ;
the judgment that lights on Israel is
only partial and temporary, the power
and dominion again return to him and
settle in everlasting possession, while
the neighbouring kingdoms that in
turn aspired to the supremacy fall to
rise no more, The question virtually
discussed in all such predictions.is this


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XXXII.





—Who shall give law to the world;
Israel, or the rival nations of heathen-
dom? And the answer returned,
though with manifold variety of form,
is perpetually the same. All other
dominions are destined to pass away ;
that of Israel alone becomes perma-
nent and universal. This is to be
sought only in Christ, in whom all
that peculiarly belonged to Israel con-
centrates itself and rises to its proper
perfection. In Him, therefore, it is
that the pre-eminence destined for
Israel has its accomplishment, and all
the external victories gained over the
surrounding heathen, or the advan-
tages granted to Israel in preference
to them, were but the sign and prelude
of that glorious ascendancy over the
whole earth which in right is already
Christ’s, and in due time shall also be
His in actual possession.” Fairbairn,

— “The prophet in this funeral song
brings Egypt into connection with
the congeries of nations on: which the
Chaldean judgment fell. The prac-
tical aim is expressed in the words of
the Psalmist—‘ Trust not in oppression
and fraud ; if riches increase, set not
your heart on them.’ The prophecy
is fitted to call forth a deep feeling of
the vanity of earthly things; to warn
against carnal confidence in earthly
power and its abuse by violence and
wrong ; and, what comes specially into
account here, to guard against envying
those who enjoy such power for the
moment. Human nature, what is it?
In an hour it falls to the ground |!”—
Hengstenberg.


Ver. 18. “The Egyptians affected to
be buried either in the isle Chemnis
or in the Pyramids. Their kings and
great ones thus would be laid by them-
selves, but Ezekiel provides them their
grave among common people—buries
them where they fall. They shall not
have what they account so much of in
their funeral.” —Pool.

“Where they an equal honour share,

Who buried or unburied are ;

Where Agamemnon knows no more
Than Irus, he condemned before 3
Where fair Achilles and Thersites lie,
Equally naked, poor, and dry.”


Ver. 19. Beauty. 1. A rare endow-
ment, whether national or. personal.
2. No modern type that has not been
equalled in the past. 3. No protection
against the ravages of time. 4 Un-
distinguishable when the grave has
done its work, 65. Its possession no
ground for vain boasting.

— “‘Art thou better than others
that thou shouldst not die and be
laid in dust? Speak, Hophra, if thou
hast any privilege to plead, what hast
thou to say why thou shouldst not go
down to the pit as a despised mor-
talt’? The prophet, hearing no plea of
privilege, says sarcastically, ‘Go down ,;
take up thy lodging, thy long, dark,
dismal recess, where thy dust and
bones shall never be known by any
royal figure.’ ”—Pool.

—‘‘How little does it signify whether
a mummy be well embalmed, wrapped
round with rich stuff, and beautifully
painted on the outside or not! Go
down into the tombs, examine the
niches, and see whether one dead car-


cass be preferable to another.”—A.
Clarke.


Ver. 20. ‘Make no ceremony more
than usually is made when common
soldiers, slain in the field where the
battle is fought, are dragged by scores
into mighty pits and thrown into them
promiscuously, or, suppose any of them
unwilling to stoop, draw them to it
against their will.”—Pool.


Vers. 21-32. The Grim Welcome of
the Dead. Awelcome. 1. To the great
majority— All her multitude.” 2. To
defeat—“ Slain by the sword.” 3. To
humiliation and shame—* They lie with
the uncircumcised, though they caused
terror in the land of the living.” 4.
To whatever comfort may be found in
sharing the same fate as great conquerors
—* Pharaoh shall see them and be
comforted.”


Vers. 22-26. “ His graves are about
him.” The Graves of our Kindred.
1. Recall many tender memories of
affection, acts of kindness, and words
of counsel received from those who
sleep so peacefully there. 2. Arrest


341


OMAP. XXXITL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





the tendency to reproach those who
are gone for any injustice they may
have done to us when living. 3. Re-
mind us we shall soon he called to
share their resting- place, and how
utterly useless all worldly gain, power,
and reputation will be to us there.
4. While reverently bending over them
we should solemnly resolve, by God’s
help, to seek that glorious immortality
which the grave is powerless to de
stroy.


Ver, 23, “ All which caused terror”
—‘ where a terror to all they would be
enemies to, and proudly boasted of
and inhumanly used their power, now
lie quiet, their dust little regarded, less
feared, and least of all pitied.”—Pool.


Ver. 27. “With their weapons of
war.” ‘It was usual in former times
to put swords, shields, and other ar-
mour in the graves of military men, as
they did in the grave of Theseus and


EZEKIEL’S COMMISSION RENEWED.


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 2.
“ Speak to the children of thy people.”
“lhe prophet turns from foreign na-
tions to Israelagain, The early portion
of the chapter(vers. 2-20)seems to have
been imparted to Ezekiel on the even-
ing previous to the arrival of the news
of the downfall of Jerusalem (ver. 22),
and was a preparation for the latter part
(vers. 23-33) imparted after the mes-
senger had come. This accounts for
the former part standing witbout date,
which was properly reserved for the
latter part. ‘If the peovle of the
land take a man of their coasts and
set him for their watchman.’ The
men were themselves to appoint the
watchman, whence, in case they did
not give heed to him, they withstood
and strove against themselves, and so
should be more convicted of their guilt
and folly.”—Lange.


Ver. 3. ‘6If when he seeth the
sword come?’—invaders. An appro-
priate illustration at the time of the


342


on the bier of Alexander the Great.
But the meaning of the prophet here
is, that those of whom he speaks
should be without these usual martial
solemnities with which people formerly
honoured their dead.” —Benson.


Ver. 32. “It is God who speaks, who
had punished former tyrants, that the
world might see His just judgments.
They were a terror to the world by
their cruelty, oppression, and continued
violence ; by their covetousness, ambi-
tion, and pride; and God had made
them a terror by His just severities in
their punishment.” — Pool.

— “Surely men disquiet themselves
about ‘a vain thing in so keenly pursu-
ing pleasure, gain, fame, and power, at
the cost of their immortal souls. What
will all these objects of worldly men’s
pursuit do for them when they are laid
in the grave ¢ Lord, do Thou teach us
the blessedness of having Thee as our
portion for ever | ”—Fausset,


(Chap. xxxiii.)


invasion of Judea by Nebuchadnezzar.
—“He blow the trumpet ”—a horn,
with clear resounding tone (Joshua vi.).


Ver. 4. “His blood shall be upon
his own head.” “He will be to
blame for his own fall, The head is
named from the custom of carrying
on the head. Blood often stands for
blood-guilt."—Hengstenberg. | Accord-
ing to others, the image is derived
from sacrifice, in which the offerer
transferred his guilt to his victim by
laying his hand on the victim’s head
(Lev. i. 4; xxiv. 14; Matt. xxvii. 25).


Ver. 5. “But he that taketh warning
shall deliver his soul.” The alone
self-guiltiness of the individual is here
made still more manifest,


Ver. 6. “He is taken away in his
imiquity.” ‘Mishap befalls no one
undeserved, even if under the circum-
stances he might have been delivered.
But the unfaithful watchman is. pun-
isned for his neglect,”— Hengstenberg.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


JHAP. XXX


a ae ee ee ee ee


Ver. 7. “I have set thee a watch-
man.” The “1” is emphatic. Eze-
kiel’s appointment to be a watchman
spiritually is far more solemn, as it is
derived from God, not from the people.
The lesson is, that the relation between
the prophet (and in general the servant
of God in His kingdom) and the people
is one full of responsibility. “ Thou
shalt hear the word at My mouth and
warn them from Me.” “Sa‘ety there-
fore demanded that the prophet have
free speech. That God should have
given them a true seer in their midst
was a sure proof of His favour, which
might well keep off despair. Jehovah
would fain save the wicked, and
threatens wrath through His prophet
only that every one may take heed
and reform.”—CGeikie,


Ver. 11. “Ihave no pleasure in the
death of the wicked.” ‘To meet the
Jews’ cry of despair in ver. 10 Ezekiel
here cheers them by the assurance that
God has no pleasure in their death, but
that theyshould repentand live(2 Peter
ii, 9). ‘A yearning tenderness mani-
fests itself here, notwithstanding all
their past sins; yet with it aholiness that
abates nothing of its demands for the
honour of God’s authority.”—Fausset.


Ver. 12. ‘The righteousness of the
righteous shall not deliver him in
the day of his transgression.” “ Self-
righteousness, ever disposed to justify
itself, had adopted among the exiles
a comfortable theory that they were
punished for the sins of their fore-
fathers rather than for their own.
Ezekiel again exposes this deception,
as he had done before (chap. iii. 20;
xvili. 24, 26, 27).”—Geikie. “The heart
that in distress misunderstands its God
will not tread the path of repentance,
which determines the return of salva-
tion ; and man is quite prone to initi-
gate his guilt and to think that God
has dealt too hardly with him.”—Heng-
tenberg.


Ver. 21. “In the twelfth year of our
captivity, in the tenth month "—a
year and a half after the capture of


the city (Jer. xxxix. 2; li 5, 6), which
took place in the eleventh year and
fourth month, ‘The one who escaped
may have been so long on the road
through fear of entering the enemy’s
country ” (Henderson) ; or, the singuiar
is used for the plural in a collective
sense. ‘Naturally the reopening of
the prophet’s mouth fur consolation
would be deferred till the number of
the escaped remnant was complete:
the removal of such a iarge number
would easily have occupied seventeen
or eighteen months.”— Fausset.


Ver. 22. “The hand of the Lord
was upon me in the evening.” Thus
the capture of Jerusalem was known
to Ezekiel by revelation, before the
messenger came, “My mouth was
opened andI was no more dumb.” He
spake the message from God to the
people contained in vers. 2-20 in the
evening before the tidings came,


Ver, 24. “ Those wastes of the land
ofIsrael.” ‘ Less Jerusalem itself than
the other cities which had been stripped
of their inhabitants (Jer. xxxiii, 10,
13), in which those who were with-
out possessions (Jer, xxxix. 10) shared
with the returned fugitives (Jer.
xl, 12), having all at once come to
great wealth of land and were puffed
up.”—Hiizig. “That there were such
people is proved by the revolt in which
Gedaliah, the Chaldean governor, was
slain.”—Hengstenberg. Compare also
the representation in Neh. i. of the
desolate condition of things, though
an interval of upwards of a century
had elapsed. “Abraham was one,
and he inherited the laud, but we are
many.” “Some of the bands of fighting-
men which had escaped the Chaldeans,
not improbably stood aloof, keeping
the country disturbed by harassing
forays. But, like true Jews, even
their robber life was dignified by a
religious colouring, Few though they
were, they fancied there was no reason
to despair, since the land had been
given to Abraham when he was alone
in the midst of the whole population, a
much more hopeless position than theirs,

343


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP, XXXII,


re


Ezekiel, however, predicted a terrible
end to these visionaries.” —Geikve.


Ver. 25. “Ye eat with the blood.”

“The eating of the blood was for-
bidden in Gen. ix. 4 as the first step
to the prohibition of murder. In the
blood of animals was to be seen a type
of the blood of men. The prescription
had a didactic end. It was to call
forth an abhorrence of shedding human
blood. Whosoever disregarded this
rohibition showed, under the Old
Taeuambne after the law had made
the horror of animal blood national,
that the germ of the murderous spirit
was in him.”—Hengstenberg.


Ver. 26. “Ye work abomination.”
The abomination is adultery. The femi-
nine form of the verb is surprising.


Ver. 28. “That none shall pass
through.” Cleared of men, even of
passing travellers. The ravage of rob-
bers and wild beasts rendered the
ordinary roads unsafe.


Ver. 30. “The children of thy
people still are talking against thee.”
Though going to the prophet to hear
the word of the Lord, they criticised,
in an unfriendly spirit, his peculiari-
ties of manner and enigmatical style
(chap. xx. 49), making these the ex-
cuse for their impenitence. “By the
walls and in the doors of the houses.”
In the public haunts and privately.


Ver. 31. “As My people.” “So
respectful, attentive, and apparently
earnest and willing.” — Hengstenberg.
Ironically, those who should be mine ;
or, as if they would be My people and
still are not. “ With their mouth they
show much love.” ‘They deal ten-
derly with their mouth—they show
ardour; affect in words an ardent love
to God and His words, while the real
inclination of their heart goes quite
another way—is turned to Mammon,
the god of the Jewish old man.”—
Hengstenberg.


Ver. 32. “Thou art unto them as
avery lovely song ”—a song of love,
a lover’s song. “ They praise thy elo-
quence, but care not for the subject of
it as a real and personal thing, just as
many do in the modern Church.”—
Jerome. “One that hath a pleasant
voice and can play well on an in-
strument.” ‘ Amidst the national im-
poverishment they amuse themselves
with the surpassing rhetorical gifts of
the new classic.”—Hengstenberg.


Ver. 33. “ That a prophet hath been
among them.” “Nomereorator. The
difference they discover in painful ex-
perience when it is too late. The
threatened punishment has already
overtaken them. They are already
excluded from. the promised salvation
which can be gained only by true
repentance,” —Hengstenberg.


HOMILETICS.


Tse OFFICES OF THE CIVIL AND SPIRITUAL WaTCHMAN COMPARED
AND CONTRASTED,


(Vers. 1-9.)


Having sung in strains of unequalled sublimity the dirge of the great
monarchies, Ezekiel returns with redoubled intensity to the duty of teaching,
The enthusiastic disciple of Jeremiah, he carries out to their most startling
consequences the principles but dimly sketched in the creed of his loved master.
In this chapter he develops in increased sharpness of definition and fulness
of detail the doctrine which is the prominent feature of his prophetic mission—
that of the responsibility of the individual soul separate from the collective
nation, separate from the good or ill deserts of ancestry. ‘ Other prophets,”

344


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. ORAP. XXX








says Stanley, “have more of poetical beauty, a deeper sense of Divine things, a
tenderer feeling of the mercies of God for His people. None teach so simply, and
with a simplicity the more remarkable from the elaborate imagery out of which
it emerges, this great moral lesson, to us the first of all lessons. On this narrow
but solid plank of the doctrine of human responsibility Ezekiel crosses the
chasm which divided the two parts of his eventful life. It is almost the last
doctrine which we hear announced before his country fell. It is the first that
meets us as he recovers from the ehock after all is over.”’ This truth we shall
find strikingly illustrated in the teaching of the present and succeeding para-
graphs of this chapter. In these verses we have the offices of the civil and spiritual
watchman compared and contrasted— :


I. In the manner of their appointment. 1. The civil watchman is appointed by
the careful discrimination of his fellow-cowntrymen. ‘The people of the land take
a man of their coasts and set him for their watchman” (ver. 2). It is a mutual
arrangement. The rulers of the state see the need of guarding its interests,
and alter due inquiry select the man who in their judgment is best qualified to
discharge the duties required, and the man willingly accepts the post. It is
a human appointment, and the fount of authority is human, though sanctioned
by the aggregate wisdom of the governing body. The government may be mie-
taken in the character of the man selected. They can only do their best in
providing for the immediate exigencies of the state; or they may err in their
conception of the trust with which they invest their officer, Human wisdom is
at the best imperfect. 2. The spiritual watchman is Divinely appointed. ‘I have
set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel” (ver. 7). Here the authority is
supreme and infallible. The Divine discernment is unerring. God never calls
and commissions the wrong man, and never appoints His servant to a work that
He does not at the same time give him power to do, however unwilling he may
be to accept the responsibility. The authority thus delegated is indisputable,
because backed by supreme power, and from which there is no appeal. The
office of the spiritual watchman is superior to all earthly governments, and has
often to be exercised above and in opposition to their worldly policy.


IL. In the duties assigned to each. 1. Zo exercise constant vigilance. ‘When
he seeth the sword come upon the land” (ver. 3). “Thou shalt hear the word
at My mouth” (ver. 7). It is the duty of each to be ever in a wakeful, listening
attitude, The look-out on board the ocean-steamer and the advanced night-
picket of a slumbering army has each a responsible post. The safety of both
vessel and army depends upon their keenness of vision and delicacy of hearing.
It is their duty to detect the first indications of danger. The duties of the civil
and spiritual watchman are alike in demanding a highly sensitive alertness and
heroic fidelity. The excavations at Herculaneum, buried by an eruption of
Vesuvius more than eighteen hundred years ago, revealed the figure of a
sentinel who remained immovable at the post of duty till swathed and suffo-
cated with the molten lava. 2. To give distinct and timely warning. ‘‘ Blow the
trumpet and warn the people” (ver. 3). “Warn them from Me” (ver. 7). It
is not enough to keep a sharp look-out. Every threatened movement of the
enemy must be faithfully reported, and a loud, clear, earnest warning sounded
when the slightest advance is made by the attacking force. The watchman
should be every moment braced up to duty, and no indulgence permitted that
will impair his faculties. The greater the peril, the more urgent and unmis-
takable should be the alarm.


III. In the reality and limitation of the responsibility of each. If the
watchman, seeing the threatened evil, neglects to warn the people, he is respon
345


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


SS


OHAP. XXXII,





sible for the calamities they may suffer; if he warns the people and they suffer
by not giving heed to the warning, he himself is clear of blame (vers. 4-6, 8, 9).
Ezekiel, while explicit in teaching what in his day was the novel doctrine
of personal responsibility, is careful to define its limits. Unlimited responsibi-
lity would be intolerable; it would tend to paralyse rather than evoke effort.
Personal responsibility is ever limited by ability, opportunity, and the nature
and scope of the trust with which we are jnvested. There is no discharge from
responsibility but by obedience to obvious duty. The burden is then transferred
to those towards whom duty has been faithfully fulfilled.


Lessons.—1l. The true watchman is placed in a position of great honour and
responsibility. 2. Should preserve all his faculties in the highest possible state of
healthy development and exercise. 3. Is faithful in the degree in which he retains the
consciousness of his Divine call.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 1-9. Individual Responsi- mise them pardon and peace without


bility—1. Recognised by the directness
of the Divine reveiation. “The word of
the Lord came unto me” (ver. 1). 2.
Augmented by the importance of the office
in which he is installed. “The people
of the land take a man and set him
for their watchman. I have set thee
a watchman unto the house of Israel ”
(vers. 2,7). 3. Is limited to the faithful
discharge of specific duties. To be on
the alert, to raise the alarm, to warn
of approaching disaster (vers. 3-5, 9).
4. Involves serious blame when obvious
duty is neglected. “His blood will I
require at thine hand” (vers. 6, 8).

— “The duty of the spiritual watch-
man is to warn faithfully the impeni-
tent of their imminent danger, and of
the willingness of God to receive them
graciously and save them freely if they
will repent. Whosoever hears the
watchman’s warning and yet takes no
heed to it shall perish, and his blood
shall be upon his own head. But the
minister who knows the danger that
is before sinners, and yet neglects to
sound the faithful note of warning,
shall not only be in part the cause of
their ruin, but shall also bring upon
his own head an awful condemnation.
They no doubt justly perish on account
of their neglect to watch and pray con-
tinually ; but he incurs at once the guilt
of his own and that of their disobedi-
ence to God. What a heavy account
they shall have to render who make
excuses for sin, flatter sinners, and pro-


346


penitence and faith |!”—Fausset.


Ver. 2. “ Take a man of their coasts,
and set him for their watchman.” A
National Guardian. 1. An important
officer in time of public danger. 2.
Is selected for some special qualifica-
tions he possesses above other of his
countrymen. 3. The safety of the
country is entrusted to his care. 4.
Should be vigilant and faithful in
the discharge of duty. 5. Is account-
able for his conduct to those who
appoint him.

— “One man may be of public ser-
vice to a whole country. Princes and
statesmen are the watchmen of a king-
dom, that are continually to employ
and, if occasion be, expose themselves
for the public safety.”—M. Henry.

— “The calling to the office of
preacher is twofold—one immediate,
the other mediate ; the former is from
God, the latter from man (Acts xxvi.
15, 16; vi. 5). No blind man, nor
dreamer, nor drowsy sleeper is fit for
an office that takes its name from
wakefulness,”— Lange.


Vers. 4, 5. Faithful Warning—
1. Should be clearly and earnestly
uttered. 2. Secures the safety of
those who give heed to it. 3. Is
uttered in vain to those who neglect
it. 4. Deprives the heedless of any
ground of complaint for the suffering
he refused to avoid.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZERIEL.


OBAP, XXX,


SSS SS SE ee ee ee ee ee ey


Ver. 6. Neglect of Duty—l. In-
excusable where the duty is clearly
defined and publicly proclaimed. 2,
An unmistakable evidence of moral
deterioration, 3. Always involves
calamity and suffering to somebody.

— “Of the watching which is en-
joined upon ourselves we are not
relieved by the obligation which lies
upon the watchman. Hence he who
is overtaken unwarned does not fall
guiltless, for his security and care-
lessness were the occasion of his fall,
Contempt of danger is no true courage,
Every one must carry his soul as in
his hand. What a mournful condi-
tion is it when the Church does not
watch, the State does not protect,
the house does not admonish | "—
Lange.


Vers. 7-9. The Ministerial Call-
ing—l. Divine in its institution. “TI
have set thee a watchman unto the


meaning of the Divine Message. “Thou
shalt hear the word at My mouth.”
3. Should be faithful in warning as well
as in instruction. “And warn them
from Me—speak to warn the wicked
from his way.” 4. Involves grave re-
sponsibility. “That wicked man shall
die in his iniquity ; but his blood wiil
I require at thine hand.” 5. Retains
the Divine approval only so far as it is
strictly faithfui. “But thou hast de
livered thy soul,”

— “With a spiritual watchman there
must be found a spiritual life, a spiri-
tual light, a spiritual wakefulness, and
dutiful fidelity in all parts of his office.”
—Starke.

— Even when the preacher’s con-
science is free from guilt in regard to
the ungodly who perish in their sins,
what a sorrow does it occasion in the
life of the preacher when he has to see
the impenitent die in their sins! “TI


would not willingly be saved,” said


house of Israel.” 2. Is to interpret the Augustine, “ without you.”


HOMILETICS.
THE UNSWERVING EQUITY or THE Driving GovVERNMENY.
(Vers, 10-20.)


I. Is joined with the most tender solicitations for the best welfare of men.
1. Jehovah has no satisfaction in the ruin of the sinner (vers. 10.11). It is a false
conception of God to regard Him as implacable and difficult to propitiate.
Such a view is possible only to the mind debased by sinful indulgence and
hardened by unbelief. Without man’s solicitation, and without his daring to
hope for such favour, God offers him life and salvation, and reveals His love
in the wondrous plan which His spontaneous mercy has provided for the
redemption of the sinning race. So slow is man to comprehend, and so little
reason had he to expect the possibility of such kindness being shown to him,
that Jehovah solemnly pledges the integrity of His Divine character in assuring
him of the fact—“ As I live, saith the Lord,” He has more pleasure in pardon-
ing than punishing. 2. Jehovah condescends to plead with the sinner to turn from
his iniquities and accept life. ‘Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways; for why
will ye die?” (ver. 11). Amazing spectacle! Incredulous condescension! God
pleading with man—the highest reason expostulating with human folly and
unreason! The monarch imploring rebels to return to their allegiance and
the parent entreating the prodigal to reform may seem the despair of baffled
helplessness. But not so with our Heavenly King and Father. His con-
descension is all the more conspicuous and significant because He is so strong,
so righteous, and so unselfish in His aim to rescue man from his self-delusion
and ruin. A greater marvel still is, that in the presence of this Divine solicitude

347


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


a


OHAP. XXXII,


man remains obdurate and indifferent. How deceitful and deadly an enemy is
fondly-cherished sin }


II. Recognises the responsibility of the individual soul “I will judge you
every man after his ways” (ver. 20). Life or death depends on individual
action. Israel is to be treated no longer as a collective nation, in the mass, but
as individuals, each one by himself. This doctrine was so novel and startling
to the Jew, and so opposed to his notion of special privileges to be enjoyed by
the aggregate nation, irrespective of the moral condition of individuals, that
the masters of the Synagogue hesitated to receive the Book of Ezekiel into the
sacred canon, and when it was adopted, decreed that it should not be read by
any Jew who was not above thirty years of age. And yet throughout the
Bible there is no truth more clearly taught than this. It is this responsibility
that gives a moral character to each man’s actions, and is the basis on which he
must be ultimately judged.


III. Distributes with exact impartiality reward and punishment according
to individual conduct (vers, 12-16, 18, 19). The seeming righteous will not
escape punishment if they sin (vers. 12, 13, 18). The wicked will not be
denied reward if they reform (vers, 12, 14-16, 19). No man can shelter himself
under the shadow of ancestral piety, or under the reputation of a blameless life.
Personal virtue can make no atonement for a single sin. On the other hand,
the most abandoned need not despair. The Lord “pardoneth and absolveth
all those who truly repent and unfeignedly believe His holy gospel.” The final
decisions of the Divine government cannot be charged with the least injustice,
but will compel universal adoration.


IV, Is the subject of querulous complaint by the wrong-doer. ‘“ Yet the
peeple say, The way of the Lord is not equal; but, as for them, their way is not
equal” (vers. 17, 20). Wrong-doing blinds the mental vision, dulls and vitiates
the moral sense, and incapacitates the soul from exercising righteous judgment.
Ignorance is always obstinately one-sided. Reminds one of the Irish jury-
man who had never met eleven such obstinate men as his fellow-jurors; and of
the recruit who maintained he was the only man of his company who was
keeping step. The sinner is ready to blame any one but himself, and even
dares to impugn the equity of the great Judge of all the earth. The reckless
audacity of such a charge reveals his own condemnation.


LEssons.—1. Divine justice and mercy are inseparable. 2. If we embrace the
principles of the Dwine government it becomes easy to do right and dificult to do
wrong. 3. The destiny of every man is, under God, in his own hands,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES. -


Vers. 10, 11. A yearning tenderness
here manifests itself, still seeking, not-
withstanding all that has taken place,
- the return of those who survived to the
way of peace. But with that tenderness


people; no return to life possible but
through a return to righteousness,


Ver. 10. Unrepented Sin—1. Pro-
duces a sullen disposition, 2. Fosters


what a stern and unflinching holiness !

There can be no relaxation or abate-

ment mentioned in respect to this, not

even amid the moanings of pain and

cries of distress which arose from the
348


the mistaken notion that we are pun-
ished for the sins of others rather than
for our own. 3. Reflects upon the
sincerity of the Divine promises,
Fills the soul with despair.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP, XXXIIL,


a


— “Thus ye speak.” ‘But not
well, whilst ye have hard thoughts of
God and heavy thoughts of yourselves,
as if your sins were unpardonable, and
that ye were already ruined beyond
relief; whereas true repentance is a
ready remedy, a plank after shipwreck
that would set you safe and render you
right again. This they had been told
before (chap. xviii.), but to little pur-
pose. ‘The word was not mingled with
faith in their hearts, and did therefore
run through them (Heb. ii. 1) as water
runs through a riven vessel.”—Trapp.

— “It is common with those that
have been hardened with presumption,
when they were warned against sin, to
sink into despair when they are called
to repent, and to conclude there is no
hope of life for them.”—M. Henry.

— ‘All in the end feel sin, but they
hate it not.—The way of the uncon-
verted in this respect 1s to look rather
to the temporal than to the eternal
life.—To despair, instead of turning to
God, is but another form of the pride
that is in the human heart.—Despair
is another kind of impenitence.—How
contrasts touch one another !—The
godly also are sometimes on the brink
of despair—David, Ps, xxxviii., and
Cain, Gen. iv. That punishment
should always be heavier to us than
sin!—He who would justify himself
would perhaps throw the blame even
upon God.—God always deals unfairly
with the wicked, as they think.”—
Lange.


Ver. 11. The Pitifulmess of the
Divine Mercy—l. Finds no delight in
punishing. ‘*I have no pleasure in the
death of the wicked.” 2. Yearns for
the recovery of those who have abandoned
the way of obedience. “ But that the
wicked turn from his way and live.”
3. Breaks forth in tenderest persuasive-
ness, ‘Turn ye, turn ye; for why will
ye die?” 4, Is declared with the most
solemn asseveration, ‘ As I live, saith
the Lord.”

— “This is one of those precious
places, those mellifluous honeycombs
which we should go on sucking
towards heaven, as Samson once did


towards his parents (Judges xiv. 9),
Here, if anywhere, we may find strong
consolation. God when He swears
desires certainly to be credited. O
happy we for whose sakes God vouch-
safeth to swear! and O wretched we
if we believe not God, no, though He
swear to us !”—7'rapp.

— “The living God wills life, and
also gives it to those who will; but
unless men also wish it, He certainly
does not give.”—Lange.

— “Why will ye die?”—“I have
been to you a nursing Father. Will
ye not love Me? I have opened a
bleeding altar, even Calvary, that the
foulest of sinners may approach. Why
will ye stay at a distance in shame
and sin? I have borne and had
patience, I have stretched out My
hands all the day long to a gainsaying
people. My prophets have laboured
and wept ; they aver, being filled with
My Spirit, that their hearts’ desire and
prayer is, that Israel might be saved,
Why will you resist the ministry of
grace? I have aided the ministry with
slow and gentle corrections. Why
will you fight against Me? You are
beloved for your fathers’ sake; you
have been to Me a pleasant vineyard.
I have planted you with the choice
vine of Sorek ; and what could I have
done for My vineyard that I have not
done? Why then will ye prefer idols
to Me? Why will you prefer shame
to glory, death to eternal life?”—
Sutcliffe.


Ver. 13. “It was a widespread de-
lusion among the Jews that they
possessed a hereditary righteousness ;
that whatever they themselves might
be, yet the righteousness of their pious
fathers, from Abraham down, would
avail them; and if they experienced
the contrary in their misfortunes they
held themselves justified in murmuring
against God. The prophet teaches, on
the contrary, that the fate of every
generation is determined by its own
relation to God.”—Hengstenberg.

— “Many eminent professors have
been ruined by a proud conceitednesa
of themselves and confidence in them

349





OHAP, XXXII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,
selves, He trusts to the merit of his tothe son. If the pledge remained it
own righteousness, and thinks he has must be restored. The retaining it is
already made God so much his debtor committing a new iniquity, and_for-
that now he may venture to commit feits any benefit of the promise. If he


jniquity, for he has righteousness
enough in stock to make amends for
it ; he fancies that, whatever evil deeds
he may do hereafter, he can be in no
danger from them, having so many
good deeds beforehand to balance
them. He thinks himself so well
established in a course of virtue that
he may thrust himself into any tempta-
tion and it cannot overcome him, and
so by presuming on his own sufficiency
he is brought to commit iniquity.”—
M. Henry.

— “Not that we are evil by nature
is what finally condemus us, but that
we remain evil in spite of the goodness
of God which seeks our conversion.”—
Lange.


Vers. 14, 15. Genuine Repentance—
1. Is not only sorrow for sin, but a
turning from it, 2. A striving to do
the right. 3. Shown in the restitution
of all wrongfully acquired goods, 4,
A permanent blessing only by walking
in harmony with the living Word.

— Conversion—“ 1. Of heart. 2.
Of conduct. 3. Of life.”"—Lange.

— ‘“Penitency is almost as good as
innocency.”—Trapp.


Ver. 15. “Robbery and violence
would be too gainful a trade if a man
might quit all scores by repentance
and detain all he had gotten; or if the
father’s repentance might serve the
turn, and the benefit of the transgres-
sion be transmitted as an inheritance


hath it not, nor is able to procure it,
his hearty repentance is enough, with
reparation ; but to enjoy the spoil and
yet to profess repentance is an affront
to Almighty God, and a greater sin
than the first act of violence, when he
did not pretend to think of God, and
so did not think of displeasing Him.
Whereas now he pretends to reconcile
himself to God and mocks Him with
repentance, while he retains the fruit
of his wickedness. He who is truly
penitent restores what he hath left to
the person who was deprived of it, and
pays the rest in devout sorrow for his


trespass,”—Lord Clarendon.


Vers. 17, 20. False Estimates—l.
Inevitable when Divine things are
measured by a human standard. 32,
The product of a miud warped with
error and sin, 3, Recoil in punish-
ment upon those who are blind to
their own falseness and injustice,


Ver. 17. “ When men find fault with
the ways of God as not equal, it is
because their own ways are not equal.
On the other hand, God says, ‘Do not
My words do good to him that walketh
uprightly ?’ (Micah ii. 7). God ‘meet-
eth him that worketh righteousness ;
those that remember God in His ways’
(Isa. lxiv. 5). The cause of sceptical
eavils at the ways of Divine provi-
dence and grace lies in the unbeliever’s
faulty state of heart which corrupts
the understanding,”—Fausseé,


HOMILETICS.


THE INFATUATION OF UNBELIER,


(Vers. 21-33.)


I. Blinds the soul to the significance of passing events.


1. The greatest


calamity 1s not understood. “The city is smitten” (ver. 21). No greater disaster
could happen to the Jew. The impregnable, the invincible Jerusalem in ruins,
the sacred Temple violated and destroyed—impossible! Yet the impossible
had maeusnes ; and the people, stupefied by the greatness of the calamity, or by


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZERIEL. OHAP. XXXII.
a EEE


the inveteracy of their wickedness, failed to grasp the meaning. In their unbe-
lieving infatuation they could not see that the Divine guardianship that en-
compassed the city with a shield that no mortal enemy could pierce had been
withdrawn, because of their sits, 2. The plainest evidences of faithful warning were
ignored. Ezekiel predicted that he would be silent for some time on matters
affecting Israel until news of the downfall of Jerusalem came. The prediction
was exactly fulfilled, and he once more opens his mouth concerning Israel (comp.
chap. xxiv. 27 with xxxiii, 22)—another proof of the Divine sanction to the
warnings of His servant; yet this, like many other similar evidences, was un-
heeded. We are infatuated indeed when passing events cease to interest us
and suggest no lessons of either warning or counsel.


II. Intensifies the practice of the grossest sins (vers. 24-26). 1. Covetous-
ness (ver. 24). They cling in a spirit of desperate covetousness to the land
already lost, and which now belonged to their conquerors. The savage greed
with which the scattered few held by the land of their forefathers might excite
compassion did we not know how hopeless was their task and how utterly
selfish their aim. They wished to keep the land not to reform but to indulge
abuses. 2, Idolatry (ver. 25). The sin which had been the occasion of all the
distresses that now afflicted the land, instead of being put away, was carried
on with aggravated enormities. 3. Tyranny. ‘Ye stand upon your sword”
(ver. 26). They do not seek to rule on principles of right and equity, but by
the tyranny of force and arms. It was the wild anarchy of reckless desperadoes.
The tyranny was all the more cruel because of the unprotected and helpiess con-
dition of the few that still remained in the land. 4. The worst form of immorality
aS 26). Adultery. How deep was the degradation of the chosen people of

od when they descended to the worst practices of the heathen, and veiled
them under the sacred name of religion! Unbelief is immorality, and abandons
man to the tyranny of all kinds of abominations.


III. Invokes a more terrible punishment (vers. 27-29). Ruin shall be piled
on ruin; the wastes shall be reduced to more hopeless wastes ; desolation shall
reign supreme. By an inevitable retribution, the sword on which they placed
their chief dependence and with which they had oppressed the weak shall be
the instrument of their own destruction, and the pestilence shall finish the work
left undone by the sword. The desolating ruin shall be so complete that the
fields and vineyards, once so peacefully cultivated and so abundantly productive,
shall be the haunts of wild beasts and the terrified inhabitants become their
prey. Travellers will be careful to avoid the infested region; “ None shall pass
through” (ver. 28). Terrible indeed will be the punishment that shall overtake
the obstinately unbelieving.


IV. Makes mockery of the most earnest utterances of the Divine message
(vers. 30-32). 1. There ts the show of charmed interest in the messenger. ‘They
come unto thee as the people cometh; they sit before thee as My people. With
their mouth they show much love, Thou art unto them as a very lovely song
of one that hath a pleasant voice and can play well on an instrument ” (vers,
31, 32). Their interest in the preacher is superficial, like that of many present-
day hearers. They are pleased with a rich, musical voice, with oratorical
eloquence, with dramatic posturings, with ritualistic display and full choral
effects ; and that is all. It is the same kind of pleasure they have in listening
to a well-rendered song, or a solo on the violin by an accomplished performer.
The serious meaning of the message and its application to their practical life
they have no desire to understand. 2. They make sport of both messenger and
message in public and private, “The children of thy people still aa


CHAP, XSALI- HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





against thee by the walls and in the doors of the houses, and speak one to
another, every one to his brother, saying—(with a chuckling contemptuousness
that reveals the hollowness and baseness of their hypocritical concern)—Come,
I pray you, and hear what is the word that cometh forth from the Lord”
(ver. 30). An invitation, not to ponder the Divine message, but to listen to
their garbled version of it, as they reproduce it with flippant sportiveness and
grotesque caricature. It is a sad evidence how completely unbelief has degraded
and infatuated the soul when the message that deals with its eternal interests
is made the subject of fun and ridicule. 3. They are too far steeped in infamy to
attempt to practise what they hear. ‘They hear thy words, but they will not do
them ; their heart goeth after their covetousness” (vers. 31, 32). They love sin
more than godliness, To give heed to the Divine message would break in
unpleasantly on the round of self-indulgence with which they are encircled as
with an iron band. They have resisted so many appeals that the heart has
become as hard as adamant. “How dangerous it is,’”’ wrote John Foster, the
celebrated essayist, “to defer those momentous reformations which conscience
is solemnly preaching to the heart! If they are neglected, the difficulty and
indisposition are increasing every month. The mind is receding degree after
degree from the warm and hopeful zone, till at last it will enter the arctic circle,
and become fixed in relentless and eternal ice,”


V. Will one day receive a rude and painful awakening. ‘“ When this cometh
to pass ie it will come), then shall they know that a prophet hath been among
them” (ver 33). The threatened judgment fell on Israel, and, when it was too
late, they saw the value of the opportunities they had despised. Those who do
not know the preciousness of their privileges by using them aright shall here-
after be made to know by being deprived of those privileges for ever. It is
the wail of many that they did not know the value of their blessings until they
were lost.


Lessons.—1l, The lowest depth of unbelief is not reached without many faithful
warnings. 2. Unbelief is subtle and deadly im its progress. 3. The cure of unbelief
is a merciful act of God.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 21. Bad News—l. Always


threatening and meets those who,
travels fast. 2. Its lesson should be


still giving themselves up to illusions,


seriously pondered. 3. Is disregarded
only by the infatuated.


Ver. 22. “The opened mouth of a
servant of God is his frankness; the
contrary is trimming and flattery; and
it is also distinguished from sarcastic
witticisms, evil speaking, and insult,
The servants of God should be frank
in speech, yet not like insolent fellows
who believe they may say everything
because no one can contradict them,
at least when in the pulpit.”—Lwuther.


Vers, 23-29. “The new discourse
here first takes up again the former
352


thought that the judgment would not
inexorably run its course. But before
the seed of Divine hope could be sown,
the last thorns and thistles of false
human hopes, and of the efforts that
grew out of them, had to be destroyed,
which even now, although against all
appearances, were convulsively grasped
by those who avoided the passage
through the strait gate of repentance
which is the condition of participating
in the Divine hope, and did not wish
to put off the spotted garment of the
flesh.” — Hengstenberg.


Vera. 24-29. The Inheritance of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP, XXXIM.


eee


the Wicked —1. A desolate waste.
“They inhabit those wastes of the
land of Israel” (ver. 24). 2. Yet held
with a dogged pertinacity. “We are
many : the land is given us for inherit-
ance” (ver, 24). 3. The scene of un-
restrained riot and wickedness. ‘ Ye
shed blood: ye work abomination ”
(vers. 25, 26). 4. Defies the most des-
perate efforts to retain it. “The sword,
devouring beasts, the pestilence,” are
beyond their power to vanquish (ver.
27). 5. B tinally swept by the desolating
vengeance of outraged justice. “I will
lay the land most desolate—becanse of
their abominations” (vers. 28, 29).

— “Such was the infatuation of the
escaped remnant in the now wasted
lands of Judea that they were even
still full of self-sufficient confidence.
Had this confidence been resting on
the restoration of God’s favour through
their repentance, it would have been
a reasonable confidence ; but it rested
on utterly false reasonings as to the
relation in which they stood to Abra-
ham. Abraham, they reasoned, ob-
tained from God the inheritance of
Canaan, and we are his children, and
therefore are entitled to succeed to
his inheritance. Abraham was but one
when he obtained the grant of the
land; much more shall we retain it
as our own who are many. But they
utterly shut their eyes to the fact that
Abraham pleased God in all his ways,
and was therefore called the friend of
God ; they, on the contrary, displeased
God in all their ways by ‘working
abominations’ and ‘standing upon
their sword,’ as if might made right.”
—Fausset.


Ver. 24. “Strange infatuation !
That when the sign of God’s displea-
sure had been so strikingly displayed
against them for their sins, scattering
all their vain confidence to the wind,
they should still, without abandoning
those sins, hope for the peculiar tukens
of the Divine favour! Yet in a more
subtle and refined form we find the
same flagrant inconsistence practised
by the Jews of our Lord’s time who,
in like manner, reckoned with con-


fidence on being children of Abraham,
as if that aloue were enough to secure
them in all covenant blessings, while
He charged them with being in spirit
children of the devil, and consequently
entitled only to look for the portion
of the lost (John viii, 33-44).”—Fair-
bairn,

— “Walls, cities, go to ruin, but
a foo] will still plant himself on the
ruins (Prov. xxvii, 22). When the
mask falls from the hypocrite, then
will the beast of prey which lay be-
hind become manifest ; and we shall
all be made manifest before the judg-
ment-seat of Christ: then the masque-
rade will be out.”—Lange.


Ver. 27. “The Divine vengeance
does not need to rush upon its victim
from behind in order to lay hold of
him, nor does it require to make a
long and laborious search after him ;
but where he has fled to and fancies
himself hidden, whether it be in the
heights or in the depths, there the
vengeance of God lies in readiness,
and has been expecting him to come to
it. In the end we all come to God.
Alas that so few should fall into His
arms, while so many fall upon His
sword! Ifthe wild beasts of passion
do not tear a man, the pestilence of
his natural corru)tion will gradually
consuine him.”—Jlid.


Vers, 27-29. ‘The small remnant in
Judea being so far from righteousness,
the prophet could only speak to them
as a minister of condemnation. What
they had to expect was only judgment
still more severe and exterminating
than what had yet been appointed.
For them the desolations of the land
must become still more desolate, and
new horrors be inflicted by the sword,
the pestilence, and the wild beast. All
must be reduced to a howling wilder-
ness, as it really was, that the new
hope for Israel might spring from an-
other and better root, and that the
people might know how impossible it
was to attain to blessing from God
without first separating trons sin,”—
Fairbairn, ee


OBAP. XXXUL


Ver, 28. “Desolate shall it be at
last about every ungodly man ; for as
the heart is, so is the life, First of all
sin desolates, then come desolations
through death ; finally, we pass into
the desolation of an eternity without
God.” —Lange.


Ver, 29. See chap xxx. 19.

— Those are intractable and un-
teachable indeed that are not made
to know their dependence upon God
when all their creature-comforts fail
them and they are made desolate,


Ver, 30-33. The Preacher's Critics
—1l. Use every opportunity in public and
private to hold him up to ridicule. “Thy
people still are talking against thee
by the walls, and in the doors of
the houses” (ver. 30). 2. Are eager
to give their own garbled version of his
message. “Come, I pray you, and hear
what is the word that cometh forth
from the Lord” (ver. 30). 3. Observe
the outward decorum of worship. ‘They
sit before thee as My people, and hear
thy words” (ver. 31). 4. Show a
fondness for the word which the state of
their hearts contradicts, ‘With their
mouth they show much love ; but their
heart goeth after their covetousness”
(ver. 31). 5. Are charmed with the
music of eloquence. ‘Thou art unto
them as a very lovely song of one that
hath a pleasant voice, and can play well
on an instrument” (ver. 32). 6. Listen
not for profit, but to pick up material for
scornful gossip. ‘‘ They hear thy words,
but they do them not” (ver. 32). 7.
Only when calamity comes do they learn
the value of what they despised. ‘* When
this cometh to pass shall they know
that a prophet hath been among them”
(ver. 33).

— ‘In making use of human agents
to reveal His will to men, the Lord
teaches us to look for no external per-
fection. There may be found all the
diversities of manner and nearly all
the imperfections which distinguish
ordinary speakers, for the Spirit, even
in His highest operations, must still
leave free-play to native peculiarities
of thought and utterance. But in re-


354


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


gard to its substance God’s Word ia
perfect, and stands nobly apart from
all that is of man, Let it ever be
ours, therefore, to hear it with rever-
ence and bow to its requirements with
child-like submission, It is we who
must fall in with its terms, not it that
must accommodate itself to ours,”—:
Fairbairn.

—‘“The Word of God is a very serious
matter. Let every one take heed how
he hears, that he be nota hearer only,
but a doer. What the prophet an-
nounces comes to pass, and if the ful-
filment takes place the mere hearer
will be the loser; he is overtaken by
the threatened punishments and ex-
cluded from the promised blessings.
He has not to deal with an excellent
orator; but behind the Son of man
stands the Lord, mighty to punish and
to save.” —Hengstenberg.


Ver. 30. ‘ Public persons are a com-
mon subject of discourse. Every one
takes liberty to censure them at plea-
sure, and faithful ministers know not
how much ill is said of them avery
day. But God takes notice, not only
of what is decreed against them, or
sworn against them, or written against
them, or spoken with solemnity and
deliberation, but of what is said against
them in common talk, and He will
reckon for it. His prophets shall
not always be made the song of the
drunkards,"—M. Henry,


Ver. 31. “Merely to hear without
doing makes all preaching unprofit-
able, Strange that sermons of rebuke
should be more attractive than grace-
sermons. Men would rather be smitten
than caressed, They think, perhaps,
that in the love there is too much
of design. If one has been struck
by the cudgel, it is still possible to
preserve one’s heart and head; but
love leaves nothing to one’s self, it
demands all—the whole man and the
whole life.” —Zange.

— “Their heart is on their half-
penny, we say; neither can the load-
stone of God’s Word hale them one jot
from the earth, As serpents have


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


CHAP. XXXIV.


a


their bodies in the water, their heads
out of the water, so here: as those
Gergesites, they mind a swine-sty more
than a sanctuary.”—Trapp.

— “ With all their loud mouth-pro-
fessions of love to God and His ordi-
nances, the love which reigns in their
heart is love of self, of fame, pleasure,
and gain. Covetousness is a grand
rival to the love of God, so that where
the love of Mammon is, there the love
of God is not.” —Fausset,


Ver. 32. “ Mere habit as regards the
hearing of sermons makes. people in-
different, and at last stupid. Pious
sentimentalism is spiritual adultery,
Satan goes with us into church. Edi-
fication and the capacity for it are twe
different things.” — Lange.


Ver, 33. “A true prophet will al-
ways leave beind him the impression
of @ true prophet.”


THE REPROOF OF THE FALSE SHEPHERDS AND A PROMISE OF THE GooD


AND TRUE SHEPHERD.


EXPLANATORY NOTES.—Ver.
1. “ Prophesy against the shepherds.”
“The trouble which the prophet here
encounters arises from the loss of civil
- government. The seeming loss, he
contends, is a real gain, as the present
government was so bad.”—Hengsten-
berg. Keil designates the turning
against the bad shepherds as a foil
for the ensuing promise.


Ver. 2. “Woe to the shepherds.”
The rulers who sought in their govern-
ment their own selfish ends, not the
good of the people ruled. Kliefoth
understands the entire body of offi-
cials who had committed to them the
leadership of the people. The office,
like that of a shepherd for his flock, ia
to guard and provide for his people.


Ver. 3. “ Ye eat the fat, and clothe
you with the wool.” Refers to the
' draining of the subjects. The rulers
levied exorbitant tributes. “ Ye kill
them that are fed "—the culminating
act denoting the murder of the subjects
in order to seize on their goods,


Ver. 4. “That which was driven
away.” “ When Israel was not held
together in the name of Jehovah
through the theocratic offices, the
scattering, the self-abandonment and
,urrender to the worldly powers was
the natural necessary consequence.” —
Lange. “ With force and cruelty have


(Chap. xxxiv.)


ye ruled them.” As the Egyptians
once did to the Israelites (Exod. i. 13,
14)—the native shepherds are no
better than the heathen despots were in
the olden time (comp. Lev. xxv. 43).


Ver. 5. “Because there was no
shepherd "—none worthy of the name,
though there were some called shep-
herds (1 Kings xxii. 17; Matt. ix. 36).
“Became meat to the beasts of the
field "—the heathen nations, the wild
stock. They became a prey to the
Syrians, Ammon, Moab, and Assyria.


Ver. 6. “My sheep—My flock.” The
repeated and emphasised “ My flock”
prepares for the resolutions of Jehovah
that follow. “None did search or
seek after them”—rather seek or
search. “The former is the part of
the superior rulers to enquire after ;
to search out is the duty of the subor-
dinate rulers.”—Junius.


Ver. 10. “I am against the shep-
herds, and require My flock at their
hand.” God had already begun to do
so, having punished Zedekiah with the
deprivation of eyesight, after having
first caused his sons to be killed and
then the other princes to be slain
(Jer. lii. 10).”—Fausset.


Ver. 11. “Behold I, even I.” This
found its most glorious fulfilment in
the appearance of Christ, as vers. 23,
24 expressly announce that God will

355


OHAP. XXXIV.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


 —


execute His pastoral office specially
by the Messiah. Yet, even before the
appearance of Christ the pastoral care
of God was active in the restoration
from the exile and the other gracious
gifts and benefits, which, however, all
point forward to the true fulfilment
and call forth the desire for it,”—
Hengstenberg.


Ver. 12. “The cloudy and dark
day ”"—the dark, afflictive time of the
people of God, when dispersed by the
heathen.


Ver. 14. “I will feed them—upon
the high mountains of Israel "—in
chaps. xvii. 23, xx. 40, the phrase is,
“ the mountain of the height of Israel,”
in the singular number, “The reason
of the differences is, there Ezekiel
spoke of the central seat of the king-
dom, where the people met for the
worship of Jehovah, Mount Zion ; here
he speaks of the kingdom of Israel at
large, all the parts of which are re-
garded as possessing a moral elseva-
tion.” —Fausset.


Ver. 16. “I will feed them with judg-
ment ”—justice and equity, in contrast
with the cruel rigour of the unfaithful
rulers.


Ver. 17. “I judge between cattle
and cattle.” “The officials are with
ver. 10 discharged and gone: the per-
sons concerned can only come into con-
sideration according to their personal
qualities, not according to their official
rank, I judge between one class of
citizens and another, so as to award
what is right to each.”——-Lange, &e.


Ver, 18. “ Ye must foul the residue
with your feet.” Not content with
appropriating to their own use the
good of others, they, from mere wanton-
ness, spoiled what they did not use,
so as to be of no use to the owners.
Grotivs explains the image as referring
to the usuries with which the rich
ground the poor (chap. xxii. 12; Isa,
xxiv, 2).


Ver. 22. “ Therefore will I save My
3&4


flock, and they shall be no more a
prey.” “After the restoration from
Babylon the Jews were delivered in
some degree from the oppression, not
only of foreigners, but also of their
own great people, who had oppressed
with bondage arising out of debts and
mortgages (Neh. v. 1-19). The full
and final fulfilment of this prophecy is
future.” —Fausset,


Ver. 23. “I will set up one Shep-
herd "—“ the complex embodiment of
shepherd watchfulness, as of all the
duties of the shepherd office — the
Divine realisation of the idea of all
that is involved generally in the nature
of the office, as service towards the
community for thesake of God, as sacred
service in behalf of God’s people.”—
Lange. “ With the unity is connected
the glory of the king and his kingdom,
as the decline was connected with the
multiplicity of the shepherds. With
thecoming of that great Shepherd ceases
not only the division of Israel, but also
the separation between Israel and the
heathen.” — Hengstenberg.


Ver. 24. “My servant David a
prince ”—“ the true David, the Mes-
siah, in whom the stem of David is to
culminate. Not a resurrection of
David, but a sending of a David who
has not yet been present.”—Hengsten-
berg. The fittest person to wield the
world-sceptre abused by all the world:
kings (Dan. ii. 34, 35, 44, 45).


Ver. 25. “I will make a covenant
of peace ”—“‘a security against hostile
powers, of which the ‘ceasing of evil
beasts’ symbolises the negative and
the ‘dwelling safely’ the positive side.
Through Christ the people of God are
predominant. The heathen world is
forced from the dominant place which
it had hitherto taken and sinks to the
servile.”—Hengstenberg, &c.


Ver. 26. “Showers of blessing.” “The
Holy Spirit’s reviving influences are
often compared to a refreshing shower
Isa. xliv. 3). The literal fulfilment
is, however, the primary one, though
the spiritual also is designed. In cor-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XXXIV,


-_eeeeooooo— LL SSSSSSSSsSsF#


respondence with the settled reign
of righteousness internally, all is to
be prosperity externally, fertilising
showers (according to the promise of
the ancient covenant, Lev, xxvi. 4;
Ps. Ixviii. 9; Mal. iii, 10) and pro-
ductive trees and lands.”—Fausset.


Ver. 29. “I will raise up for them
@ plant of renown.” According to the
old style of exposition—Messiah, the
Rod, Branch, the Righteous Branch
(Isa, xi. 1; Jer. xxxiii. 5), who shall
obtain for them renown. Hengsten-
berg, Fairbairn, and Geikie translate—
“a plantation for a name;” the soil
which is planted will be famous for its


yield, through the showers of blessing
Va 26). By reason of this fertility
srael shall be renowned among the
heathen as the people blessed of the
Lord.


Ver. 31. ‘‘And ye My flock are
men.” “ What grace when the God of
heaven condescends to men who are
taken from the earth and return to it !
Ps. viii; xxxvi. 8).”—Hengstenberg.
“There is evidently an emphasis on
men. Men are ye ; rememberyour place,
you are merely human; but remember
at the same time that I am your God:
so that without Me nothing, but with
Me all,”—Lange.


HOMILETICS.
A Grave IMPEACHMENT OF UNFAITHFUL RULERS
(Vers. 1-10.)


I. They abused their authority in ministering to their own selfish indulgence
and personal aggrandisement. ‘'‘The shepherds feed themselves Ye eat the
fat and clothe you with the wool” (vers. 2, 3). The ruler is raised to a lofty
dignity and endowed with special resources in order to watch over and protect
the interests of his people. The wants and even the luxuries of life are secured
to him that he may be free to devote his powers to the general good. He is
keenly alive to any act of treachery on the part of his people ; but he is none
the less treacherous when he abuses his high trust in seeking only his own
advantage. He has basely abdicated the highest functions of his kinghood :—

“He's a king,
A true, right king, tnat dare do aught save wrong §
Fears nothing mortal but to be unjust:
Who is not blown up with the fiattering puffs
Of spongy sycophants ; who stands unmovea,
Despite the jostling of opinion.”-—J/arston.


II. They neglected the plainest duties of their office. 1. They made no
provision for the immediate wants of the people. ‘‘Ye feed not the flock” (ver. ae
The first demand of nature is food: where this is denied to a people the result
is riot or starvation. The ruler who is ignorant how to procure food for his
people is incompetent; if he makes no effort to do so he is indolent; if he is
indifferent about it he is cruel, The king should be a father to his people, pro-
viding for. watching over, and protecting them, 2 They had no sympathy
with the afflicted and unfortunate. ‘The diseased have ye not strengthened,
neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that
which was broken” (ver. 4). It is a severe strain on the loyalty of a people
when their sufferings win no pity from their selfish ruler. It is a blot on the
brilliant reign of Queen Elizabeth that the brave seamen who defeated the
Spanish Armada were left to rot in their ships or die in the streets of the naval
ports because there were no hospitals to receive the wounded. “It would
grieve anv man’s heart,” wrote Lord Howard, the High Admiral of bruh ay, “ta

ai


OHAP, XERIV. BOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIE£G.


see men that have served so valiantly die so miserably.” Modern hospitals and
infirmaries are the practical outcome of an enlightened Christian philanthropy.
3. They made no effort to restore the disaffected and the wandering. “ Neither have
ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that
which was lost” (ver. 4). The monarch who is indifferent to the emigration
and social discontent of his people helps to weaken the stability of his kingdom.
Wealth is unsafe in the midst of rebellious poverty :—


“Tl fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates and men decay.”


The formal declaration of William II., Kaiser of Germany, in favour of the
International Regulation of Labour, is one of the most remarkable events, pro-
ceeding direct from imperial authority, of modern times. The oppressed of one
country have enriched other countries to which they fled in their despair. 4.
They retained the name of an office which their conduct had robbed of all practical
meaning. ‘Because there is no shepherd” (vers. 5, 8). They professed to be
shepherds—vigilant, faithful, kind ; but they were unworthy of the name, They
were frauds. ‘The flock was worse off than if it had no shepherd. Better no
shepherd than such shepherds. An honourable man would relinquish an office
the duties of which he was incompetent or unwilling to fulfil.


IIL Their rule was one of tyranny and violence. ‘“ With force and cruelty
have ye ruled them, and they were scattered” (vers, 4,5). It was a cruel irony
of the shepherd-character to deal in blows instead of food, and instead of tend-
ing with care to scatter with terror: the shepherd-garb disguised the fangs and
savagery of the wolf. ‘It is ill with the patient when his physician is his worst
disease.” It is the highest injustice when the ruler uses his great power te
oppress and destroy his people.


IV. They shall be divested of the office they had degraded and called te
account for their misdeeds. “1am ayainst the shepherds, and will require My
flock at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock ; neither shall
the shepherds feed themselves any more” (ver. 10). Tyranny and wrong cannot
last for ever: the reckoning-day comes on apace. In all wickedness there is
weakness that will soon or later be fatal to its reign. It is related of Lord Ampt-
hill, British Ambassador to the Court of Berlin, that during his mission in Rome
he possessed a huge boa-constrictor, and interested himself in watching its
habits. One-day the monster escaped from the box where he supposed it was
asleep, quietly wound itself around his body, and began gradually to tighten ite
folds. His position became extremely perilous; but the consummate coolness
and self-possession which had enabled him to win many a diplomatic triumph
befriended him in this dangerous emergency, He remembered there was a bone
in the throat of the serpent which, if he could find and break, he would save
himself. He was aware that either he or the snake must perish. Not a moment
must be lost in hesitation, He deliberately seized the head of the serpent,
thrust his hand down its throat and snapped the vital bone. The coils were
relaxed, the victim fell at his feet, and he was free. So one day the weak place
in wrong-doing is sure to be smitten and it must succumb. Over the head of
every tyrant there hangs the sword of retributive justice.


Lessons.—l. Treachery in government means suffering among the people. 2. A


just ruler is above the vice of corruption. 3. The highest office cannot protect the
wrong-duer from ultimate exposure and disgrace.


359


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP, XXxrW,





GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers, 1, 2. “Corruption in the upper,
the governing classes, those who give
the tone and measure to society, carries
along with it corruption among the
whole people, and that not merely for
a time, but for ever.—It is a very
honourable title to be called a shep-
herd, but to be so is a heavy burden,
with much trouble, care, and labour.”
—Lange.


Vers, 2-23. “The removal of false
rulers who have ruled for their own
selfish aggrandisement, not for the
glory of God or the real good of their
subjects, is to precede the setting-up
of the coming King, who is to rule in
love and righteousness, Messiah the
Good Shepherd. The Lord Jesus
Christ provides for the eternal well-
being of His own flock, both the elect
remnant of the literal Israel and also
the spiritual Israel, the Church, in-
finitely better than the best of earthly
shepherds ever cared for his sheep.
But the false shepherds of Israel in
Ezekiel’s days cared only for them-
selves and for their own grovelling
aims, selfish gain, and worldly pre-
eminence, like Diotrephes in ages long
subsequent (3 John 9).”—Fausset.


Vers. 2-10. A Bad Shepherd—l.
Is selfish (ver. 2). 2. Avaricious 3 3).
3. Heartless (ver. 4). 4. Cruel (ver. 4
5. A terror to the flock (vers. 5, 6
6. Shall not escape punishment (vers.
7-10).


Ver. 2. “Good shepherds they should
have been, but they were naught (Jer.
xxiii), and naught would come of them
for their maladministration. The sheep
will follow the shepherd. The com-
mon people are like a flock of cranes
—as the first fly, all follow.”—Trapp.

— “There is a woe to those who
are in public trusts, but consult only
their own private interests, and are
more inquisitive about the benefice
than about the office, what money is
to be got than what good is to be


le


done. It is an old complaint, all seek
their own, and too many more than
their own.”—M. Henry.


Ver. 3. “Ye eat the fat.” “This ye
might do, if in measure, for the work-
man is worthy of his wages (1 Cor.
ix. 7), but ye gorge yourselves with
the best of the best. If the belly may
be filled, the back fitted, that is all you
take care for.”—Trapp.

— “Ye kill them.” “ Contrive
methods for a seeming legal course to
forfeit first the life, and next the estate
of the well-fed, rich, and wealthy, and
then make merry and feast as volup-
tuous, unfaithful shepherds feast on the
fattest of the sheep in their masters’
fold.”— Pool.

— “The priests ate the tithes, the
first - fruits and the offerings of the
people ; the princes received the tri-
butes and imposts; and instead of
instructing and protecting them, the
latter took away their lives by the
cruelties they practised against them ;
the former destroyed their souls by
the poison of their doctrine and by
their bad example. The fat sheep
point out the rich, to whom these
pastors often disguised the truth by
a cruel condescension and complai-
sance,”—Calmet.


Vers. 4-6. The Disastrous Effects
of Sin. 1. Disease and suffering
(ver. 4). 2. Enslavement and oppres-
sion (ver. 4). 3. Estrangement and
dispersion (vers. 5, 6). 4. Abandon-
ment to ruin (ver. 5).


Ver. 4. “A timely spiritual refor-
mation of the’state by its rulers would
have averted the judgments of God
altogether, and even in Ezekiel’s time,
when wrath from God had already
descended, faithful conduct on their
part would have been followed by a
mitigation of this punishment and a
restoration of the scattered exiles,”—
Fausset.

— The obligations of the shepherd.

ag9


OBAP. XXXIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





office a mirror of human wretched-
ness.

— “No person is fit for the office of
a shepherd who does not well under-
stand the diseases to which sheep are
incident and the mode of cure. And
is any man fit for the pastoral office,
to be a shepherd of souls, who is not
well acquainted with the disease of
sin in all its varieties, and the remedy
for this disease and the proper mode
of administering it in those various
cases? He who does not know Jesus
Christ as his own Saviour never can
recommend Him to others, He who
is not saved will not save."—A. Clarke,


Ver. 5. “ Not merely in the bodily
but pre-eminently in the spiritual
enemies of the people of God inheres
the wolf-spirit, the devil.”—Schmieder.


Ver. 6. The Qualifications of the
True Shepherd, “1. He knows the
disease of sin and its consequences,
for the Eternal Spirit, by whom he is
called, has convinced him of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment. 2.
He knows well the great remedy for
this disease, the passion and sacrificial
death of the Lord Jesus Christ. 3,
He is skilful and knows how to apply
this remedy. (1.) The healthy and
sound he knows how to keep in health,
and cause them to grow in grace and
in the knowledge of Jesus Christ. (2.)
Those in a state of convalescence he
knows how to cherish, feed, and care
for, that they may be brought into a
state of spiritual soundness, (3.) Those
still under the whole power of the
general disease, how to reprove, in-
struct, and awaken. (4.) Those dying
in a state of spiritual weakness, how
to find out and remove the cause, (5.)
Those fallen into sin and sorely bruised
and broken in their souls by that fall,
how to restore. (6.) Those driven
away by temptation and cruel usage,
how to find out and turn aside the
temptation and cruel usage. (7.)
Those who have wandered from


360


the flock, got into strange pastures,
and are perverted by erroneous doc-
trines, how to seek and bring them
back to the fold. (8.) Those among
whom the weit has got and scattered
the flock, how to oppose, confound,
and expel the wolf. He knows how
to preach, explain, and defend the
truth. He is well acquainted with
the weapons he has to use, and the
spirit in which he has to employ them.
In a werd, the true shepherd gives up
his life to the sheep, in their defence,
and in labouring for their welfare.
And while he is thus employed, it is
the duty of the flock to feed and clothe
him, and see that neither he nor his
family lack the necessaries and con-
veniences of life.”—4. Clarke.


Vers. 7-10. The Divine Judgment
on Unfaithful Ministers—1. Js pre-
ceded by a clearly detailed indictment of
offences (ver. 8), 2. Is the expression of
the righteous indignation of God against
wrong-doing. ‘I am against the shep-
herds” (ver. 10.) 3. Demands a strict
account of the trust so grossly violated.
“T will require My flock at their hand”
(ver. 10). 4. Deprives the offenders of
all their power and emoluments, “TI will
cause them to cease from feeding the
flock, neither shall the shepherds feed
themselves any more” (ver. 10). 5.
Is mingled with tender sympathy for those
who have suffered from neglect and oppres-
sion. “I will deliver My flock from
their mouth, that they may not be
meat for them” (ver. 10).

— “The frightful judgment which is
contained even in the beautiful name
of the Shepherd.”—Lange,


Ver. 8. “God here seemeth to be
in a great heat, in a perturbation of
spirit, causing a kind of impediment
in His speech—‘ As I live: surely
because’ — 80 thoroughly was He
moved against these lewd shepherds,
whose faults He rippeth up again to
make better way to their sentence.”—.
Trapp.


HOMILETICS.
Gon’s Care over His Propue,
(Vers. 11-31.)


The unfaithful shepherds, who have occupied so prominent a place in the
prophet’s vision, now sink into the background, They have been arraigned,
and judgment passed upon them, They are disposed of, And now, by one of
those skilful dramatic changes so characteristic of the genius of Ezekiel, the
space out of which the delinquents have vanished is filled with the presence of
Jehovah, and, while we gaze, shade after shade of the Divine character is
artistically Geveloped with inimitable delicacy of touch, until we are enraptured
with a picture of the unutterable tenderness and majesty of the God of Israel.
The prophecy is full of consolation to the stricken nation, and is intended to in-
spire hope in the breasts of the disconsolate exiles, It is a sublime and graphic
description of God’s care over His people, as we shall see in the following analysis.


I, He will gather together the dispersed. 1. He will seck for them with
tender solicitude (vers. 11-13). In contrast with the heartless rapacity of the
rulers, who robbed and scattered His people, Jehovah will show that His concern
for their welfare springs from unselfish though unrequited love. He seeks not
His own advantage, but theirs. As the anxious shepherd plods over fell and
moorland, through stony valleys and thorny brakes, in search of his wandering
sheep, so the Lord will penetrate into all places where His affrighted people have
sought temporary shelter “in the cloudy and dark day.” The loving heart is reck-
less of toil and undismayed by the most formidable difficulties, 2 He will make
ample provision for their needs (vers. 14-16). He finds them famished, dispirited,
wounded ; but He “ will feed them in a good pasture, will bind up that which
is broken, and strengthen that which is sick.” Though His providence has been
abused and His counsel disregarded, their sufferings move His pity and their
wants evoke His benevolence. Even our sins cannot stem the perennial outflow
of the Divine goodness. But how inveterate and aggravated is sin committed
in the presence of such unceasing kindness! 3. He will provide for them a place
of safety. ‘There shall they lie in a good fold” (ver. 14). Defended from the
harassing exactions of false shepherds, and from the ravages of wolfish enemies,
they shall forget the weariness and fear of their long, tedious wanderings in
the restfulness and security with which they are now enfolded. It is not enough
for God to seek and find the lost ; His purpose is not accomplished until they
are safely sheltered within the arms of His omnipotent love.


II. He will deal with them according to individual merit (vers. 17-22).
Even Divine iove is strictly discriminative. Its affluence embraces all, but its
personal realisation is regulated by the moral condition of the recipient. Love
that is not governed by wisdom and justice loses strength and sanctity. “1
judge between cattle and cattle”—between men and men. God has an infallible
insight into character, and marks shades of distinction imperceptible to us,
He sees elements of good where our purblind sense sees nothing but evil, and
detects the presence of sin underneath the fairest show of virtue. He knows
how to encourage the weak and timid, and how to restrain the strong and for-
ward, He knows how to succour the oppressed, and to mete out justice to
the oppressor. It is better to fall into the hands of God than be at the mercy
of the most impartial earthly judge.

36]


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


Ie re a eee


III. He will provide for them THE Good Shepherd. 1. A Ruler of
singular and peerless worth. The One Shepherd, the Shepherd-King, as was
David, His antitype (ver. 23), Their many shepherds had been unfaithful,
avaricious, heartless, cruel. ‘hey had oppressed and scattered the flock. The
One Good Shepherd would be beyond the reach of corruption or intimidation,
He will rule in equity, He will gently lead and bravely defend His people.
He will sacrifice His life for the sheep. Others had destroyed: He will save.
2. The rule of the Good Shepherd will bring them into closer personal relationship to
God. “I the Lord will be their God” (ver. 24), The tyranny of the false
shepherds had driven the people from God, and fostered in their distracted
minds doubts as to His righteousness and goodness. But under the gracious
regimen of the Good Shepherd all this will be changed. They shall learn that
the covenant promise is unrevoked—Jehovah is still their God. The govern-
ment of the Divine Prince is not merely legal and social, but intensely and
supremely spiritual. It is the rule of God, for God, and leading to God. Such
rule may be slow and gradual in its development, but it is ever bringing us
nearer to God, and revealing His purposes and character.


OHAP, XXXIV.


“ God’s plans, like lilies pure and white, unfold 3
We must not tear the close, short leaves apart.
Time will reveal the calyxes of gold.”


IV. He will endow them with unprecedented blessings. 1. Peace (ver. 25).


2. Prosperity (vers. 26, 27). 3. Safety (vers. 25, 28). 4. Impertshable renown
(ver. 29). 5. Union with the Divine (vers. 30, 31).


Lessons.—The Divine care. 1. 4 source of comfort to the afflicted. 2. Of hope
to the penitent. 3. Of strength and hope to the diligent.
GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 11-31. “The description clude that all the rest must receive a


throughout is of an ideal kind. The
prophet foretells simply the nature of
the coming future under the form of
the old landmarks and well-known
relations. The best of the past shall
revive again; more than revive, it
shall appear free from the defects that
formerly intermingled with it, clothed
with a perfection and completeness
hitherto unknown. But while the
substance should thus coincide in the
new and the old, it is not obscurely
intimated that the shell would ma-
terially differ ; for certainly the litera}
David should not be the Prince in
whom the promise was to stand, but
One unspeakably greater than he.
When the promised Shepherd was
found to be the glorious and mighty
Lord, to whom, as David in the spirit
foresaw, the heritage, not of Canaan,
but of all lands and all nations be-
longed, it behoved the Jews to con-
362


corresponding enlargement; the re-
gion, the people, the inheritance of
blessing, must severally be what the
old but represented and typified. What
Canaan would have been with its
David restored again, and all its cove-
nant blessings enjoyed in richest pro-
fusion, such, in the new and higher
sphere of the Messiah’s Kingdom, shall
the whole domain be over which He
is the Lord, when this promise of good
things to come attains to its full and
final accomplishment. We see the
word beginaing to take effect, even
before Messiah came, in the partial
re-establishment of the Divine King-
dom within the ancient bounds, and,
as far as was needed, for the higher
purposes of the Kingdom. We see it
advancing afterwards towards its riper
fulfilment, when the great object of the
prediction came and did the part of
the Good Shepherd by avenging for


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP, XKXIV.





ever the cause of His elect and laying
the sure foundation of His everlasting
inheritance, And we see it travelling
on to its full and destined realisation
in every conquest made by the truth
of God over the darkness and corrup-
sion of the world.”—Fairbairn,


Vers. 11-16. The Divine solicitude,
Seen—1. In active endeavours to
restore the wandering (vers. 11-13,
16). 2. In bountifully supplying the
wants of the people (vers. 13-15). 3,
In affording security and rest (vers.
14, 15). 4, In the sympathetic treat-
ment of the terrified and afflicted
(ver. 16).


Ver. 11. “Rather than the work
shail be undone, I will do it myself,
and then it is sure to be well done,
Aristotle tells of a certain Persian who,
being asked, ‘What did most of all
ieed the horse ?’ answered, ‘ The mas-
ter’s eye;’ and of a certain African
who, when it was demanded, ‘ What
was the best manure or soil for a field?”
answered ‘The owner's footsteps’—
that is, his presence and perambula-
tion, Shepherds should reside with
their flocks; the Arch-shepherd will
not fail to do so.” —Trapp.

— “Though magistrates and minis-
ters fail in doing their part for the
good of the Church, God will not fail
in doing His, He will take the flock
into His own hand rather than the
Church shall come short of any kind-
ness He has designed for it. The
under-sheplerd may prove careless,
but the Chief Shepherd neither slum-
bers nor sleeps. They may be false,
but God abides faithful."—U/. Henry.


Ver. 12. “ When things are at the
worst God himself will set in: He
reserveth His holy hand for a dead
lift.” —T'rapp.


Ver. 13. “This prophecy primarily
respected their restoration from cap-
tivity in Babylon, and was in part at
least fulfilled when so many thousands
of them returned to their own land
under the conduct of Zerrubabel, Ezra,


and others, It seems, however, to look
still further, even to the general re-
storation of the whole Jewish nation
from their present wide dispersion
over the whole world, which restora-
tion most of the prophets foretell shall
be effected in the latter days. But
there is no need to confine this pro-
mise wholly to the Jews. When those
in any age or nation that have gone
astray from God are brought back by
repentance; when those that erred
come to the acknowledgment of the
truth; when God’s outcasts are gath-
ered and restored, and religious as-
semblies that were dispersed are again
collected and united upon the ceasing
of persecution ; and when the Churches
have rest and liberty, then this pre-
diction has a true accomplishment.”—
Benson.


Ver. 13. “The Divine refreshments,
images of the spiritual here, of the
eternal hereafter.” —Lange.


Ver. 15. “Food and rest, the twe
great necessities of human life. Their
rest will nourish them, and their nour-
ishment will bring them new rest.
Rest—true, eternal repose, is only to
be had under the shepherd-staff of
Christ.”—Lange.


Vers. 16-22. The Divine justice.
1. Will punish the wanton abuse of
prosperity (ver. 16). 2. Will dis-
criminate between the rich and poor,
the strong and weak, the oppressor
and oppressed (vers. 17-22}, 3. Will
deliver the abused captives (vers,
21, 22).


Ver. 16. The Lord’s inspection of the
flock at the same time a call to self-
examination.

— “The Lord feeds with judgment,
that 1s, with befitting difference, since
He dispenses to each what is proper
tv him. He performs to the weak no
more than is good for them. The
children he feeds with milk, and de-
fends them. He acts mildly or severely,
consoles, frightens, blames, caresses, as
at any time is good for us. For the

863


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL.


eee —


fearful He relaxes the reins, and those
who place their confidence in Him He
draws to Himself. If some are fat and
corrupt the weak, He takes from their
strength. Some are proud of the gifts
lent to them, and despise the simplicity
of others; for these it is good when
they are humbled and are deprived of
their gifts, so that they may obtain
the salvation of Christ. Thus He ac-
complishes the judgment and the sepa-
ration between sheep and sheep; and
so each one should be concerned about
himself, and not trouble himself re
specting others. The separation is
already going on here in secret, but at
last it will become manifest and be
seen to issue in a wide gulf. A stern
judge is the Good Shepherd. Not
merely the unscrupulous leaders of the
flock, but even the sheep themselves,
will be brought to account by Him.”


—Lange.


Ver. 17. “‘T judge between cattle
and cattle.’ Between false and true
professors, between them that have
only the form and them that have the
power of godliness, between the back-
slider in heart and the upright man.”
—A, Clarke.


Ver. 18. “Ye abuse God’s mercies,
you consume much upon yourselves,
and ye spoil more on which the poor
would have been glad to feed. There
are some who would rather give food
to their sporting dogs than to the poor
around them who are ready to starve,
and would be glad of the crumbs that
fall from the table of those masters,”
—A, Clarke.

— “Would our so-called men of
culture also but consider it, who only
tread under foot the pure doctrine, or
trouble it by their goat-like gambols,”
—Lange.


Ver. 21. “The mischievous polemic
in the Church. A theology that is
quarrelsome and combative scatters
the Churches in the world.”—Lange.


Vers, 23-31. The Good Shepherd.
1. The Divine Prince (ver. 23). 2.


364


Shall ensure peace, safety, prosperity,
and victory (vers, 25-28). Shall be
come pre-eminent in dignity and great
ness by what He does for His people
(vers. 29, 30). 4. Shall exalt His
people into a Divinely-ennobled man-
hood (ver. 31).


Vers. 23, 24, “The One Shepherd, -
according to the promise in its fulfil-
ment: 1. His official position through
all times, 2, His shepherd-service in
the flesh and in the spirit. 3. His
personality in respect to God and as
regards the flock.” —Lange,


Ver. 23. “ Who indeed is the only
Shepherd. Magistrates and ministers
are shepherds ; but Christ is the Good
Shepherd (Jno. x. 11); the Great
Shepherd and Bishop of Souls (1 Peter
ii, 25; Heb. xiii. 20); the True Shep-
herd above all for skill, love, and
power, above Jacob, above David, of
whom He is descended, and by whose
name He is here called (Jer. xxx. 9;
Hosea iii 5; Ezek. xxxvii. 24),”—
Trapp.

— “Messiah, the True Shepherd, who
hath given Himself this name both in
the Prophets and in the Gospel, and
who hath perfectly fulfilled all the
duties, the characters whereof have
been before described. He is called
David because He sprung from David
according to the flesh, because He
possessed eminently and really all
those qualities which the Scriptures
give to David as the type of the
Messiah, and because He was the
person in whom all the promises made
to David were fulfilled. Though this
prophecy was in & great measure com-
pleted when Christ by the preaching
of the Gospel gathered into one the
children of God, among whom were
many of the lost sheep of Israel, yet it
will receive a further completion at the
general conversion of the Jews.”—
Calmet.

— “David. 1, As tothe name, His
beloved (Matt. iii. 17). 2. As to His
birth in Bethlehem, 3. As to His
humble state and littleness (Isa, liii. 3),
4. As to His shepherd-service. 6. As


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


CHAP. XXXIV,





to His anointing, 6. As to His de-
votedness : David for the law, Christ
for the flock. 7. As to His victories,”
—Starke.

— “ David, king of Israel, had been
dead upwards of 400 years, and from
that time till now there never was a
ruler of any kind, either in the Jewish
Church or state, of the name of David.
This then must be some typical person,
and from the texts marked in the
margin we understand that Jesus
Christ alone is meant, as both Old
and New Testaments agree in this,
And from this one Shepherd all Chris-


tian ministers must derive their autho- |


rity to teach and their grace to teach
effectually.”—A. Clarke. The ancient
Jews allowed that the Messiah was
meant in this place.


Ver, 24. “This is that beehive of
heavenly honey we so oft meet with
in the Old Testament, which therefore
the sectaries have so little reason to
reject.” —Trapp.


Ver. 25. “‘I will make with them
a covenant of peace ’—I will cut with
them the peace covenant ; a covenant
sacrifice, procuring and establishing
peace between God and man ; and be-
tween manand his fellows. The cutting
refers to the ancient mode of making
covenants. The blood was poured out,
the animal was divided from mouth
to tail, exactly in two, the divisions
placed opposite to each other, the con-
tracting parties entered into the space,
going in at each end, and met in the
middle, and there took the covenant
oath. He is the Prince of Peace, and
through Him come glory to God in
the highest, and peace and good-will
to men upon earth,”—A. Clarke.

— “The evil beasts in the land—
spiritual false guides, worldly perse-
cutors, plausible hypocrites.”—Lange.


Ver. 26. The Church a source of
blessing. 1. As it ts the dwelling-place
of God. “My hill.” 2. As tt is enriched
with a plenitude of Divine grace. “I
will cause the shower to come down
in his season: there shall be showers


of blessing.” 3. As it is faithful and
active in diffusing tts God-given benefits.
“T will make them and the places
round about a blessing.”

— There the Church is a blessing
where there is the rain of the Holy
Spirit. Without this rain nothing
grows in the Kingdom of God: one
cannot even say Jesus is Lord (1
Cor. xii, 3).


Ver. 28. Spiritual boldness. “1.
Over against the powers of the world,
2. Over against the wickedness of sin,
3. Over against the transitoriness and
uncertainty of our earthly life. 4. Over
against the solicitude of our own heart.”
—Lange.


Ver. 29. “*TI will raise up a plant of
renown ’—a plantation to the name:
to the name of Christ. The words
might be applied to the Christian
Church ; but that Christ may be called
a plant or plantation here—as He is
elsewhere called a branch and a rod
(Isa, iv. 2; xi. 1; Jer. xxiii. 5; xxxv.
15)—is most probable. He is the
person of name—Jesus; who has a
name above every name, at whose
name every knee shall bow ; through
whose name, by faith in His name, the
diseased are healed; and in whose
name all our prayers and supplications
must be presented toGod. This is the
person of Name !”—Clarke,

— “Christ, the true tree of life.
Or the Church, planted and rooted in
Christ, and much renowned all the
world over. Christ mystical is a vine
covering the whole earth.”—Trapp.

— “The Kingdom of the Anointed
a planting, inasmuch as the members
of the Kingdom are—1. Sown by the
Word. 2. Reared, fostered by the
Holy Spirit. 3. Grown in time for
eternity, to the honour of God the
Father.” —Lange.

— “Hungering after righteousnessas
the means and preservative against the
eternal hunger and distress on account
of sin; hungeragainst hunger, asthe way


to everlasting satisfaction.” Lange


Vers, 30, 31. “ All these promises be
365


OWAP. XXXV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


ee


long also to us, if we be true believers
in Christ. Then we can say, ‘The
Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not
want.’ When we were wandering on
the mountains of error, Jesus sought
us and brought us safely into the fold.
He feeds us in the green pastures of
His ordinances now. He leads us in
paths of righteousness, and makes us
to lie down at rest, reposing on His
love ; and will at last bring us to the
heavenly land of promise, where we
shall hunger no more and thirst no
more, and our shame shall be turned
into everlasting glory.” —Fausset.


Ver. 30. “Only by the way do the
pilgrims of God doubt; not at the
beginning, and at the end not at all.
At first they proceed in faith, at last
they shall see face to face.” —Lange.


Ver. 31. “ Under the more imme-
diate interpretation of the similitude
that men are meant, there is at the
same time indicated the universality
of grace; that not Israel alone but
Adam, humanity, are named as the
flock ; and the greatness also of the
grace is perceptible in this, that Israel
is not designated by its honourable


Tue UTTER RUIN OF


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver, 2.
“Mount Seir”—Idumea, the woody
mountain region in the south of that
part of Palestine which lies to the
east of Jordan from the Dead Sea to
the Atlantic Gulf. “Seir” means
shaggy, alluding to its rugged hills and
forests, and originally to Esau, the
ancestor of Edom (Gen, xxv. 25;
xxvii. 11).


Ver. 3. “I will make thee most
desolate” —literally desolation and deso-
lateness. “It is only in their national
character of foes to God’s people that
the Edomites are to be utterly de-
stroyed. A remnant of Edom, as of
the other heathen, is to be called by
the name of God (Amos ix. 12).”—
Fausset.

386


name, that which expresses its election
of grace, but man, which calls to re-
membrance dust of the ground, sin,
and death.”—Schmieder.

— “This is a chapter which both
magistrates and rulers of the Church
ought to meditate upon very seriously.
The complaints that God here makes
of false shepherds, and the curses He
denounces against them, show that it
is the duty of pastors, with their
utmost diligence, to watch over the
sheep with which they are entrusted,
and to provide with care and readiness
for all their wants, and that if they
fail herein they must give a severe
account to God for it. This too lays
an obligation upon princes and magis-
trates to govern faithfully and justly
the people committed to their trust.
What befell the Jews, who for the
unfaithfulness of their prophets and
magistrates were utterly destroyed,
shows that it is the greatest misfortune
to a nation to have wicked rulers, and
that all who were concerned for the
glory of God and the happiness and
edification of the Church have great
reason to pray to God that He would
always raise up to His people faithful
and good pastors.” —Ostervald.


IpumEA. (Chap. xxxv.)


Ver. 5. “A perpetual hatred ”—
enmity for ever, an abiding enmity,
Edom perpetuated the hereditary
hatred derived from Esau against
Jacob. ‘By the force of the sword”
—by the hands of the sword, the sword
being personified as a devourer whose
hands were the instruments of destruc-
tion. “In the time their iniquity had
an end”—its consummation. ‘ Oppres-
sion of brethren calls at once for the
exercise of compassion, which is best
manifested where no one is innocent.
When guilt makes the end, ancient
enmity should not be let loose.”—
Lange


Ver. 6. “Sith thou hast not hated
blood ”—rather the affirmative, Surely
thou dost hate blood. “The preserva


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZERIEL


GHAP. XXXV.





tion of thy life is what thou art intent
on securing. The thought of blood
being shed among thee is what thou
art putting far from thee as the object
of aversion; but God’s purposes are
contrary to thine, and what thou
hatest He will send—blood shall pur-
sue thee.”— Fairbairn. ‘The effusion
of blood, of thy own blood, shall cleave
fast to thy footsteps. The murderer
hates the blood which he sheds, If
he hates the man with such an energy
of hate that he attempts his life, he
hates the blood in which is the man’s
soul.” —Hengstenberg.


Ver. 7. “ Cut off from it him that
passeth” There is no going to and
fro—no traffic. Hence the desolation
of death. A retribution in kind, that
she should be cut off herself, even as
she stood in the crossway to cut off
the Israelites who escaped (Obad. 14).


Ver. 10. ‘Whereas the Lord was
there.” “It is not said the Lord is
there, but was there. For a moment
He had withdrawn Himself (chap.
xi. 23); but that He was there secures
that He will be there, since He has
not yet definitely given up His inheri-
tance. Where God is in the midst
there Edom cannot possibly gain a
footing, though He give over His
people even for a long time to the
foe.” — Hengstenberg.


Ver. 11. “I will do according to
thine anger.” ‘“ From the hating come
anger and envy, expressing themselves
not only in word but also in deed.
Jehovah acts according to Edom’s
doings.” —Lange.


Ver. 13. “With your mouth ye
have boasted against me.” Edom im-
plied, if he did not express it, in hie
taunts against Israel, that God had
not sufficient power to protect His
people. A type of the spirit of all the
foes of God and His people (1 Sam.
ii, 3; Rev. xiii. 6).


Ver. 14. ‘‘When the whole earth
rejoiceth, I will make thee desolate.”
“The ‘whole earth’ refers to Judea
and the nations that submit them-
selves to Judea’s God. When these
rejoice, the foes of God and His people,
represented by Edom as a nation, shall
be desolate. Things shall be com-
pletely reversed : Israel, that now for
a time mourns, shall then rejoice, and
that forever. Edom, that now rejoices
over fallen Israel, shall then, when
elsewhere all is joy, mourn, and for
ever (Isa. Ixv. 17-19; Matt. v. 4;
Luke vi. 25).”—Fausset.


Ver. 15. ‘“‘Mount Seir, and all
Idumea, even all of it”—set in con-
trast to the inheritance of the house of
Israel.


HOMILETICS.
Tue Enemies or Gon
(Vers, 1-15.)


It sounds strange to hear again the voice of denunciation interposed in the
midst of prophecies full of consolation and hope. The doom of Edom has been
dealt with in chapter xxv., but it is introduced once more in perfect harmony
with the immediate design of the prophet, which is to show that the future
triumph of Israel will be assured by the utter defeat of her bitterest enemies.
Idumea, savagely gloating over the downfall of its hated rival, and eagerly tak-
ing possession of the desolated land, had an apparent superiority over Israel.
The real advantage was still with the people of God. With them was deposited
the seed of Divine blessing, the germ of a glorious future. In Idumea no such
germ existed. There was nothing there but inveterate hostility to Jehovah,
and no prospect but that of ultimate ruin. ‘“ While Israel rose in Christ te

367


OuAP. XXXV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


a


the supremacy of the world, Eom vanished from the face of history—their
memorial perished, their envy and cruel hatred were for ever buried among the
ruins of the nations.” The Edomites represent the heathen world and all who
have rebelled against and opposed the truth, and in their destruction we read
the ultimate fate of the enemies of God in all ages. Observe—


I That the enemies of God are actuated by a spirit of malignant hatred.
“Because thou hast had a perpetual hatred” (ver. 5). The enmity existing
between Jacob and Ksau from their birth was fostered with increasing aggrava-
tion by the descendants of the latter. Immediately after the death of Isaac,
Esau settled in Edom, and conquered the rocky territory in the neighbourhooé
of Mount Seir. From their mountain heights, overleoking the southern border
of the Holy Land, the Edomites watched with undisguised envy the growing
power of the favoured tribes. Their hatred became more acrid and implacable
in every succeeding generation. As the father of Hannibal caused his son,
when only nine years of age, to swear at the altar eternal hatred to the Romana,
so the sons of Edom were pledged to maintain unceasing hostility to Israel,
Time, which mollifies the fiercest passions, only intensified the ever-cherished
malice of the Edomites, and they embraced every opportunity to make it mani-
fest. The wild unreasoning hatred of the Edomites is a type of the malignant
opposition of the enemies of God. This deplorable condition of mind is an
evidence of the demoralising effect of sin, It is not simply a dull, sullen indif-
ference, but an ungovernable, demoniacal passion, horribly real in its activity.
Goodness is hated because it is good: God is hated because He is God.


II. That the enemies of God are infatuated with the fury of their opposi-
tion. 1. They eault over the disasters of God’s people. ‘Thou didst rejoice at the
inheritance of Israel, because it was desolate” (ver. 15), As Edom watched the
advancement of Israel with envy, so it noted the invasion and dismemberment
of the kingdom with chuckling satisfaction. When the Israelites were prostrate
and groaning under the triumphant Chaldean power, Edom laughed at their
misfortunes, There is a laughter that is utterly joyless, harsh, metallic, ringing
with scorn and an indescribable contemptuousness. It is the laughter of in-
veterate hatred—an inhuman guffaw. It is thus that the enemies of God exult
over the temporary defeat of His people. 2. They take a savage delight in helping
to make those disasters more complete. ‘*Thou hast shed the blood of the children
of Israel by the force of the sword in the time of their calamity ” (ver. 5).
Edom, forgetful of all ties of kinship, sent troops to assist the Chaldeans in the
siege of Jerusalem. More cruel than the Chaldeans, they clamoured for the
total destruction of the city, and exclaimed with fiendish gesticulations—“ Rase
it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof” (Ps. cxxxvii. 7). They eagerly
took part in plundering the city, they occupied the passes and cut off the
retreat of the fugitives who escaped the massacre at the storming, and openly
rejoiced when the citizens were carried off into slavery, boasting loudly of their
share in the terrible catastrophe (Obad, 11-14). They were never forgotten for
their base and cruel treachery. The enemies of God not only make sport of
the misfortunes of His people, but show their vindictiveness in doing all they
can to intensily their sufferings, 3. They seize with avaricious huste the possessions
they help to ruin, ‘These two countries shall be mine, and we will possess it”
(ver. 10). The Edomites not only re-entered the cities captured from them by
David when he was settling the boundaries of the Hebrew empire, but they
mace inroa‘s into Southern Palestine, taking possession of the towns as far as
Hebron. The race of the warrior kings of Judah who had kept them in check
was extinct, and the country was too feeble to resist the rapacity of the Idu-
means. The enemies of God are ever eager to make gain out of the troubles

368 ; |


Supe tee





Cee mene, See


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, , CHAP. XXXY.





they have helped to create. 4. They are ignorant of the Power they rashly defy,
“Whereas the Lord was there” (ver. 10). What a sublime stroke of the pro-
phetic pen! The sentence breaks in like a flash of lightning—the Lord is there |
The land is desolate, but not forsaken ; conquered, but not surrendered. Israel
has been carried away, but not Israel’s God. The land and the people still
belong to Him. This fact is flashed out to rebuke the presumption of Edom ;
but Edom sees it not, heeds it not. Like all the enemies of God, in his blind
infatuation he wrestles with a Power that ultimately crushes him.


III. That the enemies of God will be fnevitably destroyed. 1. Their destruc
tion will be a Divine act. ‘I will stretch out mine hand against thee” (ver. 3).
The Being they had insulted and defied vindicated His honour and supremacy
by their righteous punishment. Josephus informs us that, soon after the
destruction of Jerusalem, Nebuchadnezzar turned his arms against Edom and
the adjoining nations and defeated them with great slaughter, As in the con-
quest of Israel, Nebuchadnezzar was the instrument of Jehovah in working out
the doom of Edom. Jeremiah (chap, xlix.), Ezekiel (chaps. xxv., xxxv.), and
Obadiah describe in graphic language the fearful ravage of the Chaldean forces.
The ordinary raids of robber tribes might be beaten off, for the Edomites had
a reputation for warlike valour; but the Chaldees were irresistible, and were
accustomed to do their work with desolating thoroughness. The enemies of
God are helpless when His power is put forth to chastise. 2. Their destruction
will be on account of their inveterate wickedness. ‘‘ I will do according to thine
anger, envy, hatred, blasphemies, boasting’’ (vers. 11-13, 15). Their malignity
towards God and His chosen people was hereditary, and was nourished from
generation to generation. Their impregnable position among the hills increased
their haughtiness ; they boasted of the wisdom of their great men, and they
had all the insolence of wealth, their country being situated in the route of
commerce from north to south. They were continually stirring up the jealousies
of the tribes, and were always as sharp thorns in the side of Israel. But their
course of wickedness had an end ; their sins ruined them. 38. Their destruction
will be by the same weapon with which they destroyed others. ‘‘ Because thou hast
shed blood by the force of the sword’’ (vers. 5, 6). The law of retribution is
ever operating with surprising exactitude and impartiality. Edom had wrought
incredible horrors with the sword and been reckless in shedding human blood.
By the sword shall he be punished, and be surfeited with a verv carnival
of slaughter and bloodshed. Joab was slain by the weapon with which he
murdered Abner and Amasa years previously (1 Kings ii. 28-34). Dogs lapped
the blood and picked the bones of Jezebel, as they had done to Naboth, the
victim of her fury, fifteen years before (2 Kings ix. 36). 4. Their destruction will:
be complete and irrevocable. ‘1 will make thee most desolate” (vers. 3, 4, 7, 9,
15). Thirty ruined towns within three days’ journey of the Red Sea attest the
former greatness of Edom, The utter desolation that fell on the country and
on the descendants of Esau is one of the most impressive facts of history. They
were formerly distinguished for wisdom, now they are sunk in the grossest folly.
They regard the ruins around them as the work of spirits. The tribes now
wandering in Edom are savage and treacherous. Even the Arabs are afraid to
enter the country, or to conduct any party within its borders. The desolation is
irrecoverable, and travellers state that the whole region is a vast expanse of sand
drifted up from the Red Sea (Isa, xxxiv. 6-15; Jer. xlix. 7-22). The enemies
of God will be smitten beyond the power of recovery. 5. Their destruction will
be a vindication of the character uf the Being they madly oppose. “Thou shalt know
that I am the Lord” (vers. 4, 9, 11, 12, 15).


LEssONs.—l1. Active opposition to the good is the offspring of intensified hatred.
24 369


OHAP. XXXV.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





2. It is utterly futile to oppose God. 3, The Divine vengeance may be averted by


timely submission and repentance,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 1-15. “ Why, in this connec-
tion, should Edom have alone been
singled out for destruction? Not as if
her people only were appointed to suf-
fer vengeance at the hand of God, but
because, in the bitterness of their spite
and the intensity of their hatred to
the cause and people of God, they
stood pre-eminent among the nations,
and so were fitly chosen as the repre-
sentatives of the whole. The region
where the greatest enmity reigned is
the ideal territory where the final
recompenses of judgment take place.
The Edomite spirit, the carnal, unbe-
lieving, rebellious spirit, is most surely
doomed to perdition: enmity to the
cause and kingdom of Christ is marked
out in the councils of heaven for irre-
trievable ruin. ‘They who are of it
cannot overthrow the Church, but
must themselves be overthrown and
fall under the stroke of vengeance,”—
Fairbairn.


Ver, 3. ‘“ When punishments break
in and are already taking their course,
in this God, as it were, stretches out
His hand. Now, since His hand is
not shortened to help His children, so
also it is not too weak to punish His
enemies (Isa. lix. 1).”—Starke.


Ver, 4. “ When godliness goes out
of cities, confusion and devastation
enter in. We can never sufficiently
recognise that God alone is eternal,”—


Lange.


Vers, 5-7. Hatred—l. One of the
fruits of sin, 2. A prolific source of
other evil passions, 3. Is intensified in
virulence the longer it is cherished. 4.
Prompts to deeds of cruelty and blood-
shed, 5. Will be signally punished,

— “The fiercest mutual hatred had
for centuries thrust apart the brother-
races of Jacob and Esau. The refusal
of a passage through Mount Seir to

370


the Hebrews under Moses, in their
march from Egypt nine hundred years
before, had entailed the long sufferings of
the wilderness life, and had never been
forgotten. Under Joram, Amaziah,
and Uzziah in succession, it had been
virtually a Jewish province, till the
reign of the weak Ahaz The destruc-
tion of Jerusalem, however, had at
last given the Edomites a chance of
revenge, and they had indulged it to
the uttermost.”—Ceikie.


Ver. 5. “Edom was of the same
stock, brother to Jacob, and it was
sin to envy, but greater to hate, and
greatest to retain a perpetual hatred,
an hereditary enmity from Esau’s
time, the father of the Edomites, till
now : near one thousand two hundred
years had the seed of Esau hated
Jacob’s seed for inheriting the bless-
ing, which they as little valued as their
father did before them.”—Pool.

— “To afflict the afflicted is cruel,
This is scarcely of man, bad as he is.
He must be possessed by the malignant
spirit of the devil, when he wounds
the wounded, exults over the miseries
of the afflicted, and seeks opportuni-
ties to add affliction to those who are
already under the rod of God.”—A.
Clarke.

— “Edom is often in Scripture made
the type of the most bitter and in-
veterate enemies of God’s people in
all ages. The hatred of brothers,
when they are at variance, is pro-
verbially rancorous, Such was Esau’s
hatred of Jacob, though the latter
averted it by soft words and con-
ciliatory acts; and such was the in-
herited bitterness of Esau’s descendanta
towards Israel.”—Fausset.

— “ Where enmity leads to: it per
petuates itself by degrees in the heart ;
it is not afraid even to use the sword:
first the malice of the tongue, and
then the violence of malice. There


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP, EXXV.


—_———— eee


fore, always become reconciled at once
and completely, that no roots may
remain in the heart which may shoot
up afterwards.—The prayer of an im-
placable man is certain not to be
heard.”—Lange.


Ver. 6. “Even blood shall pursue
thee.” “As a bloodhound. It shall,
it shall ; believe me, it shall."—Trapp.

— “The track of blood behind so
many celebrated figures in history,
behind so many so-called great ex-
ploits.—The shedding of blood a char-
acteristic symptom of the world, a
mark of the spirit that rules in the
world, and of the wickedness in which
it lies." —Lange.


Ver. 7. “ Trade and intercourse cease
where God sends His judgments. The
Lord destroys nations that delight in
war.” —Lange.


Ver. 9. ‘ Edom’s sin was perpetual
hatred, and Edom’s punishment shall
be perpetual desolations. Edomites
would never return into friendship with
the Israelites, but still hate, molest,
and waste them ; now, for just recom-
pense, Edom’s cities shall be wasted,
and never return to their former glory.”
— Pool.

— “Sin is not to become eternalised ;
therefore eternal punishment.”—Starck.


Ver. 10. ‘“ Whereas the Lord was
there.” The Presence of God—l. A
reality though uurecognised. 2, A
comfort in the midst of desolation
and suffering. 3. The hope and guar-
antee of deliverance and future pros-
perity. 4, A startling revelation to
His enemies,


Vers. 10, 11. “The overthrow and
exile of the Israelites from their land
ought to have moved Edom to self-
examination, lest there should be in
herself sins found which might provoke
God to inflict similar judgments, In-
stead of this, she regarded Israel’s
calamity as her opportunity. ‘These
two countries shall be mine, and we
will possess it.’ She forgot, in her
wicked presumption, that the land of


Israel was peculiarly the Lord’s posses
sion and the Lord’s earthly dwelling-
place ; therefore, so far was Edom from
being about to gain possession of
Israel’s inheritance, that she was about
to be deprived of her own, and that
for ever.” — Fausset,


Vers. 11-15. The Triumph of the
Wicked—1. Finds its joy in the down-
fall of those they hated (vers. 11, 15).
2. Is unreal: their conquered posses-
sions a desolation ; their boasting
hollow and joyless (vers. 12-15). 3.
Is soon changed to dejection, while all
else rejoice (ver. 14),


Vers. 12, 13. The Speech of the
Wicked—1. Blasphemous, “ All thy
blasphemies which thou hast spoken”
(ver. 12). 2. Boastful. ‘‘ With your
mouth ye have boasted” (ver. 13). 3.
Copious in its insolent vocabulary. ‘Ye
have multiplied your words against
Me” (ver. 13). 4. Does not escape
Divine notice, ‘I have heard thee”
(ver. 13).


Ver. 13. ‘‘ Worldly men think lightly
of speaking vindictive and calumnious
words against the people of God, and
of forming projects for taking selfish
advantage of their times of extremity ;
but God regards such words against
His people as spoken against Himself.
There is not a word that goeth out
of our lips which God does not hear.
How careful and guarded we should
be in our words, especially in times
when our carnal passions and tempers
are excited | (Prov. x. 19).”—Fausset.


Ver. 14, 15. “What an entire re-
versal of the present order of things
there will be at the second coming of
Christ! The enemies of God, who so
often seem now to triumph, shall then
be cast down in everlasting sorrow.
The people of God, Israel and the
elect Church, who so often now mourn,
shall then rejoice with joy unspeak
able and full of glory. Edom, that
rejoiced over fallen Israel, shall then
mourn over her own irretrievable fall
while ‘ Jerusalem shall be a rejoicing

371


OHAP. XXXVL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


CY


and her people a joy.’ Let us see
that we take our portion now with the
people of God in their season of trial,
that so we may have our everlasting
portion with them in their coming
blessedness.”—Fausset.


Ver. 14. Suffering — 1. Aggra-
vated when all around is gay. 2.
Has always init a depressing element
of loneliness. 3. Has special signifi-
cance when we are conscious it is
Divinely inflicted.

— “When the whole land of Israel
rejoiceth ; as it is sometimes hale and
well with the Church when the wicked
are in the suds. Judea was the world
of the world, as Athens was the
Epitome of Greece, the Greece of
Greece.” —Trapp.

— “When the whole earth is in
peace and plenty and enjoys both, thou
shalt want all; and then envy at the
welfare of others shall break thy heart.
Envy was thy sin, and now what is
the object of envy—the prosperity of
others—shall be thy grief.”—Pool.

— “No true grace without justice.
The theocracy must accordingly pass
through the fire of affliction and be-
come purified: for the same reason,
the heathenism whose iniquity is full
must show that it has fallen under
the Divine justice. For grace is not
toleration of the bad.”—Havernick.


Ver. 15. ‘The Edomites who
thought of seizing on others’ lands, lost
their own. They who covet all do oft
lose all, yea, even the pleasure of that
they possess ; as a greedy dog swallow-
eth the whole meat that is cast him,
without any pleasure, as gaping still
for the next morsel."—Trapp.

— “Thou tookest pleasure in the
ruin of My people; for this thy sin I
will ruin thee, and then do to thee as
thou didst ; I will retaliate and rejoice
in thy ruin: thou helpedst to make
Jerusalem desolate; I will make thee
so: thou criedst to ruin them all, to
destroy all the land; all thy land
shall be ruined, and by these judg-
ments I will be known to be the Lord.” ~
— Pool.

— “This whole chapter strongly
inculcates this maxim—Do as thou
wouldst be done by, and what thou
wouldst not have done to thee, do not
to others. And from it we learn that
every man may, in some sort, be said
to make his own temporal good or
evil ; for as he does to others God
will take care to do to him, whether
it be evil or good, weal or woe. Would
you not be slandered or backbitten?
Then do not slander or backbite.
Wouldst thou wish to live in peace!
Then do not disturb the peace of
others. Be merciful, and thou shalt
obtain mercy.” —A. Clarke.


THE PROMISE oF BETTER Days FoR IsRAEL (Chap, xxxvi.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 1.
“Ye mountains of Israel”—in con-
trast to Moynt Seir of the previous
propliesy. They are here personified :
Israel’s elevation is moral, not merely
physical, as Edom’s.


Ver. 2. “The ancient high places.”
“ The perpetual heights are the
natural mountains, as a figure of the
unchangeable grandeur of which Israel
boasted, because it had the Eternal for
its protector, and in Him the security
of its own perpetuity” (comp Pa,
exxv. 2).—Hengstenberg,


372


Ver. 3. “Made you desolate and
swallowed you up”—laid you waste,
and panted after you on every side; like
wild beasts after their prey, implying
the greedy cupidity of Edom as to
Israel’s inheritance. “Ye are taken up
in the lips of talkers "—literaliy, ‘“ Ye
are made to go up on the lip of the
tongue, #.¢., on the lip of the slanderer,
the man of tongue, Edom slandered
Israel because of the connection of
the latter with Jehovah, as though He
were unable to save them.”— Fausset,


Ver. 4. “Thus saith the Lord te
the mountains, hills,” &c. The men-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP. XXKVL





tion of particulars is meant to point to
the eye which observes all, the Divine
care which beholds each and all, over
which only a human eye weeps, or, on
the contrary, rejoices. The complete-
ness of the renewed blessedness of all
parts of the land is implied.


Ver. 5. “ With joy of heart, despite-
ful minds, to cast it out as a prey "—
“witli gladness of heart and deadly
scorn, have appropriated My land to
desolate and plunder it.”— Geikie.


Ver. 7, “Shall bear their shamo”
—shall bear their share of contempt
in turn—a perpetual shame, whereas
the shame that Israel bore from these
heathen was only temporary.


Ver. 8. “Shall shoot forth your
branches and yield fruit to My people,
for they are at hand to come ”—“ shall
shoot out your verdure and yield your
fruits to My people Israel, for they
will soon come.”—Geikie, Leaves and
branches come into view as food for
cattle, while the fruit is for man, Of
the seventy years Chaldean servitude
twenty had already elapsed, so that
many of those still living might yet
see the joyful day.”—Hengstenberg.


Ver. 11. “ Will do better unto you
than at your beginnings "—“ better
than in your past. Tunis was fulfilled
when He appeared in the Holy Land
who could say of Himself, ‘ Come unto
Me, all ye that labour and are heavy
laden,’ and who far outshone Solomon
in all his glory.”—Hengstenberg.


Ver. 14. “Thou shalt devour men
no more, neither bereave thy nations
any more.” ‘‘l'be land of Israel had a
dangerous position. It was a laud of
transit, an apple of discord for the
Asiatic and African powers, and ex-
posed to oppression by the surrounding
nations of the wilderness, who always
went to it for barter. On account of
this dangerous position it is designated,
even in Num. xiii. 32, as a land that
devours its inhabitants. Precisely


such a land had God chosen for His


people. They should always have
occasion to look up to Him; and when
they fell away the rods were also laid
up. Peaceful seclusion would have
produced a stagnant condition, the
worst that can befall the people of God.
It is essential to the Church in this
world to be militant.”—Hengstenberg.


Ver. 19. “I scattered them among
the heathen.” ‘“ ‘lhe reason for their
removal was their sin, which God’s
holiness could not let pass unpunished.”
—Fausset.


Ver. 20. “They profaned My holy
name.” “The name of My holiness is
not simply the holy name of Jehovah,
but the name in which His holiness
is manifest, so that by it man names
His holiness, and hence the Holy God
Himself.” —Lange.


Ver. 21. “I had pity for Mine holy
name”—“I felt pity for it. God’s
own name, so dishonoured, was the
primary object of His pitying concern,
then His people secondarily through
His concern for it.”— Fairbairn.


Ver. 23, “I will sanctify My great
name ”"—“é&,e, My holiness as ex-
pressed in My name, securing due
weight to it, so that it shall not simply
be named as name, but evidently ex-
perienced as fact. In its being the
name of His holiness lies the necessity,
when the people who thus name God
do not sanctify it, but, on the contrary,
only contribute everywhere to its pro-
fanation, that then Jehovah should
take in hand the sanctification of His
name,and there)y of Himself.”— Lange.
“ Shall be sanctified in you before their
eyes ”—“ or before youreyes. It must
be done first before the eyes of the
people who by their depravity had
lost sight of God’s real character ; and
then what was seen by them experi-
mentally would also be seen reflectively
by the heathen who dwelt around,”—
Fairbairn.


Ver. 25. “Then will I sprinkle
clean water upoy you, and ye shall
373


OHAP. XXXVI.


be clean.” ‘‘The external restoration
must be preceded by an internal one.
The change in their condition must
not be superficial, but must be based
on a radical renewal of the heart.”—
Fausset. ‘The immediate sense of the
verse is: That Jehovah leads back
Israel from exile into their own land,
and consecrates them there to be a
people, since the punishment, so charac-
teristic for the sin that occasioned it,
is shown to be removed by the bring-
ing of them again into their own land,
the forgiveness of sins thereby already
proclaimed at once evinces and mani-
fests itself as purification of the people,
and the people put from them their old
life, especially their idolatry.”—Lange.


Ver. 26. “I will give you a heart
of flesh ”—not carnal in opposition to
spiritual, but impressible and docile
fit for receiving the good seed.


Ver. 27. “I will cause you to walk
in My statutes.” ‘“ From the bestow-
ment of the new heart flows the altered


position toward the law of God.”—


Hengstenberg.


Ver. 29. “TI will also save you from
all your uncleannesses”—the pro-
vince of Jesus, according to His name
(Matt. i. 21). To be specially exer-
cised in behalf of the Jews in the
latter days (Rom. xi 26). “And I
will call for the corn”—“ as a master
calls for a servant. All the powers
and productions of nature are the
servants of Jehovah (Ps. cv. 16 ; Matt.
vii. 8, 9).”—Jausset.


Ver. 31. “Then shall ye remember
your own evil ways ’—‘‘ with shame
and loathing. The unexpected grace
and love of God manifested in Christ
to Israel shall melt the people into
true repentance, which mere legal fear
could not (chap. xvi. 61, 63; Ps,
exxx. 4; Zech, xii, 10+ Jer, xxxiii. 8,
9).”—Fausset


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





Ver. 35, “This land is become like
the garden of Eden.” “ We have here
the clear counterpart of the night-
piece (Joel ii. 3). The comparison of
this fundamental passage, according to
which the figure of the land of Eden
can only signify a prosperous state in
general, shows how erroneous it is to
find in this passage the restoration of
Canaan to a really paradisiac glory,
and to charge those who cannot find
this in it with a spiritualising evapora-
tion.” —Hengstenberg.


Ver. 36. “I the Lord have spoken
it, and I will do it.” “I, Jehovah,
whose name and nature afforda security
that between speaking and doing no
gulf can be fixed.”—Hengstenberg.


Ver. 37. “I will yet for this be
inquired of ”—“‘so as to grant it. On
former occasions He had refused to
be inquired of by Israel, because the
inquirers were not in a fit condition
of mind to receive a blessing (chap.
xiv. 3; xx. 3). But hereafter, as in
the restoration from Babylon (Neh,
vill, ix.; Dan, ix. 3-23), God will
prepare His people’s hearts to pray
aright for the blessings which He is
about to give (Ps. cii. 13-17, 20; Zech,
xii. 10-14; xiii, 1).”—Fausset.


Vers. 37, 38. “I will increase them
with men like a flock, as the holy
flock.” “The passover was the only
one among the festivals in which there
was a great accumulation of sheep,
with which the fulness of men in re-
stored Israel is compared. But the
consecrated sheep are meant here, not
any other gathering of sheep, because
the people that is compared with the
sheep is the people of the saints of the
Lord. The fulfilment is to be sought
in the Church of Christ still more than
in the times between the exile ana
Christ.” — Hengstenberg.


4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OHAP. XXXVI





HOMILETICS.
Hore For A RUINED Nation.
(Vers. 1-16.)


In this chapter the prophet continues the theme with which his whole soul
was possessed—the prospective revival and prosperity of Israel. In the darkest
day of national desolation the lamp of prophecy glowed with a Divinely kindled
flame. The land is smitten and helpless ; but hope is still left, though that hope
is enshrined for the time in the breast of one man, as in the fatal box of
Pandora, from which issued all the evils that afflict mankind, hope was still left
at the bottom. The keen spiritual insight of Ezekiel saw that, amid the pre
vailing ruin, Israel still retained an interest in the power and faithfulness of God
which would bring about her future restoration, while the exulting hopes of the
heathen that her downfall was permanent were doomed to disappointment.
Observe—


I. That a ruined nation is an object of Divine compassion. 1. He sees its
resources exhausted. ‘They have made you desolate, and swallowed you up on
every side” (ver. 3), The land is denuded of its inhabitants and its wealth.
The hills are there, but they are no longer covered with grazing flocks and
nerds. The valleys are there, but the diligent husbandmen are gone, and the
fields and vineyards degenerate into barrenness or are choked with the wild
growths of untamed luxuriousness. The cities crumble to ruin and are forsaken.
The hum of commerce is hushed, and the animated scenes of a thriving popula-
tion are no longer visible. The garden has become a wilderness, the ground a
grave in which the national life lies buried. 2. He sees its land possessed with
strangers. ‘‘Kven the high places are ours—a possession unto the residue of the
heathen—which have appointed My land into their possession with the joy of
all their heart, with despiteful minds” (vers. 2, 3, 5). The strangers had no
right to the land; it belonged to God: nor would they have dared to seize it
had His people, to whom it had been given as a heritage, remained faithful to
Him. They were marauders, robbers, who pounced upon the land with the
avaricious joy with which the wreckers plunder a stranded ship. It was “cast
out for a prey.”” It moved the compassion and indignation of Jehovah to see
His heritage overrun and pilfered by those who fiercely hated both Him and
His people. 3. He sees its ruin the sport and mockery of tts enemies. ‘Aha, the
places are ours—ye are taken up in the lips of talkers and are an infamy of the
people—a prey and derision to the heathen” (vers. 2, 3, 4). They gloat over
the misfortunes of the nation they hated and dreaded. Israel had become a
byword and a reproach. The foulest slander was freely circulated, and her
enemies chuckled with a hideous satisfaction as they rolled the toothsome
morsel in their mouths, Every taunt would rankle like a poisoned barb as the
unhappy Israelite reflected it was a just recompense for his inveterate folly.
This state of things was faithfully predicted (Jer. xxiv. 9), and nothing was
done to prevent it. The warning was despised. Abandoned by God and man,
Israel was exposed to the pitiless contempt of the wicked. And yet the heart
of Jehovah yearned with compassion towards His afflicted people.


II. That Divine Power can restore a ruined nation to prosperity. 1. He
van do it speedily. ‘They are at hand to come” (ver. @). Though there were
fifty of the seventy years’ captivity yet to run, it waz near at hand in God's

375


OH4P. XXXVL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





determination. Fifty years is a long period in the life-of an individual, but it
is insignificant in the life of a nation. The time is near because it is sure to
come, Though Israel was far from home, dispersed in many countries, and
held in bondage by the power of her captors, she shall be brought again to her
own land, Time is a trifling factor in the working out of eternal purposes ;
and yet many then living were privileged to witness the promised restoration.
‘God is slow to punish; swift to bless. 2. He can do tt effectually (vers. 8-15).
The waste places shall be tilled and sown (ver. 8), the earth abound in fruitful-
ness (ver. 8), the hills covered with flocks and herds (ver. 11), the cities rebuilt
and crowded with inhabitants (ver. 10), commerce expand with ever-increasing
activity (ver. 11), the taunt of desolation silenced (ver. 15), and the land that
had cast out its people to perish shall support and cherish them on a scale of
unexampled munificence (vers. 11-15). When a penitent nation returns to
God there is no blessing He will withhold: its grievances are redressed, ite
honour retrieved, its peace and prosperity ensured.


III. That the promise of Divine help inspires national hope. Israel was
utterly prostrate. There was no country in that neighbourhood so desolate
and forsaken. The land of plenty was cursed with emptiness, and, like an un-
natural mother, had cast out its children to perish. Browbeaten, calumniated,
and oppressed by their enemies, the people lost heart and sank into the help-
lessness of despair. They had no more hope of revival than the salt-encrusted
pine-logs that travellers tell us are strewn on the shores of the Dead Sea,
saturated for centuries with brine. Left to themselves, there was no possibility
of recovery. But they were not to be so completely abandoned. Gradually,
and at first faintly, whispers of Divine help reached their ears, The impression
grew in distinctness and strength that the promise was real, and at length out
of the dark firmament of their miseries the bright star of hope once more shone
forth, They had ample evidence, from past experiences, that what Jehovah
promised He would surely perform. The worst of sinners need not despair;
for him the hope of salvation shines, the promise is still in force. Let him but
repent aud cry for help, and all will yet be well.

LeaRN—l1. That there ts power in the midst of apparent impotency. 2%. That
national revival begins in the putting away of national sins,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 1-15. Ged and Nature. 1.


will abide. 4. Nature responds with
God never forgets His absolute pro-


prietorship in nature. His are the
mountains, hills, rivers, and valleys,
for He made them (vers. 4-6), 2. Na-
ture remains true to God when man
is unfaithful. Man may desolate but
cannot destroy nature. The unchang-
ing continuity of its mountains, hills,
rivers, and valleys rebukes his fickleness
and infidelity. 3. Nature is honoured
by signal displays of Divine power.
“The mountains of Israel” had wit-
nessed the miracles of God on behalf
of His chosen people, and while the
earth stands their voiceless testimony
376


grateful quickness to the touch of the
Divine blessing. ‘ Ye mountains shall
shoot forth your branches and yield
your fruit. I will multiply upon you
man and beast, and will do better unto
you than at your beginnings” (vers.
8-11). 5. God will make nature a
fruitful inheritance to the obedient
(vers. 12-15).

— Man and Nature. 1. Man re-
gards nature as an opportunity to
indulge a covetous spirit. “The places
are ours in possession” (ver, 2). 2.
Man abuses the resources of nature by
sinful extravagance. “They have made


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XXXVL.





you desolate, and swallowed you up on
every side” (ver. 3). 3. It is an evi-
dence of great moral debasement when
man exults over the desolations of
nature he himself has made, “The
enemy hath said against you ‘Aha!
—Ye are taken up in the lips of talkera,
and are an infamy of the people—a
prey and derision—with the joy of all


their heart, with despiteful minds, to °


cast it out for a prey ” (vers. 2, 3-5).
4, When man violates nature he vio-
lates the laws of God, and suffers ac-
cordingly. “Thou land devourest up
men, and hast bereaved thy nations ”’
(ver. 13). 5. When man obeys God,
all the resources of nature minister to
his enjoyment (vers. 8-15).


Vers, 1-4. “The grand distinction
between the people of God as Israel,
and the people of the world as Edon,
is, whereas the latter are finally given
over to destruction, the former are
only chastened for a time, and shall
be finally and completely delivered.
The people of the world may now
seem exalted to a great height, but
their elevation is of a carnal and mate-
rial kind, and is therefore transitory.
The elevation of the Israel of God is
spiritual, and therefore permanent.
Her hills are ‘the everlasting lills’
(Gen, xlix. 26). The Mount Zion, as
the seat of God’s earthly throne, can-
not be removed, but abideth for ever
(Ps. exxv. 1). Therefore Edom’s shout
of triumph over the fallen Israel shall
be turned into wailing for her own
fall. She had greedily thought to take
possession of the ancient high places
of the people of God. Nay more, she
had turned into derision the promise
of perpetuity which God had given to
His people, as though that promise
was now proved to be abortive, and
had sneered at Israel’s counection with
Jehovah as though He were unable
to save them.”—Fausset,


Ver. 2. “Many were the enemies of
God’s pevple, but they se conspired
in one design, and were so one in
their huwours, enmity, and carriage,
that the prophet speaks of them


as one, and particularly of Edom.”—
Pool.

— “The scorn of the world an old
experience, Thus were the prophets
and Christ reproached, and the Lord
said that men would speak all manner
of evil against His disctples (Matt.
v. 11), and Paul, that we should bea
spectacle to the world (1 Cor. iv 9).”
—Lange.


Ver. 3. “Ye are taken up on the
lips of talkers, and are an infamy of
the people.” Slander. 1. A vice of
great talkers, 2. Is devoid of com-
passion for the unfortunate, 3. De-
lights in exaggeration and malicious
innuendoes, 4, Is frequently employed
to disparage and afflict the people of
God,

— “Ye are made to ascend upon the
lip of the tongue and upon the evil
fame of the people. God takes it ex-
treme ill that His people should be
traduced and defamed, which hath
been their lot in all ages, but He will
not fail to vindicate them and to
avenge them.”—Trapp.

— “God knows, sees, and hears the
misery of His children: that must
comfort them, therefore they cannot
despair. How ready men often are
not only to count up the sufferings
of others, but also in their talk to


exaggerate still more.”—Starck.


Vers. 4-6. The Divine Sympathy
with Nature. 1. Because it is His
handiwork and reflects His character.
2. Because it is the dwelling-place and
training ground of man. 3, Because
of the havoc wrought in it by the fury
of His enemies. 4. Because it is ever
faithful and obedient to His laws,


Vers. 6,7. Wrong-doing. 1. Rouses
the Divine anger. 2. Is doomed while
it rejoices in its brief triumph, 3,
Will suffer the misery it inflicts on
others. 4. Is certain to be Divinely
punished,


Ver. 6. “To these lifeless creatures
He directeth His speech to show that
every creature groaneth and waile+s


337


OMAP, XXXVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





for the redemption of our bodies, It
fareth the better also in this life pre-
sent, for the elect’s sake, as it was
once cursed for man’s sin, and hath
lain bedridden, as it were, ever since.”
—Trapp.


Ver. 7. “The righteous God, to
whom vengeance belongs, will render
shame for shame. Those that put
contempt and reproach on God’s people
will sooner or later have it turned
upon themselves; perhaps in this
world, either their follies or their
calamities, their miscarriages or their
mischances, shall be their reproach ;
at furthest, in that day when all the
impenitent shall rise to shame and
everlasting contempt.”—M. Henry.

— “They shall be paid home in
their own coin, be overshot in their
own bow, be covered with their own
confusion.” —Trapp.


Vers. 8-15. The Fertility of Nature.
1. A signal proof of the Divine bless-
ing. “Behold I am for you. And
I will multiply” (vers, 8, 9). 2.
Evidenced in the abundant increase of
fruit, cattle, men and wealth (vers.
8-11). 3. Should be regarded by the
people of God as a special blessing.
“Even My people Israel shall possess
thee, and thou shalt be their inherit-
ance” (ver. 12). 4. The more con-
spicuous because of former barrenness
and decay (vers. 13-15). 5. A type of
es prosperity of the people of


— “While Edom and Tyre rejoiced
in their sins at the fall of Jerusalem,
the jealousy of the Lord was roused
to say that they should return, and
as Jeremiah had said that fields and
vineyards should again be sold in that
city. The promises, like clouds of re-
freshing rain, scatter their blessings
on every age. They were in one form
or other continually repeated, and in
all the glowing powers of Oriental
language. But however justified the
prophets might be in the use of hyper-
bole and metaphor, they could not
exceed the truth, which would have
been the case had their promiser been

378


restricted to the weak but rising times
of Zerubbabel, Ezra, and Nehemiah.
And if the waste places were rebuilt,
why then, whole Palestina, dost thou
lie very much in ruins to this day?
Consequently the gracious cloud of
covenant blessings only scattered its
drops on Jewish ages, and gave showers
to the primitive church, reserving its
fulness, or the residue of the Spirit,
for the mountain of His holiness in
the glory of the latter day.” —Suicliffe.

— “A certain fulfilment of the most
literal kind began at an early period
to be given to the prophecy. People
of the stock of Israel did again possess
the land of their fathers; by them the
mountains of Israel were again culti-
vated, and for them the land yielded
its fruit; there again, as of old, the
seed of man and of beast did greatly
increase and multiply, so that the
region was known for ages as one of
the most fertile and prosperous in
Asia, and that too while the old and
hereditary enemies of Israel in the
neighbourhood sank into comparative
insignificance and lost their original
place in the scale of nations. Had
Israel but seen in all this the hand of
God, and viewed the whole in connec-
tion with His unchangeable righteous-
ness, there should certainly have been
nothing wanting to complete the corre-
spondence between the description of
the prophet and the facts of history.
But the old relations of the covenant
people with the kingdom of God give
way ; the outward Israel are no longer
distinctively the covenant people—all
the children of faith of every land
become the seed of blessing and heirs
according to the promise. And while
it is only under the Gospel dis-
pensation that we can expect the
perfect realisation of the promised
good, we must now no longer expect
it after the old form, or according to
the simply literal interpretation. The
good is too great and expansive te be
now shut up within such narrow limits,
for since wherever there is a royal
priesthood offering up spiritual ser-
vices to God, there the incense and
offerings of the temple are perpetuated


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





(Mal, i. 11; 1 Pet. ii, 5), so wherever
there are members of Christ there also
are the mountains of Canaan, there
are the people who have the promise
of all things for their portion, on
whom descends the blessing—life for
evermore. Nor can the old evils pro-
perly return again, for the good is
avowedly connected with nothing but
a spiritual qualification, and is entirely
dissevered from a merely ancestral
relationship or a political existence in
the world.” —Fairbairn.


Ver. 8 “Thus shall the ruined
churches bring fruit, wine, and bread,
that is, the mysteries of doctrine to
the profit of the people, that they may
no longer be rude and ignorant, but a
people taught of God. Therefore the
spiritual husbandmen, vine-dressers,
till and sow diligently. With the
plough of fear they turn up the soil
of the heart in which they sow the
new word of the Gospel, whereby the
forsaken churches become planted
anew ; and these are the mountains
which the Lord addresses.”—Heim-
Hoffman.


Vers. 9-11. “The Lord declares to
the people of Israel, ‘Behold, I am
for you.’ Since God is ultimately to
be for them, no power can avail any-
thing that is against them. God will
‘turn to’ His people in mercy, and
they shall at the same time turn to
Him in repentance. The restoration
to their own land is to be literal, and
all things and all persons in the re-
stored state of Israel are to share in
the coming blessedness—‘the moun-
tains, the hills, the rivers, the valleys,
the desolate wastes, the houses, the
cities, man and beast.’ So in the
case of the spiritual Israel, the true
Church; she is now a little and de-
spised flock, but she shall at last be a
multitude which no man can num-
ber (Rev. vii. 9);. whereas the anti-
christian faction, and all the carnal,
worldly, and unbelieving, who shall
for a time seem to triumph over the


GAP, XXXVI.





Church of Christ (Rev. xi. 7-11), shall
perish awfully and everlastingly.”—
Fausset,


Ver. 9. “It is a blessing to the
earth to be made serviceable to men,
especially to good men that will serve
God with cheerfulness in the use of
those good things which the earth
serves up to them.”—M. Henry.

— “*] will turn unto you.’ Look
towards you with regard to what
has been and is your estate, your
sufferings, which were less than you
deserved, yet were the greater because
ye are mine. Your inhabitants gave
me the back and sinned against me,
and I turned the back on you and
regarded you not: then all darkness
covered you, now my face shall be
towards you, and you shall prosper
and be fruitful to the comfort of those
that shall dwell in you and plough
and sow you.”—Pool.


Ver. 10. “They are far wrong who
consider a great increase of men as a
curse because it gives rise to want and
distress, God can nourish many as
well as few, and we should live
moderately, avoid endeavouring to sur-
pass others in expenditure, and seek
for concord in families.”— Luther.


Ver. 11. ‘“God’s kingdom in the
world is a growing kingdom, and His
Church, though for a time it may be
diminished, shall recover itself and be
again replenished.”—M. Henry.


Ver. 12. “The promised good is
always to be understood with the con-
dition that men repent (Mal. iii. 7).
The self-evident condition is, that they
do not fill up the measure of their
sins anew. There is no charter of
immunity against Ye would not. How
often is the country or a district made
to bear the blame when there comes
a pestilence among men or cattle, when
it should be known that sin gaining
the upper hand provoked God’s wrath
thereto.” — Lange.


379


OHAP, XXXVL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


re a


HOMILETICS.
Sin tHE Cause or NatTionaL Rom.
(Vers. 16-21.)


Once more the Jews are reminded of the reason for the calamities that
had overtaken them: the root-cause was their sin. It might seem strange to
them that they, of all people, should be so deeply humiliated ; but such was
the obstinacy of their rebellion that no other course was open but for Jehovah
to vindicate the cause of righteousness by unmistakable marks of His dis-
pleasure. So far as they were concerned they had no reason to expect any-
thing but a continuance of His righteous severity; but a supreme regard for
His holy name, which had influenced Him in bringing about their downfall, is
now to operate in promoting their recovery. Their restoration must begin ip
the conviction and acknowledgment of their sins,


I. Sinisa defilement of the national life (ver. 17). It is so because it is a
defilement of the individual life. Sin is the polluted heritage of universal
man, for all have sinned ; but it is intensely individual and personal. Its taint
permeates every power and faculty of the man—“ The whole head is sick and
the whole heart faint: from the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no
soundness in it, but wounds and bruises and putrefying sores.” Its seat is
inward, and it is often disguised under a fair and beautiful exterior ; but attack
it, and its impurities soon become actively manifest, as the cuttle-fish surprised by
an enemy emits an inky fluid that darkens and befouls the most vellucid waters,
The nation is defiled because the citizen is defiled, and instead of seeking
cleansing has stirred up the muddy sediment in himself and others. “ Let sin
be your deepest sorrow, your heaviest grief, the spring of many tears, the burden
of many sighs, the occasion of daily visits to the cross of Calvary.”


“ Weep not for broad lands lost ;
Weep not for fair hopes crossed 3
Weep not when limbs wax old ;
Weep not when friends grow cold 3
Weep not that death must part
Thine and the best loved heart :

Yet weep—weep all thou can—
Weep, weep, because thou art
A sin-detiléd man.”


Il, Sin is a profanation of the Divine holiness (vers. 20, 21). Sin is nut
only a degradation to man, but an injustice and injury towards God; it seems
to drag Him to the level of man, and to rob Him of every attribute that con-
stitutes Him Divine. The conduct and attendant miseries of the Israelites
dishonoured Jehovah in the sight of the heathen, who naturally inferred that if
this was all He could do for His worshippers, then He was no better than their
own deities, and the morality of His people was in many respects inferior to
that of their own. Do not think that your iniquities are unnoticed, or that
you are the only one affected by them. The unbelieving world is watching
you. The mere profession of religion is a caricature and a hypocrisy, and every
act of sin is a defamation of the character of the holy God.


ITI. Sin is punished by national ruin (vers. 18, 19). The Jews were driven
out of their own land because of their incorrigible wickedness, Their murders,
idolatries, and injustice roused the anger of God, and “ according to their way

380


— hea


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP. XXXVI.





and their doings” He adjudged them to punishment. His hand scattered
them, and no power could detain them in the land when His hand was against
them, just as no power could have disturbed their security if they had remained
faithful to Him. The nation that makes an enemy of God is doomed. The
strongest fortifications must yield, the astutest policy be confounded, commerce
decay, wealth give way to poverty, and the proudest people be humbled to the
dust. The first step in national ruin begins in moral wrong,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 16-38. “ There are mountain
regions lying within the tropics where
in the course of a single day the
traveller finds every vevetable form
peculiar to every line of latitude be-
tween the equator and the poles, and
these all laid out in regular arrange-
ment. Leaving the palms which cover
the mountain’s feet, he ascends into
the regions of the olive; from these
he rises to a more temperate climate,
where vines festoon the trees, or trail
their limbs along the naked rock ; still
ascending, he reaches a belt of oaks
and chestnuts; from that he passes to
rugged heights shaggy with the hardy
pine ; by-and-by he enters a revion
where trees are dwarfed into bushes;
rising above that his foot presses a
soft carpet of lowly mosses, till climb-
ing the rocks where only the lichen
lives, he leaves all life below; and
now, shivering in the cold, panting in
the thin air for breath, he stands on
those dreary elevations where eternal
winter sits on a throne of snow, and
waving her icy sceptre, says to vegeta-
tion—‘ Hitherto shalt thou come, and
no further.’ Like some such lofty
mountain of the tropics there are
portions of the Divine Word where
in a space of limited extent—within
the short compass of a chapter, or
even part of it—the more prominent
doctrines of salvation are brought into
juxtaposition and arranged side by
side almost in systematic order. This
portion of Scripture presents an epitome
or outline of the Gospel. Its details,
with their minute and varied beauties,
are here, so to speak, in shade; but
the grand truths of redemption stand
boldly up, much as we have seen from
sea the summits of a mountain range,


or the lofty headlands of a dim and
distant coast. We are aware that the
Mosaic economy, and many of God’s
dealings with His ancient people, were
but the shadows of good things to
come ; and when the things are come,
why look at the shadow when you
possess the substance$ However
valued in his absence the portrait of
a son, what mother, when her boy is
folded in her arms, and she has his
loved and living face to gaze on, turns
to the cold picture? What artist
studies a landscape in the grey dawn
when he may see it in the blaze of
day? True. Yet such study has its
advantages. It not seldom happens
that a portrait brings to view certain
shades of expression which we had not
previously observed in the face of the
veritable man; and when some mag-
nificent form of architecture, or the
serried ridges and rocky peaks of a
mountain, have stood up between us
and the lingering lights of day, we
have found that although the minor
beauties of fluted columns or frowning
crags were lost in the shades of even-
ing, yet, drawn in sharp and clear
outline against a twilight sky, the
effect of the whole was even more
impressive than when eyed in the
glare of day. Thus it may be well
occasionally to examine the Gospel in
the broad shadows and strongly de-
fined outlines of an old economy ;
and through God’s government of His
ancient people to study the motives, the
nature, and ends of His dealings with
ourselves. In this way the passage
before us has peculiar claims upon our


attention.” —-Guthrie’s Gospel in Ezckiet,


Ver. 16. “Man’s previous course of
38]


OHAP, XXXVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,


eT


action is the cause of God’s subse-
quent course of action, We shall have
to give account not only because of
the evil which we have done, but also
for the good things which we have
had. The world is perfect throughout
where man does not come in to dis-
turb it. Storms clear the air, an
observation which bears application in
regard to the judgments of God.”—
Lange.


Vers. 16, 17. “The word of the
Lord came unto me, saying, Son of
man.” The Human Side of the Divine
Message. “The rain in its descent
from heaven falls upon the surface
of our earth, percolates through the
porous soil, and flowing along rocky
fissures or veins of sand, is conveyed
below ground to the fountain whence
it springs. Now, although rising out
of the earth, that water is not of the
earth earthy. The world’s deepest
well owes its treasures to the skies.
So was it with the revealed will of
God. It flowed along human channels,
yet its origin was more than celestial,
it was Divine. Those waters at whose
pure and perennial springs faith drinks
and lives, while conveyed to man along
earthly channels, have their source far
away—in the throne of God. No
doubt God could have used other
instrumentality. He might have com-
missioned angels on His errands of
mercy, and spoken at all times, as He
did sometimes, by seraph lips. With
rare exceptions His ambassadors were
men. The patriarchs, prophets, and
apostles—those inspired missionaries
of heaven—were all sons of men,
In this arrangement observe—l. The
kindness of God to man. Who has read
the story of Moses without feeling that
it was a very great kindness both to
the infant and his mother that he had
her bosom to lie on, and that God in
His providence so arranged matters
that the very mother of the child was
hired to be its nurse. Who else could
be expected to treat the outcast so
lovingly and kindly? And I hold
it a singular kindness to man that
he is selected to be the instrument of


382


saving his fellow-men. If that parent
is happy who has snatched a beloved
child from the flood or fire, and the
child saved and thus twice given him
becomes doubly dear, what happiness
in purity or permanence to be com-
pared with his who is a labourer with
God in saving souls! 2. The honour
conferred on man. What dignity does
this world offer, what glittering stars,
what jewelled honours flash on her
swelling breast, to be for one moment
compared with those which they win
on earth and wear in heaven who have
turned souls from darkness to light?
As yon planet worlds that roll above
us draw bright radiance from the sun
around which they move, so surely
shall they shine who spend and are
spent in Jesus’ service; they shall
share His honours and shine in His
lustre. It was the prayer of Brainerd,
‘Oh that I were a flaming fire in the
service of my God!’ 3. The wisdom
of God. Mirabeau said of a man who
addressed the French Convention for
the first time, ‘That man will yet act
a great part; he speaks as one who
believes every word he says.’ Much
of pulpit power under God depends
on that. They make others feel who
feel themselves, It is true a man
may impart light to others who does
not himself see the light. It is true
that like a concave speculum cut from
a block of ice, which, concentrating the
rays of the sun, kindles touchwood or
explodes gunpowder, a preacher may set
others on fire when his own heart is
cold as frost. Yet commonly it happens
that it is what comes from the heart
of preachers that penetrates and affecta
the hearts of hearers, Like a ball red-
hot from the cannon’s mouth, he must
burn himself who would set others on
fire. If man may not feel what he
preaches, angels could not. Man saved
himself the more earnestly seeks the
salvation of his perishing fellow-man.,
During a heavy storm off the coast of
Spain a dismasted merchantman was
ovserved by a British frigate drifting
before the gale, Every eye and glass
were on her, and a canvas shelter on
a deck almost level with the sea sug.


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





gested the idea that even yet there
might be life on board. With all
their faults no men are more alive to
humanity than our rough and hardy
mariners; and so the order instantly
sounds to put the ship about, and
presently a boat is lowered, and starts
with instructions to bear down upon
the wreck. Away after that drifting
hulk go these gallant men over the
mountain swell of a roaring sea;
they reach it, they shout, and now a
strange object rolls from that canvas
screen against the lee shroud of a
broken mast. It is hauled into the
boat. It proves to be the trunk of a
man, bent head and knees together,
so dried up and shrivelled as to be
hardly felt within the ample clothes—
go light that a mere boy lifted it on
board. It is conveyed to the ship and
Jaid on the deck, [n horror and pity
the crew gather around it. These
feelings suddenly change into astonish-
ment. The object shows signs of life,
The seamen draw nearer; it moves
and then mutters—in a deep sepul-
chral voice, mutters—‘ There is an-
other man.’ Rescued himself, the first
use the saved one made of speech was
to try to save another.” —Guthrie,


Ver. 17. The Defiler. “1. Sina de-
filement. Look at sin, pluck off that
painted mask and turn upon her face
the lamp of God’s Word. We start,
for it reveals a death’s head. I stay
not to quote texts descriptive of sin.
It is a debt, a burden, a thief, a sick-
ness, a leprosy, a plague, a poison, a
serpent, a sting—everything that man
hates it is. Name me the evil that
springs not from this root—the crime
that lies not at this door. Hypocrite
and dead professor! let us open thy
bosom: full of all corruption, how it
smells like a charnel house! We are
driven back by the noisome stench—
we hasten to close the door, It is a
painted, putrid sepulchre, whose fair
exterior but aggravates the foulness
within, 2. The nature of this defile-
ment. (d.) It is internal. Like snow-
drift, when it has levelled the church-
yard mounds, and glistening in the


OHAP. XXXVL





winter sun, lies so pure, white, fair,
and beautiful above the dead that
fester and rot below, a plausible pro-
fession may wear the look of innocence
and conceal from human eyes the fow]-
est heart-corruption. The grass grows
green upon the sides of the mountain
that holds a volcano in its bowels.
Behind the rosy cheek and lustrous
eye of beauty how often does there
lurk a deadly disease, the deadliest
disease of all. Like these maladies,
sin has its seat within. It is a disease
of the heart, and the worst and dead-
liest of all heart-complaints. (b.) It is
universal, Although the hues of the
skin differ, the form of the skull and
the features of the face are cast in
different moulds, the features, colour,
and character of the heart are the
same in all men, In Adam all have
died—have sinned, and therefore died.
Thus sin, like our atmosphere, em-
braces every region of the world. Like
death, it is universal, The tree is dis-
eased not at the top, but at the root,
and therefore no branch of the human
family can possibly escape being af-
fected by sin. (¢c.) It is incurable.
What moral effect had God’s judg-
ments on His ancient people? As
always happens in incurable diseases,
the patient grew worse instead of
better. As always happens when life
is gone, the dead become more and
more offensive. This internal and
universal defilement is one which
neither sorrows can atone for nor suf-
ferings remove. | have seen the char-
acters of the writing remain on paper
which the flames had turned into a
film of buoyant coal ; I have seen the
thread that had been passed through
the fire retain in its cold grey ashes
the twist which it had got in spinning ;
I have found every shivered splinter
of the flint as hard as the unbroken
stone; and let trials come in provi-
dence sharp as the fire and ponderous
as the crushing hammer, unless a
gracious God send along with these
something else than these, bruised,
broken, bleeding as thy heart may
be, its nature remains the same,.”—
Guthrie.
383


OHAP. XXXVL


— Man Sinning. “1. Manis fallen.
Compare man with any other of the
creatures of God, and how directly we
come to the conclusion that he is not,
nor can be, the creature he came from
his Maker’s hands. Turn to the bloody
horrors of this battlefield. The tram-
pled ground lies thick with the mingled
brave, the air is shaken with the most
horrible sounds, every countenance
expresses the passions of a fiend.
Covering her eyes, humanity flies
shrieking from the scene and leaves
it to rage, revenge, and agony. Fiercer
than the cannon’s flash flames of wrath
shoot from brothers’ eyes; they draw,
they brandish their swords, they sheath
them in each other’s bowels; every
stroke makes a widow, every ringing
volley scatters a hundred orphans on
a homeless world. Sooner would I be
an atheist, and believe there was no
God, than that a man appears in this
scene as he came from the hand ofa
Benignant Divinity. Man must have
fallen, 2. Apart from derived sinful-
ness man has personal sins to answer for.
You may deny original, but can any
man in his senses deny actual sin?
You may as well deny your existence ;
it sticks to you like your shadow. If
every thread of life’s web were yet to
weave, what man would makethefuture
a faithful copy of the past? No man liv-
ing would. 3. The guilt of these actual
sins 18 man’s own. We attempt in vain
to fix the blame on others—to lay the
burden on any shoulders but our own.
We talk of the strength, we plead the
suddenness of temptation; but how
often have we sinned designedly,
deliberately, repeatedly? We have
sinned when we knew we were sin-
ning ; we have repaired to scenes where
we knew that we were to sin. We
have done what the heathen never
did, what Sodom and Gomorrah never
did, what Tyre and Sidon never did—
we have rejected a Saviour, and in-
sanely refused eternal life.”—Guthrie.


Vers, 18, 19. God’s Punitive Jus-
tice. “1. God is slow to punish. No
hand of clock goes so slow as His hand
of vengeance. Look, for example, or

384


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





the catastrophe of the Deluge. There
was a truce of one hundred and twenty
years between the first stroke of the
bell and the first crash of the thunder.
Noah grew grey preaching repentance,
The ark stood useless for years, a huge
laughing-stock for the scoffer’s wit.
Most patient God! God does pour
out His fury; but His indignation is
the volcano that groans loud and long
before it discharges the elements of
destruction and pours its fiery lavas
on the vineyards at its feet. 2. The
truth of God requires the punishment of
sin. God has reiterated in a thousand
ways the awful sentence—‘ The soul
that sinneth it shall die.’ Let sin go
unpunished either in person or substi-
tute ; this saves the sinner—no doubt
of that; but at what price? You save
the creature’s life at the expense of
the Creator’s honour. Your scheme
exalts man, but far more than man is
exalted is God degraded. By it no
man is lost; but there is a greater loss
—something more awful happens. The
truth of God is lost; and in that loss
His crown is spoiled of its topmost
jewel, His kingdom totters, and the
throne of the universe is shaken to its
foundations. 3. The love of God requires
the punishment of sin. Love tor those
who have the highest claim on a
sovereign’s protection requires that
justice take her course and the guilty
die. That the community may live in
peace, that the citizen may feel safe
in the bosom of his family, that streets
may be safe to walk on, that beds
may be safe to lie in, that our country
may be fit to live in, crime must be
punished. Divine love is no blind
Divinity, and God being as wise as
tender, sinners may rest assured that
out of mere pity for them He will
neither sacrifice the interests nor peril
the happiness of His people, 4. Unless
sin is punished the language of Scripture
appears extravagant. Let me beseech,
implore you to read with tears and
prayers those passages of Scripture
that unveil the miseries of the lost,
Blot uot from your minds what you
cannot blot out of the book of God.
The sufferings and miseries which


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OMAP, XXXVI





await the impenitent and unbelieving,
God has painted in most appalling
colours. They are such that, to save
us from them, His Son descended from
these heavens and expired upon a cross,
They are such that when Paul thought
of the lost he wept like a woman.
The Gospel has in it elements of terror.
But it is like our atmosphere—occa-
sionally riven by the thunder and
illumined by the fatal flash, at times
the path of the stealthy pestilence,
charged with elements of destruction
and impregnated with the seeds of
disease ; but how much more a great
magazine of health, filled with the most
harmonious sounds, fragrant with the
sweetest odours, hung with golden
drapery, the pathway of sunbeams,
the womb of showers, the feeder of
fertilising streams, the parent of har-
vests, and the fountain of all earth’s
life! And, just ss in that atmosphere
which God has wrapped around our
globe there is much more health than
sickness, much more food than famine,
much more life than death, so in the
Bible there is much more love than
terror.” —Guthrie.


Ver. 19. “The scattering power of
sin; in truth, it scatters the souls of
men into the whole world, and that is
already their judgment which sinners
have to experience.” —Lange.

— “God frequently repeats that
His judgments upon the Jews were no
more than what their‘own ways or
doings obliged Him to inflict. There
was in His dealings with them no
arbitrary exercise of sovereignty, but
they were dealt with according to their
ownconduct, And thus God deals with
mankind in general; His actions in
regard to them are not founded in
an arbitrary exercise of His absolute
sovereignty over them, but in impar-
tial justice, wisdom, and goodness;
aud He judges them according to their
own ways, and not according to the
dictates of an arbitrary will.”—Benson.


Vers. 20, 21. The Name of God—
1. Is the expression of His immaculate
holiness, 2. Ig defamed by human
sin. 3, Is misunderstood by those who
witness the sufferings of His people.
4, Will vindicate to the universe its
inviolable justice and righteousness,


Ver. 20. “They did profanely sin
against those precepts of My law which
heathens did know, venerate, and ob-
serve better than the Jews. Their
heathen neighbours said, with taunt
and cutting reprimand—‘ These are
the people of the Lord.’ These captive
slaves, that are most forlorn of men,
will have it that their God is the Lord,
the mighty and the good God, the true
and faithful One that gave them the
land out of which they are driven. If
He be good as they boast, how comes
it to pass that His people are in such
ill state? Was He weak and could
not keep them in their own land,
or doth He falsify His word? You
miserable Jews, say what this mean-,
eth, But by their impure life they
opened the mouths of the heathens to
blaspheme and call the holiness of God
into question, When they saw His
people so unholy they concluded—‘ As
is the people so is their God ;’ and this,
as it was a great offence and scandal
to the heathen, so it was a great dis-
honour to God.”—Pool.

— “With the sinner goes also his
curse, his other shadow.—Thus this
chapter teaches us how the first petition
of the Lord’s prayer should be under-
stood. The name of the Lord is hal-
lowed as well by the prosperity of the
elect, which may obtain even under
the cross, as by their purification from
sin.—A bad life ought not to put good
doctrine in question.”—Lange.


Ver. 21. “ God His own justification
in this world.—God sanctifies His
name among men by benefits as well
as by judgments and punishments,”—
Lanae.


385


UHAP XXXVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


ee a


HOMILETICS.
SrreiruaAL PROSPERITY.
(Vers, 22-38.)


I. Is bestowed as an act of unmerited Divine goodness (vers. 22-24)
Israel had forfeited all claim to the Divine pity ; they had broken every clause
in their part of the covenant. No injustice would have been done had they
been passed by for ever and another nation selected to carry out the work in
which they had so signally failed. But the Divine honour must be vindicated.
The Lord had chosen Israel, had wedded Himself to them in closest union of
both promise and blessing, had lavished upon them the love of His great heart
and made them distinguished by miracles of power. Must all this go for
nothing! Amid the general defection He did not overlook the fact that a
few remained faithful, And yet, not for their sakeg, nor for the sake of the
people who had so cruelly disappointed and wrongec Him, but for His own
Name’s sake, He resolves upon the vindication of His honour. That vindica
tion had been partially seen in the punishment, but is to be more fully
displayed in the restoration and prosperity of His people. An old lesson,
which the world in all ages has been so slow to take in, is to be again enforced
—that spiritual good is superior to and the only sound basis of temporal good.
Our smallest mercies are undeserved. How unfathomable is the goodness
which continually surrounds us with spiritual riches !


II. Begins in a thorough renovation of the moral nature. 1. Sin is removed
(ver. 25). There is no possibility of the future being better than the present
unless the heart is cleansed from sin. Man is powerless to do this (Jer. ii. 22).
It is an act of God. The ceremonial cleansing of the Law was typical of the
spiritual cleansing of the Gospel. The Divine cleansing is thorough and com-
plete—“ Ye shall be cleansed from all your filthiness and from all your foul
gods.” 2. A new nature ucquired (ver. 26). The old nature was full of
idolatries ; the new shall be clear of these. The old nature was stubborn,
stolid, hard as stone; the new shall be soft, tender, impressionable, receiving
the Divine impress as the melted wax receives the impress of the seal. The
human shall be suffused, interpenetrated, and transformed by the Divine, It
is a spiritual miracle. Man can mould the intellect and modify the disposition,
but God alone can change and renew the heart. 3. The renovation evidenced by
practical obedience (ver. 27). In the spiritual world, as in the physical, every
effect must have an adequate cause, and the effect must ever be in harmony
with the nature and operative force of the cause. A life of moral obedience is
the practical outcome of the influence of moral law acting at the centre of
activity. Physical law is inflexible, and must ever produce the same class of
phenomena with unvarying regularity. Moral law is not less unalterable, but
it operates within the sphere of human freedom and cannot produce the same
cast-iron sameness of resulte as is done in the unchanging operations of physical
law: it respects the free, voluntary exercise of the human will. The Spirit of
God so operates upon all the powers of the soul as to make obedience to
God’s law not only possible, but cheerful, consistent, and acceptable. Enforced,
mechanically regulated obedience is unworthy of man and displeasing to God.
The reality of a spiritually transformed nature is seen in a constant endeavour
to observe the Divine “statutes and judgments and do them.”


Iil. Is the only condition in which temporal prosperity can be troly
886


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL OMAP. EXEXVE
rr ES


appreciated and safely enjoyed (vers. 28-30, 33-38). With the return of
Israel to spiritual allegiance there is promised a return of temporal prosperity,
and it is more than hinted in these verses that the outward prosperity should
be proportioned to their moral obedience. Had they been more faithful, the
promise of national restoration would have been more completely realised than
history as yet has shown it to be. Temporal prosperity to the unbelieving
is not only delusive, but dangerous. The success achieved by diligence and
virtue has become a curse when the loss of rectitude has led to its abuse. The
founders of the illustrious family of the Medici rose to affluence and power not
only by their commercial genius, but by their philanthropy and virtue, John
de Medici being honoured by his countrymen with the title of “the Father of
the Poor ;” and his son Cosmo has inscribed on his tomb the title of “ Father
of his country.”’ But with the decline of virtue in their descendants wealth
and prestige vanished. Spiritual prosperity is the precursor of temporal pros-
perity. We never properly enjoy the good things of this life but as we use
them in the fear and love of God, the all-bountiful Giver.





IV. Humbles the soul under a sense of personal unworthiness (vers. 31,
32). "Tis ever so. Nothing humbles the soul more than a display of God’s
condescending goodness. We are ashamed of the sins committed against bene-
ficence so tender, so constant, so generous. We feel that such mercy is utterly
undeserved. The goodness of God melts the heart into penitence, which a
misconception of severity has hardened into indifference or reckless bravado
(Rom. ii. 4,5). A genuine repentance is one of the most hopeful symptoms
of spiritual prosperity. The glory of Divine grace is often seen to best advan-
tage through the mist of tears,


V. Is secured by earnest and persevering prayer (ver. 37). God had pro-
mised prosperity, and, apart from Israel’s deservings, had determined to bestow
it, but none the less must it be sought by prayer and supplication. Whatever
God has promised is a legitimate subject for prayer. Prayer is the language of
conscious dependence; but how vast is the scope of the suppliant which is
limited only by “the exceeding great and precious promises!” Those blessings
are most highly prized, and bring the greatest spiritual enrichment, which are
secured by earnest and agonising prayer.


Lessons.—l. God has a definite purpose in giving or withholding prosperity.


2. Spiritual prosperity is the highest kind of prosperity. 3. The highest blessings
are not secured without importunate prayer.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 22-24. The Divine Imparti-
ality—1. An essential characteristic
of the Divine nature. 2. Exercised
in the accurate distribution of punish-
ment and reward. 3. Reveals the
enormity of human ingratitude and sin.
4, Vindicates the integrity of the Divine
name, 5. Seen in the generous treat-
ment of the underserving, 6. A power-
ful motive to repentance and obedience,


Ver. 22. “It is not for any merit


which God sees in His people that He
has pity on them, for if God weighed
their merits there could be nothing
in them to recommend them to His
favour; but it is in consideration of
His own holy name and character as
the God of covenanted grace, that so
He may vindicate its sanctity before
the nations from the reproach brought
on it through the sins and the terrible
punishment of the covenant people,
Let us hence learn that the honour
387


GHAP. XXXVI.


HOMILETIC CUMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





of His own holy name is the first
grand end of all God’s dealings of
wrath and mercy. Let us fall in with
the purpose of God, and make the
honour of His name our chief plea
in our prayers for mercy and our in-
fluencing motive in all our acts,”—
Fausset.

— ‘‘God’s Motive in Salvation. 1.
Regard to His own glory. 2 In
saving man for His own honour and
glory God exhibits the mercy, holi-
ness, love, and other attributes of the
Godhead, 3. The doctrine that God
is not moved to save man by any
merit or worth in him is a truth of
the highest importance to sinners. 4.
It is as important for the saint as for
the sinner to remember that he is not
saved through personal merit, or for
his own sake. 65. This doctrine, while
it keeps the saint humble, will help to
make him holy.

“Here, no ornament to park or gar-
den, stands a dwarfed, stunted, bark-
bound tree. How am I to develop
that stem into tall and graceful beauty,
to clothe with blossoms those naked
branches and hang them till they bend
with clustered fruit! Change such as
that is not to be effected by surface-
dressing, or any care bestowed on the
upper soil. The remedy must go to
the root. You cannot make that tree
grow upwards till you break the crust
below, pulverise the hard subsoil, and
give the roots room and way to strike
deeper down ; for the deeper the root
and the wider-spread the fine filaments
of its rootlets, the higher the tree lifts
an umbrageous head to heaven and
throws out its hundred arms to catch,
in dews, raindrops, and sunbeams, the
blessings of the sky. The believer
offers this analogy between grace
and nature, that, as the tree grows
best skyward that grows most down-
ward, the lower the saint descends in
humility the higher he rises in holi-
ness, The soaring corresponds to the


sinking.” —Guthrie’s Gospel in Ezekiel.


Vers. 23, 24. “‘God Glorified in Re-
demption. 1. God might have vindi-
tated His honour and sanctified His

888


name in our destruction. 2, God
sanctifies His name and glorifies Him-
self in our redemption, 3. God’s
power, wisdom, holiness, justice, and
mercy glorified in redemption. 4. In
redemption God is glorified in the
complete discomfiture of all His and
our enemies,

“The effect of the wind is visible,
not the element itself. The clouds
scud across the sky, the trees swing
their arms wildly in the air, aerial
waves chase each other across the corn,
and the boat, catching the gale in her
flowing sheet, goes dancing over the
billows. So, although in a sense in-
finitely higher, the Inyisible is visible ;
and in His works we see One who,
seeing all, remains Himself unseen.
God is lost, not in darkness, but in
light ; a sun that blinds the eye which
is turned on its burning disc. Angels
themselves, unable to sustain His glory,
cover their faces with their wings and
use them, as a man his hand, to screen
their eyes from the ineffable effulgence.
Unbeliever though he was, the great
Laplace, in one of his last and not least
memorable utterances, said—‘ It is the
little that we know; it is the great
that remains unknown.’ On the con-
secrated spot, where the cross of salva-
tion rose and the blood of a Redeemer
fell, I find the centre of a spiritual
universe, Here, in a completed arch,
if I may so speak, locked fast by the
key, all the properties of divinity meet ;
here, concentrated as in a focus, ita
varied attributes blend and shine.”—
Guthrie.


Vers. 25-28. Heart-Renewal — 1.
The work of the Divine Spirit, 2.
Accomplished only by being cleansed
from sin. 3. A thorough and self-
conscious change. 4. Evidenced by
an outward and practical obedience to
the Divine law. 5. Puts the soul in
its true relationship to God.


Ver. 25. “The mention of clean
water to be sprinkled on the people as
the means of purification can only be
understood symbolically ; it does not
refer to any mere external rite, or


HOLILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OMAP, XXXVZ,


seer


to any specific ordinance of the old
covenant, such as the lustration cere-
mony with water and the ashes of the
red heifer, or to the ablutions con-
nected with the consecration of the
Levites, It is rather to be viewed in
reference to the purifications by water
collectively, which were all, in one
respect or another, symbolical of the
removal of impurity and the establish-
ment of the worshipper in a sound and
acceptable condition, This was no
more of a merely formal and outward
character in Old Testament times than
it is now, as we may learn from the
whole tenor of this prophecy. It was
by their moral pollutions most of all
that the people of Israel had profaned
God’s name and drawn down His dis-
pleasure ; and the purification which
was to undo the evil and again to
sanctify the name of God could be
nothing short of a conformity to God’s
own righteousness, which throughout
all ages is the same.”—Fairbairn.

— Man Justified. “1. God’s people
are not chosen because they are holy.
2. In redemption, the saved are not
justified by themselves, but by God.
3. We are not justified through the
administration or efficacy of any out-
ward ordinance. 4. We are justified,
or cleansed from the guilt of sin, by
the blood of Christ. The greatest of
all questions, ‘What must I do to be
saved ?’ is one which admits of a
short and plain answer. Capable of a
wide expansion, it may yet be brought
within a very narrow compass, The
river, which there flows between dis-
tant wooded banks and yonder spreads
itself out into a lake, reflecting on its
mirror-face the bright heavens above
and the dark hills around, is here—
where its foaming waters flash past
loud as thunder and quick as lightning,
or creep sullenly along at the bottom
of the deep, dark gorge — brought
within narrow bounds; bounds so
narrow that, with nerve enough, by
one brave leap from rock to rock I
could clear its breadth. Even so all the
wide expanse of doctrines to be be-
lieved and duties to be done over
which we might expatiate in reply to


the question, ‘What shall I do to bu
saved?’ is contracted, compressed, com-
prehended in Paul’s brief address—
‘ Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and
thou shalt be saved.’ As salvation is
the one thing needful for man, faith is


the one thing needful for salvation.”—
Guthrie.


Ver. 26. Man Converted. “1. It
is a great change—not a mere olit-
ward reformation. 2. It is a birth.
3. It is a resurrection. Our little
child, watching with curious eye the
apparent motion of objects, calls out
in ecstasy and bids us see how hedge
and house are flying past the carriage,
You know it is not these that move ;
nor the fixed and firm shore, with its
trees and fields, and boats at anchor,
and harbours and headlands, that is
gliding by the cabin-window. That is
but an illusion of the eye ; the motion
is not in them but us.”—Guthrie.

— The Heart of Stone and the
Heart of Flesh. “1. The heart of stone.
1. Stone is cold. 2. Hard. 3. Dead.
Il. The heart of flesh a new heart, 1.
By this change the understanding and
judgment are enlightened. 2. The
temper and disposition are changed
and sanctified. 3. In conversion man
gets a warm heart, a soft heart, a living
heart. 4. By conversion man is en-
nobled. Near by a mass of rock that
had fallen from the overhanging crag,
which had some wild-flowers growing
in its fissures and on its top the fox-
glove with its spikes of beautiful but
deadly flowers, we once came upon an
adder as it lay in ribbon-coil, basking
onthe sunny ground. At our approach
the reptile stirred, uncoiled itself, and
raising its head, with eyes like burning
coals, it showed its venomous fangs,
shook its cloven tongue, hissed, and
gave sign of battle. Attacked, it re-
treated, and aking for that grey
stone, wormed itself into a hole in its
side. Its nest and home were there,
And in looking on that shattered rock,
fallen from its primeval elevation, with
its flowery but fatal charms, the home
and nest of the adder, where nothing
grew but poisoned beauty and nothing

3893


OHAP. XXXVI.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





dwelt but a poisoned brood, it seemed
to us an emblem of that heart which
the verse describes as a stone, which
experience proves is a habitation of
devils, and which the prophet pro-
nounces to be desperately wicked.” —
Guthrie.

— “The heart of stone does not bear
bending according to God’s will, where-
as the heart of flesh is soft and of such
a texture that God can impress into its
understanding a living knowledge, into
its will a voluntary obedience, and into
the inclinations a holy order.”—Starke.


Ver. 27. The New Life. “I. Ji is
a willing obedience to the law of God.
Il. It ts @ progressive obedience. ‘I
will cause you to walk in My statutes.’
Other images convey the idea of pro-
gress, but this of progress achieved by
exertion, progress the triumph of an
intelligent mind and the reward of a
determined will. 1. In this image
God’s people find comfort and en-
couragement. 2. This image stimu-
lates to exertion. III. This willing
and progressive obedience is the sign and
seal of salvation. IV. One of the most
powerful means to accomplish the duty
of the new life 1s to cultwate the love of
Christ. 1. Love is the most powerful
of all motives, 2. Love is a motive
to duty as pleasant as it is powerful.
V. A powerful motive to duty lies in the
fact that by our obedience to these statutes
the verdict of judgment shall be settled.
The last day is God’s Day of settle-
ment with a world that has had long
credit. It is the winding-up of this
earth’s bankrupt estate and each man’s
individual interests. It is the closing
of an open account that has been
running on ever since the fall. It is
the day when the balance is struck
and our fate is heaven or hell. Our
hands are now sowing seed for that
great harvest.”—Guthrie.

— “IT will put My Spirit, the great
principle of light, life, and love, within
you, to actuate the new spirit and
to influence the new affections and
passions, that the animal spirit may
not become brutish, that the mental
powers become not foolish, I will

390


put My Spirit within you, so that aa
the new spirit may influence the new
heart, so will My Spirit influence your
new spirit, that each may have a
proper mover; and then all will be
pure, regular, harmonious, when pas-
sion is influenced by reason and reason
by the Holy Ghost. And the cause
shall be evidenced by the effects ; for
I will cause you to walk in My statutes
—not only to believe and reverence
My appointments relative to what J
command you to perform; but ye
shall walk in them, your conduct shall
be regulated by them.”—A. Clarke.

— “First the inward and then the
outward change is God’s order, while
we men always proceed in the reverse
order. What good a man does is not
his, but God’s work in him.”—Starke.


Ver. 28. “To the heavenly among
men there is no lack even on earth;
to him who has what alone is worth
having nothing shall be wanting.”—
Lange. ;


Vers. 29-36. “Spiritual blessings
were largely comprised in their tem-
poral ones, as the kernel is enclosed
in the shell. Hence Christian holi-
ness and all the blessings of the new
covenant are here principally implied.
The Jews looked for the bringing-in
of a better hope. They had a laver
in which they washed ; but David says,
‘TI will wash my hands in innocency.’
They had the blood of sprinkling, but
a better fountain was expected to be
opened for sin and for uncleanness,
They had circumcision ; but the true
circumcision was that of the heart.
They had the law written on the
tables of stone; but the Messiah who
says, ‘Thy law is within Me,’ here
promises to write it on the heart.”—


Sutcliffe.


Vers. 29, 30. The Productiveness of
Nature—l. 4 Divine gift. “I will
multiply the fruit of the tree and the
increase of the field.” 2. Promptly
responds to the Divine voice. “I will
call for the corn and increase it.” 3,
A guarantee against famine, “I will


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL


OHAP, XXEVE


a


lay no famine upon you—ye shall
receive no more reproach of famine
among the heathen.” 4. Is appreciated
only by those who are morally cleansed.
“T will save you from all your un-
cleannesses,”


Ver. 29. “I will call for the corn.’
All necessaries for aliment comprised
in one, and these brought to them at
God’s call, which they will hear (Ps.
cv. 16, 40; Heb. ii. 21, 22). Famine
is God’s arrow; He shoots it; where
it is, He layeth it; but His people
shall neither have it their misery nor
their reproach any more.”—Pool.


Ver. 31-36. “Nothing so melts the
sinner into repentance as the love and
grace of God, where he could have
looked only for wrath because of his
sins, Let us, if we desire true repent-
ance, receive it as the gift of God at
the foot of the cross of Christ, where
we see our sin forgiven at the cost of
such an awful sacrifice, flowing from
the gratuitous love of God. The
terrors of the law can frighten, but
the grace of God in Christ alone can
melt the heart.” —Fausset.


Vers. 31, 32. Conscious Sin—1. The
yesult of reflection om personal wrong-
doing. “Then shall ye remember
your evil ways and your doings that
were not good.” 2. Humbles the soul
in profound self-abasement. “Ye shall
lothe yourselves in your own sight for
your iniquities and for your abomina-
tions, Be ashamed and confounded for
your own ways.” 3. Convinces the soul
that all blessings have a Divine source.
““Not for your sakes do I this, saith
the Lord God.”


Ver. 31. “When I have given you
My Spirit, renewed your hearts,
brought you by miraculous mercy out
of captivity in a strange land unto
liberty in your own, ye shall call to
mind, review and examine all your
past life, your ways opposite to God’s,
therefore both their own by choice
and also evil in their very nature.
Your mind shall abhor what you loved


and deeply grieve at what you re-
joiced in. When swine ye wallowed
in mire; when made sheep you shall
as much fear and flee from it.”—Pool.

— “There are some things we can
hardly forget—our sorrows and our
pleasures, as Esau ; some things we can
hardly remember—our faults and our
friends, as Joseph’s butler. Augustine
was famous for two of his works—his
‘Retractions,’ which are the confessions
of his errors; and his ‘Confessions,’
which are the retractions of his life.”
—Trapp.

— “In conversion man regains his
memory, Loathing is not a sign of
sickness only, but in matters spiritual
it is a sign of convalescence, Our life
must become sorrow to us, otherwise
sorrow will not become life to us”—
Lange.


Ver. 32. “Grace works shame, and
so much the more as it makes the
wilderness a paradise, the beggar a
king, and the sinner a priest. We
boast of nothing in Christ and we
boast of all things,”—Lange.


Vers. 33-36. Moral Reform—1l. The
basis of temporal prosperity. 2. Can
be accomplished only by Divine power.
3. An evidence to the world of the
Divine veracity.


Ver. 36. “‘I the Lord have spoken
it, and I will do it.’ The Security of
the Believer. 1. The text announces
a most important truth. 2. This truth
imparts comfort to a true Christian,
Through his confidence in this truth—

1) he commits all his earthly cares
to God ; (2) he is sustained amid the
trials of lite; (3) he cheerfully hopes
and patiently waits for heaven, 3.
Both nature and providence illustrate
the truth of the text. The voice of
every storm that, like an angry child,
weeps and cries itself to sleep, the
voice of every shower that has cleared
up into sunshine, the hoarse voice
of ocean breaking in impotent rage
against its ancient bounds, the voice
of the seasons as they have marched
to the music of the spheres in un-


391


OMAP. XXXVI.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


nnn E Ea EESEEESEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEmeae!


broken succession over the earth, the
scream of the satyr in Babylon’s empty
halls, the fierce shout of the Bedouin
as he hurls his spear and careers in
freedom over his desert sands, the
wail and weeping of the wandering
Jew over the ruins of Zion—in all
these I hear the echo of this voice of
God—‘I the Lord have spoken, and I
will do it.’”—G@uthrie.


Ver. 37, 38. An Increasing Popu-
lation—1. An evidence of national
prosperity. 2. A great national re-
sponsibility. 3. Should be instructed
in the knowledge and worship of God.
4. An imposing spectacle when en-
gaged in the praise and service of


God.


Ver. 37. “Thus saith the Lord God.”
The Divine Word—1l. Emphasised by
frequent repetition. This thefourteenth
time this expression is used in the
present chapter. 2, The foundation
and guarantee of blessing to man.
3. Should be devoutly pondered. 4.
Is infallible alike in promise and
threatening,

— “*T will yet for this be enquired
of by the house of Israel, to do it for
them.’ The Nature, Necessity, and
Power of Prayer. 1. Nature herself
teaches us to pray. 2. Some diffi-
culties connected with the duty. The
decrees of God render prayer unneces-
sary. From want of faith prayer must
be useless, 3, Prayer must be earnest.
4. Prayer is powerful. 5. Prayer is
confident. Child of God, pray on. By
prayer thy hand can touch the ‘stars,
thy arm stretches up to heaven. Nor
let thy holy boldness be dashed by the
thought that prayer has no power to
bend these skies and bring down thy
God. When I pull upon the rope
which fastens my little skiff to a
distant and mighty ship, this feeble
arm may not draw its vast bulk to
me, but I draw myself to it, to ride in
safety under protection of its guns,
and in my want enjoy the fulness of
its stores. And it equally serves my
purpose and supplies my needs that.
although prayer were powerless to

392


move God to me, it moves me to God.
If He does not descend to earth I
ascend to heaven.”—Guthrie.

— “For all these blessings, whether
of sanctification or of millennial glory,
God will be enquired of in prayer;
for the duty and the promise are
everywhere connected in the sacred
writings. It is remarkable that when
St. Paul mentions holiness of heart at
large, it is generally with the most
fervent supplications for its attain-
ment (Eph. iii, 14-19; 1 Thess, v.
23). This is still the only way for
men to attain purity of heart and the
mind of Christ.”—Suicliffe.


Ver. 38. ‘Thus shall men multi-
ply and fill the cities of replanted
Judah. And the increase of the num-


bers of a people is then honourable.


when they are all dedicated to God
as a holy flock, to be presented to
Him as living sacrifices. Crowds are
a lovely sight in God’s temple,”—
Benson.

— “Such promises as those con-
tained in this chapter cannot be taken
in an absolute sense; they must be
understood to some extent condi-
tionally, They reveal the kind pro-
pensions of God towards His people,
what He is disposed and ready to do
towards them, rather than what He
will for certain accomplish at any stage
or period of their history. So far the
Word contains an absolute element,
as God certainly pledges Himself to
make provision for securing, in a larger
measure than formerly, a proper re-
generation of heart and conduct in
His people, and also for giving palpable
proof of this in their more flourishing
and prosperous condition generally.
The goodness of God was certainly to
manifest itself for these ends; but it
would do so to the full extent repre-
sented only if they continued in His
goodness.” —Fairbairn.

— “There is no period of the Jewish
history from that time until now
to which this beautiful chapter can
be applied. It must belong to the
Gospel dispensation ; and if the Jews
will still refuse, contradict, and blas-


meee


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP, AXXVE.





pheme, let no Christian have any
fellowship with them in their opposi-
tion to this Almighty Saviour. Let
none be indifferent to His salvation,


let all plead His promises, and let the
messengers of the Churches proclaim
to the Christian world a free, a full,
and a present salvation.”—A. Clarke,


THE VISION oF THE Dry Bones REVIVIFIED A SYMBOL OF THE DEATH
AND RESURRECTION oF IsRAEL, (Chap. xxxvii.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 1.
“The hand of the Lord was upon me.”
“The abrupt commencement without
and, points out that the fact here
related is extraordinary and out of
connection with the usual prophetic
activity. The hand of the Lord de-
notes the overruling Divine influence.”
—Hengstenberg. “The valley ”—“ the
plain or valley near Tel Abib, familiar
to Ezekiel as the scene of the vision of
the cherubim. Now, however, to his
horror, he found it full of dry, wither-
ing bones—the wreck of a vast host
slain by the sword. Wandering over
the wide expanse, the multitude of
these ghastly relics of mortality and
their bleached dryness, the very em-
bodiment of death, filled him with
awe.” —CGeikie.


Ver, 3. “Can these bones live?”
“TImplying that, humanly speaking,
they could not; but faith leaves the
question of possibility to rest with
God, with whom nothing is impossible
(Deut, xxxii. 39). An image of Chris-
tian faith which believes in the coming
resurrection of the dead, in spite of all
appearances against it, because God
has said it (John v. 21; Rom. iv. 17 ;
2 Cor. i. 9).”—Fausset.


Ver. 4. “ Prophesy upon these
bones "—prophesy over them ; pro-
claim God’s quickening word to them.


_ Ver. 6. “Ye shall know that I am
the Lord "—“ by the actual proof of
My Divinity which I will give in re-
viving Israel.”—Fausset.


Ver. 7. “And as I prophesied there
was a noise.” God’s voice of power is
followed by a rustling caused by the


bones coming rustling up from the
surface of the valley.”—Lange.


Ver. 8. “ The sinews and the flesh
came upon them, and the skin covered
them; but there was no breath in
them.” “So far, they were only co-
hering in order as unsightly skeletons.
The next step, that of covering them
successively with sinews, skin, and
flesh, gives them beauty; but still no
breath of life in them. This may
imply that Israel hereafter, as at the
restoration from Babylon was the
case in part, shall return to Judea
unconverted at first (Zech. xiii, 8, 9).
Spiritually a man may assume all the
semblances of spiritual life, yet have
none, and so be dead before God.”—
Fausset. ‘There is reference to the first
creation of man. There also the lower
element comes first into being, then the
higher. The prophet is penetrated
with the thought that the real misery
of the people is the moral ruin. The
remedy, therefore, cannot stop at the
restoration of the civic state. The
main thing is a renewed outpouring
of the Spirit and the restoration of
union with God thereby effected, which
was originally accomplished by God
breathing into man the breath of life.”
—Hengstenberg.


Ver. 9. “ Prophesy unto the wind”
—the spirit of life, or life-breath. For
it is distinct from “the four winds”
from which it is summoned. Lange
says what is here spoken of is—the
universal spirituality which pervades
all creation. The Spirit is evidently
here referred to under the symbol of
the wind. His influence is supreme
and operates in all parts of the earth.


Ver. 10. “So I prophesied, and the
393


OHAP, XXXVI.





breath came into them ”—such honour
God gives to the Divine word even in
the mouth of a man: how much more
when in the mouth of the Son of God!
(John vy. 25-29). Though this chapter
does not directly prove the resurrection
of the dead, it does so indirectly, for
it takes for granted the future fact as
one recognised by believing Jews, and
so made the image of their national
restoration (Isa. xxv. 8; xxvi. 10;
Dan, xii. 2; Hosea vi. 2; xiii. 14).


Ver. 11. “Our bones are dried.”
“We are undone ”—Cesenius, ‘“ Re-
duced to ourselves "—Hitzig. “It is
over with us”—Delitzsch. “We are
cut off for us. The for us points out
how grievous the sad fact is for those
concerned, how painfully they were
affected by it "—Hengstenberg. There
is nothing in us to give hope, like a
withered branch cut off from a tree, or
a limb from the body. The national
state was as hopeless of revival as
marrowless bones of reanimation.
“Cut off,” separated, shut out from
God’s help.


Ver. 12. “I will open your graves”
—the abodes of the exile, since the
Jews who were in exile considered
themselves like dead men.


Ver. 14. “ And shall put My Spirit
in you, and ye shall live.” ‘ The
inspiriting and quickening for a home
system which is to have permanence,
and especially in the case of a people
like Israel, will of necessity be spiritual
and religious (Isa. xiv. 1; chap. xvii.
24; xxi. 14; xxxvi. 36).”—Lange.
“ Wherever within the Christian
Church a new state of death arises,
there this prophecy always comes again
into force, until at the end of days death
be fully overcome,”’—Hengstenberg.


$
Ver. 16. “Take thee one stick ”—
alluding to Num. xvii, 2, the tribal
rod. The union of the two rods was
a prophecy in action of the brotherly
union which is to reunite the ten
tribes and Judah. As their severance
under Jeroboam was fraught with the
394


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; EZEKIEL


greatest evil to the covenant people, se
the first result of both being joined by
the Spirit of life to God is, they be-
come joined together under the one
Covenant King, Messiah — David.—
“Write upon it, For Judah, and for
the children of Israel his companions”
—his associates; i.e, For Judah and,
besides Benjamin and Levi, those
who had joined themselves to him of
Ephraim, Manasseh, Simeon, Ashur,
Zebulun, Issachar, as having the
temple and lawful priesthood in his
borders (2 Chron. xi, 12, 13, 16; xv.
9; xxx. 11, 18). The latter became
identified with Judah after the carry-
ing away of the ten tribes, and re-
turned with Judah from Babylon, and
so shall be associated with that tribe at
the future restoration. ‘Then take
another stick, and write upon it, For
Joseph, the stick of Ephraim. and for
all the house of Israel his companions.”
‘‘Ephraim’s posterity took the lead,
not only of the other descendants of
Joseph, but of the ten tribes of Israel.
For 400 years, during the period of
the Judges, with Manasseh and Ben-
jamin, its dependent tribes, it had
formerly taken the lead: Shiloh was
its religious capital, Shechem its civil
capital God had transferred the
birthright from Reuben, for dishonour-
ing his father’s bed, to Joseph, whose
representative his son Ephraim, though
younger than his brother Manasseh,
was made by his grandfather Jacob
(Gen. xlviii. 19; 1 Chron. v.1). From
the pre-eminence of Ephraim, Israei ia
attached to him as companions, The
‘ali’ in this case, not in that of Judah,
which has attached as companions only
some of the children of Israel, implies
that the bulk of the ten tribes did not
return at the restoration from Babylon,
but is and shall continue distinct from
Judah until the coming union at the
restoration.” —Fausset.


Ver. 19. “And they shall be one
in mine hand.” ‘The interpretation
keeps firm hold of the symbolic action
—the union py and in God, as opposed
to the separation by and in Ephraim.”
—Lange.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


CHAP, XXXVI





Ver. 22. “I will make them one
nation.” The now plainly expressed
signification of the stick: the one nation
will be one kingdom. “And one king
shall be king to them all” “Not
Zerubbabel, who was not a king either
in fact or name, and who ruled over
but a few Jews, and that only for a
few years, whereas the king here reigns
for ever. Messiah is meant (chap.
xxxiv. 23, 24). The union of Judah
and Israel under King Messiah sym-
bolises the union of Jews and Gentiles
under Him, partly now, perfectly here-
after (ver. 24; John x. 16).”—Fausset.


Ver. 23. “Neither shall they defile
themselves with idols.’’ ‘Since sin,
and especially idolatry, had contributed
to the separation spoken of, the dis-
course turns to that. The worship of
idols islocalised transgression.” Lange.


Ver. 24. “ David My servant shall be
king over them.” See note on ver. 22,


Ver. 25. “They shall dwell therein
for ever” (Isa. lx. 21; Joel iii 20;
Amos ix. 15).


Ver. 26. “I will make a covenant
of peace”—better than the old legal
covenant, because an unchangeable
covenant of grace (chap. xxxiv. 25; Isa,
lv. 3; Jer. xxxii. 40). Will guarantee
them security from all hostile enemies
“And I will place them.” ‘God now
Himself orders and determines every-
thing concerning them—sets them, in
opposition to their former fluctuating,
because self-ordered, condition.”—Fair-
barn. ‘I will set My sanctuary in
the midst of them.” The essence of
the sanctuary is the presence of God
among them.


Ver. 28. ‘ The heathen shall know
that I the Lord do sanctify Israel.”
“‘This separation and preference, this
marking-off from the profane world,
which constitutes the idea of sancti-
fication, follows from this, that God’s
sanctuary is in Israel, that He dwells
among them with all the fulness of
His blessings and gifts. The natural
consequence of this recognition com-
pelled by facts is, that the heathen
seek for admittance among this people.”
— Hengstenberg.


HOMILETICS.
THE RESPICITATION OF AN ErFETE NATION.
(Vers, 1-14.)


In this peragrapn we have another example of the bold and startling imagery
familiar to the genius of Ezekiel, and of his vivid insight into the possibilities
of Divine power. To his realising faith, the bleached and desiccated skeletons
of the valley are a formidable army of living and moving forces. The concep-
sion of the resurrection of the dead on so vast a scale indicates a remarkable
advance in that age of the revelation of what God can do for His people.
Observe—


I. That the resuscitation of an effete nation seems a physical impossi-
bility. 1. The nation is lifeless and hopeless (ver. 1, 2). The skeletons are
dislocated and scattered; the bones are very dry and crumbling into dust.
Though not actually buried, they are slowly burying themselves in their pro-
gressive decay. The evidence of death is complete. It is beyond the power
of any known physical law to breathe the ghastly fragments into life. A
nation, or an individual, so utterly defunct seems beyond the possibility of
recovery. Saith the proverb, “‘ From privation to possession there ts no return.”
Well might Israel say, “Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost; we are
cut off from our parts” (ver. 11), 2 Its vesurrection not impossible to God

895


OHAP, XXXVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


pm


(ver. 3). If Ezekiel had been asked the question by any other than Jehovah,
“‘Can these bones live?” he would have promptly answered, “No; it is im-
possible.” It is beyond the reach of human philosophy to put life into dry
bones, and it passes the wit of human politics to restore a captive and scattered
nation. But the prophet had already learned not to limit the power of God,
and he reverently and falteringly answered, “ Lord, Thou knowest:;” if it can
be done and is to be done, Thou alone must do it, All things are possible te
God. His power is limited only by His will.


Il. That the resuscitation of an effete nation is accomplished only by
Divine power. 1. By Divine power working through authorised human agency
(vers. 4-8). The prophet was directed to prophesy over the bones; the terms
of the message were put into his lips, and the results of his preaching were
Divinely indicated to him. He obeyed the Divine mandate ; he preached ; the
silent valley rustled and rattled with the noise of bone fitting into bone, and
while he gazed there grew as from the soil an innumerable mass of perfected
human forms, But here the limitation of human agency, even when acting
under Divine supervision, is plainly indicated. The bodies were prone and
lifeless: ‘there was no breath in them.” While startled and terrified at the
effect of his words, as if an army of Frankensteins had been summoned from
the dust, the prophet felt his own utter helplessness, He was powerless to ad-
vance the development a single step further. It was an experience that is often
familiar to the earnest preacher. He may sway his audience with his impas-
sioned eloquence till they are roused into boisterous enthusiasm or dissolved
in tears; but there his power ends. To create a moral and spiritual change is
beyond his province. It is said that on one occasion, when Chrysostom was
greeted by his congregation with a storm of delighted applause because of his
overwhelming eloquence, he besought them with tears to forget the preacher
and look to God, who alone can renew the heart and reform the life. 2. By the
direct inspiration of the Divine breath (vers. 9,10). Life is the breath of God.
Still, under Divine direction, the prophet invokes the help of the life-giving
Spirit. A mysterious breath passes over the prostrate forms; they move and
leap to their feet, “an exceeding great army.” The Spirit that renews the face
of the earth, robing it with velvet verdure and decorating it with nodding
flowers, can alone raise the dead to life and adorn the soul with spiritual beauty.
A lady who recently visited the Fijian Archipelago writes :—‘ As I lived for
two years in the midst of this kindly, courteous people, and marked the reverent
devoutness of their lives and the simple earnestness of their bearing at the
never-failing morning and evening family worship and frequent church services,
I found it hard to believe the facts related to me by reliable eye-witnesses of
the appalling scenes of carnage, fighting, human sacrifices, debasing idolatry,
and loathsome cannibal feasts which five, ten, or fifteen years previously formed
the incidents of daily life in districts where now English ladies and their chil-
dren may travel or settle in perfect security.” What had wrought this change!


The breath of the Divine Spirit had blown through those lovely islands and
transformed the moral wastes.


III. That the resuscitation of an effete nation is a suggestive revelation of
the Divine character (vers. 11-14). 1. That God alone has absolute power over
life and death. It is the vanity of man to set too high a value upon his own
works. He imagines he can work out his own regeneration; but when he
touches the mysterious edge of life and death he is baffled and compelled to
confess his helplessness. It is the solitary and incommunicable prerogative of
the Godhead to educe life out of death. The supreme greatness of God is
evidenced in the exercise of His resurrection power. 2. That the nations should

396


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OHAP, XXXVIK.


_





Jearn to acknowledge and adore the true God. ‘Ye shall know that I am the
Lord: that I the Lord have spoken it and performed it” (vers. 13, 14). The
deities of the heathen could do nothing for their votaries, either to prevent
their ruin or to rescue them from it. There is but one living and true God,
and the only hope of moral revival and salvation for humanity is in Him,
“Thou hast made us for Thyself,” wrote Augustine, “and our hearts can have
no rest until they rest in Thee.”


LEssons.—1l. The nation that ignores God must perish. 2. One nation is Divinely
favoured that other nations may be blessed. 3. God will be glorified either in the rise
or fall of nations.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers, 1-14. ‘Seized by the hand of


live?’ So soon as, after addressing
the Spirit, Ezekiel is borne aloft. He


the bones, the prophet addresses his


is carried away through mid-air and
set down in a lonely valley among the
hills of a distant land. At some former
period it appears to have been the
scene of a great battle. There hosts
had sustained the charge of hosts, and
crowns perhaps were staked and won.
The peace of these solitudes had been
rudely broken by the shrieks of the
wounded, the wild shouts of the vie-
tors, the clash of arms, and the savage
roar of war. It was silent, calm now.
The storm was down; but the tempest
that swept over it had left it strewn
with wrecks. The dead had been left
unburied. They mouldered where they
fell, the skull rattled in the cloven hel-
met, the sword of the warrior lay rust-
ing beside his skeleton, and the handle
was still in the relaxed grasp of the
bony fingers. On these unsepulchred
corpses the birds of the air had sum-
mered and the wild beasts of the field
had wintered. The rain had washed and
the sun had bleached the bones which
the ravens had picked bare—they were
white and dry. In these grim and
ghastly skeletons a doleful picture of
death was spread out before the pro-
phet. In all the scene which he sur-
veyed there was neither sign nor sound
of life, but, it may be, the croak of the
raven, the howl of the famished wolf,
or the echo of his own solitary foot-
fall. Here Ezekiel was standing, a
lonely man, amid the mouldering dead,
when a voice made him start. It came
from the skies, charged with the strange
question—‘ Son of man, can these bones


God, there came from heaven a living,
life-giving breath. It blows down the
valley, and as, in passing, it kisses the
icy lips of the dead, and stirs their hair
and fans their cheek, man after man
springs to his feet, until the field which
Ezekiel found covered with ghastly
skeletons is crowded with a mighty
army, all armed for battle and war—
the marshalled host of God.”— Guthrie.

— “There can be no reasonable
doubt as to the leading scope and pur-
pose of this remarkable vision. It is
intended to counteract the feeling of
despair which had succeeded to the
opposite one of carnal security and
presumptuous confidence which at an
earlier period had wrought so disas-
trously among the people. Now that
they were reduced to so hapless and
shattered a condition, the glowing de-
lineations the prophet had been draw-
ing of a happy future seemed as
visionary to their minds as formerly
had appeared his dark forebodings of
impending distress and ruin. They
felt as if they had become like bones
dried and scattered at the grave’s
mouth, and destitute of everything on
which they could build any reasonable
prospect of restored felicity. The pro-
phet therefore meets them on their
own ground. He admits that, as com-
pared with the elevated prospects he
had been unfolding, they were in them-
selves no better than lifeless skeletons,
but at the same time shows that even
this could raise no barrier against the
Tealisation of the better future, since


397


OHAP, XXXVI.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





they had to do with the word of Him
who is equally able to make alive as
to kill. And it must have been im-
possible for any thoughtful and pious
Israelite to enter into the application
made of this vision to the temporal
resuscitation of Israel’s prostrate con-
dition, without perceiving how it also
involved, for all true believers, the
future resurrection of their bodies from
the power of death.”—Fairbairn.

— “Besides the deliverance of the
Jews from Babylon, this vision is
a lively representation of a threefold
resurrection. 1. Of the resurrection of
souls from the death of sin to the life
of righteousness, to a holy, heavenly,
spiritual, and Divine life by the power
of Divine grace accompanying the word
of Christ (John v. 24, 25). 2. The
resurrection of the Gospel Church, or
any part of it, from an afflicted state
to liberty and peace. 3. The resurrec-
tion of the body at the great day,
especially the bodies of believers, to
life eternal.” — Benson.


Ver. 1-10. Lessons from the Valley
ef Vision. ‘1. The text presents us with
a picture of the spiritual state of our race
—‘dead in trespasses and sins,’ 2.
With an illustration of the human instru-
mentality God generally employs in the
work of quickening the dead in sin—the
preaching of the Gospel. 3. With a
view of the Diwine agency employed in
the work of quickening the dead wn tres-
passes and sins—the power of the Holy
Spirit."—T. D. Anderson, B.A.

— The Secret of Successful Preach-
ing and True Revival. “1. The first
thing necessary is a Divinely appointed
sphere. The prophet had to speak
his message in a particular place. One
reason why men are not successful
to-day is because they are not where
(rod designed them to be. Not
ministers simply, but Christian men
in busisfess, for secular professions are
as much in God’s hands as religious
ones. 2. A second requirement és con-
tact with the misery to be removed. The
prophet was not commanded to stand
a great distance off and proclaim his
message. ‘The Spirit of the Lord

398


set him down in the midst of the
valley and caused him to pass by
them round about,’ and thus he was
brought into close contact with his
work, We must not say, ‘The people
must come up to us;’ we must go
down to them, sympathise with them,
identify ourselves with them. 3. The
neat requirement is confidence in God
(ver. 3). 4. A fourth requirement ts an
inspired message (vers. 4-6). We ought
always to listen for what God says ;
and if the vision tarry we should
agonise in prayer —‘ Lord, tell ue
what to say and how to say it.’ 5,
There must be a willingness to declare the
message given. ‘So I prophesied as I
was commanded.’ 6. When all these
requirements are met, the result must be
a manifestation of Divine power. We
have, in the mode in which this power
was manifested, the indication of a
true revival. It is gradual. There
was (1.) an effect produced. ‘There
was a noise.’ (2.) The effect became
visible. ‘Behold a shaking.’ (3.)
The visible effect took a particular
form. ‘The bones came together,’
&c, (4.) The Holy Ghost came down
and life is given. ‘The breath came
into them, and they lived and stood up
on their feet.””—The Lay Preacher.

— Spiritual Resurrection. cea be
The condition of the world. (1.) Spiri-
tually dead—‘ Bones.’ (2.) Hopelessly
so—‘ Dry bones.’ (3.) Universally so
—‘A valley full’ 2. The means for tts
recovery. (1.) A Divine appointment—
preaching. (2.) The claim of attention.
(3.) The offer of salvation. 3. The
wonderful result, (1.) The Gospel is
accompanied by Divine power. (2.)
The Spirit is essential to complete
success, (3.) In the use of the means
success is certain.”—Pulpit Analyst.


Vers. 1, 2. In the Presence of Death.
1, A humbling spectacle, 2. A solemn
reminder of our own mortality. 3. An
occasion of sorrow. 4, We see the
superficiality of all things earthly, 5.
We are taught the necessity of a moral
and spiritual preparedness. 6. Find
our true consolation in the loving and
eternal God.


— +
3 5 in had


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


Ver. 1. “ This valley is found indeed
everywhere. In other words, Is there
not plenty of dead bones? The best
thing is, that God still cares even for
such.” — Lange,





Ver, 2. “ As Christ often improved
His miracles by a spiritual turn of
thought, so we may improve this
astonishing restoration of the Jews to
illustrate the conversion of sinners.
Man in his fallen state is dead in
trespasses and sins; he has lost the
life of God. He is dry and parched,
for in his flesh dwelleth no good thing,
He has lain.a long time in that most
piteous situation, so that he is not
only dry, but with man there is no
hope of his conversion. The calamity
is not solitary but universal— Behold
there were very many in the open
valley.’ To raise and recover fallen
man, ministers must not only be im-
pelled with the spirit of faith and love,
but they must mix among the wicked,
as the physicians with the sick. We
may stay in our closets learning our
Master’s wisdom till we neglect to do
our Master’s work. We must mix
among the dry bones, watch their
passions, trace their habits, and learn
their evasions of conscience and of the
Gospel. Ministers must not despair,
though the cases may seem hopeless.”


—Sutcliffe.


Ver. 3. “O Lord, Thou knowest.”
Human Perplexity—1. Finds refuge
in the Divine omniscience. 2. Reve-
tently acknowledges the illimitableness
of the Divine power. 3. Teaches the
soul to render unquestioning obedience
to the Divine command.

— “The Russians in a difficult
question are accustomed to answer—
‘God and our great Duke know all
this.’ ”— Trapp.

— “Since God is omniscient and
omnipotent, the resurrection of the
dead is possible; but since He has
also promised it and cannot break His
word, it is also certain (John v. 25).”
—Starke.


Ver. 4. “O ye dry bones, hear


= Te 10):


CHAP, XXXVI





the word of the Lord.” An Urgent
Message. Addressed—l. To a dead
nationality. 2. To a dead Church,
3. To a dead faith. 4. To dead soula


Ver. 5. “Neither need the resur-
rection of the dead be held a thing
incredible concerning God’s power and
truth (Acts xxvi. 8). The keeping
green of Noah’s olive-tree in the time
of the flood, the blossoming of Aaron’s
dry rod, the flesh and sinews coming
to these dry bones and the breath
entering into them, what were they
all but so many lively emblems of the
resurrection ?”—Trapp,


Ver. 6. “Sinews tie the bones to-
gether. Flesh fills up the hollownesses,
and being full of muscles, helps motion.
Skin, as the upper silken garment,
covers all with a clear and blushing
colour. Breath lastly must be added,
All this God declares He will do.”—
Pool.


Vers. 7-10. The Successful Preacher
—l. Is Divinely commissioned. 2. Is
careful to declare only the message
God reveals to Him. “So I pro-
phesied as I was commanded” (vers,
3. Recognises the necessity of
prayer for the inspiration of the Spirit.
“Come from the four winds, O breath,
and breathe upon these slain” (ver.
9). 4. Is honoured in seeing the fruit
of his labours. ‘The breath came into
them, and they lived” (ver. 10).

— ‘Three degrees or processes have
been remarked in this mystic vision.
When the prophet was commanded to
prophesy, to foretell, on the authority
of God, that there should be a restora
tion to their own land—l. There was
a noise, which was followed by a general
shaking, during which the bones be-
came arranged and united. 2. The
flesh and skin came upon them, so
that the dry bones were no longer
seen, 3. The spirit or soul came into
them, and they stood up perfectly
vivified. Perhaps these might be illus-
trated by three periods of time which
marked the regeneration of the Jewish
polity :—1; The publication of the edict

399


OMAP. XXXVI.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





of Cyrus in behalf of the Jews, which
caused a general shaking or stir among
the people, so that the several families
began to approach each other and pre-
pare for their return to Judea (Ezra
i, 2, 3). But though partially restored,
they were obliged to discontinue the
rebuilding of the Temple. 2. The edict
published by Darius in the second year


of his reign (Ezra iv. 23, 24), which -


removed the impediments thrown in
the way of the Jews (Ezra vi. 6, 7).
3. The mission of Nehemiah with
orders from Artaxerxes to complete
the building of the Temple and the
city (Neh. ii 7). Then the Jews be-
came a great army, and found them-
selves in sufficient force to defend
themselves and city from all their
enemies.” —A. Clarke.

— ‘The vision secondarily sets forth
the spiritual resurrection of the people
of God now through the regenerating
power of the Holy Ghost; and then
hereafter their literal resurrection also,
through the same Spirit (Rom. viii.
11; Phil. iii, 20). It needs the same
Almighty power to raise a sinner from
his natural state of spiritual death as
it does to raise a corpse to life. To
man both alike are impossible. But
faith believes in the power and will
of God to quicken the dead where to
sense the case would seem hopeless.
The spiritual resurrection is not in-
stantaneously complete, but is pro-
gressive. At first there is the outward
and inward preparation for the recep-
tion of the Spirit of life, and then at
last the breath of life enters the man,
and he becomes truly born again of
the Spirit. Let us never be satisfied
with the outward semblances of spiri-
tual life—the bones, sinews, flesh, and
skin—which give the form of beauty
and life, but which are not the life
itself. None but living believers shall
stand before the living God. Prayer
is the means whereby to obtain the
breath of spiritual life, both for our-
selves and for others (ver. 9; Sol. Song
iv. 16).”—Fausset.


Ver. 7. “If the voice of the Holy
Ghost is heard in the heart, then there
400


is a movement of the heart, and blessed
is he who obeys the impulse.”—Starck.


Ver. 8 “The spirit and not the
uniform is that which truly unifies,
and the consciences of men are not to
be dealt with as the regimental tailor
deals with soldiers.” —Lange.


Ver. 9. “When ministers succeed in
promoting a law-work on the mind,
always in due time mixing comfort
with terror, they must turn their eyes
to heaven and become advocates and
intercessors for the promised Com:
forter. Our sermons have toc much
of the didactic; we divide, explain,
and teach. We dwell on words and
truths already understood. But after
setting good things before an audience,
why may we not assist piety in utter-
ing the wishes of their hearts to obtain
them? The frequent prayers which
St. Paul mixes with his discourses are
the most pathetic and touching parts
of his writings.” —Sutcliffe.

— “Vision of the Dry Bones—a
theme for a missionary sermon. 1. 4
striking description of the religious state
of the heathen world. (1.) The persons
made the subject of this prophetic
vision are represented as dead. (2.)
The number of the dead forms another
part of the picture—‘the valley was
full of bones.’ (3.) They were un-
buried. The destructive effects of sin,
the sad ravages of death, lay exposed
and open tothe sun. (4.) The state of
the dead—‘ the bones were very dry.’
Under this strong figure the hopeless-
ness of their condition is represented.
2. The means by which its mystical
resurrection ts to be effected. (1.) The
ministry of the Word is the grand
means appointed by God for the sal-
vation of the world, (2.) The words
may be considered as an injunction on
the preachers of the Gospel— Pro-
phesy unto these dry bones.’ (3.)
The injunction ‘Prophesy’ respects
not only ministers, but you also who
have a private station in the Church,
3. The certain success which should foliow
the application of the appointed means,
(1.) Our confidence rests on the powes


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP. XXXVIL


St


of the Gospel. (2.} Our confidence in
the certain success of the Gospel rests
algo on experience. (3.) Prophecy con-
firms the certainty of success."—R.
Watson.


Ver. 10. “‘An exceeding great
army.’ A power, or army of strong,
courageous, and well-ordered soldiers,
The phrase in the Hebrew is very
full—a power, or great host, very, very
great. ‘Thus they rise that the prophet
and we might know how safe they
would be in themselves, and how
terrible to their enemies.” —Pool.


Vers, 11-14. National Life—1l. De-
pendent on God for its worth and
permanence. 2. Sinks into decay and
oblivion when it ignores God. 3.
Indebted for its revival to the good-
aess and power of God.


Ver. 11. “ ‘Our hope is lost.’ Let
them hope as hope can: we have
hanged up all our hopes now that the
city and Temple are destroyed. Thus
carnal confidence, as it riseth up into a


corky, frothy hope when it seeth suffi-
cient help, so it sitteth down into a
faithless, sullen discontent and despair
when it can see no second causes.”—
Trapp.


— The language of unbelief makes
the calamity great, and God’s power
to help little,


Vers. 12,13. ‘‘Though your captivity
be as death, your prisons and confine-
ments close as the grave, yet I will
open those graves. I will lift you out,
lend you a hand to bring you out with
life and strength. And I will be your
guide, that you may know the way ; be
your support, that you may be able to
go ; and your guard and defence against
dangers of the way, that you may
certainly come into your own land,
When your restitution to your own
land and your prosperity in it, when
your growth tostrength and power shall
be so miraculously effected, then you
shall acknowledge and publish the
glory of My power, faithfulness, good-
ness, and wisdom.”-— Pool,


HOMILETICS.
THe UNITY oF THE KINGDOM oF Gom
(Vers. 15-28.)


I. Promoted by the blending of hostile nationalities into a universal brother.
hood (vers. 15-22). We have here another example of tlie realism of Kzekiel’s
method of teaching. By the bringing together of two separate rods, or sceptres,
till they appeared as one in the hand of the prophet, he illustrated the approach-
ing union of the rival kingdoms of Judah and Israel. The misfortunes of the
past had been intensified by the rupture of the kingdom of David. Internecine
wars had weakened both North and South and left the exhausted tribes an easy
prey to the heathen invaders, The removal of the ten tribes into Assyrian
exile more than a century and a half before toned down the bitterness of
ancient animosities in the breasts of the two tribes still left in the land ; and
when they, in their turn, suffered the miseries of exile, a spirit of brotherhood
was awakened among all the tribes, and they yearned for the time when they
should again become a united nation. The prophets no less than the people
looked forward to this desirable consummation. They saw that the fires of
affliction were already fusing the broken and scattered elements into a strongly
welced national unity. But in the wider scope of the prophetic vision, the
union of Israel and Judah was regarded as a type of the future union of all
natins in the universal kingdom of Messiah, In the march of the centuries
and the advancement of knowledge the nations are being drawn closer to each


20 401


G@AP. XXXVIL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





other; war, hatred, and jealousy will ultimately disappear, and peace and right
eousness everywhere prevail :—
“ © scenes surpassing fable, and yet true,

Scenes of accomplished bliss! Which who can eg

Though but in distant prospect, and not feel

His soul refreshed with foretaste of the joy ?

Antipathies are none. In the heart

No passion touches a discordant string,

But all is harmony and love.”-—Cowper.


If. Acknowledges the supreme authority of the one Divine King. “I will make
them one nation, and one king shall be king to them all. David My servant
shall be king over them, and they all shall have one shepherd. My servant
David shall be their prince for ever” (vers. 22-25). It was plainly revealed that
the coming Messiah-King was to be a descendant of David, the Jewish hero,
and both prophets and people expected that he would restore the kingdom on
the lines of its ancient constitution, for they knew nothing higher. The con-
ception of a purely spiritual kingdom was altogether beyond the range of human
thought, and was not dreamed of till proclaimed by the lips of our Lord. Even
then the idea was but slowly comprehended by the best-instructed Jewish minds ;
and the rejection of the true Messiah by the bulk of the Jewish nation shows
how unwilling or incapable they were to take in the sublime notion. It is only
by the light of the New Testament that a later age has been able to realise
the far-reaching significance of the prophetic vision. The true Israel is not a
political but a spiritual community, gathered out of all nations under heaven,
compacted and unified into a spiritual kingdom, acknowledging and serving one
Divine Ruler, who is King of kings and Lord of lords,


III. Established by the Divinely imparted righteousness of its subjects (vers,
23, 24). Sin disintegrates and scatters, as the chequered history of the Jewish
nation proves. But the stability and permanent unity of the Messianic king-
dom will be ensured in the fact that it is built up and established in right
eousness. It is composed of sanctified natures from which the enfeebling defile-
ment of iniquity will be cleansed, and the changed lives of its subjects will be
evidenced in practical holiness, ‘They shall walk in My judgments, and observe
My statutes and do them.” It is :—


“The kingdom of established peace,
Which can no more remove 3
The perfect power of godliness,
The omnipotence of love,”


IV. Confirmed by a perpetual covenant (vers. 26, 27). The terms of the
covenant have a Divine origin aud sanction—“I will be their God, and they
shall be My people.” Here is the guarantee of its inviolability. Had it rested
on political or any human considerations, it would have been insecure. God is
ever faithful to His part of the covenant, notwithstanding the infidelity and
ingratitude of His people. It is, moreover, a covenant of peace—the moral
breach occasioned by sin is healed by pardon and reconciliation through the
intervention of Messiah, who by His offered and accepted sacrifice has made it

sasible to subdue the inveterate enmity of the human heart and bring man
into spiritual union with God. The reality and perpetuity of the covenant are
assured by the abiding presence of God with His people. ‘I will set up My
sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore.” The unity of the Divine
kingdom will be maintained by incessant worship and the loftiest spiritual
fellowship.


Y. Demonstrates the Divine faithfulness (ver. 28). Israel had sinned ané
402


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP, XXXVil.
———


had defamed the reputation of Jehovah, and in their sufferings, which rendered
them a spectacle of wonder and a theme of derision, their enemies entertained
false and distorted views of the God of Israel. But in the moral reform of
Israel and the unmistakable evidence of God’s presence and working amongst
them, the heathen are compelled to own that He is the only true God, and
unalterably faithful in word and deed. The growing unity uf the kingdom of





righteousness is an ever-present object-lesson to the universe, teaching the


indefectible faithfulness of Jehovah.


LEssons.—1. The unity of the kingdom of God is founded in spiritual affinity to


the Divine.
shipped,


2. Is in process of organisation wherever Christ is embraced and
3. Wil one day be a grand reality.


wor-


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers, 15-28. “The whole people of
Israel had been represented as partici-
pating in the regenerating efficacy of
the spirit of life which was to be given
from above ; and as the direct result of
this was to unite them to God, so its
secondary operation could not fail to
be to unite them in brotherly concord
with each other, For the true covenant-
people must form but one body, as
they can only have one Head; and
hence, as the necessary shell for pre
serving this great truth, it was so
strictly enjoined of old that they
should have but one Temple, one high-
priest, one king, and one common-
wealth. The breaking-up of this
united brotherhood by the revolt of
the ten tribes under Jeroboam, how-
ever needful at the time as a salutary
chastisement to the house of David, is
constantly represented as a sad dis-
memberment of the household of God,
and the source, to a large extent, of the
more overwhelming tide of evils which
thenceforth set in upon the land, and
at last laid it desolate. As soon, there-
fore, as there might be produced a re-
vived and healthful condition among
the covenant-people, there must be a
return to brotherly union, and that in
connection with the house of David;
for to this house had been committed
the right to rule over the heritage of
God, and to abide in separation from
it was to continue in rebellion against
Heaven. That there has been no
adequate fulfilment of this prophecy
in what may be called the literal sense


of its terms is too plain to require any
lengthened proof. The most char-
acteristic part of the description—the
cementing, strengthening, benignant
tule of David —had not even the
appearance of a literal fulfilment in
the post-Babylonish history of Israel ;
and, with so strong and prominent a
feature of an ideal sort as the eternal
presidency of David, it seems amazing
that any one should expect it to be
realised after that manner in the ages
to come.”—Fairbairn.


Vers. 15-17. Joining the Sticks.
“1. Learn the sad condition of the people
of Israel at the time the prophet wrote.
1.) It was contrary to nature. (2.)

ispleasing to God, (3.) Disastrous
to themselves. 2. The happy condition
to which the people of Israel were about to
be restored. That of unity, harmony,
oneness. (1.) Union is of great im-
portance to the Church itself. (2.) It
is an immense advantage to the sur-
rounding community. (3.) It is well-
pleasing and highly honouring to God,
3. The agency by which this delightful
change was to be effected. (1.) God
breathed into them a principle of
spiritual life. (2.) He sent them wise
advisers and earnest intercessors, Ke
He visited them with a sore trial—
captivity. (4.) He appointed them a
common work—the rebuilding of the
city and Temple of Jerusalem. (5.)
He makes His residence in their midst.
Christ in the midst of a Church acts
like a magnet in the midst of sted


409


OMAP. XXXVIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: LZEKIEL.


ee


particles: He attracts all to Himself.”
—Pulpit Analyst.


Ver. 16. “A cleft stick is a poor
business in itself, but if God please to
make use of so slender a thing, it may
serve for a very great purpose ; as here
by the uniting of two sorry sticks in
the hands of the prophet is prefigured
the uniting of Judah and Israel, yea,
of Jews and Gentiles, in the hand of
the Lord—that is, in Christ Jesus,
who is the hand, the right hand and
the arm of God the Father.” —Trapp.


Ver. 17. “‘Join them one to another,’
Some would have this done miracu-
lously ; but I do not think God bade
the prophet work a miracle, Were it

‘so, God would rather have said, ‘I
will make them one,’ for He can do
miracles, It was enough if glued
together, or but held in his hand, so
that in his hand they were one.”—
Pool.


Vers, 18-20. The Unity of the People
of God—1. Has its basis in their united
love of God. 2. Strengthened by Divinely
ordered events, “I will make them
one stick, and thev shall be one in
mine hand” (ver. 19). 3. Admits of
great diversity of individual character.
Each tribe had its distinctive peculi-
arity. 4. Shall be openly recognised.
“The sticks shall be in thine hand
before their eyes ” (ver. 20).


Ver. 19. “I will once more bring
them all under one King and make
them of one mind. Religion is the
only best bond of affection. The very
heathens honoured the primitive Chris-
tians for their unanimity. As the cur-
tains of the Tabernacle were joined by
loops, so were they by love; and as
the stones of the Temple were so closely
cemented together that they seemed
to be but one stone, so was it among
them. Neither need we wonder, since
Christ’s Church is but one; neither is
there any such oneness or entireness
anywhere as among the saints, Other
societies are but as the clay in the
toee of Nebuchadnezzar’s image: they

404


may cleave together, but not incorpo-
rate one into another.”—Trapp.


Ver. 20. “As the separation of Judah
and Ephraim was the punishment of
apostasy, and led to still further evils,


religious and political, so hereafter,


when both are one with God, through
the spirit of life uniting them to the
one Covenant-Head, Messiah-David,
they shall be united to one another as
no longer two but one people. In re-
spect to the spiritual Israel, the Church,
nothing has more impeded the progress
of the Gospel than the mutual divisions
of professing Christians. Let us pray
for the blessed time when all Christians
shall be one inwardly and outwardly,
as the Lord Jesus prayed (John xvii.
21). Meanwhile, if in non-essentials
we differ for a time, let us endeavour
at least to keep the unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace.”— Fausset.


Vers. 21-25. National Unity—1.
Conditioned by geographical environment
T will gather them on every side, and
make them one nation in the land,
upon the mountains of Israel” (vers.
21, 22). 2. Confirmed by the suppression
of tribal feuds and animosities. ‘“ They
shall be no more two nations ” (ver. 22).
3. Cemented by good government. “One
king shall be king to them all. David,
my servant, shall be king over them,
and they all shall have one shepherd ”
(vers. 22, 24). 4. Has a solid founda-
tion in practical piety. “ Neither shall
they defile themselves any more with
idols: they shall walk in My judg-
ments, and do them” (vers. 23, 24).
5. Secures permanency of national life.
“They shall dwell in the land, they
and their children’s children for ever ”
(ver. 25).


Ver. 22. “ Politically speaking, they
never had a king from that day to this,
and the grand junction and government
spoken of here must refer to another
time—to that in which they shall be
brought into the Christian Church with
the fulness of the Gentiles, when Jesus,
the King of kings and Lord of lords,
shall rule over them.”——A. Clarke,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP, XXXVIL


SS


Ver. 23. “Idolatry is a very defiling
sin, and the Jews in both kingdoms
were exceedingly addicted to it, perti-
nacious in it, to the utter ruin of both
kingdoms ; but after the return from
Babylonish captivity, we find nowhere
that they fell into idolatry."—Pool.


Ver. 24. “No Christian is a bad
man, unless he be a counterfeit.”—
Athenagoras,


Vers. 26-28. The Presence of God
with His People—1. Guaraniced by
covenant relationship. “I will make a
covenant of peace with them: I will
be their God, and they shall be My
people” (vers. 26, 27). 2. An assur-
ance of stability and increase. “1 will
place them and multiply them” (ver.
26). 3. A motive for loftiest worship.
“1 will set My sanctuary in the midst
of them: My tabernacle shall be with
them ’”’ (vers. 26, 27). 4. A testimony
to the Divine faithfulness. ‘The heathen
shall know that I the Lord do sanctity
Israel” (ver. 28).


Ver. 26. “‘It shall be an everlast-
ing covenant with them,’ may be fitly
explained of the Gospel, being such a
covenant as shall never be abolished
or give way to any new dispensation,
It is certain that the expression, ‘a
covenant of peace,’ could not at all
agree with the ancient covenant; for
when was there an age, half an age,
or twenty years’ peace in Israel? The
whole history of the Jewish nation is
nothing more than a recital of wars
and continual divisions. And if we
understand it of peace between God
and His people, where shall we find
this people faithfully attached to the
- Lord during one century only? We
have only to open the books of the
prophets and the other sacred records
to remark their infidelities and per-
petual rebellions against God. This
expression, therefore, can only respect
the new covenant whereof Jesus Christ,
the Prince of Peace, is the Mediator,
and who gives us that true peace which
surpasses all conceptions.”— Benson.


— “In closing this section, we pre-
sent a brief outline of the view that
has been taken of the prophecies
contained in the three closely related
chapters, xxxiv., XXXV., Xxxvii., and
which in substance applies equally to
many other portions of the prophetical
Scriptures. 1. They were originally
given to revive and animate the hearts
of God’s covenant-people, by holding
out to them the assured prospect of a
reversion from the present evil, and
their still certain destination in God’s
purpose to the highest and most
honourable place on the earth. 2.
It was the duty of those to whom
such prophecies were delivered at once
to believe the word spoken to them,
and apply themselves in earnest to do
what was needed to secure its accom-
plishment. 3. But there being mani-
festly ideal features introduced into
the delineation, clearly betokens a
kind and degree of blessing which
could not have been completely ful-
filled under the old covenant. 4. The
new things thus to be looked for in
the future could only meet with their
full and adequate accomplishment in
Christ, who is certainly the David of
the promise. 5. Therefore, in form-
ing one’s conceptions now of the real
import of such prophecies, we must
throw ourselves back upon the nar-
rower and more imperfect relations
amid which they were written, and
thence judge of what is still to come,
Those who would find a literal Israel
and a non-literal David, or a literal
restoration in Christian times, and a
non-literal Tabernacle and ritual of
worship, arbitrarily confound together
things dissimilar and incongruous, and
render certainty of interpretation abso-
lutely impossible. 6. The view thus
given is confirmed by the reproduction -
of some of these prophecies in the field
of the New Testament Church, set
free, as was expected, from the out-
ward distinctions and limits of the
Old. 7. The common interpretation
which understands Christ by David,
and takes all the rest literally, must
inevitably tend to justify the Jew i
his unbelief.”—Fairbairn.

405


GOHAP, XXXVIIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





THE WARLIKE ASSAULT oF Goa, AND ITs REPULSE. (Chap. xxxviii.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 2.
“Gog.” ‘An ideal name; it is simply
the root of Magog, the only related
name known to history. The whole
prophecy demands a non-literal inter-
pretation. The prophetical delinea-
tions of the Divine principles of govern-
ment are thrown into the familiar
forms of Old Testament relations. The
final triumph of Messiah’s truth over
the most distant and barbarous nations
is represented as a literal conflict on
a gigantic scale, Israel being the battle-
field, ending in the complete triumph
of Israel’s anointed King, the Saviour
of the world. It is a prophetical
parable, in which every trait in the
delineation is full of important mean-
ing, only couched in the language of
a symbolical representation, While
the vision respecting Gog and Magog
in the Apocalypse (chap. xx.) may be
regarded in substance a reannounce-
ment of the prophecy before us, it
does not follow that the prophecy in
the Apocalypse has exactly the same
compass as in Ezekiel. In each case
alike the vision is appropriated to
describe the final workings of the
world’s evil, and its results in con-
nection with the kingdom of God;
only, the starting-point is placed farther
in advance in the one case than in the
other, Therefore, as found in Ezekiel,
it can throw no light on the chrono-
logical arrangement of the Avpoca-
lypse."—Fairbairn. “Chief prince of
Meshech and Tubal” “ Rosh,” trans-
lated chief, is taken as a proper name
hy some, and probably refers to the

Russi, a people from whom the modern
Russians derive their name. Schrader
accepts Magog as equivalent to Scy-
thians, Tubal = Tabal, according to
him, bordered on Cilicia, and seems
to have been what was afterwards
Cappadocia. It was famous for great
horses. Meshech he regards as having
lain north-east of Cappadocia in Lower
Armenia, Magog was Gog’s original
kingdom, though he acquired the
mastery over Meshech and Tubal,
406


and so might be called their chief
prince.


Ver. 3. “I am against thee, O Gog,
the chief prince of Meshech and
Tubal.” His high-sounding titles are
repeated, to imply the haughty self-
confidence of the invader as invincible,


Ver. 4, “I will turn thee back ”—
“as a refractory wild beast which
thinks to take its own way, but is bent
by a superior power to turn on a course
which must end in its destruction.
Satan shall be by overruling Provi-
dence permitted to deceive them to
their ruin (Rev. xx. 7, 8).”—Fausset.
“It is significant that the irruption of
Gog is here and in what follows re-
ferred to Jehovah. He means to march
against Jehovah, but the latter has
him in tow—he must march whither
He will to his own destruction, as in
former times Pharaoh did not thwart ~
the God of Israel when he refused to
let His people go, but acted so because
Jehovah Himself had hardened his
heart to plunge him into destruction.”
—Hengstenberg. ‘And put hooks into
thy jaws”—rings in thy jaws; the
rings which are put in the most
tender parts of intractable animals on
which to fasten the bridle or reins
(chaps. xix. 4, xxix. 4; 2 Kings xix.
28). “Horses and horsemen” —a
decidedly. Scythian trait, for the rich-
ness in horses of these hordes, most
equestrian tribes, was already known
to Herodotus, ‘Olothed with all sorts
of armour”—“clothed with splendour,
an Assyrian element introduced: thus
the figure of Gog is enlarged.”—Lange.


Ver. 5. “Persia, Ethiopia, and Libya,”
or Phut. “These are in the farthest
south from Babylon, where Ezekiel
lived. The Asiatic Cush or Ethiopia
lay in Central and Northern Babylon,
Phut was the name, according to Hbers,
of some wandering tribes of Arabia.
Sayce thinks Phut was the Somali
country in Eastern Africa.” —G@éikie.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP. XXXVIIL


a


Ver. 6. “Gomer ”—the Celtic Cim-
merians of Crim-Tartary, “Togarmah”
—“the Armenians of the Caucasus,
south of Iberia. A pictorial and mani-
festly symbolical grouping of nations,
There is no impossibility in the con-
nection of nations so distant from one
another, The anti-Chaldaic coalition,
which the prophet himself had wit-
nessed, actually extended from Ethiopia
to Persia. The impossible lies rather
in this, that all these nations are to
co-operate at a definite time against the
petty Palestine.”—Hengstenberg, &c.


Ver. 7. “Be thou prepared.” “Irony.
Prepare thee and all thine with all
needful accoutrements for war, that ye
may perish together !”— Fausset,


Ver. 8. “After many days thou
ehalt be visited” (Isa. xxiv. 22, xxix,
6). Gog meant to visit the people
of God, but in reality he is himself
visited. It was God who led him in
order to prepare him for his downfall.
It is very consolatory to the Church
that God not merely conquers its
enemies, that even their hostile under-
taking is under His guidance, that
they move not hand nor foot but at
His command. “In the latter years”
—‘at the end of the years, This
indicates that the catastrophe belongs
to a quite new order of things—the
Messianic epoch,.”— Hengstenberg.


Ver. 9. ‘Thou shalt ascend and
come like a storm—like a cloud to
cover the land.” ‘The cavalry of the
Tanjou frequently consisted of two or
three hundred thousand men, formid-
able by the matchless dexterity with
which they managed their bows and
their horses, by their hardy patience
in supporting the inclemency of the
weather; unchecked by torrents or by
precipices, by the deepest rivers or by
the most lofty mountains, they spread
themselves over the face of the country
and overthrew all who opposed them.”
— Gibbon.


Ver. 10. “Thou shalt think an evil
thought ’—conceive a mischievous pur-


pose, as to attacking God's people in
their defenceless state.


Ver. 11. “I will go up to the land
of unwalled villages, to them that
dwell safely.” The towns lie open,
in fancied security, the prize of a
sudden attack.


Ver 12. “That dwell in the midst
of the land ”—“ the navel of the land,
not physically but morally; a central
position for being a blessing to the
world. ‘lhe literal sense, ‘navel,’ seems
to point to the fact of its being the
moral centre of the world, not to its
moral eminence (chap. v. 5).”— Fausset.


Ver. 13. ‘Sheba and Dedan and
the merchants of Tarshish ”—“the
Arabian nations Sheba and Dedan
as representatives of the land-trade,
and Tarshish of the sea-trade. Repre-
sentatives of that portion of the world
who, though they are not disposed to
take any active part against the cause
of God, are well pleased to see others
do it. This worldly feeling makes
them disrelish the truth, and they are
ready to cheer on those who would
make a spoil of its defenders,”—Fair-
bairn.


Ver. 15. ‘All of them riding upon
horses.” Itis related of the Scythians
that they eat, drink, and sleep in the
saddle.


Ver. 16. ‘‘ When I shall be sancti-
fied in thee, O Gog”—when God dis-
plays His incomparable glory in his
punishment,


Ver. 17. ‘Art thou he of whom I
have spoken in old time by My ser-
vants the prophets of Israel?” “Gog
and Magog are here identified with
the enemies spoken of in other pro
phecies (Num. xxiv. 17-24; Isa. xxvil
1; Isa. xxvi. 20, 21; Jer. xxx. 23, 24;
Joel iii. 2; Micah v. 5, 6; Isa. xiv. 12-
14, lix, 19), God is represented as
addressing Gog at the time of his
assault : therefore the old time is the
time long prior when Ezekiel uttered

407


GHAP, XXXVIIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BZEKIEL,


a a Le cE =aCTEITIISINNET SR UEISENTSEUISERESSU/EINEEISIITIE SRT SSSI I EAT TT


these prophecies ; so he also, as well as
Daniel (xi.) and Zechariah (xiv.), are
included among the prophets of Israel
here.” —Fausset.


Ver. 18. ““My fury shall come up
in My face ”’—literally, into My nose ;
in Hebrew the idiomatic expression
for anger, as men in anger breathe
strongly through the nostrils.


Ver. 20. “All shall shake at My
presence.” ‘An earthquake, the figure
of a great annihilating catastrophe in
the human world, in which all has
the feeling as if the earth were dis-
solving. The catastrophe affects only
the enemies of God’s people ; but it is
so dreadful that the whole world seems
to come to an end—that all that lives
on earth is felt to be affected by it;
every high thing is cast to the ground
without discriminating whether it be-
longs to the enemy or not. All terrible
particular judgments in their opera-


tions come upon the sense like a unt
versal judgment.”—Hengstenberg.


Ver. 21, “Every man’s sword shall
be against his brother.” One great
means by which God sweeps away the
enemies of the king is the internal
discord, for which He presents the
natural occasions. The community of
hatred can scarcely offer successful
resistance to these (see historical ex-
ample, 2 Chron. xx.).


Ver. 22. “With pestilence, blood,
hail, fire, and brimstone.” The colours
of the picture are partly taken from
the Egyptian plagues, and from the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah.


Ver, 23. “Thus will I magnify My-
self.” The destruction is effected by
an intervention of Jehovah, His fight-
ing for His people, who are small
compared to the greatness of Gog
(ver. 15).


HOMILETICS.
Tur Fierce ONSLAUGHT OF THE ENEMIES OF THE TRUTE.
(Vers. 1-23.)


The beautiful picture of tranquil prosperity depicted in the close of the last
chapter would be difficult for the captive Jews to realise, unless there was the
assurance of protection from hostile attacks like those which had brought them
to their present deplorable condition. What avails it, they cry, even if we
are restored? The heathen power still predominates, and we shall be crushed
back again into irretrievable ruin. The wild, savage races of Scythia had
spread terror over all Western Asia in the days of Josiah, and were still
remembered with dread. Against such desponding thoughts the prophet here
offers comfort. The heathen nations as a whole, in their opposition to the
kingdom of God, are represented under the figure of a great invasion of the
Holy Land by the Scythian forces. All the battles which restored Israel has
to wage are united in one great battle. He who would lead his people out of
captivity would be their omnipotent defender, the foe would be triumphantly
vanquished, and Israel, the kingdom of the Messiah, finally delivered from
all fear, would enter on a period of temporal and spiritual prosperity. The


descriptions of the chapter illustrate the sierce onslaught of the enemies of the
Truth. Observe—


I, That the enemies of the Truth are rallied and commanded by a leader
of conspicuous ability (vers. 2-7). Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal
—a1 ideal character, one possessing great military genius, faculty for organisa-
tion, power to manoeuvre vast armies, revelling in destruction, and animated by
a mighty hatred tothe good. Gog’s forces are composed of diverse nationalities,

408


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP. XXXVI
SE


extending over a wide area (vers. 5, 6), and present an imposing and threatening
aspect (vers. 4, 7). The invasion and overthrow of the Chaldeans, the conflict
of the Maccabees with Antiochus Epiphanes, the temporary successes and defeat
of the Turks—to each of which historical events some interpreters would limit
the application of the prophecy—were but feeble prototypes of a coming struggle.
with a powerful embodied Antichrist. Sin is fruitful in breeding formidable
confederacies, and never lacks a leader. The people of God have often to
complain with the Psalmist—‘ How are they increased that trouble me? Many
are they that rise up against me ” (Ps. iii. 1),


II. That the enemies of the Truth are fertile in plots to work mischief
(vers. 10-12). ‘Thou shalt think an evil thought” (ver. 10). Here is a land
defenceless, “dwelling without walls, and having neither bars nor gates,” its
people inoffensive, quietly pursuing their avocations in fancied security ; their
“cattle and goods” are increasing, and they have no means of offering resistance.
Let us pick a quarrel with them, and “take a spoil” (ver. 12). It is true
they have done us no harm, nor are likely to do; but what of that? It is
enough that they love the truth that we hate, and will become an easy prey to
our superior force, If we yield to the suggestions of an evil heart, we trample
down the laws of justice and equity, and can readily concert a plan of wholesale
robbery and crime. The boldest highwayman or cattle-riever will not go more
directly to his mark than we.


Ill. That there is a class of persons ever ready to make gain out of the
havoc created by the enemies of the Truth (ver. 13). The eager merchants of
Tarshish are referred to as young lions because of their well-known ferocity,
There is little room for gentleness and pity in the breast of the unscrupulous
trader. Where the carrion lies, there the vultures gather: where there is spoil,
the traders, Gain is often made out of the misfortunes and sufferings of others.
Many who would shrink from bringing about the ruin of others do not hesitate
to make all possible profit out of the ruin. Looters, “ the snappers-up of uncon-
sidered trifles,” hang about the skirts of every victorious army.


IV. That the onslaught of the enemies of the Truth is flerce and terrible

(vers. 8, 9, 14-17). The army of Gog was to burst upon Israel like a storm-
cloud, enveloping and desolating the land. In all ages the forces of unbelief
have made violent attacks upon the citadel of Divine Truth; and there have
been times when it seemed as if the foundations had been shaken and the fabric
must fall into hopeless ruin, But when the shock has spent itself, the strong-
hold has stood forth more prominent and stable than before. The great world-
crisis is yet future. A time is coming that will test the faith of the most
stalwart. Baffled and defeated in all previous attempts, the enemies of the
Truth will gather up and concentrate all their powers, and all that wily
diplomacy, vindictive hatred, and intensified rage can do will be combined in
one grand, united, final effort. What will be the result? Mark—


V. That the most formidable onset of the enemies of the Truth will be
Divinely opposed (vers. 17-23). 1. The Divine anger will be roused (vers. 17-19).
“‘ My fury shall come up in My face ”—in My nostrils, as men are accustomed
to show anger by a flushed countenance and dilated nostrils. An anthropo-
morphic representation : God stooping to the use of human methods of thought
and expression. Injustice and cruelty provoke the Divine wrath ; He is not an
indifferent spectator of the oppressions inflicted upon His people, “ When the
great day of His wrath is come, who shall be able to stand?” (Rev. vi. 17).
2. The Divine power will employ against the enemies of the Truth the most destructive
forces—earthquakes. wars, pestilence, storms (vers, 19-22). The resources of

409


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


ee ——ee


OMAP, XXXVI.


the universe are in the hands of God, and He can use them on the side of
righteousness and in the punishment of tyranny and wrong. Heaven and earth
are armed against every evil work, and will effectually prevent its triumph.
3. The Divine character will be vindicated in taking vengeance on the enemies of the Truth


(ver. 23).


God will be known and His honour magnified in judgment us well as


in showing mercy. The mightiest army is impotent before His avenging sword,
The defence and rescue of Mis people will demonstrate His power, His faithful-


ness, and His justice,


Lessons.—l. Hatred of the Truth manifests itself im violent opposition. 2. A
time comes in the life of every man when he must take sides for or against the Truth,
3. Evil is doomed to suffer terrible defeat. 4, The resources of Ommnipotence ars at


work in defence of the Truth.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Chaps. xxviii, xxix. “The last con-
flict of the world with God, and the
complete overthrow of the former.
The place occupied by this section
shows that it refers to times subse-
quent to the restoration of Israel.
Hitherto the prophecies have been
directed against the more immediate
neighbours of God’s people. Their
fall is to make room for Israel’s
triumph. But as the Church—the true
Israel—waxes stronger and stronger,
more distant natious will come into
collision and must be overthrown be-
fore the triumph is complete. Heuce
the present prophecy is directed against
peoples dwelling in the remote regions
of the North. From this quarter had
come the terrible invasion of the
Scythians, who had possession of Asia
twenty-three years, and in the course
of this time they had certainly over-
run Syria, and had probably made
their appearance in the Holy Land,
Some have thought that this prophecy
is directed against these Scythians,
foretelling their fall, like that of the
other invaders of the land of Israel.
But in this prophecy there is little
distinctive of one nation. It is a
gathering together of the enemies of
Jehovah to make their last effort, and
to be overthrown. The seer passes
now to the final struggle between good
and evil, and the triumphant establish-
ment of the Divine rule. It is the
same struggle which is depicted in the
Book of Revelation (xx. 7-10), where

410


St. John adopts words and phrases
of Ezekiel, indicating thereby that he
is predicting the same event which
Ezekiel had foretold.”—Speaker’s Com-
mentary.


Vers. 1-23, “In many passages of
Scripture God forewarns the Church
of a great conspiracy, headed by one
person, about to be made against God
and His Christ, as also against both
the literal and the spiritual Israel in
the last days, As Antiochus fearfully
desolated Judea and blasphemously
desecrated the Temple of God, towards
the close of Old Testament times,
so Antichrist, here described under
the ideal name Gog, and his godless
hosts under the name Magog, shall
terribly oppress Israel and the Chureh
of Christ, and arrogate to himself
divine honours, towards the close of
the times of the Gentiles in the New
Testament dispensation. Haughty and
blasphemous self-confidence shall be
his prominent characteristic. His im-
mense hordes of formidable warriors
in his train, seduced by Satan to their
destruction, shall add to his innate
presumption.” —Fausset,


Vers. 1-13. The Audacity of Evil.
—1. Often embodied in a champion of
distinguished genius (vers, 2, 3). 2.
Succeeds in organising a formidable
confederacy (vers. 4-6). 3. Is blind
to the superiority of the power, with
which it has to wrestle, and is deaf


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XXXVIKX,


a ee eee


to all warnings (vers. 7, 8). 4. Ap-
parently overwhelming in its attack
(ver. 9). 5. Stimulated by its own
wicked devices (ver. 10). 6. Wantonly
assaults the inoffensive and defenceless
(vers. 11, 12). 7. Is applauded by
those who hope to share in the wreck-
age it creates (ver. 13).


Vers. 1-7. The Sufferings of God's
People. ‘1. After prophecies of grace
and mercy come tidings of afflictions
and judgments (ver. 2). 2. The great
princes of the earth, being no friends
to the Church of God, have God for
their enemy (ver. 3). 3. The Lord at
His pleasure can bring enemies and
armies upon His own people (ver. 4).
4, The Lord can easily bring men to
do His work and service, whatever the
difficulty or danger be (ver. 4). 5.
From all quarters of the world there
are enemies ready to combine and act
with Gog and Antichrist against the
Church, the Truth, and Christ Him-
self (vers. 5, 6). 6. The enemies of
the Church make great preparations
against the same (ver. 7). 7. Princes,
notwithstanding all their preparations,
cannot secure themselves, nor those
under their command (ver. 7).”—Green-


hill,


Ver. 2. “This cannot be one single
person, or one only prince, though
like enough it points out some one
by whom the troubles foretold were
begun ; yet the successors of this one,
whoever he was, are included and
designed by this Gog; nor is ‘he to be
limited to one certain nation that he
was king of, nor yet confined to one
age, or to two or three. Others think
that all the enemies of Israel, in all
quarters, both open and secret enemies,
are here intended, and that the anti-
Christian forces and combinations are
what the prophet foretells.”—Pool.


Ver. 4. “I will turn thee back, and
put My hook into thy jaws ”—“1I will
disappoint ali thy designs, and turn thee
about as easily as a fisherman masters
a great fish, when he has once fastened
the hook into its jaws.” Benson.


— “I will place rings in thy jawa.”
“Gog is represented as an unmanage-
able beast which is compelled to follow
its leader, and the thought is thereby
expressed that Gog is compelled to
obey the power of God against his
will.” — Kew.


Ver. 7, “God, the prophet, and the
Church deride this mighty preparation,
as once the daughter of Zion laughed
Sennacherib, that proud Assyrian, to
scorn, and the scoff is doubled. Such
a mighty army will need great maga-
zines and granaries, and good watches
and guards, for theirmarching insafety;
therefore, awaken thy diligence, let
nothing be wanting, for, O Gog, thou
wilt find I am against thee, saith the
Lord.” — Pool.


Ver. 8. God Slow to Punish “1.
God bears with the worst of men a
long time. ‘After many days.’ 2.
Though wicked men be spared long,
yet at last they shall suffer. ‘Thou
shalt be visited.’”"—Greenhill.

— “They shall dwell safely.” “This
began to be fulfilled when, for three
hundred and eighty years after their
return, Israel lived tolerably quiet :
afterwards Antiochus vexed them and
did much damage. What remains of
longer and fuller quiet and prosperity
after the slaying of Gog, time will dis-
cover to the people of God, whose lot
it will be to stand up in those days.”—
Pool.


Ver, 9. “ This storm is violent, with
confused, tumultuous noises and with
devastation, as the word implies ; and
come as a storm—that is, as dark,
as large, as inevitable, and which con-
tinueth the violent waving storm.” —
Pool.

— The Adversities of the Church.
“J, The Church and people of God
are subject to calamities. The Church
is oft afflicted and tossed with tempest :
but here is some comfort — storms,
tempests, and clouds last not long; they
cease after a little time, and the sun
shines again. 2. The goodness of God
in foretelling the Church what shail
come upon it ; storm, clouds, perplexity

411


GaP, ZXXVITI.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


LD


—not to discourage His people, but
to awaken them to prayer, hcliness of
life, and living by faith.”—Greenhill.

— “In the world we have anguish
to the end; before we expect it, a
storm arises and heaven and earth
seem hid from our eyes, Our security
is peace with God: Christians wish
indeed peace with all men, but the
world keeps no peace with them.
Such is its turbulence, that it has no
rest ; such its darkness, that it would
like to shut out all light, even God
Himself from being our lamp. — If
great armies resemble clouds, how soon
can a wind disperse them! (2 Kings
xix. 35).”—Lange.


Vers. 10-13. God’s Knowledge of
the Tactics of the Wicked. “1. God
foreknows and determines things to
come, even those things that seem
most free and contingent, as the
thoughts of men’s hearts (ver. 10).
2. God doth not only foreknow but
prediscovers the purposes, counsels,
and plots of His Church’s enemies, to
evidence His care thereof (ver. 10, 11).
3. The enemies of the Church do watch
and take advantage against the Church:
they wait for and seek occasions to ruin
the same (vers. 11, 12). 4. Wicked.
ones will undertake great matters ana
venture their lives to satisfy their lusts
(ver. 12). 5. The wicked confederate
and combine together to mischief the
Church of God (ver. 13). Wicked
men are thorns, and they cleave to-
gether to scratch and vex the right-
gous,” —Greenhill,


Ver. 10. A Wicked Brain. 1. A
willing ally of a wicked heart. 2
Fertile in plotting mischief. 3. Its
only conception of justice is how it
may most cleverly circumvent it 4.
Is indifferent to the sufferings its
schemings may occasion others. 65, Is
often deluded by its own smartness.

— “Thus God is a heart-searcher ;
He knows the evil purpose in the man
himself.” —Starck.


.  Wers. 12, 13. “A covetous desire for
the possessions of the people of God
412


and envy at their exalted position in
the centre of the world are the motives
by which Gog is impelled to enter
upon his predatory expedition against
the people living in the depth of peace.
This covetousness is so great, that even
the rich trading populations of Sabea,
Dedan, and Tarshish perceive it, and
declare that it is this alone which has
determined Gog to undertake his ex-
pedition. Their words give promi-
nence to the obvious thirst for booty
which characterises the multitude led
by Gog.”— Keil.


Ver. 12. “ How good it is to possess
the goods which cannot be stolen—the
joy which no one shall take from us!
—To the end the world seeks only the
temporal, the earthly.” —Lange.


Ver. 13. “The merchants of Tarshish
—the inhabitants of the sea-coast west-
ward, and Magog north. Robbers by
land on three sides, pirates by sea on
the fourth, in a confederacy to spoil the
Church of God.” —Pool.

— “It is the tendency of a gain-
seeking spirit to look to no other
considerations but its own selfish and
worldly interests, Gain is the godli-
ness of the carnal mind. Whatever
promotes directly or indirectly the
acquisition of silver, gold, cattle, and
goods is the uppermost thought; and
whilst, perhaps, the more quietly dis-
posed of the worldly shrink from
an active participation in unjust and
ungodly invasions, yet they are well
oes at such wars when seeming to

e conducive to their own gains, and
will not scruple to traffic in the un-
hallowed spoils, at the sacrifice of
conscience and the will of God,”—
Fausset.


Vers. 14-23. The Power of Evil—l,
Is imposing in its battle-march (vers.
14-16), 2. Is allured and limited by
the power it opposes (vers. 16, 17).
3. Excites the Divine wrath (vers. 18,
19). 4. The forces of heaven and
earth combine in its defeat (vers, 20-
22). 5. Its defeat a signal vindication
of the Divine character (ver. 83).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP. XXXVIIZ





Vers, 14-16. The Divine Protec-
tion. “1. When God’s people are in
Canaan they have safety (ver. 14). 2.
Those who design and attempt mie-
chief against the people of God shall
experimentally know that God is their
Protector and the Revenger of their
wrongs (ver. 14). 3. The secret plots
and deep designs of men at length
break out into action (ver. 15). 4
The great enemies of the Church have
many helpers and adherents fitted to
further their wicked designs (ver. 15).
5. Though all people and lands in the
world be the Lord’s, yet some people
and lands are His in a more peculiar
manner (ver. 16). 6. God takes occa-
sion, from the attempts of the wicked, to
execute His just judgments upon them,
and so to get glory to His name even
from heathens (ver. 16).”—Greenhill.


Ver. 14. “ ‘Prophesy and say unto
Gog.’ Say it over again, that it may
be the better considered for the
strengthening of the hands and hearts
of My people.” —Trapp.


Ver. 16. “Gog gathers all from all
quarters to be with him to take the
spoil; God brings them together to
do that among them which may make
the heathen see and own His hand.
They do it in proud contempt of God
and His people; but God doth it to
glorify His own name and to vindicate
His people.”—Pool.


Ver. 17. “‘ By My servants the pro-
phets of Israel.’ Not by prognosti-
cators or soothsayers, but by true
prophets. Now, though they had not
foretold this when Ezekiel did, yet
when the question shall be asked by
the Church, it will be so many hun-
dreds of years past, it may well refer
to these prophets. Besides, Dan. xi. ;
Zech. xiv. ; Isa, xxvi. 20, 21, xxvii. 1;
Jer. xxx. 23, 24; Joel iii. 1, 15, 16;
Micah v. 5, 6, are prophets cited as
those who spake of this mighty enemy
and his coming, and from which an
understanding reader may soon collect
that this foe was intended as well as
others in those places.” — Pool.


— The Credibility of Prophecy.
“1. The Lord doth infallibly know
things to come. 2, The prophets de-
livered many things which were not
recorded. 3. Those whom God sends
to make known His mind to men, He
owns, honours, and protects, 4. It is
not an accidental or casual thing that
enemies do come against the Church.”
—Greenhill,

— Everything has been told before :
they who hold to the Word have to
fear no surprises,


Vers. 18-22. God’s Proceedings
against His Enemies. “1. When
wicked men are plotting and attempt-
ing the ruin of the Church, God’s
wrath is kindled against them (ver.
18). 2 When mischief is intended
against God’s people, His love and
indignation are manifested: His love
to His people, His indignation towards
their enemies (vers. 18, 19). 3. The
judgments of God are dreadful; they
affect all creatures—the fishes of the
sea, the fowls of heaven, the beasts
of the field, all that creeps upon the
earth: all men on the face of the
earth shall shake; mountains, rocks,
walls, shall fall (ver. 20), 4. God can
easily raise forces against His and the
Church’s enemies; He can do it with-
out any trouble (vers. 21, 22). 5.
As God can easily gather armies for
the good of His Church, so He can as
easily ruin armies which are against
His Church: He can mingle a per-
verse spirit among them, so divide
them that they shall execute one an-
other (ver. 21). 6. God hath a variety
of means and ways whereby to destroy
armies and punish enemies (ver. 22).
7. Those who join with great ones in
wicked enterprises must look to suffer
grievous things with them.”—Greenhill.


Ver. 18. “Fury is the glow which
bursts forth in the breathing of wrath.
The wrath of God is the holy jealousy
with which He, for the protection of
His kingdom—the kingdom of peace
—dashes down the wicked; and this
wrath of eternal protecting love is
fearful.” —Schimieder.

413


OMAP, XXXIX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


ee


Vers. 19-23. “The visible creation
takes part in this great catastrophe.
A dreadful scene of confusion ensues,
and ruin bursts forth from every side
upon the head of sinners. In fierce
bewilderment they draw their swords
one upon another. All conceivable
plagues work together for their de-
struction, and so Jehovah is mani-
fested as the holy God.”—Havernick.


Ver, 20. “Here is a lofty strain
indeed, giving us the description of
the tokens of God’s presence against
His enemies; the effects of His dis-
pleasure against them are seen in all
the creatures, sensible that their Maker
is angry, though they know not with
whom or for what. If to be inter-
preted literally, we shall find some
Scripture parallels (Ps. Ixxvii. 16, 19;
xxix. 5, 6). But men, apprehensive
of God’s displeasure and shaken with
their own guilt, shall much more shake.
But I think it is a very elegant allusive
description of those strange troubles


THE DESTRUCTION oF GoG AND


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 2.
“T will leave but the sixth part of
thee "—-I will six thee; i¢., afflict thee
with six plagues—pestilence, blood,
overflowing rain, hailstones, fire, brim-
stone (chap. xxxviii. 22). Or, draw
thee back with a hook of six teeth
(chap. xxxviil. 4)—the six teeth being
those six plagues. The rendering in
the text supposes that the verb is
derived from the Hebrew numeral six ;
but this rendering is not recognised by
the LXX. or the Vulgate. The verb
has an Ethiopic root, and the passage
should be rendered—I will lead thee
along—to thy ruin.


Ver. 3. “I will smite thy bow out
of thy left hand.” The Scythians
were renowned as archers. The left
hand holds the bow, the right bends
it and fits on the arrow. God will
strike the weapons out of his hand, so
that he shall be incapable of fighting.
“Thou shalt fall upon the mountains

414


and consternation of men’s minds at
that day, and so metaphorically to be
understood.” —Pool.


Ver. 23. “Thus undeniably prove
that I am the mighty, just, faithful,
wise, holy, and merciful God toward
My people; and that I am the great,
just, and terrible One against Mine
and My Church’s enemies.”—Pool.

— “This end God proposeth to
Himself in all His works; and well
He may, since He hath none higher
than Himself to whom to have respect.
And let all this that hath been said
comfort us against the rage and good
success, if any such yet be, of the
anti-Christian rout, since these are
but—as was once said of decaying
Carthage—the last sprunts and bites
of dying wild beasts.”—Trapp.

— “The conclusion is, that the re-
sult of everything is to magnify and
sanctify God. We ought, therefore,
to begin all our affairs with God.”—
Lange.


His Vast Anmizs. (Chap. xxxix)


of IsraeL” The scene of Israel’s
preservation shall be that of Gog’s
destruction. :


Ver. 6. ‘‘I will send a fire among
them that dwell in the isles.” The
judgment described in chap. xxxviii.
20 as universal is here extended to
the isles to show that it should fall
not only on Gog and his land, but on
those who share his feelings of hatred
and opposition to the kingdom of
God, and who had perhaps helped
Gog with fleets and troops.


Ver. 7. “I will not let them pollute
My holy name ”—by seeming to desert
My people. He would profane His
name if He were to abandon His people
continually to the heathen world. The
revelation of holiness in Israel pre-
cludes further profanation of Jehovah in
reference to Israel among the heathen.


Ver. 8. “Behold it is come, it ia


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XXXIE.





done ”"—very expressive, denoting the
absolute certainty of the event. The
prophet sets it down as already past,
as it is the nature of faith to see that
which is not as if it already existed.


Ver. 9. “They shall burn them
with fire seven years.” The weapons
of the army left on the battlefield shall
be so numerous as to supply fuel for
the people of the land for seven years,
Seven years is a hyperbolical term de-
rived from the intensive significancy
of the number in Hebrew usage and
designed to express a very long time.
Seven was the number connected with
the cleansing after contact with the
dead (Num, xix. 11), and this purifi-
cation of the land by the clearance of
the heathenish spoils was a holy work,
and indicated how thorough would be
the judgment of God upon His enemies.


Ver. 11. “I will give unto Gog a
place of graves.” Gog meant to bury
the people of God and appropriate
their land ; but he is buried by them,
and receives only so much of the land
as suffices fora grave. “The valley of
the passengers on the east "— referring
to its position on the east side of the
Dead Sea, along which lay the high-
road for traffic to Petra and Ezion-
geber. It would thus be notoriously
public, and, arresting travellers in their
progress, would compel them to reflect
on the signal judgment inflicted on
the enemies of the covenant-people,
There is also, as is common in Hebrew,
a play upon words—there were pas-
sengers to be buried, passengers to walk
over their graves, passengers to bury
them (ver. 15). “It shall stop the
noses of the passengers ”"—arrest the
attention and impede the progress of
the passers by the multitude of graves
and the strong odour of decay. Their
graves would be close to those of
their ancient prototypes, Sodom and
Gomorrah in the Dead Sea, both
alike being signal instances of God’s
judgments.


Ver. 14. “Moen of continual employ-
ment.” Literally, men of continuance,


men regularly appointed to this busi-
ness, to express the magnitude of the
work and the systematic way in which
it is performed. “ After the end of
seven months shall they search”—to
see if the work was complete.


Ver. 16. “Thus shall they cleanse
the land.” According to the Mosaic
law, a dead body caused a peculiar
defilement to all with which it came in
contact. So that, as the land of Israel
represents figuratively the Church of
Christ, the purification of that land is
a proper part of the figure to indicate
such a sanctification and cleansing of
His Church as St. Paul describes in
Eph. v. 26, 27,


Ver. 17. “Speak to every feathered
fowl and every beast: gather your-
selves to My sacrifice.” ‘This bold
imagery is quite in the style of Eze-
kiel’s poetic genius. The invited
guests are represented as being filled
not only with the flesh of the victims
in general, but with that of the horses
and the charioteers. The entire pas-
sage is strikingly parallel with Rev.
xix. 17,19. Compare also Isa, xviii. 6,
xxxiv. 6; Zeph. i 7 ; Mark ix. 49.


Ver. 18, “Fatlings of Bashan "—
often applied in the prophets to proud,
despotic, wanton enemies of God and
His people, Bashan being renowned
for its fat meadows, Fatness implies
prosperity, which often makes men
refractory towards God (Deut. xxxii.
14, 15).


Vers. 22, 23. “The house of Israel
shall know; and the heathen shall
know.” ‘The terrible judgment upon
Gog will have this twofold effect as a
revelation of the glory of God—lIsrael
will know that the Lord is, and will
continue to be, its God; and the
heathen will know that He gave Israel
into their power and thrust it out of
its own land, not from weakness, but
to punish it for its faithless apostasy.


Ver. 25. “ And have mercy on the
whole house of IsraeL” The restora


415


OwaP. XXXIx,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


pu


tions of Israel heretofore have been
partial ; there must be one yet future
that is to be universal (Hoa, * U1:
Rom. xi. 26).


Ver. 26. “After they have borne
their shame ’’—after they shall have
borne in full the punishment of their
sin: after they have become sensible
of their guilt and ashamed of it (chaps.
xx. 43; xxxvi. 31).


Ver. 28, “‘ And have left none of
tlem any more there.” After the fall
of the Chaldean monarchy, access to


had yet in Canaan their home and im
the Temple at Jerusalem their spiritual
dwelling-place.


Ver. 29. “I have poured out My
Spirit.” Comp. Joel ii. 28; Zech. xii.
10; Acts ii. 17. There St. Peter dis-
tinctly appropriates these prophecies
to the outpouring of the Holy Spirit
on the day of Pentecost, and the
inauguration of the Church of Christ
by that miraculous event. But this
was the beginning of the fulfilment of
these verses of the prophets. They
shall find their consummation when
time shall be no more,


their native land was free to all Israel;
and those who voluntarily remained


HOMILETICS.
Tue SIGNAL DEFEAT OF THE ENEMIES OF Gop’s PEOPLE
(Vers. 1-29.)


In this chapter we have a prophetic description of the ultimate fate of Gog,
the ideal impersonation of the power of evil, and the utter destruction of his
vast armies. The embattled hosts march to the conflict with proud ostentation
and confident of victory. Their swords shall soon provide a banquet for the
birds of prey that hover over them, and for the wild beasts whose hungry
growls are heard around them, little dreaming that the stricken bodies of the
invaders must furnish the feast. An unseen and irresistible power lures them
on to their ruin; they are smitten with paralysis, their weapons drop from their
hands and cover the ground like corn newly cut with the reaper; they perish
in myriads on the mountains and the open fields, the birds and beasts are
summoned to gorge themselves on the human carrion, and the only remnants of
the once formidable warriors of Gog are found in innumerable graves. In this
boldly conceived vision we have a realistic picture of the final and utter destruc-
tion of all the enemies of God’s people.


I. This defeat will be an act of Divine judgment (vers. 1-7). The champions
of evil do not sufficiently consider what is involved in the fact that God is
against them. Little do they know about the infinite resources of the power
they have to reckon with. They see in the people of God only the apparently
helpless victims of their hatred and fury: they know not, nor do they care to
know, the real character of their Almighty Defender. The silence of God they
mistake for indifference ; the patience of God they misconstrue into weakness ;
the threatenings of God are meaningless vauntings, or if they mean anything,
they apply to every one else but themselves ; their attitude and spirit is a com-
bination of blasphemous and reckless defiance. God is slow to punish, full of
long-suffering and mercy, careful to afford ample space for repentance ; and yet
all the time a finely attuned ear may detect the Divine refrain rising on the air,
already palpitating with the breath of coming vengeance—“ Shall I not visit for
these things, saith the Lord ; and shall not My soul be avenged on such a nation
as this?” (Jer. v. 9, 29; ix. 9). At last the thunderbolt crashes out of the

416


ode


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, GHAP, XXXIX,





gathering clouds, the enemies of God are stricken with fear, their forces routed,
and all are involved in terrible and irrevocable destruction.


IL This defeat wil be on ascale of unexampled vastness. This is evident—
1. From the number of weapons strewn on the battlefield (vers. 8-10). 2%
From the time and space occupied in burying the slain (vers. 11-16). 3. From
the greatness of the feast provided for the birds and beasts of prey (vers. 17-22).
Many of the wars of history were waged on a gigantic scale, and the wars of
the Jews were often attended with great slaughter. The two rival kingdoms
of Judah and Israel were in perpetual feud with each other, and there were few
wars in the history of the world marked with greater ferocity and destruction,
It is computed that in one battle the number of the slain amounted to no less
than 500,000 Israelites. But the greatest battle of the ages will not exceed in
calamity and carnage the final overthrow of the enemies of God’s people. Their
widespread combinations, their vast hosts cleverly marshalled in battle array,
their compacted unity, will make their defeat the easier, the more direct and
complete. They will be allured to gather into a mass, that in a mass they
may perish.


Ill. This defeat will make clear to the nations the unchanging equity of the
Divine procedure. 1. That the people of God, like all other peoples, are punished
because of their iniquities (vers. 23, 24). The Israelites wilfully and stubbornly
trespassed against God; therefore He hid His face, withdrew His protection,
and abandoned them to the cruelty of their enemies, They could not com-
plain that they were unjustly or harshly treated. “According to their un-
cleanness and their transgressions” they were dealt with. They deserved all
they got, and when they came to themselves, they would be the first to
acknowledge it. It was not God’s vindictiveness but their own iniquities that
plunged them into misery. He simply deals with them as with all other
offenders, of whatever nationality. God is the implacable foe of sin wherever
and in whomsoever found (Rom. ii. 6-11). He is unchangeably faithful in
justice, mercy, and truth. 2. That all who faithfully respond to the teaching of
the Divine Spirit shall enjoy the protection and favour of God (vers. 25-29). While
God will punish evil-doers, He does not overlook the least symptoms of re-
pentance, and is eager to make known His clemency. Those who have injured
Him the most are assured of His mercy. It is said the Emperor Adrian,
meeting a man who had insulted him before he came to the throne, said to
him, “ Approach ; you have nothing to fear; I am an emperor.” It is God-like
to be free from resentment. The Spirit is given to convince of sin, to melt
the soul into contrition, to direct it to the great source of help, and to bring
it face to face with God, where all is light and peace and safety. God hides
His face from the incorrigible sinner, but reveals it to the truly penitent.


Lzssons.—1l. The most powerful combinations of the wicked are impotent when
in conflict with Jehovah. 2. The Divine honour is pledged to ensure the ultimate
triumph of righteousness. 3. Disobedience to the Divine law in individuals or in
nations will be visited with terrible punishment.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 1-29. “The present chapter Ezekiel is not predicting the invasion
proceeds to describe the defeat of evil of an actual army, but the advance of
and the triumph of God and His _ evil under that figure. So he declares
people, We must bear in mind that the overthrow of evil by the figure of

&p 417


OWAP, XXXIX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





a host routed and slain, and the conse-
quent purification of a land partially
overrun and disturbed. It is the
manner of Ezekiel to dwell upon the
details of the figurative acts which he
portrays, bringing them before the
mind as vivid pictures, and employing,
so to speak, the strongest colouring.
This has led some so to rest on the
picture as to forget that it is a figure.
Thus they have searched history to
find out some campaign in the land
of Israel, some overthrow of invaders,
on which to fix this prophecy, and
have assigned localities to the burial-
place, and even thought to discover
the spot to which belongs the appella-
tion, Hamon-Gog. But in truth the
details are set forth in order to carry
out the allegory, and their very ex-
travagance, so to speak, points out
that we have but the shadow of a
great spiritual reality, which man can
only faintly represent and feebly grasp
in a figure.” —Speaker’s Commentary.

— ‘We find in the prophecy the fol-
lowing important and salutary truths:
—1l. While the appearance of the new
David to take the rule and presidency
over God’s heritage would have the
effect of setting His people free from
the old troubles and dangers which
had hitherto assailed them, it should
be far from securing them against all
future conflicts with evil.- lt would
rather tend to call up other adversaries
and enlarge the field of conflict, so as
to make it embrace the most distant
and barbarous regions of the earth.
For the whole earth is Christ’s heri-
tage, and sooner or later it must come
to an issue between the adherents of
His cause and the children of error
and corruption, 2. From the very
nature of the case, this trial would
fall to be made on a very large scale
and with most gigantic resources, so
that all preceding contests should ap-
pear small and vanish out of sight, in
comparison of this last great struggle
in which the world’s destiny was to be
decided for good or evil. 38. Though
the odds in this conflict could not but
appear beforehand very great against
the people and cause of Christ, yet


418


the result should be certainly on their
side, and simply because with them is
the truth and the might of Jehovah.
4. As all originated in the claim of
Messiah and His truth to the entire
possession of the world, so the whole
is represented as ending in the com-
plete establishment of the claim. It
is understood at last that it was His
zeal for the interests of righteousness
which led Him to chastise, in former
times, His own professing people, and
that the same now has induced Him
to render them triumphant over every
form and agency of evil, And now,
all counter rule and authority being
put down, the prospect stretches out
before the Church of eternal peace and
blessedness in what at length become
the new heavens and the new earth,
wherein dwelleth righteousness,”—
Fairbairn,


Vers. 1-7. God’s Dealings with His
Enemies. “1. Those who are enemies
unto the Church, God is an enemy
unto them. 2. Wicked men may be
in great honour and have great power.
3. There are seeming contradictions in
Holy Scripture. God was with Gog
and against Gog: with him by His
providence to bring him forth to mani-
fest his spleen and gall against the
land of Israel; and against him by
His power and justice to destroy him
for his cruelty and bloodiness. There
are many scriptures seeming to destroy
one another; but if rightly understood
do sweetly comply and shake hands
together. 4. God’s hand is in the
undertakings of enemies against the
Church. 5. It is in the Lord to dis-
able and disappoint warriors when
they are ready for battle. 6. That in
the same place where God shows rich
mercy to the godly, there He executes
severe judgments upon the enemies,
7. That armies and others are exposed
to public shame and miserable ends is
of God, 8. What the Lord speaks,
that shall certainly take place. 9,
When God begins to visit the enemies
of His Church, He makes progress
therein. 10. When God shows mercy
to His Church and destroys the enemies


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OBAP, XXXIZ,


a


of it, He provides for His own honour,
sanctifies His name, and makes Him-
self to be known distinct from all other
gods.”— Greenhill.

— The Infatuation of the Wicked—
1. Renders them reckless in their
attack upon a superior Power (ver. 1),
2. Blinds them to the fact that they
are being led to destruction by the
Power they defy (ver. 2). 3. Knows
not the moment they may be suddenly
reduced to helplessness (ver. 3). 4. In-
volves them in terrible and universal
destruction (vers. 4-6). 5. Makes their
punishment a means of exalting the
justice and holiness of the Being they
madly opposed (ver. 7).


Vers. 2-5. “As the land of Israel
shall be the scene of Gog’s wicked
attack on the people of God, so shall
it be the scene of the awful punish-
ment inflicted upon Gog and of the
deliverance of Israel, How often God
thus marks the retributive justice of
His dealings (as in the case of Ahab’s
and Jezebel’s obtaining possession of
Naboth’s vineyard through false accu-
sation, murder, and robbery) by visit-
ing the transgressor with judgment on
the very scene of his guilt! (1 Kings
xxi. 19, xxii. 38; 2 Kings ix. 21, 25,
26, 36).”—Fausset.


Ver. 3. The Man of War—l. An
imposing figure when fully armed for
battle. 2. Should carefully weigh the
merits of the cause he espouses. 3.
Exposes his folly when he proudly
boasts about his individual prowess,
4. May in a moment be deprived of
both strength and weapons.

— “I will disarm thee. As Hero-
dotus reports of Sennacherib and his
Assyrians in Egypt, that their quivers,
bow-strings, and targets were gnawed
to pieces by mice and rats in one
night, so that they were forced to fly
for their lives. And as our chroniclers
tell us that in the battle between
Edward IIL, of England and Philip of
France there fell such a_ piercing
shower of rain as dissolved their
strings and made their bows useless.”
—Trapp.


Ver 6. “ Those who shall abet Gog,
virtually though not actively joining
him in the invasion, shall be taught
by bitter experience to know that
their fancied security in their sea-girt
or sea-washed and distant lands is a
self-deceit ; a fire from the Lord shall
consume them, so that they shall know,
to their cost, the God of power, whom
they refused to know as the God of
grace and love, Self-confidence and
careless living, under the mistaken
notion of security, have proved the
ruin cf millions of immortal souls.”—
Fausset.

— “The fire of God upon sympa-
thies with evil. —The far-reaching
effect of Divine judgment.”—Lange.


Ver. 7, “Israel hereafter shall, by
the special grace of God, be kept from
dishonouring the holy name of their
God by their sins and the consequent
judgments which made the heathen
think that Jehovah was unable or
unwilling to save His people. How
joyful is the prospect to the people of
God that the time is ere long com-
ing when they shall be placed under
the blessed necessity of uninterrupted
obedience to God’s will! Tempta-
tions from the flesh, the world, and
Satan, which now harass them, shall
then be at an end. Sin, which is now
their greatest sorrow because it most
dishonours the name of their Lord,
shall be no more; and the Lord shall
make known His holy name with
such attractive power that He will
not let them pollute it any more.”—
Fausset.,


Ver. 8. The Infallible Certitude of
the Divine Word. 1. Notwithstanding
that all natural appearances are against
it. 2. Though its fulfilment is in the
future. 3. Notwithstanding the most
desperate opposition. 4. Confirmed by
many notable examples. 5. Because
the Lord hath spoken it. 6. Should
induce an unfaltering confidence.

— Fulfilled Prophecy. “1. There
is a certain time determined for the
destruction of the Church’s enemies,
which God looks upon as present and

419


GHAP, XXXIX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


op.


done. 2. The particular time is hidden
frem men and known only unto God.”
—Greenhill,


Vers. 9, 10. The Spoils of a Great
Victory. “1. God will give victories
to His Church and people which seem
incredible. 2. The Lord makes that
advantageous to His people which
their enemies intended to damnify and
ruin them by. 3. After the overthrow
of Gog and Magog, Antichrist and his
adherents, the Church of God shall
have great peace. 4. The people of
God shall have a day of recompense
for the wrongs and injuries they have
sustained.” —Greenhill.

— “It may be wondered they burn
these weapons which might be of use
to them for defence and safety ; but it
was done partly because they were
weapons of the uncircumcised, partly
because they were anathemata, as all
Jericho was, but chiefly in testimony
that God was their safety and defence.”
—Pool.

— Mariana in his History of Spain
says, that after the Spaniards had
given that signal overthrow to the
Saracens in 1212, they found such a
vast quantity of lances, javelins, and
such-like that they served them for
four years for fuel.

— “The fire of Christianity comes
at last over all the weapons of this
world, They then warn instead of
injuring. If God is our shield, then it
is seen what becomes of all the shields
of men, long and short, Let not your-
self be covered and screened by the
world. The world, with its pomp and
power, after all exists only to furnish
fuel for the children of God. Thus
the godly man finally gains the upper
hand, however long and strongly the
ungodly have behaved proudly.”—
Lange.


Vers. 11-16. The Burial of the
Slain. “1. God disappoints the ex-
pectation of the wicked while living,
yet sometimes affords fayour when
they aredead. 2. After great victories
wherein many are slain people should,
for public good, be careful to bury


42”


the dead, though it require time, be
troublesome and chargeable. 3. By
great victories over enemies God
honours His own name and makes His
people to have aname. 4 After con-
quering there ought to be cleansing.”
—Greenhill,

— “ Where Gog shall expect to find
a spcii and a possession, he shall only
find a grave; and that a grave near
the sea that entombs his ancient pro-
totypes, the fire-blasted cities of Sodom
and Gomorrah—the Dead Sea The
publicity of this place of burial will
arrest the attention of the many that
pass that way, These shall recognise
the righteous judgment of the Lord in
the destruction of Gog. How often
are the transgressor’s deeply-laid plans
brought to nothing in a moment, and
the mischief which he prepares for
others recoils on himself! Those who
have experienced great deliverances
should be thoroughly zealous in pro-
moting a complete and radical reforma-
tion. Every man should render the
utmost help he can towards furthering
the good work. Sin, the polluting
thing, needs to be searched out in its
most secret recesses. Let not the
casual passer-by think that he is ex-
empt from the duty of exerting him-
self in word and deed for the glory
of God and the good of the Church,
any more than the stationary dweller
in hisown home. All have their place
and work to do; and it is only by
general co-operation. that the work
of the Lord can be most completely
effected.” —Fausset.


Ver. 11. The Fate of the Proud
1. A defeat where they expected vic-
tory. 2. Execration and disgust where
they expected applause. 3. Oblivion
where they expected fame. 4. A grave
where they expected riches. 5. It
is a testimony to the sacredness of
the human body that even the proud
and cruel are honoured with a grave.
6. Justice leaves its dead victim at
the grave’s mouth: Mercy tenderly
buries it.

-——~ ‘Besides many other reasons for
burying these slaughtered multitudes.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





the humanity that religion is full of
would guide the Jews to it, and God
tells us that Gog shall have a grave
in Israel. He came to take possession,
and so he shall, but not as he purposed
and hoped, but as,God intended: Gog
shall possess his house of darkness in
that land which he invaded to make
a prey of. He shall have one place
there—a grave.”—Pool,

— “Like Gog, many a one finds a
grave where he least expected it. The
grave, a quiet answer to so many loud
questions, the echo to so many and
various forms of ‘I will!’ Here the
proudest and most foaming waves will
subside. Masters cease at the brink
of the grave ; the continuation follows
_ —4.¢, rottenness, horror, judgment of
survivors on the dead, to say nothing
of the judgment of God, who has from
the beginning kad the same decision
regarding them.”—Lange,


Ver. 13. “It shall be to the house
of Israel a renown, a commendation,
matter of praise, that they did, like
men, bury the dead, who otherwise
must have been all dung on the face
of the earth, and the swelling hill
rising from their buried bones shall
be a monument to the praise of Israel’s
courtesy. Or else thus, the day of
My being glorified shall be a renown
to Israel. As it is an honour to be
owned of God, so when God shows He
owneth such, He gives them honour
among all that observe it.”—Pool.


Ver. 15. The Sacredness of the
Human Body. 1. It is designed to
be the temple of the Divine (1 Cor.
vii. 19). 2. Shall ultimately be raised
from the dead (Rom. viii. 23; 1 Cor.
xv. 35). 3. Should ensure it reverent
burial. 4. Not a single bone to be
treated with indignity.


Ver. 16. “The world, the city of
the dead—Hamonah, What a stillness
of death after the bustle of so many
departing things and departed men |—
The enemies of the Church leave after
their death a shameful name behind
them (Acts xii. 20-23).”—Lange.


CHAP XXXIX.





Vers. 17-29. “The destruction of the
enemy, viewed as to its results with
reference to the people of God. The
purposes of the past dispensation shal]
be made clear to God’s people them-
selves and to the heathen, All shall
see that the judgments which have
fallen upon the chosen race were no
sign of any change of purpose of the
Almighty, but the consequence of their
sins, and that, these sins once aban-
doned, the favour of their God will
return in yet more abundance,”—
Speaker's Commentary.


Vers. 17-20. Evidences of Divine
Judgment. ‘1. That all creatures are
at the command of God, and ordered
to do this or that according to His
wise providence (ver. 17). 2. That
God doth execute some great and
signal judgment when He summons
the creatures to eat the flesh and drink
the blood of the slain (vers. 18, 19).
3. It is matter of delight and pleasure
unto God to destroy the enemies of
His Church and people (ver. 17). 4.
God is impartial in His judicial dis-
pensations; He punisheth the great
delinquents as well as the lesser (vers.
18, 20). 5. Great men and vulgar
ones also may be a prey to the
creatures, and lie without burial for
a season. 6. God provides for the
brute and dumb creatures, and that
abundantly (ver. 17).”—Greenhiil.

— A Strange Banquet. 1. If we
consider the guests invited—the birds
and beasts of prey (ver. 17). 2. If
we consider the kind of food provided
—the flesh of princes and mighty men
(ver. 18). 3. If we consider the
horrible surfeiting of the wild revellers
(vers. 19, 20). 4. A revolting spectacle
of humbled pride.


Ver. 17. “ What an end after such
a beginning! The beginning was,
Israel shall fall a prey to Gog; now
the end is, that Gog lies there a prey
to the very beasts of the field.”—
Lange.


Vers. 21-24. The Final Issue of
Divine Punishment. ‘1. The great
421


€BAP. XXXIX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





end of God’s judgments upon sinful
men is His glory (ver. 21). 2. Dread-
ful judgments upon the wicked are
engaging mercies unto the vodly (ver.
22). 3. God doth withhold mercies
from His people and lay sad judg-
ments upon them for their sins (ver.
23). 4. God will convince His enemies
of the true cause of His executing
dreadful judgments upon His people
(ver. 23). 5. None have just ground
of complaint whatsoever judgments
are upon them, howsoever God deal


by them (ver. 24).”—Greenhill.


Vers, 23-29, The Hidden and the
Open Face of God. 1. That human
sin obscures the vision of God’s face
(vers. 23, 24). 2. That when God
hides His face His people are exposed
to the ravages of the enemy (ver. 23).
3. That while God hides His face His
hand is employed in promoting the
interests of His people (vers, 25, 27,
28). 4. That when suffering humbles
the soul into genuine repentance the
face of God reappears. Repentance is
the soul coming to the knowledge of
God (vers. 26, 28). 5. The work of
the Divine Spirit upon the soul pre-
pares it for the everlasting vision of
the open face of God (ver. 29; comp.
2 Cor. iii 18).


Ver. 23. “The heathen thought
meanly of the God of Israel, and
reckoned they came into captivity be-
cause the people of some greater god
had by the power of their god pre-
vailed against Israel’s God and His
people; but by this overthrow given
to Gog they shall see it was not im-
potence in Israel’s God, but iniquity
in Israel’s people, that brought them
into captivity. When God withdrew
His defence, as fenceless, they fell
under the sword of the enemy, for it
is He that subdueth enemies and giveth
victory.” — Pool.


Vers. 25-29, God’s Goodness a
Motive for His Activity. “1. The
afflictions of God’s people may be
- long and sharp, yet they shall not
be always; they shall have an end.

422


2. There is a day of mercy to come
for the Jews, even all of them (ver.
25). 3. The great things God doth
for His people are not done for their
worth or merits, but for His holy
name’s sake (ver. 25). 4. Sin brings
men to shame and punishment, which
they must undergo somewhere or other
(ver. 26). 5. In times of peace and
safety usually men forget God and sin
against Him (ver. 26). 6. The Lord
by openly delivering His people from
an afflicted condition doth sanctify
His own name and hath it sanctified
by others (vers. 27, 28). 7. There is
a time when the Jews shall not only
have mercy, but abundant and lasting
mercy (ver. 29). Now they are like
dead trees without any sap in them ;
but then they will be like trees well-
rooted, full of sap, and in their greatest
glory—full of branches, leaves, blos-
soms, fruit, and the sun shining upon
them (Rom. xi. 15).”—Greenhill.


Ver. 25. “This restoring captive
Jews is mere mercy. It is very true
by sin they deserved to be made
captives, and it is as true they never
did or could deserve a deliverance
from captivity. It was not extremity
of justice that so punished, but it was
the riches of mercy that so pardoned
and redeemed.”—Pool.


Ver. 27. “Sanctified by their accept-
ing punishment, repenting for sig,
loathing their former ways and them-
selves for them, acknowledging God
to be holy, engaging themselves in
covenant of perpetual obedience to
God and keeping it; by these things
God will be sanctified among the
Israelites and in sight of the nations,
when they see the furnace hath puri-
fied them.”— Pool.


Ver. 29. The Promise of the Spirit.
1. The constant theme of Old Testa-
ment prophets. 2. Blessedly realised
in the history of the Church in all
ages, 3. Fulfilled in the remarkable
advances of the Gospel in the present
day. 4. The guarantee of future uni-
versal victory.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL


OBAP. XE.


———————————————eeeeeEeEeeeEeEeEeEeEeeeeeEeeeeeSFSsSFSsFFeses


— “It is the Spirit of the Lord
which, when poured out, inclines the
heart to appreciate aright God’s mar-
vellous grace, and so produces repent-
ance. ‘The same Spirit in the heart is
also the earnest to assure the children
of God that their now reconciled Father
will hide His face from them no more,
May the promise of the full outpouring
of the blessed Spirit in the latter days
on both Israel and the Church be soon
realised; and for this end may the
spirit of prayer more and more per-
vade all the professing disciples of the
Lord Jesus ! ”—Fausset.

— “Which as a Spirit of truth shall
enlighten their minds, and make them
wise unto salvation; as a Spirit of grace
shall regenerate and create them anew ;


as a Spirit of power shall strengthen
them for every duty and enable them
to withstand and conquer every temp-
tation; as a Spirit of holiness shall
cleanse them from sin, sanctify their
souls, and stamp them with Mins
image; and as a Spirit of adoption
and consolation shall inspire them
with confidence and hope, and render
every branch of obedience and every
exercise of piety and virtue sweet and
delightful to them.”— Benson.

— “The true Israel, the people of
the Spirit. The outpouring of the
Spirit of Jehovah is the end of all the
ways which He has gone with Israel
in anger and compassion, and the
consummation of Israel in the Chris-
tian Church,” —Lange.


‘The deliverance of the Hebrews was wrought out in a most remarkable
manner, Mattathias, raising the standard of patriotism, called around him the
pious portion of his countrymen. His party increased rapidly till they became
a considerable army. He appointed his third and bravest son Judas military
commander, by whom the Syrian generals that were sent against him were
defeated. In battle after battle he proved victorious, Even the army which
Lysias sent into Judea could not stand before him. Though composed of thirty
thousand foot and seven thousand cavalry, and increased by auxiliaries from the
provinces, it proved powerless before him. Putting the enemy to flight, he
secured immense booty. The like success attended him the following year,
when he defeated an army of sixty thousand men, made himself master of
several strong cities, and, retaking Jerusalem, purified the Temple and restored
its solemn services. His brothers, Simon and Jonathan, proved themselves
worthy successors of this devoted patriot; the independence of the Jews was
finally secured, and the royal dignity vested in the Asmonwan family, in which
it continued till the time of Herod the Great.” — Henderson.


THE VISION OF THE RESTORED TEMPLE AND THE REINHABITED LAND,
(Chaps. xl.—xlviii.)


This is a development of the promise contained in chapter xxxvii, 27. The
subject of the closing chapters of Ezekiel is the restitution of the kingdom of
God. This is expressed by a vision in which are displayed not only a rebuilt
Temple, but also by a reformed priesthood, reorganised services, a restored
monarchy, a reapportioned territory, a renewed people, and, as a consequence,
the diffusion of fertility and plenty over the whole earth, The return from
Babylon was indeed the beginning of this work, but only a beginning, intro-
ductory to the future kingdom of God, first upon earth, finally in heaven, The
vision must therefore be viewed as strictly symbolical, the symbols employed
being the Mosaic ordinances. These ordinances had indeed in themselves a
hidden meaning, The Tabernacle in the midst of the tents of the tribes, and
afterwards the Temple in the capital of the land of inheritance, was intended
to signify the dwelling of Jehovah among His people; the priesthood was te


423


OHAP. XL,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





denote the mediation between God and man ; the monarchy the sovereignty of
God, the people the saints of God, the territory their inheritance. So that the
symbols here employed have an essential propriety ; yet they are truly symbols,
and as such they are to be regarded.”—Speaker’s Commentary.


THe IpgaL TEMPLE OF THE FuTURE. (Chap. xl)


EXEGETICAL NOTES,—Ver. 1.
“In the five and twentieth year.”
The fiftieth year from the 18th of
Josiah, the year of his memorable
passover (2 Kings xxii. 12). The
jubilee year began with the month of
Tisri, on the tenth day of which was
the day of atonement. God allowed
the prophet to see the Temple and the
future freedom of Israel on the day of
jubilee because then servants became
free, and on the day of atonement
because then the sins of Israel are
forgiven. “In the fourteenth year
after the city was smitten, in the self-
same day.” The desolation of the
Temple, city, and commonwealth is
here recalled in vivid contrast to the
glorious restoration that is to be.


Ver. 2. “Set me upon a very high
mountain ”— Moriah, very high as
compared with the plains of Babylon,
still more so as to its moral elevation
(chaps. xvii. 22 ; xx. 40).—“‘ By which
was as the frame of a city.” It is
not a city which is seen, but a building
—the Temple and its courts—like a
city in its construction, surrounded by
massive walls,


Ver. 3. “Behold, there was a man.”
The Old Testament manifestation of
heavenly beings as men prepared
men’s minds for the coming incar-
nation.—“ Like the appearance of
brass.” Brightly shining — resplen-
dent.—“ With a line of flax "—for
long measurements — measuring the
ground-plan.—* And a measuring
reed "—used in measuring houses, It
marked the straightness of the walls,
To measure implied a separation to
sacred purposes,


Ver. 5. “By the cubit and a hand-
breadth.” Measures were mostly taken
from the human body. The greater


424


cubit, the length from the elbow to the
end of the middle finger, a little more
than two feet ; exceeding the ordinary
cubit, from the elbow to the wrist, by
a hand-breadth—+.¢., twenty-one inches
in all The palm was the full breadth
of the hand, three and a half inches.
“The breadth of the building.” The
boundary wall. The height and
breadth of this will are given, but not
the length, which is determined here-
after, and-shown to enclose a square, &
side of which is 500 cubits.


Ver. 6. “The gate whieh looketh
toward the east.” This is particularly
described, all the other gate-buildings
being exactly like it. The east gate
was to be especially sacred, as it was
through it the glory of God had de-
parted (chap. xi. 23), and through it
the glory was to return (chaps. xliii,
1, 2; xliv. 2, 3).


Ver. 7. “ And every little chamber
was "—guard-chambers, for the use of
the Levites who watched at the Temple
gates, and for depositing utensils and
musical instruments. In our transla
tion the words was and were are con-
tinually introduced, but are not in the
original, They would be better away.
The substantives depend upon the verb
measured throughout.


Ver. 9. “And the posts thereof "—a
projection like the ram’s horn. Hence |
in architecture a column projecting
from the wall with its base, shaft, and
capital, or it may be the base only, as
in verses 16, 49.


Ver. 14. “He made also.” The
angel is exhibiting a newly con-
structed building, and therefore is
said to make it,


“Narrow windows "—closed with


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


Gwar, Th





network—the jambs sloping towards
the opening. The ancients had no
glass, so they had the windows latticed
—narrow in the interior of the walls
and widening at the exterior. This
however, though common in later
styles, is not in accordance with the
architecture, in which all the lines were
straight and the spaces rectangular.
“Likewise to the arches” — the
porches. The arch was at this time
unknown in architecture. The word
probably denotes a hall or colonnade
of posts, as in verse 14.


Ver. 17. “A pavement made for
the court “—tesselated mosaic, This
pavement came up to the sides of the
gate-buildings, and was carried along
the sides of the court parallel to the
boundary-wall, thus forming a border
of forty-four cubits to the court.


Ver. 18. “The lower pavement.”
The outer court being lower than the
inner, the pavement running round, it
was naturally called the lower pave-
ment, to distinguish it from the pave-
ment of the inner court.


Vers. 20-28. The north and south
gates were of precisely the same dimen-
sions as the eastern gate. In the case
of the two other gates no mention
is made of a building with thirty
chambers, such as was found on the
east side. Only one was needed, and
it was assigned to the east as being
the sacred quarter, and that most con-
veniently situated for the officiating
priests.


Ver. 31. “The arches thereof”—
the porches, the columned hall. “And
the going up to it had eight steps.”
From the precincts to the outer court
were seven steps, from the outer to
the inner court eight, making together
the number of the Psalms (Ps. cxx.-
exxxiv.),supposed by some to have been
called Psalms of Degrees because they
were sung by the choir of Levites upon
the steps (degrees) of the Temple courts.


Ver. 38. “‘ By the posts of the gates.”


By the pillars which were in front and

along the sides of the gate-building.

Gates must here be used for the gates’
proper, of which there were more than

one in the gate-building,


Ver. 39. “In the porch.” Not
under the covered portico, which was
only ten cubits broad, but in the
angles formed by the porch and gate
front.


Ver, 43. “ And within were hooks”
—cooking apparatus for cooking the
flesh of the sacrifices that fell to the
priests. The hooks were fastened in
the walls within the apartment, to
hang the meat from, so as to roast it,


Ver. 44. “The chambers of the
singers.” These were Levites of par-
ticular families, those of Heman,
Asaph, and Merari, whose genealogy
is carefully traced up to Levi in 1
Chron. vi. 31.


Ver. 45. “The keepers of the charge
of the house ”—the priests who keer
watch as guards of the Temple.


Ver. 46. ‘‘ The keepers of the charge
of the altar: the sons of Zadok.” The
priests were all descended from one
or other of the two sons of Aaron—
Eleazar and Ithamar. David distvri-
buted the priestly offices between the
families of Zadok, the representative
of Eleazar, and Ahimelech, the repre-
sentative of Ithamar. The high-priest-
hood had for many years been in the
line of Ithamar, to which Eli belonged ;
but Solomon, removing Abiathar from
the high-priesthood because of the part
he took in the rebellion of Adonijah,
and appointing Zadok, restored this
office to the family of Eleazar, The
priests who had charge of the sacrifices
were distinguished from the rest of
the Levitical priests as they “ which
come near to the Lord to minister unto
Him.”


Ver, 48. “ The porch of the house.”
The new chapter should begin at this
verse, as here the seer passes from the


425


CHAP. XL. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,





court to the Temple itself, beginning Ver. 49. “By the steps ”’—ten steps
with the porch. The front of the (lxx.), asin the later Temple. “ Pillars
Temple porch consisted of a central by the posts ”—literally, to the posts,
opening with two columns on either meaning that upon the bases ( posts)
side, stood shafts (pillars).


HOMILETICS.
A Drvinety INSPIRED SEER.
(Vers. 1-4.)


The concluding vision of the prophet is not the least striking in the magnificent
series. The poetical conception is full of boldness and grandeur, though the
details are wrought out with prosaic minuteness of literalness. It is quite in
keeping with the graphic style of this sublime prophet of the captivity. Ezekiel
bursts upon the scene like the storm-cloud described in his first prophecy ; the
progress of his visions dazzles us like the revolving chromatic lights in the midst of
the moving cloud, until the storm is spent, the cloud melts into space, and so much
of the light remains as reveals the splendours of a city, Temple, and common-
wealth illumined with the unfading glory of an ever-present God. He writes
as a Jew and a priest familiar from his earliest days to the time of his opening
manhood with the scenes of the Temple-worship in his ever-loved Jerusalem.
The materials of his visions are drawn from the experience of his youth, when
impressions are clearest and most indelible. His conception of the Temple of
the future is therefore an enlargement of the one he had seen and known on
Mount Moriah ; for the human mind cannot create anything out of nothing, but
can only contrast, combine, and expand from something that already exists.
And the glory of future Messianic times will exceed that of the present, as the
glowing picture now presented by the prophet transcended the scene of deplor-
able desolation that then reigned over the land of promise. Like all the other
visions, the one we are now to consider was intended to comfort and inspirit the
disconsolate Jews, and to light up the gloom of their captivity with the well-
founded hope of a brighter and better day. The rarest blessings—blessings that
form a new epoch in the outgrowth of religious experience—often come to God’s
people in the hour of their most abject misery. We are sometimes humbled
that we may gather strength to bear more meekly the weight of a loftier
exaltation. Observe—


J. That a Divinely inspired Seer retains the use of his natural faculties
in intensified clearness. 1. He is conscious of a lofty mental elevation. “The
hand of the Lord was upon me, brought me into the land of Israel, and set me


upon a very high mountain” (vers. 1, 2). Genius is something distinct from —


Divine inspiration. Genius is a species. of inspiration; it generates its own
inspiration. It is the gift of God, and imposes on its possessor a responsibility
for its legitimate use proportioned to its quality. Where ordinary talent
advances by slow degrees, genius soars on rapid wing. But Divine inspira-
tion is the mind of God acting for the time being on the mind of man for a
special and definite purpose. Whatever genius or talent man possesses, it is raised
by contact with the Divine Spirit and made the vehicle of the Divine purpose.
The man is still conscious that he is himself, while he is also conscious he is
but the instrument, for the time being, of a superior power. 2. He és clearly
cognisant of matters of fact, Ezekiel is not so far carried away out of himself,
or fascinated by the brilliance of the visions of God, as to overlook that it was
426


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP. Xi,





“in the five and twentieth year of the captivity, in the tenth day of the month,
in the fourteenth year after the city was smitten” (ver. 1). Divine inspiration
does not destroy or supersede, but strengthens and clarifies our common-sense.
It allows room for the free-play of individual peculiarities. It preserves the
truth communicated inviolate, in its human setting. It does not do for man
what. he can do for himself. Hence the inspired books of the Bible bear the
impress of the writers’ strongly marked individuality.


Il. That the Divinely inspired Seer is favoured with extraordinary visions.
1. He sees in outline a magnificent city-temple. “The frame of a city on the
south” (ver. 2), Precisely in this direction would the former city and Temple
appear to any one approaching them from the north, He saw the picture or
model of a temple as vast as a city; it is a city for men to dwell in; it is a
temple for God to dwell in, To his priestly predilections the building is
all temple, occupying a space and presenting a grandeur of ritual exceed-
ing anything hitherto known in Jewish history. The highest conception to
Ezekiel of the future glory of Israel was a great temple with a perfect form
of worship.. The loftiest vision of the latest New Testament seer is that of a
city in which there is no temple, but where God is Himself the temple and
the light and glory of the whole (Rev. xxi. 22, 23). ‘ Accustomed to cities,
we raise a great city of God in our imaginations of the future, just as in an
age or region where cities were unknown we might have pictured heaven as
a garden like Eden.”—Getkie. 2. He is brought into the presence of an instructor
possessing rare endowments, ‘‘ Whose appearance was like the appearance of
brass”—shining with the lustre of superior gifts: “with a line of flax in his
hand and a measuring reed”—instruments for conveying exact knowledge
(ver. 3). This being is identified by the New Testament seer as Christ, the
sovereign architect of His own Church (Rev. i. 13-15; xi. 1). Such a person
might well be introduced with an ecce—“ Behold a man” (ver. 3). All the
details of the vision that followed were imparted by this heavenly messenger,
and become intelligible only as he enlightens and instructs. the mind of the
beholder. The inspiration of the Divine Spirit brings the soul into the im-
mediate presence of God and lights up the revealed word with a Divine
meaning. Then it is that the lines of right and wrong stand out in clear and
startling contrast.


III. That a Divinely inspired Seer is required to exercise his best powers
to understand the meaning of the subjects revealed (ver. 4). Not only are
the outward and inward senses to be on the alert, but all are to be earnestly
concentrated upon the devout study of the truth. It is surprising how much
can be seen in a subject that engages our affections. Love quickens and
illumines all our sensibilities. ‘Love sees not with the eyes, but with the
mind.” Inspiration helps but does not displace our natural faculties. Mental
and spiritual insight are gained by the diligent exercise of our powers (Heb,
v. 14). Nature reveals its greatest secrets only to the industrious. The world
is full of endless suggestiveness to the wakeful and resolute student.

IV. The Divinely inspired Seer is commissioned to freely and fully com-
municate his knowledge for the benefit of others. ‘Declare all that thou
seest to the house of Israel” (ver. 4). We may not tell all we learn from
others, but we may safely declare aiJ we learn from God: there is nothing to
conceal; nothing but what will be the better for telling. We have never
mastered a subject until we can talk about it intelligently and forcibly. What-
ever knowledge has been helpful to ourselves should be communicated for the
good of others. Knowledge that is not freely circulated is valueless; it is so

427


CHAP, XL,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


Ne "


much useless lumber; and the mind, like an overloaded boat, is in constant
danger of being swamped. The most highly gifted teacher delights to give
of his best, and is often as modestly unconscious that he is doing so as the
loveliest flower is unconscious of the beauty it displays and the delicious


perfume it scatters.


The man who is Divinely inspired to see a truth is
irresistibly impelled to make it known.


Lessons.—1. The grandest truths are Divinely revealed. 2. The revelations of
God are not appreciated without diligent study. 3. The superior knowledge of the


few ts intended for the good of the many.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 1-4. “We observe so far a
resemblance between the commence-
ment and the close of the book, that
in each alike the prophet is borne
away by a Divine hand and placed
amid the visions of God. There are,
however, two characteristic differences
between the earlier and the later.
First, in respect to the region where
these ideal manifestations of Divine
truth and glory were given—formerly
on the banks of the Chebar, as if the
glory of Jehovah had forsaken its old
haunts; and now on what was em-
phatically the mount of God, as if He
were again returned thither and had
already raised it to a far nobler eleva-
tion. The substance of the visions,
too, very strikingly differs; for, while
that on the Chebar was fitted chiefly
to awaken thoughts of terror and
solemn awe, this was calculated to
produce feelings of the liveliest confi-
dence and the most exalted hopes,
The heavens seemed now cleared of
all their stormier elements and were
radiant with the sunshine of the Divine
favour.” —Fatrbairn.

— “The vision beginning here and
continued to the end of this book is
one impossible as yet to understand
fully, and for the clear explanation of
which we must wait until the event
makes the whole plain. There are
difficulties about a literal interpreta-
tion; but these may all vanish when
the fulfilment takes place: and there
is the difficulty about explaining tne
whole figuratively, that thus the minute
and accurate details seem meaningless
and needless, whereas faith assures us

428


that all the most minute parts of God’s
Word have their purpose and aim.””—
Fausset.

— “There is nothing in Holy Scrip-
ture that is not useful and profitable,
though at first sight it may seem
otherwise. Metals lie hid in hardest
quarries ; wholesome herbs are found
oft in roughest places, and precious
stones in barren sands. Hippocrates
says that in the faculty of physic
there is nothing smail, nothing con-
temptible. Aristotle says, in all nature
nothing is so mean, vile, and abject
that deserves not to be admired; and
the Rabbins have a saying that a
mountain of sense hangs on every apex
of the Word of God.”—Trapp.

— Divine Communications to Man.
“1. The Lord keeps an exact account of
the time of His Church and people’s suffer-
ing (ver. 1). He-is the best and most
punctual chronologer of all in heaven
and earth. Men and angels may mis-
take, misreckon, but the Lord doth
not, cannot. When we are in misery
we think God forgets us (Ps. lxxix. 5;
Ixxxix. 46); but He takes notice of
every hour, day, month, and year.
2. When the Church ts low, in the worst,
most desperate and deplorable condition,
even then the Lord hath a care of His
Church (ver. 1). When the Church is
in the wilderness, under persecution in
Egypt or Babylon, the Lord is solici-
tous for it. 3. The Church is Mount
Zin, or Mount Zion is the Church
wherein God makes known His mind
for the comfort of His people (ver. 2).
Mountains are high, conspicuous, and
strong, and so is the Church; or


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. EL


EEE


mountains is good air, so likewise is
in the Church; hills are nearer heaven
than other places; they are below,
the Church is above the world. 4.
The Church is well seated and well ordered.
‘Upon which was the frame of a city’
(ver. 2). It is seated upon a mountain,
the mountain of God’s decree, power,
and truth; it is well ordered, for it is
as the frame of a city, where every-
thing is in its right place and all fitly
joined together. 5. The Man Christ,
who ts sinless and glorious, is the chief
builder and exact measurer of the Church
and things belonging to it (ver. 4). The
line and reed are in His hand; He
measures all the trees and stones used
in this building, the outward and in-
_ward courts, with all their appurte-
nances. He was the son of Joseph, a
carpenter, and some mystery might lie
in that. 6. The way into Zion and unto
the Father is by Christ (ver. 3). He
stands in the gate of the Temple ready
to receive any that should come and
be found fit for entrance: He had His
line and reed in His hand to measure
them. None unmeasured might enter.
7. The Lord Jesus, when, Divine things
are presented to us, would have us attent,
tntent, and apply the whole heart unto
them (ver. 4). Let us mind, and mind
to purpose, all things shown us of
Christ; let us set our senses and
whole heart upon them. 8. What the


Lord Christ reveals unto His servants, the.


prophets ant ministers, they must not
reserve to themselves, but communicate to
others for their instruction, edification,
and comfort, ‘Declare all that thou
seest’ (ver. 4). They must not only
utter what they receive, but utter all
they receive (Acts xx. 27).”—Greenhill.


Ver. 1. “The Word of God counts
the years and months and days of our
distress to make us understand that it
is not unknown to God how long we
have borne the yoke of the cross and
the oppression of tyrants,”—<Starck,

— “Ezekiel was already five-and-
twenty years in a foreign land. We
must be prepared and purified in many
ways by God’s Spirit before we can
rightly understand the consolations of


God; and one grows in God when
one learns under present sufferings
to see more and more of the eternal
comfort.” — Diedrich.

— “The vision of the Temple a tri-
logy of thoughts. 1. From judgment
to mercy. 2. From prison to freedom,
3. From the world to Christ and inte
the community of God.”—Lange.


Ver. 2. The Visions of God —1.
Need a highly sensitised spirituality to
appreciate. 2. Are on a scale of un-
exampled magnificence. 3. Have a
close connection with the supreme in-
terests of humanity. 4. Are a revela-
tion of His character and purposes.
5. Should be reverently and earnestly
contemplated. 6. Elevate the spectator
to a lofty moral standard,

— “To human eyes Canaan was lost
for Israel, to human eyes Jerusalem
lay in the dust; but the prophet sees
it again far more glorious. Such seeing
is truly given by God in the Spirit.
Land, city, and Temple had been lost
through the sins of the people; yet
Israel must remain and fulfil its eternal
purpose for the glory of God. A fairer
and loftier Jerusalem and Temple must
be still in store for Israel, which the
prophet represents entirely by figures
taken from the old land, the old royal
seat, and the old Temple. Yet he does
not merely make the old be renewed ;
everything becomes quite different in
order to indicate that the Kingdom of
God will in its completion present a
quite different figure.” — Diedrich,

— “The land of Israel is the hiero-
glyph of the inheritance which God will
give to His people from the whole world,
which, in contrast thereto, is called the
sea or the wilderness.”—Lange.

— “This is indeed a place to sit
down in and meditate. Jerusalem
in the old covenant, the Jerusalem
which is the Christian Church and
the Jerusalem above—what a theme
for contemplation throughout time and
eternity !—Jerusalem a Sabbatic place
in the working days of the world’s
history.” —Lange,


Ver. 3. The Architect of the Divine
429


OHAP. XL.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


eee .0£0wDOD EE


Temple—1. Is illumined with the
lustre of His unique qualifications.
“Whose appearance was like the ap-
pearance of brass.”’ 2. Possesses the
means of constructing an exact and
symmetrical building. ‘ With a line of
flax in his hand and a measuring reed.”
3. Has absolute control of the structure
which He rears, ‘ Hestood in the gate.”
4. Is Himself an illustrious pattern of
the glorious edifice into which man may
be morally built up (Eph. ii. 20-22).

— “Like bright polished brass which
strongly reflected the rays of light.
Probably he had a nimbus or glory
round his head. This was either an
angel, or, as some think, a personal
appearance of our blessed Lord.”—A.
Clarke.

— “With a line in his hand and a
measuring reed.” The Law of God—
1. Is the unchanging standard of moral
actions. 2. Regulates the form and
constitution of the Church. 3. Is un-
erringly applied by the hand of the
great Master Builder in every stage of
the Church’s upbuilding. 4. Is clearly
defined in the Divinely inspired Word.

— ‘The measurements are—1,
Exact, to show that the promise is not
vague, but certain. 2. Equal, to denote
harmony. 3. Vast, to mark majesty
and grandeur. The extraordinary
massiveness of the walls may have had
reference to the enormous structures
raised at this time by Nebuchadnezzar,
who was not only the greatest con-
queror but the greatest builder in the
world.”—Speaker’s Commentary.

— “Let every man examine himself
by this measuring-rod how far he has
advanced.”—Gregory.

— “Christ is indeed the foundation
and corner-stone of His Church; but
He is also the Builder, and brings the


building erected thereon always more
and more to perfection. The brass
signifies holiness and purity, also life
and permanent strength, Christ is the
strong and invincible Hero.”—Lange.

— “He stood in the gate.” Else
where also Christ stands at the door
and calls, invites in, shows the way
and opens the entrance to the Temple
and into the inner sanctury.


Ver. 4. High Spiritual Attainments
—l. Not reached without the diligent
exercise of all our powers. 2. The
outward senses are the gateways of
spiritual knowledge. 3. Only that
which affects the heart interests and
influences the whole man, 4. High
spiritual attainments the best qualifica-
tion for instructing others.

— “This building of Ezekiel’s is not
to be understood of a new material
building, but, like the chariot at the
beginning and also the building at the
end, is nothing else than the Kingdom
of Christ, the holy Church of Christen-
dom here on earth even to the last
day. But how all the parts are to
be properly interpreted and placed,
that we will defer until we shall see
the whole building prepared and ready.
Although it is a mystery, it ought not
to remain a mystery.”—Lange.

— “The threefold summons to
attention intimates that a matter is
here treated of which is of the greatest
importance to the community of God.
To this it is essential that faith in
the indestructibility of the Kingdom of
God, and in its resurrection from every
death, live in it in full power. It is
this alone which is here treated of,
however dense may be the veil of
architectural details behind which it is
concealed.” —Hengstenberg.


HOMILETICS.


Tue CHurcH or Gop a BUILDING


(Vers. 5-49.)


I, Strongly guarded. ‘Behold a wall on the outside of the house round
about” (ver. 5). The first and second Temples were surrounded by a massive


430


i foil


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP. Kt,
eee


wall. This wall denoted not only the separation of the Church from the world,
but also the Divine power that protected the Church at every point. The Lord
is said to be a wall of fire and a shield encompassing and guarding His people
(Zech. ii, 5; Ps. v. 12). Both the pre-and-post-exilian Temples have perished ;
but the Church of God remains, and is more firmly established than ever. The
Lord is its invulnerable defence.


IL Accessible to every sincere inquirer. There are ample gates east, north,
and south (vers. 6-19, 20-23, 24-26, 32-35). 1. There are gates to show that all
are welcome. From whatever quarter they come, the gates are invitingly open.
All earnest seekers after God, of whatever nationality, may find an entrance
into the Divine Temple (Matt. viii. 11). 2. There are gates, to indicate that only
those who come by those gates can be admitted. The Lord of the Temple has the
absolute right to formulate His own conditions of entrance. There is to be a
moral fitness in the applicant (Rev. xxi. 27). None who come with a broken
and contrite heart—a sense of self-helplessness and need—shall be turned away
(Ps. xxxiv. 18 ; John vi. 37).


III. Suffused with light. There are windows, narrow without, but widened
within to diffuse the light more copiously (ver. 16). The little chambers had
windows: so little Churches, little saints, have their measure of light. The
Church of God is the light and instructor of the world (Matt. v. 14). If that
light were quenched, myriads would be doomed to grope their aimless way in
hopeless darkness. The Church is bright and clear only as it is constantly
bathed in the light of God.


IV. With ample provision for acts of highest worship. 1. There is the altar of
sacrifice (vers. 47, 39-43), The sacrifices were intended to point out the desert
of sin, the need of repentance and expiation, to acknowledge that the goods of
the offerer belonged to God, and to be a type and memorial of the coming
sacrifice of Christ to be offered ounce for all. They were a pledge of the sincerity
of the worshipper. There is no true worship without sacrifice, 2. There is the
offering of praise. There is a special place in the Temple for the singers (ver. 44).
The music was assigned to the Levites, and to those Israelites of note whose
daughters had married into the priesthood. But these Israelites were allowed
to take part only in the instrumental part of the service ; the vocal part was
sung by the Levites only. Wind and stringed instruments were used—trumpets,
pipes or hautboys, viols, lutes, harps, and cymbals. Psalms were sung and were
arranged according to the character of the service, on ordinary or special occasions,
Music reaches its highest consecration when it is devoted to the worship of God.
Praise is the essence of true worship. 3. There is the duty of prayer (vers. 45, 46).
Prayers were offered by the priests at the morning and evening services, and
were expressed in well-known and constantly repeated forms, in some of which
prayers the people joined the priests. After prayers, they rehearsed the ten
commandmentsand repeated the portions of the Law written on their phylacteries.
The phylactery sentences were repeated daily, the time of the morning at which
this duty was to begin being stated by the Jewish Rabbis as “from such tima
as a man can see to distinguish between blue and green, even until sunrising.”
The chambers of the priests were conveniently situated for their duties. It
was their privilege to come near to the Lord to minister unto Him (ver. 46)..
Prayer brings the soul into the immediate presence of God, and is an essentia’
element in genuine worship.


V. With an imposing and conspicuous entrance. ‘The porch of the house’
(vers. 48, 49). The porch was an elevated building, rising higher than the
431


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


SD


OMAP. XL.


Temple itself, and was approached by a flight of steps. It wasa prominent and
imposing object as soon as you entered the inner court, or court of sacrifice, It
admitted to the Holy Place, and led ultimately to the most Holy Place, While
the porch seemed to invite the worshipper to enter, it also taught that we
are not to rush into the Divine presence with indecent haste, but draw. near
thoughtfully and by slow and solemn stages—passing first through the outer
court, then the inner, and through the porch into the house itself. Christ is
the door of the heavenly Temple (John x. 9; Rev. iv. 1), and through Him the
soul is conducted into the midst of its imperishable treasures and endless


revelations.


Lrssons.—l. The Church of God is securely founded in unchanging truth 2 Is


composed of indestructible material.


3. Invites all men to share in its privileges.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 5. The Divine Protection—1.
Surrounds the Church like a wall. 2.
Is invincible. 3. Secures the ever-
lasting safety of the faithful. 4.
Cannot be pleaded as an excuse for
personal unfaithfulness,

— “The Church has a triple wall—
1. God as protection. 2. The angels
as guardians. 3, Believers—in other
words, their prayers.”—A. Lapide.

— “The object of the wall is to
draw the boundary between the sacred
and the profane. This boundary had
adouble meaning. To the community
it was a warning not to draw near
the sanctuary with unrenewed hearts.
With respect to God, it guaranteed
that He would eventually separate
His people from the world. Because
the people of God had neglected the
warning implied in the boundary, as a
just punishment the boundary was also
in the latter respect destroyed. To
the desecration as guilt succeeded the
desecration as punishment. In the
pierced wall, the smitten city lay an
image of the abandonment of the people
of God to the world. That this re-
lation will be altered again in the
future, that God will again raise His
reformed people to independence, is
figured by the erection of the new
wall, which in this respect is an em-
bodiment of God’s help and grace that
are to be imparted to the covenant-
people renewed in spirit.”—Hengsten-
berg.

— “A measuring-reed of six cubits

432


long by the cubit and a hand-breadth.
The larger measure of the sanctuary—
1. From the love wherewith God loves
us. 2. According to the love where-
with we ought in return to love God
in the brethren.” —Cocceius.


Ver. 6. ‘‘And went up the stairs


thereof.” (See also vers. 22, 26, 31,
34, 37, 49). Progress in Divine
Things. “1. We come to the know-


ledge of spiritual things by degrees ; they
are not known at once, but successively.
Temple mysteries we come unto by
steps. Christ leads His people on from
one thing to another, from faith to
faith, from strength to strength. 2.
The knowledge of Divine things is not
attained without labour and difficulty.
There are steps and stairs in this
Temple, and those that will behold the
glory and understand the mysteries of
it must go upward, first one step and
then another. It is difficult to go up
steps and stairs. 3. In Temple work we
must make progress. It is not sufficient
to go up a step or two and then stand
still or descend: we must go forward,
higher, to the top. Christ overcame
all difficulties; He went up all the
stairs, and persevering to the end, was
crowned (Rey. iii. 21).”—G@reenhill.

— “When believers enter they have
—1. A guide with them into all truth,
2. Without Him they can do nothing,
3. Progress is made toward full know-
iedge of God and Christ.”—Cocceius,

— “The east gate as model and


sie ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,
EEE


~~


pattern gate in its homiletical signifi-
cance: every sermon ought to lead to
the Father through Christ.”

— “The Jews called the east the
fore-part of heaven ; the west the back-
part: by the first they denote spiritual
things; by the second temporal and
earthly things. Those that come into
this Temple must mind spiritual things;
they must not let out their hearts to
the world and worldly delights—they
are western things, and there was no
door in the west. They must go up-
wards, not downwards ; keep within,
not go out.”—Greenhiil.

— “One must not so thoughtlessly
imagine that only a single leap is
required to come into heaven, but
constant ascent is requisite and neces-
sary in order to seek after the things
that are above.”


Ver. 7. The Chambers of the Temple
—* i. Represent the mansions which
are in heaven. 2. The entertainment,
rest, and comfort the saints enjoy in the
Church under Christ. 3. The several
congregations, or churches, of Gospel
times, be they little or great, all which
are in the Church of Christ, as these
chambers were in this visional Temple.”
— Greenhill.

— In the Lord’s House are many
mansions, according to the distinction
of offices and gifts: each mansion
serves to ornament the house.


Ver. 8. “The porch reminds us of
the peace and repose connected with
the consciousness of the grace of God.”
_ —Ccolampadius.

— “Truly they who are preparing
for the holy office of the ministry are
measured in many ways, and they
should still further test themselves by
the measure of the sanctuary.” —Starck.


Vers. 13-15. “Thus those who are
in this way are walled around, covered
and protected on all sides; so that
nothing can befall them in Him who
is the Door and the Way, but every-
thing leads forward to the sanctuary
when we walk in Christ Jesus,”—
Cocceius.


35


CHAP, XE,


Ver, 16. The Light of the Church—
1. Is borrowed light that comes through
the windows of its ordinances. 2 An
evidence of its joyous experiences (Pa.
xcvii, 11), 3. A testimony to the
world wrapped in moral darkness,

— “By these windows is signified
the spiritual light which should be in
the Church of Christ. He is called
The Sun (Mal. iv. 2), A Great Light
(Isa. ix. 2), and The Light of the
World (John viii. 12). And by those
windows—the apostles, prophets, evan-
gelists, pastors, and teachers—He hath
and still doth let in light into the
Church, The least churches and the
least saints shall not be without win-
dows; they shall have light and joy,
teaching and comfort.”—Greenhill.

— “In the Church of God darkness
has no place, but the light of truth
and faith shines everywhere; yea,
believers themselves are a light in the
Lord, whose works shine before men.
They who walk in the ways of the
Lord have the true, cheerful and clear
light ; while the natural soul is a gate-
way without windows,”—Lange.


Vers, 17-19. The Outer and Inner
Courts of the Temple. “In the out-
ward court the people stood; and it
represented the nations outside the
Church. The inward court repre-
sented the Church, where the Word
of God enlightens and nourishes us,
and Christ is our altar of perfumes.
The Holy of Holies represented heaven;
into it the high priest only entered—
typifying our High Priest, the Lord
Jesus, His entrance in there alone
by His own power, to bring us thither.
So that the first signified the state of
nature ; the second the state of grace;
the third the state of glory. Hereby
the greatness of the Church in the
time of the Gospel, and especially in
the time of the New Jerusalem, is
pointed out. These courts were of
great compass, and had gates looking
to the several parts of the world.”—
Greenhill.


Ver. 17. “Those who are employed
in God’s House ought to keep even
433,


CHAP. XX,





their feet clean, for holiness is the
ornament of His House.’’—<Starck.


Ver. 20. “By the diversity of the
gates you may recognise the diversity
of those who enter. As in our
cathedrals every part tells something
to the deeper-seeing connoisseur, 80
this is still more the casé in Ezekiel’s
Temple. Everything here is in har-
mony and mutual correspondence, like
the Old and the New Testaments,
Moses and Christ, the prophets and
the apostles,”— Lange.


Ver, 24. When we are in Temple
work, we must move according to the
mind of the Master Builder, and not
of our own heads.


Ver. 28. “The courts are separated,
for the covenant of Abraham is one
thing, the covenant of Moses another,
and the covenant of Christ still another.
Yet they only mutually confirm one
another. For are not the contents of
the covenant the promises of God, who
graciously forgives sin? One court,
however, is nearer than another to the
sanctuary. Walkest thou unhindered
in the court of the priests, busied with
spiritual sacrifices; then thank the
Lord, and extend the hand to others
that by thy support they may over-
come difficulties.” —Ccolampadius.


Ver. 31. “And the going up to it
had eight steps.” (See also vers. 34,
37, 49; comp. with vers, 22, 26), A
Step Higher—1. An important quali-
fication for every leader of religious
thought. 2. Should be the constant
ambition of every student of Scripture
truth. 3, Should mark the steady ad-
vance of individual spiritual experience.


Ver. 37. “The people that came
thither were to be holy, but the priests
who came into the inner court were to
be more holy. They who are nearest
God should be most holy ; they are to
be a step at least above others,””—
Greenhill.


Ver. 38. “This signifies that our
434


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


eT


hearts may remain unclean, even when
we give our bodies to be burned for
the glory of God. The constant morti-
fication of the flesh must ground itself
on Christ, otherwise we will lose cour-
age.—The believing soul presents its
heart, as one sets a table, on which-
Christ as sacrifice is beheld, for faith
lays hold of this alone.”—Lange.


Vers, 39-43. A Place of Sacrifice
—l. May be found everywhere. 2.
Essential to acceptable worship. 3.
A constant reminder of sin. 4, Con-
stantly points to the All-efficacious
Sacrifice.

— It is not to be imagined that
under the times of Christ the Jewish
worship should be revived. These
expositions of tables, offerings, and
sacrifices import some other thing—
the good and plentiful provision which
should be in the Gospel Church.

— “The return to literal sacrifices
would seem to be a return to the
beggarly elements of legal types after
we have got the antitype. We are
sure, therefore, that the Temple-sacri-
fices in restored Jerusalem, of whatever
nature they may be, will not set aside
the fixed principle that the one sacrifice
of Christ is final and complete. Two
considerations may help to lessen the
difficulty. 1. The Jews, as a nation,
stand to God in a peculiar relation,
distinct from that of Christians of the
present elect Church, gathered out of
Jews and Gentiles indiscriminately.
The same principle, therefore, of
the non-existence of sacrifice in any
form may not hold good in that dis-
pensation to be ushered in by the
advent of Messiah and His reign over
the restored Israelite nation as holds
ood in our present Gentile times,
That shall be the period of public
liturgy, or perfect outward worship of
the great congregation on earth, as the
present time is one of gathering out
spiritual worshippers one by one. Be
sides Israel’s relation to Christ as her
spiritual Saviour, she will then also
perform a perfect outward service of
sacrifice, prayer, and praise, as a-nation,
to her manifested Divine King reigning


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


CHAP, Xk.


SS SSS


in the midst of her; and all nations of
the earth shall take a part in that ser-
vice as recognising His Divine King-
ship over them also, 2. The Israelites
shall probably also set forth, in all its
harmonious parts, the outward beauty
and inward sanctity of the Temple-
service, which in their palmiest days
of old they had never exhibited in its
full perfection. The full excellence
and antitypical perfection of all the
parts of the ancient Temple-service,
which, from ignorance of its hidden
meaning, seemed a cumbersome yoke
and unintelligible to the worshipper,
shall then be fully understood, and
therefore shall become a delightful ser-
vice of love, instead of, as formerly,
a burdensome task. Israel’s province
will be to exhibit, in the minutest
details of sacrifice, the essential unity
of the Law and Gospel, which now
seem opposed. The ideal of the theo-
cratic Temple and its service shall then
first be realised.” —Fausset.


Ver. 44, “These set out the spiritual
joy and songs which should be in the
Church of Christ (Isa. lxv. 14, 17, 18).
In this Jerusalem will be a holy priest-
hood to offer up spiritual praise (1 Pet.
ii. 5). Conquerors are full of joy and
much in singing praises, especially
spiritual conquerors.”—Greenhill.

— “A place in the House of God is
justly due to them who sing the praise
of God in spiritual and heavenly songs,
which contribute so powerfully to
spiritual edification. In these corrupt
days music is used more for sin and
vanity than for the praise of God.
When will it be free from this service
to vanity? He who draws near to
God sings to Him also in His heart:
they sing best who in the midst of
troubles are full of joy. They incite
others to sing.” —Lange.

— “That the singers are here so
prominent is explained by this, that in
the exalted position of the community
of God more ample material was given
them for new songs, so that the singing
in the worship of the new Temple must
play a chief part, as indeed the multi-
plication of the singers and musicians


under David stood connected with the
advance which the people of God had
then made. Even in the times soon
after the return from the exile singing
revived in a degree that had not been
since David.”—Hengstenberg.


Vers, 45, 46. ‘ By these priests may
be understood the ministers of the
Gospel who have charge of the holy
things and persons (1 Tim. vi. 13, 14;
Acts xx. 28). They are the watchmen ;
the charge of souls is committed to
them, and they must be accountants
for them (Heb. xiii. 17). So true
Christians are priests in this Temple,
and some have charge of the holy
things and persons therein (Rev. v.
10).”—Greenhill,


Ver. 46. The Priestly Office—1.
Gains its distinction more by moral
fitness than sacerdotal lineage. 2 A
solemn responsibility. 3. Brings the
ministrant into the immediate presence
of God. 4. Is the honoured privilege
of the truly godly.

— “Since ‘sons of Zadok’ is in our
language equivalent to ‘sons of right-
eousness,’ this implies that only those
duly keep the charge who are justified
by faith and born of God, whom Jesus
Christ has begotten and upholds by
the word of His power.”—(Ccolam


padius.


Ver. 47. “Christ doeth all things in
His Church in number, weight, and
measure. By His Spirit He ordereth
the length, breadth, and depth of His
spiritual House, and bestoweth His
gifts by measure to each member
(Rom. xii.; 2 Cor. x.; Ephes. iii. 4).”
—Trapp.

— “The true Temple is the body
of Christ as He took it out of the grave
on the third day, for it surpasses all
figures and is pure life. The prophet
here prophesies of it; but he does so
in lisping words, and for the sake of
his contemporaries his understanding
of Christ in these chapters, where he
speaks of Christ’s Kingdom and sanc-
tuary, is still in swaddling-clothes.”—
Diedrich.

435


OHAP. XLI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


a


Vers, 48, 49. “The porch of the
house.” The Entrance to the Church.
—1l. Stands invitingly open to the
penitent. 2. Must be passed to enjoy
the highest spiritual privileges. 3. Is
broad enough to admit the worst who
are truly contrite, and narrow enough
to exclude the incorrigible. 4. A
joyous spectacle to angels and God
when thronged with sincere in-
quirers,


Ver. 48. “It was of the nature of
the porch to be open, being an open
approach to a space that is or may be
closed, which shelters from the incle-
mency of the weather those who must
wait for the opening. A door is not
mentioned here, as otherwise generally
in the closed rooms of the Temple.
The words, ‘ three cubits on this side,
and three cubits on that,’ indicate that
an open space was left in the midst.
In the porches of the court, that
had a large thoroughfare, the whole


space within must have been open.”—
Hengstenberg.

— Christ is a porch to His people.
Jerome once said that while we are
in this life we are in a porch-state.
Here we have a body of death, see all
things imperfectly ; but when we enter
into the heavenly Temple we shall be
free, and know as we are known.


Ver. 49. “There were pillars, one
on this side and another on that.”
“ The proportion in height agrees with
the thickness of the corner pillars,
which in the court amounts only to
two cubits, here to five. In a building
which was consecrated to the Lord of
heaven, and was to effect a connection
between heaven and earth, the most
emphatic reference to heaven could
not be wanting; as far as it was pos-
sible for man, the head of the building
must point to heaven; humility, no
less than pride, has need of a tower
whose top is in heaven.” —Hengstenberg.


THE TEMPLE AND ITS ORNAMENTS. (Chap. xli.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 1.
“The temple”—the holy place, the
Temple proper, as distinguished from
the porch, described in chap. xl. 48, 49,
and from the Holy of Holies (1 Kings vi.
17; vii. 50). “Which was the breadth
of the tabernacle.” Which was is not in
the original, and should be omitted. As
in the measurement of the porch the
angel had pointed to Solomon’s Temple,
so here in the edifice itself he points to
the old Tabernacle. Worship is pro-
gressive, and expresses itself in har-
mony with the culture of every age,


Ver, 2. “The breadth twenty cubits.”
The measurements are internal, the
‘ game as in the Temple of Solomon.


Ver. 3, “Then went he inward.”
Towards the Holy of Holies. It is
significant that in this case it is not
said he brought me in, but he went in,
because the Holy of Holies was not
to be entered even by a priest like
Ezekiel, but only by the high priest

42€


once a year. So the angel enters, and
announces the measurements to Ezekiel
whilst he stood in front of the Temple.
“The door six cubits, and the breadth
of the door seven cubits.” The first
measurement of the door was from
post to post six cubits, and the second
measurement, the breadth of the door,
was the breadth of the actual doors
which shut off the Holy of Holies, and
which may have been so hung that
each of the posts projected half a cubit
beyond the hinge of the door, which
opened inwards.


Ver. 4. “So he measured the length
thereof.” The measurements of the
Holy of Holies exactly correspond with
those in Solomon’s Temple (1 Kings
vi. 20).


Ver. 5. “The wall of the house "—
the outer wall of the Temple itself.
Its thickness of six cubits corresponds
with the colossal proportions of the
architecture of the East. “Every side


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP. XL





chamber”—the singular used collec
tively for the plural, to denote the
whole series of side chambers,


Ver. 6. “Three, one over another,
and thirty in order.” Literally, “three,
thirty times.” ‘That is, there were
three stories, and each story was
divided into thirty chambers, “They
entered into the wali which was of
the house for the side chambers.”
The wall here described is not the
wall of the Temple, which was six
cubits (ver. 5), but another wall, which
was five cubits (ver. 9), parallel to it,
built for the side chambers, and may
be said to be of the house—ie., be-
longing to it.


Ver. 7. “There was an enlarging.”
This wall had for the ground-story its
full thickness of five cubits; then it
was diminished one cubit, so as to
form a ledge whereon to rest the
beams of the floor of the second story,
and again was further diminished one
cubit tor the floor of the third story.
Thus there was an enlarging of the
second story of the chambers by one
cubit, and of the third story by two
cubits beyond the breadth of the cham-
bers on the ground-floor, “A winding
about still upwards.” The upper
stories were approached by winding
stairs, still upward from one story to
another.


Ver. 8. “Great cubits.” “Literally,
to the extremity or root of the hand.”
—Henderson. “To the joining or point
where the foundation of one chamber
ceased and another began.” —Fairbairn.
“To the wing of the house.”—Busztorf.
“The Hebrew word signifies in the
first instance joining, and is probably
used as an architectural term to denote
line of junction between two stories,
which would be that of the ceiling of
the lower and the floor of the upper
story.”—Speaker’s Commentary.


,
Ver, 9. “And that which was left”
—the passage between the side cham-
bers and the Temple wall, implying
that no place was to be left which


was to be held, as of old, not sacred.
The verb I saw governs the whole of
the eighth and ninth verses.


Vers. 12-17. In these verses we
have a summary of the measurements
and details of buildings already men-
tioned. The buildings measured had
been the gates of the courts, the Temple,
and the building on the separate place.
All the overlaying was done by care-
ful measurement, accuracy of measure
being, according to Hebrew ideas, an
ingredient of perfection.


Ver. 18. “Made with cherubim and
palm trees.” Cherubim a symbol of
Divine life; palm-trees of life in
general. “Every cherub had twe
faces.” Being in sculpture or carving,
two faces only would be visible to
the spectator. The cherubim have
each four faces (chap. i. 10). They
indicate that the house is dedicated
to the God of the whole terrestrial
creation; not to a national god of
limited power.


Ver. 19. “The face of a man was
toward the palm trees.” The faces
of the cherub look to the palms, to
indicate that all creation, animate and
inanimate, is a whole—a harmonious
work of the creative power of God.


Ver. 21. “ The appearance of the one
as the appearance of the other.” The
appearance in this visicn was the same
as in other visions: the appearance of
the sanctuary, or Holy of Holies, was
similar to that of the Temple. They
differed only in magnitude,


Ver, 22. “The altar of wood—the
table that is before the Lord.” ‘The
altar of incense (chap. xliv. 16): at it,
and not at the table of shew-bread, the
priests daily ministered. Table and
altar are convertible terms. It stood
in front of the vail, and is therefore
said to be before the Lord. It is
called a table, as being that at which
the Lord will take delight in His

eople, as at a feast. It is not to
i confounded with the eight tables


ane
.


OHAP. Xik,


outside at the north gate, which are
to be altars for sacrifice of the burnt-
offering and sin-offering (chap, xl


49).


Ver. 25. “And there were thick
planks upon the face of the porch
without.” Ewald translates it leaf-
work, which agrees very well with the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZERIEL.





context—“ And there were leaves in wood
on the face of the porch without.”


Ver. 26. “Palm trees on the one
side and on the other side” The
porch and likewise the wings take the
character of the subordinate from this,
that only palms are figured on them,
and not cherubim also,


HOMILETICS.
Tur TEMPLE A SYMBOL OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH.
(Vers. 1-26.)


I. As it is the habitation of the Divine presence. ‘This is the most holy
place” (ver. 4); so called because in the Tabernacle and in Solomon’s Temple
it was in this place that the Shekinah dwelt—the visible manifestation of the
Divine glory. It was also called the oracle (1 Kings vi. 16), because from
thence Jehovah declared His will. Into this sacred adytum even Ezekiel
was not admitted. The angel entered alone. ‘‘Then went he inward and
measured” (ver. 3), and reported the dimensions to the seer, as he stood
awe-struck at the door. The hallowed presence of God is unapproachable but
to the holiest. The Christian Church to-day is the spiritual Temple of Jehovah,
His home and resting-place; it is filled with His living presence, and that
presence, growing more luminous and satisfying, will be the imperishable glory
of the Church for evermore.


Il. As it is a combination of strength and beauty (Ps. xcvi. 6). 1. Lt 4
constructed im harmony with well-known laws (vers. 1-17). Its walls are strong
and massive, its buildings symmetrical, exact in measurement, every detail
minutely developed, and the whole edifice constructed according to the laws
of proportion. Everything about the building is in perfect harmony with the
great end proposed—to reveal the character of the Master Builder and to
foster and promote the loftiest worship. The indestructible stability of the
structure is assured, as it is built on the incorruptible laws of righteousness and
love. The grandest fabrics of the world-empire are gnawed and crunched by
the destructive teeth of time. The colossal piles of architecture which filled
the soul of Ezekiel with wonder and fear in his Assyrian captivity are now
dust and ruins, monuments in their decay of the unfailing truth of God’s Word
and significant studies of the pious antiquarian; but the Temple of Jehovah
remains, and shall from age to age endure, 2 It is ornamented with artistic
suggestiveness (vers. 18-20, 25). Doors, posts, pillars, and walls were chastely
decorated with the figures of cherubim and palm-trees—symbols of life, life
in its manifold and highest forms, life traced upwards to its grand creative
source, The charm of all art is in its power to delineate lite in its endless
manifoldness, The painted canvas or chiselled stone is of no value unless it
contains those inimitable touches of genius that are full of the suggestiveness
of life. The joy of a picture is in what it suggests rather than in what it
portrays; the artist may see more in a theme than he has power to represent,
‘The dewdrop that glitters on the end of every leaf after a shower is beautiful
even to a child; but to a Herschel, who knows that the lightning itself sleeps
within it, and understands and feels all its mysterious connections with earth

438


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, ’ OBAP. XLL





and sky and planets, it is suggestive of a far deeper beauty. The eye sees only
what it brings with it the power to see. The Temple of God is a living
Temple, quivering with the Divine life that pervades every part, and to the
spiritually cultured senses it seems with radiant forms of divinest beauty.


III. As it makes ample provision for the highest needs of the soul (ver. 22).
The altar of incense is here significantly called “the table that is before the
Lord.” The greatest need of the soul is God ; but God can be approached and
known only through sacrifice. God Himself provides the altar of sacrifice and
the victim too (Heb. ix. 11-14 ; x. 10-14). The Divine provision is a well-spread
banquet, over which God Himself presides. All are invited to freely partake,
and the joy of the feast is found in the presence of God at the table. The altar
of the heavenly Temple is an altar of incense, but it is the incense of praise ; and
as the incense, daily rising, diffused itself and perfumed the earthly Temple, so
the sweet odour of praise and thanksgiving shall continually ascend before the
Lord in the celestial banqueting-house. There is no sacrifice too great for us to
offer to Him who has done and suffered so much for us, In an Italian hospital
was a soldier lying severely wounded. A lady visitor spoke to him, dressed his
wound, smoothed his pillow, made him all right for the day, and before leaving
placed a bouquet of flowers beside his head. The grateful soldier, with his pale
face and eyes full of tears, looked up and said, “That is too much kindness,”
She was a lady with a true Italian heart, and looking back to the soldier she
quietly replied, ‘‘ No, not too much for one drop of Italian blood!” And shall
we not freely own that the consecration of all our powers of body and soul is
not too much to give in return for the shedding of our Emmanuel’s blood on
our behalf %


Lessons.—1. The Temple of God a spiritual fabric. 2. The everlasting home of the
holy. 3. Resplendent with Divine glory.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 1-26. ‘““Ezekiel never intended
that a structure should be reared
precisely according to the plan and
measurements he furnishes, otherwise
he would have been still more minute
in his delineations. He has given
enough, however, for his great object,
which was chiefly to show that in the
Divine purpose respecting the future
there was to be a full and every way
complete reconstruction of the House
of God, if not inthe outward and
material sense, yet in the higher things,
which that represented and symbolised,
apd with the effect of securing a far
purer and more elevated condition for
the covenant-people. It is this last
point which throughout he seeks to
render prominent by the nature of his
descriptions.” —Fairbairn.

— “The spiritual lesson to be learned
by us from the description here is, that


the Church of God, the Temple of the
Holy Ghost, as it shall hereafter be
manifested on earth, shall be on a
scale of grandeur such as has never
yet been witnessed, and its worship
shall be on a corresponding scale of
glory, beauty, and blessedness. Not
till then shall the Lord be worshipped
visibly in the beauty of holiness by the
whole congregation of earth, led on
by Israel as the leader of the mighty
choir, None of the defects which
attend our present liturgical worship
shall alloy the perfection of the public
services of God which shall then be
rendered to Him through Christ.
There shall be no divisions. Now
the catholicity of the Church is but
partially seen, though it is a blessed
reality, and its unity is hardly to be
recognised at all, split up as it is into
a hundred denominations with varying
439


OBAP. XLI. -





confessions of faith and different forms
of worship; then all shall be one in
outward worship, as well as in inward
unity of the spirit, and the world will
in consequence be attracted to believe
the Divine misson of Messiah (John
xvii. 21).”—Fausset,

— The Temple a Representation of
Christ and His Ohurch. “1. Jt is a
representation of the humanity of Christ.
(1.) The Temple was holy ; sowas Christ
(Luke i, 35; Acts xiii, 35; 1 Pet. i.
19, ii, 22; Heb. vii. 26). (2.) The
Temple was light and beautiful within ;
so was Christ (Col. ii 3; John i. 14;
Cant. v. 10; Ps. xlv. 2). (3.) By the
Temple they came to know the mind
of God ; so by Christ God is known
(Heb. i. 2; John xv. 15). (4.) The
Temple was God’s delight: there God
dwelt and manifested His glory (chap.
xliii, 4, 5). So Christ (John i, 14;
Matt. iii. 17; 1 Tim. ili, 15). 2. It is
a representation of the Church of Christ,
(1.) All things in this Temple were
measured ; so in the Church (Ephees, ii.
21; Rev. xi.1). (2.) Christ was in this
Temple, did all therein and showed
all to the prophet; so in the Church
(Col. i. 18; Rev. ii. 1, xxi. 3). (3.) In
this Temple were chambers, galleries,
and stories, one above another; so in
the Church there are several ranks
and degrees of officers and members
(1 Cor. xii. 28; Ephes. iv. 11; 1 Tim.
v. 17, iii, 8; 1 John ii 12, 13)."—
Greenhill,


Ver. 1. “If we diligently attend to
the instructions given us in the plainer
parts of religion, and profit by them,
we shall be led further into an acquaint-
ance with the mysteries of the King-
dom of God. They that are willing to
dwell in God’s courts shall at length
be brought into His Temple. Ezekiel
was himself a priest, but by the iniquity
and calamity of the times was cut
short of his birthright privilege of
ministering in the Temple; but God
makes up the loss to him by intro-
ducing him into this prophetical, evan-
gelical, celestial Temple, and employing
him to transmit a description of it to
the Church, in which he was dignified

440


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


+


above all the rest of his order.” —BY.
Henry.

— “We ought to go forward under
God’s guidance in the ways of the
Lord from glory to glory, but not to
go backward or stand still except in
meditation. The good spirit leads
men to the Church, there to listen
devoutly to the Word of God; the
evil spirit keeps them back from it.”—
Starke.


Ver. 3. “Then went he inward and
measured.” The Highest Truths—l.
Often a lonely quest. 2. Seen only by
the morally pure. 3. Fill the soul
with profound awe. 4. Are to be com-
municated to others with the utmost
exactitude.


Ver. 4, “And he said unto m;,
This is the most holy place” The
Most Holy Place—l. Is where God
manifests His presence. 2. Is not
now confined to any one spot under
heaven. $8. What a privilege to meet
with one who can direct us to the
holiest place! ‘He said unto me,
This is the most holy place.”

— “The most holy place is set
before us as the goal, and we under-
stand thereby a heavenly state on
earth, namely, the Church of the New
Testament, Accordingly, in chap. xliii.
the entire circuit of the mountain is
called most holy, from which it is
evident that no one is truly inside


this Temple, or even in its courts, who —


is devoid of the New Testament per-
fection—Heavenly glory, or eternal
bliss, is no doubt the only complete
Holy of Holies, yet he who has entered
the kingdom of grace has come to a
glory which eye hath not seen nor
ear heard, neither hath entered into
the heart of man, to praise and glorify
God for ever.”—Lange.


Ver, 5. ‘‘The chambers are not all
of the same size, but they are all
connected with the sanctuary; the
same is the case with the progress
and growth of the members of the
body of which Christ is the Head—
The saints of God are also measured





round and round; no heavier task is
iaid upon them, no greater tempta-
tion befalls them, than what is their
Father’s will. That the chambers are
connected denotes the brotherly rela-
tion in the sanctuary (Ps. cxxxiii. ; 1
John iii).—God provides for His ser-
vants covert and shelter in the world.”
—Lange.


Ver. 6. “There is a threefold rank
or order of the members of the Church ;
there are lowermost, middlemost, and
uppermost. These, as they have their
several offices and gifts accordingly, so
they must keep to their own stations,
do their own business, live in love,
and wait till called into a higher
room,”—Trapp.

— ‘Those in the Church are not
all of one rank, whether officers or
others; some are of the lower rank,
some in the middle, and some upper-
most: there are children, young men,
and old men; and the higher any get,
the more enlargement and greater
breadth do they see in the things of
God and this Temple; and notwith-
standing this difference among them,
there is a sweet harmony between
them, and they serve one another,”—
Greenhill.

— “That they might have hold,
but they had not hold in the wall of
the house.’ Temple Workers—1.
Find much of their work lies outside
the Temple itself. 2. Their work gains
its significance and worth by being in
connection with the Temple. 3. Their
nearness to the Temple no guarantee
of the permanence of their labour.
4, Their sphere of work, like these
side chambers resting on a separate
wall, may be removed without affect-
ing the stability of the Temple. 5.
Should be careful in all their work
to maintain the inviolability of the
Temple.

— “Leaning upon God, upheld by
Him, but not mixed up with Him in
our affairs—Of ourselves we cannot
stand a single moment.”—Lange.


Ver. 7. Still Upward. “I. Still up-
ward and still larger is the plan of


WOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


THAP. Bz,








Divine procedure. 1. The work of
creation was in full harmony with
this method, 2. The same in revela-
tion. 3. The same feature in Divine
architecture in our Lord’s history. 4.
Same in the history of the Church.
Il. The text illustrates the saints ex-
perience. 1. Ivis so in a man’s views
and thoughts of God. 2. In a saint’s
apprehension of the blessings of salva-
tion. 3. In his spiritual growth 4.
So too with his love. 5. So in aspira-
tion and communion. III. The text
sets forth the saint’s destiny.” —Homiletic
Monthly.

— “The higher we build up our.
selves in our most holy faith, the more
should our hearts, those living temples,
be enlarged.”—-M. Henry.

— “This might remind God’s
people of heavenly-mindedness where-
by their hearts will be enlarged when
once got above the world, as birds sing
sweetly when aloft in the air.”—Trapp.

— “In QGod’s House we must go
upward by growth in grace, that the
mind may be always the more firmly
directed heavenward.—The breadth in
the top part.—Christians ought not to
contract but to expand as they grow,
older. Higher grace gives expansion
in width and breadth, The narrower
points of view with which we ascend
gradually disappear.—The broader
heart on the height of the Christian
life in theory and practice.—Prayer an
ascending stair.—But let us not for-
get that which lies in the middle. In
the middle is the means, the way of
mediation.” —Lange.


Ver. 8. The secret of the height
depends on the foundation.


Ver. 10, “In the Church much more
room is taken up by such as are void
of the treasure of God’s grace than by
better men, rich in faith and heirs of
the Kingdom of Christ.”—Trapp.


Ver. 12. The history of dogmas is in
many respects the off-place in Ezekiel’a
Temple.


Ver. 16. “Enlightenment is fre>
44)


OHAP. XL.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





above ; only thus do we obtain a
conception of heavenly things.—Faith
is a window, and, as compared with
vision, a narrow one.—Through His
wounds we see into the heart of Christ
as through a window.”—Lange.


Ver. 17. “The Lord Christ will
measure Christians of what height,
breadth, and depth they are; their
actions, affections, and graces will be
measured (Rev. xi. 1).”—Greenhull.


Vers. 18-20, 25. The Noblest Pro-
vince of Art—l. To idealise the
manifold forms of the highest life.
2. Is consecrated to the holiest ends
in the service of God, 3. Finds scope
for the most gifted genius in beautify-
ing the Temple of God.


Ver. 18. ‘Cherubims are generally
taken for the portrait of angels and
framed to the beauty of young men
with wings. Yet is the description of
them different in different places, as in
Ezekiel’s vision chap. i., Isaiah’s vision
chap. vi., John’s vision Rey, iv., and
in Solomon’s Temple. Palm-trees—a
very beautiful, upright tree from a
straight, well-grown body, spreading its
head with large boughs and branches,
which were used on occasions of joy
and were emblems of victory (John xii.
13; Rev. vii. 9).”—Peool.

— “This was to teach Christians
who are the temples of God. 1. To
live like angels for holiness. 2. To
suffer, as palm-trees, any pressures or
pains for His sake with invincible
patience. By their piety in their lives
and patience at their death the primi-
tive Christians won much upon their
persecutors.”—Trapp.


Ver. 19. “These seem to represent
the angels who have more than the
wisdom of a man and the courage of a
lion ; and in both they have an eye
to the palms of victory and triumph
which are set before them, and which
they are sure of in all their conflicts
with the powers of darkness,”—W.
Henry.

— “Teachers ought to be men.

442


especially to humbled consciences, but
lions against enemies.”


Ver. 22. “The table before the
Lord.” The Divine Generosity—l.
Provides a rich and varied feast for
His people. 2. His presence at His
own table is the choicest feast. 3. His
table is also an altar from which the
incense of thanksgiving and praise
rises acceptably before Him.

— “The altar is designated as the
table or board before the Lord because
that which is set on it—the incense,
denoting the prayers of the saints (Ps.
exli, 2; Rev. v. 8, viii. 3)—is re-
garded as spiritual food which the
people present to their heavenly King,
The altar appears as the table of the
Lerd also in chap. xliv. 16. The
offering appears as the food of God
Mal. i. 7. Not without cause is the
altar in 1 Kings vii. 48 compared with
the table of shew-bread ; the bread
laid on the latter denoted the spiritual
nourishment which the people are to
present to their heavenly King, which
is good works.”—Hengstenberg.

— “This altar is at the same time
a table, as Christ is to our souls in the
Holy Supper.”

— “This altar of wood and four-
square was a type of Christ, in whom
our prayers come before God as in-
cense, and He is the propitiation for
our sins (1 John ii. 2; Ex. xxx. 1; Ps.
exli. 2; Rev. v. 8), The largeness of
this altar above that of old shows that
the saints under the Gospel would make
much more improvement of the Lord
Jesus in prayer, and make use of His
mediation and intercession by faith
in their heavenly sublimated supplica-
tions, than the saints of old were
ordinarily wont to do.”—Trapp.

— This Altar a Representation of
Christ. ‘1. Though the altar was of
wood, it was shittim wood—incorrup-
tible; so Christ’s human nature was
incorruptible; it saw no corruption
(Acts xiii. 35).° 2. It was larger than
that under the Law; so the worship
of God in Christ’s time should be en-
larged (Mal. i. 2). 3. Sweet incense
was offered to God on this altar.


=


HOMILETIGC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XLII,





Where the people prayed the priest
offered incense (Luke i. 9, 10), and
when we pray Christ offers up our
prayers with the incense and perfume
of His merits (Rev. viii. 3, 4; Ephes.
v. 2). 4. On this altar was incense,
morning and evening; it was a per-
petual incense ; so Christ, our altar,
offers up prayers perpetually for us
(Heb. vili, 25). 5. This altar is the
table before the Lord. There is some-
thing in this expression worthy con-
sideration. (1.) That poor, sinful,
weak, unworthy creatures may come
to Christ not only as an altar to have
their prayers presented to God, but
as a table to have refreshing to their
souls (John vi. 35,55 ; Luke xxii. 30 ;
Rev. vii. 17, it. 7, 17).  (2.) That
the Lord Himself is delighted and
satisfied in and with Christ, as we are
with a table full of dainties, having
the choicest meats and drinks (Matt,
iii. 17 ; Isa. xlii. 1). Christ is the altar,
the table, the sacrifice, and the meat
and drink upon the same,”—Greenhill,


Ver. 23. “ Doors let in and shut out ;
so also does the Church.—Ornament is
here combined with solemness. We
have not here the joyous worldly
beauty of Greece, but neither have
we the solemness dark as death as in
Egypt. The world opens its doors half


THE CHAMBERS OF THE


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 1.
“Into the chamber ”—to the cham-
bers; the Hebrew is a collective noun.
“The building towards the north.”
The direction in which the chambers
lay. Place a comma between building
and toward.


Ver. 2. “Before the length of a
hundred cubits was the north door”
—i.e., before the separate place, which
was that length. The seer had before
spoken of chambers for the officiating
priests on the north and south gates
of the inner court (chap. xl. 44-46).
He now returns to take a more exact
view of them.


to frivolity and half to despondency.
—The sanctuary of the heart also must
be shut, and not with one door only.
Our treasure is incomparable, and ought
to be preserved with much watchful-
ness and strong exhortation.”— Lange,

— “The Gospel and its ordinances
—faith, repentance, and baptism—are
the means to salvation; by them we
obtain entrance to the communion of
saints, the favour of God, and the
kingdom of heaven. Christ is the
way and the door (John xiv. 6 ; x. 7),
because He has given us the means
which are the way and door to the
Church and unto life: these doors are to
be open for the sheep and to be shut
against the goats. We may also under-
stand by these doors the ministers dis-
pensing the Gospel and the ordinances
thereof; they are to be holy, vigilant,
and zealous as the cherubims, and con-
stantly green, growing, and flourishing
as the palm-trees.”—Greenhill.


Ver. 26. “ They had palm-trees
wrought or engraven on both sides,
implying that the materials of Christ’s
Temple must not be common, but
beautifully carved work. The House
of Christ and everything in it must
be decorated with the engravings of
God’s Spirit (Ps. xlv. 13; Rev. xxi.
18, 19)."—Greenhill.


Prizsts. (Chap. xlii.)


Ver. 4. “ And before the chambers
was a walk of ten cubits breadth
inward.” The word for walk may
mean gangway, and there may have
been in the middle of the chambers a
gangway leading inward, with stairs
to the upper stories, ten cubits wide,
while along the north front of the
building there was a kerb of one cubit,
as before the guard-chambers (chap.
xl. 12), on which kerb the north
doors (leading to the basement) opened.
Hengstenberg calls the walk a street.


Ver. 5. “Now the upper chambers
were shorter.” “To be rendered
thus :—And the upper chambers were

443


CHAP, XLIL





shortened, for galleries took off from
them (literally, did eat of them), from
the lower and from the middlemost
chambers of the building. The build-
ing rose in terraces, as was usual in
Babylonian architecture, and so each
of the two upper stories receded
from the one below it.”—Speaker’s
Commentary.


Ver. 7. “The wall that was with-
out.” The wall here must be one
from north to south, fencing off from
the outer court the passage along the
east side of the chambers, and therefore
fifty cubits long.


Ver. 8. “And, lo, before the Temple.”
This describes their position in a
general way ; more precisely, they lay
over against partly the separate place
and partly the Temple court.


Ver. 9. “As one goeth into them
from. the outer court.” There was an
entrance at the north of this passage
by which the priests entered into
the chambers and inte the Temple
court,


Ver. 10. ‘‘The chambers were in
the thickness of the wall.” The
verse should be rendered :—Breadth-
wise was the wall towards the east;
in front of the separate place and of
the building were the chambers.


Vers. 11, 12, assert that on the
south side of the separate place was
a block of chambers precisely similar
to that on the north.


Ver. 13. ‘‘ Where the priests shall
eat the most holy things.” In Lev.
x. 13 it was prescribed that the priests
should eat of the sacrifices in the holy
place. This was originally before the
altar in the inner court—now separate
chambers are assigned, and these be-
come the holy place for this purpose.


AAg


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





Only the meat-offerings—the sin and
guilt offerings—are mentioned, not the
slain or peace offering, because only in
the former were the portions falling to
the priests most holy, and as such to
be consumed by the priests alone, in
their official function; whereas in the


peace-offerings the priestly portion was —


consumed by the priests with their
whole family, including even the
females (Lev. x. 14). .


Ver. 14. “When the priests enter —


therein.” Another purpose for which
these chambers were to be used was
for the unrobing of the priests. Only
after they have changed their garments
which they have used in the service
of God are they to enter into inter-
course with the people in the outer
court.


Ver. 15. “Measuring the inner
house.” Not the Temple, but the
Temple and its courts, all that lay
within the wall on the outside of the
house (chap. xl. 5).


Ver. 16. “He measured the east
side—five hundred reeds.” ‘The vast
extent is another feature marking the
ideal character of the Temple. It
symbolises the great enlargement of


the Kingdom of God in the times of |


the Messiah.


Ver. 20. “To make a separation.”
The sanctuary proper was the Most
Holy Place as distinguished from the
rest of the Temple; but the term was
capable of extension, first to the whole
Temple, then to all the ground that
was separated to holy as distinguished
from profane or common uses. No
longer shall the wall of partition be to
separate the Jew and the Gentile, for
Christ hath broken down the middle
wall of partition between us (Ephes, ii.
14), but to separate the sacred from
the profane.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. CHAP. XLII,








HOMILETICS.
WOorREERS FOR GOD: THEIR PRIVILEGES AND DISTINOTION.
(Vers, 1-20.)


I, That workers for God have ample provision for all their needs. These
chambers were intended for shelter, rest, and refreshment for those who waited
on God in worship; every necessary comfort and convenience was provided,
The priests were wholly devoted to their sacred calling; they renounced the
world and all its most tempting prizes, and gave themselves up body and soul
to a life-long consecration to the work of the Temple. The law of worship
demanded this complete self-renunciation; and at the same time it secured to
the servant of God everything that was essential to his well-being and to help
him in his hallowed work. The minister of the Divine Word must be relieved
from the fret and care of worldly things, that he may be free to apply himself
with a whole-hearted abandon to the study and interpretation of spiritual
things (1 Tim. iv. 15). Let him take care of the sacred deposit committed to
his trust, and God will take care of him. The faithful worker for God need
have no anxiety about the future: his anxiety should be undividedly centred
on the duties of the present (Luke x. 7; Phil. iv. 19).


II. That workers for God should prepare by devotions in private for the
profitable worship of God in public. The chambers, though near the Temple,
were separate from it, were strictly private, placed in the midst of stillness and
retirement favourable to meditation and prayer. The power of the worker for
God in public is acquired by diligent devotion in private. God is known in
the greatness and glory of His character and the wisdom and righteousness of
His ways ; not in the midst of noise and uproar, but in quietness and solitude.
The thinker must isolate himself for the time being from all distraction, and
quietly and prayerfully wait on God. “Be still, and know that I am God”
(Ps. xlvi. 10). Not in the wild commotion and brazen clangour of the battle-
field, not in the whizzing hurricane of national strife and uproar, not in the
rush and worry of excessive worldly care, are the holy secrets of Divine things
divulged to the soul, but in the solitude of retirement, in the hush and stillness
of some meditative retreat, where the tocsin of war is never heard and the peal
of cannon and crash of arms never penetrate. Not that we are to indulge in
a life of useless quietism and inactivity. We must ilence our meaningless
clamour and pause in our demonstrative activities in order that God may
speak and may work His purpose in us: then we receive our commission and
are inspired to speak and work for Him. On the quiet pastoral slopes of
Midian, Moses, in stillness and awe, witnessed the splendours of the Divine
revelation; and then went forth to work, and his life thenceforward was a
continuous scene of tireless and prodigious activity Among the rugged crags
of Horeb, Elijah was favoured with a fuller revelation of the Divine character—
not in the roaring tempest, the crashing earthquake, or the devouring fire, but
in the subduing whisper of the still, small voice—and he rose up to do the
will of God with a tenderer and a nobler spirit than he had known before.
In the dreary solitudes of Patmos the beloved John beheld, in enraptured
stillness, visions of the future history of the Church as they rolled before him
in panoramic splendour, and then spent the rest of his life in writing and speak-
ing about them for the benefit of the ages to come, And so the workers for
God, in the quietness and secrecy of the closet, receive the blessing of the Lord

245


OHAP. XLII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





that they may bear it forth to the public sanctuary and make their fellow-
worshippers all the richer for sharing with them the outpoured endowments
of Heaven.


Ill. That workers for God should be distinguished by superior sanctity.
1. The character of their work demands it. It is holy work; it has to do with
holy things (ver. 13). In connection with the Temple of God a clear and
unmistakable distinction is made between things sacred and profane (ver. 20).
The law of cleansing observed in the Levitical ritual with such scrupulous
minuteness was intended to set forth the absolute necessity of purity in all
who took part in the ministrations of the Temple (Isa. lii. 11). Only the holy
can comprehend and teach holiness. To understand philosophy we must be
philosophic, to appreciate a poet we must be poetical, and to understand purity
we must be ourselves pure. 2. The success of their work will be influenced by ét.
It will be seen in its effects both upon themselves and upon others. How
often is the best work for God marred by the intrusion into it of human
imperfection and sin! It is said that Michael Angelo was once seen absorb-
ingly engaged on an important painting with a lighted lamp fastened across
his forehead, so that no shadow from himself might fall upon his work. Even
so ought we to lift up the-light of a God-given holiness that no shadow of
self may darken and disfigure the work we are doing for Him. Man is never
8o great, so luminous, so grand, as when he is doing holy work with the light
and help of the holy God.


Lessons.—l. To do the best work for God needs prayerful preparation. 2. Work
done for God has its own special rewards, 3. Personal holiness requisite for the
highest kind of success in work for God.

GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 1-20. “ By these buildings Ver. 3. “The inner court. This


connected with the Temple and per-
taining to its outward economy we
should be reminded that the Lord
bestows upon the pious the other
necessaries of life also. in Him they
find their entire satisfaction ; but they
use food, drink, intercourse with men
and this world, as if they did not use
all this. Thus to the pure all things
are pure that they do with pure and
upright heart. The Word of God
makes us strong when it is with us,
and blesses also outward things. The
Lord has ordained that they who
preach the Gospel shall live of the
Gospel.” Gcolampadius.


Ver. 1. “As this Temple was pro-
vided with many chambers, but each had
its own purpose, so believing Christians
must be sanctified chambers for the
glory of God—one for this use, another
for that (2 Tim. ii, 21).”—Starck.

446


was a figure of the Church invisible,
as the outer court was of the visible
and external.”—Trapp,


Ver. 4. The Social Instinct—1. Leads
to the place where congenial company is
to be found. 2. Delights in the fellow-
ships associated with the House of God.
3. Finds its supreme satisfaction in
spiritual communion with the highest,

— “Before the chambers was a
walk of ten cubits—a way of one
cubit.” “There is a broad way and
& narrow way ; a ten-cubit way and a
one-cubit way. The Church at one
time has prosperity and freedom ; it
is in ‘a walk of ten cubits;’ and the
time will come when it shall have
greater latitude, liberty, and pros-
perity. At another time the Church
is in straits, afflictions, temptations,
and persecutions: it is in ‘a way of
one cubit.’”—Greenhill. ;


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XiL


ES


— “A way of one cubit.” “A
narrow way, but such as led into
spacious walks of ten cubits breadth
inward, Strait is the gate and nar-
row the way that leadeth unto life
eternal; but they that hit it, hold
it, shall walk arm-in-arm with angels
(Matt. vil. 14; Zech, iii. 7). Through
many tribulations we enter the King-
dom ; but there God will set our feet
in a large room (Acts xiv. 22; Ps,
xxxi. 8). Let it be remembered that
this narrow way is but short; it is of
but one cubit.”—Trapp.

— * Weare not to spend all our time
between the church and the chamber,
though a great deal of time may be
spent to very good purpose in both;
but man is made for society and
Christians for the communion of saints,
and we must make conscience of the
duties of that communion and take
the comfort of its privileges and plea-
sures.”—M. Henry.


Vers. 5,6. The Law of Gradation—
1. Recognised in the various duties
and offices in the Church of God. 2.
Regulates the distribution of intel-
lectual and spiritual endowments. 3.
Limits responsibility to gifts and
opportunities,


Ver. 5. “ While in the previous
chapter the breadth increased with the
elevation, it here becomes narrower.
The progressive growth in grace is
a wider consciousness of Christ, but
a constantly narrowing self-conscious-
ness (1 Cor. xv. 9). So is the service
in the gospel, when with increasing
years our view into eternity expands
and similarly contracts in temporal
matters ; the nearer the day of reckon-
ing is, our responsibility becomes the
clearer to us and the more clearly do
we see our many mistakes and dis-
loyalties.—There are three stages of
life: youth, manhood, and old age,
and the last is the narrowest of all.”—


Lange.


Ver. 6. “Had not pillars.” “The
strength of this Temple was not every-
where alike; some parts had pillars,


others had none, or not equal to
others. So in the Church of Christ,
some parts of it have strong pillars,
eminent teachers, whereas other parts
are wholly destitute, or have such as
are weak.” —Greenhill.


Ver. 7. ‘God is able to set walls
around those who desire to keep them-
selves pure from the stains of the
flesh and to protect them in the hour
of trial and temptation. True be-
lievers are protected; no one can
injure them (John x. 27).”—Starke.

— “The wall of God’s protection
extends as far as the Church, or any
part of it.”


Vers. 8, 9. Public and Private Wor-
ship—1. Mutually helpful in the
culture of spiritual life. 2. The use
of the one does not supersede the
use of the other. 3. Public worship
a solemn testimony and the sphere
where the most memorable blessings
are realised. 4. Private worship an
essential preparation for successful
public worship. 5. Public worship a
privilege, to be preferred before and
above private worship.


Vers. 13, 14. The Blessing of Food
and Clothing — 1. Abundantly pro-
vided for all the creatures of God. 2.
Not sufficiently appreciated. 3. Eat-
ing and drinking a holy refection to be
enjoyed with a thankful heart, which
should be suitably expressed before
and after partaking. 4. A proof of
the universality of the Divine care and
goodness.

— “If we have to understand by
the priests those brought up from
childhood in the faith of Christ and
walking in this way, then in these
verses is figured their fellowship with
one another in particular, their united
inquiry into the Word and meditation
thereon, and on the mystery of Christ,
for growth of knowledge and increase
of joy, so that they are prepared and
adorned in one and the same faith,
always to return to and worship at
the altar, which is Christ.—Glory and
holiness in their connection ; how this

44?


OHAP. XLII





connection is stamped on this Temple
and its arrangements and purposes,
even to the most minute particulars.—
Profane ministers profane the sanc-
tuary.— We ought not to approach the
holy table of the Lord with worldly,
impenitent hearts.”— Lange.

— Ministerial Duties and Privi-
leges. “1. Zhe priests approached unto
the Lord. In all administrations of
the Gospel ministers approach near
to God, and in all their approaches
He looks to be sanctified by them.
2. The priests in God’s service had
good accommodation. Here is a Divine
ordinance for ministers’ maintenance.
Whatever good things people possess,
they ought to communicate a part to
their teachers (Gal. vi. 6; 1 Cor. ix.
13, 14). 3. Holy things are to be laid
in holy places. Holy hearts are fit
places for God, Christ, the Spirit, the
Gospel and all the ordinances of it.
4, Ministers ought to have other frames
of spirit in them when they are nearer to
God in the duties of His worship than at
other times (ver. 14). Then they are
to put on holy garments, be clothed
with zeal, fear, and all holy affec-
tions. They are to discharge their
office with gravity and authority, that
their ministry be not despised.”—


Greenhill,


Ver. 13. “ Ministers must eat as well
as other - they are not of the chameleon
kind—cannot live on air; and the
Lord Christ hath ordained that they
which wait at the altar are partakers
of the altar (1 Cor. ix. 13, 14).”"—
Trapp.

— “The chambers, though private,
are to be near the Temple, which
teaches us that our communion with
God in our secret chambers is to pre-
pare ux for public devotions in the
sanctuary, and to enable us to derive
all the benefits from them which God
has designed. There can be no real
worship in public if there be not also
worship in private. In the Temple of
the Holy Ghost, the Church, there are
multitudes dwelling by faith, and yet
there is room for more,”—Fausset.

— “Those that have public work

448


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


—


to do for God and the souls of men
have need to be much in private to
fit themselves for it. Ministers should
spend much time in their chambers,
in reading, meditation, and prayer,
that their profiting may appear; and
they ought to be provided with con-
veniences for this purpose.” —M. Henry.


Ver. 14. “The clerical coat does not
make the clergyman, yet it is a defence
and an admonition. The best clerical
garment, and one which we may always
put on and wear everywhere, is our
sanctification in Christ. It is as great
a mistake to carry about the clerical
coat everywhere, like a monk, as to
leave it at home from unclerical frivolity
or worldly-mindedness, Paul became
all things to all men, but not at the
expense of his ministerial office.”—
Lange.

— “Ministers may not leave their
station, lay aside their holy calling, en-
tangle themselves with worldly cares
and businesses, but make their ministry
their business, giving themselves wholly
to it. As in doing their office they
must use all becoming gravity and
authority as the ambassadors of Christ,
so at other times they must familiarise
themselves with their people, becoming
all things to all men, in Paul’s sense,
that they may win some.”—Trapp.


Ver. 15. “So wide and spacious
will the New Testament Church be,
in distinction from the Old Testament
Church. A greater than Solomon in
all his pomp and glory is here, for
Jesus is the Light of all nations. The
true Church is the collection of the
scattered believers that are in the
world.—Observe, only after he had
learned exactly the internal magnitude
did the prophet learn the external. It
is labour in vain to labour in investi-
gating nature until we have first laid
a good foundation in godliness, With-
out this we continue too much devoted
to the contemplation of visible things
and make them our idols, so that they
become a stumbling-block and a snare
to ourselves and other inexperienced
people. But when thou hast come to


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZERIFL





know the inner meaning of spiritual
things, and hast tasted the length,
neight, and depth of the love of God,
then thou mayest busy thyself with
all visible things. Thou wilt every-
where pause, and contemplating things
with the spiritual eye, say, ‘O Lord
our Lord, how excellent is Thy name
in all the earth !’”—Luange,


Vers, 15-20. The Messianic Church.
“1. Jts extent and latitude. It is in all
quarters of the world. 2. Its stability
and firmness. The buildings of this
Temple are four-square—stable, firm,
and lasting. So the Church is strong
and permanent (Ephes. ii. 20; Isa. liv.
14; Matt. xvi. 18). 8. Tis lustre and
beauty. Great buildings in the form
of a square are beautiful and glorious,
So the Church (Cant. vi. 4). 4. Its
safety. This Temple had a wall round
about (ver. 20). The wall of the New
Jerusalem is great and high, sufficient
to secure all who are within (Rev. xxi
12). 5. Its sanctity. This wall was to
separate between the sanctuary and
the profane place (ver. 20). The
Church is a company called out of and
separate from the world, who have
given up themselves to God and
Christ.” —Greenhill.


Vers. 16-20. The Grandeur of the
Divine Temple. 1. Jt is of vast extent.
He measured the east, north, south,
and west sides, each side being 500
reeds (vers. 16-19)—in all a square
of 14 of a mile—exceeding the limits
ofall ancient Jerusalem. This signifies
the great enlargement of the Church of
God in future times. 2. Jé $s immov-
ably secure. ‘ He measured by the four
sides.” Its square form betokened
the strength and solidity of the whole
~-an emblem of the kingdom that


cannot be moved. 3. It marks off am
unmistakable distinction between the holy
and profane, *‘*To make a separation
between the sanctuary and the profane
place” (ver, 20).

— “Thus every way it exhibits to
the eye of faith the true ideal of that
pure and glorious Temple which, resting
on the foundation of the eternal Son
and girt round with all the perfections
of Godhead, shall shine forth the best
and noblest workmanship of Heaven.”
—Fairbairn.


Ver. 20, “In Christ all has assumed
such a shape that through Him the
sanctuary now always continues pre-
sent in humanity ; and the true altar
of burnt-offering, Golgotha, is always
before the eyes of the Most Holy
Father, in order, for the sake of the
sacrifice thereon offered, to love, sane-
tify, and protect us all.”—Diedrich.

— “Gold is purged in the fire,
shines in the water ; as, on the other
side, clay is scorched in the fire, dis-
solved in the water.”—Trapp.

— “The Jews accounted the whole
earth profane—common or unclean—
compared with Canaan, and Canaan
common or less holy than Jerusalem,
and every part nearer the Temple the
more holy ; and so here the outward
court was enclosed to distinguish it
by its comparative holiness; it was
more holy than all without it.”—Pool.

— “A difference is to be put
between common and sacred things,
between God’s name and other names,
between His clay and other days, His
Book and other books, His institutions
and other observances; and a distance
to be put between our worldly and
religious actions, so as still to go about
the worship of God with a solemn
pause.” —M. Henry.


THE CONSEORATION OF THE TEMPLE, (Chap. zxliii.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 2.
“Behold, the glory of God.” As the
Shechinah-glory was the peculiar dis-
tinction of the old Temple, so it was
to be in the new in a degree as much


3F


more transcendent as the proportions

of the new exceeded those of the old.

The fact that the Shechinah-glory was

not in the second Temple proves that

it cannot be that Temple which ig
449


OBAP. ZLIT.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





meant in the prophecy. “ The glory
eame by the way of the east.” The
same way by which Jehovah had left
the house to destruction because it had
been polluted and profaned (chap. xi.
22, 23). He now returns to take
possession of His holy habitation, pre-
pared and sanctified for His reception.
“His voice was like a noise of many
waters.” The creature has its voice
only from the Creator, and therefore
must His voice sound above its voice,
loud though it be (Ps. xciii. 3,4; Rev.
15). “The earth shined with His
glory.” He who said, “ Let there be
light,” shines forth, when He appears
in the clearest light, as He who dwells
in inaccessible light (1 Tim. vi. 16;
Ps. 1.2; Rev. xviii. 1). By this burst
of light extending far beyond Israel is
symbolised an enlightenment of the
face of the whole earth—the entire
region of humanity thus shown to
have been in itself and hitherto dark.


Ver. 3. “ When I came to destroy
the city ”—i.e., to pronounce God’s
word for its destruction: so completely
did the prophets identify themselves
with Him in whose name they spake.
“T fell upon my face.” As in chap. i.
28 the prophet fell down upon his face
before the majesty of an angry God, so
here before that of God appearing in
His grace.


Ver. 5. “The glory of the Lord
filled the house.” So when Jehovah
took possession of the Tabernacle (Ex.
xl. 34, 35), and of Solomon’s Temple
(1 Kings viii. 10, 11).


Ver. 7. “And he said unto me.”
“The speaker is designated as a man
(ver. 6), and yet he here speaks as
God and applies to himself that which
can belong only to Jehovah. We
have thus without doubt the angel of
God before us, the only one in whom
the opposition of God and man is
mediated and removed.”—Hengstenberg.
“The place of My throne.” God from
the first claimed to be their King
politically and religiously, and had
resisted their wish to have a human

450


king as implying a rejection of Him as
the proper Head of the State The
Messiah-King shall realise the original
idea of the theocracy, with its at once
Divine and human King reigning in
righteousness over a people all right
eous (Isa. lii. 1; liv. 13; lx. 21).


Ver. 7. “For ever.” Observe that
the words for ever mark the distine-
tion between the new and the former
sanctuary,


Ver. 9. “Put away their whoredom,
and the carcasses of their kings.”
“ As whoredom designates idolatry in
general, so what is meant to be said
by the corpses of their kings applies
to the worship of kings, the forgotten
subjection to Jehovah under them,
who, if kings, yet are perpetuated only
as corpses.”—Lange. Ahaz brought
in an idolatrous altar from Damascus
(2 Kings xvi. 11), and Manasseh built
altars in the house of the Lord (2
Kings xxi. 4).


Ver 10. “That they may be ashamed
of their iniquities.” When the holy
significance of the Gospel is shown
to men by the Holy Spirit, they
are ashamed of their sins. “Let
them measure the pattern.” Devia-
tion from the exact rules of the
Mosaic ordinances was connected with
the transgression of the people. So
the restoration according to the pattern
of the Law was symbolical of their
return to obedience.


Ver. 12. “The whole limit thereof
shall be most holy.” This superlative
most holy which had been used exclu-
sively of the Holy of Holies was now
to characterise the entire building,


Ver. 13. “These are the measures
of the altar”—the altar of burnt
offering, the appointed means of access
to God. God is about to instruct the
seer as to the sacrifices of inauguration
whereby places, services, priests, and
people were to be dedicated anew to
the Lord, as of old under Solomo
(1 Kings viii.). =


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: EZEKIBL





Ver. 18. “These are the ordinances
of the altar.” “The consecration of
the altar corresponds to the consecra-
tion of the peopie to Jehovah, their
entire surrender and presentation of
themselves to Him. The burnt-offer-
ings usher in the class of offerings
which obtains in the state of grace.
The justified man lives henceforth not
to himself; the service of the Lord
which is ministered in the Church is
symbolised by this purpose of the
altar of burnt-offering ; hence there
is no avt of worship without burnt-
offering. The self-surrendering reliance
on grace continues to be taken into
account, as in the past so for the
future, and so the burnt-offering may
be called the perpetual offering of the
Church of God.”-—Lange.


Ver, 24. “Shall cast salt upon
them.” ‘Salt was to be cast on
every meat-offering (Lev. ii. 13). Here
it is added to the burnt-offering to
express still more the idea of purifica-





tion, In the second Temple no sacri-
fice was complete without the use of
salt, and the Rabbis tell us that there
was a@ great heap of salt close to the
altar always ready for use, and that
the inclined plane to the altar was
kept covered with salt.”—Edersheim’s
Temp,


Ver. 26. “And they shall conse-
crate themselves ”—literally, fill ther
hands; the conferring of office upon
persons in whose hand is laid what they
have forthwith to offer and what they
have to handle, referring to Ley. viiL
27; Ex. xxix. 24, 25.


Ver. 27. ““And I will accept you.”
After this inauguration the regular
service is resumed, and will be accept-
able to God. Under the guidance of the
Epistle to the Hebrews we cannot fail
to recognise in this vision the symbol
of the purification of the Church of
God by the cleansing blood of Christ,
Victim and Priest (Heb, viii, ix, x.).


HOMILETICS.
Tuer REVELATION OF THE GLORY OF JEHOYAR
(Vers. 1-6.)


I. It was a revelation possessing some remarkable features. 1. Ji was a
revelation of the Divine Word. “ His voice was like a noise of many waters”
(ver. 2). The dreamy murmur of summer streams soothes the soul into peace;
but the roar of the ocean-storm fills it with dread. So God can speak to man
in a whisper that comforts, or in a voice that alarms the soul with its trumpet-
like tones. The Word of God is His voice; it is powerful, and is intended to
be heard afar. In the constant declaration of the Gospel-message that voice
is ever pealing in the ears of the nations, and is distinctly heard above the din
of loudest opposition. 2. It was a revelation of visible splendour. ‘The earth
shined with His glory” (ver. 2). The works of God are a revelation of His
glorious character. He is said to “clothe Himself with light as with a
garment,” and His works are a garment jewelled with stars, embroidered
with constellations, and glittering with the riches of all worlds, at once hiding
and revealing the Divine form. ‘ His glory is the fulness of the whole earth”
(Isa. vi. 3). 3. Zé was a revelation of overwhelming majesty. “And I fell upon
my face” (ver. 3), overpowered with the awful grandeur of the vision. The
greatness of the Creator rises sublimely above His mightiest works; and a
sight of the peerless majesty of Jehovah prostrates the soul with a humbling
consciousness of imperfection and sin.


II. It was a revelation of the glory of Jehovah consecrating His Temple
451


OHAP. XLII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL 4


en a Ee


“The glory of the Lord filled the house” (vers. 4. 5). So it filled the ancient
Tabernacle and the Temple of Solomon (Ex. xl. 34 ; 1 Kings viii. 10). Nosuch
visible glory filled the second Temple. It is to be seen again only in the
completed Temple of the future, The manifested presence of God in the
believing soul, as in the perfected Church, is its holiest consecration. The
glory of the new Temple shall never fade, because the Divine presence will
never be withdrawn.


IIL It was a revelation requiring spiritual help to see and understand.
1. The help of the Spirit is necessary to see the visions of God, “So the Spirit took
me up, and brought me into the inner court ; and, behold, the glory ” (ver. 5).
The unaided intellect is incapable of perceiving spiritual realities ; they must be
Divinely unfolded (1 Cor. ii. 9, 10, 14). The Spirit throws around the soul a
heavenly-tempered atmosphere, through which are sifted the glorious visions of
God. 2. The help of the Spirit is necessary to interpret the Word of God. “And I
heard Him speaking to me out of the house ” (ver. 6). The Bible is a closed
book to the unspiritual, The literary student may find pleasure in its history
and poetry; but its inner meanings are a hidden secret until the soul is
anointed with the unction of the Spirit. It is in the Temple that the Spirit
delights to interpret to the devout worshipper the transcendent revelations of
the Divine Word.


Lessons.—The glory of Jehovah—l. Shines in all His works. 2. Should be
prayerfully sought out. 3. Is abundantly satisfying.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers, 1-6. “The glory of the God
of Israel must take possession of the
new Sanctuary, as in time past of the
Tabernacle and of Solomon’s Temple.
But it is in a different form. The
glory was of old veiled in a cloud
resting on the mercy-seat of the Ark
between cherubim of carved wood,
lifeless and motionless, as though the
mercy and the power of God were in
some sort restricted to the material
building and the people to whom it
belonged. Now a personal and living
God enters the Sanctuary, condescend-
ing to occupy it, not merely as a fixed
dweiling-place, but as a centre from
whence His power and mercy radiate

: freely to the utmost ends of the earth,
Hence amidst the detailed prepara-
tions of the house no mention is made
of mercy-seat, so important a part in
the former Sanctuary.”—Speaker’s Com-
mentary.

— “What we are taught here is,
that Jehovah would renew the mani-
festation of His favour to the covenant-
people, which He did pre-eminently

462


when He dwelt among them in the
person of His Incarnate Son.”—Hen
derson.

— “We have to notice the essentially
moral character of all that was here
displayed in vision respecting the |
future things of God’s Kingdom. It
was not a pattern whieh God was
going to carry out anyhow and accom-
plish as by a simple fiat of Omnipo-
tence. It depended upon the condition
of the people, and only if they agreed
to put away sin from among them
and give God the supreme place in
their hearts could He manifest Himself
toward them in the manner described.”
—Fairbairn.

— Divine Manifestations—1l. Are
always made at the right time and
place (ver. 1). 2. Are on a scale of
Imposing magnificence (ver. 2). 3.
Though retaining points of similarity,
they are suited to special emergencies
(ver. 3). 4. Overawe the soul with
their grandeur (ver. 3). 5. Are chiefly
seen in connection with the Sanctu


(vers. 4, 5). 6. Have a distinct signi-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XLII.





fieance for the privileged beholder
(ver. 6). 7. Are more highly appre-
ciated when shared with a sympathetic
companion (ver. 6),


Ver. 1. “The prophet saw not the
glory of God till he had first seen the
Mount measured, the Temple restored,
Men must usually wait upon God in
the use of means ere they see the King
in His glory. Men must awake out
of the west of wickedness and stand
up from dead courses and companies,
if Christ, the Day-Star from on high,
shall give them light (Eph. v. 14;
Luke ii, 28-32).”—Trapp.

— “Open to me the pearl gates, Thou
who art the ornament of heaven’s city,
Light from Light, chosen as the light
before the world began. The entrance
of the glory from the east for lighting the
Temple took place when the apostles,
on the Day of Pentecost, were endued
with power from on high.”—Lange.


Ver. 2. “The glory of God which
shines in the Church shines on the
world. When God appeared for David
the brightness that was before him
dispersed the clouds (Ps. xviii. 12),”

— “All knowledge, all religion, and
all arts and sciences have travelled
according to the course of the sun,
from east to west. From that quarter
the Divine glory at first came, and
thence the rays of Divine light con-
tinue to diffuse themselves over the
face of the earth. From thence came
the Bible, and through that the new
covenant. From thence came the pro-
phets, apostles, end first missionaries
that brought the knowledge of God to
Europe, to the isles of the sea, and to
the west first, and afterwards to these
northern regions.” —A. Clarke.

— “This glory of the Lord seems
to have been intended as an emblem
of the light of the Gospel, which is the
glory of Christ, and which spread from
the eastern part of the world into the
western ; and which has been, and still
is, powerful and mighty in operation in
saving mankind and enlightening the
earth with abundance of knowledge,
holiness, and comfort.” — Benson,


— “Where the Gospel is preached
the waters of life make a noise, not
only of themselves, but also from the
stones which men cast in, and from
the rocky banks of worldly hearts
which make resistance; but the glory
of eternity shines on earth. The loud
noise of the glory is the voice of them
who praise the Lord with one heart
and one voice, here on earth as there
in heaven (Rev. xiv. 1). Let us pray
God to enlighten the dark earth of
our heart with that holy light of His
glory.”—Lange.

— “And the earth shined with
His glory.” ‘How can it do other-
wise when the Sun of Righteousness
cometh in place and irradiateth both
organ and object? (2 Cor. iv. 6). Into
Solomon’s Tempie God came in a thick
cloud; not so here. Light is now
more diffused than ever. Woe be to
those who wink, or who seek straws
to put out their eyes withal.”—Trapp.

— “Before the coming of Christ
the world was full of heathenish dark-
ness, and Canaan full of types, cere-
monies, and shadows; there was little
light or lustre there. But when Christ
came the oracles of the heathen ceased,
the Jewish shadows vanished, and the
earth shined with the glory of the
Gospel (Matt. iv. 16).”—Greenhill.


Ver. 3. ‘“‘God appeared in the same
manner when He sent him to speak
words of terror, and when He sent him
to speak words of comfort, for in both
God is and will be glorified.”

— “The knowledge of God never
causes pride but humility, because it
at the same time discovers the corrup-
tion of the heart. The more modest a
man is and the less he trusts to himself,
the more he is endowed with the know:
ledge of God. The bowed down are
revived by the Lord, and led by the
Spirit to the place where the majesty
of the God of glory shines.” —Lange.


Ver. 4. “The sins of impenitent
Israel caused the glory of the Lord to
go out of His house, but now the
repentance of Israel is blessed with
the return of this glory.” —Pool.

Azo


CHAP, XLII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





— “What hinders this glory from
filling also thy heart, provided it is
not full of other things, and needs
first to become empty, that thy hunger
and desire may, by the breath of the
Spirit, seek and find satisfaction in its
fulness ¢”—Lange.


Ver. 5. Humility—1l. The true atti-
tude of the soul in the revealed presence
of God. 2. The result of conscious
personal unworthiness. 3. Leads to
exaltation.


Ver. 6. “I heard distinctly, intelli-
gibly, so that 1 am sure it was no


glory, speaks to His people out of
His Temple.”— Pool.

— “The Lord Christ, who is the
chief Architect in Temple work, stands
by His prophets and servants who are
employed therein. When the Temple
was first built many were employed
therein, but they were not left to their
own wisdom and skill. Solomon was
principal ; he was present, counselled,
directed, and assisted ; therefore it is
said he built the house. So in Ezekiel’s
Temple, a type of the Gospel Temple,
Christ was present; He counselled,
directed, assisted, and stood by the
prophet,”—Greenhal.


delusion. The Lord, who was in that


HOMILETICS.
HouInEess THE LAW OF THE NEw TEMPLE
(Vers. 7-12.)


I. The Divine government is based in holiness (ver. 7), The throne of
God, the symbol of regal and governmental authority, is firmly established in .
righteousness. God is holy, His throne is holy, His law is holy, and every
single act of His universal administration is pervaded and beautified by His
immaculate holiness (Ps. xlvii. 8). The perfected Temple will be the ever.
lasting home and resting-place of Jehovah, and holiness will be the unchanging
law of the house (Ps. xciii. 5).


II. The transgressions of God’s people against the law of holiness was the
cause of their ruin (vers. 7, 8). Nothing is more plainly revealed or more
frequently and emphatically repeated than this truth, that the sufferings of
God’s people were brought upon themselves by their disobedience. Sin is 80
deceptive in its lure and so demoralising in its subtle action, that when its
inevitable punishment comes the transgressor is surprised and aggrieved, as if
some undeserved injustice had been done to him. It is the nature of sin to
blind the soul to its real enormity. Sin cannot reveal itself as sin: it is only
as the light of Divine holiness is flashed into it that its terrible havoc is
exposed. Therefore, in vindication of His holy name and to produce genuine
repentance in the defaulter, God’s denunciations of sin are incessant.


III. The blessings of the law of holiness may be enjoyed by all who truly
repent. 1. True repentance is a humbling consciousness of sin (ver. 10). The seer
is instructed to reveal to Israel the glorious character of the new Temple in
order to make them ashamed of their iniquities. A revelation of the goodness
of God in what He provides for us, of the purity of God in what He demands,
prostrates the soul in humiliation and sorrow. A sanse of shame is the first
hopeful sign towards moral reform. A teacher of the deaf and dumb once asked
his pupils to write down what they thought was the most delightful emotion,
One wrote joy, another hope, another gratitude, another love ; but one peaceful.
looking girl, with eyes shining with tears, wrote, “ Repentance is the most

454


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, CHAP, KLIK.


delightfal emotion ;” and when asked why, answered, “ Because it is so delight.
ful to be humbled before God!” 2. True repentance is the putting away of sin
(ver. 9). Sorrow for sin is puerile, weak, illusive, unless accompanied by a
sturdy resolution to amend. Sin must not only be grieved over, but forsaken,
Maudlin tears reform nothing. 3. True repentance is evidenced by obedience,
“ That they may keep all the ordinances and do them” (ver. 11). The proof
of genuine sorrow is seen in an honest endeavour to observe the laws over
whose violation we grieve. It is not enough to know the right; we must do it,
God reveals His laws, not that they may be admired and praised, still less trans-
gressed, but that they may be observed and practised. Let sorrow for the past
urge to prompt and faithful service. .


IV. The law of holiness is all-comprehensive in its operation (ver. 12).
In the old Temple only one spot was accounted the Holy of Holies ; but in the
new Temple every part is most holy; the law applies with equal force to each
portion of the consecrated house. The law of God’s Temple is the law of the
universe, and furnishes the standard by which all thoughts, words, and deeds
will be unerringly estimated.


Lessons.—1. Holiness ts the law of the highest life.


2. Holiness is the glory of
@ perfect character.


2. Holiness is the organ of the grandest spiritual visions,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers, 7-9. The Divine Ruler—1. Is
enthroned in the midst of His people
(ver. 7). 2. Cannot tolerate a rival
(ver. 8). 3. Ensures the everlasting
happiness of the obedient (ver. 9).


Ver. 8. Spurious Religion. 1. is in-
stitutions a poor imitation of the genuine,
* Setting their threshold by My thresh-
olds, and their post by My posts.”
2. Gains no authority by its proximity to
the genuine. “The wall between Me
and them.” 3. Js an aggravated pro-
fanation of the genuine. “They have
even defiled My holy name by their
abominations that they have com-
mitted.” 4. Incurs the Diwine displea-
sure and punishment. ‘ Wherefore I
have consumed them in Mine anger.”

— “The palace of Solomon abutted
upon the southern side of the embank-
ment of the Temple platform. Thus
the threshold of the King’s dwelling
was set by the threshold of Jehovah,
and their posts by His posts, and there
was but a wall between Jehovah and
them. It was not that the act of
building a palace close to the Temple
was in itself profane, but when the
kings gave themselves up to idolatry


this vicinity was to the Temple a
pollution and defilement.”—Speaker’s
Commentary.


Ver. 9. “God now first returns to
the apostates; but His grace is de
signed to work repentance, and then
He will never more depart from them.”
—Diedrich.


Vers. 10-12. The Vision of Divine
Things—1. Humbles the soul under
a sense of ingratitude and sin (ver. 10).
2. Stimulates to a more earnest and
practical obedience (ver. 11). 3. Re-
veals the exalted sanctity of the Divine
law (ver. 12).


Vers. 10, 11. The New Temple.
“ The Israelites of tle Captivity might
see the pattern when they had re-
pented of their iniquities ; till then it
was impossible. The idea of a spiritual
society could not unfold itself to them
while they were living in a heartless,
divided, self-righteous state. They
must be humbled before they could
feel the possibility of such a society;
still more before they could confess
it to be veal. The hindrance to the


455


GOHAP. XLITI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





discernment of it was not an intel-
lectual one; it was not that they
wanted the intuition and the foresight
of the prophet; it was wholly moral.
It was their baseness and selfishnese
which made their eyes dim that they
could not see, and their ears heavy
that they could not hear. It was so
then; it was so in every generation
afterwards. ‘Repent,’ said John the
Baptist, ‘for the kingdom of heaven
is at hand.’ The pattern of the house
is about to be presented to you. The
spiritual society, of which your Temple
is the imperfect outward embodiment,
is going to be manifested. The Head
of it is among you, but you cannot see
it, you cannot see Him, Repent; turn
round to God, that He may remove
the film from your eyes and enable
you to receive the revelation which
He is making to you. The same
language goes through the Gospels.
All the blindness which is ascribed to
the Jewish nation is mainly this, that
they would not accept it as the mani-
festation of a kingdom for human
beings, of a society grounded upon
the name of the Son of God and the
Son of Man; that they would have
only a Jewish society, And that
Jewish society proved itself not to be
Jewish, but a miserable collection of
sects, hating each other and contrary
to all men, not claiming to be children
of God, and therefore not able to assert
their title as children of Abraham;
essentially inhuman, and therefore ne-
cessarily given up to the worship of
a false god—of Mammon instead of
Jehovah. Ezekiel was to show his
countrymen the form of the house
when a confession of their iniquities
should enable them to discern the
pattern after which it was to be built.
The law must hold good for all time
to come. There may be such a house
yet built in Jerusalem. But it must
be built by a people who are capable
of giving the outward expression to
an inward truth that is possessing
them; who have humbled themselves
in dust and ashes before God for their
selfishness, their exclusiveness, their
worship of gold; who have confessed
456








the Cross to be the highest manifesta-
tion of the wisdom and power of God;
who have rejoiced in that manifesta-
tion because it is universal, and who
have perceived that the Divine Unity
is not a narrow, selfish individuality,
but the unity of a Father with a Son
in one Spirit."—F. D. Maurice.


Ver. 10. “Solomon’s Temple left the
people in their disobedience and wor-
ship of idols; but this house belongs
to a higher order. He who lays it
to heart will cease sinning and duly
examine the Temple and its measure-
ments. The shame ot the poor sinner
finds in the Temple—which is Christ—
exactly the right measure.’’—Lange.

— “Nothing so effectually makes
men ashamed of their sins as the
revelation to them by the Holy Ghost
of Christ crucified and Christ glorified
in the hearing of the Word. The height,
depth, length, and breadth of the love
of Christ to His spiritual Temple, the
elect Church, causes the believer te
loathe his past course of life and
henceforth desire to live wholly te
Christ. Thus believers are prepared
for further discoveries of the blessed
laws of God’s spiritual house,”—
Fausset.

— “1, When God reveals mercy
and shows kindness to a sinful people,
they ought to be ashamed and repent
of all their former iniquities. (1.) As
acts of filthiness. (2.) As acts of
folly. (3.) As acts of unkindness and
ingratitude, (4.) As fearing a just
reproof. (5.) As fearing God’s cause
and name will suffer by them, 2.
Those who have humbled themselves
for their former sins are fit to be
spiritual mathematicians.” —Greenhill.

— “And let them measure the
pattern.” “That by a holy geometry
they may in the spirit of their minds
take all the dimensions of it and be
transformed into the likeness of the
heavenly pattern. These are those
holy and heavenly mathematics which
none can learn but those that are
taught of God, and without which
none can be Christ’s disciple; like as


none might be scholar to Plato that


ere


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: ESEKIEL.





had not the grounds of geometry.”—
Trapp.


Ver. 11. “ They who repent of their
sins are capable of knowing the Temple
and its arrangements, while those who
wantonly pursue fleshly desires receive
not the spirit of wisdom, and are in-
zapable of knowing the law of the Lord
(2 Tim. ii. 19 ; 1 John iii. 3).”"—Lange.

— The Ordinances of the Temple.
‘‘1, That to repentant men, ashamed
of all their evil doings, the ways of
&od’s house are to be made known by
the prophets and ministers. 2. Temple
and Church work must not be accord-
ing to men’s fancies, but according to
the mind of God and that pattern He
gives forth. 3. That the Temple and
Church of Christ has distinct and
peculiar laws of its own. 4. The
Church in due time shall be such a
Temple as is represented by this vision.
5. The end of making known the laws
and ways of God’s house is, that they
may be observed and practised.”—
Greenhill.


Ver. 12. The Law of God’s Church.
1. The Church of God has a good
foundation. ‘Upon the mountain.’ 2.


The Church of God is eminent and
conspicuous. ‘Upon the top of the
mountain.’ 3, The whole Church
of God is to be made up of holy
materials. ‘The whole limit thereof
round about.’ 4. The law of this
house, which is holiness, is specially
to be observed. ‘Behold, this is the
law of the house.’ ”—Greenhill.

— “The law of the house—which
was pre-eminently entitled to be called
the law—consisted in the whole region
of the Temple-Mount being most holy.
Not, as hitherto, was this characteristic
to be confined to a single apartment
of the Temple; it was to embrace the
entire circumference occupied by the
symbolical institutions of the kingdom,
the chambers allotted to the priests,
and even the courts trodden by the
people, as’ well as the immediate
dwelling-place of Jehovah. So that
the pattern delineated is that of a
true theocracy, having God Himself
for King, with the community in all its
members for true denizens of the king-
dom and acceptable ministers of right-
eousiess before the Lord.”— Fairbairn.

— Let none expect the protection
and blessings of it that will not sub-
mit to this law.


HOMILETICS.
THe ALTAR AN EMBLEM OF TRUE WORSHIP,
(Vers. 13-27.)


L That true worship must be offered at the Divinely consecrated shrine
(vers. 13-26). The importance attached to the altar here described is seen in
the minute particulars given concerning its measurements and structure, and
the elaborate ceremonial observed in its dedication to the service of Jehovah.
It was not like one of the portable altars that idolatrous worshippers were
accustomed to carry about with them in their journeys and wars, but was a
fixed shrine having a permanent place in the Temple, and was the recognised
medium of access to God. Here the worship of the Temple must be offered.
The Jewish system being a theocracy, a visible representation of the reign of
God, Jehovah was worshipped by them as both God and King. This twofold
character was observable in all the arrangements of the ancient cultus. The
Temple was at once the shrine of God and the palace and throne of the King.
Christ is the Altar of the new dispensation, the Divine shrine conseerated by
suffering and death, through whom alone worship can be offered to the God of
heaven. From any other altar worship rises no higher than the smoke that
ascends from it, and ite effect disappears as quickly.

A57


CHAP. XIum. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL


Ii. That true worship is a sacrifice (ver. 27). As soon as the altar was
duly consecrated sacrifices were perpetually offered upon it. “The burnt-
offering” was the perfect sacrifice, because the victim was wholly consumed
by fire and sent up to God, as it were, on the wings of fire. It was a memorial
of God’s covenant, and signified that the offerer belonged wholly to God, that
he dedicated himself, soul and body, to Him, and placed his life at His disposal.
Every such sacrifice was a type of the perfect offering made by Christ on behalf
of the human race. ‘ The peace-offering ” was not an atoning sacrifice to make
peace with God, but a joyful celebration of peace made through the covenant,
In this part of the ritual, more than in any other, we see Jehovah present in
His house inviting the worshipper to feast with Him. Peace-offerings were
presented either as a thanksgiving, or in fulfilment of a vow, or as a free-will
offering of love and joy. ‘True worship is a sacrifice, a free offering up of the
worshipper and all he has to God, and is expressed in devout adoration and
thanksgiving and in joyful praise. It is the spontaneous outburst of a loving
heart, yearning to render homage to the great object of its love, and finding
its deepest satisfaction in the exercise.


II. That true worship is acceptable to God (ver. 27). It is acceptable
when and as it is offered in the manner and spirit God has Himself prescribed,
It must be offered through Christ, the true Priest and Altar, and with the aid
of the Divine Spirit. Many of the heathen priests acknowledged the moral
element in worship, as when one counselled, ‘Sacrifice to the gods, not so
much clothed with purple garments as with a pure heart.” And another said,
“God regards not the multitude of the sacrifices, but the disposition of the
sacrificer.” God must cease to be Spirit before any service but that which is
spiritual can be accepted by Him. David expresses the blessedness and help
received in worship by men of all ages, in that earnest invitation, “O come,
let us worship and bow down” (Ps. xcv. 6, 7). To refuse to worship God is
as great a folly as to deny His existence. He who denies the being of God
is an atheist to His essence; he who denies His worship is an atheist to His
honour. The instinct of worship is as universal as the notion of a God, or else
idolatry would never have gained so firm a footing in the world. Our minde
are a beam from God, and, as the beams of the sun when they touch the earth,
should reflect back upon God. We unsoul our souls when we neglect the
worship of God, and are like flies that are found oftener on dunghills than
among flowers.


LEssons.—l. Worship is absolutely necessary for the culture of the soul. 2.
Worship is acceptable only as it is offered according to Divinely sanctioned methods,
3. Idolatry ts a false and debasing worship,

GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers, 13-27. “Now that the Lord course was the altar, at which all gifts


has taken possession of the house, the
prophet goes on to show how the
work of fellowship and communion
with Him is to proceed on the part of
the people. It must begin anew, and
of course be conducted after the old
manner, for no other could here come
into contemplation, In ancient times
the grand medium of Divine inter-
458


and sacrifices were to be presented
for the Divine favour and blessing.”
—Fairbairn.

— The Divinely Authorised Altar
—1l. Is minutely described that there
might be no question as to its identity
(vers. 13-17). 2. Is solemnly conse-
crated that there may be no doubt
as to the necessity for its use (vera


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY : EZEKIEL.


CHAP. SETy.





18-26). 3. Provides a way of accept-
ance to every penitent seeker (ver. 27).


Ver. 13. The Jews after their return
from captivity had an altar long before
they had a Temple (Ezra iii. 3), but
the altar here spoken of is an altar in
the Temple, the mystical Temple, em-
blematic of the Gospel Church ; and
this altar is mystical too, for Christ is
our Altar.

— “No one could go into the Temple
without passing by the altar, and so
no one can go into heaven without
the sacrifice of the death of Christ.”—
Starck.


Vers. 15-17. “The number twelve
was symbolical of the twelve tribes,
four of the earth, sixteen is the square
of four, and fourteen the double of
seven—the number of the covenant as
being composed of three, the number
of God, an of four, the number of the
world. Thus we have in the altar a
special instance of Hebrew symbolism.”
—Speaker’s Commentary.


Ver. 15. “‘So the altar’—Heb.,
the mount of God. ‘And from the
altar’—Heb., from the lion of God.
Perhaps the first was a name given to
the altar when elevated to the honour
of God, and on which the victims were
offered to Him; and the second, the
lion of God, may mean the hearth,
which might have been thus called
because :t devoured and consumed
the burnt-offerings as a lion does his
prey..—A larke.


Ver. 16. “Christ, the Christian
Altar, is comr'ste, firm, and fixed.”
—Trapp.


Ver. 17. “ “oward the east.”
“These stairs were placed eastward
that he who went up should have his
face to the west, his back to the east :
his face toward God, not toward the
rising sun, as they who made the sun
their idol.” —Pool.


Wer. 18. “Thus God comes firat


<


and gives grace; His grace makes
ashamed, chastises, sanctifies, recon-
ciles, and produces intimate eternal
fellowship. This is always God’s way
with men, provided only we recognise
it aright in these days of ours when
now it is set in the most glorious
light; Christ and the apostles have
given additional clearness to Ezekiel.”
—Diedrich,


Vers, 18-27, “ Although the chief
scope of this vision be to set out the
glory and greatness of the Church
under the Gospel and among the
Gentiles, yet, because the Jews at
this time being in Babylon were to
return to Jerusalem, the Lord alludes
to ordinances, rites, and ceremonies
which were well known among the
Jews, holding out under them the
epiritual worship of the Gospel.”—
Greenhill.


Ver. 24, The Best Efforts of Man
—l. Are tainted with impurity. 2.
Need to be cleansed and made whole-
some, 3. Augmented in efficacy when
salted with study, prayer, tears, and
suffering.

— Grace is the salt with which all
our religious performances must be
seasoned (Col. iv. 6).

— “True Christians are sacrifices
well seasoned: incorrupt doctrines
will make incorrupt souls and bodies;
the salt makes both immortal: men
soundly salted with Gospel truths
shall never perish.” —Greenhill.


Ver. 27. As to the future sacrificial
service of Israel, we can well afford to
wait till God by the event shall clear
up every difficulty ; and throughout
eternity we shall adoringly wonder at
the beautiful variety and, at the same
time, perfect unity of the several parts
of the mighty scheme of redemption
through the incarnate Son of God.”—
Fausset.

— “Those who were in Christ be-
fore others ought in this to serve as
priests to the younger believers."—
Lange.

459








AMOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





Tux RELATION OF PRINCE AND Prizsrs To THE TEMPLE. (Chap. xliv.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 1.
“The gate of the outward sanctuary”
—the court of the priests as distin-
guished from the Temple itself. “ This
gate shall be shut”—shut to the people,
but opened on certain days for the
prince (chap. xlvi. 1), he holding the
place of God in political concerns, as
the priests do in spiritual. Only a
prince of the House of David might
sit down in the priests’ court. Asa
mark of respect to an Eastern monarch,
the gate by which he enters is thence-
forth shut to all other persons.


Ver. 3. “It is for the prince.” The
Rabbis understood this to be the
Messiah ; but this cannot be, as He
would not be likely to offer a burnt-
offering as the prince was required to
do (chap. xlvi. 4). The prince must
mean the civil ruler under Messiah:
he represents Messiah, who entered
heaven, the true Sanctuary, by a way
that none other could. ‘ Because the
Lord hath entered in by it.” “ How
glorious must the entering Lord be
when the prince cannot be more
highly honoured than by a place in
the gate by which He entered !”—
Hengstenberg. “To eat bread before
the Lord ”—a custom connected with
sacrifices (Gen. xxxi. 54; Ex. xviii.
12, xxiv. 11; 1 Cor. x.18). Accord-
ing to the old law, these feasts be-
longed only to the priests ; none of the
rest of the congregation, not even
the king, might partake of them: the
new system gives to the prince a
privilege which he did not before
possess, he standing, as the represen-
tative of Messiah, in a higher position
than the kings of old.


Ver. 6. “The rebellious house of
Israel.” The sins of the priesthood
acted and reacted on one another:
like priest, like people ; and like people,
like priest (Jer. v. 31; Hos. iv. 9).
God expostulates with His people in
the seat of their former iniquity (ver.
4; chap. viii. 3).

460


Ver. 7. “Strangers.” Here the people
are taught that unfaithful priests un-
circumcised in heart (Acts vii. 51),
though of the true lineage, are re
garded as strangers.


Ver. 8. “Ye have set keepers "—
according to your own pleasure, not
My ordinances (Num. xvi. 40; 1 Kings
xii. 31).


Ver. 10. “The Levites that are
gone away far from Me.” The Levites
as a body had remained true to the
Temple-service at Jerusalem (2 Chron.
xi. 13). But individuals among them
deserted to Israel. These apostate
Levites shall bear their iniquities ; they
shall not be restored to their former
rank and privileges,


Ver. 1l. “Yet they shall be minis-
ters "— servants performing menial
offices for the ministering priests—
acting as porters, helping in the
slaughter of the victims, but not as
sacrificing priests. They shall not
be excluded from all service in the
Sanctuary, but degraded from the
functions of priests to those of simple
Levites. One may be a believer, and
that, too, in a distinguished place,
and yet lose some special honour—
be acknowledged as pious, yet be ex-
cluded from some dignity. “ Having
charge at the gates.” Though stand-
ing as mere doorkeepers, it is in the
house of God which hath foundations ;
whereas they who dwell with the
wicked dwell in but shifting tents
(Pa. Ixxxiv. 10).


Ver. 15. “The priests, the Levites,
the sons of Zadok.” The priests of
the line of Ithamar were to be dis-
charged from ministrations in the
Temple because of their corruptions,
Zadok, according to his name, which
means righteous, and his line were to
succeed, as they did not take part in the
general apostasy to the same degree
41. Kings ii, 35 ; 1 Chron. xxiv. 3). It


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





indicated a race of faithful and devoted
servants—a priesthood serving God in
newness of spirit, not in the oldness of
the letter, as the people whom they
represented should also have become
true Israelites, themselves a royal
priesthood offering up spiritual sacri-
fices to the Lord.


Ver. 17. “Clothed with linen gar-
ments.” Four vestments were worn
by the ordinary priest —the linen
breeches, the coat, the girdle, and the
bonnet, The material of which they
were made was linen, or, more accu-
rately, byssus, the white shining cotton
stuff of Egypt. These two qualities
of the byssus are specially marked
as characteristic, being symbolical of
purity.


Ver. 20. “Neither shall they shave
their heads ”—as mourners used to do,
and as the Levitical priests were for-
bidden to do (Lev. xxi. 1-5). The
worshippers of the Egyptian idols
Serapis and Isis shaved their heads—
another reason why the priests of
Jehovah are not to do so. “Nor
suffer their locks to grow long "—as
the luxurious, the barbarians, and
soldier in warfare did.


Ver. 21. “Neither shall any priest
drink wine ”—lest the holy enthusiasm
of their devotion should be mistaken
for inebriation, as in Peter’s case (Acts
ii. 13, 15, 18).


Ver. 23. “And they shall teach ”—
to spread out the hand, for example,





to point to something, to teach. The
priestly service is to comprehend wor-
ship and doctrine, representation of
the people before God, and representa-
tion of God before the people—every-
thing with an eye to sanctification.


Ver. 24. “They shall stand. in
judgment.” There was in the second
Temple a council of priests whose
special duty it was to regulate every-
thing connected with the Sanctuary.


Ver. 28. “It shall be unto them for
an inheritance.” The remains of the
sacrifices were a chief source of the
priests’ support. “Iam their inherit-
ance—possession ”—something which
one grasps and retains. Jehovah is the
all-sufficing possession of His servants
(Num, xviii, 20; Deut. xviii. 1).


Ver. 30. “ And every oblation ’—
offering, or heave-offering, whatever is
according to precept, or of free will,
lifted up for Jehovah as a consecrated
gift to the Sanctuary. “ That he may
cause the blessing to rest in thine
house.” The heaving and waving of
the offering involved the thought that
in consequence of such gifts to the
priest the blessing of God is brought
down on the individual house.


Ver. 31. “That priest shall not
eat of anything that is dead of itself,
or torn.” This was defiling for any
man (Lev. xvii. 15); how much more
so for the priests of Jehovah! (Lev.
xxii. 8). Thus was the idea of holi-
ness strictly enforced,


HOMILETICS.


THE DIaNiTy OF THE Civ. RULER
(Vers. 1-3.)


I, Arises from the exalted character of His regal functions, The king is
the human representative of Divine justice, both in its administration and
maintenance; he is God’s vicegerent and deputy. The word that describes
his office indicates his power—King, Konning, Able-man. He is the summary of


all that is great and noble in man.


“ Priest, teacher, whatsoever of earthly or


of spiritual dignity we can fancy to reside in a man embodies itself here, to


46]


CHAP. XLIV. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.











command over us, to furnish us with constant practical teaching, to tell us for
the day and hour what we are to do.” He is a leader and guide of men, and
must be lifted far beyond the suspicion of selfishness and partiality. He must
rule in equity and righteousness, with an ear deaf to the flattery of the rich,
and a hand ever ready to help the oppressed and poor. He must defend
virtue among the weakest, and punish iniquity among the strongest. Every
brave and honest endeavour to act the king adds new lustre to the dignity
of the office. The king, like every other true man, is not above acting upon
the advice—


“This above all: To thine own self be true,
And it must follow, as the light the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.”


II. Distinguished by privileged access to the Divine Temple dae 1-3).
The east gate, through which the glory of the Lord entered the Temple, wus
to be shut, to be a perpetual reminder of that signal honour paid to the building ,
and to induce a profound reverence for the Divine majesty. But the princu
was permitted to enter the porch of that gate to indicate that his office brought
him into nearer contact with God, and to give weight and authority to all his
royal proceedings. It is necessary to surround and support the throne with
the sanctions of Divine privilege in order to keep up the king to the loftiest
standard of right and to give force to every act of justice in the kingly ad-
ministration.


III. Maintained by spiritual communion and fellowship with the Divine
Ruler. ‘He shall eat before the Lord” (ver. 3). The prince is permitted to
enter the porch of the east gate that he may worship God. It is thus he is
constantly reminded of his high duty and receives moral strength to act in
harmony with the Divine standard. The higher we rise in the social scale the
greater are our responsibilities, and the more need is there to seek Divine
help to be faithful and true. The loftiest function of the king is to be the
patron and protector cf religion. He must seek power for his work at the
same source to which the humblest believer is invited—in communion with
God. The soul finds its greatest blessings in intense fellowship with the
highest, Augustine once beautifully said, ‘‘Thou mayest seek after honours
and not obtain them; thou mayest labour after riches and yet remain poor;
thou mayest doat on pleasures and have many sorrows. But our God, of His
supreme goodness, says, ‘ Whoever sought Me and found Me not? Whoever
desired Me and obtained Me not? Whoever loved Me and missed Me? I am
with him that seeks Me. He hath Me already that wishes for Me; and he that
loveth Me is sure of My love.’” Fellowship with God is the secret of power to
govern righteously and to labour with pleasure and success,


Lessons.—l. The kingly office has grave responsibilities, 2. The highest honour


of the king is to be the faithful servant of God. 3, The king must seck Divine grace
to fulfil the duties of his office.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 1-3. “The spiritual truth to
be learned here is, that our Messiah
entered heaven, the true Sanctuary,
by a way that none other could, on
the ground of His own perfect holi-

462


ness (Rom. i. 4): all we must enter
as sinners gaved by grace. Through
Him alone believers eat before the
Lord in the communion of the Holy
Supper, and shall hereafter expery


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


CHAP, KLIV.





mentally realise that scripture, ‘Blessed
is he that shall eat bread in the
kingdom of God’ (Luke xiv. 15).”—
Fausset.


Ver. 1. “And it was shut.” The
Glories of Heaven—l. Are Divinely
secured, 2. Are open to all penitent
seekers, 3, Are inaccessible to the
unbelieving,

— “Our heart too should be shut
to the world and the devil when once
the holy God has entered into it and
His glory has swallowed up sin and
misery in us. Alas! if the door of
heaven should be shut !”—Lange.


Ver. 3. “What could this import
but that the prince should feel he now
occupied a place of peculiar nearness
to God? As God’s vicegerent and
deputy among the people, it became
him to be the most distinguished re-
presentative in public life of God’s
holiness ; to tread the higher walks
of spiritual communion with heaven,
end stand pre-eminent in his zeal for
the interests of truth and righteous-


ness, Far now from usurping the
authority that belonged to God and
abusing it to selfish ends, all authority
and power in Israel should be exer-
cised—if this Divine ideal were re-
duced to practice—in a solemn feeling
of subordination to God’s majesty and
with an unfeigned desire for His glory.”
— Fairbairn.

— The Kingly Office— 1. Enjoys
distinguished privileges, 2. Involves
much anxious thought and onerous
toil. 3, Needs the help of an earnest,
practical piety.

— “The Christian ruler ought to
be the Christian pattern of his people.
He is not to preach, just as it is not
his office to offer sacrifice ; but he is
to nourish and protect the Church and
avow its faith, He ought to have a
good conscience and joy before the
Lord because of his princely office,
which does not merely consist in this,
that we live in peace and quiet under
his sceptre, but also that the people
may hear the Word of God and without
fear offer to Him the sacrifices of their
worship ”—Lange.


HOMILETICS.
A Hoty PrizsrHoon
(Vers. 4-31.)


L Urged to fidelity by admonitions of former neglect. 1. Reminded of the
lofty standard of Temple-service (vers. 4, 5). Having seen the exalted position
of the prince, the prophet is shown the character of the priesthood which is to
minister in the glorious Temple. A vision of the Divine glory filling the house
is again flashed upon him, and he is earnestly called upon to observe with
special care the ordinances and laws of the priesthood and every minute detail
of the Temple-ritual. The supreme holiness of Jehovah and the manifested
splendour of His majesty demand a worship of the highest and purest order.
He can be ministered unto acceptably only by a holy priesthood. The object
of worship reacts upon the worshipper; and our conceptions of God must
necessarily affect and mould the character of the worship we offer to Him. Our
souls should be continually straining after enlarged views of God, that our
worship may be intelligent, reverent, and holy. 2. The apostasy of priests and
people is a desecration of the Temple (vers. 6-10). Priests and people had been
unfaithful to covenant engagements and rebelled against the Divine laws. The
corruption of the one class reacted upon the other, and their conjoint abomi-
nations polluted the holy Sanctuary. The old adage, “Like priest, like people,”
is not less true than “ Like people, like priest.” The priesthood is bound by its
calling always to be ahead of the people in teaching and morality. 3. Unjfaih

463


OHAP, XLiV. HOMIEETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


ful priests are deposed from the highest service (vers, 11-14). The Levites whe
were carried away with the idolatrous tendency of the times are degraded in
their status, Yet their punishment is mixed with mercy. They were not
utterly excluded from the Temple. While they were not allowed to take part
in the more privileged acts of worship, they were permitted to perform inferior
and menial duties. The goodness of God ever provides a way of recovery for
the erring ; and the humblest place in His Temple is a post of honour that
should be appreciated the more it is undeserved.





II. Composed of those who have been faithful in time of trial (vers. 15, 16).
Amid the general detection the descendants of Zadok maintained their integrity,
and they are promoted to honour; they become a type of the holy priesthood
which is to occupy the highest place in the newly constituted Temple of the
future. Trial ie the test of character, and every resistance to evil is a strengthen-
ing of the morai fibre. The men who are to-day wielding the mightiest influence
for good in Church and State are those who, in the midst of obscurity and mis-
representation, have remained true to their conscience and their God. As gold
shines the brighter when submitted to the fiercest fire, so religious principle
gor with a diviner lustre the more it is tried. Trial is the pathway to honour
and fame.


III. Must observe the Divinely sanctioned laws of purity (vers. 17-27).
The minute directions here given concerning the vestments and habits ot the
priests have a distinctly moval significance. They must wear linen garments,
emblems of cleanliness and purity; they must not shave their heads—as mourners
did—nor let their hair grow uncut—as persons unfit for active service—nor
drink wine when engaged in Temple-service—lest they should be unfit for high
spiritual emotions—nor do anything which under the outward restrictions of a
symbolic ritual betokened a want of inward purity. The holiness that pervades
the house of God must pervade the hearts and lives of those who are called to
minister in its hallowed services, The spirit in which the holiest acts are done
is a sample and pattern of the spirit in which every duty should be done (Luke
xxii. 19 ; comp. Col. iii. 17),


IV. Assured of adequate maintenance (vers. 28-31). God takes care to
make ample provision for those who work for Him. What they may lack in
worldly affluence He makes up to them in the satisfying comfort of His
presence and in the riches of His grace. Poverty has its temptations and
anxieties, but it is powerless to harm the soul that has its inheritance in God.
Let body and soul be wholly devoted to the service of God, and He will not fail
to furnish all necessary supplies (Ps. xxxvii. 3).


Lrssons.—1. Priestly sins are aggravated because of the privileges and opportunities


of the priestly office.’ 2. Priestly duties demand the loftiest purity. 3. The priest ta
a power for good only as he is faithful to the Divine law.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 4-31. “ All who are engaged
in the ministry should be blameless,
sound in the faith, full of good
works, exemplary in their lives, walk-
ing humbly before God and circum-
spectly in the sight of men, They


should be especially careful in forming
connections, and prudent in the man-
agement of their |.milies, observing
and teaching others io keep the statutes
of the Lord. They should delight in
every part of their sacred service, yet


- ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OnAP, XLIV,





do all in humble reliance on Christ.
Their wants should be supplied, so
that they may not be obliged to in-
volve themselves in worldly cares and
employments for a maintenance,”—


Henry and Scott.


Vers. 4, 5. Divine Revelations—1.
Should be seen from different points of
view. “Then brought he me the way
of the north gate before the house”
(ver. 4). 2. Overpower the earnest
student wiih their splendour. ‘1 looked,
and behold the glory filled the house,
and I fell upon my face” (ver. 4), 3.
Boldly challenge the most minute and
careful investigation. “Mark well all
the ordinances, the entering in and
every going forth of the sanctuary”
(ver. 5).


Ver. 4. “God reveals His glory to
His servants, especially when He calls
on them to make known His will to
His people (Acts xviii. 9; xxiii. 11).”


Ver. 5. ‘‘Divine things are not to
be drowsily listened to or drowsily
engaged in. In everything there must
be heart—in seeing, in hearing, in
doing.—The goings in and out of the
Sanctuary a solemn consideration for
every one, but especially for those who
keep the charge of the Sanctuary, what-
ever their rank in the service,” —Lange.


Vers. 6-14. God’s Treatment of
Rebels. 1. Their sins are accurately
recorded—trebellion (ver. 6), abomina-
tions (vers. 6, 7), polluting the Sanc-
tuary (ver. 7), idolatry (ver. 12),
breaking of covenant (ver. 7), neglect
of duty (ver. 8). 2. They are faith-
fully reproved (vers, 6-13). 3. They
are made conscious of their evil doings.
‘They shall bear their iniquity ” (vers.
10,12). 4. They suffer official degrada-
tion (vers. 11, 14).


Ver. 7. “The voice of the people,
the choice of the people, is not God’s
voice, God’s choice, but frequently
God’s judgment to the full.—Self-
chosen Divine service is an abomina-


to the Lord.” —Lange.


Vers. 8, 14. ‘Ye have not kept the
charge. But I will make them keepers
of the charge.” The Divine Mercy—
1. Takes note of every act of unfaith-
fulness. 2. Does not fail to administer
faithful reproof. 3. Does not utterly
abandon the transgresaor. 4. Is ever
ready to restore the penitent.


Ver. 8. ‘What general can employ
a soldier who is everything else, but
no soldier #”


Ver. 9. “It is a token of the greatest
decline of the Church when the wicked
and manifest hypocrites are not only
not expelled, but go freely in and out,
and even have the ruling power.”—


Lange.


Ver. 10. “ Where there are ungodly
teachers there is no want of ungodly
hearers (Jer. v. 31). Degraded priests
a mirror for pastors.” —Starke.


Ver. 11. “ Even in the performance
of subordinate service, where one
originally stood higher, the grace of
God may be with us, provided we
let God’s humbling of us issue in con-
version of heart and look upon the
punishment as a righteous recompense.
It is not at all necessary that we
should, as the world calls it, make a
successful career in the clerical pro-
fession.”—Lange.


Ver. 12. “ The sins of the preacher
in their consequences as regards the
life of the community.”


Ver. 13. “How great then was the
love of the Lord Jesus to Peter and
the rest of His disciples after His
resurrection, as in sending them that
sweet message (Mark xvi. 7), so in
readmitting them to the work of the
ministry after so foul a revolt! (John
xx. 21-23). And doth He not the
very same still for His poor sinful
servants who desire indeed to fear
His name, but are oft overtaken in 4
fault through infirmity of the flesh?”
—Trapp.
~— “Let us beware of losing precious

465


CHAP. XLIV.


opportunities wherein we may have
the honour of doing great things for
God, such as Mark lost in leaving
Paul and Barnabas in Pamphylia, and
in not going forward to the glorious
work through love of ease or fear of
man; and such as the disciples lost in
not affording Jesus at His request the
sympathy of their prayers and tears,
through drowsiness, in Gethsemane.”
—Fausset.

— “The ignominy of failure in
ministerial life: personal access to
God is hindered, and the office be-
comes a torment.”—Lange.

Vers. 15, 16. Fidelity in God’s
Service —1. Commendable in times
of general backsliding. 2 Attracts
the Divine notice and approval. 3.
Rewarded with special honour and
blessing.

— “1. The Lord takes ‘notice of
those who serve in His house, who are
false and who are faithful in corrupt
and apostatising times. 2. God takes
pleasure in and honours those who
are faithful and constant in His ser-
vice.” —Greenhill.

-— “The promise of a priesthood of
the house of Zadok entirely corre-
sponded to the promise of a shepherd
with the name of David. It is the
raising up of a people who should be
themselves such a priesthood, and the
sons of Zadok came into notice only
because in connection with them there
was an historical ground for taking
them as representatives of a right-
hearted spiritual community. All was
to rise into a new and higher sphere,
first the Kingdom of God itself, and
then the people who enjoyed its dis-
tinctive privileges and experienced its
blessings.” —Fairbairn,


Ver. 16. “The precepts according
to the law should remind us that
preachers particularly run within lists,
as Paul writes of the Christians,
What is fitting for any one else may
yet be far from seemly in a preacher.
—But it is just those who take things
easy that speak most of their severe
toil and the heavy labour they have to
undergo.” — Lange.

466


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL


————


Ver. 17. “The reason is plain; wool
is more apt than linen t» contract dirt
and breed insects ; linen breeds none:
besides, this is a vegetable and the
other an animal substance. lt was
an ancient maxim that whatever was
taken from a dead body was impure
in matters of religion, and should not
be permitted to enter into the Temple.
The Egyptian priests always wore linen
on their bodies and shoes of matting
or rushes on their feet. The Moham-
medans never write the Koran upon
vellum or skin of any kind, as they
would consider that as a defilement.”
—A. Clarke.


Vers. 17-24. “The various precepta
respecting the purifications and the
dress of the priests strikingly impress
our minds with the great sanctity
which God attaches to the ministry.
The bodies of ministers must be pre-
served in sanctification and in honour,
He who does the work and delivers
the Word of God must habitually live
the servant and friend of God. Nothing
in his person, in his food, in his dress,
or in his conduct must revolt the
faithful against the Word and ordi-
nances of the Lord. On the contrary,
all about the priest must be inviting
and calculated to recommend religion
by a cloud of virtues and engaging
qualities. If religion do not make
ministers holy and happy, what hope
can remain for the people? ”—Suécliffe.


Ver. 19. “He who ministers at the
Sanctuary must never seem profane,
nor a fop in his attire, nor comic in
his speech, nor a man of the world in
his transactions, He may seem ridicu-
lous to the world, only never conformed
to the world.””—Lange.


Ver. 20. “Seemly, but not remark-
able either in defect or excess.—Men
of extremes are unfit for the holy
ministry.”


Vers. 23, 24. Ministerial Duty—1.
To point out the clear distinction between
the false and the true. “They shall
teach My people the difference between


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,








the holy and profane, and cause them
to discern” (ver. 23). 2. To be just
and impartial in controversy. ‘They
shall judge according to My judg-
ments” (ver. 24). 3. To observe and
enforce obedience to the Divine laws.
“They shall keep My laws and statutes
and hallow My Sabbaths” (ver. 24).


Ver. 23. “As their life, so, above
all, their teaching ought to preserve the
people from defilement and train them
to purity.”


Ver. 24. “The obligation to hallow
the Sabbaths of the Lord is not done
away with by the advent of Messiah ;
for here, ia a passage which, in any
fair interpretation, can only apply to
Christian times, this obligation is ex-
pressly insisted on.”—Fausset.

— ‘‘God’s word is God’s judgment,
the righteous Judge, right law and
upright judgment.—The servant of
God as umpire in disputes. He must
not be a party man, but stands over
the parties.” —Lange.


Ver. 25. “They who are the mes-
sengers, heralds, and representatives
of an eternal life shall neither have
their serenity disturbed by the death
of believers, which is no death, nor
their pure life defiled by the life of
the spiritually dead, which is no life,
—We too are allowed to wipe our
eyes, as God wipes away every tear
from the eyes of His saints.”


Ver. 28. God the Heritage of the


Good — 1. Ensuring all necessary
temporal good. 2 Supplying all-
sufficing spiritual blessing. 3. Cures
all anxiety as to present and future
maintenance.

— ‘All who have first the Kingdom
of God for their possession are also
truly priests. God feeds them wholly
on what is hallowed, and he who will
have a blessing in his house must
evince love to them.”—Diedrich.


Ver. 30. “That he may cause the
blessing to rest in thine house.”
Ministerial Maintenance a Source of
Family Blessing—1l. As it is liberally
devised, 2. As it is cheerfully be-
stowed. 3. As it is gratefully appre-
ciated.

— “It is all in all to the comfort of
any house to have the blessing of God
upon it, and that blessing to rest in it ;
to dwell where we dwell and to extend
to those who shall come after us. And
the way to have the blessing of God
upon our estates is to honour God
with them, and to give Him and His
ministers, Him and His poor, their
share out of them. God blesses, He
surely blesses the habitation of those
who are thus just (Prov. iii. 33); and
ministers, by instructing and praying
for the families that are kind to them,
should do their part tewards causing
God’s blessing to rest there.”——Benson,


Ver. 31. “In God’s service there is
no filthy lucre. The Lord purifies
everything for them who eat with
Him.”— Diedrich.


Tue APPORTIONMENT OF TERRITORY AROUND THE TEMPLE (Chap. xlv.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 1.
“Divide by lot ”—not by casting
lots, but by allotment, the several
pertions being assigned according to
rule. ‘‘ Ye shall offer an oblation ”—
from a Hebrew root to heave or raise,
because when anything was offered
to God the offerer raised the hand,
“Unto the Lord an holy portion”
The Lord’s portion is subdivided into
three parte—that for the Sanctuary


(vers, 2, 3), that for the priests (ver.
4), and that for the Levites (ver. 5).
This provision for the priests and
Levites, out of proportion in any
actual arrangement, is no doubt in-
tended to symbolise the reverence
and honour due to God and expressed
by liberality to His services and His
ministers, ‘The length five and
twenty thousand reeds, and breadth
ten thousand.” The English Versiop
487


GHAP. EBV.


fills in the ellipsis with reeds, accord-
ing to chap. xliiii 16. Cubits are
mentioned in ver. 2, but not here,
implying that there cubits alone are
meant. Taking each reed at twelve
feet, the area of the whole would be a
square of sixty miles on each side,
The holy portion of the Lord com-
prised the whole length and only twe-
fifths of the breadth. The form of
a square indicates the settled stability
of the community and the harmony of
all classes,


Ver. 5. “A possession for twenty
ehambers ”— meaning tliat the Levites,
who live in twenty out of the thirty
chambers mentioned in chap. xl. 17,
shall have the portion of land for a
possession,


Ver. 6. “For the whole house of
Israel” This portion is to belong to
the whole people, not to be subject to
the encroachments made by the later
kings of Judah (Jer. xxii. 13).


Ver, 7. “A portion for the prince.”
“The prince’s possession is to consist
of two halves, one on the west, the
other on the east, of the sacred territory.
The prince as head of the holy com-
munity stands in closest connection
with the Sanctuary ; his possession,
therefore, on both sides must adjoin
that which was peculiarly the Lord’s.”
—Fairbairn, The definition of the
prince’s territory was to prevent the
oppressions foretold (1 Sam. viii. 14),
described (2 Kings xxiii. 35), and
reproved (Jer. xxii).


Ver. 10. “Ye shall have just bal-
ances.” This fitly introduces the
strict regulation of quantities in the
prescribed offerings,


Ver. 11. “ The ephah and the bath.”
The ephah was in use for dry measure,
the bath for liquid. The homer seems
to have contained about 75 gallons,
The homer was employed as a stan-
dard, for in calculation the ephah and
bath were both after the homer, accord-


ARR


<





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





ing to the standard of the homer, and
were to be equal to each other


Ver. 12. “The shekel shall be twenty
gerahs.” “Thestandard weights were
lost when the Chaldeans destroyed the
Temple. The threefold enumeration
of shekels, twenty, twenty-five, fifteen,
probably refers to coins of different
value, representing respectively so
many shekels, the three collectively
making up a maneh. By weighing
these together against the maneh a test
was afforded whether they severally
had their proper weight; sixty shekels
in all, containing one coin a fourth of
the whole (fifteen shekels), another a
third (twenty shekels), another a third
and a twelfth (twenty-five shekels).”—
Menochius.


Ver. 13. “This is the oblation that
ye shall offer.” Here the offerings
are reduced to regular order and the
amounts ordained. In later days there
were often shortcomings in these re-
spects (Mal. iii. 8). This is obviated
and regularity ensured in the new
order of things,


Ver. 16. “All the people shall give
this oblation for the prince.” The
people’s gifts were to be placed in the
hands of the prince, so as to form a
common stock out of which the prince
was to provide what was necessary for
each sacrifice.


Ver. 18. “In the first month, in
the first day of the month.” It is
probable that this celebration is the
first in a series of generally recurring
ordinances, and in this case we have
an addition to the Mosaic ritual.


Ver, 25. “In the seventh month”
This is the Feast of Tabernacles (Num.
xxix. 12). Of the other great festival,
the Feast of Weeks, no mention is made,
Ordinances that are literal, though not
slavishly bound to the letter of the
law, will set forth the catholic and
eternal verities of Messians Kuing-
dom.


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: EZERIEL, CHAP, XLY.
a rr nce


HOMILETICS.
RELIGION THE TRUE Basis or Equity.
(Vers. 1-25.)


_ Humanitarianism professes to construct a morality apart from religion. It
Is contended that man has within himself the norm or rule of right, and by
the exercise of his own will-power he can elect to do that which he ought to
do and which it is best to do, and which is for him the highest good. But
who is the man referred to? Is it the man formed in God’s image, who fell
into sin, which must necessarily fetter all moral actions, and who is redeemed
by Christ: or is it the man, the pure product of nature, working with the dim
light of his own unaided reason, and ignoring every other god but the one
centred in his own egoism? The notions of equity in the natural man must
necessarily be crude, uncertain, distorted. Man needs, in order to act up to the
highest level of justice, not only a revelation of the infallible standard of right,
but the aid of Divine power to rectify and strengthen his moral faculties. We
have in this chapter an illustration of Religion as the only true basis of Equity.


I, Seen in the impartial distribution of land (vers. 1-8). Here all is to
be fairly and unchangeably allocated and according to the unchallengeable
principles of religious equity. The form of a square for the land apportioned
to the priests, the prince, and the people indicated the perfect harmony and
satisfaction existing among these classes. There was no ground for envy, no
temptation or disposition to invade and appropriate the territory of another.
Nothing has exhibited the insatiable avarice of man more strikingly than his
treatment of the land question: to gratify his greed for possession he has not
hesitated to practise duplicity, fraud, and oppression. The tendency has been
to accumulate the bulk of the land of a nation in the hands of the few, and
scant respect has often been paid to the rights of the many. In the good
time coming, when religion, and not simply utility, shall be universally acknow-
ledged as the true basis of equity, the rights of king and people shall be readily
recognised, and all occasion for lawless interference with each other’s posses-
sions will be abolished (ver. 8).


IL Seen in the accurate adjustment and use of weights and measures
(vers, 9-13). The moral degeneracy of the Jews was apparent in their business
transactions. They tampered with weights and measures, and they were fre-
quently charged with falsifying balances (Amos vili. 5; Hosea xii. 7 ; Micah
vi. 11). There was ample ground for the severe reproof of the prophet that
their ways were not equal (chap. xxxiii. 17). Their trickery and over-reaching
was an abomination in the sight of God (Prov. xi. 1; xx. 23). The law of
the land, however carefully framed and wisely administered, does not always
secure perfect justice as between man and man, even when that law is inter-
preted in the light of equity. The morality of Christian times does not always
reach the standard of Pagan honesty. When valuable presents were sent to
Epaminondas, the celebrated Theban general, he used to say, “If the thing
you desire be good, I will do it without any bribe, even because it is good ; if it
be not honest, I will not do it for all the goods in the world.” It is dangerous
to trifle with conscientious scruples: it is better to suffer abuse and misrepre-
sentation than to do wrong. The tender sensitiveness of the conscience, like
the delicate bloom of ripe fruit, when it is once damaged can never be restored .
the heart sighs in vain for the exquisite experience of a time of former con-

46°


OHAP. ELV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





scious innocence. It does not pay to do wrong. A merchant one day, measur-
ing a piece of cloth and finding it short, asked his clerk to help him to stretch
it to the required length. The young man refused on conscientious grounds ;
he lost his situation, but he afterwards rose into fame and greatness, and his
praise was in all the churches. It does pay to do right. Religion is the only
true basis of equitable dealing as between man and man; it teaches us to
render to each other that which is just and equal.


III. Seen in regulating the ordinances of worship (vers. 14-25). The exact
directions given in these verses regarding the sacrifices indicate that everything
connected with Temple-service must be regulated according to the strictest laws
of equity. Of all places, the Sanctuary must aot be polluted or its worship
marre with mutilated offerings and half-hearted devotion. Morality alone,
moi. ty divorced from true religion, does not inspire worship—it lacks motive,
lifting power. We cannot worship God till we know Him, and we never know
Him till we love Him and the whole soul is swayed and thrilled with the
influence of that love. The laws of ethics are but broken lights of a higher
truth, and the fragments have been still more hopelessly shattered and inextric-
ably confused by the infatuated attempts of men to construct them into a


philosophy of religion that shall be independent of Divine sanctions.


dream !


Vain


It isa revetition of the task of Sisyphus, who spent his time in rolling


a stone up a hill, which as soon as it reached the summit rebounded again to


the plain.
aid of genuine religion.
God or man.


The equitable demands of Divine worship can alone be met by the
The soul must be made good before it can be just to


LrEssons.—1. The highest ideal of equity should be expressed in just and equal


laws.


2. Religion, and not utilitarianism, is the true basis of equity. 3. Worship ts


acceptable to God only as it is in perfect harmony with justice and equity.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 1-9. The Land Question—1.
Should recognise the Divine ownership
(ver. 1). 2. Should sanction a dis-
tribution in harmony with the rights
and claims of all classes (vers. 2-8).
3. Should not allow unjust exactions,
or the oppression of the weak by the
strong (ver. 8). 4. By its equitable
settlement removes temptations to
robbery and wrong (ver. 9).


Vers. 1-6. “ The frequent occurrence
of the number five in these measure-
ments is remarkable, and if we consider
that God has fitted in the human hand
five instruments by which man fashions
to his will the materials of the world—
that these are the measure of his power
over them—we may be instructed by
this passage to believe that every Chris-
tian State is bound to provide for the
maintenance of pure and undefiled re-

479


ligion, according to the measure of ite
power in the earth.” —M‘Farlan.


Ver. 1. “A portion of the land
was first reserved for the Lord. His
Temple required an ample space of
ground and His poor required support,
and He ever lives their Guardian and
constant Friend. If we expect the
Lord’s blessing we must pay Him
homage down to the widow’s mite.
It is well, therefore, for men when
they come to their inheritance to con-
secrate their fortune by a small offering
to Heaven in this way, as it seemed
the young ruler in the Gospel wished
to do.” Sutcliffe.

— ‘Those who live from God’s hand
are content with His measure, even
when it turns out small and modest.—
it ought to be our joy to be near God,
to be associated with Him.”— Starck,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZERIEL,


CHAP, xiv


Ver. 3. “The Sanctuary was situated
in the centre of all; so ought religion
to be the central point of life, and
Christ the centre of true religion.—
Religion, faith, Christianity, ought not,
either in the life of nations or of indi-
viduals, to be placed in a corner merely
as a tolerated piece of antiquity.”


Ver. 4. “The Lord’s faithful priests
shall dwell beside Him and be with
Christ for refreshment and revival from
the strife and disquiet of men among
whom they are scattered.”—Lange.


Ver. 7. “Royalty which watches
with a paternal eye for the public
weal should be amply supported in
return, The king is the Lord’s
minister, and, next to a lot of land
for the Lord’s house, his support is
guaranteed in order and prior to the
provision for ministers of religion.
His portion was adjacent to the capital
because he must reside contiguous to
the court and the bench of justice,”—
Sutcliffe.

— “For princes to have their do-
mains is not unjust, but they should
not seek to draw everything into these
domains.” —Starke.


Ver. 8 “To protect, but not to
fleece.—Governments ought to give
good heed to weights, measures, and
coinage, and allow no inequalities to
creep in.—Knowingly to pass spurious
coin is intentional deceit, and so is
the clipping of coins in order to lessen
their weight.—Unjust gain does not
profit the third generation. Lightly
come, lightly gone.”—Lange.


Vers.9-12. An Ideal Commonwealth
—l. Where God is acknowledged and
obeyed. 2. Where the ruler is just
and powerful. 3. Where oppression
and violence are unknown, 4. Where
commerce is conducted on principles of
strictest equity.

— “1, Princes and magistrates
commonly are covetous and cruel. 2.
Christianity does not overthrow but
establish magistracy. 3. The great
thing required of them is to do justice,


execute judgment and justice, do wrong
to none, neither suffer wrong to be done,
4, Princes are not to rule by prero-
gative in an arbitrary way, but they
themselves are tied to the laws of God
and bound by them.”—Greenhiil.


Ver. 9. “Self-interest and avarice,
that have hitherto wrought so perni-
ciously, shall no longer prevail among
the people of the future, but rather
righteousness, a spirit of willing sac
rifice.”— Hengstenberg.

— “How happy would nations be
if their princes ruled in justice, not for
self-aggrandisement, but for the glory
of God and as holding theic authority
under Christ; and kow happy the
people so governed wouid be, living
in tranquillity, prospecity, and true
godliness |” —Fausset.

— “This is the voice of God to all
the rulers of the earta—‘Take away
your exactions, do not oppress the
people ; they are Mine, Abolish all
oppressive taxes,’”’—A. Clarke,


Ver. 10. Jast Balances—1. Requi-
site as between man’s actions and his
conscience. 2. As between man and
man. 3. As between man and God.
4, Will be used in the final judgment,


Ver. 13. ‘‘ Even the small gifts of the
poor, when given in true love, are an
acceptable offering (Heb. xiii. 16).—It
is reasonable that a man set apart a
considerable portion of his income for
the glory of God and the support of true
worship.—The revenue for spiritual
objects is most defrauded.” —Lange.


Vers. 16-25. A Good King—1. Is
interested in the religious welfare of
his people (ver. 16). 2. Sustains the
ministers of the truth in their sacred
work (vers. 17-21). 3. Makes generous
provision for the national worship of
God (vers, 17, 22-25).

— “These offerings would be per-
petual remembrancers to the prince of
the sacred character he maintained as
the head of such a people, and would
supply him by Divine enactment with
what was needed to fulfil this part of

471


CHAP. XLV,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





his office without resorting to arbitrary
and oppressive measures. Expressed
more generally, it was a symbol of
the perfect harmony and mutual co-
operation which should exist in such
a holy communion in regard to the
public service and glory of God ; with-
out constraint or any sort of jarring,
the several classes would freely and
faithfully do their parts. They were
all symbolical of the spiritual and
eternal truths of God’s Kingdom, and
may be variously adjusted, as is now
done, in order to make them more
distinctly expressive of the greater
degree of holiness and purity that is
in future times to distinguish the
people and service of God over all
that has been in the past.”—Fair-
bairn.


Ver. 17. When Christ on the cross
consecrated the new Temple, He can-
celled our sins.


Vers, 18-25. “This order of solemn
services does not follow exactly the
order of Moses, of Solomon, or of
Ezra, who, on the return from cap-
tivity, rearranged the festivals on the
Mosaic pattern. Familiar as Ezekiel
was with every detail of the Levitical
law, this deviation can scarcely have
been accidental, and we may herein
recognise fresh indications that the
whole vision is symbolical, represen-
tative of the times when, after the
oblation of the one Sacrifice, recon-
ciliation and sanctification were effected
for man through the presence of God
dwelling in the midst of the people.”
—Speaker’s Commentary.


Ver. 18. ‘At the beginning of the
new year of grace, and with the newly
rising light, the Temple was again
raised up or opened, and the true
justificaticn and sanctification through
the sacrifice of Christ recognised and
proclaimed.”—Lange.

— Let us begin our years, our
months, our weeks, and days with
self-examination, repentance, faith,
prayer, and devotedness to God, and
spend them in like manner.


473


Ver. 20. “Sin as error and seduction,
and error and seduction as sin,—We
ought to attend Divine service from
beginning to end.”—Lange.


Ver. 21. “Every solemnisation of
the Lord’s Supper a fulfilled paschal
solemnity.—But our Passover is Christ.
—It behoves us to celebrate the Feast
of Tabernacles in spirit and in truth
so much more than the Jews the nearer
we approach eternity.—Our home is
above, to which we draw nearer every
moment.” —Lange.


— “Hereafter there shall be a new
Passover and a new Feast of Taber-
nacles observed in Israel, with cere-
monies vastly exceeding in glory those
of the same feasts under the Old Tes-
tament. The antitypical, perfect, and
eternal realities of Christ’s manifested
Kingdom shall be set forth with obser-
vances which, though literal, are not
to be slavishly bound down to the
letter of the old law, but which
shall bring out all the heretofore
hidden glories and excellences of that
law viewed in its essential spirit.”—
Fausset.


Vers. 22-25. “The sin-offering to be
sacrificed first of all, the sins of prince
and people being transferred to it as
the priest confessed them with his
hands on the head of the victim, to
show their conviction that the wrath
of God must abide on them till trans-
ferred to another who should die in
their stead; then came the burnt-
offerings, to show that, being clear
of guilt in His sight, He would
accept their service and transfer it
with themselves into His heavenly
glory by the Spirit, as the burnt-
offerings were by the fire of the altar.”
—M‘Farlan.


Ver. 25. “By these feasts and sac-
rifices also we are reminded of the
spiritual joy the saints have in their
communion together under the Gospel
and spiritual sacrifices they offer-up to


God by Christ.” —Greenhil.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.








AN Imposine Sprcracte or WorsHIP IN THE TEMPLE. (Chap. xlvi.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 1.
“The gate of the inner court opened.”
The inner east gate of the ‘Temple,
otherwise shut, shall be opened on the
Sabbath and new moon. This rule
does not interfere with chap. xliv. 1.
There the outer gate is expressly named.
This also here remains shut, as indeed
chap. xlvii. 2 presupposes that it is
shut once for all; otherwise it would
have been opened for the prince,—


Hengstenberg.


Ver. 2. “The prince shall stand by
the post of the gate and the priests
prepare his burnt-offering.” The King
of the future is the Messiah; the
princedom shines in His light, in the
brightness of the glory that entered
through the east gate, which in view
thereof is shut for ever toward the
outside. A clear distinction is drawn
between prince and priest, to avoid in-
terference with each other’s functions.


Ver. 3. “The people worship at
the door of this gate.’’ The people
may not enter the inner gate; they
worship at the opened door, through
which they catch a glimpse of the
altar of burnt-offering, which the prince
sees better from a nearer point, The
upper pavement on either side of the
eastern gate provided room for such
worshippers.


Vers. 4, 5. “The burnt-offering and
the meat-offering.” These Sabbath
offerings are larger than those of the
Mosaic law, to imply that the worship
of God is to be conducted by the

rince and people in a more muni-
heant spirit of self-sacrificing liberality
than formerly. Moses prescribed for
the burnt-offering two lambs, and for
the meat-offering two tenth deals of
flour mingled with oil. ‘As he shall
be able to give”’—literally, the gift of
his kand. As he shall be willing to
give, the amount being left to the will
ofthe giver. The same meaning in the
slightly varied expression of verse 7.


Ver. 6. “The new moon” No
mention is made here of the blowing of
trumpets, which was an important part
of the New-Moon Festival (Num. x. 10).


Ver. 10. “The prince in the midst
of them.” Not isolated as at other
times, but joining the throng of wor-
shippers at their head, after the ex-
ample of David (Ps. xlii. 4): the
highest in rank animating the devo-
tions of the rest by his presence and
example,


Ver. 12. “The prince shall prepare
a voluntary burnt-offering.” Not only
is he to perform official acts of worship
on holy days and feasts, but in volun-
tary offerings daily he is to show his in-
dividual zeal, surpassing all his people
in liberality, and so setting them a
princely example,


Ver. 13. ‘“*Thou shalt prepare it
every morning.” The evening sacrifice
is omitted, because the seer is not enu-
merating the sacrifices of the law, but
selecting a few of them with a parti-
cular object in view.


Ver. 16. “If the prince give a gift
unto his sons.” The prince was to be
provided with possessions of his own
to prevent him having recourse to ex-
actions from his subjects, and lest in
the course of time he might be tempted
to such exactions, enactments are added
to prevent the alienation of the prince’s
land. The mention of the prince’s sons
is another argument against Messiah
being meant by the prince.


Ver. 20. “The place where the
priests shall boil the trespass offer-
ing.” The paschal lamb was to be
eaten roasted. The flesh of the other
sacrifices was to be sodden or boiled
(Lev. vi. 28; 1 Sam. ii, 13 ; 2 Chron,
xxiv. 14), The meat-offering (flour
and honey) was baked (Lev. ii. 4).


Ver. $2. ““Thore were courts joined.”
473


OHAP. XLVI.


Smaller courts joined or attached to
the walls of the courts, at the corners
of the latter.


Ver. 24. “The places where the
ministers boil the sacrifice of the
people.” The careful provision made
to keep the offerings of priests and
people separate was to prevent collision


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


between them, as the enactments of
vers. 16-18 were to secure their re-
spective rights to prince and people,
All this implies that no longer are the
common and unclean to be confounded
with the sacred and divine, but that in
even the least things, as eating and
drinking, the glory of God is to be the
aim (1 Cor. x. 31).


HOMILETICS.
Tue TruE WORSHIP oF JEHOVAH.
(Vers, 1-15.)


L Unites all classes in its sacred exercises (vers. 1-3). Prince, priests, and
people become one in the act of worship ; as they are all alike dependent on God,
go they all bow down before Him and adore and praise His goodness. Rank,
wealth, display, sink for the time being into insignificance; it is simply a
congregation of human souls, with common wants and weaknesses, craving help
and blessing from a common Father. The monarch is never so great as when
he bends in lowly homage at the feet of God. It is a sublime sight to see king
and peasant kneeling together in prayer and adoration. The sincere worship
of God is a great power in unifying the human race ; inequalities are forgotten,
asperities toned down, national peculiarities are more kindly interpreted, and a
universal solvent is discovered that melts and blends the hearts of men into a
spiritual brotherhood. The grand bond of union in the future will be evidenced
in the unceasing worship of Jehovah,


II. Demands generosity in giving proportionate to ability (vers. 4-12). The
offerings mentioned here are on a scale of liberality exceeding anything known
under the Mosaic regimen. The prince set an example in generous giving,
which the people cheerfully imitated. Our gifts to God’s cause should not be
more nor less than our circumstances justify. It is a great help in worship,
and an important feature of it, to come to God’s house with a gift in our hand,
The more heartily we enter into the spirit of worship the more clearly shall we
understand and practise the science of proportionate giving, A missionary was
staying with a wealthy Christian philanthropist, whose house was richly orna-
mented with paintings and sculpture, and was eulogising an exquisite marble
statue of Silence—the figure of a boy with his finger to his lips) They had
known each other from boyhood, and were free and confidential in conversation.
“Do you admire that statue?” asked the friend of the missionary. ‘I never
saw anything in my life equal to it for grace,” replied he. ‘“ What do you
think I gave for it?” ‘I cannot imagine.” “I gave ninety guineas.” ‘* And
what did you give at the collection to-night ?” asked the missionary. ‘Oh, I
gave five pounds.” ‘Five pounds!” said the missionary. ‘“‘Shame on you!
Here you give ninety guineas for a marble statue of Silence and five pounds
towards sounding the Gospel all over the earth. That is badly laid out money.”


III. Is to be constantly rendered (vers. 13-15). The burnt-offering was
presented daily—“every morning”—and the “ meat-offering continually by a
perpetual ordinance unto the Lord.” The dawn of every day should be wek
comed with prayer and praise, The day is well begun when it is begun with

474


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OBAP, XEVL


ee





=


God ; and the religious character of the day will be decided by the way in
which we spend its first hour. It is said that the spider mends its broken
web every morning, and always begins in the middle. So we before entering
on our daily calling should be careful to repair the broken webs of our lives,
beginning each morning with the heart. There is a flower called the Gummy
Cystus, which blooms every morning, unfolding a large, beautiful, snow-white
flower. By its example this flower invites the soul every morning to unfold


the blessom of a holy and fervent devotion.


Work is worship, and the life of


each day should be one glad psalm (Ps. lv. 17).


Lssons.—1. Temple-work is worship. 2. Worship promotes the fellowship sf
heawts. 3. The soul reaches its highest good in the worship of God.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 1-5. Sabbath Privileges—1.
Rest from anxious toil (ver. 1). 2
An open Sanctuary (ver. 1). 3. An
opportunity for all classes to worship
God (vers. 2, 3). 4. Should be char-
acterised by generous offerings (vers.
4, 5).


Vers, 1, 2. Royalty and Worship.
“1. Princes must not enter into the
inner court, and may not change ahy-
thing in the worship of God. 2. They
are to countenance and maintain the
worship of God. 3. They must wor-
ship the Lord publicly on Sabbath-
days and on special occasions as well
as other people. 4, They must not im-
pede the worship of God.”—Greenhill.


Ver. 1. “Work does not hinder
holiness, but furthers it—1. By pre-
venting temptation. 2. By nourishing
experience of God’s bounty and pro-
vidence. 3. By filling the heart with
objects of heavenly thought. 4. By
stirring up to prayer and praise for
each day’s mercies.” — Trapp.

— “There is a time for prayer and
a time for work. On work-days we
are not to rest as on the Sabbath.
He who does not work ought not to
eat, whatever his pretences are. The
door to the Father, the source of all
grace, opens itself to us when the
gracious light of the love of God
again shines forth, as it often does
after great darkness.”—Lange.


Ver. 3. “The chief magistrate was


always obliged to attend the public
worship of God, as well as the priest,
to show that the civil and ecclesias-
tical States were both under the same
government of the Lord, and that no


- one was capable of being prince or


priest who did not acknowledge God
in all his ways. Ungodly priests and
profligate magistrates are a curse to
any land.”—A. Clarke,

— “The gate shall not be shut
until the evening. The gate is open
till the evening; be ready therefore,
When the Bridegroom has once gone
in, the gate is shut and fools excluded
(Matt. xxv.).”—Trapp.


Ver, 3. In the old covenant it is
said “before the Lord;” in the new
covenant * in the Lord.”


Vers. 4-15. “‘ The offerings here pre-
scribed are generally in excess of those
enjoined by the law, to note the greater
devotion and magnificence under the
new state of things. Still, as of old,
there was a certain liberty left to give
in such proportion as the will might
prompt or the ability permit, and the
seer contemplates in his vision of better
times a willing king and a people
ready to give of their substance to
the utmost of their means.”—Speaker’s
Commentary.


Ver. 4. “The Lord’s day is a day
in which especially liberal gifts to the
Lord’s cause are the appropriate accom-
paniments of the worship of the Sanc-

&75


CHAP, XLVI


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY EZEKIEL,








tuary, attesting that we do not desire
to offer to our best Benefactor a service
which costs us nothing (2 Sam. xxiv.
24). If the Israelite was not to appear
before the Lord at the Passover empty
(Ex. xxiii 15), much less ought the
Christian, who enjoys such vastly
superior privileges, to offer grudging
and stinted gifts.”—Fausset.


Vers. 8-10. Religious Decorum—l1.
Should be rigidly observed by king
and people, 2. Regulates the manner
of entering and leaving the Sanctuary.
3. An aid in the public worship of
God.


Ver. 8. “The influence of love shall
extend into the whole world from the
south to the north, so that they from
the north and from the south shall go
to meet one another, in order to receive
and embrace one another as brethren,
—No one should go out of the church
as he came into it; he should always
take home with him something for
his edification (Eccles, iv. 17; Acts
xvi. 14).”’—Lange.


Vers, 9-15, “A beautiful picture of
a religious people ; the highest in rank
freely mingling with the mass of wor-
ehippers, and inspiriting their devo-
tions by the elevating influence of his
presence and example. But to show
that his worship was not merely to be
of a public and official nature, that it
should spring from a heart truly alive to
Divine things, the prophet passes from
those holiday services to the voluntary
offerings, which the prince was also to
present to the Lord. The proper head
of a religious people, he was to surpass
them all in the multitude and variety
of his acts of homage and adoration,”
— Fairbairn,


Ver. 9. “1. The Lord expects not
only prince and priests to worship
Him in a public way, but the people
also. 2. The way of God’s servants
is a straight and right-forth way. 3.
The shortness of man’s life is here


476


represented; he enters the world, goes
on a little way, and then goes out of it
again.” —Greenhill,

— “1. Teaches us not to turn our
backs upon the holy ordinances, 2.
To make straight paths for our feet,
and be making daily progress towards
perfection. 3. That our memories are
frail, and here we shall meet with
many things that will withdraw us
from thinking upon God. 4. That
our life is but short—a passage from
one gate to another. One being asked,
‘What is life?’ made an answer
answerless, for he presently went his
way.”—Trapp.


Ver. 10. The Divine Leader—1. Is
ever in the midst of His people. 4%.
Guides to the best spheres of religious
and secular work. 3. Superintends
and overrules all the changes of human
life. 4, Guarantees all needed help
in the Church and in the world.

— “Prince and peasant stand on
the same level in worshipping before
God, who is no respecter of persons,
yet those in exalted positions, as
princes and nobles, exercise a power-
ful influence over men, and may accord-
ingly be the instruments of great good
when they set a godly example before
those beneath them.”—Fausset.


Vers. 13-15. Morning Prayer. 1. A
duty we owe to God. 2. Decides the
character of the day’s experience. 3,
Essential to religious growth 4,
Should be offered in an earnest and
thankful spirit.


Ver. 15. “Grace makes the heart
free, and so also willing. As God’s
grace is new every morning, so also
ought our devotion to Him to be re-
newed every morning. Our whole life
should be a sacrifice from morning te
night, and next morning again. Since
Christ’s appearance the night has dis-
appeared and the day has come; there
are now only morning sacrifices."—


Lange.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OMAP. XLVI.


gE SR RF I TE TRG,


HOMILETIOS.
JUSTICE AND GENEROSITY.
(Vers. 16-18.)


I, That property rights are founded in universal justice. “The earth is the
Lord’s, and the fulness thereof,” and it is He who gives power to get wealth.
Property acquired by industry, merit, and by just regard to the rights of
others is secured by recognised law. Yet the law knows nothing of absolute
ownership: man has but a life-interest in his possessions, for we brought
nothing into this world, and we can carry nothing out. The law which pro-
tects property also limits the exercise of the owner’s pc wer over it.


II. That ample possessions afford opportunity for acts of corresponding
generosity. Property has its duties as well as its rights. Great wealth means
great responsibility ; it furnishes increased facilities for doing good. Few men
give in proportion to their means. Liberality is measured not by what a man
gives, but by what he has left. It is degrading to spend one’s life in getting
and securing what we get; the soul is shrivelled into a miserly selfishness.
Giving expands our human sympathies and widens a man’s outlook. There is
a pleasure in accumulating, but there is a nobler pleasure in giving. Gonsalvo,
the great Spanish captain, used to say, “Never stint your hand. There is no
way of enjoying one’s property like giving it away ;” and he acted up to his
own precept,


III That it is neither justice nor generosity to give away what belongs
to another (vers. 16-18). The prince was amply provided for that he might
be generous both to his family and his servants; but he was prohibited from
indulging generosity by seizing the possessions of others. Some are generous
enough with what belongs to others. It is mistaken generosity ; it is fraud
and robbery. Justice demands that a man must be generous only with what
is his own, The prince gains power and affection, not by violating but by
guarding the rights of his subjects. Property is sweetened and seasoned by
acts of judicious liberality.


Lrssons.—1. Property is a sacred trust, for which we are accountable to God.


2. Property acquired by oppression is unsafe, 3. We must be just before we can be
generous,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers, 16-18. The Duty of the
Wealthy—1l. To provide for their
own family (ver. 16).
towards their dependents (ver. 17).
3. To respect the laws by which their
possessions are governed (vers. 16, 17).
4, To avoid oppression and protect the
rights of others (ver. 18).

— “Tt is an exhibition, by an indi-
vidual trait, of the pure righteousness


9. To be liberal


and settled order which should pervade
the Kingdom of God when set up in
its new and more perfect form, Every-
thing should now be ruled by the
principles of eternal rectitude, and no
license given, no occasion even, or
pretext afforded for the usurpations
of tyrannical violence.”— Fairbairn.


Ver. 17. “ As Alexander the Great,
47”


@HAP, XLVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL,





who, going to subdue a great part of
the habitable world, gave away to his
servants almost all he had, and when
one of his officers asked what he would
leave for himself, he answered, ‘Hope.’”
—Trapp.

— “He who is profuse in giving is
easily compelled to take from others
what belongs to them.”—Hengstenberg.


Ver. 18, “Ill accidents attend such
princes as affecting to be absolute in
power, will be too resolute in will or


jects to enrich their servants and para-
sites.” —TZrapp.

— “How blessed shail that state
be wherein alike the temptation from
without and the inclination from with-
in to do wrong shall no longer have
place! This is the model towards
which we ought to aspire; and in this
respect this picture of the future Israel
may serve as the ideal according to
which, in the spirit if not in the letter,
our State politics should be framed.”—
Fausset.


dissolute in life, oppressing their sub-


HOMILETICS.
THe Morau SIGNIFICANCE OF Damty Foom
(Vers. 19-24.)


I. Phat the supply of daily food is a constant evidence of the Divine care.
There is not a single meal for which we are not indebted to the Divine thought-
fulness and blessing. God smiles upon the soil, and it teems with plenty for
man and beast. The wants of the tiniest insect, the most solitary bird, are
not overlooked. Famine is man’s handiwork—the result of sin, of indolence,
or lack of foresight, and is sometimes a punishment for his lavish extravagance
and wrong-doing. God is the munificent benefactor and food-provider for His
countless offspring (Ps. cxlv. 16).


II. That all the possible needs of man are satisfied in connection with
Divine worship. The priests who ministered before the Lord and the people
who worshipped were fed with the sacrifices they offered (vers. 20-25).
Workers for God are promised an unfailing supply of physical food (Ps. xxxvii.
3). Their work is not to suffer by undue anxiety concerning temporal things.
He who provides for the higher needs of man will not neglect the lower: the
greater includes the lesser (Matt. vi. 33).


III. That every meal should be enjoyed in a spirit of devout thankfulness.
Every meal should be a miniature sacrament. We should remember that God
always sits down at the table with His children; His presence makes every
meal a joyous feast. Hating and drinking cannot degenerate into sensual excess
when we remember the Provider of the feast is present. We can make no
adequate return for His goodness, but we can and must be thankful. A thank-
ful heart glorifies God (1 Tim. iv. 4; 1 Cor. x. 31; Phil. iv. 6).


Lessons.—1. The law of supply and demand is Divinely regulated. 2. There ia
no lack to those who serve God. 3. The prayer is Divinely taughi—“ Give us this day
owr daily bread.”


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 19. “In the Kingdom of God,
as in the kingdom of nature, and in


478


the full sense of the expression, every-
thing has its own place. Only the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


OHAP. XLVIL





things of men are in disorder because
they are sinners, and sin is disorder in
every respect.” —Lange.


Ver. 20. “Ministers should indite
good matters in their hearts for the
use of the people, and then their
tongues shali be as the pen of a ready
writer. They shall not feed their
hearers with crude and undigested
stuff, but such as is well boiled and
baked with the fire of the Holy Spirit,
kindled on the hearth of their own
hearts, that from the heart they may
speak to the heart.”—Trapp.

— “To cook is to bring to a proper
condition, so that the food tastes well
and is agreeable; so ought also the
truth to be prepared.—Is not homi-
letics a kind of sacred cookery 1”—
Lange.


Ver. 24. Spiritual Food—1. Should
be studiously prepared by the faithful
minister. 2 Should be partaken of
by the minister himself. 3. Should
be provided for the worship of the
Sanctuary. 4. Is essential in nourish-
ing and strengthening the soul.

— “In God’s Church there shall
always be provision both for His
ministers and people. Those who
have but from hand to mouth have
their bread hot, as it were, from
God’s hand, which is best of all.”—
Trapp.

— “Thus in one part of the house
was food for the body, and in another
food for the soul. In this view heaven
shall greatly exceed earth, for there
we shall not need the bread that per-
isheth. He that eateth of the tree of
life shall live for ever.” —Suicliffe.


Tor VISION or THE Hoty WATERS IsSUING FROM THE TEMPLE,


(Chap. xlvii.)


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Ver. 1.
“The house eastward.” The house is
the Temple itself; the waters issued
from beneath the south-east corner and
flowed along the south of the porch
which projected into the inner court.


Ver. 2. “There ran out waters on
the right side.” “The waters flow east-
ward —towards the Kedron, thence
towards the Jordan, and so along the
Ghor to the Dead Sea. The main
point in the picture is the rapid aug-
mentation from a petty stream into a
mighty river, not by the influx of side-
streams, but by its own self-supply
from the sacred miraculous source in
the Temple.”— Henderson.


Ver. 3. “To the ankles.” This may
coincide with the step gained in the
haptism of Cornelius (Acts x.) and
the opening of the Church to the
Gentiles.


Ver. 4. “To the knees—loins.” The
mission of St Paul and Barnabas (Acts
iii, 1-4) is another marked epoch in


the Church’s history; and the time
of St Paul’s martyrdom denotes an
increase in the Gentile Church, which
corresponds with the waters reaching
to the loins.


Ver. 5. “ Waters to swim in.”
“ When under Constantine the Roman
Empire had become Christian, the
Church may be contemplated as the
full river, to flow on throughout time
to the final completion of Isaiah’s pro-
phecy, xi. 9.”—Speaker’s Commentary.


Ver. 7. “ Very many trees.” Trees
were the natural consequence of abund-
ance of water (Ps. 1.3; Rev. xxii. 2).
The luxuriant fertility of the ground
on the shore of the Dead Sea under
the fresh springs of Engedi well illus-
trate this.


Ver. 8. “Into the sea, the waters
shali be healed.” The Dead Sea,
covering the guilty cities, Sodom and
Gomorrah. In its bituminous waters
no vegetable or animal life is said to
be found. But now death is to give

479


O@AP, XLVilL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





place to life in Judea and throughout
the world, as symbolised by the heal-
ing of these death-pervaded waters
(John iv. 14; Rev. xxii. 2, 3).


Ver. 9. “ Whithersoever the rivers
shall come.” Heb., “the two rivers.”
This new river is to come into the
Dead Sea through the same plain as
the Jordan. The Jordan always flowed,
but now, when another river comes in
and two rivers flow into the sea, the
waters shall be healed. Hengstenberg
interprets the two rivers as meaning
strong river.


Ver, 10. “From Engedi unto En-
eglaim.” Engedi, now Ain-Jidy, west
of the Dead Sea, David’s place of
refuge. En-eglaim, on the confines of
Moab, near where the Jordan enters
the Dead Sea. These limits comprise
between them the whole Dead Sea.
“ Their fish shall be according to their
kinds.” “Jerome quotes an ancient
theory that there are 153 kinds of
fishes, all of which were taken by the
apostles (John xxi. 11), and not one
remained uncaptured, signifying that
both the noble and base-born, the rich
and the poor, and every class, are being
drawn out of the sea of the world to
salvation.” — Fausset.


Ver. 11. “Not be healed; given
to salt.” ‘Those districts in which
the salt-deposits proper were formerly
found shall henceforth be waste places.
The thought is this—Only those who
bar themselves against the gracious
stream of Divine love and are unwill-
ing to regain health are henceforth
to be given over to the curse, continu-
ing to exist as monuments thereof.”—
Havernick. What is given to salt is
entirely forfeited to death.

Ver. 12. “Shall grow all trees for
meat ”—trees of life-giving and life-
restoring virtue shali bloom, similar in
properties to and exceeding in number
the tree of life in Eden (Rev. ii. 7;
xxii. 2, 14). ‘Whose leaf shall not
fade ’’—expressing not only the un-
failing character of the heavenly medi-
cine of the tree of life, but also that


480


the graces of the believer, which ars the
leaves, and his deeds, which are the
fruits that flow from those graces, are
immortal (Ps, i. 3; Jer. xvii, 8; Matt,
x. 42; 1 Cor. xv. 58).


Ver. 13. “This shall be the border.”
Substantially the same as Num. xxxiv.;
there the description begins with the
south, here with the north. ‘Joseph
shall have two portions ”—according
to the original promise of Jacob to
J ee (Gen, xlviii. 5, 22; Joshua
xiv. Joseph’s sons were given the
eae forfeited by Reuben, the
first-born (1 Chron. v. 5). The special
mention of Joseph’s portions was to
express that the twelve portions were
to be exclusive of Levi’s land, which
was to be provided out of the oblation,


Ver. 14. “One as well as another.”
Ezekiel is speaking of tribes, not in-
dividuals. Each tribe is to have an
equal breadth of land assigned to it.


Ver. 15. “The way of Hethlon to
Zedad”—on the north boundary of
Canaan. Names of places in the
actual northern border are given, not
to mark exact geographical position,
but to show that the original promise
will be fulfilled.


Ver. 16. “Hamath”—at the foot
of Mount Hermon, on the Orontes,
‘*‘Berothah””—probably the same as
Berothai, a city in Syria conquered
by David (2 Sam. viii. 8). ‘ Hazar-
hatticon”—the middle Hazar, to distin-
guish it from Hazar-enan, ‘‘Hauran”
— Auranitis, a tract in Syria, south
of Damascus.


Ver. 18. “Unto the east sea”—
the Dead Sea.


Ver. 19. “From Tamar ”—a village
near the southern end of the Dead
Sea, ‘To Kadesh”—on the borders
of the Wilderness of Sin, where the
children of Israel strove with Moses.
“The river to the great sea.” Lite
rally, “riverward to the great sea.” By
the river is meant a torrent-stream


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


OHAP, XLVIL


ee


entering the Mediterranean near Rhi-
nocolura, now El Arish. This is the
river of Egypt mentioned in Num.
xxxiv. 5.


Ver, 22. “And to the strangers
that sojourn among you.” Here is
quite a new feature in the distribution


of the land. Not only the Israelites
by descent, but those who join them-
selves to Israel by allegiance to the
true God, shall have a right of inherit-
ance, The difference which existed
under the old covenant between Jew
and Gentile is now at last done away


(Rom. x. 12; Gal. iii, 28; Col. iii. 11).


HOMILETICS.
THE RIVER OF THE WATER OF LIFE
(Vers. 1-12.)


I. Has its source in the Temple of God (ver. 1, 2). Not from the Temple
as such, but from the presence and activity of Him whose glory filled the
Temple. All the spiritual blessings that now enrich the world appear to issue
from the Church of God, and so they do; but not from the Church as an
organisation, but from Him who gives life, form, and stability to the organisa-
tion itself. This important fact is liable to be overlooked, Ezekiel had gone
round the Temple repeatedly, prospecting, measuring, admiring, until his soul
was filled with amazement at its colossal proportions and gorgeous ritual; but
not till it was specially revealed to him did he see the waters issuing from
under the threshold of the house, and became aware of their mysterious and
Divine source. So we are apt to be so absorbed in contemplating the outward
structure and vast movements of the Church as to lose sight for the time of
the Divine power that gives vitality and meaning to the whole. It is a blessed
moment for us when we are brought by the Spirit to “the door of the house”
and shown the secret of all this mighty energy. It is our wisdom frequently
to wait in meditation and prayer at the threshold of God’s house, the fountain-
head of all blessing, until our souls are penetrated with the thought that the
excellency of the power in Temple-work is not of man, but of God. Then we
ean say with David, “ All my springs are in Thee” (Ps. lxxxvii. 7).


Il. Widens and deepens in its progressive outflow (vers. 3-5). Beginning
as a small rill of water at the Temple threshold, the river, within a little more
than a mile’s space, rapidly widens and deepens so as to be unfordable, and
this not by the aid of contributary streams, but from itself. Here we see the
miraculous character of the river and its evident ideal teaching, as a stream
rising at the top of a mountain, feeding itself and so quickly augmenting,
is at variance with all known natural laws, It is a type of the River of the
Water of Life, flowing in Gospel channels, and spreading and deepening among
the nations of the earth, What a suggestive study to trace the course of this
river in its steady advances through the world! In many places the wilder-
ness has been transformed into a garden of Eden, Our knowledge of Divine
truth, like the waters of the Sanctuary, is shallow at first, but should grow in
depth and preciousness with the years. So in our experience of spiritual
things: there should be constant progress from grace to grace,


III. Imparts fertility and blessing wherever it flows (vers. 6-12). This
mystic river produced extraordinary effects. Wherever it circulated vegetation
was quickened, trees remarkable for fruitfulness and medicinal properties
spraug up on its banks, and the bituminous waters of the Dead Sea, cured of


ga 48]


CHP. XLVIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





their deadly poison, swarmed with fish. Barrenness gives place to fertility
and abundance, and the river-course is a scene of animation and increasing
activity. So the Gospel—the River of the Water of Life—brings life, health,
beauty, and fruitfulness wherever it comes. Dead souls are quickened into
life, diseased souls healed, feeble souls strengthened, and the spiritual life of
believers is made more intense and productive. Like the fabled goddess whose
pathway was beautified with flowers which sprang up wherever she set her
feet, so the course of the Gospel river may be distinctly traced by the flowers
and fruits of grace that adorn and enrich its banks,


LEssons.—l. Christ is the source and His Word the channel of soul-refreshing
life. 2. Wherever the Gospel spreads it produces life and frutifulness. 3. True
religion is progressive, and flourishes best by disseminatiny itself.


Tue VISION OF THE WATERS.
(Ver. 9.)


We take the holy waters to be the emblems of the Gospel—that wondrous
scheme of mercy, perfected by the atonement of Christ, made vital by the
everlasting Spirit and adapted to the salvation of the world.


I. The source of the holy waters. While through the Temple come to us
the tidings of our peace, the blessing itself does not originate there, but is
conveyed to it from a source invisible and afar. In God’s great provision for
the restoration of the fallen race there are both instrumental and efficient
agencies, He has appointed means, and a Divine and perpetual resident to
infuse those means with life. They who love the river of the Temple are the
likeliest, walking on its banks, to find its source issuing from the throne,
While we thus appreciate the uses of the Temple as an instrumentality of
blessing, and rejoice in the waters as they flow, we must remember always
that they issue from the foundation of the house and have their springs in
the everlasting hills; in other words, that God is the one source of life.
Though the Saviour has ascended up on high, He has shed forth His Spirit.
That Spirit lives on earth, the perpetuator of the Gospel impression, the
inspirer of all thought that is holy, the great and living agent in the con-
version of mankind. Men say the truth is power, but it is not, alone. It is
feeble as the pliant osier or the bruised reed against the malignant enmity of
evil. But let the Spirit animate it, and it shall overcome all hostility, and be
brave and mighty to prevail,


II. The progress of the holy waters. You observe that in the context the
progress of these waters is said to have been gradual and constant, The
prophet saw them first reaching to the ankles, then to the knees, then to the
loins, and then they became a river too deep to be forded, even a river to swim
in. There was no ceasing in the flow, there was no ebbing of the waters ; they
flowed gradually and constantly in the ever-deepening stream. And this is
only a description of the progress of the Gospel of Christ. Small and feeble in
its beginnings—those trembling but earnest fishermen, its earliest preachers—
with wealth and rank and patronage and power all arrayed against its progress
—with Cesars conspiring to strangle it, and armies marched out against its
fugitive sons—how marvellous was its triumph! And though after the esta-
blishment of Christianity there was a seeming eclipse of faith, and corruptions
blemished the comeliness of the bride of Christ, the gradual progress among

482


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OHAP. XLVI





_ the nations did not cease. One after another they received her teachings and
submitted to her sway. Insensibly she moulded the institutions of society and
stamped upon them her own image. Sanguinary codes were relaxed ; unholy
traffic terminated ; cruelty had her arm paralysed and her sword blunted;
fraud and lust and drunkenness became no longer things of glorying, but of
shame; there was a gradual uplifting in the moral health, as if there flowed
around the people the bracing air-waves of a purer atmosphere; and men
wondered whence the healing came. The river had done it all: flowing on,
now through the darkling brake, and now over the open plain; now fertilising
the swards upon its banks; now rejoicing in the depth of its own channel—
imperceptible almost in the increasing volume of its waters to those who con-
tinually beheld it, and yet, to those that gazed only at intervals, seemed to have
both widened and deepened every day. And it is rolling on still, Perhaps
there never was an age of such quickened religious activity as the one in which
we are privileged to live. There are two thoughts suggested by this gradual
and constant progress of the Gospel. The first encourages our faith ; the second
reminds us of our responsibility. If we believe, with all the firmness of a
settled conviction, that the Gospel is of God, we may rest in the assurance
that it must and will prevail; and this hearty faith in its triumphant destiny
will save us from the extremes of feeling—from undue elation in seasons of
unusual promise, and from unusual depression in seasons of peculiar languor.
The other thought addresses itself solemnly to ourselves. It is quite impossible
for us to live in times like ours, when not only the ordinary religious privileges
exist and are enjoyed, but when there is so much of special unction with the
Word, and such large and manifest workings of the Holy Ghost, without entail-
ing an added amount of responsibility. Beware of attributing the Holy Spirit’s
work to evil agency. That is marvellously like the sin that has no forgiveness,
Beware of setting yourselves in an attitude of resistance to good influences,
The waters wear the stones, but do not change their nature. Beware of delay-
ing yourselves into hardness of heart. The waters petrify sometimes, and there
are some moral petrifactions, alas! which cannot be broken even by the hammer
of the Word.


III. The efficacy of the holy waters. How complete and how effectual the
healing! “ Everything shall live whither the river cometh.” And this is true of
the Gospel. Not only can it reach every man, but each part of every man. Life
for the understanding, that it may no longer be smitten by error—life for the
imagination, that its strange fires may be quenched and a purer flame be kindled
in their stead—life for the memory, that it may no longer be haunted by the
wraiths of ghostly sins—life for the affections, that they may revel in a pure
attachment which is not idolatry, ever increasing and yet ever satisfied—life
for the whole nature, that it may not be dead in trespasses and sins—life for the
destiny, that it may not even be sullied by the shadow of death, but exult in an
ever-brightening inheritance through an eternal day. It shall flow into the
desert, and love to God shall be implanted where was formerly enmity, and the
whole nature shall be turned about to serve Him. It shall flow into the sea,
and though the proud waves shall resist its entrance, it shall overcome tneir
frantic waters and heal them of their plague. Some of you have seen, as I
have, a very fine illustration of this, so far as earthly things can illustrate
heavenly in nature’s bounteous kingdom. I stood last summer at the point of
confluence, near the fair city of Geneva, where two great rivers meet but do
not mingle. Here the Rhone, “ the arrowy Rhone,” rapid and beautiful, pours
on, its waters of that heavenly blue which it is almost worth a pilgrimage te see ;
there the Arve, turbid and muddy, partly from the glaciers from which it is so
largely fed, and partly from the clayey soil which it upheaves in its impetuous

&83


OMAP, ELVII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





path, brawls hoarsely in its passionate course ; and for a long distance beyond
the point of junction they roll side by side with no barrier between them but
their own innate repulsions, each making now and then an encroachment upon
the other, but beaten back again into its own domain. Like mighty rival forces
of good and evil do they seem, and for a long time the issue is doubtful. But
far down the long valley, if you look again, you find that the frantic Arve is
mastered, and the Rhone has coloured the entire surface of the stream with ita
own emblematic and beautiful blue. I thought, as I gazed upon it, that it
symbolised the long-protracted conflict between truth and error; but in medi-
tating upon the flowing of these healing waters, and reading that they shall
flow into the sea and heal it, the vision of the scene rose up before me, fresh
and vivid as the facts of yesterday."—W. Morley Punshon, D.D.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Vers. 1-12. “The effect of the gladness, Instead of spending itself,


establishment of the mountain of the
house of the Lord on the top of moun-
tains, or of Christianity generally, is a
great outpouring of the Holy Spirit
signified by these waters. As they
were not to be seen before the issuo of
the man with the measuring-line, they
are to accompany the preaching of the
Word by the ministers of Christ, and
the operations of the Spirit shall be-
come the more admirable and profound
as they proceed in their spread over
all the world, as is significd by their
increasing depth. By them shall the
evil influences of the world be healed
and everlasting life conveyed to all
that will receive them. Still, some
shall harden even then under its in-
fluence, and become more rank and
nauseous in sin than before, as is
signified by the unhealed bays,”—
M‘Farlan,

— “Issuing as this stream does from
the threshold of the Temple, from the
very foot of the throne of God, it must
be, like all the special manifestations of
God to His Church, itself of a spiritual
nature, and only in its effects productive
of outward material good. It is the
efflux of that infinite fulness of life
and blessing which is treasured up in
His spiritual Temple, and continually
pours itself forth as the operations of
His grace proceed among men. It is
emphatically a river of life. Wherever
it is experienced, the barren soil of
nature fructifies, the dead live again,
the soul is replenished with joy and

aga


like the streams of nature, as it ad-
vances through the moral deserts of
the world, it multiplies and grows,
until corruption is changed into in-
corruption, mortality is swallowed up
of life, and the earth, which God had
cursed for man’s sin, is transformed
into the inheritance of the saints in
light.”’— Fairbairn.


Vers. 1-5. “ Ezekiel’s Temple, with
its ritual, ministers, and congregation,
symbolises the presence’ of Jehovah in
the midst of aloyal people. The waters
are the blessings which flow from this
source to animate and refresh all the
inhabitants of the earth. The deepen-
ing of the waters in their course shows
the continual deepening of spiritual life
and multiplication of spiritual blessings
in the growth of the Kingdom of God.”
—Speaker’s Commentary.

— “In the Kingdom of God things
proceed from little to great: in the
kingdoms of the world often from
great to little. Satan begins his things
with lofty impetuosity, but finally they
end in nothing and everything comes
to disgrace.”—Hafenreffer.


Ver. 1, 2. The Progress of Truth.
“1, As it is Christ who makes known
the things of the Temple, so He makes
known some at one time, some at
another. 2, The waters of the Gospel,
the gifts and graces of the Spirit, flow
from Zion. 3. These spiritual waters,
although they flow from Zion, Christ


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZERIEL.





is the fountain and original of them.
4. Sanctuary waters are not common
but choice mercies; they are right-
side mercies, south-side blessings,”—


Greenhill.


Ver. 1. The Gradualness of Divine
Revelation—1. Accommodated to our
imperfect faculties, 2. Suited to our
varying circumstances, 3. Educative
in its process. 4. Enables us more
clearly to grasp the meaning and
grandeur of the truths unfolded,


Vers. 3-9, “The AtheisticIdea. It
is affirmed that Christianity is waning
because of the advancement of science.
The business of the scientist is with
matter. There is something back of
matter —a force beneath life. No
painter, there is no picture: no God,
there is no nature. What doctrine
has science demolished? 1. Has science
done away with the Incarnation? The
scientist knows that the sum of the
history of nature is made up by the
entrances at epochs of higher types of
being. Are not all these appearances
prophecies of the grand entrance of
the Higher Being? 2. Has science done
away with the Atonement? The law
everywhere manifest is the depend-
ence of one creature on another. 3.
Has science done away with sin? Sin
is as much a fact, a phenomenon of
human life, as the circulation of the
blood. 4. Where is Christianity wan-
ing? In Germany? Compare this
century with the last. A short time
ago thousands of students flocked to the
great universities to hear the doctrinas
of Fichte, Hegel, Kant, and the Ration-
alists of Tubingen. Now scarcely a
class of twenty can be collected for
that purpose. In France? Compare
this century with the times when a
deluge of blood followed the blas-
phemies of Rousseau, D’Alembert,
Diderot, and Voltaire. In England?
Compare the Britain of to-day with
the Britain of yesterday, when Chubb,
Hume, and Bolingbroke could sneer
at the story of the Cross—when the
clergy were immoral. In America?
Compare it with the time when the


ORAP. XLV.


students in our colleges called them
selves by the names of leading French
atheists. Where will you find such a
college to-day? 5. What is the motive-
power of science? Compare the ages of
faith and the ages of scepticism and
see the results. How high has science
lifted the shadows that rest on the
human heart? It is only this blessed
religion, this radiance from the throne
of God, that can lighten the gloom.”—
Homiletic Monthly.


Vers, 3-5. The Temple-River emble-
matic of Religion in the different
stages of Human Life. 1. Childhood.
“The waters were to the ankles”
(ver. 3). Religion may be shallow
and yet genuine, 2. Youth. “The
waters were to the knees” (ver. 4).
Still exposed to much of the world
and its attractions, yet standing in
the truth. 3. Manhood. ‘The waters
were to the loins” (ver. 4). In the
midway of life’s struggle, but deepen:
ing in piety. 4. Old age. “Waters
to swim in, a river that could not be
passed over” (ver. 5). A more pro.
longed and profound study of the
truth revealing its unfathomable vast
ness and prompting the strongest
veteran-swimmer to exclaim, “Oh, the
depth of the riches!” (Rom. xi. 33).

— “Holy Scripture and its revela
tions also resemble these sacred waters,
in that whosoever searches into them
will find some parts intelligible to all
who sincerely desire to know them,
Other parts require a deeper investi-
gation; others a deeper still; and others
are beyond our depth, and in respect
to these, we can only adore the infini-
tude of God’s wnsearchable wisdom,
and humbly wait for His own time of
revealing their now hidden meaning.
The growth of grace in the individual
soul, similarly, is a progressive work,
beginning with but a small stream
from the fountain-head, but sure to go
on increasing until it is expanded into
the boundless and unfathomable river
of heavenly pleasures (Ps, xxxvi. 8).”
—Fausset.

— “This vision may be applied—l.
To the gradual discoveries of the plan of

435


HWOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


salvation. (1.) In the patriarchal ages.
(2.) In the giving of the Law. (3.) In
the ministry of John the Baptist. (4.)
In the full manifestation of Christ by
the Holy Ghost. 2. To the growth of
a believer in the grace and knowledge of
God. (1.) The seed of the Kingdom.
(2.) The blade from that seed. (3.)
The ear out of that blade, (4.) The
full corn in that ear. 3. To the dis-
coverics a penitent believer receives of the
mercy of God im his salvation, (1.) A
little child, born of God, he begins to
taste and feed on the heavenly food,
(2.) He grows up and increases in
stature and strength, and becomes a
young man. (3.) He becomes matured
in the Divine life, and has his spiritual
senses exercised so as to become a
father in Christ. 4. Zo the progress of
Christianity, (1.) A few poor fisher-
men. (2.) Afterwards many Jews.
(3.) Then the Gentiles of Asia Minor
and Greece. (4.) The continent and
isles of Europe, (5.) Now spreading
through Africa, Asia, and America,
at present these waters are no longer
a river, but an immense sea; and
the Gospel-fishers are daily bringing
multitudes of soula to God.”—A,.
Clarke.

— The Spread of the Gospel. ‘1.
Christ is the architect and measurer
of all things belonging to His Church.
2. The motion of Sanctuary waters is
not accidental, but according to Divine
appointment. 3. The doctrine of the

ospel is never rightly understood
unless taught by Christ. 4. The doc-
trine of the Gospel, the conversion of
sinners, and the graces of the Spirit
proceed gradually. 5. The Gospel has
depths and mysteries no human under-
standing can comprehend. 6. Sanc-
tuary waters afford comfort to the
saints in their deepest distresses.”—


Greenhill.


Ver, 5.“ There was no such natural
course of waters in the place, nor is it
imaginable that in three miles or there-
abouts the waters should so rise; but
it is emblematical, hath a deep mys-
tevious meaning, and includes spiritual
("278 amd their wonderful growth


from small beginnings, and these from
the Temple.”—Pool.

— “This marks the rich and over-
flowing grace which God designs to
shed down on the earth in the Gospel


- age and in the glory of the latter day ;


and it apprises believers that they
should not remain in a loitering state,
trampling the shallow waters of grace,
but go on to a deeper baptism of the
Spirit till they can swim in the abound-
ing streams,”—Sutcliffe.

— “Representing the fathomless
depth of the Scriptures, which is such
that we may well do by it as the
Romans did by a lake, the depth
whereof they could not sound, and
dedicated it to Victory: also the abund-
ance of spiritual graces in the Church,
the love of Christ which passeth all
knowledge, and the over-abounding
goodness of God. Speaking of this
subject, Chrysostom said: ‘I am like a
man digging ina deep spring ; I stand
here, and the water rises upon me; I
stand there, and still the water rises
upon me. It is indeed a sea that has
neither bank nor bottom.’ ’—Trapp.


Ver. 6. “Hast thou seen this?” A
Suggestive Question—l. As asked by
the well-informed. He knows more
than I do, or why the question? 2.
As addressed to the anxious inquirer.
This may meet my case, 3. As ad-
dressed to the thoughtless and indifferent.
There is a world of knowledge hitherto
closed to him, 4. Indicates there 1s
much we miss for want of a keener in
sight into truth.


Vers. 7-10. Fishers in Gospel Waters.
“1, The waters of the Gospel have
their own course. 2. That people
without the Gospel are like the Dead
Sea (ver. 8). 3. The waters of the
Sanctuary have curing and quickening
virtue (vers. 8, 9). 4. The preachers
of the Gospel are fishers (ver. 10). 5.
These Gospel-fishers catch fish of all
sorts (ver. 10).”’—Greehill.


Vers. 8, 11. The Power of the
Gospel—1 Seen in its penetrating the
most unlikely places “The desert—~


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


CHAP, SLVI,





- the Dead Sea” (ver. 8). 2. Efficacious
‘in giving life and healing to all
who accept it. “The waters shall be
healed” (ver. 8). 3. Inefficacious
where it is resisted and rejected.
“The miry places and marshes shall
be given to salt” (ver. 11).


Ver. 8. “God’s Sanctuary a well-
spring of life for the Dead Sea of the
world (Ps, lxxxvii. 7). God’s thoughts
of peace over the abysses of the world’s
wretchedness. In other cases a clear
and wholesome stream which flows
into a muddy and putrid lake be-
comes corrupt: it is otherwise with
the Gospel, which brings recovery and
health to the earthly-minded heart.
It is a power of God, but man will not
let the power work.”— Lange.


Ver. 11. “Those whom the Gospel
waters of life do not reach, through
their own indolence and carnality,
shall be given over to everlasting
barrenness ; nor can any more awful
punishment be imagined than that
the sinner should be given up to the
unrestricted and everlasting workings
of his own sin, bitterness, and filthi-
ness,” —Jausset.

— The Hebrew language often ex-
presses irremediable barrenness and
unprofitableness by being given up to
salt, salt being equivalent to barren-
ness in that language. When Abime-
lech destroyed Shechem he sowed the
ground whereon it stood with salt, to
denote that it should never be culti-
vated or inhabited again (Judges ix.
45).

» ‘Unsound, rotten parts, neither
sea nor yet sound ground, an emblem
_ of hypocrites. Low land, sopped with
the overflowings of unhealthful waters,
neither fit to breed fish as the sea, nor
bear trees as the land.” —Pool.


Vers. 9-12. Spiritual Influence—1.
Vitalises all it touches (ver. 9). 2.
The active principle of fertility and
lenty (vers. 9, 10, 12). 3. Cannot

resisted without disaster (ver. 11).
4. Is ever flowing from the Divine
Temple. ‘“‘ Because they issued out of


the sanctuary” (ver. 12). 5. Is both
the food and medicine of the soul,
“The fru shall be for meat, and the
leaf for medicine” (ver. 12).


Ver. 10, “The ministers of the
Church are compared to fishers be
cause of the contempt with which
they are regarded by the rich and
powerful of this world; because of
their labour by day and night, in heat
and cold; because of the fruitlessness
of their labour at times—‘ We have


‘caught nothing ;’ because of the dan-


gers they incur in stormy weather;
because of their confidence, which, as
in the case of the husbandman, must
rest on God; because of the various
kinds of implements they use. They
rescue souls from the abyss.”—Starck.


Vers, 11, 12, Moral Barrenness and
Fruitfulness. ‘1. Those places and
persons to which the waters of the
Sanctuary come, or coming do not
heal, are designed to barrenness and
destruction (ver. 11). 2. True Chris-
tians are fruitful (ver. 12). 3, The
cause of fruitfulness is the doctrine
and grace of the Gospel (ver. 12), 4.
The holy examples of true saints are
medicinal (ver. 12).”—Greenhill.


Ver, 12. Never-ending Spring. “The
text a promise and picture of a never-
fading spring. Goodness and spiritual
beauty are eternal. 1. The everlast-
ing youthfulness of a Christly soul,
2. The everlasting fruitfulness of a
Christly soul. 3. The explanation of
the glorious phenomenon is in this—
‘ Because their waters issued out of the
sanctuary.’ A sacred place, a pure
sanctuary, a holy fountain where the
soul may cleanse itself from the dust
and stains of the world. Fruit for meat
and leaves for medicine. A healthy
inner life ensures a fruitful outer life.
A Christly soul is always young and
beautiful.”—Homiletic Monthly.

— “The blessed growth close by
the river of life. Evergreen leaves,
yet not leaves merely, but also fruit!
Thus it is with life from God’s Sane-
tuary.”-—Lange,

487


OBAP, XLVIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





HOMILETICS.
we INHERITANCE OF THE GOom
(Vers. 13-23.)


I. Is secured by Divine promise (ver. 14). That promise was declared and
ratified in the most solemn manner—‘ Concerning the which | lifted up Mine
hand.” Though the inheritance is not in possession, and all appearances are
against the realisation of the promise, yet it is enough that the promise is
made. Israel is kingless and portionless, bereft of Temple and all its im-
posing ceremonials, fretting in slavery and sorrow, moaning in poverty and
ruin, and with no prospect of immediate deliverance, yet the inheritance is
sure, for God hath promised. The Divine Word is more valid than the best-
authenticated legal document,


II, Is explicitly defined (vers. 15-20). To show that it is no baseless hope,
no Utopian dream, but a substantial, blessed reality. Its boundaries are clearly
described and exactly measured to show that every inch of its frontiers is
guarded with the presence and power of Jehovah, and to inspire an unwavering
assurance of its realisation and enjoyment, The Lord deals in neither false
measures nor false promises,


III. Is enjoyed by the obedient irrespective of nationality (vers. 21-23).
The distinction between Jew and Gentile is abolished. The inheritance is
made free for all nations. Whoever fears God and works righteousness unites
himself to the true Israel, the perfect Church of the Messiah, shall enjoy the
same privileges as the faithful and obedient descendants of Abraham. Tribes,
classes, nations, are absorbed and lost in the spiritual unity of an imperishable


brotherhood. Christ is all and in all.


Lessons.—1l. The Divine promise never fails.
have a rich inheritance here and hereafter.


unknown in the heavenly Kingdom.


2. The faithful servants of Jehovah
3 National strifes and jealousies will be


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES. —


Vers. 13-23. “A people settled in
the inheritance of their God is the
proper result of the re-establishment
of the covenant and the renewal of
their souls after its principles of right-
eousness. There is no more reason
for understanding this portion accord-
ing to the letter than those which
went before. The whole vision is of
a piece—a pictorial representation of
the future things of God’s Kingdom
under the image of the past, yet so
altered and adjusted as to indicate the
vast superiority of what was to come
compared with what hitherto had
been.” — Fairbairn.

488


— The Heritage of the Faithful.
“]. Here we have the great extent
of the Church under Christ. 2, The
state of Christians in the Church and
all their spiritual blessings are of free
grace. 3, The one and same inherit-
ance belongs to the believing Jew
and Gentile.” —@reenhill.


Vers. 13, 14. The Divine Faithful-
ness —‘‘l. Is not impaired by the
lapse of time, or by the fickleness of
man, 2. Is solemnly declared. ‘Con-
cerning which I lifted up mine hand.
3. Seen in the kindness shown to
succeeding generations, ‘To give unto


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZERIEL.


OHAP, XLVIN.


A tn a


your fathers; this land shall fall unto
you forinheritance,” 4, Should elicit an
exclusive and unwavering confidence.


Ver. 13. “ Who ean define the boun-
daries of the Church, especially in the
last days? But as here the boundaries
of Canaan are defined, so the boundaries
of the Church are faith and life in the
Scriptures of the apostles and prophets,
which accordingly no one is to overpass
(Gal. vi. 16). God gives to His children
very differently ; from him to whom a
double portion has been given a corre-
sponding return is required.”—Starck.


Vers. 22, 23. The Impartiality of
God-—1. Seen in His equitable treat-


Tue IpraAL ALLOTMENT OF THE Hoxiy LAND.


EXEGETICAL NOTES, — The
order of the original occupation of
the Holy Land by the tribes under
Joshua is partly, but only partly,
followed. It is a new order of things,
and its ideal character is evinced, as
elsewhere, by exact and equal mea-
surements. From north to south
seven tribes succeed each other—Dan,
Asher, Naphtali, Manasseh, Ephraim,
Reuben, Judah, each occupying the
full breadth of the land from east to
west. Then comes a portion separated
as an offering to the Lord, into (1) a
northern portion for the Levites; (2)
2 central portion for the priests and
the Temple ; (3) a southern portion
for the city and those who serve it.
These three form a square which does
aot occupy the whole breadth of the
\and, but is flanked on either side,
east and west, by portions assigned to
the prince. Then follow, south of the
city, five portions for the five remaining
tribes— Benjamin, Simeon, Issachar,
Zebulun, and Gad—similar to those
assigned to the seven, Thus the
Levites, the Temple, and city are
guarded by Judah and Benjamin,
the two tribes who had through-
out preserved their allegiance to the
true sovereignty of Jehovah, and thus
the plan expresses the presence of


ment of the faithful in all ages and
nations. 2. Is continually promoting
the spiritual unity of the human race.
3. Will be terribly evident in His
punishment of the finally impenitent,


Ver. 22. “It is not birth, but the
new birth, that makes men children of
God Here under earthly figures the
Jerusalem that is above with her chil-
dren is typified, and the calling of the
Gentiles from east and west and the
utmost bounds of the earth is described.
God here opens to all the holy gates
of His Church, and prescribes to the
Church herself the commandment of
meekness, love, and brotherly kind-
ness.” — Lange,


(Chap. xlviii.)


Jehovah among His people, summed
up in the name of the city with which
Ezekiel’s prophecy closes, “ The Lord
is there.” —Speaker’s Commentary.


Ver. 1. “A portion for Dan.” Lite
rally, Dan one. The same is repeated
for each tribe, the usual mode in
Hebrew of expressing distribution and
implying equality in the portions. Dan,
as morally semi-heathen, has the least
honourable place in the extreme north.


Ver. 2. “Asher.” No one of note
in this tribe is mentioned in the Old
Testament. The prophetess Anna
belonged to it (Luke ii. 36).


Ver. 4. “A portion for Manasseh.”
The intercourse and unity between the
two and a half tribes east of the Jordan
and the nine and a half west of it
had been kept up by thie splitting of
Manasseh, causing the visits of kinsmen
one to the other from both sides of the
Jordan, There shall be no need for
this in the new order of things.


Ver. 5. “A portion for Ephraim.”
This tribe, with its two dependent
tribes, Manasseh and Benjamin, for
upwards of 400 years under the judges
held the pre-eminence,

489


CHAP. XLVITI.


Ver. 6. “A portion for Reuben ”—
doomed formerly for incest and in-
stability not to excel (Gen. xlix. 4).
No distinguished prophet, priest, or
king came from this tribe. To it
belonged the mutinous Dathan and
Abiram, A_ pastoral and Bedouin
character marked it and Gad (Judges
v. 16).


Ver. 15. “The five thousand that
are left.” The remainder of the great
square of 25,000 reeds from north to
south. ‘‘A profane place for the
city ”— not strictly sacred as the
sacerdotal portions, but applied to
secular or common uses; 80 chap.
xiii, 20.


Ver. 19. “Out of all the tribes of
Isracl” Formerly the citizens of
Jerusalem were out of the tribes of
Benjamin and Judah. Now all the
tribes are to have an equal part in it,
to avoid jealousies (2 Sam. xix. 43).


Ver. 23. ‘“‘Benjamin shall have a
portion.” This tribe alone with Judah
had been throughout loyal to tle house
of David, so its prowess at the night
of the national history was celebrated
as well as in the morning.


Ver. 24. “Simeon a portion.” Simeon


HIOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


was omitted in the blessing of Mogea
(Deut. xxxiii.), perhaps because of the
Simeonite prince who at Baalpeor led
the Israelites in their idolatries witn
Midian (Num, xxv. 14).


Ver. 25. “Issachar a portion ”—its
ancient portion had been on the plain
of Esdraelon. Compared (Gen. xlix.
14) to “a strong ass crouching between
two burdens”—tribute and tillage;
never meddling with wars except in
self-defence.


Ver. 31. “The gates of the city.”
The twelves gates bear the names of
the twelve tribes, to imply that all are
regarded as having an interest in it.


Ver. 35. “The Lord is there.” “The
name of the city shall be no longer
Jerusalem—The vision of peace—but
Adonai-shama—The Lord is there—be-
cause Jehovah will never again with-
draw from it as He once withdrew,
but will hold it as His everlasting
possession.”—Jerame. Not that the
city will be so called in mere name,
but that the reality will be best ex
pressed by this descriptive title (Jer
iii, 17, xxxiii. 16; Zech. ii. 10; Rev
xxl, 3, xxii. 3). A prophetic vision
fulfilled in Emmanuel, God with us, whe
tabernacled among men (John i. 14).


HOMILETICS.
Tur EarTHLY CANAAN A TYPE OF THE HEAVENLY.
(Vers. 1-35.)


In this closing chapter we have a condensed summary of the magnificent
vision described in the previous chapters with such fulness and exactitude.
Reviewing the gradual development of the prophecy, Ezekiel catches up its chief
features and groups them in a pictorial forn. calculated to arrest the attention
and keep alive the hope of God’s people through the dreary years that followed.
The lost land is restored and repeopled ; from the ruins of the old Jerusalem
rises a city exceeding in vastness and splendour the colossal buildings of anti-
quity ; the Temple like a guardian angel occupies a lofty, central position, round
which the current of city life and worship is continually circling, and from that
Temple, like rays of golden light, the glory of the Divine presence is spread
throughout the holy and happy land. The prophetic description suggests the
Earthiy Canaan as a type of the Heavenly. :

490


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : EZEKIEL, OWAP. XLVITE.


I, In the significant position occupied by the Temple of Jehovah. “The
Sanctuary in the midst” (vers. 8,10, 21). To the pious Jew the Temple wae
the glory of Palestine, the all-prominent, central object, towards which his gasu
was ever directed, and wherever he prayed his face was reverently turned towards
the holy place. In the midst of the heavenly Canaan the Temple stands con-
spicuous. Worship is the delightful employment of the glorified, and the very
essence of their individual bliss (Rev. v. 15).


Il. In the spectacle it presents of a united spiritual brotherhood (ver. 29).
The land was divided in equal portions among the tribes, and a holy oblation
apportioned for the Temple, priests, Levites, prince, and people (vers. 9-22).
There was no ground, nor was there any disposition, to indulge in the envyings
and jealousies that had vexed and torn asunder the different tribes,

“ Antipathies arma none, In the heart


No passion touches a discordant string,
But all is harmony and love.”


The charm of heaven is its inviolable unity. Each heart is bound together by
the cord of love, and the union is cemented and strengthened by the worship
and service in which all have a common interest. The unifying power is ever
present in the object of their constant praise. There the prayer of Jesus has its
most sublime realisation (John xvii. 21-23).


Ill. In the honourable position assigned to those who have been conspicuous
for fidelity. The tribes of Judah and Benjamin, who remained faithful to
Jehovah when all the rest were renegade, have a place of honour in close
proximity to the holiest—Judah on the north and Benjamin on the south of
the portion of land specially dedicated to the Lord (vers. 7, 23), The priests,
the sons of Zadok, who had kept the charge while the Levites went astray, are
also generously remembered in the new order of things (ver. 11). Man loses
nothing by making a resolute stand for truth and righteousness. He may sink
in the estimation of the temporising and may suffer for his principles ; but it is
wore disastrous to sink in his own estimation, and still more in the estimation
of God: that would be to entail suffering from which there is no relief. The
faithful champion for the truth shall have victory in this life and distinguished
reward in the next (Rev. iii. 12 ; vii. 14-17).


IV. In being presided over by the manifested glory of the Divine Presence.
‘The Lord is there” (ver. 35). To the true Israelite the Temple of the earthly
Canaan was a synonym for the Divine presence: there He dwelt, there He
revealed His glory from between the cherubim, and thence He declared His
law and governed His people. The light, the glory, the joy of heaven is the
presence of the Divine King robed in peerless majesty and ever displaying the
endless manifoldness of His matchless character. Its beauty, its splendour, its
order, its purity, its ecstasy, are all summed up in the exulting fact— The Lord
is there /”


Lessons.—1. We learn that things earthly are the patterns of the heavenly, 2. In
our darkest experiences we are cheered with the brightest visions of the future. 3, The
supreme glory of heaven is a sight of the unveiled presence of Jehovah.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.
Vers, 1~7, “The places of more or regulated by the degree of faithfulness


tesa honour assigned to each tribe are to the Lord and His ordinances by
49)


OHAP. XLVIM.


which the tribes severally were char-
ucterised. Thus Judah and Benjamin,
the tribes which adhered longest to
the ordinances of the Temple and to
the house of David when the rest
apostatised, shall hold the most hon-
ourable positions, Dan, on the con-
trary, is to have the least honourable
place at the extreme north, as having
been so early as the times of the Judges
in a great degreee demoralised and
heathenised. So in respect to the
degrees of glory which await all the
saints in the coming Kingdom of God,
the measure of honour will be regulated
by the measure of faithfulness, Herein
believers have the strongest incentive
not merely to work, but to abound
in the work of the Lord (1 Cor. xv.
58).”—Fausset.


Vers. 8, 10, 21. “The Sanctuary
in the midst.” The Centrality of the
Church of God—1. A special mark of
the Divine honour and affection. 2.
Indicates its supreme importance to the
universe. 3. The choicest blessings
emanate from and converge towards
it. 4. Itis the seat of Divine authority
and power.


Ver, 8. “ Thy heart is in thy midst ;
take heed to whom it belongs: is it a
temple of God in which His Spirit
dwells, or is it a habitation of unclean
spirita? God hag an eternal right to
the centre of man. God is the centre
of the spirit-world, and in Him every-
thing lives and moves.” —Lange.


Vers. 10-14. God’s care for His
Servants. 1. They shall have ample
provision for all their needs (ver. 10).
2. He will specially reward those who
have been faithful to Him in times of
trial (vers, 11, 12). 3, Their posses-
sions shall be permanent and secure
(ver. 14).


Ver. 11. “To err with the erring
excuses no one ;. the way is broad, not
for us to walk on it, but to call atten-
tion to the narrow path of life.”—Starck.


Ver. 13, “The priests had their lot
492


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,


near the Sanctuary, and the Levites
had theirs in the centre of the tribes,
that they might be ready for the ser-
vice of God and for the instruction of
the people. Hence the Lord, having
made the priests His first care, expects
that they should make the souls of the
people their sole concern.” —Sutcliffe.


Vers. 15-20, 30-35. A Happy
City—1. Occupying a spacious area,
2. Commanding vast temporal re-
sources. 3, Enjoying unexceptionable
religious privileges. 4. Inhabited by
a devout and contented people. 5,
Providing ample facilities for ingresa
and egress. 6. A model of order, good
government, unity, and peace.


Vers, 15-20. “The city was ample
and glorious, being about nine miles
from gate to gate and thirty-six miles
in circumference. The unbelief of the
Jews in our Lord’s time was fostered
by a literal interpretation of the pro-
phecies which, under splendid figures
taken from earthly scenes, shadowed
forth that superior and spiritual empire
which He came to establish, and their
carnal! hopes and prospects of temporal
dominion and glory led to the rejection
of the true Messiah. Nor is it much
less delusive to expect a literal fulfil-
ment of the predictions we have been
contemplating, which would in effect
be going back to that shadowy dis
pensation which the Gospel is intended
to supersede, instead of advancing to
that brighter and more spiritual glory
to be revealed in the latter day, and
would, instead of converting Jews to
Christianity, bring back the Christian
Church to a state of Judaism.”—/Sut-
cliffe.


Ver. 18. “Behold here the great
goodness of God, who thinks of even
the labourers in the city and cares for
them. But every Christian ought to
to be an upright labourer, as every
stone, wherever it is placed, belongs
to the building and contributes to its
erection.” —Lange.


Ver. 19. Holy Citizena “1. The





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





citizens are holy men, not common,
profane men; Israelites, not Gibeonites,
2. They are men chosen not out of
one, but out of every tribe. $, They
are to be serviceable—to improve their
talents for the good of the city.”—
Greenhill,


Ver. 20. “ All our dealings must be
- Bquare, or else we are not of the holy
portion, of the New Jerusalem.”—
Trapp.


Vers. 23-34. “As in the great
family of man not one face answers
precisely to another, but each is dis-
tinguished by some peculiarity, so it is
amongst the children of God: there-
fore, though the sons of Israel were so
many, they had all their distinguishing
names, to which doubtless the searcher
of their hearts and the orderer of their
lives saw something corresponding in
their character and history. Here also
we see that, whatever our place may be,
it is ordered for us by God, as the lots
of the tribes in the earth ; that, how-
ever we may enter into the kingdom
of heaven, the peculiarity of our char-
acter shall be regarded there, seeing
the names of its gates are not one but
many; that, whatever the history of
our preparation for it be, suitable
character of glory is provided for us
there, since its gates open upon every
quarter of the earth.”—M‘Farlan.


Ver. 23. “ Let every man be content
with the portion of temporal goods
which he possesses, for the Lord has
apportioned it (Matt. xx. 14).”—Lange.


Vers. 30-35. The City of God—l.
Is well and strongly founded. 2, Is
comely and beautiful. 3. Has aceess
to it from ali parts. 4. Its happiness
from the Lord’s inhabiting it.

— “The names of the twelve tribes
are to be severally connected with the
twelve gates of the city, for all alike
shall have an interest in it in their
respective places and situations. So
the very humblest believer has his due
place appointed to him in the heavenly
citv. That shall be a blessed change


OHAP. XLVUTL.





from the present scene of disorder and
confusion to a world wherein all be-
neath God, from the highest to the
lowest, know and keep their place in
the most perfect harmony, love, and
blessedness.”—Fausset.


Ver. 35. “The glory and joy of
heaven shall not be so much the ab-
sence of all present woes and the pre-
sence of all the other good things
which God shall bestow, as it shall
consist in this: the Lord Himself shall
be there as the everlasting portion, joy,
and light of His people.” Fausseé.

— “That such scenes should have
been described with such assured confi-
dence and at a time so deeply over-
spread with gloom, was indeed an
ennobling triumph of faith over sight.
It gave a most illustrious proof of the
height in spiritual discernment and
far-seeing insight into the purposes of
Heaven, which is sometimes imparted
in the hour of greatest need, especially
to the more select instruments of the
Spirit’s working. Here the heart of
faith is taught never to despair, even
in the darkest seasons. And when it
is seen how much of the scheme de-
lineated in the prophetic vision has
already been accomplished, should not
believers feel encouraged to look and
strive for its complete realisation ?”—
Fairbairn.

— “Here endeth this remarkable
vision, which, though greatly mystified
by many of the attempts to explain it,
stands forth to view on the sacred
page as a noble specimen of Divine
Wisdom, admirably calculated to in-
spire the captive exiles in Babylonia
with the cheering hope of their re-
settlement in their own land and the
restoration of their beloved metropolis
and Temple. In contemplating it, the
truly spiritually-minded Christian, with
his thoughts raised above all earthly
localities, will not perplex himself
with subtle and trifling inquiries, but
grasp the grand ideas which the vision
suggests, and anticipate for himself in
a future world a realisation of what
was only dimly shadowed forth by that

described "— Henderson.
493


GHAP., XLVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.


HOMILETICS.
JEHOVAH-SHAMMAH: THE CITY OF THE DIVINE PRESENCE
(Ver. 35.)


I. An abode of impregnable safety. “The Lord is there.” He will be
always there, never to desert it as He did the earthly Temple because of the
sins of His people. It is sustained and defended at every point by His in-
vincible power. The enemy assails in vain; no weapon can pierce the invul-
nerable defence, Evil cannot invade its holy precincts. Its inhabitants are for
ever freed from the struggles and warfare with sin with which their earthly
life has been harassed, ‘The Divine Ruler governs with irresistible and loving
authority, and the order and peace of the city remain for ever unbroken.


IL An abode of unfading beauty and splendour. ‘The Lord is there.” The
city shines with the reflected glory of His matchless perfections, and every part
of the edifice is moulded into indescribable beauty and tipped with splendour,
Perfection is the highest beauty. The Lord beautifies everything He touches.
There is not a flower that blooms, a bird that flies, or a star that glitters but
is adorned in every part of its wondrous structure with the reflected beauty
of the Divine Artist. What, then, must be the inimitable beauty of the soul
which, created in the Divine image, redeemed and transfigured by Divine love,
is now admitted a citizen of the heavenly commonwealth, to bask for ever in
the glory of the Divine presence 4


III. An abode of endlessly satisfying joy. ‘The Lord is there.” In His
presence is fulness of Joy (Ps. xvi. 11). The withdrawal of that presence is
the soul’s acutest misery, and is a catastrophe #2 be constantly deprecated
(Ps. li. 11). The joy of earth is mingled with disappointment and distress;
but in the city of the Divine presence no sorrow wrings the heart with
anguish or brims the eyes with tears. The soul is satisfied for ever with the
raptures of the ever-blessed God.


‘Let earth repent, and hell despair,
This City has a sure defence:
Her name is called ‘The Lord is thee,’
And who has power to drive Him thence ?”-—Oowper,


REFLECTED RAYs FROM THE Best LiteRARY LIGHTS ON THE SIGNIFICANCE
OF EZEKIEL’s TEMPLE.


“The whole wondrous vision is only the picture of a condition of surpassing
glory, expressed in imagery peculiar to the prophet. No one thinks of taking
the almost parallel visions of St. John in the Apocalypse as literal descriptions,
We do not expect to see the holy city, the New Jerusalem, actually coming
down from God, out of heaven, nor that it will be literally four-square, with
walls and gates like an ancient town, nor that the walls will be over 200
feet high, or the city itself 1500 miles square, or that its buildings and spires
will rise 1500 miles into the air; and yet it must be done, if the description is
to be understood otherwise than figuratively. To Ezekiel and St. John alike,
the only aim was to convey the highest conception of magnificence as each
imagined it most vividly presented. Living in the age of Rome and great
provincial cities, St. John thinks of a New Jerusalem such as he describes

494


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. CHAP. XLYIII.





imbued with a strongly Jewish and priestly bias, Ezekiel sees a glorious
Temple rise before him, and all the details of a re-establishment of the
Theocracy in Palestine, with transcendent splendour. To the mind of St.
John, the Temple had ceased to be a central religious thought; in that of
Ezekiel, the priest, it was supreme. In both, the inspired writer is left free to
express the surpassing glory of the Messianic age in the only way possible ta
his modes of thought and the ideas of his age.” —Geikie’s Hours with the Bible.


“It was probably a Jubilee year when this vision was seen. The Temple
and city were in ruins, but God was pleased in this way to revive the hopes
of His people.

“Grotius and others have conceived that Ezekiel was simply guided to leave
behind patterns on the basis of which the Temple should in after-days be
rebuilt and its services restored. But an examination of the vision will show
the insufficiency of this explanation. Not only was this plan never carried
out, but it was, as Ezekiel must have known, incapable of execution. The
physicai features cf the land would not admit of the separation of precincts a
mile square, surrounded by a territory sixteen miles by forty-eight. The river,
though connected with the stream brought by conduit-pipes into the actual
Temple, soon passes into a condition wholly ideal, and the equal apportionment
of the land to each of the twelve tribes is compatible neither with history nor
geography. That the Temple and its services were symbolical of the Sacrifice
and of the Priesthood of Christ the Epistle to the Hebrews sufficiently proves.
The assemblage of the Christian Church around Christ as the central object of
worship was that of which the assemblage of the people around the Temple
was the type and representative ; and it is more simple to understand the vision
as portraying immediately the Church of Christ, than to refer to such a partial
fulfilment as would give to the details an unreality discouraging to such as
were looking to an actual rebuilding. But as the Jews already knew some-
thing of the typical character of the Temple services, this vision was intended
to teach them more, and the very impossibility of realising its form was to
draw them to the substance, and to give them prospects looking beyond any
material reconstruction, just as Haggai consoled them for their disappointment
at the erection of the second Temple by promises of spiritual glory.

“Others have looked upon the vision as purely allegorical, and disregarding
its symbolical character, have interpreted it according to mere fancy. But
many of the details had an actual existence in the original Temple, and some
were exactly repeated, as though they were essential and not accidental.

“If we are surprised at the minuteness of the details, we must remember
that it is of the essence of a vision that the seer has before him every line, as
in a carefully drawn picture. In verbal illustration much is left undescribed,
and the figures employed are often not carried out; but in a vision the seer at
least has all before him, and it is the manner of Ezekiel to describe all he
sees, and so to put his reader in the same position as himself. This may
account for the insertion of details unimportant in themselves; but the num-
bers and figures employed are not without their meaning. Bahr has, in an
elaborate treatise, shown that among the Eastern nations numbers and figures
have ever had a highly symbolical character, and has applied such symbolism
to the details of the Tabernacle and of the Temple. Without entering into
particulars, we may remark that the symbolical numbers of the Temple of
Solomon were repeated in the vision of Ezekiel, which reproduces with scrupu-
lous accuracy the leading dimensions of the most holy part of the edifice, and,
even where there are variations, employs constantly the same fundamental
sumbers and figures. Among the Hebrews the perfect figure was the square
or the cube, and harmony was thought to be attained by exact equalitv. av


435


OHAP, XLVIIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL.





by the repetition of like dimensions. Thus in the ideal Temple, as in the
real, we find the fundamental measure of 100 cubits square, which is main.
tained in the Temple-court and in the court of sacrifice.

“ The vision is intended to depict the perpetual worship of the God of heaven
in the Kingdom of Christ. To the mind of an Israelite the proper figure to
represent this would be the Temple and its services, with people, priest, and
prince each doing their fitting part.

“Tn other parts of this book Ezekiel points forward to the spiritual teaching
of the Gospel; here to a people mourning over a ruined Temple, scattered
priesthood, and a captive king, the seer sets forth in visions that which the
last of the prophets foretold in words (Mal. i, 11), This will aiso account for
the absence of all mention of the high priest and his office. In the old dis-
pensation the chief function of the high priest was the performance of the great
act which typified the atonement wrought by the sacrifice and death of Christ
for the sins of the world. This atonement was effected once for all upon the
Cross, and in the new dispensation Christ appears in the midst of His people
as their Prince and Head, leading and preseuting their prayers and praises
day by day to His Father in heaven.

“Tt is to be observed that the vision represents the coming dispensation as a
kingdom, and in this respect has especial reference to the rule of Messiah,
foretold under the name of David. We find that Solomon took a special part
in the Temple-services as king, and here there are new and remarkable pro-
visions for the prince; and thus is brought forth, as a leading feature in the
vision, the figure of a king reigning in righteousness, the representative of
Jehovah upon earth.”—Speaker’s Commentary.


“The description of the Temple does not correspond with the plan of the
Tabernacle, or that of the ftrst Temple. These were real buildings, and were
erected according to the patterns shown by God Himself to Moses and to
David; but this is an ideal communicated, not to a leader or king in order
to be actually carried out, but to a seer, who wrote down his vision for the
consolation of the captives of Babylon. It cannot even have been meant that
this ideal structure should have been built by the Jews after the return from
captivity, or at any subsequent period. The dimensions of the Temple, as
given in the vision, are greater than the entire ancient city of Jerusalem,
The dimensions assigned to the city are as great as the whole of Palestine
between the Jordan and the Mediterranean Sea, and could not be placed on
a square centring at Mount Zion without covering part of that sea. Plainly
the Temple is ideal, and so is the city. The vision was given to keep before
the minds of the exiles the duty of rebuilding Jerusalem and the Temple on
their restoration to their own land. The stupendous scale of the vision was,
we presume, intended to project the thoughts of devout readers into far-distant
times—not the times of the present Church of God, but those of the future
glory and blessing on the earth, centring at Zion and Jerusalem, when the
Lord shall be King over all the earth, and the Holy City shall be named
Jehovah-Shammah, ‘The Lord is there,’”—Donald Fraser, D.D.


“ That there be things hard to be understood in the Sacred Scriptures these
nine last chapters, as well as the beginning of Ezekiel, do abundantly testify ;
and such difficult things are in these last that they have made many men of the
greatest parts to tremble at the thought of interpreting them. The Rabbins
say that the first of Ezekiel and these last chapters are inexplicable secrets,
and understood by none, and therefore forbid their disciples to read them ;
adding, when Elias shall come he will explain all things, Jerome, that great
light in his time, professes his trepidation hereat, that he did knock at a closed

496


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL, OHAP, XLVIIL








door. Gregory the Great, when he went about this work, said, ‘We pursue a
midnight journey.’ Maldonate affirms that this last prophecy of Ezekiel is so
difficult and dark that it appears scarcely possible to be understood. C&colam-
padius tells us that in chapter xlii, there is the grand difficulty which ancient
expositors understood not; and he brings in Rabbi Solomon, who wrote upon
the whole Talmud, saying that he thinks there is not anything extant which
aids the understanding of it ; and professes that neither by his own study, aid
of ministers, nor by his own reading, he attained any help in understanding the
meaning of this building, but only what he had from heaven: and of himself he
saith, chap. xlv., ‘In this passage, above all others, I feel the weakness of my
own understanding, yet silently I adore its mysteries, It is good to tremble
at the Word of God, both what we understand and what we understand not ; for
all is of equal authority, and to him that trembles thereat the Lord looketh,
and will let in light. The vision is dark, but God dwells in darkness; the
Temple and city are dark, but Jehovah-Shammah, ‘The Lord is there,’ whom
we most humbly desire to let out some beams of light, whereby we may come
e understand something of the incredible sweetness of these dark and deep
things.

“This vision, therefore, points out the introduction of a better hope, viz., the
Church of Christ under the Gospel, A. Lapide tells us that many Rabbins and
Jews refer this Temple and city to the Messiah, expecting that He should build
them ; and because this third Temple and new city are not yet built they think
the Messiah is not yet come. That which the vision doth chiefly hold out unto
us is, the building of the Christian Temple, with the worship thereof, under
Jewish expressions which began to be accomplished in the apostles’ days. And
that the spiritual Temple, consisting of believing Jews and Gentiles, is chiefly
intended we may see from that correspondency between Ezekiel and John in
his Gospel and Revelation.”—Greenhill,


‘The import of the vision in the main is this: that God would in due time
accomplish the restoration of His exiled people to the land of their fathers,
effect the reconstruction of their ruined Temple and reorganisation of its
religious services, and bless them with manifest tokens of His favour. At the
time it was granted, the Hebrews were in a state of the lowest depression in
Babylon.

“Fourteen years had elapsed since the destruction of their sacred edifice,
and nothing could have been better calculated to revive their drooping hopes,
reinvigorate their confidence in their Covenant-God, and encourage them to
return to Palestine when the hour of their liberation should arrive, than the
brilliant prospect of the restoration of their civil and religious privileges, which
the prophet here holds out to their view.

‘“ Let now any reader of ordinary intelligence turn up the description of the
vision, and let him be asked what is the impression which it naturally makes
upon him, and which he finds it impossible to dismiss from his mind, and he
will candidly own that it is that of a literal Temple. With respect to the
waters, chap. xlvii., it is altogether different. Here there was nothing left for
the Jews to do in bringing about the realisation of the vision. Having left the
Temple, the seat of the Divine residence, and the source whence blessings were
to flow to the restored Hebrew nation, the prophet is carried in vision south-
wards into the regions of the Dead Sea, which had been noted for everything
that was forbidden and noxious in its aspect—the very embodiment of barrenness
and desolation, These were now to be converted into fertility and beauty, As
in the previous condition they were strikingly symbolical of the spiritually
unproductive and abhorrent character of idolatrous Israel, so they were now to
serve as images of the renewed state of things when God should bring back His

95 497


OMAP, XLVUL. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,





people, and, according to His promises, bless them by conferring upon them
abundantly the rich tokens of His regard. By the copious effusions of the
influences of His Holy Spirit, He would restore His Church to spiritual life, and
gender her instrumental in diffusing blessings to the world around.

“The only apparently plausible objection that can be taken to the literal
interpretation of the Temple is founded on the dimensions assigned to it.
It remains, however, to be settled whether reeds be the measure intended,
and whether the language be not susceptible of another construction, Nor is
there any inconsistency in interpreting one part of the vision literally and the
other symbolically. The cases are perfectly different. In the one a literal
Temple was required to meet the circumstances of the exiled Hebrews; in the
other, though outwardly restored, the Temple and Temple-worship weuld still
have left them in a state of spiritual destitution, if they had not received the
blessing from on high. The rich and abundant communication of this blessing
we conceive to be beautifully set forth under the image of a river issuing forth
from the Divine presence in the new Temple, and, increasing as it flows in
the direction of the Dead Sea, spreading life and fertility wherever it comes.”
—E, Henderson, D.D.


“If any one will take up the full circuit of the wall that encompassed the
holy ground, according to our English measure it will amount to half a mile
and about one hundred and sixty-six yards. And whosoever, likewise, will
measure the square of Ezekiel (chap. xlii, 20), he will find it six times as large
as this (chap. xl 5), the whole amounting to three miles and a half and about
one hundred and forty yards—a compass incomparably larger than Mount
Moriah divers times over; and by this very thing is shown that that is
spiritually and mystically to be understood.

“The description of the Temple and city that he hath given in the end of his
book, as it was a prediction of some good to come, so was that prediction true,
thus far according to the very letter—namely, that there should be a Temple
and a city newly built; and so it was a promise and a comfort to the people then
in captivity of their restoring again to their own land, and their enjoying
Jerusalem and the Temple again as they had done in former time before their
removing aud captivating out of their own country. But as for a literal
respondency of that city and Temple to all the particulars of his description,
it is so far from it that his temple is delineated larger than all the earthly
Jerusalem, larger than all the land of Canaan. And, thereby, the scope of
the Holy Ghost in that ichnography (ground-plot) is clearly held out to be,
to signify the great enlarging of the spiritual Jerusalem and Temple, the Church
under the Gospel, and the spiritual beauty and glory of it, as well as to certify
captived Israel of hopes of an earthly city and Temple to be rebuilt; which
came to pass upon their return under Cyrus.”—Lighifoot,


“The general scope of the vision may be twofeld. 1. To assure the captives
that they should not only return to their own land and be settled there, which
had been often promised in the foregoing chapters, but that they should have,
and therefore ought to be encouraged to build, another Temple, which God
would own, and where He would meet and bless them; that the ordinances of
their worship should be revived, and the sacred priesthood should there attend ;
and though they should not have a king to live in such splendour as formerly,
yet they should have a prince or ruler that should countenance the Word of
God among them, and should himself be an example of a diligent attendance
upon it; and that prince, priests, and people should have a very comfortable
settlement in their own land. 2, To direct them to look further than all this,
and to expect the coming of the Messiah, who had before been prophesied of

498


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL OHAP. XLVIII.





under the name of David (the man that projected the building of the first
Temple), and who should set up a spiritual Temple, even the Gospel Church,
the glory of which should far exceed that of Solomon’s Temple, and which
should continue to the end of time. And the Gospel Temple, erected by
Christ and His apostles, was so closely connected with the second material
Temple, and was erected so carefully just at the time when that Temple fell
into decay, being designed to receive its glories when it resigned them, that it
was proper enough that they should both be referred to in one and the same
vision ; which vision, under the type and figure of a Temple and altar, priests
and sacrifices, foreshowed the spiritual worship that should be performed in
Gospel times, and that worship perfected at last in the kingdom of glory, in
which, doubtless, these visions will have their full accomplishment; if not, as
some think, in a glorious and happy state of the Gospel Church to take place
on earth in latter days,”— Benson.


“Tt is a great thought which presents itself unadorned to our view in the
prophetico-symbolic Temple: God henceforth dwells in perfect peace, revealing
Himself in the unbounded fulness of His glory, making Himself known in the
living Word of progressive, saving, and sanctifying redemption. Everything is
placed upon the ample circuit of the Temple, whose extended court receives
all people, and through whose high and open gates the King of Glory is to enter
in (Ps, xxiv, 7-9), and then upon the order and harmony of the Divine
habitations, the well-proportioned building (chap. xlii. 10); and the revela-
tions of the holiest are stored up in the pure deep water of His Word, which
in life-giving streams issues from the Temple. The stone tables of the Law are
consumed, and the fresh and free fountain of eternal truth streams forth from
the Temple of the Spirit, quickening and vivifying in land and sea, awakening
by its creative and fructifying power a new and mighty race on earth, And
thus hast thou, much-misjudged yet lofty seer, in the unconscious depth of thy
mysteriously flowing language, set up upon the great undistinguishing, well-
proportioned, and beautifully compacted building a type of the simple yet lofty
Temple of Christ, from which flows the spiritual fountain of life,”— Umbreit.


“The ideal Temple exhibits, not the precise literal outline, but the essential
character of the worship of Messiah as it shall be when He shall exercise sway
in Jerusalem among His own people, the Jews, and thence to the ends of the
earth. A Temple with sacrifices now would be a denial of the all-sufficiency of
the sacrifice of Christ. He who sacrificed before, confessed the Messiah; He
who should sacrifice now would solemnly deny Him. These difficulties, how-
ever, may be all seeming, not real. Faith accepts God’s Word as it is, waits for
the event, sure that it will clear up all such difficulties. Perhaps, as some think,
the beau-ideal of a sacred commonwealth is given according to the then-existing
pattern of Temple-services, which would be the imagery most familiar to the
prophet. The minute particularising of details is in accordance with Ezekiel’s
style, even in describing purely ideal scenes. The old Temple embodied, in
visible forms and rites, spiritual truths affecting the people, even when absent
from it. So this ideal Temple is made, in the absence of the outward Temple,
to serve by description the same purpose of symbolical instruction as the old
literal Temple did by forms and acts. As in the beginning God promised to be
a Sanctuary to the captives at the Chebar, so now at the close is promised a
complete restoration and realisation of the theocratic worship and polity under
Messiah, in its noblest ideal (Jer. xxxi. 38-40). Israel’s province may here-
after be to show the essential identity, even in the minute details of the Temple
sacrifices, between the Law and Gospel (Rom. x. 4, 8). The ideal of the
theocratic Temple will then first be realised.” —Fausset.

499


OHAP XLYII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,








“ As to the Messianic character of the substance of this whole vision Jewish
and Christian commentators are generally agreed; and the opinion which,
according to Jerome, many of the Jews entertained, and which has been sup-
ported by the rationalistic expositors after the example of Grotius—namely, that
Ezekiel describes the Temple of Solomon destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar as a
model for the rebuilding of it after the return of the Jews from the captivity—
has not found much favour, inasmuch as, apart from all other objections to which
it is exposed, it is upset by the fact that not only are its supporters unable to
make anything of the description of the spring which issues from the threshold
of the Temple, but they are also unable to explain the separation of the Temple
from the city of Jerusalem ; as it would never have occurred to any Jewish
patriot, apart from Divine revelation, much less to a priest like Ezekiel, who
claims such important prerogatives for the prince of the family of David in
relation to the Temple, to remove the house of Jehovah from Mount Zion, the
seat of the royal house of David, and out of the bounds and territory of the
city of Jerusalem. But even if we lay aside this view, and the one related to
it, viz., that the whole vision contains nothing more than ideal hopes and
desires of better things belonging to that age, with regard to the future restora-
tion of the destroyed Temple and kingdom, the commentators, who acknowledge
the Divine origin of prophecy and the Messianic character of the vision, differ
very widely from one another with reference to the question how the vision is
to be interpreted ; some declaring themselves quite as decidedly in favour of
the literal explanation as others in favour of the figurative or symbolico-typical
view, which they regard as the only correct and Scriptural one,”— Keil.


‘‘ According to some we have here ‘a model, according to which, on the
return of the people, the Temple should have been rebuilt,’—a building specifica.
tion by Divine authority. But this opinion forgets that we have here to do not
with an architect but with a prophet—with one whose department is not the
hands but the hearts, which he has to awaken to faith and hope. It cannot
produce a single analogy from the prophetic region: nowhere have the prophets
intruded into the department of legislation, for which under the old covenant
other organs were provided. Especially all the other prophecies of Ezekiel of
the time after the destruction bear not a legislative but a hortatory character.
In particular, the adjoining prophecy concerning Gog and Magog leads us to
expect that here also much will belong to mere pictorial description, which is
excluded if we ascribe a legislative import to the section. To this is added the
obvious impossibility of erecting a building according to the specifications given.
These suffice only to give play to the imagination. We have in particular
almost nothing of materials, to which so much space is devoted in the descrip-
tion of Solomon’s Temple. As a rule, the specifications are confined to the
mere measures and distances ; whence those who, like Villalpandus, have under-
taken to give literal plans of Ezekiel’s Temple have been obliged to draw much
from their own fancy. Lastly, in the building of the second Temple, it is mani-
fest that no reference is made to Ezekiel’s Temple, As the reason of this cannot
be sought in any doubt of the Divine mission of Ezekiel, whose prophecies were
admitted into the canon, it can only be found in this, that men saw in this
prophecy something else than a building specification. The restoration of the
city and the Temple rests on the ground of the firm conviction of the living
power and indestructibility of the Kingdom of God, the symbol of which wae
the Temple, according to a view pervading the whole of the Old and New Testa-
ment. And as the prophecy reaches beyond its first fulfilment, it guarantees
that within the Kingdom of God life shall arise out of every death—that the
old covenant cannot go down without rising again gloriously in the new,”
Hengstenberg.

500


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL. OHAP. XLVEEL





“What is this Temple? The first obvious suggestion is, that Ezekiel was
looking forward to the times of Ezra; that this Temple is an anticipation of that
of which Zerubbabel brought forth the headstone. But the building which
rises before the eyes of the seer covers an area which the second Temple never
can have occupied. In Ezekiel’s vision there is a distinct allusion to that
appearance of the glory of the Lord which belonged, the Jews say, exclusively
to the elder building. Christian writers have availed themselves of these
circumstances to decide peremptorily that the vision is of a spiritual, not an
earthly Temple. The difficulties in the way of such an opinion are very great.
Accurate admeasurements in feet and cubits seem as if they must relate to a
visible, not to an invisible fabric. There are still two possible opinions One
is popular among many of our countrymen. It is, that a Temple exactly
answering to Kzekiel’s description will appear hereafter in Jerusalem. The
other, that Ezekiel carried with him into Chaldea the habits, the prejudices, and
formality of the priestly order to which he belonged. Therefore, though he
had high moral purposes and divine instincts, he could not but regard the
reappearance of a Temple like that which Nebuzaradan had destroyed, only
more magnificent, as the consummation of an Israelite’s dreams and hopes.

“‘ But where did the prophet get these measures? To what did they corre.
spond? There cannot be the slightest doubt, I conceive, tuat the general form
and construction of the building, the different parts of which it was to consist,
the cherubim and palm-trees which were to adorn it, were suggested to him by
that which he had actually seen, If he taught that the future was to be unlike
the past, that there was no common root out of which they both grew, he would
be faithless to his vocation, he would be forgetting the permanent and eternal
Being. Solomon’s Temple had been Ezekiel’s primer or first lesson-book. I have
anticipated what I have to say to those who maintain that Ezekiel is giving us the
pattern of a Temple made of living stones, not of stones hewn out of an earthly
quarry. By a spiritual Temple they do net, I trust, mean an unsubstantial
Temple, one built of clouds and mists, one erected by the eye whicn sees it.
They believe, doubtless, the spiritual temple to be a spiritual society, possessing
a real unity inhabited by the Divine Presence resting on the Divine Name,
Well, I do not doubt that Ezekiel saw more or less clearly the pattern in
earthly forms, But we must remember, first, not to confound the pattern with
the earthly forms which set it forth; secondly, we must assure ourselves that
. whatever is spiritual and substantial will seek to find some expression for itself,
to make the things of earth into mirrors which may reflect at least a portion of
ita glory. In chap. xlvi. 8 we have announced a great moral and political law
which was a necessary and natural corollary from the doctrine that the Temple
was to be the building which denoted the restoration of the national society.
This is a law which those who merely talk of a spiritual Temple without be-
lieving that that Temple is to make its influence felt in this world would never
dream of promulgating. This is a law which it was most strictly in the function
of a Jewish prophet to assert, not as proceeding from him, not even as proceed-
ing from Moses, but as coming from the mouth of the Lord.”—F, D. Maurice.


“The views entertained upon the vision generally may be ranged under four
classes. I. The historico-literal, which takes all as a prosaic description of what
had existed in the times immediately before the captivity, in connection with
Solomon’s Temple, II. The historico-ideal, According to it the pattern exhibited
to Ezekiel differed materially from anything that previously existed, and pre-
sented for the first time what showd hare been after the return from the
captivity, though from the remissness and corruption of the people it never
was properly realised. III. The Jewish carnal view. It is the opinion of some
Jewish writers that the description of Esekiel was actually followed by the

501


oHaP. XLVIil, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZERIBL.





children of the captivity as far as their circumstances would allow, and that
Herod, when he renovated and enlarged it, copied after the same pattern. But
as this was necessarily done in an imperfect manner, it waits to be properly
accomplished by the Messiah, who, when He appears, shall cause the Temple
to be reared precisely as here described. IV. The Christian-spiritual or typical
view, according to which the whole representation was not intended to find
either in Jewish or Christian times an express and formal realisation, but was
a grand complicated symbol of the good which God had in reserve for His
Church, especially under the coming dispensation of the Gospel. There are
several considerations to be kept in view in the interpretation of the vision.
1. That the description purports to be a vision—a scheme of things exhibited
to the mental eye of the prophet in the visions of God. This alone marks it to
be of an ideal character. 2. That this is confirmed by the substance of it, as
there is much that seems obviously designed to force on us the conviction of
its ideal character. There are things in the description which, taken literally,
are in the highest degree improbable, and even involve natural impossibilities,
3. That some may be disposed to imagine that, as they expect certain physical
changes to be effected upon the land before the prophecy can be carried into
fulfilment, these may be adjusted in such a manner as to admit of the prophet’s
measurements being literally applied. It is impossible, however, to admit such
@ supposition, 4, That the vision, as it must, if understood literally, imply
the ultimate restoration of the ceremonials of Judaism, so it inevitably places
the prophet in direct contradiction to the writers of the New Testament.
5. That, holding the description to be conclusively of an ideal character, we
affirm that the idealism is precisely of the same kind as that which appeared in
some of the earlier visions—visions that must necessarily have already passed
into fulfilment, and which therefore may justly be regarded as furnishing a key
to the right understanding of the one before us. 6. That, looking to the manifold
and minute particulars given in the description, some may be disposed to think
it highly improbable that anything short of an exact and literal fulfilment
should have been intended. 7. That it may be asked whether the feeling
against a spiritual understanding of the vision and a demand for outward
scenes and objects literally corresponding to it does not spring to a large
extent from false notions regarding the ancient Temple and its ministrations
and ordinances of worship, as if these possessed an independent value apart
from the spiritual truths they symbolically expressed? On the contrary, the
Temple, with all that belonged to it, was an embodied representation of Divine
realities, 8. That in the interpretation of the vision we must keep carefully
in mind the circumstances in which it was given, and look at it, not as from a
New but as from an Old Testament point of view. We must throw ourselves
back as far as possible into the position of the prophet himself. He speaks
chiefly of Gospel times, but as one still dwelling under the veil and uttering
the language of legal timea."—Patrick Fairbairn, DD.


INDEX.


Activity, God in human, 116

Adaptedness of God’s messages, 30

Adultery, spiritual, 250

Adversities of the Church, the, 411

Afflicted, God the sanctuary of the, 129

Agent of Divine vengeance, the, 328

Altar a representation of Christ, the, 442

——— an emblem of trua worship, the, 457

— the Divinely authorised, 458

Apostasy, Israel’s, 166; the punishment of, 170

Appeal of religion to the feelings, the, 127

Architect of the Divine Temple, the, 429

Art, the noblest province of, 442

Aspects of God’s government over men, 68%

—— under which God communicates with
men, 134 /

Atheistic idea, the, 485

Attainments, high spiritual, 480

Audacity of evil, the, 410

BaD news, 352

Bad shepherd, a, 359

Balances, just, 471

Banquet, a strange, 421

Barrenness and fruitfulness, moral, 487

Beauty, 341

Believer, the security of the, 391

Best efforts of man, the, 459

Blasphemy, 234

Blessing, the Church a source of, 365

Blessing of food and clothing, the, 447

Boldness, spiritual, 365 :

Bones, vision of the dry, 400

Brain, a wicked, 412

Building, the Church of God a, 430

Burial of the slain, the, 420

CaLL to repentance, an earnest, 208

Canaan, the earthly, a type of the heavenly, 490

Care over His people, God's, 361

Catalogue of Jerusalem’s sins, the, 267

Chambers of imagery, 94

—— of the Temple, the, 433

Christ, a Tree prepared by God, 189

Christian Church, Temple a symbol of the,
438

Tnristians, the real security of, 157

@hurch a source of blessing, the, 365; the ad-
ye.sities of the, 411; of God a building,
the, 430; the entrance to the, 436; the
Messianic, 449; the law of God’s, 457; of
God, the centrality of the, 492

Citizens, holy, 492

City, a happy, 492; of God, the, 493; of the
Divine Fresence, the, 494

Commission, requisites for executing the, 24

Commonwealth, an ideal, 471

Conclusions as to sin, 65

Conditions of spiritual knowledge, 62

Confederacies, unholy, 325

Consideration, 201

Conscious sin, 391

Conversion, 350; Israel's, 248

Gonverted, man, 389

Corruption of true worship, $2

— of the nation, the, 274

Oreation’s materials instructing men, &

Credibility of prophecy, the, 418

Critics, the preacher's, 354

DarKngss, $38

Dead, the grim welcome of the, 341

Death, 333; in the presence of, 398 ; vision of
sudden, 123; of Ezekiel’s wife, Jerusalem’s
destruction typified by, 300

Decorum, religious, 476

Defeat of the enemies of God's perple, 416


Defeated, the moan of the, 328

Detiler, the, 383

Deliverance, the mark of, 108

Delusiveness of idolatry, 325

Departing God, a, 131

Designation of the prophet, genorai conditions
of the, 7; preliminary steps to the, 9

Desolations of the sword, the, 338

Difficulties and their conquest, 337

Dignity of the civil ruler, the, 461

Divine communications to man, 426

— dispensations, the mixed character of, 240

—— faithfulness, the, 488

—— impartiality, the, 387

—— generosity, the, 442

—— government, the unswerving equity of, 347

— justice, the, 363

judgment on unfaithful ministers, 360

ader, the, 476

manifestations, 452

— mercy, the, 465

the pitifulness of the, 349

—— message, the human side of the, 388

— protection, the, 413

— revelations, 465

— Kuler, the, 455

—- solicitude, 363

—— sympathy with nature, the, 877

Temple, the grandeur of tha, 449

—— things, progress in, 432

the vision of, 455

—— vengeance, the agent of, $28

the terribleness of the, 336

—— Word, the, 392

the infallible certitude of the, 419

Divinely authorised altar, the, 458

—— inspired seer, a, 426

Duty accepted for reasons, 26; neglect of, 347;
ministerial, 466 ; of the wealthy, the, 477

Eayrt humbled, 319

Elders before Ezekiel, the, 218

Election, Israel’s, 224

Emotional worship, 97

Empire, the river the natural souree of, 332

End of man’s existence, the, 155

Enemies of God, the, 367

—— of the truth, fierce onslaught of the, 408

—— God's proceedings against His, 413

—— of God’s people, signal defeat of the, 416

—— God’s dealings with His, 418

Entrance to the Church, the, 436

Equity of the Divine government. the, 347

—— religion the basis of true, 469

—— of God’s government, the, 203

Error preached, 143

Estimates, false, 350

Evidences of Divine judgment, 421

Evil, the audacity of, 410; the power of, 412;
increase of, 83

Ezekiel’s Temple, reflected rays from the best
literary lights on the significance of, 494

Faos of God, the hidden and the open, 422

Faithful warning, 346; the heritage of the, 488

Faithfulness, the Divine, 488

in stewardship, 110

Fallen greatness, 332

False estimates, 350

Family blessing, ministerial maintenance @
source of, 467

Fate of the proud, the, 420

Fear, reasons for, 838

Features of Divine disciplinary government, 108

Feelings, appeal of religion te the, 127

Feet and wings, 118

503























INDEX.





Fertility of nature, the, 378

Fidelity in God’s service, 466

Final issue of Divine puvishment, the, 421

Final judgments upon Jerusalem, 297

Fishers in Gospel waters, 486

Food, spiritual, 479

—— the moral significance of daily, 478

—— and clothing, the blessing of, 447

Freedom from future evils, misleading hopes of,
140

Fulfilled prophesy, 419

Funeral chaut oer the graves of fallen nations,
339

GuneRositTv, the Divine, 442

—— justice and, 477

Genuine repentance, 350

Glories of heaven, the, 463

Glory of Messiah's Kingdom, the, 188

God a hedge about His people, 276

—— a departing, 131

— and Nature, 376

—— glorified in redempiion, 388

—— revealed in judgment, 325

-——— the enemies of, 367

—— the presence of, 371

—- the name of, 385

— the hidden and the open face of, 422

— the visions of, 429

— the law of, 430

—— the heritage of the good, 467

— the impartiality of, 489

the city of, 493

— the judiciary administration of,

in human activity, 116

—— the sanctuary of the afilicted, 129

—— hiding Himself from Israel, 238

—— slow to punish, 411

God’s action against iniquities, 46 ; affecting His
servants, 48

—— call to service a trust, 36

—— care over His people, 361

for His servants, 492

— comfort in punishment achieved, 57

—— dealings with His enemies, 418

—— disclosure of sin, 90

—— goodness a motive for His activity, 422

—— government over men, some aspects of, 68

— enon on Israel justified, 173

—— knowledge of the tactics of the wicked, 412

—— messages, the adaptedness of, 30

— motive in salvation, 388

—— name, 226

— people, the sufferings of, 411

—— proceedings against His enemies, 413

—— purpose of mercy towards Israel, 177

—— punitive justice, 384

—— sword of vengeance against Jerusalem, 250

—— treatment of rebels, 465

—— ways made known, 87

Good, the inheritance of the, 488

— Shepherd, the, 364; king, a, 471

Gospel, the spread of the, 486; the power of
the, 486 ; waters, fishers in, 486

Government of God, the, 19

— the unswerving equity of the Divine, 847

—— features of Divine disciplinary, 103

the equity of God’s, 203

Gradation, the law of, 447

Gradualness of Divine revelation, the, 485

Graves of fallen nations, a funeral chant over
the, 339

Graves of our kindred, the, $41

Greatness, the perils of, 332

Greatness, fallen, 332

Grim welcome of the dead, the, 841

Guardian, a national, 346

Harpy eity, a, 492

Hatred, 370

504











Heart-renewal, 388

—— of stone and heart of flesh, the, 389

Heathen nations, the prophecies against, 304

Heaven, the glories of, 463

Heritage of the good, God the, 467

-—— of the faithful, the, 488

High spiritual attainments, 430

Highest truths, the, 440

Holiness the law of the new Temple, 454

Holy place, the most, 440; priesthood, a, 463)
citizens, 492

Hope for a ruined nation, 375

Horrors of waz, the, 324

Human body, the sacredness of the, 421

— life, the Temple-river emblematic of te:
ligion in the different stages of, 485

Human perplexity, 399

—— side of the Divine message, the, 382

Humility, 454

Hypocritical inquirers after God, 145

IDEA, the atheistic, 485

Idolatry in the heart, 146; vengeance on, 324;
the delusiveness of, 325

Imagery, -hambers of, 94

Impeachment of unfaithful rulers, 357

Impartiality, the Divine, 387 ; of God, the, 489

Individual responsibility, 346

Individuality of the soul, the, 194

Infallible certitude of the Divine Word, the, 219

Infatuation of the wicked, the, 419

of unbelief, 350

Influence, spiritual, 487

Inheritance of the wicked, the, 352

— of the good, the, 488

Iniquities, God’s action against, 46

—— affecting His people, God's actiun against, 43 -

Inquirers after God, hypocritical, 145

of false prophets, the, 148

Israel, God’s purpose of mercy towards, 177

Israel's apostasy, 166

—— conversion, 243

— election, 224

—— fallen royalty, lamentation over, 912

JEHOVAH, the opposition of, 328

— the revelation of the glory of, 451

—— the true worship of, 474

Jehovah -Shammah; the city of the Divine
Presence, 494

Jerusalem, the punishment of, 287

Jerusalem's destruction, the prophecy of, 247

typified by the death of Ezekiel's wife, 30€

— fall and rising, 260

—— sins, the catalogue of, 267

Joining the sticks, 403

Judah, the sin of, 284

— and Samaria, sins and punishment of, 29]

Judgment, God revealed in, 325

— evidence of Divine, 421

—— the last warning of, 294

— Tyre threatened with, 306

Judgments of God upon nations, the, 153

— upon Israel justified, God’s, 173

Judiciary administration of God, the, @8

Just balances, 471

Justice and generosity, 477

—— the Divine, 363

—— God’s punitive, 384

Justified, man, 389

KINDRED, the graves of our, 341

King, « good, 471

—— of Tyre, the, 313

Kingdom of God, the unity of the, 401

—— of Judah, lamentation for the, 215

Kingly office, the, 463

Knowledge, conditions of spiritual, 62

Lament, a pathetic, 324

Lamentation over Israel's fallen royalty, 215

-—— for the kingdom of Judah, 215











INDEX.





pend beret 470

st warning of judgment, the, 294

Law-of God, the 40

—— of gradation, the, 447

-— of God’s Church, the, 457

— te the unrighteous and righteous son, ths,


Laws for judging moral conduet, 39

Leader, the Divine, 476

Lies, refuges of, 123

Life, the new, 390

— national, 401

—— the river of the Water of, 481

-—— weak points in human, 77

—— unestimated influences on human, 113

Lessons of suffering, the, 327

—— from the Valley of Vision, 388

MAN converted, 389

—— and Nature, 376

Divine communications to, 428

—— justified, 389

—— of war, the, 419

=—— sinning, 384

——— the best efforts of, 459

Man’s destiny, how brought about, 7B

—— existence, the end of, 155

Manifestations, Divine, 452

Men, some aspects urder which God communi-
cates with, 134

Men’s evasion of the Divine interference, 187

Mercy, the pitifulness of tae Divine, 349

~— the Divine, 465

Message, an urgent, 399

Messiah’s Kingdom, the glory of, 188

Messianie Church, the, 449

Ministers, the Divine judgmoat on unfaithful, 360

Ministerial calling, the, 347

—— duties and privileges, 448

— duty, 466

maintenance a source of family blessing, 467

Misleading hopes of freedom, 140

Mixed character of Divine dispensations, the, 240

Moan of the defeated, the, 328

Monarch humbled, a proud, 326

Moral barrenness and fruitfulness, 487

— conduct, laws for judging, 39

— corrupticn in the Church, 159

—— reform, 391

— significance of daily food, 478

Morality, religion and, 98

Morning prayer, 476

Mourning for other men’s sins, 105

Name of God, the, 385

Nation, the corruption of the, 274

— the overthrow of a great, 822

-—— hope for a ruined, 375

the resuscitation of an effete, $36

National unity, 328,404

—— greatness no guarantee of permanence, 330

guardian, a, 346

—— ruin, sin the cause of, 380

—— life, 401

Nations, the interdependence of, $32

—— afuneral chant over the graves of fallen, 339

—— the judgment of God upon, 152

Nature, God and, 376

—— man and, 376

—— the Divine sympathy with, 377

— the fertility of, 378

— the productiveness of, 390

Neglect of duty, 347

Never-ending spring, 487

New life, the, 390

News, bad, 302

Noah, Daniel and Job, 153

Orrick, the priestly, 435; the kingly, 463

Offices of civil and spiritual watchmen
pered and contrasted, 344

















Qaslaught of the ewemics of the truth, 488
Opposition ef Jehovah, the, 328
Oppression, 199

Order, the perfect, 117

Ordinances of the Temple, the, 457
Overthrow of a great nation, the, $22
PARABLES, teaching by, 183

People of God, the unity of the, 404
Perfect order, the, 117

Perils of greatness, the, 332

Permanence, national greatness no guarantee


of,
Perplexity, human, 399
Picture of righteousness, a, 197
Pitifulness of the Divine merey, the, 349
Place of sacrifice, a, 434
—— the most holy, 440
Population, an increasing, 392
Postulates for an effective watchman, 88
Power of evil, the, 412
—— of the Gospel, the, 486
—— of the Word of God, the, 64
Prayer, the nature, necessity, and power of, 396
—— morning, 476
Prayers, unsatisfied, 108
Preacher, the successful, 399
Preacher’s critics, the, 354
Preaching, the secret of successful, 338
Presence, returning from the, 131
—— of God, the, 371
with His people, the, 405
—— the withdrawal of the Lord’s, 80
Priesthood, a holy, 463
Priestly office, the, 435
Productiveness of nature, the, 390
Progress in Divine things, 432
—— of truth, the, 484
Promise of the Spirit, the, 422
Promised blessing, 244
Prophecy of Jerusalem's destruction, 247
—— the credibility of, 413
—— fulfilled, 419
Prophecies against heathen nations, 304
Prophets, the inquirers of false, 148
Prosperity, spiritual, 386
Protection, the Divine, 413, 432
Proud, the fate of the, 420
monarch humbled, a, 326
Punish, Ged slow to, 411
Punishment, the final issue of the Divine, $Zi
— achieved, God’s comfort in, 67
—— of apostasy, the 170
—— of Jerusalem, the, 287
QUESTION, a suggestive, 486
Reasons for fear, 338
Rebels, God’a treatment of, 465
Redemption, God glorified in, 388
Reflected rays from the best literary lights oe
the significance of Ezekiel’s Temple, 494
Reform, moral, 391
Refuges of lies broken up, 122
Religion, spurious, 465
—— the basis of true equity, 469
—— and morality, 98
Religious decorum, 476
—— sensibility, the sources ef, 14
—— movements, women in, 1.
Repentance, genuine, 350
—— not efficacious, 204
—— an earnest call to, 208
Requisites for executing the commission, 28
Responsibility, individual, 346
Restraints in serving the Lord, 41
Resurrestion, spiritual, 398
Resuscitation of an effete nation, the, 335
Returning from the Presence, 131
Revelation, the gradualness of the Divine, 486








| Revelation of the Glory of Jehovah, the, 451


505


INDEX.


i


Revelations, Divine, 465

Reviling God’s people, 263

Revival, the secret of true, 398

Righteousness, a picture of, 197

River of the Water of Life, the, 481

River the natural source of empire, the, 382

Royalty aud worship, 475

Ruler, the Divine, 455

the dignity of the civil, 461

Rulers, impeachment of unfaithful, 357

SaBBATH privileges, 475

Sacred terrible sword-song, the, 253

Sacredness of the human body, the, 42)

Sacrifice, a place of, 434

Salvation is of the Lord, 162

—— God’s motive in, 388

Samaria, the sin of, 291, 282

®ecret of successful preaching, the, 308

Security of the believer, the, 391

of Christians, the real, 157

Seer, a Divinely inspired, 426

Sensibility, the sources of religious, 14

Sensitiveness to spiritual evil, 49

Servants, God’s care for His, 492

Service, fidelity in God’s, 466

Serving the Lord, restraints in, 41

Shepherd, a bad, 359

— the good, 364

——— the qualifications of the true, 360

Sin, unrepented, 348

—— the disastrous effects of, 359

—— the cause of national ruin, 380

— conscious, 391

—— some conclusions as to, 65

— trouble on trouble for, 71

—— God’s disclosure of, 90

—— of the first generation of Israel, 229

—— of the second generation of Isracl, 282

— of Judah, the, 284

Binning, man, 334

Sins, mourning for other men’s, 106

Slain, the burial of the, 420

Slander, 377

Smelting-furnace, a threefold, 271

Social instinct, the, 446

Solicitude, the Divine, 363

Soul, the individuality of the, 124

Sour grapes, 192

Speech of the wicked, the, 371

Spirit, the promise of the, 422

Spiritual boldness, 365; prosperity, 386; re
surrection, 398 ; food, 479; influence, 487 ;
evil, sensitiveness to, 49; adultery, 280

Bpoils of a great victory, the,

Spread of the Gospel, the, 486

Spring, never-ending, 487

Spurious religion, 455

Step higher, a, 434

Stewardship, faithfulness in, 126

Aticks, joining the, 403

Still upward, 441

Strange banquet, a, 421

Successful preacher, the, 399

Suffering, 372

~— the lessons of, 327

Sufferings of God’s people, the, 411

Suggestive question, a, 486

Summary of the sins and punishment of Jedah
and Samaria, 291

Sword, the desolations of the, 338

YEAOHING by parables, 183

Yempie, the architect of the Divine, 429

-——- the chambers of the, 433

=—— @ symbol of the Christian Church, the, 438


506














Temple, a representation of Christ and His
Church, the, 440 2

the grandeur of the Divine, 449

holiness the law of the new, 454

——- the new, 455

—— the ordinances of the, 457

Temple-river emblematic of religion in the
different stages of human life, the, 485

Temple-workers, 441

Time of God’s communication to be noted, 184

Trials, 254

Triumph of the wicked, the, 871

Trouble on trouble for sin, 71

True shepherd, the qualifications of the, 360

Truth, the onslaught of the enemies of the, 46

— the progress of, 484

Truths, the highest, 440

Tyre threatened with judgment, 308

—— the king of, 313

Tyre’s greatuess and downfall, 308

UNBELIEF, the infatuation of, 350

Unestimated influences on human life, 118

Unholy confederacies, 325

Unity, national, 328, 404

— of the Kingdom of God, the, 401

—— of the people of God, the, 404

Unsatisfied prayers, 108

Unrepented sin, 348

Unrighteous and righteous aon, the law of, 3%

Upward, still, 441

Urgent message, an, $99

VAIN worship, 89

Valley of Vision, lessons from the, 898

Vengeance on idolatry, 324

—— the agent of Divine, 328

——. the terribleness of the Divine, 336

—— against Jerusalem, God’s sword of, 3%

Victory, the spoils of a great, 420

Vision of the dry bones, 400

—— of Divine things, the, 455

— of the waters, the, 482

of sudden death, a, 123

Visions of God, the, 429

Wag, the horrors of, 324; the man of, 419

Warning, faithful, 346

of judgment, the last, 294

Watchman, postulates for an effective, &

Watchmen, the civil and spiritual, 344

Waters, the vision of the, 482

Weak points in human life, 77

Wealth unserviceable, 83

Wealthy, the duty of the, 477

Where much is given, much required, 65

Wicked brain, a, 412

— the inheritance of the, 352

— the triumph of the, 371

— the speech of the, 371

—— God's knowledge of the tacties of the, 412

-— the infatuation of the, 419

Wilful worship, 98

Wings, feet and, 118

Withdrawal of the Lord’s Presence, the, 80

Women in religious. movements, 142

Word, the Divine, 392 :

— of God, the power of the, 64

Workers for God: their privileges and distine
tion, 445

—— Temple, 441

Worship, vain, 89; corruption of true, 92; emu
tional, 97 ; pete and private, 447; royalty
and, 475; the altar an emblem of true, 47;
of Jehovah, the true, 474

Wrong-doing, 377

Zion, the prophecy against, 315





























| BS491 .P65/vollg


|__The Preacher s complete homiletical com





BS
4G/
Pbt


UG


THEOLOGY LIBRARY
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT


CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA
AA!


7
“4 34 3 Jo1711




























































as

4%.

4 ta

ithe ¢

ag t ‘J

+ 4% .
Setar or phye gs es
AiG atatatatetatatata™.
oP PLO DESC Oe ULES
Beh DESL REDE DE we wie)
Age ttesss gkatatat ates ysat
Pee ye bebe Pepe eae bebe et





fat etetet
Be APH De oe were)
PLD POL DL PEPE LOL PE DeS
ett
Rie ae ote Stats tetes





Nei<sete







aahe
Ata
<ieees





ites
Cee a eb ye reer)
4o4 484% 64 46458
Saye
Rat tt tae sat oe
PO i ae see
Cpe be be Dibra pita bebe!
seiacie “hi <h<
ASK see aitesehs ppp bebe!
4 CSchb oe bebs be pebe sept oie DE Debt ot eM M babe
DUBE D PME pEDE DL va bt bt PL DL abe St bt PADLUE oath ra be ROE SR OLS
LPL eve OE LD ee ry Dh pn De DER bean Dee Webs bebe We bt boot bbe
Ata gia e tang gti g i gta stat aha ata gi ate tata ale chat atest
Wha tnhat ah s5 st 4tat ses gtatatat tates, het tanta esas gatas tat ate?
Pater ut eS shat eeu ST See DEDEDE PATE VEY DEOL DL POEL ILP IDLE
PPAR ROR AAR AP
Cav nea COPD OE Deb SEDs DL bub SEP SE OK oe pte Dn ra ba R bet Be ba Ds baa bah
tect ebetate te tat nsec teenie she teat kites et sted tees gs et et ete tet ee
Debt Ee ron be bye bine bebe ie bees bape Pe Da bebs bebe Dab on ot Py Pe bab Dos Dy by
Ler bree pe yr eer br me bo ODEN by > PLOY, Me be Dt MEPL DL DED De DOW OLDS Pe DEM
2545556254 225¢ Pre ar ee bebe be ar Pe Pe Pe PE Pree La PL DEBE DL DEDEDE PCS
oats test he tate sate cece seis ste sen en sete teal eset abet tate tatitatisena
see atta seeates ca asacat Sees steseasctat Pata taset couse se sesesecageseserties
tah ah eS aS asec elas ate tata sinh tesa te Sac Sasa sesh seat eset eect ete teeta te hete
Eat oes ee Pate PEL Deen Pa bs baba Deby bs he pba by De bE BE ba baby bo hy POET De
Pt piStErRr Ero brat re oy ot Opt My PEE pe DEOL DEOL DML OA DE DE PL DC EDL DL DDE PE DEDEDE!
Lepr pr peer beeen PoP BP bt BED Stat bt OLDE ES BEDE OL ENDL EDP Le PEt DED OL ODPL OR DED S|
é & 48 4 PLD DEP SEOLDE PE PEPE POE PL DL DE DES
PSP LPRoa bab chy ePOL PEPE DL PLD PEPE PE DL UG PE PLPEPL DROP DP RrL PROD pP StS bor!
iaatate Shetesetat ¢ sg bebe ba seces
PEbebL De br St pepe DUDE MDE C bE be De DL UL PL EOL De Be ODL be DDL DEDEDE DLDE DESL DD
Paes Petee Sr Eo Rt BS Bib? br Et Me BE bE be DL be bt bebe See at bt OL bran be br be bt bt be bebe Dt DE Dt re}
Sc itadptoeste eee atssasat emetic ed genset itetatetas eS asain Schein lahat ete te ta tetatatetctetct 2
ERP ESSPo ayy ae ae De ORE DU ber MERE DDE me be ee bs DE DE Pe aE PE be Pr Dee DE bee be DE De bi be ot be DESE DE DED ES
£ Rep Debt nt pe Dh Ret peat pe pee DS pa En PLD SE DE OS DADE EL a BEOd be rs ba Bt DUDE D EDL DEDEDE Da
seen ae ys Set acea hetatate cette tehaseSeSetetese eked elas eketeseteSetcSetcSesesekehescecel ese gece
ESR pe Re Te PERT DD PEELE CDEP Bebe OPER OT RPL PCAC PLL OLP PEPE Pee
SPP ce DLP ER pr Behe Bebe Fe Dt Bebe Bib be Da DEP BE DA BLP DED DL PEPE D DS NEP PEP EP DEOL DP EP Se O p>
ese ataset ae sean Senese ParaeP ary robp rae pint ot stot or bho o BEDE DE pt ot Ot DED bE >be DeDL aE DEPP DEDEDE DLS
CeEbc bbe bean beep ber Rhee Mee os ben bs beht babe bi ba me Dh DL PL be Py bE DLR Pe PLDs Pa DEDEDE ODDS PE De PEPE Pe Pt OD DI
PER PCE PL De SLO PCO PE DEAE OT Dr EP DD ee DERE DT Debt ye be he be bebe Di be bebe Me DEDEDE DL DS DEDEDE DEON SE PEPE DL ADDN DRPL EDL]
iat se states s hs . SS eteSatetatete . Bake >»
Segeiahecaudsagtstgtetatetghaey tet cesactet sha sett tates Sebo aeoeat be pepe pe bebe bee bEDe be EPL DEE DEDEDE DEDEDE DEOL Ds Pipi
4 wt easeedtetat ate tet eSenescessevesercceseas, Sot pane ee et eh eeet ates ces EDU H PE De DEEDS Pe DEDEDE DE DD Ot Da)
RoMatetccet
aa sonata:
54:








<





aw
‘AA.



















































a eaatetat
ek ee het











art





ek













Bey





C3





e


























rs











peers


Peta, ey
an
ICV


aS.




















Sch = Sabet Pers Sei eheS<52
LAME PEVE Sep DUP ECOL DEPT EE DT DEDEDE DEER DE PDL ER DED DEDEDE DUDE bt bn by Dr DUDE Se bE DR DePEDS DEDEDE DLO

Digiahate Sasa ta lesssat ssa tate tate tote (eset stese hehe See sste tase ete Naha <eeasesasactan eitgeasek

5. sot etyhatetes. 44%, CPSPE PLP Pe eve De PEPE POL PCD PL DE PLO PL ILL PL PEPE PL PLP SPAT Epis ‘
Sta Dro bibe peDL ee oy Pe beer ee pepe bebe nt Be bt ot ox bet be ht De be bee PeBeSt DEON be Dr RE bebe br PDL OD De PEM Pes
At Bat aigt tect ss, zt tot ot, SPP EPP PLP LPL PL PL PEPE DEP EPL P EPL PL ial <4 het
Soot brn itp pe ae pt wot bets pep ee EP DEST SE EDC Oe De OT DE ST PLOT PT oT Da ep he DEDEDE DL bt bP Dr bP bE bn:

a Essa sated eke tace etecetegstaceesteieseategneeeeneate asseoteentseasecs bbbpps babe es bene.
454g te% e654 5< , 43425 Ohh ght ett yt arts DP alors







ogra


















re
We ak








Re tets






rary
a,


A






cy
3


*


‘ents
Us





ays hee,
‘
3













ai
ree?








ery








aie
fat






























yea








Fs


aftr obs
ak oe 3


























































Pye Fs















Fa ye












PLoS Perot Erbe ee prot} Sei prety <3 7 eh et eS <
Freer pEDe hobs bebe PE DED Pa DEBE PE DE DL BEDE RT DEOL DEDEDE DL be De DUD DE DL De Ot DO PL DE DE De DD PLD PEDO
Set peariepe ae best or ae Dice pet Stat ate Deby ibe PDR DE Dre ay DEL RRZE REDE ICNP DEPP PBL PED:
PPPS PLL PSPS TSP GPL Pea m EPL na Pa Pe Pe ot Pent PEL PL MG LICE PSPS P SIE RPS) BP b bibl bt So br by
CPatpepr ph SER Br EP yeh? oT Ree bor ST oT oP OtP TPE Pe SeDE DEPT REDE Dr bee br bt De PEDE be pi bebe bt BEDE DEDL DUDE DL)
Libya ar ar ul pe beat pea pe MeDr pepe pe pe bebe ae br at Ot Dr be Dr Re DE be pee De be PEM SEDL DA DL DDE De ODE DED DE DLS
Pe ba ee ee PD PLL PL ee De BBE) BOD, PE) Pe DL Pe PLP PP Pas
tak tes 82S 58a season os. PPS PE rates terrae nr pepe at DP bP Dea ae pr Dep at pear a bib? DP DP Dr DP ab Dr ot bel
Leet ahatctc tote tetese tc te retct ste tehate tate tatete tesa <a! eh eta hah Sah takes leh hahahah ehes Sat
Sanips me by be ete Py Be PL PLDT EPL De PLDT ES PLR PLDC DEDEDE DL DL HL DEDEDE DL DS Oy baba PPE DE PEO DEPT DEDE DEPE DEOL MEDD
gt pt ehetatata tata tetetetase’. Pot pe be pi br bebe ht yt bet pr been ee bt be pr pe be bebe be pepe Sebi bebe eer BED. BE Dr BP SC baY
PSPS Par orS Para Pare nt ob ere be as ph hehe pt bt ht he Deb. beat Peet PED? at Bt BEDE DE PER aU bt pe be be Dy bt bt be br be bet
pr beh) # zene peees ete Kas soesSeSeseSeseSeSe5 ese tah cha tele taseseces, Ser eh et chase
ot pret eet owt ath Repent Or nee pe nt DEDEDE SEDO DE DC DE DE Br at by bE DER. DED bt bs Deb? me DED DL De De be byt pt De Bt bt
etates pect etakehetstasctateta’ Rat ade tote ta tel elastase tested Soh ah gt het hes eke teks eke sas atta sasasata®
be Ky ESEPCoR Sea PEP heh RP EPSP no oP ater at Satu aE Dror uP nT hia DPS br he bib Dep ht PSP Paap LPSP EPL P SPS
poarch ea ree bc prea pL Der cer pebe bebe moat bebe hehe a DLE DEDEDE OO OLD Dr DE DUDE DS DE DOPE DE reba PL Dabs pa Po
PSParePnta ata be bhp eat e et peer pent pear Er DT athe Sree bP Dra P aD pepe hat at bt pepe are DE bebe oe ar or or ht
Seat pe PELL ROLL PLDC PERO P EPSP PS Pe PePS PEPE RPE PS PE PSPS PEDO PEOPLE DE DT DEDEDE DeDE DY
EMPL L EME DE Deh DE METERS PE DLOL DE DEM DE DEPE DEM DEDL Mbt bn ODE DEDEDE EDL ME DEDEDE EDS PEM EDL OE?
BESSA Te 34 254 2S 6 S54 TS TAC he OS 2S Shs aK IS RS IK OS 1S SES EES IS BSS oh S Sas oS hee,
SELL St DEP DDL DED Ot DDL DED DLL PLD BL PL DLL DP DLP Pe PLP PL PPD EPL PEG PEPE PEP aL
a 78k
Di ppr pater pr oe hPL De Ht De bobs bebe be DED rn Pe bien PABE DL be DI Pe PLDLSE DL BODE DEDEDE DRDLDE DD DD)
SPL Pe Pe Pt PL On Pe PL PEP. PL DL Poe PEPE PL Dt Dy DL DL Dn D1 PLD Py OS Dt HDL PLL PL Pe PL PE PSP) PEPE PEP Pa
Pat reP Ear er boner stare hoa! braret aarp RC hs mi pt pe boars Br PP er DT Orbe pe be bt Dt br bey be Dt be bebe Or Dt
SSS Stes, SP Pea Pats 455 354 25. ot DLL PL Pe Pt el bi Pl Dt Dt Pi DL PLDs pt Dt Dr Pee
cases eset ssiesstesese Sagenent Ler beh a abe epee be pr pr ot mer be br ot Pl ety
PEL eC ERe boyy bor bo br oe be pupt pest pep: Dipl prot be bebe be br >) EDL pe De be Dy Dt DE bE Deby PLD LDL Mt
oo gsc Seta Sas aha setae te tere tase se te seca Se PLPC PLPL PLP PS DL PSP PE PL Pa PL PEP LDS PL Ph PPL PPL PSPS PL PLO Pars Pa Paes
eagras ci esatengsescscse renee: Pra Pare PeParatar or pret n mae seat Dey pipe DE Die be DED PED DE pr De by DA PED
= Pari eet RP br pt pt bo bt pepe me bt be pipe bi be be be be bi be pe >t bebe be DE PDT be DOD Dr DESDE Da DY be br Deer bL Drs
Pach eer aes pret hehe br De pr ee bebep! pe the SE mo pe DE bE DL br PL PEDEPL DEDEDE Pred ot DEDEDE PLD DEDEDE:
PEP PLP ota S ete te tetas te te tete te ne®. es SER AS gt Ce eat eke tah gtatchatatctaSetc®. AOS te S Gt,
SOLU MDL De De DL Pept be pedi be bebe be be bebe bree prot or pEDny Pee otee peer per er pepe ps pepe at pr De Dear}
a £28, PSP PR PLP Pe DEPP PEPE PEPE PLP. PL PSPS Parts Cpe ee oS 28 oS 2s ES etek ee Sees tht et tS 2428.
Pee pearpe at ot ae bE Met Dep Pepe Pe Dem. DL Db PLD PLPC PS SL DE DCD FEDS DL Pe PDL DE PPL Pr De PEPE DLDS SDs PROT Re Ob Pe PC PODS
PEED by oa bape Pet bebe Pe be bab ee bem BEDS ODL DEDEED DS DE DEDEDE DEDEDE DEDEDE OLDE DL DUPLO DRPL DD DS PEPE DEDEDE DD POPE:
peptpeseprpr pt peer br pe pr dt meee bobs Deep PE Dror mt Pt Rr be bebe pa bobs ft mtbr be bebe bt pe DADS be Pe bt PODL DE DL Dba im BUDD DE DS be]
CHU DEDC DEDEDE REDE DC EE DE Pe PEDE PERE PE bee br be be br OL BEDE DEDE Da De DDL OT DEEEPLER ME DEDEPEDE DE DY DL DEOL PL DEDD DEDEDE DOPE DO)
etpcoleretee nt deat peprece epee pe ee pr roby eben bet be oe libs be Dh DEDEDE pipe pe pepe De OT DEDEDE DL py PLDT DEOL DED? ha bn bs bebe bt bi
Cet phpe pe pt br pepe br babs bbe Dept pt bs PEPE bebe De DS pL Ds LDL De De PL DECC PEL DS PEPLDL PEDO DEDL DEDEDE DEDS PLDLDLPLDS PEPE DLS
epire eee eep OTe Pe PEP REDL PPL PERL BUDE PL peeb ee bE peDE Reb DDE DEDEOL OLS SDE DL BEDS DED DEDEDE DUDE BEDE DL DY DEPT!
pprbrerbere nt aepe peprhr pe bebe pt phi hr bemebe bE DE DENT PDE DED: DEDEDE DL DEDD DUDE DL De DEDEDE DEDEDE DE a DD PE DE DOPE Pes
BopPerse peter perpen br ol pepe bebe mene pe bebe be pies brat ny bem De Debt DED be per be Pe PEPEBEDL DE DEDEDE DD Sahase
POPPE OL SLE SPEED DT oT DED DT ITM DDT DY PL PL OTD. be PEPE M DEDEDE DE DEDEDE DL DE DEDEDE DED. by PE MEDE DS DEDEDE DEPT POI
poppe pneen pede pepepe De DepED PE Dept PEPE EDs Peps DED, DCD E Ps Bt Pl De Pa DS Pa POOL OPE DEBE DL SEDI BS PLOD PE PLPL DS DODD IS FEL DED
SPL Pa PLP Dee DP OP PLD PLP PL DS PL PSPS PL DLP DS PL) 3e $032 PEP SPT hee bes pr be pie beat by bees 32423388
S4b<3 DP ee Pe ee y eT eh Ne pet PP ODED EL DIED DED DEOL ON I Sntera cenecgnengsasscanetens sa lard
SSSR IS SSS SSS STS ES SS DESAI SSSA 3S BSS S88 Sk OOS os S24 R605 258 e KS OS SES OS gt Po Ln Pet os Det Pe PLS
pieipr pint prer peer e ee bet bear ee pr pit RPL De DL Debs he DESC EEDL DED DEDE BEDE DEDEDE DUDE DL OL DEOL OE DD DOL DOD: Be DeOL Pe De PLDs Pel
riteticbabantee hp nteepese et pte bt Bet DED be br be Dem pat Dine Deb be PL De Oy Der BODE Es Pmt Pe bebe bt be PL PEDS pe be br ey bat Dope by
STE ne ple ae pep ar pr at keep Dh pene pent bi Psd py by Dy PE DEREDL DS DE De DEDEDE DE Pa De DEPLDEPLDL DES DEP
Bata Petec one pepe ba pepe pba bs be pr bl Pept bribe br Bebe abr er pr bebe PePr PPLE DED pepe bebe PON PS Der De PEPE DDRE DS DE Dn DE De DED DC PEBR EDS
apniaet pipratatePeh Dee y7 tere merene ee Pats TatpPahnPaay PDD ROP DNEP Pee SEM PRRDOR ED ERED ESE DS ppeprenp be bree babe br br br bt bee
PPP Per ee PPL PP PLD PL PSOE PS PERL RED PL PP PO Beehes ese a sasatesese PLDLPL De PL DE PLL ot ei
4 SxSeichases Sao






Sarprerarar pepe eepl et pe per er erp) 332) SPaPerpre rhe rath area e hh
s858235 Bponcpih stptscpp aes) pepatprarpenppeneeen oper ptrepere Rt steph etree:


exaneae = bs
SSS SS S4 ASSESSES SaaS Soa sa es Sess es esha Sesesese 3
Seay tssatas SPL PRP ECP PPL cee Pel Or ot pr pe ok br bebe? SESS 35S53855

ele has eSs ts hehe ase 82455, Shae Sasi SPpaper ny

)








SPE heme Peis Pe Pies habe be ba Pe bebe bry Pe Prs
shatecctalapacctesesecarece Sretbrer eRe PLR MP RCP MPe PEP pt mee ee et he
be pet BEL tpt oe Dy be be Dah be bebe Pe be Pe DE PL DEOL DEDEDE DEDEDE OLDE DEDL DL DEDEDE OE
SSe8y SBS SPEPS Pa Pare Pa Ph Pals Pu PsP SPL PSPS MPL PSPS Ps PO Ok Pe Ps:
pers esate RSet SSS SSSS SESS peprerererprornterp tye p ePons

= ASSES SSRIS SES eae 4
Sosatesseas pr ote Pptpt pepe si at br peter br Brn peor De bebe bs ibe dees














BESNSERES








&
Debts oe bape bey bt
ee SeSESSEES
Sette
























py











fe


Ke

















vs






















RrShRROEOLORDERREDSIESRESAESSEOEOSESPRESTL OSES SDS DEDSESDENI EDS EPSRSSEES
Roc beperr ere aM pri PrP peas pr pr, Dee be DE POHL De bee PRED DDE DE REDS DUDLS
Bis Secesetecacececagereceiasececasaee erate ee ea ee ee eas Pept rb ar pra pep pede s
eapooePetb pear erate bp Eby eRe ore Pea ar or ep are beet REE
PPL PE PSUS PAr Sar er ahh pi Deve DDE OPE DEDEDE? Bt pr DE De REDE DUBE DE DE. Pr DP DEO
PSPS EPS PP OS PPS Bs Ph PES OS Ph Pe PPS Pb PS Pe PSPs Pa De, Po PnP Pd Po Pa PD PS PL BED PS Ps
BQSLSS Rpt pcprer erp SeSeSesaseccSe prerbt pr ptpentor epee pephiter peer beh re eh a
SSESS ISPS ISIS LESS aN eases Se ea a ee ea a ae eS a eee ea ee a ea Tae a Se hg Sete Seta eT aS
SRESSrSERRS MONTANE PM ESPERO PLES RE PSP OSPCEED ESD bapapperesbseeme Oberon em Pros aPaPo PPS PEP DSPOPD!


nAR
KK








S48.
= 33255 SLATS IAESESSS SES PPh EPL P LPL DD PLL DDO PIES
reerprpr pret prprncnrmr pe nceepe nto beh bert Eprtprerpmerbehy pr bene pepe Demi be)
paaSs GSES CSRS Soe sane tase ha getese ese secess
PERE e ERE e ety PSP EPS Pais Pah PLDs PLP PL Pa LPL Rs PO Po Ot Pe PL DS De Phe
pi otpane babe Debye DEDEDE DE DD OE e Dt pe Pee ds DUDE pe bbe Ded LOE DL DED DE DSRS NS
age ekesatate pire Ph beds OP pr pepe Oe PADD Da py uno Debs Dabs DEP DEDEDE bo De Ps
Seseeetess ss akes. piprprr rer be pry pepl beh) pede bea e Dr Deb be pean be baie
SBS SSIES sss SSS HERS SERBS SSS
SSS ESS 9 MGS SS SENSIS ASS ASS Rn ta aa oa ese Toten eke se ease









3x5.






















































Se>

















ee








vs


























*











Ae th





Pyar
















ry
de Se


bears
Les
Paro PES
SeSa3eks



















Cys





VIET
hal dy &


ISDS LSTA S



















Pane
*














S33
SERRE RS
Sessesence

SSG


a ¥'9







< = SSRSSSEE NRE
SPS Parse SES gs esses tS SES SES. ete eS hy Se SES ESSE
SESSEEESHSEERESERERESEREENS SeSs$ehsHERN Relate
ehh abe bebe ae pee pene bape be ee) Ses te SSeS eS
SsaS Be SSesenesesesesosc sess: DepED SDD pepe wean b oy: bebe pepe be eee ate
SS GSTS ISI SIS ISIS TAIND SNES ones SPEPa Ph ont Phe Pe Pa Pee De PLO DEEDS De Do De Dee
SASSER. * PEPE PE PP PS Pa PSPSPS Pa Ph PPA Pa PEP PE PS PL OS
Petar enParnraear are heaPeraP aaah oh hPa ath ara r ara erat t Pama
SS SSSRSESSSER REESE RRA RRER SRE ESS
pepe eenn pep) Petar Par hepe Dent ne bebe Pr ar ORO PE DEDEDE REPL DEDEDE DEDEDE DED! De Demi
neeS testes < SPR PE DES PEPE PO DOLD POPE PEP Pa PoP PhP PS Dn PL ee Po Dh PSL Re DS DSP DPE te Rey
SSS ISIS ESS =, SPEER PELL PE OEP tebe PRE DEERE REM RE RS PERL PEO PLDL CRE DE MED: DEOL EDD
S@USS SSS se RSME NSSSESEERSSRESESERRESIENENER SSS
Sree eee Deh S PRESE DLL R ED REDE DEPT De Dene he ee Pe De PE De DL oe Or De Orme Pr DEBE REN Dre Pr Del
Bak ROP Pema Pea Pe} SSSR RASS SOE MDS ES MESS AN SaaS SS
Sopp SEES ES Set hea ye SsSatspetedsiedsick apescrasan eect ee
~ RSS SMES ~. SSE GE
Perbhptentprpear eras neers SiS SSS
SSSA
SEMIS asasesapensy
Sisk Sis Spree pe hr
SPL PEPI REDE Deke De REDD DERE he De Lh
SSSR SSE SESS TESS EER EES ENS
Prorat ans STASIS. SQA SG. “'
SSS NSPS SMES SS TS SE SAR SS Sea
KSINR ERE BREE SSS
SESE BNI EEN ERR SEEN
























SSRIS SEER SESE SEE SEES EERE
SERN ERS NSS SNE SEIN
<








SENS BREESE SD) e

SBR RES SRS AE

SIN SSSSESESTS TRESS SES
SSS










S23 3 <
PeReRESr DPan RES
SNES RSENS
SRERSNSE <a3t
Repreter atthe tenh pret b:






Naa ag eta a Sata Su Fee.
SSERSSERERERESE
SSSR ERNIE











Ady
ae o
y,


A






Y
7


o
hhe
oe,









ChP
et
SLBA








=
aa
Bata ata eS

Ss 5
eee Sasatatanae
Sasaeaseas

<

s






Pity PEAT;


Cb bed koe


py





:
Pate bathe

SSS
SSS
