ee ee} = < 
+3 =" = = = a 25. 43 Less spa ee Wt 
StU R EEE EE ES Stats ee. TeseeiiaSsalsteserts cate 
Sota tegoiecetatats ; . = =. 4 f 
+55 tear PSPSPS) nee a F nao eeetatey = ot cS 
SERN US 
Sttas 


=. 
om 
sacs 


Med b ay 
fi 
nies 


pul 


, mat ye 


y i 


ie 
Datwrtwig’ 

of 
Bruin 


i 
" Weel 
DE a ea 
yal 


eth I bee 
pee 


wh Bb A 


eit 
Se ates 


ey 


eae 
ins 


ae Se 
pe eeae: 
gases 
ete 


Rate DA i 
=. Pee y 
Saree 
ataeas 
pa ates 
a 


-2 
pays 
oe 


Sieh eae Ly 


eases 


eat ot Be ot 
Fs 


> 
2 
ei Pest 


ar 
5? 
va 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


httos://archive.org/details/fournundredsilenOO0OOhair_b605 


ge 


THE FOUR HUNDRED SILENT YEARS 


—_ 
= —— 
a 


————— 


yesano 
teydo 

sul Jo 4 : 

ey) sv va ‘ ‘Qui0s : : ry 84) 10 ‘vyjezog BI UBIO 
yaNo ; 


et stya Jo 4s 
ial 


-[[!Y @AY 10 INO} S1BA0O WaT BENAEP— HLN0G AHL WOK WHEIVSAUSL JO AGIA 


aN 


Ta 


THE FOUR HUNDRED 
SILENT YEARS 


(From Malachi to Matthew) 


H. A. IRONSIDE 


Author of “‘ Lectures on Daniel ;"" ‘‘ Notes on Ezra, Nehemiah ane 
ther;”’ ‘“ Notes on the Minor Prophets,”’ etc., eta 


CMINART 
NCINNAT! BIBLE SEM 
ES LIBRAR? 


ose 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS 
Neptune, New Fersey 


First Edition, February 1914 


GOs 
“ S38 
oot: 

~~ io F 


PAG ory 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


PREFACE 


OME time ago I endeavored, though with 

no claim to originality of treatment, to draw 
practical lessons for the separated people of God 
from the captivity and post-captivity books of the 
Old Testament. At the suggestion of the pub- 
lishers I have now sought to trace the history ot 
the same people through the years of waiting 
that elapsed from the time when the voice cf 
inspiration ceased until the heavens resounded 
with the glad announcement of ‘‘Glory to God 
in the highest, and on earth peace, good-will 
toward men,” thus heralding Messiah’s iong- 
promised advent. 

In preparing this work, I have been greatly 
helped by a series of papers entitled, ‘‘ From 
Malachi to Matthew,” which appeared a number 
of years ago in an English periodical now discon- 
tinued.* Dr. Grant’s ‘‘Between the Testaments” 
has also been consulted, and had that volume 
been more in accord with a belief in the plenary 
inspiration of Scripture, the book now in my 
reader’s hand might perhaps not have been pre- 
pared. The Old Testament Apocrypha, (especially 
I. Maccabees), Josephus, and various Jewish his- 


* Faithful Words, edited by H. F. Witherby 


4 Preface 


tories of recent date, have also afforded consider- 
able help. 

It will be observed that my object has been, 
not merely to give a chronological outline of 
events, or a series of biographical sketches, but 
to trace throughout lessons and warnings for 
any who to-day, as those in the days of Nehe- 
miah, have sought to return toand obey the word 
ot God, in separation from the infidelity and 
apostasy of the times. Such are exposed to sim- 
ilar dangers—though of a spiritual character— 
as those which confronted the Jews. From their 
history we may therefore obtain valuable sug- 
gestions, and by carefully considering the causes 
of their failures, be preserved from falling into 
the same snares. 

History repeats itself in manifold ways, and 
he who is wise will not despise its instruction. 
‘‘Happy is the man that feareth alway;” for he 
who thinks he stands, is the one who is exhorted 
to take heed lest he fall. 


H. A. IRonsipE 


March, 1914. 


CONTENTS 


Chapter I.— THE JEWS UNDER PRIESTLY RULE 


From Darius to the fall of the Persian 
Empire—425-335 B. C. 


Under the Macedonian Empire to the 
end of the hereditary priesthood. 


Chapter II.—THE DAys oF THE MACCABEES 


Chapter III.~To THE END oF THE ASMONEAN 
DYNASTY ; : . 


Chapter IV.—THE EDOMITE ASCENDANCY 


Chapter V.— THE LITERATURE OF THE JEWS 


Page 


16 


32 


67 


82 


95 


os “ 
; nig 
™y., ' x 
. = 
\ 
7 
~ 
~~ ES 
. 

— 

‘ we 
— 
y 
mid oy Bam & 
~T, » 
\ 

4 

i : tee 
a2 a 
7 ‘ 


The Four Hundred Silent Years 


CHAPTER I 


The Jews Under Priestly Rule 


(From the times of ‘‘ Darius the Persian’’ (Neh 12: 22) to the 
fall of the Persian Empire—about 425 to 335, B. C.). 


HE average Bible reader seldom knows much 

of the stirring events which followed in rapid 
succession the days of rehabilitation, described in 
the interesting and instructive records of Ezra and 
Nehemiah. He gets more than an inkling of the 
fallen condition of the restored remnant in the sol- 
emn expostulation of the last prophet, Malachi; but 
when he opens the New Testament and begins to 
read the Gospel of Matthew, he finds an utter 
change of atmosphere and conditions. The Old 
Testament closes with the people of the Jews par- 
tially restored to their land, but under Persian 
dominion. The New Testament opens with the 
same people greatly multiplied and dwelling in the 
«he same country, but under Roman sway, and yet 
with an Edomite vice-king exercising jurisdiction 


8 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


over part of the land. In many other respects cir- 
cumstances have undergone a marked change, and 
generally for the worse. 

What brought about these changes? What move- 
ments, civil, religious, and political, were in progress 
during the four hundred silent years after prophetic 
testimony had died away with a last solemn warn- 
ing of a possible curse to smite the land and people 
once so richly blessed? (Mal. 4: 6). 

We cannot turn to the unerring word of God for 
an authentic and inspired answer to these questions ; 
but we are able, nevertheless, to reply to them with 
a large measure of assurance, since God has been 
pleased to preserve, uninspired but fairly reliable, 
chronicles of the history of His chosen people in the 
four centuries that succeeded the days of the proph- 
ets. The Jewish historian, Josephus, and the un- 
known (save to God) author of the first book of the 
Maccabees, have left us records that are generally 
considered trustworthy, and are largely corroborated 
by Jewish traditions and historical side-lights. 

With Nehemiah, the history and experiences of 
the returned Remnant in the Land end, at a time 
when evil was creeping in and decay was beginning. 
In his lifetime Nehemiah earnestly endeavored to 
uphold their covenant-relation with God, and zeal- 
ously sought to maintain that holy separation from 
the idolatrous nations surrounding them, as a pecu- 
liar people to Jehovah, wherein alone their strength 
lay. Balaam had declared, “The people shall dwell 
alone; they shall not be reckoned among the nations,” 
and he had also taught Balak to cast a stumbling- 


The Jews under Priestly Rule 9 


block before Israel by breaking down this very sep- 
aration. “The doctrine of Balaam’” had been their 
snare ever afterwards, and we see in the closing 
chapters of Nehemiah how difficult it was to stamp 
it out. 

Nehemiah’s efforts were largely successful; and 
while his godly life and testimony still had influence 
over the people there was a measure at least of out- 
ward separation. But Malachi is witness that peo- 
ple may be separated from outside evils and not be 
separated to the Lord. This is a constant danger. 
Who has not heard “ heady, high-minded” believers 
prating of “separation from evil as God’s principle 
of unity” (as indeed it is, other things being equal), 
who seem quite to forget that it is separation fo 
Christ that alone gives power to the former. 

Separation from, may end in mere Pharisaism. 
Separation fo, will result in practical godliness, and 
be evidenced by devotedness, with brotherly love 
and unity. 

But this truth ever needs consecrated men of God 
to insist upon its recognition; otherwise, there is 
always the likelihood of its being forgotten, and a 
form of godliness without the power usurping its 
place. Of Israel of old, when first settled in the 
land, we read: “And Israel served the Lord all the 
days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that 
outlived Joshua, and which had known all the works 
of the Lord, that He had done for Israel” (Josh. 24: 
31). We have something analogous to this in the 
ease now under consideration. The Jewish remnant, 
generally speaking, walked before God in a measure 


10 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


of holy separation and cleaving to His name and 
His word during the days of Ezra and Nehemiah, 
and of the elders who outlived them; but even in 
Malachi’s time declension had made very rapid 
progress. 

After the death of Nehemiah the “ Tirshatha,” or 
Governor, they enjoyed a large measure of indepen- 
dence under the mild rule of the Persian kings, and 
even for a time after the Medo-Persian “Bear” had 
been defeated and superseded by the four-headed 
“Leopard” of Greece (Dan. 7)—or, using the simile 
of Nebuchadnezzar’s dream, after the silver king- 
dom had been displaced by the dominion of brass 
(Dan. 2). 

Government was entrusted by these Gentile sover- 
eigns to the high-priest, who previously was but a 
religious leader. In Nehemiah 12: 10, 11, 22,*we have 
the high-priestly line traced down from Jeshua, or 
Joshua (who came up from Babylon, with Zerubbabel 
at the first return, and is the one described in Zech- 
ariah’s vision, chap. 3), through Joiakim, Eliashib, 
Joiada, and Jonathan to Jaddua, the latest historical 
character mentioned in the Old Testament. 


*“And Jeshua begat Joiakim; Joiakim also begat Eli- 
ashib,and Eliashib begat Joiada; and Joiada begat Jona- 
than, and Jonathan begat Jaddua. .. The Levites, in the 
days of Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and Jaddua, were 
recorded chief of the fathers: also the priests, to the 
reign of Darius the Persian ’’—which was nearly to the 
end of the Persian Empire. 


The Jews under Priestly Rule alak 


Eliashib succeeded to the high-priesthood during 
the life-time of Nehemiah, and it was his grandson 
(Joiada’s son), whom the Tirshatha indignantly 
“chased ” from him because of his unhallowed alli- 
ance by marriage with the house of Sanballat the 
Horonite (Neh. 13: 28). 

One tradition credits the closing of the canon 
of Old Testament to the days of Eliashib, before 
the death of Ezra. “The great synagogue” was 
supposed to have been presided over by this vener- 
able servant of God (Ezra), and he is generally con- 
sidered to have largely edited the books and arranged 
the Psalms in the order in which they are found in 
the Hebrew Bible. Some have thought to identify him 
with Malachi, supposing the title “ Malachi” to be 
an untranslated word, simply meaning “ My messen- 
ger,” or Messenger of Jehovah.” But this seems 
unlikely, as Malachi apparently portrays a later 
stage of declension. He may have prophesied in the 
days of Joiada or Jonathan. It is more than likely 
that another tradition, which gives Simon the Just 
the credit of settling authoritatively the limits of 
the canon, is the correct one. 

Of these high-priests we know but little, save that 
Josephus implies that the former (Joiada) was ex- 
ceedingly friendly to the mixed nations surrounding 
Judea, as indeed seems very likely, from the fact 
referred to above; his son having wedded the daugh- 
ter of Sanballat, the arch-conspirator (Neh. 13: 28). 
The Jewish historian, Josephus, declares that this 
young man, upon being driven out by Nehemiah, 
went over to the Samaritans, and with the aid of 


12 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


his wealthy and influential father-in-law, established 
the Samaritan system, and projected the building of 
a rival temple on Mount Gerizim. Such a temple 
was in existence as early as the days of Alexander 
the Great, but whether the unworthy son of Joiada 
had to do with its building is questionable. It is 
frequently the case, however, that one outwardly 
connected with the truth, without knowing its power 
in the soul, becomes the bitterest enemy of that 
which is of God, when repudiated for his unholy 
ways. 

Jonathan (who is also called Johanan) left a 
most unsavory record. He was an insubject, god- 
less man; though he remained to thelast among the 
Jews, even committing the horrid crime of murder 
to make more secure his own place of authority as 
high-priest and ruler. He profaned the very temple 
of God by assassinating his brother Joshua (or Jesus) 
within its sacred precincts. Thus had corruption 
and violence so soon found a foothold among the 
separated remnant, emphasizing the solemn fact 
that mere correctness of position is of no real value, 
so far as maintaining what is of God is concerned, 
unless there be personal piety and devotedness to 
the Lord. We often hear of being “in the right 
place,” “on the true ground,” etc., but they are hol- 
low and empty expressions when divorced from right- 
eousness and holiness of truth. That believers on 
the Lord Jesus Christ should be a separated, un- 
worldly people, no right-thinking Christian will 
deny or even question for a moment; but it is to 
the Holy and the True we are to be set apart, and 


The Jews under Priestly Rule 13 


only as we “go forth unto Him,” will our separation 
be of any real value, and we ourselves “vessels unto 
honor, sanctified and meet for the Master’s use.” 

Man is prone to rest in what is merely outward, 
while neglecting or coolly ignoring what is inward; 
for ““man looketh on the outward appearance, but 
God looketh on the heart.” Hence the importance 
of insisting on veality, and not being content with 
mere outward conformity and ecclesiastical order. 
A Diotrephes will demand the latter while neglecting 
the former; but, on the other hand, another may 
be equally wrong if he lays stress only on what is 
subjective, while paying no attention to the ques- 
tion of association. The well-balanced Christian will 
have a care as to both, and neglect neither. 


But we must return to our task of tracing out the 
history of the Jewish people under the high-priestly 
regime, during the years of Persian domination. 

Jaddua was exercising the sacerdotal office when, 
in the course of God’s ways, the time had arrived 
for setting the Persian rule aside and giving it to 
the Greek. Jaddua was a man of spotless integrity, 
and his name is held in veneration to the present 
time. 

It is related of him that he was a faithful servant 
under the kings of Persia; but when Alexander the 
Great had destroyed Tyre, and driven the armies of 
Darius Codomanus to the east in confusion, Jaddua 
was assured that the time had come for the fulfil- 
ment of Daniel’s prophecy as to the destruction of 
the second world-empire and its being replaced by 


14 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


the third. He recognized in the youthful Macedonian 
conqueror the rough he-goat with the notable horn 
between it, eyes, who was to run upon the two- 
horned ram in the fury of his power and destroy it 
completely. Hearing that the cities of Syria were 
falling one by one before him, and that Alexander 
was actually on his way to besiege Jerusalem, Jad- 
dua is said to have put on his pontifical garments, 
and with the Scriptures of the Prophets in his hand, 
to have gone forth to meet the conqueror, attended, 
not by armed men, but by a body of white-robed 
priests. As they drew near the army of Alexander, 
the latter is said to have hastened to meet them, 
prostrating himself on the ground before Jaddua, 
declaring he had but recently beheld the venerable 
pontiff in a vision, and recognized him as the repre- 
sentative of the God of heaven, who would show 
him what would be greatly to his advantage. Jad- 
dua opened the prophetic roll, and had one of the 
scribes in his company read the visions of Daniel and 
their interpretation. Alexander saw the undoubied 
reference to himself, and declared he would never 
permit Jerusalem to be touched nor its temple 
polluted, and sent the high-priest back laden with 
gifts. 

It is impossible at this late day to know whether 
this story is a mere tradition or sober history; but 
there is nothing unlikely about it; at least it teaches 
a valuable lesson, reminding us that the word of God 
has foretold the end from the beginning, and He 
who inspired it has declared, “My counsel shall 
stand, and I will do all My pleasure.” Jaddua pos- 


The Jews under Priestly Rule 15 


sessed those Scriptures which reveal God’s plans as 
to the nations of the earth; for prophecy is but his- 
tory written prior to the events. Therefore it is not 
at all unreasonable to suppose that he acted as tra- 
dition relates. 

This is the specific value of the study of prophecy, 
that it enables one to act in the present in the light 
of the things that are yet future. So writes the 
apostle Peter, when he tells us: “We have also the 
prophetic word made sure; whereunto ye do well 
that ye take heed in your hearts, as unto a lamp 
that shineth in a dark place till the day dawn and 
the day-star arise. Knowing this first, that no proph- 
ecy of the Scripture is of its own interpretation; for 
the prophecy came not in old time by the will of 
man; but holy men spake from God, being moved 
by the Holy Spirit” (2 Pet. 1: 19-21, 1911 Version). 
“Daniel the prophet,” as our Lord calls him, was one 
of these; and his book was doubtless in Jaddua’s 
hand—not written by some unknown apocryphal 
romancist a hundred years later, as modern pseudo- 
critics would have us believe—but a part of the in- 
spired word of God outlining events that were com- 
ing upon the earth long before some of the nations 
and many of the persons specified so distinctly 
were in existence. 


16 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


(Under the Macedonian or Greek Empire B. C. 230. to the 
end of the hereditary priesthood. ) 


The “Scripture of truth,” communicated to Daniel 
by the angel (Dan. 10: 21), gives in outline the his- 
tory of the wars following the death of Alexander 
the Great, but tells us nothing of the various high 
priests who succeeded one another as temporal and 
spiritual lords in Judea. They were frequently but 
the puppets of their imperial masters, whether 
Syrian or Egyptian; for Palestine throughout nearly 
a century was an almost continual battle-ground, 
between the Kings of the North, (Syrian) and the 
Kings of the South (Egyptian) in their successive 
wars. 


Alexander died at Babylon, B. C. 323, being only 
about 33 years of age, after a reign of 12% years. 
His was a life of remarkable achievement and mar- 
vellous conquests. With plans for greater things 
still to be accomplished, he died a sacrifice to his 
passions, when he ought to have been in the prime 
of manly vigor. 

Having appointed no successor, nor given direc- 
tions as to the disposition of his vast and newly- 
formed empire, with no heir but the prospect of a 
yet unborn child, he left all in confusion. Dis- 
order, intrigue, and ambition threatened to destroy 
the immense empire erected at so bloody a cost. 

After a time, however, it was agreed among his 
principal generals that the empire should be held by 
them for the posthumous child. who proved to be a 


The Jews under Priéstly Rule 17 


son and was called Alexander II. Another reputed 
son, Hercules, had been slain sometime before. The 
jealousies of the generals soon resulted in the same 
fate being meted out to the infant heir and his 
mother Roxana. 

The dominions were then divided among the prin- 
cipal generals, only two of whom need particularly 
occupy us, as they are the progenitors of the two 
rival dynasties denominated the Kings of the North 
and of the South. 


Antigonus, one of Alexander’s most powerful gen- 
erals, together with his son Demetrius seized Syria 
and the adjacent region, and sought to control Pales- 
tine of which Ptolemy Lagus, another general, was 
governor. The Jews favored Antigonus, and Ptole- 
my’s son, Soter, determined to wreak upon them a 
fearful vengeance for their treasonable actions. He 
besieged and sacked Jerusalem, entering it on the 
Sabbath, massacred vast numbers of the wretched 
inhabitants, and transported many more (some say, 
one hundred thousand) to Egypt, where he gave them 
such unexpected privileges that, despite all they had 
suffered from him, they were quite content to dwell 
in his land, and many of their co-religionists joined 
them, as life in Egypt was far more peaceful than 
_in war-torn Palestine. These Egyptian Jews became 
| fargely Gentilized as the years went on, discarding 
their native tongue and many of their former cus- 
toms, speaking the Greek language and copying the 
ways of the nations. Henceforth they became a 
power to be reckoned with, and for a time threat- 


18 The Four Hundrea Silent Years 


ened to completely annihilate the ancient Jewish 
faith. 

Against Ptolemy Soter, Antigonus now turned 
his arms, and at first was successful in wresting 
the three provinces from him. But, for five years, 
triumph alternately turned between first Ptolemy 
then Antigonus, until the unhappy land of Palestine 
was about ruined, and its people completely crushed. 

Many in their despair imagined that the only pos- 
sible and logical way out of their distresses was to 
become assimilated with the warring factions of one 
side or the other, as much as possible; and because 
of Ptolemy’s superior enlightenment and hopeful in- 
ducements the majority clung to him. 

But in these dark days, during which Palestine 
was “the Debatable Land,” spoiled by her warring 
foes, there was always an election of grace, who 
held tightly to the now completed Scriptures of the 
Old Testament, embraced under three great heads, 
or divisions, viz., “The Law, the Prophets and the 
Psalms,” and clung desperately to the apparently 
forlorn hope of the coming Deliverer. It was of 
such that Malachi had written: “They that feared 
the Lord spake often one to another, and the Lord 
harkened and heard it; and a book of remembrance 
was written before Him for them that feared the 
Lord, and that thought upon His name. And they 
shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that 
day when I make up my jewels (or, peculiar treas- 
ure); and I will spare them as a man spareth his 
own son that serveth him. Then shall ye return and 
discern between the righteous and the wicked, be- 


The Jews under Priestly Rule 19 


tween him that serveth God and him that serveth 
Him not” (Mal. 3: 16-18). It was just such a sep- 
arating or winnowing process that was then going 
on. Ptolemy and Antigonus were but the flails used 
to separate the wheat from the chaff, or the great 
rollers that crushed the ore, and freed God’s jewels 
from the mass of the Jews in whom was but a 
traditional faith. 

Nor were the sorrows of the remnant at an end 
when, in B.C. 301, the Battle of Ipsus put a quietus 
on the evil energy of Antigonus. In this great 
conflict—one of the decisive battles of the world— 
Antigonus and Demetrius were opposed by the re- 
nowned quartette of Alexander’s generals, among 
whom his empire was ultimately divided, namely: 
Ptolemy Soter, Seleucus, Lysimachus, and Cassander. 
The allies were triumphant, slaying Antigonus, ut- 
terly routing his army, and causing Demetrius to 
flee for his life. He was apprehended several years 
later by Seleucus, and died in captivity. 

The confederate generals, who had previously 
borne the titles of governors or satraps, now par- 
titioned the empire, Cassander becoming king 
of Greece ; Lysimachus of Thrace, or Armenia; 
Seleucus, of Syria and the adjacent regions; and 
Ptolemy of Egypt, Palestine, Libya and Arabia. 
It was the four-fold division of the Grecian em- 
pire pictured in the four horns of the rough goat 
seen in the vision by Daniel, and so plainly pre- 
dicted in the “writing of truth.” In fact, the elev- 
enth chapter of Daniel gives a summary of the con- 
flicts of the Seleucidze (as the successors of Seleucus 


20 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


were called) and the Ptolemies (the Egyptian rulers) 
for a century and a half after the battle of Ipsus. 

But as it is rather the Jews than their Gentile 
rulers with whom we are concerned, we turn to trace 
again what little is left on record of their vicissitudes 
while the potsherds of the earth strove with one 
another. 

Jaddua, the high-priest, died sometime between 
Alexander’s death and the agreement, about twenty 
years later, of which we have spoken. He was suc- 
ceeded by Onias I., of whom we know but little, who, 
in turn, died B.C. 300, one year after the battle of 
Ipsus. His son, known as Simon the Just, succeeded 
him—so-called, Josephus tells us, “because of his 
piety toward God and his kind disposition to those 
of his own nation.” The 50th chapter of the apo- 
cryphal book of Ecclesiasticus is his best memo- 
rial. There he is described as “Simon the high-priest, 
the son of Onias, who in his life repaired the house 
again, and in his days fortified the temple; and by 
him was built from the foundation the double height, 
the high fortress of the wall about the temple.” And 
various other works of piety are credited to him. He 
is eulogized in terms that more befit Messiah Him- 
self, even described as the “morning star,” “the 
sun shining upon the temple,” and “the rainbow 
giving light in the bright clouds.” 

That the temple service was had in honor, and a 
measure of reverence and godliness preserved among 
the priests and people in his days, must be the con- 
clusion of all who read the chapter through. 

Simon was one who sought to stem the Hellen- 


The Jews under Priestly Rule 21 


izing or Grecianizing spirit, and to recall the people 
to that separation to God which would have been 
their strength had they known what it was to main- 
tain it in holy humility. In verses 22 to 26 we may 
have the language of Jesus, the son of Sirach, but 
we undoubtedly have the sentiment of Simon the 
Just. Verses 25 and 26 are noteworthy: “There be 
two manner of nations which my heart abhorreth, 
and the third is no nation. They that sit upon 
the mountain of Samaria, and they that dwell among 
the Philistines, and that foolish people that dwell in 
Sichem (Shechem).” 

The dwellers in Shechem, whom he stigmatizes 
so bitterly, were the Samaritans, who had built their 
hated rival temple upon Mount Gerizim, and had 
with abhorrent effrontery dared to add an eleventh 
commandment to the law: “Thou shalt build an 
altar on Mount Gerizim, and there only shalt thou 
worship!” How apt we all are, unconsciously, to 
arrogate such pretentious claims to that with which 
we have decided to associate ourselves. 

The other two classes were the temporizers who 
sought a league with these Samaritans, and the apos- 
tates who had gone over to Israel’s ancient foes, the 
Philistines; both alike were thorns in the side of the 
pious and patriotic. To the fourth party belonged 
Simon himself; those who repudiated all that was 
foreign to the spirit of Judaism and clung tenaciously 
to the holy writings and the sacred temple services. 
That these largely drifted into ceremonialism and 
heady exclusiveism should be a sad warning to those 
who attempt to maintain divine truth in a fleshly 


7 iz The Four Hundred Silent Years 


way, without the Spirit’s power. From these arose 
the sect of the Pharisees; rigid separatists, but hard 
and legal, having “a form of godliness, but denying 
the power thereof.” On the other hand, we see in 
the Hellenizers the forerunners of the contemptuous, 
cultured, but unsound Sadducees of our Lord’s day. 

Simon was president of the Sanhedrim or High 
Council of the Jews, and the first of the great Rabbis 
whose oral teaching was embodied in the Mishna, 
which almost superseded the word of God itself. Alas, 
how ready are well-meaning people to put the min- 
istry of human teachers in the place of the Holy 
Scriptures, and almost unconsciously begin “teaching 
for doctrines the commandments of men.” That 
Simon himself never contemplated this is evident; 
for, if tradition speaks truly, he it was who added 
the finishing touches to the work accredited to 
Ezra, and established authoritatively the canon of 
the Old Testament. He ever emphasized the supreme 
importance of the word of God, though he himself 
was looked up to in later days as if among the in- 
spired, and in this we have another serious lesson 
for our own times. For there is the constant dan- 
ger of either setting aside God-given teachers, or 
else actually allowing their ministry to supersede the 
Bible. Such men would indeed be the last to wish 
that such a place be given them. The object of all 
divinely-gifted servants of God would be to assert 
the authority of Scripture; their one desire in oral 
or written ministry would be the elucidation of the 
Word, and recalling the people of God to the Book, 
in place of giving them a substitute for it. But 


The Jews under Priestly Rule 23 


again and again has the ministry of great gifts, 
justly valued, been put in place of the Word of the 
living God, and thus made into a creed, which to 
maintain is to be orthodox, and to vary from is 
to be accounted heterodox. 

The death of Simon the Just occurred in 291 B.C. 
He left an infant son; so his brother Eleazar was 
honored with the high-priesthood, a position he held 
until his death fifteen years later. Though wars 
abounded about them, and rumors of wars distracted 
them, the Jews enjoyed comparative peace in his 
time. The rival kings of the North and the South 
might carry on their struggles as they would, but 
Jehovah was to His people, during the reigns of 
the first three Ptolemies, who exercised suzerainty 
over Palestine, “a little sanctuary,” in which the 
righteous found safety and peace. God was watch- 
ing over them. His good hand was upon them, and 
they found blessing, both temporal and spiritual, 
though the heathen raged without, and sects within 
threatened eventual ruin. 

Ptolemy Soter reigned twenty years, and was suc- 
ceeded, 284 B.C., by his son, known as Ptolemy 
Philadelphus. Considerable importance attaches to 
his reign; for it was while he was king and Eleazar 
high-priest, that the first translation of the Holy 
. Scriptures was made. The Pentateuch, or five books 
_of Moses was, by his request, translated into Greek, 
about the year 277 B.C., and book after book fol- 
towed until the entire Old Testament was rendered 
in the same language, and deposited in the Imperial 
Library at Alexandria. This translation is generally 


24 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


known as the Septuagint (seventy), from a tradition 
that it was the joint production of seventy translators, 
though it is generally supposed the correct number 
was seventy-two. Another tradition says it was so- 
named because of the idea of the Jews that there 
were just seventy Gentile nations, and as Greek was 
at that time the world-language, this was the Bible 
for the entire seventy. 

The version thus produced rapidly grew in favor 
even among the Jews, few of whom could read their 
own Hebrew Scriptures, as the Hebrew was already 
fast becoming a dead language. This was the Bible 
used in the days of our Lord and His apostles; and 
largely accounts for apparent discrepancies between 
Old Testament texts and New Testament quotations, 
which are generally from the Septuagint. This 
Greek translation of the Old Testament is often ex- 
pressed by the Roman numerals LXX. 

In later days the strictly orthodox Rabbis of the 
Pharisaic school bitterly regretted this translation, 
and declared that it was “as great a calamity as the 
making of the golden calf.’”’ This was because some 
of its renderings were rather paraphrases than 
translations, and were of such a character as to be 
a great aid to the Hellenizing Jews in their efforts 
to introduce the new learning and to overthrow the 
so-called orthodox teaching. 

Upon Eleazar’s death, 276 B.C., his brother Man- 
asseh became high-priest, and held office until his 
own decease, 251 B.C., which was the thirty-fourth 
year of Ptolemy Philadelphus. Little of moment 
occurred during his incumbency. He was succeeded 


The Jews under Priestly Rule 25 


by Onias II., the son of Simon the Just, who was an 
infant at his father’s death. This man was an un- 
worthy son of so worthy a father. Josephus de- 
scribes him as “a man of little soul.” During the reign 
of Ptolemy Euergetes, whocame to the throne 247 
B.C., the evil behaviour of Onias brought the nation 
of the Jews into grave trouble and danger. He ne- 
glected the annual tribute of twenty talents of silver 
for some years until the amount due to Euergetes be- 
came exceedingly high; and at last he sent an 
official called Athenion to demand the entire sum, or 
threaten the destruction of the Jewish state. 

Onias and the inhabitants of Jerusalem were panic- 
stricken and knew not what to do. Only through 
the diplomacy of a nephew of the high-priest, Joseph, 
son of Tobias, was the calamity averted. He opened 
his house to the Egyptian ambassador and enter- 
tained him in a magnificent manner, and so pleaded 
for the Jews that Athenion returned to his royal 
master to give a most favorable report of the young 
man, and to counsel consideration for his nation. 
Joseph himself set out after him to plead in person 
for the royal clemency. On the way he traveled in 
a caravan of merchants from Ccele-Syria and Phe- 
nicia. Overhearing certain of those declaring their 
business, he determined to outwit them. It was their 
object to endeavor to purchase from the king for 
eight thousand talents the right to farm the taxes 
throughout Coele-Syria, Pheenicia, Judea and Samaria. 
Joseph saw how he might profit by such an appoint- 
ment if he could obtain it for himself, so he deter- 
mined to offer double the amount for the privilege, 


26 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


depending upon more than making it up out of the 
people. On the proper occasion he made his offer 
and was able to secure the position, and two thousand 
men were appointed to assist him. He was thus the 
first Jewish publican—the beginning of a detestable 
class in the eyes of all lovers of Israel, and put on 
the same level as the “sinners” of the nations, or 
even considered beneath them. 

For twenty-two years Joseph kept this place. For 
a time, during the ascendency of Antiochus the 
Great (of whose wars we shall speak later on), he 
lost his lucrative post, but recovered it again when 
the Egyptian arms triumphed, and held it until his 
death. 

We can well understand the abhorrence that Jo- 
seph’s course would inspire in the breasts of true 
Jewish patriots. As the servant of a foreign poten- 
tate, and under his protection, he enriched himself 
at the expense of his own people, grinding the faces 
of the poor, and extorting from them all he possibly 
could by taxes on their lands and goods, of which 
he kept for himself all that was over and above the 
yearly fee paid to the king of Egypt for the privilege. 
No wonder the name “publican” came to be a 
synonym for all that was disgraceful to the Jew, and 
unworthy. 

Upon the demise of Onias II., his son Simon IL., 
succeeded him as high priest. 

In his days grave conflicts were continually go- 
ing on among the nations around, but there was 
comparative peace in Judea, save that warring fac- 
tions among themselves did much to disturb the 


The Jews under Priestly Rule 27 


equanimity of the Jewish commonwealth. Parti- 
cularly was this the case between the family of 
Joseph, known as “the sons of Tobias,” and the 
house of the high-priest. The ill-gotten gains of the 
publican-priest brought joy neither to himself nor 
his family, but resulted in a household feud of fier- 
cest intensity, into the details of which we need not 
now enter, but shall advert to later. 

The kings of the North and South continued their 
struggle for the possession of the Land, and once 
more Palestine played the part of a “ buffer state.” 

Seleucus Nicator, the founder of the dynasty of 
the Seleucide, reigned thirty-three years, and was 
succeeded by Antiochus Soter, who reigned nineteen 
years. His successor, Antiochus Theos, wedded 
Berenice, a daughter of Ptolemy Philadelphus, who 
hoped thereby to strengthen his hold on Syria, but 
the ruse was a failure, and only made matters 
worse. 

Antiochus Theos was followed by Seleucus Calli- 
nicus. He was killed, 226 B. C., by a fall from his 
horse. This was the year after Onias II. sent hig 
crafty nephew Joseph into Egypt to make peace 
with Ptolemy. Seleucus Ceraunas, a weakling, and 
an object of contempt, succeeded Callinicus, but 
was poisoned within a short time. He was suc- 
ceeded by his brother, destined to become one 
ef the most renowned of the Syrian kings, and 
known in history as Antiochus the Great. He be- 
came king 223 B.C., while Ptolemy Euergetes was 
on the Egyptian throne. This prince died two 
years later, poisoned, it is supposed, by his son 


28 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


Ptolemy IV., known as Philopater, who soon after- 
wards murdered his mother and brother. Against 
him Antiochus the Great declared war, with the 
ostensible purpose of recovering Palestine and the 
adjacent lands for himself. At first he was success- 
ful, but at the battle of Raphia, 217 B.C., he was 
defeated with tremendous loss. 

Philopater marched through the land in triumph, 
and the people everywhere submitted to the exultant 
victor. In Jerusalem he gained the favor of the 
Jews by giving rich gifts to the temple and offering 
many sacrifices and oblations. But he undid all this 
a little later by insisting upon entering the Holy of 
holies against the vehement protests of priests and 
people. Tradition says that as he impiously pressed 
forward he was smitten with paralysis and carried 
out half dead. As a result, he left Judea in dismay, 
but with intense hatred for all things Jewish. 

A peace was shortly afterwards patched up be- 
tween Ptolemy and Antiochus, whereby Ccele-Syria 
and Palestine were confirmed to the king of Egypt. 
For a few years following, the Jews in Palestine 
had rest, but it was far otherwise with those who 
were settled in Alexandria and other parts of Egypt. 
Against them the resentment of Ptolemy burned 
fiercely, and he persecuted them unmercifully, thus 
proving that Egypt was, as the prophet had long 
ago declared, “a bruised reed” to rest upon. 

Philopater died 204 B.C., succeeded by his son 
Ptolemy Epiphanes, a child of but five years of 
age. In his minority Antiochus the Great re-asserted 
his claim to the lost territories, and seized them in 


The Jews under Priestly Rule 29 


203-2, B.C. A few years later Scopas, an Egyptian 
general, led an army into Palestine and recovered the 
two provinces, but the following year, 198 B.C., 
Antiochus recaptured them. In 193 B. C., a marriage 
was consummated between the youthful Ptolemy 
and Cleopatra, daughter of Antiochus, and on the 
basis of this a peaceful agreement entered into 
whereby the revenues should be divided between the 
two kingdoms, and Palestine be nominally subject to 
Egypt. On Antiochus’ further troubles, his war with 
Rome, his defeat, his sacrilegious pillaging of the 
temple of Jupiter-Belus (187 B.C.), and his death by 
the hands of the mob, when according to Daniel’s 
words, “He stumbled and fell, and was not found,” 
we need not here dwell, as it is with the Jews we are 
immediately concerned. 

Their sufferings had been fearful to contemplate 
in the awful years referred to above. Whichever 
party won, they lost. Whoever prospered, they were 
robbed. But in those days of terror and nights of 
anguish, who can doubt that “many were purified 
and made white” who otherwise would have been 
living in ease and careless indifference toward God? 

Seleucus Philopater followed his father as king 
of Syria, but died by the treachery of his treas- 
urer, Heliodorus, 175 B.C. This Seleucus is the 
“raiser of taxes” spoken of in Dan. 11; his father’s 
war with Rome having made it necessary to pur- 
chase peace at a great price. 

Ptolemy Epiphanes died by poison while yet a youth, 
180 B.C., and his son, Ptolemy Philometer reigned 
in his stead; his mother, Cleopatra, being queen- 


30 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


regent. At this time Seleucus Philopater held au- 
thority over Palestine, though how he obtained it is 
not clear, but it seems that the Jews themselves 
preferred Syrian to Egyptian rule, and readily sub- 
mitted to him. This was during the high-priesthood 
of Onias IJI., in whose days the second book of the 
Maccabees says, “The holy city was inhabited in 
all peace, and the laws were kept very well, because 
of the godliness of Onias, the high-priest, and his 
hatred of wickedness” (2 Macc.3:1). Thus we 
have again illustrated the proverb, “Like priest like 
people.” On the other hand, we have evidence of 
an easy-going self-confidence which rested in keep- 
ing the laws of the Lord “very well,’ when, in re- 
ality, there was the gravest reason to be in the dust 
of humiliation before God for the centuries of failure 
that had resulted in the Lo-ammi condition in 
which they were still found. For they are never 
owned as God’s people after the Babylonian cap- 
tivity, nor will be again till their repentance in the 
time of the end yet to come. 

Onias III. was the last to obtain the high-priest- 
hood by inheritance. He was eventually deposed by 
Antiochus Epiphanes, brother and successor to Se- 
leucus Philopater. With his setting aside, the high- 
priestly epoch closes and a new period begins, which 
we leave, with the events leading up to it, for a dis- 
tinct chapter. 

The century we have been considering, was one 
in which the Jews had practically no national his- 
tory, and we have been chiefly occupied with their 
rulers and neighbors. They were, nevertheless, ever 


The Jews under Priestly Rule 31 


under the eye of God, and nothing happened to them 
Sut what his love and wisdom allowed. 

Throughout all the darkness, He kept a lamp of 
testimony burning in Jerusalem, according to the 
word He had sworn to His servants of old, for 
David’s sake and for His own glory. 

In the next period He gave them unexpected de- 
liverances that remind us of the days of the Judges, 
and to the consideration of this heroic epoch we will 
now turn.* 


*T have endeavored to trace out a little more in detail 
the history of the Ptolemies and the Seleucide in my 
Lectures on Daniel. The inquiring reader might consult 
the address on chapter 11: 1-35. 


CHAPTER II 


The Days of the Maccabees 


4 OR a long time there had been two main parties 
striving for the domination in Judea. One, and 
that the weaker company, clinging tenaciously to 
the law and its observance, though continually add- 
ing to it, and becoming more and more legal. These 
eventually became known as the Pharisees (from a 
root meaning to separate), and whom the apostle 
Paul describes long after this as “the straitest sect 
of our religion,” and whose self-righteousness and 
hypocrisy the Lord had to condemn so severely in 
His days on earth. Only by degrees, of course, and 
after a long time did the Jewish party reach the 
condition depicted in the New Testament. It was 
the result of holding the truth in a carnal way— 
contending for what was divine while neglecting 
spirituality and self-judgment. They thus became 
censorious judges of others and complacent condoners 
of themselves. 

On the other hand, the dominant party in the davs 
of Simon II. and Onias III. was the Hellenizing faction 
—bringing in Grecian ways and customs. They saw 
no deliverance for the Jews save in following the 
ways of the nations. They cried, “Let us go auc 
make a covenant with the heathen ” (1 Macc. 1: 11). 
and sought to popularize as far as possible the new 


CE adn gq 99S 


GIdWAL AHL WOUd NGAIYG SNYOGOITAH 


11). 


jane 


[7 


iy 


is be 


SCHECHEM, BETWEEN MTS. EBAL AND GERIZIM. “A land of hills and valleys” (Deut. 11 


The Days of the Maccabees 33 


ways. Greek philosophy, Greek games, and even 
tolerance of Greek religion were persistently advo- 
cated. Even Onias II., the high-priest, had been 
suspected of thus trying to break down the middle 
wall of separation; and later priests openly con- 
fessed their desire to see all that was distinctively 
Jewish replaced by what was Grecian. These were 
the predecessors of the polished, but infidel Sad- 
ducees. 

Besides these two great parties, there was a third, 
if it be right to stigmatize them by the appellation 
party. They were a feeble and afflicted people, “the 
poor of the flock,” who abhorred the ways of the 
heathen, yet refused the legal pretensions of the 
Nationalists, and clung devotedly to the word of 
God and the promise of the coming Messiah. From 
these sprang, in after-years, the Essenes—a sect 
whose actual tenets are difficult to define, but who 
placed spirituality above outward conformity. They 
have been called the Quakers of Judea, and by others 
the Pietists. 

But there were also purely political factions dis- 
turbing the peace of Judea. An “Egyptian” and a 
“Syrian” party had been gradually developed 
among the Jews, the names plainly indicating the 
object of each. In addition to these features of un- 
rest, corruption had made sad inroads among the 
oriesthood and the heads of the people. Avarice 
and covetousness, love of power and of ease, were 
eating the very life out of the great families and 
those who should have been examples to the flock. 

We have already mentioned Joseph, the son of 


34 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


Tobias, who first bought the privilege of farming 
the taxes from Ptolemy Eurgetes. This lucrative 
office was held by him and his sons for many years, 
giving them thereby an importance almost as great 
as that of the high-priest. But the love of money is 
a root for all evils, and it brought disaster to the 
house of Tobias. Joseph was the husband of two 
wives, one of whom bore him seven sons; the other, 
but one, who was named Hyrcanus. The father’s 
own character was thoroughly reproduced in this 
youth, in greed and cunning. In his father’s old 
age, he was sent by him to Egypt to congratulate 
the king and queen on the birth of a son. Hyrcanus 
used the opportunity to bribe the king with money 
obtained from his father’s agent, and by these un- 
worthy means secured the royal authority to become 
collector of revenues on the east of Jordan. This 
greatly enraged his father Joseph and his brothers, 
who waylaid Hyrcanus and sought to killhim. They 
were themselves defeated, however, and two of them 
slain, while Hyrcanus escaped unharmed. Joseph did 
not long survive this event. After his death matters 
went from bad to worse. 

The strife overleaped the family of Tobias and 
became a national affair. Some of the people, 
amongst whom was Simon the high-priest, espoused 
the cause of the five brothers, while others supported 
Hyrcanus, who retreated beyond Jordan, and seven 
years later committed suicide, fearing the wrath of 
Antiochus, the Syrian king, who then held sway 
over the land. Before he died, he appears to have 
obtained the favor of Onias III., the last hereditary 


The Days of the Maccabees 35 


high-priest (who succeeded Simon his father, 195 
B.C.), for the ill-gotten treasure of Hyrcanus was. 
deposited in the temple, and Onias described the 
publican as “a man of great dignity.” 

At this time the governor of the temple was a 
Simon who is supposed to have been the eldest 
brother of Hyrcanus. Between him and Onias a 
bitter feud developed, and in 176 B. C., Simon, find- 
ing Onias too powerful for him to cope with in 
Jerusalem, went to Apollonius, governor of all that 
- region (under Seleucus Philopater, the “raiser of 
taxes,” of whom we have spoken in the previous 
chapter), and told him of the immense treasure of 
Hyrcanus and others deposited for safe-keeping in 
the sanctuary. 

Apollonius lost no time in acquainting the king 
with the welcome news, and the needy monarch at 
once sent Heliodorus, his treasurer, to take possess- 
ion of the money. In some way he was hindered, 
and the treasure was not removed. The story told 
in 2 Macc. 3: 5-40 is that Heliodorus came to Jeru- 
salem and made inquiry of Onias, who informed 
him that the treasure was indeed there, but that it 
would be sacrilege to touch it. The king’s treasurer, 
however, demanded the money, and upon his being 
denied he attempted to enter the temple to secure 
it, when he saw an apparition in the form of “a horse 
with a terrible rider upon him, and adorned with a 
very fair covering, and he ran fiercely, and smote at 
Heliodorus with his forefeet, and it seemed that he 
that sat upon the horse had complete harness of 
gold. Moreover two other young men appeared be- 


36 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


fore him, notable in strength, excellent in beauty, 
and comely in apparel, who stood by him at either 
side, and scourged him continually, and gave him 
many sore stripes” (2 Macc. 3: 25, 26). This turned 
the treasurer from his purpose, and he departed to 
his master without the object of his quest. 

It is related, however, that Simon was not so 
credulous as Heliodorus, but boldly insinuated trick: 
ery, and declared that Onias was responsible in 
some way for the supposed apparition. Bitterness 
and strife increased; partisans were assassinated, 
and dissension grew so intolerable that Onias de- 
parted on a mission to the king, determined to se- 
cure his intervention. Things had fallen to a low 
ebb indeed when a heathen monarch had thus to be 
appealed to with a view to settling a dispute among 
the descendants of those zealous Jews returned out 
of Babylonish captivity in the days of Zerubbabel 
and Nehemiah. 

Seleucus, the king, died, however, before Onias 
reached him, and the king’s brother, Antiochus, 
who surnamed himself Epiphanes (the illustrious), was 
declared king. He is called by an opposite designa- 
in Daniel 11: 21, R. V., namely, “a contemptible 
person.” His own courtiers evidently concurred in 
this last appellation, for they changed one Greek letter 
in this self-assumed name, which made it Epimanes 
(the madman). 

This wretched king is the persecuting “King of 
the North,” a synopsis of whose history had been 
pre-written in Daniel 11: 21-35. He has been well- 
named “The Antichrist of the Old Testament.” At 


The Days of the Maccabees 37 


first he came in peaceably, and by flatteries sought 
to gain the confidence of the Jews, but afterwards 
became their bitterest persecutor, and the profaner 
of the temple. Ere Onias could gain his ear, Joshua, 
the high-priest’s brother, offered this Antiochus four 
hundred and forty talents in all if he would sell him 
the high-priestly position, and set aside his venerable 
brother. Joshua further promised to do all in his 
power toward Grecianizing the Jews, even to the 
changing their name to “Antiochians.” This offer 
delighted the avaricious ruler, who declared Onias 
no longer high-priest, but gave the office to Joshua, 
who at once began to carry out his pledges, giving 
up his own honored name for that of Jason, after a 
Greek hero. He constructed a gymnasium, and fur- 
thered in every way the adoption of Greek learning, 
fashions and games; even going “so far as to send 
special messengers from Jerusalem to Tyre bearing 
money for offerings to Melcarth, the Phoenician 
Hercules, on the occasion of the games in his honor” 
(see 2 Macc. 4: 18-20). 

Thus was the rationalistic pre-Sadducean party 
completely in power, and it seemed as though both 
the national and the spiritual parties were thoroughly 
crushed, if not ready to be annihilated. The first 
chapter of the first book of the Maccabees gives us 
a vivid picture of the wretched estate of the Jews, 
who had begun so well under Ezra and his co- 
adjutors. 

Four years passed, and Jason, the pseudo-priest, 
sent a younger brother named Onias, to Antioch, 
bearing the tribute-money for Antiochus. Jason now 


38 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


was to prove that “whatsoever a man soweth, that 
shall he also reap.”” He had sown deceit and treachery 
through flattery and bribery. He reaped the same. 
For Onias determined to obtain the lucrative and 
honorable title of high-priest for himself. He there- 
fore flattered and fawned upon the vain, covetous 
king, and offered him three hundred talents more 
than Jason for the position. He was successful, 
therefore, and returned to Jerusalem, bearing the 
royal commission, with the intention of ousting his 
brother from the office. The “sons of Tobias” 
rallied to his support, but Jason and his friends re- 
fused to relinquish their place and power, so that 
Onias was forced to retire to Antioch, temporarily 
outwitted. There he besought the king’s aid, pledg- 
ing himself to go further than his brother in Gre- 
cianizing the Jews, and changing his own name to 
Menelaus. This won the king to hearty support of his 
cause, and he returned once more to Jerusalem with 
a royal escort. At this Jason fled in terror and 
Menelaus held the priesthood. 

The senior Onias,the last legitimate high-priest, still 
lived, and “ vexed his righteous soul” as he saw the 
evil deeds of the apostate party. Finally, when Mene- 
laus, in order to make up the tribute-money, robbed 
the temple of its golden vessels, selling them at Tyre 
and elsewhere, Onias sternly spoke out, calling the 
false priest to account for his unhallowed ways. 
For this he was hated by the sacrilegious wretch 
whom he had reproved, and he appointed Andronicus 
to assassinate him. The aged pontiff was foully 
murdered, and Menelaus congratulated himself on— 


The Days of the Maccabees 39 


having his stern reprover out of the way. But the 
vile deed inflamed many lovers of Israel, and so great 
a protest was made to Antiochus, that he felt com- 
pelled to interfere by causing Andronicus to be put 
to death, though Menelaus himself escaped. As time 
went by he became more and more abandoned, 
reveling in shameful iniquity, and guilty of horrible 
enormities—yet wearing the sacred mitre inscribed 
with “Holiness unto the Lord!” 

Again he laid hands on other of the holy vessels, 
but this time the mass of the people, among whom 
were ever found many who “looked for redemption 
in Israel,” rose up in their wrath, determined to de- 
fend the house of God against this sacrilegious 
plunderer. They joined battle with three thousand 
of the partisans of Menelaus, led by Lysimachus his 
brother. Lysimachus was killed and his party de- 
feated. Menelaus chagrined and disgraced appealed 
to the king, sending a delegation of rationalistic 
members of the Sanhedrim bearing the most potent 
of arguments— money in abundance. The people 
protested, but all their complaints were ignored at 
the sight of Menelaus’ gold, and the king acquitted 
the high-priest and slew his accusers. 


Antiochus Epiphanes invaded Egypt, about 171 
B.C., and soon a rumor reached Jerusalem that he 
was dead. Upon the circulation of this report there 
was great rejoicing, and the Jason party again 
gathered courage, knowing that the people detested 
Menelaus. With a thousand men they carried the 
walls, slew their opponents, and drove Menelaus 


40 Yhe Four Hundred Silent Years 


into the castle. But a sudden turn of affairs enabled 
the latter to get the upper hand, and Jason was 
driven out and retreated to a strange land, where 
he died “ detested by ail,” as one historian says, and 
as we can well believe. 

News that Jerusalem had been overjoyed to hear 
of his death reached Antiochus in Egypt and threw 
him into a fury. The troubles between Jason and 
Menelaus were reported as though there had been 
a popular uprising and a revolt against the royal 
authority. In a paroxysm of rage he led his armies 
like an overwhelming flood through the land, and 
assaulting Jerusalem with wrathful energy, took the 
city by storm, upon which followed a fearful sack 
and carnage. Over 40,000 persons were slain in 
three days, and an equal number torn from their 
homes and led away as captives. Nor was this 
all. Guided by the wretched apostate Menelaus, he 
forced his way into the Holiest of all, carried off the 
golden candlestick, the table, the incense altar, and 
other vessels; destroyed the books of the law, and 
set up the “abomination of desolation” by erecting 
an idol-altar upon the holy altar of burnt-offerings, 
upon which he sacrificed a great sow, and with a 
broth made of its unclean flesh, sprinkled and defiled 
all the temple. 

The horror with which a godly Jew regarded this 
terrible desecration is almost beyond our conception. 
Never till the personal Antichrist sits in the temple 
of God yet to be erected in Jerusalem, in the days 
of the coming tribulation, will such dreadful scenes 
be repeated. Both are called by the same name. 


The Days of the Maccabees 41 


In Daniel 11: 31 the past deed is depicted years be- 
fore the event: “And armed men going forth from 
him shall pollute the sanctuary, the fortress, and 
shall take away the continual sacrifice, and they 
shall set up the abomination that maketh desolate.” 
In Daniel 9: 26, 27, the future is before us, when the 
Antichrist will again defile the temple, “and for the 
overspreading of abominations he shall make it des- 
olate.”” This is what Daniel 12: 11 refers to, and is 
the passage to which our Lord directed the attention 
of His disciples in Matt. 24: 15, as a sign of the end 
of the age. 

The impious acts of Antiochus became a signal for 
the revival of the ancient spirit in a remnant, ac- 
cording to Daniel 11: 32: “And such as do wickedly 
against the covenant shall he corrupt by flatteries; 
but the people that do know their God shall be strong 
and do exploits.” Thus the Maccabean period is 
introduced—the time of the great Jewish war of in- 
dependence. Then it was that the following verses, 
33 to 35, were literally fulfilled:* “And they that have 
understanding among the people shall instruct many; 
yet they shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by 
captivity, and by spoil many days. Now when they 
shall fall they shall be helped with a little help: but 
many shall join themselves to them with flatteries. 
And some of them of understanding shall fall, to try 


* The reader will observe that this concludes the past 
history of the Jews in Daniel 11. Verse 36, which has 
not yet come to pass, refers to the days of Antichrist. 
(See the author’s Lectures on Daniel.) 


42 The Four Hundred Siient Years 


them, and to purify, and to make them white, even 
to the time of the end: because it is yet for a time 
appointed.” 

For twenty-three hundred days, or about six anda 
half years, the temple was to be polluted, according 
to the same prophet Daniel. Then the sanctuary 
was to be cleansed and divine service re-instituted. 
And so it was. In 171 B.C. the abomination that - 
made desolate was set up. In 165-4 B.C. the temple 
was purified and re-dedicated by command of Judas 
Maccabeus. The intervening 2300 days were the 
strenuous times of which we now proceed to take 
note. 

For a time the Jews were utterly disheartened, 
yet a remnant cried to God: “O Lord, how long?” 
and hoped in Him who had ever been the Helper of 
Israel. 

In 169 B.C. Antiochus made another inroad 
against Egypt, and was at first successful, until met 
by a Roman embassage demanding that he return 
to his own land. The decree of the Roman senate 
was handed to the haughty tyrant, who asked for 
time to consider it; but with his rod, Popillius, one 
of the ambassadors, drawing a circle around Anti- 
ochus, demanded an answer of yes or no before he 
left the circle. Antiochus, alarmed, submitted and 
left Egypt, determined to vent his rage on Palestine 
again. He sent an army under Apollonius to destroy 
the already ruined city of Jerusalem, the name of 
which signifies “Foundation of peace,” but which 
has known more sieges and bloodshed than any 
other existing city — having been sacked twenty- 


The Days of the Maccabees 43 


seven times already, and God’s word clearly predicts 
two fearful sieges for the future. 

Apollonius fell upon the defenceless people in a 
manner worthy of the madman he served. Pretend- 
ing peace, he entered unopposed, and on the holy 
Sabbath day fell upon the wretched inhabitants, 
slaying the men by thousands, and carrying the 
women and children captive. The houses and walls 
were demolished and the city set on fire. Thus, in 
the pathetic language of 1 Macc. 1: 39, “ Her sanctu- 
ary was laid waste like a wilderness; her feasts were 
turned into mourning, her Sabbaths into reproach, 
her honor into contempt.” 

And over and above all this an Act of Uniformity 
was passed compelling all the people in the domin- 
ions of Antiochus to worship his gods and no others. 
Athenzus was sent to Jerusalem to dedicate the 
temple to Jupiter Olympus, in whose honor sacrifices 
were instituted, and the miserable Jews still remain- 
ing among the ruins of their old homes were forced 
to take part in the horrid services and to eat of the 
unclean sacrifices. Defilement could not further go. 
Israel had been made to know to the full the tender 
mercies of the heathen, whose culture and brilliancy 
had been so attractive to the rationalizers among 
them. The outward contamination was but the 
manifestation of what God’s holy eye had seen long 
since; even as the leprosy on king Uzziah’s forehead 
had but made known before all the corruption that 
had been working within. 

Antiochus and his minions knew no mercy. They 
spared neither age, sex, nor condition. Young and 


4.4. The Four Hundred Silent Years 


old, men and women, priests and people, rich and 
poor, suffered alike in those fearful days of ven- 
geance. Women who attempted to keep the law 
and circumcise their sons, were led publicly through 
the city with their babes at their breasts and flung 
bodily from the city walls, thus being literally bro- 
ken to pieces. Any who were discovered observing 
the Sabbath day were apprehended and burnt alive. 

Josephus’ account of those dire and sorrowful 
times remarkably coincides with the epistle to the 
Hebrews’ account of former saints’ sufferings. Says 
the Jewish historian: “They were whipped with 
rods, and their bodies were torn to pieces, and were 
crucified while they were still alive and breathed.” 
The apostle wrote of the same heroes of faith: 
“They were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that 
they might obtain a better resurrection; and others 
had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, 
moreover of bonds and imprisonment. They were 
stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, 
were slain with the sword: they wandered about in 
sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, 
tormented (of whom the world was not worthy); they 
wandered in deserts and mountains, and dens and 
caves of the earth” (Heb. 11: 35-38). 

One incident will show how truly these words 
applied to the faithful among the Jews in this time 
of trouble. One woman and her seven sons were 
apprehended together and dragged before the vile 
and infamous king, who commanded them to cast off 
their faith and to become worshipers of his gods. 
As they boldly refused, the first son was seized in 


The Days of the Maccabees 45 


the presence of his heroic mother and his six breth- 
ren, his tongue torn out, his members cut off, and 
he burned alive over a slow fire. Again the alter- 
native was presented to worship the demon-gods and 
live, or be faithful to Jehovah and die. Unyielding, 
the second son was taken and flayed alive before 
the eyes of the rest. And so the horrid trial went 
on till but one son was left, and he the youngest. 
The king personally pleaded with him to renounce 
his faith and bow to the gods, promising riches, 
ease and honor for himself and his mother if he 
obeyed. Fearing he might weaken, the devoted wo- 
man encouraged his heart in the Lord, saying, “O 
my son, have pity upon me that bare thee . . . I be- 
seech thee, my son, look upon heaven and earth, 
and all that is therein, and consider that God made 
them of things that were not; and so was mankind 
made likewise. Fear not this tormentor, but be 
worthy of thy brethren; take thy death, that I may 
receive thee again in mercy with thy brethren” 
(2 Macc. 7: 27-29). How strong was this testimony 
to the Jewish faith in the resurrection when uncor- 
rupted by Sadducean influence! 

The youth, thus encouraged, defied the king, re- 
buked him for his iniquity, and predicted his final 
judgment, till the wretched monarch was so enraged 
that, we are told, he “handled him worse than all 
the rest,” and “this man died undefiled, and put his 
whole trust in the Lora” (chap. 7: 39, 40). The 
mother was then despatched, and the eight faithful 
spirits rested together in Abraham’s bosom. 

It would only be soul-harrowing to dwell longer 


46 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


on details such as these. The night was indeed dark; 
the storm raged relentlessly; hope almost died 
within the breasts of the faithful; when, like the 
shining forth of the star of morning, arose Matta- 
thias who dwelt in Modin. 

This man was the father of five sons, and he and 
his sons are the Maccabees of everlasting renown. 
The name means, “The hammer of God,” and was 
originally the appellation given to the third son 
Judas, but is generally now applied to them all. 

It is not possible at this late day to locate the vil- 
lage of Modin, where dwelt this devoted family of 
priestly descent. Mattathias was of the house of 
Asmonzus, of the course of Joarib, so his family 
are called Asmonzans. They were among those who 
bewailed before God the corruption and violence of 
the times, and in secret were being prepared by the 
mighty One in whom they trusted, for public service. 

There came one day to Modin, Apelles, king Anti- 
ochus’ commissioner, to force all the inhabitants to 
conform to the heathen rites. Recognizing in Matta- 
thias a ruler and an honorable man, Apelles came 
first to him, demanding that he set the example by 
sacrificing on the heathen altar which had been set 
up in the midst of the village. Mattathias indig- 
nantly refused, and declared without reservation 
that neither he nor his sons would harken to the 
king’s words. As he spoke, a renegade Jew pressed 
through the throng to offer before the idol. This so 
stirred the venerable old man that he ran forward 
and slew not only the transgressor himself, but ere 
the astonished commissioner realized his danger, he 


The Days of the Maccabees 47 


also was slain by Mattathias, who then destroyed 
the altar. Thus had a second Phinehas arisen in 
Israel. 

The breach was made; the king was openly defied. 
So, crying, “ Whosoever is zealous of the law, and 
maintaineth the covenant, let him follow me,” the 
aged Mattathias fled from the city into a mountain 
retreat, leaving all his goods behind him. Unto him, 
as to David in the hold, a company of devoted men 
gathered, his own sons leading the way. So had 
God again visited the Jews, even in the days when 
they were still under the Lo-ammi sentence—“ Not 
My people”—because of their sins. The flame of 
insurrection spread far and wide, and as of old, the 
“discontented, in debt, and distressed,” rallied to the 
standard of Mattathias. 

From Jerusalem an army of Syrians was at once 
despatched to crush the rebellion in its very incep- 
tion. They fell upon a heterogeneous mass of Jews 
who were encamped in the wilderness, on their way 
to the hiding place of Mattathias. It was the holy 
Sabbath, and the patriotic band felt they dared not 
violate its sanctity by armed resistance, so a thous: 
and were butchered like defenceless sheep. But this 
led to a change of judgment, and decided the Jews 
never again to refuse to defend their country and 
their families on the holy day, but to fight manfully 
for all that was dearer to them than life itself, even 
on the Sabbath, the rest of which had been so rudely 
disturbed by the ferocious heathen. 

The most devoted Jews joined Mattathias ; those 
known as the Assidzans. or Chasidim (2. e., the Pious), 


48 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


who detested all that savored of idolatry, and clung 
tenaciously to the old paths, as well as the nationalist 
party, who were actuated more by mere patriotism 
than true piety. 

From place to place this band of insurrectionists 
went through the country, daily augmented by fresh 
recruits, tearing down idol-altars, overthrowing 
heathen temples, circumcising the children who 
were without the covenant-sign, and proclaiming the 
triumph of the law of God. 

For less than a year was Mattathias spared, the 
intensity of the times being too much for his years; 
and in 166 B.C. the venerable old patriarch died. 
Ere he resigned his laborious work he gathered his 
sons about him, and charged them not to turn aside 
from the service he now committed to them till the 
land and the temple were cleansed of the pollutions 
of the heathen. His son Judas, ““Maccabeus” (the 
hammer of God), he appointed to succeed himself as 
leader of the revolutionary army, while he called 
upon all to weigh well the wise counsels of his son 
Simon, who was noted for his sagacity and single- 
ness of purpose. The aged leader was buried in 
Modin, amid great lamentation, and at his tomb the 
people consecrated themselves anew to the service 
of God and their brethren. 

Victory everywhere crowned the efforts of Judas. 
He surprised the enemy time after time, bursting in 
upon their encampments in the middle of the night, 
spreading terror and confusion among them, and 
causing himself to be dreaded by them all. 

Apollonius, the governor of Samaria, went out 


The Days of the Maccabees 49 


against him with a great host, but was ignominiously 
defeated, and at last himself slain, while his army 
was scattered and their arms and accoutrements 
left in the hands of the Jews. With the sword of 
Apollonius the great Maccabean chieftain fought 
ever afterwards. 

Another and greater army, commanded by Seron, 
was sent by king Antiochus to annihilate the Jewish 
company. The two forces met at Beth-horon. Seron, 
haughty and defiant, at the head of a vast host; 
Judas, intrepid and strong in faith, but leading a 
small company, who had been obliged to fast all that 
day, and were weak and discouraged as they beheld 
their insolent foes. “How,” they asked, “shall we 
be able, being so few, to fight against so great a 
multitude, and so strong?” Like a second Asa, 
Judas replied : “ With the God of heaven it is all 
one to deliver with a great multitude, or a small 
company.” Nor was his faith disappointed. En- 
couraged by the remembrance of the past mercies 
of Jehovah, the Jews threw themselves, in the appar- 
ent recklessness of faith, upon their disdainful foes, 
and under the daring leadership of Judas, scattered 
them like chaff before the flails, and completely de- 
feated the Syrians, who fled wildly in all directions, 
leaving a vast number of dead and wounded on the 
bloody field. Thus was it demonstrated that one 
should chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand 
to flight, in reliance upon God their strength. 

News of these events threw Antiochus into a fury; 
he raged like a maniac as report of success after 
success on the part of Judas and his bands reached 


50 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


the Syrian capital. A great army was at once plan- 
ned, to be led by the king in person, which would 
utterly annihilate the detested Jews. But money was 
lacking; the treasury being practically empty, the 
angry king set off to Persia to collect tribute, and 
with other means to raise the much-needed funds. 
Meantime, half of the army was sent to Pales- 
tine, headed by Lysias, one of his mightiest generals, 
who was charged to completely extirpate all Israel, 
and blot out of the land every memorial in existence 
of the insolent nation that had dared to defy so 
mighty a king! 

It seems to have been Satan’s great effort to de- 
stroy the seed of Abraham, and so to nullify the 
(Messianic promise. Often had he sought thus to 
fring to nought the word of God in the past, but 
had been divinely defeated on every occasion; and 
he, the great arch-enemy of God and men, was again 
to find that he was powerless against the fiat of the 
Eternal. 

Lysias divided the army among three generals, 
Ptolemy, Nicanor, and Gorgias, with 40,000 foot and 
7,000 horsemen, sending this great host into Judea 
to preclude all possibility of defeat. So certain were 
the Syrians of victory that Nicanor had it publicly 
proclaimed that upon his return ninety Jews would 
be sold for one talent; thus arousing the cupidity of 
the dealers in slaves, whose money it was supposed 
would soon be pouring into the coffers of Antiochus. 

Against this mighty army Judas could only op- 
pose a visible force of 6,000 men; but can we doubt 
that the armies of heaven, visible only to faith, were 


The Days of the Maccabees 51 


encamping round about the little Jewish band, as of 
old in the mountains surrounding Dothan? 

The Syrians pitched at Emmaus, and at Mizpeh 
was the camp of the Jews. With ashes on their 
heads and sackcloth on their bodies, they fell down 
before God in prayer and confession. Eleazar, the 
brother of Judas, read from the Holy Scriptures as 
they fasted and humbled themselves before the 
mighty One who had been their Help in ages past. 
He was their reliance in the hour of trial then ap- 
proaching. For their battle-cry they took the words, 
“The help of God;”’ and with hearts strong in the 
Lord and the power of His might, they waited for 
the morrow. 

And while they waited, they watched. Faithful 
sentries noted every move of the over-confident 
Syrians. Ere daylight scouts came to Judas to tell 
him that the division of the enemy under Gorgias 
was already preparing to march, hoping by an early 
attack to surprise the sleeping Jews and to carry all 
before them. The little army of Israel were roused 
at once. When Gorgias arrived at the Jewish camp 
he found it deserted, for Judas and his men were 
already marching down upon the Syrians by a 
different road. Suddenly the cry of Judas, “Fear ye 
not!” rang out on the still air, and a loud blast of 
trumpets sounded the assault. Like men who knew 
neither fear nor danger the Jews flung themselves 
upon the great army before them, and in a few mo- 
ments the enemy were scattered in all directions. 
Three thousand Syrians fell, and when Gorgias re: 
turned, in ignorance of the events of the early 


RIG 31 


sE CINCINNATI BIBLE SEMINARY O35 
| LIBRARY tebe 


52 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


morning, he imagined the Jews were in retreat. 
“These fellows flee from us,” he cried, and led his 
band on in haste to the plain, only to find the tents 
on fire and the Syrians fleeing in disorder on every 
side. Amazed and disheartened, Gorgias and his 
men turned and fled as a company of Jews bore 
down upon them. 

Thus was the battle ended, and the army of Lysias 
disgracefully defeated. The Jews gathered the spoil 
together, then rested for the Sabbath, praising God 
for His marvelous ways and mercy to Israel. 

Determined to retrieve the good name of his army, 
Lysias gathered a force of nearly twenty thousand 
more men the following year and again descended 
upon Judea. But the army of Judas was now ten 
thousand strong, and with these zealots, relying on 
“the Saviour of Israel,” he boldly met the 65,000 
Syrians in Idumea, and drove Lysias in defeat and 
disgrace to Antiochia. So overwhelming was this 
blow, that it was years before the Syrian army re- 
covered from its effects, and in the meantime (164 
B.C.), less than a year after the triumph of Judas, 
the vile Antiochus Epiphanes died a horrible death, 
raving in madness and foul with an evil disease that 
rotted the flesh upon his bones while life was yet in his 
filthy body. He had reigned eleven years, and came 
to his end as he was hastening home from Persia to 
avenge the defeat of his generals upon the exultant 
Jews. 

But ere the king’s death, an event of great impor- 
tance occurred at Jerusalem: the cleansing of the 
temple, as predicted by Daniel, at the expiration of 


The Days of the Maccabees 5S 


the 2,300 days of defilement. It was in 171 B.C. 
that the sanctuary was first polluted. In 165 and 
164, the holy place was purified, and the ancient 
service reestablished amid the joyful acclamations 
of the Chasidim and the enthusiastic shouts of the 
nationalists. 

When Judas and his brethren went up to Jerusa- 
lem it was a dreadful sight that greeted them. The 
holy city was in ruins, the temple disfigured and 
desolate, the courts overgrown with shrubs, the 
sacred altar profaned, the beautiful gate burned, and 
the entire place a scene of desolation. Rending their 
garments, the people gave way to wailing and tears, 
but the sound of the trumpet called them to labor, 
not to weep; and with a small armed company set 
aside to keep the Syrian garrison in the fortress in 
check, the rest began the labor of repairing the 
sanctuary and cleansing the building and the hal- 
lowed vessels. The altar was set aside altogether as 
too unclean for purification, and a new one built in 
its place. The temple was renovated and decorated, 
and at last, all was in readiness for its re-dedication. 
This took place on the 25th Chisleu, 165 B.C., ex- 
actly three years from the day when the first offering 
had been made on the altar to Jupiter, and some six 
and a half years after it had been first polluted by 
Antiochus. Ever after, the Jews kept “‘ The Feast of 
the Dedication” as a yearly festival (see John 10: 22), 
in the wintry month of Chisleu, or December. Ere 
the next year, 164 B.C., was well advanced, the 
temple service was going on again as before the 
desecration. 


54 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


For the greater part of the next three years the 
work of ridding the land of its enemies and restoring 
the cities of Israel was vigorously carried on by the 
heroic Judas. He fortified Mount Zion and placed a 
Jewish garrison there, rebuilt the walls, and re- 
habilitated the waste places, bringing order out of 
chaos, and changing despair to hopeful contempla- 
tion of the future. Upon an uprising of Israel’s 
ancient foes, the _Idumeans, or Edomites, and the 
Ammonites, Judas and his brother Jonathan led an 
army into their territories and discomfited them at 
every turn, till they were glad to make peace and 
refrain from further interference. Simon, a brother 
of Judas, commanded an army that overran Galilee, 
subjugating lawless bands which were inflicting ter- 
ror by pillaging and slaying the defenceless people 
who had sought refuge there. Wherever the Mac: 
cabean brothers were in command victory followed ; 
but on several occasions, when led by rash and mis- 
guided men, the Jews were defeated. 


Antiochus Epiphanes was succeeded by his nine- 
year-old son, known as Antiochus Eupator; Lysias, 
the old enemy of the Jews, was regent, and again he 
determined to wipe out the stain upon his honor by 
crushing Judas and his forces. He invaded the land, 
therefore, with an army vastly greater than that 
commanded by Judas. The two hosts met in Judea, 
and, for the first time, the Jews suffered a serious 
reverse. Eleazar, the brother of Judas, was slain 
while attempting to destroy what he supposed was 
the king’s beast. He observed a large elephant, 


The Days of the Maccabees 55 


gorgeously bedecked, and thought it was ridden by 
the boy-king and his guards. Thinking to win un- 
dying renown, and to stem the assault of the foe, he 
cut his way through a company of Syrians, got 
underneath the mighty beast and thrust his spear 
into its belly. The great creature fell, crushing 
Eleazar by its weight. It was not the king’s beast, 
however, and nothing was really accomplished by 
the indiscretion of Eleazar. His death greatly dis- 
couraged the Jews, while it did not hinder the 
progress of the invaders, who drove their stubborn 
foes before them, so that they retreated to Jerusa- 
lem. 

Lysias laid siege to the city, and cutting off all 
supplies, threatened all the inhabitants with death 
by famine if they attempted to hold out against him. 
But the God of Israel intervened again, and caused 
the purpose of Lysias to be frustrated by the break- 
ing out of rebellion in Syria: Philip, a rival of Lysias, 
having attempted to overthrow the government in 
the latter’s absence. 

This made it imperative for Lysias to raise the 
siege and to return in haste to the capital; which 
he did, after concluding peace with the Jews, guar- 
anteeing them protection. But when the king 
was admitted to the city and his officers saw the 
strength of the walls, the pledge was partially 
violated by the destruction of the defenses. The 
army then marched away in haste to Antiochia, 
where Philip was outwitted and the rebellion 
crushed. 

It will be remembered that the treacherous high- 


56 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


priest Menelaus was in office when Mattathias first 
rose against the Syrians. He continued to hold the 
title through all the stormy years of revolution, but 
met his death at this time. Lysias, declaring that he 
was the real cause of the revolt, impeached him be- 
fore the king. He was slain, then, and the high- 
priesthood conferred upon one named Alcimus, who, 
unfortunately, was every whit as vile as his infamous 
predecessor. This was in 163 B.C. 

The rest of the story of Judas issoon told. During 
the next year he labored earnestly for the blessing 
of Israel, though he it was who first formed the 
Roman alliance as a result of which Judea became 
eventually a Roman province. The circumstances 
were these: In 162 B. C., Demetrius, son of Seleucus 
Philopater, and therefore nephew of Antiochus Epi- 
phanes and cousin of Eupator, appeared in Syria to 
contest the authority of the boy-king. He had been 
carried to Rome as a hostage some years before, but 
had escaped and made his way to Tripolis in Syria, 
where he gave out that the Roman senate had au- 
thorized him to take over the kingdom from his 
cousin. Many rallied to his standard, and after a 
desperate conflict the king and Lysias were appre- 
hended by the pretender and put to death. Demet- 
rius then ascended the throne, taking the title Soter, 
meaning Saviour. 

Alcimus, the newly-appointed high-priest, bought 
his favor with a present of a golden crown and other 
gifts, and thus his office was confirmed to him. 
This hypocritical, self-seeking prelate lost no time 
jn slandering Judas Maccabzus and his followers to 


The Days of the Maccabees 57 


the king, and command was given to Nicanor, the 
old enemy of the Jewish commonwealth, to ad- 
vance against Judas, put him to death, and destroy 
his army. But Nicanor knew from past experience 
that this was easier said than done. Instead of en- 
gaging Judas in battle, therefore, he entered into a 
peace compact with the Jews, which seemed honor- 
able and satisfactory to both sides. This did not 
suit the policy of Alcimus, and he boldly accused 
Nicanor to the king, who sent instructions that the 
original plans or orders must be carried out. Upon 
this Nicanor, much against his own judgment, ad- 
vanced upon the army of Judas, who had been 
apprized of the violation of the compact in time to 
be prepared for war. At Beth-horon and Adasa the 
opposing hosts encamped, and, joining battle, Judas 
was again triumphant, and the king’s soldiers beat 
an ignominious retreat. Nicanor was killed, and his 
head and right hand were carried to Jerusalem in 
triumph. “For this cause,” says the author of 
1 Maccabees (chap. 7: 48-50), “the people rejoiced 
greatly, and they kept that day a day of great glad- 
ness. Moreover they ordained to keep yearly this 
day, being the thirteenth of Adar. Thus the land of 
Judea was in rest a little while.” 

But it was evident to Judas that the era of quiet 
could not last long, for the Syrian king would not be 
likely to allow this dishonor to his army to pass un- 
avenged. The stern old warrior, Judas, therefore, 
determined to make an alliance with Rome, which 
was now the dominant power of the West, and al- 
ready making her influence felt in the East. Had 


58 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


Judas read and understood the words of Daniel as to 
the rise of the fourth empire, and realized that the 
third was doomed? It can scarcely be doubted. 
He knew, too, how potent had been the word of a 
Roman senator in the days of Epiphanes; so it was 
natural enough that he should seek an alliance with 
the ‘‘beast dreadful and terrible, having great iron 
teeth.” Better be a friend than a foe of such a 
power, he may have thought. Yet it is evident that 
Judas had dropped to a lower level than he had 
occupied in days gone by when his reliance had 
been alone upon the God of Israel. Rome was but 
an arm of flesh, and the Jews were to find in her an 
oppressor beyond all others ere the fruit of this pact 
had fully been gathered. 

Negotiations were entered into with the Roman 
senate, and a treaty drawn up and signed, which 
seemed likely to ensure peace to Israel. But Judas 
was not to live to see it, nor indeed did the wished- 
for peace prove as lasting as he had hoped. Before 
Demetrius could be notified of the alliance with 
Rome and warned to beware of harming or acting 
unjustly toward her “friends and confederates the 
Jews,” the energetic Syrian monarch had dispatched 
a force of 22,000 men against Judas, led by Bacchi- 
des and the infamous high-priest Alcimus. The 
army of patriots numbered but 3000. The old spirit of 
confidence in God seemed to be gone. Judas was 
anxious and troubled; his men were in fear, and 
urged a retreat. The worthy old warrior could not 
consent to this, and, because of his stern refusal, his 
farce was farther reduced by numerous desertions. 


The Days of the Maccabees 59 


Yet he led the forlorn hope when the Syrians came 
upon him, and fought bravely and doggedly to the 
last; but ere the battle ended the hero of Israel was 
no more. Judas, “the hammer of God,” was over- 
whelmed and slain! 

What his death meant to the Jews, words fail to 
express. They were broken-hearted and in despair; 
though God had not left them without a leader, for 
his brother Jonathan at once took his place as cap- 
tain-general of the little army. This was in the year 
161 B.C. 

The troubles of the Jews were multiplied. The 
“Syrian party,” headed by Alcimus, endeavored 
with all its power to defeat the Roman alliance and 
re-establish the Syrian sway; and for a time there 
was distress and civil war. But the wretched Alci- 
mus died the next year (160 B.C.), and a measure 
of quiet was restored. But there were other dis- 
tresses; a great famine brought fearful suffering to 
many, and the activity of Bacchides kept Jonathan’s 
little army continually on the defensive until, with- 
drawing to the wilderness of Tekoa, he managed to 
wear out by guerilla tactics the trained soldiers of 
his opponent who sought again and again to capture 
him, only to be repulsed and outwitted each time. 

For two years there was comparative quiet; then 
in 158 B.C. Bacchides came again into Judea to 
seek the destruction of Jonathan. He was defeated, 
however, and favorable terms of peace concluded 
between the two armies. 

Troubles in Syria, in connection with the claims 
of a pretender to the throne named Balas, caused 


60 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


king Demetrius to desist from further efforts to sub- 
jugate the Jews, and for several years there was 
quiet in Judea, while both Demetrius and Balas 
sought the favor and support of Jonathan and his 
army. In vain Demetrius offered him privilege after 
privilege; Jonathan could not or would not trust 
him. Balas, who took the name of Alexander, 
offered to confer the high-priesthood upon him 1f 
Jonathan would espouse his cause. After months of 
negotiations his offer was accepted, and at the Feast 
of Tabernacles, 153 B.C., Jonathan was solemnly 
robed in the high-priestly garments, which he as- 
sumed for the good of his people. Yet it is clear 
that all this was opposed to the plain word of God. 
Trusting to or acting in the flesh to procure a de- 
sirable end, can never be of the Holy Spirit. 

When Alexander Balas and Demetrius met, the 
latter was defeated and slain while in retreat. Thus 
was Alexander confirmed as king of Syria, and to 
strengthen himself he entered into an alliance with 
the king of Egypt, who gave him his daughter as 
wife. Balas professed to be the natural son of Anti- 
ochus Epiphanes, and, because it served their pur- 
pose, he got the Romans to own his claim. 

It seemed now as though all must be well with 
the Jews: a Maccabean was high-priest; the foreign 
party was crushed; a Roman puppet was on the 
Syrian throne; and a Roman-Jewish alliance was in 
force. What more could be needed to secure peace 
and prosperity? Alas, that which was most impor- 
tant of all now seemed to be lacking—simple trust 
in the living God! 


The Days of the Maccabees 61 


The future was to prove that “vain is the help of 
man,” and that no human arrangements can stand, 
or procure the end in view, if they be opposed to the 
word of the Lord, and spring from expediency in 
place of faith. 

In 148 B.C. trouble again loomed large on the 
horizon of the Jews. Theson of Demetrius, after- 
wards known as Nicator (the Conqueror), who had 
been in hiding since his father’s death, determined 
to regain the throne and kingdom. This prince first 
attacked Jonathan as a supporter of the usurper 
Balas, but was defeated, though not until Ptolemy, 
the king of Egypt, had come into Palestine with an 
army to assist Alexander, his son-in-law. While en- 
gaged in thus helping the Jews, he learned of a plot 
against his own life, laid by one of Alexander’s 
officers. Ptolemy demanded that the offender be 
delivered up to him. Upon Alexander’s refusal, 
he justly concluded that the upstart-king had 
sanctioned the attempt to destroy him. This 
caused him to demand the return of his daugh- 
ter and the severance of the Syro-Egyptian alliance. 
Ptolemy now espoused the cause of Demetrius 
against Alexander, and the wife of the latter was 
given to Demetrius, his rival. 

Alexander was soon defeated and slain. His 
head was sent to Ptolemy, who, however, only lived 
three days after receiving it. In 146 B.C. Demetrius 
was proclaimed king of Syria and hailed as “ Nica- 
tor.” <A rather flimsy compact existed for a time 
between this prince and Jonathan, but when in 144 
B.C. Antiochus, the son of Balas, arose to contest 


62 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


the crown with Demetrius Nicator, Jonathan severed 
all relations with the latter, and threw his influence 
on the side of Antiochus, who confirmed his right to 
the high-priesthood and sent him a present of golden 
vessels for use in the temple; also giving him per- 
mission to be clothed in purple and to wear a golden 
buckle, only worn by those of royal blood. 

Jonathan proved an able ally. He led his army 
in person against Demetrius, defeating his forces; 
and renewing the alliance with Rome, cast all his 
influence on the side of the son of Balas, who was 
triumphantly hailed king of Syria and Palestine. He 
was an able and generous prince and a real friend 
of the Jews, who appreciated fully the part Jonathan 
had taken in aiding his cause; but he was destined 
to reign for a very short season, falling a victim to 
the treachery of Tryphon, one who was largely instru- 
mental in placing him upon the throne. Ere Anti- 
ochus fell, Jonathan was also fated to die by the 
machinations of the same traitorous commander. 

Tryphon coveted the crown for himself, and real- 
izing that the son of Mattathias was as a bulwark 
of the throne, he craftily sought to obtain possession 
of his person. Under a pretence of inviting him for 
friendly conference, Jonathan was prevailed upon to 
enter the city of Ptolemais, accompanied by less 
than a thousand men. These troops were cruelly 
massacred and their leader imprisoned. Upon this 
news reaching the surrounding nations, they pre- 
pared to invade Judea now that the veteran leader 
was powerless to aid his people. Tryphon also set out 
at the head of an army to overrun the land, deter- 


The Days of the Maccabees 63 


mined to subjugate the “eternal” nation. Fear filled 
the souls of the men of Israel, and they were in de- 
spair until Simon, the brother of Jonathan, came to 
the front, encouraged their hearts by recounting the 
deeds of valor performed of old, and was unani- 
mously chosen as captain of the host. 

Hearing this,Tryphon notified Simon that Jonathan 
had been apprehended and imprisoned because of 
his failure to pay the tribute-money, and that if he, 
Simon, would send two hundred talents of silver and 
two sons of the high-priest and commander as hos- 
tages, their father would be released. Simon had 
little faith in the traitor’s promises, but he thought 
it best to comply, hoping thereby to save his broth- 
er’s life. All was of no avail, however; for after 
receiving the money and securing the hostages, 
Tryphon had Jonathan brutally murdered, and re- 
sumed operations against the Jews. This was in 144 
B.C.—seventeen years after Jonathan had become 
the leader of his people. His body was later recov- 
ered, and buried at Modin, his former home. 

Tryphon shortly afterwards secretly slew the youth- 
ful king Antiochus and laid hands on the crown, 
declaring himself king. He was a relentless enemy 
of the Jews, and during his troublous reign caused 
them much discomfort. 

Demetrius Nicator, the deposed king, who had 
been driven out by the armies of Antiochus, was 
still alive and plotting to regain the royal dignity. 
It seemed to Simon that he was much to be pre- 
ferred to the detestable Tryphon, so he decided to 
espouse his cause. Sending him a crown of gold and 


64 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


a robe of scarlet, Simon sought to make a treaty 
with him which would insure peace between them. 
This greatly pleased Demetrius, who readily agreed 
and confirmed the high-priesthood to Simon, forgave 
the Jews all tribute, and declared all past faults for- 
given. He really surrendered his title to Palestine 
as a whole, so that Simon was virtually governor of 
a free people, if able to hold their own against 
Tryphon. Thus the Syrian servitude of 170 years 
came to an end in that year, 143 B.C. At the same 
time the Romans confirmed their former league on 
plates of brass, and the Lacedemonians also entered 
into a peaceful alliance with Israel, so that Tryphon 
dared no longer molest them. 

For a brief period the land enjoyed rest and pros- 
perity under the wise leadership of Simon. The 
cities were rebuilt, the lands tilled, and the arts of 
peace pursued. So pleased were the people of the 
Jews with Simon, that they held a general assembly 
in his third year, 141 B. C., when they conferred the 
priesthood and the government upon him and his 
heirs forever, engraving their decision in brass and 
fixing it upon pillars in Mount Zion. 

But again misfortune loomed darkly on the hori- 
zon; for in the same year they became involved 
once more in the quarrels of the rival claimants to 
the Syrian throne. Demetrius Nicator had been 
captured by the king of Persia, and his brother An- 
tiochus Pius usurped the kingly title and prepared 
to contest his claim with Tryphon. Obtaining per- 
mission from Simon to pass through his lands in 
order to recover the territories ruled over by his 


The Days of the Maccabees 65 


father, he led an army against Tryphon, whom he 
defeated, thus obtaining the dominion he sought. 
Though he had confirmed all the pledges given by 
his brother to Simon, he became jealous of the lat- 
ter’s power and liberty, and sent an army to invade 
Judea, with orders to seize the government and carry 
captive all who opposed his authority. 

Simon, though very old, roused himself to the de- 
fence of his people in true Maccabean spirit, and 
putting his sons Judas and John (known as Hyr- 
canus) in command of the army, met the foe in 
bloody conflict and defeated him, to the great elation 
of the Jews. But their joy was turned into mourn- 
ing when very soon afterwards Simon and two of 
his sons were assassinated at a banquet, and that 
through the treachery of his son-in-law, named 
Ptolemy. Thus died the last of the famous sons of 
the stern old God-fearing patriot Mattathias, in 135 
BC: 

For us, who are seeking to learn lessons of practi- 
cal value from all this, one thing stands out as a 
solemn warning: the people of the Jews had largely 
lost that godly separation and dependence which 
should have been their sanctification. In their dis- 
tresses, in place of implicit reliance on the God of 
their fathers, they turned to alliances with the 
heathen, depending on an arm of flesh that often 
failed them, and was to be their ruin in the end. 
Who that is even ordinarily familiar with the his- 
tory of the Church, can fail to see that the same 
snare has ever been the bane of every movement 
which in its early beginnings was marked by devot- 


66 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


edness to Christ and reliance upon the living God, 
but which as the freshness of early days passed 
away, and numbers were added who had obtained 
the truth at little cost (often coming into it almost 
by natural birth), lost this peculiar link with the 
Divine, and depended more and more on what was 
merely human? This is the weakness of practically 
every religious society, and no company of Chris- 
tians can afford to be indifferent to the danger of 
such a course. Power and blessing, victory and 
spiritual freshness are the portion of those who 
cleave to the Lord alone. Weakness and barrenness 
as surely follow upon amalgamation with the world, 
as in the case of the Jews in the days upon which 
we have been dwelling. 


CHAPTER III. 


To the End of the Asmonean Dynasty 


OHN HYRCANUS, son of Simon, succeeded io 

the place and honor of his father, in accordance 
with the decision of the great council. His first act 
was to attempt the relief of his mother, who was 
held captive by her unworthy son-in-law Ptolemy. 
In this he was unsuccessful. The aged woman was 
murdered, and her assassin could not be apprehended. 
Antiochus Pius again invaded the land, determined 
if possible to crush the independent spirit of the 
Jews, but he was once more outwitted, though the 
cause of much suffering for weary months. At the 
feast of tabernacles of that year a treaty was signed 
which rather gave the advantage to the Syrians, and 
Antiochus returned to his own land, after having 
sent a costly sacrifice to the temple at Jerusalem as 
a sop to Jewish pride. 

Antiochus did not hold his sceptre long, for in the 
year 130 B.C. he fell in battle with the Parthians, 
and his ill-starred brother, Demetrius, came out of 
captivity to succeed him, reigning a little over four 
years, and being himself slain, 126 B.C. 

John Hyrcanus renewed the league with the Ro- 
mans, in order to strengthen himself against the 
Syrians, whom he attacked in several cities with 
varying loss and gain; in the main successful, how- 
ever. He introduced a new policy (too often fol- 
lowed since, alas, even by what professes to be the 


68 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


Church), namely, compelling the conquered peoples 
to abjure their systems of worship and conform to 
Judaism by becoming circurncised, and thus be added 
to the Jewish people, or giving them the alternative 
of aviolent death. But forcible proselyting could 
only result in disaster. Converts by co-ercion were 
ever an element of weakness. 

It must be evident to the most cursory reader 
that the Jews had allowed themselves to greatly de- 
cline from the spirituality of the days of Ezra and 
Nehemiah, or even the zeal for the covenant of the 
days of Judas Maccabeus. Formality and rational- 
ism were eating the very life out of them. They 
gloried in their past history, but were far from 
present subjection to the law of God. Thus has it 
ever been when the twin evils of either narrow party 
spirit or broad latitudinarianism have been allowed 
to do their deadly and soul-destroying work. The 
one makes bigoted fanatics, who imagine that all 
divine counsels centre in themselves, and become 
intolerant, formal and exacting. The other pro- 
duces careless, pleasure-loving “ broad-churchman- 
like’ professors, who are indifferent to all that is 
vital in religion, content to have a form of godliness 
while denying its power. 

Such were the opposite characteristics of the two 
great parties that for years had been forming among 
the Jews, and which had in the times of Hyrcanus 
become definitely separated and designated as the 
sects of the “Pharisees” and “Sadducees.” The Mac- 
cabees were ever of the former company, until now, 
when John Hyrcanus made it manifest that he had 


To the End of the Asmonean Dynasty 69 


decided leanings towards the more liberal Sadducees. 
For a time he remained nominally a Pharisee, until 
at a certain feast, a leader of the “ most straitest 
sect”? demanded of him that he resign the priest- 
hood, which had been held by the Asmoneans since 
Jonathan, in plain disobedience to the letter of the 
law. Hyrcanus indignantly inquired the reason for 
this request; and the one who had made it, not 
daring to be frank, said it was because it had been 
bruited abroad that the mother of the high-priest 
was a Gentile, one who had been taken captive in 
the war. This story, palpably false, enraged Hyr- 
canus, who demanded that the calumniator be se- 
verely punished. The latter was declared to be guilty 
of an offence punishable only by bonds and stripes. 
The lightness of the sentence seemed to convince 
Hyrcanus that the Pharisees really upheld the man, 
and he ended the matter by turning away from them 
altogether and openly joining the Sadducean faction. 
Edersheim very properly designates this act as “the 
beginning of the decline of the Maccabees.” Hence- 
forth they sank by quick changes to the 'evel of the 
company they kept. 

Hyrcanus rapidly lost his influence with the mass 
of the people, and being both secretly and openly 
opposed by the Pharisees, his after years were full 
of trouble and distress. In 107 B.C. he died, having 
accomplished little that could be said to be to God’s 
praise or the blessing of the Jews, though Josephus 
(evidently a partial critic) says he possessed the gift 
of prophecy. He appointed his wife to be “ mistress 
of all” after his death; but she was set aside by her 


70 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


son Aristobulus, who succeeded to the dignities and 
authority of his father. This man added nothing to 
the decaying glory of the family, though he was the 
first of his race to assume the title of king of the 
Jews—a title which Zerubbabel, of the royal family 
of David, would not take in the days of the restora- 
tion. 

The young king left a brief but blood-stained 
record behind him. He became the murderer of his 
mother—imprisoning and starving her to death, and 
slew or imprisoned all his brothers. Within a year 
he had gone the way of ali flesh, dying in 106 B.C. 

His widow, Salome, then released his living breth- 
ren, and made the eldest king. He was known as 
Alexander Janneus. The Greek names of these sons 
of Hyrcanus show how far from the Maccabean 
spirit their degenerate children haddrifted. Alexander 
slew one of his brothers, permitting the other to 
live, and occupied himself in wars of conquest; his 
sister-in-law, Salome, acting as regent of the king- 
dom during his campaigns. 

The Pharisees were still the dominant party in 
Jerusalem, while the king was openly a Sadducee. 
He detested the strictness of the separatists and 
publicly defied them on one memorable occasion 
by pouring the water from the Pool of Siloam upon 
the ground instead of the altar, at the feast of 
tabernacles. This was a ceremony prescribed, not 
in the law, but the ritual, and referred to by our 
Lord in John 7: 37, 38. A terrible uproar was pre- 
cipitated by what the Pharisees regarded as a sacri- 
legious act, and Alexander called in his foreign 


To the End of the Asmonean Dynasty 71 


troops to quell the riot. So fearful was the disturb- 
ance, that ere it was put down six thousand people 
had been slain. But this was only the beginning. 
Rebellion and insurrection broke out everywhere, 
and before peace was established some fifty thousand 
persons were killed. In their desperation, the Phari- 
sees and their followers intrigued with their ancient 
foes, the Syrians, who sent an army to help them, 
hoping thereby to recover Palestine for themselves. 
At their first battle Alexander was defeated, and the 
victorious foreigners began to overrun the land. 
This changed matters somewhat; it caused many 
who previously had either opposed or been non- 
committal, to rally to the standard of Alexander. 
His army was so strengthened that the Syrians felt 
it would be hopeless in the then state of the in- 
flamed populace to pursue their plans; so they 
withdrew. In the party strife that followed, Alex- 
ander carried all before him, and crushed out the 
last spark of insurrection in a most barbarous man- 
ner, following the heathen custom of crucifying and 
mutilating vast numbers of men, women and even 
children, thus rendering his throne secure and his 
name infamous! His cruelty won for him the title 
of “the Thracian.” 

His reign was somewhat lengthy (twenty-seven 
years), and in his later years he vigorously carried 
on his policy of subjugating and proselytizing by 
force the surrounding nations, who were given the 
alternative of submitting to circumcision or being 
put to death. He died in 79 B.C., and in his will 
directed that his body be given to his old opponents 


194 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


the Pharisees to do with it as they would. This un- 
expected submission of the grim warrior so surprised 
and pleased them that they buried him in great 
honor. 

It was during his reign, about 88 B. C., as pointed 
out by Prideaux, that Phanuel, the husband of Anna 
the prophetess, died, according to Luke 2 : 36, 37, 
for she had been “a widow of about fourscore and 
four years” at the time of the presentation of the 
infant Jesus in the temple. Allowing for the differ- 
ence of four years between B.C. and A. D., this 
would place her husband’s death as mentioned. 
Thus we come now to the first link with the New 
Testament. Anna was a wife and a widow in the 
reign of Alexander; through all the turbulent years 
that followed, she ever waited for the consolation of 
Israel, and she was in the temple to welcome the 
promised Messiah when His mother and His foster 
father first brought Him up to the house of God to 
carry out the legal ritual regarding the birth of a 
male child. Simeon’s age is not given, but he too 
may have been living ere Alexander Janneus died, 
or else he must have been born shortly afterward. 

Two sons were left by “the Thracian,’ named 
Hyrcanus and Aristobulus; but he directed in his 
will that his wife Alexandra should succeed him; 
and as the Jews generally regarded her as opposed 
to the policies of her late husband, the nation con- 
curred in his choice. She was accordingly acknowl- 
edged as queen-regent, though Josephus declares, 
“the Pharisees had the authority.” She appointed 
her son Hyrcanus high-priest, but he was a weak, 


t 


I 


| 


| 


| 


RUINS OF ANTONIA, THE PALACE OF THE MACCABEES (JERUSALEM ) 


ANCIENT COINS 


COIN OF PTOLEMY I 


COIN OF PTOLEMY III 


<a 


yo 


COIN OF TITUS 


To the End of the Asmonean Dynasty 73 


vacillating man, who had little interest either in 
matters of religion or affairs of state, and readily 
acquiesced in the will of the dominant party. The 
Pharisees repealed the decrees of John Hyrcanus 
and “bound” and “loosed” whom they would. So 
active and offensive were they that many who 
would not conform to their wishes fled from Jerusa- 
lem, or obtained leave from the queen to settle 
elsewhere, as it was impossible for them to live in 
peace in the capital unless they accepted the dog- 
mas and followed the usages of these extreme 
legalists, who then dominated the state. 

These non-conformists, on the other hand, were 
as far removed from subjection to the law of God as 
to the traditions of the elders. They were of the Sad- 
ducean caste—loose in their lives, liberal in their 
religious views, and Gentilizers in politics. They 
entrenched themselves in fortresses at various 
points, and secretly plotted the downfall of their 
enemies, the Pharisees. 

Aristobulus, the brother of Hyrcanus, sympathized 
with these men. He despised his indolent brother, 
hated the stern, puritanical principles of the Phari- 
sees and coveted the crown and kingdom. But he 
bided his time, until at last a serious illness attacked 
the queen. Upon learning this, he hastened from 
Jerusalem and rallying the exiles, soon had some 
twenty-two strongholds and a very respectable army 
at his command. Too late, Hyrcanus realized the 
folly of inaction, and urgently sought to have the 
queen proclaim him the heir; but she died before 
anything could be done. 


74 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


Thus the two brothers found themselves at the 
head of rival factions. Hyrcanus led out an army 
to meet Aristobulus and his troops, but no battle 
was fought, for most of the high-priest’s soldiers de- 
serted to his younger brother, and Hyrcanus fled in 
terror to Jerusalem. Finally, terms of peace were 
arranged whereby Aristobulus was proclaimed king 
and Hyrcanus confirmed in the priesthood. 

Each seemed satisfied with this arrangement, and 
peace might have been maintained for years had it 
not been for the ambition and machinations of a 
man of whom we have not hitherto spoken, but who 
was destined to play a large part in Jewish history 
for years to come. 

This man was an Idumean, named Antipater. He 
was the father of Herod the Great who, by a strange 
combination of circumstances, was to be “ the king 
of the Jews,” in whose reign the long-expected Mes- 
siah was to be born. 

Antipater was not a Jew, but of the hated Edomite 
race, the descendants of Esau, though a proselyte, 
outwardly at least, of Judaism. Under king Alexander 
he had been appointed governor of Idumea, and had 
become possessed of great power and authority. He 
was retained in that position by Queen Alexandra. 
Hyrcanus and Antipater were close friends, and the 
latter was not at all pleased to see the regal author- 
ity given to the younger brother. He evidently 
feared his own aspirations might be blighted by the 
downfall of the high-priest. So he determined to 
act at once, and act vigorously, to thwart this. Per- 
suading Hyrcanus that his life was in danger 


To the End of the Asmonean Dynasty 75 


through the plotting of Aristobulus, he finally pre- 
vailed upon the easy-going priest to flee to Aretas, 
king of Arabia, who was also in the plot and one of 
Antipater’s friends. An arrangement was made 
whereby the three allies, Hyrcanus, Aretas and Anti- 
pater raised an army of 50,000 men, with which 
they set out to overthrow Aristobulus. “Biting and 
devouring one another,” the Jews were in grave 
danger of “being consumed one of another”—a 
lesson to all religious controversialists since! 

The king of Judea, utterly unable to cope with 
such a host, dared not give battle, but fled to Jeru- 
salem and shut himself up there for safety. He was 
besieged by the Arabians and the discontented 
Jews, who both by might and trickery sought to 
have him delivered up by the people. The mass 
were in favor of Hyrcanus, but the priests, who 
were largely of the Sadducees, generally sided with 
Aristobulus. Their influence was strong enough to 
keep the populace from opening the gates to the 
besiegers, and so the investment of the city dragged 
on for weary weeks and months. 

Among the priests was an eccentric character of 
some influence and piety, named Onias, who was 
declared to be a remarkable man of prayer. It was 
told of him that on one occasion, during a season of 
prolonged drought, causing great suffering and dis- 
tress, he had drawn a circle round himself with his 
-od in the sand, and declared that he would never 
cross over it until his prayers were heard and rain 
was given. How long he remained thus enclosed we 
do not know, but he did not move out of the self- 


76 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


imposed limits until the welcome showers began to 
fall. The enthusiastic people called him ever after 
Onias Ham-meaggel: that is, Circle-drawer Onias. In 
some way this man fell into the hands of the be- 
sieging forces, who took him to their camp and 
commanded him to pray for the success of the cause 
of Hyrcanus and against Aristobulus and the priestly 
Sadducean faction. The Jews in the beleaguering 
army were insistent, and would brook no refusal. 
After pleading in vain for liberty, Onias at last arose 
and prayed: “O God, King of the whole world, 
since those who stand with me now are Thy people, 
and those who are besieged are Thy priests, I pray 
Thee harken Thou neither to the entreaty of those 
against these, nor bring to effect what these pray 
against those.”’ The multitude rushed upon him in 
a rage, and he was mercilessly stoned to death. The 
incident shows the prevailing temper and affords a 
melancholy view of the condition of mind in which 
the people were found at the time. A passionate, 
factional spirit was withering up all piety, save in 
“the poor of the flock” who waited for the shining 
forth of the Sun of righteousness. 

As the siege dragged on, it came near the sacred 
passover season, and there were no beasts in the 
city for the sacrifices. This obliged the priests to 
come to some terms with the besiegers, and the 
latter agreed to supply cattle and sheep at the ex- 
orbitant price of a thousand drachmas for each beast. 
The money was gathered, and passed over the walls 
to those appointed to receive it, but no beasts were 
given in return, and the priests were in despair. 


To the End of the Asmonean Dynasty 77 


Relief at last came in an unlooked-for way. Pom- 
pey, the noted Roman general, sent forces under 
Scaurus and Gabinius into Syria to restore order 
there. Each section of the Jews sent emissaries to 
Damascus to seek the aid of the Romans against the 
others, and at last through bribery the party of 
Aristobulus won, and at command of the Romans 
the allies retreated and were pursued and utterly 
routed by the priestly party. As a reward for timely 
aid, the Jews presented a golden crown to Pompey 
who had come to Damascus. 

But the troubles of the Jews were far from a set- 
tlement. Antipater determined to carry his cause in 
person to Pompey, and was graciously heard by the 
latter. Aristobulus then determined to do the same, 
but offended by his rude, insolent bearing. A third 
party also appeared, and declared that both Hyrcanus 
and his brother were unauthorized upstarts and dis- 
turbers of the commonwealth, and the people asked 
that both be set aside and other rulers appointed in 
their places. Aristobulus feared his was a losing 
cause, and hastily leaving Damascus, fled to Alexan- 
drium, where Pompey pursued him. Allowing the 
town, which was a fortress, to fall into the general’s 
hands, the king fell back and retreated to Jerusalem, 
which he sought to put in condition to stand another 
siege. Upon the appearance of Pompey before the 
walls, however, Aristobulus changed his mind, off- 
ered to surrender and to pay any required indem- 
nity. To this Pompey agreed; and holding Aristo- 
bulus as a hostage, sent an agent into the city to 
collect the promised money. 


78 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


But the Jewish soldiers were not disposed thus 
tamely to accede to the demands of the Romans; 
the deputation found the city guarded and the walls 
manned for defence, while the request for indemnity 
was refused. All in the city were not agreed as to 
the policy of the soldiers, but they carried the day, 
and the siege was renewed. 

Eventually the lower part of the city surrendered, 
and the Temple Hill alone held out, despite the 
efforts of the invaders to take it by assault and cast- 
ing military mounds, from which missiles of various 
kinds were projected into the fortress. Learning by 
experience that the Jews refrained from all offensive 
tactics on the Sabbath, the Romans did the same, 
and spent each seventh day strengthening their 
earth-works and putting themselves in a better po- 
sition to storm the walls. In this way a decided ad- 
vantage was gained, but nevertheless the desperate 
little band of zealots held out for over three months. 
Firally, a Roman battering-ram demolished one of 
the largest towers; through the breach thus made, 
the besiegers pressed their way, and a fearful scene 
of carnage followed. 

It is said that twelve thousand persons perished 
by sword and fire on that fearful day, the horrors of 
which no pen could describe, and indeed it would be 
but soul-harrowing to attempt it. Many of the 
priests were cut down in the temple itself as they 
officiated in holy things; for through all the siege 
and final fall of the city the service had been kept 
up, while the cries of the distracted people were in 
vain addressed to God who. in accordance with the 


To the End of the Asmonean Dynasty 79 


prophecy of Hosea, given some centuries earlier but 
still unrepealed, had cast them off as not His people. 
Individuals indeed were owned and saved, but the 
nation as such He would not own, and in deepest 
woe they reaped the bitter fruit of years of evil 
sowing. 


This was the end of Jewish independence. Hence- 
forth Judea was but a Roman province. How little 
had Judas Maccabeus foreseen what the result of his 
treaty with Rome would mean to his people! Bet- 
ter far would it have been to have depended alone 
upon the Lord of Hosts than to have placed confi- 
dence in Rome. 

Pompey deprived Hyrcanus of all kingly honors, 
but confirmed him in the high-priesthood and or- 
dered the temple service continued. He had polluted 
the holy place by entering it himself, but afterwards 
gave orders for its purification, thus pacifying the 
Jews. Aristobulus he carried as a captive to Rome, 
together with his son Antigonus; another son, Alex- 
ander, was also a prisoner, but escaped before reach- 
ing the Imperial City. He afterwards made a futile 
attempt to revive the Jewish state, but Gabinius, the 
Roman general, left in charge by Pompey, defeated 
him in 57 B.C. A little later Aristobulus escaped, 
and making his way to Palestine, endeavored to stir 
up revolt, but in vain. He was re-captured and re- 
turned to Rome in chains. In 55 B.C. Alexander 
tried once more, but could get no following of any 
moment, and was defeated at Mount Tabor. 

Gabinius governed Judea under Scaurus, who was 


80 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


appointed over all the region once ruled by the Se 
leucidz. He restored order in the desolated land, 
established a firm and able government, respected 
the rights of the Jews so far as was compatible with 
Roman policy, and really gave far more satisfaction 
than had the degenerate sons of the Maccabees. 
Hyrcanus submitted peaceably to the yoke and was 
befriended by Antipater who, on his part, had the 
confidence and good-will of Pompey. 

Thus for a season a measure of prosperity suc- 
ceeded the hard and difficult years that had been the 
lot of the Jews for so long. The next year it was 
rudely disturbed by a visit from Crassus who was 
now consul in conjunction with Pompey in Rome. 
Being in need of money, Crassus marched to Jerusa- 
lem determined to lay hands on the temple treasure, 
the vast extent of which had aroused his cupidity. 
In vain Eleazar, the priest in charge, sought to 
divert him from his impious purpose by offering in- 
stead a large ingot of gold which had been hidden 
away. Crassus took the gold and the treasure also, 
and carried away to Rome a quantity of money, 
jewels and plate, estimated at some ten millions of 
dollars. 

This so aroused the Jews, that many rallied about 
Alexander, and he, for the third time, raised the 
standard for revolt. Crassus returned in 52 BC 
and forced him to terms of peace. Two years later 
Scipio was made president of Syria, and in Rome 
Cesar and Pompey were at strife. In order to gain 
an advantage over Pompey, Julius Czsar liberated 
Aristobulus and aided him to return to Judea, with 


To the End of the Asmonean Dynasty 81 


two legions of soldiers. His son Alexander was to 
raise a force and join his father. But Scipio, as a 
friend of Pompey, nipped the plot in the bud by 
apprehending and beheading Alexander, while other 
agents of Pompey contrived to poison Aristobulus 
ere he reached Judea. 

Thus Antigonus alone remained of the sons of 
Aristobulus. Of him and his unfortunate end we 
shdll hear later. He never regained the crown save 
for a very short time, though he fought desperately 
for it. The Asmonean princes by their profligacy 
and godlessness had lost all that their noble fathers 
had gained. 

The glory had departed and Shiloh had not yet 
come! Was the word of God to be discredited at 
last, and the hope of Israel go out in darkness? Not 
so; the tribal sceptre should not depart from Judah 
till Messiah appeared, though it was preserved in 
such a way as “to hide pride from man” and to 
give exercise for faith. God would preserve a light 
in Jerusalem and maintain His people in their land 
till He should come whose advent had so long been 
foretold, but it should be under the fostering care 
of the hated Edomite, whose object should be but 
his own glory and exaltation. 


CHAPTER IV 


The Edomite Ascendancy 


E closed our last chapter with Hyrcanus still 

occupying the office of high-priest, under the 
patronage, though really the authority, of Antipater, 
and both subject to Scipio. Antigonus alone re- 
mained of the adult Asmonean princes, and he was 
still in captivity. We now hasten on to the events 
of the last half century ere the birth of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

Pompey’s star set as that of Julius Caesar domin- 
ated the firmament. The latter came into Syria in 
47 B.C., and made a relative, Sextus Cesar, presi- 
dent of the province. Returning shortly to Rome, 
he was made Dictator of the world. 

Antipater had been able to ingratiate himself with 
Czsar in his expedition against the Pontians and 
Cappadocians, and in return the Dictator made him 
a free citizen of Rome, and constituted him Procur- 
ator of Judea. Thus had the crafty Edomite reached 
the position for which he had long been scheming. 
He remained the friend and patron of Hyrcanus, and 
supported him against the appeals of Antigonus, 
who was endeavoring to win the favor of Cesar. 
But the Procurator was no longer a young man. 
His honors had been late in coming, and he found 
the additional burdens heavy to bear. Accordingly 
he appointed his two sons, Phasael and Herod, gov- 


The Edomite Ascendancy 83 


ernors of Galilee and of Jerusalem respectively, thus 
putting the Holy Land fully under Idumean rule. 
On the other hand, it should not be forgotten that 
Idumea had been conquered by John Hyrcanus, 130 
B.C., and the nation forcibly converted and circum- 
cised, so that Antipater and his descendants, though 
of the house of Esau, were now Jews in religion, at 
least outwardly. And the after-history of the family 
shows that they valued Judaism from a veligio-politico 
standpoint; their constant efforts being in opposition 
to the Grecianizing policy of some of the Jewish 
rulers. The glory of their race they conceived to be 
bound up with the triumph of the ancient ritual. 
It was Esau’s last and fruitless effort to obtain the 
blessing of Jacob, forfeited so long before. 

Herod was but a youth of twenty years (or, as 
some say, only fifteen), when appointed by his father 
to the governorship of Judea. He was a young man 
of extraordinary energy and ability, and in his ear- 
lier years, before lust and ambition had done their 
deadly work, was characterized by many attractive 
qualities. But he made what might have been a 
fatal mistake very soon after assuming the dignities 
of his office. In Galilee an uprising took place of 
Jewish zealots, whom Josephus (out of deference to 
the foreigners upon whom he fawned) calls “a horde 
of robbers.” Herod suppressed this incipient rebellion, 
and, without the consent of the Sanhedrim, put their 
leader to death. For this act of rashness he was 
summoned to answer before the great council, jeal- 
ous of his Idumean descent and of their own pre- 
rogatives. 


84. The Four Hundred Silent Years 


Hyrcanus trembled for the outcome. He was a 
friend of Herod, and yet did not wish to appear to 
take sides against the council. Sextus Czsar wrote 
, commanding him to clear the young governor, who 
' had but acted as a faithful servant of Rome. Could 
he have done so decently, Hyrcanus would have re- 
scinded the order of the Sanhedrim, but that was 
impossible under the circumstances, so Herod was 
called to account. He appeared, robed in royal 
purple, accompanied by an armed guard, and with 
all the bearing of a great official rather than a per- 
son on trial for a grave offence. His manner over- 
awed the Jewish priests and doctors, who were about 
to acquit him, when the aged president of the 
council, Sameas, spoke out boldly for condemnation, 
declaring with what seemed like the voice of proph- 
ecy that, if they freed him, “this man whom they 
sought to absolve, would one day punish them all.” 
Stirred by the old man’s fiery words, the judges de- 
cided to pronounce sentence of death. Hyrcanus, 
upon learning their intention, suddenly prorogued 
the council, and sent word to Herod secretly to flee 
for his life, acquainting him with the mind of the 
elders. 

The governor at once withdrew from the city; but 
in place of recognizing his indebtedness to the high- 
priest, came against him with an army, determined 
to destroy him as the representative of the system 
that had dared to question his authority. Antipater 
got word of his movements in time to interfere, and 
Herod was dissuaded from his purpose. He after. 
wards had his revenge by slaying the entire San- 


The Edomite Ascendancy 85 


hedrim, with the exception of a man named Pollio, 
and the aged Sameas who had counselled his death. 

For several years the walls of Jerusalem had been 
left in a state of ruin, ever since Pompey’s triumphal 
entry, until in 44 B.C. Julius Cesar authorized Anti- 
pater and Hyrcanus to repair them. The work was 
begun at once, though greatly hindered by the 
kaleidoscopic events of the next few years. Czesar 
was slain by Brutus and his co-conspirators a few 
months after issuing the order to rebuild the walls, 
and for some time confusion reigned not only in 
Rome but in the various provinces. In Judea Antipater 
had difficulty in maintaining his authority, and was 
eventually poisoned by an agent of the anarchistic 
element by the name of Malichus, who in turn was 
done to death by one of Herod’s agents after con- 
siderable disputations and unrest. 

The friends of Malichus claimed Hyrcanus as one 
of their party, but this seems unlikely. The old 
man’s vacillating character made him the plaything 
of the whirling eddies in the political stream, and 
subjected him to much misunderstanding and mis- 
representation. Herod, however, seems to have be- 
lieved the high-priest was in the plot, but took no 
extreme steps; chiefly, perhaps, because he was 
espoused to the grand-daughter of Hyrcanus, Mari- 
amne, of bitter memory. 

In 42 B.C., Antigonus, of whom little had been 
heard for some years, again appeared and, raising 
an army of malcontents, made another effort to se- 
cure the crown. Herod acted with his accustomed 
energy and easily defeated him, driving him into 


86 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


exile. Antigonus appealed to Mark Antony, the 
Roman general and friend of the slain Cesar, but 
without success; for Herod had been beforehand in 
the matter and had won Antony’s regard by large 
sums of money. Antony appointed Phasael tetrarch 
of Galilee and Herod tetrarch of Judea, thus raising 
their rank and confirming their authority. 

The desperate Antigonus next fled to Parthia and 
made a league with the king of that country, who 
furnished him with an army for the payment of one 
thousand talents and five hundred Jewish women! 
How low had a prince of the Maccabean line fallen 
who could thus sell his country-women into a slavery 
far worse than death! Byacting quickly Antigonus 
took Jerusalem by assault, imprisoned Phasael and 
Hyrcanus, and would have apprehended Herod him- 
self, had not the latter fled in the night with a few 
relatives and friends who preferred to risk misfortunes 
with him rather than be exposed to the wrath of 
Antigonus. Supported by the Parthians, Antigonus 
was declared king, and set up a puppet court. In 
order that Hyrcanus might never again be high- 
priest, the wretched prince bit off his ears, thus 
maiming the aged prelate and rendering him, accord- 
ing to Levitical law, unfit to serve in the temple. 
He then gave him into the hands of the Parthians, 
who took him away to their own country. Hyrcanus 
was afterwards slain by Herod, when he regained his 
authority. 

Phasael, the brother of Herod, remained in prison, 
until feeling that his death was decreed by Anti- 
gonus and the Parthians, he decided to slay himself 


The Edomite Ascendancy 87 


rather than die by their hands; so he dashed his 
brains out against the stone walls of his cell. 

Herod sought shelter in Arabia, but it was refused 
him; upon which he made his way to Egypt, and 
there took ship for Rome, which he reached in 
safety, after being very nearly shipwrecked in a 
tempest. He repaired to the presence of Antony, 
who received him with much favor, listened with 
sympathy to his pitiful story, and commended him 
to Octavius Czsar and the senate. The latter con- 
ferred upon him the title of king of Judea, and sent 
him back to Palestine with full authority to dispos- 
sess the usurper and maintain his own title by force 
of arms. In seven days after Herod’s arrival in 
Rome as a fugitive with a price on his head, he 
sailed for Judea with a band of soldiers hailing him 
as king. This was in 40 B.C. 

Herod landed at Ptolemais, and learning that his 
mother, sister, and Mariamne, his betrothed, were 
shut up in Masada, where they were besieged by 
Antigonus, he put himself at the head of the Roman 
legions, marched rapidly to the battle-ground, raised 
the siege, and placed his relatives in safety. Hethen 
moved quickly on from place to place, defeated the 
nationalist bands at every turn, and pushed on to 
Jerusalem, which he besieged for two years. It fell 
in 37 B.C., through the aid of Sosius, the president 
of Syria, whose soldiers were guilty of such atroci- 
ties that even the cruel Herod had to beg Sosius to 
restrain them, lest he be but king of a desert! It 
was at this time that all of the Sanhedrim but two 
were slain. Antigonus pleaded for mercy, but So- 


88 Thes Poursiiundied Silent sX ears 


sius treated him with scorn and contempt, calling 
him “Antigone” (the feminine form of his name), 
and sending him in chains to Antony at Rome. 
Herod bribed the latter to destroy him, and he was 
beheaded as a rebel against the empire. 

A year before, Herod had been married to the 
beautiful but ill-fated Mariamne, through which 
alliance he hoped to win the favor of the Jews, as 
his queen was of the Asmonean line; but in this he 
was unsuccessful, for his cruelty made him hated by 
all. “Better be Herod’s pig than Herod’s son” was 
a proverb in after years. 

There remained yet one male descendant of the 
Maccabees, a young man named Aristobulus, Mari- 
amne’s brother. This young Asmonean was the hope 
of such as still dared to look forward to the re-estab- 
lishment of the Jewish line. He was the son of Alexan- 
dra, daughter of Hyrcanus, and of Alexander, son of 
Aristobulus, Hyrcanus’ brother; he was therefore of 
unquestioned Maccabean blood. Alexandra sought 
to have him appointed high-priest, but Herod passed 
him over in favor of an obscure priest from Babylon, 
on whom he thought he could depend to carry out 
his will in any emergency that might arise. Alex- 
andra was greatly angered by this, and applied to 
Cleopatra, the Egyptian queen, for aid, beseeching 
her to use her influence with Antony in her son’s 
behalf. She was successful. Herod was overruled, 
and Aristobulus made high-priest. At the feast of 
tabernacles he appeared before the people, a hand- 
some youth, clad in the gorgeous robes of the pon- 
tiff of Israel. As they thus beheld an Asmonear 


The Edomite Ascendancy 89 


again officiating in the solemn rites, the joy of the 
Jews was great, and they applauded rapturously. 
Their acclamations stirred Herod’s jealousy, and 
immediately after the celebration the high-priest was 
“ accidentally ” drowned in the king’s fish-ponds at 
Jericho. 

Herod appeared to be pained and surprised at the 
untimely end of the last male scion of the Macca- 
bees, and gave him a magnificent funeral, appearing 
himself as chief mourner. But all this sham and 
pretense failed to deceive the Jews, who knew that 
Aristobulus had been murdered at the king’s com- 
mand. Alexandra appealed to Antony for judgment 
against Herod, again prevailing upon Cleopatra to 
speak for her. Herod was cited to appear before 
Antony to answer for the crime charged against 
him. He appointed his uncle, Joseph, procurator 
in his absence, committed his wife Mariamne (the 
only person he ever loved) to his care, and obeyed 
at once, leaving secret instructions that in the event 
of his condemnation and death, she was to be assas- 
sinated immediately. Josephus tells us that Joseph 
let Mariamne into the secret, and ironically remarks, 
she “did not take this to be an instance of Herod’s 
strong affection!” 

A rumor was soon circulated in Jerusalem that 
Herod had been found guilty and put to death by 
torture; upon which Alexandra endeavored to secure 
the throne. She had been misled, however, for soon 
Herod returned, fully exonerated; his bribes having 
proven more powerful than Cleopatra’s pleading. 
Herod then cast Alexandra into prison for a time, 


90 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


but his fury having abated, Alexandra was released 
from prison. 

Domestic troubles now broke out in the household 
of Herod, hurrying him on to fearful crimes which 
threw their dark shadow over all the rest of his 
career. His sister Salome, jealous of Mariamne’s 
influence over her brother, accused her secretly of 
unfaithfulness, naming Joseph as the guilty para- 
mour. Herod pretended not to credit this, but be- 
came jealous and suspicious when Mariamne asked 
him how he could have given instructions to kill her 
if he really loved her? Convinced of his uncle’s 
perfidy, he slew him without trial, but for the pre- 
sent spared his wife. In 29 B.C. he was called be- 
fore Octavius, and ere he left home repeated his 
former order. In some way Mariamne again learned 
of it, and when Herod returned, bitterly reproached 
him for his want of confidence and affection. In his 
jealous fury he had her put to death, only to be- 
come shortly after the victim of fearful remorse. 
Despair and resentment filled his mind with gloom 
and horror. So terribly was he affected that he fell 
ill, and became deranged for a time. 

While Herod was in this state, Alexandra con- 
ceived the idea of again making an effort to possess 
herself of the government; but her plot was dis- 
covered ; Herod roused himself from his melancholy, 
and she was put to death for her crime (28 B.C.) 
Thus had the Asmonean family been obliterated and 
the hopes of Israel almost quenched. 

Not through Mattathias, however, but through 
David was the Seed to come through whom all the 


The Edomite Ascendancy 91 


world should be blessed. And God had still preserved 
the royal line, though now sunk in poverty and ob- 
scurity. The “fulness of time” had almost come 
when the promise at last was to be fulfilled. 

Meantime the bloody Edomite sat on David’s 
throne, and his course became more and more vile 
as the years went on. Mariamne had borne him 
two sons, Alexander and Aristobulus. These boys 
were sent to Rome to be educated. Upon their re- 
turn, at the instigation of their vindictive aunt Sa- 
lome, who had been the cause of their mother’s 
death, they were strangled. Their half-brother Anti- 
pater, son of a former Idumean wife, Doris, had 
been named as Herod’s successor in 11 B.C., and in 
6 B.C. the strangulation took place. The wretched 
king went through a semblance of law in the mat- 
ter, citing his sons before the council, and there so 
vehemently accusing them, that sentence of death 
was passed upon the unhappy youths. Shortly after- 
wards his son, Antipater, was accused of plotting to 
secure the throne at once by poisoning his father, 
and he also was executed by Herod’s orders. 

Yet through all these years of intrigues, family 
quarrels, and bloodshed, Herod did much for the up- 
building of Jerusalem and the prosperity of Palestine, 
He built many great cities on a plan far above any. 
thing previously attempted by the Jews. As a gen. 
eral, he was everywhere victorious; as a diplomat, 
he knew no equal; as a legislator, he displayed un- 
exampled wisdom and care for his kingdom and 
the interests of his people. A lover of the arts and 
a patron of religion, he was, nevertheless, a monster 


92 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


of impiety, an Idumean Nero, who would stop at 
nothing to attain his selfish ends. 

It was this Herod, so-called “the Great,” that re- 
built the temple in unparallelled grandeur; and he 
made it his boast to have outdone Solomon himself. 
The restored building gleamed with gold and costly 
marbles, and was the pride of the nation of Israel 
and the wonder of their neighbors. Once he had 
set his mind upon the attainment of any object, 
Herod allowed nothing to hinder the consummation 
desired. He moved on through bloody crimes and 
vilest barbarities to the goal he had before him of 
being considered the ablest and wealthiest of the 
kings of the East, winning thus for himself the title 
“Magnus,” or as we say, Herod the Great. 

And now, as we draw near the close of Herod’s 
life, we must remind the reader that our Saviour 
was born four years before the popular reckoning 
known as Anno Domini. When in the sixth century 
of the Christian era, it was determined to begin 
dating from the birth of our Lord, a mistake of 
four years was made in computing the exact time. 
This was only recognized many centuries later, and 
it would have thrown all subsequent chronology into 
confusion to have sought then to rectify the error. 
Consequently, strange as it appears to write it, 
Christ was born in the year 4 B.C. This was but 
two years after the judicial murder of the sons of 
Herod and Mariamne. Consequently it was in 
that year the angel of the Lord announced first to 
Zecharias the birth of a son in his old age, John, 
who should be the forerunner of his Lord, to pre- 


Che Edomite Ascendancy 93 


pare the way before Him; and later to Mary the ful- 
filment of the Promise through her, in the birth of 
Him who was to be called Emmanuel—our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ. 

It is no wonder that, upon the arrival of the wise 
men from the East, inquiring as to a new King of 
the Jews, the guilty monarch suspected a plot. He 
craftily inquired of the priests and scribes as to 
the Jewish expectations and hopes of a Messiah- 
King under pretense of giving Him honor; and 
when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men,” 
issued the mandate for the slaying of all the infants 
of Bethlehem. 

Christ had indeed been born to be not only King 
of the Jews, but King of kings and Lord of lords. 
Herod and all of his class were as men doomed to 
destruction, whose lives were prolonged for a little 
season that repentance and remission of sins might 
be preached to all nations ere the King so long ex- 
pected should fall like the mighty Stone from heaven 
on all the kingdoms of earth, and henceforth rule in 
righteousness and everlasting peace. 

Herod’s death occurred, as narrated in the Gospel, 
during the time the infant Saviour was hidden in 
Egypt, and he was succeeded by Archelaus, as we 
also read in Matthew. 

But it is not part of our task to follow the further 
course of events with which every reader of the New 
Testament is familiar. We set out to tell the story 
of the “Four Hundred Silent Years” which inter- 
vened between the Old and New Testaments, which 
God has seen fit to leave blank in our Bibles. Our 


94 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


task, therefore, save for a closing chapter on the 
literature of that period, is now done. 

The reader will have little difficulty in realizing 
why the Saviour was not received by the covenant 
people. Their long years of declension had ren- 
dered them unable to recognize their Messiah when 
He appeared in accord with the scriptures of the 
Prophets. Their eyes had become blinded; their ears 
heavy ; their hearts hardened, and their consciences 
seared; and so, not knowing the Scriptures, they 
fulfilled them in condemning the Prince of Life. Yet 
they were in Immanuel’s land and the Holy City; 
gathered to the place where Jehovah’s Name had 
been set of old. They were punctilious about the ser- 
vices of the temple; fond of reasoning about the 
Scriptures; proud of their descent from the patri- 
archs; and in their self-righteous complacency, de- 
spising their Gentile neighbors. But all this availed 
nothing when spiritual discernment was gone and 
religion a matter of ritual rather than of life. It is 
not necessary to press the lesson for our own times. 
He who sees it not himself would not heed it if an- 
other urged it upon him. 


CHAPTER V 


The Literature of the Jews 


HEN one meditates on the troublous times 

we have briefly gone over in the foregoing 
pages, it is surprising what an amount of literature 
has come down to our times from a people so har- 
assed and distressed. 

We have already seen that the canon of Scripture 
was closed very shortly after the days of Nehemiah. 
The voice of inspiration had ceased, nor was it again 
heard till the “dayspring from on high” had visited 
His people (Luke 1: 78), and God then spake to us 
in His Son. All later books than that of Malachi, the 
last of the prophets, have therefore no place in the 
Old Testament. But every book found in it hag 
been authenticated by our Lord Himself when He 
declared “the Law, the Prophets and the Psalms” te 
be in very truth the word of God, and all included 
in ‘the Scripture which cannot be broken.” The 
three divisions referred to above comprise all the 
books we call the Old Testament. They were held 
sacred and divinely inspired by the Jews, and no 
others were by them ever added. It was the Roman 


Catholic Council of Trent that first had the temerity 
to include the Apocrypha among the books reputed 


to be God-breathed. What the nature of this collec- 


tion is we shall notice shortly. 
It is necessary to be clear and positive as to the 


| inspiration of the Old Testament, for efforts are not 


96 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


wanting in this unbelieving generation to shake the 
faith of the simple in books like Esther, Daniel, 
Jonah and others. But all of these were written ere 
the voice of prophecy was suspended ; all the books 
now in our Bibles, and none other, were in the Bible 
loved, quoted and honored by the apostles, and en- 
dorsed as divinely-given by the Lord Jesus. He ex- 
pressly refers to “Daniel the prophet,” and “the 
sign of the prophet Jonah,” in language that admits 
of no doubt as to the high plane on which He placed 
their writings. 

But in the Maccabean age and later there were 
other books of instructive character, making no 
claim of inspiration, which the Jews have always 
valued, and which the early Christians sometimes 
yead in their meetings for the sake of the lessons 
they contained, though with no thought of putting 
them on a level with the Hebrew Scriptures or the 
Greek New Testament. 

These are the books collected by no one knows 
whom, and for convenience’s sake designated A poc- 
rypha—that is, “Hidden.” Some of them are of 
finest literary quality; others are very inferior. 
Some, like 1 Maccabees, have distinct historical 
value; others are thoroughly unreliable and contra- 
dictory of known facts. All were written in Greek 
in the days of the great literary awakening which 
took place when Grecian culture was almost idolized 
by many of the Jews. The first book of the Apoc- 
rypha is known as: 


I. Esdras, which is the Greek form of Ezra. 
This is largely a copy of the book of that name in 


The Literature of the Jews 7 


our Bibles, with considerable added matter of very 
doubtful quality. The book was evidently produced 
in order to impress the educated Gentiles with God’s 
care over the despised Jew. 


II. Esdras is of an altogether different character, 
and undoubtedly by a different hand. It is a book 
of strongly apocalyptic style, consisting chiefly of a 
series of rapt visions with more or less spirituality 
interwoven. The writer evidently took Daniel, Eze- 
kiel and Zechariah as his models, and was one whose 
soul was inflamed by their glorious promises of 
blessing coming upon Israel, and fearful denunci- 
ations of judgment upon the foes of the chosen 
people. On the other hand, it abounds with inac- 
curacies and statements contradictory to the word 
of God. 


The book of Tobit professes to be a record of the 
strange experiences of an Israelite of that name, 
who belonged to the tribe of Naphtali, and was 
among those carried away by the Assyrians. It is 
thoroughly unreliable; a religious romance, full of 
absurdities, and yet teaching lessons of morality and 
true piety. It is in this book that we find an angel 
called Raphael. The only two angels actually named 
in Scripture are Michael and Gabriel. The incanta- 
tions and thaumaturgic wonders of Tobit make it 
unworthy of the least credit, but add to its interest 
as an entertaining literary work. It, no doubt, often 
took the place in a Jewish home of many of the 
nursery tales of our own day, inculcating strict, 
moral and religious principles, with enough admix- 


98 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


ture of the marvellous to hold the attention of 
youth. 


Judith is the story of the deliverance of Israel in 
the days of Nebuchadnezzar, by a Jewish matron, 
who goes alone into the camp of the enemy, gives 
herself into the power of the heathen general, Holo- 
fernes, for his destruction. When he becomes com- 
pletely enamored of her wisdom and beauty, she 
takes him at an advantage and, while he sleeps, 
with his own sword she smites off his head. Whether 
there be any truth in the story or not, it is now im- 
possible to say; but Judith has ever since been re- 
garded as a national heroine, and her conduct viewed 
as on a very exalted level. Yet she deceives Holo- 
fernes, and does not hesitate to do evil that good 
may come; though preserving her own body invio- 
late. 

With the exception of 1 Maccabees, the book 
of Judith is the finest narrative-work of the Apo- 
crypha. 

The omission of the name of God in the canonical 
book of Esther, caused it long to be questioned by 
the devout, who did not understand the divine 
reason for this. Hence we have in 


“The rest of the chapters of the book of Esther, 
which are found neither in the Hebrew nor in the 
Chaldee,” an effort to correct this. But it isa 
blundering attempt by a blundering scribe to im- 
prove God’s perfect work. One only needs to read 
the inspired book of Esther, and then this marred 
human document, to observe the difference between 


The Literature of the Jews 99 


God-breathed Scriptures and this human imitation.* 

The next two books in the Apocrypha are to be 
classed in an altogether different category. They 
are among the finest specimens of uninspired wis. 
dom literature, and are worthy of being ranked with 
the Discourses of Epictetus, the Morals of Marcus 
Aurelius, and the Essays of Bacon, though they are 
greatly inferior to the inspired book of Proverbs. 

The Wisdom of Solomon is an anonymous 
work to which the great king’s name is attached in 
the title. It is not of quite so high an order as the 
book that follows it, but is nevertheless of great 
value. The companion record is called : 


“The Wisdom of Jesus the Son of Sirach, or 
Ecclesiasticus.”’ It is generally conceded that 
this choice collection of proverbs and wise sayings 
is, as it professes to be, the production of Jesus (the 
Greek form of Joshua) the son of Sirach, who lived 
in the land “almost after all the prophets,” and who 
has here embodied the sound instruction he received 
as a youth from his grandfather Jesus, who wrote 
in Hebrew, and died, “leaving this book almost per- 
fected.” The grandson translated, edited, and ar- 
ranged it, making no claim to inspiration; he sent 
it forth hoping thereby to edify his nation, confess- 
ing his liability to error, but craving an unbiased 
reading of the work he had prepared in Greek from 


*T have a little book called ‘“‘ Notes on Esther,” which 
might help any who have never noticed the reasons for 
the omission of the divine name. 


2100 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


the Hebrew records left by the elder Jesus. The date 
given is in the years of Ptolemy Euergetes; and the 
praise of Simon the Just, in chapter 50, shows that 
the writer lived during his pontificate. 

It will be remembered by Bible students that 
Jeremiah had a servant named Baruch. He it is 
who is presumed to be the author of the book of 
Baruch, the next in order. But there is no evidence 
that such was really the case. It is a work of little 
worth. The last chapter (6) professes to be “ The 
Epistle of Jeremiah,” written to the captives who 
were about to be led away to Babylon by Nebuchad- 
nezzar. It is of a much less elevated order than the 
authentic writings of “the Weeping Prophet.” 


There are three tales which were added to the 
book of Daniel, and are given in order in the next 
section of the Apocrypha. The first is entitled : 


“The Song of the Three Holy Children,”’ 
and was added after the 23rd verse of Daniel, chap. 
3. It pretends to give the song that the three He- 
brew young men sang as they walked unhurt in the 
fiery furnace, and is of value as preserving the 
character of Jewish piety in the days we have been 
considering. 


The History of Susanna was published as a 
preface to the canonical prophecy of Daniel. Shy- 
lock’s exclamation, “A Daniel come to judgment!” 
upon listening to Portia’s wisdom, finds its explana- 
tion here. It tells the story of the attempt of two 
lecherous elders, first to rob a young Jewish wife of 
her virtue, and upon being repulsed successfully, to 


The Literature of the Jews 101 


blackmail the object of their vile but defeated 
purpose. Daniel, a mere youth, appears upon the 
scene, and by examining each of the villains sepa- 
rately, causes them to contradict one another in 
such a way as to establish both the innocence of 
Susanna and their own wickedness. 

The third tale was added at the end of Daniel, 
and is called, “The History of the Destruction of 
Bel and the Dragon.” It is a wonder-tale, akin 
to that of Tobit, telling of a test made by Daniel 
and the Babylonians as to the power of the god Bel, 
and a great dragon who was overcome by Daniel 
through a mixture of pitch, fat and hair, which he 
thrust into the creature’s mouth. One cannot fail to 
see in the whole foolish story the influence of Chal- 
dean superstition as to charms and magical prepara- 
tions on the mind of the writer. The miracles of 
the Bible are always of a serious, sober character, 
serving an important or useful purpose. They are 
never mere works of power, startling and bewilder- 
ing with no moral motive. It is otherwise with the 
counterfeited signs of Satan’s emissaries and with 
the wonder-works told in uninspired legends, such 
as that related in this un-historic history of “ Bel 
and the Dragon.” 


The Prayer of Manasses purports to be the 
contrite supplication of Manasseh, the son of Heze- 
kiah, upon his repentance. It is wholly fanciful, but 
interesting as giving an insight into Jewish piety. 


I. Maccabees is a historical record of the wars 
of the Jews from the death of Alexander the Great 


102 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


to the pontificate of Simon the brother of Judas 
Maccabeus. It is from this book that our knowledge 
of the Jewish wars of independence has been 
mostly drawn. The style is vigorous and intensely 
dramatic, carrying the reader from scene to scene 
with unabated interest. As a testimony to the un- 
failing care of Jehovah for His people even when 
under His hand because of their sins, and His 
ready grace meeting them the moment they confess 
their iniquities and seek His face, the book is of 
great value. Yet the history makes no claim to 
divine inspiration. Who the author is, it is now 
impossible to say; but he was evidently a sincere 
lover of Israel and Israel’s God. 


II. Maccabees is much less reliable, though of 
great interest. It is a strange commingling of sober 
history and untrustworthy legend. The book is 
valued by the Roman church because of its apparent 
endorsement of the unscriptural custom of offering 
prayers for the dead. In chap. 12 : 43-45, Judas 
Maccabeus is said to have offered a sin-offering for 
the dead, and made thereby a reconciliation for them 
that they might be delivered from sin. Whatever 
may have been in the mind of Judas, his act has no 
Scriptural sanction. 

There are two other books known as 3rd and 4th 
Maccabees, which were not included in the received 
Apocrypha by the Council of Trent, though it is de- 
clared by some that they were omitted by mistake. 
The first is fragmentary and legendary ; the second, 
a lengthy, religious novel. 

Other literary remains there are which were long 


The Literature of the Jews 103 


valued by the Jews, but are now seldom read, and 
some completely lost; as, for instance, the Book of 
Enoch; the Secrets of Enoch; the Book of Jubi- 
lees; Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs; Psalms 
of Solomon; Sibylline Oracles; Assumption of Mo- 
ses; the Apocalypse of Elijah; the Apocalypse of 
Zephaniah, and some others, of which early Chris- 
tian Fathers make mention, but which are no longer 
extant, so far as is now known. Some of these were 
begun during the days of the Asmoneans, and only 
completed in the Christian era; thus partaking of a 
mixed Jewish and Christian coloring. The Sibylline 
Oracles and the Book of Enoch are of this character. 

It is a significant fact that in all the long years 
of the four silent centuries we have had before us, 
not so much as a psalm or any other literary pro- 
duct has come down to us that is worthy to be 
compared with the precious treasures of the Old 
Testament. Some, it is true, have attempted to 
assign Maccabean dates to some of the books of the 
Prophets and to several of the more recent psalms, 
but their guess-work theories are of no real value, 
and there can be little doubt that all were written 
when the last line of Malachi had been penned. 
The canon of the Jewish Scriptures was then com- 
plete. No desultory fragments were to be added in 
after years. When again the prophetic voice should 
be heard, it would be to announce the coming of 
Him who was the object and theme of “all the 
Scriptures,” and whose advent in grace would be 
the occasion for the production of a New Testament 
completing the written revelation of God to man. 


104 The Four Hundred Silent Years 


The two volumes are the work of the one Spirit 
whose delight it was to “take of the things of 
Christ and show them unto us.” 

It is interesting and, from an educational stand- 
point, profitable, to familiarize oneself with these 
strange and ancient volumes; but all are as dark- 
ness itself when contrasted with the clear light that 
shines from the Sacred Oracles, the Holy Scriptures, 
given by inspiration of God for the furnishing of the 
man of God unto all good works; of which it is 
written, 

**Forever, 0 Lord, 
Thy Word is settled in heaven.” 


ANOW LV HOAV Sune WOYA MOLISATANYS NSIATOON AHL 


fi 


LEM FROM THE MOUNT OF OLIVES 


a 
b, 


ERUSA 


JE 


ar 


Sep S 


é 
2) 


This book may be kept 
FOURTEEN DAYS 


A fine will be charged for each 
day the book is kept overtime. 


Demco 38-293 


_ CINCINNATI BIBLE COLLEGE & SEM. LIBRARY 


oe «eee 
qc 
I cusisegnensy Mle 


1 rs 
| The Four Hundred Silent Yea 
ee a ee eee 


Pate Oo 


LHE CINCINNATI BIBLE 
SEMINARY LIBRARY 
(At peeled Ox Bs Ye ee eee 

ee 


tay Bele ey ee SS io 
; ey jase os ie 


Oa 
a5 


iy 
Fue ee 


