This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized 
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the 
information in books and make it universally accessible. 

Google books 

http://books.google.com 




LIBRARY 

OF THE • 

University of California. 






GIFT OK 

CTLO-KJL lU)WL 



Class 




\ 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 



6*iv<»5 to T0e narot oP FV««n>*f> Ctfffij) 
WJ**f*r (1*20- 1*90 of W«** -row? 

«ftu5**K* 0y0«r5oo hu>rv*c# l*.VP0«efcr rtUX. 
S-D.(lur»<wl) I^O> 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



BY 

ROBERT ANDERSON, C.B., LL.D. 

Assistant Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis 




JJork 

DODD MEAD & CO. 
149-151 FIFTH AVENUE 
1897 



Digitized by Google 




£T/3j~ 

A (o 



■ j i N 1 
( 1 



K 



[r 



Digitized by Google 




^rc^< <r C<z (>x£ tfZc ct c ■ 






\-c^ S rr V 



y 



'S^J2^Jd (Tc-^J~ 



PREFACE 

A S regards its chief aim this book may be 
left to speak for itself. No preface is 
needed save by way of appeal to the reader to 
deal kindly with its faults. Written during a 
busy year of a busy life, it may possibly claim 
some little indulgence upon that score. 

And as for the rest two prefatory words may 
suffice. The one is this sentence from Froude’s 
“ History of England ” : — “ For the religion of 
Christ was exchanged the Christian religion.” 
The other is the plea that, where controversy 
comes in, the principles of civilised warfare 
have here been kept to : every consideration for 
the enemy, but no quarter for traitors. 

39, Lixdex Garden's, W. 



1 12594 



Digitized by C.ooQle 




Digitized by 




CONTENTS 



PAOK 



Chapter 


I. 


1 


p 


II. 


II 


p 


III. . 


. 19 


p 


IV. 


33 


p 


V. 


. 48 


n 


VI. 


61 


*f 


VII. . 


. 71 


p 


VIII. 


84 


it 


IX. 


. 96 


it 


X. 


106 


n 


XI. 


. 117 


p 


XII. 


132 


p 


XIII. . 


. 146 


Appendix 


163 



Digitized by C.ooQLe 




Digitized by Google 




CHAPTER I 

A SILENT Heaven is the greatest mystery of 
our existence. Some there are, indeed, for 
whom the problem has no perplexities. In a 
philosophy of silly optimism, or a life of selfish 
isolation, they have “attained Nirvana , ” For such 
the sad and hideous realities of life around us 
have no existence. Upon their path these cast no 
shadow. The serene atmosphere of their fools' 
paradise is undisturbed by the cry of the suffering 
and the oppressed. But earnest and thoughtful 
men face these realities, and have ears to hear that 
cry ; and their indignant wonder finds utterance 
at times in some such words as those of the old 
Hebrew prophet and bard, “ Doth God know ? 
And is there knowledge in the Most High?” 

2 l 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



2 

Society, even in the great centres of our modern 
civilisation, is all too like a slave-ship, where, with 
the sounds of music and laughter and revelry on 
the upper deck, there mingle the groans of untold 
misery battened down below. Who can estimate 
the sorrow and suffering and wrong endured during 
a single round of the clock even in the favoured 
metropolis of highly favoured England ? And if it 
be thus in the green tree, what shall be said of the 
dry ! What mind is competent to grasp the sum 
of all this great world’s misery, heaped up day after 
day, year after year, century after century? Human 
hearts may plan, and human hands achieve, some 
little to alleviate it, and the strong and ready arm 
of human law may accomplish much in the pro- 
tection of the weak and the punishment of the 
wicked. But as for God — the light of moon and 
stars is not more cold and pitiless than He appears 
to be ! 

Every new chapter in the story of Turkish mis- 
rule raises a fresh storm of indignation throughout 
Europe. The conscience of Christendom is out- 
raged by tales of oppression and cruelty and wrong 
inflicted on the Christian subjects of the Porte. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



3 



Here is a testimony to the Armenian massacres of 

1895 

“ Over 60,000 Armenians have been butchered. In Trebizond, 
Erzeroum, Erzinghian, Hassankaleh, and numberless other places 
the Christians were crushed like grapes during the vintage. The 
frantic mob, seething and surging in the streets of the cities, swept 
down upon the defenceless Armenians, plundered their shops, 
gutted their houses, then joked and jested with the terrified victims, 
as cats play with mice. The rivulets were choked up with corpses ; 
the streams ran red with human blood ; the forest glades and rocky 
caves were peopled with the dead and dying; among the black 
ruins of once prosperous villages lay roasted infants by their 
mangled mothers’ corpses ; pits were dug at night by the wretches 
destined to fill them, many of whom, flung in when but lightly 
wounded, awoke underneath a mountain of clammy corpses, and 
vainly wrestled with death and with the dead, who shut them out 
from light and life for ever. 

“ A man in Erzeroum, hearing a tumult, and fearing for his 
children, who were playing in the street, went out to seek and 
save them. He was borne down upon by the mob. He pleaded 
for his life, protesting that he had always lived in peace with his 
Moslem neighbours, and sincerely loved them. The statement 
may have represented a fact, or it may have been but a plea for 
pity. The ringleader, however, told him that that was the proper 
spirit, and would be condignly rewarded. The man was then stripped, 
and a chunk of his flesh cut out of his body, and jestingly offered 
for sale : ‘ Good fresh meat, and dirt cheap,’ exclaimed some of 
the crowd. * Who’ll buy fine dog’s meat ? ’ echoed the amused 
bystanders. The writhing wretch uttered piercing screams as some 
of the mob, who had just come from rifling the shops, opened a 
bottle and poured vinegar or some acid into the gaping wound. 
He called on God and man to end his agonies. But they had only 
begun. Soon afterwards two little boys came up, the elder crying, 
‘ Hairik , Hairik (Father, father), save me ! See what they’ve done 
to me ! ’ and pointed to his head, from which the blood was Stream- 



Digitized by Google 




4 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



ing over his handsome face, and down his neck. The younger 
brother — a child of about three — was playing with a wooden toy. 
The agonising man was silent for a second and then, glancing at 
these his children, made a frantic but vain effort to snatch a dagger 
from a Turk by his side. This was the signal for the renewal of his 
torments. The bleeding boy was finally dashed with violence 
against the dying father, who began to lose strength and conscious- 
ness, and the two were then pounded to death where they lay. The 
younger child sat near, dabbling his wooden toy in the blood of his 
father and brother, and looking up, now through smiles at the 
prettily dressed Kurds and now through tears at the dust-begrimed 
thing that had lately been his father. A slash of a sabre wound up 
his short experience of God’s world, and the crowd turned its 
attention to others. 

‘ ‘ These are but isolated scenes revealed for a brief second by the 
light, as it were, of a momentary lightning- flash. The worst cannot 
be described .” — Contemporary Review , January, 1896. 



The following refers to still more recent 
horrors : — 



“In no place in this region has the attack upon the Christians 
been more savage than in Egin. Every male above twelve years of 
age who could be found was slain. Only one Armenian was found 
who had been seen and spared. Many children and boys were laid 
on their backs and their necks cut like sheep. The women and 
children were gathered together in the yard of the Government 
building and in various places throughout the town. Turks, Kurds, 
and soldiers went among these women, selected the fairest, and led 
them aside to outrage them. In the village of Pinguan fifteen 
women threw themselves into the river to escape dishonour .” — The 
Times , December 10, 1896. 



And what is the element in all this which most 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



5 



exasperates the public sentiment? It is that the 
Sultan has the power to prevent all this, but will 
not. That, while possessing ample means to re- 
strain and punish, he remains unmoved, and in the 
safe seclusion of his palace gives himself up to a 
life of luxury and ease. But has Almighty God 
no power to check such crimes? Even Abdul 
Hamid has been shamed into laying aside the 
dignity of kingship, and making heard his personal 
voice in Europe to repel the charge his seeming 
inaction has raised to his discredit . 1 But in vain 
do we strain our ears to hear some voice from the 
throne of the Divine Majesty. The far-off heaven 
where, in perfect peace and unutterable glory, God 
dwells and reigns, is SILENT ! 

“ So I returned, and considered all the oppres- 
sions that are done under the sun ; and behold, the 
tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no 
comforter ; and on the side of their oppressors 
there was power ; but they had no comforter.” 
And this in a world ruled and governed by a 
God who is Almighty ! 

1 The Marquis of Salisbury’s speech at the Pavilion, Brighton, on 
the 19th of November, 1895. 



Digitized by Google 




6 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



And when we withdraw our thoughts from the 
great world around us, and fix them upon the 
narrow circle of His faithful people, the facts are 
no less stern, and the mystery grows more in- 
scrutable. Devoted men leave our shores, for- 
saking the security, the comforts, the charms, the 
countless benefits of life in the midst of our 
Christian civilisation, to carry the knowledge of 
the true God to heathen lands. But by and by 
we hear of their massacre by the hands of those 
whom thus they sought to elevate and bless. And 
where is “ the true God ’ they served ? The little 
band of Christian men who were in a special sense 
His accredited ambassadors, noble women too, 
who shared in their exile and their labours, and 
little children whose tender helplessness might 
excite the pity of a very devil, in their terror and 
agony cried to Heaven for the succour which never 
came. The God they trusted might surely have 
turned the hearts, or restrained the hands, of their 
brutal murderers. Is it possible to imagine cir- 
cumstances that would more fitly claim the help 
of Him whom they worshipped as all powerful 
both in heaven and on earth ? But the earth has 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



7 



drunk in their blood, and a silent Heaven has 
seemed to mock their cry! 

And these horrors are but mere ripples on the 
surface of the deep, wide sea of the Church's 
sufferings throughout the ages of her history. 
From the old days of Pagan Rome right down 
through the centuries of so-called “ Christian ” 
persecutions, the untold millions of the martyrs, 
the best and purest and noblest of our race, have 
been given up to violence and outrage and death 
in hideous forms. The heart grows sick at the 
appalling story, and we turn away with a dull but 
baseless hope that it may be in part at least 
untrue. But the facts are too terrible to make 
exaggeration in the record of them possible. 
Torn by wild beasts in the arena, torn by men as 
merciless as wild beasts, and, far more hateful, 
in the torture chambers of the Inquisition, His 
people have died, with faces turned to heaven, 
and hearts upraised in prayer to God ; but the 
heaven has seemed as hard as brass, and the God 
of their prayers as powerless as themselves or as 
callous as their persecutors ! 

But most men are selfish in their sympathies. 



Digitized by 



Google 




8 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



Some private grief at times looms greater than all 
the sum of the world’s miseries and the Church’s 
sufferings. If ever there was a saint on earth, it is 
the mother to whose deathbed sons and daughters 
have been summoned from various pursuits of 
business or of pleasure. In all their wanderings 
that mother’s piety and faith have been a guiding 
and restraining influence. And now, thus gathered 
once more in the old home, they are keen to watch 
how, in the solemn crisis of her last days on earth, 
God will deal with one of the loveliest and truest 
of His children. And what do they behold ? The 
poor body racked with pain that never ceases till 
all capacity for suffering is quenched by the hand 
of Death ! If human skill could give relief the 
attending physician would be dismissed as heart- 
less or incompetent. Is God , then, incompetent or 
heartless ? To Him they look to relieve the death 
agonies of the dying saint, but they look to Him 
in vain ! 

Or it may be some grief more selfish still. The 
crash of some great sorrow that turns a bright 
home into a waste, and leaves the heart so be- 
numbed and hard that even the so-called “con- 



Digitized by 



Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



9 



solations of religion ” appear but hollow platitudes. 
Why should God be so cruel ? Why is Heaven so 
terribly silent ? 

The most prolific fancy, the most facile pen, 
would fail to picture or portray, in their endless 
variety, the experiences which have thus stamped 
out the last embers of faith in many a crushed 
and desolated heart. “ There are times,” as a 
Christian writer 1 puts it, “ when the heaven that is 
over our heads seems to be brass, and the earth 
that is under us to be iron, and we feel our hearts 
sink within us under the calm pressure of un- 
yielding and unsympathising law.” How true the 
statement, but how inadequate ! If it were merely 
on behalf of this or that individual that God failed 
to interfere, or on one occasion or another, belief 
in His infinite wisdom and goodness ought to 
check our murmurs and soothe our fears. And, 
further, if, as in the days of the patriarchs, even a 
whole generation passed away without His once 
declaring Himself, faith might glance back, and 
hope look forward, amidst heart searchings for the 
cause of His silence. But what confronts us is 
1 Dean Mansel. 



Digitized by Google 




IO 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



the fact, explain it as we may, that for eighteen 
centuries the world has never witnessed a public 
manifestation of His presence or His power. 

“ Doth God know ? ” At first the thought 
comes up as an impatient yet not irreverent 
appeal. But presently the words are formed upon 
the lip to imply a challenge and suggest a doubt ; 
and at last they are boldly uttered as the avowal 
of a settled unbelief. And then the sacred 
records which awed and charmed the mind in 
childhood, telling of “ mighty acts ” of Divine 
intervention “ in the old time,” begin to lose their 
vividness and force, till at last they sink to the 
level of Hebrew legends and old-world myths. In 
presence of the stern and dismal facts of life, the 
faith of earlier days gives way, for surely a God 
who is entirely passive and always unavailable is 
for all practical purposes non-existent. 



Digitized by Google 




CHAPTER II 

T ^THEN we turn to Holy Writ this mystery 
* * of a silent Heaven, which is driving so many 
to infidelity, if not to atheism, seems to become 
more utterly insoluble. The life and teaching of 
the great Prophet of Nazareth have claimed the 
admiration of multitudes, even of those who have 
denied to Him the deeper homage of their 
faith. All generous minds acclaim Him as the 
noblest figure that has ever passed across the 
stage of human life. But Christianity claims 
for Him infinitely more than this. The great 
and unknown God had dwelt in impenetrable 
darkness and unapproachable light — seeming 
contradictories which harmonise in fact in a 
perfect representation of His attitude toward 

ii 



Digitized by Google 




12 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



men. But now He at last declared Himself. 
The Nazarene was not merely the pattern man 
of all the ages, He was Himself Divine, “ God 
manifest in the flesh. ,, The inspired prophets had 
foreshadowed this : now it was accomplished. The 
dream of heathen mythology was realised in the 
great foundation fact of Christianity — God assumed 
the form of a man and dwelt as a man among 
men, speaking words such as mere man never 
spoke, and scattering on every hand the proofs of 
His Divine character and mission. 

But the sphere of the display was confined to 
the narrowest limits — the towns and villages of a 
district scarcely larger than an English county. 
If this was to be the end of it, a theory so sublime 
must be exploded by its inherent incredibility. But 
throughout His ministry He spoke of a mysterious 
death He had to suffer, and of His rising from the 
dead and returning to the heaven from which He 
had come down, and of the triumphs of His power 
to follow upon that ascension — triumphs such as 
they to whom He spoke were then incapable of 
understanding. And in keeping with the hopes 
He thus inspired, among His latest utterances, 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



13 



spoken after His resurrection and in view of His 
ascension, we find these sublime and pregnant 
words — “ All power is given unto Me in heaven 
and on earth.” The position of avowed unbelief 
here is perfectly intelligible ; but what can be said 
for the covert scepticism of modern Christianity 
which explains this utterance to mean nothing 
more than the assertion of a mystical authority to 
send out preachers of the gospel ! 

Accept the scheme of revelation as to man’s 
apostasy and fall, and his consequent alienation 
from God, and the history of the world down to 
the time of Christ can be explained. But type and 
promise and prophecy testified with united voice 
that the advent of Messiah should be the dawn of 
a brighter day, when “ the heavens should rule,” 
when all wrong should be redressed, and sorrow 
and discord should give place to gladness and 
peace. The angelic host who heralded His birth 
confirmed the testimony, and seemed to point to 
its near fulfilment. And these words of Christ 
Himself ring out like a proclamation that earth’s 
great jubilee at last was come. Nor did the events 
of the early days which followed belie the hope. 



Digitized by Google 




14 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



If because of a great public miracle wrought by 
them in His name the apostles were threatened 
with penalties, they appealed from men to God, 
and then and there God gave public proof that He 
heard their prayer, for “the place was shaken 
where they were assembled.” 1 Sudden judgment 
fell upon Ananias and Sapphira when they sinned, 
and as a consequence “ great fear came upon all.” 2 
“ By the hands of the apostles were many signs 
and wonders wrought among the people.” 3 From 
the surrounding villages “ the multitude ” — that is 
the inhabitants en masse — gathered to Jerusalem 
carrying their sick, “and they were healed every 
oner 4 And when their exasperated enemies seized 
the apostles and thrust them into the common 
prison, “the angel of the Lord by night opened 
the prison doors and brought them forth.” 5 

At this very period it was, no doubt, that the 
martyr Stephen fell. Yes, but ere he sank beneath 
the blows showered upon him by his fierce 
murderers, the heavens were opened, and revealed 
to him a vision of his Lord in glory. If martyr- 

1 Acts iv. 31. 2 Ibid. v. 1-11. 3 Ibid. v. 12. 

4 Ibid. v. 16. 5 Ibid. v. 19. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



15 



dom brought such visions now, who would shrink 
from being a martyr ! By a like vision the most 
prominent witness to his death became changed 
into an apostle of the faith he had resisted and 
blasphemed. And when he in his turn found 
himself in the grasp of cruel enemies at Philippi, 
his midnight prayer was answered by an earth- 
quake which shook the foundations of his prison. 
Unseen hands struck off the chains which bound 
him, freed his feet from the stocks in which they 
had been made fast, and threw the gaol doors 
open. 

The Apostle Peter, too, had experienced a like 
deliverance when held a prisoner by Herod at 
Jerusalem, and this on the very eve of the day 
appointed for his death. The record is definite 
and thrilling. “ Peter was sleeping between two 
soldiers, bound with two chains ; and the keepers 
before the door kept the prison, and behold the 
angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light 
shined in the prison ; and he smote Peter on the 
side and raised him up, saying, Arise up quickly. 
And his chains fell off from his hands.” “ The 
iron gate ” of the prison “ opened to them of its 



Digitized by Google 




i6 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



own accord,” and together they passed into the 
street. 

These are but gleanings from the narrative of 
the opening chapters of the Acts of the Apostles. 
Divine intervention was no mystic theory with 
these men. “ All power in heaven and in earth ” 
was no mere shibboleth. The story of the infant 
Church, like the early history of the Hebrew 
nation, was an unbroken record of miracles. But 
there the parallel ends. Under the old economy 
the cessation of Divine intervention in human 
affairs was regarded as abnormal, and the fact was 
explained by national apostasy and sin. And the 
times of national apostasy were precisely the 
period of the prophetic dispensation. Then it was 
that the Divine voice was heard with increasing 
clearness. But in contrast with this, Heaven has 
now been dumb for eighteen long centuries. This 
fact, moreover, might seem less strange if prophecy 
had ceased with Malachi, and miracles had not 
been renewed in Messianic times. But though 
miraculous powers and prophetic gifts abounded in 
the Pentecostal Church, yet when the testimony 
passed out from the narrow sphere of Judaism 



Digitized by Google 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



1 7 



and was confronted by the philosophy and civili- 
sation of the heathen world — at the very time in 
fact when, according to accepted theories, their 
voice was specially required — that voice died away 
for ever. 

Is there nothing here to excite our wonder? 
Some of course will dispose of the matter by 
rejecting every record of miracles, whether in Old 
Testament times or New, as mere legend or fable. 
Others again will protest that miracles are actually 
wrought to-day at certain favoured shrines. But 
here in Britain, at least, most men are neither 
superstitious nor infidel. They believe the Biblical 
record of miracles in the past, and they assent to 
the fact that ever since the days of the apostles 
the silence of Heaven has been unbroken. Yet 
when challenged to account for this, they are 
either wholly dumb or else they offer explanations 
which are utterly inadequate, if not absolutely 
untrue. 

To plead that the idea of Divine intervention 
in human affairs is unreasonable or absurd is only 
to afford a proof how easily the mind becomes 
enslaved by the ordinary facts of experience. 

3 



Digitized by Cioogle 




i8 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



The believer recognises that such intervention was 
common in ancient times, and the unbeliever most 
fairly argues that if there really existed a God, all- 
good and almighty, such intervention would be 
common at all times. The taunt would be easily 
met if the Christian could make answer that this 
world is a scene of probation where God in His 
infinite wisdom has thought fit to leave men 
absolutely to themselves. But in presence of an 
open Bible such an answer is impossible. The 
mystery remains that “ God, who at sundry times 
and in divers manners spake in time past unto the 
i fathers,” never speaks to His people now! The 
Divine history of the favoured race for thousands 
of years teems with miracles by which God gave 
proof of His power with men, and yet we are 
confronted by the astounding fact that from the 
days qf the apostles to the present hour the 
history of Christendom will be searched in vain 
for the record of a single public event to compel 
belief that there is a God at all ! 1 

1 See Appendix, Note I. 



Digitized by Google 




CHAPTER III 



T N the old time men worshipped false gods, as 
they do still in heathendom to-day. Atheism 
is the recoil from Christianity rejected. But the 
unbelief of earnest men who are willing to believe, 
but cannot, is not to be confounded with the blind 
and bitter atheism of apostates. 

Nor will it avail to plead that the miracles by 

which Christianity was accredited at first still live 

as evidence of its truth. That will not satisfy the 

question here at issue, which is not the truth of 

Christianity but the fact of a silent Heaven. That 

in presence of the measureless ocean of human 

suffering in the great world around us, and in spite 

of the articulate cry so constantly wrung from the 

hearts of His faithful people, God should preserve 

19 



Digitized by Google 




20 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



a silence which is absolute and crushing — this is 
a mystery which Christianity seems only to render 
more inscrutable. 

Here, however, we are assuming that miracles 
are possible, and thus we shall incur the contempt 
of all persons of superior enlightenment. But we 
can brook their sneers. Nor will they betray us 
into the folly of turning aside to enter upon the 
great miracle controversy, save in so far as the 
subject in hand requires it. Open infidelity has 
made no advance upon the arguments of Hume. 
Indeed the phenomenal triumphs of modern 
science have only served to weaken the infidel’s 
position, for they have discredited the theory that 
new discoveries in nature might yet account for 
the miracles of Scripture. The only thing distinc- 
tive about the infidelity of our own times is that it 
has assumed the dress and language of religion. 
Among its teachers are “ Doctors of Divinity” and 
Professors in Christian universities and colleges. 
And as the disciples and admirers of these men 
claim for them superior intelligence and special 
vigour of mental perception, an examination of 
these pretensions may not be inopportune. But 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



21 



vivisection is to be deprecated, and mere abstract 
statements carry little weight. How, then, are we 
to proceed? An Oxford Professor of the past 
generation will do as the corpus vile for the 
inquiry. Let us turn to the treatise upon “The 
Evidences of Christianity ” in the notorious “ Essays 
and Reviews.” Its thesis may be stated in a single 
sentence — That the reign of law is absolute and 
universal. From this it follows of course (i) that 
a miracle is an impossibility, and (2) that Holy 
Scripture is altogether unreliable. Inspiration, 
therefore, is out of the question, save as all good- 
ness and genius are inspired. 

It may seem feeble to turn back now to the 
“ Essays and Reviews,” but the last forty years have 
made no change in the German Rationalism which 
that epoch-making book first brought to the notice 
of the average Englishman. These views are 
being taught to-day in many of our schools of 
theology. The future occupants of so - called 
Christian pulpits are being taught that the miracu- 
lous in Scripture must be rejected, and that the 
Bible must be read like any other book. 

Now what concerns us here is not whether this 



Digitized by 



Google 




22 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



teaching is true : let us assume its truth. Nor yet 
whether the teachers be honest : we assume their 
integrity. But what can be said for their intelli- 
gence ? Any dullard can trade upon the labours 
of others. The most commonplace of men can 
understand and adopt the tenets of the rationalists. 
Where mental power will declare itself is in the 
capacity to review preconceived ideas in the light 
of the new tenets. Let us apply this test to the 
Christian rationalists. The incarnation, the resur- 
rection, the ascension of Christ — these are incom- 
parably the greatest of all miracles. If we accept 
them the credibility of other miracles resolves 
itself entirely into a question of evidence. If we 
reject them the whole Christian system falls to 
pieces like a house of cards. To change the 
figure, when Christianity is exposed to the clear 
light and air of “modern thought,” what seemed to 
be a living body crumbles into dust. Yet these 
men profess unfaltering faith in Christianity. But 
while their faith does credit to their hearts, it 
proves the weakness of their heads. Those who 
believe in the Divinity of Christ while rejecting 
inspiration and miracles, may pose as persons of 



Digitized by Google 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



23 



superior enlightenment — in fact, they are credulous 
creatures who would believe anything. Such faith 
as theirs is the merest superstition. Appeal might 
here be made to unnumbered witnesses among the 
scholars and thinkers of our time, who in face of 
this dilemma have found themselves compelled to 
choose “between a deeper faith and a bolder 
unbelief. ,, 

If Christ was indeed Divine, no person of 
ordinary intelligence will question that He had 
power to open the eyes of the blind, the ears of 
the deaf, the lips of the dumb. If He had power 
to forgive sins, it is a small matter to believe that 
He had power to heal diseases. If He could give 
Eternal Life there is nothing to winder at in the 
record that He could restore natural life. And if 
He is now upon the throne of God, and all power 
in heaven and earth is His, every man of common 
sense will brush aside all sophistries and quibbles 
about causation and natural laws, and will recog- 
nise that our Divine Lord could do for men to-day 
all He did for them in the days of His ministry on 
earth. 

But how is it that He does not ? I know that if 



Digitized by Google 




24 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



in the days of His humiliation this poor crippled 
child had been brought into His presence He 
would have healed it. And I am assured that His 
power is greater now than when He sojourned 
upon earth, and that He is still as near to us as 
He then was. But when I bring this to a practical 
test, it fails. Whatever the reason, it does not 
seem true. This poor afflicted child must remain a 
cripple. I dare not say He cannot heal my child, 
but it is clear He will not. And why will He not? 
How is this mystery to be explained ? The plain 
fact is that with all who believe the Bible the great 
difficulty respecting miracles is not their occurrence 
but their absence. 

In his “Foundations of Belief,” Mr. Balfour 
reproduces the suggestion that if the special cir- 
cumstances in which a miracle was wrought were 
again to recur, the miracle would recur also. But 
even if the truth of this could be ascertained, it 
would have no bearing on the present problem. 
Miracles, Mr. Balfour avers, are “ wonders due to 
the special action of Divine power.” As then we 
have to do neither with a mere machine nor with a 
monster, but with a personal God who is infinite 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



25 



in wisdom and power and love, how is it that in a 
world which, pace the philosopher, cries aloud for 
that “ special action,” we look for it in vain ? 

In his “ Studies Subsidiary to the Works of 
Bishop Butler,” Mr. Gladstone speaks in the same 
sense, but still more definitely. In his discussion 
of Hume’s dictum, that miracles are impossible 
because they imply the violation of natural laws, 
he says : “ Now, unless we know all the laws of 
nature, Hume’s contention is of no avail ; for the 
alleged miracle may come under some law not yet 
known to us.” But surely this admission is fatal. 
The evidential value of miracles, against which 
Hume is arguing, depends on the assumption that 
they are due, as Mr. Balfour says, to “ the special 
action of Divine power,” and that but for such 
action they would not have occurred. That is to 
say, it is essential that the act or event represented 
as miraculous should be supernatural . If, there- ^ 
fore, the “ alleged ” miracle can be brought within 
the sphere of the natural , it is thereby shown not to 
be a real miracle. In other words, it is not a 
miracle at all. 

If a miracle were indeed a violation of the laws 



Digitized by Google 




26 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



of nature, not a few of us who believe in miracles 
would renounce our faith. For then the word 
“ impossible ” would be transferred to the sphere 
in which it is rightly predicted of acts attributable 
to the Almighty. “It is,” we declare, “impossible 
for God to lie ” : it is equally impossible for Him 
to violate His own laws; He “ cannot deny Him- 
self.” But this vaunted dictum owes its seeming 
force solely to confounding what is above nature 
with what is against nature. Beyond this it is 
nothing but a cloak for ignorance. 

Here is a stone upon the road. In obedience to 
unchanging law it lies there inert and tends to sink 
into the ground. Were it to rise from the earth 
and fly upward toward the sky, it would, you say, 
be indeed a miracle. But this you know is abso- 
lutely impossible. Impossible ! A rude boy who 
comes along snatches it from us and flings it 
into the air. This mischievous urchin has thus 
achieved what you declared to be impossible ! 
“ But,” you exclaim, “ this is mere trifling, we saw 
the boy throw it up ! ” Is it by our senses, then, 
that the limits of possibility are to be fixed ? 
This is materialism with a vengeance! Suppose 



Digitized by 



Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



2 7 



the boy himself should fall over a precipice, and 
you grasped him and drew him up again to safety, 
would this be a violation of the law of gravitation ? 
Why, then, should it be such if his rescue were 
achieved by some unseen hand ? A miracle it 
would be, no doubt, but not “ a violation of the 
laws of nature.” As Dean Mansel expresses it, a 
miracle is merely “the introduction of a new agent, 
possessing new powers, and therefore not included 
under the rules generalised from a previous 
experience.” 

But some thoughtless person may still object | 
that matter can be put in motion only by matter, 
and that to talk of a stone being raised by an 
unseen hand is therefore absurd. Indeed ! Will 
the objector tell us how it is he puts his own body 
in motion ? The power of something that is not 
matter over matter is one of the commonest facts 
of life. The Apostle Peter walked upon the sea. 
u Nonsense,” the infidel exclaims, with a toss of his 
head, “ that would be a violation of natural laws ! ” 
And yet the phenomenon may have been as 
simple as that produced when he himself shakes 
his head ! It is possible, moreover, that the laws 



Digitized by Google 




28 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



may yet be explained under which the miracles 
were performed . 1 Nor would they cease to be 
miracles if those laws were known ; for the test of 
a miracle is not that it should be inexplicable, but 
that it should be beyond human power to accom- 
plish it. Whether or not the power in exercise 
be Divine is matter of evidence or inference ; but 
once the presence of Divine power is ascertained, 
a miracle, regarded as a fact , is accounted for. 

If a surgeon restores sight to a blind man, or a 
physician rescues a fever patient from death, the 
fact excites no other emotion than our gratitude. 
But when we are told that such cures have been 
achieved by Divine power without the use of 
medicine or the knife, we are called upon to refuse 

1 This possibly may be what Mr. Gladstone means in the state- 
ment criticised at p. 25 ante. But if so, I am at a loss to under- 
stand either his language or his argument. He seems to suggest 
that the “alleged” miracles may yet be explained to us, just as 
the predicted eclipse of the moon which terrified the South Sea 
Islanders might afterwards have been explained to the savages. My 
own meaning an illustration may make plain. That fire should 
come down from the sky and kindle a pile of wood is a common- 
place phenomenon. It might occur during any thunderstorm. 
But if I heap wood together upon a certain spot, and at my word 
lightning falls upon it and consumes it, this is a miracle ; and the 
element of the miraculous is in the fact that I have set in motion 
some power that is above nature and competent to control it. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



29 



even to examine the evidence. The plain fact is 
that men do not believe in “ Divine power,” or the 
“ unseen hand.” Disguise it as we will this is the 
real point of the controversy. In the case of every 
human being, “ special action ” is a duty if thereby 
he can relieve suffering or avert disaster, but in 
the case of the Divine Being it is not to be 
expected or indeed tolerated ! It is accepted as 
an axiom that Almighty God must be a cipher in 
His own world ! 

The doctrinaire infidel rejects Christianity on 
the ground that the only evidence of its truth is 
the miracles by which it was accredited at the first, 
and that miracles are impossible — propositions/ 
both of which are untenable. The ordinary 
infidel, on the other hand, bringing practical 
intelligence and common sense to bear upon the 
question, rejects Christianity because, he argues, if 
the Christian’s God were not a myth He would 
not remain passive in presence of all the suffering 
and wrong which prevail in the world. That is to 
say, discarding the contention of the doctrinaire 
philosopher that miracles are impossible, he main- 
tains that if there really existed a Supreme Being 



Digitized by Google 




30 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



of infinite goodness and power, miracles would 
abound. And the vast majority of infidels belong 
to this second category. But though the philoso- 
phers are few, and their sophistries have failed to 
take hold of the minds of common men, they have 
well-nigh monopolised the attention of Christian 
apologists. Common men, moreover, unlike the 
philosophers, are apt to be both fair and earnest, 
and ready to consider any reasonable explanation 
of their difficulties. But the answer offered them 
is for the most part either futile or inadequate. 

Mr. Gladstone, for instance, falls back upon 
the plea that “ if the experience of miracles were 
universal, they would cease to be miracles.” But 
what possible ground is there for this? They 
would cease to excite wonder, no doubt ; but that 
is no test of the miraculous. In the beginning of 
our Lord’s ministry, and before the antipathy of 
the religious leaders of the Jews took shape in 
plots for His destruction, His miracles of healing 
were so numerous and so free to all, that they 
must have come to be regarded as matters of 
course. He “went about,” we read, “ in all Galilee, 
healing all manner of disease and all manner of 



Digitized by Google 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



3i 



sickness among the people. And the report of 
Him went forth into all Syria, and they brought 
unto Him ALL that were sick, holden with 
divers diseases and torments, possessed with 
devils, and epileptic, and palsied ; and He healed 
them.” 1 In presence of such an unlimited display 
of miraculous power all sense of wonder must have 
soon died out. But yet every fresh cure was a 
fresh miracle, and would have been recognised 
as such. 

And so would it be in our own day, if, for 
example, whenever a wicked man committed an 
outrage upon his neighbour, Divine power inter- 
vened to strike down the offender and protect his 
victim, the event would cease to excite the least 
surprise. But all would none the less recognise 
the hand of God, and own His justice and 
goodness. And there would be no infidels left — 
except, of course, the philosophers ! 

The difficulty therefore remains unsolved. The 
true explanation of it will be considered in the 
sequel ; but at this stage the discussion of it is a 
mere digression. So far as the present argument 
1 Matt. iv. 23, 24 (R.V.). 



Digitized by Google 




32 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



is concerned the matter may be summed up in 
borrowed words : “ The Scripture miracles stand 
on a solid basis which no reasoning can overthrow. 
Their possibility cannot be denied without denying 
the very nature of God as an all-powerful Being ; 
their probability cannot be questioned without 
questioning His moral perfections ; and their cer- 
tainty as matters of fact can only be invalidated 
by destroying the very foundations of all human 
testimony.” 1 

1 Bishop Van Mildert’s “ Boyle Lectures,” sermon xxi. Of the 
truth of these last words Hume’s celebrated treatise supplies most 
striking proof. He takes exception to the evidence for the Chris- 
tian miracles; but when he goes on to speak of certain miracles 
alleged to have occurred in France upon the tomb of Abbe Paris, 
the famous Jansenist, he admits that the evidence in support of 
them was clear, complete, and without a flaw. But yet he rejects 
( them, and that solely because of “ the absolute impossibility, or 
miraculous nature of the events ” ! It behoves us to regard such 
evidence with suspicion ; but to accept the evidence and yet to 
reject the facts thus established, is indeed “ to destroy the very 
foundations of all human testimony.” 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV 

r | ''HAT Paley and those who follow him have 
* piistaken and misstated the evidential value 
of the miracles of Christ may seem to some a 
startling proposition ; but it is by no means a 
novel one. To this error, moreover, it is that the 
argument against miracles in John Stuart Mill's 
“ Essays on Religion" owes its seeming cogency. 

The unbelief of the Christianised sceptic com- 
pares unfavourably with the agnosticism of the 
honest infidel. The one in rejecting miracles 
destroys the authenticity of the Gospels, and thus 
recklessly undermines the foundations of Chris- 
tianity. The object of the other is a defence of 
human reason against supposed encroachments 

upon its authority. The one trades in sophistries 

4 33 



Digitized by Google 




34 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



I Go 



which have been again and again refuted and 
exposed. The other propounds arguments which 
have never yet been adequately answered. The 
pseudo-Christian practically joins hands with the 
atheist ; for no amount of special pleading will 
avail to silence Paley’s challenge, “ Once believe 
there is a God, and miracles are not incredible.” 
The avowed agnostic seizes upon Paley’s gratuitous 
assertion that a revelation can only be made by 
miracles, and he sets himself to prove that miracles 
are wholly invalid for such a purpose. 

Among English men of letters Mill’s position is 
almost unique. From the account of his childhood 
in that saddest of books, his “ Autobiography,” it 
would appear that he approached the study of 
Christianity from the standpoint of a cultured 
pagan. He was wholly unconscious, therefore, that 
his argument against the theologian’s position was 
entirely in accord with the teaching of Scripture. 
“ A revelation cannot be proved Divine unless by 
external evidence ” : such is his mode of restating 
Paley’s thesis. And the problem this involves may 
be explained by the following illustration. 

A stranger appears, say in London, the metropolis 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



35 



of the world, claiming to be the bearer of a Divine 
revelation to mankind, and in order to accredit his 
message he proceeds to display miraculous power. 
Let us assume for the moment that after the 
strictest inquiry the reality of the miracles is 
established and that all are agreed as to their 
genuineness. Here, then, we are face to face with 
the question in the most practical way. If the 
“Christian argument ” be sound we are bound to 
accept whatever gospel this prophet proclaims. 
And no one who knows anything of human nature 
will doubt that it would be generally received. 
The Christian, however, would be kept back by 
the words of the inspired apostle : “ But though 
we or an angel from heaven should preach unto you 
any gospel other than that which we preached unto 
you, let him be anathema.” 1 In a word, the Chris- 
tian would at once give up his “Paley” and fall 
back upon the position of the sceptic in the 
“Essays on Religion”! He would insist, moreover, 
on bringing the new miracle-accredited gospel to 
the test of Holy Writ, and finding it inconsistent 
with the gospel he had already received, he would 
1 Gal. i. 8 (R.V.). 



Digitized by Google 



36 THE SILENCE OF GOD 

reject it. That is to say, he would test the 
message, not by the miracles, but by a preceding 
revelation known to be Divine. 

That Christ came to found a new religion, and 
that Christianity was received in the world on the 
authority of miracles — these are theses which com- 
mand almost universal acceptance in Christendom. 
It may seem startling to maintain that both are 
alike erroneous, and that the Christian position has 
been seriously prejudiced by the error. And yet 
this is the conclusion which the preceding argu- 
ment suggests, and to which full and careful 
inquiry will lead us. Is it not a fact that those in 
whose midst the miracles of Christ were wrought 
were the very people who crucified Him as a 
profane impostor? Is it not a fact that when 
challenged to work miracles in support of His 
Messianic claims He peremptorily refused ? 1 

“ However,” says Bishop Butler, in summing up 
his argument on this subject, “ the fact is allowed 
that Christianity was professed to be received into 
the world upon the belief of miracles,” and “ that 
is what the first converts would have alleged as 
1 Matt. xii. 38, 39, xvi. 1-4. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



37 



their reason for embracing it.” Language cannot 
be plainer. The “ first converts,” having witnessed 
the miracles, reasoned out the matter, and con- 
cluded that he who wrought them must be sent of 
God ; and thus became converts. But where is 
the authority for such a statement ? As a matter 
of fact not one of the disciples is reported to have 
attributed his faith to that ground. 1 The narra- 
tive of the first Passover of the ministry, which 
may seem at first sight to refute this, is in fact 
the clearest proof of it. Here are the words : 

“ Many believed on His name, beholding His 
signs which He did. But Jesus did not trust 
Himself unto them , for that He knew all men.” 2 
That is to say, He refused to recognise any such 
discipleship. 

Then follows the story of Nicodemus, who was 
one of the number of these miracle-made converts. 
He had reasoned himself into discipleship, pre- 
cisely as Butler supposes ; but, as Dean Alford 
expresses it, 3 he had to be taught that “ it is not 1 

1 If any should quote the case of Simon Magus as an excep- 
tion, they are welcome to their argument ! 

2 John ii. 23, 24 (R.V.). 3 Greek Test. Com., John iii. 



Digitized by Google 




38 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



( learning that is needed for the kingdom, but life> 
and life must begin by birth.” Such is throughout 
the testimony of St. John. Entirely in harmony 
with it is the testimony of St. Peter, who shared 
with him the special privilege of witnessing that 
greatest of the miracles, the Transfiguration on 
the Holy Mount. “ Being born again (he writes), 
not of corruptible seed but of incorruptible, by the 
Word of God? 1 

Still more striking and significant is the case 
of St. Paul. As great a reasoner as Butler, and 
moreover a man of unswerving devotion to what 
he deemed to be the truth, the completed testimony 
of the ministry and miracles of Christ left him a 
bitter opponent and persecutor of Christianity. “ I 
obtained mercy” is his own explanation of the 
change which took place in him. And again, 
“It pleased God, who . . . called me by His grace, 
to reveal His Son in me.” Some may call such 
language mystical. To others, who are them- 
selves what St. Paul till then had been, it may 

x i Pet. i. 23. Still more definite are the Lord’s words addressed 
to Peter in response to the confession of His Messiahship, “ Blessed 
( art thou, Simon Bar -Jonah ; for flesh and blood hath not revealed 
' it unto thee, but My Father which is in heaven ” (Matt. xvi. 17). 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



39 



even seem offensive. But whatever its meaning, 
and however regarded, certain it is that it implies 
something wholly different from what Bishop 
Butler’s words would indicate . 1 

But if the miracles were not intended to be a 
ground of faith in Christ, why, it will be asked, 
were they given at all? They had a twofold 
character and purpose. Just as a good man who 
is possessed of the means and the opportunity 
to relieve suffering is impelled to action by his 
very nature, so was it with our blessed Lord. 
When “ the Word was made flesh and tabernacled 
among us,” it was, if we may so speak with 
reverence, a matter of course that sickness and 
pain and even death should give way before Him. 
He “ went about doing good and healing all that 
were oppressed of the devil because God was with 
Him .” The sceptics talk as though our Lord 
were represented as stopping in His teaching at 
intervals in order to work some miracle to silence 
unbelief. The idea is absolutely grotesque in its 



x St. Paul’s testimony gains in emphasis because of the vision on 
the Damascus road which, but for his explicit words, might lead us 
to call him a miracle-made disciple. 



Digitized by 



Google 




40 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



falseness. On the contrary we read such state- 
ments as this, that “ He did not many mighty 
works because of their unbelief.” 1 As a matter 
of fact, while there is not recorded a single 
instance in the whole course of His ministry 
where faith appealed to Him in vain — and this 
it is which makes the inexorable reign of law 
to-day so strange and overwhelming — neither is 
there recorded a solitary instance where the 
challenge of unbelief was rewarded by a miracle. 
Every challenge of the kind was met by referring 
the caviller to the Scriptures. 

And this suggests the second great purpose 
for which the miracles were given. With the 
Jew politics and religion were inseparable. Every 
hope of spiritual blessing rested on the coming 
of Messiah. With that advent was connected 
every promise of national independence and 
prosperity. The pious few who constituted the 
little band of His true disciples thought first and 
most of the spiritual aspect of His mission. The 
multitude thought only of deliverance from the 
Roman yoke, and the restoration of the bygone 
1 Matt. xiii. 5S. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



4i 



glories of their kingdom. In the case of all alike 
His chief credentials were to be sought in the 
Scriptures which foretold His coming, and to 
these it was that His ultimate appeal was always 
made. “Ye are searching the Scriptures, 1 ” He 
said to the Jews, “ and these are they which bear 
witness of Me, and ye will not come to Me .” 1 
“If they hear not Moses and the prophets neither 
will they be persuaded though one rose from the 
dead.” 2 

In this respect the evidence of the miracles was 
purely incidental. It is nowhere suggested that 
they were given to accredit the teaching; their 
evidential purpose was solely and altogether to 
accredit the Teacher . It was not merely that they 
were miracles, but that they were such miracles 
as the Jews were led by their Scriptures to 
expect. Their significance depended on their 
special character^ and their relation to a pre- 
ceding revelation accepted as Divine by those for 
whose benefit they were accomplished. 



1 John v. 39, 40 (R.V.). a Luke xvi. 31. 

3 Very strikingly is this exemplified in John the Baptist’s case 
(Matt. xi. 2-5 ; see also John v. 36). 



Digitized by Google 




42 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



And this suggests, it may be remarked in pass- 
ing, another flaw in the Christian argument from 
miracles, as usually stated. What is supernatural 
is not of necessity Divine. “ Every one who works 
miracles is sent of God : this man works miracles, 
therefore He is sent of God.” The logic of the 
syllogism is perfect. But the Jew would rightly 
repudiate the major premises, and of course reject 
the conclusion. As a matter of fact he attributed 
the miracles of Christ to Satan, and our Lord met 
the taunt, not by denying Satanic power, but by 
appealing to the nature and purpose of His acts. 
As they were manifestly aimed against the arch- 
enemy, they could not, he urged, be assigned to 
his agency. 

The subordination 'of the testimony of miracles 
to that of Scripture appears more plainly still 
in the teaching after the resurrection. “ Beginning 
(we read) at Moses and all the prophets He ex- 
pounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things 
concerning Himself.” And again, “These are the 
words which I spake unto you while I was yet 
with you, that all things must be fulfilled which 
were written in the law of Moses and in the pro- 



Digiti; _ / Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



43 



phets and in the Psalms concerning Me.” 1 Nor 
was it otherwise when the apostles took up 
the testimony. St. Peter’s appeal, addressed to 
the Jews of Jerusalem, was to “all the prophets, 
from Samuel and those that follow after, as many 
as have spoken .” 2 Such also was St. Paul’s 
defence when arraigned before Agrippa: “I con- 
tinue unto this day (he declared) witnessing both 
to small and great, saying none other things than 
those which the prophets and Moses did say should 
come.” 3 And when we turn to the dogmatic 
teaching of the Epistles we have the same truth 
still more explicitly enforced, that Christ “ was a 
minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, 
to confirm the promises made unto the fathers, 
and that the Gentiles might glorify God for His 
mercy, as it is written .” 4 

Page after page might thus be filled to prove 
the falseness of the dictum here under discussion. 
“ A new religion ! ” It would be nearer the truth 

1 Luke xxiv. 27, 44. This threefold division of the Old Testa- 
ment was the one commonly adopted by the Jew — the law, the 
prophets, and the “ Hagiographa.” The Psalms stood first in the 
third division, and thus came to give its name to the whole. 

2 Acts iii. 24. 3 Acts xxvi. 22. 4 Rom. xv. 8, 9. 



Digitized by Google 




44 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



to declare that one great purpose of Messiah’s 
advent was to put an end to the reign of religion 
altogether. Such a statement would be entirely 
in keeping with the spirit of the only passage in 
the New Testament where the word occurs in 
relation to the Christian life. 1 Christ was Himself 
the reality of every type, the substance of every 
shadow, the fulfilment of every promise of the old 
religion. Whether we speak of the altar or the 
sacrifice, the priest or the temple in which He 
ministered, Christ was the antitype of all. His 
purpose was not to set these aside that He might 
set up others in their place — He came, not to 
destroy the law and the prophets, but to fulfil 
them. The very details of that elaborate ritual, 
the very furniture of that gorgeous shrine which 
was the scene and centre of the national worship, 
all pointed to Him. The ark of the covenant, 
the mercy-seat which covered it, the most holy 
place itself, and the veil which shut it in — all were 
but types of Him. The several altars and the 
many sacrifices bore witness to His infinite per- 
fections and the varied aspects of His death as 
1 James i. 27. 



Digiti: J^b 



^Google 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



45 



bringing glory to God and full redemption to 
mankind. In plain truth, the attempt to set up 
a religion now, in the sense in which Judaism was 
a religion, is to deny Christianity and to apostatise 
from Christ 1 

In the light of this truth the force of the 
sceptic's argument is wholly dissipated. When 
the Nazarene appeared, the question with the 
Jew was not whether, like another John the 
Baptist, He was “ a man sent of God," but whether 
He was the Sent One, the Messiah to whom all 
their religion pointed and all their Scriptures bore 
testimony. “ We have found the Messiah : ” “ We 
have found Him of whom Moses in the law, and 
the prophets, did write ." 2 Such were the words 
in which His disciples gave expression to their 
faith, and by which they sought to draw others 
to Him. The question, then, is not whether a 
revelation can be accredited by external evidence, 
but whether such evidence can avail to accredit 
a person whose coming has been foretold. And 
this no accurate thinker would for a moment 
dispute. 

1 As regards the use of the word “ Religion,” see Appendix, 
Note II. 2 John i. 41, 45. 



Digitized by Google 



46 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



In Dean Swift’s fierce invective against the 
Irish bishops of his day he suggested that they 
were highwaymen who, having waylaid and robbed 
the prelates appointed by the Crown, had entered 
on their Sees in virtue of the stolen credentials. 
The whole point of this satire lay in the theo- 
retical possibility of the suggestion. Nothing is 
more difficult in certain circumstances than to 
accredit an envoy. But if he be expected, the 
merest trifle may suffice. An agent is sent upon 
some mission of secrecy and danger. A mes- 
senger will follow later with new and full instruc- 
tions for his guidance. The messenger is described 
to him, but his sense of the peril of his position 
makes him plead that he shall have adequate 
credentials. In response to his appeal I pick up 
a scrap of paper, tear it in two, and handing him 
the half I tell him that the other moiety will be 
presented by the envoy. No document, however 
elaborate, would give surer proof of his identity 
than would that torn piece of paper. 

Thus we see in what sense, and how certainly 
and simply, “ external evidence ” may avail “ to 
accredit a revelation.” And the sceptic’s objection 



Digitized by google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



47 



being set aside, he is again confronted with the 
irrefutable force of Paley’s argument upon the 
main issue. 

But another question claims notice here, ignored 
alike by exponent and objector. They have dis- 
cussed the problem from the purely human stand- 
point, whereas the revelation offered for our 
acceptance claims to be Divine. Man is but a 
creature ; can God not speak to him in such wise r 
that His word shall carry with it its own sanction 
and authority ? To assert that God cannot speak 
thus to man is practically to deny that He is God. 
To assert that He has never in fact spoken thus 
involves a transparent petitio principii. It might 
be urged that the authenticity of prophecy and 
promise has been established by their fulfilment. 
But certain it is that the prophets declare how . 
God did thus speak to them, the Scriptures 
assume it, and the faith of the Christian endorses 
it. 



Digitized by Google 




CHAPTER V 

T N the preceding chapter it has been shown 
* that on this question of the evidential value 
of miracles the infidel is right and the Christian 
is wrong. It is not true that a revelation 
can only be made by miracles. The error of 
Paley’s thesis can be demonstrated by argument. 
It can be exemplified moreover by reference to 
the case of the Baptist, who, though the bearer 
of a Divine revelation of supreme importance, 
had no miracles to appeal to in support of it. 1 

It has been further argued that, so far as 
their evidential force was concerned, the “Christian 
miracles ” were for that favoured people “of whom, 
as concerning the flesh, Christ came.” And if 

1 John x. 41. 

48 



Digitized by Google 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



49 



this be well founded we shall be prepared to 
find that so long as the kingdom was being 
preached to Jews, the miracle abounded, but that 
when the gospel appealed to the heathen world, 
miracles lost their prominence, and soon entirely 
ceased. The question remains whether the sacred 
record will confirm this supposition. 

Who can fail to mark the contrast between 
the earlier and the later chapters of the Acts 
of the Apostles ? Measured by years the period 
they embrace is comparatively brief ; but morally 
the latter portion of the narrative seems to 
belong to a different age. And such is in fact 

b. 

the case. A new dispensation has begun, and the 
Book of the Acts covers historically the period 
of the transition. “To the Jew first” is stamped 
on every page of it. The Saviour’s prayer upon 
the Cross 1 had secured for the favoured nation a 
respite from judgment. And the forgiveness asked 
for carried with it a right to priority in the procla- 
mation of the great amnesty. When “ the apostle 
of the circumcision,” by express revelation, 
brought the gospel to Gentiles they were rele- 

1 Luke xxiii. 34. 

5 



Digitized by Google 



50 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



gated to a position akin to that formerly held 
by the “proselytes of the gate.” 1 And even 
“ the apostle of the Gentiles ” addressed himself 
first, in every place he visited, to the children of 
his own people. And this not from prejudice, 
but by Divine appointment. “It was necessary ,” 
he declared at Pisidian Antioch, “ that the word 
of God should first be spoken to you.” 2 Even 
at Rome, deeply though he longed to visit the 
Christians there, 3 his first care was to summon 
“the chief of the Jews,” and to them “he testified 
the kingdom of God.” And not until the testi- 
mony had been rejected by the favoured people 
did the word go forth, “The salvation of God is 
sent unto the Gentiles, and they will hear it.” 4 
But, it will be objected, the Epistle to the 
Romans had been already written. True ; but 
this only makes the narrative of the Acts still 
more significant Those who profess to account 
for the Bible on natural principles seem ignorant 
of some of the main facts of the problem they 



1 Acts x. This is made still more clear by chap. xv. 2. 

2 Acts xiii. 46 (R.V.) ; cf. xvii. 2, 10, xviii. 1-4. 

3 Rom. i. 11. 4 Acts xxviii. 17, 23, 28. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



5i 



pretend to solve. They give no explanation of 
the omissions of Scripture. Contrast, for example, 
the first Gospel with the fourth. The writers of 
both shared the same teaching and were in- 
structed in the same truth. How is it, then, that 
Matthew contains not a single sentence which is 
foreign to the purpose for which it was written 
as presenting Israel’s Messiah, the “ son of 
David, the son of Abraham ”? 1 How is it that 
John , which presents Him as the Son of God, 
omits even the record of his birth, and deals 
throughout with truth for all scenes and all 
time? And so with the Acts of the Apostles. 
As St. Paul’s companion and fellow-labourer, the 
writer must have been familiar with the great 
truths revealed to the Church in the earlier 
Epistles, but not a trace of them appears in his 
treatise. Written under the Divine guidance for 
a definite purpose, nothing foreign to that pur- 
pose finds a place. To the superficial it may 
appear but a chance collection of incidents and 
memoirs, and yet, as has been rightly .said, 

1 The prophetic utterance of Matt. xvi. 18 will not be deemed an 
exception to this. 



Digitized by Google 



52 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



“there is not a book upon earth in which the 
principle of intentional selection is more evident 
to a careful observer.” 1 

The special and distinctive position enjoyed 
by the Jew was a main feature of the economy 
then about to close. “ There is no difference ” 2 is 
a canon of Christian doctrine. Men talk of the 
Divine history of the human race, but there is no 
such history. The Old Testament is the Divine 
history of the family of Abraham . The call of 
Abraham was chronologically the central point 
between the creation of Adam and the Cross 
of Christ, and yet the story of all the ages 
from Adam to Abraham is dismissed in eleven 
chapters. And if during the history of Israel 
the light of revelation rested for a time upon 
heathen nations, it was because the favoured 
nation was temporarily in captivity. But God 
took up the Hebrew race that they might be 
a centre and channel of blessing to the world. 
It was owing to their pride that they came to 
regard themselves as the only objects of Divine 
benevolence. 

1 The Bampton Lectures, 1864. 2 Rom. iii. 22. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



53 



When some great French wine-grower appoints 
an agent in this country, he no longer supplies 
his wines except through that agent His object, 
however, is not to hinder but to facilitate the 
sale, and to ensure that spurious wines shall not 
be palmed off upon the public in his name. 
Akin to this was the purpose with which Israel 
was called out in blessing. The knowledge of 
the true God was thus to be maintained on 
earth . 1 But the Jews perverted agency into a 
monopoly of Divine favour. That temple which 1 
was to have been a “house of prayer for all 
nations ” 2 they treated as though it were not 
God’s house, but their own, and ended by de- 
grading it till it became at last “ a den of thieves.” 
But the position thus Divinely accorded them 
implied a priority in blessing. And this principle 
pervades not only the Old Testament Scriptures 
but the Gospels. To us indeed it is natural to 
read the Gospels in the light of the Epistles, 
and thus “ to read into them ” the wider truths 

1 Such was the spirit of their inspired Scriptures. See, eg ., 

2 Chron. vi. 32, 33 ; Psa. lxvii. 1-3, &c. 

2 Mark xi. 17 (R.V.). 



Digitized by Google 




54 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



of Christianity. But if the canon of Scripture 
ended with the Gospels this would be impos- 
sible . 1 

Suppose again the Epistles were there, but the 
Acts of the Apostles left out, how startling 
would appear the heading “To the Romans,” 
which would confront us on turning from the 
study of the Evangelists ! How could we account 
for the transition thus involved ? How could we 
explain the great thesis of the Epistle, that there 
is no difference between Jew and Gentile, both 
being by nature on a common level of sin and 
ruin, both being called in grace to equal privi- 

1 “If,” says the author of “Supernatural Religion,” “Chris- 
tianity consist of the doctrines preached in the Fourth Gospel, it is 
not too much to say that the Synoptics do not teach Christianity at 
all. The extraordinary phenomenon is presented of three Gospels, 
each professing to be complete in itself, and to convey the good 
tidings of salvation to man, which have actually omitted the 
doctrines which are the conditions of that salvation.” This is ^ 
fair specimen of the sort of statement which, owing to prevailing 
ignorance of Holy Scripture, suffices to undermine the faith even of 
cultured people in our day. The Gospels were not written “ to 
teach Christianity,” but to reveal Christ in the different aspects of 
His person and work as Israel’s Messiah, Jehovah’s servant, Son of 
Man and Son of God. No one of them is “ complete in itself” ; 
and the Fourth alone expressly professes to teach the way of 
salvation (John xx. 31). 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



55 



leges and glory? The earlier Scriptures will be 
searched in vain for teaching such as this. Not 
the Old Testament merely but even the Gospels 
themselves are seemingly separated from the 
Epistles by a gulf. To bridge over that gulf is 
the Divine purpose for which the Acts of the 
Apostles has been given to the Church. The 
earlier portion of the book is the completion of 
and sequel to the Gospels ; its concluding narrative 
is introductory to the great revelation of Chris- 
tianity. 

But was not the death of Stephen, recorded in 
the seventh chapter, the crisis of the Pentecostal 
testimony ? Undoubtedly it was ; and thereupon 
“the apostle to the Gentiles ” received his com- 
mission. But it was a crisis akin to that which 
marked the ministry of our blessed Lord Himself 
when the Council at Jerusalem decreed his de- 
struction. 1 From that time He enjoined silence 
respecting His miracles , 2 and His teaching became 
veiled in parables. 3 But though His ministry 
entered upon this altered phase, it continued until 

1 Matt. xii. 14. a Ibid. xii. 15, 16. 

3 Ibid. xiii. 



Digitized by Google 




56 THE SILENCE OF GOD 

His death. So was it in the record of the Acts. 
Progress in revelation, like growth in nature, is 
gradual, and sometimes can be appreciated only 
by its developments. The apostle to the circum- 
cision gives place to the apostle to the Gentiles 
as the central figure in the narrative, but yet in 
every place the Jew is still accorded a priority 
in the offer of blessing, and it is not until, in 
every place from Jerusalem round to Rome, that 
blessing has been despised, that the Pentecostal 
dispensation is brought to a close by the pro- 
mulgation of the solemn decree, “The salvation 
of God is sent unto the Gentiles .” 1 

The hopes excited in the breasts of the dis- 
ciples by their Lord’s last words of cheer and 
promise were more than realised. Converts 
flocked to them by thousands, and “ signs and 
wonders were wrought among the people.” And, 
as already noticed, not only was Divine power in 
exercise to accredit their testimony, but also to 
deliver them from outrage, and rescue them from 
bonds and imprisonment. Nor was St. Paul 
behind the rest in these respects. But compare 
1 See Appendix, Note III. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



57 



the record of Pentecostal days with the narrative 
of his imprisonment in Rome, and mark the 
change! When dragged to gaol at Philippi as 
a common disturber of the peace, Heaven came 
down to earth in answer to his midnight prayer, 
the prison doors flew open, his gaoler became a 
disciple, and the magistrates who had committed 
him, besought him, with obsequious words, to 
comply with commands they no longer dared to 
enforce. But now he is “the prisoner of the 
Lord.” His bonds are known everywhere to be 
for Christ . 1 In other words, there is no side 
issue, no incidental charge, as at Philippi, to 
conceal the true character of the accusation 
against him. It is a public fact that it is only 
because he is a teacher of Christianity that he 
is held in bonds. If the received theory respect- 
ing miracles be well founded, this is the scene 
and here is the occasion for “signs and wonders 
and mighty deeds,” such as he had appealed to 
in his earlier career . 2 But Heaven is silent. 
There is no earthquake now to awe his per- 
secutors. No angel messenger strikes off* his 
1 Phil. i. 13. a 2 Cor. xii. 12. 



Digitized by Google 




58 THE SILENCE OF GOD 

chains. He stands alone, forsaken of men, even 
as his Master was, and seemingly forsaken of 
God. 1 How natural the sceptic’s taunt that 

miracles were cheap with the peasants of Galilee 
and the rabble of Jerusalem ! A miracle at 
Nero’s Court might indeed have “ accredited 
Christianity.” In truth, it might have shaken 
the world. But miracle there was none ; for, 
the special testimony to the Jew having ceased, 
the purpose for which miracles were given was 
accomplished. 

Like a day that breaks with unclouded splen- 
dour, and approaches noontide in all the glory 
of perfect summer, but then begins to wane, 
and early closes in amidst the gloom of gather- 
ing storm-clouds that shut out the sky and 
darken all the scene, so was it with the course 
of that brief story. At the first great Pentecost 
three thousand converts were baptized in a single 
day, the manifested power of God filled every 
soul with awe, and those who were His own had 
“ gladness of heart ” and “ favour with all the 

1 2 Tim. iv. 1 6 . This passage disposes of the tradition that 
St. Peter was Bishop of Rome. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



59 



people.” And when the first threat of persecution 
drove them together in prayer, “the place was 
shaken where they were assembled . . . and with 
great power gave the apostles witness of the resur- 
rection of the Lord Jesus.” 1 The seeming check 
of the first martyr’s death was followed by the 
conversion of him who caused it, the fierce perse- 
cutor and blasphemer, won over to the faith he 
had struggled to destroy, and chained to the 
chariot-wheels of the triumph of the gospel. But 
now we see that same Paul, albeit the greatest of 
the apostles and the foremost champion the faith 
has ever known, standing alone at Cesar’s judg- 
ment-seat, a weak, crushed man, given up to death 
to satisfy the policy or caprice of Imperial Rome. 

In days to come “the song of Moses and the 
song of the Lamb ” shall mingle once again in the 
anthem of the redeemed : the song of Moses — 

“ I will sing unto the Lord for He hath triumphed gloriously, 

The horse and his rider hath He thrown into the sea ” — 



that song of the public triumph of Divine power 
openly displayed ; and the song of the Lamb — 

1 Acts iv. 23-33. 



Digitized by Google 




6o 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



the song of that deeper but hidden triumph of 
faith in the unseen. But now the song of Moses 
has ceased, and the Church’s only song is the 
song of Him who overcame and won the throne 
through open defeat and shame. The days of the 
“ rushing mighty wind,” “ the tongues of fire,” the 
earthquake shock, are past. The anchor of the 
Christian’s hope is firmly fixed in the veiled 
realities of heaven. He endures “ as seeing Him 
who is invisible.” 



Digitized by Google 




CHAPTER VI 



'"T^HE Sovereign of the Universe is on the 
A whole a good Sovereign, but with so much 
business on His hands that He has not time to 
look into details . 1 Such was Cicero’s apology two 
thousand years ago for Jupiter’s neglect of his 
terrestrial kingdom. And the words would fairly 
express the vague thoughts which float through 
the minds of common men if they think of God 
at all in relation to the affairs of earth. But there 
are times in every life when, in the language of 
the old Psalm, “heart and flesh cry out for the 
living God.” 2 The living God : not a mere Provi- 
dence, but a real Person — a God to help us as our 
fellow-man would help if only he had the power. 

1 Froude’s “Cesar, a Sketch” p. 87. 2 Psa. lxxxiv. 2. 

61 



Digitized by 



Google 



62 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



And at such times men pray who never prayed 
before ; and men who are used to pray, pray with 
a passionate earnestness they never knew before. 
But what comes of it ? “ When I cry and call for 

help He shutteth out my prayer ” : 1 such is the 
experience of thousands. Men do not speak of 
these things ; but, as they brood over them, the 
cold mist of a settled unbelief quenches the last 
spark of faith in hearts chilled by a sense of utter 
desolation, or roused to rebellion by a sense of 
wrong. 

To some no doubt all this will savour of the 
mingled profanity and ignorance of unbelief. But 
by many these pages will be welcomed as giving 
f full and fair expression to familiar thoughts. And 
the statement of these difficulties here is made 
with a view to their solution. But where is that 
solution to be found ? It is no novel experience 
with men that Heaven should be silent. But what 
is new and strange and startling is that the silence 
should be so absolute and so prolonged ; that, 
through all the changing vicissitudes of the 
Church’s history for nearly two thousand years 
1 Lam. iii. 8 (R.V.). 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 63 

that silence should have remained unbroken. This 
it is which tries faith, and hardens unfaith into open 
infidelity. 

Can this mystery be solved ? Mere speculations 
respecting it are profitless. The solution must be 
found in Holy Scripture, if at all. The Old 
Testament, of course, will throw no light on it. 
Neither will the Gospels afford a clew ; for these 
are the record of “days of heaven upon earth.” 
Nor yet need it be sought in the Acts of the 
Apostles, for, as already seen, the Book is the 
record of a transitory dispensation marked by 
abundant displays of the power of God among 
men. Is it not clear that if the key to the great 
secret of the Gentile dispensation can be found 
at all, it is in the writings of the apostle to 
the Gentiles that we must make search for it? 

But here the ways divide. The wide and well- 
worn highway of religious controversy will never 
lead us to the truth we seek. That is reached only 
by a path which the general reader will refuse. 
Our choice lies between a study of these Epistles 
viewed as disclosing the “ Pauline ” developments, 
or perversions, of the teaching of the great Rabbi 



Digitized by Google 



64 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



of Nazareth, or as containing that further revelation 
promised and foreshadowed by our Divine Lord 
in the later discourses of His ministry on earth. 
The one road is deemed the highway of modern 
enlightenment, the other is disparaged as a by- 
path now disused, or frequented only by the 
mystic and the unlearned. But in this sphere 
popularity is no test of truth. Let the atheistic 
evolutionist account for it if he can, the fact re- 
mains that man is essentially a religious being. 
He may sink so low as to deify humanity and 
make self his god, but a god of some sort he must 
have. 1 Religion is a necessity to him. The Chris- 
tian religion prevails in Christendom ; other systems 
hold sway among the decaying civilisations of the 
world ; but neither the deepest degradation nor 
the highest enlightenment has ever produced a 
single nation or tribe of atheists. 

This undoubted fact, however, may well give rise 
to most serious thoughts. It cannot be admitted 

1 “We know, and it is our pride to know, that man is by his 
constitution a religious animal ; that atheism is against, not only 
our reason but our instincts ; and that it cannot prevail long ” 

| (Edmund Burke). “ Street arabs and advanced thinkers,” is Mr. 
Balfour’s classification of the exceptions to this rule (“ Defence of 
Philosophic Doubt ”). 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 65 

that the element of truth is of no account in 
religion, or that all these religions are equally 
acceptable. And once we come to the question of 
their relative excellence the religion of Christen- 
dom defies all comparison. May we, then, main- 
tain that all adherents of the Christian religion are 
assured of Divine favour ? Let us for a moment, 
forgetting what is due to “ the spirit of the age,” 
assume the Divine authority of Scripture, and we 
shall find ourselves confronted by doubts whether 
religion in this sense is of any avail whatever. 
Judaism was, indeed, a Divine religion. It had 
“ ordinances of Divine service and its sanctuary,” 1 
Divinely appointed in a sense to which no other 
system could pretend. And yet we read : “ He is 
not a Jew who is one outwardly, neither is that 
circumcision which is outward in the flesh ; but he 
is a Jew who is one inwardly, and circumcision is 
that of the heart.” 2 And again, “ For neither is 
circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision, but a 
new creature.” 3 Now, if in a religion which 
seemed to consist so much in externals, the ex- 
ternals were absolutely of no value whatever save 

* Heb. ix. 1 (R.V.). 2 Rom. ii. 28. 3 Gal. vi. 15. 

6 



Digitized by Google 



66 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



as they had their counterpart and reality in a man's 
heart and life, this surely must be still more true 
of Christianity. May we not assert with confi- 
dence that he is not a Christian who is one out- 
wardly, but he only is a Christian who is one 
inwardly? May we not maintain that there is 
a distinction sharp and clear between Christianity 
and the religion of Christendom. 

In the case of the Roman and Greek Churches, 
this distinction becomes a deep and yawning gulf. 
And further, as Mr. Froude has well said, in those 
countries which rejected the Reformation, “ culture 
and intelligence have ceased to interest themselves 
in a creed which they no longer believe. The laity 
are contemptuously indifferent, and leave the priests 
in possession of the field in which reasonable 
men have ceased to expect any good thing to 
grow. This is the only fruit of the Catholic 
reaction of the sixteenth century." And he adds : 
“If the same phenomena are beginning to be 
visible in England, coincident with the repudia- 
tion by some of the clergy of the principles of 
the Reformation ; and if they are permitted to 
carry through their Catholic ‘ revival,' the divorce 



Digitized by Google 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



6 7 



between intelligence and Christianity will be as 
complete among ourselves as it is elsewhere.” 
“Between intelligence and Christianity ” a divorce 
is impossible. But by “ Christianity ” the author 
here means “ the religion of Christendom ” ; and 
with this correction his assertion is irrefutable. | 
Mr. Balfour’s “ Foundations of Belief” escapes the 
difficulty here suggested by stopping short at the 
very threshold. His work is “ introductory to the 
study of theology.” And here his criticisms are 
searching, and his logic is without a flaw. But 
one step more would have brought him to the 
point where the ways divide. What is the 
theology he is aiming at? Is it the religion of 
Christendom — a human religion based on a 
Divine ideal, framed to reach and regulate men’s 
opinions and conduct so far as the spiritual side 
of their complex being is concerned ? Or is it 
Christianity — a Divine revelation commanding the 
faith and thus moulding the character and con- 
trolling the whole life of those who receive it ? 

In the estimation of some the great religion of 
Asia compares favourably with that of Christen- 
dom, on account of its freedom from priestcraft and 



Digitized by Google 




68 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



ceremonial observances, its repudiation of penance 
and everything of mere asceticism, and the 
singular truth and beauty of its doctrine of “the 
middle path.” But the comparison is altogether 
dishonest. It is drawn between the ideal 
Buddhism of our English admirers of Gautama, 
and the Christian system in its more corrupt 
developments. The practical Buddhism of Bud- 
dhist races is a gross and degrading superstition, 
and it cannot compare with the Christian religion 
even at its worst. And even the refined Bud- 
dhism presented by its Western exponents is 
wanting in that ennobling element which is dis- 
tinctive of Christianity. * The wholly legendary 
and half mythical story of Gautama’s life are a 
poor equivalent for the well-ascertained facts of 
the ministry of Christ . 1 Here let a witness speak 
whose judgment is warped by no religious bias. 

1 For a calm, scholarly, and crushing refutation of those who, 
like de Bunsen, Seydel, &c., represent Buddhism as the original of 
Christianity, and of those who, like Sir Edwin Arnold, read Chris- 
tianity into Buddhism, see Prof. Kellogg’s “ Light of Asia and 
Light of the World ” (Macmillan). 

The Buddhism of Gautama, I may add, has no claim to be 
reckoned a religion , for it has no God. It was not a religion at all, 
but merely a philosophy. But his followers, in obedience to the 
instinctive craving of human nature for a religion, made Gautama 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



69 



“It was reserved for Christianity,” says Mr. Lecky, 

“ to present to the world an ideal character which, 
through all the changes of eighteen centuries has 
filled the hearts of men with an impassioned love, 
has shown itself capable of acting on all ages, 
nations, temperaments, and conditions ; has not 
only been the highest pattern of virtue, but the 
highest incentive to its practice, and has exerted 
so deep an influence that it may be truly said that 
the simple record of three short years of active life 
has done more to regenerate and soften mankind 
than all the disquisitions of philosophers and all 
the exhortations of moralists. This has, indeed, 
been the well-spring of whatever has been best 
and purest in the Christian life. # Amid all the 
sins and failings, amid all the priestcraft, the per- 
secutions, and fanaticism which have defaced the 
Church, it has preserved in the character and 
example of its Founder an enduring principle of 
regeneration.” 

If the Christian religion, even in its outward and • 



himself their God. And the Buddhism of later times has invariably 
assimilated some of the elements of the base polytheisms by which 
it has been surrounded. 



Digitized by Google 




70 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



human side, can justly claim such a testimony as 
this, what words are adequate to describe CHRIS- 
TIANITY in the higher and deeper sense? And 
let no one carp at this distinction as fanciful or 
forced. In fact, it is broad and vital. Just as the 
religion of Asia is based on the life and teaching 
of Gautama, so the religion of Christendom, re- 
garded as a human system, claims to be based 
on the life and teaching of the great Rabbi of 
Nazareth. But the advent and ministry of Christ 
were, in fact, introductory to the great revelation of 
Christianity. Thus was crowned and completed, 
as it were, the fabric which had been rearing for 
ages. In the public aspect of it His mission had 
relation to the economy about to close. He was 
“ born under the law.” 1 He “ was a minister of 
the circumcision for the truth of God.” Hence His 
words, “ I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the 
house of Israel.” And as the result, infinite love, 
and grace which knows no distinctions, were re- 
strained. “ I have a baptism to be baptized with,” 
He exclaimed, “ and how am I straitened till it be 
accomplished ! ” 

* Gal. iv. 4. 



Digitized by Google 




CHAPTER VII 



J UST half a century ago the theologians of 
Christendom were startled by the publica- 
tion of Ferdinand Christian Baur’s treatise on 
Paul. It was an epoch-making book. The 
author’s critical researches had led him to assert 
the unquestionable authenticity of the Epistles to 
the Romans, the Corinthians, and the Galatians. 
And fastening on these writings as our safest 
guides in historical inquiries respecting the cha- 
racter and rise of primitive Christianity, he went 
on to demonstrate its Pauline origin. “ These 
authentic documents,” he urged (to quote a recent 
writer), “reveal antitheses of thought, a Petrine 
and a Pauline party in the Apostolic Church. 

The Petrine was the primitive Christian, made 

71 



Digitized by Google 




7 2 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



up of men who, while believing in Jesus as the 
Messiah, did not cease to be Jews, whose 
Christianity was but a narrow neo- Judaism. The 
Pauline was a reformed and Gentile Christianity, 
which aimed at universalising the faith in Jesus 
by freeing it from the Jewish law and traditions. 
The universalism of Christianity, and, therefore, 
its historical importance and achievements, are 
thus really the work of the Apostle Paul. His 
work he accomplished not with the approval and 
consent, but against the will and in spite of the 
efforts and oppositions, of the older apostles, and 
especially of their more inveterate adherents who 
claimed to be the party of Christ.” 1 

If we are to understand the sequel to the present 
argument we must rescue from its false environ- 
ment of German rationalism the important truth 
which Baur thus brought to light and distorted . 2 
We must needs recognise the intensely Jewish 
character of the Pentecostal dispensation. And in 

1 “The Place of Christ in Modem Theology,” by Principal 
Fairbairn, D.D., p. 267. 

2 A dozen years before Baur’s “Paul” appeared, the truth 
thus attributed to him was discussed at the then celebrated 
“ Powerscourt meetings ” in Ireland ! 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



73 



this connection we must also apprehend the two- 
fold aspect of the death of Christ. The Cross 
was the manifestation of Divine love without 
reserve or limit ; but it was also the expression 
of man’s unutterable malignity. Did reverence 
permit us to give play to imagination on such 
a subject, we might suppose the death of Christ 
accomplished by the Roman power in spite of 
protests and appeals from an aggrieved and down- 
trodden Jewish people. More than this, we might 
suppose “ the King of the Jews ” given up to 
death on grounds of public policy, yet treated 
to the last with all the respect and homage due 
to His personal character and royal claims. 

And who will dare to aver that the atoning 
efficacy of the death of our Divine Lord, how- 
ever accomplished, could be less than infinite? 
But mark the emphasis which Scripture lays 
upon the manner of His death. It was “ the death 
of the Cross ” No element of contempt or hate 
was wanting. Imperial Rome decreed it, but it 
was the favoured people who demanded it. The 
“wicked hands” by which they murdered their 
Messiah were those of their heathen masters, but 



Digitized by Google 




74 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



the responsibility for the act was all their own. 
Nor was it the ignorant rabble of Jerusalem that 
forced the Roman government to set up the cross 
on Calvary. Behind the mob was the great 
Council of the nation. Neither was it a sudden 
burst of passion that led these men to clamour for 
His death. Hostile sects forgot their differences 
in deep-laid plots to compass His destruction. 
The time, moreover, was the Paschal feast, when 
Jews from every land were gathered in Jerusalem. 
Every interest, every class, every section of that 
people shared in the great crime. Never was 
there a clearer case of national guilt. Never was 
there an act for which a nation could more 
justly be summoned to account. 

But Infinite mercy could forgive even that 
transcendent sin, and in Jerusalem itself it was 
that the great amnesty was first proclaimed. 
Pardon and peace were preached, by Divine 
command, to the very men who crucified the 
Son of God ! But here prevailing misconceptions 
are so fixed that the whole significance of the 
narrative is lost. The apostles were Divinely 
guided to declare that if, even then, the “men 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



75 



of Israel” repented, their Messiah would return 
to fulfil to them all that their own prophets had 
foretold and promised of spiritual and national 
blessing . 1 

To represent this as Christian doctrine, or the 
institution of “ a new religion,” is to betray 
ignorance alike of Judaism and of Christianity. 
The speakers were Jews — the apostles of One 
who was Himself “a minister of the circum- 
cision.” Their hearers were Jews, and as Jews 
they were addressed. The Pentecostal Church 
which was based upon the testimony was in- 
tensely and altogether Jewish. It was not merely 
that the converts were Jews, and none but Jews, 

1 Though the revisers have reproduced St. Peter’s words in 
one important passage which the Authorised Version has misread, 
yet to take these simple words in their plain and obvious meaning 
is to risk being looked upon as either fool or faddist. The words 
are : “ Repent ye therefore, and turn again, that your sins 

may be blotted out, that there may come seasons of refreshing 
from the presence of the Lord ; and that He may send the 
Christ who hath been appointed for you, even Jesus ; whom the 
heaven must receive until the times of restoration of all things, 
whereof God spake by the mouth of His holy prophets. ... Ye 
are the sons of the prophets and of the covenant which God 
made with your fathers” (Acts iii. 19, &c.). The whole passage 
should be carefully studied, and by all means see Alford’s notes, 
showing how fully and definitely all this refers to Jewish hopes 
and promises. 



Digitized by Google 




76 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



but that the idea of evangelising Gentiles never 
was even mooted. When the first great perse- 
cution scattered the disciples, and they “ went 
everywhere preaching the Word,” they preached, 
we are expressly told, “ to none but to the Jews.” 1 
And when after the lapse of years Peter entered 
a Gentile house, he was publicly called to account 
for conduct that seemed so strange and wrong . 2 

In a word, if “To the Jew first” is character- 
istic of the Acts of the Apostles as a whole, “ To 
the Jew only ” is plainly stamped upon every 
part of these early chapters, described by theo- 
logians as the “ Hebraic section ” of the . book. 
The fact is clear as light. And if any are 
prepared to account for it by Jewish prejudice 
and ignorance, they may at once throw down 
this volume, for it is here assumed that the 



1 Acts viii. i, 4 ; cj. xi. 19. It is noteworthy that at this time all 
the believers went out preaching except the apostles. And yet 
there are those who maintain that preaching is an exclusively 
apostolic function ! 

a Acts xi. The words “they that were of the circumcision” 
might seem to suggest that there were Gentiles at that time in the 
Church. But, as Dean Alford says, Luke uses the phrase from 
the standpoint of the time when he was writing : “In this case 
all those spoken of would belong to the circumcision.” 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



77 



apostles of the Lord, speaking and acting in the 
memorable days of Pentecostal power, were 
Divinely guided in their work and testimony. 

The Jerusalem Church, then, was Jewish. 
Their Bible was the Jewish Scriptures. The 
Jewish temple was their house of prayer and 
common meeting-place. 1 Their beliefs and hopes 
and words and acts all marked them out as Jews. 
Hence the amazing number of the converts. On 
the day of Pentecost alone three thousand were 
baptized. 2 Soon afterwards their company would 
seem to have more than trebled.3 At the time 
of the sin and death of Ananias and Sapphira, 
still further “ multitudes, both of men and 
women,” were added to their company. And 
at the time of the appointment of the men 
who, by a strange vagary of tradition, have been 
misnamed “ the deacons,” 4 it is recorded that 



1 Acts ii. 46, iii. 1, v. 42. 2 Ibid. ii. 41. 

3 Ibid. iv. 4. If “ the number of the men came to be about 
five thousand,” it is reasonably certain that the whole company 
was double this number at least. 

4 They are never so called in the Acts. Indeed, our English 
word “ deacon ” has no equivalent in ancient or in Biblical Greek, 
and if the Revisers had been true to their avowed principles of ( 

translation the word would have disappeared. Aiaxopog is used 

>/ 



Digitized by Google 




78 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



“the number of the disciples multiplied in 
Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of the 
priests were obedient to the faith.” 1 Nothing 
was further from the thoughts of these men 
than “ founding a new religion.” On the con- 
trary, while hailing the rejected Nazarene as 
their national Messiah, they clung with passionate 
devotion to the religion of their fathers. 

But what bearing has all this upon the ques- 
tion here? The Jews had crucified the Messiah. 
But now, when vengeance swift and terrible 
might have been expected to fall upon that 
guilty people, Divine mercy held back the 
judgment and called them once again to re- 
pentance. The testimony was full and clear, 
and it was confirmed by a signal display of 
miraculous power. But what was the answer 
of the men who sat “ in Moses' seat ” — the 
accredited leaders and representatives of the 

twenty-two times in the Epistles, and should be rendered 
“minister” in every case, and especially in Phil. i. i, and 
i Tim. iii. 8 and 12, where ministers are distinguished from 
bishops. In the Gospels it occurs eight times, and always as 
equivalent to “ servant ” in the common acceptation, save in 
John xii. 26, where it is used in a higher sense. 

* Acts vi. 7. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



79 



nation ? 1 By the murder of Stephen they re- p 
enacted, so far as it was in their power to re-enact, 
the supreme tragedy of Calvary. Having regard 
to all the events which marked the interval, that 
further crime betokened a more deliberate hate, 
and therefore a greater depth of guilt even than 
the Crucifixion itself. There was no popular 
clamour now to blind their judgment. When, 
some months before, in a formal meeting of 
their national senate, 2 the plot to murder the 
apostles was first mooted, 3 it was one of the 
great doctors of the Sanhedrin who intervened 
on their behalf. Gamaliel's words, moreover, and 
the action which the council took on them, give 
proof how entirely the position and teaching of 
the apostles were within the scope of Jewish 
beliefs and hopes, and how thoroughly they were 
regarded as a Jewish sect.4 But these men 

1 Matt, xxiii. 2. 2 Acts v. 21, 33-40. 

3 I use the word murder advisedly, for under the Roman law 
the Jews had no power to put any one to death. The crucifixion 
was a judicial murder ; the stoning of Stephen was murder pure 
and simple. See John xviii. 31. 

4 Acts v. 34-40 ; cf. xxii. 3. A quarter of a century later 
they were still known as “the sect of the Nazarenes” (Acts 
xxiv. 5). See p. 85 post . 



Digitized by Google 




8o 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



were so blinded by religious rancour that no 
voice, human or Divine, could avail to restrain 
them. 

Heaven’s best gifts, when perverted or abused, 
often turn to what is virulently bad ; and reli- 
gion, when divorced from spiritual life, appears 
to have some mysterious power to narrow and 
harden and deprave the human heart “ It 
cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jeru- 
salem ! ” 1 The pathos of the words does not 
conceal their scathing irony. Among common 
men, however evil or degraded, a prophet might 
pass unharmed : religious men alone would 

persecute and murder him ! In every age, 
indeed, religion has been the most implacable 
enemy of God, the most relentless persecutor of 
His people. Witness the tombs of the prophets ! 
Witness the blood-stained pages of the Church’s 
history! The Christian martyrs in unnumbered 
millions — for though their names are written in 
heaven, earth has kept no record of them — the 
best and purest and noblest of mankind, have 
been tortured and done to death in the name 
1 Luke xiii. 33. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



81 



of religions How just is the infidel's taunt that 
it radically vitiates the standard of human 
morals ! 2 ^ 

The men by whose hands the “ first martyr ” 
died were the very men who had been “ the 

betrayers and murderers ” of Christ. In times 

of riot or excitement mobs will commit excesses 
which, in his better moments, every man of them 
would deprecate. But these men were not of 
the class that mobs are made of. The high 

priest presided. Around him were the elders 
and the scribes. By the great Council of the 
nation it was that the deed was done. Its 

members were the acknowledged religious leaders 
of the people. Many of them, like Saul of 
Tarsus, himself the formal witness of the death, 
were men of blameless life, of untiring zeal and 
intensest piety. And as the cruel stones were 

1 The victims of the so-called Christian persecutions have been 
wildly estimated at over fifty millions ! Of the victims of pagan 
Rome I have never seen any estimate. And pagan persecutions 
also were in the name of religion ! From the death of Abel in 
primeval times down to the massacres of Armenian Christians 
to-day, religion has heaped up the tale of human guilt and 
sorrow. 

2 Mill’s “ Autobiography,” p. 40. 

7 



Digitized by Google 




82 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



showered upon that face which had shone like 
an angel’s as they looked on it, it was hatred 
to the Nazarene that fired their hearts. Their 
King they had driven out : Stephen was the 
messenger sent after Him to declare anew their 
deliberate purpose to reject Him. 1 This was 
their answer to the heaven-sent testimony of 
Pentecost. “ All manner of sin ” against the 
Son might be forgiven ; they had now com- 
mitted that deeper sin against the Holy Ghost, 
for which there could be no forgiveness. 2 

During the forty years of Jeremiah’s ministry 
the first destruction of Jerusalem was delayed. 
So now well-nigh forty years elapsed before the 
crash of that still more awful judgment which 
engulfed them. God is very pitiful, and then, 
as now, “ He had compassion on His people 
and on His dwelling-place. But they mocked 
the messengers of God, and despised His words, 
and misused His prophets, until the wrath of 
the Lord arose against His people till there was 
no remedy.” 3 But though the public event 

1 Luke xix. 14. 2 Matt. xii. 31, 32. 

3 2 Chron. xxxvi. 1 5, &c. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



83 



which marked their fall was thus deferred, the 
death of Stephen was the secret crisis of their 
destiny. Never again was a public miracle 
witnessed in Jerusalem. The special Pentecostal 
proclamation 1 was withdrawn. The Pentecostal 
Church was scattered. The apostle of the 
Gentiles forthwith received his commission, and 
the current of events set steadily, and with con- 
tinually increasing force, toward the open rejection 
of the long-favoured people and the public pro- 
clamation of the great characteristic truth of 
Christianity. Within that truth lies concealed 
the key to the mystery of a silent Heaven. 

1 Acts iii. 19-36. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VIII 



have now reached a stage in this 
* * inquiry where a retrospect may be 
opportune. Expression has been given to diffi- 
culties and doubts to which no thoughtful person 
is a stranger. And these, it has been seen, are 
rather intensified, than answered or removed, by 
an appeal to the mere surface current of 
Scripture testimony. The “Christian argument” 
from miracles has been shown to be not only in- 
adequate, but faulty. And we have turned to 
the Acts of the Apostles to find how fallacious 
is the popular belief that the Jerusalem Church 
was Christian . In fact, it was thoroughly and 
altogether Jewish. The only difference, indeed, 
between the position of the disciples during the 

84 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



85 



“ Hebraic period ” of the Acts, and during the 
period of the Lord’s earthly ministry, was that 
the great fact of the Resurrection became the 
burden of their testimony. And finally we have 
seen how the rejection of that testimony by the 
favoured nation led to the unfolding of the 
Divine purpose to deprive the Jew of his 
vantage-ground of privilege and to usher in the 
Christian dispensation. 

The Divine religion of Judaism in every part of 
it, both in the spirit and the letter, pointed to the 
coming of a promised Messiah ; and to maintain 
that a man ceased to be a Jew because he 
cherished that hope, and accepted the Messiah 
when He came — this is a position absolutely 
grotesque in its absurdity. It would not be one 
whit more monstrous to declare that in our own 
day a man ceases to be a Christian if and when 
faith in Christ, from being a mere shibboleth of 
hfe creed, becomes a reality in his heart and life. 

Twenty years after the Pentecostal Church was 
formed, the disciples were still regarded by their 
own nation as a Jewish sect. “ The sect of the 
Nazarenes,” Tertullus called them in his arraign- 



Digitized by 



Google 



86 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



ment of Paul before Felix ; and Paul, in his 
defence, repudiated the charge, claiming that the 
followers of the Way were the true worshippers of 
the ancestral God of his nation . 1 Israel fell, not 
because the disciples, alive to the spiritual 
significance of their religion, accepted Christ, but 
because the nation rejected Him, and persisted in 
that rejection, “despising His words and misusing 
His prophets, till there was no remedy.” 

It would be an idle and profitless speculation 
to discuss what would have been the course of 
the dispensation if the Pentecostal testimony 
had led the Jews to repentance. What concerns 
us is the fact that Israel's fall was due to the 
national rejection of Messiah, and that that fall 
was “ the reconciling of the world ” 2 — a radical 
change in God's attitude toward men, such as 
the Old Testament Scriptures gave no indica- 

1 Acts xxiv. 5, 14. “ After the Way, which they call a sect, so 

serve I the God of our fathers ” (see also xxviii. 22), and he goes on 
to appeal to the law and the prophets. “The Way ” came to be 
the common expression for their teaching (see, e.g ., Acts xix. 9, 
23, xxii. 4, xxiv. 14, 22 R.V.). And speaking before a heathen 
judge he purposely uses, not the Jewish expression, o Qeog nbv 
irarkpiov iipubv, but the term familiar to the heathen, 6 iraTp^og 
Qeoq, the ancestral or tutelary God. 

2 Rom. xi. 15. 



Digitized by Google 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



87 



tion of, and even the Gospels foreshadowed but 
vaguely. We thus steer our course unswayed 
by the ignorance of the Christian sceptic and 
the animus of the avowed unbeliever. The one, 
disparaging the Epistles, turns back to the Sermon 
on the Mount to seek there an ideal Christianity : 
the other has no difficulty in showing that the 
teaching of Christ, when so perverted, is the 
dream of a visionary. The Sermon on the ^ 
Mount combines principles of limitless scope with 
precepts designed for the time at which they were 
spoken, and the spiritually intelligent cannot fail 
to discriminate between the two. It was for such 
the Bible was written, and neither for infidels nor 
fools . 1 ^ 

We conclude, then, as we study the records of 
the Pentecostal Jewish Church, that the charac- 
teristic truths of Christianity have yet to be 
revealed. Turning back to the earlier Scriptures 
with the knowledge we now possess, we may find 
them there in embryo, but the full and formal 
promulgation of them must be sought in the 
Epistles. But here the parting of the ways will 
1 See Appendix, Note IV. 



Digitized by Google 




88 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



become still more definitely marked. In passing 
away from the ministry of “ the apostle to the 
circumcision,” we leave behind us, of course, the 
religion of Christendom — for is not St. Peter its 
patron saint ? Mere Protestantism, moreover, has 
but little sympathy with studies of this kind. 
And as for that school of religious thought which 
seems for the moment to stand highest in the 
popular favour, we break with it entirely on 
entering upon the inquiry which lies before us. 
None such will accompany the truth-seeker as he 
passes on his lonely way. 

But while other schools will be simply indifferent 
to this inquiry, open hostility will be the attitude 
of those who claim to be the party of progress and 
enlightenment. It may be well, therefore, to turn 
aside once again to examine their pretensions. 
No generous mind would willingly insult a man’s 
religion, whether he be Christian or Jew, 
Mahometan or Buddhist. But when “ religious ” 
men pose as sceptics and critics, they come out 
into the open, and forfeit all “right of sanctuary.’ 
Courtesy is due to the religious man who stands 
behind the labarum of his creed. Courtesy is no 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



89 



less due to the agnostic who refuses faith in all that 
lies outside the sphere of sense or demonstration. 
But what shall be said for those who discard 
belief in the supernatural while they claim to be 
the true exponents of a system which has the ^ 
supernatural as its only basis ; or who deprecate 
belief in the inspiration of the Scriptures, while 
they profess to hold and teach that to which, 
apart from inspiration in the strictest sense, none 
but the credulous would listen? 

These men pretend to mental superiority ; but 
we only need to tear away the lion’s skin they 
masquerade in to find — exactly what we might 
expect! Here is a dilemma from which there is 
no escape. If the New Testament be Divinely y 
inspired, we accept its teaching ; we believe that 
Jesus was the Son of God, that He was born of a 
virgin, that He died and rose again, that He 
ascended to heaven, and now sits as man at the 
right hand of God ; in a word, we are Christians, 
and to take any other position is to stultify our- 
selves by dethroning reason itself. If, on the 
other hand, the New Testament be not inspired, 
no consensus of mere human opinion or testimony, 



Digitized by Google 




90 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



however ancient or venerable or widespread, would 
warrant our accepting figments so essentially 
incredible ; in a word, we are agnostics : and to 
take any other position is to pose as superstitious 
fools who would believe anything. 

The Christian and the infidel cannot both be 
right, yet both are entitled to respect, for the one 
position is logically as unassailable as the other. 
But what shall be said for the unbelieving 
Christian, or the Christianised infidel? If he be 
dishonest he is almost bad enough for a gaol ; if 
he be honest he is almost weak enough for an 
asylum. The weak deserve our pity ; the wicked 
our contempt. And their claim to be freethinkers, 
their affectation of intellectual superiority, give 
proof that with the majority the more generous 
alternative is the true one. The old Jewish 
proverb about straining out a gnat and swallowing 
a camel well describes their attempt to combine 
the most fastidious scepticism with the blindest 
faith. These modern Sadducees talk “ as though 
wisdom were born with them ” ; whereas, in fact, 
like their prototypes of old, they are the stupid 
advocates of an impossible compromise. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



9i 



Let there be no misunderstanding here. It is 
not a question of demanding faith on grounds 
which are either false or inadequate. It is not a 
question of trading on the superstitious element 
in human nature, lest common men, in throwing 
off the restraints of religion, should allow liberty 
to degenerate into licence. This appeal is 
addressed to the fair-minded, the intelligent, the 
thoughtful. If we possess a revelation, and if the p 
doctrines of Christianity are Divinely accredited 
as true, reason commands our acceptance of them, 
and unbelief is an outrage upon reason itself. If, 
on the other hand, we have no revelation ; or, 
what comes to the same thing, if the Divine 
element in Scripture is merely traditional, and 
must be separated from abounding error — picked 
out like treasure from a dust-heap — then we must 
either give up our Protestantism and fall back on 
the authority of the Church, or else we musL 
needs face the matter fairly, and accept and act 
upon the dictum that “the rational attitude of 
the thinking mind towards the supernatural is that 
of scepticism.” The superstitious will take refuge 
in the former alternative ; the latter will commend 



Digitized by Google 



92 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



itself to all free and fearless thinkers. The 
former, indeed, is not only intellectually deplor- 
able, but logically absurd. We are called upon 
to believe the Scriptures because the Church 
accredits them. The Bible is not infallible, but 
the Church is infallible, and upon the authority 
of the Church our faith can find a sure foundation . 1 
But how do we know that the Church is to be 
trusted ? The ready answer is, We know it upon 
the authority of the Bible. That is to say, we 
trust the Bible on the authority of the Church, 
and we trust the Church on the authority of the 
Bible! It is a bad case of “the confidence 
1 trick.” 

But, it will be said, is it not to the Church that 
we owe the Bible ? 2 Regarded as a book we owe 
| it indeed in a sense to the Church, just as we 
owe it to the printer. But in a sense which 
^ appeals to us more closely here in England we 
owe it to noble men who rescued it for us in 
defiance of the Church. Let not the Protestants 
of England forget William Tyndale. His life- 

1 This is the position assumed by “Lux Mundi.” See specially 
pp. 340-341. 

2 The Old Testament we owe, of course, entirely to the Jews. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



93 



work was to bring the Bible within reach even 
of the humblest peasant. And for no other 
offence than this the Church hounded him to his 
death, never resting till it strangled him at the 
stake and flung his body to the flames. 

But the Bible is more than a book — it is a 
revelation; and thus regarded, it is above the 
Church. We do not judge the Bible by the 
Church ; we judge the Church and its teaching 
by the Bible . 1 This is our safeguard against the 
ignorance and tyranny of priestcraft. But in our 
day those who deprecate most strongly the tyranny 
of the priest are precisely those who champion 



1 The Church of England teaches unequivocally that there is 
neither salvation nor infallibility in the Church, and that the 
Church’s authority in matters of faith is controlled and limited by 
Holy Writ (see Articles xviii.-xxi.). And this is Protestantism ; not p 
a repudiation of authority in the spiritual sphere, but a revolt 
against the bondage of mere human authority falsely claiming to be 
Divine. It delivers us from the authority of “ the Church,” that 
we may be free to bow to the authority of God. “ The Church ” 
claims to mediate between God and man. But Christianity teaches 
that all pretensions of the kind are both false and profane, and 
points to our Divine Lord as the only Mediator. Protestantism is 0 
not our religion, but it leaves us with a free conscience and an open 
Bible, face to face with God. It is not an anchorage for faith ; but 
it is like the breakwater which renders our anchorage secure. It 
shields us from influences which make Christianity impossible. ! 



Digitized by 



Google 



94 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



most loudly the tyranny of the professor and the 
pundit. The occupant of a University chair cannot 
fail to be eminent in the branch of knowledge in 
which, he excels, and his value as a specialist is 
unquestionable. But he may be so utterly un- 
spiritual, and withal so deficient in judgment and 
common sense, that his opinion may be worth less 
than that of an intelligent peasant or a Christian 
schoolboy. The fabric of the Bible, he tells us, 
is wholly unreliable, but some of its most un- 
believable mysteries are truths Divinely revealed. 
But what claim has he to be listened to in such 
a case? The setting of the trinket is worthless, 
and most of its seeming gems are spurious, but 
here and there he indicates a diamond or a pearl. 
But the profoundest knowledge of mathematics 
or Oriental dialects does not qualify a man to 
judge of pearls and diamonds. Still less does it 
fit him to recognise spiritual truths . 1 

If the Bible has really been discredited by 
modern research, let us have the honesty to own 

1 These men declare that to them our faith in Holy Writ seems 
foolishness. But Holy Writ warns us that “the natural man 
receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God : for they are foolish- 
ness unto him ” (i Cor. ii. 14). 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



95 



the fact and the manliness to face its consequences. 
But if the Bible has not been thus discredited, if 
the results of modern research have been entirely 
in its favour , 1 then let us show a bolder frpnt in 
our stand for faith. And let faith and unbelief 
measure their distance once again. 

The Bible was written for honest hearts. It 
is addressed, moreover, to spiritual men. And 
what is the practical test of spirituality? "If any 
man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, 
let him acknowledge that the things which I write 
unto you are the commandments of the Lord ” : 2 
these words betoken, not the insolence of a priest, 
but the authority of an inspired apostle. It is 
as believers then, and in the spirit of faith, that 
we turn to the Epistles. 

1 To record the points on which the Bible was formerly attacked, 
marking off those which modern research has disposed of — this is a 
task which awaits a competent pen. And when the book is written 
it will astonish both friends and foes. 

2 i Cor. xiv. 37. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IX 



“ T N Christ’s grand and simple creed, expressed 
in His plainest words, eternal life was the 
assured inheritance of those who loved God with 
all their hearts, who loved their neighbours as 
themselves, and who walked purely, humbly, and 
beneficently while on earth. In the Christian 
sects and churches of to-day, in their recognised 
formularies and elaborate creeds, all this is repudi- 
ated as infantine and obsolete ; the official means 
and purchase-money of salvation are altogether 
changed ; eternal life is reserved for those, and for 
those only, who accept, or profess, a string of 
metaphysical propositions conceived in a scholastic 
brain and put into scholastic phraseology ” 1 
To any one who aims at having clear thoughts 
and well-based beliefs nothing is more helpful than 
1 W. R. Greg’s “ Creed of Christendom.” 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



97 



adverse criticism. Hence the value of the words 
here quoted. They may be taken, moreover, as 
expressing the opinions of a large and important 
class by whom the writer, though no longer with 
us, may still be claimed as a champion and repre- 
sentative. 

A preliminary question which presents itself is, 
Where are we to find this “grand and simple 
creed” thus commended to our acceptance? If, 
as the agnostic tells us, the Gospels are mere 
human records, what can be sillier than to appeal 
to them for the teaching of Christ ! It was a 
conceit of ancient writers to put long speeches 
into the mouths of their heroes, and the discourses 
attributed, to the Nazarene fall at once into the 
category of romance. But we are told that while 
the evangelists are not to be trusted when they 
record plain events of which they were eye- 
witnesses, like the miracles of Christ, they are 
to be believed implicitly when they profess to 
record verbatim His prolonged discourses ! If the 
Gospels be Divinely inspired, agnosticism is sheer 
folly : if they be not inspired, our faith is sheer 
superstition. 

8 

V 

& 



V 




\P*gitized by 



Google 




98 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



The next thought which these words suggest 
is that if eternal life be indeed reserved for those 
whose character and conduct are marked by 
absolute perfection, the whole human race is 
doomed. Perfect love to God and man is a 
standard which excludes even the saintliest of 
saints, and common men may at once dismiss all 
hope of reaching it. And yet the author is right. 
It is thus and only thus that eternal life can be 
inherited by any child of Adam. What concerns 
us, then, is to inquire whether possibly some other 
road to blessing may be open to us. Agnosticism 
is Greek for ignorance ; may we not hope that 
this particular agnostic is true to his name, and 
that Divine love goes far beyond what he seems 
ever to have realised or heard of? 

The statements here challenged are important 
as showing how seriously the great truth of the 
Reformation is prejudiced by the very prominence 
assigned to it in our Protestant system of theology. 
That it should loom great in our estimation is but 
natural, having regard to the fierceness of the 
struggle to which we owe its recovery. And yet 
the dogma that justification is by faith is but a 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



99 



secondary truth, and ancillary to another of wider 
range and more transcendent moment. “ For this 
cause it is on the principle of faith, that it may be 
according to Grace.” 1 Grace is the characteristic 
truth of Christianity. According to the great 
doctrinal treatise of the New Testament, we are 
“justified by grace,” “justified by faith,” “justified 
by blood ” — that is, by the death of Christ in its 
application to us, for such is the meaning of the 
sacrificial figure of which the word “ blood ” is 
the expression in the New Testament. Grace is 
the principle on which God justifies a sinner ; 
faith is the principle on which the benefit is 
received ; and the death of Christ is the ground 
on which alone all this is possible — we are 
“justified freely by His grace through the re- 
demption that is in Christ Jesus .” 2 

And they who are thus justified can urge no 
claim to the benefit on the ground either of 
merit or of promise. For if we could earn a title 
to it, there were no need of redemption ; and if 

1 Aid rovro U iriareiot; \va Kara x&P lv (Rom. iv. 16). Theology 
has no better definition of grace than that given by Aristotle ( Rhet. 
ii. 7). 

2 Rom. iii. 24. 



Digitized by Google 




IOO 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



God had pledged Himself by covenant to grant 
it, there were no room for grace. Grace is 
sovereign, but it is free. 

There are two alternative principles on which 
alone justification is now theoretically possible. 
The one is by man’s deserving it ; the other is 
through God’s unmerited favour. Let a man, 
from the cradle to the grave, be everything he 
ought to be, and do everything he ought to do ; 
let him, as our author puts it, love God with all 
his heart, and his neighbour as himself ; walking 
“ purely, humbly, and beneficently while on earth,” 
and such an one will “ inherit eternal life.” But 
all such pretensions betoken moral and spiritual 
ignorance and degradation. All men are sinners ; 
and being sinners they are absolutely dependent 
upon grace. 

Mr. Greg’s words are based on the incident in 
our Lord’s ministry which called forth the parable 
of “ The Good Samaritan.” “ A certain lawyer,” 
desirous of testing the Saviour’s doctrine, put to 
Him the question, “ Master, what shall I do to 
inherit eternal life?” He had heard no doubt 
that the great Rabbi was heretical, disparaging 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



IOI 



the law of Moses, and pointing the common folk 
to an easy bypath to life. How great then must 
have been his surprise when he got answer, 
“ What is written in the law ? How readest thou ? ” 
In response he repeated the well-known words, 
so familiar to every Jew, enjoining love to God 
and man. And surprise must have grown into 
astonishment when the Saviour added, “ Thou 
hast answered right; this do and thou shalt 
live.” The strictest legalist in the Sanhedrin 
could find no flaw in teaching such as that ! 
But the question was, how a man could inherit life, 
and to such a question, one and only one answer 
was possible. To hide his confusion the lawyer at 
once proposed a further question, “ And who is my 
neighbour ? ” thus seeking to escape upon a side 
issue, as is the way with lawyers of every age. 
And this drew from the Lord that exquisite story 
which has taken such hold upon the minds of men. 
The Greek word for “ neighbour ” is the one near> 
and the lawyer's inquiry implied that he was not 
bound to love every one with whom he came in 
contact. The high-caste Jew, if such a phrase may 
be allowed, would rather die than owe his rescue 



Digitized by 



Google 




102 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



to a Samaritan, so the Lord brings a Samaritan 
into the parable, contrasts his conduct with that of 
the Levite and the priest, and asks which of the 
three acted as neighbour to the poor wretch whom 
the robbers had left half dead upon the roadside. 

Such was the surface teaching of the parable, but 
in common with every other parable, it had a 
hidden and spiritual meaning. He had answered 
the inquiry how a perfect being could inherit life : 
He now unfolds how a ruined sinner can be saved. 
The traveller upon the road from the city of blessing 
to the city of the curse is robbed of his all, and 
left wounded almost to death, and helpless. A 
priest and a Levite pass by. Why a priest and 
a Levite ? Because He would thus impersonate the 
law and, in a word, religion. These could help a 
man who was able to help himself, but for the 
helpless sinner they can do nothing. “But a 
certain Samaritan came where he was.” Why a 
Samaritan? Because He would teach that the 
Saviour is One whom, but for his ruin and misery, 
the sinner would despise and repel. “ And ” — let 
us mark the words — “ when he saw him he had 
compassion on him, and went to him, and bound 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



103 



up his wounds, and set him on his own beast, and 
brought him to an inn, and took care of him ; ” 
and at the inn he paid the reckoning, and made 
provision for his future. 

In every detail the story has its counterpart in 
spiritual truth. It tells of a Saviour who saves ; 
who comes to a sinner where he is and as he is ; 
who binds up wounds that are deeper and more 
terrible than any brigand’s knife can inflict ; who 
brings him out of the place of danger to a place of 
security and peace, and provides for all his future 
needs. And all this without bargain or condition, 
and unconstrained by any motive save His own 
infinite compassion. 

How one longs that honest-minded men like 
the author of “The Creed of Christendom” could 
be brought at least to hear these truths and to 
know that this is the gospel of Christianity! | 
Their writings give proof that here in Christian 
England there are persons of enlightenment and 
culture whose most legitimate revolt against 
priestcraft and everything of mere religion has 
thrown them back into pagan darkness. But in 
the midst of this darkness light is shining. The 



Digitized by Google 




104 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



agnostic’s version of “Christ’s grand and simple 
creed ” would make Pharisees of some men — and 
heaven is absolutely closed to such — while it 
would relegate mankind in general to the position 
of hopeless and desperate outlawry. But Holy 
Scripture testifies that “ Christ died for the 
ungodly ,” and that the man who believes in Him 
is justified. 

And believing in Him has nothing in common 
with “accepting a string of metaphysical pro- 
positions. ,, It means bowing to the Divine 
judgment upon sin, and accepting Christ as 
Saviour and Lord. Distrust w’as the turning- 
point in the creature’s fall, for the overt act 
of sin was but the fruit of unbelief. How 
natural, then, that trust should be the turning- 
point in his recovery ! There was a time in 
England when the wearing of a certain flower 
was the recognised avowal of loyalty or treason. 
And this was a mere outward act which might be 
insincere, whereas a man’s beliefs are part and 
parcel of himself. The tragedy of Calvary has 
come to be regarded as a mere incident in 
history, natural in the circumstances, and fitted to 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



105 



emphasise and enhance the dignity of man. God 
points to it as the worlds “ crisis,” an event of such 
stupendous moment that, in view of it, indifference 
is impossible. He who died there does not seek 0 
either our pity or our patronage He claims our 
faith .. It is a question of personal loyalty to 
Himself. 

But this chapter is a digression. Let us turn to 
the teaching of the Epistle to the Romans. 



Digitized by Google 




CHAPTER X 



T)OSTSCRIPTS are proverbially important, 
and apostolic postscripts are no exception 
to the rule. But the final postscript to St. Paul’s 
Epistle to the Romans has been treated with 
strange neglect by theologians. Witness the 
extraordinary carelessness with which it has 
been translated even by the Revisers of 1 88 1 ! 
With his own hand it was, no doubt, that, after 
his secretary, Tertius, had laid down the pen, the 
apostle added the pregnant words which end the 
Epistle : “ Now to Him that is able to stablish 

you according to my gospel even the preaching 
of Jesus Christ according to [the] revelation of a 
mystery which hath been kept in silence through 
times eternal, but now is manifested and by 

106 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



107 



prophetic scriptures according to the command- 
ment of the Eternal God is made known unto all 
the nations unto obedience of faith — to the only | 
wise God through Jesus Christ be the glory for 
ever. ,, 1 

“ My Gospel.” The words, three times repeated 
by St. Paul, 2 are no mere conventional expression. 
They are explained in several of his Epistles, 3 and 
with peculiar definiteness in his letter to the Gala- 
tians. He there declares in explicit and emphatic 
terms that the gospel which he preached among the 
Gentiles was the subject of a special revelation 
peculiar to himself. Not only was he not taught ^ 
it by those who were apostles before him, but he it 
was who, by Divine command, communicated it to 
“ the twelve ” ; and this was not until his second visit 

1 Our English versions have distorted the passage, first by a punc- 
tuation (I have followed Dean Alford’s), which makes the mystery a 
characteristic of the power to stablish us, whereas it characterises 
the preaching by which we are stablished ; and secondly, by their 
rendering of the words did re ypcufnov Trpo<fii)TiKibv {cf. Matt, 
xxvi. 56, “ the scriptures of the prophets”). It claims notice also 
that both “revelation ” and “ mystery ” are anarthrous ; but while the 
English idiom seems to require the article before the former word, 
its insertion before “mystery” is not only unnecessary, but mis- 
leading. 

2 Rom. ii. 16, xvi. 25 ; 2 Tim. ii. 8. 

3 See, e.g., Eph. iii. ; Col. i. 25, 26. 



Digitized by Google 




io8 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



to Jerusalem, seventeen years after his conversion. 1 
It is certain, therefore, that his testimony was essen- 
tially distinct in character and scope from anything 
we shall find in the ministry of the other apostles, 
as recorded in the Acts. And this, he declares, 
they themselves acknowledged. “They saw,” he 
says, “ that the gospel of the uncircumcision was 
committed unto me, as the gospel of the circum- 
cision was unto Peter.” 2 The latter was a promise 
according to the Scriptures of the prophets : the 
former, a proclamation according to the revealing 
of a mystery kept secret from eternity, but now 
manifested in this Christian dispensation, and by 
prophetic Scriptures made known to all nations. 
What, then, were those writings? What the 
mystery which was thus revealed? 

The rendering of the passage in our English 
versions is a compromise between translation and 
exegesis ; and that the exposition thus suggested 
is erroneous is clear from the fact that it makes 
the apostle’s statement inconsistent to the verge of 
absurdity. If it be by the writings of the Hebrew 
prophets that the gospel is made known to all the 
1 Gal. i. n-ii. 12. 2 Ibid. ii. 7. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



109 



nations, it certainly was not a mystery kept secret 
through all the ages ! The words “ by prophetic 
writings ” refer, of course, to the Scriptures of the 
New Testament; and as the gospel thus made 
known was entrusted, not even to the other 
apostles, but only to “ the apostle of the Gentiles,” 
it is again, of course, to the Epistles of Paul that 
we must 'turn to seek for it. Do these Epistles, 
then, contain any great characteristic truth or truths 
which cannot be found in the earlier Scriptures ? ^ 

Our English word “ mystery ” means something 
which is either incomprehensible or unknown ; but 
this is not the significance of the Greek musterion . l 
In its primary meaning in classical and Biblical 
Greek it is simply a secret ; and a secret when once 1 
disclosed may be understood by any one. A patent 
lock is a “ mystery.” It is as easily opened as any 
other, provided we have the proper key, but without 
the key it cannot be opened at all. The mysteries 
of the New Testament are Divine truths which till 
then had been “kept in silence”; truths which had 
not been revealed in the earlier Scriptures, and 
which, until revealed, could not be known. Once. 

1 See Appendix, Note V. 



Digitized by Google 



I IO 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



1 



and once only, the word was used by the Lord 
Himself, as recorded in the three first Gospels, and 
it occurs four times in the Apocalypse. But with 
these exceptions it is found only in St. Paul's 
Epistles, where it occurs no fewer than twenty 
times. 

In some of these passages the word is used in a 
secondary sense. In others, definite secrets are 
revealed. And notably we find the following : — 

The mystery of Lawlessness, culminating in the 
revelation of the Lawless One . 1 

The mystery that at the coming of the Lord some 
of His people will pass to heaven, as Elijah did, 
“ with death untasted and the grave unknown .” 2 

The mystery that in the present dispensation 
believers are united to Christ in a special relation- 
ship as members of a body of which He Himself is 
the head.3 

Here, then, we have specific “mysteries” respect- 
ing which the earlier Scriptures are silent; and it 
may be added that, though now revealed, they are 



1 2 Thess. ii. 7, 8. Within the Church, of course. Lawlessness 
in the world is as old as sin. 

2 i Cor. xv. 51. 3 Eph. iii. 4,6, v. 30, 32 ; 1 Cor. xii. 12, 13, &c. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



in 



still unknown to the majority of Christians. But | 
these are truths essentially for the believe r, whereas 
the “ mystery ” of the apostle's postscript is em- 
phatically a truth for ALL — a truth to be “made 
known to all the nations for the obedience of 
faith." 

The apostle's statement, however, assumes that 
his words would be understood by those to whom 
they were addressed. Therefore, as he had never 
personally visited Rome, we may confidently turn 
to the Epistle itself to find within it the truth 
referred to. 

First, then, it is a mystery truth — a truth which 
till then had been “kept in silence.” Secondly, it is 
a truth of universal scope and application. And 
thirdly, it is a truth to be found in the Epistle to 
the Romans. With these clews to guide us there 
can be no difficulty in fixing upon the truth which 
is here in question ; for one, and only one, will 
satisfy these requirements. 

In common with some other great truths of the 
Christian faith Reconciliation has received but scant 
notice from theologians. Many a page might be 
filled w r ith quotations from standard books which 



Digitized by Google 




1 12 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



either misrepresent or deny it But all attempts to 
oust it from our creeds rest, as Archbishop Trench 
declares, “on a foregone determination to get rid 
of the reality of God’s anger against sin.” 1 Sin not 
merely alienated man from God, it alienated God 
from man. A just and holy God could not but 
regard him as an enemy. But “ while we were 
enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of 
His Son.” And “through our Lord Jesus Christ” 
they who believe “have now received the recon- 
ciliation.” 2 “All things are of God who reconciled 
us to Himself through Christ, and gave unto us the 
ministry of the reconciliation, to wit, that God was 
in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself, not 
reckoning unto them their trespasses, and having 
committed unto us the word of the reconciliation. 
We are ambassadors, therefore, on behalf of Christ,” 
the apostle adds, “ as though God were entreating 
by us, we beseech men on behalf of Christ, ‘ be ye 
reconciled to God ’”3 — an appeal to the sinner, not, 

1 “Synonyms,” Part II. p. 123. 2 Rom. v. 10, 11. 

3 2 Cor. v. 18-20. This passage is inseparably associated in my 
mind with an incident once narrated to me by the late Sir Robert 
Lush. When Serjeant Wilkins returned to the Law Courts after an 
illness which practically ended his career, Mr. Lush (as he then was 



Digitized by Le 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



"3 



as too commonly represented, to forgive his God, | 
but to come within the unsought benefit which 
God in His infinite grace has accomplished. For 
(the apostle further adds) “Him who knew no sin 
He made to be sin on our behalf, that we might 
become the righteousness of God in Him.” 1 

Words could not be simpler, and yet, as already 
noticed, the truth so plainly taught is in many 
quarters perverted or denied. Just as in our day 
there are doctrinaire philanthropists who talk of 
crime as though it were nothing but a natural eccen- 
tricity of weak natures, so there are theologians who 



delight in such representations of sin that if provi- 
sion had not been made for it in the Divine economy 



f 



the omission would be entirely to the discredit of 



saw him sitting with his face in his hands, and he noticed that tears 
were falling from between his fingers. The Serjeant was not of his 
acquaintance, but when he saw him 'hurriedly leave the court, he 
followed him, and delicately referring to what he had seen, he asked 
if he was in any trouble in which he could be of service to him. The 
Serjeant gratefully acknowledged his kindness, but explained his 
seeming distress by the fact that the words above quoted, which he 
had been reading that morning, had come back to his mind as he sat 
in court, and he could not restrain his emotion. The incident will be 
appreciated by those who know the sort of man he was. Suffice it 
to say it had not been his habit to read the Bible. But how many 
such there are who turn to it in times of sickness or trouble ! 

1 Cor. v. 18-21. 

9 



Digitized by Google 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



1 14 

the Deity. Others, again, so fritter away the great 
truths of Divine love to the world and the recon- 
ciliation of the world to God through Christ, that 
the sovereignty of God degenerates into mere 
favouritism, and the death of Christ is no more 
than a means by which the favoured few can attain 
the blessing. 

This great truth of Reconciliation will be sought 
in vain in the Old Testament Scriptures. The 
revelation of it, indeed, was impossible so long as 
the Jew held the position which he forfeited by 
rejecting the Messiah. Reading the Gospel of 
John in the light of the Epistles we can discern it 
in the teaching of our Lord ; but without that 
light no one would dare to formulate it. To the 
Jew, indeed, the doctrine must have been astound- 
ing, and even among Christians it is received with 
hesitation and reserve. But the difficulties which 
beset the exposition of the fifth chapter of Romans 
relate only to the argument. The doctrine it teaches 
is unequivocally clear. “ As through one trespass 
[the result was] unto all men to condemnation ; 
even so through one act of righteousness [the result 
was] unto all men to justification of life.” If words 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



ii5 



have any meaning this declares that the death of 
Christ had effects as widespread and universal as the 
sin of Adam. If that sin “brought death into the 
world, and all our woe,” so the great dikaidma 
brought justification of life to all men in so far as 
the Eden trespass brought condemnation to them. 

But the work of Christ goes infinitely further 
than this. The Eden trespass ushered in the reign 
of sin. “ Sin reigned unto death.” “ The wages of 
sin is death,” and sin claimed the very throne of 
God as an agency for enforcing its just demands. 
But Calvary has dethroned sin, and grace now 
reigns supreme. And this not at the expense of 
righteousness, but through righteousness. And as 
sin reigned unto death, so grace now reigns unto 
eternal life. Or, getting behind the magnificent 
imagery of the Epistle, we grasp the amazing truth 
that the Divine attitude toward men is one of uni- 
versal beneficence. It is not that the Gentile has 
attained to the special position of privilege from 
which the Jew has fallen, for apart from “the 
household of faith” there is no favoured people 
now. “There is no distinction between Jew and 
Greek, for the same Lord is Lord of all, and is 



Digitized by Google 




ii6 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



rich unto all that call upon Him ; for whosoever 
shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be 
saved .” 1 Eternal life is thus brought within reach 
of every human being to whom this testimony 
• comes . 2 How, then, is it possible that so few 
pMt receive the benefit? The answer to this question 
claims a chapter to itself. 

1 Rom. x. 12 (R.V.). 

2 Such a statement will be resented by that school of religious 

thought which boasts as its founder one of the greatest of the 
Church’s teachers. But let us appeal from the disciples to their 
master. Here is Calvin’s commentary upon the verse above quoted 
(Rom. v. 1 8). “ He makes this favour common to all because it is 

propounded to all, and not because it is in reality extended to 
all ; for though Christ suffered for the sins of the whole world, and 

[ is offered through God’s benignity indiscriminately to all, yet all 
do not receive Him.” 

And the following extract from his commentary on the third 
chapter of the Gospel of St. John is no less apposite. Referring 
to the sixteenth verse he says : ‘ ‘ Christ employed the universal term 
whosoever both to invite indiscriminately all to partake of life, and 
to cut off every excuse from unbelievers. Such is the import of the 
term world. Though there is nothing in the world that is worthy of 
God’s favour, yet He shows Himself to be reconciled to the whole 
world when He invites all men without exception to the faith of 
Christ, which is nothing else than an entrance into life.” 

And if anyone ask, How, then, is Judgment possible? the answer 
is that Judgment is based upon this very truth. See c. xii. post. 



Digitized by Google 




CHAPTER XI 



r I A HE devil of Christendom is a myth. Just as 
^ human fancy, working on a basis of fact and 
truth, has impersonated an object for its worship, 
so by a like process it has created a scapegoat to 
account for the crimes and vices of humanity. A 
mythical Jesus is the Buddha of Christendom ; a 
mythical Satan is its bogey. In the one case as 
in the other a gulf separates the myth from the 
reality. 

The Satan of Christian mythology is a monster 

of wickedness, the instigator to every crime of 

exceptional brutality or loathsome lust. The Satan 

of Scripture is the awful being who dared to offer 

his patronage to our Divine Lord. When a man is 

led into evil courses “ he is drawn away by his own 

117 



Digitized by Google 




ii8 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



lust.” 1 The human heart, our Lord Himself de- 
clares, is the vile spring from which immoralities 
and crimes proceed. 2 Using the word “ immoral ” 
in its narrow, popular sense, there is no basis for 
the belief that Satan ever provokes to an immoral 
act. Indeed, if we leave out of account his incite- 
ments aimed against Christ personally, the solitary 
instance of Ananias and Sapphira alone affords a 
pretext for asserting that he ever tempted any 
one to do anything which human judgment would 
condemn. 3 

This statement may seem startling, but it is true, 
and its truth can be established. Of the unseen 
world we know absolutely nothing beyond what 
Scripture reveals : to the Scriptures, therefore, we 
must turn. And here the Old Testament is 
eloquent by reason of its silence. If the popular 
belief were well founded, is it possible that from 
Genesis to Malachi not a word could be found in 
support of it? In three passages only is Satan 
mentioned. The first describes the fall of man, and 
there the entire aim of the tempter was to alienate 

1 James i. 14 2 Mark vii. 21. 

3 See Appendix, Note VI. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



1 19 



the creature from God. In the r6le of philan- 
thropist he appeared to our first parents, and sowed 
in their hearts the seeds of distrust. 1 The next 
passage describes his assaults on Job, and here 
again his only aim was to lead the patriarch 
to doubt the Divine goodness. 2 And the third 
narrates that mysterious incident in which he 
sought to hinder the high priest Joshua in the 
discharge of his sacred office. 3 

When we turn to the New Testament we must 
avoid the popular error of confounding Satan with 
the angels that “ kept not their own principality, 
but left their own habitation.” 4 These are in 
bonds, awaiting “ the judgment of the great day.” 
They have no part in the course of human affairs. 
Demons, again, are beings of a wholly different 
order. It is assumed that they are subordinate to 

1 Gen. ii. 2 Job i. ; ii. 

3 Zech. iii. 1, 2. In 1 Chron. xxi. i and Psa. cix. 6, the word 
rendered Satan in A.V. is merely an adversary. And I cannot 
avail myself of Isa. xiv. 12, &c., and Ezek. xxviii. 14, &c., much as 
they would help me, because there is no way of ascertaining certainly 
whether Satan is there intended. I have no doubt of it myself. ; 
The word Devil does not occur in the Old Testament. In the four 
places where “Devils” is used in A.V. the R.V. adopts other 
words. 

4 Jude 6 ; 2 Pet. ii. 4. 



Digitized by 



Google 




120 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



the devil, and as some of them are expressly- 
called “ unclean spirits,” uncleanness is attri- 
buted to Satan. But the assumption is based 
only upon Jewish beliefs, and, even if a true 
one, the inference is forced. A ruler may 
have vicious subjects and yet not himself be 
vicious ! 1 

But are not sins described as “ the works of the 
devil ” ? And what of the words, “ He that doeth sin 
is of the devil”? Will the objector consider the 
definition of sin to which this refers — one of the 
only definitions in the Bible ? “ Sin is lawlessness .” 2 
The possession of an independent will is man’s 
proud but perilous boast. His duty and safety 
and happiness alike demand that this will shall 
be subordinated to the will of God, and all revolt 
against the Divine will is sin. Lawlessness is its 

1 In Matt. xii. 24-27, our Lord neither adopted nor rejected the 
Jewish belief. How grotesque is the suggestion that at such a time 
He should have discoursed to them on demonology ! Passing the 
subject by, He turned their taunt back upon themselves by 
the words, “If I by Beelzebub cast out demons, by whom do 
your sons cast them out?” Unless the phenomena described by 
spiritualists may be explained by delusions or fraud, they must be 
attributed to demons ; and there seems strong reason to believe 
that some men are possessed by “ unclean ” demons. 

2 1 John iii. 4 (R.V.). 



Digitized by Google 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



12 



essence ; the element of immorality is entirely ' 
accidental. 

And this explains the apostolic comment upon 
the precept “ Be angry and sin not.” 1 Anger may 
in itself be right. But if cherished it is apt to 
degenerate into vindictiveness ; and thus what in 
its inception may betoken fellowship with God — 
for “ God is angry every day ” 2 — may lead to 
thoughts and even acts which are only evil. There- 
fore the apostle adds, “ Let not the sun go down 
upon your wrath, neither give occasion to the 
devil.” The Satan myth leads men to read this 
as though it were no more than a warning against 
homicidal violence. But the closing passage of 
this same Epistle 3 gives proof that the apostle’s 
theology of Satanic temptations relates to a far 
different sphere. The normal conflict of the Chris- ^ 
tian life begins where the struggle with “ flesh 
and blood ” has ceased. It is in the spiritual 
sphere, and not in the domain of morals, that the 
panoply of God is needed. The Pharisee or the 

1 Eph. iv. 26. The words are quoted verbatim from Psa. iv. 4 
(LXX). 

2 Psa. vii. 11. 3 Eph. vi. 10-20. 



Digitized by Google 




122 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



Buddhist can boast as high a standard of morality 
as the Christian. Their motives may be lower, but 
the outward results are the same. When some 
man of repute is betrayed into acts of shame the 
devil would be held accountable for his fall in any 
f ecclesiastical court. But not at the Old Bailey, 
where prejudice avails nothing, and proof must be 
full and clear. No one may assert that Satan 
might not stoop to such means to attain his ends, 
but we may aver that no “ previous conviction ” 
is recorded to his prejudice. 

“ But,” the objector will indignantly demand, 
“did not our Lord Himself denounce him as a 
liar and a murderer?” Yes truly, such were his 
words to the Pharisees who were plotting His 
death. But what is their significance? Let us 
consider them with open minds, for the Satan 
myth has so obscured their meaning that the 
commentaries will not help us. To the Jews’ vain 
boast of their descent from Abraham, the Lord 
replied that the patriarch’s children would walk in 
their father’s ways ; but as for them, they sought 
to kill Him because he had spoken to them God- 
( given truth. They then fell back upon that fig- 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



123 



ment of the apostate, the fatherhood of God, thus ( 
bringing on themselves the scathing words, “ Ye 
are of your father the devil, and the desires of 
your father it is your will to do. He was a 
murderer from the beginning and has not stood 
in the truth because truth is not in him. When 
he speaketh THE lie he speaketh of his own, 
for he is a liar and the father of IT.” 1 These, 
remember, are not words of vulgar invective. 
They are the words of Christ Himself to men of 
character and repute, honourable and earnest men 
who, under their responsibilities as the religious 
leaders of the people, deplored His teaching as 
pestilent and profane. Such language addressed 
by such lips to such men is awful in its solemnity ; 
but what does it mean? 

The devil was “ a murderer from the beginning.” 
The beginning of what? Not of his own ex- 
istence, surely, for he was created in perfection 
and beauty. Nor yet of the Eden paradise, for 
Satan had dragged down others in his ruin long 
before our earth became the home of man. His 
being a murderer connects itself immediately with 
1 John viii. 44. See Appendix, Note VII. 



Digitized by Google 




124 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



THE truth which he has refused and THE lie of 
which he is the father. As we listen to these 
solemn and mysterious words of our Divine Lord 
we are accorded a glimpse into a past eternity 
when the great mystery of God was first made 
known to “ principalities and powers,” the great 
intelligences of the heavenly world . 1 Greatest 
of them all was the being whom now we know as 
Satan, and the promulgation of the purpose of 
the ages disclosed to him the fact that a First-born 
was yet to be revealed who was “ in all things to 
have the pre-eminence.” 

Science has poured contempt upon the old 
belief that man is the centre of the universe. 

! And yet the old belief was right. But He who 
claims this transcendent dignity is not the man 
of Eden — “ vain insect of an hour ! ” — but the 
Man who is “ the Lord from Heaven.” And He 



1 This is probably the explanation of the “ coincidences ” between 
Christianity and some of the old religions of the world. I do not 
allude to Buddhism, for its seeming “coincidences” admit of a 
much more prosaic explanation (see, e.g ., Professor Kellogg’s work 
referred to at p. 68 ante , note) but to the cult of Tammuz and 
ancient Babylon. Scripture warns us that in the future Satan will 
travesty the Divine mysteries ; is it strange if he has done so in the 
past? 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



125 



it is who is the object of the devil’s hate. In 
compassing the fall of Adam he may perchance 
have imagined that he was the promised first-born. 
But it was not till the Temptation of Christ Him- 
self that Satan and his lie were at last revealed. 
Not one person in a thousand of those who read 
the record of it attempts to realise its significance. 
How could the Satan of Christendom dare to 
stand before the Lord of Glory ! And how could 
the suggestions of such a loathsome monster be 
anything but hateful and repulsive ? Suppose the 
biographer of some noble-minded and holy woman 
sought to emphasise the purity of her mind and 
the steadfastness of her character by recording 
that she was once closeted with a man well known 
to her as a coarse and shameless libertine, and 
yet passed through the ordeal unscathed ! No less 
preposterous does the narrative of the temptation 
appear if we read it in the false light of the 
Satan myth. 1 

The Satan of Scripture is a being who claimed 
to meet our Lord on more than equal terms. 
Having “led Him up” and given Him that 

1 See Appendix, Note VI. 



Digitized by Google 




126 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



mysterious vision of earthly sovereignty, “ the 
devil said unto Him,” we read, “To Thee will 
I give all this authority and the glory of them; 
[ for it hath been delivered unto me, and to whom- 
soever I will I give it. If thou therefore wilt 
worship before me it shall all be thine.” 

Is this no more than the raving of irresponsible 
f madness or impious profanity? It is the bold 
assertion of a disputed right. Satan claims to 
be the First-born, the rightful heir of creation, 
the true Messiah, and as such he claims the 
worship of mankind. Men dream of a devil, 
horned and hoofed — a hideous and obscene 
monster — who haunts the squalid slums and 
gilded vice-dens of our cities, and tempts the 
depraved to acts of atrocity or shame. But, 
according to Holy Writ, he “fashions himself 
into an angel of light,” and “ his ministers fashion 
themselves as ministers of righteousness.” 1 Do 
“ ministers of righteousness” corrupt men’s morals 
or incite them to commit outrages ? 

And this prepares the way for the further 
statement that it is the religion of the world 

1 2 Cor. xi. 14. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



127 



which he controls, and not its vices and its crimes. | 
“ The god of this world ” is his awful title — a title 
Divinely conceded to the Evil One, not because 
the Supreme has delegated His sovereignty, but 
because the world accords him its homage. It 
is in the sphere of religion, then, that the influence 
of the Tempter is to be sought — not in the 
records of our criminal courts, not in the pages 
of obscene novels, but in the teaching of false 
theologies. 

The lie of which he is the father is the denial 
of the Christ of God, the Christ of Calvary, the 
only mediator between God and men, the pro- 
pitiation for the world’s sins — the “ mercy-seat ” 1 
where an outcast sinner , can meet a holy God 
and find pardon and peace. But “ the god of this 
world hath blinded the minds of the unbelieving 
that the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, 
who is the image of God, should not dawn upon 
them.” 2 Hence it is that men turn to the Church, 



1 In 1 John ii. 2, and iv. io He is called the tXaff/tof. In 
Rom. iii. 25 He is called the ’iXaarripiov (mercy-seat). The word 
occurs but once again in the New Testament, i. e . , Heb. ix. 5. 

2 2 Cor. iv. 4 (R.Vr). 



Digitized by Google 



128 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



to religion, to morality, to “the Sermon on the 
Mount” — making the Lord Himself minister to 
their self-righteousness and pride — in a word, to 
anything and everything rather than to the Cross 
of Christ 

What led to the discovery of the planet 
Neptune was the apparent disturbance from some 
unknown cause in the movements of other planets. 
And have we not reason to search for a “ Nep- 
tune” in the spiritual sphere? Is it not clear 
that there is some sinister influence in operation 
here ? How else can it be explained that in 
the full light of our advanced civilisation, even 
persons of the highest intelligence and culture are 
gulled by the tricks and superstitions which form 
the stock-in-trade of priestcraft ? 

But “the lie” has other phases. The mind of 
the Tempter is disclosed no less in some of our 
most popular books of piety. Eternal judgment 
and a hell for the impenitent, redemption by blood, 
and the need of salvation through the death of the 
great Sin-bearer — these and kindred doctrines are 
rejected as survivals of a dark and credulous age : 
it is for man to work out his owrr destiny, and to 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



129 



raise himself to the Divine ideal. And all this is 
prefaced and made plausible by boldly insinuating 
that plain words Divinely spoken are either mis- 
understood or spurious. A new gospel some men 
call this : it is the oldest gospel known. In every 
point it reminds us of the old, old words : “ Hath 
God said ? ” “ Ye shall not surely die : ” “Ye shall 
be as gods knowing good and evil.” The “Jesus ” 
of this theology bears a sinister resemblance to 
the great philanthropist of Eden ! In the name 
of that “ other Jesus ” 1 the Christ of God would be 
again rejected if He returned to earth to-day. 

During His ministry on earth the Lord’s acts and 
words to the fallen and depraved led to His being 
branded as the friend of the dishonest and the im- 
moral. And why? This question is best answered 
by another : Did He not come to seek and to save 
the lost? How then could He drive them from 
His presence ? A strange Saviour such would be ! 
Sin He could not tolerate, but for sinners His love 
and pity were infinite. And His detractors mis- 
took sympathy with sinners for sympathy with sin. 
But when men refused to own that they were lost, 

1 2 Cor. xi. 4. 

IO 



Digitized by Google 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



130 

and separated themselves from Him by an impass- 
able barrier of religion and morality, infinite love 
was powerless. Omnipotence itself was baffled ! 
And He who had wept in silence in presence of 
human sorrow gave way to unrestrained outbursts 
of grief as He contemplated their doom. 1 

On yet another occasion He exclaimed, “ How 
often would I have gathered thy children together 
as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, and 
ye would not !' 2 The hand stretched out to save 
them they thrust from them with obl/quy. And 
what wonder ! Men of blameless morality, of the 
deepest piety, of intense devotion to religion — 
men looked up to and respected by the people, 
who acknowledged them as leaders, were told 
that the degraded and depraved had better hopes 
of heaven than themselves. His teaching was a 
public scandal ; His mission was an insult to them. 
And all truth and decency were outraged when 
He openly called them “ children of hell,” and 
told them they had the devil for their father ! 

1 In John xi. 35 the word used betokens silent tears. The word 
in Luke xix. 41 means to lament with every outward expression of 
grief. 

2 Luke xiii. 34. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 131 

When a malignant tumour is eating at the 
vitals the tenderness of the physician is useless ; 
the surgeon’s knife must reach the mischief, let 
the risk be what it may. And surely if He 
who was so gracious, so “ meek and lowly in 
heart,” spoke such scathing words as these, it was 
because no tenderer treatment could avail. It was 
because their own case was desperate, and their 
influence was disastrous. And such men must 
have successors and representatives on earth 
to-day. Who are they, then, and where? Let 
the thoughtful reader work out the answer for 
himself. But let him keep in view the factors of 
the problem. It was not the “ publicans and 
harlots ” who were branded thus as hell-begotten. 
Alas for human nature, no devil was needed to 
account for the sins of such ! But to the religious 
Jews it was that these awful words were spoken. 
And why ? Because the Satan cult is to be sought ^ 
for, not in pagan orgies, but in the acceptance of 
the Eden gospel, and the pursuit of religious 
systems, which honour man and dishonour Christ. 

Here, then, is the answer to the question pro- 
pounded at the close of the preceding chapter. 



Digitized by Google 




CHAPTER XII 



I ^ VERYBODY knows the little girl who, 
* — ' having heard her father complain that 
his watch needed cleaning, stole away to clean 
it in a basin of soap-suds ! The story is but a 
grotesquely exaggerated instance of what we all 
suffer from — ignorant zeal, unintelligent desire 
to please. No one but a brute would vent his 
anger on his baby, when, with eyes sparkling and 
cheeks flushed at the thought of having done a 
kind and useful service, she brings him his ruined 
watch. But if this were done by one who ought 
to have known better, no such restraint would be 
called for. To this every one will assent ; but no 
one seems to take account of similar considerations 

in our relations with the Deity. 

132 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



133 



“The chief end of man is to glorify and enjoy j| 
himself for ever/’ Such is the present-day reading 
of the first great thesis in the catechism of the 
Westminster Divines . 1 And to attain this end 
man wants a religion and a god, just as a prince 
needs a private chaplain. But a chaplain should 
know his place, and not intrude where his presence 
would be embarrassing. And so with God. It is 
intolerable that He should claim to decide in what 
way alone we can please Him. In leading moral 
and religious lives we “ render to God the things 
that are God’s.” And we must not forget what is 
due to ourselves. But “ the chief end of man is to 
glorify God.” This is what the Westminster 
Divines really wrote ; but that was long ago, and 
the Westminster Divines were ignorant, and knew 
nothing of “ the gospel of humanity ” ! 

In a word, God claims our homage, and we offer 
Him our patronage. He claims the undivided 
devotion of our life, and we offer Him religion and 



1 “The Scotch Catechism” it is commonly called, as though 1 
Westminster were somewhere north of the Tweed ! This cate- I 
chism was compiled by pious and learned “ Dons” of Cambridge 
University, and adopted by “an assembly of learned and godly 
divines” convened in Westminster Abbey. 



Digitized by Google 




134 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



morality. But God does not want our patronage ; 
neither does He want either our morality or our 
religion. “ Monstrous ! ” the reader will exclaim, 
preparing to throw down the volume. “Is it a 
matter of indifference whether we are moral and 
religious, or not?” By no means a matter of 
indifference as regards ourselves: not even as to 
our life on earth, to say nothing of the judgment 
| to come. But of supreme indifference to God. 
The man who struts about, inflated by the conceit 
begotten of humanity gospels, is like the Jew who 
supposed he was doing the Most High a benefit 
when he piled “the fat of fed beasts” 1 upon His 
altar — the altar of the “ God who made the world 
and all things that are therein.” 

Strange though it may seem, God has a purpose 
and a will ; and He is so unreasonable as to require 
the recognition of that purpose, and compliance 
with that will. But these are matters of revela- 
tion ; and, therefore, here once again the ways 
divide. Human religion in every phase of it is of 
interest to men, and books about it will be read, 

| noticed, and discussed. But Christianity is a 

1 Isa. i. II. 



Digitized by Google 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



135 



Divine revelation, and, therefore, to use a popular 
vulgarism, it is “ boycotted.” But in the great 
truths of Christianity, now so little known, is to 
be found the only true philosophy, the only true 
solution of the deeper problems of life, which so 
perplex and grieve us. 

God’s judgments are righteous. And the prin- 
ciples which govern them are clearly stated : He 
“ will render to every man according to his deeds : 
to them who, by patient continuance in well-doing, 
seek for glory and honour and immortality, 
eternal life.” 1 Who will question the equity of 
this ? The story is told of Bishop Wilberforce, 
that a Hampshire railway porter, a hedge theolo- 
gian of local fame, tried to pose him with the 
question, “ What is the way to heaven ? ” “ The 

way to heaven ? ” said the bishop, as the train in 
which he was seated moved out of the station — 
“ turn to the right , and keep straight on ! ” But 
what is the right? This is the vital question. 
And this every man claims to settle for himself. 
Whatever reason and conscience declare to be 
right is right — this is a maxim almost universally 
1 Rom. ii. 6, 7. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



136 

accepted. And in the absence of a revelation, it 
is, within certain limits, practically true. But when 
the Supreme makes known His will, compliance 
with that will becomes the test of well-doing. 

In the Mosaic economy, religion and morality 
had prominence. And in the cult of Christendom, 
which, in one aspect of it, is but a corrupted form 
of Judaism, disguised by Christian phraseology, 
religion and morality are everything. But the 
era of religion and morality is past. These were 
like guides which were followed in the darkness 
till the goal was reached to which they led. The 
Mosaic economy was a state of tutelage which 
ended with the coming of Christ. To set up 
morality and religion now is to bring ourselves 
within the denunciation of the words which follow 
in the passage quoted : “ But unto them that are 
contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey 
unrighteousness, indignation and wrath.” Hence 
the Lord’s reply to the question, “ What shall we 
do that we might work the works of God?” 
“ This,” He replied, “ is the work of God, that ye 
believe on Him whom He hath sent.” 1 “ Then a 

1 John vi. 28, 29. 



Digitized by Google 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



137 



man may be as immoral as he likes, provided only 
he ‘ believes/ as you call it.” Such is the rejoinder 
of the contentious. Such was the criticism of those 
who heard His words. Reason told them it was 
wrong ; and clinging to their morality and religion, 
instead of believing in “the Sent One,” they 
crucified Him. 

To set up an altar “ to an unknown God ” is the 
highest possible attainment of natural religion. 
But as St. Paul said at Athens , 1 even the light of 
nature should teach men that God does not want 
our service or our patronage “as though He needed 
anything.” He wished men to seek Him, even 
though they had need to grope for Him blindly 
and in darkness — “to feel after Him and find 
Him.” And He could give them blessing in 
spite of ignorance, for “ He is a rewarder of dili- 
gent seekers.” If they but “turned to the right 
and kept straight on,” He could, to use the 
apostle’s words, “ wink at the ignorance.” “ But 
now,” he goes on to say, “He commandeth all 
men everywhere to repent.” And the change 
depends on this, that God has revealed Himself 

1 Acts xvii. 22-31. 



Digitized by Google 




138 THE SILENCE OF GOD 

in Christ, and therefore ignorance of His will is 
sin that shuts men up to judgment. A new era 
has dawned upon the world. “ The Word was 
made flesh and dwelt among us.” The darkness 
is past, the true light is shining. To turn now to 
conscience or to law — to religion and morality — 
is to act like men who, with the sun in the zenith, 
keep shutters barred and curtains drawn. The 
principle on which God deals with men is the 
same, but the measure of man's responsibility is 
entirely changed. Such was the great truth so 
plainly stated by our Divine Lord in His words to 
Nicodemus. This, He declared, was the condem- 
nation, not that men’s deeds were evil — though for 
these there shall be wrath in the day of wrath — 
but that, because their deeds were evil, they had 
brought upon themselves a still direr doom : light 
had come into the world, but they turned from it 
and loved the darkness. 

Men cannot and will not believe that the great 
controversy between them and God is altogether 
about Christ. To most men, indeed, the very 
statement seems to savour of mysticism. The 
death of Christ is one of the commonplaces of the 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



139 



philosophy, as well as of the theology, of Christen- 
dom. Men boast of it as the highest tribute to 
human worth. But God’s estimate of it is vastly 
different. “ The Son of God has died by the p 
hands of men ! This astounding fact is the 
moral centre of all things. A bygone eternity 
knew no other future ; an eternity to come shall 
know no other past. That death was the world’s 
crisis. For long ages, despite conscience outraged, 
the light of nature quenched, law broken, promises 
despised, and prophets cast out and slain, the world 
had been on terms with God. But now a tremen- 
dous change ensued. Once for all the world had 
taken sides. In the midst stood that cross in its 
lonely majesty: God on one side with averted 
face ; on the other Satan, exulting in his triumph. 
And the world took sides with Satan.” 1 

And in presence of that cross God calls upon 
every one to whom the record comes to declare 
himself on the one side or the other. But 
men struggle to evade the issue. Many, of 
course, ignore it altogether in a selfish or a vicious 
life ; but not a few attempt a compromise by 

1 “ The Gospel and its Ministry,” p. 12. 



Digitized by Google 




140 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



turning to religion. But so far as this supreme 
question is concerned the result is the same for 
all. What the end will be of those who never 
heard of Christ we know not. But there is neither 
reserve nor mystery in Scripture as to what the 
portion will be of those who “ obey the gospel ” 
and of those who reject it. Upon that choice 
depends the eternal destiny of each. Hence the 
virulence with which the Bible is attacked ; for if 
Christ be beyond our reach our responsibility is 
at an end. Some there are indeed who affect 
personal devotion to Himself though they dis- 
parage or despise the Scriptures. But every 
thoughtful person recognises that it is only 
through the record that we can reach the person, 
that it is only through the written Word that 
we can reach the Living Word. Hence His 
declaration : “ He that rejecteth Me, and receiveth 
not My words, hath one that judgeth him : the 
word that I have spoken, the same shall judge 
him in the last day.” 1 

The consequences, then, of accepting or rejecting 
Christ are eternal. No other question is open. 

1 John xii. 48. 



Digitized by Google 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 141 

Morality ! In morals, as in physics, the greater 
includes the less, and the gospel teaches a higher 
morality than conscience and law combined. But 
in this Christian dispensation God is not im- 
puting their sins to men. Were it otherwise the 
silence of Heaven would give place to the thunders 
of His judgments. Every question of judgment 
was either settled for ever at the Cross, or has 
been postponed to the day that is still to 
come : God “ knows how ” “ to reserve the unjust 
to the day of judgment to be punished,” 1 and the 
day of judgment is not yet. 

A red-letter day it must have seemed to the 
village community of Nazareth when the great 
Rabbi who had grown to manhood in their midst 
reappeared in their synagogue, and stood up to 
read the Sabbath lesson from the Prophets. 
Opening the roll delivered to Him, He found 
the passage beginning, “The Spirit of the Lord 
is upon me, because He anointed me to preach 
good tidings to the poor ; He hath sent me to 
proclaim release to the captives, and recovering 
of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that 
1 2 Pet. ii. 9. 



Digitized by Google 




142 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



are bruised, to proclaim the acceptable year of 

the Lord ” : and abruptly closing the book, 

He handed it back to the attendant and sat 
down. Having stood forward to read the lesson 
for the day, He stopped in the middle of the 
opening sentence. What wonder that all eyes 
were fastened on Him ! “ This day,” He broke 

the silence by declaring, “is this Scripture ful- 
filled in your ears.” 

“ And the day of vengeance of our God ” were 
the words that followed without a break on the 
open page before Him ; but He left those words 
unread. “The acceptable year of the Lord” He 
then and there proclaimed, and it still runs its 
|? /o-k course, but the great day of judgment is even 
now still future. 

Not that the moral government of the world 
is in abeyance. Even here and now men reap 
what they sow. Righteousness prospers and 
iniquity brings its own penalty. Not always 
indeed, nor openly ; but generally, and with 
sufficient definiteness to make it clear that this 
is the rule — the ordinary course of things. And 
further, in the Divine economy provision is made 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



M3 



for human government ; and the sword is entrusted 
to men that rulers may be a terror to the evil- 
doer and a protection to the good. Were it 
otherwise society would be impossible. But while 
men are thus empowered to punish offences 
against human laws, the judgment of sin is alto- 
gether with God. 

And here we recall another declaration of our 
Divine Lord. “ The Father judgeth no man, but 
hath committed all judgment unto the Son.” 
“ We believe that Thou shalt come to be our 
judge” is upon the lips of thousands who in 
their hearts imagine that He will mediate in 
the judgment between them and an offended 
God. But it is to the crucified One Himself 
that in virtue of the Cross the Divine prerogative 
of judgment has been assigned. And He, the 
sinner’s only Judge, is now the sinner’s Saviour. 
Purification for sins accomplished, He has “ sat 
down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.” 1 
The official attitude of Christ, if such a phrase 
may be allowed, is one of rest. The work of 
redemption is complete. The great amnesty has 



f 



1 Heb. i. 3 . 



Digitized by Google 




144 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



been proclaimed. Heaven is thrown open to the 
lost of earth. Eternal life is brought within the 
reach of the weakest and the worst of men. God 
is not imputing trespasses, but preaching peace. 
And the only Being in the universe who has 
power to punish sin is now seated on the throne 
of God as Saviour, and His presence there has 
changed that throne into a throne of grace. 
Grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal 
life ; for “ the free gift of God is eternal life in 
Christ Jesus our Lord. ,, 1 

“ How monstrous all this is ! The idea of sup- 
posing that people who have consistently lived 
religious lives are to be shut out of heaven, while 
the worthless and depraved can obtain forgive- 
ness and acceptance simply by believing in 
Christ ! ” Such will be the criticism these 
statements will generally evoke. Monstrous it 
may seem ; but before men hold it up to 
censure or ridicule let them pause and reflect 
what it is that they are thus rejecting. “ To 
Him bear all the prophets witness that through 
His name every one that believeth on Him shall 
1 See Appendix, Note VIII. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



145 



receive remission of sins .” 1 Nor is it a dogma 
of “ Pauline doctrine,” but the teaching of one 
of the simplest parables of Christ, that waifs and 
tramps from the highways and the slums sit 
down in the Kingdom of God, while the once 
invited guests — the moral and religious — are ex- 
cluded . 2 And the parable is explained by the 
doctrine that His Divine mission was “ not to 
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.” 

1 Acts x. 43 (R.V.). 2 Luke xiv. 15-24. 



II 



Digitized by Google 




CHAPTER XIII 



A SILENT Heaven ! Yes, but it is not the 
^ ^ silence of callous indifference or helpless 
weakness ; it is the silence of a great sabbatic 
rest, the silence of a peace which is absolute and 
profound — a silence which is the public pledge 
and proof that the way is open for the guiltiest 
of mankind to draw near to God. When faith 
murmurs, and unbelief revolts, and men challenge 
the Supreme to break that silence and declare 
Himself, how little do they realise what the 
challenge means ! It means the withdrawal of 
the amnesty ; it means the end of the reign of 
grace; it means the closing of the day of mercy 
and the dawning of the day of wrath. 

Among the statements which distressed the 
orthodox in the late Professor Tyndall’s famous 
Birmingham address on “ Science and Man,” was 

146 



Digitized by Google 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



147 



his reference to the Herald Angels’ song. “ Look 
to the East at the present moment ” (he exclaimed) 
“as a comment on the promise of peace on 
earth and goodwill towards men. The promise 
is a dream ruined by the experience of eighteen 
centuries, and in that ruin is involved the claim 
of the ‘ heavenly host ’ to prophetic vision.” 
But the angels’ song was not a promise ; still 
less was it a prophecy. That anthem of praise 
was a Divine proclamation. The time was not 
yet when God could enforce peace between man 
and man ; but grace “came by Jesus Christ,” and 
with that advent peace and goodwill became the 
attitude of God to men. And this “on earth,” 
even in the midst of their sorrows and their sins. 
“ He came and preached good tidings of peace .” 1 
And “ he that has ears to hear ” can catch the 
echo of that voice as it still vibrates in our air. 
If God is silent now it is because Heaven has 
come down to earth, the climax of Divine reve- 
lation has been reached, there is no reserve of 
mercy yet to be unfolded. He has spoken His 
last word of love and grace, and when next He 
1 Eph. ii. 17 (R.V. marg .). 



Digitized by Google 




148 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



breaks the silence it will be to let loose the 
judgments which shall yet engulf a world that 
has rejected Christ. For “our God shall come 
and shall not keep silence.” 1 

A silent Heaven is a part of the mystery of 
God ; but Holy Writ declares that a day is fixed 
in the Divine chronology when “ the mystery of 
God shall be finished.” 2 And when that day 
breaks, the heavenly host shall again be heard, 
proclaiming that “ The sovereignty of the world 3 
is become our Lord's and His Christ's, and He 
shall reign for ever and ever.” And at this 
signal the wonderful beings that sit on thrones 
around the throne of God shall raise the anthem, 
“We give Thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, 
which art, and wast, and art to come, because 
Thou hast taken to Thee Thy great power, and 
hast reigned. And the nations were angry and 
Thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead that 
they should be judged, and that Thou shouldest 
give reward to Thy servants the prophets and 
to the saints and them that fear Thy name, 

x Psa. 1. 3. 3 Rev. x. 7. 

3 7 ) [SacriXha rov k 6 <j(jlov (Rev. xi. 15). 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



149 



small and great, and shouldest destroy them 
that destroy the earth.” 1 Then at last He 
will assume the power that even now is His 
by right, and openly reward the good and put 
down the evil. In a word, He will do then 
what men think He ought to do now and 
always. And if He delays to do this, it is not 
that He is “slack concerning His promise.” 
God’s own “ apology ” for His inaction is that 
He is “ longsuffering to us-ward, not willing that 
any should perish, but that all should come to 
repentance.” 2 

Through all the ages until Christ came the 
course of human history was an unanswered 
indictment by which every attribute of God was 
seemingly discredited. The Divine power and 
wisdom and righteousness and love were all 
brought into question. But the advent of 
Christ was God’s full and final revelation of 
Himself to man. There are mysteries, no 
doubt, which still remain unsolved, but they 
are mysteries which lie beyond the horizon ^ 
of our world. First among these is the origin 
1 Rev. xi. 15-18. 2 2 Pet. iii. 9. 



Digitized by Google 




150 THE SILENCE OF GOD 

of evil. Not the Eden fall, but the fall of 
that wonderful Being to whose “ devices ” the 
Eden fall was due. Why did God permit the 
first and noblest of His creatures to turn devil? 
But of all the questions which immediately 
concern us, there is not one which the Cross of 
Christ has left unanswered. Men point to the 
sad incidents of human life on earth, and they 
ask “ Where is the love of God ? ” God points 
to that Cross as the unreserved manifestation of 
love so inconceivably infinite as to answer every 
challenge and silence all doubt for ever. 1 And that 
Cross is not merely the public proof of what God 
has accomplished ; it is the earnest of all that He 
has promised. The crowning mystery of God is 
Christ, for in Him “ are all the treasures of wisdom 
and knowledge hidden. ,, 2 And those hidden 



1 Anything which is manifest is of course raised out of the 
sphere of doubt or question ; and God declares that in the Cross 
of Christ His grace and kindness and love have been manifested 
(Tit. ii. ii, iii. 4; 1 John iv. 9). But, ignoring the stupendous 
fact that, for our sakes, He “spared not His own Son,” men seek 
to put Him upon proof of His love ; and the test is whether He 
complies with some specific appeal urged in the petulance of 
present need or sorrow. 

2 Col. ii. 2, 3 (R.V.). 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



15 



treasures are yet to be unfolded. It is the 
Divine purpose to “ gather together in one all 
things in Christ. ,, 1 Sin has broken the harmony 
of creation, but that harmony shall yet be 
restored by the supremacy of our now despised 
and rejected Lord. In the very name of His 
humiliation every knee in heaven and on earth 
and in the underworld shall bow before Him, 
and every tongue shall confess that He is 
Lord . 2 

And to believe in Christ is to own His Lordship 
now . Hence the promise, “If thou shalt confess 
with thy mouth Jesus as Lord, and shalt believe 
in thy heart that God raised Him from the dead, 
thou shalt be saved .” 3 The sinner who thus believes 



in Christ anticipates now and here the realisation 
of the supreme purpose of God, and he is 
absolutely and for ever saved. 



1 Eph. i. 10. 2 Phil. ii. 10. 

3 Rom. x. 9 (R.V.). The true Buddhist will declare himself by 
the way in which he names his master, never omitting some title 
expressive of his reverence for him. And the true Christian will 
declare himself in the same way. If a man habitually writes or 
speaks about “Jesus,” we may be sure, whatever his creed may 
be, that he is a Socinian at heart. “That Jesus Christ is Lord” 
is the special testimony of Christianity, and the Christian will not 
forget it even in his words. 



P 



Digitized by Google 




152 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



It was in the power of these truths that the 
martyrs lived and died. Here was the secret of 
their triumph — not “ the general sense of Scripture 
corrected in the light of reason and conscience ” ; 
not the insolent pretensions of priestcraft, degrading 
to every one who tolerates them. With hearts 
awed by the fear of God, garrisoned by the peace 
of God, and exulting in the love of God, shed 
abroad there by the Divine Spirit, they stood for 
the truth against priests and princes combined, 
and daring to be called heretics they were faithful 
to their Lord in life and in death. 

Heaven was as silent then as it is now. No 
sights were seen, no voice was heard, to make 
their persecutors pause. No signs were witnessed 
to give proof that God was with them as they lay 
upon the rack or gave up their life-breath at the 
stake. But with their spiritual vision focussed 
upon Christ, the unseen realities of heaven filled 
their hearts, as they passed from a world that was 
not worthy of them to the home that God has 
prepared for them that love Him. But with us, 
the degenerate sons of a degenerate age, faith 
falters beneath the strain of the petty trials of our 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



153 



life. And while He is saying “ I will never leave thee 
nor forsake thee,” our murmurs drown His voice ; 
and though professing to be “ followers of them 
who through faith and patience inherit the pro- 
mises,” our petulance and unbelief put from us 
the infinite compassions of God. “ They endured ^ 
as seeing Him who is invisible”: we can see 
nothing but our troubles and our sorrows, which 
loom the greater because viewed through tears of 
selfish grief, that blind our eyes to the glories of 
eternity. 

The dispensation of law and covenant and 
promise — the distinctive privileges of the favoured 
people — was marked by the public display of 
Divine power upon earth. But the reign of grace 
has its correlative in the life of faith. Ours is ^ 
the higher privilege, the greater blessedness of 
those “who have not seen and yet have believed .” 1 
And walking by faith is the antithesis of walking 
by sight. If “signs and wonders” were vouchsafed p 
to us, as in Pentecostal days, faith would sink to a 
lower level, and the whole standard and character j 
of the discipline of Christian life would be changed . 2 1 

1 John xx. 29. 8 See Appendix, Note IX. 



Digitized by 



Google 




154 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



The sufferings of Paul denote a higher faith 
than “ the mighty deeds ” of his earlier ministry. 
Not until miracles had ceased, and he had 
entered on the path of faith as we now tread it, 
was it revealed to him that his life was to be 
“ a pattern to them that should afterwards 
believe .” 1 

And what a life it was ! Here is the amazing 
record: “Of the Jews five times received I forty 
stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, 
once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a 
night and a day have I been in the deep ; in 
journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of 
robbers, in perils by my own countrymen,' in 
perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, in 
perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in 
perils among false brethren ; in weariness and 
painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and 
thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness .” 2 
And all this not only without a murmur, but 
with a heart exulting in God. Instead of grum- 
bling at his infirmities he made a boast of 
them. Instead of repining at his persecutions 
1 i Tim. i. 1 6. 2 2 Cor. xi. 24-27. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



155 



he learned to take pleasure in them . 1 Not 
vainly nor morbidly, but “for Christ’s sake,” his 
Master and Lord, for whom, he declared, “he 
had suffered the loss of all things.” Reviewing all 
his privations and sufferings he describes them as 
“ light affliction which is for the moment, working 
for us more and more exceedingly an eternal 
weight of glory,” and he adds, “ while we look, not 
at the things which are seen, but at the things 
which are not seen ; for the things which are seen 
are temporal, but the things which are not seen 
are eternal .” 2 

How different this from the experience de- 
scribed in the opening chapter! 3 There it is 
a case of those who, seeing nothing beyond the 
events and circumstances of their life, turn away 



1 Here is an ascending scale of experience : — 

“ Hath God forgotten to be gracious ? Hath He in anger shut up 
His tender mercies?” (Psa. lxxvii. 9). 

“ I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because Thou didst it ” 
(Psa. xxxix. 9). 

“ I have learned in whatsoever state I am therewith to be con- 
tent ” (Phil. iv. n). 

“ Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities . . . 
I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in perse- 
cutions, in distresses for Christ’s sake ” (2 Cor. xii. 9, 10). 

2 2 Cor. iv. 17, 18. 3 Page 10 ante . 



Digitized by Google 




i$6 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



from God with hardened and embittered hearts. 
But the sons of faith look away from the fierce 
waves and threatening storm-clouds, for well they 
know that — 

“ Above the voice of many waters, 

The mighty breakers of the sea, 

The Lord on high is mighty.” 1 

And thus, filled with glad thoughts of the 
home beyond and of the glory to which He is 
calling them, they can rejoice in Him, even 
though in heaviness in manifold trials, for the 
proof of their faith is precious . 2 

Men understand and appreciate the asceticisms 
of religion — “ will-worship, and humility, and 
severity to the body” — penances and ordinances 
which are “after the precepts and doctrines of 
men.” 3 But these have nothing in common 
with the life of faith. They are paths by which 
men delude themselves in vain efforts to reach 
the Cross. But it is at the Cross itself that 
the life of faith begins. And the spiritual 

1 Psa. xciii. 4 (R.V. revised. The word voice is in the plural, 
but it is obviously the Hebrew poetical plural : not several voices, 
but the great voice ”). 

2 1 Pet. i. 6, 7. 3 Col. ii. 23 (R.V). 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



157 



miracles of that life are more wonderful than 
any which merely controlled or suspended the 
operation of natural laws. Greatest of them all 
is the miracle of the new birth by the Spirit of 
God, with its outward side of conversion from 
a life of selfishness or sin to a life of conse- 
crated service. And those who have experienced 
it can say in the words of Holy Writ, “ We 
know that the Son of God is come, and hath 
given us an understanding, that we (may) know 
Him that is true .” 1 And carrying the truth to 
others, they find it produces the same results 
which they themselves have proved. And this 
not merely in isolated cases or in favouring 
circumstances. Recent years, during which so 
many who have publicly pledged their belief that 
the Bible is true , 2 and who are subsidised to 
teach that it is Divine, have been labouring to 



1 1 John v. 20. 

2 Every candidate for ordination must publicly declare, in reply 

to the Bishop, that he “ unfeignedly believes all the canonical Scrip- 
tures of the Old and New Testaments.” Whether such a pledge 
ought to be required I will not discuss. The fact remains. And 
this being so, when clergymen set themselves to discredit the Bible, ^ 
the primary question suggested concerns their own honesty. Has 
the Church a lower standard of morality than the Clubs ? I 



Digitized by Google 




158 THE SILENCE OF GOD 

prove that it is unreliable and human— these 
have been precisely the years in which Christian 
men have carried it to some of the most de- 
graded races of the heathen world, with results 
that surpass all previous records, giving over- 
whelming proof of its Divine character and 
mission. 

To men like these there is a sense in which 
Heaven is not silent. The science of to-day has 
taught us that there are rays of light, till now 
unknown, which can penetrate the densest sub- 
stances. But these rays can only be evolved 
when the atmosphere of earth has been excluded. 
And such wonders have their counterpart in the 
spiritual sphere. Those who can thus escape 
from the influence of earth, and rise above the 
seen and temporal, have eyes to see and ears to 
hear the sights and sounds of another world ; 
and with united voice they testify that God is 
with His people and that His Word is true. 

And behind these men are tens of thousands 
of Christians at home, including not a few 
of the greatest theologians, and thinkers, and 
scholars of the age, who share their beliefs and 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



159 



rejoice in their triumphs. Not that the question, 
What is truth? can be settled by a plebiscite! 
For truth has always been in a minority. But 
there is no element of cohesion in error. Among 
the children of error there is no bond of unity 
save such as depends on common hostility to truth. 
One generation kills the prophets ; another builds 
their sepulchres. Those who shed the martyrs’ 
blood are repudiated and condemned by their 
successors and representatives to-day. But the 
children of truth in every age are one. Great 
is the “cloud of witnesses” encompassing us 
round — the righteous dead of all the ages past. 
And when our race shall have been run, we too 
in time shall pass from the arena to join the 
mighty throng, until at last, their ranks com- 
plete, the ever-swelling host shall stand, a count- 
less multitude, before the throne of God. 



What a success this book might have been had 
it but fulfilled the promise of its earlier pages ! 
If only it had gone on to enforce the revolt 
against faith suggested in the opening chapter, 



Digitized by Google 




160 THE SILENCE OF GOD 

then indeed it would have been “ reviewed ” in 
the newspapers and “ called for ” at the libraries. 
But while sceptical attacks upon the Bible rank 
with general literature , 1 any defence of it which 
appeals to its deeper teaching is deemed unsuited 
for notice in the secular press. And so it comes 
about that everything which unbelief has to urge 
is brought prominently before the public, but the 
vast majority of people never hear of a book which 
is distinctly Christian. 

Religion and Scepticism are rival competitors 
for popular favour. And yet there are many who, 
though conscious of longings too deep to be satis- 
fied by mere religion, make choice of religion 
because they know of no other refuge from un- 
belief. And there are others again who, “with 
too much knowledge for the sceptic’s side,” drift 
into scepticism in their recoil from priestcraft . 2 
To some such, perchance, these pages may suggest 
a better way. For Christianity delivers us not 



1 Appendix, Note X. 

2 The lives of the Newmans afford an apt illustration. Both 
made shipwreck of their faith — the one in religion, the other in 
infidelity. The “Apologia” and the “Phases of Faith” are 
among the saddest of books. 



Digitized by Google 




THE SILENCE OF GOD 



161 



only from scepticism on the one hand, but from 
superstition on the other. 

And to not a few this volume may be welcome 
as affording a clew to pressing difficulties which 
perplex and distress the thoughtful. Infidelity 
trades upon the silence of Heaven, the inaction of 
the Supreme. If there be a God, almighty and 
all-good, why does He not use His power and give 
proof of His goodness in the way men choose to 
expect of Him ? The answer usually offered by 
the Christian apologist fails either to silence the 
opponent or to satisfy the believer. And rightly 
so, for it is lacking not only in cogency but in 
sympathy. The God of the Bible is infinite both 
in power and in compassion ; and in other ages 
His people had public proof of this. Why, then, 
is He so silent? 

The question is not why He does not always 
declare Himself, but why He never does so. If, 
as already urged, whole generations even passed 
away without experiencing any direct manifesta- 
tion of Divine power on earth, then, in presence 
of some crushing sorrow, some hideous wrong, 
His people might well exclaim with Gideon long 

12 



Digitized by Google 




162 



THE SILENCE OF GOD 



ago, “If the Lord be with us, why then is all 
this befallen us? and where be all His miracles 
which our fathers told us of ? ” 1 But what con- 
cerns us is the fact that throughout the entire 
course of this Christian dispensation since Pente- 
costal times, “ the finger of God ” 2 has never been 
openly at work upon earth, never once has a 
public miracle been witnessed — “a single public 
event to compel belief that there is a God at all ! ” 
Are we left to grope in darkness for the answer ? 
Does revelation throw no light upon it?. To 
suggest the solution of this mystery these pages 
have been written. 

1 Judg. vi. 13. “ Luke xi. 20. 




Digitized by Google 




APPENDIX. 



Note I. (page 18). 

I N these pages I am dealing only with miracles 
in the theological sense ; that is, with Divine 
miracles. The phenomena of Spiritualism I have 
never personally investigated ; but if genuine they 
are clearly miraculous, and to reject, on a priori 
grounds, the mass of evidence adduced in proof 
of them in books like Professor A. R, Wallace’s 
“ Miracles and Modern Spiritualism,” seems to me 
to savour of the stupidity of unbelief. Assuming 
their genuineness, no Christian need hesitate to , 
account for them by demoniacal agency. To I 
attribute them to departed spirits is as unphiloso- 
phical as it is unscriptural. It would seem that in 
this Christian dispensation, when the third Person 
of the Trinity dwells on earth, demons are subject 
to restraints which were not imposed in a pre- 
ceding age, but there is no reason to refuse belief in 
their presence or their power. 

163 



Digitized by Google 




164 



APPENDIX 



Religious miracles also claim a passing notice 
here. I do not allude to the tricks of priests, but 
to cases of extraordinary cures from serious illness ; 
and some at least of these appear to be supported 
by evidence sufficient to establish their truth. The 
phenomena of hysteria and mimetic disease will 
probably account for the majority of cases of the 
kind. Others again may be explained as instances 
of the power of the mind and will over the body. 
The diseases which are necessarily fatal are com- 
paratively few. But when a patient gives up hope 
his chances of recovery are greatly reduced. On 
the other hand, the progress of disease may be 
controlled, and even checked, by some mastering 
influence or emotion which turns the patient’s 
thoughts back to life, and makes him believe he 
is convalescent. But while the vast majority of 
seemingly miraculous cures may thus be explained 
on natural principles, there may perhaps be some 
' which are genuine miracles. There are no limits 
to the possibilities of faith, and God may thus 
declare Himself at times. 

There is nothing in this admission to clash 
with the concluding statement of my second 
chapter, that in our dispensation, unlike those 
which preceded it, there are no public events to 
compel belief in God. I am there dealing, not 
with the mere fact of miracles, but with their 
evidential value ; and if there have been miracles 



Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX 



165 



in Christendom, that element is wanting in them. 
I may add that among Christians it is pestilently 
evil to make the exceptional experience of some 
the rule of faith for all. The Word of God is our 
guide, and not the experience of fellow-Christians ; 
and when this is ignored the practical consequences 
are disastrous. The annals of “faith-healing,” as 
it is called, are rich in cases of mimetic or hys- 
terical disease, but about the spiritual wreckage 
due to failures innumerable they are silent. 



Note II. (page 45). 



According to the dictionary the primary meaning 
of religion is “ piety.” But this, of course, is entirely 
personal and subjective. In these pages I use the 
word only in its original sense, in which alone it 
occurs in our English Bible. “ How little ‘ religion 1 
once meant godliness, how predominantly it was 
used for the outward service of God, is plain from 
many passages in our Homilies, and from other 
contemporary literature.” But though Archbishop 
Trench, from whose “English Past and Present” 
this sentence is quoted, suggests that such a use of 
the word is now obsolete, I venture to maintain that 
it is in this, its original, but now secondary, mean- 
ing that it is commonly used at the present day. 

And I may appeal to the fact that the Revisers 
have retained it even in Gal. i. 13, 14, wherd “the 
Jews' religion” is twice given as the equivalent 



r 



Digitized by Google 




i66 



APPENDIX 



of “Judaism.” In the only other passages where 
it occurs (Acts xxvi. 5, and James i. 26, 27), it is 
the rendering of the Greek OpriaKela, a word which 
means the outward ceremonial service of religion, 
the external form, as contrasted with svaifieia, a 
word which, with one exception, is always translated 
godliness in the fifteen passages where it occurs. 
Gptl<TK£(a is rendered worshipping in Col. ii. 18, thus 
plainly showing that it is outward ceremonial it 
implies. Its use in Acts xxvi. 5 needs no com- 
ment, but in James i. its significance is generally 
missed. “ Pure religion,” the writer declares, “ is 
this” — and every Israelite (for to such the Epistle 
was specially addressed) would expect a reference 
to new ordinances in lieu of those of the bygone 
dispensation ; but his thoughts turn in a wholly 
different direction — “to visit the fatherless and 
widows in their affliction, and to keep himself 
unspotted from the world.” As Archbishop 
Trench remarks, the very dpr\GKua of Christianity 
“consists in acts of mercy, of love, of holiness.” 
The words are intended, not to indicate a parallel, 
but to suggest a contrast. In no more forcible 
and striking manner could the apostle teach that 
Christianity is not a Opr}<jtce'ia at all. 

Note III. (page 56). 

The Acts of the Apostles is divided by theolo- 
gians into three main periods : The Hebraic (chaps. 



Digitized by Google 




APPENDIX 



167 

i.-v.) ; the Transitional (vi.-xii.), and the Gentile 
(xiii.-xxviii.). But this classification is arbitrary. 
The Hebraic section includes at least the first nine 
chapters ; and if the view of the Book here advo- 
cated be correct, the rest must be regarded as 
transitional . That it is so in a real sense no 

student can fail to recognise ; and that this is the 
intention of the narrative I venture to maintain. 
The admission of the Gentiles, recorded in chap, x., 
was on strictly Jewish lines, as the apostles came 
to understand, and James explained at the Council 
of Jerusalem (xv. 13, &c.). Those that were 
scattered by the Stephen persecution preached “ to 
Jews only” (xi. 19). The marginal note to ver. 20 
in R.V. shows that the passage must not be strained 
to imply a denial of this. That Paul’s ministry 
during the year he spent in Antioch was confined 
to Jews,, appears from xiv. 27. 1 When from 
Antioch Paul and Barnabas came to Salamis “ they 
preached in the synagogues of the Jews” (xiii. 5). 
When they came to Pisidian Antioch, they again 
repaired to the synagogue (ver. 14). And it was 
not till the Jews rejected the ministry that the 
apostles “ turned to the Gentiles ” (ver. 46). 
This passage marks one of the minor crises in 
the narrative. At Iconium again the apostles 

1 Because if Gentiles had been evangelised during his first visit, 
there would have been no need to announce on his return that God 
had opened the door of faith to Gentiles. 



Digitized by Google 




i68 



APPENDIX 



preached in the synagogue of the Jews (xiv. i). 
As the “ Greeks ” here mentioned were attending 
the synagogue, they were evidently proselytes, and 
are not to be confounded with the “ Gentiles ” 
of verses 2 and 5. Verse 27 of the fourteenth 
chapter, makes it clear that Paul's ministry among 
the Gentiles began with his sojourn in Pisidia 
(chap. xiii.). 

Chap. xv. claims far fuller notice than can here 
be given to it. Any one can see, however, that it 
records the session of a council of Jews to deal 
with new problems to which the conversion of 
Gentiles had given rise. Chap. xvi. 1-8 records 
the apostles' visits to existing Churches. The 
vision of ver. 9 then called them to Philippi 
where (as probably at Lystra) they found no 
synagogue. But on passing thence to Thessa- 
lonica “Paul, as his manner was," frequented the 
synagogue (xvii. 2). So also at Berea (ver. 10), 
and at Athens (ver. 17). 

From Athens Paul came to Corinth where 
“ he reasoned in the synagogue every Sabbath " 
(xviii. 4). So also at Ephesus (ver. 19, and 
xix. 8). Thence it was he turned towards 
Jerusalem upon that mission which is regarded 
by some as the fulfilment of his ministry, and 
by others as a turning away from the path of 
testimony to the Gentiles, seemingly marked out 
for him to follow. Be this as it may, having 



Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX 



169 

been carried a prisoner to Rome, his first care 
was to call together — not the Christians, much 
though he longed to see them (Rom. i. 10, n), 
but — “ the chief of the Jews,” and to them to 
give the testimony which he had brought to his 
nation in every place to which his ministry had 
led him. In his introductory address to them 
he claimed the place of a Jew among Jews : 
“ I have done nothing (he declared) against the 
people, or the customs of our fathers” (xxviii. 17) ; 
but when these, the Jews of Rome, refused the 
proffered mercy, his mission to his nation was at 
an end ; and for the first time separating himself 
from them, he exclaimed, “ Well spake the Holy 
Ghost through Isaiah the prophet unto your 
fathers” — and he went on to repeat the words 
which our Lord Himself had used at that kindred 
crisis of His ministry when the nation had openly 
rejected Him (Acts xxviii. 25 R.V. ; Matt. xiii. 13, 
cf. xii. 14-16). 

My contention is that the Acts, as a whole, is- 
the record of a temporary and transitional dispen- 
sation in which blessing was again offered to the 
Jew and again rejected. Hence the sustained 
emphasis with which the testimony to Israel is 
narrated, and the incidental way in which the 
testimony to Gentiles is treated. Of the thousands 
baptized at Pentecost a large proportion doubtless 
were of the strangers mentioned in ii. 9-1 1 ; and 



Digitized by Google 




170 



APPENDIX 



these carried the testimony to the Jews in all 
the places there enumerated. The 5,000 men 
mentioned in iv. 4 were apparently resident in 
Jerusalem, and these, when scattered by the 
Stephen persecution, “went everywhere preaching 
the Word,” “but to the Jews only” (viii. 1, 4, and 
xi. 19). Surely we may assume that there was 
not a district, not a village, inhabited by Jews, 
where the gospel did not come. 

Some, perhaps, will appeal to passages like Acts 
xv. 12 to disprove my statement that miracles had 
special reference to the favoured nation. The 
careful student, however, will see that nothing in 
the narrative is inconsistent with what I have 
urged. For example, the miracle at Lystra was 
in response to the faith of the man who benefited 
by it (xiv. 9), and its effect on the heathen who 
witnessed it was not to lead them to Christianity, 
but first to make them pay Divine honour to the 
apostles, and then, finding they were not gods but 
men, to stone them. I have not said that there 
were no miracles wrought among the heathen, but 
that, when the gospel was carried to the heathen, 
miracles lost their prominence, and that they ceased 
absolutely just at the time when, if the recognised 
hypothesis were true, they would have been of the 
highest value. The great miracle of xvi. 26 was a 
Divine intervention on behalf of the apostle. And 
among the Jews of Ephesus (xix. n) and the 



Digitized by Google 




APPENDIX 



171 

Christians of Corinth (1 Cor. xii. 10) there were 
miracles, as doubtless elsewhere also. But there 
were no miracles seen by Felix or Festus or 
Agrippa ; and, as already noticed, when Paul 
stood before Nero the era of miracles had closed. 
The miracles of Acts xxviii. 8, 9 are chronologically 
the last on record, and the later Epistles are wholly 
silent respecting them. 

Note IV. (page 87). 

Every one recognises that the advent of Christ 
marked a signal “ change of dispensation,” as it is 
termed : that is, a change in God’s dealings with 
men. But the fact is commonly ignored that the 
rejection of Christ by the favoured people, and 
their fall in consequence from the position of 
privilege formerly held by them, marked another 
change no less definite and important (Rom. 
xi. 15). And yet this fact affords the solution 
of many difficulties and a safeguard against many 
errors. As indicated in these pages, it gives the 
clew to the right understanding of the Acts of the 
Apostles — a book which is primarily the record, 
not, as commonly supposed, of the founding of 
the Christian Church, but of the apostasy of the ( 
favoured nation. But it also explains much that 
perplexes Christians in the teaching of the 
Gospels. 

During the last Carlist rising in Spain a wealthy 



Digitized by Google 




172 



APPENDIX 



Spanish marquis was said to have mortgaged his 
entire estate to its utmost value, and to have 
thrown the proceeds into the war-chest of the 
insurrection. It was a reasonable act on the 
part of any one who believed in the Pretender’s 
cause. To him, and to others like him, the acces- 
sion of Don Carlos to the throne would bring 
back their own, and far more besides. So was it 



with the disciples in days when the kingdom was 
I being preached to the earthly people. Certain of 
the Lord’s precepts had reference to the special 
circumstances of that special dispensation. Take 
“ the Sermon on the Mount ” for example. Our 
Lord was there unfolding the principles of the 
promised kingdom, and giving precepts for the 
guidance of those who were awaiting its estab- 
lishment. It is all for us, doubtless, but not 
always in the same sense that it was intended to 
convey to them. Christians, for instance, pray the 
kingdom prayer. But with us “ Thy kingdom 
come ” is a general appeal for the advancement 
of the Divine cause : with them it was a definite 



petition for the near realisation of the promised 
earthly reign. And what a meaning the prayer 
for daily bread had for those who were enjoined 
to carry neither purse nor scrip, but to trust their 
heavenly Father to feed them as He feeds the 
birds ; for, like the birds, they had “ neither 
storehouse nor barn ” ! 



Digitized by Google 




APPENDIX 



173 



Principles are unchanging, but the definite pre- 
cepts recorded in such passages as Matt. v. 39-42 
and vi. 25-34 were framed with reference to the^ 
circumstances of the time, and to the special testi- 
mony which the kingdom disciple was to maintain. 
The Christian, unlike the kingdom disciple in this 
respect, is entitled to defend himself against outrage, 
and to resist any invasion of his personal or civil 
rights ; and he is expressly enjoined to make 
provision for the future. Banking, insurance, and 
thrift are not forbidden by Christianity. “Take 
nothing for your journey,” the Lord directed, as 
He sent out the Twelve, “ neither staves, nor scrip, 
nor bread, nor money ; neither have two coats ” 
(Luke ix. 3). And referring to this, when He was 
about to be taken away from them, He asked, 

“ When I sent you without purse, and scrip, and 
shoes, lacked ye anything? And they said, Nothing. 
Then said He unto them, But now, he that hath a 
purse, let him take it, and likewise his scrip; and 
he that hath no sword, let him sell his garment and 
buy one” (Luke xxii. 35, 36). 

What* can be plainer than this? In civilised 
communities, of course, the State takes charge of 
“ the sword ” (Rom. xiii. 4), and the individual 
citizen is not left to defend himself; but the 
principle is the same. One who is “instructed 
unto the kingdom,” the Lord declares, is like “a 
householder who brings out of his treasure things 



Digitized by 



Google 




174 



APPENDIX 



new and old” (Matt. xiii. 52). But Christians 
nowadays are not thus “instructed.” They are 
rather like householders who, bringing out what- 
ever comes first to their hand, give new milk to their 
guests and old wine to their babies ! And as the 
result Holy Scripture is brought into contempt, and 
earnest and honest-hearted believers are stumbled 
or perplexed. 

Another clew is needed to guide us in the right 
use of the teaching of the Gospels. Some of the 
Lord’s words were addressed to the apostles as such y 
and we must remember this in applying them to 
ourselves. 

With reference to the Sermon on the Mount it 
may be asked, Does any one imagine our Lord 
supposed that people would wish to add twenty 
inches to their height? Matt. vi. 27 should no 
doubt be read as the American Revisers render it, 
“Which of you by taking thought can add one 
cubit to the measure of his life ? ” 

Note V. (page 109). 

The primary and usual meaning of /ivtm'ipiov 
in Biblical Greek is indicated by its use in the 
Septuagint. It occurs eight times in the second 
chapter of Daniel (verses 18, 19, 27, 28, 29, 30, 47 
(twice), and again in chap. iv. 9), and in every case 
it is translated secret in our English version. The 
word occurs also in the Apocrypha, and always in 



Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX 



175 



this same sense. This, too, is its ordinary use in 
the New Testament ; but the word was then 
already acquiring the further meaning which 
belongs to it in the writings of the Greek Fathers, 
namely, a symbol or secret sign. And in this sense 
it appears to be used in Rev. i. 20 and xvii. 5, 7. 
In chap. x. 7 it occurs in its earlier meaning. So 
also apparently in Eph. v. 32, though the Vulgate 
understands it differently, using the word sacra - 
mentum to translate it. If it is to be read in the 
one way, the secret referred to is that believers are 
members of the Body of Christ: if in the other 
way, marriage is the symbol intended. 

The Latin version of Eph. v. 32 is of special 
interest as indicating the original meaning of 
sacrament , as “ a mystery ; a mysterious or holy 
, token or pledge n (Webster). Bishop Taylor thus 
speaks of God sending His people “the sacrament 
of a rainbow.” And Hooker writes: “As often as 
we mention a sacrament , it is improperly under- 
stood ; for in the writings of the ancient fathers 
all articles which are peculiar to Christian faith, 
all duties of religion containing that which sense or 
natural reason cannot of itself discern, are most 
commonly named sacraments . Our restraint of the 
word to some few principal Divine ceremonies 
importeth in every such ceremony two things, the 
substance of the ceremony itself, which is visible ; 
and besides that, something else more secret, in 



Digitized by Google 




176 



APPENDIX 



reference whereunto we conceive that ceremony to 
be a sacrament/* 

In this passage, it will be noticed, the word is 
used precisely in the secondary sense assigned to 
it in Johnson’s “ Dictionary,** viz., “An outward 
and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace.** 
Johnson’s first meaning of the word is “ an oath ** ; 
and the Latin word sacramentum may possibly 
have acquired that meaning on account of some 
outward act or sign which accompanied the taking 
of an oath. According to Hooker’s use of the word 
sacrament , the English practice of kissing the 
Testament would be so described. 

Note VI. (page 118). 

If the reader will take up the New Testament, 
and with the help of a good concordance turn to 
every passage where the devil is mentioned or 
referred to, he will be startled to find how little 
there is to give even a seeming support to the 
popular superstition upon this subject. Three 
passages only can I find that seem to suggest that 
Satan tempts to acts of immorality. Of 1 John iii. 
8-10, I have already spoken. The other two are 
1 Cor. vii. 5, and 1 Tim. v. 15; and with these 
I will deal presently. 

In the temptation of our Lord there was of course 
no question of morality. The devil’s aim was to 
draw Him away from the path of dependence upon 



Digitized by Google 




APPENDIX 



1 77 



God, and specially to divert Him from the path 
which led to the Cross. It was this also which 
brought such a terrible rebuke upon Peter when 
the Lord addressed him as “ Satan ” (Matt. xvi. 23). 
And when Satan asked to have Peter (as he had 
asked to have Job) it was his faith he sought to 
destroy. “ I made supplication for thee/’ the Lord 
added, “that thy faith fail not” (Luke xxii. 31, 
32 R.V.). 

And with the memory of this before him no 
doubt it was that the apostle wrote the words, 
“ Your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh 
about, seeking whom he may devour : whom with- 
stand stedfast in your faith ” (1 Pet. v. 8). In the 
parable of the tares in the field, it is the devil who 
sows the tares (Matt. xiii. 39). And in the parable 
of the sower the devil’s work is described as taking 
away the word out of the hearts of those who hear 
it, “ lest they should believe and be saved.” And 
if Elymas the sorcerer was called a “ son of the 
devil,” it was because of his “ seeking to turn aside 
the proconsul from the faith ” (Acts xiii. 8, 10). 

Two passages indicate his mysterious “power of 
death,” viz., Heb. ii. 14, and Jude 9, which tells 
of his claiming as of right the body of Moses. 
And two passages again indicate his power of 
inflicting disease and pain, namely, Luke xiii. 16, 
and Acts x. 38, but these may probably be ex- 
plained by reference to the case of Job. 

13 



Digitized by Google 




178 



APPENDIX 



In Rev. xii. 9 (R.V.), he is called “ the deceiver of 
the whole world ” (cf. Rev. xx. 10) ; and in that book 
he is represented as the leader in the great coming 
struggle between faith and unfaith, between the 
acknowledgment of God and the denial of Him. 
There is no need to quote the many passages which 
indicate his malignant hatred of God and of His 
people, but if he be the obscene monster of Christian 
tradition, how is it that, from cover to cover, the 
Bible is silent on the subject? In his “ devices ” 
upon men the Satan of Scripture is the enemy, not 
of morals, but of faith. 

And if in view of the mass of testimony leading 
to this conclusion we turn back to the two passages 
above cited, we shall be prepared to read them in a 
new light. In 1 Tim. v. we shall read verse 15 in 
the light of verse 12. The “turning aside after 
Satan ” there referred to is “ the setting at nought 
their first faith? And the Christian will not hesi- 
tate to follow Calvin in understanding the “ faith ” 
here intended as the faith of Christ. The word 
7noroc occurs two hundred times in the Epistles ; 
and in this sense only is it used, with the solitary 
exception of Tit. ii. 10. There is the very strongest 
presumption therefore against the suggestion that 
here it means no more than a woman’s “ troth ” to 
her dead husband. Such a suggestion, moreover, 
makes the apostle contradict himself. It makes 
him say that young widows “ have condemnation ” 



Digitized by 



Google 



APPENDIX 



179 



because they wish to marry again ; and yet 
he ends by expressly enjoining that they are to 
marry again! (ver. 14 R.V.). Verses n-13 give 
his reasons for that injunction. The passage is 
incidentally an overwhelming condemnation of 
nunneries, but the usual c&nstruction put upon it 
is an outrage upon Holy Writ and a gross libel 
upon women. And I may add that if that con- 
struction were the true one the limit of age at 
which widows were to be provided for would 
certainly have been fixed much earlier than sixty. 

The expressions “ waxing wanton against Christ,” 
and “ turning aside after Satan,” are to be explained 
by reference to the Scriptural standard of spiritual 
life and the Scriptural theology of Satanic tempta- 
tions. So also of 1 Cor. vii. 5. The solemn practical 
lesson there to be learned is that any departure 
from prudence and propriety may give Satan an 
advantage — an occasion to undermine or corrupt 
the Christian’s faith. 

As for Ananias, his story is so misread that the 
lesson of it is lost to the Church. He was not a 
bad man, but a good man. In the enthusiasm of 
his zeal he sold his landed property that he might 
devote the proceeds to the common fund. But 
here the suggestion presented itself to him to put 
aside a portion for his own use. His wife was in 
the plot, and boldly lied to conceal it. But 
Ananias spoke no lie, he only acted one, as people 



Digitized by Google 




i8o 



APPENDIX 



are used to do nowadays. If he lived to-day he 
would be held in the highest repute. Indeed there 
are few to be found in these selfish days who 
could compare with him. The moral is not the 
wickedness of man but the holiness and “ severity ” 
of God, and the subtlety of Satanic temptations. 
Satan tempted him, not to a vicious or “ immoral ” 
act, but only to do what, as the apostle said, he had 
an unquestionable right to do. He did not lie to 
men — so the Word expressly tells us — but he lied 
to God, and swift judgment fell on him. If God 
were dealing thus with men in our day, the number 
of the burials would be a serious difficulty ! 

To the case of Judas I have not expressly 
referred, because it so obviously falls within the 
category of temptations aimed directly against 
Christ Himself. 

Note VII. (page 123). 

The exegesis here offered of John viii. 44 is 
not based on the grammar of the Greek article. 
The revisers have adopted an unsatisfactory 
compromise between exposition and translation. 
“ To speak a lie ” is not English. In our lan- 
guage the proper expression is “ to tell a lie.” 
But no one would so render the Greek words 
XaXtiv to 7r<TEu$og ; and by inserting in the 
margin the old and discarded gloss, the revisers 
only betray their dissatisfaction with their own 



Digitized by e.ooQie 




APPENDIX 



181 



reading. The words must mean either some 
definite lie, or else in the abstract sense the 
whole range of what is false. (See Psa. v. 6 
LXX). In this view of the passage all speech 
would be regarded as divided between truth 
and falsehood — God-speech and devil-speech. 
But this is somewhat fanciful here, and, in 
regard to the words which follow, somewhat 
forced. And if, as I venture to urge, it is not 
the false in the abstract which is here in view, 
but a concrete instance of it, the question of 
grammar is no longer open. And, thus rendered, 
the connection is clear between Satan the liar 
and Satan the murderer. He is not the instigator 
to all murders, but to the murder there and then 
in question, the murder of the Christ ; he is not 
the father of lies , but the father of the lie of 
which “ the murder ” is the natural consequence. 

In Rom. i. 25, where both words (“ truth ” 
and “ lie ”) have the article, I suppose both are 
used in the abstract sense. In Rev. xxi. 27 and 
xxii. 1 5 the word “ lie ” is anarthrous. But in 
2 Thess. ii. n it is again the lie of John viii. 44. 
The Lawless One who is yet to be revealed, is 
described as he “ whose coming is after the working 
of Satan with all power and signs and lying 
wonders.” God does not incite men to tell lies 
or to believe lies. But of those who reject “ the 
truth ” it is written, “ He shall send them strong 



Digitized by Google 




APPENDLX 



182 

delusion that they should believe the lie.” Be- 
cause they have rejected the Christ of God, a 
judicial blindness shall fall upon them that they 
shall accept the Christ of humanity, who will be 
Satan incarnate. 

In these pages I have kept clear of prophecy, 
for they are addressed in part to those who 
have no belief in prophecy. But if the prophetic 
student will shake himself free from the Satan 
myth he will find the Divine forecast of the future 
become radiant with new light. Terrible wars 
are yet to convulse the nations, bringing famine 
in their train. But the coming Man will bring 
peace to the world. He will command universal 
homage not merely by reason of his Satanic 
miraculous powers, but because of his splendid 
human qualities. The adherents of “ the truth ” 
will, alone of all the race, have cause to mourn 
his sovereignty. His reign will be the era of 
man’s “millennium,” a time of order and pros- 
perity unparalleled, when the arts of peace shall 
flourish, and the utopias of philosophers and 
socialists will be realised. And that the Satan 
cult which will then prevail on earth will be 
marked by a high morality and a specious 
“form of godliness,” is plainly indicated by the 
warning that, but for Divine grace, it would 
“ deceive the very elect.” It is also, I venture 
to think, plainly foreshadowed by current events. 



Digitized by Google 



APPENDIX 



183 



Christians are trifling with sceptical attacks upon 
Scripture. But the real issue involved in these 
attacks is the Divinity of Christ ; and I venture 
to predict that those of us who shall live for 
another quarter of a century, shall yet witness 
a widespread abandonment of that great truth 
by many of the Churches. The decline of faith 
during the last five-and-twenty years has been 
appalling, and we are already within measur- 
able distance of a more general acceptance of 
the Satan cult — a religion marked by a high 
morality and an earnest philanthropy, but wholly 
devoid of all that is distinctively Christian. “Free 
from dogma ” is the favourite expression : and 
this “ freedom ” means the ignoring of the great 
truths of Christianity. 



Note VIII. (page 144). 

According to English law “ the Lord’s day ” — 
as Sunday is designated in the old statutes — 
is a day on which no judge or magistrate may 
sit, and no jury may be empanelled. The criminal 
may be taken red-handed, but all that the law 
may do is to hold him in ward until the day of 
grace has run its course, and a competent tribunal 
may adjudicate upon his crime. If our law went 
further in the same direction, and the functions 
of the constable also were suspended, it would 



Digitized by Google 




APPENDIX 



184 

afford an apter illustration of the great truth that 
is here in question. But to make the parable 
complete, we must go even further still, and 
suppose not only that the criminal enjoys for 
the moment freedom even from arrest, but that 
there is an amnesty in force by which he may 
secure absolute immunity from all the conse- 
quences of his crime. 

But to hold such language is to speak in an 
unknown tongue ; and to turn to the words of 
Scripture in support of it is to risk losing men’s 
attention altogether. The mystery of the gospel 
is that God can justify a sinner, and yet be just. 
He justifies the ungodly. “To him that worketh 
not, but believeth in Him that justifieth the un- 
godly, his faith is counted for righteousness” 
(Rom. iv. 5). Here is another kindred statement : 
“The grace of God hath appeared salvation- 
bringing to all men.” And the passage proceeds : 
“ For we also were aforetime foolish, disobedient, 
deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living 
in malice and envy, hateful, hating one another. 
But when the kindness of God our Saviour, and 
His love-toward-man, appeared, not by works 
done in righteousness, which we did ourselves, 
but according to His mercy He saved us” (Tit. ii. 
11, 12, and iii. 2-5). Or if any would wish to 
have words spoken by the lips of our blessed 
Lord Himself, they will be found in many a 



Digitized by Google 




APPENDIX 



185 



passage of the Gospels. Here, for example, is 
His testimony to Nicodemus : “For God so loved 
the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, 
that whosoever belie veth in Him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life.” 

Are we not justified, then, in saying that for- 
giveness and eternal life are brought within reach 
of all ; that heaven is made as free to sinful men 
as infinite love and grace can make it ? If words 
have any meaning, this, and nothing less than this, - 
is the truth. But how is this gospel treated ? In 
the minds of the religious it excites the utmost | 
indignation. They no longer burn men at the > 
stake for proclaiming it, as in darker days they 
used to do, but though their anger shows itself in 
gentler ways it is just as real. And upon com- 
mon men it makes no impression whatever. A 
man once stood on London Bridge, for a wager, 
offering real sovereigns for a shilling each. The 
notice he displayed was plainly worded, and it 
was read by hundreds of the passers-by. But by 
all it was read incredulously, and therefore with 
indifference. He won his wager : not a single coin 
was taken from him ! And for the same reason 
“the »gospel of the grace of God” is ignored. It j 
will be thus ignored by hundreds who will read 
these pages. Men are possessed by the belief that 
eternal life can be attained only upon impracticable 
conditions, and so their attitude towards the whole 



Digitized by Google 




APPENDIX 



1 86 

matter is one of apathy. But apathy gives place 
to anger if any one dares to speak of eternal 
judgment and a hell for the impenitent. No 
blasphemy can be too daring to hurl at a God 
who would not bring a sinner to heaven in the 
same way a constable brings a drunken prisoner 
to the lock-up — without his will, or, if needs be, 
against his will ! 

But man, made in the image of God, is endowed 
with a will, and to that will the Divine appeal is 
addressed. “Ye will not come to Me that ye 
might have life ” was the Lord’s yearning entreaty 
to those who listened to His words, but refused 
to give heed to them. “ Whosoever will , let him 
take the water o.f life freely.” God’s own heaven 
is the home to which He is calling sinful men. 
Hell has been prepared, not for such, but for the 
devil and his angels. But if men refuse Christ and 
take sides with Satan, they must reap what they 
sow. 



Note IX. (page 153). 

“ Of what value, then, is prayer? ” some one will 
ask, and “ What place is there for it ? ” It is with 
extreme diffidence that I venture to give expres- 
sion to thoughts on this subject which have long 
taken possession of my own mind. And 1 do so 
only because it may possibly bring relief to many 



Digitized by Google 




APPENDIX 



187 



who are sorely distressed at the seeming failure of 
the prayer-promises of the Gospels. Words could 
not be plainer than those in which our Lord im- 
pressed on His disciples that Almighty power was 
absolutely at their disposal, if only they had faith. 
When they wondered that the fig-tree withered at 
His word, He told them that they too could com- 
mand this, or even the moving of a mountain. And 
He added, “ And all things whatsoever ye shall ask 
in prayer, believing, ye shall receive ” (Matt. xxi. 
20-22). How many there are who in in tensest 
earnestness have claimed such promises, and have 
reaped bitter disappointment which has staggered 
their faith ! It is easy of course to explain the 
failure by reading into the promise conditions of 
one kind or another, though the Lord Himself 1 
made no conditions whatever. But instead of I 
tampering thus with His words, let us consider 
whether the true solution of the difficulty may not 
be found in the truth which these pages have 
endeavoured to unfold. 

And here the striking fact claims attention that 
while the record of the Pentecostal dispensation 
presents us with the practical counterpart of all 
such promises, the Epistles, which unfold the doc- 
trine of the present dispensation, and describe 
the life which befits that doctrine — the life of 
faith — inculcate thoughts about prayer which 
are essentially different, and which are entirely 



Digitized by Google 




APPENDIX 



1 88 

in accord with the actual experience of spiritual 
Christians. 1 

Some perhaps may urge that while the earlier 
Gospels may thus be explained, St. John cannot 
be treated in this way. I can in reply but plead 
with the thoughtful reader to consider whether 
every word addressed to the apostles is intended 
to apply to all believers at all times. Take John 
xiv. 1 2 as a test of this. Is every believer to be 
endowed with miraculous powers equal to or 
greater than those exercised by the Lord Him- 
self? We are prepared at once to limit the scope 
of such words : is it so clear, then, that the words 
which immediately follow are of universal applica- 
tion ? We have the fact, I repeat, that both these 
promises were proved to be true in the Pentecostal 
dispensation, and that neither has been proved to 
be true in the Christian Church. 2 So also of 
chap. xv. 1 6, and of xvi. 23, &c. 

But, it will be asked, Is not the promise explicitly 
repeated in St. John’s First Epistle (1 John iii. 22 
and v. 14, 15) ? I think not. It seems to me that 
the apostles were in a special sense empowered both 

1 James v. 13 may seem to be an exception. But without raising 
the question where “ the Elders of the Church ” are to be found in 
our day, it may suffice to notice that this Epistle, being expressly 
addressed to Israel (chap. i. 1), belongs dispensationally to the 
Pentecostal era, which will be renewed when Israel is restored. 

2 See Chap. V. ante. I am convinced that they will be equally 
true in a dispensation which is still future ; but I do not enter on 
such topics here. 



Digitized by Google 




APPENDIX 



189 

to act and to pray in the name of the Lord Jesus, 
whereas the Christian should bow in presence of 
the words, “ according to His will.” As Dean 
Alford here remarks, “If we knew His will 
thoroughly, and submitted to it heartily, if would 
be impossible for us to ask anything, for the spirit 
or for the body, which He should not hear and 
perform. And it is this ideal state, as always, 
which the apostle has in view.” But the Christian 
too commonly makes his own longings, or his 
supposed interests, and not the Divine will, the 
basis of his prayer ; he goes on to persuade him- 
self that his request will be granted ; he then 
regards this “ faith ” as a pledge that he has been 
heard ; and finally, when the issue belies his con- 
fident hopes, he gives way to bitterness and un- 
belief. True faith is always prepared for a refusal. 
Some, we read, “ through faith,” “ obtained pro- 
mises ” ; but, no less “ through faith,” “ others were 
tortured, not accepting deliverance.” 

Some, perhaps, may think it a sufficient refuta- 
tion of all this to appeal to what are called “striking 
answers to prayer,” such as certain Christians have 
experienced in every age. But the appeal refutes 
itself. They are justly regarded as “ striking 
answers ” precisely because they are exceptional. 
No one may dare to limit what God will do for 
the believer. But to make the experience of some 
the standard of faith for all is one of the greatest 



Digitized by Google 




190 



APPENDIX 



errors and snares of Christian life. If these 
promises are of universal application, the fact 
that any answer to prayer should be considered 
striking in any sense is proof of general apostasy. 

A detailed examination of the passages in the 
Epistles which refer to this subject would far ex- 
ceed the limits of a note. One more may suffice. 
I allude to the familiar words of Phil. iv. 6, 7 : “In 
nothing be anxious ; but in everything by prayer 
and supplication with thanksgiving let your re- 
quests be made known unto God. And the peace 
of God, which passeth all understanding, shall 
guard your hearts and your thoughts in Christ 
Jesus” (R.V.). It is a solemn thing to make 
unconditioned demands upon God. To the 
record of such prayers may often be added the 
solemn words : “He gave them their request, 
but sent leanness into their soul.” Hezekiah 
prayed in this way. He claimed a prolongation 
of his life, and God granted his petition ; and the 
added years gave him his son Manasseh, and the 
consequences of Manasseh’s sin (that God “ would 
not pardon ”) still rest as a blight and a curse upon 
that nation ! Such a prayer, I make bold to say, 
is unfitting to the Christian. How different the 
teaching of the Divine Spirit ! It may be the 
life of husband or wife, of parent or child, that is 
in the balance : what then shall be the believer’s 
attitude ? To claim it, as Hezekiah did, and chance 



Digitized by 



Google 







APPENDIX 



191 

the awful risks which the answer may entail ? Or 
“by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving/’ 
to leave the request with God ; and having thus left 
it all with Him, to trust His love and wisdom with 
the issue? It was thus the apostle prayed, when 
he sought relief from that mysterious hindrance to 
his ministry ; and the denial of his request, instead 
of bringing bitterness of soul, only served to teach 
him more of “ the power of Christ ” (2 Cor. xii. 
8, 9). Above all it was thus the Master prayed in 
the garden of Gethsemane (Matt. xxvi. 39, 42). 

The prayer of the Pentecostal age was like 
drawing cheques to be paid in coin over the 
counter. The prayer of the Christian dispensa- 
tion — that is, of the life of faith — is to make known 1 
our requests to God, and to be at peace. If the I 
matter were one within the power of a friend 
to deal with — a friend whose wisdom we could 
trust and of whose love we were assured — should 
we not be content to say, after telling him all, 

“ Now you know my feelings and my wishes, and 
I leave the case entirely in your hands.” And this 
is just what God invites. 

Note X. (page 160). 

The sceptic seldom admits that any position 
once held by him is untenable, and a signal ex- 
ception to this is deserving of special notice. Not 



Digitized by Google 




APPENDIX 



192 

content with making havoc of the Old Testament, 
criticism has long been “ running amuck ” through 
the New Testament also. “ It has been demon- 
strated ” (says a recent writer) “ that the selection 
of the books composing it and their separation 
from the vast mass of spurious gospels, epistles, 
and apocalyptic literature was a gradual process, 
and, indeed, that the rejection of some books and 
the acceptance of others was accidental. ,, 1 But 
all this is now exploded by the greatest living 
authority upon the subject, Professor Harnack of 
Berlin. And his testimony is all the more telling 
because he gives no sign of repentance as regards 
his utter rejection of Christianity. Himself the 
foremost champion of unorthodoxy, he freely owns 
that in this matter the critics are wrong and the 
orthodox are right. Here is an extract from the 
preface to his recent work on “ The Chronology of 
the oldest Christian Literature ” : — 



1 Mr. Andrew D. White’s “ Warfare of Science with Theology,” 
vol. ii. p. 388. This writer’s appointment to the American 
Embassy at Berlin will no doubt call increased attention to his 
book. Real forensic skill is apparent in the use he makes of his 
great erudition ; for, allowing for one important omission, his work 
is quite encyclopedic. His indictment of “theology” is over- 
whelming, and with much of it J am of course in thorough 
, sympathy. But of Christianity, so far as appears from his treatise, 
he knows absolutely nothing. To him our Divine Lord is merely 
“the Blessed Founder” of the Christian religion — the Buddha of 
~ Christendom. Indeed he belongs to that large class of persons 
who, without offence, may be aptly described as Christianised 
Buddhists. 



Digitized by 



Google 



APPENDIX 



193 



“ There was a time — the general public indeed 
has not got beyond it — in which the oldest Chris- 
tian literature, including the New Testament, was 
looked upon as a tissue of deceptions and forgeries. 
That time is passed. For science it was an episode 
in which it learned much, and after which it has 
much to forget. The results, however, of the 
fallowing investigations go in a ‘ reactionary ’ 
direction, beyond what can be described as the 
middle position of present-day criticism. The 
oldest Literature of the Church in all main points 
and in most details, from the point of view of 
literary criticism, is genuine and trustworthy. In 
the whole New Testament there is in all prob- 
ability only a single writing which can be looked 
upon as pseudonymous in the strictest sense of the 
word — i.e. y the Second Epistle of Peter.” 



r 



This is but one of many proofs that the tide has 
turned which in recent years has threatened to 
undermine the Christian faith. In the scepticism 
of the day there is nothing distinctive save that so 
many of its champions are men who are publicly 
pledged and subsidised to teach what they deny. 
It is only the unstable and the ignorant who are 
overwhelmed by a book like that above cited . 1 
Neither the well-instructed nor the spiritual can 
be thus led to reject the Bible as a fraud and 

1 “ Warfare of Science with Theology.” 

*4 



Digitized by Google 



194 



APPENDIX 



Christianity as a superstition. They can under- 
stand the difference between a Divine revelation 
and human comments and commentaries. To 
take a single example — they do not regard the 
Ussher-Lloyd Chronology in the margin of our 
English Bible as “ equally inspired with the sacred 
text itself.” 1 And while refusing to accept open- 
mouthed the wild conjectures of certain Egypto- 
logists as to the antiquity of ancient dynasties, they 
recognise that the “ conjectural periods ” between 
the Deluge and the Kingdom must be largely 
extended. 

If we eliminate the blunders of theologians and 
“ reconcilers ” on the one hand and the theories 
(as distinguished from the facts) of science on the 
other, a ponderous treatise like Mr. A. D. White's 
would be reduced to very small proportions. The 
whole “ Mosaic Cosmogony ” controversy is ruled 
out at once, and many questions which seem of 
serious moment shrink into the background or 
entirely disappear. Moreover, there is in Holy 
Scripture a “ hidden harmony ” unknown to those 
I who ignore the scheme of type and prophecy 
! which permeates the whole. This study is a sure 
j antidote to scepticism. No student of prophecy 
I is a sceptic. And as regards the typology of 
I Scripture, which is the alphabet of the language 



1 “ Warfare of Science with Theology,” vol. i. p. 253. 



Digitized by C.ooQLe 



APPENDIX 



195 



in which the New Testament is written, there is | 
not one of the rationalists who has given proof of 
possessing any knowledge whatever. Ignorance • 
of the alphabet is a fatal defect in those who claim 
to expound the text ; and this ignorance, which 
Hengstenberg deplored in his day, is still absolute 
in the case of all without exception who are 
seeking to prove that the Bible is but a human 
book. “Truth brings out the hidden harmony, 
when unbelief can only, with a dull dogmatism, 
deny.” 




Digitized by Google 




Digitized by 



INDEX 



Acts of the Apostles, scope and 
purpose of the, 49-60, 63, 76, 

84, 166-170, 171 
Alford, Dean, 37, 76//, 107//, 
189 

Ananias, 14, 77, 118, 179 
Angels, fallen, 119 

,, the herald, 13, 147 
Aristotle’s Rhet. % 99 n 
Armenian massacres, the, 3, 4 
Atheism, 19, 64 

Balfour, Mr. A. J., 24, 25, 64**, 

67 

Bampton Lectures 1864, 52 
Baur, F. C., 71, 72 
Believing in Christ, meaning of, 
104, 151 

Bible, the, 92-95, 157 
Buddhism, 68, 70, 124/*, 151// 
Burke, Edmund, 64** 

Butler, Bishop, 36, 37, 39 

Calvin, Ii6w, 178 
Carlist insurrection, 171 
Christ, advent of, n-13, 1 7 1 
,, divinity of, 22, 183 

,, lordship of, 1 5 1 

197 



Christ, testimony of the Bible 
to, 41, 43, 44 

Christianity, character, of, 36, 
43> 66, 67, 69, 70, 173 
Chronology of the Bible, 194 
Church, authority of the, 91- 
93 

Church of England, teaching of, 
93 " 

Cicero, 61 

Cross, the, 73, 74, 139, 150, 156 

“ Deacons, the,” 77 
Demons, 118, 163 
Devil, the, 118-131, 176-180 
,, see" Satan” 

“ Essays and Reviews,” 21 
Eternal life, how obtained, 
98-104, 1 16, 144, 185 

Fairbairn, Dr., 71-72 
Faith, see " Believing ” 
Faith-healing, 164, 165 
Froude, J. A., 61, 66 

Gladstone, Mr. W. E., 25, 
2 8«, 30 



Digitized by Google 




INDEX 



198 

Grace, 99 

Greg, W. R., 96, 100 

Harnack, Prof., 192 
Hengstenberg, 195 
Hezekiah’s prayer, 190 
Hooker, 175 
Hume, 20, 21, 25, 32 n 

Infidelity, 20, 29 

John, St., 38 

„ gospel 01, 51, 54/2, 188 
John the Baptist, 41/2, 48 
Judgment, Christ’s prerogative, 
1 43 

Justification, 98-100, 184 

Kellogg, Prof., 68/2, 124/2 

Lecky, W. E. H., 69 
Lie, the, 128, 180, 18 1 
“ Lux Mundi,” 92/2 

Mansel, Dean, 9, 27 
Martyrs, the Christian, 7, 80, 
81/2, 152 

Matthew, gospel of, 51 
Mill, John Stuart, 33, 34, 
81 

Miracles, definition of, 24, 27, 
3°, 161 

,, evidential value of, 

25> 33-47, 48, 170 

,, possibility of, 17, 

23-32, 34 

,, Pal ey’s argument from, 

33 &c. , 48 &c. 

,, of Christ, 12, 30, 31, 

36, 37, 39 



Miracles, cessation of, 10, 17, 18, 
24,49, 57, 58, 153, 
161, 170 

,, rejection of, 20, 29 
Missionaries, 157-158 

,, massacres of, 6 
“ Mystery,” meaning of, in 
Scripture, 109, 1 74-1 75 

Neptune, discovery of, 128 
Newmans, the, 160/2 
Nicodemus, 37, 185 

Ordination pledges, 157 

Paley, 33, 34, 48 
Paris, Abbe, 32/2. 

Paul, St., conversion of, 15, 38, 

39, 55 

,, ministry of, 56, 57, 83, 

107, 137, 167-169 
,, sufferings of, 154 

Pentecostal dispensation, 16, 56, 
58, 72, 75, I69, 187, 188 
Peter, St., 15, 27, 38, 49, 75, 88 
Prayer, 62, 186-191 
,, Hezekiah’s, 190 
,, the Lord’s, 172 
Protestantism, 88, 93/2, 98 
I 

Rationalists, the, 22 
Reconciliation, 114 
Religion, asceticisms of, 156 
,, evil effects of, 80 

,, Christianity not a, 36, 

43-45,66,78,166 
“ Religion,” use of, in English 
Bible, 165 

Romans, Epistle to the, 50, 54, 
106 



Digitized by Google 




INDEX 



199 



“Sacrament,” meaning of, 175, 
176 

Salisbury, Marquis of, 5 n 
“ Samaritan, the good,” 1 00-103 
Satan, 117-131, 176-180, 181- 

183 

,, controls religion, 127, 
178, 182 
,, fall of, 150 

Sceptics, the religious, 21, 23, 
33, 88-94, 157, 193 
“ Sermon on the Mount,” 87, 
128,172-174 
Sin, 1 1 2, 120 
Spiritualism, 163 
Stephen, St., 14, 55, 79, 81, 
82 

“ Supernatural Religion,” 54;/ 



Swift, Dean, 46 

Taylor, Bp., 175 
Temptation, the, 125, 126, 176 
Temptations, Satanic, 176-180 
Trench, Archbp., 112, 165, 166 
Tyndale, Wm., 92 
Tyndall, Prof., 146 

Van Mildert, Bp., 32 

Wallace, Prof. A. R., 163 
“ Way, the,” 86 « 

Westminster Divines, the, 133 
White, Mr. A. D., 192, 194 
Wilberforce, Bp., 135 
Wilkins, Sergeant, H2« 




UNWIN BROTHERS, THE GRESHAM PRESS, WOKING AND LONDON. 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by 



Googl 




Digitized by 




i 



RETURN 
TO* 



SIBPW-atiom department 



LOAN PERIOD 1 

HOME USE 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 



ibn w i/n i g 

Renewals and Recharges may be niade 4 days prior to the due dote. 
Books may be Renewed by calling 642-3405. 



SEP 11 1986 




bV VV 








— kotO- ^ SC 


► 




fWJ \ 

— =?> q 


a 




SEP J 

















































FORM NO. DD6, 

UNIV. 



BERKELEY, €A 94720 



®S 



Digitized by 



Google 



- yr An 838 

GENERAL LIBRARY- U.C. BERKELEY 



■HHUIUIII 

B00D8t27?3 





Digitized by Google 



Digitized by 




