
Book 






University of Chicago Library 



GIVEN BY 



VI 



Besides the main topic this book also treatyof 
S^tbject No, On page Subject No. On page 



HP1 /"* ! -C"'/^ ,! 

1 he Creed di:.Creea$ 





A Series, pf; 
of " 



Expositions . ... 



. . ... 



By 

F. B. Meyer, BA 

) 

Minister of Christ Church, Westminster Bridge Road, 

Lambeth, and Ex-President of the National 

Federation of Free Churches. 




NEW YORK CHICAGO TORONTO 

Fleming H. Revell Company 

LONDON AND EDINBURGH 



! * 





I 

< 

I 



.* 








\1 



v* 







. *.* . **. 



apostles' Creek 



-H- 



5 believe in (Bob tbe ffatber Hlmfgbtg, 
Rafter of beaven anb eartb : 

Hnb in Sesns Cbrist Ibis onl$ Son 
our %orb, Mbo was conceipeb bg tbe 
fbolg Gbost, 3Born of tbe \Dir0in /Bbars, 
Suffereo unDec Pontius Dilate, Mas 
ctncifie^ t>eat>, ano t>urieo t ibe be* 
scenbeb into bell; TEbe tbirD bas Ifoe 
rose again tcom tbe fceao, 1be ascenbeb 
into beaven, Hnb sittetb on tbe rigbt 
banb ot (Bob tbe fatber Elmfabts; 
3from tbence t)e sball come to jnbge 
tbe qnicft anb tbe beab- 

5 believe in tbe Ibolp. Gbost; TTbe 
bol$ Catbolic Cburcb ; tlbe Communion 
ot Saints ; ^be forgiveness of Sins ; 
Ube TResnrcection of tbe bob)?, Hnb tbe 
life everlasting* Bmem 



THE PROLOGUE 

THE noble and venerable formulary known as 
the Apostles' Creed, though presenting the essence of 
their Belief and Testimony, cannot be positively 
credited to the Apostolic Age. Indeed, whatever 
may have been the practice of individual churches, 
there is no trace in Christian Literature of any 
definite summaries of Christian Belief till a much 
later age the age of Irenaus and Tertullian. 

"It is sufficiently evident," writes Principal 
Tulloch, " that ' Confessions of Faith,' or ' Rules 
and Standards of Truth ' existed in the Ante-Nicene 
Church from the last quarter of the second century 
.... but it is equally evident that there was no 
Rule of Faith universally accepted by the Church, 
or authoritatively imposed by any Catholic body up 
to the time of the Nicene Council." 

The earliest form of this Creed is contained in 
the Confessions of Faith, presented to Julius, 
Bishop of Rome, by Marcellus, the Bishop of 
Ancyra, about the year A.D. 336. He describes 
it as the faith, which he "learnt and was taught 

from the Holy Scriptures." 

v 



VI THE PROLOGUE 

Substantially then the Apostles' Creed was in 
existence probably from the end of the Fourth 
Century, though there is no evidence of its general 
reception, in its completed form, till about the middle 
of the Eighth Century. 

It has always captivated the Christian Imagina- 
tion and Heart, because of its simplicity, its brevity, 
its freedom from elaborate theological phraseology ; 
and probably a larger number of Christian people, 
of all churches and sects, could unite in reciting it, 
than any other statement of Christianity in existence. 
For this reason I venture to term it the CREED OF 
CREEDS. 

Probably it is the one Creed in which all Christen- 
dom could unite. A striking evidence of this was 
given in the recent World-Baptist Congress, when 
at the request of the venerable Dr. Maclaren, the 
entire assembly of three thousand delegates, from 
all parts of the earth, stood and repeated, with 
impressive emphasis, these well-known clauses. 
The episode was the more remarkable, as the 
Baptist denomination has always shown itself 
very conservative in the adoption of forms or 
liturgies of any kind. It is recognised, however, 
among all branches of the Church of Christ, that 
no one communion can claim any exclusive pro- 
prietorship in this great Creed, All schools of 



THE PROLOGUE Vll 

theology may meet in its ancient precincts, piled 
by builders who have long since passed from faith 
to sight. 

In preparing these brief expositions of its several 
clauses, I have made use of notes gathered long 
since, in one or two of the earlier of which are traces 
of the BOSTON LECTURES. / cannot recall any 
others to whom I should make acknowledgment. 
This little treatise is placed at the service of the One 
Church, in the underlying Unity of which we all 
believe, and when the time arrives for the outward 
manifestation of that Unity, surely the Apostles' 
Creed will take a foremost place in the expression 
of the common and universal Faith. 

F. B. MEYER. 



THE CREED OF CREEDS 



The Uncertainty of Natural Religion 

IT cannot be denied that races which lie outside 
the sphere of Revealed Religion have possessed 
materials of arriving at the knowledge of God. 
The creation of the world has made known His 
power and Godhead ; sunshine or rain, fruitful 
seasons and fertile soils have told of His daily 
care ; great prophets and teachers, rearing them- 
selves aloft above their fellows, have caught the 
beams of His glory, and reflected them ; the Light 
that lighteth every man coming into the world 
has illumined conscience and heart ; the geo- 
graphical situation and location in the world's 
development have been so contrived as to induce 
men to seek after God and fumble about the 
latch of his Glorious Temple, if haply they might 
find Him ; and thus many have attained to very 
wise and true conceptions of the Divine Nature. 
We have only to quote some of the expressions in 
the ancient Vedic Hymns, or paragraphs from 
the writings of Seneca, to establish this. And it 



2 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

is in reference to such, conclusions of the human 
mind, apart from the clear teachings of Revela- 
tion that the last of the prophets cries : " From 
the rising of the sun even unto the going down 
of the same my name is great among the Gentiles, 
saith the Lord, and in every place incense is 
offered unto my name and a pure offering." 

But at the best there was deep uncertainty 
mingled with all these conclusions, however wise 
and good. In Athens, an altar was erected 
to the unknown God, whom this very religious 
people worshipped in ignorance. In Egypt one 
of the most famous Temples bore on its portico 
the legend, " I am He that was, and is, and shall 
be, but no mortal hath lifted my vail." Granted 
that the summer spoke of God's love, what of 
winter with her storms. Was not the message 
of the Pleiades cancelled by that of Orion ? Did 
not the brightest and longest days descend at 
last into the dark tomb of the night ? The mind 
of man hovered between the two extremes, but 
on the whole yielded to the darkest suspicions 
and fears. Hence the awful rites with which 
Priests, on behalf of their fellows, sought to 
propitiate and soothe the Divine Nature. The 
conclusions of Natural Religion find an apt 
expression in the Book of Job : " Touching the 



UNCERTAINTY OF NATURAL RELIGION 3 

mighty, we cannot find Him out. ... Oh that 
I knew where I might find Him, that I might come 
even to His seat ! " 

Equally uncertain were men in their conclu- 
sions about Forgiveness and the Future Life. 
They hoped that their sins might be pardoned, 
but they were never sure how much was required 
for the Divine satisfaction. Should they give 
their first-born for their transgressions, the fruit 
of their bodies for the sins of their souls ? And 
as to the existence of the soul beyond death, 
it passed, so the wisest said, to a land of darkness 
and of the shadow of death, a land of thick dark- 
ness, as darkness itself ; a land of the shadow of 
death, without any order, and where the light 
was as darkness. The bewildering uncertainty 
of the wisest and best of men was very pitiful. 
They peered into the thick curtain of black night 
which surrounded their lives, and said that they 
were reminded of the flights of a sparrow through 
a brilliantly lit hall, coming out of the wintry 
blasts on the one hand, and after a brief space of 
warmth and colour, returning to them again, 
but no one knew whence or whither. 

We can hardly realise the intensity with which 
the mariners of those days, as they heard the 
surf beating on the rocks, longed for day to break 



4 THE CREED OF CREEDS , 

on the spiritual horizon. Agitated by conscience, 
driven by fear, conscious of a Presence they could 
not comprehend, approaching the infinite mystery 
of an impenetrable secret, the heart of man 
cried aloud for light, that it might live in hope 
and die in peace. 

There is something of this in our own age also. 
To many amongst us black gulfs of doubt open 
on every side, and in desperation multitudes are 
flying for refuge either in positivism which leaves 
out of account the yearnings, the instincts, the 
peremptory facts of the soul, or in the assumed 
infallibility of the Roman Church, which rules 
the spirit through the confessional and strives to 
silence it by papal edicts or interdicts. Amid 
these false harbours, and misleading lights, how 
great a relief it is to turn to the calm certainty 
of Christian truth. 



The Certainty of the New Testament 

FROM Matthew onward to the Apocalypse, however 
much the books of the New Testament differ 
in other respects, they are marked by one invaria- 
ble characteristic which accosts us on every page ; 
and that is the solemn tone of certainty which per- 
vades them. There is not a single breakdown 
into speculation or balancing of probabilities. 
Such was the verdict of a beloved friend of mine, 
the Rev. Edward White, who, after a life of 
vigorous conflict came to be as much revered for 
the saintliness and sweetness of his disposition 
as he was respected for his learning and acumen. 
It is not necessary to have recourse to his pages 
for sufficient evidence of this special trait in the 
New Testament writers. The signs of it are to 
be discovered on every page. 

Writing to his friend, Theophilus, the Evangelist 
Luke affirms that the facts of the Gospel were 
surely believed amongst the Christians with whom 
he consorted, and that he had set himself to a 
careful and accurate tracing down of them all 
from the very first, that his friend might fully 



6 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

know the certainty of the things in which he had 
become instructed (Luke i. 1-4). 

The Apostle Peter asserts that they had not 
followed cunningly devised fables, when his 
fellow apostles and himself had made known the 
power and coming of the Lord Jesus, but that 
the word of prophecy had been made sure to them 
(2 Peter i. 16, 19). And he does not hesitate to 
describe the basis of Christianity as A ROCK, a 
solid Rock, so that he who believed and built 
on it could not be confounded (1 Peter ii. 6-8). 

John, the beloved Apostle, is not less emphatic. 
He tells us what he had seen with his eyes, and 
handled with his hands, concerning the Word of 
Life, and that he bore witness and declared what 
he had seen and felt, that his readers might share 
with him the joy of a certain knowledge (1 John i. 
1-4). His First Epistle rings with the words 
we know. " We know that the Son of God is 
come." ....;" We know Him that is true." . . 
" We know that we have passed from death 
unto life." . . . . " We know that we shall be 
like Him." .... 

Or if we turn to the Epistles of the last and 
greatest of the Apostles, the most cursory examina- 
tion of his Epistles is sufficient to convince the 
enquirer that his mind and heart reposed on the 



CERTAINTY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 7 

most absolute certainty of the Gospel which he 
proclaimed both in the facts on which it rested 
and the deductions which were made from them. 
His favourite word is Epignosis to describe the 
deep and searching knowledge of the Christian 
disciple. He says that we must no longer be 
children tossed on the waves and carried to and 
fro by every current, but ought to arrive at the 
unity of the faith of the thorough knowledge of the 
Son of God (Eph. iv. 13). He protests that he 
dared not cease praying until his converts have 
been brought to a condition of thorough knowledge, 
according to the Image of Him who has created 
them (Col. i. 9 ; iii. 10). He insists on the full 
assurance of understanding, the solid certainty of 
fact on which the Christian faith rested, and the 
confidence or boldness which were the necessary 
result (Col. ii. 2 ; 2 Cor. iii. 12 ; see also Heb. iv. 
16, x. 19). He said, " We believe and therefore 
speak ; " and again, " We know that if this 
earthly house be broken up, we have a house not 
made with hands ; and yet again, " Though we, 
or an angel from heaven, should preach unto you 
any Gospel other than that which we preached unto 
you, let him be anathema." 

Throughout, the sacred writers speak as those 
for whom the vail had been rent, and the darkness 



8 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

dissipated. They know whom and what they had 
believed, and were persuaded. They asserted that 
they had received not the spirit of the world, but 
the Spirit which was of God, that they might 
know the things which ordinary men had not seen 
with their eyes, nor heard with their ears, though 
they had been freely given them by God. 

It was this accent of assured certainty that 
captivated the world. Just at the moment when 
the old religions which had held the allegiance 
of the foremost races were tottering to their fall, 
and when the most absolute despair that had 
ever enwrapped the world was settling like a pall 
over the minds of men, there burst on their aston- 
ished ear the assertion, on the part of simple and 
unlearned witnesses, that they had found the 
Truth and the Truth had made them free. 

The witness-bearers were put to every conceiv- 
able test. Their quality was tested by fire and 
sword. They were confronted by every kind of 
opposition from the sneers of Roman proconsuls 
to the contempt of Athenian sages, but they never 
wavered. Had they stood as sponsors for a 
new system of philosophy, they might have 
yielded to superior intellects, and been put to 
shame and silenced ; but when it was a question 
of facts which are equally within the cognisance 



CERTAINTY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 9 

of fishermen and artisans as of philosophers, 
they could not renounce their affirmation that 
God had been manifested in the flesh, seen of angels, 
believed among the Gentiles, and received up in 
glory. ' 



If so much Certainty, why all the Diversity ? 

THERE is Diversity ! Christendom resembles 
a mosaic of different patches of colour. The 
Greek, the Roman, the Anglican Churches, and 
some hundred differing denominations, fill the 
air with their protestations that they possess 
the Truth. They profess that what they teach 
is the original doctrine of the Apostles, and some 
of them add, that to diverge from their doctrines 
and formularies is to run the risk of perishing 
everlastingly. 

Now it should be admitted at the outset that 
each of these bodies has some truth given it in 
charge, else it could not continue ; and that speak- 
ing generally, the affirmations are true, whilst 
the limitations and negations are false. But 
why is it, since the Apostles were so positive in 
their declarations, that these infinite varieties 
exist ? The answer surely lies in the distinction 
between the facts on which Christianity rests, 
and the deductions or doctrines which have been 
made from them. 

In the facts the immense preponderance of 

Christians are agreed. That Jesus the Son of 

10 



IF SO MUCH CERTAINTY 11 

Mary after the flesh was born in the days of 
Csesar Augustus, lived, died, and rose from the 
dead, that He ascended into Heaven and gave 
the Holy Spirit to His Church, are accepted as 
facts by the most diverse sections of the pro- 
fessing Church. A striking illustration of this 
was given during the debates in the House of 
Commons on the Education Bill. Between Mr. 
Healy, a loyal son of the Roman Church, and 
the large numbers of Free Churchmen, Radicals, 
and Socialists who crowded the benches on one 
side of the House, there could have been as small 
a degree of common ground as between him and 
the Anglican Churchmen who sat on the other, 
but the whole house was hushed and united in the 
sense of a great unity, as in a voice broken with 
passionate emphasis and emotion, he closed his 
speech with these touching words, " If there be 
one thing which I and mine have a grip of, it is 
this the belief in the Infinite Christ to come ; 
yes, and the belief that our children, whatever 
be their distresses, their misfortunes, their poverty, 
if they have listened to the teaching and put in 
practice the lessons given them by the priest 
in the Catholic schools, they will hereafter reap 
a rich and an exceeding great reward." 
With the explanations which the Apostles give 



12 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

of the facts of the Gospels, there is also very 
general accord. It is the unvarying assertion 
of the Apostles that those explanations were 
revealed to them by the direct teaching of the 
Holy Spirit. The Apostle Paul, for instance, 
says that God made known to him the inner 
meaning, or mysteries of the gospel of the Spirit, 
and that he spoke in words which the Holy Spirit 
taught. He declares most solemnly that the 
gospel which he preached was not after men, 
neither was he taught it, but by the revelation of 
Jesus Christ. He refers also to the mould of 
doctrine into which the faith of his converts had 
been poured. On the whole it may be said that 
Christendom accepts these explanations, and reads 
into the facts recorded in the Gospels thoughts 
and conceptions which would not otherwise be 
associated with them; as for instance, that the 
Death of the Cross was a sacrifice for the sins of 
the world, and the; Resurrection and Ascension 
an entrance into the Holiest of the High Priest. 
But it is when we come to the deductions drawn 
from these explanatory statements that the 
infinite varieties of the creeds of churches assert 
themselves. Opinions are as numerous as minds. 
The pure light is reflected from ^thousands of 
different facets and angles. Human views and 



IF SO MUCH CERTAINTY 13 

conceptions of truth are distorted by the medium 
through which they reach us, by the prevalence 
of preconceived notions, by the effect of heredity 
and early training, by hasty generalizations and 
one-sided views, and by the strong effect which 
one mind exercises over another. For these and 
similar reasons, we group ourselves differently, 
arrange ourselves under diverse flags, take up 
strong dogmatic positions, and crystallize into 
Churches and Denominations. 

If we trusted less in our intellect and more to 
our heart, if we calmed and quieted ourselves 
as weaned babes in absolute childlikeness and 
simplicity of soul, if we were slower to speak and 
quicker to listen, if instead of reprimanding one 
another we were more eager to bring others into 
the unity of the faith of the knowledge of the Son 
of God, if we magnified essentials more and non- 
essentials less, if we put Christ before creeds, 
and His Glory above Churches, it is probable that 
the Lord's Prayer for our manifested oneness 
would seem less of a far-away dream, and more 
of a practical reality. 

But it must be re-affirmed, for it is so often 
lost sight of, that there is substantial agreement 
among Christians of every name "that Christ 
died for our sins, according to the Scriptures ; 



14 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

that He was buried, and that He hath been raised 
on the third day according to the Scriptures ; 
that as by man came death, by man came also the 
resurrection of the dead, and as in Adam all die, 
so also in Christ shall all be made alive ; and that 
repentance and remission of sins should be 
preached in His name unto all the nations." 



No Special Claims of the Apostles' Creed 

IT is not possible to trace it to its origin. Almost 
certainly it was not the product of the Apostolic 
Age. But it has commended itself to all Christian 
people, because it deals almost exclusively with 
the great facts of the Gospel story, and with the 
simplest inspired explanations of those facts; whilst 
it abstains from those niceties of definition which 
accost us in the Athanasian and Nicene Creeds. 
It was this characteristic that led the venerable 
Dr. Maclaren to call on the World's Assembly of 
representative Baptists in 1905 to join with him 
in repeating the Apostles' Creed, as an expression 
of their oneness with the entire Church of Christ. 
There can be no thought of imposing this or 
any other creed on the Christian conscience. No 
man or set of men has any right to insist on the 
acceptance by individuals or churches of any 
form of words, however venerable of age, or con- 
secrated by use. No formulary known to man 
can comprehend the whole horizon of truth ; and 
there are probably thousands who might not 
accept every item even of the Apostles' Creed, 
simple and elementary as it appears, but their 
names are undoubtedly written in the Lamb's 

15 



16 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

Book of Life, and they are included in the Holy 
Church of the Redeemed. 

How thankful we should be that the truth 
about God's Redeeming Grace is not given in a 
series of abstract propositions, but in the living 
Person of Jesus, in His life and words, His wonder- 
ful deeds and death ! There is as much difference 
between the conceptions of theologians and the 
narratives of the Gospels, as between the Laws 
of Scientists and the outspread face of Nature. 
Thank God, we say again, that the Apostles' 
Creed is not an integral part of Scripture, else 
only those would be stamped with the mint-mark 
of Christianity who accepted it, whilst those who 
hesitated about its least particular would be 
consigned to the uncovenanted mercies of God. 

No, our salvation does not consist in any 
intellectual Credo. The devils believe and trem- 
ble ; whilst the dying thief who had only the 
dimmest possible vision of the nature of Christ 
was saved. The faith of the mind may be per- 
fectly orthodox, and yet exercise no saving effect 
upon character or life, but it thereby shows itself 
to be a dead faith, since it is without works or 
fruit. Whereas the faith of the heart, which may 
fasten on some tiny fragment of Christ's Person, 
which touches the hem of His garment, which 



NO SPECIAL CLAIMS OF THE CREED 17 

opens its window in the dark to admit the cassia 
fragrance of His Person is certainly accepted 
and instructed. Salvation does not consist in our 
belief about Christ, but in our trust in Him. There 
must, of course, be some knowledge of His Person 
and Work, but this may be very fragmentary 
and slender, and yet the soul's faith will link it 
to Him that was, and is, and is to come, for ever- 
more. Not the Bible, but Christ of whom the 
Bible speaks, not the Creed, but Christ of whom 
the Creed is true, not the Sacraments, but Christ 
who instituted them, not the Atoning Death of 
Christ, but Christ who made the Atonement, 
must ever be the object of the soul's faith. And 
again, we repeat it, there are many who may be 
unable to pass the test of the Creed, to whom, 
because the soul has exercised the right attitude 
towards Him, our Lord will say at last, " Come 
ye blessed of My Father, inherit the Kingdom 
prepared for you from the foundation of the 

World." 

But though the obligatory use of the Creed, 
as a test of Christianity, may be resisted, it will 
be generally admitted that it serves as a most 
useful synopsis and compendium of the great 
facts of our Common Faith, and in this sense it 
may be made use of and prized by all Christians. 



18 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

It is deeply impressive to hear a great company 
of men and women repeat these noble words. On 
the great Pacific or Atlantic liners, in log-shanties, 
in the midst of Mohammedan, Hindoo, or Chinese 
populations, the heart must be torpid and irre- 
sponsive indeed that is not moved by the recita- 
tion of these venerable sentences. In face of the 
Infidelity that says there is no God, of the Agnosti- 
cism that cries we cannot know, of the Pantheism 
which confounds God with His works, of the 
Followers of the False Prophet who assert that 
Mahomet is the supreme Prophet of the Most 
High, it is a great act for a group of people, who 
would probably agree in nothing else, to stand 
together to affirm that they believe in the Almighty 
Maker of Heaven and Earth, and in Jesus Christ, 
His only Son, their Lord. 

The position of the Apostles' Creed in the Service 
of the Church of England is specially noteworthy. 
Coming as it does after the great outbursts of 
adoration and worship, and before the Inter- 
cessions and Supplications of the congregation, it 
seems almost the climax of the Liturgy, the highest 
point of the upward climb from the lowest 
penitence to the shining tablelands where God 
Himself is Sun. 



THE CREED OF CREEDS 



"I Believe in God" 

IN the rainless, smokeless air, the temples, public 
buildings, and statues of Athens must have stood 
out in clear-cut beauty, as the Apostle rose to 
make his defence before the most cultured and 
critical audience of the age. The faces which 
met his were not only exquisitely chiselled by 
nature, but were refined by habitual contempla- 
tion of the highest themes that can engage the 
heart of man. They, however, confessed them- 
selves Agnostic as to the Existence and Nature 
of the Supreme Being. The altar which he had 
espied among many others testified to this. The 
inscription which it bore upon its face contained 
that word. The contrast was therefore the more 
startling when the stranger, whose disputations 
in the Agora had aroused so much interest, 
opened his address by saying : Whom ye worship, 
without knowing, Him I declare unto you God 
that made the world and all things therein. 

It is a noble position for any man to take up 
and maintain in a world of agnostics. It is a 
great thing to be able to say, / believe in God. 

21 



22 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

That magnificent affirmation can only be made 
by a reverent, thoughtful, pure-hearted soul, 
whose windows stand open to the Infinite. 
Nature cannot say it. Like a mirror she can 
flash the Glory of God from world to world, as 
birds pass their morning carol from tree to tree, 
but she cannot say, / believe in God. The brute 
creatures may recognise their owners and " their 
master's crib," but they cannot say, We believe 
in God. The idiot and the sensualist are alike 
excluded from the grandeur of these words. It 
needs manhood, intelligence, sobriety, self-control, 
reverence, before the heart can inspire, and the 
lips utter, the first clause of the Creed, I believe 
in God. 

Obviously the grounds on which this affirmation 
rests differ widely from those on which students 
of nature are wont to rest their arguments. They 
use the hammer, crucible, or chemical test, the 
scalpel or microscope, which convey their message 
immediately to the senses of sight, touch, or 
taste. But the existence and nearness of God 
cannot be proved to human sense. " Eye hath 
not seen, nor ear heard." He cannot be unveiled 
to the eye ; nor touched by the hand reached out 
to feel Him in the dark ; nor inhaled as a scent 
or breath. To all these tests He is as impalpable 



I BELIEVE IN GOD 23 

as the love of your most intimate and devoted 
friendship. The Being of God is only appre- 
hended by the spirit of man, which is probably 
endowed with senses which correspond to those 
of the body. It too has its sight, its touch, its 
hearing, and its taste ; to which, when they are 
awake, and not drenched by materialism and 
sensuality, it is as easy to demonstrate the Being 
of God as the existence of matter. " The spiritual 
man discerneth all things, though he himself is 
discerned of no man." Clean and uncurtain the 
windows of your inner life. Cease to do evil, 
learn to do well. Be absolutely true to your 
highest ideals. If the Dawn is not yet on the sky, 
yet face the east, and as certainly as you seek 
you shall find. The light of the glory of God 
will break on you. " He that is of the Truth 
heareth My voice." 

It will come to you thus : If there be a God, 
He must be a Thinker ; the universe is every- 
where full of thought ; and on your heart and 
mind thoughts will steal of purity and wide hori- 
zons, and lofty inspirations. If there be a God, 
He must be Full of Force and Energy ; the worlds 
bear witness to the Presence of some mysterious 
pressure behind them, urging them forward ; and 
through your being, you will become aware of 



24 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

the thrill of His energy. If there be a God, He 
must be Love ; for this is universally diffused in 
lower and higher forms amongst His creatures, 
and if you are still you will experience in moments 
of depression, and penitence, the wafting of a 
warm breeze of tenderness across your weary, 
fevered spirit. If there be a God, He must be 
Truth; for the heart of man bears witness to 
this as its highest attribute, and it is impossible 
that what is so prominent in man can be deficient 
in Him who is postulated as the origin and source ; 
and you may verify this, as you listen to the voice 
which expostulates within you against all that is 
base and false and mean. Thus each man carries 
within His own heart the means by which He can 
verify the existence of God, so that for himself 
and by the exercise of his own faculties, he may 
be able to say, I believe in God. 

It fell to my lot the other morning to cross 
Westminster Bridge, as the dawn was breaking 
over the noble forms of the buildings which line 
the river-front. Before me lay the Houses of 
Parliament, the venerable Abbey, and the long 
array of the Embankment carrying the eye to 
the Dome of St. Paul's rising out of the morning 
haze. Beside me was St. Thomas' Hospital. I 
had hardly passed it, when I became conscious 



I BELIEVE IN GOD 25 

of an unwonted sound the lapping of the Thames 
against the steps. I had never heard it before, 
because never before had I crossed the bridge 
when the noise of the traffic was hushed. So is 
it with the soul. Amid life's busy rush, we cannot 
hear the inner whisper which attests the Being 
of God : but when the day is done, the stars 
glimmer out ; when feet cease to trample the 
forest, squirrels, rabbits, and birds reveal their 
presence ; when the heart is hushed, a voice is 
heard crying, I believe, in God. 



3-(5i6) 



II 

"I Believe in God the Father" 

IT was a great day in the evolving story of the 
Universe, when Man, as a High Priest, robed and 
crowned, could stand forth and say, I believe in 
God ; but perhaps it was a greater, when after 
ages of thought and observation, the Divine 
Spirit enabled him to add the words, I believe in 
God, the Father. " Like as a father pitieth his 
children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear 
Him." 

The yearning of the heart for love postulates 
and proves unless existence be an insoluble 
riddle, an aimless maze that there is a responsive 
Love behind the painted curtain that screens the 
eternal and infinite from our view. Do fish flash 
from the still surface of the lake for food which is 
not provided each fly for its own season ? Do 
swallows preen their wings for flight to summer 
lands, which do not exist, or which they shall 
never reach ? Does the young lion cry for food, 
which it shall search for in vain through the forest- 
glade ? Does not the yearning of the babe, its 

outcry or its silent tears, prove that there is a 

26 



I BELIEVE IN GOD THE FATHER 27 

mother's heart, which cannot forget the sucking 
child, and a fountain of nourishment in the 
maternal breast ? So the unsatisfied yearning 
of the human heart, which turns even from the 
tender love of woman to call aloud for a Love 
which is altogether satisfying and complete, 
proves that there must be a Father's Heart, a 
Father's Pity, and a Father's Forgiveness, waiting 
to run to meet, to kiss, to clothe with the new robe, 
and feast with song and dance. 

This was the supreme message of Jesus to the 
world. His teachings about the necessity of 
Propitiation and Sacrifice, though unmistakable, 
were subordinate to the constant reiteration of 
the Fatherhood of God. He had come from " the 
bosom of the Father " : and to the Father He 
was to return. It 'was His meat and drink to do 
the Father's will. Heaven was the Father's 
House with its many mansions. He that had 
seen Hun had seen the Father, because He was in 
the Father, and the Father in Him. When we 
pray, He taught us to say, " Our Father which 
art in Heaven." 

There can be no doubt that there is an inner 
circle of Sonship. Those who receive Christ have 
the right or power to become Sons of God in an 
inner or more vital sense, and because they are 



28 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

sons, the Spirit of the Son is sent into their hearts, 
whereby they cry, " Abba, Father " (John i. 12 ; 
Gal. v. 1, 2). But as the Apostle said, All men 
are God's sons, in the true and deep sense of being 
His offspring (Acts xvii. 28). The fatherly 
tenderness and love of God go far over the entire 
range of humanity. They are not confined to a 
favoured few, who stand in the inner golden 
circle. There is no fragment of humanity that, 
by virtue of its creation, may not stand beneath 
the blue heavens, and pointing upwards, say, / 
believe in God the Father, adding softly : "0, my 
Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before 
Thee, and am no more worthy to be called Thy 



son." 



Like a Father He forgives. He takes on Himself 
the loss, the cost, the shame of our sin, and to 
how much these amount we have no clue save 
the mysterious anguish of the Garden and the 
Cross ; and He gives His pardon to each penitent 
and believing soul, so absolute that it resembles 
the obliteration by the incoming tide of the rude 
figures and letters that children had scored on 
the smooth' surface of the sand. Ah, sinful child, 
thy tears and prayers, thy confessions and vows 
have not lost their way in the dark night. They 
have travelled, like some wireless message to the 



I BELIEVE IN GOD THE FATHER 29 

Divine Lover of Men. " Thy prayers are heard 
and thine alms are come up as a memorial before 
God ; " but it is not on account of one or the 
other that thou art forgiven, but because of His 
free grace and mercy, " declared unto us in 
Christ Jesus, our Lord." Hark, He speaks Thy 
sins, which are many, are forgiven. Rise up, go 
thy way and live thy life under the sure conviction 
that Heaven and Earth may pass, but that Word 
shall stand for ever. 

As a Father He comforteth. The prophet uses 
a yet tenderer phrase, and tells us that God 
comforts as mothers do. Yet men are very 
tender, when their little child is sobbing as if its 
heart would break. If God's tenderness is in 
proportion to the infiniteness of His nature, is 
there any exaggeration in the Psalmist's con- 
ception of His putting our tears into His bottle, 
as infinitely precious, and writing our sobs down 
in His Book. Poor tired child, lean back and lie 
with all thy weight near His heart, He knows 
thy sorrows, is acquainted with thy grief. He 
will not let the fire burn or the waters drown. 
He will sustain thee in the trial and when it has 
done its perfect work will wipe away thy tears. 

As a Father He encourages. A little child going 
up a dark stairway to his bedroom was fearful 



30 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

of the goblins that haunted the shadows, unless 
his mother stood at the foot of the stairs and 
kept talking to him till he reached his room. So 
our Father's voice sounds through the dark spaces 
of life, saying : " Fear not, I am with thee ; be 
not dismayed, I will help thee ; " and we can say, 
as we hear His well-known voice, with renewed 
emphasis : " I believe in God the Father." 



Ill 

"The Father Almighty" 

WE talk of laws, and the word veils our ignorance. 
What is law, but an expression for the orderly 
and regular working of Force. When we speak 
of law we only define the method in which force 
works, but say nothing about the force which 
underlies it. Consider the mighty energies which 
are at work on every side of us, the rush of the 
wind, the pulse of the tide, the waves of light, 
the thrill of magnetism, the throb of heat. Yes, 
and beneath all, the mysterious powers of radium 
and ether, which are probably destined to be the 
great dynamics of the coming age. 

What are these but variations of a deeper and 
more central Force, lying behind and beneath 
them, which is the expression of a personal will. 
There cannot be thought without a thinker ; 
there cannot be plan without a controlling mind ; 
there cannot be energy or force without an agent. 
When a balloon floats over a town, or a shell 
breaks in the air ; when a volcanic wave rolls up 
on the beach, or a comet flashes through the dark 
abyss of space, you must confess that behind 

them there is a mind which is expressing itself 

31 



32 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

in the forth-putting of its might. And it is 
because of the evidences of Divine Energy around, 
that each of us can say, " I believe in God the 
Father Almighty" 

He is Almighty in the universe of matter. 
When He speaks, it is done ; when He commands 
it stands fast. He is the Creator of the ends of 
the earth, and faints not though the whole burden 
of sustaining the universe rests upon His shoulders. 
Mountains are as the small dust which gathers 
on the scales, and does not affect the weights, and 
islands in His estimate are very little things. 

He is Almighty in the realm of moral beings. 
Demons cannot withstand His authority ; when 
He bids them, they must go forth. He does 
according to His will, to quote the words of one 
of the greatest conquerors the world has ever 
known, " among the armies of heaven." Even 
though He never invades the soul of man un- 
bidden, and though men account themselves free 
agents and plot against His will, though the kings 
of the earth set themselves and the rulers take 
counsel together, they only do whatsoever His 
counsel and His hand determined beforehand 
should be done. It is a great mystery that it 
should be so, but without doubt so it is (Acts 
iv. 28), 



THE FATHER ALMIGHTY 33 

This Almighty strength is within our reach, if 
we are willing to avail ourselves of it. Isaiah 
says that "they who wait on the Lord renew 
(Heb. " change "), their strength ; " and the whole 
history of the Bible tells of men who did so. 
Abraham as the years passed changed his ideal 
of strength from Ishmael with his Arab-blood to 
Isaac, patient, yielding, passing through death to 
resurrection. Moses changed his strength from 
that of the swift, powerful athlete, who with one 
blow felled the tyrant to the ground, to the 
strength which is derived from fellowship with 
the I AM. Peter changed his strength from that 
of self-assertion to that of the Spirit of Pentecost. 
It is even recorded of our Lord that though He 
was crucified in weakness, He liveth by (Greek, 
" out of ") the power of God (2 Cor. xiii. 4). 

Have we all learnt the lesson ? The youths 
faint and are weary, and the young men utterly 
fall ; but the everlasting God (El, " the Strong "), 
the Lord (Jehovah) fainteth not, neither is weary ; 
and " He giveth power to the faint, and to them 
that have no might, He increaseth strength." 
Then they mount up with wings as eagles, they 
run without being weary, they walk and do not 
faint. 

Why not henceforth begin to mount up, to 



34 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

run, to walk in the strength which faith may 
derive from the Almighty ? " I am Alpha and 
Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, saith the 
Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to 
come, the Almighty." " And He said, man, 
greatly beloved, fear not : peace be unto thee, 
be strong, yea, be strong. And when He had 
spoken unto me, I was strengthened, and said, 
Let my Lord speak ; for Thou hast strengthened 



me." 



You have tried to bear a crushing sorrow in 
your own strength, to love back some wayward 
heart, to redeem wasted years, to repair breaches 
that yawn in the Temple of your soul. All has 
been unavailing : but will you not learn hence- 
forth to let in the Almighty Love, which bears, 
believes, hopes, endures all things, and never 
faileth. What your love cannot do, His can. 
Prophecies, tongues, and knowledge shah 1 vanish 
away, but love abideth, for love is Lord of all. 

You have tried to vanquish some besetting sin, 
but in vain. The old Adam has been too strong 
for young Melancthon. Notwithstanding pro- 
testations and resolutions, vows and prayers, the 
strong man armed has repressed all attempts at 
revolt and kept his place. But why not cry out 
to the Stronger than the Strong ? All the power 



THE FATHER ALMIGHTY 35 

of God is resident in Jesus Christ. He is the 
Power of God. To Him are entrusted the keys 
of the Unseen. He shall succour you, though 
most weak and helpless. He will hold the door 
against your strong adversary and make you more 
than a conqueror, giving you warrant indeed to 
say, " / believe in God the Father Almighty." 



IV 

" Maker of Heaven and Earth " 

ON the shores of Indian seas, the traveller may 
sometimes come across one of the most exquisite 
productions of Nature. It is a kind of chalice, 
called Neptune's cup, which has been built up by 
myriads of polypi. First they constructed the 
base, then the slender stem, and finally the cup- 
like pinnacle. There are not only an evident 
plan and purpose, but exquisite beauty in that 
crystal cup ; and beauty is surely the attribute 
and product of a mind like our own, only infinitely 
richer and more refined. 

What if this world with its sun and sister- 
worlds constitutes a Neptune's flower on the 
shores of the Universe ! As there is incontro- 
vertible evidence of the thought of a thinker, and 
the plan of an architect in the one, so much more 
in the other. The beauty of the world, of its 
nights and mornings, its rainbows and flowers, 
its waterfalls and dells, its babes and children, 
is a sufficient warrant for our affirmation, I believe 
in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and 

36 



MAKER OF HEAVEN AND EARTH 37 

Earth. Everywhere there are traces of the Love 
of the Father, and the Power of the Almighty. 

John Stuart Mill tells us that if we want to 
prove the existence of God, we shall do well to 
hold fast to the argument of the evident plan 
which pervades creation ; and the only thing that 
Matthew Arnold had to say against it was that 
he had had no experience of world-building. But 
if some Indian were to travel to our country, 
and see our railway stations, our locomotives, and 
electric trams, he would not say, " I have had no 
experience of such things, and therefore I suppose 
they grew up by chance." He would be more 
likely to say, " There was a path to my native hut, 
but it was not cut out of the forest without fore- 
thought ; there was only one tiny room in my 
wigwam, but it was the result of planning and 
labour ; my only weapons were the arrows that 
I carefully sharpened on the stone, but they 
required the utmost thought and care, or they 
had never sufficed to bring down the big game ; 
and therefore all these wonderful things which 
I see about me must be due to an intelligence, 
akin to but infinitely superior to mine or my 
forefather's." 

Where there is a plan, such as is evident in the 
mechanism of heaven and earth, and in the 



38 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

adaptation of our nature to appreciate and enjoy 
them, there must be an idea ; where there is an 
idea, there must be a purpose ; where a purpose, 
there thought ; where thought, a Thinker, and 
so you get back to the same conclusion as before 
when arguing from the existence of Force. 

Take, for instance, the mechanism of the eye 
the retina and the iris, the crystalline lens and 
vitreous humour, the variety of muscles by which 
it is focussed and adjusted. What a vast number 
of minute and exacting conditions must be ful- 
filled, before there can be perfect and unblurred 
vision. It is impossible to believe that this intri- 
cate and beautiful mechanism can have been due 
to the fortuitous concourse of atoms, or to the 
power of human volition. It must have been due 
to an intelligent Being who created the eye and 
light to match it, the ear and sound to match it, 
the nostril and fragrant scents to match it, 
the heart and love to match it, the spirit and 
truth to match it, and when it is asked, what is 
His Name, there is but one answer, "/ believe 
in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and 
Earth." 

Two concluding thoughts demand expression. 
First what is our attitude towards this Almighty 
and Personal God, who thinks and wills, who 



MAKER OF HEAVEN AND EARTH 39 

loves and plans ? Daniel Webster, the profound 
American philosopher, was asked on one occasion, 
what was the greatest thought that he had ever 
conceived, and he replied/" The greatest thought, 
gentlemen, that I have ever conceived is the 
consciousness of my personal responsibility to a 
personal God ; " and he arose and left the room. 
The company that was gathered around his table, 
were for a little while absolutely silent, every soul 
was filled with astonishment at the magnificence 
of the reply. It seemed wonderful to hear such 
a statement from such a man. Yet, I suppose 
that the most marvellous thing that any of us 
carries in his heart is the Urim and Thummim 
stone of conscience, which sparkles with the 
Truth and darkens with Falsehood. What has 
been our response to our Maker ? " It is He 
that hath made us, and we are His. We are His 
people, and the sheep of His pasture." Have we 
acted thus ? Is this our attitude towards Him ? 
If not, the Door of Christ's mediation stands open 
for us. " No one cometh unto the Father," He 
says, " except by Me." 

Lastly, do we realize that He who made the 
heavens and the earth is willing to fashion us 
according to His perfect plan ? It is easier to 
make worlds than men ; to fashion stars and 



40 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

flowers than souls. Yet let us put ourselves 
before Him saying, " But now, Lord, Thou art 
our Father ; we are the clay and Thou our 
potter ; and we are all the work of Thy hands. 
Maker of Heaven and Earth, make me ! 



V 

"I Believe in Jesus Christ, His only Son, 

our Lord" 

THIS is the creed of St. Ambrose and St. Augustine, 
of Savonarola and Huss, of Luther and Melanc- 
thon, of Wycliffe and Knox, but long before its 
majestic sentences were formulated, its substance, 
and especially this clause, was steadfastly 
believed, 

"/ believe in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our 
Lord." It is the voice of John the Baptist, who 
said : " I saw the Spirit of God descending like 
a dove, and it abode upon Him, and I saw and 
bare witness that this is the Son of God." 

"/ believe in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our 
Lord" It is the voice of the guileless Nathanael, 
whose heart was read, as he sat beneath his 
favourite sycamore, and who acknowledged that 
Jesus of Nazareth was " King of Israel and Son 
of God." 

"/ believe in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our 
Lord" It is the voice of Thomas, who loved even 

to death, but could not believe, but who, as he 

41 



42 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

saw the marks of the wounds, was convinced of 
the omniscience of the Risen Saviour, and was 
compelled to exclaim, " My Lord and my God." 

"7 believe in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our 
Lord" It is the voice of Peter, to whom it had 
been revealed, not by flesh and blood, but by the 
Father Himself, that Jesus was the Christ, " the 
Son of the living God." 

" / believe in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our 
Lord" It is the voice of John, the Beloved 
Apostle, who leant on the bosom of the Lord in 
tenderest fellowship, and said : " We have an 
understanding to know Him that is true, and we 
are in Him that is true, even in His Son, Jesus 
Christ." 

But the wish is sometimes expressed for the 
evidence of a man of absolute integrity and finely 
balanced mind, who should investigate the claims 
of Christ, as it might be investigated by a com- 
mittee of experts. If such an one could have 
lived in that distant first century, and left his 
opinion to be opened by us to-day, and if it 
corroborated the Creed how reassuring and 
strengthening to our faith ! But there is on 
record just such a verdict. There was a young 
man, who was a student in the great University 
at Jerusalem, during the time when Jesus of 



I BELIEVE IN JESUS CHRIST 43 

Nazareth was working His wonderful miracles, 
and who afterwards became a member of the 
High Council. He knew everything that could 
be said by the enemies of Christ in opposition to 
His claims, because he was the close friend of 
Annas and Caiaphas ; indeed, he made it the 
object of the opening years of his brilliant career 
to extirpate the nascent religion which was known 
as the " Way " of the Crucified. He met the 
followers of Christ in debate, put them to the 
torture, breathed out threatenings and slaughter, 
which he executed even in strange and distant 
cities. So far from being prejudiced in favour of 
Christianity, he was strongly antagonistic to it ; 
but notwithstanding all, he became so convinced 
of the undeniable claims of Jesus of Nazareth, 
that he turned completely round, and lived to be 
the chief Apostle of His Divine Sonship. Though 
he knew all that could be said against this 
doctrine, he embraced and preached it, with his 
wide, logical, and practical mind, meeting in- 
veterate opposition, sacrificing every advantage 
which birth and position could confer, and affirm- 
ing always that the life which he lived in the flesh 
was a life of faith on the Son of God, who, as he 
said, " loved me and gave Himself for me." 
His opinions are contained in his letters, which 



44 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

are preserved in our Scriptures, and have influ- 
enced the foremost minds of every age. Renan, 
Strauss, and Baur, though they do not class 
themselves as Christian disciples, admit that the 
four first Epistles of the New Testament were 
written by Paul, before the year A.D. 60, that is, 
27 years after the Resurrection, and upon those 
pages we find the definite and repeated statement 
of the former opponent of Christianity, that its 
Founder most certainly lived, died, rose again, 
and was the only begotten Son of the Father, who 
was " Declared to be the Son of God with power, 
according to the Spirit of Holiness, by the 
resurrection from the dead." 



VI 
"I Believe ... in Jesus" 

IT is not often that this Name of our Lord stands 
alone in the Epistles, but it is, of course, very 
frequent in the Gospels. Indeed, there, it is His 
ordinary appellation. Given Him by the angel 
who announced His birth, it was the name by 
which His mother and sisters addressed Him, and 
was familiar throughout the mountain village, 
where He dwelt for 30 years. In their simplicity 
the Evangelists use this word almost constantly, 
without preceding it by Lord, or following it by 
Christ^ but uttering it in its unadorned humility. 
It declares distinctly the human nature of our 
Lord, and is fragrant of Nazareth, nestling in its 
quiet nook apart from the great life of Rome or 
Greece, and recalls the carpenter's home with its 
humble circumstances and humble fare. It 
suggests the thirst at the well-head, and the 
hunger in the early morning which searched the 
fig tree, the weariness that made Him sleep amid 
the storm, the loneliness that suffered without 
the gate, the thoughtful kindness that spread the 
breakfast amid the haze of early dawn when the 

45 



46 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

silver ripples broke at His feet, and how He 
ascended in a truly human form. " This same 
Jesus," the angels said, " shall come again." It 
was Jesus whom Stephen saw standing on the right 
hand of God. " I am Jesus whom thou perse- 
cutest," was the arresting word to Saul on his 
way to Damascus. It is in the name of Jesus, the 
Son of Man, that every knee shall bow, and every 
tongue confess allegiance, and it is Jesus who 
sends His angels through the ages, to tell His 
servants the things that must shortly be done. 
In every passage where the name Jesus stands 
alone, emphasis is meant to be laid upon the 
human aspect of His wonderful character. 

But there is more in it than this. When the 
angel gave it to His parents He accompanied it 
with the explanation that He should be called 
Jesus because He would save His people from 
their sins. The full significance of this sweet 
appellation is seen in the original as we have it 
in " Joshua," of which it is the shortened form, 
and which is really Yeho-shua, meaning Jehovah 
the Saviour. Whenever we utter this title for 
the Son of God our Saviour, we use that mystic 
wonderful word that Moses heard at the burning 
bush, and which for ages no Jew dare repeat 
JEHOVAH. 



I BELIEVE ... IN JESUS 47 

" Jehovah " carries in its very heart the message 
of salvation, for its announcement to Moses was 
accompanied with the declaration " I am come 
down to deliver them." The redeeming saving 
aspect of the Divine Nature was always prominent 
in that great Name, but its reference is made still 
clearer by the addition of the word that saves. 
Jesus saves His people, not only from the guilt 
but from the power of sin. By the infusion of 
His own nature into their hearts He undermines 
their love of sin, sets shuttles working which 
weave the white garments of a pure and holy 
character, teaches us to hate what we once loved, 
and to love much that was foreign and distasteful. 
Those who open their hearts to the spirit of 
" Jesus " live in this world with the solar light in 
their hearts, gracious words on their lips, are like 
the dew of the Eastern morning refreshing the 
thirsty herbage, and go to and fro amongst men 
performing beneficent and celestial service. Not 
only are they 'delivered from sin's tyranny, but 
with deft hands they minister to men, stooping 
as good Samaritans over wounded and pillaged 
travellers, to whom they minister of the wine of 
the life-blood of their Lord, and the oil of the 
grace of His Spirit. 

Once more, this Name, which the greatest 



48 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

hymnists have set to inimitable verse, which has 
inspired a Bernard, a Zinzendorf, a Guyon, a 
Cowper, and a Havergal, which is the first word 
that mothers teach their children, and the last 
word that dying saints breathe as they pass Time's 
threshold sets forth the human side of God's 
character, and reveals features of His transcendent 
nature which must always have been present. 
We no longer dread the great God, or shrink before 
the light of the jasper throne, for in the midst of 
it is the form of a man, and we understand that 
He who lived in Nazareth and Palestine is the 
reflection in our human existence of qualities 
which are as integral to the Almighty as 
Omnipotence itself. 



VII 
"I Believe on ... Christ" 

CHRIST is the Greek translation of the Hebrew 
Messiah, and of each Anointed is the English 
rendering. There is evident reference to the 
ancient Hebrew custom of anointing with oil 
Priests, Prophets and Kings. 

Our Lord was not only the Son of the Virgin 
Mother according to the flesh, and the Son of 
Go'd in virtue of His eternal union with the Deity. 
He was also the one white flower of the Hebrew 
race, the fulfilment of its ideal, the gathering up 
of all the points and suggestions contained in 
Hebrew life, during long centuries of preparation, 
the Man of whom the greatest men of Judaism 
were only fragments. All that was sweetest, 
noblest and best in Joseph, Moses, David, 
Jeremiah, met in Him in exquisite harmony and 
proportion. Of Him poets had sung ; to Him 
seers had borne testimony ; a long line of priests 
had set forth one side of His glorious nature ; an 
unbroken descent of kings, another ; all these 
concurrent streams poured their floods into the 
great reservoir of His nature. This is the inner 

49 



50 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

meaning of the genealogy of Matthew in which 
he shows the line of descent of whom was bora 
Jesus, who is called CHRIST. 

His anointing took place at the waters of bap- 
tism, when the heavens were opened, and the 
Spirit of God descended upon Him. Thereafter 
it was competent for Him to say, " The Spirit of 
the Lord is upon Me, because He hath anointed 
Me." In after days the Apostles spoke of God's 
holy Servant, " whom Thou didst anoint " (Acts 
iv. 27 ; x. 38). In the old dispensation it was 
prescribed that when any offered an oblation of 
a meal offering, it should be of fine flour on which 
oil and frankincense were placed (see Lev. ii.). 
How precisely the type was realized in the Christ ! 
His manhood was even and pure as fine flour ; 
it was fragrant with aromatic spice and anointed 
with fresh oil. Throughout His life He was a 
sweet savour sacrifice, holy and acceptable and 
well-pleasing unto God. 

Christ is for the most part used as another 
Name for our Saviour, but indeed it is rather 
the designation of an office. When we use it we 
are justified in placing " the " before it. Herod 
demanded " where the Christ should be born " ; 
Simon Peter said, " Thou art the Christ ; " the 
chief priests mocking said, " Let the Christ, the 



I BELIEVE ON ... CHRIST 51 

King of Israel, descend from the cross " ; " If 
this is the Christ of God His chosen, let Him save 
Himself." 

We believe that Jesus is the Christ because He 
so exactly fulfils the whole Levitical dispensation. 
The prophets had foretold that the Messiah should 
be God and Man ; exalted and debased ; the 
Ancient of Days and a babe of a span long ; the 
Almighty, but dependent upon a woman's care ; 
Master and Servant ; Priest and Victim ; King 
and Subject ; Mortal, but the Conqueror of Death ; 
anointed with the oil of Joy, but a Man of Griefs ; 
acquainted with the woes of men, and the Fellow 
of the Almighty. So complex were the wards of 
the lock that no key has been found which would 
perfectly meet their demand until He came who 
fulfils in His Person every one of these apparent 
contradictions. 

Without hesitation our Lord challenged the 
erudite scholars of His time who were versed in 
Old Testament scriptures to deny the validity of 
His title. They had thought of only one side of 
the ancient prophecies, those that depicted the 
Messiah as a Conquering King. He insisted that 
there was another side which could only be fulfilled 
by one who had trodden the path of humiliation 
and suffering. " fools," He said, " and slow 



52 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

of heart to believe all that the prophets have 
spoken ! Ought not Christ to suffer these things, 
and to enter into His glory ? " 

It is because our Lord exactly realises the 
complex conception of the Messiah yielded by the 
Old Testament, that the Christian Church is able 
to affirm its belief in Him as the Christ. 



VIII 

"I Believe in . . . . His only Son" 

WRITING from St. Leonard's in 1857, Charles 
Kingsley said, " No difficult texts shall rob me of 
Jesus Christ as the Son of God. In Him I find 
a counterpart of Him in whom we live, and move, 
and have our being, in Him I worship the abysmal 
God." In this faith he lived and died. When he 
lay dying at Eversley Rectory, his wife apparently 
dying in another chamber, he exclaimed, with 
the light of eternity on his face, " Only in the 
faith of Jesus Christ, as Son of God, can the most 
educated and the simplest find peace." "And 
so," in the words of Mrs. Kingsley, "he passed 
into the unseen, a noble, unabashed, and true 
knight of Jesus, affirming his belief in Jesus Christ, 
His only Son." 

All who believe in Christ are sons. Because 
we are such, God has sent forth the Spirit of His 
Son into our hearts, crying, " Abba, Father " 
(see Gal. vi. 1-7). But our sonship is separated 
by an infinite chasm from the Sonship of Jesus. 
Peter was right in his great confession, " Thou 
art the Christ, the Son of the living God." We are 

53 



54 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

sons, He is the Son ; we are born again, He is the 
" Only Begotten Son." Those who lived with 
Him during His earthly life beheld His glory as 
of the only begotten of the Father, and it was 
because He was the only begotten Son which was 
in the bosom of the Father that He was able to 
declare Him (see John i. 14-18 ; iii. 16-18 ; 1 
John iv. 9). 

All that is meant in the unique relationship of 
the Son of the Father it is impossible for mortal 
man to know or say. But when we utter the 
sublime definition of God's nature, " God is Love," 
it follows of necessity that from all eternity there 
must have been one to love and one to be loved, 
and a spirit of love uniting these twain. It would 
seem as if the doctrine of the Trinity were impli- 
cated whenever we think of God as Eternal Love. 
It has always been true that the Father loved 
the Son before the foundation of the world, that 
the Son has loved the Father even to the laying 
down of His life, and that the blessed Spirit has 
been the Eternal Spirit, because He also is Love 
(John xvii. 24 ; xiv. 31 ; Heb. ix. 14). 

Our Lord was deeply conscious of His Divine 
Sonship. How far He had understood its entire 
significance during His early years we cannot tell, 
but from the moment the Voice of God through 



1 BELIEVE IN ... HIS ONLY SON 55 

the open sky, declared Him as His beloved Son 
there was no doubt or hesitancy. He said that 
God was His own Father, making Himself equal 
with God (John v. 18). He said that no one 
knew the Father save the Son (Matt. xi. 27). 
When surrounded by His foes He did not hesitate 
to claim Sonship in a special sense even to unity 
(John x. 33-38). We cannot read the marvellous 
prayer of John xvii. without realizing that He 
felt His Sonship to be unique and eternal. It is 
because of His own deep consciousness of this 
relationship that we profess our belief in the only 
begotten Son. 

The Apostle affirms that the truth of this 
affirmation was declared with power at His 
resurrection (Rom. i. 4), and more than once 
quotes Psa. ii. 7 as being realized when the First- 
born was brought into the world (Acts iii. 13 ; 
Heb. i. 5, 6). Therefore we need have no hesita- 
tion in addressing Him in the majestic words of 
the ancient psalm, "Thy throne, God, is for 
ever and ever : a sceptre of righteousness is the 
sceptre of Thy Kingdom." 



IX 

"I Believe in Jesus Christ our Lord" 

IT was this item in the Creed that aroused the 
deepest hostility of the Roman Emperors. They 
were liberal enough in permitting all the nations 
they subdued to worship their gods, and to put 
their images in the Pantheon, but they persecuted 
Christianity to the death, because, with true 
insight, they perceived that the Founder of 
Christianity asserted a royalty over His followers 
which they acknowledged as superior to the 
imperial sovereignty. If He might have been 
relegated to a secondary position, there would 
have been no grounds for persecution, but it was 
because that other King, one Jesus, claimed to 
be King of Kings and Lord of Lords, that every 
effort was made to exterminate the new religion. 
There is, therefore, no position which our Lord 
can take with any one of us except as Lord, and 
it is because so few give Him His true position, 
and place the government upon His shoulder, 
that His Kingdom is so slow in coming, and He is 

so limited in His power to bless. 

56 



I BELIEVE IN JESUS CHRIST OUR LORD 57 

There is no doubt a phase of religion which is 
as much richer in its experience than that which 
is commonly enjoyed amongst Christians, as the 
sky of the tropics is bluer than the leaden atmo- 
sphere of our northern climate. Take, for instance, 
the testimony of Billy Bray, the Cornish Miner, 
who said : " The Lord made me so happy that I 
cannot express what I felt. I shouted for joy ; 
I praised God with my whole heart. ... I think 
this was in November, 1823, but what day of the 
month I do not know. I remember this, that 
everything looked new to me the people, the 
fields, the cattle, the trees. I was like a new man 
in a new world. I spent the greater part of time 
praising the Lord." 

Or take the testimony of John Bunyan, who 
describes his experience thus : " Now could I see 
myself in heaven and earth at once ; in heaven by 
my Christ, by my Head, by my Righteousness 
and Life, though on earth by my body and person. 
Christ was a precious Christ to myself that night, 
I could scarcely lie in my bed for joy and peace 
and triumph .through Christ." 

Or take the experience of the wife of Jonathan 
Edwards in these fragrant and inspiring words : 
" When I arose on the morning of the Sabbath, 
I felt a love to all mankind wholly peculiar in its 

5-(5i6) 



58 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

strength of sweetness, far beyond all that I have 
ever felt before. The power of that love seemed 
inexpressible. I thought if I were surrounded by 
enemies who were venting their malice and cruelty 
upon me, it would still be impossible that I should 
cherish any feelings towards them but those of 
love and pity, and ardent desires for their 
happiness." 

It is said also of Colonel Gardiner by a friend, 
that he was cured of impurity in a single hour : 
" So soon as he was enlightened from above, he 
felt the power of the Holy Ghost changing his 
nature so wonderfully that all desire and inclina- 
tion were removed as entirely as if he had been a 
sucking child, nor did they return." 

These testimonies might be greatly multiplied, 
but in each case it could be shown that they arose 
when the soul took Christ to be not only its 
Saviour but its Lord. May this not have been 
the cause of our failure ? We have looked at the 
wounds of Christ for cleansing, but have not 
remembered that the Victim of the Cross was 
Master and Lord. There has been no triumphal 
procession through the thoroughfares of our souls ; 
no coronation in the secret fane of our hearts; 
no definite surrender of the keys of government, 
the symbols of authority, into His hands; 



I BELIEVE IN JESUS CHRIST OUR LORD 59 

because this has not been done because we have 
been more anxious to secure our salvation than 
to give Him His rights ; because we have not 
trusted Him with absolute devotion, we have 
missed the joy, the peace, the deliverance from 
the power of sin, the baptism of perfected love, 
and the fortitude of spirit which others enjoy. 
But directly we hand over the empire, and believe 
that He accepts it (and He does accept it so soon 
as we surrender it) all these will begin to be our 
own. There will be an illumination throughout 
the dark regions of the inner life, banners, accla- 
mations, shouts of joy ! " Rejoice, thy King 
cometh, having salvation." 

" If thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as 
Lord, and shalt believe in thine heart that God 
raised Him from the dead, thou shalt be saved." 
(Rom. x. 9, R.V.) " For this cause Christ died, 
and lived again, that He might be Lord " (Rom. 
xiv. 9). " I give you to understand that no man 
can say Jesus is Lord but in the Holy Spirit " 
(1 Cor. xii. 3). 



X 

"Conceived by the Holy Ghost" 

THE miraculous conception and birth of our Lord 
has been sometimes assailed, because it is alleged 
that it is not borne out by the references made to 
it in other parts of Scripture, and specially in the 
Gospels themselves. But surely this assertion 
cannot be sustained. 

In the archaic record of Genesis, it was foretold 
that the seed of the Woman should bruise the 
serpent's head, and the expression is so remark- 
able as even then it foreshadowed some such 
event as actually occurred. The Fourth Evan- 
gelist, in his sublime Prologue, clearly enough 
defines the miraculous origin of Christ, when He 
says, "The Word was made Flesh." On the 
assumption that Jesus descended naturally from 
Joseph and Mary, he would surely have said, 
" The Word came in the flesh." That the Word 
of the Eternal should have taken on Himself our 
nature clearly involves the creative Act of the 
Holy Spirit. The Apostle Paul undoubtedly refers 
to the same fact, when he says that " the Second 
Man" is the Lord from Heaven, in contrast to 

60 



CONCEIVED BY THE HOLY GHOST 61 

" the First Man," who is of the earth earthy ; 
and when he says again, that our Lord was made 
of a woman. 

When the fulness of the time arrived, a new 
vital principle appeared. And it was as much 
due to the creative work of God as the mystery of 
Regeneration. He that works in our hearts, 
implanting the incorruptible seed of the new and 
heavenly life which constitutes us sons of God, 
wrought in the very depths of human nature, 
as represented by Mary, and thus that Holy 
Thing could be born of her, which we know as 
" the Son of God." 

The most casual acquaintance with the gospels 
is sufficient to prove that they portray a unique 
Personality. Christ was the white flower of our 
race, revealing itself on a stock which was dark 
and ugly, exhaling the rarest fragrance, and 
prolific in healing influences ; but this was the 
marvel of it that notwithstanding His profound 
humility, there was no consciousness of sin. All 
others, who have attained superlative excellence, 
have prostrated themselves in lowliest self-abase- 
ment in the presence of God, confessing themselves 
unclean, but in the hours of most radiant fellow- 
ship with the Divine, there is no confession on 
His lips, because He is without sin. In the glad 



62 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

certainty that none can meet His challenge, He 
cries, " Which of you convinceth. Me of sin ? " 

But how can we account for this . closeness of 
identification with our race on the one hand, 
coupled with this apartness on the other, unless 
we accept the teaching of His Immaculate Con- 
ception ? He was not born of the will of man, 
but of the will of God, and was therefore wholly 
pure from sin. Anselm in his Cur Deus Homo 
mentions the four methods in which God can 
make man ; by the law of natural generation, or 
as He made Adam, or as He made Eve, or as our 
Lord was made in secret and curiously wrought 
in the lowest parts of the earth. As the first man 
originated, without father and without mother, 
from the creative energy of God, which spiritual- 
ized the dust of the earth, so did the Second Man 
originate without father by that effectual power 
of the most High, which spiritualized humanity. 

It may be that the mystery would seem less 
remote did we know more of the laws of birth 
among the very lowest forms of life, where the 
ordinary law of generation seems suspended. 
Why should not the highest revert to and touch 
the lowest, as a perfect ring, worn on the Creator's 
ringer ! 

In any case those who have accepted the first 



CONCEIVED BY THE HOLY GHOST 63 

statement of Genesis, " In the Beginning God 
created," may be at perfect rest in the presence 
of this other great mystery and assert their belief 
that Jesus was Conceived by the Holy Ghost. Oh, 
Spirit of Generation, ^-generate us ! 



XI 

"Born of the Virgin Mary" 

WHAT a moment of transcendent joy was that 
when Mary bore her Son ! What though the 
surroundings of His birth were the rudest and 
humblest possible, that the stall provided the 
chamber, and the manger the cradle, whilst the 
beasts moved restlessly at their halters ! Hers 
was the joy of bearing a Child on whom the light 
of prophecy was focussed ! A woman's joy when 
a man-child is born into the world was in her 
case mingled with the memory of the words of 
the Angel Gabriel, spoken at the Annunciation, 
" He shall be great, and shah 1 be called the Son 
of the Most High : and the Lord God shall give 
unto Him the throne of His father David : and 
He shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever ; 
and of His Kingdom there shall be no end." 
Could she forget those words spoken but nine 
months before, when her cousin accosted her as 
blessed amongst women, and as the Mother of 
the Lord ? and surely she had also been informed 
of the word of Zacharias, who had compared her 

64 



, BORN OF THE VIRGIN MARY 65 

* ' " 

Child to the Dayspring from on high that visits 
the world with general illumination. 
All her highest hopes were realised, and the 
confirmation was given to them, when, presently, 
the wise men from the East obtained admission 
to their humble dwelling-place, and presented 
Joseph and herself with costly gifts of gold, 
frankincense and myrrh, and when the shepherds 
came, telling of the wonderful vision of angels, 
and went forth glorifying and praising God. A 
further corroboration had been given her when 
she presented her Child in the Temple, and was 
greeted by the prophetess Anna, who, when she 
saw the Child, gave thanks unto God, and spoke 
of Him as being connected with the redemption 
for which she and many were looking. 

It also confirmed her high hopes when the aged 
Simeon took the Child in his arms, and blessed 
God that he had lived to see His salvation the 
Light of the Gentiles, and the Glory of Israel. 
But what did the old man mean when, looking 
steadily at her, he said, " Yea, and a sword shall 
pierce through thine own soul " ? She could not 
forget his significant look, or those warning words. 
Whenever she thought of them she gave an 
involuntary shudder. What lay hidden for her 
Boy in the dim future which should make His 



66 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

life a stepping-stone and a stumbling-block for 
many in Israel, and a sign which should be spoken 
against ? She did not, and could not, understand 
these words ; they came back upon her frequently 
as a breath of coming autumn in the midst of a 
radiant summer day. 



XII 
" Born ... Suffered " 

"THE Child grew and waxed strong in spirit, 
filled with wisdom, and with the grace of God." 
Everything that could make child-life beautiful 
clustered in His character. Unusual moral beauty 
and intellectual faculty, modesty, humility and 
sweetness of disposition characterised His young 
life, as it unfolded in the gentle atmosphere of the 
carpenter's home ; and perhaps in the ecstasy of 
her motherly affection Mary almost forgot the 
sinister shadow which had for a moment darkened 
her soul. 

From the time, however, of His first visit to 
Jerusalem, it seemed as though a new conception 
of life was breaking upon Him, as though another 
authority was being recognised, as though He 
were about to yield obedience to another voice. 
The same thought was accentuated when eighteen 
years after they sat together at the Marriage 
Feast at Cana, and in the tenderest manner He 
taught her that there were limits to the authority 
which her earthly relationship had permitted her. 

On two other occasions Jesus spoke to her. 

67 



68 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

Once He refused to give up the work in which 
He was engaged at her call ; and again, when a 
woman in the crowd, touched by His inimitable 
loveliness, magnified the mother that bore Him, 
He gently corrected her by saying that there was 
an even higher relationship for those who heard 
God's Word and did it. It was as though He 
anticipated the superstition and reverence which 
in following centuries would gather around her 
name, and indicated that in the Kingdom of 
Heaven position was reached, not by adventitious 
circumstances, but by those qualities of heart 
and soul which may be acquired by all. 

In these days it is most important to remember 
this. When asked to worship Mary, to pray to 
her as our Lord's mother, to entreat her to exert 
influence upon her Son, let us remember with 
what strong emphasis He put aside the exercise 
of all motherly control, and said, in effect, that 
she stood only on the level of the other disciples, 
and that her position, like their's, would be 
entirely determined by their attitude toward the 
will of God. 



XIII 

"Suffered" 

HE suffered in every limb, muscle, and tendon 
of His body. The thorns of His crown were 
encrimsoned ; His pallid face was worn by watch- 
ing and sorrow ; the old purple garment, brought 
from some press in the guards'-room, and flung 
around His shoulders in mockery, was saturated 
in blood from the wounds which were deeply 
scored upon His back. The victim was often 
known to fall fainting or dying beneath the blows 
of the heavy thong loaded with lead. Thus He 
suffered under Pontius Pilate in every part of His 
physical nature. 

He was suffering loneliness. His delight had 
always been with the sons of men. He had never 
been so happy as when the publicans and sinners 
drew near, women ministered to Him, and children 
clustered to His knee. He sought the companion- 
ship of His friends in the house of mourning, on 
the Mount of Transfiguration, and in the Garden 
of His anguish. But there was no one with Him 
now. Lover and friend stood apart. His 
disciples had forsaken Him. No one understood, 



70 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

except perhaps Mary of Bethany, and she only 
to a limited extent, the sublime purpose and pro- 
gramme which He came to realise. As He looked 
round on that sea of upturned faces, there was 
no one that looked back to Him with the kindling 
glance with which spirit recognises spirit. 

He was suffering alone because so absolutely 
misunderstood. No one ever came towards His 
fellows with heart so big and overflowing with 
desire to bless, as when He stepped out of the 
Infinite, desiring at any cost to Himself to make 
the earth smile like Eden on the morning of 
Creation. He would not have reckoned the pain, 
but have cheerfully given tears, sweat of blood, 
and death-agony, if only those for whom He 
expended Himself had understood. We reck not 
the cost of pain if only those for whom we suffer 
gave us credit for the nobility of our purpose, 
but the bitterest ingredient in our Lord's cup was 
that He came to His own, and His own received 
Him not, His aims and purposes were misunder- 
stood. He was called a liar, and a ring-leader of 
sedition ; subjected to slander and hate. 

He suffered keenly also as a patriot. With 
prophetic vision He beheld the lowering clouds 
gathering over the doomed city, and the eagles 
Girding in the air, until the carcase was ready. 



SUFFERED 71 

-*- 

The cry of the mothers of Jerusalem was even 
now ringing in His ear, as they beheld their chil- 
dren flung from spear to spear by the Roman 
soldiery. He could see the dread circle of crosses 
environing the city walls, until there was no more 
weod to make them each cross bearing its 
sufferer. To anticipate such a fate for the city 
of David, the joy of the whole earth, consecrated 
by holy memories from the days of Abraham, 
plunged a sword into His spirit, that pierced it 
to the quick. -^ -<-- - - *** & -i.-r.$ 

h- But, especially He suffered as the Saviour. The 
sins of all the world were made to meet in Him, 
as if from every heart, confluent streams of guilt 
poured their black tides into His heart. He stood 
for the race. He bore our sins in His own body 
on the tree. As the Lamb of God He was bearing 
the sins of the world. " He was once offered to 
bear the sin of many." " Surely He hath borne 
our griefs and carried our sorrows. ... He was 
wounded for our transgressions. He was bruised 
for our iniquities ; the chastisement of our peace 
was upon Him ; and with His stripes we are 
healed. All we like sheep have gone astray, we 
have turned every one to His own way ; and the 
Lord hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all." 
His suffering unto death was not incidental to 



72 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

His career, but His main purpose and aim. Others 
die because they were born ; He was born that 
He might die. He was the Lamb slain from all 
eternity in the purpose of the Father, and it was 
necessary that He should realise that purpose in 
experience and fact, learning obedience by the 
things that He suffered, becoming a merciful and 
faithful High Priest that He might succour those 
who suffer being tempted, and that by His suffer- 
ing unto death He might present a perfect obla- 
tion, sacrifice and satisfaction for the sins of the 
whole world. We may not understand the philo- 
sophy of this great fact which lies at the root of 
God's dealings with our race, and perhaps with 
the universe, but we may bind the comfort of it 
to our hearts as we say, " He suffered the just for 
the unjust and to bring us to God." 



XIV 
"Suffered under Pontius Pilate" 

PONTIUS PILATE ! What a cluster of association 
gathers round that name ! The Roman Pro- 
curator, Caesar's representative, the special 
selection of the Emperor Tiberias, because his 
relentless temper seemed to fit him to cope with 
the Jewish people. His rule was as devoid of 
mercy as it was of justice. Venality, violence, 
and robbery, malicious insults, and judicial 
murders without even the formality of trial, 
bloodthirsty cruelty which mingled the blood of 
the sacrificers with the blood of the victims they 
sacrificed such was the dark and terrible record 
of his three years' reign ! 

Former governors to some extent had respected 
the religious scruples of the Jews. They even 
removed the Emperor's image from the Roman 
standards before marching their soldiers into 
Jerusalem, so as to avoid the semblance of 
worshipping Caesar ; but Pilate ignored the most 
sacred feelings of the Hebrew race, and forced 
upon them the hated emblem. It was before 
such a man that " Jesus Christ witnessed the good 

73 

6 (3516) 



74 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

confession." To this fact the heathen historian 
Tacitus bears unhesitating witness. 

It is probable, since his wife was with him, that 
on this occasion the Governor was occupying, not 
the fortress of Antonia, but the magnificent palace 
built by Herod the Great at the north-western 
angle of the Upper City. It was thither, about 
six o'clock in the morning of the most fateful day 
of Pilate's life that the Jewish leaders brought 
the bound Christ. 

He was not wholly ignorant of the motives by 
which they were actuated. " He knew that for 
envy they had delivered Him up." It is probable, 
also, that between the granting of the Roman 
guard on the previous evening and the morning 
appearance of accusers and accused, he had had 
a profound talk with his wife Procula, who is 
described in one Apocryphal Gospel as a convert 
to Judaism, and at least had a tolerably accurate 
knowledge of the Person and Claims of Jesus. 
This probably accounts for the strange reluctance 
which, at the beginning of the trial, made him 
so unwilling to proceed, and withheld him from 
having anything to do with that " just man." 

Pilate stands on the plains of time, as Lot's 
wife stood on those of Sodom a warning in stone 
to those who know what they ought to do, and 



SUFFERED UNDER PONTIUS PILATE 75 

try to do it, not straightforwardly, but obliquely, 
not by meeting high-handed wrong with a resolute 
front, but by cajoling it, and fencing with its 
malicious demands. They say, Don't do thus 
and thus, it is inexpedient, here is a wiser course, 
let us advise you for your good to follow it : but 
in saying this, they desert the one impregnable 
fortress against which the gates of hell cannot 
prevail ! Christ had never been crucified under 
Pontius Pilate, if at the first enunciation of their 
clamorous demands, like Gallio afterwards, he 
had driven the Jewish leaders from his judgment 
seat, indignant at their suggestion to soil Roman 
Justice with so base a crime. 

He assured himself that this King of the Jews 
meditated no treason against his Imperial master. 
He seemed to be a visionary, a dreamer of dreams, 
a brainless fanatic, at the worst. From this 
private inquiry he returned to the Jews, whose 
passion was rising swiftly with every hour's delay, 
with the verdict, sustained by every evidence of 
truth, " I find in him no fault at all." 

Then the full fury of the pitiless storm surged 
up to his feet, and broke over him. Hell was let 
loose ! He sent the prisoner bound to Herod 
but why bound ! He placed Jesus and Barabbas 
side by side in the vain hope that rather than 



76 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

have the criminal let loose among them, they 
would demand the release of Jesus ! He tried 
to appeal to their pity by submitting their victim 
to the awfully cruel torture of scourging surely 
that would be penalty enough ! He expostulated, 
reasoned, and appealed. The more he opposed 
the popular frenzy, the more vehement it grew. 
The Lord never hesitated to bear witness. To 
the Truth, to His own Divine Nature, and to the 
only absolute source of Power, He bore unflinching 
testimony. He was by royal pre-eminence " the 
faithful martyr " (Rev. i., see Greek) : but in 
bitter contrast, Pilate, who paltered with truth, 
ultimately denied it, and finally drifted into doing 
the very deed which even his black soul loathed. 
" Go, soldier," said he, in the usual language of 
the criminal court, " fetch a cross." And thus 
it came to pass that our Lord "suffered under 
Pontius Pilate." 



XV 

"Crucified!" 

IT was a terrible form of death, which had become 
fearfully common throughout the Roman Empire. 
The Cross stood for the maximum of lingering 
torture, indignity, and shame which man could 
inflict upon his fellow. It was invented by the 
Phoenicians, but Rome from the time of Csesar 
adopted and improved on it. 

Dr. Edersheim tells us that three kinds of cross 
were in use : the so-called St. Andrew's Cross, 
like an X, the Cross in the form of a T, and the 
ordinary Latin Cross. It was on the latter that 
the God-Man was crucified. His agony on the Tree 
rendered that form of death no longer shameful, 
but has made the Cross the symbol of love and 
mercy, of humanity and civilization. 

Golgotha derived its name from its skull-like 
appearance. Thus we speak of the brow of a hill. 
It stood two or three minutes aside from the high 
road, with a sudden depression beneath, as if the 
jaws of the skull had opened. Thither Christ 
bore His cross, accompanied by four soldiers, and 

preceded by the centurion in command. 

77 



78 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

The weight of the cross was too heavy, how- 
ever, for that frail body, which had yielded sweat 
and blood the night before, had been unrefreshed 
by food or sleep, and bore upon it the deep furrows 
of recent scourging. Small wonder that the pity 
of the daughters of Jerusalem was moved ! 
Before many steps had been taken, the heavy 
beam had to be transferred to Simon of Cyrene, 
and perhaps Jesus needed to be Himself supported 
till the sad procession reached its scene of 
execution " outside the city wall." 

We dare not harrow the feelings which 
Christianity has made so sensitive by narrating 
in detail the harrowing incidents that followed. 
It is enough to mention the nails, the erection of 
the cross, the weight of the body, the shame, the 
fever, the rigour, the inability to move. We turn 
away our eyes ! We cannot endure to look ! 
But remember He was held there not by iron 
bands or soldier cohorts, but of His own choice. 
No man could take His life from Him. He had 
power to lay it down, and power to take it again. 
The love of man constrained Him ! 

The cross was not high, probably " those blessed 
feet " were but one or two feet from the ground. 
Above His head the title, written perhaps by 
Pilate's own hand : on the ground beneath, the 



CRUCIFIED ! 79 

soldiers dicing for his clothes : on either side a 
malefactor : quite near a group of women and 
disciples who loved Him better than themselves : 
an outer ring of Israel's leaders, jeering, taunting, 
and wagging their heads : all around the roar of 
the crowds, of the scum and refuse of Jerusalem, 
attracted to the sickening spectacle. And thus 
from nine in the early morning for three long, 
weary hours, till, at midday, midnight suddenly 
supervened. 

He thought of the soldiers and prayed that they 
might be forgiven : gave comfort to the dying 
penitent beside Him : made provision for the 
mother that bare Him : and whose heart was 
pierced by the sharp sword of unutterable suffer- 
ing. Then the World's Redeemer girded Himself 
to meet to the full measure the bitterness of death, 
the death of the Substitute, of the supreme 
Sacrifice, of the Accursed. It is written, " Cursed 
be every one that hangeth on a tree," and in 
fulfilment of this prophecy He was therefore 
made a sin-offering and a curse for man. 

No mortal eye may penetrate the shroud of 
darkness which hangs over those hours of more 
than mortal woe. It is enough to know that He 
gave His life a ransom for many, vanquished the 
last and greatest enemy of our race, and obtained 



80 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

eternal redemption for us all. The cry of forsaken- 
ness uttered at three in the afternoon, marked the 
climax of that awful tragedy, which purchased a 
world's redemption ; and the words " I thirst," 
as the expression of human need seemed to indi- 
cate that the more terrible aspect of spiritual 
anguish was over. He would not take the drug 
offered Him at the beginning, because He must 
suffer with full consciousness ; but gladly accepted 
the vinegar which gave Him the physical vigour 
with which to meet the article of death. 

The breaking light, not only of the sun, but of 
the Father's manifested love now broke on the 
Redeemer's soul, and its calm serenity is mirrored 
in " the Father " of conscious fellowship, with 
which He passed to the Joy that was set before 
Him. " He was crucified through weakness, and 
liveth by the Power of God." 



XVI 
"Dead" 

"HE became dead" (Rev. i. 18, R.V., marg.), 
i.e., the Saviour chose to die and died because 
He would. From the Transfiguration Mountain 
He might have stepped into Paradise, by the 
open door through which Moses and Elijah had 
come, but to have done this would have been to 
leave man unredeemed. In the language of an 
old Christian hymn, it was not death which 
approached Christ, but Christ death : He died 
without death. He met it, not as conquered, but 
as a Conqueror. In the words of the Fourth 
Evangelist, " He bowed the Head and gave up 
the Spirit." 

The accompaniments of His death were most 
remarkable. The earth was rent and the gates 
of the ancient graves were opened. And in the 
most Holy Place, the veil of the Temple was rent, 
and the secrets of the Most Holy Place stood 
revealed. In this connection it is interesting to 
notice that Josephus speaks of the mysterious 
extinction of one of the lights of the Golden 
Candlestick some forty years before the destruc- 
tion of the Temple, and the Talmud narrates the 

81 



82 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

supernatural opening of the great Temple-gates. 
Is it not probable, therefore, that these may be 
corroboration of the Gospel statement as to the 
miraculous accompaniments of that wondrous 
death, which was indeed the death of Death, and 
the opening of the Kingdom of Heaven to all 
believers. 

There was no doubt that He was dead. In 
response to the punctilious demand of the Jews, 
that the end of the sufferers should be hastened, 
and their bodies removed before nightfall from 
their crosses, a company of soldiers broke the bones 
of the two malefactors, but when they came 
to the cross of Jesus, they found that He was dead 
already, and so " a bone of Him " was " not 
broken." But the unbrokenness of His bones 
witnessed to the indubitable certainty that He 
was dead. 

To make sure, however, one of the soldiers, 
with a lance " pierced His side," making so deep 
an incision that the risen Lord could challenge 
Thomas to thrust his hand into it. 

From the riven side there came forth Blood 
and Water, not water only, but water and blood. 
It has been thought from this that our Lord 
literally died of a broken heart, because the sac 
or bag which contains the heart is always filled 



DEAD 83 

with serous fluid, when the walls of the heart 
have burst under some excessive strain. If this 
were indeed the case, how beautifully it would 
illustrate the Psalmist's lament, " Reproach hath 
broken my heart." To how many, as they have 
looked on Him whom they pierced, has this 
spectacle been the dawn of a new hope. The 
water and blood have been " the double cure " of 
sin. By the blood we have been redeemed from 
sins of the deepest dye, by the water we are 
cleansed as in the laver of old. We could do 
without neither. 

Dead ! Those eyes that wept with pity fast 
closed ! Those hands that touched blind eyes 
and leprous skins nerveless ! The door of those 
lips close-locked ! That tender heart broken ! 
The temple of His body in ruins ! The feet un- 
able to stir from the cruel nail that held them 
together to the wood ! It was thus that men 
repaid the love of God. By wicked hands they 
crucified and slew the Prince of Life, who came 
to them, with eager pity, His hands filled with 
priceless gifts. But through that death the sad 
entail of Adam's sin was averted, and through 
the open portals of those wounds love has stepped 
out upon our world. 

The death of Christ has a deep significance in 



84 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

respect to the holiness of Christian character. It 
cut off from the outer world the Head and King 
of those who believe, and by union with Him 
those who are one with Him through a living 
faith and own Him King must reckon that they 
also are dead unto sin. Between the world that 
cast out their Master and themselves, stands His 
cross, so that it has no desire to come to them, 
nor do they desire to go to it. Only a heartless 
Queen could marry the murderer of her dead 
husband ! 

It is clear also that to all who are one with 
Christ, by the affinity of faith and love, that 
Death has robbed death of its terrors. To quote 
the old Latin sentence : " The death of death 
brought death to death by His death." When 
the moment of dissolution arrives, and the long 
union between soul and body must be broken, 
when we are summoned to that supreme exodus, 
we shall find that death has been abolished, that 
its victory and power have passed away a 
moment's shadow, the gentle snapping of a silver 
cord, the unloosing of the shore-rope, and we shall 
find ourselves sailing out on a sunlit sea. 



XVII 
"And was Buried" 

THE Sabbath Day was at hand, and that Sabbath 
was a high day because it linked the Sabbath 
rites with the ceremonial of the Passover. It was 
necessary, therefore, that whatever had to be 
done should be done at once, and God, to whom 
the dying Lord had committed His Spirit, cared 
for His Body also. 

Mary had anticipated this hour when she came 
to anoint His Body for the burying. She alone, 
as is probable of all who gathered round His 
Sacred Person, had realized that His Death would 
be by violence, and that there would be no 
opportunity for women to perform the last offices 
of love. She hoped that the tenacious fragrance 
of the sweet spikenard would cling to His beloved 
Body, through all the scenes of anguish and shame, 
not only reminding Him of her love, but ensuring 
to Him the same tender regard as would have 
been His had He slept His last sleep in the 
Bethany home. But His Father was even more 
thoughtful of the Body of His Beloved. Let us 

not shrink from trusting God utterly with our 

85 



86 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

body as well as our soul, which may be sown in 
dishonour, but shall be raised in glory. 

It had been predicted by the olden prophets 
that if His grave was made with the wicked, He 
should be with the rich in His death. And so 
it befel, for Joseph of Arimathea, a member of 
the Sanhedrin, a man of high character and great 
wealth, who had never ventured to confess the 
Master during his earthly life, and had given no 
indication of his affection, except that he had 
abstained from the vote of the Sanhedrin, hastened 
from the cross with its lifeless burden, and begged 
of Pilate that the dead body might be given to 
his care. 

The Romans were indifferent to the fate of the 
body, and left it to the birds of the air, but Pilate 
readily assented to Joseph's request, and the 
more so, because his heart smote him for his own 
action in the earlier part of the day. He was 
moreover astonished that death had already taken 
place, and inquired of the centurion whether such 
were the fact. 

Nicodemus, a man of enormous wealth, became 
his coadjutor ; the one purchased a long piece of 
fine linen, whilst the other spread it with myrrh 
and aloe-wood, and the two, with the help of 
others who were lingering near, bore the precious 



AND WAS BURIED 87 

casket from which the Divine-human spirit had 
passed, to rest in the new tomb, which Joseph 
had hewn out for himself in the solid rock. 

The burial of Jesus has been the theme of match- 
less pictures, and we need not stay to paint the 
scene. But as strong and loving hands bear the 
body to the open grave, wrap the head in the 
white napkin, roll the limbs in fragrant linen, and 
lay the Body reverently on its rocky niche, we 
take one last look at all that was mortal of the 
immortal Saviour. With united strength the 
great stone is rolled upon the aperture as the last 
rays of the setting sun bathe the world. But 
this is not all. Though we see them not, angels 
sentinel the spot, and sit within the vault, shed- 
ding the radiance of heaven. It is but a little 
while, and the grave, rejoicing for but a brief 
spell in the victory, must surrender her spoils. 
This is He who leads captivity captive. 

We cannot forget the repeated reference which 
the Apostles make to the burial of Christ. Paul 
says, " We were buried therefore with Him 
through baptism unto death " ; and again, 
" Having been buried with Him in baptism." 
(Rom. vi. 4 ; Col. ii. 12.) 

In his view the grave of Christ had been trans- 
formed into a garden grotto in which each 



88 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

redeemed disciple should quietly sit, remembering 
in the silence and solitude of the grave, how 
definite a barrier it made between Christ's earthly 
ministry, and that eternal priesthood which He 
exercises in the Unseen World. If it made so 
definite a break for Him, it surely can do no less 
for those who are the members of His Body, " of 
His Flesh and Bone." 

Who need fear to lie in the Grave, since Christ 
has lain there ? Why should we be anxious 
about our dust, since God was so careful of His 
Son's ? We cannot be holden any more than He 
was. For us, too, the Day of Resurrection must 
come apace. 



XVIII 
"He Descended into Hell" 

IN his Pentecost sermon the Apostle Peter tells 
us, speaking of our Lord, that His soul was not 
left in Hell (Acts ii. 27, A.V.). In this he quoted 
Psalm xvi. 8, " Thou wilt not leave my soul in 
Hell, neither wilt Thou suffer Thine Holy One 
to see corruption." Clearly we must infer that 
Christ's soul must have entered the sombre 
precincts of the region, thus designated, or there 
would have been no thought of His being left 
there. 

When the Authorised Version was made, the 
word hell had not acquired those dread associa- 
tions which now gather around it. It meant 
simply " a covered place," " the dark hole into 
which a tailor might fling his waste shreds, or 
some shady nook hidden by leafy boughs." The 
translators used the word to render two Greek 
ones, Hades and Gehenna, and so the confusion of 
thought has become still more confounded. 

There was a considerable difference in the mind 
of the Hebrew people between the places denoted 
by these two words. They had no idea that the 

89 



90 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

world was round, and there was no necessity for 
Divine illumination on this point. God's Spirit 
does not inform us on matters which we are able 
to discover for ourselves. The chosen race was 
Divinely taught and inspired as to the Infinite 
and Eternal world which is concealed by but the 
thinnest veil of gauze, but their notions of cos- 
mogony and astronomy were crude and element- 
ary. They thought of the earth as a vast plain, 
floating through space as a broad leaf floats 
through the air, the upper side lit by the sun and 
inhabited by the living, the underside sunless and 
gloomy and reserved for the souls of those who 
have died. This underside was called Hades 
the Unseen. 

Therefore, we meet frequently with the three- 
fold designation of " things in heaven, and things 
on earth, and things under the earth " (Phil, 
ii. 10). And we are told that " He descended 
into the lower parts of the earth " (Eph. iv. 10). 
As you can only fill a vessel from the bottom 
upwards, so, says the Apostle, in the process of 
filling all things with His glorious Fulness, our 
Lord began at the very bottom. " Shout, ye 
lower parts of the earth, for the Lord hath done 
it." In this immense Kingdom of the Unseen, 
the disembodied spirits of the departed awaited 



HE DESCENDED INTO HELL 91 

their final award, but not all under the same con- 
ditions ; for Hades consisted of two provinces, 
Paradise and Gehenna. In one of our Lord's most 
memorable parables, we are told that Lazarus 
was borne to the bosom of Abraham, that is, in 
the Paradisaical world, whilst the rich man lifted 
his eyes from the torment of Gehenna. 

The Revisers use our English word Hell as the 
equivalent of Gehenna, leaving the word Hades 
wherever they find it. For instance, in our Lord's 
pathetic apostrophe to Capernaum, instead of 
the A.V., " Thou shalt be brought down to Hell," 
the R.V. gives the rendering, " Thou shalt be 
brought down to Hades ; " i.e., all the gay and 
busy crowds that now throng thy streets will soon 
have passed into the world of the Unseen, and 
will have no successors. Again, the old version 
of the memorable prediction of the stability of the 
Church ran thus, "The gates of Hell shall not 
prevail against it," but the latter version is the 
more accurate, which asserts that the Gates of 
Hades, i.e., the principalities and power of the 
unseen world, from whatever quarter they may 
emanate, shall never overthrow the Church, which 
avows, as Peter did, the Divine Sonship. 

When we recite this clause in the Creed, we 
therefore affirm our faith that He who was very 



92 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

God of very God, not only conformed to the laws 
of our humanity in His Birth, but in His death 
also ; and that when His soul left the sacred body, 
which it had tenanted for three-and-thirty years, 
and which was not destined to see corruption, it 
went forth, clothed in that psychical body which 
it had woven for itself, to visit those further 
kingdoms which lie on the other side of this brief 
span of human existence. 

On the one hand, He said to the dying thief, 
" This day thou shalt be with Me in Paradise " ; 
whilst, on the other, the Apostle Peter tells us that 
being put to death in the flesh, but made alive 
in the Spirit, he went and preached unto the 
spirits in Prison, bearing them tidings of an 
accomplished salvation. The Apocryphal Gospel 
of Nicodemus adds that on entering Gehenna, our 
Lord took our forefather Adam by the hand, and 
said to the vast crowds of imprisoned spirits, 
" Come ye with me as many as have died through 
the tree which he touched, for behold I raise you 
up through the Tree of the Cross," so by the Cross 
as a bridge the inhabitants of Gehenna passed 
over into Paradise. But this is a legend only. 



XIX 

"He Descended into Hell, the Third Day 
He Rose Again from the Dead" 

" THOU wilt not leave my soul in Hades " with 
those words on His lips, our Lord breathed out 
His soul into the care of the Father. We are 
expressly told that when He had cried with a 
loud voice, saying, " Father, into Thy hands I 
commend My Spirit," He gave up His spirit. It 
was clearly a deliberate and voluntary act. He 
laid down His life of Himself, for this command- 
ment and authority had been given Him of His 
Father (John x. 18). As man, in the early prime 
of life, with all the wonderful possibilities that 
continued life suggested, it was natural that He 
should cling to it, and may not the thought of 
surrendering it so early have been one of the 
ingredients in the cup ? But at the Father's 
bidding He became obedient to death, even the 
death of the Cross. 

Can you not hear Him singing to Himself as 
He descended the darksome iron staircase into 

the Crypt of Death, "Thou wilt not leave my 

93 



94 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

soul in Hades, neither wilt Thou suffer Thine Holy 
One (i.e., My Body) to see corruption ; Thou wilt 
show Me the ways of Life, and make Me exceeding 
glad with Thy countenance." His voice grows 
fainter as He descends into those unexplored 
depths, but it does not falter. The Father would 
surely raise Him up again, and give Him another 
life, richer, fuller, and more perfect than could be 
contained within the limits of His manger-cradle 
and the rock-hewn grave. "This Jesus hath 
God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses." 

When the believer reaches the moment known 
as death, his soul, so far as we can understand, 
goes forth from this mortal case, leaving it as 
some of the lower forms of life slough off their 
outer skin. It is not unusual to meet with the 
skin, which the snake has cast aside, amid the 
withered leaves of autumn. But the soul is not 
disembodied. The radiant body of Resurrection 
may not as yet be given, but it is robed in the 
psychical, or astral, body, which is being woven 
beneath this. It is probable that we are building 
it up by each deed of self-denial and self-sacrifice. 
Every time that we bring into subjection the body 
of our humiliation, we are contributing to the 
growth of that fair tenement of the soul, which 
shall be its more perfect expression and implement. 



HE DESCENDED INTO HELL 95 

This surely is the House which is of Heaven, con- 
cerning which Paul speaks so rapturously 
(2 Cor. v.). 

Thus attired, the soul passes into the presence 
of Christ. It is not adequate to speak of that 
condition of existence as being Paradise, for surely 
the Resurrection, of Christ has greatly altered our 
whole conception of the Unseen World. He went 
with the dying thief to Paradise, but Paradise is 
only the third heaven (compare 2 Cor. xii. 2, 4) ; 
and now He has ascended far above all the 
heavens (Eph. iv. 10). We have a Great High 
Priest, who hath passed through the heavens 
(Heb. iv. 14). If then when we are absent from 
the body we are present with the Lord, it must be 
true of us also, when we depart to be with Him, 
that we enter upon the fulness of that blessed 
state, which is transcendent and heavenly. 
What other changes may await us we know not. 
What may be prepared for us, as the trumpet of 
the Archangel sounds, and the dead are raised, is 
a Divine mystery, or secret. But this we- know, 
that the time, long or short, which may elapse 
between the moment called Death and the hour 
of full consummation and bliss is not a thin and 
attenuated existence, when the bodiless ghost 
shall be carried hither and thither by the breath 



96 THE CREED OF CREEDS , 

of Eternity. Still less is it a period of uncon- 
sciousness. The body sleeps, but the untiring 
soul, as keenly alive as ever, is ever elaborating 
new plans and going forth on new exploits. Not 
one moment of cessation from vivid consciousness. 

The works of those who die in the Lord follow 
with them into the Eternal World. They see His 
face, and serve Him, and His Name is on their 
foreheads. Some rule over ten cities, and some 
over five ; others judge angels ; and some surely 
will be sent with the good news of the revealed 
Love of God to announce them to distant worlds 
" to the intent that now unto the principalities 
and the powers in the heavenly places may be 
made known, through the Church, the manifold 
wisdom of God." 

In the case of the Lord there was no period of 
unconsciousness between His death and Resur- 
rection, and there will be none for us. A moment 
of shadow as the soul disentangles itself from its 
grosser embodiment, then freedom in the morning 
air of Eternity. 



XX 

"The Third Day He Rose Again from the 

Dead" 

WHY are we sure of our Lord's Resurrection ? 

There is, first, the evidence of the Open Grave. 
On the Friday night, the women left the sepulchre 
with many tears, and were succeeded after a brief 
interval by the Roman sentries, and so the weary 
hours sped with leaden-footed pace until the third 
morning broke. What a spectacle was revealed 
by the herald streaks that glimmered timidly over 
Olivet ? The stone disturbed ; the sentries 
panic-stricken ; angels radiant with tidings of the 
Risen Christ ; but the dear body gone, only the 
grave-clothes were left. 

But that missing body and those remaining 
clothes are to us among the most conclusive of all 
the proofs of our Lord's glorious Resurrection. 
Where was the body that had been nailed to the 
cross and buried so lovingly in that garden-tomb ? 

Some say that He swooned, and had recovered 
as He lay in His narrow niche ; and rolled away 
the stone with his own hand. But how could 

97 



98 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

one who had passed through the scourging and 
the death of consuming agony, who had sweat 
great drops of blood in Gethsemane, and had 
fainted beneath the weight of His Cross on the 
Via Dolorosa, have become possessed of sufficient 
strength to move a stone which had required the 
united strength of three or four to roll into its 
place ? But suppose that He was capable of this, 
was there any conceivable reason for Him to leave 
behind His clothes ? How impossible, too, to 
think that He was somewhere in hiding on the 
Day of Pentecost, in hiding on the Ascension Day, 
in hiding when Stephen was for His sake stoned ! 
The hypothesis is too monstrous to be entertained 
for a moment. 

Could His enemies have borne away His body P 
Surely not, for it would have been the easiest 
thing possible for them to produce it directly His 
friends began to proclaim His Resurrection . Here 
would have been a conclusive proof that their 
contention could not be sustained. 

If robbers had stolen it, would it not have been 
well worth their while to have produced it when 
the Sanhedrim was endeavouring to put down 
the voice of the infant Church. If His friends had 
borne it off, how impossible they would have 
found it to convince the world that He who was 



THE THIRD DAY HE ROSE AGAIN 99 

crucified in weakness was living by the power of 
God. 

Think, too, of the orderliness of that sepulchre. 
In their hurry to the sepulchre on the morning of 
the Resurrection, John outstripped his older 
friend, and his loving, and, therefore, quick eye, 
instantly detected the orderliness with which the 
clothes were disposed, and we are told that " he 
saw and believed." That the handkerchief, which 
had been bound about His head, should be 
wrapped together in a place by itself was in itself 
evidence enough that the Master was risen. If 
His friends had taken away the body they would 
have borne it off decently covered. If His enemies 
had done so surely they would not have taken 
the trouble to unwind it. To them both linen 
clothes and spices would have been an appreciable 
addition to their spoils. Surely there was some- 
thing in the appearance of the clothes which could 
not be accounted for, except that they had 
collapsed by the transformation which had 
changed the solid body on which they rested into 
something as unsubstantial as the viewless air. 
" He seeth the linen clothes lying." 

Then with what tenderness Jesus had wrapped 
up the napkin which had been lovingly placed 
around His head ! As the gift of tender love He 



100 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

could not lightly cast it aside, but with His own 
hands had wrapped it together, and laid it by 
itself. Surely this was a trait, living and com- 
pelling of Him who had bidden the multitudes sit 
down in ordered ranks, had ordered the fragments 
to be collected, and who noticed with a smile the 
two common coins dropped by a poor woman in 
the treasury. 

The Resurrection Body was evidently not 
altogether dissimilar to that which the Apostles 
had known and loved. Mary recognised the 
voice. Thomas beheld the scars of the cross, 
they all knew Him, convinced against their will. 
Yet how different ! All the former substance was 
present, but in another form, as water may exist 
in the form of steam. If matter be, as modern 
science says, only a form of electricity, why should 
not the rate of vibration have become so altered, 
that what had been visible to human eyes should 
evade them, just as certain sounds are too shrill 
and piercing for the majority of ears ! Thus, the 
Lord could pass through closed doors, appear and 
disappear, and ascend contrary to gravitation, to 
the higher home from which He came. 



XXI 

11 The Third Day He Rose Again " 

THERE are other proofs of this central fact of our 
Religion. 

And it should be borne in mind that Christianity 
is not primarily a system of Philosophy or 
Theology. It is not, therefore, capable of being 
proved by argument, but the facts on which it 
rests are attested by eye-witnesses. 

The disciples did not expect Christ to rise. 
Renan's suggestion as to the origin of the belief 
in the Resurrection would be more worthy of 
credence if they had done so. It would have been 
credible that an excited imagination, which was 
eagerly expecting to see Christ risen from the 
tomb, might have mistaken a fluttering whiteness 
in the weird twilight for His presence. Many of 
the so-called appearances of the Middle Ages were 
probably due to this. Young girls expected to 
see an angel or the Mother of our Lord, and the 
expectation so wrought on their imagination as 
to assume bodily form and shape. 

But with the disciples and friends of Christ the 

101 



102 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

case was far different. Did the women expect 
Christ to rise ? Why then did they prepare their 
spiceries and come so early to the tomb ? Did 
Mary expect Jesus to rise ? Why then did she 
mistake Him for the gardener ? Did Thomas 
expect Him to rise ? Why, then, did he say, 
" Except I see in His hands the print of the nails 
I will not believe ? " Did the disciples as a 
whole expect to see Him risen ? Why then did 
Jesus upbraid them with their slowness of heart 
to believe the Scriptures ? 

The testimony of Paul is of priceless value in 
this respect. He had the opportunity of knowing 
all that the Pharisees could say against belief in 
our Lord's Resurrection. From his boyhood he 
had been taught to hate the Nazarenes : to 
despise their claims. He had investigated the 
whole case for himself, as the immense sacrifices 
which he was compelled to make for his belief 
compelled him to do, but he was willing to sur- 
render everything rather than renounce the faith 
which had been begotten in his soul by that vision 
on the road to Damascus. 

The Resurrection was witnessed to, not by one 
lone woman, but by 500 brethren at once, most 
of whom were living when Paul wrote his first 
letter to Corinth. They not only saw Him, but 



THE THIRD DAY HE ROSE AGAIN 108 

ate with Him. They did not see Him at a distance 
but near, not once or twice but often. They heard 
from His own lips things touching the Kingdom 
of God. There is no event in history more tho- 
roughly authenticated. If we refuse to accept 
this evidence, none would avail to convince us. 

Notice the emphasis that the Apostle laid on this 
sublime event. " Yea, rather, is risen again " 
(Rom. viii. 34). We stand before the cross where 
Jesus died, and contemplate the infinite love 
which led Him to that supreme act." Instead 
of the joy that was set before Him, He endured 
the Cross ! " We try to estimate the full results 
of His death in this and other worlds. We 
endeavour to penetrate the mystery of that cry 
of forsakenness, and to unravel the secret of His 
broken heart. We cry, miracle of miracles ! 
mystery of mysteries, unparalleled love ! 

But Paul cries, " Yea, rather" It was as 
though he said, Great and precious as is the death, 
the Resurrection of the Lord is still greater and 
more precious, because it is the Father's ratifica- 
tion of His claims, and the seal of His acceptance 
as our Mediator and King. The cross tells us 
much, the open grave tells us more. In the death 
we realize how near Jesus can come to every soul 
of man, who is frail as the flower and grass, but 



104 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

in the Resurrection we realize that He who died 
in weakness lives by the power of God. 

Do we sufficiently realize " the power of the 
Resurrection ? " What a power is exerted on an 
entire family when the eldest boy leaves the 
village home for a situation in the great city. 
The thoughts of the mother and father, of the 
sisters and brothers are constantly travelling 
across the intervening distance, and sending wire- 
less messages of love and prayer. They feel that 
they have a stake in London now. It almost 
seems as much their city as the nearest market 
town. If they hear any one speaking of London 
they listen with a new interest as though they 
were citizens already. 

Thus is it with those who love our Lord Jesus. 
He has conquered death and the grave. Leading 
captivity captive, He has gone like another Joseph 
into the great and awful Palace. And as we are 
one with Him, we, too, have passed into that 
strange new life. We died with Him, lay in His 
tomb, and were raised in Him, when He rose, and 
in Him we sit enthroned. 



XXII 
"He Ascended" 

The Scene 

No first-class writer of fiction would attempt a 
double climax of his plot. If he has wrought out 
his conception from stage to stage until the 
various threads are woven into one final scene, 
he dares not challenge the reader to follow him 
in a second and further climax. But what fiction 
dare not attempt, these unsophisticated historians 
have done. Had they invented the Gospel story, 
surely they would have been content to trace 
their Master's steps to the Cross, and His body to 
the grave. The mind of man could not have 
added to the supreme tragedy of Calvary aught 
more arresting and amazing. It would not have 
sought anything beyond, or been able to discover 
a Pelion to place on Ossa. 

But even if it be supposed that the Evangelists 
had sought to invent a description of the Saviour's 
visible return to His Father's House, how different 
would have been the details of His Home-going. 
They would have gathered all Jerusalem to 

105 



106 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

witness it ; would have painted Caiaphas, Herod, 
and Pilate as posted to see His triumph, in spite 
of all their machinations ; would have imitated 
the departure of Elijah by giving Him a chariot 
of fire, and borrowed from the announcement of 
His birth a choir of angels. On the supposition 
that they had to invent it, they would surely have 
painted an apotheosis, whose colouring would have 
worthily befitted the return of the Son of God, 
as He led captivity captive. 

How different from all this is the simple 
narrative of the Gospel ! " He led them forth," 
we are told, " as far as to Bethany." It is un- 
likely that His Form would have been apparent 
to any eyes but theirs. It is not given to the 
ordinary natural eye to discern the supernatural 
and spiritual. To the ordinary citizens of the 
Holy City it seemed as if an ordinary group of 
wayfarers was making its way through the streets 
to one of the Eastern gates, but none guessed that 
before or amongst them went One fairer than the 
sons of men, He, whom some six weeks before the 
rulers had hounded to His death, and the Roman 
soldiers had nailed to the Cross. 

They trod again the well-known path, crossed 
the familiar brook, ascended the road down which 
the procession of lowly triumph had come with 



HE ASCENDED 107 

shouts of Hosanna, turned once more to look upon 
the well-known scenes of Temple and City, on 
which the light of sunrise was breaking, passed 
over the brow of the hill and dipped down into 
the little village of Bethany, nestling beneath its 
palm trees, and there, before Jerusalem was well 
awake, or the villagers were beginning to pour 
along the road, to sell the produce of their gardens, 
a little eager group assembled, with a strange awe 
in their hearts, hardly realizing, perhaps, that this 
was the last time that those blessed feet should 
stand upon the Mount of Olives, till He should 
come again in the Glory of the Father and of the 
Holy Angels. 

In addition to the Apostles, surely Martha, 
Mary, and Lazarus must have been summoned to 
join the little group, and were thus assured of a 
love which time could not cool, nor distance sever. 
What a memorable meeting, and how precious 
every word He spoke ! Amongst His last words 
were the assurance that they should receive power 
to become His witnesses. His voice was full of 
more than wonted pathos, His face shone as the 
Sun, His hands, as He spake, were outspread in 
benediction. "And it came to pass, while He 
blessed them, he parted from them and was 
carried up into heaven." 



108 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

There was no sudden rupture of their inter- 
course. Without abruptness, or precipitancy, 
He withdrew from the scenes of earthly ministry, 
as gently and unobtrusively as He had come. 
" He was received up into Heaven." " While 
they beheld, He was taken up ; and a cloud 
received Him out of their sight." 



XXIII 
"He Ascended into Heaven" 

Beyond the Cloud 

WHEN the beggar, Lazarus, died, he was carried 
by the angels into Abraham's bosom ; when 
Elijah passed home he went by a chariot of fire, 
sent from the Father's Home, in honour of His 
brave servant and son ; but when Jesus ascended 
up where He was before, it was by the innate 
beauty and dignity of His character. It was as 
though its specific gravity was too light for the 
dense atmosphere of our world, and naturally 
sought its own divine and heavenly level. 

The last vision that man had of the ascending 
Lord, as He departed out of this world unto the 
Father, was of His outstretched hands in the act 
of Benediction. Still His words fell in flakes of 
music, still His pierced hands blessed them, and 
still they gazed after Him, as He went, until the 
chariot-cloud, moored in mid-air for the purpose, 
received Him, or to use another metaphor, fell 
between them and His receding figure, as the 
curtain of the Tabernacle behind the figure of the 
High Priest. :.. 

109 



110 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

But what happened on the other side of that 
cloud ? Where the Evangelist leaves off, the 
Apostle begins, and tells us that between that 
cloud and His throne were gathered principalities 
and powers, might and dominion (Eph. i. 21). 
We gather from a comparison with a subsequent 
paragraph in the same Epistle, that these were not 
friendly but antagonistic. They were the rulers 
of the darkness of this world, the spiritual hosts 
of wickedness in the heavenly places (vi. 12). 

It was as though a summons had been sent 
forth to all the dark powers of Hell to make one 
last rally to prevent the Saviour's final ascent. 
Of course, there could have been no thought 
whatever of successfully preventing the return of 
the Son to the bosom of the Father. He had 
come from the abysmal depths of Deity, these 
were His native Home. Even whilst He had 
been a pilgrim and sojourner in this far country 
He had been in Heaven (John iii. 13). God must 
go to God. But the great object of contention 
was the proposal to take our human nature with 
Him to the right hand of God, raising it to the 
supreme place in the Universe. It was this that 
aroused the intense opposition of those fallen 
spirits, which, as we are assured by Scripture and 
observation, throng the lower heavens. 



HE ASCENDED INTO HEAVEN 111 

They regard themselves as beings of a superior 
order to ourselves. Created earlier, and perhaps 
endued with larger powers, the angels " that kept 
not their first estate " claim a priority in the ranks 
of existence over that youngest born of the family 
of moral beings man. It was therefore, an 
unwelcome discovery to learn that the Son of God 
was not content to wear our humanity for a few 
brief years, but was bent on bearing it, married 
in .indissoluble union with His own, beyond the 
highest heavens. 

It would seem, therefore, that the Prince of the 
Power of the Air, the Spirit that works in the sons 
of disobedience, summoned all the forces of malign 
and wicked spirits to bar the way of the Ascending 
Lord. Again it was the hour of the power of 
darkness. The conflict of the Garden and the 
Cross was renewed. Christ's assailants gathered 
for their last great stand, until that yet future 
day when their ranks will be broken for ever 
before the charge of the armies of heaven, follow- 
ing Him on white horses, and clothed in pure 
linen, white and clean (Rev. xix. 11-16). 

But you might as well endeavour to keep a 
cork at the bottom of the ocean by heaping miles 
of sea-water on it, as repress the ascending Lord 
by massing against Him the black squadrons of 



112 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

dark demon hosts. He cleft His way through 
them, as a sunbeam might cleave the morning 
mists. " God set Him at His own right hand in 
the Heavenlies, far above all principality, and 
power, and every name that is named, not only 
in this world, but in that which is to come." 



XXIV 
"He Ascended into Heaven" 

Captivity led Captive 

IN the Epistle to the Ephesians, which, on account 
of its numerous references to the Ascension, may 
well be described as " The Ascension Epistle," we 
are told that " When He ascended up on high," 
our Lord "led captivity captive," and both 
received and gave gifts to men (Eph. iv. 8). 

That quotation is borrowed from one of the 
sublimest of the Psalms, an ode of almost un- 
rivalled splendour, which was composed by David 
on the occasion of the carrying of the ark from 
the obscure lodging, in which it had tarried for 
many months, to the newly-prepared tent on 
Mount Zion. 

A study of this Psalm the 68th will reveal 
these successive steps. As the priests stoop to 
assume the sacred burden of the ark, taking on 
their shoulders what might be deputed to no 
ox-cart, the white-vestured choristers sing softly 
of the Exodus, when God went forth before His 

113 



114 THE CREED OF CREEDS , 

people, marching through the wilderness at their 
head. As the procession moves slowly forward, 
the Psalmist tells of the quivering earth, the 
dropping skies, the panic-stricken flight of heathen 
kings, whilst the women that publish the tidings 
are a great host. 

Finally, as the festal march, accompanied by 
the blast of trumpets, the clang of cymbals, and 
the sweet voices of the singers, begins to climb 
the sacred Mount, there is a new and loftier note 
in the song. It seems as though the air is full of 
angels. The old cruel spirits, which had haunted 
the place in the days of the Jebusites, have given 
place to " thousands of angels and twenty 
thousand of the chariots of God " (ver. 17). The 
obscene and evil hosts, who had for so many 
centuries dominated the minds of men, are being 
led in chains to receive their righteous doom. 
They who were wont to lead in captivity are now 
reduced to captivity. The hands that used to 
fix the iron fetters on the wrists of the conquered 
are now fast closed in fetters. From myriads of 
voices the victorious refrain is repeated. 

Every splint of wood in the Ark, every stone 
in Mount Zion, and every note in Hebrew 
minstrelsy were symbolical of Jesus Christ. " The 
testimony of Jesus " was the aim and object of 



HE ASCENDED INTO HEAVEN 115 

the entire Hebrew economy ; the Apostle, there- 
fore, was in exact accord with the entire spirit 
of the Old Testament, when beneath the guidance 
of the Spirit of God, he took up this ancient Psalm, 
making it a new song, as he applied it to the 
Ascension of our Lord, and said of Him that He 
also led captivity captive. This phrase is bor- 
rowed from Deborah's magnificent apostrophe to 
Barak "Arise, Barak, and lead thy captivity 
captive, thou son of Abinoam " (Judges iv. 12). 
What a glimpse of an old-world triumph ! First, 
the war-worn but victorious soldiers, then the car 
drawn by milk-white steeds, on which the Victor 
stands erect and garlanded, behind him slaves 
bearing the spoils, and lastly the long lines of 
captives, amongst them, sullen, cowed, and silent, 
the kings whose nod had sufficed to decide the 
fate of kingdoms. 

When our Lord went through the Heavens, it 
was not as Victim but as Warrior, not as the dying 
Lamb but as the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. 



Thousands of angels accompanied Him, welcoming 
Him home, and bound in fetters, behold the 
captive forms of Evil ! The world " I have 
overcome the world ; " Death and Hades " I 
have the keys of Hades and of Death ; " the 
Grave " Grave, where is thy victory ; " and 



116 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

greater than them all, he that had the power of 
death, even the devil, who had kept myriads in 
his thrall. " The Breaker is gone up before them ; 
they have broken up and passed through the gate, 
and the Lord at the head of them " (Micah ii. 13). 



XXV 
"He Ascended into Heaven" 

As Priest 

WE are told that the World's Redeemer passed 
through the Heavens (Heb. iv. 14, R.V.). We 
know that there are three Heavens, and there may 
be seven (2 Cor. vii. 2). But whatever be their 
number, Jesus passed through them as the High 
Priest passed through the Courts and Curtains of 
Tabernacle or Temple until He reached the Most 
Holy Place, where the Shechinah shone above 
the Ark. But all these things were patterns of 
the things in the Heavens (Heb. ix. 9). 

The Old Testament precedes the New, in order 
to give us God's definitions and nomenclature ; 
and the very design of the Levitical system was 
to furnish the phrases and symbols, which, in the 
process of time, would be required to describe the 
deepest mysteries of forgiveness, mediation, 
acceptance, and fellowship with God. 

In order to impress on man his unfitness and 
unworthiness to enter the Divine Presence apart 
from the Mediation of the Divine-man, a special 

place was constructed, viewed as the peculiar 

117 



118 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

residence of God. Ordinary men, who were of 
unclean lips and dwelt among a people of unclean 
lips were carefully excluded from its precincts. 
A certain class, however, was carefully selected, 
and of this the picked and perfectly developed 
men were again chosen, to whom was assigned the 
privilege of representing their fellows in the sacred 
courts ; and of these only one who must be 
dressed in stainless white, and bear blood in his 
hands, was allowed to enter the inner shrine on 
one great day in the year. 

But what a blessing that he could enter ! What 
a comfort it must have been for those who were 
" ignorant and out of the way " to realize that 
he represented them, that in His Person they were 
accepted and welcome, and that nothing of their 
failure could hinder the mediation of their High 
Priest. Were their names not graven on his 
breast-plate, and borne on his shoulders ! Had 
He not promised to plead for them at the hour of 
prayer ! Was not the sacrificial blood which He 
bore a sufficient atonement ! The most troubled 
heart might rest in such considerations. 

This is exactly our position before God's 
Majestic Purity and Stainless Holiness. As of 
old, the High Priest went into the Holy of Holies 
to stand before the Mystic Light that shone 



HE ASCENDED INTO HEAVEN 119 

between the Cherubim, and plead for the people 
on the ground of the shed blood, so our ascended 
Lord passed through the Heavens " now to appear 
in the presence of God for us." 

We must not think, of course, that Jesus needed 
to propitiate an angry and unwilling God, 
because we know that God loved the world and 
that " God was in Christ reconciling men to 
Himself ; " but we may be thankful to realize that 
He is God's Ideal imputed to those who believe, 
that He has met the claims of infinite Justice, that 
life has come through His wounds, and atonement 
through His blood. 

What a comfort it is to be able to say, " Look 
not on me, nor on my past, Thou of purer eyes 
than to behold sin, but behold my Shield, look 
on the Face of Thine anointed and beloved Son, 
my representative and propitiation. Accept me 
in virtue of what He is, and did, and will do for 
ever ! " 

Throughout a memorable chapter in that great 
Epistle which specially elaborates these thoughts, 
the writer repeatedly strikes the note that " He 
ever liveth," and that " He ever liveth to make 
intercession " (Heb. vii.). And in the Book of 
Revelation we behold the Angel of the Covenant 
mingling much incense with the Prayers of Saints 



120 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

offered on the Golden Altar, which is before the 
Throne (Rev. viii. 3). What words or symbols 
could more effectually reassure those who have 
fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before 
them in the Gospel ! When our faith grapples 
such thoughts as these, we are kept from drifting 
on the surge of life's tides (Heb. vi. 19). 

Directly the laborious duties of the Great Day 
of Atonement were over, the High Priest arrayed 
himself in his splendid robes, and came forth to 
bless the congregation. So will our Saviour 
reappear, returning from the heaven of heavens, 
which has received Him till the restitution of all 
things of which God has spoken since the world 
began. 

He appeared once to put away our sin. He 
appears always before the face of God for us. He 
will appear the second time in glory to put the 
last touches on His work by Resurrection and 
Eternal Judgment. 



XXVI 
"He Ascended into Heaven" 

As Forerunner and Paraclete 

" I GO to prepare a place for you," Jesus said. 
Not otherwise could the Unseen have become real 
to those who loved Him. " We know not whither 
Thou goest," so had they spoken. But when He 
uttered those illuminating words, a shaft of golden 
light fell on all the future. He was going to the 
Father's House ; there were many mansions 
there ; He was about to prepare a place for them ; 
and where He was in the Unseen Holy, there also 
would they be. And it was enough. 

How strange and wonderful the distant metro- 
polis seems to the people of a remote and desolate 
coast, to which the postman comes but once a 
week, and in which the scream of the railway 
whistle never sounds. The mother of a fisher- 
man's orphaned children mentions its name with 
a strange awe, as she recounts on winter evenings 
what she has heard of its splendour, its wealth, 
its sin, its nameless perils. But presently one of 
her boys goes there in a coasting barque, and 
returns with stories of all he has seen, and the 

distant becomes near, and the unfamiliar less 

121 



122 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

strange and terrible. Finally, if one of the boys 
settles there, and writes often of all that he is 
doing, and says that he is making money and 
getting on, that he is preparing a home for those 
he loves, and will never be content until they 
come to him, and goes on to describe the arrange- 
ments which he is making by which all the tastes 
and idiosyncrasies of his loved ones will be 
perfectly consulted and met, then for the whole 
family that distant city is almost as familiar and 
dear as their native cottage with its peat smoke 
and cow byre. 

It is thus that Jesus has invested the Unseen 
World with the tenderest associations for those 
who believe in God, and believe also in Him. 
Somewhere, and not far away, He is. The blue 
curtains of the sky barely conceal Him. He is 
moving to and fro, engaged on our behalf in 
making our future home as fit as possible for the 
natures which He is training for their new en- 
vironment. As the bird prepares the nest for 
her brood, as the wild beast of the forest prepares 
its lair for its young, as the human mother for 
months before the child is born prepares for its 
needs, so that nothing is required by the little 
helpless babe that tender foresight has not antici- 
pated, so the Lord Jesus is preparing for us things 



HE ASCENDED INTO HEAVEN 123 

which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor the 
heart of man conceived. 

It may be asked, is there any proof that the 
Ascended Lord is thus engaged on our behalf ? 
Surely there is, in the fact that His influence is 
continually making itself felt in the realms of 
human thought and action. By His Spirit Jesus 
is always influencing the course of events on the 
shifting scenes of earthly history. Every revival 
of religion that moves the heart of the Church, 
every advance in missionary enterprise, every 
fresh accession of light on the great problems of 
eternity, every new prophet or teacher which 
stirs the heart of the listening crowd, is the gift 
of the Ascended Christ, and the proof that He 
lives and cares. " He gave " (may we not add, 
He gives ?} " some, Apostles ; and some, prophets ; 
and some, evangelists ; and some, pastors and 
teachers." 

There is a yet more personal proof that the 
Ascended Christ is deeply interested in the well- 
being of His Church. " Unto every one of us is 
given grace according to the measure of the gift 
of Christ." He receives gifts for us, and bestows 
them on us on every one of us. 

When a desire awakens in the heart it is a 
proof that there is some good thing in store, 



124 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

which will make our nature fuller and richer than 
ever. Apart from the entrance of that desire, 
we might fail to look for or wish the perfecting 
of our character and the fulfilment of our destiny. 
But wherever there is such desire, it is the certain 
evidence that the supply of its craving awaits us 
in the Ascended Christ. The spirit of evil may 
offer some lower form of gratification, but if we 
dare to refuse it and wait only upon God, if we 
claim and appropriate the unseen but infinite 
supply from the Hands of our Lord, if we persist 
in affirming our possession and in thanking Him 
that we have received we shall have ever new 
and repeated proofs that Jesus lives for us in 
God's presence as the channel of the Divine 
supply. 



XXVII 
"He Sitteth at the Right Hand of God" 

His Majesty 

" THE Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on my 
right hand, until I have made thy foes the foot- 
stool of thy feet." This is a quotation from an 
ancient Messianic Psalm. Our Lord said that 
David said it, being taught by the Holy Spirit ; 
and out of it He made a puzzle, which His wily 
foes could not answer without making admissions, 
which would concede His claims. 

" What think you about the Christ ? Whose 
Son is He ? " " David's," they replied, " How 
then," He asked, " does David call Him Lord ? 
For if he calls Him Lord, how can He be his 
Son?" (Ps. ex. 1; Matt. xxii. 41). No one 
could say a word in reply, nor, from that day 
forth, did any one venture to put a question to 
Him. 

But what dignity is here ! The right hand is 
always the place of dignity and honour. To sit 
at the right hand of the King is the privilege of 
the Queen or eldest son, of the Vicegerent or 

Favourite : and to be invited to sit at the right 

J25 



126 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

hand of Jehovah, this can only belong to " the 
Man that is His fellow." To which of the Angels 
has He ever said, " Sit at My right hand, till I 
make thy foes a footstool for thy feet ? " (Heb. 
i. 13). They are ministering spirits, sent forth 
to render service for the benefit of them, who, 
before long, will inherit salvation : but to the 
Son He saith : " Thy throne, God, is for ever 
and ever." 

When, therefore, in the Creed, we avow our 
belief that He who was known as Jesus of Naza- 
reth now sitteth at the right hand of God, we 
acknowledge as clearly as words can do it that He 
is God, and that the Father has crowned Him with 
glory and honour. 

Of course if we admit that Jesus Christ is all 
this, it becomes us to give Him reverence. He 
is our Brother, but He is our'God. We must not 
only be orthodox in Creed, but becoming in 
behaviour and speech. It does not follow that 
those who bow their heads at each mention of His 
name are superior in these respects to those who 
do not literally conform to such observance ; but 
it becomes us all to remember that His Name is 
above every name, that in the Name of Jesus 
every knee should bow and every tongue confess 
that He is Lord to the Glory of God the Father, 



, SITTETH AT THE RIGHT HAND OF GOD 127 

Nothing glorifies the Father more absolutely than 
tjiis loyal and constant recognition of the glory 
of His Son. 

There are several practices which such a recogni- 
tion will enforce. We shall for the most part 
avoid speaking of Him familiarly by the human 
name of Jesus, and shall either prefix the title 
Lord, or follow it by Christ, the Hebrew term for 
the Messianic King. We shall adopt a reverential 
posture when we address Him, either standing or 
kneeling, but not lolling listlessly. We shall obey 
His precept with careful obedience, lest He should 
upbraid us as He did the chosen people, saying, 
" If I be King, where is Mine honour ? " 

Some men, whom we know, and who cannot be 
accused of cant or weakness, are so inspired with 
their conception of the Glorious Exaltation of 
their Master, that they seem to be always 
courteous, standing in His Presence, with un- 
covered heads, and something of His dignity 
passes into their demeanour. 

Emerson remarks of the English Cathedrals 
that their custodians by habitual contemplation 
of the stately beauty around them, become 
imbued with a certain stateliness of mien, which 
well becomes them ; and certainly it is impossible 
for the mind to dwell constantly on the glories 



128 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

of Jesus without becoming changed from glory 
to glory, by the Spirit of the Lord. 

What an inspiring thought is here, that He 
whom we know as our Kinsman and Friend, is 
in the midst of the throne, possessed of infinite 
power, wisdom, and love. Our human nature 
ranks highest in the universe of created things. 
We are brethren of the King, and when we pray, 
we speak into the ear of One before whom the 
four living creatures, emblems of the highest 
intelligence and the twenty-four elders fall down, 
saying, "Thou art worthy." 



XXVIII 
"He Sitteth at the Right Hand of God" 

His Energy 

THE Right Hand is the symbol of the putting 
forth of Power. The Psalms abound with such 
words as these : 

Thy right hand, Lord, is glorious in power; 
Thy right hand, Lord, has dashed in pieces the enemy, 
The right hand of the Lord is exalted : 
The right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly. 

This is only a figure of speech. God is not to 
be localised at any one spot in His boundless 
universe. He is everywhere, and He is equally 
everywhere. Every part of the wide creation is 
equally His throne, and equally the place of His 
right hand. This is the inner secret on which 
Faith builds her reckonings. 

Wherever there is the putting forth of Divine 
energy, you have the operation of the right hand 
of the Most High. When a sparrow falls to the 
ground in the forest depths, it is there. When a 
little child is suddenly withdrawn from peril, it 
is there. When a faithless disciple is about to 
sink into the depths of the lake, it is there to 

catch and .uphold him. If we take the wings 

129 



130 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts 
of the sea ; even there shall His hand lead us, 
and His right hand shall hold us. He caused His 
glorious arm to go at the right hand of Moses, 
dividing the water before them, to make Himself 
a glorious name. Whenever the Prophets and 
Seers of the Hebrew Commonwealth came 
across an urgent need for the Divine Interference 
they did not hesitate to bid the Almighty pluck 
his right hand from His bosom in order to deliver 
and avenge. " Awake, awake, oh arm of the 
Lord ! " 

We are therefore quite prepared for the an- 
nouncement of the Evangelist, that when our 
Lord had finished His instructions to His disciples, 
he was received up and continued to co-operate 
and work with them, as they went everywhere 
preaching His word. So deeply inwrought into 
their consciousness was this conception, that when 
the Apostles had returned to their own company 
from the remonstrances and threatenings of their 
foes, they asked the Lord to stretch forth His 
hand and do wonders and signs in the sight of the 
people. 

There are two significant expressions in the 
Book of the Acts. It begins something in this 
strain : " In my former treatise, the third Gospel, 



SITTETH AT THE RIGHT HAND OF GOD 131 

I dealt with all that Jesus did and taught as a 
beginning." Notice the careful wording which 
the beloved physician adopts. He does not 
admit that the death of our Lord put an end to 
His mighty deeds, but that when the Heavens 
received Him out of their sight, He was only just 
beginning to make His mighty power known, 
He sits at the right hand of God, ever going forth 
in its company to do great things for His people. 
We are told also in Acts ii. 47, that " the Lord 
added to the Church daily such as should be 
saved." Notice it is said that the Lord did this 
great and blessed thing. Not only does He do 
according to His will, in the army of heaven, and 
among the inhabitants of the earth, but when a 
dying but penitent malefactor is lifted from a 
scaffold to the Paradise of God, whenever the 
tears of broken hearts have to be wiped away, 
whenever the lips of the Messenger have to be 
touched with a live coal from off the altar, when- 
ever a brand has to be plucked from the burning, 
whenever a Saul has to be arrested on his murder- 
ous path in answer to the prayers of an Ananias, 
there the right hand of God is going forth in its 
might or soft gentleness, and Jesus Christ is the 
Alpha and Omega, Beginning and End, All in all, 
in its operations, 



132 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

Sometimes we are told that He worked by His 
servants, and sometimes with (Acts xv. 4 and 12). 
The first preposition suggests instrumentality, 
the second co-operation. But each confirms the 
thought that Jesus is the right hand of the Most 
High. He is the energy of God, whether in 
Creation, Providence, the Evolutions of human 
history, or Redemption. 

Let us not think of ourselves, then, as standing 
alone, like Athanasius against the whole world. 
If we are only doing His will in His way, we may 
reckon on Him with absolute certitude. Never 
before the time, and never behind, He will come 
riding upon a cherub, and flying on the wings of 
the wind. 



XXIX 

"He Sitteth at the Right Hand of God" 

His Finished Work 

THIS is the point on which the Writer of the 
Epistle to the Hebrews insists. The great point 
of that marvellous treatise is to prove the supe- 
riority of Christianity to the old Levitical rites. 
Amongst other proofs he adduces the contrast 
between the wearisome reiteration of the olden 
sacrifices, which proved their inefficiency by their 
incessant repetition, with the " once for all " 
finished work of Christ. 

The sacrifices were offered "year by year 
continually " (x. 1) ; " there was therefore a 
remembrance made of this every year " (3) ; 
" every priest stood in his daily ministry, offering 
oftentimes the same sacrifices " (11). " But this 
Man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, 
for ever sat down on the right hand of God." (12). 
It might be rendered, " He for ever sat down." 
" For by one offering He hath perfected for ever 
them that are being sanctified " (14). 

In this remarkable passage, the whole gist of 
the argument turns on the contrasted attitudes 

133 



134 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

of the priests, and the Priest. There were no 
seats in the Tabernacle or Temple ; no provision 
was made for sitting; the ministrants must 
perforce be on their feet, for their work was never 
done. Year after year, century after century, 
the unceasing stream of penitents, driven with 
contrition for the same sins, flowed through the 
holy places. 

But when Jesus said, " It is finished," the work 
of Redemption to which He had put His Hand 
when He arose from the bosom of the Father was 
completed ; so far at least as God's side was 
concerned. 

As we compare the Gospels, we find that these 
memorable words were spoken " with a loud 
voice." It was, in fact, the shout of a conqueror. 
Finished, the types and shadows of the Jewish 
ritual. Finished, the long line of prophecies, 
closed like gates behind the King as He passed 
through. Finished, the work which the Father 
had given Him to do. Finished the ransom 
price of man's redemption. Finished, the putting 
away, of sin. " Now once in the end of the ages 
He was manifested to put away sin by the sacrifice 
of Himself. . . . Christ was once offered to 
bear the sins of the many " (Heb. ix. 26, 28). 

This is a redeemed world. Something definite 



SITTETH AT THE RIGHT HAND OF GOD 135 

was done for it when Jesus died. He achieved 
our emancipation from the condemnation and 
thrall in which our race has involved itself, though 
the application of His mighty work on our behalf 
must largely depend on each man's repentance, 
faith, and appropriation. The debt is paid, but 
we must listen to the trumpet of jubilee, and go 
forth from the house of the creditor. We must 
believe that we have sold ourselves for nought, 
and have been redeemed without money. " Turn 
you to the stronghold, ye prisoners of hope, even 
to-day I declare that I will render double unto 
thee." 

Once in conversation with an aged Christian 
minister, to my great surprise I discovered that 
he was accustomed each day to confess all the 
sins of which he retained the recollection, as far 
back as his thoughts could travel. It was 
astounding. This is clearly not the divine 
method. God casts the sins of His children 
behind Him into the depths of the sea; blots 
them out ; remembers them no more. " If we 
confess our sins, He is faithful and just " 
faithful to His promises, and righteous to Jesus 
Christ, " to forgive us our sins." 

What can all this mean, except that we too 
may enter into His rest. As He sat, we may sit. 



136 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

As He ceased from His works, so may we from 
ours. We may sit together with Him in the 
heavenlies. " Let us draw near with a true heart, 
in full assurance of faith, having our hearts 
sprinkled from an evil conscience." So long as 
Jesus retains His seat, we may possess ourselves 
in peace. 



"He Sitteth at the Right Hand of God" 

His Expectation 

THIS is the centre of the great argument of 1 Cor. 
xv. 25. " He must reign," i.e., He must continue 
seated on the Throne, until the Father shall 
have put all things under His feet (Ps. viii. 6 ; 
ex. 1). Even the last enemy, Death, will be 
placed by the Father under the feet of the Son. 
The proud neck of the all-conqueror must become 
the footstool of the feet which were pierced by 
him with the rugged iron of the Cross. 

Of course, when it is said that all things are to 
be subjected unto Him, it must be clearly under- 
stood that the Father Himself must be excepted. 
But when the whole universe has been made 
subject unto Him, then the Son also Himself shall 
become subject to Him who has granted Him so 
marvellous a supremacy, and God shall be All 
in all. " Then," as Bengel puts it, " all creatures 
will be able to say, God is everything to me." 

The attitude of Christ is therefore one of calm 
expectancy. The Father said, " Ask of me, 
and I will give Thee the heathen for Thine 

137 



138 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

inheritance and the uttermost parts of the earth 
for Thy possession." 

Our Lord has asked, and in reply the Father has 
bidden Him sit at His right hand, whilst He 
subdues the principalities and powers of the 
Heavenly Places. The task seems impossible 
and the more so, because God refuses to avail 
Himself of the Divine attribute of omnipotence. 
He will conquer by moral and spiritual means, 
though it may take millenniums. But silently, 
slowly, and surely, the process of subjugation 
is going on. 

Granted that enormous wrongs are still perpe- 
trated by man against his fellow, that war and 
lust and crime with linked hands ravage vast 
tracts of territory, and that the floods of misrule 
and rebellion lift up their voices ; granted that 
the kings and princes of the world are gathered 
together against the Lord and against His Christ ; 
yet they are only doing whatsoever God's hand 
and counsel determined before to be done. Their 
very fury is another step in the direction of their 
final subjugation. Every plunge fastens the 
noose more securely round their necks (Acts iv. 
28). They dig pits into which they fall themselves. 

Examination by torture is a thing of the past. 
The sports of the people are less debasing, for 



SITTETH AT THE RIGHT HAND OF GOD 139 

even in Spain the bull-fight is decaying. Society 
is more careful of girl and child life. A victorious 
foe feels it incumbent to care for the wounded of 
the vanquished. Arbitration Treaties fill the 
air. The Public Press is quick to expose wrong- 
doing. The evils of over-crowding receive the 
attention and engage the sympathy of our fore- 
most men. Abominable inhumanity is not per- 
mitted to pass unchallenged, as witness the late 
diabolical outrages on the natives of the 
Congo-Balolo territory. 

When compelled by the lords of the Inquisition 
to recant his discovery that the earth moved 
round the sun, and to accept their theory that it 
was stationary, Galileo muttered between his 
teeth, yet it moves ; so in the teeth of those who 
indulge in their pessimistic assertions that things 
are waxing worse, we reiterate our conviction 
that God's purpose is quietly moving on, and 
bringing about that new Heavens and new Earth, 
in which dwelleth Righteousness. 

Meanwhile Christ sits and waits. It is to this 
attitude that the Beloved Apostle alludes, when 
he says, that we are partakers in the sorrows, 
the Kingship, and the patient endurance of Jesus 
(Rev. i. 9). 

We sometimes say to each other, " How 



140 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

can He bear to see all the horror and misery of this 
poor world ! " He sees not yet all things put 
under Him that is most surely true. But He 
sees that they will be (Heb. ii. 9, etc.). He 
beholds the emancipated race, the far-off interest 
of tears, the joyful harvest, and it nerves Him to 
endure. 

In patience He possesses His soul, because He 
sees that all things are working for good. He 
knows that the Father will not fail nor be discour- 
aged till He have set judgment in the earth. 
Already He hears singing across the field of battle 
the refrain, "The Kingdoms of this world are 
become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of His 
Christ, and He shall reign for ever." 



XXXI 

"God, the Father Almighty" 

THE Creed strikes again the note it struck in the 
first clauses, but there is now an added force and 
beauty. 

The most blessed thing in child-life is the slow 
and blissful awakening, not only to the blue sky, 
the sun, the frolic of the kitten, the lawns ena- 
melled with gold and silver, but to the two faces 
that bend over it, and the two arm-cradles which 
seem softer and cosier than blankets, feathers, 
or down. We wish we could think ourselves back 
to those earliest moments of recognition. They 
were carefully registered by the parents, who 
were our twin deities then, and who, perhaps in 
Paradise itself, could recall the exact time and 
place when their baby knew them. 

But this is the essential thought the Priority 
of the Father's Love ! The child is not conscious 
of having made its father love it by any artifice 
or laboured obedience of its own. It simply 
awoke to find itself loved ineffably. It was born 
an heir to great estates, and entered on its 
possession, making lavish demands upon the 

141 



142 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

exchequer, and never deeming that its claims 
could not or would not be met. 

This is precisely our position towards God, 
the " Father Almighty," though theologians have 
done their best to obscure the thought. Some 
have said that God was terribly angry with the 
whole race, and that much was required before 
He could look on any of us with favour. Others 
that every child was born into the world, a child 
of the devil. Others that the new birth must 
take place before we could claim a share in the 
Father's Love. 

It can never be possible for us to forget what 
Jesus told us, as to the necessity of being twice- 
born, if we would stand with Himself on the plane 
of the most sacred relationship with God. We 
need to be born, not of man, nor of the will of the 
flesh, but of God, if we would receive the Spirit 
of the Son into our hearts, and call Him, as the 
Son did in Gethsemane, " Abba Father " ; but 
when all this is stated and admitted, we cannot 
forget that Paul, addressed the Athenians as the 
offspring of God, and surely this is warrant 
enough to claim for every little babe that opens 
its eyes in this world, though it be in gaol, gipsy 
caravan, or Indian rice-field, the Fatherly regard 
and love of God. It need do nothing to earn that 



GOD, THE FATHER ALMIGHTY 143 

love, any more than it has to create the sunshine, 
but just to yield to it, as when a tiny skiff floats 
gently on a broad and noble stream. 

If we love God it is because He first loved us. 
If we seek Him, as the child cries for its mother, 
it is because He taught us to want and lean upon 
Him. If we are feeling orphaned and lonely, 
it is because we have not known and believed 
the Love that God hath to us, and this, perhaps, 
because we have not cherished an altogether 
loving, trustful spirit towards others. Our 
religious life is our poor echo of response to the 
Divine Purity, Strength and Sweetness, that 
have been bending over us since our childhood. 

Out of that Father's Heart have sprung those 
blessed provisions for our redemption from sin 
and folly, for the honouring of justice, the estab- 
lishment of right relations with the laws of the 
universe, the methods of soul-purgation and 
deliverance, which are the theme of all the theol- 
ogies. But it must never be forgotten that the 
Father's Love was the origin and source of all. 
" God so loved the world that He gave His only 
begotten Son " ; " God was in Christ, reconciling 
the world to Himself." 



XXXII 
"The Father Almighty" 

YES, again! "the Father Almighty," but 
there is a difference between those words, as we 
recite them at the beginning of the Creed, and as 
we recite them now that certain other clauses 
have attracted us and been explained. We have 
learnt that Father was not only the Creator, but 
gave the Son to be the Saviour of the world, that 
He was crucified, dead, and buried, as the 
exponent of the Father's loving plan for our 
salvation, and that " the Man of Love " is now 
seated at the Father's side. Thus there is an 
altogether new note in the songs of Eternity. 

This is exquisitely illustrated in the fourth and 
fifth chapter of the Book of Revelation. The 
word Apocalypse, as we all know, is Unveiling, 
it contains an account of the realities, which John 
beheld, when the slight veil that hangs between us 
and them parted for a few minutes. What a 
comfort it is to know that the word contains no 
suggestion of long sight or the telescope, for under 
those circumstances we should have been com- 
pelled to think that there was truth in the words, 

144 



THE FATHER ALMIGHTY 145 

which are absolutely false, and which no child 
should be allowed to sing : 

There is a happy land, 
Far, far away. 

Heaven is not far away. It lies all around us, 
from our infancy and onward. Only a veil hides 
us from it, which may be slit or torn at any 
moment. The Apocalypse, therefore, simply tells 
the story of that which 's, and which always is. 
Hence the value of searching beneath its gorgeous 
images for the truths that lie beneath. 

Now, in those two chapters, there are five songs. 
The third of these is entitled a new song, as though 
it embodied some fresh conception of the Divine 
Nature ; and when once it has been uttered, it 
seems to enhance the imagination of Heaven, 
for it absolutely colours and dominates the fourth 
and fifth. 

The earlier part of the fourth chapter describes 
the throne of the Eternal, bathed in splendour 
which excels that of earth's most precious jewels. 
The emerald rainbow of God's perfected purpose 
surrounds it ; the sea of glass is spread out before 
it. The rarest colours of the natural world are 
focussed in one rich panorama of beauty. Next 
we learn of the Eternity and Moral Perfections of 
God. The ceaseless chant of the wonderful beings 



146 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

which represent Creation, tells us that God's 
Nature is Holy. Time with its senses of past, 
present, and future leaves no trace upon His 
Eternal Life. Next, we catch the music of 
that Song of Creation, which ascribes the existence 
of the whole great universe to the will of its 
Personal Intelligent First Cause. Still further we 
are taught that the scroll of history, to which 
none can add, nor any subtract from it, awaits 
His hand to unfold it seal by seal. None of these 
mighty considerations, however, avails to startle 
a new song. 

But it is when in the midst of the throne with 
its burning glory there appears One who bears 
the marks of Calvary ; when the Lamb of the 
Cross, the Grave, and the Glory appears, who 
revealed the cost to which the redeeming Love of 
God was prepared to go, who was made sin for us, 
and who by His tears, and stripes healed us, then 
Heaven breaks out into a new song. It was as 
though its imagination were caught, and its 
admiration aroused. They sang a new song, 
saying, " Thou art worthy to take the Book and 
open the seals thereof, for Thou wast slain, and 
hast purchased us to God by Thy blood." Hence- 
forth God the Father Almighty is associated with 
the Lamb, "as it had been slain." 



THE FATHER ALMIGHTY 147 

It is from the Throne of God and of the Lamb 
that the River issues, whose limpid waters descend 
with Holy Spirit fulness to the arid plains of 
Earth. The Throne of God and the Lamb are 
in the midst of the City and His servants serve 
Him. The Lord God Almighty and the Lamb 
make the sun and moon needless " they are the 
Light thereof ." When the Seer looks around for 
the Temple of the Holy City, the most natural 
enquiry for a Hebrew to whom the Temple was 
the very heart and centre of the Holy City he is 
told that the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb 
are the Temple of it. 

So is it with this grand old Creed, when it 
mentions for the second time the Holy Name 
of the Father Almighty, there is the touch of an 
added depth and tenderness, sweetness and pathos 
for the Lamb is in the midst of the Throne, and 
sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty. 



XXXIII 
"From Thence He shall come to Judge" 

ASTRONOMERS tell us that our Sun, with its 
attendant train of planets, is rushing through 
space at an inconceivable speed towards a certain 
star in the cluster Alcyone, still infinitely distant ; 
and it is also true that our world and all our 
race are hastening forward, with a speed that 
no power on earth can arrest or slacken, to an 
event of most momentous interest, to a goal of 
the utmost sublimity. That event, the final 
judgment ; that goal, the Great White Throne. 

This has been the universal belief of man, even 
apart from the Bible. The wits of Athens who 
scouted Paul's doctrine of the Resurrection, 
offered no denial when he said that God would 
judge the world in righteousness by the Man 
whom He had ordained ; and when the same 
great apostle brought the same great theme 
before a profligate Roman, and reasoned of the 
Judgment to come, Felix trembled. In every 
human bosom, Christian or Pagan, savage or 
civilized, there is a sense of right and wrong, 

148 



HE SHALL COME TO JUDGE 149 

a feeling of moral responsibility, a foreboding 
of final judgment. 

As we look round upon society, we meet with 
facts that offer the strongest presumptions in 
favour of a settling-time, when all the wrongs of 
time may be eternally rectified. The wicked 
prosper, whilst the righteous are persecuted ; vice 
drives its carriage, and fares sumptuously every 
day, whilst Lazarus is borne each day by kindly 
hands to lie at the rich man's gate. God could 
never allow such anomalies to exist unless a Day 
were coming when Time's inequalities shall be 
adjusted. 

Belief in the Judgment is one of the primal 
principles of the Gospel. Our Lord said, " The 
Word that I have spoken shall judge him at the 
last day," and "Marvel not at this, the hour is 
coming in which all that are in their graves shall 
hear the voice of the Son of Man, and shall come 
forth," and again, " The Father judgeth no man, 
but hath committed ah 1 judgment unto the Son." 

There is a sense, of course, in which the Judg- 
ment is always in progress. In Matt. xxv. 31, 
etc., the Son of Man is represented as sitting on 
the throne of His Glory, while before Him all 
nations are gathered, and judged according to 
their temper and spirit, their attitude towards 



150 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

their poor, their oppressed, their imprisoned 
captives, those who could not help themselves. 
This, of course, is always in process. Dynasty 
after dynasty, race after race, empire after empire, 
have risen from obscurity, shown themselves 
capable of government, have exercised imperial 
authority for a given term of centuries, and then, 
as they have been eaten through with luxury, 
rapacity, and cruelty, they have been condemned 
to the everlasting fire, which is always burning 
in the universe, for the destruction of institutions 
which have ceased to fulfil a useful purpose in the 
world. 

It is equally certain that the judgment is 
constantly being exercised with reference to 
individual lives. Men speak of it as Nemesis. 
The old Mosaic saying is much more often applied 
to modern life than we sometimes think " Eye 
for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for 
foot, burning for burning, wound for wound, 
strife for strife." If a woman takes away a man's 
, affection from his wife, it is more than likely that 
she, too, will be tormented by jealousy in her own 
married life. If Jacob deceives his old father 
he will be deceived by his own sons. As Adoni- 
bezek treated three score and ten kings so will 
he be treated in his day of retribution. Sir Roger 



HE SHALL .COME TO JUDGE 151 

destroys the Bell of the Inchcape Rock, and on 
that rock his own ship goes to pieces. 

There is more of this Retribution being admi- 
nistered in the world of to-day than we suppose. 
The mills of God may grind slowly, but grind 
they do, and that to powder. 



XXXIV 

" From Thence He shall come again to 
Judge" 

IT is important to distinguish between " the 
judgment-seat of Christ " and " the Great White 
Throne." They are essentially different. 

It seems as though some Christians supposed 
that the question of their final acceptance with 
God could not be ascertained until the verdict 
of the end of the world. Nothing could be further 
from the truth. Apart from scores of arguments 
against such an hypothesis, the words of Christ 
are conclusive, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
he that heareth My word, and believeth Him 
that sent me, hath Eternal life, and cometh not 
unto judgment" (John v. 24, R.V.). Of course 
not, because the sins of such have been confessed, 
judged, and forgiven. 

Directly the soul identifies itself with Christ, it 
is reckoned as having passed through His Cross, 
Grave, and Resurrection, and it would be in- 
conceivable that it should be treated as though 
its position were in suspense. It is accepted in 
the Beloved, adopted into the Family of God, 

152 



FROM THENCE HE SHALL COME AGAIN 153 

its sins and iniquities are as though they had 
never been committed, it is called into fellowship 
with the Son of God, to assist in His Divine Work 
of putting down all rebellious rule, authority, and 
power. The Apostle even informs us that we 
shall act as Christ's co-assessors, and shall judge 
angels (1 Cor. vi. 3). 

It is likely enough also that the Divine verdict 
and sentence on other lives than those of His 
children will be issued long before the final awards 
of the Great Last Day. Each soul will know 
long before that time, and perhaps on awakening 
in Eternity, what the unimpeachable award has 
been. 

Though, therefore, Christian believers need not 
await the Great White Throne with any amount 
of alarm, there is for each of them a judgment- 
seat, " the judgment-seat of Christ," before which 
they must all stand to be judged. The Apostle 
knew that even he could not claim exemption 
from that enquiry to be held by his Lord. " We 
must all" he says, " be made manifest before the 
judgment-seat of Christ ; that each may receive 
the things done in the body, according to what 
he hath done, whether it be good or bad . . . 
therefore we make it our aim that we may be 

accepted of Him " (2 Cor. v. 9, 10). 

ii (2516) 



154 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

This clear statement is, of course, in harmony 
with the Master's own words. The Lord comes 
to reckon with His servants, and to apportion 
them rewards, according to their employment 
of the talents He had entrusted to them. In 
the evening hour the Master of the vineyard 
comes to pay the husbandmen. It is not now 
a question of salvation or destruction, but of the 
adjustment of reward ; and the reward is adjusted 
on the principle of Faithfulness to Trust. Where 
the two talents have been faithfully turned into 
four, there is the same generous meed of appro- 
bation, " Well done, good and faithful servant," 
as in the case of those who have turned five into 
ten. 

It seems as though these considerations do 
not enter into the hearts of the majority of God's 
people. A professedly Christian man says : 
" Is it likely that God will send me to hell because 
I like a little gay society, or enjoy a quiet game 
of Bridge, or allow myself occasionally to visit 
music-halls and theatres ? " Certainly God is 
not likely to send people to hell for such things. 
But this is the more important question, " What 
is your Master Christ, who redeemed you at such 
cost, going to say about a frivolous, vain, and 
empty life, which was destitute of noble purpose 



FROM THENCE HE SHALL COME AGAIN 155 

and strenuous endeavour, and felt it irksome to 
be always ' on duty ? ' " 

What we should fear most the Apostle Paul 
called it "the terror of the Lord" is lest at 
the end of a so-called Christian life, He should 
shut the door in our face, the door, not of 
Heaven, but of entrance into those higher festi- 
vities and sacred employments which await us 
yonder. There is a suggestion of this in Luke xii. 
46, in which the Master allots a portion with the 
unbelievers to the servant whom He had honoured 
with great opportunities, of which he had proved 
himself unworthy. 



XXXV 

" He will Come to Judge the Quick and 

Dead" 

The unique -fitness of the Judge 

" THE Father," said our Lord, " judgeth no man, 
but hath committed all judgment unto the Son." 
Surely it is right that He, who has conducted 
the whole course of the Mediatorial Kingdom, 
should preside on the august occasion when it 
will necessarily come to an end. It was through 
Him that the promise of hope was spoken to 
Adam ; throughout the ages He has been counter- 
working the power of evil ; His death laid the 
foundations of eternal victory ; and surely to no 
hand but His could be confided the final scene. 
" Then He shall deliver up the Kingdom to God, 
even the Father, that God may be All in all." 

And who so qualified for this supreme position 
as Jesus Christ ? Suppose that the fudge of all 
were to be some archangel, finite indeed, but in- 
vested with the highest attributes of wisdom 

156 



HE WILL COME TO JUDGE 157 

and power, might we not tremble for the issue ? 
Could any finite being grasp the details of every 
human life so thoroughly, that there should be 
no mistake, no overlooking of inconspicuous 
goodness, no failure to comprehend the complexity 
of motive, no condoning of specious crime. 

What then ! Shall the throne be occupied by 
the Deity Himself ? Shall men appear before their 
Maker, and receive the final sentence from the 
Omniscient ? Certainly, such an arrangement 
would not be liable to the objections which lie 
against the appointment of a creature, however 
lofty, to the position of judge. Nothing could 
escape His eye, nothing warp His judgment, none 
could impugn the impartial righteousness of His 
decisions. As the vast multitudes climbed up 
from their graves, to learn that they were to be 
judged by their Creator, they would be assured 
that none of them would have reason to complain 
that absolute justice had not been done to him. 

Yet who would not tremble at the thought ? 
No doubt the decisions would be incontestably 
just, but would the Great God be able to under- 
stand us, to allow for us, to take into consideration 
our weakness, our frailty, our mortal nature, with 
all its strange admixture of motive ? Ah, terror 
of terrors ! " Enter not into judgment with us, 



158 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

God, for in Thy sight shall no man living be 
justified." 

This mortal fear seems to cry out for a human 
Judge! Only man can possess perfect fellow- 
feeling with man ; only man can so enter into the 
circumstances of our mortal life, as to make due 
allowances for weakness, heredity, and environ- 
ment. Yet how could we be satisfied with a 
merely human judge ? Just now, we would not 
have an angel, because he was not omniscient, 
but a man would be even more liable to err than 
one of the first-born sons of light. 

What then shall meet our case ? We require the 
Omniscience of God, that is indispensable ; but 
we also need the sympathy of man. What shall 
we do ? We are perplexed, and in despair, until 
we open the page of Scripture, and learn that 
" God hath appointed a day in which He will 
judge the world, by that Man whom He hath or- 
dained," and that " the Father hath given Him 
authority to execute judgment also, because He 
is a Son of Man" (See also Acts xvi. 31 ; John 
v. 27, R.V., marg.) 

This will suffice us ! As man, He wept, suffered, 
was tempted, died, passed through all conceivable 
circumstances of this mortal life ; but as God, 
the universe rose out of nothing at His Word, 



HE WILL COME TO JUDGE 159 

His eyes are as a flame of fire, He has a perfect 
understanding of all things from the first. There 
is no fear of miscarriage of justice. He will not 
flinch before high-handed rebellion, but He will 
not quench the smoking flax. 



XXXVI 

" He will Come to Judge the Quick and 
the Dead" 

The Throne and the Congregation 

IT is described as " a great white throne " (Rev. 
xx. 11). Great, because of the momentous nature 
of the issues to be settled there. Great because 
of the vast congregation that shall be gathered 
there, angels from heaven, men from the first man 
to the last, demons from the pit, an audience 
that shall assemble only once. Great, because 
of its contrast with all other thrones that shall 
have been reared throughout the whole course of 
time. Great, because connected with the final 
winding up of Time, and the entrance on Eternity- 
It is also a white Throne. White, because 
immaculately pure. There have been plenty of 
thrones, either black or crimson : black with the 
crimes of their occupants, or crimson with the 
blood through which they have been won ; but 
that throne shall be white with the stainless 
character of the Judge and the immaculate justice 
of His decisions. Against the burning purity 

160 



HE WILL COME TO JUDGE 161 

of that throne, all evil will stand revealed in its 
true nature. 

Pass on to notice the Assembly at the Bar. 
"The angels that kept not their first estate, 
but left their own habitation, hath He reserved 
in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the 
judgment of the last day ! " They shall be 
there, compelled to witness the triumph of Him 
whom once they challenged in impious and futile 
war. 

All nations of men shall be there, the quick, 
i.e., those living when the Last Judgment is set, 
and the dead, i.e. all who are in their graves, shall 
hear His Voice, and come forth. From the sands 
of sultry deserts, where toiling caravans have 
sunk down to die ; from wintry wastes of ice 
and snow, where, wrapt in white winding-sheets, 
the sleeper has slept his last sleep ; from the crypt 
of the stately abbey, from the crowded city 
cemetery, from the caves and dens of the earth, 
from ancient pyramids and mausoleums, the dead 
shall come to judgment. 

The sea shall give up its dead ; the myriads of 
sleepers who have gone down in its silent caves, 
in storm, in battle, or in shipwreck, shall emerge 
from the abysmal depths, and hasten to be 
judged. 



162 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

Death and Hades shall be unlocked by Him, at 
whose girdle hang their keys, and shall disgorge 
their victims to swell the mighty mass. Babylon, 
Jerusalem, Rome, London, New York, will pour 
forth their myriads. Marathon, Waterloo, and 
Sedan will start to life, and their squadrons march 
to that bar. Not one unit of the human family, 
no shrivelled leaf, no blighted fruit, no tiniest 
twig will be missing. 

A man may evade the summons of an earthly 
court, but there will be no possibility of evading 
the warrant of that bar. It is possible to discover 
a sanctuary, where the human apparitor of justice 
fails to follow the criminal, but man has never 
discovered the spot where God is not. The 
ocean-depths, coral-reefs, and waving sea-weed 
tresses cry, " God is here ; " " the depths of the 
sea are His also." The pendent crystals of 
gloomy caverns cry, " It is useless coming here 
to escape God, see we are His workshop." 
Vales never trodden by human foot point to 
ferns, and flowers, and moss to attest the Divine 
Presence. Before the commonest acacia-bush in 
the desert waste, man has to take the shoes from 
off his feet, because the place is holy ground. 
No, there is no escaping God. "The small 
and great must stand before Him." When the 



HE WILL COME TO JUDGE 163 

roll is called, each child of our race will have to 
answer, Here! 

Ah ! vast assembly ! Here will be a spectacle 
of Grandeur and Sublimity which Eternity itself 
can witness only once ! 



XXXVII 

" He shall Come to Judge both the Quick 

and Dead" 

The Books 

WE are told that "the Books were opened and 
the dead were judged out of the things which were 
written in the books, according to their works." 
(Rev. xx. 12). What books are these ? 

The Book of Providence containing a list of 
all the benefits received from the Hand of God. 
The days of health and sunshine ; the days of 
prosperity and gladness ; the days of hope and 
promise. All will be recorded there ! Page after 
page, column after column, line upon line ! Loving 
friendships, holy impressions, glorious opportuni- 
ties, hair-breadth deliverances, miraculous escapes, 
necessaries and luxuries, the human and the divine 
nothing will be omitted, and all leading up 
to the Divine challenge " What could have been 
done more to my vineyard, that I have not done 
in it, wherefore, then, brought it forth wild 
grapes ? " 

The Book of Nature, from which it will be shown 

that the sequence of natural law, the evidences 

164 



HE SHALL COME TO JUDGE 165 

of a Great First Cause, the flush of sunrise, the 
hush of night, the starry depths, rain, sunshine, 
and fruitful seasons, were all intended to light 
men's hearts to God. 

The Book of Memory, on the leaves of which 
all things are recorded with inevitable precision. 
No word or deed of man is lost. A German 
scholar had a memory so wonderful that he could 
repeat whole volumes of Latin, German, and 
French without an error. A Russian officer has 
been known to repeat the roll-call of any regiment 
after reading it twice. Psychologists hold that 
nothing is lost from the memory of man. Impres- 
sions remain in the brain like words written on 
paper in invisible ink. So it has been stated, and 
so it is ; and when God says, " Son, remember ! " 
the sea will give up its dead, and the sins of our 
lives, of premeditation and impulse, of passion 
and intellect, of intention and conduct will start 
to view. 

The Book of Conscience. Just as a shorthand 
scribe behind the arras of the court takes down 
every item in some great trial, noting especially 
each admission and confession, so does Conscience 
keep its unerring record, which must be produced 
at the last. 

Lastly, the Book of Life will be opened. Often 



166 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

it is mentioned in successive pages of the Bible. 
It was referred to by Moses, by Daniel, and by 
our Lord. The Apostles were bidden to rejoice 
most of all because their names were written in 
it. The best reward that the Apostle could devise 
for his humble helpers was to assure them that 
their names were written there. 

It is called " the Lamb's Book of Life " because 
had it not been for Him, not one name would have 
been inscribed, because all in it were set down 
before the Foundation of the World, and because 
He purchased them with His most precious blood. 

Has He written your name there ? It is more 
important to be sure of this than to have your 
name inscribed in the genealogical lists of heralds. 
" If any was not found written in the Book of 
Life, he was cast into the Lake of Fire." 

There are words in Rev. iii. 5 which suggest 
that, since Jesus is the propitiation for the sins 
of all, the names of all are inscribed on those 
pages, and only blotted out when they force their 
Divine Keeper to do so. But be that as it may, 
it is certain that any penitent and believing soul 
may have his name written in heaven, because 
he that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life. 



XXXVIII 
"I Believe in the Holy Ghost" 

His Divine Personality 

ON one occasion, when engaged on the third of 
his great Missionary Circuits, Paul came to the 
vast heathen city of Ephesus. After some 
enquiry he discovered a handful of people, who 
had given up idolatry, and were turning their 
faces towards Christianity. The first enquiry, 
which he put to them was sufficiently startling, 
and certainly went to the root of the matter. 
" Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye 
believed?" "The Holy Ghost!" said they, 
"we have not so much as heard whether there 
be any Holy Ghost." 

So, at least, the A.V. gives it ; and the words 
might be repeated as they stand, by myriads 
throughout Christendom. They have not so 
much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost. 
In some quarters the existence of the Holy Ghost 
is positively denied ; in others it is simply 
ignored. Year in and year out you hardly hear 
Him mentioned, except in the Creed, the Doxo- 
logy, and the Benediction. It is a grievous 

167 



168 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

omission, but goes far to explain the lack of ear- 
nestness, fervour, and life. The river is shut off, 
small wonder if the desert refuses to blossom as 
the rose ! The Power is switched off. What 
wonder that the machinery is at a standstill ! 

We believe in the Personality of the Holy 
Ghost, because of the distinct affirmations of 
Scripture. No one who accepts the teachings of 
Christ as conclusive can read the 14th, 15th, and 
16th chapters of the Fourth Gospel, without being 
convinced that to our Lord, the Holy Ghost was 
as distinct a Personality as Himself. He always 
speaks of Him with the personal pronoun. Even 
though the word for Spirit in Greek is neuter, 
it is always followed by the ungrammatical but 
emphatic use of a personal pronoun. Not the 
Holy Spirit, which . . . but the Holy Spirit, 
whom . . . He shall teach, He shall glorify, He 
shall convict. 

The Apostle bids the Ephesian Christians not 
to grieve the Holy Spirit of God (Eph. v. 18). 
Not grieve the Spirit ! Grief can only be felt 
by a Person, and He must be more than a breath 
or influence, who can be spoken of in such terms. 

Again, when He is speaking of the gifts con- 
ferred on the early Church, He ends his enumera- 
tion by saying, " All these worketh the self-same 



I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST 169 

Spirit, distributing to every man severally as He 
will (I Cor. xii. 11). " As He will" Just now we 
saw that He had feelings, and could be grieved, 
now we learn that He has power of choice as well. 

Again, when, the Antioch Church was awaiting 
divine direction as to her future, an eye-witness 
tells us that the Holy Ghost said, " Separate Me 
Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have 
called them, so they being sent forth by the Holy 
Ghost departed " (Acts xiii. 1-4). Here in 
addition to emotion and will is the decision of 
authoritative power. Moreover, how could Peter 
charge Ananias and Sapphira as conspiring to 
lie to the Holy Ghost (Acts v. 3) ; and how could 
our Lord have spoken of a certain sin as a 
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost (Mark iii. 29), 
unless He were as literal a Being as either the 
Father or the Son ? 

That He is a Divine Person is equally obvious. 
In every mention of the Benediction His Name 
occurs with that of the Father and the Son ; and 
repeatedly in the references to the Trinity of 
Persons in the Godhead, there is given an explicit 
acknowledgment of His Deity. Everywhere it 
is implied that with the Father and the Son, He 
must be worshipped and glorified. The Thrice- 
Holy of the Heavenly Worshippers indicates that 

12 (2516) 



170 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

the Sevenfold Spirit which is before the Throne 
is God. 

There is undoubtedly to mortal minds an 
impenetrable mystery in the doctrine of the 
Holy Trinity, but it is interesting to know that 
there is no system of ancient Oriental thought, 
to which it is not familiar ; as though it were a 
necessity of the human mind to conceive of One 
who loves, of one who is loved, and of one who 
is the nexus and bond of love between them. 



XXXIX 

"I Believe in the Holy Ghost" 

Consider His works! 

THE earth of old was a mere shapeless mass, the 
star-dust of which contained moisture enough 
to make all the oceans, and matter enough for 
continents and mountains. What reduced this 
chaos to the ordered beauty of the world in which 
we live ? " The Spirit of God moved (brooded) 
on the face of the waters." 

From the death of Abel to the days of Noah, 
there was a godly seed, and men called on the 
name of Jehovah ; the line of the sons of God 
was kept uncontaminated by the enormous sins 
of the Antediluvian world. How was this 
possible ? " The Spirit of God strove with man." 

The time between the Deluge and the Birth 
of Christ was lit by the words of noble men 
Psalmists, Prophets, Law-givers, and Historians 
words which shine for ever from the pages of 
the Bible, and which the world will never let die. 
How is it that a nation so peculiar, so separate, 
so marked as the Hebrew race, was able to. give 
its religious literature to the world, and though 

171 



172 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

placed in the fiercest crucible it has never yielded 
anything but high morality, truth, and common- 
sense. How is this phenomenon to be accounted 
for ? There is but one reply, " Holy men of God 
spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." 
" All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God." 

One of the most remarkable facts in history is 
the change which came upon the disciples within 
ten days of the Ascension of Christ. Before that 
hour they were constantly showing their ignorance 
of the first principles of His Kingdom, afterwards 
they never mistook ; before, they were as timid 
sheep, afterwards as lions ; before they had no 
power to move or change men's hearts, afterwards 
their mere quotation of Scripture seemed potent 
enough to convict thousands of sin. What 
explanation can be given, except that when Jesus 
was welcomed to the Father, He asked and 
received that other Paraclete of whom He had 
spoken, and shed Him down on the gathered 
handful of the upper room. 

How is it that the name of Jesus is spreading 
from land to land, from shore to shore ? By 
what means have the Triumphs of the Cross been 
won ? Why, these ruined temples, these deserted 
shrines, these idols thrown to the moles and bats ? 
There is again but one reply, Christ is gone, but 



I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST 173 

the Spirit is here. Christ has sent Him forth 
from the mediatorial throne to be His Vicegerent. 
We stand at Wittemberg and behold the waves 
of the Reformation rising and overflowing Europe ; 
see Huss and Jerome perish in the fires, but 
lighting fires that never die down ; listen to 
Savonarola's burning eloquence ; hear Cranmer's 
dying testimony ; follow Whitfield in his seraphic 
labours ; study Wesley's magnificent masonry 
in the Methodist Church ; chronicle the successive 
revivals that have swept over the world, bearing 
hundreds of thousands into the Kingdom of God ! 
and we have no option than to confess, that we 
believe in the Holy Ghost. 



XL 

"I Believe in the Holy Ghost . . ." 

The Lord and Giver of Life 

WHEN we are born into this world we are not 
sons of God in the high sense in which we may 
become so, for we are distinctly told that only 
those who receive the Christ-life into their hearts 
obtain the right to become children of God, who 
were born, " not of blood, nor of the will of the 
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God " (John i. 
14). It is equally clear that we are not born 
children of the devil, men only become so when 
they have made a decisive choice of evil, and have, 
so to speak, been " born again " into the family 
of the Devil. We are born simply children of 
men. "Adam begat a son in his own likeness, 
after his image " (Gen. v. 3). 

At birth the spirit, which is our capacity for 
God, the window of the soul that looks out on the 
Infinite, resembles the Holy of Holies in the 
Tabernacle of old, a mere dark unused chamber, 
before the shechinal Light and Fire shone within 
its curtained walls. If Regeneration never takes 

place, the soul is the supreme guide and rule of 

174 



I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST 175 

life, and the man remains a merely natural, or as 
the Greek word signifies, a soulish man (Cor. ii. 
14). But in Regeneration, which may take place 
in the earliest dawn of consciousness, or on the 
verge of Eternity, the Spirit of the Living Christ 
introduces into the spirit the seed or germ of His 
exalted and glorious Being. We are begotten 
again, " not of corruptible seed, but of incorrupti- 
ble, through the Word of God, which liveth and 
abideth for ever " (I Peter i. 23). 

If there were no bees in a garden, with the 
musical hum of their quivering wings, the plants 
would be unable to produce bud, blossom, or 
fruit. It is only as they pursue their untiring 
ministry of bearing the pollen from one flower to 
another, fertilising and fructifying them, that the 
garden is aglow with radiant colour and luscious 
fruit ; and it is only as the Holy Spirit brings the 
Christ-germ into our hearts, that we become 
fragrant or fruitful. 

" Ye must be bora again." We cannot force 
our way up into the Kingdom, but must receive 
the seed of the Kingdom, dropping into us from 
above. Hence we are told, " Except a man be 
born from above, he cannot see the Kingdom of 
God " (John iii. 3) ; " Except a man be born of 
water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the 



176 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

Kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh 
is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is 
spirit " (6). Nothing could more plainly assev- 
erate and certify the declaration that the Holy 
Spirit is the Giver of Life. It is only as He 
breathes on the slain that the dead of the valley 
of Vision arise to become a great army. 

But He is also the Lord of Life. There is no 
opportunity for mistaking the accent of authority 
in His voice. With good reason He has been 
described as the Vicegerent of the Deity. " Arise 
and get thee down," He said to Peter, when He 
was hesitating as to his duty, "and go with 
them " (i.e., the messengers from Cornelius), 
" nothing doubting ; for I have sent them " 
(Acts x. 20). " Separate me Barnabas and Saul 
for the work whereunto I have called them " 
was there not the imperial ring in those words, 
which indicated the next forward movement of 
the Church (Acts xiii. 1-4) ? He forbade the 
Apostles to preach the word in Asia Minor, and 
suffered them not to go into Bithynia, doing for 
them what He would do for us all (Acts xvi. 7, 8). 
Happy are they, then, who are led by the Spirit ! 

The secret of a blessed Christian experience 
is to live in the power of this truth, that the 
Holy Spirit is literally the Lord, as He is the Giver, 



I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST 177 

of Life. Sometimes He will direct us towards 
individuals, as when He said unto Philip, " Go 
near, and join thyself to .this chariot " (Acts viii. 
29) ; at other times, we shall be bound in the 
Spirit to go up unto Jerusalem, knowing that 
bonds and afflictions await us, but not able to 
draw back (Acts xx. 22, 23). The note and mark 
of His Rule are always the crucifixion of the self- 
life to the glorification of the Christ-life, and the 
combination of circumstances, which lock with 
His inspirations, as the wards of a lock with its 
key. Whether to act or rest, whether to speak 
or be still, whether to go in or go out all will 
be made clear by the witness and leading of the 
Spirit in the depths of our heart. 



XLI 

"I Believe in the Holy Ghost ..." 

Who proceedeth from the Father and the Son 

THE second clause of these sentences is borrowed 
from the Nicene Creed, which is recited at the 
Communion Service of the English Church. But 
it is not the original Creed as adopted by the 
great Council held at Nicaea in A.D. 325. That 
ended with the words "in the Holy Ghost," 
but other clauses were afterwards added to 
arrest the spread of Arianism, and amongst them 
the notable one which declares that the Holy 
Spirit proceeds from the Father " and the Son" 

This addition is one of the standing grounds 
for the separation between the East and the West. 
The Eastern Church has never accepted the 
insertion of these words in the Creed, and it was 
only in A.D. 1014, that Pope Benedict VIII, under 
the pressure of the Emperor, consented to use 
the addition in the service of the Mass, whence 
it passed into the English Prayer-Book. 

But there is much to be said for the addition 
of the words, " and the Son" for not only do they 
set forth unmistakably the essential Unity and 

178 



I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST 179 

Equality of the Father and the Son, but they 
affirm a very distinct Scripture truth. The River 
of Water of Life, which beyond question is an 
emblem of the Mission of the Spirit, proceeds 
from the Throne of God and of the Lamb (Rev. 
xxii. 1). Notice that it is one Throne, but jointly 
occupied (Rev. v. 6), for God is One. In addition 
to this there is a wealth of testimony, which all 
goes to show that both the Father and the Son 
are concerned in the communication of the Spirit 
to the Church and the Individual. " I will pray 
the Father, and He shall give you another Com- 
forter " ; and again, "It is expedient for you 
that I go away ; for, if I go not away the Com- 
forter will not come unto you, but if I depart* 
I will send Him unto you " (John xiv.16, xvi. 7). 
Probably the clearest definition of the province 
of the Father and the Son in the gift of the Holy 
Spirit is that given by the Apostle Peter on the 
Day of Pentecost " Having received of the Father 
the promise of the Holy Spirit, He hath poured 
forth this, which ye see and hear " (Acts ii. 33). 
In the mystery of the Holy Trinity, Father, Son, 
and Spirit are One, but in the order of their 
fellowship in the Redemption and Sanctification 
of Men, the Father is the Origin and Source, the 
Son is the Mediator and Channel, whilst the Spirit 



180 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

is the Gift of God to the heart of the believer. 
Of the Father, and through the Son. " Through 
Christ Jesus we both have our access in one Spirit 
unto the Father " (Eph. ii. 18). 

It must never be forgotten that God's one 
purpose and aim in Creation is to realize or repro- 
duce Himself in the work of His Hands ; and in 
order to effect this the Holy Spirit has come forth 
from the abysmal depths of the Deity. We find 
Him at work in the long physical transformations 
by which this earth was prepared to be the Home 
of Man, and the Theatre for the evolution of God's 
plan. " The Spirit of God brooded on the face 
of the waters." It was to His operation that the 
emergence of Kosmos from chaos was due, and 
the separation of the light from darkness, of land 
from water, of the day from night. He super- 
intended the long climb of organic life from the 
tiny infusoria to the gigantic prehistoric animals. 
Throughout the patriarchal and other preparatory 
eras the same mighty Spirit was ever striving 
with the obtuseness and sin of men, until Jesus, 
through His creative energy, was born of the 
Virgin Mother, then the long process reached its 
culmination. The voice that sounded over the 
waters of Baptism proclaimed Him to be the 
Beloved Son in whom God was well pleased. 



I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST 181 

But this was not all. That life in which Deity 
and Humanity combined in perfect harmony 
passed through death and resurrection, each of 
which was superintended by the gracious opera- 
tion of the Spirit (Heb. ix. 14 ; Rom. i. 14), and 
finally ascended to the right hand of power, that 
it might become reduplicated and reproduced 
in all who believe. This is what the Holy Spirit 
has come to secure. At first he proceeded forth 
to form and raise the Body of the Christ ; now 
he proceeds from Father and Son to form Christ 
in our hearts, and repeat His beauty and strength 
in the Church, which is left on earth to carry out 
and accomplish His Redemptive purpose. 

" Therefore to whom turn I but to Thee, the 
ineffable Name, Maker, and Builder, Thou of 
houses not made with hands ? What ! have fear 
of change from Thee who art ever the same ? 
Doubt that Thy power can fill the heart that Thy 
power expands ? " 



XLII 
" I Believe in the Holy Ghost . 



n 



Who with the Father and the Son together is 
Worshipped and Glorified 

" COME, let us worship and bow down ; let us 
kneel before the Lord our Maker, for He is our 
God" such is the repeated summons of the 
Psalter. It seems as though human voices are 
not loud or sweet enough to satisfy the Psalmist, 
and he calls on the heavens with their myriad 
constellations to be glad, and the earth with all 
her wealth of life to rejoice. The roar of the full 
and brimming sea, the branches and leaves of the 
trees of the wood, the incense of flowers, the hum 
of insects are all pressed into the blessed minstrelsy 
of Praise. 

There is a great difference between Thanks- 
giving and Praise. In the former, we bless God 
for what He has done on our behalf, in the latter 
for what He is in Himself ; and therefore Praise 
is more and greater than thanksgiving. It is less 
likely to be vitiated or coloured by the selfish 
element, which is always so ready to intrude. 
Praise is the purest, loftiest, noblest act, and the 

182 



I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST 183 

one most like the employment of Heaven, which is 
within our human reach. Losing sight of earth 
and time, borne on strong and steady wing, the 
soul mounts up as on the wings of an eagle, which 
makes its straight course to the sun, and seems 
to seek absorption by its dazzling splendour. 

In the service of the Prayer-book, the climax 
is reached in the noble Te Deum. The suppliant 
begins with confession and absolution. Tremulous 
and low his voice, broken its accents, but presently 
his soul begins to bestir itself, and prune its wings 
for soaring. " Glory be to the Father, and to the 
Son, and to the Holy Ghost " rings like a bugle- 
call, leading to the further incitement of the con- 
gregation to come before God's presence with 
thanksgiving, and make a joyful noise unto Him 
with Psalms. After Praise has spent itself, there 
are supplications and intercessions for all men, 
and specially for the saints. 

Praise is Worship, but Worship is probably 
more than Praise. In Praise the soul utters 
itself audibly, but Worship is its prostration in 
the presence of God. Without a spoken word, 
we sometimes prostrate ourselves at the foot of 
the jasper-throne, casting our crowns there, and 
content to leave God to interpret what we can 
find no words to express. 



184 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

It is remarkable to notice throughout the 
Bible that the Ascriptions of Praise and Worship 
are generally threefold. In Psalm xcix. each of 
three stanzas ends with a call to worship, and 
the words, " Holy is He," or " the Lord our God 
is holy." In Isaiah's sublime vision, one seraph 
is heard crying to another, " Holy, Holy, Holy is 
the Lord of Hosts " (vi. 3). In the Apocalypse, 
the four living creatures have no rest day and 
night, saying, "Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord 
God, the Almighty, which was, and is, and is to 



come." 



It could hardly be otherwise, when once a true 
vision has been granted into the nature of the 
Holy Trinity. Those who have seen the throne, 
encircled by its emerald rainbow, with its light 
of sardonyx, its Lamb, and the seven lamps of 
fire that burn before it, cannot refrain from the 
Doxology which includes each Person of the 
Godhead. 

It is sometimes asked if we should pray to the 
Holy Spirit. So far as we can discover, the 
proper procedure of the Court of Heaven is to 
pray to the Father, through the Son, by the gra- 
cious assistance of the Holy Spirit. " We know 
not what we should pray for as we ought, but the 
Spirit maketh intercession for us with groanings 



I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST 185 

that cannot be uttered." No harm is done, if 
we pray to the Holy Spirit. As a matter of fact, 
the hymns in which we address the Spirit, asking 
Him to descend or come, are prayers addressed 
to Him. To whichever Person in the Godhead 
we direct our prayers, they are sure of reaching 
the right quarter. Address your envelope as you 
may, the letter will be delivered. But on the 
whole we must admit that the Spirit is in our 
hearts, or in the heart of the Church, ennobling, 
teaching, quickening us, suggesting our petitions, 
and seeking to glorify Christ, who is ever the 
supreme object of His activity. 

But in Praise and Worship, let us include the 
Holy Spirit in our ascriptions. Let us worship 
and glorify Him. Let us bring Gold, and Frankin- 
cense, and Myrrh. And let us cultivate the holy 
habit of Worship. Often when we are sad and 
depressed, when we are beset by sin and tempted 
of the Devil, when "the mists hang thick o'er 
hill and fell," it will greatly help us to join the 
great assembly of blessed ones, Angels, Saints, 
and the Spirits of the just made perfect, in their 
high worship, contributing our little rill to that 
mighty current which is ever pouring into the 
Ocean heart of God. 



XLIII 
"I Believe in the Holy Ghost . . ." 

Who spake by the Prophets 

THE Apostle Peter supplies the thought which is 
crystallized in these words. He tells us that the 
Spirit of Christ was in the Prophets, when they 
foretold the grace which was to come to us. They 
could not decipher all His meaning. That Christ 
should suffer and enter His glory by the blood- 
stained path was clear, but the time and the 
characteristics of the time were hidden from their 
most careful enquiry. He goes on to say, that the 
olden prophets, with the Apostles of the early 
Church, and the very angels, blend their wonder- 
ing and adoring glances on the uplifted Cross, the 
Grave, and the Ascension Mount (I Peter i. 11-12). 
A further light is furnished in his second Epistle, 
where he tells us that the written word of prophecy 
resembles a lamp shining in a dimly-lighted place, 
to be extinguished at dawn, that it never came 
from the prophets' own prompting, nor by human 
will, but men spake from God as they were borne 
along by the Holy Spirit. The idea seems to be 

that of boats hurrying along some swiftly flowing 

186 



I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST 187 

current, which carries them on its broad bosom 
seawards. (II Peter i. 19-21). 

These remarkable utterances by one whose 
thought is saturated with the Old Testament 
Scriptures, remind us of the great work of the 
Holy Spirit in preparing the way for Christ. In 
many of the Old Testament passages, which refer 
to Him, He is represented as a Divine Power 
acting on the material universe, or the physical 
life of men ; brooding over Chaos ; sent forth to 
renew the face of the earth ; enabling the artists 
to adorn the Tabernacle, and nerving heroes to 
superhuman feats of strength and endurance ; 
but here His personal and individual Ministry in 
glorifying the Son of God is distinctly recognised. 
He is described as " the Spirit of Christ," and as 
now, so then, He bears witness to Him. Testi- 
mony of Jesus is the Spirit which underlies 
prophecy. 

It is almost impossible to formulate a perfectly 
satisfactory definition of Inspiration. A literal 
rendering of the word gives us in-breathing. We 
may say, therefore, that Inspiration is the in- 
breathed thought and word of God. We may, 
also, get help from the phrase used by Peter, that 
the prophets were borne along as on a stream of 
holy impulse. The word of the Lord was as a 



188 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

fire in their bones, and they were weary of for- 
bearing, and could not stay. Messages and visions 
were given them by the Divine Spirit, working 
in the depths of their nature, but they were left 
to select such words as seemed the fittest medium 
of utterance, though even these were winnowed 
by the superintendence of the same Spirit. 

Difficult as it is to define Inspiration, the least 
instructed are aware of its presence. It is a divine 
quality in the sacred writings, which speaks for 
itself, and betrays its presence by inimitable 
characteristics. Inspired words search the heart, 
grapple with the conscience, inflame the affec- 
tions, enlighten the judgment, summon the 
soul into the presence of God, awaken responses 
from the lowest depths, communicate the divine 
nature, and bring eternity into the simplest, 
plainest, and most ordinary lives. We recognise 
the saline quality of the ocean wave, so soon as 
the sea-water touches our lips. There is no need 
to prove to us that an avenue of limes is fragrant, 
or that a rose exhales rare perfume, our senses 
are immediately aware of their respective charms. 
Sugar is sweet apart from logic, or analysis, or 
explanation as to the source from which its sweet- 
ness is derived. So it is impossible to read the 
Bible carefully and thoughtfully, without realising 



I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY k GHOST 189 

its intrinsic and unique qualities. The bush 
burns with fire. The shechinah trembles between 
the Cherubim. The still small voice thrills the 
soul. There is a glory on the sacred pages which 
never lay on sea or shore. As amid the human 
limitations of Jesus of Nazareth, there was the 
ardent effulgence and glory of Deity ; so though 
the divine thoughts are incarnate in human 
phrase, they betray themselves, they cannot be 
hid, they proclaim their source. 

We owe a profound debt to modern research, 
which has thrown so much light on the Old Testa- 
ment, practically rediscovering the larger portion 
of it, and setting it in a new light ; but let us 
remember that its main message is not to the 
intellect but the heart, and that we shall never 
derive the full help and comfort it was meant to 
impart, unless we submit ourselves to Him who 
originally inspired it, in the faith that He will 
reveal its secret, sacred message. 



XLIV 

"I Believe in . . . the Holy Catholic Church" 

WHAT is the Holy Catholic Church ? In the 
venerable minute-book of Rothwell Congrega- 
tional Church, 250 years old, the following words 
of Dr. Francis Junius, Professor of Leyden, " of 
that choice University in Holland " (1595), are 
quoted by the first Pastor, written in an 
exquisitely neat and beautiful hand. 

" The Holy Catholic Church is the Congregation 
of all them, who by the Election of God are called 
together in Christ Jesus to Eternall Life, Eph. 
ii. 21 : of which part is in heaven as the Elect 
Angells and holy men and women made perfect ; 
the other parts gathered to Christ here on earth. 
This Church in regard of God's dwelling in and 
possessing itt is called the Temple, Court, Taber- 
nacle, City, and Kingdom of God : in regard of 
that excellent communion with Christ, named his 
spouse, wife, etc., friend, beloved, because of their 
mutuall affection ; for worth, a Queene most 
faire, for holiness a dove, virgin, etc. ; for propaga- 
tion of children the Mother of us all ; for largeness, 

the universall Church ; for number " the only 

190 



I BELIEVE IN THE CATHOLIC CHURCH 191 

one," of which argument the whole booke of the 
Canticles is a most plenteous word. This Church 
is not made by men for they are naturall, carnall, 
and weake, nor Angells for they are not authors 
of life, but ministering spirits for the Elect. God 
the Father alone begott itt in Christ by his Holy 
Spiritt, according to his good will for his own 
Glorie." 

The substance of this, most evangelical 
Christians to-day would heartily accept, demur- 
ring only at that clause which incorporates " the 
elect Angels " in the Church, which is the mystical 
Body and Bride of Christ. It may also be ad- 
mitted that there is a considerable force in the 
objection of those who would exclude the Old 
Testament saints from this High and Lofty 
Organism, on the ground that the Church only 
came into existence at the Resurrection of Christ, 
and that her history dates from that golden 
moment in the past until that other golden 
moment in the distant future, when, at the con- 
summation of the present age, the whole Church 
shall be presented to God, " a glorious church, not 
having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing." 

Whilst admitting the truth of this, we would 
at least urge that the materials for any given 
Church or Temple must be excavated before they 



192 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

can be used, and that the lower courses of the 
spiritual Temple are said by the Apostle to consist 
of Apostles and Prophets. Why should we not 
believe that the elements of the Church were in 
solution before Jesus died, and suddenly crystal- 
lized when He rose ? But if any adduce the Old 
Testament analogy that Eve was taken from 
Adam's side, whilst he slept, and that Joseph's 
brethren and his wife stood in different ranks of 
fellowship with himself, we will not argue the 
matter further, but wait until the light of another 
world discloses the whole mystery of Christ and 
His Church. 

When our Lord told His vehement Apostle 
that He would build His Church on the bed-rock 
of his newly-uttered confession, it is surely 
legitimate to believe that he had already selected, 
prepared, and shaped the materials, in previous 
ages, even before the time when Enoch walked 
with God. 

We distinguish therefore between any specific 
congregation of faithful men, who meet for the 
observance of the Sacraments, and the Preaching 
of the pure Word of God (according to the defini- 
tion of the Church of England Article), and that 
great all-inclusive body, which is independent of 
century and territory, and includes all who are 



I BELIEVE IN THE CATHOLIC CHURCH 193 

united with. Christ by a living faith. It is to this 
that our Lord alludes, when He says, " I will 
build My Church." 

Christ is the great Master-Builder. " Behold,' 5 
said the Prophet, " the Man whose name is the 
Branch, He shall grow up out of his place, and He 
shall build the temple of the Lord ; even He shall 
build the temple of the Lord ; and He shall bear 
the glory." Surely it was to these words that the 
Lord referred when He said, " I will build My 
Church." For the site He chose, not some sinless 
planet, but this sin-stained earth ; for the 
materials, not unfallen angels, but weak and un- 
worthy mortals ; for the plan, not that which 
would redound to the glory of His Might, but of 
His Grace. Amid the debris and ruins of the ages, 
He is building that which will stand for ever, the 
indestructible Temple and Palace of God, from 
the foundations laid in His Blood to the top- 
stone glistening in the dawn of eternity, on which 
will be the ascription of Glory to God in the 
highest. 



XLV 

"I Believe ... in the Holy Catholic Church" 

WE have seen that the Holy Catholic Church is 
composed of all, of whatever church or sect, who 
are united with Christ by a living faith. They 
may never have been recognised as belonging to 
one of our many religious organizations on earth ; 
like the dying thief, may never have entered into 
union with Christ till the article of death ; or like 
George Fox may have repudiated all existing 
churches, because they could not agree with them 
in certain particulars ; but they are bound by a 
living faith to the great Head of the Church ; and 
such a faith uniting to Christ, necessarily unites 
the believer to all who are similarly connected 
with Him, although he never heard of their 
existence, or looked into their face. 

(1) In John x. 16, our Lord spoke of those 
other (Gentile) souls which did not belong to the 
Jewish fold, and said, with a divine imperative, 
" them also I must bring, and they will listen to 
My voice. They shall become one flock under one 
Shepherd." Notice that word flock. In A.V. the 

Greek word was mistakenly rendered " one fold" 

194 



I BELIEVE IN THE CATHOLIC CHURCH 195 

But the Greek word is not so, and the translators 
have done rightly in rendering it by flock. There 
may be many folds, but there is only one flock. 
Sheep may be contained in the Baptist, the 
Presbyterian, the Episcopal Fold, and may be 
strongly tarred with the brush of sectarianism, 
but there is only one Flock, and the nearer you 
get to the Shepherd and to the upper lawns, you 
lose sight of the hurdles of the folds, and see the 
whole flock gathering around the Lamb, who as 
a shepherd leads them to living fountains of water, 
where they thirst no more, and God wipes away 
all tears. That one Flock is the Holy Catholic 
Church ; holy, because separated from the goats ; 
catholic, because the great multitude is composed 
of all nations, and kindreds, and peoples, and 
tongues. 

(2) Before our Master died, He returned to the 
same theme in His High Priestly prayer, in which 
He gives two infallible signs of those who belong 
to His Church. He speaks, first, of those whom 
the Father had given Him out of the world (John 
xvii. 6, 9, etc.). When we ask who those may be 
thus selected from the rest of mankind, we get our 
answer from another discourse, in which He said, 
" Every one whom the Father gives Me will come 
to Me, and him who comes to Me I will never on 



196 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

any account drive away " (vi. 37 : Weymouth's 
trans.). 

All that the Father gives Him come to Him ; 
all, therefore, who come to Him may be reckoned 
as having been given Him of the Father. They 
may come from the east and west, from the north 
or south, but if only they come they are included 
in the Divine Gift, they can never perish, they 
shall be His, in that day when He shall make up 
His jewels, and all these are included in the Holy 
Catholic Church. 

But there is a second definition of the same 
persons, in that wonderful prayer, when the 
Master says, "Nor is it for them alone that I 
make request : it is also for those who trust in 
Me, through their word, that they all may be one " 
(John xvii., 20, 21 : Weymouth). Here is comfort 
indeed ! You may have been recognised by no 
Church, received by no minister, confirmed by no 
rite ; your name may never have been enrolled 
in a list of communicants, or on a Church-roll, 
you may belong to the Roman, the Anglican, or 
the Eastern Church, or to no Church at all, you 
may be a Ritualist or a Salvationist, but if amid 
many failures and sins, you are believing in Jesus 
Christ, as your Divine Saviour, you are most 
certainly a member of the Holy Catholic Church, 



I BELIEVE IN THE CATHOLIC CHURCH 197 

from which as Savonarola told the Pope's Legate, 
no power can separate you. 

(3) The Apostle Paul tells us that the hidden 
Secret of the Church had been revealed to Him, 
and entrusted to His stewardship, that He might 
unfold it to the minds of men (Eph. iii. 6). He was 
led to understand that Gentiles had as much 
right to be members of the Church as Jews. 
" The Gentiles," he said, " are joint heirs with us, 
and form one body with us, and have the same 
interest as we have in the promise, which has been 
made good to us." 

This thought is the special burden of the Epistle 
to the Ephesians, which may be described as the 
Epistle of High Churchmanship, so saturated is 
it with the conception of the oneness of all 
believers in the Holy Catholic Church. 



XLVI 
"I Believe . . . in the Holy Catholic Church" 

IN the Epistle to the Ephesians the Apostle deals 
primarily with the Church not with churches, 
but with the Church; and -under three 
comparisons. 

It is a Temple. God's first Dwelling Place 
was " the High and Holy Place " of the Tented 
Sky. Then, according to the thought of pious 
Jews, He dwelt in the temple built by Solomon. 
Next the Nature of Jesus provided Him a Home. 
But now another Temple has been prepared for 
Him. It is "built upon the foundation of 
Apostles and Prophets, Christ Jesus Himself being 
the chief corner-stone ; in whom, each several 
building, fitly framed together, groweth into a 
holy temple in the Lord ; in whom ye also are 
builded together for a habitation of God in the 
spirit." 

The word Temple means " to cut." Before the 
Romans erected a temple to any of their gods, 
the services of the augur were called in to cut off 
a piece of soil, by sacred rites, from the common 

198 



I BELIEVE IN THE CATHOLIC CHURCH 199 

ground around ; and is not this fencing off of the 
soil emblematic of the separation of saved spirits 
to be the special shrine for the Indwelling of the 
Holy Spirit. It is this that invests the Church 
with its vitality. All other organisations rise, 
have their career of usefulness and glory, to wane 
ultimately as the moon does ; but age after age 
the Church persists, because she is constantly 
being renewed from within. Though her outward 
body may be subjected to the fiercest processes 
of disintegration, yet her inward being is renewed 
day by day. 

It is a body, of which Christ is Head 

" There is one Body ! " says the Apostle (Eph. 
iii. 1, 13, 16). "And as the Body is one, and 
hath many members, and all the members of the 
body, being many, are one body, so also is Christ." 

Each member of the Body has its own function ; 
and it would be a pity, therefore, to obliterate 
denominational distinctions, because their 
differentiation probably leads to the presentation 
of the whole circle of truth in a more forcible 
manner, than if the whole were equally held by 
all. Just as each note in the chord must preserve 
its identity to secure a perfect harmony ; and as 
each band of colour of the prism must be true to 



200 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

itself, if a perfect ray of pure light is to be pro- 
duced, so each denomination probably realises a 
very distinct purpose in God's plan. But each 
must hold the truth in love, none thinking that 
it has a monopoly of the truth ; it is only " with 
all saints " that we can comprehend the length, 
and breadth, and depth, and height, of the Love 
of Christ. 

Each member of the Body is necessary to the 
rest. If the eye stand for the High Anglican and 
the hand for the Free Churchman, " the eye cannot 
say to the hand, I have no need of thee : " or if 
the head stand for the highly-placed ecclesiastic 
and the feet for the illiterate and poor, " the head 
cannot say to the feet, I have no need of you." 
"Nay," says the Holy Spirit by the Apostle, 
" those members of the body which seem to be 
more feeble are necessary." 

Schism is therefore only possible when mem- 
bers cease to have the same care one of another, 
when we despise each other, or cease to suffer or 
rejoice in the experiences which befall our fellow- 
members. Schism does not consist in a difference 
of view but in a difference of spirit, and in a lack 
of spiritual sympathy. It may, therefore, become 
the sin of the believer who most conservatively 
maintains his outward connection with the historic 



I BELIEVE IN THE CATHOLIC CHURCH 201 

Church, if he depreciates or denies his weaker and 
less regular brethren in Christ. 

When any member of the Body is injured, how 
soon it affects the whole organism with pain and 
heaviness ; and the man begins to nourish and 
cherish it to restore its perfect health. As soon 
as the efferent nerves flash to the Head tidings 
of the hurt, the efferent nerves bring back the 
impulses for care and comfort. Ah, how quick 
the sympathetic union between Christ and the 
least of His members ! He nourisheth and 
cherisheth it ... because we are members of 
His Body ! (Eph. v. 30, 31 .) Let us do likewise. 

It is the Bride of the Lamb. (Eph. v. 25, etc.) 
Like another Ruth, through the love of One in 
whose eyes she has found favour, she reigns over 
the lands where once in rustic guise she wrought 
in humble toil. For some reason or other Christ 
wants our love, and therefore has paid our debts, 
redeemed us to Himself, changed our name, and 
given to us to sit with Him on His throne. " Come 
hither," cried the Angel, " I will show thee the 
Bride of the Lamb." 



XLVII 
" I Believe , , . in the Communion of Saints " 

THERE is Communion in Worship. How often 
we have recited these words to ourselves, when 
alone in some distant land, or voyaging across 
the waste of waters, or detained by illness, either 
personal or relative, in our home, whilst the stop- 
ping bells told of the whole multitude gathered 
within the familiar walls. We have taken up the 
Prayer-Book and slowly recited the office, we 
have read the Psalms and sung the hymns, we 
have compared Lesson and Collect, till the Message 
of the Christian Year has sunk into mind and soul ; 
and suddenly our chamber has become filled with 
holy presences, and we have realised that we were 
not alone, but formed part of an innumerable 
company, which no one could number, who with 
us are ascending the steps of the Heavenly Temple. 
Their songs are wafted to our ears, the very 
atmosphere they breathe enwraps us also. 

How much blessing would accrue to those who 
are detained from Church on Sunday morning or 
evening, if they would cease to think of the phy- 
sical deprivation, and would remember that they 

202 



I BELIEVE IN THE COMMUNION OF SAINTS 203 

were spirits who, though apparently imprisoned 
and confined by the body, were really independent 
of it, and could go forth to mingle with the vast 
crowds that surround God's throne, in ceaseless 
worship, 

Call me, rather, silent voices, 
Upward through the starry tract, 
To the glimmering heights beyond me, 
On and always on. 

There is Communion in Prayer and Service. " If 
two of you," said the Master, " agree as touching 
anything that ye ask . . ." The word translated 
agree is " are in symphony." When the Holy 
Spirit strikes two spirits, in accord with Himself, 
and they utter the self-same prayer or breathe 
the same desire, there is a lovely symphony, which 
is very dear to God. They may not be conscious 
of the oneness, and have entered into no compact 
with each other ; their concert is altogether due 
to the Spirit, but such prayer never miscarries. 
Cornelius prays in his house, and Peter on the 
house-top ; Ananias prays in his home at Damas- 
cus, and Saul in the house of Judas ; these are 
but specimens of myriads of instances, in which 
spirit has blended with spirit before the 
mercy-seat, 

In his Revival Lectures, Finney tells of a pious 



204 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

man in Western New York who was sick of con- 
sumption. He was poor and had been sick for 
years. An unconverted merchant was very kind 
to him, and the only return he could make was 
to pray for his salvation. By-and-bye, to the 
astonishment of everybody, the merchant was 
converted, and a great revival followed. After 
the death of this poor man, his widow put his 
diary into Mr. Finney's hands, from which it 
appeared that he had been in the habit of setting 
apart certain hours in the day to pray for certain 
churches and missionary stations. His diary 
contained entries like the following : " To-day I 
have been enabled to offer the prayer of faith for 

the outpouring of the Spirit on " And it 

was subsequently discovered that mighty revivals 
had commenced and swept over those localities, 
nearly in the exact order of his praying. It was 
thus that he was able to take part in the work of 
God in places that he would never visit. 

A station under the care of a missionary in 
connection with the China Inland Mission was the 
scene of constant revival ; and the secret only 
leaked out on the return of Mr. Hudson Taylor to 
England, when he came in touch with a single 
disciple who made it the subject of his unceasing 
prayer. 



I BELIEVE IN THE COMMUNION OF SAINTS 205 

There is Communion in Suffering. Whenever a 
colliery accident, a massacre of Armenians or 
Bulgarians, a shipwreck, a railway accident, or 
a battlefield strewn with wounded, elicits sym- 
pathy, prayer, and ready help, throughout 
Christian communities, there is a blessed mani- 
festation of the communion of saints. One 
member suffers, and all the other members suffer 
with it. 

"As there is but one Body, and one Spirit, 
and one Hope of our Calling, one Lord, one Faith, 
one Baptism, one God and Father of us all, may 
we henceforth be all of one heart, and of one soul, 
united in one holy bond of Truth and Peace, of 
Faith and Charity, so that we may with one mind 
and one mouth glorify Thee, God, our Father, 
through Jesus Christ our Lord." 



XLVIII 
" I Believe ... in the Forgiveness of Sins " 

THIS clause in the Creed is ever memorable for 
the comfort it brought to the heart of Martin 
Luther, when he was passing through an agony of 
conviction, and it reminds us of Psalm cxxx., 
which begins with De Profundis and ends with 
Plenteous Redemption. 

Four of the greatest saints of the Church have 
left on record their love for that Psalm, which 
contains the comforting and inspiring assurance, 
" There is forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest 
be feared" Luther set it to one of his grandest 
songs, and it was sung around his bier, as his 
body was carried to its last resting-place. John 
Owen, the great Puritan commentator, tells us 
that in a time of great depression the verse just 
quoted was the key to his prison-house. John 
Wesley tells us that on the eve of his memorable 
visit to Germany, a sermon on the same text was 
the means of a great revival in his soul. And 
Jonathan Edwards, when he lay a-dying, noticing 
how the watches in his sick-chamber went 

206 



I BELIEVE IN THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS 207 

repeatedly to see if the morning were breaking, 
recalled this Psalm, and spoke of it as having 
been the great solace of his life. It is remarkable 
what different stages of experience are met by 
the same words. Christian life is a spiral staircase ; 
we go round and round, always coming back to 
the same view from another level. As saints grow 
in the likeness of God, they come back and back 
again on the fundamental principles of forgiveness 
and redemption and peace through the mediation 
of Christ. When I stood at Serampore, beside the 
grave of William Carey, it brought a mist of tears 
to my eyes, as I spelt out the verse that he himself 
selected : 

A guilty, weak, and helpless worm, 

On thy kind arms I fall, 
Be thou my strength and righteousness, 

My Saviour and my All. 

Dr. Draper, the great scientist, has invented 
an instrument of such delicacy, that he is able to 
photograph constellations which cannot be de- 
tected by the eye ; another has invented an instru- 
ment which will register the pulse of an insect. 
As civilization advances, we become quicker to 
appreciate shades of expression and harmony 
which would have escaped less sensitive ages. 
Similarly the growth of the soul is diagnosed by 



208 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

the delicacy and quickness with which it dis- 
criminates right and wrong. Our Christian life 
is not a deepening one unless we are becoming 
more and more sensitive of shades of selfishness, 
envy, jealousy, and uncharitableness, which fill 
us with shame, and make us cry out for forgive- 
ness. To the end of life the greatest saints will 
call themselves the chief of sinners, and confess 
that their only hope is in Him who came by water 
and blood, not by water only, but by water and 
blood. 

It is Forgiveness that we need ! That we should 
forget is not enough. In one of his books, Mr. 
Edward Bellamy refers to the hypothesis that 
memory may consist of an infinite number of very 
minute fibres, each of which represents the recol- 
lection of one fact ; and he goes on to suggest 
that if somehow any one fibre, which records some 
daring sin could be dissolved, the remorseful 
recollection of that sin would be obliterated. He 
depicts the case of a woman who had committed 
one terrible sin, and was mesmerized, so to speak, 
by its perpetual presence. She dared not enter 
society or face recognition, but lived under a 
spell. After submitting herself to this imaginary 
process, somehow the fibre of memory which held 
the record of her sin was discovered and dissolved, 



I BELIEVE IN THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS 209 

and she came out of the trance with great light- 
ness of soul. But that is a mean way of getting 
away from the past. It is like a woman murder- 
ing her child, and then taking laudanum to drown 
the memory of her crime. 

Sir Arthur Helps suggests that the best way to 
escape the memory of our sin is to buy a bottle of 
" sleep-medicine," by taking draughts of which 
memory is drugged. Some people seem to invest 
heavily in this sleep-medicine, rushing from 
continent to continent, from society to society, 
from one amusement to another, never daring to 
be alone, always drugging their memory with 
opiates. 

No, none of these remedies will really avail, 
They would not have availed Augustine, or 
Luther, or Bunyan. When we are in the depths 
of conviction, there is only one star shining far 
above the pit's mouth which has power to raise 
us from the depth to the height, from the depth in 
which we cry, as though we alone were the sinner 
of sinners, " God be merciful to me, the sinner," to 
the height, where in the ecstasy of assured 
acceptance, we cry, " Being justified by faith, we 
have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus 
Christ." 



XLIX 

"I Believe in the Forgiveness of Sins" 

FORGIVENESS is the one cry of the converted soul. 
" Then began I," says Bunyan, " with sad and 
careful heart, to consider the nature and largeness 
of my sin, and to search into the Word of God, 
if I could in any place espy a word of promise, 
by which I might take relief. Wherefore I began 
to consider that of Mark iii., "All manner of 
sins and blasphemies shall be forgiven unto the 
sons of men," which place, methought, at a blush, 
did contain a large and glorious promise for the 
pardon of high offences, but considering the place 
more fully, I thought it was rather to be under- 
stood, as relating more chiefly to those, who had, 
while in a natural state, committed such things 
as are there mentioned ; but not to me, who had 
not only received light and mercy, but that had, 
both after, and also contrary to that, so slighted 
Christ as I had done. And now was I both a 
burden and a terror to myself ; now was I weary 
of my life, and yet afraid to die. Oh ! how gladly 
now would I have been any body but myself ! 
Anything but a man, and in any condition but 

210 



I BELIEVE IN THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS 211 

my own ! for there was nothing that did pass 
more frequently over my mind, than that it was 
impossible for me to be forgiven my trans- 
gressions, and to be saved from wrath to 



come." 



" And as I was thus musing, and in my studies, 
that saying came in upon me, * If Thou, Lord, 
shouldest mark iniquities, Lord, who should 
stand ? but there is forgiveness with Thee, that 
Thou mayest be feared ' (Ps. cxxx. 3, 4). These 
were good words to me, especially the latter part 
thereof ; to wit, that there is forgiveness with 
the Lord, that He might be loved, and had in 
reverence, for it was thus made out to me. ' That 
the great God did set so high an esteem upon the 
love of His poor creatures, that rather than He 
would go without their love, He would pardon 
their transgressions.' " 

" One day," he continues, " as I was passing 
into the field, and that, too, with some dashes on 
my conscience, fearing lest yet all was not right, 
suddenly this sentence fell upon ray soul, ' Thy 
Righteousness is in Heaven.' And, methought, 
withal, I saw with the eyes of my soul Jesus Christ 
at God's right hand ; there was my righteousness. 
It was not my good frame of heart that made my 
righteousness better, nor my bad frame that made 



212 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

my righteousness worse ; for my Righteousness 
was Jesus Christ Himself, * the same yesterday, 
to-day, and for ever.' " 

" Now did my chains fall off my legs indeed ; 
I was loosened from my afflictions and irons, my 
temptations also fled away, for by this Scripture 
(1 Cor. i. 30) I saw that the man Christ Jesus, as 
He is distinct from us, as touching His bodily 
presence, so He is our Righteousness and Sanctifi- 
cation before God. Here, therefore, I lived for 
some time very sweetly at peace with God through 
Christ. Oh ! methought Christ ! Christ ! there 
was nothing but Christ that was before my eyes, 
now I could look from myself to Him, and could 
reckon, that all those graces of God that were 
now green on me, were like those cracked groats 
and fourpence-halfpennies that rich men carry in 
their purses when their gold is in their trunks at 
home. Oh ! I saw my gold was in my trunk at 
home ! In Christ my Lord and Saviour. Now 
Christ was all ; all my righteousness, all my 
sanctification, all my redemption." 

" At another time, yet suddenly there fell upon 
me a great cloud of darkness ; I was so overrun in 
my soul with a senseless, heartless frame of spirit 
that I could not feel my soul to move or stir after 
grace and life by Christ ; I was as if my loins were 



I BELIEVE IN THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS 213 

broken, or as if my hands and feet had been tied 
and bound with chains. After I had been in this 
condition some three or four days, as I was sitting 
by the fire, I suddenly felt this word to sound in 
my heart, ' I must go to Jesus.' At this my former 
darkness fled away, and the blessed things of 
heaven were set in my view. Then with joy I 
told my wife, ' now, I know, I know ! ' But 
that night was a good night to me, I have had 
but few better. I longed for the company of some 
of God's people, that I might have imparted unto 
them what God had showed me. Christ was a 
precious Christ to my soul that night ; I could 
scarce lie in my bed for joy, and peace, and 
triumph, through Christ. Hebrew xii. 22 was a 
blessed Scripture to me for many days together 
after this. 

" The words are these, * Ye are come to Mount 
Sion, to the city of the living God, and to God 
the Judge of all, and to Jesus the Mediator of the 
New Testament, and to the blood of sprinkling.' 
Through this sentence the Lord led me over and 
over, first to this word, and then to that ; and 
showed me the wonderful story in every one of 
them. Blessed be God for having mercy on me ! " 



" I Believe ... in the Forgiveness of Sins" 

FROM the consideration of John Bunyan's ex- 
perience, these particulars arise, which need to be 
re-emphasized to every succeeding generation. 
Here at least is a theme which never grows 
old. 

Forgiveness, to give the conscience rest, must be 
founded on Justice. When David weakly and 
indulgently forgave Absalom, without confession 
or reparation of the wrong he had done, he 
inaugurated a policy which led to the undoing 
of his realm ; and if God were to forgive us, with 
an easy and benign readiness, and without making 
it clear that He had been at pains to do so, 
consistently with the reign of His universal and 
eternal equity, there would be an incessant and 
unappeasable fear on our part that an outraged 
Law would arise to demand compensation, with 
the alternative, if it were not given, of effecting 
the overthrow of the Moral Universe. Therefore 

214 



I BELIEVE IN THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS 215 

we are comforted in knowing that God was Him- 
self such and satisfied the demands of Righteous- 
ness. " He is faithful and just to forgive us our 
sins." He shows His righteousness, when passing 
over sins in His forbearance. He shows His 
righteousness at this present season, " that He 
might Himself be just, and the justifier of Him 
that hath faith in Jesus " (Rom. iii. 26). 

Forgiveness is through Jesus Christ. " Be it 
known unto you, therefore," said the Apostle, 
who himself had drunk deeply of the cup of 
conviction and forgiveness, that through this man 
is proclaimed unto you remission of sins " (Acts 
xiii. 38). We can never understand what it was 
that our Saviour did for us all upon the Cross, 
but we believe that in some way He made a full, 
perfect, and sufficient satisfaction, and atonement 
for the sins of the world, and it is, therefore, in 
His name that we ask to be forgiven. It is with 
a meaning which the Psalmist never knew, that 
we say, " For Thy Name sake pardon my iniquity, 
for it is great." 

Forgiveness is contingent on Confession. " If 
we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to 
forgive us our sins " (I John i. 9). For a whole 
year David refused to confess his great sin, and 
he tells us that so long as he kept silence, his bones 




216 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

waxed old by reason of his anguish of soul, and 
his flesh was consumed with fever-heat ; but 
directly he said " I will confess my transgressions 
unto the Lord," directly he acknowledged his 
iniquity and ceased to hide his sin, the sweet sense 
of forgiveness stole into his heart (Ps. xxxii. 5). 
In confession, which should be to God alone, the 
soul takes God's side against itself. It is not 
necessary to wait till tears rise in the eyes, or 
strong compunction wrings the conscience. Some- 
times we begin in cold blood to confess that we 
have perverted that which was right and it did 
not profit us, and as we proceed we are sensible 
of the floods of uncontrollable sorrow rising. But 
if they come not, still the confession is good, when 
the will is bent and broken. Tell God your fault, 
extenuating and excusing nothing, taking all the 
blame to yourself, press out all the black blood, 
accept the most deeply-spoken verdict of your 
soul against itself. 

When possible Confession and Reparation to 
man should accompany the soul's confession to 
God. " When possible," because it is not always 
legitimate or wise to confess everything to those 
who, but for your confession, would never have 
been acquainted with a certain form of evil. 
Under perplexing conditions of this kind, it is 



I BELIEVE IN THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS 217 

well to say to the Lord that you are perfectly 
willing to say all and do all that He may require 
of you, only that He must make so clear what He 
does require, that you may know it without the 
least hesitation. He must go before you, and 
lead you in the way. 

The Hebrews were taught to restore the value 
of property that they had injured, directly or 
indirectly, and to add a fifth part (Lev. v. 16). 
And it is impossible to believe that a lower 
standard should guide our conduct in all cases, 
like those specified in the ancient law (Lev. vi. 1-5). 

Forgiveness is Instantaneous and Absolute. He 
pardons immediately on our confession and 
abundantly (Isa. Iv. 7) ; He removes sin as far 
as dawn is from sunset (Ps. ciii. 12) ; He casts all 
our sins into the depth of the sea (Micah vii. 19). 
The most remarkable statement of all is that of 
the new covenant, as given by Jeremiah, and the 
writer of Ep. to Hebrews, and evidently referred 
to by our Lord, when the cup of the supper was 
in His hand (Luke xxii. 70), " their sins and iniqui- 
ties will I remember no more" (Heb. viii. 12). 
They will never be brought up against us, they 
will never be allowed to diminish the blessing 
God wants to bestow, they can never be mentioned 
at the great White Throne or for ever. 



218 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

Forgiveness binds us to God. We fear to grieve 
Him again. The thought of all that we have cost 
Him deters us from doing the like again. Indeed, 
the memory of that grieved face makes us more 
than ever anxious not to crucify Him afresh, or 
put Him to an open shame. 



LI 

"I Believe . . . in the Resurrection of the 

Body" 

THE Apostle tells us that the Body of the Believer 
is a purchased possession of God, which waits to 
be redeemed from the power of corruption (Eph. 
i. 14). The work of our Lord, therefore, includes 
the entire nature. It is not enough for Him to 
save the soul, illuminate the mind, purify the 
affections, and indwell the spirit. He has set 
himself to fashion anew the body of our humilia- 
tion, that it may be conformed to the body of 
His Glory, according to the working whereby He 
is able even to subject all things unto Himself 
(Phil. iii. 21). 

The question has unceasingly been asked from 
the earliest days, " How are the dead raised up, 
and with what body do they come ? " And the 
only answer is the analogy which the Apostle 
draws between the bare grain, which the farmer 
casts into the furrows of the earth, and its re- 
appearance in the glorious body with which God 
endows it, when the harvest covers the fields with 
waving gold. " So also is the Resurrection of the 

219 



220 THE CREED OF GREEDS 

Dead. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in 
incorruption ; it is sown in dishonour, it is raised 
in glory ; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in 
power ; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a 
spiritual body. . . . The first man is of the 
earth, earthy ; the second man is of heaven. ... 
And as we have borne the image of the earthy, 
we shall also bear the image of the heavenly" 
(I Cor. xv. 35-50). 

If we press this analogy, we must admit that 
the germ of the Risen Body is already within us. 
Before the cone of wheat falls into the ground 
to die, it still bears in its heart the germ of the 
golden-headed stalk : we may, therefore, confi- 
dently assert that now and here, whilst our body, 
which is as the seed to the essential germ, is still 
vigorous and active, the principle, which is to 
break into such glorious fruition is most certainly 
present. 

The analogy has been pressed home a point or 
two further by one profound thinker of a former 
generation who suggests that the decay of the 
outer man, like the dissolution of the albuminous 
matter in the seed, is really the nourishment of 
the spiritual germ, through all the experiences of 
physical weakening and decay. " The germ lies 
hidden in the flesh of our mortality through what 



I BELIEVE IN THE RESURRECTION 221 

we call life : what we call death completes the 
process : the mere husk or shell within which the 
spiritual body was forming, is put off with painful 
struggle and buried away with the dead leaves of 
autumn, and in Resurrection the Lord gives a 
body as it hath pleased Him, wherewith it may 
stand up and maintain its relations with the beings 
and objects of the celestial sphere." 

It is clear that the sacred writers can offer but 
a partial revelation of the properties and powers 
of that Resurrection Body. These are among the 
things which it is not lawful, nor possible, for man 
to utter. We know but in part, and can but 
prophesy in part ; we can see some of the great 
outstanding shafts and pillars of truth, though we 
may not be able to descry the connecting arches 
which bind them into a symmetrical and beautiful 
structure. The images of the things in the 
heavens are revealed to us, but the heavenly 
things themselves, who can know ? Of this at 
least we are sure that " if our earthly house of this 
tabernacle were dissolved, we have in the heavens 
a building from God, a house not made with hands, 
eternal. For in this we groan, longing to put on 
over this our dwelling-place from heaven, because 
we would not be unclothed, but clothed upon " 
(2 Cor. v. 1-4). 



222 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

Gleams of that Resurrection Body have been 
given to human eyes. By the Risen Lord it was 
clearly apparent to those who had loved Him. 
Perhaps we get glimpses of it in those hours when 
the fires of Holy Love and Purity transfigure the 
very bodies of our dear ones, and shine through 
them, as through porcelain. In any case, we 
cannot doubt that we shall recognise again the 
features, the gestures, the very voice of our 
beloved. 

Daughter of Heaven ! our grieving hearts repose 
On the dear thought that we once more shall see 
Thy beauty like Himself our Master rose 
So shall that beauty its old rights maintain, 
And thy sweet spirit own those eyes again. 

There shall be a Resurrection of the unjust as 
well as of the just. What can their bodies be but 
the embodiments of the evil passions which have 
wrought within them ! But of the just the body 
shall surely be the perfect vehicle of the holy soul. 
Not tiring in service, however prolonged ; not 
failing to give expression to the loftiest and most 
ardent volitions of the spirit ; not needing sleep 
or rest, or food ; but ever lending itself to the 
impulse of the indwelling spirit (Ezek. i. 12). 
" When He shall be manifested, we shall be like 
Him, for we shall see Him as He is." 



LII 
"I Believe ... in the Life Everlasting" 

IT is clear that life everlasting is something more 
than life that lasts for ever. Immortality, great 
and wonderful as it is, cannot exhaust the mean- 
ing of these words. The Greek philosophers were 
aware of the Immortality of the soul, but they 
never knew what we mean, when under the teach- 
ing of Christ, we profess our Faith in Everlasting 
Life. 

It is equally clear that this frequent phrase does 
not mean heaven, because, in several passages of 
the New Testament we are taught that our eternal 
life does not date from the moment of death, as, 
for instance, " He that believeth in the Son hath 
everlasting life " (John iii. 36). Our everlasting 
life is begun, and in the great future, when we 
see all things as they are, we shall know that our 
birthday was not that of our physical birth, but 
of that reception by us of the Christ-life, which 
shall never cease to expand into the likeness of 
God. 

The Greek word translated everlasting, in the 
A.V., is rendered by eternal in the R.V. (Matt. xxv. 

223 



224 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

46). The note of duration is not its prominent 
characteristic, but rather quality than quantity. 
It is What sort of Life ? rather than How Long 
of Life ? That this is so will be made clear by 
the citation of one familiar verse, "This is life 
eternal, that they should know Thee, the only 
true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast 
sent." This being so, we can well understand the 
words, " He that hath the Son hath THE Life " 
(i.e., the life, which is life indeed), he that hath 
not the Son of God hath not THE Life " (1 John 
v. 12). 

. Not life. Recent physical science affirms that 
there is no such thing as dead matter. The head 
of a well-known college in U.S.A. told me that 
when taking a walk with one of his young-woman 
students, he struck a piece of rock with his walk- 
ing-stick, and asked her whether it was alive or 
dead. " Professor," she said, " it's alive." 
Matter is only a form of electricity, the atoms of 
which are Electrones. 

It is clear, however, that the rock is destitute 
of the sentient life of the dog, and this also is 
destitute of the moral life of the child ; and this 
again entirely destitute of the spiritual life of a 
Moses or a John ; and even these may be destitute 
of a side of experience which is familiar enough 



I BELIEVE IN THE LIFE EVERLASTING 225 

to those who have crossed the border-line. It is 
evident, then, that we may enjoy the life of some 
lower place, but be entirely destitute of the life 
of the planes above. This is what the Apostle 
meant by saying, " She that liveth in pleasure is 
dead while she liveth." You may be living in the 
world of art, or science or politics, and a very 
vivid and intense life it may be, and yet may 
never have entered that other kingdom, where 
real life is alone to be found. 

The Real Life can only be obtained from the Living 
Christ. There has been a revival of late of an 
old suggestion that life may be spontaneously 
generated. This was originally the theory of Dr. 
Bastian, who filled a bottle with hay, sealed it 
hermetically to guard against the inclusion of air, 
baked it so as to kill all the living germs already 
in the bottle, and found, after an interval had 
elapsed, that germs of life were still breeding life. 
But Dr. Tyndall and Dr. Dallinger proved that 
the vitality of those germs was so great that they 
will exist though the intensest heat be applied to 
them, and that, therefore, the proof-experiment 
of spontaneous generation broke down. 

Many theologians have tried to establish the 
thesis that the counterpart of spontaneous 
generation exists in the soul of man, that man 



226 THE CREED OF CREEDS 

became good by a kind of levelling-up process, 
and that there is no need for the impartation of 
Life from without. 

To this we oppose the repeated teaching of the 
New Testament, that only he who has received 
the Son of God by a living faith, has life. The 
Eternal Life, which was from Eternity was 
manifested for a space in the Person of Jesus 
Christ, passed through death and resurrection, 
and now from the heart of Him who unites the 
Divine and the Human perfectly, waits to pour 
itself forth into all hearts that will yield to and 
accept it (I John i. 1-4). " This is the witness, 
that God hath given to us Eternal Life, and this 
Life is in His Son " (I John v. 11). Open your 
heart towards Christ, and you will receive Him, 
and receiving Him, live. You may not always 
be conscious of its uplifting glory, but the fountain 
may rise up within you, though its waters make 
no flashing in the light, and no music as they fall. 

The Life which is Life Indeed. To know God, 
to live in fellowship with God, to be conscious 
that the Holy Spirit is dwelling within, to yearn 
over others and help them to realise themselves 
this is the Eternal life, unto which the righteous 
shall go away (Matt. xxv. 46) ; and to have this 
is to have the Blessedness of Heaven already. 

Q (2516) 



BT993 
.146 



Meyer 



The creed of creeds 



J2MQSSL 



FEB 8 















i 



BT893 



JIhe_er,e.d~Q^cejftds. 
264039 






