BS  455  .A54  v.l 

Anderson,  Christopher,  1782- 
1852. 

The  annals  of  the  English 


i^H 

^■" 

^■P 

Ki 

^iff— — 

I^^^My 

1 

1  ^  -=  ^ ^=— 

IP? 

^m 

K-=— ^ 

m^^^Sfsgj^T^^^jR  * ,  '* 

,    J 

^  ==— ^.^ 

t^~^ft 

^Ol 

ifc-=- -^^=^==-= 

[[l{[]i|i^~>-^^E^fe^ 

'^^^ishmS 

^ — - —    ' 

B^^^^^^^^^. 

"^R^ 

^ — ^'^  —  — ^=:^ — — ^  j 

^ffl^^^^^^9^Kr^^-s^^^ 

11^^  "jH 

^ —                  — — -^^^^^fl^  ! 

^^^^^dfi^^^^^^ 

^)  ffl 

^^^^^       =^ '^s^^^ 

^MpH^^^^^ 

^    '^»^ 

^^M^  ^.-  ==^=.i             1 

^^pr_%-^3^j^^^^^^ 

gi,  ^»,           WTTI* 

ffilfekii^^ft-         ~                           ^ 

^^          ^^^ 

^^^^^^^                           - 

^^^^^^^^_ 

^^M 

^^^^^fe                  1 

^^^^^p^ 

■■"■       "^      ^^^Ife^          ^^^^e:^ 

_^^^^^^H 

K^l^^^^^^^^^ ^ 

^^p 

.^^1 

^H 

BN^^|BRro™B^gSBMH^^^^^                    ,i 

M^^^ma^^ml 

^^^^0; 

^  ^^^^H 

^^H 

W^MB^^M           i 

^^^^^^^^^ 

-^  ~""^^B 

Sk 

wBKS^sS^KB^^^SS^^^^^^^'^                 ^ 

l^^^^P^^^^ 

^^^^^S3 

^.^a^^^P 

fS 

pi^j^^JU 

= 

-  ^^—  --^=r=^ 

jbLh^^^^».^ 

P^^^^r!!^^^^^^^^         ■'LllL                                 _^__ 

=^               .  = 

— ~ — ' — — 

^^^^J^SLjf^ 

•* ^ ■ 

■--  — -- — =- 

W^:^^"^  ^ 

: = 

-=^=r5=r;=r;^ 

^P^^;=^^^^^--    ^    ^^E€:- 

'-^ 

: . 

•:^i;-v-i^rp^--:^=.-^ 

""^^■^" =_=^-^  -^^-"-^ 

-^ 

-■ ■ = 

N^V 


TTMBAILH 


laruUri.  H^/VcAfrm^.  M4S 


THE 


annals  of  x^t  Cnjjlid)  iStblr 


IN   TWO    VOLUMES 


VOL,     I. 


MDXXV  — MDXXXVII. 


"  I  CAN  fcarce  think  any  pains  milTpent  that  bring  me  in  folid  evi- 
dences of  that  great  truth,  that  the  Scripture  is  the  word  of  God, 
which  is  indeed  the  Grand  fundamental — And  I  ufe  the  Scripture, 
not  as  an  arfenal,  to  be  reforted  to  only  for  arms  and  weapons  to  de- 
fend this,  or  that,  party,  or  to  defeat  its  enemies ;  but  as  a  matchlefs 
Temple,  where  I  delight  to  be,  to  contemplate  the  beauty,  the  fym- 
metry,  and  the  magnificence  of  the  ftrufture,  and  to  increafe  my 
awe,  and  excite  my   devotion   to  the  Deity  there  preached   and 

adored." 

The  Hon.  Robert  Boyle. 


K 


THE   ANNALS   OF 


iCIje  €ngUfl)  Mbit 


BY 


CHRISTOPHERS  ANDERSON 


VOL.   I. 


SLondon 

WILLIAM    PICKERING 

1845. 


P  R  E  F  A  C  E. 


|iiE  work  which  is  now  offered  to  public  attention, 
has  been  drawn  from  authentic  and  unpublished 
manuscripts,  from  the  original  printed  authorities  in 
succession,  and  the  editions  of  the  Scriptures  them- 
selves. It  will  be  found  to  contain  the  historic  Annals  of  the 
English  Bible,  viewed  in  contrast  or  connexion  with  national 
affairs  ;  including  Memoirs  of  Tyndale,  his  contemporaries 
and  successors  ;  the  first  introduction  of  the  Sacred  Volume, 
as  printed  in  the  native  language,  into  England,  Scotland, 
and  America  ;  the  earliest  triumphs  of  Divine  Truth,  and  its 
'progress  down  to  the  present  day;  the  imperative  obligations 
of  British  Christians  in  such  extraordinary  possession  of  the 
Word  of  God. 

In  the  literature  of  this  country,  although  it  has  been  so 
often  felt  and  regretted,  a  more  observable  deficiency  does 
not  exist,  than  that  of  there  being  no  history  of  the  English 
Bible.  It  may  have  been  imagined,  that  such  a  narrative 
could  embrace  no  heart-stirring  incidents,  or  incidents  laid  as 
the  foundation  of  a  great  design,  no  frequent  peril  of  life,  no 
hair-breadth  escapes,  nor,  especially,  any  of  those  transac- 
tions in  which  the  vital  interests  of  this  nation  have  been  in- 
volved. No  mistake  could  have  been  greater,  but  whatever 
has  been  the  cause,  the  defect  is  notorious.  The  people  of 
every  city  alike,  have  never  been  informed,  at  what  time,  and 
in  what  a  singular  manner,  their  ancestors  first  received  the 
oracles  of  God,  as  printed  on  the  continent  for  their  benefit. 
As  for  their  subsequent  prevalence  and  effects,  these  form  a 
vein  of  British  history  which  has  never  been  explored, 
vor..  I.  h 


vi  PREFACE. 

The  Sacred  Volume,  indeed,  carries  internal  evidence  of  its 
divine  origin,  and  that  in  abundance  ;  but  still,  with  reference 
to  the  Bible  now  being  used  daily,  and  read  so  long,  through- 
out this  kingdom,   no  questions  can   be  more  natural  than 
these — "When  was  this  volume  first  translated  from  the  origi- 
nal, and  put   into  print  1     Who  was  the  man  that  laboured 
night  and  day  to  accomplish  this  ?     Like  his  Divine  Master, 
was  he  betrayed  unto   death  ?      If  so,  who  betrayed  him  ? 
What  became  of  his  betrayers  1     Or,  was  there  any  one  man 
who  befriended  him,  in   his   last  days,  or  final  trial  ?     And 
since  all  this,  and  much   more,  did  take  place  abroad ;  in  the 
first  transmission,  in  the  secret  and  singular  conveyance  of 
the  heavenly  treasure  to  our  shores,  what  were  the  distinct 
tokens   of  a  superintending   Providence  to  be  observed  and 
adored?      What   Avere  the  notable  circumstances  connected 
with  its  earliest  triumphs  over  the  prejudice  and  passion  of 
our  common  nature  ?     Or,  in  short,  hoie  has  this  Sacred  Vo- 
lume, revised,  and  re-revised,  after  three  hundred  years,  come 
down  into  our  hands  ?     And  yet,  up  to  the  present  moment, 
should  any  individual  throughout  this  country  apply  to  his 
Christian  teacher,  or  any  child  to  his  Parent,  and  put  these 
and  other  deeply  interesting  questions,  no  definite  answer  can 
be  returned  ;  nor  is  there  a  single  publication,  which,  if  it 
lead  not  astray,  will  not  leave  the  inquisitive  reader  nearly  as 
far  from  satisfaction  as  when  he  began.     If  a  Translator,  in 
whose  train  all  others  have  followed,  must  be  allowed  to  rank 
far  above  all  mere  Reformers,  it  is  strange  if,  on  such  a  sub- 
ject, historians  generally  should  have  slumbered  or  slept ;  yet 
the  histories  of  Halle  and  Foxe,  of  Stowe  and  Strype,  of  Bur- 
net and  Collier,  of  Turner  and  Lingard,  or  Soame,  as  well  as 
the  history  of  Translations  by  Lewis,   Herbert,  or  Dibdin, 
with  the   Biblical   literature   of  Townley,   of  Cotton,   or  of 
Home,   may  all  be  read,  and  they  must  be,  when  such  a 
period  is  explored  ;   but  from  all  these  sources  put  together, 
still  the  reader  can  form  no  conception  of  what  actually  took 
place,  witli  regard  to  the  Scriptures.     The  incidental  circum- 
stances mentioned  are  not  only  few  in  number,  but  scarcely 
one  of  them  appears  in  its  true  light  or  appropriate  connexion. 
Many,  and  b}^  far  the  most  curious  and  productive  incidents, 
have  remained  in  utter  oblivion. 

After  reading,  in  succession,  oven  all  these  works,  no  one 


PREFACE.  Vll 

can  possess  any  adequate  or  correct  idea  of  that  mighty 
phalanx  of  talent,  policy,  and  power,  so  firmly  arrayed  against 
the  introduction  of  divine  truth  in  our  native  tongue  into  this 
Kingdom ;  and  consequently  no  reader  has  ever  had  before 
him  the  most  powerful  display,  in  comparatively  modern 
times,  of  the  irresistible  energy  of  the  Divine  Word.  This 
remark  applies  with  equal  force  to  Scotland,  of  which  nothing- 
has  hitherto  been  known,  as  it  does  to  England,  of  whicli 
there  has  been  known  so  little,  and  that  so  incorrectly  nar- 
rated. This  energy,  too,  in  both  countries,  having  been  ex- 
hibited at  a  period  when  the  truth  was  unbefriended  by  a 
single  human  being,  in  office,  nay,  when  the  judges  and  rulers 
of  the  land  were  up  in  arms,  or  raging  against  it ;  the  detail,  if 
justice  could  be  done  to  it,  must  form  one  of  the  most  curious 
and  impressive,  if  not  the  most  valuable  chapters  in  British 
history.  The  times  chanored  indeed,  and  have  often  changed 
since,  and  yet,  it  is  presumed,  no  reader  will  find  the  story 
begin  to  droop  in  point  of  interest ;  much  less  forfeit  its  pecu- 
liar character,  as  an  undertaking  of  Divine  Providence,  down 
to  the  present  hour. 

Certain  portentous  signs,  unexpectedly  marking  our  own 
day,  and  at  which  not  a  few  have  been  startled,  very  power- 
fully invite  the  general  mind  to  the  sacred  text,  in  its  all- 
sufficiency,  by  itself  alone,  or  to  "  the  Bible  without  note  and 
comment."'''  But  without  even  glancing  at  these  here,  to  the 
Sacred  Volume,  in  our  native  tongue,  considered  simply  in 
the  light  of  a  printed  hooJc,  there  happily  belong  two  pecu- 
liarities, more  than  sufficient  to  fix  the  mind,  with  intense 
interest,  on  its  origin  and  history.  These  are  the  number  of 
its  copies,  and  the  extent  to  which  it  is  now  in  perusal. 
Neither  the  one,  nor  the  other,  has  yet  been  rendered  so  pal- 
pable, as  to  engage  the  notice  they  deserve,  and  which  the}" 
will,  at  last,  certainly  secure. 

After  the  commencement  of  the  present  century,  when  at- 
tention was  awakened  to  the  obligation  imposed  on  this  coun- 
try, of  giving  the  Sacred  Volume  to  all  nations,  or  of  attempt- 
ing to  do  so ;  with  regard  to  the  Scriptures  in  our  own  Eng- 
lish, it  was  even  then  asserted,  that  the  number  of  copies 
already  in  existence,  was  greater  than  that  in  all  other  lan- 
guages put  together.  The  number,  at  all  events,  had  passed 
beyond  human  calculation,  while  every  one  agreed  that  other 


viii  PREFACE. 

nations  were  comparatively  but  ill  supplied,  and  that  many 
more  were  entirely  destitute.  The  moment,  however,  for 
combined  exertion  had  come ;  this  has  continued  ever  since, 
even  with  growing  energy  ;  and  it  is  now  assuredly  more  than 
time  for  the  contributors  to  observe  the  result.  Notwith- 
standing all  that  had  been  printed  and  sold  for  more  than 
two  centuries  and  a  half ;  the  number  of  English  Bibles  and 
New  Testaments  separately,  which  have  passed  through  the 
press,  within  the  perfect  recollection  of  many  now  living,  has 
exceeded  the  number  of  souls  in  Britain  !  It  has  been  more 
than  double  the  population  in  1801  ! 

Should  we  suppose  the  printing-press  to  have  been  em- 
ployed incessantly  every  lawful  day,  or  three  hundred  and 
thirteen  days  in  the  year,  and  for  ten  hours  daily,  throughout 
the  four  seasons  of  all  these  years  ;  then  has  it  been  moving, 
on  an  average,  at  the  rate  of  more  than  th'ee  copies  of  the 
Sacred  Volume,  whether  of  the  Bible,  or  New  Testament 
separately,  every  minute ;  or  five  hundred  and  sixty-three 
thousand  four  hundred  annually  !  But  the  speed  at  first,  or 
for  several  years,  was  slow,  when  compared  with  that  which 
followed.  For  some  time  past,  it  has  nearly  doubled,  so  that 
in  the  space  of  twelve  months  the  press  has  sent  forth  more 
than  a  million  of  copies  ;  or  say  above  nineteen  thousand 
every  week,  above  three  thousand  every  day,  three  hundred 
every  hour,  or  five  every  minute  of  working  time  !  At  this 
rate  there  has  been  producing  equal  to  an  entire  volume,  and 
such  a  volume,  in  less  than  twelve  seconds  !  To  the  minds 
of  many  in  recent  years,  velocity  or  speed,  in  various  forms, 
has  proved  a  subject  of  ardent  study  and  delight,  but  here  is 
one  form,  which,  when  viewed  in  its  ultimate  moral  conse- 
quences, will  not  admit  of  any  rival  competitor.  Yet  com- 
pared with  its  importance,  it  has  been  but  little  regarded  ;  and 
never  yet,  as  it  ought  to  have  been,  in  connexion  with  the 
state  of  other  nations.  Before  thousands,  or  rather  millions 
of  our  countrymen,  the  process,  from  day  to  day,  has 

"  Mov'd  on  unheeded,  as  the  bird 
That  cleaves  the  yielding  air  unheard, 
And  yet  must  prove,  when  understood, 
The  harbinger  of  endless  good." 

To  a  certainty,  however,  it  had  never  entered  into  the  im- 
agination of  a  single  individual,  that  more  copies  of  the  Scrip- 


PREFACE.  ix 

tures  would  be  demanded  in  the  English  tongue  alone,  than 
in  that  of  all  other  nations  put  together  !  And,  more  espe- 
cially, as  the  number  of  versions  now  called  for,  and  as  con- 
templated by  Britain,  is  above  one  hundred  and  fifty  !  At 
the  outset,  had  any  individual  suggested  the  propriety  of 
printing  ticenty  millions  of  English  Bibles  and  Testaments, 
what  would  every  other  man  have  thought  or  said  ?  The 
proposal  would  have  been  fatal  to  the  design.  The  general 
result  which  so  many  have  concurred  in  producing,  was  fore- 
seen by  no  one.  Thus  it  is,  that,  by  the  agency  of  man,  the 
intentions  of  Providence  are  wrought  out,  in  the  guidance  of 
a  nation,  or  the  government  of  the  world.  In  all  our  move- 
ments, or  combinations.  His  hand  and  power  appear  at  last, 
conspicuously ;  and  if  any  seek  for  evidence,  that,  with  all 
our  supposed  shrewdness,  we  are  still  a  governed  race,  he  may 
find  it  here.  Like  some  of  those  great  operations  in  nature, 
which  proceed  unnoticed,  amidst  all  the  turmoil  of  this  ever 
shifting  scene,  this  work  has  gone  on,  and  arrived  at  a  height, 
which  in  the  light  of  an  event.,  is  sufficient  to  arrest  the  atten- 
tion of  every  intelligent  mind,  exciting,  as  it  ought,  to  deeper 
inquiry  and  reflection. 

But  if  the  English  Bible  be  so  distinguished  for  the  num- 
ber of  its  copies,  it  is  equally,  or  rather  more  so,  by  the  ex- 
tent  to  which  it  is  now  being  read.  With  the  movement  of 
the  press,  we  have  another  movement,  not  less  worthy  of 
notice,  and  one  which  renders  the  subject  doubly  interesting, 
or  rather  momentous.  It  is  about  nineteen  years  ago,  since  it 
was  remarked  by  an  acute  living  writer,  Mr.  Douglas — "  The 
world  has  not  witnessed  an  emigration  like  that  taking  place, 
from  this  kingdom  to  America,  so  extensive  in  its  range,  so 
immeasurable  in  its  consequences,  since  the  dispersion  of 
mankind."'''  He  compared  it  to  the  principle  of  attraction  in 
the  material  world — "  an  influence  which  like  that  of  Nature, 
was  universal  without  pause  or  relaxation ;  and  hordes  of 
emigrants  were  continually  swarming  off",  as  ceaseless  in  their 
passage,  and  crowded,  and  unreturning  as  the  passengers  to 
eternity."  Since  then,  however,  and  especially  with  every  re- 
turning spring,  has  come  as  certainly  the  season  of  migra- 
tion ;  and  from  many  seaports,  our  countrymen  have  been 
sailing  far  and  wide  as  the  winds  and  waves  could  carry  them. 
In  short,  with   the   exception  of  the  most  remarkable  of  all 


xii  PREFACE. 

rally  verified  ?  Such,  at  all  events,  is  the  present  high  anJ 
momentous  position  of  Britain  and  her  sons. 

If,  from  this  moral  elevation,  we  could  once  look  down  to 
the  valley  below,  and,  guided  only  by  impartial  history,  ob- 
serve the  singular  path  by  which  the  nation  has  been  led  up 
to  such  an  eminence,  we  should  better  understand  what,  and 
how  much,  is  involved  in  the  history  of  Divine  Revelation  in 
our  native  tongue  ;  to  say  nothing  of  many  reflections  which 
could  never  before  have  occurred  to  any  mind.  The  following 
pages  form  an  attempt  to  furnish  the  reader  with  such  a  his- 
tory, from  the  first  sheets  thrown  off"  at  the  press,  down  to  the 
millions  now  dispersed  and  in  use,  whether  at  home  or  abroad. 

But,  even  here,  and  before  we  descend — before  we  begin, 
where  the  Almighty,  in  a  manner  so  peculiar,  began  with  this 
nation — if,  from  this  summit,  we  now  look  round,  is  there  any 
parallel  case  to  be  discerned  ? — any  nation  upon  ground  so 
high  ?  No,  not  one,  nor  by  many  degrees  :  not  even  Ger- 
many, with  all  her  Bibles.  Yet  is  there  nothing  on  which 
the  eye  may  and  should  rest,  in  the  way  of  comparative  con- 
trast ?  Assuredly  there  is,  for  there  is  one  other  European 
language  upon  which  the  sun  also  neter  sets.  It  is  the  Spanish, 
and  the  contrast  may  be  soon  expressed.  The  Bible  in  Spain  ! 
The  Bible  in  Britain  !  Two  languages  on  which  the  sun 
shines  with  no  intermission,  yet,  in  point  of  supply,  are  they 
wide  as  the  poles  asunder  I  What  a  contrast  is  presented  here, 
whether  we  look  to  Spain  herself,  or  to  her  offspring  in  those 
colonies  once  all  her  own  !  In  the  history  of  Europe  at  this 
moment,  no  two  facts  of  similar  magnitude  can  be  placed  in 
opposition  before  the  human  mind.  One  is  almost  reminded 
of  the  sun,  in  comparison  with  a  star  of  the  smallest  magni- 
tude. Let  the  contrast,  the  indescribable  contrast,  at  once 
humble  and  inspirit  a  people  whom  God  has  so  distinguished. 

To  all  those,  therefore,  who  regard  the  Scriptures,  printed 
in  our  native  tongue,  to  be  infinitely  the  highest  boon  ever  be- 
stowed on  Britain  ;  or  to  the  English  Christian,  whether  he 
be  at  home  or  abroad — in  Britain,  Ireland,  or  America — in  In- 
dia, China,  Australia,  or  New  Zealand — i\\e  providential  oi-igin 
of  that  Sacred  Volume  to  which  he  daily  turns  his  eye,  cannot 
be  a  subject  void  of  interest.  Its  progress  to  completion  he  will 
find  to  have  involved  a  struggle,  with  which  there  is  no  other 
to  be  compared — its  history  since,  one  that  boars  directly  and 


PREFACE.  xiii 

with  great  power  on  the  present  day  ;  and,  once  aware  of  cir- 
cumstances, when  he  himself  sits  down  to  the  perusal  of  the 
sacred  page,  whether  in  the  temperate,  the  torrid,  or  the  frigid 
zone,  he  will  be  better  able  to  regard  the  favour,  as  one  of  the 
innumerable  happy  consequences  of  its  original  triumph  over 
all  the  enmity  and  rage  displayed  of  old,  and  the  barriers  which 
were  raised  in  vain,  against  its  reception  into  his  native  coun- 
try or  fatherland. 

With  respect  to  the  commencement  of  the  following  history, 
the  first  half  of  the  sixteenth  century,  embracing  one  of  the 
most  eventful  periods  in  the  annals  of  Europe,  is  familiarly 
known  to  have  produced,  in  this  country,  a  number  of  conspi- 
cuous characters,  and  the  lives  of  almost  every  one  of  them, 
have  been  given  to  the  world  again  and  again.  One,  however, 
— and,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  term,  as  it  regards  his  influ- 
ence on  posterity — by  far  the  most  eminent,  has  been  hitherto 
all  but  overlooked.  Often  confounded  or  linked  with  other 
men  of  very  inferior  consequence,  there  has  been  no  reader  of 
English  history  who  could  possibly  estimate  the  amount  of  his 
obligations,  to  the  modest  and  immortal  William  Tyndale. 
Independently  of  his  ability  as  one  of  the  most  powerful  writers 
of  the  age,  when  his  name  is  connected  with  the  Sacred  Vo- 
lume, which  he  first  translated  from  the  original  text  into 
English,  which  he  first  put  to  press,  and  then  sent  into  his 
native  land,  we  have  no  other  man  to  be  compared  with  him  at 
the  time  ;  and  when  to  this  is  added,  his  unspotted  personal 
christianit}^  his  uncompromising  spirit,  and  genuine  patriot- 
ism, it  is  altogether  unaccountable  that  every  incident  in  his 
valuable  life  has  not  been  gleaned,  and  arranged  into  a  distinct 
memoir,  long  before  the  present  day.  Such  a  work,  including 
his  noble  convert  and  young  companion,  John  Fryth,  ought 
to  have  been  a  household  book  for  many  generations  back. 

But  in  neglecting  Tyndale  personally,  an  object  infinitely 
above  him  has  been  neglected.  In  the  course  of  her  varied  and 
singular  history,  there  is  no  favour,  we  must  repeat,  bestowed 
upon  Britain,  that  is  ever  to  be  compared  with  the  Bible  in 
her  vulgar  or  vernacular  tongue  ;  to  say  nothing  of  this  being 
now  her  most  distinguished  and  distinguishable  feature.  But 
for  its  free  and  unfettered  perusal,  the  eminence  to  which  she 
has  attained  among  the  European  nations,  or  confessedly  above 
them,  had  never  been  reached.     Her  rise  and  progress,  in  all 


xiv  PREFACE. 

that  is  worthy  of  possession,  can  never  be  separated  from  this 
heavenly  gift  or  deposit.  Yet,  if  this  be  granted,  and  the  best 
of  her  sons  with  one  voice  will  do  so,  then,  in  the  introduc- 
tion, or  first  importation  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  in  type,  at 
such  a  period,  and  by  such  means,  there  must  have  been  certain 
paths,  certain  footsteps,  in  divine  Providence,  corresponding 
to  the  greatness  of  the  boon  bestowed.  In  other  words,  though 
the  cause  itself,  in  the  morning  of  its  origin,  might  seem  only 
like  "  smoking  flax  or  a  bruised  reed,"  one  might  expect  to 
witness  even  national  aflairs,  or  the  Crown  itself,  and  the 
movements  of  Government,  treated,  in  many  instances,  as  al- 
together subordinate.  As  far,  then,  as  men  in  power  and  place 
were  concerned,  the  reader  must  now  be  left  to  judge  whether 
he  does  not  observe  the  cause,  emphatically  in  its  commence- 
ment, and  upon  all  necessary  occasions  ever  after ^  like  the  star 
in  Joseph's  dream,  to  which  "  the  sun  and  the  moon,  and  the 
eleven  stars,  made  obeisance."  These,  and  other  singular  oc- 
currences, it  is  true,  ought  to  have  been  marked  and  recorded 
long  before  three  centuries  had  passed  away  ;  but  though  they 
have  required  to  be  sought  out  in  the  pages  of  original  manu- 
script, and  of  rare  books,  and  to  be  traced  with  scrupulous 
caution,  they  are  not  the  less  worthy  of  observation  now,  and 
more  especially  in  the  existing  state  of  our  country.  Perhaps 
some  unknown  benefit  may  be  involved  in  so  many  important 
incidents  having  been  left  for  disclosure  to  the  present  hour. 

The  Scriptures  in  English  manuscript^  the  revival  of  Letters, 
as  well  as  the  Invention  of  Printing,  preceded,  by  many  years, 
any  application  of  that  noble  art  to  our  English  version.  But 
the  entire  period  may  be,  or  rather  ought  to  be,  regarded  as 
containing  a  series  of  events,  'preliminary  to  that  memorable 
occurrence,  and,  therefore,  though  but  slightly  sketched,  they 
require  to  be  noticed  in  the  light  of  a  deliberate,  yet  appro- 
priate introduction.  This,  accordingly,  has  been  attempted, 
as  due  to  the  history  following. 

It  is,  however,  the  English  Scriptures  in  print,  and  their 
first  introduction,  especially  into  England  and  Scotland,  with 
their  subsequent  introduction  to  North  America,  which  are 
about  to  claim  particular  attention  ;  and  as  the  path  has  never 
been  trodden  before,  some  explanation  becomes  necessary,  with 
regard  to  the  sources  whence  materials  have  been  derived. 
Having  looked  into  the  histories  already  named,  as  well  as 


I'RKFAC'K.  XV 

other  kindred  works,  and  observing  not  only  the  paucity  of 
facts,  but  various  discrepancies  among  all  these  authors,  the 
writer's  first  resort  was  to  that  unrivalled  store  of  original  ma- 
nuscript in  the  British  Museum.  It  was  impossible  to  enter- 
tain any  previous  theory.  Various  details  were  expected, 
though  not  the  slightest  hope  w'as  then  indulged  that  any  very 
connected  series  of  events  could  ever  be  drawn  out.  On  dis- 
covering, however,  to  what  extent  these  manuscript  pages  had 
been  permitted  to  remain  in  oblivion,  he  persevered.  Im- 
portant original  documents,  both  in  the  Chapter  House  of 
Westminster,  and  in  the  State  Paper  Office,  have  also  been 
consulted ;  and,  of  course,  the  State  Papers,  or  Correspond- 
ence, in  five  volumes  quarto,  relating  to  England,  Scotland, 
and  Ireland,  printed  since  1830,  by  the  Government  Commis- 
sion. After  having  gone  over  the  entire  surface  of  Tyndale's 
age,  the  writer  was  highly  obliged  by  the  perusal  and  use  of 
various  extracts  of  correspondence,  collected  by  the  indefatiga- 
ble industry  of  the  Rev.  Thomas  Russell,  A.M.,  the  editor  of 
the  works  of  Tyndale  and  Fryth.  It  was  no  trifling  corrobo- 
ration when  the  author  found  himself  not  only  unmoved  from 
a  single  position  he  had  taken,  but  confirmed  in  his  statements 
by  several  incidental  circumstances,  some  of  which  might  have 
escaped  notice. 

With  reference  to  rare  printed  works,  as  well  as  scarce  edi- 
tions of  the  Scriptures,  besides  the  British  Museum  ;  the  Bod- 
leian at  Oxford ;  the  University  Library,  that  of  St,  John's 
College,  and  others,  at  Cambridge;  the  Baptist  Museum  of  Bris- 
tol ;  the  Althorp  Library  of  Earl  Spencer  ;  that  of  his  Royal 
Highness  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  while  yet  entire,  with  those  of 
Lambeth  and  St.  Paul's,  have  been  consulted  in  succession ; 
but  to  no  other  collection  of  Bibles  and  Testaments  has  the 
author  been  so  much  indebted  as  to  that  of  his  friend  Lea  Wil- 
son, Esq.  of  Norwood  Hill.  In  early  days  an  English  merchant 
of  Antwerp,  will  be  found  to  occupy  a  conspicuous  and  honour- 
able place  at  the  commencement  of  this  history  ;  and  it  is  in 
perfect  keeping  with  the  entire  narrative,  that  a  collection  so 
rich,  and  in  such  a  perfect  state,  should  now  be  in  the  pos- 
session of  a  London  merchant.  Without  his  assistance  as  to 
various  minute  particulars,  the  list  at  the  close  of  this  work 
could  not  have  been  so  complete.  It  will  be  found  to  contain 
many  authentic  editions,  which,  altogether  unknown,  have 


xviii  PREFACE. 

if  they  can  find  anotlier  walk,  in  past  times  down  to  the  pre- 
sent, of  such  a  character  as  lies  at  the  root  of  all  that  has 
ever  existed  under  the  name  of  Christianity  within  the  king- 
dom ;  and  so  important  as  in  vital  connexion  with  its  progress 
throughout  the  earth.  If  with  the  changing  scenes  through 
which  the  history  will  be  found  to  pass,  it  had  ever  forfeited 
its  original  cast  or  character,  there  it  might  have  terminated, 
and  there  it  ought.  But,  on  the  contrary,  as  the  continuation 
so  singularly  corresponds  with  the  commencement,  there  was 
to  be  found  no  halting-place  before  the  present  day. 

In  point  of  time,  the  history  of  our  English  Scriptures,  from 
the  date  of  their  first  appearing  in  print,  will  be  found  to  take 
precedence  of  all  the  Institutions,  Establishments,  or  local  in- 
terests, within  our  shores.  The  noble  contest,  so  singularly 
commenced  and  conducted,  was  nearly  decided  before  their 
origin ;  at  least,  the  first  brunt  of  the  battle  was  over,  and 
Divine  truth  had  been  so  effectually  sown  and  rooted  in  our 
native  soil,  that,  from  that  early  period,  all  the  power  of  the 
enemy  has  been  in  vain.  This,  of  itself,  gives  the  story  a 
preference,  or  a  prior  claim  to  consideration,  before  any  other 
narrative  in  the  form,  or  under  the  name,  of  religious  history. 
Nor  is  this  its  only  peculiarity.  Ever  since,  the  continuation 
will  be  found  maintaining  a  higher  place,  describing  a  larger, 
and  therefore  a  loftier  circle,  than  that  of  any  mere  class  or 
denomination  whatever ;  embracing,  without  any  interruption, 
the  Christian  community  of  Britain  in  its  widest  sense.  It 
will  continue  throughout  as  independent  of  all  local  interests, 
as  it  was  before  they  had  existence.  That  the  history  of  the 
English  Bible  has  never  before  been  viewed  in  this  light,  is 
freely  granted  ;  nor  had  the  author  himself  the  slightest  idea  of 
this,  its  marked  or  distinguishing  peculiarity,  before  he  began. 
It  is  now  the  more  worthy  of  notice,  and  may  prove  of  some 
service,  in  different  ways,  beside  that  of  promoting  modesty 
of  statement  by  any  single  community  in  Britain.  No  sec- 
tion of  Christians,  it  will  be  seen,  of  whatever  name,  can  pos- 
sess any  title  to  rank  itself  as  having  been  essential,  either  to 
the  progress  or  to  the  general  prevalence  of  the  English  Scrip- 
tures, much  less  to  their  original  introduction.  This  is  an 
undertaking  which  has  been  uniformly  conducted  above  their 
sphere  of  judgment.  Should  this  general  prevalence  turn  out 
to  have  been  almost  equally  independent  of  the  civil  power. 


PREFACK.  xix 

from  Henry  the  Eighth  down  to  Charles  the  Second,  or  rather 
to  the  present  hour,  it  will  form  altogether  by  far  the  most 
singular  fact,  as  such,  in  the  annals  of  the  kingdom.  It  is  a 
feature  in  the  history  of  our  Bible,  claiming  supreme  atten- 
tion from  the  existing  age. 

Upon  the  whole,  the  present  forms  a  department  in  past 
history,  with  which  every  Minister  of  the  truth,  in  English, 
ought  to  have  been  familiar  long  ago,  nay,  and  every  Parent 
throughout  the  kingdom.  As  it  regards  instruction,  as  well 
as  ground  for  new  reflections,  it  will  be  found  to  occupy  a 
course  or  channel  peculiar  to  itself.  Perhaps  the  fifth  book  in 
our  New  Testament  Scriptures,  may  in  part  explain  its  cha- 
racter. Men,  indeed,  have  entitled  that  book  "  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles  ;"  but  it  is  in  reality  a  history  of  the  way  and 
manner  in  which  "  the  Word  of  the  Lord  greic  and  multiplied!^'' 
— the  Apostles  themselves,  whether  as  individuals  or  as  a  body, 
being  treated  in  perfect  suboi'dination  to  the  grand  or  leading 
design.  In  some  faint  resemblance  to  this  manner,  so  ought 
the  history  of  the  Divine  Word,  in  our  native  tongue,  to  have 
been  attempted  long  since ;  leaving  men  and  things,  whether 
great  characters  or  national  events,  in  the  subordinate  places 
which  have  actually  belonged  to  them.  At  the  same  time, 
such  men  and  such  events,  viewed  as  they  have  now  been, 
sometimes  in  contrast,  and  at  other  times  in  connexion  with 
the  progress  of  Divine  Revelation  itself,  lend  a  peculiar  zest 
or  life  to  the  entire  narrative.  Upon  the  characters  of  Henry 
VIII.  and  Wolsey,  of  Warliam,  Tunstal,  or  Sir  Thomas 
More,  of  Cranmer  and  Lord  Crumwell,  with  many  other  men 
well  known  under  all  the  subsequent  reigns,  certainly  no  such 
additional  light  could  have  been  thrown,  till  they  were  brought 
into  immediate  contact  or  contrast  with  the  printing  or  circu- 
lation of  the  Scriptures  in  our  native  tongue. 

Should  the  reader,  therefore,  at  any  time,  wish  to  view 
only  the  progress  of  that  unequalled  conflict  in  our  national 
history,  which  ended  in  the  English  Bible  being  given  to 
Britain,  and  extends  to  the  close  of  the  first  volume,  he  may 
do  so,  by  following  throughout  the  largest  letter  of  the  text ; 
but  if  to  understand  also  the  existing  state  of  the  nation  at 
the  moment,  or  those  circumstances  which  render  that  pro- 
gress doubly  striking,  the  smaller  type  must  not  be  omitted. 
While  thus   proceeding   from  year  to  year,  he  will  see  how 


XX  PREFACE. 

unavailing  were  all  the  efforts  of  human  malignity  ;  and  huw 
feeble  a  thing  is  human  nature,  though  armed  with  power 
and  pride,  when  striving  to  stem  the  progress  of  divine  truth. 
In  the  midst  of  enemies,  from  the  throne  downwards,  all  along 
shewn  to  be  so  contemptible  in  themselves,  when  the  moment 
fixed  for  victory  has  come,  the  reader  will  share  in  the 
triumphs  of  a  conquest  as  perfect,  as  it  seemed  improbable. 

But  even  from  the  commencement,  and  down  to  our  own 
times,  or  the  close  of  the  second  volume,  some  such  his- 
tory has  become  positively  essential  to  a  just  estimate  of 
our  present  peculiar  condition  as  a  Nation,  now  by  far  the 
most  responsible  under  heaven.  It  may,  and  it  will  fur- 
nish motives  to  action,  such  as  can  be  drawn  from  no 
other  retrospect.  It  forms  a  key,  if  not  the  only  one,  to 
our  highest  imperative  obligations ;  and  it  may  well  be  pon- 
dered, as  the  path  by  which  Jehovah  led  our  forefathers,  in  a 
way  of  his  own  devising,  with  more  than  "  the  pillar  of  a  cloud 
by  day,  and  a  pillar  of  fire  by  night."  In  this  view,  the  his- 
tory, though  never  written  before,  and  therefore  not  under- 
stood, can  never  be  out  of  date.  It  involves  the  commence- 
ment and  continuance  of  a  Cause,  which  is  but  pursuing  its 
course  in  our  own  day,  not  only  to  a  wider  extent,  but  with 
greater  energy  than  ever  before,  and  yet  to  be  pursued  with 
greater  still. 

In  conclusion,  the  author,  it  will  be  evident,  is  far  from 
placing  any  reliance  on  the  mei^e  dispersion  of  Bibles,  even  by 
the  million ;  but  although  no  man  can  measure  the  conse- 
quences of  the  immutable  standard  of  divine  truth  having 
been  exhibited  to  the  eye  of  this  nation,  the  spirit  of  the  age 
loudly  demands,  that  the  history  of  that  exhibition  should 
now  be  more  accurately  known.  Once  understood,  it  must  be 
left  to  the  judgment  of  every  discerning  reader,  whether,  at 
the  present  crisis,  in  such  unparalleled  possession  of  the 
Sacred  Volume,  British  Christians  can  close  their  eyes  with 
impunity  on  the  existing  state  of  other  nations — the  condi- 
tion of  a  world. 


Edinburgh, 

\dth  February  1845. 


CONTENTS 


THE    FIRST    VOLUME. 


INTRODUCTION. 

Brief  survey  of  the  ages  which  preceded  any  printing  of  the  Scrip- 
tures in  the  English  tongue — Including  the  revival  and  tri- 
umph of  classical  learning  and  the  arts,  contrasted  with  the 
times  of  Wickliffe,  with  his  version  of  the  entire  Sacred  Volume, 
and  its  effects — The  invention  of  printing,  its  rapid  progress  to 
perfection,  and  the  point  to  which  the  European  nations,  but 
more  especially  England  and  Scotland  had  been  brought, 
before  ever  this  invaluable  art  was  applied  to  any  version  of 
the  Sacred  Scriptures  in  the  language  spoken  by  the  people. 


Page 


THE  ANNALS 

OR 

HISTORY   OF  THE   ENGLISH   BIBLE. 

BOOK  L— ENGLAND. 
CI;e  iictfln  of  llenre  f^c  dSis'iitlf. 


SECTION  I.— 1484  ?-1509-1523. 

From  the  birth  of  Tyndale,  the  original  translator,  to  his  embarka- 
tion for  the  Continent,  in  pursuit  of  his  design,     ...  1 

SECTION  II.— 1524-1525. 

The  New  Testament  in  English  preparing  by  Tyndale,  for  circu- 
lation in  his  native  land  ;  and  in  two  editions  from  the  press  by 
the  close  of  1525 — State  of  England  immediately  before  the 
reception  of  either  edition,  ......  44 

VOL.  I.  c 


CONTENTS. 


Page 


SECTION  III.— 1526. 
Memorable  introduction  of  the  New  Testament  into  England — the 
first  two  editions — the  first  alarm  in  London,  Oxford,  Cambridge 
— the  first  burning  of  books — New  Testament  denounced  by  the 
King  and  Wolsey — then  by  Tunstal  and  Warham — The  Third 
Edition — Violent  contention  respecting  it — Burning  the  Sacred 
Volume,  abroad  and  at  home — but  all  this  fury  is  ineffectual,  87 

SECTION  IV.— 1527. 

The  Translator's  progress — His  earliest  compositions — Agitation  of 
Europe — Sack  of  Rome — Consequences — Persecution  in  England 
— Virulent  Opposition  to  the  New  Testament — Warham  and 
the  Bishops  buying  it  up — Fresh  importations — The  Fourth 
Edition — Scriptures  singularly  introduced  once  more,    .  .        134 

SECTION  v.— 1528. 

Tyndale  and  Fryth — England  and  Spain — England  and  Italy — Re- 
trospect— Present  persecution  in  England — Arrested  by  pre- 
vailing disease — Persecution  in  Antwerp — Nobly  withstood, 
and  the  English  Envoy  defeated — Wolsey's  pursuit  after  Tyn- 
dale and  others — His  efforts  are  all  in  vain,  .  .  .166 

SECTION  VI.— 1529. 

Tyndale's  progress  in  the  Old  Testament — Persecution  in  Eng- 
land— Thwarted  once  more — Tunstal  at  Antwerp — Wolsey's 
career — Tyndale's  influence  in  the  Palace — Craumer  first  em- 
ployed— Wolsey's  fall — Lord  Chancellor  More — Rise  of  Crum- 
well — Parliament  assembled — Commotion  there — More,  the 
Bishops,  and  the  King,  in  league  against  the  Scriptures— Co v- 
erdale  sent  to  Hamburgh — Another  or  fifth  edition  of  the 
New  Testament,  so  dreaded  by  the  authorities,         .  .  .     208 

SECTION  VII.— 1530. 

Tyndale's  progress  in  the  Old  Testament — Practice  of  prelates — 
State  of  England — Wolsey's  final  ruin,  sickness,  death — Perse- 
cution goes  on — King  and  prelates  denounce  the  Scriptures — 
Latimer's  bold  remonstrance — New  Testaments  burnt  by  Tun- 
stal— Another,  the  sixth  edition — Vigorous  importation  going 
forward — Death  of  S.  Fyshe,  .  .  .  .  .  .241 

SECTION  VIIL— 1531. 

Formidable  opposition — Pursuit  after  Tyndale  by  the  King  and 
Crumwell — Still  in  vain — Tyndale's  answer  to  Sir  T.  More — 
Epistle  of  John  expounded — Jonah,  with  a  prologue — Critical 


CONTENTS.  xxiii 

state  of  England — Renewed  persecution — Brother  of  Tyndale 
— Bilney  —  Bayfield — Many  books  importing — Constantyne 
caught — Escapes — Persecution  abroad — Powerful  remonstrance 
from  Antwerp,  by  Vaughan  the  English  ambassador,  with 
Crumwell,  including  the  King  and  the  Lord  Chancellor  More,       266 

SECTION  IX.— 1532. 

Tyndale's  progress — Exposition  in  Matthew — His  sentiments 
under  persecution — The  King  not  appeased — Renewed  pursuit 
of  Tyndale — Now  by  Sir  Thomas  Elyot — Still  in  vain — State 
of  England — Parliament — The  Bishops  fined — The  King's  af- 
fairs— Persecution  goes  on — Bainham — Latimer — More  against 
Tyndale — Fryth  arrives  in  England — In  peril — In  the  Tower 
— Writing  there  in  defence  of  the  truth,  and  addressing  the 
Christians  in  England,  .  .  .  .  .  .  .315 

^SECTION  X.— 1533. 

One  distinguishing  feature  of  Tyndale's  course  and  character  as 
compared  with  all  his  contemporaries — His  answer  to  Sir  T.  More 
— His  letter  to  Fryth  in  prison — State  of  England — Fryth's 
voice  from  the  Tower — Strange  condition  of  England — The  King 
married — Craumer's  procedure — Gardiner  roused — Fryth's  ex- 
amination before  the  Bishops  assembled — His  triumph  in  argu- 
ment— Martyrdom — England  and  the  Continent — One  efiect 
of  Fryth's  death — Sir  T.  More  writing  still — One  powerful  op- 
ponent at  home — More,  considered  as  a  controversialist — His 
prodigious  exertions — Other  qualities — Finally  overcome — The 
prospect  is  rather  brightening,       ......     350 

SECTION  XL— 1534. 

Tyndale  all  alone  after  Fryth's  death — Genesis,  second  edition — 
Fresh  issue  of  the  Pentateuch — Surreptitious  edition  of  the 
New  Testament  by  Joye — The  corrected  and  improved  edition 
by  Tyndale — Joye's  interference  explained — State  of  England 
— Parliament  assembled — Separation  from  Rome — Constructive 
treason — More  and  Fisher  in  trouble — The  Pontiff's  supremacy 
at  an  end — The  import  of  that  event  equally  misunderstood  in 
England,  by  sovereign  and  subject — Divine  truth  in  progress — 
Richard  Harman,  an  early  importer  of  New  Testaments,  is  now 
in  London — Restored  to  favour  by  the  Queen — Glance  at  the 
past  and  present — The  New  Testament  importing  in  several  edi- 
tions, in  forcible  contrast  with  the  idle  dreams  of  the  Convocation,     391 


xxiv  CONTENTS, 


Page 


SECTION  XII.— 1535. 
Tyndale's  apprehension  at  Antwerp — Imprisonment  in  the  Castle 
of  Vilvorde — Distinct  information  conveyed  to  Crumwell  and 
Cranmer — The  strenuous  exertions  of  Thomas  Poyntz — Risking 
his  own  life  for  Tyndale's  sake — Tyndale's  progress  in  prison — 
State  of  England — Key  to  its  commotion — Henry's  supremacy — ' 
Fisher  and  More  fall  before  it — The  odium  ensuing — The  visita- 
tion of  Monasteries — Cranmer  and  the  Bishops — Cranmer  and 
Gardiner  in  collision — The  latter  offending — His  dexterity  or 
address — He  is  translating  Lvike  and  John  ! — Gardiner  and  Pole 
— Spain — France — German  States,  and  Barnes  as  envoy — The 
Bishops  applied  to  for  a  translation  of  the  New  Testament — A 
fruitless  attempt — And  in  contrast  once  more,  with  fresh  edi- 
tions of  Tyndale's  translation,  printed  and  importing  this  year,      416 

SECTION  XIII.— 1536. 

Last  year  of  Tyndale — State  of  England — Monasteries — The  two 
Queens — Anne  Boleyn — Mock  trial — Queen  executed — Scene 
succeeding — The  new  or  unprecedented  Parliament — Queen 
Anne's  treatment  reviewed — Her  character — The  new  or  un- 
precedented Convocation — Latimer  preaching  before  it — State 
of  parties  there — Old  and  new  learning — Proceedings  in  Con- 
vocation— The  first  articles — Crumwell's  first  injunctions — No 
Bible  mentioned — 

Tyndale's  latter  days — Phillips  once  more — Cold  indifference  of 
England — The  Court  of  Brussels — Home  and  abroad  now  deeply 
implicated — The  martyrdom  of  Tyndale — His  benevolent  cha- 
racter— His  reward — Poyntz,  the  friend  of  Tyndale — Future 
history  of  the  miserable  betrayers — State  of  the  Continent  at 
the  time  of  Tyndale's  death — State  of  England  and  her  King 
— The  only  prosperous  cause,  or  the  year  which  excelled  all 
the  preceding — Nine  or  ten  editions  of  Tyndale's  Testament,         457 

SECTION  XIV.— 1537. 
Memorable  introduction  of  the  entire  Sacred  Volume — Myles  Co- 
verdale — His  circumstances  compared  with  Tyndale's — Cover- 
dale's  temporary  success — The  remarkably  sudden  change — 
Tyndale's  Bible — State  of  England  before  its  introduction — 
Cranmer's  previous  engagements — Tyndale's  Bible  arrived — 
Immediately  received — Must  be  bought  and  read — The  King 
agrees — This  at  first  seems  to  be  incredible — Grafton  the  pro- 
prietor— All  parties  most  memorably  overruled — Distinction 
between  the  Bible  rejected  and  the  Bible  received — Conclusion 
of  the  first  year  of  triumph,  ......      551 


INTRODUCTION. 


BRIEF    SURVEY    OF   THE   AGES    WHICH     PRECEDED    ANY    PRINTING   OF    THE 

SCRIPTURES    IN    THE    ENGLISH    TONGUE INCLUDING   THE    REVIVAL   AND 

TRIUMPH  OF  CLASSICAL  LEARNING  AND  THE  ARTS,  CONTRASTED  WITH 
THE  TIMES   OF  WICKLIFFE,   WITH   HIS   VERSION  OF    THE    ENTIRE   SACRED 

VOLUME,    AND    ITS    EFFECTS THE    INVENTION  OF    PRINTING,    ITS    RAPID 

PROGRESS  TO  PERFECTION,  AND  THE  POINT  TO  WHICH  THE  EUROPEAN 
NATIONS,  BUT  MORE  ESPECIALLY  ENGLAND  AND  SCOTLAND  HAD  BEEN 
BROUGHT,  BEFORE  EVER  THIS  INVALUABLE  ART  WAS  APPLIED  TO  ANY 
VERSION  OF  THE  SACRED  SCRIPTURES  IN  THE  LANGUAGE  SPOKEN  BY 
THE  PEOPLE. 

The  darkest  hour  in  the  night  of  Europe,  is  an  era  respecting 
which  historians  are  not  even  yet  agreed.  It  has  been  regarded  by 
many  as  being  in  the  tenth  century.  One  or  two  other  writers 
consider  the  seventh  or  eighth  century  to  be  the  lowest  in  point  of 
depression,  or  the  nadir  of  the  human  mind ;  and  they  suppose 
that  its  movement  in  advance  began  with  Charlemagne,  while 
England  can  never  forget  her  own  Alfred  the  Great.  A  few  mo- 
derns, too  fastidious,  or  by  no  means  so  affected  by  the  gloom  and 
barbarity  of  the  middle  ages,  profess  to  be  tender  of  allowance  as  to 
the  extent  of  this  darkness,  and  would  fondly  persuade  us  to  adopt 
a  more  cheerful  retrospect.  But  speaking,  generally,  with  refer- 
ence to  the  people  at  large,  the  entire  period,  from  the  fifth  or 
sixth  to  the  fourteenth  century,  presents  at  the  best,  but  a  tedious 
and  dreary  interval  in  the  history  of  the  human  mind.  Individual 
scholars,  indeed,  like  stars  which  shed  their  light  on  the  surround- 
ing gloom,  there  ever  were ;  and  wherever  there  existed  any 
marked  regard  for  Sacred  writ,  in  the  vernacular  tongue,  there  the 
life-spark  of  Christianity  was  preserved.  The  Albigenses,  the 
Waldenses,  and  other  parties,  might  be  adduced  in  proof;  the  per- 
secution and  dispersion  of  whom,  had  considerable  influence  in  dif- 
fusing the  light  which  its  enemies  laboured  to  extinguish. 


xxvi  INTRODUCTION. 

It  was  not,  however,  till  after  a  long  and  profound  sleep  through- 
out the  dreams  and  visions  of  the  middle  ages,  that  the  human  mind 
was  at  last  effectually  roused  to  action  ;  and  in  none  of  the  countries 
throughout  Europe  more  decidedly  than  in  Italy  and  England. 
But  still,  for  some  great  moral  j^urpose,  worthy  of  infinite  wisdom, 
and  to  be  afterwards  disclosed,  that  mind,  throughout  all  these 
western  kingdoms,  was  first  to  be  permitted  to  discover  what  was 
the  utmost  vigour  of  its  native  strength. 

First  came  the  age  of  the  chisel,  and  the  painter's  pencil,  and  the 
pen,  not  to  say  of  the  music  of  the  human  voice.  Those  stupendous 
fabrics,  which  began  to  be  erected  from  the  tenth  to  the  twelfth 
centuries,  in  which  the  massive  dullness  of  the  Lombards,  was  giv- 
ing way  to  the  influence  of  the  Saracens  of  Spain,  still  stand  out  in 
proof,  that  many  hands  were  already  busy,  under  the  guidance  of 
some  presiding  ingenious  mind.  Literature  and  the  fine  arts,  more 
especially  classical  learning,  painting,  and  sculpture,  were  then 
to  enjoy  that  triumph,  the  spoils  of  which  now  adorn  the  walls 
of  every  palace,  as  well  as  the  cabinets  and  libraries,  the  gal- 
leries and  public  rooms  of  every  city  in  Europe.  This  triumph, 
too,  must  take  place  in  Italy,  or  in  the  very  seat  of  that  ex- 
traordinary power  which  had  ruled  for  ages,  with  unmeasured 
sway,  over  all  the  west ;  for,  throughout  the  long  preceding  night,  it 
could  never  be  said  that  Rome  herself  had  been  either  asleep  or  in- 
active. The  Eternal  City,  as  it  was  styled,  the  Lady  of  Kingdoms, 
like  the  Assyrian  of  old,  having  "  found  out  as  a  nest  the  riches  of 
the  people ;  as  one  gathereth  eggs  that  are  left,  so  had  she  gathered 
all  the  earth  ;"  and,  generally  speaking,  it  was  only  here  and  there 
tliat  some  solitary  individual  "  moved  the  wing,  or  opened  the 
mouth,  or  peeped." 

There  was,  however,  one  singular  peculiarity  belonging  to  this 
power.  Ruling  over  the  mind,  its  vigour  seemed  to  increase  with  its 
remoteness  from  the  seat  of  government ;  and  the  thunders  of  the 
Vatican,  unlike  those  of  nature,  often  struck  terror  in  proportion  to 
the  distance  at  which  they  were  heard.  This  much  at  least  is  cer- 
tain, that  though  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  formed  the  utmost  con- 
fines of  that  power  on  the  west,  there  was  no  country  between  these 
islands  and  Italy  where  the  Roman  Pontiff  felt  such  confidence  of  his 
strength,  nor  one  which  was  more  harassed  and  oppressed  by  his  pe- 
cuniary exactions.  The  western  states  of  Europe,  even  the  most  re- 
mote, had,  indeed,  all  couched  down  under  their  burdens,  and  that 
for  ages,  before  the  full  claims  of  the  Rota,  or  pontifical  conclave, 
were  admitted  upon  Italian  ground.  Nor  is  this  mystery  inexpli- 
cable. Kings,  however  despotic,  had  by  degrees  been  moulded  to 
subjection ;  but  the  stern  Republics  of  Italy,  composed  of  a  metal 


VENICE,  IN  ITS  ORIGIN.  xxvii 

least  of  all  malleable,  long  remained  hard,  unbending,  and  most  vex- 
atious neighbours.  To  say  nothing  of  Florence,  Pisa,  or  Genoa,  it  is 
well  known  that  even  in  the  diocese  of  Italy,  properly  so  called,  the 
Milanese  had  resisted  the  claims  of  the  Pontiff  down  to  the  eleventh 
century ;  and  during  the  twelfth,  tlie  country  was  covered  with 
cities  still  tightiug  for  liberty ;  but  that,  so  very  near  to  Rome, 
there  should  have  been  such  a  power  or  form  of  government  as  that 
of  Venice,  at  once  arrests  attention  as  by  far  the  most  extraordinary 
point  in  European  history.  As  this  remarkable  State,  less  than  two 
hundred  and  fifty  miles  distant  from  Rome  itself,  "  arose  before  the 
old  empire  of  Rome  was  swept  away,  endured  through  the  barbarism 
of  the  northern  irruptions,  as  well  as  through  all  the  darkness  ensu- 
ing, and  was  only  extinguished  by  Napoleon  within  our  own  times, 
its  history  forms  a  connecting  chain,  if  not  the  only  one  that  can 
now  be  traced,  between  the  Europe  of  the  Romans,  of  the  middle 
ages,  and  of  modern  history."^  AVith  its  internal  feuds  we  do  not 
interfere;  but  no  survey,  however  brief,  can  be  complete  where  Ve- 
nice is  overlooked.^ 

An  insignificant  band  of  fugitives,  in  the  fifth  century,  took  pos- 
session of  the  rocks  and  little  islands  on  the  north-west  shores  of  the 
Adriatic  sea.  Cut  oft'  from  all  possessions  on  the  mainland,  not  pos- 
sessing one  foot  of  laud  there  for  eight  hundred  years,  but  surround- 
ed by  their  own  marshes,  they  were  at  first  ruled  by  magistrates 
sent  down  from  Padua.  This  people,  resolved  to  provide  for  their 
own  security,  form  a  government  for  themselves.  "  Detestation  of 
the  despotic  authority  or  government  of  one  man,  and  an  inflexible 
determination  to  remain  a  sepai'ate  and  distinct  people,  were  the  two 
principles  by  which  the  Venetians  were  guided,  and  upon  which 
they  continued  to  act  with  the  steadiness  and  success  of  a  natural 
principle."  At  the  close  of  the  seventh  century,  indeed,  they  elect- 
ed a  chief  magistrate,  (the  Doge,  Dux,  or  Duke,)  whose  ottice  was 
to  continue  for  life,  and  the  people  to  choose  his  successor ;  but  his 
powers,  though  vast,  were  rendered  next  to  nominal  by  those  of  the 
Council  and  the  other  magistrates.  AVithout  his  Council  the  Doge 
durst  not  open  an  oflicial  letter,  and  much  less  do  any  thing  ofiicial. 
Yet  here,  and  at  a  moment  when  every  prince  in  Europe  was  a  vas- 
sal to  the  Emperor,  either  of  the  East  or  West,  the  Venetians,  un- 
subdued, were  rising  to  greater  opulence  and  strength.  Though 
Pepin  fought  against  them  with  all  his  strength,  they  conquered,  and 

'  As  early  as  the  year  12fi8,  a  law  passed  in  Venice,  enjoining  the  Ambassadors  of  the  Re- 
public to  note  down  and  communicate  whatever  they  could  observe,  and  these  curious  as  well 
as  valuable  reports,  well  known  as  the  Venetian  Rlazioni,  referring  to  all  the  courts  of  Eu- 
rope, continued  from  time  to  time  for  above  five  hundred  years.  The  last,  full  of  striking  and 
accurate  information,  relates  to  the  commencement  of  the  French  Revolution  in  1792.— Rankc. 

2  For  most  of  these  facts  as  to  Venice  we  are  indebted  to  Daru  or  Sismondi,  and  an  able  ar- 
ticle on  the  Venetian  constitution  in  the  Edinburgh  Review,  vol.  xlvi. 


xxviii  INTRODUCTION.  [xiii.  CENT. 

put  ail  end  to  all  claims  on  their  allegiance  ;  Charlemagne  had  no 
choice  left  except  to  declare  them  independent. 

At  a  much  later  period  when  we  turn  to  Rome  under  successive 
Pontiffs,  and  their  insatiable  thirst  for  power  ;  while  the  Doge  of 
Venice  convoked  the  people,  whether  from  the  different  islands  or 
the  districts  of  the  capital,  for  the  purpose  of  choosing  their  own 
pastors  and  bishops  ;  not  one  of  whom,  by  fixed  and  original  laws, 
could  hold  any  civil  office,  whether  of  honour  or  emolument ;  to 
him  belonged  the  power  of  installing  these  Bishops,  as  well  as  of 
awarding  all  ecclesiastical  punishments.  The  assertion  of  such 
rights,  of  course,  could  not  be  easily  maintained,  and  more  espe- 
cially in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  power  which  had  determined  to 
overshadow  all  the  earth :  but  as  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth 
century  may  be  truly  regarded  as  the  twilight  of  a  better  day, 
Venice,  amidst  her  own  rocks  in  the  sea,  will  serve  as  a  contrast  to 
the  entire  surface  of  Europe,  and  prove  the  extent  to  which  she  had 
still  secured  her  independence. 

THE  THIRTEENTH  CENTURY. 

In  our  own  country,  at  the  commencement  of  this  century,  poor 
King  John  was  actually  promising  to  make  his  kingdom  tributary 
to  the  Pontiff,  with  a  proffer  of  not  less  than  a  thousand  merks,  or 
a  sum  equal  to  £20,000  now,  over  and  above  the  old  tribute :  and 
although  the  Barons  soon  after  wrested  Magna  Charta  from  him,  to 
shew  how  low  the  kingdom  had  sunk,  we  find  the  Pontiff,  at  this 
same  John's  request,  annulling  the  proceedings.  The  great  char- 
ters, it  is  true,  w^ere  confirmed  by  his  successor,  Henry  III. ;  but 
the  power  of  Rome  was  growing  every  day  during  his  fifty-six 
years  reign.  It  was  then  that  the  Pontiff  was  exclaiming — "  Truly, 
England  is  our  garden  of  delight !  It  is  an  unexhausted  well !  and 
where  so  much  abounds,  much  may  be  acquired."  No  wonder  that 
he  thus  exulted,  when  his  income  from  England  was  three  times  as 
much  as  that  of  the  King  on  the  throne."^  But,  above  all,  in  proof 
of  the  Pontiff's  power  towards  the  west,  this  was  the  era  of  that 
detestable  persecution  of  the  Albigenses,  pursued  with  such  hideous 
cruelty.  The  execrable  measure,  in  which  plunder  was  the  grand 
object,  was  counselled,  planned,  and  commanded  by  Rome. 

Now,  if  we  seek  for  any  relieving  contrast  throughout  the  entire 
century,  it  is  to  Italy  itself  that  we  must  turn  our  eye.  Even  in 
the  neighbouring  Republic  of  Florence,  it  is  true,  amidst  the  sur- 
rounding gloom,  Dante  had  begun  to  sing,  in  his  own  style,  about 


3  Under  Innocent  IV.  his  revenue  from  England  yiim  70,000  merks,  that  of  the  Crown  was 
not  30,000.— Grosskstc.    After  this  it  went  on  increasing.— il/.  raris,  Flares  Histor. 


THE  REPUBLIC  OF  VENICE.  xxix 

paradise  and  the  infernal  regions,  not  forgetting  to  intermingle  cer- 
tain severe  allusions  with  his  poem ;  and,  besides  this,  there  was  his 
treatise  "  JMonarchla,"  distinctly  hostile  to  the  claims  of  liome  :  but 
for  the  bolder  contrast  to  the  sentiments  of  all  Europe,  we  must 
look  to  Venice.  It  is  admitted  that  in  the  commencement  of  this  cen- 
tury the  Venetians  had  chosen  to  apply  to  Rome  for  an  indulgence, 
but  this  was  merely  to  facilitate  a  treaty  with  the  Caliphs  of  Egypt. 
Eager  to  I'etain  their  commerce  with  the  East  Indies,  they  wished  to 
open  a  communication  between  the  Nile  and  the  Red  Sea ;  and  had 
they  succeeded,  perhaj)s  the  trade  might  never  have  passed  from  their 
hands.  Still,  this  application  betrayed  no  disposition  to  bow  alle- 
giance. On  the  contrary,  this  ancient  Republic  had  reigned,  for 
more  than  two  centuries,  as  Lords-paramount  of  the  Adriatic  :  and 
although  that  gulf  washed  the  shores  of  various  States,  those  of  the 
Rommi  Church  among  the  number,  not  one  of  them  dared  to  navi- 
gate it,  or  even  fish  in  its  waters,  without  a  license  from  Venice,  for 
which  they  paid  a  heavy  tribute.  When  one  sovereign  Pontiff  pre- 
sumed to  inquire,  by  what  right  they  pretended  to  domineer  there, 
the  brief  reply  given  was — "  That  sea  is  ours." 

But  the  sea  would  not  suffice  any  longer  as  the  bounds  of  their 
sovereignty ;  and,  therefore,  about  the  middle  of  this  century,  they 
began  to  acquire  land.  Arvi  in  Romagna  was  taken  under  their 
special  protection,  much  in  the  same  style  as  the  provinces  of  India 
have  since  been  taken  under  that  of  Britain.  This  place  belonged 
to  the  Church,  and  that  in  the  opinion  of  the  Emperor  ;  but  even  he 
said  not  a  word.  It  so  happened,  too,  that  the  Venetians  did  not 
approve  of  any  ecclesiastic  engaging  in  war,  and  if  he  did,  at  their 
hands  he  must  abide  the  consequences.  The  Captains-General  of 
the  Pontiff's  troops,  were  dignitaries  of  his  Church.  Such  a  pri- 
soner being  taken,  with  his  crosier,  sceptre,  and  sword ;  the  Vene- 
tians condemned  him  to  ride,  sitting  backwards,  on  a  mule,  and  pre- 
ceded by  the  common  crier,  proclaiming — "  Behold  the  wicked 
priest,  who  displeased  God  in  his  life,  and  was  taken  in  iniquity." 
Such  a  proceeding,  in  the  year  1274,  had  no  parallel  in  any  other 
part  of  Europe. 

It  was  little  more  than  seven  years  after  this  when  the  Pontiff, 
Martin  IV.,  having,  in  his  customary  style,  given  the  sovereignty 
of  Naples  to  Charles  of  Anjou,  and  proclaimed  a  crusade  against  the 
lawful  heir,  chose  also  to  excommunicate  the  Venetians  because  they 
would  not  unite  in  the  outrage.  But  was  the  result  similar  to  that 
which  ensued,  in  all  other  nations  ?  On  the  contrary,  for  three  long 
years,  no  priests  officiated,  no  prayers  were  offered  in  their  churches, 
and  without  yielding,  they  allowed  the  Pontiff  to  die !  His 
successor,  Honorius  IV.,  at  last  succeeded,  and  removed  the  inter- 


XXX  INTRODUCTION.  [xill.  CENT. 

diet.  There  had  indeed  been  one  condition,  and  that  was  no  other 
than  that  the  Inquisition  should  be  admitted.  But  here,  again,  the 
terms  were  unprecedented,  triumphantly  sufficient  to  destroy  its 
character,  and  point  out  Venice  as  an  exception,  if  not  a  signal,  to 
all  other  countries.  The  negotiation  for  this  end,  had,  in  all  cases, 
no  other  than  political  objects  in  view,  and  the  Court  of  Rome  had 
persevered  with  Venice  throughout  the  successive  reigns  of  ten  Pon- 
tiffs ;  but  the  termination  only  shewed  the  superior  sagacity  and 
continued  power  of  the  Republic.  Thus — if  three  ecclesiastics  were 
to  take  cognizance  of  heresy  there,  then  they  must  be  subject  to  the 
control  of  magistrates  chosen  by  the  Great  Council  ;  and  if  there 
were  to  be  three  such  judges,  one  of  them  must  be  a  natural  subject 
of  the  Republic,  the  Bishop  of  Venice.  But  again,  if  these  three 
men  were  to  derive  authority  from  the  Pontiff,  then  they  could  not 
sit  down  on  their  tribunal,  without  a  commission  in  writing  from 
the  Doge.  If  they  were  to  convict  of  heresy  in  any  instance,  then 
every  Jew  and  even  Turk  must  be  free,  as  not  belonging  to  the 
Pontiff's  community ;  nay,  and  every  member  of  the  Greek  Church, 
as  their  controversy  with  Rome  was  still  undecided.  Moreover,  no 
usurer  was  to  be  seized  by  them,  though  one  of  the  most  desirable 
of  all  characters ;  because,  though  violating  the  precepts  of  religion, 
he  did  not  dispute  its  dogmas  ;  no  blasphemer,  because  though  guilty 
of  irreverence,  he  was  not  of  schism  or  innovation  ;  nor  even  any 
bigamist,  because  the  second  marriage  was  a  violation  of  a  civil 
bond.  In  short,  at  a  period  distinguished  for  general  blindness  or 
pusillanimity,  here  was  one  exception  to  both.  The  Venetians  ne- 
gotiated with  their  eyes  open,  and  were  not  to  be  outwitted.  The 
interests  of  commerce  were  with  them  superior  to  every  other  con- 
sideration, and  to  preserve  it  from  all  injury  or  vexatious  interrup- 
tion, the  sovereign  Pontiff  himself  must  still  keep  his  distance. 

The  century  closed  at  Venice  by  a  marked  alteration  in  this 
singular  Government,  or  the  exchange  of  the  Republican  form  for 
that  hereditary  and  severe  Aristocracy,  which  became  the  diploma- 
tic model  of  its  day.  But  it  is  unnecessary  to  pursue  the  subject 
farther.  We  have  come  to  the  commencement  of  another  century, 
and  our  assertion  thus  far  is  proved.  The  Pontiff  and  his  fellows, 
had  been  all  along  more  potent  at  a  distance,  than  at  home  under 
their  native  sky ;  aud  the  one  great  lesson  afforded  by  the  Italian 
Republics,  and  especially  Venice,  was  this,  that  the  power  of 
Rome,  when  at  its  height,  was  resistible.  This  too  becomes  still 
more  worthy  of  notice,  inasmuch  as  the  freedom  enjoyed  in  these 
commercial  states  was  not  that  which  we  now  understand  by  the 
term — far  from  it.  In  numerous  instances,  the  lives,  the  property 
and  even  the  honour  of  the  citizens  were  not  secured  ;  but  in  ages 


THE  ITALIAN  SCHOOL  OF   LETTERS.  xxxi 

when  the  reason  of  mankind  had  been  subdued,  and  their  rulers 
were  reduced  to  vassals,  these  lesser  communities,  under  an  Italian 
sky,  had  proved  what  reason  and  the  power  of  resistance  could  do. 
Two  hundred  years  before  Henry  the  Eighth  was  born,  Venice  had 
shewn  that  Rome's  loudest  thunder  might  fall  innocuous  to  the 
ground.  Immovable  and  unshaken,  and  though  uniting  some  of 
the  most  odious  practices  of  despotism  with  the  name  of  liberty,  yet 
bent  upon  securing  certain  rights,  and  prosperity  to  commerce,  a 
mere  handful  of  people  in  the  adjoining  sea  had  continued  to  testify 
to  the  millions  of  Europe,  that  the  power  they  so  much  dreaded 
might  be  braved  with  impunity. 

Thus  terminated  the  thirteenth  century,  but  we  are  still  more 
than  two  hundred  years  distant  from  the  period  when  the  Sacred 
Scriptures  were  first  printed  in  the  vernacular  tongue ;  and  yet 
both  centuries  may  now  be  viewed  with  considerable  advantage  as 
an  approach  or  gradual  introduction  to  that  important  event. 

THE  FOURTEENTH  CENTURY. 

In  the  course  of  the  fourteenth  century,  whether  we  look  to  Ger- 
many, to  Italy,  or  our  own  country,  the  events  are  equally  interest- 
ing, and  full  of  promise.  Within  the  first  of  these,  the  influence  of 
that  singular  confederation,  called  the  "  Hanse  Towns,"  had  begun 
to  be  felt.  The  league,  by  this  time,  included  more  than  sixty 
cities.  These  had  commerce  for  their  common  object  or  bond  of 
union ;  but  they  were  the  germs  of  future  freedom,  and  ultimately 
contributed,  in  no  inferior  degree,  to  the  protection  of  individual 
rights.  Thus  early  was  Divine  Providence  in  operation  with  a 
view  to  a  better  day.  At  the  same  time,  nothing  can  be  more 
natural  than  that  an  Italian  author  should  claim  for  his  country  the 
precedence  of  all  other  nations,  whether  as  to  the  science  of  govern- 
ment, or  the  revival  of  learning.  He  is  well  entitled  to  speak  out ; 
and  on  account  of  the  result,  he  ought  to  be  first  heard,  not  only  in 
this,  but  more  especially  in  the  next,  or  the  fifteenth  century. 

"  The  science  of  governing  men  for  their  advantage,"  says  one  of 
the  ablest  native  authorities,  "  of  developing  their  individual  facul- 
ties, intellectual  and  moral,  for  their  greater  happiness — that  politi- 
cal philosophy,  began  in  Europe  only  with  the  Italian  Republics  of 
the  middle  ages,  and  from  thence  diffused  itself  over  other  nations." 
Again,  "  The  Italians,  in  the  fourteenth  century,  discovered,  as  it 
were  anew  the  ancient  world  :  they  felt  an  affinity  of  thoughts, 
hopes,  and  tastes  with  the  best  Latin  writers,  which  inspired  them 
with  the  highest  admiration.  Petrarch,  and  particularly  Boccaccio, 
passed  from  this  study  to  that  of  Grecian  antiquity ;  and  on  the 
solicitation  of  the  latter,  the  Republic  of  Florence  in  1360  founded 


xxxii  INTRODUCTION.  [^xiv.  CENT. 

a  chair  of  Grecian  literature,  the  first  in  the  west/  A  passion  for 
erudition  sjiread  from  one  end  of  Italy  to  the  other,  with  an  ardour 
proportionable  to  the  dark  ignorance  of  the  preceding  centuries.  It 
was  imagined  that  all  knowledge  consisted  in  knowing  and  imitating 
the  ancient  masters.  The  highest  glory  was  attached  to  classical 
learning;  and  Petrarch  and  Boccaccio  attained  a  degree  of  cele- 
brity, credit,  and  power,  unequalled  by  any  other  men  in  the  mid- 
dle ages — not  by  reason  of  those  merits  which  we  feel  at  the  present 
day,  but  as  the  pontiffs  and  interpreters  of  antiquity." 

"  We  owe  to  the  learned  of  the  fourteenth  century,  and  to  their 
school,  a  deep  sentiment  of  gratitude.  They  discovered  and  rendered 
intelligible  to  us  all  the  chefs  d'oeuvre  of  antiquity.  Fragments  only 
of  classic  works  remained,  scattered  throughout  Europe,  and  on  the 
point  of  being  lost.  These  learned  men  of  Italy  collected,  collated,  and 
explained  them  ;  without  their  antiquarian  zeal,  all  the  experience 
of  past  ages,  all  the  models  of  taste,  all  the  great  works  of  genius, 
would  never  have  reached  us,  and  probably,  without  such  guides,  we 
should  never  have  attained  the  point  on  which  we  now  stand,"^ 

In  thus  writing,  the  author,  of  course,  had  in  his  eye,  not  only 
the  close  of  the  fourteenth,  but  the  greater  part  of  the  fifteenth  cen- 
tury, when  Italy,  in  truth,  became  the  garden  of  literature  and  the 
arts,  the  wonder  and  delightful  resort  of  the  learned  throughout  Eu- 
rope. As  a  fact,  it  is  of  imj^ortance,  not  only  to  concede,  but  observe 
this,  and  let  the  precedence  be  fully  understood  as  holding  a  place  in 
the  course  of  events  about  to  transpire.  The  learning  and  refine- 
ment of  Italy,  about  to  assume  that  position  in  history  which  the 
wisdom  of  Greece  had  done  in  the  days  of  old,  must  enjoy  her  long 
reign  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  without  any  superior.  Now  that 
the  human  mind  is  waking  up, let  the  Italian  "  ima<jine  that  all  know- 
ledge consisted  in  knowing  and  imitating  the  ancient  masters,"  and 
let  "  the  highest  glory  be  attached  to  classical  learning ; "  let  the 


4  The  first  lecturer  was  Leo,  or  Leontius  Pilatus,  who  filled  the  chair,  however,  only  three 
years.  In  returning  to  Italy  by  sea,  after  revisiting  Greece,  the  ship  was  caught  in  a  tempest. 
Leo  had  lashed  himself  to  the  mast,  hut  was  killed  by  lightning. — Bcriiifflon's  Middle  Apes. 

6  SisMONDi.  Such  is  the  exultation  of  the  Italian  author.  At  the  same  time  it  must  be  borne 
in  mind,  that  certain  learned  men,  far  to  the  west,  had  not  been  left  ignorant  at  least  of  i)ne  facts 
recorded  in  Greek  authors.  The  Arabic  translations,  and  Latin  from  the  Arabic,  in  the  twelfth 
century,  however  barbarous  in  style,  might  have  compensated  as  to  the  scientific  facts,  though 
the  Greek  classics  had  been  lost.  At  least  so  Scaliger  insisted.  These  were  being  read,  and 
discover  a  thirst  after  Greek  science,  even  in  Spain.  There  the  Jew  as  well  as  the  Saracen 
had  been  striving  to  excel,  and  it  has  been  remarked  by  Forster,  that  as  Isaac  and  Ishmael 
met  together  as  brethren,  at  the  (/j'ai'c  of  Abraham,  their  common  father,  so,  after  many  ages, 
the  posterity  of  both  had  met,  not  to  destroy  each  other,  but  to  display  the  full  extent  of  their 
intellectual  power.  Under  the  Caliphs,  instead  of  the  canonical  policy  of  proselyting  by  the 
sword,  both  Saracen  and  Jew  were  permitted  to  try  the  efficacy  of  the  pen.  Their  career,  how- 
ever, was  soon  run,  and  whatever  may  be  said  of  architecture,  as  to  literature,  ccrtahily  little 
or  no  decided  progress  was  made  till  the  Italians  had  studied  and  translated  the  Greek  ori- 
fiinals.  Then,  whatever  had  been  dark  or  mysterious  throughout  the  middle  ages,  became 
clear  and  defined. 


THE  RISING  CLAIMS  OF  ENGLAND.  xxxiii 

"  chief  works  of  antiquity  be  rendered  intelligible,"  and  the  men  of 
Italy  "  collect,  collate,  and  explain  them."  In  short,  as  Greece  is 
coming  to  the  assistance  of  Rome,  and  "  the  groat  masters"  must 
first  rise  to  show  the  extent  of  their  powers ;  since  the  former,  at 
the  commencement  of  the  Christian  era,  had  stood  in  a  peculiar 
relation  to  the  surrounding  nations — so,  let  Italy  now  stand  in  the 
same  relation  to  Europe.  Distinguished  for  classical  learning,  and 
first  in  the  arts,  if  not  the  sciences,  she  claims  to  be  the  well-spring 
of  all  the  less  civilized  nations  in  the  west.  Minute  criticism  may 
here  be  dispensed  with,  nor  does  any  admirer  of  the  Sacred  Volume 
need  to  object  to  the  fullest  concession.  Let  Dante  and  Petrarch 
for  the  moment,  and  Boccaccio  and  Poggio  Bracciolini  lead  the  way. 

In  all  this,  however,  it  must  now  be  granted  in  return,  there  was 
literally  nothing  of  Divine  light,  properly  so  called — no  reverent, 
distinct  approach  to  the  Sacred  Volume  ;  and  this  becomes  the  more 
observable,  as  the  only  country  in  Europe  to  which  we  can  look  for 
this,  was  that  which,  of  all  others,  was  held  in  greatest  contempt  by 
Italy;  to  say  nothing  of  its  being  at  once  the  most  distant  from  Rome, 
if  not  also  the  most  oppressed  by  that  power.  This  was  no  other 
than  our  native  land.  Bracciolini,  the  last  of  these  Italian  scholars, 
had  actually  visited  it,  and  viewed  this  country  with  chagrin,  if  not 
disdain,  when  compared  with  the  enthusiastic  love  of  classical  litera- 
ture which  polished  and  adorned  his  country.^ 

Yes,  so  far  as  the  revival  of  learning  was  concerned,  it  is  worthy 
of  particular  notice  that,  in  England,  it  was  associated,  even  from 
this  early  period,  Avith  a  special  leaning  towards  the  Oracles  of  God, 
and  that  on  the  part  of  several  eminent  men,  all  alike  well  known, 
not  only  at  home,  but  as  distant  as  Italy,  Of  these,  in  proof,  we  can- 
not omit  to  notice  four — Robert  Grossteste,  Richard  Aungerville, 
Richard  Fiizralph,  and,  above  all,  our  oicn  Wicklifpe. 

The" first  of  these,  m(leed,"GROSSTESTE,  died  as  early  as  the  year  1253,  and, 
three  years  before  that  event,  made  no  scruple,  when  preaching  at  Lyon  before 
Innocent  IV.,  to  arraign  his  clergy,  in  the  boldest  terms,  for  their  ignorance, 
and  arrogance,  and^flagitious  conduct.  Now  this  was  above  an  hundi-ed  years 
before  the  erection  of  Boccaccio's  chair  for  Greek  in  Florence  ;  and  yet  cer- 
tainly Grossteste  was  not  unacquainted  with  either  Greek  or  Hebrew.  He  had 
translated  Dionysius  the  Areopagite  7  and  Daraascenus  into  Latin — had  facili- 
tated the  knowledge  of  Greek  by  a  translation  of  Suidas's  Lexicon — had  pro- 
moted John  of  Basingstoke  because  he  was  a  Greek  scholar,  and  possessed  of 
Greek  manuscripts,  which  he  is  said  to  have  brought  from  Athens.  Nicholas, 
surnamed  Gi'secus,  resided  with  Grossteste,  to  help  him  in  translating  from  the 
Greek  ;  nor  should  it  be  forgotten  that,  however  humble  might  be  the  claims 

6  Shepherd's  Life  of  Poggio,  1802. 

7  A  spurious  book,  it  is  true,  and  one  upon  which  Grocyn  lectured  at  St.  Paul's  as  genuine, 
till,  examining  its  authenticity,  he  discovered  his  mistake,  and  then,  with  becoming  candour, 
openly  explained  that  he  had  been  in  error. 


xxxiv  INTRODUCTION.  [xiv.  CENT. 

of  this  eminent  man  to  the  character  ot  a  Grecian,  all  this  happened  above  a  cen- 
tury before  that  Boccaccio  himself  had  positively  asserted  of  the  Italian  scholars, 
that  they  did  not  know  so  much  as  the  Greek  alphabet.  Nor  was  Grossteste 
unacquainted  with  Hebrew,  though  we  cannot  assert,  with  Wharton,  that  he  was 
profoundly  skilled  in  it.  The  number  of  Jews  then  in  England,  as  well  as  of 
Hebrew  manuscripts,  fully  accounts  for  what  might  seem  incredible  to  those  who 
have  not  looked  into  the  times.8  At  this  early  period,  however,  the  chief 
eminence  of  Grossteste  arose  fi'om  his  being  a  decided  friend  to  vernacular 
translations  of  the  Scriptures.  "  It  is  the  will  of  God,"  said  he,  "  that  the 
Holy  Scriptures  should  be  translated  by  many  translators,  and  that  there  should 
be  different  translations  in  the  Church,  so  that  what  is  obscurely  expressed  by 
one,  may  be  more  perspicuously  rendered  by  another. "9  _  Was  there  any  other 
counti-y  in  Europe  where  as  much  had  been  expressed  by  any  man,  before  the 
middle  of  the  fourteenth  century  ?  If  not,  then  let  Grossteste  or  Greathead 
be  allowed  to  have  sounded,  if  not  the  first,  one  of  the  earhest  feeble  notes  of 
preparation  ;  though  more  than  a  hundred  years  must  pass  away  before  the 
subject  be  taken  up  in  good  earnest,  and  though  England,  confessedly,  will 
first  sink  into  greater  barbarism. 

Richard  of  Bury,  (son  of  Sir  Richard  Aungerville)  the  Chancellor  of 
England  and  Bishop  of  Durham,  who  died  before  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth 
century,  was  a  man  more  to  the  Italian  taste,  so  far  as  a  passion  for  literature 
was  concerned.  If  we  allow  him  to  express  his  own  feelings,  he  was  "  carried 
away  and  even  beside  himself  with  immoderate  love  of  books,  and  desire  of 
reading  ;"1'^  though  there  was  one  fault,  too  much  akin  to  the  rest  of  his  order, 
a  desire  to  monopolize  every  book  to  themselves.^'  This  man  employed  col- 
lectors not  only  in  England,  but  in  France,  Italy,  and  Germany.  Perfectly 
familiar  with  French  from  his  residence  in  that  country,  at  one  period  he  re- 
garded Paris,  on  account  of  its  literature,  as  the  "  paradise  of  the  world  ;"  at 
another,  he  laments  over  its  decline.  But  he  visited  Italy  also,  and  there  met 
with  Petrarch.  The  celebrated  Italian,  indeed,  mentions  Aungerville  in  one 
of  his  epistles — Virum  ardentis  ingenil.'^- 

But  there  was  yet  another  Richard,  well  known  to  the  last,  of  a  superior 
character,  and  far  more  diffusive  spirit.  This  was  Fitzralph,  an  Irishman, 
too,  and  the  energetic  precursor  of  Wickliffe,  in  opposition  to  the  Friars.  Born, 


8  From  the  time  ofWilliam  the  Conqueror  numbers  of  Jews  had  come  into  England.  In  the 
beginning  of  the  twelfth  century  there  were  as  many  as  1500  at  York.  At  Bury,  in  Suffolk,  their 
synagogue  was  large.  In  addition  to  London,  they  are  mentioned  as  living  at  Lincoln,  Northamp- 
ton, and  Norwich,  at  Ramsey,  Stamford,  and  Marlborough,  Andover,  Derby,  and  Oxford.  Often 
had  they  been  exposed  to  wanton  cruelty,  till  at  last,  in  1290,  they  were  unwisely,  as  well  as 
barbarously  banished  by  Edward  I.,  when  their  number  amounted  to  above  16,(100.  Their  resi- 
dence had  been  of  advantage  to  the  country,  if  we  may  judge  by  a  period  of  only  eigJit  years,  from 
December  I2G5,  to  February  12/4,  as  given  by  Sir  E.  Coke.  They  had  paid  to  the  Crown 
£420,000,  an  immense  sum  in  those  days.  They  were  branded,  indeed,  as  usurers;  but  they 
were  not  more  so  than  the  Italians,  who  remained  here  under  protection.  This  banishment, 
however,  we  have  noticed,  because  it  was  favourable  to  the  diffusion  of  Hebrew  manuscripts, 
many  of  which  fell  into  the  hands  of  Roger  Bacon  and  other  friars.  The  Abbey  of  Ramsey  was 
distinguished  as  a  depository.  The  Hebrew  Lexicon,  compiled  by  Holbeach,  one  of  its  inmates, 
was  preserved  from  destruction,  in  1531),  by  Robert  Wakefield,  the  first  Professor  of  Hebrew  at 
Oxford.     See  Warton,  Rapin,  and  Townley's  Biblical  Literature. 

9  "  Dcus  voluit,  ut  plures  interpretes  S.  Scripturam  transferrent,  et  diversae  Translationes  in 
ecclesia  esscnt ;  idcirco  ut  quodunus  obscuriiis  dixerat,  alter  manifestius  redderit."— //-7iaj?0Mt 
Auct.  Hist.  Dogmat.  c.  2,  pp.  41(>418.  See  also  Townley's  Biblical  Literature,  and  Warton's 
Dissertation,  2. 

'0  "  Exstatico  quodam  librorum  amore  potenter  se  abreptum." 
"  "  Laicll  omnium  librorum  communione  sunt  indigni!" 

'2  Petrarch  says,  that  he  once  had  a  conversation  with  him  respecting  the  "  Ultima  Thule" 
of  the  ancients,  as  if  he  had  come  from  near  the  end  of  the  earth. 


PREDECESSORS  OF  WICKLIFFE.  xxxv 

it  has  been  said,  at  Dundalk,  and,  at  all  events,  certainly  there  interred,  though 
he  had  died  at  Avignon,  Fitzi-alph,  then  Primate  of  Ireland,  after  preaching 
indefatigably  in  that  country  and  in  London,  had  gone  to  face  Innocent  VI. 
himself,  on  the  subject  of  those  exactions  and  abuses  which  had  become  past 
all  endurance.  If  Aungerville  was  bent  upon  collecting  and  engrossing  all 
books  ;  still  farther  to  the  west  than  even  the  "  Thule"  of  the  Ancients,  at  the 
utmost  verge  of  the  Pontiff's  authority,  even  in  Ireland  itself,  there  was  then  a 
thirst  after  knowledge  which  could  not  be  satisfied.  Fitzralph  complained  aloud, 
and  told  Innocent  that  "  no  book  could  stir,  whether  in  divinity,  law,  or  physic, 
but  these  Friars  were  able  and  ready  to  buy  it  up," — "  that  he  himself  had 
sent  four  of  his  secular  chaplains  from  Armagh  to  Oxford,  who  sent  him  word 
again  that  they  could  neither  find  the  Bible,  nor  any  other  good  profitable 
book  in  divinity,  meet  for  their  study,  and  therefore  were  minded  to  return 
home  to  their  own  country." 

As  for  the  Primate  himself,  by  his  own  account,  "  the  Lord  had  taught  him, 
and  brought  him  out  of  the  profound  vanities  of  Aristotle's  philosophy,  to  the 
Scriptures  of  God."  "  To  thee  be  praise,"  says  he,  at  the  commencement  of 
his  life,  written  by  himself,  once  in  the  possession  of  Foxe,  and  which  he  meant 
to  have  printed, — "  To  thee  be  praise,  to  thee  be  glory,  to  thee  be  thanksgiv- 
ing, O  Jesus  most  holy,  Jesus  most  powerful,  Jesus  most  amiable — who  hast 
said,  '  I  am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life,' — a  way  without  deviation,  truth 
without  a  cloud,  and  life  witliout  end.  For  thou  the  way  hast  shewn  me,  thou 
the  truth  hast  taught  me,  and  thou  the  life  hast  promised  me.  A  way  thou 
wast  to  me,  in  exile,  the  truth  thou  wast  to  me,  in  counsel,  and  life  thou  wilt  be 
to  me,  in  reward. 13 

Could  the  assertion  which  has  been  often  repeated,  only  be  confirmed,  that 
Fitzralph  translated  the  New  Testament  into  the  Irish  language,  or  that  such 
a  translation  existed  in  his  time,  it  would  form  one  of  the  most  curious  facts  in 
the  history  of  modern  literature  ;  pointing  out  Ireland  as  that  country  in  Eu- 
rope which  had  been  the  first  pitied,  as  it  has  been  the  last. '"'  But,  at  all 
events,  in  the  very  same  year,  or  1360,  in  which  Fitzralph  expired  at  Avignon, 
John  Wickliffe,  at  the  age  of  thirty-six,  was  allured  from  his  hitherto  retired 
life  ;  and  when  he  came  to  write  his  "  Trialogue,"  he  speaks  of  Fitzralph  as 
having  preceded  him,  in  terms  of  high  commendation. '^ 

We  have  now,  however,  arrived  at  a  point  in  history  fraught  with 
the  deepest  interest,  and  bearing  so  directly  on  the  subject  of  the 
following  pages,  that  it  becomes  necessary  to  pause  a  few  moments, 
and  look  round.  Let  Grecian  literature,  by  all  means,  revive  in 
Italy,  for  this  will  be  drawn  upon,  as  soon  as  the  proper  time  arrives  ; 
but,  in  the  meanwhile,  something  else  must  be  accomplished  and  very 


13  "  Tibi  laus,  tibi  gloria,  tibi  gratiarum  actio,  Jesu  piissime,  Jesu  potentissime,  Jesu  dulcis- 
sime  ;  qui  dixiste,  '  Ego  sum  via,  Veritas  et  vita.'  Via  sine  devio  ;  Veritas  sine  nubilo,  et  vita 
siue  termino.  Quod  tute  viam  milii  osteiuiisti;  tute  veritatem  me  docuisti ;  et  tute  vitam  niilii 
promisisti.     Via  eras  milii  in  exilio  ;  Veritas  eras  in  consilio  ;  et  vita  eris  mihi  in  pra;mio." 

'■»  Archbishop  Usshcr  speaks  of  certain  fragments  of  such  a  translation  being  in  existence 
even  in  his  own  time.  For  various  other  particulars  respecting  Fitzralph,  the  author  may  refer 
to  his  "  Historical  Sketches  of  the  Native  Irish,"  or  to  the  third  edition  of  that  work,  entitled, 
"  The  Native  Irish  and  their  Descendants." 

)5  "  Ab  Anglorum  episcopis  conductus  Armachanus  novem  in  Avinione  conclusiones  coram 
Innocentio  6.  et  suorum  cardinaliura  ceeIu,  contra  fratrum  mendicitatera,  audacter  publicavit 
Verboque  ;  ac  scriptis  ad  mortem  usque  defendit.'  — Wickliffe's  Trialogus,  4to,  1525. 


V 


xxxvi  INTRODUCTION.  [xiv.  CENT. 

far  to  the  west.  The  event  which  took  place  was  not  only  a  marked 
and  powerful  one,  in  relation  to  England,  but  it  formed  the  first  of 
a  series  in  Europe,  although  more  than  an  entire  century  passed 
away  before  the  precedent  was  followed  by  other  countries.  We 
refer  to  the  translation  of  the  entire  Sacred  Volume  into  the  lan- 
guage spoken  hy  the  people.  Fragments  there  had  been  in  several 
languages,  but  the  present  work  being  complete  from  Genesis  to  Re- 
vehition,  intelligible  to  the  common  peoj^le  of  that  day,  and  intended 
for  their  express  perusal,  may  be  regarded  as  the  first  positive  in- 
stance of  its  kind  in  modern  Europe.  It  is,  at  least,  the  only  one 
in  the  fourteenth  century  upon  which  we  can  now  lay  our  hand,  no 
continental  nation  having  any  thing  similar  to  produce. 

John  Wickliffe,  a  native  of  Yorkshire,  was  born  in  the  year 
1324,  and,  in  1360,  at  the  age  of  thirty-six,  first  came  into  public 
view,  where  he  conspicuously  remained  to  the  day  of  his  death,  or 
the  31st  of  December  1384.  For  his  life  and  opinions  we  refer  to 
other  sources,  and  must  here  confine  our  attention  to  that  work 
which  will  ever  give  the  chief  distinction  to  his  name. 

Before  the  commencement  of  such  a  design,  the  position  of 
Wicklifie  should  be  contemplated.  To  say  nothing  of  the  Maho- 
metan and  Pagan  worlds,  two  other  communities  had  extended  their 
influence  over  the  nations.  Alike  opposed  to  the  right  of  private  judg- 
ment, and  the  rising  freedom  of  the  human  mind,  and  now  equally 
sunk  into  a  state  of  unutterable  depravity,  both  had  fixed  a  malig- 
nant eye  on  that  very  book  which  Wicklifie  had  determined  to  give 
to  his  country.  These  two,  it  is  well  known,  were  the  Eastern  and 
Western,  or  the  Greek  and  Latin  Churches.  Both  had  not  only,  and 
long  since,  utterly  neglected  and  contemned  the  Sacred  Writings,  but 
both  had  interdicted  their  translation  into  any  vernacular  tongue. 
That  it  was  not  only  unlawful,  but  injurious,  for  the  people  at  large 
to  read  the  Scriptures,  had,  indeed,  for  ages,  been  regarded  as  an 
axiom,  by  all  these  nations.  Nor  was  this  idea  left  to  pass  current 
merely  as  a  received  opinion.  Not  to  mention  other  proofs,  more 
than  an  hundred  and  fifty  years  before  Wickliffe  had  finished  his 
determined  purpose,  or  in  the  year  1229,  at  the  Council  of  Toulouse, 
when  forty-five  canons  were  passed  and  issued  for  the  extinction  of 
heresy  and  the  re-establishment  of  peace,  what  were  two  of  those 
canons  ?  One  involved  the  Jirst  court  of  inquisition,  and  another 
the Jlrst  canon,  which  forbade  the  Scriptures  to  the  laity,  or  the 
translation  of  any  portion  of  them  into  the  vulgar  tongue.  The  lat- 
ter was  expressed  in  very  pointed  terms. 

"  We  also  forbid  the  laity  to  possess  any  of  the  books  of  the  Old 
or  New  Testament,  except,  perhaps,  the  Psalter  or  Breviary  for  the 
Divine  Offices,  or  the  Hours  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  which  some,  out 


THE   TIMES   OF   UICKLIFFE.  XXXvii 

of  devotion,  wish  to  have  ;  but  having  any  of  these  books  translated 
into  the  vulgar  tongue,  we  strict!  1/  forlid?'^ 

In  the  face  of  all  this,  and  far  more  than  can  now  be  explained, 
must  Wickliffe  commence  his  heartfelt  task  ;  and  so  he  did,  with  his 
eyes  open  to  the  prejudices  of  a  world.  His  translation,  which  was 
finished  in  the  year  1380,  is  supposed  to  have  occupied  him,  amidst 
various  interruptions,  for  many  years.  Some  have  imagined  that 
this  great  work  employed  the  translator  for  ten  years  only,  but  Mr. 
Baber,  with  far  greater  probability,  has  said,  "  From  an  early 
period  of  his  life  he  had  devoted  his  various  learning,  and  all  the 
powerful  energies  of  his  mind,  to  effect  this,  and,  at  length,  by  in- 
tense ajiplication  on  his  own  part,  and  with  some  assistance  from 
a  few  of  the  most  learned  of  his  followers,  he  had  the  glory  to  com- 
plete a  book,  which,  alone,  would  have  been  sufficient  (or  at  least 
ought)  to  have  procured  him  the  veneration  of  his  own  age,  and  the 
commendations  of  posterity." 

In  accounting  for  such  a  movement  as  this,  it  has  been  but  too 
common  to  inquire  after  something  similar  which  had  happened  in 
the  earth,  and  loosely  supposing  some  connexion  between  them,  as 
cause  and  effect,  thus  leave  the  extraordinary  event,  without  the 
slightest  reference  to  the  finger  of  God.  Any  influential  connexion, 
however,  between  the  Waldenses  or  Vaudois  and  Wickliffe  has 
never  been  clearly  proved,  and  probably  never  will.  At  all  events, 
before  he  could  be  stimulated  by  their  example,  he  seems  to  have 
taken  his  ground,  as  it  is  only  in  his  latest  compositions  that  a  few 
slight  references  to  them  are  to  be  found,  as  to  a  people  with  whose 
sufferings  he  sympathized.  He  was  on  the  Continent,  at  Bruges,  it 
is  true,  from  1374  to  1376,  but  he  had  commenced,  and  must  have 
been  far  advanced  in  his  undertaking,  long  before  then.  In  short, 
as  far  as  the  term  can  be  applied  to  any  human  being,  the  claims  of 
Wickliffe  to  originality  have  now  come  to  be  better  understood,  and 
every  Christian  will  recognise  the  "  secret  mover ;"  while,  in  refer- 
ence to  the  times  following,  when  tracing  the  history  or  influence  of 
Divine  Truth  throughout  Europe,  the  habit  of  ascending  no  higher 
than  Germany  is  past,  or  passing  away. 

Down  to  the  period  of  about  two  years  before  Wickliffe  had  com- 
pleted his  translation,  the  only  ideas  or  incidents  which  had  any 
powerful  influence  upon  mankind  generally,  were  such  as  stood 
connected  with  the  Pontiff,  and  his  peculiar  system  of  rule  or  govern- 
ment ;  but,  in  reference  to  this  subject,  by  the  year  1 378,  among  the 


16  "  Prohibemus  etiam,  ne  libros  Veteris  Testamenti,"  &c.    Labbei  Sacro-Sancta  Concilia  ii., 
p.  1.,  p.  430.     The  profane  mixture  of  human  composition  with  the  Divine  Word  is  sufficiently 
characteristic  ;  and  it  is  of  importance  to  observe  that  the  prohibition  expressly  referred  to  the 
Latin  Bible  itself.    It  seems  to  have  been  a  step  taken  to  prevent  translation. 
VOL.  I.  d 


xxxviii  INTRODUCTION.  [xiv.  CENT. 

European  nations,  there  had  sprung  up  a  marked  difference  of  opi- 
nion. One  question  engrossed  them  all,  and  it  was  nothing  less 
than  this — W/to  was  Pontiff?  In  the  year  1305,  through  the  in- 
fluence of  France,  the  Court  of  Rome  had  been  translated  into  that 
Kingdom,  and  there  it  remained  for  seventy-four  years,  to  the  great 
damage  of  Rome  as  a  city,  but  without  any  rent  or  division  in  the 
system.  Edward  the  Third  had  expired  on  the  21st  of  June  1377, 
after  a  reign  of  above  half  a  century,  and  about  that  very  moment 
Gregory  XI.  had  ordered  Wickliffe  to  be  seized  and  imprisoned,  till 
farther  orders.  Early  in  the  following  year,  although  our  translator 
of  the  Scriptures  had  not  only  stood  high  in  favour  with  the  late 
King,  but  still  did  so  with  many  in  Parliament,  and  was  powerfully 
protected  by  John  of  Gaunt,  Duke  of  Lancaster,  he  was  summoned 
by  the  Bishops  to  answer  for  himself  at  St.  Paul's.  Thus  did  this 
body  of  men  first  come  out,  appearing  as  a  distinct  interest  in  the 
kingdom,  and  thus  they  will  remain  for  above  five  generations  to 
come  ;  proving  ever  and  anon,  upon  all  occasions  of  alarm,  that  they 
were  the  determined  opponents  of  Divine  Truth.  As  a  body,  they 
will  oppose  its  being  couA^eyed  to  the  people,  and  at  every  successive 
step  of  progress.  Their  malice  at  this  time,  however,  was  over- 
ruled, as  it  will  so  often  and  conspicuously  be,  a  century  and  a  half 
later ;  but,  in  the  meanwhile,  nothing  must  prevent  Wickliffe  from 
finishing  his  translation.''' 

The  year  1378  was  in  truth  an  important  one  as  it  regarded  our 
translator's  design.  On  the  27th  of  March  the  reigning  Pontiff  had 
died ;  an  event  which  not  only  put  an  end  to  the  bulls  against 
Wickliffe,  but  gave  rise  to  what  was  called  "  the  great  schism  ;" 
so  that  soon  after  there  were  two  Pontiffs — one  beyond  the  moun- 
tains, as  the  Italians  said,  and  one  at  Rome — consigning  each  other 
to  perdition.  Of  this  state  of  things  Wickliffe  did  not  fail  to  avail 
himself.  "  He  saw  the  head  of  the  body  cloven  in  twain,  and  the 
two  i^arts  made  to  fight  with  each  other ;"  and  he  immediately  sent 
forth  two  tracts,  one  upon  "  the  schism  "  itself,  and  the  other  upon 
"  the  truth  of  Scripture."  Every  city  and  state  became  agitated, 
and  as  the  question  soon  divided  the  nations  throughout,  it  so  hap- 
pened that  England  and  Scotland  were  of  opposite  opinions  :  the 
former  holding  fast  by  Urban  VI.  of  Rome,  who  had  been  first 
chosen  ;  the  latter  followed  Clement  A^II.  of  Avignon.  England 
and  France  indeed  became  the  most  ardent  supj)orters  of  the  oppo- 
site parties,  while  such  was  the  extent  to  which  the  controversy  had 


'7  The  Assembly  at  St.  Paul's  having  broken  up  in  riot  and  confusion,  there  was  a  second  at- 
tempt to  execute  their  purpose  in  a  Synod  at  Lambeth  in  June,  but  the  Bishops  were  deterred 
from  coming  to  any  definite  sentence  by  a  message  from  the  Queen-Mother  by  Sir  Lewis 
Clifford. 


WICKLIFFE'S   TRANSLATION   OK  THE    BIBLE.  XXXIX 

gone,  that  some  men  of  the  University  of  Paris  had  begun  to  think 
of  a  plurality  of  Pontiffs,  and  the  appointment  of  one  to  every 
kingdom.  The  idea  of  one  power  exercising  authority  over  all  na- 
tions had  seemed  to  them  untenable,  if  not  injurious. 

Soon  after  this,  in  the  year  1379,  Wickliffe,  as  divinity  professor, 
had  gone  to  fulfil  his  accustomed  annual  duty  at  Oxford,  but  there 
he  was  seized  with  an  alarming  illness.  The  friars,  imagining  that 
his  course  was  now  near  an  end,  contrived  to  visit  him.  Four  of 
their  ablest  men  had  been  selected,  or  a  friar  from  each  of  the  men- 
dicant orders,  and  they  were  admitted  to  a  patient  hearing.  After 
reminding  him  of  the  great  injury  he  had  done  to  their  order — for 
Wickliffe  was  a  determined  enemy  to  all  idleness  and  all  extortion — 
they  exhorted  him,  as  one  near  to  death,  that  he  would  now,  as  a 
true  penitent,  bewail  and  revoke  in  their  presence,  whatever  he  had 
said  to  their  disparagement.  As  soon  as  they  had  done,  Wickliffe 
calling  for  his  servant,  desired  to  be  raised  up  on  his  pillow ;  when 
collecting  all  his  strength,  with  a  severe  and  expressive  countenance, 
and  in  a  tone  of  voice  not  to  be  misunderstood,  he  exclaimed,  "  / 
shall  not  die,  but  live.,  to  declare  the  evil  deeds  of  the  friars."  Con- 
fused, if  not  confounded,  little  expecting  such  a  reply,  they  imme- 
diately left  him ;  and  Wickliffe  recovered,  to  finish  in  the  year  fol- 
lowing his  translation  of  the  entire  Bible. 

Extraordinary,  however,  as  the  character  of  Wickliffe  was, — a 
man  confessedly  far  above  all  his  contemporaries,  it  may  still  be 
inquired,  whether  he  was  qualified  for  the  task  of  translating  the 
Sacred  Volume  ?  The  Scriptures  had  been  originally  given  in  He- 
brew and  Greek  ;  but  so  far  from  the  nations  of  the  West  furnish- 
ing men  sufficiently  acquainted  with  either,  England  at  least  had 
sunk  into  greater  ignorance  even  since  the  days  of  Grossteste  ; 
nay,  an  hundred  and  fifty  years  later,  when  Tyndale  had  translated 
from  the  original  tongues,  some  of  the  priests  of  the  day  were  try- 
ing to  persuade  the  people  that  Greek  and  Hebrew  were  languages 
newly  invented.  Here,  it  is  true,  was  AVickliffe,  an  able  and  acute, 
a  zealous  and  determined  man,  and  withal  an  excellent  Latin  scho- 
lar, but  of  Greek  or  Hebrew  he  knew  nothing.  Nor  was  it  at  all 
necessary  that  he  should  possess  such  erudition,  since  a  translation 
from  either  Greek  or  Hebrew  tcould  not  have  harmonised  with 
the  first.,  or  the  present.,  intention  of  Divine  Providence.  A  reason 
there  was,  and  one  worthy  of  infinite  wisdom,  why  not  only  the 
English  translation,  but  most  of  the  first  European  versions  must 
be  made  from  the  Latin.  These  nations,  including  our  own,  had 
nothing  in  common  with  the  Greek  community,  but  for  ages  they 
had  been  overrun  by  the  Latin.  This  language,  long  since  dead, 
(»ven  in  Italy,  had  been  the  refuge  and  stronghold  of  their  oppressor. 


xl  LNTRODUCTION.  [xiv.  CENT. 

from  generation  to  generation ;  and  upon  looking  back,  no  spectacle 
presented  to  the  eye  is  so  remarkable,  as  that  of  so  many  different 
nations,  equally  spell-bound  by  the  same  expedient.  There  was  a 
Latin  service,  and  there  was  a  Latin  Bible,  professedly  received, 
but  the  possession  of  even  this  had  been  forbidden  to  the  people  at 
large ;  very  much  in  the  same  spirit  as  the  Shasters  of  India  are 
forbidden  by  the  Brahmins  to  be  looked  upon,  or  even  heard,  by 
the  people.  It  was  the  Latin  Bible,  therefore,  long  buried  in  clois- 
ters, or  covered  with  the  dust  of  ages,  which  must  now  be  brought 
forth  to  view.  Confessedly  imperfect,  it  was  of  importance  first  to 
prove  that  it  had  all  along  contained  enough  for  mortal  man  to 
know,  in  order  to  his  eternal  salvation  ;  and  once  translated  into 
any  native  tongue,  not  only  will  the  language  touch  the  heart,  but 
the  people  at  last  know  what  that  mysterious  book  was,  from  which 
they  had  been  debarred,  so  wickedly  and  so  long.  Although,  there- 
fore, the  nation  was  yet  an  hundred  and  fifty  years  distant  from  the 
English  Bible,  properly  so  called,  the  present  should  be  regarded  as 
the  first  preliminary  step.  An  all-disposing  foresight,  far  above 
that  of  any  human  agent,  is  now  distinctly  visible  in  drawing  first 
upon  that  very  language  which  had  been  employed  for  ages  as  the 
instrument  of  mental  bondage.  It  shall  now  be  made  to  contribute 
to  the  emancipation  of  the  human  mind.  Latin,  it  is  true,  had  been 
the  conventional  language  of  the  priests  and  students  of  different 
countries ;  but  still,  so  long  as  this  language  remained  untouched  by 
a  translation  of  the  Scriptures  into  any  vernacidar  tongue,  it  is  a 
historical  canon  that  no  nation  was  ever  greatly  moved.  This  holds 
true  of  our  own  country,  in  the  age  of  ^nanuscript,  but  it  will  become 
far  more  emphatically  so,  even  seventy  years  after  the  invention  of 
printing^  when  the  Scriptures,  once  translated  from  the  original 
tongues,  come  to  be  printed  in  the  language  then  spoken,  and  spoken 
still. 

At  such  a  period  as  this  the  translation  of  Wickliffc  could  only  be 
diffused,  of  course,  by  the  laborious  process  of  transcription  ;  but 
transcribed  it  was  diligently,  both  entire  and  in  parts,  and  as  eagerly 
read.  There  were  those  who,  at  every  hazard,  sought  wisdom  from 
the  Book  of  God,  and  their  number  could  not  be  few.  A  contempo- 
rary writer  has  affirmed  that  "  a  man  could  not  meet  two  people  on 
the  road,  but  one  of  them  was  a  disciple  of  Wickliffe."  This  was  the 
testimony  of  an  enemy,  and  not  improbably  the  language  of  hatred 
and  fear  combined,  uttered  with  a  wish  to  damage  the  cause  ;  it  was 
the  testimony  of  an  ecclesiastic,  a  Canon  of  Leicester,  in  reference  to 
an  era  hailed  by  the  people  ;  and  although  the  Word  of  Truth  had 
not  "  free  course,"  there  can  be  no  question  that  it  was  glorified  in 
the  reception  given  to  it  by  many.     "  The  soldiers,"  he  says,  "  with 


WIGKLIli'FE'S  VERSION  AND  ITS  EFFECTS.  xli 

the  dukes  and  earls,  were  the  chief  adherents  of  this  sect — they  were 
their  most  strenuous  promoters  and  hohlest  combatants — their  most 
powerful  defenders  and  their  invincible  protectors."  A  very  remark- 
able admission,  as  it  accounts  for  the  great  progress  made,  in  spite 
of  opposition.  All  this  and  niuch  more  is  uttered  in  the  tone  of 
lamentation  ;  and  what  was  the  occasion,  as  expressed  by  the  Canon 
himself  ?  "  This  Master  John  "Wickliffe,"  says  he,  "  hath  translated 
the  Gospel  out  of  Latin  into  English,  which  Christ  had  intrusted 
with  the  cleryy  and  doctors  of  the  Church,  that  thei/  might  minister 
it  to  the  laity  and  weaker  sort,  according  to  the  state  of  the  times 
and  the  wants  of  men.  So  that  by  this  means  the  Gospel  is  made 
vulgar,  and  laid  more  open  to  the  laity,  and  eve7i  to  women  who  can 
read,  than  it  used  to  be  to  the  most  learned  of  the  clergy  and  those  of 
the  best  understanding  !  And  what  was  before  the  chief  gift  of  the 
clergy  and  doctors  of  the  Church,  is  made  for  ever  common  to  the 
laity!  "18 

It  was  in  the  same  spirit  that  another  contemporary  writer  urged 
that  "  the  prelates  ought  not  to  suffer  that  every  one  at  his  pleasure 
should  read  the  Scripture,  translated  even  into  Latin  ;  because,  as  is 
plain  from  experience,  this  has  been  many  ways  the  occasion  of  fall- 
ing into  heresies  and  errors.  It  is  not,  therefore,  politic  that  any 
one,  wheresoever  and  whensoever  he  will,  should  give  himself  to  the 
frequent  study  of  the  Scriptures." 

These  men  specially  referred  to  a  period  which  lasted  for  about 
twenty  years,  or  from  1380  to  1400,  and  it  was  one,  though  but  too 
short,  which  distinguished  this  country  from  every  other  in  Europe. 
However  transient,  or  but  like  an  handful  of  corn  for  all  England, 
in  any  sketch  of  the  times  it  should  never  pass  unnoticed. 

Yv'hile  the  nations  generally  were  discussing  the  respective  claims 
of  two  rival  Pontiffs,  amidst  all  the  confusion  of  the  times,  and  al- 
though there  were  many  adversaries,  for  the  last  twenty  years  of  the 
fourteenth  century  in  England,  no  authoritative  stop  must  be  put  to 
the  perusal  of  the  Divine  record.  The  Bishops,  it  is  true,  with  the 
Primate  of  Canterbury  at  their  head,  may  rage  and  remonstrate,  may 
write  to  Rome  and  receive  replies,  but  in  vain.  The  entire  Sacred 
Volume  had  been  translated,  the  people  were  transcribing  and  read- 
ing, and  the  translator  had  frequently  expressed  himself  in  the 
boldest  terms.  "  The  authority  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,"  said  he, 
"  infinitely  surpasses  any  writing,  how  authentic  soever  it  may 
appear,  because  the  authority  of  Jesus  Christ  is  infinitely  above  that 
of  all  mankind." — "  The  authority  of  the  Scriptures  is  independent 
on  any  other  authority,  and  is  preferable  to  every  other  writing,  but 

'8  Henry  de  Knyghton,  "  De  evenlis  Anglice."  '9  William  Butler,  a  Franciscan  friar. 


xHi  INTRODUCTION.  [xiv.  cknt. 

especially  to  the  books  of  the  Church  of  Rome." — "  I  am  certain, 
indeed,  from  the  Scriptures,  that  neither  Antichrist,  nor  all  his  dis- 
ciples, nay,  nor  all  fiends,  may  really  impugn  any  part  of  that  vo- 
lume as  it  regards  the  excellence  of  its  doctrine.  But  in  all  these 
things  it  appears  to  me  that  the  believing  man  should  use  this  rule  , 
— If  he  soundly  understands  the  Sacred  Scripture,  let  him  bless  God  ; 
if  he  be  deficient  in  such  perception,  let  him  labour  for  soundness  of 
mind.  Let  him  also  dwell  as  a  grammarian  upon  the  letter,  but  be 
fully  aware  of  imposing  a  sense  upon  Scripture  which  he  doubts  the 
Holy  Spirit  does  not  demand."  ^^ 

Many  other  passages,  in  terms  as  strong,  might  be  quoted  from  his 
writings ;  and  "  among  his  latest  acts,"  says  Vaughan,  "  was  a  defence 
in  Parliament  of  the  translation  of  the  Scriptures  into  English.  These 
he  declared  to  be  the  property  of  the  people,  and  one  which  no  party 
should  be  allowed  to  wrest  from  them." 

Now  that  the  cause  of  such  a  man,  as  well  as  that  he  himself  should 
have  been-  so  befriended,  was  one  of  the  distinguishing  features  of  the 
present  period.  The  Duke  of  Lancaster  continued  to  be  his  shield 
for  years  ;  and  although,  when  Wickliff"e,  in  addition  to  grievances 
felt,  went  on  to  Christian  doctrines,  the  Duke  faltered  in  his  support, 
yet  nearly  six  years  after  the  translator  was  in  his  grave,  the  same 
voice  was  heard  in  favour  of  the  translation.  In  the  thirteenth  of 
Richard  II.,  or  1390,  a  bill  was  proposed  to  be  brought  into  the 
House  of  Lords  for  suppressing  it,  when  Lancaster,  in  boldly  oppos- 
ing this,  told  them,  "  That  he  would  maintain  our  having  this  law  in 
our  own  tongue,  whoever  they  should  be  that  brought  in  the  bill ;" 
and  once  introduced,  it  was  immediately  thrown  out.  But  Lancas- 
ter was  not  the  only  friend  :  to  his  brother,  the  Duke  of  Gloucester, 
Wickliflfe  dedicated  at  least  one  of  his  pieces  ;  and  on  one  important 
occasion,  when  the  former  gave  way,  the  Queen-Mothex",  or  widow  of 
the  Black  Prince,  put  a  stop  to  persecution.  Lord  Percy,  Earl-Mar- 
shal, was  also  friendly ;  but  perhaps,  above  all,  much  was  owing 
to  the  reigning  Queen,  and  that  for  ten  years  after  WicklifFe's 
death.  Ann  of  Luxemburg,  the  sister  of  the  Emperor  Wenceslaus, 
and  of  the  King  of  Bohemia,  as  consort  of  Richard  II.,  had  arrived 
in  this  country  in  December  1381 ;  an  event  of  great  importance  in 
connexion  with  Wickliffe's  exertions.  If  he  had  so  far  enlightened 
England,  his  writings  were  also  to  electrify  Bohemia,  so  that  Ann 
had  "  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such  a  time  as  this."  This  lady 
already  acquainted  with  three  languages,  Bohemian,  German,  and 
Latin,  soon  acquired  that  of  this  country,  and  for  years  was  distin- 
guished for  her  diligent  perusal  of  the  Scriptures  in  Eiu/Ush.     This 

20  Trjalogiis.  lib.  iii. 


WICKLIFFE'S  VERSION  AND  ITS  EFFECTS.  xliii 

much  was  testified  of  her  by  a  very  notable  witness — tbe  Lord 
Chancellor  Arundel,  then  Archbishop  of  York,  when  he  came  to 
preach  at  her  interment.  "  Although  she  was  a  stranger,"  he  said, 
"  yet  she  constantly  studied  the  four  gospels  in  English  ;  and  in  the 
study  of  these,  and  reading  of  godly  books,  she  was  more  diligent 
than  the  prelates,  though  their  office  and  business  require  this  of 
them."  The  gospels  in  English,  he  added,  the  Queen  had  sent  to 
himself  to  peruse,  and  he  had  replied  that  they  were  "  good  and 
true."^^  Queen  Ann's  course  of  reading  was  even  well  known  to 
WicklifFe,  before  he  exjjired  in  138-t,  so  that  she  must  have  served 
as  a  powerful  example  to  others,  for  at  least  ten  years.  The  trans- 
lator had  thus  early  inquired,  whether  "  to  hereticate"  her  on  ac- 
count of  her  practice,  "  would  not  be  Luciferian  folly." 

The  Queen,  says  Rapiu,  was  a  great  favourer  of  WicklifFe's  doc- 
trine, and  had  she  lived  longer  would  have  saved  his  followers ;  but 
the  illustrious  foreigner  once  interred,  and  thus  so  remarkably  eulo- 
gized, a  diflferent  scene  immediately  opened  to  view,-^ 

After  his  Queen's  death,  Richard  II.,  the  grandchild  of  Edward 
III.,  had  gone  to  Ireland,  there  to  prolong  the  misgoverument  of 
that  country ;  and  only  four  months  had  elapsed,  when  this  very 
man,  Arundel,  who  afterwards  was  the  main  instrument  in  dethron- 
ing the  King,  and  one  of  the  bitterest  enemies  of  Divine  Truth  in 
the  next  century,  was  in  great  alarm.  In  deep  hypocrisy,  at  West- 
minster, he  might  choose  to  twit  the  prelates  with  their  ignorance 
of  Scripture,  in  comparison  with  a  Queen  who  had  to  acquire  the 
language,  and  thus  please  the  ear  of  his  Majesty,  as  well  as  seem 
to  lament  his  loss  ;  but  he  had  no  intention  that  the  people  should 
take  the  hint,  or  advance,  and  shew  him,  as  well  as  his  brethren, 
the  way.  The  remarkable  though  transient  period,  however,  to 
which  we  now  refer,  was  as  distinguished  for  boldness  of  sentiment, 
as  for  the  protection  providentially  afforded  to  those  who  were 
searching  the  Scriptures  for  themselves. 

On  the  29th  of  January  1395,  a  Parliament  was  held  at  "West- 
minster, and  the  time  had  come  to  speak  out.  The  sentiments  were 
not  those  of  a  feeble  band,  whispered  in  secret.  They  were  ex- 
pressed in  the  shape  of  a  remonstrance,  and  presented  to  the  House 
of  Commons.     They  were  posted  at  St.  Paul's,  and  also  at  West- 


21  This  testimony  of  Arundel  is  given  by  Fose,  from  an  original  MS.  in  Worcester  Library. 

22  This  illustrious  Princess,  Ions  remembered  as  "  the  good  Queen  Ann,"  died  at  the  early 
age  of  twenty-seven,  to  the  deep  grief  of  her  devoted  husband,  who  then  lost  his  best  and  only 
true  friend  and  adviser.  She  expired  on  Whitsunday  7th  June  13!)4,  and  was  not  interred  till 
Monday  the  3d  of  August.  Ou  the  tomb  at  Westminster,  the  day  of  her  death  is  stated  to  be 
"  .A((7.vV  seventh  day,"  an  unaccountable  mistake,  since  the  letters  of  invitation  to  his  Queen's 
funeral  on  the  3d  of  August,  by  the  King  himself,  are  still  in  existence — "  Given  at  West- 
minster loth  June  139-!,"  and  a  similar  one  to  the  citizens  of  London,  dated  the  141h  of  the  same 
month. — See  Kymer's  Foedera,  vol.  vii.,  p.  771;. 


xliv  liNTRODUCTION,  [xiv.  CENT. 

minster.  This,  let  it  be  observed,  was  above  a  hundred  and  twenty 
years  before  Luther's  voice  was  heard ;  and,  taken  all  in  all,  the 
argument  throughout  may  be  compared  to  an  arrow,  shot  from  a 
bow  as  strong  as  the  intrepid  German  afterwards  ever  bent.^^ 

Richard,  still  in  Ireland,  was  preparing  to  take  the  field  again, 
when  Arundel,  our  preacher  at  AVestminster  in  August  last,  had 
reached  him  in  May,  and  accompanied  by  Braybrook,  the  Bishop 
of  London.  Six  or  seven  years  before  this  the  disciples  of  Wick- 
lifie  had  been  congregating  in  difterent  places,  and  actually  appoint- 
ino-  ministers  among  themselves  to  perform  Divine  service,  after 
their  own  sentiments:  while  his  "  poor  priests,"  as  they  were 
styled,  had  been  travelling  and  preaching,  barefooted^  through  the 
country ;  but  this  pointed  and  posted  remonstrance  had  filled 
Arundel,  Braybrook,  and  their  brethren,  with  dread.  They  en- 
treated the  King,  in  name  of  the  clergy,  to  return,  intimating  that 
the  least  delay  might  occasion  irreparable  damage.  The  followers 
of  AVicklifie,  they  said,  had  made  instance  to  set  on  foot  a  reforma- 
tion— they  had  many  friends  in  the  kingdom,  nay,  in  the  Par- 
liament itself,  and  the  clergy  were  afraid  they  would  proceed  to 
action.  Richard  listened,  immediately  left  the  management  of  his 
war  to  the  Earl  of  March,  and  returned.  He  took  certain  measures, 
it  is  true,  to  check  the  rising  tide  of  sentiment,  but  still  the  Scrip- 
tures were  not  suppressed,  nor  was  there  one  drop  of  blood  shed  for 
what  "  they  called  heresy,"  till  the  commencement  of  the  next  cen- 
tury, under  lieury  the  Fourth.^* 

Under  a  monarch  so  weak  and  ill-advised  as  Richard  IL,  a  man 
who  minded  only  trifles,  and  thought  of  nothing  save  his  own  plea- 
sures, that  the  close  of  the  fourteenth  century  should  have  been  thus 
distinguished,  must  appear  strange,  but  it  is  not  unaccountable. 
This  was  only  the  commencement  of  a  series  of  striking  proofs,  that, 
in  first  conveying  to  the  people  of  this  country  the  Word  of  Life, 
Divine  Providence  would  dispense  with  what  has  been  called  "  royal 
sanction."  Certain  individuals  near  the  throne,  and  more  enlightened, 
had  been  permitted  to  act,  and  Richard  must  have  allowed  his  Queen 


23  After  stating  that  when  the  Church  in  this  land  "  began  first  to  dote  in  temporalities," 
then  "  faith,  hope,  and  love,  began  to  vanish  and  flyaway;"  they  added, — "  Our  usual  priest- 
hood \inol  that  which  Christ  ordained  to  his  disciples.  The  celibacy  of  the  priesthood  induceth 
infamy  into  the  Church.  The  feigned  miracle  of  the  sacrament  of  bread  induceth  all  men 
into  idolatry,  except  a  very  few.  Exorcism  and  hallowings  are  the  very  practices  of  necro- 
mancy. A  king  and  bishop,  a  prelate  and  justice,  a  curate  and  officer,  in  one  person  or  worldly 
office,  doth  make  every  kingdom  out  of  ^ood  order.  Prayer  for  the  dead  is  a  false  foundation 
of  alms,  so  that  all  the  houses  of  alms  in  Fiigland  are  falsely  founded.  Pilgrimages  and  obla- 
tions to  images  of  wood  and  stone  are  very  near  of  kin  to  idolatry,  and  they  are  not  more  to  be 
honoured  than  Judas'  lips.  Auricular  confession,  the  minister  of  lust,  only  gives  occasion  to 
scandalous  intrigue.  Manslaughter,  cither  by  war,  or  by  any  pretended  law  of  justice,  for  any 
temporal  cause  or  spiritual  revelation,  is  expressly  contrary  unto  the  New  Testament.  The  vow 
of  chastity  is  the  cause  of  horrible  \ici:a."— Ex  Archills  Regiis.  All  these  positions  were  en- 
forced hy  solid  arguments  at  length,  as  given  by  Foxe,  from  the  original.  24  gee  Bapin. 


ITALY  AND  ENGLAND  IN  CONTRAST.  xlv 

to  have  had  considerable  influence,  and  so  gratify  her  wishes ;  but, 
independently  of  these  parties,  the  King  himself,  bent  upon  increas- 
ing the  royal  prerogative,  was  no  friend  to  any  control  from 
abroad.  For  a  hundred  years  past,  under  the  three  first  Edwards, 
the  power  of  the  Crown,  and  the  influence  of  the  Commons,  as  a 
branch  of  the  legislature,  had  been  increasing  by  slow  degrees,  and, 
more  especially,  three  memorable  statutes  had  been  passed,  viz.  those 
of  Mortmain,  Provisors,  and  Prajmunire.-^  Now,  these,  even  under 
this  present  monarch,  had  been  not  merely  recognised,  but  the  power 
of  the  last  two  generally  strengthened.  Some  parties  having  ven- 
tured abroad,  to  solicit  their  repeal,  Richard,  by  a  proclamation, 
ordered  their  return  to  England,  on  pain  of  death  and  forfeiture  of 
estate.  Nor  could  these  statutes  ever  be  repealed.  Why  they 
lay  inoperative  or  dormant  for  an  hundred  and  thirty  years  will  be 
afterwards  explained  ;  but  there  they  were,  as  powerful  instruments, 
to  be  wielded  another  day,  by  Henry  the  Eighth,  upon  the  fall  of 
Cardinal  Wolsey.  As  for  Richard  II.,  he  drove  on,  till  the  power 
which  he  sought  rather  to  reduce  than  promote,  at  last,  and  through 
Arundel,  artfully  secured  his  deposition,  in  September  1399.^ 

At  the  conclusion,  therefore,  of  the  fourteenth  century,  we  cou- 
ce<le  to  Petrarch,  or  Boccaccio  and  bis  fellows,  all  that  is  demanded 
as  to  the  revival  of  learning  in  Italy ;  nor  has  England  any  occa- 
sion to  be  ashamed  of  the  contrast  or  distinction  between  the  two 
countries.  The  pursuits  of  both  were  but  in  their  infancy.  In  the  i 
former,  "  imagining  that  all  knowledge  was  to  be  found  in  the  ' 
ancient  Masters,"  they  were  beginning  to  seek  after  Mount  Par- 
nassus and  their  old  Romans ;  but  in  the  latter  they  were  in  search 
of  Mount  Zion  and  the  fishermen  of  Galilee.  The  Italian  had  be- 
come eager  after  the  wisdom  of  Greece,  and  the  nervous  oratory  of 
his  forefathers  ;  the  Englishman,  after  the  wisdom  of  God,  and  the 
course  pursued  by  the  first  planters  of  Christianity.  If  any  of  our 
countrymen  were  looking  to  Greece  at  all,  it  might  be  only  to  such 
as  had  proved  to  "  be  the  first-fruits  of  Achaia  unto  God,"  and  if  to 
Rome,  it  was  only  to  those  in  the  imperial  city,  once  so  beloved, 
"  whose  faith  was  spoken  of  throughout  the  whole  world." 

25  Statute  of  Mortmain. — By  Ma^jna  Charta  no  person  was  to  alienate  their  lands  to  the 
Church.  This  had  been  disregarded ;  and  as  the  clergy  alone,  by  themselves,  formed  a  body 
called  the  Church,  which  never  died,  and  therefore  never  alienated  any  property,  it  was  demon- 
strated to  the  King,  Edward  I.,  that  all  the  land  of  the  kingdom  might  be  transfeired  to  this 
body.  To  prevent  estates,  therefore,  from  falling  into  dead  hands,  that  is,  hands  of  no  service 
to  the  King  or  the  community,  hence  the  statute  of  Mortmain.  Provisors. — If  the  Pontiff 
presented  any  benefice  contrary  to  the  rights  of  the  King  or  Patrons,  the  gift  came  to  the  King 
for  that  turn.  But  Rome  used  to  be  full  of  suitors  for  livings  in  England.  If  any  now  sued  for 
such  provisions  they  were  to  be  imprisoned  and  fined  at  the  King's  will.  Pft.EJiUNiRE. — If  any 
one  carried  any  cause,  belonging  to  the  King's  courts,  into  any  other  or  foreign  court,  they  were 
to  be  imprisoned  at  the  King's  pleasure,  and  their  lands,  goods,  and  chattels,  were  forfeited  to 
the  Crown. 

26  His  escape  into  Scotland,  or  his  death  in  140(i,  has  been  a  historical  puzzle  ever  since.— 
See  Tytler't  History  of  Scotland. 


xlvi  INTRODUCTION.  [xiv.  CENT. 

The  manuscripts  of  Wickliffe's  version  complete,  are  numerous 
still ;  and  perhaps  not  much  less  so  than  those  of  the  New  Testament 
separately,  not  to  mention  different  pieces,  or  entire  books  of  the 
translation.  In  examining  some  of  these,  whether  in  the  Bodleian 
Library  at  Oxford,  in  the  British  Museum,  or  in  private  collections, 
we  have  been  struck  with  their  legibility  and  beauty.  They  have 
all,  indiscriminately,  been  called  Wickliffe's  version^  but  variations 
of  expression  are  to  be  found  in  a  few ;  and  it  is  not  so  generally 
known  that  we  possess  two  distinct  versions,  one  under  Wickliffe's 
own  eye,  and  another  a  recension  of  the  entire  sacred  text.^ 

It  is  certainly  a  singular  circumstance  that  this  translation  of 
Wickliffe  has  never  been  printed !  The  New  Testament,  it  is  true, 
was  published  by  Mr.  Lewis,  in  the  year  1731,  or  three  hundred 
and  fifty  years  after  it  was  finished,  and  once  more  by  Mr.  Baber,  in 
1810;  but  the  Bible  entire,  now  four  hundred  and  sixty-four  years 
old,  has  never  yet  been  published.  By  the  time  that  Tyndale  was 
born,  indeed,  it  would  not  have  been  intelligible  to  the  people  at 
large ;  moreover,  it  was  from  the  Latin  Vulgate,  and  the  period 
had  arrived  when  the  translation  must  be  drawn  from  the  original 
tongues.  But  still,  even  as  a  most  interesting  literary  production,one 
could  never  have  imagined  that  above  twenty  sovereigns  would  have 
sat  on  the  throne  of  England  since  the  invention  of  printing,  before 
such  a  work  had  issued  from  the  press.  By  Fabricius,  a  foreigner, 
as  well  as  others,  this  has  been  often  referred  to  as  a  national  dis- 
grace, but  happily,  the  reproach,  at  last,  is  in  the  course  of  being 
wiped  away.  Both  these  versions  to  which  we  have  alluded  are 
now  in  the  press,  printing  in  parallel  columns,  at  the  Oxford  Uni- 
versity press,  and  under  the  eye  of  Sir  Frederick  Madden  and  the 
Rev.  J.  Forshall,  of  the  British  Museum.^^ 

Thus  then,  whatever  darkness  reigned,  or  enmity  was  shewn  in 
this  country,  throughout  the  whole  of  the  next  century,  these  pre- 
cious volumes  were  preserved,  and  the  surviving  copies  remain, 


"'  Upon  examining  one  large  folio  manuscript  Bible,  in  the  Bodleian,  (Fairfax,  2,)  we  find 
these  words  at  the  close.  "  Ye  eer  of  ye  lord  mccc  viii  yis  book  was  ended."  But  there  can 
be  no  doubt,  on  inspection,  that  one  c  has  been  erased  ;  and  the  prohibitiim  of  Wickliffe's 
translation  by  Arundel,  in  that  very  year,  1408,  is  sufficient  to  account  for  the  erasure.  That 
it  is  not  so  ancient  as  the  version  of  1380,  is  evident,  from  certain  notes  on  the  margin  of  that 
date  having  here  crept  info  the  text.  In  turning  over  the  leaves  of  this  manuscript  Bible,  a  pecu- 
liar sort  of  interest  is  felt,  if  it  actually  be  the  very  book  once  possessed  by  one  of  the  worst 
of  men,  as  explained  by  Lewis,  viz.  Kdmund  Bonner,  who  stood  so  unrivalled  in  the  sixteenth 
century  for  his  hypocrisy  and  brutal  cruelty.  Upon  inquiring  for  anotlier  MS.  [Fairfax,  39U1, 
21,)  entitled,  in  the  Catalogue,  "  an  ancient  manuscript  concerning  the  translation  of  the  SS.  into 
English,"  it  was  found  to  be  a  very  pretty  cojjy  of  the  New  Testament,  all  but  the  Four  Gospels. 
These  belong  to  the  old  MSS.  and  Collections,  above  120  volumes,  bequeathed  by  Thomas  Lord 
Fairfax  to  the  Bodleian,  at  his  death,  in  1671.  This  last  is  in  quarto,  but  there  are  manuscripts 
of  a  smaller  size,  fit  for  the  pocket,  e.y.  Hatton,  111,  &c. 

28  The  first,  or  earliest  text,  is  from  a  manuscript  of  the  late  Francis  Douce.  Esq.,  now  belong- 
ing to  the  Bodleian,  at  Oxford  ;  the  second  is  from  MS.  Reg.  i.,  c.  viii.,  in  the  British  Museum. 


ITALY  AND  ENGLAND  IN  CONTRAST.  xlvii 

like  so  many  veritable  torch-bearers  for  the  time  being.  They 
may,  and  indeed  must  have  shone  often  in  secret,  or  at  the  midnight 
hour,  and  certainly  not  without  effects,  to  be  disclosed  another 
day  :  but  at  all  events,  here  is  one  palpable  existing  distinction  be- 
tween this  country,  and  every  other,  at  the  moment.  It  is  one 
which  stands  in  the  finest  keeping  with  all  that  took  place  in  the 
days  of  Tyndale.  The  favour  of  God,  even  at  this  early  period,  had 
already  begun  to  place  this  Island  in  that  conspicuous  position 
which  it  was  afterwards  to  occupy  among  the  nations  of  Europe, 
with  regard  to  the  possession  and  the  diffusion  of  his  blessed  Word. 

Let  this  ever  be  regarded  as  the  grand  distinction  of  Britain. 
And  while  the  Italian  historian,  down  to  the  present  hour,  continues 
to  rejoice  in  the  triumph  of  literature  and  the  arts  upon  his  na- 
tive soil,  nearly  five  hundred  years  ago;  let  not  the  British  Chris- 
tian fall  behind  him  in  joy  and  gratitude  over  that  contemporaneous 
triumjjh  which  at  last  led  his  country  to  a  better  hope  and  a  brighter 
day.  Let  him  rather  compare  the  two  countries  noic,  and  observe 
the  too-much-neglected,  but  all-suflicient  reason,  for  the  prodigious 
distinction  between  the  two. 

No  storm,  however,  arose  in  Italy,  nor  any  cloud,  to  obscure  the 
rising  sun  of  her  classical  literature.  On  the  contrary,  though  Rome 
itself  may  still  be  troubled,  that  sun  is  only  about  to  burst  upon  the 
country  in  all  its  splendour,  and  the  men  of  Italy  are  to  be  allowed 
ample  scope  still,  for  above  an  hundred  years,  to  do  their  utmost. 
Yery  different  was  the  reception  given  by  our  forefathers,  as  a  na- 
tion or  as  a  government,  to  the  voice  of  God.  Here  at  home,  in 
some  resemblance  to  the  visit  paid  by  the  Almighty  to  Elijah,  there 
must  it  seems  be  first  the  wind,  and  then  the  earthquake,  and  then 
the  fire,  before  ever  the  "  still  small  voice "  is  heard  with  effect. 
Nay,  and  when  once  it  comes  through  Tyndale's  version,  and  is 
heard  by  the  people,  we  shall  find,  however  strange,  that  no  official 
man  in  England  will  be  able  to  divine  from  whence  it  came,  or  by 
what  mysterious  conveyance  it  had  reached  their  ears  ! 

THE  FIFTEENTH  CENTURY. 

Although,  strictly  speaking,  only  a  century  of  preparation,  still  the 
fifteenth  must  ever  be  esteemed  more  important  than  any  that  had 
preceded  it,  and,  in  one  point  of  view,  more  influential  than  any  that 
has  followed  since.  When  it  is  observed  that  an  art,  then  first 
applied,  though  nearly  four  hundred  years  old,  is  only  now  rising  to 
greater  power  in  this  country  every  day,  and  is  evidently  destined  to 
be  employed  by  all  nations,  no  wonder  that  it  should  be  so  regarded. 
It  is  true,  that  "  in  the  wisdom  of  God,  it  pleased  God  by  the  fool- 
ishness of  preaching,"  nay,  and  the  preaching  of  what  was  deemed 


xlviii  INTRODUCTION.  [xv.  CENT. 

foolishness,  "  to  save  tliem  that  believe."  This  sovereign  appoint- 
ment remains  unrepealed — it  is  but  awaiting  its  mightiest  triumphs 
— God  will  be  his  own  interpreter,  and  make  his  purpose  good.  The 
power  of  the  press,  great  as  it  is,  will  yet  be  demonstrated  to  be  far 
inferior  to  the  power  of  the  tongue.  The  enlightening  of  the  world 
depends  not  upon  the  ingenuity  of  man,  upon  the  march  of  intellect, 
or  the  school  of  arts,  but  upon  the  fixed  appointment  of  Heaven.  Yet 
after  this  is  granted,  it  is  evident  that  to  this  new  influence,  as  far  as 
it  goes,  first  employed  in  the  fifteenth  century,  there  can  be  no  limits, 
short  of  the  earth  which  we  inhabit.  In  connexion,  therefore,  with 
the  Divine  assurances  in  Scripture,  which  of  themselves  are  all-suf- 
ficient, it  may  be  viewed  as  an  additional  indication,  a  providential 
hint,  that  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God  is  to  be  universal.  Of 
course  we  refer  to  the  invention  of  printing. 

This  deeply  interesting  century  throughout  must  ever  be  viewed  in 
two  very  diflferent  lights.  First,  as  an  ever-shifting  scene  of  agitation 
among  all  the  nations  of  Europe,  in  their  connexion  with  Italy  ;  and 
then  as  the  era  so  distinguished  for  the  revival  of  learning  and  the 
invention  of  printing.  How  all  this,  so  far  as  Britain  was  concerned, 
is  to  be  regarded  as  only  an  introduction  to  the  printing  of  the  Sacred 
Volume  in  our  vernacular  tongue,  will  appear  when  the  century  has 
passed  away. 

Generally  speaking,  it  has  been  said,  that  this  was  the  period  when 
''  the  relations  of  governments  with  each  other  began  to  be  more  fre- 
quent, regular,  and  permanent."  It  was  the  season  for  great  combina- 
tions, whether  for  peace  or  war,  in  which  the  Pontiff  must  now  come 
down,  and  form  merely  one  of  the  parties  on  either  side.  This  course 
operated  powerfully  in  favour  of  civil  states,  while  no  other  authority 
in  Europe  exhibited  such  occasional  marks  of  impotence,  or  waning 
political  influence,  as  that  of  Rome. 

The  fifteenth  century,  however,  still  requires  to  be  considered  half 
and  half,  as  there  was  a  material  difference  between  the  first  and  the 
second.  During  the Jirst,  we  see  the  continuance  of  the  great  Western 
schism,  the  union  of  the  Eastern  and  Western  Churches  before  they 
were  shaken  to  the  ground,  closing  with  the  noted  licentious  jubilee, 
under  Nicholas  V.,  at  Rome  in  1450.  During  the  second^  we  are  en- 
grossed by  other  affairs.  The  fall  of  the  Greek  Empire,  the  rapid 
progress  of  literature  in  Italy,  and  the  invention  of  printing  in  Ger- 
many. All  these  were  so  many  preparatives  for  the  emancipation 
of  the  human  mind,  or  that  war  of  opinion  by  which  the  sixteenth 
century  was  to  be  so  distinguished.^'* 


29  The  discovery  of  America  by  Columbus  in  1492,  and  of  the  passage  to  India  by  Vasco  de 
Gama  in  14!)7>  only  fix  the  eye  with  deeper  interest  on  the  century  to  come. 


THE  GREAT  SCHISM.  xlix 

But  to  return,  aud  commeuce  with  the  great  schism.  It  continued 
without  interruption  for  fifty-one  years,  from  1378  to  1429,  though 
the  consequences  were  deeply  felt  by  the  Pontiff  for  twenty  years 
longer.  This  could  not  fail  to  oi^crate  powerfully  on  the  whole  of 
Europe.  It  was  the  first  "shaking"  of  the  nations,  before  the 
coming  of  Him,  to  whom  all  nations  should  turn.  This  noted 
schism  has  been  called  great,  to  distinguish  it  from  all  those  which 
had  preceded.^"  It  at  last  suggested  the  necessity  for  a  General 
Council,  so  that,  during  the  first  half  of  the  fifteenth  century.  Coun- 
cils became  the  order  of  the  day.  The  first,  held  at  Pisa  in  1409, 
tried  to  heal  the  breach  by  deposing  both  Pontifis,  (Gregory  XII. 
and  Benedict  XIII.,)  and  choosing  a  third,  or  Alexander  V.,  in 
which  decision  England  acquiesced,  but  Scotland  still  dissented.^^ 
Alexander,  a  feeble  character,  was  succeeded  in  1410,  or  next  year, 
by  Balthasar  Cossa,  or  John  XXIII.,  a  man  as  distinguished  for 
violence  of  temper  as  licentiousness  of  morals.  Three  years  after  he 
summoned  a  Council  to  meet  at  Pome,  but  so  far  from  this  city  being 
attractive  at  that  time,  only  a  few  attended  to  the  call.  The  conse- 
quence was,  that,  although  his  Council  sat  from  the  close  of  141  2  to 
the  11th  of  June  following,  no  other  business  was  accomplished  save 
some  condemnation  of  the  writings  of  WicklifFe. 

In  the  year  following  a  far  more  imposing  Council  was  held  at 
Constance,  where  the  man  who  had  sat  in  judgment  upon  Wickliffe 
must  be  himself  condemned,  though  not  on  that  account.  John  was 
deposed,  however,  and  Gregory  XII.,  who  had  stood  out  for  five 
years,  or  ever  since  his  deposition  at  Pisa,  abdicated ;  but  Peter  de 
Luna,  Benedict  XIII.,  still  held  fast  by  his  claim ;  and,  whoever 
withdrew  from  him,  Scotland  would  not.  Thus  it  curiously  happened 
that,  for  two  years  and  four  months,  from  July  1415,  the  only  Pon- 
tiff in  existence  was  a  dejJosed  one,  and  the  only  kingdom  or  province 
that  adhered  to  him  in  the  end,  was  Scotland  !^^  It  was  during 
this  strange  period  that  the  merits  of  Wickliffe  were  afresh  discussed 
and  condemned,  not  by  an  individual  Pontiff,  but  a  General  Coun- 
cil ;  and  to  such  an  execrable  length  did  they  proceed,  that  though 
our  translator  had  now  been  in  his  grave  full  thirty  years,  they 
ordered  his  bones  to  be  dug  up,  (if  they  could  be  distinguished), 
and  burnt  to  ashes.     Their  spite  was  not,  indeed,  immediately  gra- 


M  Far  from  being  the  first,  if  the  reader  chooses  to  consult  the  best  original  authorities,  he  will 
be  able  to  count,  between  the  year  452  and  1429,  not  fewer  than  twenty-eight  instances,  in  which 
there  were  tvo,  and  sometimes  three  or  more  Pontiffs  at  the  same  time  ;  and  as  these  conflicts 
were  frequently  aecided,  not  by  equity,  but  by  the  influential  power  of  the  successful  candidate, 
"lence  all  attempts  to  prove  what  is  called  an  uninterrupted  succession  become  utterly  vain. 
That  any  man  should  now  waste  a  moment  on  such  an  attempt,  is  humbling  to  human  nature. 

3'  As  well  as  Spain,  i.  e.  Arragon,  both  of  whom  adhered  to  Benedict,  while  Germany,  Hun- 
gary, aud  Naples  adhered  to  Gregory.     See  also  as  to  Scotland,  vol.  ii.  of  this  work,  p.  396. 

32  See  the  Council  of  Perth,  anno,  1416,  or  Wilkin's  Cone,  i.,  p.  193. 


1  INTRODUCTION.  [xv.  CENT. 

tified,  for  what  reason  does  not  appear ;  but  so  mean  is  the  malice 
of  the  wicked,  that,  thirteen  years  afterwards,  Martin  V.^  whom  this 
Council  was  about  to  elect,  sent  peremptory  orders  to  have  the  sen- 
tence strictly  fulfilled.  Thus,  nearly  forty- four  years  after  his  dis- 
solution, they  attempted  it,  burning  certain  bones  presumed  to  be 
Wickliffe's,  and  throwing  the  ashes  into  the  Swift,  an  adjoining 
brook,  which  runs  into  the  Severn. 

The  bones  of  the  illustrious  dead  having  been  solemnly  denounced, 
the  Council  then  proceeded  to  the  living,  or  the  well  known  disciple 
of  Wickliffe,  John  Huss :  and  on  the  Cth  of  July  1415,  they  con- 
demned him  to  be  burnt,  as  they  also  did  his  fellow-countryman, 
Jerome  of  Prague,  in  May  141 G.  These  men  of  violence  and 
blood,  having  thus  covered  themselves  with  never-dying  infamy, 
were  very  eager  to  have  rendered  their  sittings  periodical,  and  the 
Council  a  permanent  branch  of  their  church  constitution  :  but  at 
last  having  elected  Otho  Colonna  as  Pontiff,  on  the  1 1  th  of  Novem- 
ber 1417,  he  took  the  name  of  Martin  Y.,  and  the  Council  broke 
up  in  April  1418. 

This  man,  however,  still  had  a  rival  in  Benedict,  till  November 
1424 ;  nay,  in  Clement  VIII.,  chosen  as  his  successor,  who  did  not 
resign  till  July  1429.  Martin  dying  in  1431,  before  the  close  of 
the  year,  another  General  Council  had  assembled  at  Basil,  which 
did  not  dissolve  for  twelve  years.  To  any  Pontiff,  these  were  sea- 
sons of  anxiety,  and  by  no  means  in  favour  of  any  claim  to  infalli- 
bility, but  this  Council  assumed  a  tone  hitherto  unknown.  Not 
only  asserting  the  supremacy  of  a  Council,  but  divesting  the  Pontiff 
of  several  highly- valued  and  acknowledged  rights ;  they  prohibited 
him  from  creating  new  cardinals,  and  suppressed  a  large  portion  of 
his  revenue,  arising  from  the  first  year's  income  on  all  benefices. 
Eugenius  IV.,  the  successor  of  Martin,  at  length  feeling  this  assem- 
bly so  irksome  and  untoward,  tried  to  hold  another  Council,  first  at 
Ferrara  in  1438,  and  then  at  Florence  in  the  following  year ;  so 
that  as  there  had  been  Pontiff  against  Pontiff  for  many  years,  and 
each  of  them  choosing  his  own  cardinals  ;  the  world  was  now  kept 
awake  by  Council  against  Council,  denouncing  each  other,  and  each 
of  them  choosing  its  own  Pontiff!  The  Council  of  Basil,  deposing 
Eugenius,  chose  for  their  head  the  retired  Duke  of  Savoy,  who 
assumed  the  title  of  Felix  V. 

A  moment  such  as  had  not  occurred  for  nearly  seventy  years,  or 
since  1378 — a  moment  favourable  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  Pontiff, 
now  at  last  arrived.  It  was  the  accession  of  Nicholas  V.,  in  March 
1447,  as  the  successor  of  Eugenius.  Even  after  this,  indeed,  a  rival 
still  remained;  but  the  Emperor  interposed,  and  in  April  1449, 
securing  the  retirement  and  renunciation  of  Felix  to  all  claiins,  the 


CLASSICAL  LEARNING  AND  THE  ARTS.  li 

pontifical  authority  at  once  rose  to  a  height  which  it  had  not  en- 
joyed for  many  years.  The  jubilee  of  1450,  a  scene  of  riot  and 
licentiousness,  to  which  people  from  all  parts  of  Europe  came, 
seemed  not  only  to  prove  that  Rome  was  an  attractive  point  of 
union  still,  but  that  the  Pontiff  might  lift  up  his  head  once  more, 
and  say,  "  I  sit  secure,  and  shall  see  no  sorrow."  Assailed,  for 
above  seventy  years,  from  without  and  from  within — from  without 
by  the  influence  of  Wickliffc  and  Huss,  and  from  within  by  men  of 
the  Pontiff's  own  order — still  there  seemed  to  be  little  or  nothing 
lost.  General  Councils  had  wrangled  for  many  years,  though,  as 
such,  they  had  now  failed,  and  there  will  be  no  General  Council 
now,  till  long  after  a  very  different  scene  has  opened  on  the  world.^^ 

But  still  though  they  had  failed,  it  was  only  in  one  sense.  The 
principles  then  and  there  broached  could  not  die.  The  principles 
maintained,  especially  at  Basil,  continued  to  operate  thi'oughout  the 
rest  of  this  century,  and  in  a  way  so  obnoxious  to  Rome,  as  to  agi- 
tate every  successive  Pontiff.  They  were  these  principles,  and  more 
especially  the  tenet,  that  the  authority  of  a  General  Council  was  supe- 
rior to  that  of  the  Pontiff,  which  suggested  to  the  Sovereign  of  France, 
Charles  VII.,  what  was  styled  "  the  pragmatic  sanction"  in  1438, 
while  Germany  had  adopted  it  in  1439  ;  both  Sovereigns  having 
made  it  the  law  of  their  respective  kingdoms.'^'*  Germany,  indeed, 
had  bowed  allegiance  before  the  jubilee,  but  France  would  not. 
This  "  sanction,"  like  the  statutes  of  provisors  and  praemunire  in 
England,  was  meant  to  operate  powerfully  in  preventing  the  wealth 
of  France  from  flowing  into  Italy  ;  a  mode  of  resistance  to  pontifical 
authority,  to  which  that  power  was  ever  most  tenderly  alive.  The 
King  of  France  might  occasionally  waver,  as  did  Louis  XI.,  when 
Eneas  Sylvias,  or  Pius  II.,  wept  for  joy ;  but  then  the  Parliament 
of  Paris  must  now  also  be  acknowledged,  and  they  firmly  resisted. 
One  Pontiff  after  another  might  denounce  the  measure,  as  they  did 
also  the  English  statutes,  but  still  there  was  no  change  throughout 
this  century.  No  change,  till  one  obscure  individual  was  raised  up 
in  this  country,  and  another  in  Germany,  who,  under  God,  were  to 
accomplish  a  work,  to  which  neither  Kings  nor  General  Councils 
were  equal  or  disposed. 

But  if  subjects  such  as  these  engrossed  or  agitated  the  masses  of 
men ;  there  was  a  movement  on  the  part  of  individuals,  and  these 
possessing  no  civil,  no  official  power  whatever;  another  influence  of 
a  far  more  powerful,  penetrating,  and  enduring  character,  by  which 


33  There  was  no  General  Council  till  that  which  was  held  at  Trent,  from  1545-],'>().f.  That 
was  the  last,  and  if  there  ever  he  another,  it  will  be  assembled  on  the  brink  of  the  precipice. 

3<  "  Pragmatic  Sanction,"  a  general  term  for  important  ordinances,  which  had  been  enacted 
in  public  assemblies,  with  the  counsel  of  Prapmatici,  or  eminent  statesmen  and  lawyers. 


Hi  INTRODUCTION.  [xv.  CENT. 

this  century  was  distinguished.  In  the  midst  of  such  a  thorny 
maze,  or  perpetual  convulsion,  on  the  Continent,  it  might  certainly 
have  been  presumed  that  there  was  not  one  moment  left  for  any 
thing  else;  but  there  is  yet  that  other  view  of  this  century,  to 
which  any  reader  must  now  be  glad  to  escape.  Forming  such  a 
contrast  to  these  broils,  and  going  forward,  not  by  connivance,  but 
in  open  day,  it  is  like  another  world ;  although,  before  long,  both 
courses  will  turn  out  to  have  been  in  perfect  harmony  with  the 
great  end  in  view.  Ancient  prejudices,  and  certain  long-fixed  as- 
sociations of  the  mind,  were  shaken  to  the  root,  by  the  events  at 
which  we  have  already  glanced :  but  for  the  entrance  of  new  ideas, 
and  the  notable  reception  of  Divine  Truth  itself.  Providence  was 
preparing  at  the  same  time,  or  throughout  the  entire  century. 

The  triumph  of  Classical  Learning. 

We  have  already  conceded  to  Italy  the  precedence  which  she 
claims,  as  the  revivalist  of  classical  learning ;  and  truly  the  first 
buds  of  promise  in  the  fourteenth,  were  as  nothing  to  the  full  blown 
garden  of  the  fifteenth  century.  In  the  first  years  of  its  com- 
mencement, individual  natives  of  Greece  were  finding  their  way  into 
that  country,  nay,  from  about  the  year  13.95,  their  language  was 
taught  in  Florence  and  Venice,  in  Milan  and  Genoa,  by  Emanuel 
Chrysoloras.  The  Pontiff  chosen  in  1409,  Alexander  V.,  was  a 
Grecian  by  birth.  The  whole  lives  of  Italian  scholars,  we  are  told, 
were  now  devoted  to  the  recovery  of  ancient  works,  and  the  revival 
of  philology ;  while  the  discovery  of  an  unknown  manuscript,  was 
regarded,  says  Tiraboschi,  "  almost  as  the  conquest  of  a  kingdom." 
But  "  that  ardour  which  animated  Italy  in  the  first  part  of  the  fif- 
teenth century,  was  by  no  means  common  to  the  rest  of  Europe. 
Neither  England,  nor  France,  nor  Germany,  seemed  aware  of  the 
approaching  change."  So  says  Mr.  Hallam,  in  perfect  harmony 
with  Sismondi.  Learning,  indeed,  such  as  it  was,  had  even  begun 
to  decline  at  Oxford,  but  the  eastern  empire  was  now  hastening  to 
its  end,  and  in  1453,  came  the  fall  of  Constantinoj)le.  Long,  there- 
fore, before  the  close  of  the  century,  the  roads  to  Italy  will  be 
crowded  with  many  a  traveller,  and  among  the  number  we  shall 
find  that  Englishmen,  though  the  most  distant,  were  not  the  last  to 
hasten  after  classical  attainments.  Native  Italians,  we  are  perfectly 
aware,  have  been  jealous  of  our  ascribing  too  much  to  the  event 
just  hinted,  but  there  can  be  no  question  that,  in  its  consequences, 
it  proved  the  first  powerful  summons  to  Europe  to  awake.  On  the 
sackino-  of  Constantinople,  we  know  of  five  vessels  at  least,  that 
were  loaded  with  the  learned  men  of  Greece,   who   escaped  into 


THE  INVENTION  OF  PRINTING.  liii 

Italy,  Of  course  they  brouglit  their  most  valued  treasure,  or 
their  books,  with  them  ;  and  thus  by  one  and  another,  as  well  as 
the  eager  Italian  himself,  a  stock  of  manuscript  was  accumulated 
on  Italian  ground,  which  was  just  about  to  be  honoured  with  a  re- 
ception, very  different,  indeed,  from  that  of  being  slowly  increased 
by  the  pen  of  the  copyist  !''■'  Italy  thus  became  the  point  of  attrac- 
tion to  all  Europe.  But  how  singular  that  the  scholars  of  the  west, 
as  with  common  consent,  should  hasten  to  this  one  country  for  that 
learning,  over  the  eftccts  of  which,  the  chief  authority  there,  though 
so  pleased  at  first,  was  afterwards  to  bewail,  nay,  to  mourn  for 
ages,  or  to  the  present  hour  ! 

"While,  however,  Italian  scholars  were  thus  busy,  and  leaving  the 
Pontiff  to  fight  his  own  battles,  they  were  but  little  aware  of  what 
was  preparing  for  them  elsewhere.  They  were  in  fact  more  igno- 
rant of  this,  than  the  western  scholar  had  been  of  their  thirst  for 
learning ;  and  was  there  no  indication  here,  of  but  one  guiding,  one 
all-gracious  power  ? 

The  Invention  of  Printing. 

An  obscure  German  had  been  revolving  in  his  mind,  the  first 
principles  of  an  art,  applicable  to  any  language  on  the  face  of 
the  earth,  which  was  to  prove  the  most  important  discovery  in  the 
annals  of  mankind.  At  the  moment  when  they  were  storming 
Constantinople  in  the  east,  he  was  thus  busy ;  spending  all  his  sub- 
stance, in  plying  his  new  art  with  vigour  upon  a  book,  and  upon 
such  a  BOOK  !  Neither  Kings,  nor  Pontiffs,  nor  Councils  had  been, 
or  were  to  be,  consulted  here  ;  nor  was  he  encouraged  to  j^roceed 
by  one  smile  from  his  own  Emperor,  or  from  any  princely  patron. 

No  mechanical  invention  having  proved  so  powerful  in  its  effects 
as  that  of  printing,  it  is  not  wonderful  that  so  much  research  has 
been  bestowed  on  the  history  of  its  origin  and  progress.  The  pre- 
cise order  in  which  some  particular  cities  Jirst  enjoyed  its  advan- 
tages, still  continues  to  afford  room  for  minute  criticism,  but  the 
progress  of  inquiry  has  reduced  the  field  of  controversy  to  a  very 
narrow  compass.  A  better  history  of  the  art,  indeed,  and  more 
especially  of  its  curious  and  rapid  progress  throughout  Europe,  may, 
and  should  still,  be  written ;  but  the  general  results  already  ascer- 


35  After  the  accession  of  Nicholas  V.,  to  which  we  have  alluded,  he  added  5000  volumes  to 
the  library  of  the  Vatican,  many  of  which  were  Greek  books,  or  translations  from  them  into 
Latin.  Here  were  the  versions  of  Xenophon,  Diodorus,  Polybius,  Thucydides,  Herodotus, 
Appian  of  Strabo,  the  Hiad,  the  works  of  Plato,  Aristotle,  Ptolemy,  Theophrastus,  and  the 
Greek  fathers.  Among  others,  this  was  especially  imitated,  if  ncit  preceded,  by  Cosmo  de 
Medici,  the  Florentine  merchant, ;to  whom  a  cargo  of  Indian  s]);ci.s  and  Greek  books  was  often 
imported  in  the  same  vessel.  His  active  agent,  Janus  Lascaris,  returned  from  the  east,  with 
two  hundred  Manuscripts,  eighty  of  which  were  tlien  unknown  in  the  libraries  of  Europe. 

VOL.  I.  e 


Hv  I.XTKODUCTION.  [xv.  CHNT. 

tained,  have  now  approached  to  such  accuracy,  as  to  suggest  and 
justify  several  important  and  striking  reflections.  These  results 
demand  our  notice  at  the  close  of  the  century,  as  they  will  be  found 
to  involve  one  important  bearing  on  the  subsequent  history  of  the 
Sacred  Volume,  when  it  came  to  be  first  printed  in  the  vernacular 
tongue. 

Mentz,  in  the  Duchy  of  Hesse  (Mayence  or  Mainz),  on  the 
left  bank  of  the  Rhine,  and  four  hundred  miles  from  Vienna, 
may  be  regarded  as  the  mother  city  of  printing ;  and  although  three 
individuals  shared  the  honour  of  perfecting  the  art  on  the  same 
spot,  if  not  under  the  same  roof,  the  invention  itself  is  due  to  only 
one  man.  Henne  GaMisfleisch,  commonly  called  John  Gutenberg, 
{Anfflice,  Goodhill,)  the  individual  referred  to,  was  born  in  Mentz, 
not  Strasburg,  as  sometimes  stated,  about  the  year  1400;  but,  in 
1424,  he  had  taken  up  his  abode  in  the  latter  city  as  a  merchant. 
About  ten  years  after  this,  or  in  1 435,  we  have  positive  evidence 
that  his  invention,  then  a  profound  secret,  engrossed  his  thoughts ; 
and  here,  in  conjunction  with  one  Andrew  Dritzehen  and  two  other 
citizens,  all  bound  to  secrecy,  Gutenberg  had  made  some  experiments 
in  printing  with  metal  types  before  the  year  1439.  By  this  time 
Dritzehen  was  dead ;  and  in  six  or  seven  years  more,  the  money 
embarked  being  exhausted,  not  one  fi-agment  survives  in  proof  of 
what  they  had  attempted.  Gutenberg,  returning  to  his  native 
city  in  1445-6,  he  found  it  absolutely  necessary  to  disclose  his 
progress.  More  money  was  demanded,  if  ever  he  was  to  succeed ; 
and  having  once  opened  his  mind  fully  to  a  citizen,  a  goldsmith  of 
Mentz,  John  Fust,  he  engaged  to  co-opei"ate  by  aff'ording  the  need- 
ful advances.  At  last,  therefoi'e,  between  the  years  1450  and  1455, 
for  it  has  no  date,  their  first  great  work  was  finished.  This  was 
no  other  than  the  Bible  itself ! — the  Lathi  Bible.  Altogether  un- 
known to  the  rest  of  the  world,  this  was  what  had  been  doing  at 
Mentz,  in  the  West,  when  Constantinople,  in  the  East,  was  storming, 
and  the  Italian  "  brief  men,"  or  copyists,  were  so  very  busy  with 
their  pens.  This  Latin  Bible,  of  641  leaves,  formed  t\\Q  Jirst  im- 
portant specimen  of  printing  with  metal  types.  The  very  first  ho- 
mage was  to  be  paid  to  that  Sacred  Volume,  which  had  been  sa- 
crilegiously buried,  nay,  interdicted  so  long ;  as  if  it  had  been,  with 
pointing  finger,  to  mark  at  once  the  greatest  honour  ever  to  be  be- 
stowed on  the  art,  and  infinitely  the  higliest  purpose  to  which  it  was 
ever  to  be  applied.  Nor  was  this  all.  Had  it  been  a  single  page, 
or  even  an  entire  sheet  which  was  then  produced,  there  might  have 
been  less  occasion  to  have  noticed  it ;  but  there  was  something  in 
the  whole  character  of  the  aff'air  which,  if  not  unprecedented,  ren- 
dered it  singular  in  the  usual  current  of  human  events.     This  Bible 


LATIN  BIBLE,  THE  FIRST  BOOK  PRINTED.  Iv 

formed  two  volumes  in  folio,  which  have  been  "•  justly  praised  for 
the  strength  and  beauty  of  the  paper,  the  exactness  of  the  register, 
the  lustre  of  the  ink."  It  was  a  work  of  1282  pages,  finely  exe- 
cuted— a  most  laborious  process,  involving  not  only  a  considerable 
period  of  time,  but  no  small  amount  of  mental,  manual,  and  mecha- 
nical labour;  and  yet,  now  that  it  had  been  finished,  and  now  offer- 
ed for  sale,  not  a  single  human  being,  save  the  artists  themselves, 
knew  lioic  it  had  been  accomplished !  The  profound  secret  remain- 
ed with  themselves,  while  the  entire  process  was  probably  still  con 
fined  to  the  bosom  of  only  two  or  three ! 

Of  this  splendid  work,  in  two  volumes,  at  least  18  copies  are  known 
to  exist,  four  on  vellum,  and  fourteen  on  paper.  "  Of  the  former,  two 
are  in  this  country,  one  of  which  is  in  the  Grenville  collection  ;  the 
other  two  are  in  the  Royal  Libraries  of  Paris  and  Berlin.  Of  the 
fourteen  paper  copies  there  are  ten  in  Britain :  three  in  public 
libraries  at  Oxford,  London,  and  Edinburgh,  and  seven  in  the  pri- 
vate collections  of  difterent  noblemen  and  gentlemen.  The  A'ellum 
copy  has  been  sold  as  low  as  £260,  though  in  1827,  as  high  as 
£504  sterling.  Even  the  paper  Sussex  copy  lately  brought  £l90. 
Thus,  as  if  it  had  been  to  mark  the  noblest  purpose  to  which  the 
art  would  ever  be  applied,  the  first  Booh  printed  with  moveable 
metal  tt/pes,  and  so  beautifully,  was  the  Bible. 

Like  almost  all  original  inventors,  Gutenberg  made  nothing  by 
the  discovery,  at  which  he  had  laboured  for  at  least  twenty  years, 
from  1435  to  J  455.  The  expenses  had  been  very  great ;  and,  in 
the  course  of  business,  after  the  Bible  was  finished,  the  inventor  was 
in  debt  to  the  goldsmith,  who,  though  opulent,  now  exhibited  a  charac- 
ter certainly  not  to  be  admired.  He  insisted  on  Gutenberg  paying  up 
his  debt ;  and,  having  him  in  his  power,  actually  instituted  a  suit 
against  him,  when,  in  the  course  of  law,  the  whole  printing  apparatus 
fell  into  Fust's  possession,  on  the  6th  of  November  1455.  Accord- 
ing to  Trithemius,  one  of  the  best  authorities,  poor  Gutenberg  had 
spent  his  whole  estate  in  this  difficult  discovery  ;  but  still,  not  dis- 
couraged, he  contrived  to  print  till  1465,  though  on  a  humbler  scale. 
Having  been  appointed  by  Adolphus  the  Elector  of  Mentz  one  of 
his  gentlemen,  (inter  aidlcos,)  with  an  annual  pension,  he  was 
less  dependent  on  an  art  which  to  him  had  been  a  source  of  trouble, 
if  not  of  vexation.    He  died  in  the  city  of  his  birth  in  February  1468. 

Fust  had,  from  1456,  pursued  his  advantage,  and  with  great 
vigour,  having  adopted  as  his  acting  partner  Peter  Schoeflfer,  (^An- 
fflice,  Shepherd,)  a  young  man  of  genius,  already  trained  to  the  busi- 
ness, to  whom  he  afterwai'ds  gave  his  daughter  in  marriage.  The 
types  emjjloyed  hitherto  had  been  made  of  brass,  cut  by  the  hand. 
An  advance  to  the  present  mode  of  producing  types  by  letter -found- 


Ivi  INTRODUCTlOxV.  [xv.  CENT. 

ing  was  still  wanted,  and  the  art  of  cutting  steel  punches  and  casting 
matrices  has  been  ascribed  to  Schoeffer.^^ 

The  first  publication  of  Fust  and  SchoefFer  was  a  beautiful  edition 
of  the  Psalms,  still  in  Latin,  finished  on  the  14th  of  August  1457, 
and  there  was  a  second  in  1459  ;  but  the  year  14C2  arrived,  and 
this  was  a  marked  and  decisive  era  in  the  history  of  this  extraordin- 
ary invention  ;  not  merely  for  a  second  edition  of  the  Latin  Bible, 
in  two  volumes  folio,  dated  1462,  and  now  executed  according  to  the 
improved  state  of  the  art ;  but  on  account  of  what  took  place  in  Mentz 
at  the  same  moment. 

A  change  had  arrived,  far  from  being  anticipated  by  these  the 
inventors  of  jtrinting,  and  one  which  they,  no  doubt,  regarded  as  the 
greatest  calamity  which  could  have  befallen  them.  Gutenberg 
had  been  the  father  of  printing,  and  SchoefFer  the  main  improver 
of  it,  while  Fust,  not  only  by  his  ingenuity,  but  his  wealth,  had 
assisted  both ;  but  all  these  men  were  bent  upon  keeping  the  art 
secret ;  and,  left  to  themselves,  unquestionably  they  would  have  con- 
fined the  printing  press  to  Mentz  as  long  as  they  lived.  Fust  and 
Schoeffer,  however,  especially  eager  to  acquire  wealth,  had  resolved 
to  proceed  in  a  very  unhallowed  course,  by  palming  off  their  produc- 
tions as  manuscripts,  that  so  they  might  obtain  a  larger  price  for 
each  copy.  The  glory  of  promoting  or  extending  the  art  must  now, 
therefoi'e,  be  immediately  and  suddenly  taken  from  them.  Invention, 
of  whatever  character,  like  Nature  itself,  is  but  a  name  for  an  effect, 
whose  cause  is  God.  The  ingenuity  He  gives  to  whomsoever  He 
will,  but  He  still  reigns  over  the  invention,  and  directs  its  future 
progress.  At  this  crisis,  therefore,  just  as  if  to  make  the  reference 
to  Himself  more  striking,  and  upon  our  part  more  imperative,  we 
have  only  to  observe  what  then  took  place,  and  the  consequences 
which  immediately  followed. 

Fust  and  Schoeffer  had  completed  their  first  dated  Bible,  of 
14G2,  but  this  very  year  the  city  of  Mentz  must  be  invaded.  Like 
Constantinople,  it  was  taken  by  storm,  aud  by  a  member  too  of 
that  body,  who  in  future  times  so  lamented  over  the  effects  of 
printing.  This  was  the  Archbishop,  or  Adolphus,  already  mentioned. 
The  consequences  were  immediate,  aud  afford  an  impressive  illus- 
tration of  that  ease  with  which  Providence  accomplishes  its  mightiest 
operations.  The  mind  of  Europe  was  to  be  roused  to  action,  and 
materials  sufficient  to  engage  all  its  activity,  must  not  be  wanting. 
But  this  demanded  nothing  more  than  the  capture  of  tico  cities,  and 
these  two,  far  distant  from  each  other !     If  when  Constantinople 

36  By  this  mode  leaden  types  were  first  produced,  and  then  of  lead  with  a  mixture  of  tin  or 
hammered  iron.  The  invention  of  ii/pc  metal,  or  one  pound  of  regulus  of  antimony  to  five  of 
lead,  is  of  comparatively  recent  origin. 


PRINTING  IN  ROME.  Ivii 

fell  in  the  east,  the  Greeks,  with  their  manuscripts  and  learning, 
rushed  into  Italy,  to  join  the  already  awakened  Italian  scholars : 
Mentz  also  is  taken,  and  the  art  of  printing  spreads  over  Europe, 
with  a  rapidity,  which  still  excites  astonishment. 

This  city,  once  deprived,  by  the  sword  of  the  conqueror,  of  those 
laws  and  privileges  which  belonged  to  it  as  a  member  of  the  Rhen- 
ish Commercial  Confederation  ;  all  previous  ties  or  obligations  be- 
tween master  and  servant  were  loosened,  and  oaths  of  secrecy  im- 
posed under  a  former  regime,  were  at  an  end.  Amidst  the  confusion 
that  ensued,  the  operative  printers  felt  free  to  accept  of  invitations 
from  any  quarter.  But  whither  will  they  bend  their  steps,  or  in  what 
direction  will  the  art  proceed  ?  Where  will  it  meet  with  its  warm- 
est welcome,  and  in  which  capital  of  Europe  will  it  be  first  esta- 
blished ?  The  reader  may  anticipate  that  the  welcome  came  from 
Italy,  but  it  is  still  more  observable,  that  the  first  capital  was 
Rome  !  Yes,  after  the  capture  of  Mentz,  Rome  and  its  vicinity, 
the  city  of  the  future  Index  Expurgatorius ,  gave  most  cordial  wel- 
come. The  art,  while  in  its  cradle  in  Italy,  must  be  nursed  under 
the  inquisitive  and  much  amused  eye  of  the  Pontiff  himself  ! 

One  might  very  naturally  have  presumed,  that  the  enemies  of  light 
and  learning,  or  of  all  innovation,  would  have  been  up  in  arms ; 
and  it  is  certainly  not  the  least  extraordinary  fact  connected  with  the 
memorable  invention  of  printing,  that  no  alarm  was  expressed, — 
neither  at  its  discovery,  nor  its  first  application,  even  though  the  very 
first  book  was  the  Bible.  The  brief-men  or  copyists,  it  is  true, 
were  angry  in  prospect  of  losing  their  means  of  subsistence ;  and  in 
Paris  they  had  talked  of  necromancy,  or  the  black  art,  being  the 
origin  of  all  this  ;  but  there  was  not  a  whisper  of  the  kind  in  Italy. 
Indeed,  as  to  an  existing  establishment  of  any  kind,  any  where,  no 
dangerous  consequences  were  apprehended,  by  a  single  human  being 
as  far  as  we  know  ;  but  most  certainly  none  by  the  reigning  Pontiff 
himself,  or  even  by  the  conclave  with  all  its  wonted  foresight.  On 
the  contrary,  the  invention  was  hailed  with  joy,  and  its  first  efiects 
were  received  with  enthusiasm.  Not  one  man  appears  to  have  per- 
ceived its  bearing,  or  once  dreamt  of  its  ultimate  results.  No,  the 
German  invention  was  to  be  carried  to  its  perfection  on  Italian 
ground.  Residents  and  official  persons  in  Rome  itself,  are  to  be  its 
first  promoters,  and  that  under  the  immediate  eye  of  Paul  II.,  a 
man  by  no  means  friendly,  either  to  learning,  or  to  learned  men. 

This  curious  incident  is  rendered  much  more  so,  by  one  or  two 
others  in  immediate  connexion  with  it.  Even  while  the  art  was 
yet  a  secret  in  Germany,  the  very  first  individual  of  whom  we  read 
as  having  longed  for  its  being  brought  to  Rome,  was  a  Cardinal, 
Nicholas  de  Cusa ;  the  first  ardent  promoter  of  the  press  in  that 


Iviii  INTRODUCTION.  [xv.  CENT. 

city  was  a  Bishop,  John  Andreas  the  Bishop  of  Aleria  and  Secre- 
tary to  the  Vatican  Library.  He  furnished  the  manuscripts  for  the 
press,  prepared  the  editions,  and  added  the  epistles  dedicatory.  It 
had  been  on  the  summit  of  a  hill,  twenty-eight  miles  east  of  Rome 
near  Subiaco,  and  close  by  the  villa  once  occupied  by  the  Emperor 
Nero,  that  the  first  printing  press  was  set  up.  In  the  monastery 
there,  by  Conrad  Sweynheim  and  Arnold  Paunartz  from  Germany, 
an  edition  of  Lactantius'  Institutions  was  finished  in  the  year  14G5  ; 
but  next  year,  they  removed,  by  invitation,  into  the  mansion  house 
of  two  knights  in  Rome  itself.  They  were  two  brothers,  Peter  and 
Francis  de  Maxirais.  Here  it  was  that,  aided  by  the  purse  of 
Andreas,  the  first  fount  of  types  in  the  Roman  character,  so  called 
ever  since,  was  prepared,  and  all  other  materials  being  ready,  they 
commenced  with  such  spirit  and  vigour,  that  the  Secretary  of  the 
Vatican  "scarcely  allowed  himself  time  to  sleep."  Let  him  speak 
once  for  himself,  in  one  of  his  dedications  prefixed  to  Jerome's 
Epistles. 

"  It  was,"  says  he  to  the  Pontiff,  "  in  your  days,  that  among  other  divine  fa- 
vours this  blessing  was  bestowed  on  the  Cliristian  world,  that  every  poor  scholar 
can  purchase  for  himself  a  libi'ary  for  a  small  sum — that  those  volumes  which 
heretofore  could  scarce  be  bought  for  an  hundred  crowns  may  now  be  procured 
for  less  than  twenty,  very  well  printed,  and  free  from  those  faults  with  which 
manuscripts  used  to  abound — for  such  is  the  art  of  our  printers  and  letter 
makers,  that  no  ancient  or  modern  discovery  is  compcu-able  to  it.  Surely  the  Ger- 
man nation  deserves  our  highest  esteem  foi-  the  invention  of  the  most  useful  of 
arts.  The  wish  of  the  noble  and  divine  Cai'dinal  Cusa  is  now,  in  your  time,  ac- 
complished, who  earnestly  desired  that  this  sacred  art,  which  then  seemed  rising 
in  Germany,  might  be  brought  to  Rome.  It  is  my  chief  aim  in  this  epistle  to 
let  postei-ity  know  that  the  art  of  printing  and  type-making  was  brought  to 
Rome  under  Paul  II.  Receive,  then,  the  first  volume  of  St.  Jerome  graci- 
ously,— and  take  the  excellent  masters  of  the  art,  Coui'ad  Sweynheim  and  Arnold 
Pannartz,  Germans,  under  your  protection." 

This  Pontiff,  named  Peter  Barbo,  and  a  Venetian  by  birth,  had 
no  sooner  come  into  office,  in  14C4,  than  he  immediately  suppressed 
the  College  of  abhreviators  and  turned  out  all  the  clerks  of  the 
breves,  regardless  of  the  sums  they  had  paid  for  their  places.  And 
although  this  body  was  composed  of  the  most  distinguished  men  of 
learning  and  genius  in  Rome,  he  chose  to  say  they  were  of  no  use, 
or  unlearned !  Yet  now,  scarcely  two  years  after,  the  same  man 
was  sauntering  into  the  printing  office,  nay,  it  is  affirmed  that  he 
visited  it  "  frequently,  and  examined  with  admiration  every  branch 
of  this  new  art !"  Would  he  have  done  this  had  he  foreseen  the 
consequences  ?  And  what  must  future  Pontifis  have  sometimes 
thought  or  said  as  to  his  idle  simplicity,  or  his  lack  of  foresight  ? 

Meanwhile,  so  zealous  were  these  men,  that  in  five  years  only. 


PRINTING  IN  ROME,  VENICE,  AND  ELSEWHERE.  lix 

or  from  14G7  to  1472,  they  had  printed  not  fewer  then  twelve 
thousand  four  hundred  and  seventy-five  volumes,  in  twenty-eight 
editions,  some  of  them  of  large  size,  and  all  beautifully  executed. 
Among  these  we  find  the  Latin  Bible  of  1471.  It  was  the  second 
edition  with  a  date^  the  first  printed  in  Rome,  and  however  beauti- 
ful in  execution,  well  known  to  be  by  no  means  distinguished  for 
its  accuracy ;  a  circumstance  which  ought,  in  common  modesty,  to 
have  infused  a  forbearing  or  lenient  temper  with  regard  to  all  future 
jftrst  attempts.  It  by  no  means  followed,  however,  although  Rome 
had  taken  the  lead,  that  it  was  also  to  furnish  a  ready  market  for 
the  sale  of  books.  On  the  contrary,  the  printers  now  laboured 
under  such  a  load  of  printed  folio  volumes,  that  unless  relieved, 
they  must  have  sunk  altogether,  as  no  doubt  they  suffered.  Yet 
still,  by  the  year  1 476,  twelve  other  works  had  issued  from  the 
press.  Among  these  were  the  "  Postils,"  or  Notes  of  Nicholas  de 
Lyra,  the  Jirst  printed  Commentary  on  the  Scriptures.  But  the 
Commentary  brought  them  down !  They  had  better  have  never 
touched  it,  as  it  was  by  this  huge  work,  in  five  folio  volumes,  they 
were  nearly,  if  not  entirely,  ruined  in  business.  Such,  however,  was 
the  fruit  of  only  one  printing  office,  and  in  less  than  ten  years. 
Ulric  Han,  or  Gallus,  had  commenced  printing  soon  after  these,  the 
first  two,  and  at  least  thirteen  other  printers  followed  ;  so  that,  before 
the  close  of  the  fifteenth  century,  the  diflerent  tcorks  published  in  the 
Imperial  city  alone,  had  amounted  to  nearly  one  thousand ! 

We  have  been  thus  particular  as  to  the  capital  of  Italy,  not  for- 
getful of  the  place  it  then  occupied  in  the  world,  and  especially  after- 
wards, in  the  sixteenth  century.  The  facts  now  mentioned  place 
that  power  in  a  point  of  view  not  unworthy  of  observation  ever  since. 
Before  long,  no  invention  was  to  occasion  such  perplexity  to  Rome 
and  her  conclave  as  that  oi printing ,  and  yet  the  art  enters  Italy,  and 
the  Pontiff  himself,  as  it  were,  cordially  sanctions  the  insertion  of  a 
wedge  which  all  Italy  will  drive  ;  or,  in  other  words,  he  breaks  the 
ground,  and  gives  the  first  onset  in  a  direction  which  his  suc- 
cessors have  toiled  in  A^ain  to  arrest.  Little  did  Peter  Barbo, 
the  Venetian  Pontiff,  know  what  he  was  about,  when  wandering 
into  the  printing  office  for  his  amusement.  When  examining,  with 
a  mixture  of  wonder  and  delight,  the  diflferent  moA^ements  of  the 
printing  machine,  had  he  only  suspected  the  mighty  and  irresistible 
consequences,  how  soon  would  he  have  reduced  the  whole  concern 
to  ashes,  and  discharged  the  thunders  of  the  Vatican  in  every  direc- 
tion !  But  no,  and  in  Rome  itself,  the  printers,  compositors  and 
pressmen,  shall  go  on  issuing  folio  after  folio,  and  of  works  which 
still  exist  and  enrich  the  libraries  of  Europe. 

Independently,  however,  of  all  this,  what  signified  Rome,  when 


Ix  INTRODUCTION.  []xv.  CENT. 

compared  with  the  extent  to  which  the  art  had  now  reached.  Had 
a  single  city  or  town  waited  for  the  concurrence  or  sanction  of  the 
Pontiif  ?  So  far  from  it,  Bamberg  in  Franconia,  and  Cologne,  had 
j)receded  Rome,  and  in  ten  years  only  after  the  capture  of  Mentz, 
the  art  had  reached  to  upwards  of  thirty  cities  and  towns,  including 
Venice,  and  Strasburg,  Paris,  and  Antwerp  ;  in  only  ten  years  more 
ninety  other  places  had  followed  the  example,  including  Basil  and 
Brussels,  Westminster,  Oxford,  and  London,  Geneva,  Leipsic,  and 
Vienna.  With  regard  to  Germany,  the  mother  country  of  this  in- 
vention, Koberger  of  Nuremberg  was  supposed  to  be  the  most 
extensive  printer  of  the  fifteenth  century.  Plaving  twenty-four 
presses,  and  one  hundred  men,  constantly  at  work,  besides  employing 
the  presses  of  Switzerland  and  France,  he  printed  at  least  twelve 
editions  of  the  Latin  Bible.  And  when  we  turn  to  the  native 
capital  of  the  reigning  Pontiff,  Venice,  where  printing  had  com- 
menced only  two  years  after  Rome,  what  had  ensued  in  the  next 
thirty,  or  before  1500  ?  Panzer  has  reckoned  up  not  fewer  than  one 
hundred  and  ninety-eight  printers  in  Venice  alone,  more  than  sixty 
of  whom  had  commenced  business  before  the  year  1480,  and  altoge- 
ther, by  the  close  of  the  century,  they  had  put  forth  at  least  two 
thousand  nine  hundred  and  eighty  distinct  publications,  among  which 
are  to  be  found  more  than  twenty  editions  of  the  Latin  Bible.  As 
the  roman  letter  was  first  used  in  Rome,  so  the  italic  was  in  Venice, 
where  Aldus  had  offered  a  piece  of  gold  for  every  typographical 
error  which  could  be  detected  in  any  of  his  printed  pages. 

In  short,  before  the  close  of  this  century,  a  space  of  only  thirty- 
eight  years  from  the  capture  of  Mentz,  the  press  was  busy,  in  at 
least  two  hundred  and  twenty  different  places,  throughout  Europe, 
and  the  number  of  printing  presses  was  far  above  a  thousand !  This 
rapidity,  rendered  so  much  the  more  astonishing  from  the  art 
having  risen  to  its  perfection  all  at  once,  producing  works  so  beau- 
tiful that  they  have  never  been  excelled,  has  been  often  remarked, 
though  it  has  never  yet  been  fully  described.  To  mark  its  swift 
and  singular  career  throughout  Europe  with  accuracy  and  effect, 
would  require  a  volume,  and,  to  certain  readers,  it  would  prove  one 
of  the  deepest  interest. 

Such  an  extraordinary  revival  of  the  arts  and  of  literature  could  not 
fail  to  affect  and  greatly  improve  the  external  appearance  of  our  Island. 
Witness  those  beautiful  specimens  of  architecture  in  Britain  peculiar 
to  this  age,  and  still  regarded  by  so  many  as  its  appropriate  glory. 
Or,  what  is  more  to  our  purpose,  witness  the  encouragement  given 
to  literature  by  such  meu  as  Humphrey  Duke  of  Gloucester,  John 
Earl  of  Worcester,  and  Earl  Rivers,  and  the  deep  interest  taken  in 
William  Caxton,  the  father  of  printing  in  our  native  land.    AVith  the 


THE   FINAL  AMOUNT  OF  ALL  THIS   EXERTION.  Ixi 

exception,  indeed,  of  the  Sclavonian  or  northern  nations,  all  others 
in  Europe  had  contributed  to  the  interests  of  science ;  but  in  Italy, 
by  way  of  eminence,  the  human  mind  had  been  permitted  to  exhaust 
its  power.  The  utmost  that  human  ingenuity  and  patient  perseverance 
could  effect  had  been  accomplished.  Works  begun  in  one  age,  had 
been  carried  on  and  finished  by  the  next.  Man  had  been  allowed 
to  expend  all  his  energy.  The  models  left  for  his  posterity  to 
admire,  can  only  be  feebly  and  imperfectly  copied,  for  as  yet  they 
have  never  been  excelled. 

But  what  then,  we  are  now  bound  to  inquire,  what  had  all  this 
goodly  array  accomplished  for  the  heartfelt  refinement,  the  best  or 
true  enlargement  of  the  human  mind  ?  To  see  such  intellectual  relish, 
such  sensibility  and  taste  spring  up  amidst  general  ignorance  and 
barbarity,  was  the  wonder  of  the  age ;  but  what  had  all  this  paint- 
ing, and  statuary,  and  architecture,  nay,  this  learning  and  printing, 
effected,  and  more  especially  for  the  masses,  or  the  people  as  such  ? 

Let  a  receut  intelligent  writer  answer  the  question.  "  In  looking 
at  the  history  of  the  Italian  Republics,  from  the  eleventh  to  the  fif- 
teenth century,"  says  Guizot,  "  we  are  struck  with  two  facts  seem- 
ingly contradictory,  yet  still  indisputable.  We  see  passing  before 
us  a  wonderful  display  of  courage,  of  activity,  and  of  genius — an 
amazing  prosperity  is  the  result.  We  see  a  moA'ement  and  a  liberty 
unknown  to  the  rest  of  Europe.  But  if  we  ask  what  was  the  real 
state  of  the  inhabitants — how  they  passed  their  lives — what  was 
their  real  share  of  happiness — the  scene  changes.  There  is,  perhaps, 
no  history  so  sad,  no  period,  perhaps,  during  which  the  lot  of  man 
appears  to  have  been  so  agitated,  subject  to  so  many  deplorable 
chances,  and  which  so  abounds  in  dissensions,  crimes,  and  misfor- 
tunes. Another  fact  strikes  us  at  the  same  moment ;  in  the  politi- 
cal life  of  the  greater  part  of  these  Republics,  liberty  was  always 
growing  less  and  less.  The  want  of  security  was  so  great  that  the 
people  were  unavoidably  driven  to  take  shelter  in  a  system  less 
stormy,  less  popular  than  that  in  which  the  state  existed.  Look  at 
the  history  of  Florence,  Venice,  Genoa,  Milan,  or  Pisa ;  in  all  of 
them  we  find  the  course  of  events,  instead  of  aiding  the  progress  of 
liberty,  instead  of  enlarging  the  circle  of  institutions,  tending  to 
repress  it — tending  to  concentrate  power  in  the  hands  of  a  smaller 
number  of  individuals.  In  a  word,  we  find  in  these  Rupublics,  other- 
wise so  energetic,  so  brilliant,  and  so  rich,  two  things  wanting — 
security  of  life,  and  the  progress  of  institutions." 

Whether,  then,  as  to  Italy  or  any  where  else,  we  need  scarcely 
again  inquire,  what  had  all  this  learning  and  refinement  done  for  the 
emancipation  of  the  soul  from  bondage,  or  its  clear  escape  from 
tyrannizing  lust  ?    What,  for  its  way  of  access  unto  God,  or  the  only 

VOL.  I.  / 


Ixii  INTRODUCTION.  [xv.  cent, 

way  of  acceptance  with  Him  ?  Absolutely  nothing;  nay,  to  speak  cor- 
rectly, if  the  uses  to  which  all  things  had  been  converted  be  observed, 
far  worse  than  nothing.  Those  venerated  and  confessedly  beautiful 
piles  throughout  Europe,  with  all  that  they  contained,  and  in  many  in- 
stances now  contain,  assume  a  very  grave  and  sombre  aspect,  when- 
ever it  is  remembered  that  in  them  we  behold  but  the  ingenious  and 
laborious  efforts  of  the  blind,  mistaking  their  way  to  "  a  house  not 
made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens."  They  stand  before  us  as 
the  professed  and  united  homage  of  thousands,  in  their  lifetime  and 
by  their  dying  testaments,  to  that  Being,  before  whom  all  external 
display,  all  outward  adorning,  the  magnificence  of  building  or  the 
melody  of  sounds — nay  the  extended  hands,  the  bended  knee  and  the 
uplifted  eye  are  as  nothing,  without  the  intelligent  exercise  of  the 
inward  faculties. 

Now,  not  to  speak  of  other  nations,  what  in  Britain  had  yet  been 
done  with  regard  to  these  ?  Were  the  inward  faculties  cultivated, 
or  even  allowed  to  be  so  ?  Was  there  any  attention  yet  paid  to  a 
vernacular  literature  which  could  interest  or  enlarge  the  general 
mind  ?  So  far  from  it,  for  any  one  man  to  read  a  fragment  of 
Scripture  in  his  native  tongue,  though  yet  merely  in  manuscrij)t,  was 
sure  to  expose  to  oppression ;  and  for  the  first  half  of  this  very  cen- 
tury, whether  in  England  or  Scotland,  the  barbarity  of  burning  to 
ashes,  and  of  severe  persecution  for  opinions  held,  had  been  practised 
by  all  the  authorities.  Nor  were  they,  in  England,  diverted  from 
such  cruelty  till  engrossed  by  war  with  France.  Then  came  those 
intestine  divisions  and  heartburnings — the  wars  of  the  White  and 
Red  Rose — those  deadly  feuds  between  the  Houses  of  York  and 
Lancaster,  when,  as  Fuller  has  expressed  it,  in  reference  to  any  who 
thought  for  themselves,  "  the  storm  was  their  shelter."  These  wars, 
however,  so  far  from  affecting  the  hold  which  the  Pontiff  had  of  this 
country,  were  only  so  many  too  evident  proofs  of  the  secret  but  pro- 
digious influence  of  his  votaries,  in  murdering  one  man  and  setting  up 
another.  At  the  close  of  the  long  conflict,  therefore,  by  the  down- 
fall of  Richard  III. — after  thirteen  pitched  battles — at  the  expense 
of  more  than  an  hundred  thousand  men — Henry  the  Seventh,  or  the 
first  prince  of  the  House  of  Tudor,  most  dutifully  allied  himself  with 
the  paramount  power  of  Rome;  and  began  to  educate  his  second  son 
as  an  ecclesiastic,  afterwards  to  be  known  as  Henry  the  Eighth. 
The  father  had,  indeed,  humbled  the  Barons  of  England,  while  he 
himself  remained  the  devoted  vassal  of  the  Pontiff;  and,  at  the  end 
of  the  fiftecntli  century,  the  capital  of  Italy  was  still,  in  its  own 
ancient  sense,  the  capital  of  the  world. 

At  the  close,  then,  of  this  brief  sketch,  however  imperfect,  it 
must  now  be  evident  that  to  have  overlooked,   what  have  been 


THE  FINAL  AMOUNT  OF  ALL  THIS  EXERTION.  Ixiii 

styled  by  way  of  courtesy,  the  immortal  trophies  of  painting, 
music,  and  song,  of  sculpture  and  architecture,  nay,  and  of  printing, 
for  the  first  seventy  years  of  its  existence,  would  have  been  doing 
great  injustice  to  what  was  about  to  follow,  in  the  sixteenth  cen- 
tury. Of  all  these  sources  of  attraction,  that  singular  power  which 
held  court  and  council  at  Rome,  had  been  permitted  to  take  the 
fullest  advantage ;  nor  was  she  slow  to  perceive  the  power  they  pos- 
sessed, to  charm  both  the  eye  and  the  car.  Printing,  however,  was 
the  most  intellectual  of  all  the  arts,  and  yet  it  will  now  be  manifest, 
that  Infinite  Wisdom  was  by  no  means  in  any  haste  to  employ  it. 
The  orators  of  Greece  and  Rome  had  been  allowed  to  try  their  skill 
once  more  in  improving  mankind.  The  classics  were  permitted  to 
enjoy  their  second,  and  more  splendid  triumph,  and  appear  before 
the  world  in  a  richer  dress  than  they  had  ever  done ;  and  since  the 
colloquial  dialect,  the  tongue  spoken  by  the  people,  was  not  the  lan- 
guage of  what  was  called  the  Church,  in  any  nation  of  Europe,  and 
Latin  alone  was  her  language  everywhere,  then  let  that  tongue, 
through  the  press,  also  enjoy  unprecedented  scope.  Let  no  Pontiff', 
ever  after,  have  any  reason  to  complain  that  ample  justice  was  not 
first  done  to  his  system.  Let  him  first  have  his  fill  of  letters^  even 
to  overflowing.  Let  him  richly  enjoy  the  first  fruits,  or  the  highest 
place,  nay,  the  monopoly  of  all  the  arts,  and  even  the  printing  press 
to  boot ;  and  before  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  century,  let  there  be 
issued  from  the  press,  above  an  hundred  editions  of  the  Latin  Bible, 
for  such  was  the  fact :  and  throughout  Europe,  let  there  be  hourly 
spoken  still,  more  than  "  ten  thousand  words  in  an  unknown 
tongue." 

After  all  this,  and  with  an  especial  reference  to  our  native  land, 
we  now  ask, — could  there  have  been  a  more  marked  approach 
towards  the  importation  of  Divine  Truth  into  our  Island,  in  the  lan- 
guage then  spoken  by  the  people,  and  spoken  still  ?  A  more  impres- 
siA^e  series  of  events,  as  introductory  to  the  printing  of  the  Scriptures 
in  our  vernacular  tongue  ?  The  Sacred  boon  was  about  to  be  con- 
ferred, and,  at  last,  by  millions  of  copies.  To  the  inhabitants  of 
Britain,  by  way  of  eminence,  and  for  three  hundred  years,  were 
about  to  be  committed  the  oracles  of  God  ;  at  least  the  translator  to 
be  employed,  was  now  growing  up.  But  before  Divine  Revelation 
is  permitted  to  assume  the  shape  of  a  jyrMi^cY/ volume,  are  we  not 
now  bound  to  look  back,  and  do  justice  to  the  manner  of  its  intro- 
duction ?  If  there  be  certain  points  in  the  history  of  every  country 
at  which  the  inhabitants  would  do  well  to  pause ;  to  us,  at  least, 
and  as  living  apart  from  the  Continent  in  the  adjoining,  sea,  this 
was,  or  rather  still  is,  one  of  the  first  importance,  as  the  commence- 
ment of  a  new  and  unprecedented  epoch. 


Ixiv  INTRODUCTION.  [xv.  CENT. 

The  mighty  movement  of  the  sixteenth  century  was  at  hand. 
The  outward  forms  of  society  had  undergone  a  great  change,  and 
this,  it  is  freely  granted,  had  produced  a  class  of  less  fearful 
thinkers.  But  the  tide  of  human  activity  having  been  first  per- 
mitted to  rise  so  high,  and  accomplish  so  little,  ought  never  to  have 
been  overlooked.  The  distinction  was  about  to  be  drawn,  between 
mere  intellectual  culture  and  mental  vigour,  or  in  other  words, 
between  all  that  man  had  been  able  to  effect,  and  what  the  Saviour 
of  the  world  M'as  about  to  do,  by  means  so  simple,  and  an  agency 
soon  to  be  so  deprecated  by  human  authority ;  or  rather  by  only 
one  selected  individual  then  so  generally  despised,  and  since  so 
unaccountably  forgotten  ! 

Thus  are  we  imperatively  bound  to  distinguish  between  the 
oratory  of  Greece  and  Rome,  or  the  feeble  language  of  literature, 
and  the  voice  of  Jehovah  in  his  word,  when  it  once  reached  the  ear 
or  the  eye  of  our  forefathers,  in  their  native  tongue ;  to  distin- 
guish as  carefully,  between  the  jjoicer  of  the  press,  and  the  power 
of  what  issued  from  it ;  between  printing,  however  splendid  to  the 
eye,  and  what  is  printed,  when  addressed  by  the  Almighty  to  the 
heart ;  between  all  the  wisdom  of  this  world,  and  that  which 
Cometh  down  from  above  ;  between  printed  books  without  exception, 
and  "  the  oracles  of  God." 

Twenty-five  years  of  the  sixteenth  century  have  indeed  still  to  pass 
away,  before  the  New  Testament  in  English,  as  translated  and  com- 
mitted to  the  press  byTyndale,  will  be  given  to  England  and  Scotland, 
but  these  years  will  only  render  the  event  more  striking, — an  event 
which,  even  in  our  own  day,  and  at  such  a  singularly  momentous 
period  as  the  present,  will  be  found  to  deserve  and  reward  far  more 
thoughtful  consideration,  not  in  itself  merely,  but  especially  in  its 
consequences,  than  it  has  ever  yet,  for  three  hundred  years,  at  any 
previous  point  of  time,  received. 


THE  HISTORY  OF 

THE    ENGLISH    BIBLE, 

BOOK   I.-ENGLAND. 

l^tm  Of  lenrp  tfte  (BiqW). 


SECTION   I. 

FROM    THE    BIRTH    OF    TYNDALE,   THE   ORIGINAL   TRANSLATOR,    TO    IIIS    EM- 
BARKATION FOR  THE  CONTINENT,  IN  PURSUIT  OF  HIS  DESIGN. 

^?<S??i?'^  HE  opening  of  the  sixteenth  century,  a  period  so 
l^^i^^  big  with  interest  to  all  Europe,  has  been  presented 
sfff^'P?  in  very  different  lio'hts,  both  by  British  and  Con- 
tinental  authors.  Some  have  very  carefully  brought 
into  one  focus  a  number  of  concurrent  events,  and  then  rested 
in  this  conclusion  ;  that  if  there  had  never  existed  such  men 
as  those  with  whose  names  we  have  been  long  familiar,  all 
that  occurred,  must  have  taken  place.  These  are  believers  in 
what  has  been  styled,  the  "force  of  circumstances,"  and  though 
there  be  a  power  which  governs  the  world  independently  of 
man,  they  rise  no  higher ;  our  men  of  circumstances,  can  see 
nothing  great  in  individual  character.  Other  writers,  from  too 
fond  partiality  for  their  native  land,  and  scarcely  looking  beyond 
it,  have  assigned  exclusive  renown  to  their  own  great  men. 
An  Italian,  on  behalf  of  his  own  Italy,  assumes  the  undivided 
glory  of  the  revival  of  literature,   philosophy,  and  the  fine- 

VOL.   I.  A 


2  THE  SIXTEENTH  CENTURY  [uoOK  I. 

arts  ;  and  then  all  the  refinement  or  enlargement  of  the  human 
mind  which  ensued,  he  traces  to  this  one  source.  While  a 
(lerman  author,  in  regard  to  the  revival  of  Christianity,  insists 
that  his  country  led  the  van,  and  by  that  path  in  which  others 
only  followed.  He  will  perhaps  admit  WicklifFe,  rising  in 
England  a  century  and  a  half  before,  to  be  the  morning  star  ; 
but,  after  this,  Luther  is  his  sun,  or  great  planet,  and  other 
countries  have  been  regarded  as  stars,  revolving  in  wider  or 
narrower  circles  around  it,  like  satellites  drawn  after  it  by  its 
movement.  The  figure  may  be  considered  beautiful,  and  please 
the  fancy,  but  it  has  the  disadvantage  of  being  incorrect.  It 
not  only  violates  the  order,  but  obscures  the  peculiar  character 
or  glory  of  what  actually  took  place. 

"  If,"  says  an  author,  whose  interesting  work  is  not  yet 
completed,  "  If  we  regard  dates,  we  must  then  confess  that 
neither  to  Switzerland  nor  to  Germany  belongs  the  honour  of 
having  been  first  in  the  work,  although,  hitherto,  only  those 
countries  have  contended  for  it.  That  honour  belongs  to 
France.  This  is  a  fact  that  we  are  the  more  careful  to  esta- 
blish, because  it  has  possibly,  till  now,  been  overlooked."' 
And  at  this  crisis,  or  the  opening  of  the  sixteenth  century,  as 
far  as  these  countries  are  concerned,  he  has  proved  his  asser- 
tion. But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  Britain  be  included,  we  must 
be  allowed  to  hold  fast  by  the  fourteenth  century ;  the  age  of 
Wickliffe,  or  the  translation  of  the  Sacred  Volume,  entire, 
into  the  language  of  the  people.  From  that  period,  to  say 
nothing  of  the  New  Testament  separately,  or  of  various  beau- 
tiful fragments  ;  possessing,  as  we  do  still,  about  thirty  copies 
of  that  Bible  entire,  seventeen  of  which  are  perfect,  we  trace 
the  effects,  from  that  early  age  down  to  the  days  of  Tyndale. 
The  reading  of  the  Scriptures  in  manuscript,  however  obnoxi- 
ous to  the  authorities,  will,  in  the  following  history,  link  itself 
most  distinctly  with  the  more  eager  perusal  of  those  first  im- 
ported in  print.  Opposition  to  the  latter,  will  bring  out  evi- 
dence as  to  both. 

All  questions,  however,  as  to  priority  or  dates,  become  of 
inferior  moment  when  compared  with  another  ascertained  fact. 
If  we  look  at  the  first  quarter  of  the  sixteenth  century,  Lefevre 
in  France,  and  Zuinglius  in  Switzerland,  Luther  in  Germany, 

1    Merle  D'Aubign^. 


1500.]  IN  ITS  COMMENCEMENT.  3 

and  Tyndale  in  England,  appear  before  the  world,  and  to  the 
eye  of  man  in  this  order  ;  they  were  contemporaries,  living  in 
their  respective  countries ;  Lefevre  being  by  far  the  oldest 
of  the  four,  and  Zuinglius  the  youngest.  But  then  it  is  no 
less  evident,  that  the  first  impressions  of  these  four  men  were 
altogether  independent  of  each  other.  They  were  individually 
influenced  by  a  power,  though  unseen,  equally  near  to  them 
all.  From  that  moment  they  were  already  destined  to  the 
work  assigned  them,  but  not  one  of  them  liad  exchanged  a 
single  thought  with  another,  "  Germany,"  says  the  same 
author,  "  did  not  communicate  the  light  of  truth  to  Switzer- 
land, nor  Switzerland  to  France,  nor  France  to  England  :  all 
these  lands  received  it  from  God,  just  as  no  one  region  trans- 
mits the  light  to  another,  but  the  same  orb  dispenses  it  direct 
to  the  earth."  We  now  speak  of  the  origin,  or  the  one  great 
though  secret  cause  of  all. 

But  the  secret  and  universal  Mover  being  once  acknowledg- 
ed, upon  advancing  only  a  single  step  farther,  we  instantly 
discover  that  a  marked  distinction  has  been  drawn,  between 
our  own  separate  Island,  and  all  other  Countries  on  the  ad- 
joining Continent.  In  France,  but  more  especially  in  Switzer- 
land and  Germany,  there  was  the  living  voice,  throughout 
life,  of  the  man  raised  up,  calling  upon  his  countrymen  to  hear 
and  obey  the  truth ;  and  so  God  had  ordered  it  in  England, 
a  century  and  a  half  before,  in  the  case  of  WicklifFe.  But, 
now,  his  procedure  is  altogether  different,  and  out  of  the 
usual  course  pursued  in  other  lands.  Tyndale  had  lifted  up 
his  voice,  it  is  true,  boldly,  and  with  some  effect,  but  he  is 
withdrawn  from  his  native  land,  and  never  to  return.  The 
island  is  left  behind  by  him,  and  left  for  good.  In  other 
countries  the  man  lives  and  dies  at  home.  Lefevre,  when 
above  a  hundred  years  old,  weeps,  because  he  had  not  felt  and 
displayed  the  courage  of  a  martyr;  Zuinglius  dies  in  battle  for 
his  country ;  and  Luther,  after  all  his  noble  intrepidity,  ex- 
pires in  his  sick  chamber :  but  Tyndale  is  strangled  and  burnt 
to  ashes,  and  in  a  foreign  land.  Englishmen,  and  Scotsmen, 
and  Germans,  are  gathered  together  against  him  ;  yes,  against 
the  man  who  enjoyed  the  honour  of  having  never  had  a  Prince 
for  his  patron  or  protector  all  his  days  ;  men  of  three  nations 
at  least  concur  to  confer  upon  him  the  crown  of  martyrdom, 
so  that,  among  all  his  contemporaries,  in  several  points  of 


4  POSITION  OF  ENGLAND.  [bOOK  I. 

view,  but  especially  as  a  translator  of  the  Scriptures,  he  stands 
alone. 

Whether,  therefore,  in  England  or  in  Scotland,  the  conse- 
quence has  been,  that,  at  this  early  period,  we  have  no  great 
or  powerful  character  to  present,  as  warring  upon  his  native 
soil,  with  the  darkness,  whether  of  ignorance  or  error,  and  lead- 
ing on  to  victory.  Our  man  is  abroad,  and  is  pursued,  but 
cannot  be  taken,  till  his  work  is  done ;  while  the  Almighty 
himself,  appears  as  so  much  the  more  in  immediate  contact 
with  this  country.  The  work  is,  by  way  of  eminence.  His 
oicn.  Divine  truth,  it  is  granted,  is  but  an  instrument,  yet 
as  an  instrument,  it  was  now  shown  to  be  perfect  for  its  pur- 
pose ;  and  the  design  goes  on,  till  men  of  authority,  and 
power,  and  wrath,  are  baffled,  overcome,  and  overruled.  More- 
over, there  has  been  ever  since  a  providential  superintendence 
of  this  work,  an  uninterrupted  care,  lest  it  should  be  con- 
founded with  any  thing  else  in  this  Kingdom,  all  which  we 
are  the  more  bound  both  to  mark  ourselves,  and  point  out  to 
other  nations. 

That  the  eyes  of  his  countrymen  have  never  been  turned 
towards  Tyndale,  as  they  ought  to  have  been  long  ago,  but 
more  especially  to  that  work  which  God  did  by  him  in  the 
midst  of  our  land,  is  one  of  those  m^^steries,  which,  at  this 
moment,  we  do  not  even  attempt  to  explain  ;  but  it  will  be 
the  object  of  the  following  pages,  to  trace  the  footsteps  of  our 
Translator,  from  his  origin  to  his  end  ;  and  especially  the 
history  of  that  Version  which  he  first  gave  to  his  country. 

One  fovirth  part  of  the  sixteenth  century  had  passed  away  before  any 
portion  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  translated  from  the  original  Greek  into 
the  English  language,  was  printed  abroad,  and  first  conveyed  into  Eng- 
land and  Scotland.  We  have  already  glanced  at  foregoing  ages  as  in- 
troductory to  this  memorable  event,  but  the  political  and  literary  con- 
dition of  England  for  these  twenty-five  years,  immediately  preceding, 
renders  the  event  itself  much  more  worthy  of  consideration. 

Henry  the  Seventh,  and  the  first  monarch  of  the  Tudor  family,  having 
attained  the  crown  by  his  sword,  on  the  field  of  Bosworth,  had  ascended 
the  throne  of  England  in  the  month  of  August  1485,  and  to  the  close  of 
his  life  in  April  1509,  he  had  reigned  as  Lord  paramount  of  all  his  Barons, 
though  not  of  his  Ecclesiastics.  It  was  left  for  his  son,  Henry  the  Eighth, 
to  find  out,  in  convenient  season,  that  he  was,  as  Crumwell  expressed  it, 
only  half  a  Sovereign.     At  the  age  of  eighteen,  in  1509,  Henry  had  been 


1500-23.]  POSITION  OF  ENGLAND.  .5 

left  by  his  father,  the  richest  Prince  in  Europe,  and  with  more  preten- 
sions to  learning  than  any  monarch  of  that  day.  His  wealth,  at  his  ac- 
cession, is  stated  to  have  been  at  least  one  million  eight  hundred  thousand 
marks,  if  not  pounds  ;  an  amount,  at  all  events,  equal  to  many  millions 
of  the  present  time.  But  whatever  his  wealth  may  have  been,  in  the 
brief  space  of  a  few  years  it  was  entii-ely  dissipated.  This,  in  its  own 
way,  had  signalised  him,  and  more  especially  as  by  the  second  year  of 
his  reign,  he  had  begun  to  take  a  more  decided  part  in  the  politics  of 
the  European  Continent,  and  upon  a  larger  scale  than  England  had  ever 
before  done. 

On  looking  abroad,  Italy,  it  may  be  supposed,  still  commanded  the  first 
notice.  The  reigning  Pontiff  for  ten  years,  or  from  1503  to  1513,  was 
Julius  the  Second,  a  man  who,  it  has  been  said,  "  retained  in  the  chill 
of  age,  all  the  fire  of  youth,"  and  became  distinguished  for  his  violent 
and  warlike  passions.  His  statue  being  to  be  cast  in  brass,  by  Michael 
Angelo,  the  artist  required  to  know  whether  he  would  have  a  hooh  in  his 
left  hand,  "  No,"  replied  Julius,  "  give  me  a  siporc?,  I  am  no  Scholar." 
Literature  and  the  fine  arts  had  triumphed,  but  above  all  the  arts, 
Julius  was  now  absorbed  in  that  of  War.  Bent  upon  the  deliverance 
of  Italy  from  eveiy  interference  with  his  authority,  he  commenced  with 
Venice,  the  growing  power  of  which  he  was  the  first  to  curtail.  Having 
previously  applied  to  Germany,  France,  and  Naples,  he  had  formed  the 
celebrated  league  of  Cambray,  and  thus  succeeded.  But  having  once  so 
far  humbled  this  republic,  at  the  solicitation  of  Henry  VIII.,  now  rising 
into  rank  and  influence,  he  consented  to  peace.  So  it  has  been  said  ; 
but  the  truth  seems  to  be,  that  Julius,  unwilUng  that  the  Venetian  state 
should  fall  into  the  hands  of  any  of  his  allies,  left  it  still  powerful,  though 
within  its  ancient  limits.  By  this  period,  however,  both  France  and 
Spain  had  planted  their  foot  in  Italy  ;  Louis  the  XII.  having  the 
Sovereignty  of  Milan,  and  Ferdinand  that  of  Naples.  The  former, 
jealous  at  once  of  his  possession,  and  of  the  growing  ambition  of  the 
Pontiff,  had  opposed,  and  at  last  besieged  him  in  Bologna ;  a  high  of- 
fence, and  not  to  be  forgotten.  By  Julius,  therefore,  in  October  1511, 
an  alliance  offensive  and  defensive,  having  for  its  object  "  the  extinction 
of  schism  and  defence  of  the  Church,"  had  been  accomplished,  when 
England  assumed  an  unprecedented  place  in  the  politics  of  Europe. 
This  alliance,  styled  "  the  holy  league,"  had  been  signed  by  Ferdinand, 
by  the  Venetian  State,  and  ultimately  by  Maximilian  the  Emperor  of 
Germany.  But  Ileniy  of  England  had  at  once  assented,  Julius  having 
flattered  him  with  no  less  a  title  than  that  of  "  Head  of  the  Italian 
League."  The  real  object  was  to  crush  France,  or  compel  Louis  to  let 
go  his  hold  of  Milan.  He  had  hitherto  been  styled  by  the  coui-t  of 
Rome,  "  Most  Clnistian  King  ; "  but  now  this  appellation  was  actually 
promised  to  the  King  of  England,  and  no  man  seemed  to  be  so  great  a 


6  POSITION  OF  ENGLAND.  [book  l. 

favourite  as  young  Henry.  It  was  this  same  Pontiff,  also,  who  ahout 
four  years  before,  had  sent  his  Legate  to  James  the  Fourth  of  Scotland, 
with  a  Bull  of  the  title  "  Defender  of  the  Faith  ; "  accompanied  by  that 
hallowed  Sword,  which  is  still  exhibited,  as  a  relic,  in  the  castle  of 
Edinburgh.  At  this  period,  certainly,  there  was  no  prospect  that  either 
North  or  South  Britain  would  ever  prove  unfaithful  to  the  Pontiff's 
chair.  In  the  meanwhile,  this  league  against  Prance  had  embroiled 
Henry  into  war  with  Scotland,  as  James  the  Fourth,  though  married  to 
his  sister,  now  took  part  with  his  ancient  ally.  The  result  is  well  known 
— an  expedition  to  France  in  1513,  from  which  Henry  returned  with  but 
little  credit,  either  to  his  wisdom  or  talents  ;  while  his  arms  in  Scotland, 
under  Surrey,  had  proved  fatal  to  his  brother-in-law,  and  the  flower  of 
the  Scotish  nobility,  at  Flodden  field. 

In  his  expedition  to  France,  Henry  had  been  accompanied  by  an 
ecclesiastic,  his  Almoner,  about  to  become  by  far  the  most  conspicuous 
man  of  his  day,  whether  in  England  or  on  the  Continent.  We  need 
scarcely  name  Thomas  Wolsey.  Immediately  after  their  return,  several 
remarkable  changes  were  crowded  into  a  little  space  ;  thus  making  way 
for  an  era  such  as  Europe  had  never  witnessed,  and  one  in  which  Henj-y 
and  his  prime  Minister  were  to  perform  no  subordinate  part.  Fired  with 
ambition,  they  will  stand  ready  to  help  each  other  at  convenient  season. 
While  Henry  was  plunged  into  war  both  with  France  and  Scotland, 
Julius  II.  died  at  Rome,  and  had  been  succeeded  by  Leo  the  Tenth,  the 
youngest  Pontiff,  and  one  of  the  most  celebrated,  that  had  ever  reigned. 
Louis  of  France,  who  had  not  only  propitiated  the  Roman  See,  but  been 
allied  in  marriage  to  Mary,  Henry's  youngest  sister,  died  in  1515,  and 
was  succeeded  by  Francis  the  First.  In  the  same  year,  after  much  soli- 
citation, Leo  had  raised  Wolsey  to  the  rank  of  a  Cardinal,  when  he  began 
to  feel  as  though  he  were  a  second  king  :  and  in  1517,  by  the  death  of 
Ferdinand,  King  of  Spain,  Charles  V.  had  svicceeded  to  that  throne. 

At  last,  or  in  January  1519,  the  Emperor  Maximilian  expired  also  ; 
when  the  three  young  kings,  Henry  VIII.,  Francis  I.,  and  Charles  V., 
became  candidates  for  the  Imperial  Crown.  The  truth  is,  it  had  been 
twice  offered  by  Maximilian  himself  before  his  death,  to  Henry  ;  and  had 
he  not  doubted  the  sincerity  of  the  Emperor,  and  not  consulted  with 
Cuthbert  Tunstal,  he  might  have  accepted  the  proffer.  But  "  now  that 
the  glittering  prize  was  open  to  competition,  he  disclosed  his  wishes  to 
his  favourite  ;  and  both  the  King  and  the  Cardinal,  reciprocally  inflam- 
ing the  ambition  of  each  other,  indulged  in  the  most  flattering  delusions. 
In  fancy  they  were  already  seated,  the  one  on  the  throne  of  the  Caesars, 
the  other  in  the  chair  of  St.  Peter,  and  beheld  the  whole  Christian  world, 
laity  and  clergy,  prostrate  at  their  feet.  The  election  of  Henry  would 
secm-e,  it  was  foretold,  the  elevation  of  Wolsey  ;  and  the  Bishop  of  Wor- 
cester, (an  Italian,  but  residing  at  Rome,  whose  diocese  was  farmed  by 


1500-23.]  POSITION  OF  ENGLAND.  7 

Wolsey,)  had  hecu  aiming  to  secure  the  consent  and  assistance  of  the 
Pontiff  in  favoui'  of  the  King  of  England." 

Such,  at  least,  is  the  representation  of  Lingard ;  but  be  this  as  it  may, 
Charles,  it  is  well  known,  was  chosen  Emperor,  to  the  mortification  of 
the  other  candidates,  and  especially  to  that  of  the  young  King  of  France, 
who  had  been  most  treacherously  promised  support  by  Henry,  while  he 
himself  was  striving  after  the  same  honour  !  At  this  moment,  however, 
Francis  found  it  necessary  to  pocket  the  affront,  and  to  fortify  himself 
against  the  Emperor,  he  insisted  that  Henry  should  fulfil  a  previous  en- 
gagement, to  pay  him  a  visit  in  France.  To  this  he  consented,  and 
Wolsey,  as  the  consummate  master  of  ceremonies,  had  the  arrangement 
of  the  whole  affair  :  but  before  they  embarked,  no  sooner  had  they 
reached  Canterbury,  than,  to  the  surprise  of  many,  though  not  of  the 
Cardinal,  Charles  the  Fifth,  on  board  of  a  squadron  said  to  be  bound  for 
the  Netherlands,  was  announced  as  approaching,  merely  to  pay  a  visit 
to  his  Uncle  and  Aunt,  the  King  and  Queen  of  England.^  In  three 
days,  the  Emperor  had  so  far  gained  upon  the  good  will  of  Henry ;  while 
by  hints  as  to  the  Pontificate,  promises  and  presents,  he  had  secured  the 
ambition  of  Wolsey  in  his  favour.  The  King  of  England  with  his  Car- 
dinal then  passed  on  to  Francis,  and  to  the  performance  of  a  splendid 
pageant,  in  mockery  of  friendship.  The  negotiations  which  afterwards 
ensued,  only  prove,  that  Henry,  once  disappointed  of  the  imperial  dignity, 
had  fixed  his  eye  on  the  crown  of  France.  In  short,  his  Majesty  of 
England  had,  in  his  own  estimation,  become  the  arbiter  of  Europe.  With 
Wolsey  at  his  right  hand,  he  began  to  feel  as  though  he  held  the  balance 
between  the  two  Continental  rivals,  Charles  and  Francis ;  while  his  Prime 
Minister,  the  veritable  potentate,  was  about  to  be  courted  at  one  period, 
and  dreaded  at  another,  not  only  by  these  Sovereigns,  but  by  the  Pontiff 
himself  for  the  time  being. 

As  proof  of  the  English  Cardinal  rapidly  rising  to  this  dignity,  we 
have  only  to  mark  those  successive  steps  by  which  he  had  shown  him- 
self to  be  so  attentive  to  his  personal  aggrandisement  ;  recollecting  all 
the  while,  that  he  is  to  be  viewed  as  the  true  index  to  the  rising  eccle- 
siastical power  of  Italy  over  England.  Having  in  1515  obtained  the  red 
hat  of  a  Cardinal,  his  Royal  Master,  now  so  won  by  his  fascinating  man- 
ner and  luxurious  habits,  had,  in  December  of  that  year,  made  him  Lord 
Chancellor,  instead  of  William  Warham,  Archbishop  of  Canterbm-y  ;  for 
the  Chancellor  in  those  days  had  been  uniformly  a  churchman.  Then 
Leo  the  Tenth,  in  July  1518,  had  in  effect  transferred  to  him,  within  the 
limits  of  England,  almost  all  his  powers  as  Pontiff,  by  creating  him  his 
Plenipotentiary  or  Legate  a  latere.     Since  the  year  1514  he  had  been 


-  This  was  not  an  accWcntal  visit.     On  the  8th  of  April,  (152(1),  Henn-  hail  orderctl  liis  Am- 
bassadors to  fix  the  time  and  place. 


8  POSITION  OF  ENGLAND.  [liOOK  I. 

Archbishop  of  York,  and  after  that,  farined  the  revenues  of  Worcester 
and  Salisbury  on  behalf  of  two  foreigners,  Italians,  resident  at  Rome. 
He  had  held,  in  commendam,  the  Diocese  of  Bath  and  the  Abbey  of  St. 
Albans.  As  early  as  1518  he  had  a  settled  annuity  from  the  French 
King,  of  twelve  thousand  livres  ;  and  in  1520,  Charles  V.  and  the  Pontiff 
had  granted  him  an  yearly  pension  of  seven  thousand  five  hundred 
ducats,  as  the  revenues  of  Toledo  and  Placencia,  two  bishoprics  in 
Spain.  The  epistolary  correspondence  addressed  to  him,  and  still  in 
preservation,  proves  the  height  to  which  he  had  attained.  Louis  XII., 
Francis  I.,  and  Charles  V.,  addressed  him  as  their  "good,"  or  "good  and 
loyal  friend."  Maximilian  before  this,  and  the  Pontiffs,  always  approach- 
ed him  with  marked  consideration.  The  Venetian  Republic  abroad,  had 
treated  him  as  a  vital  portion  of  the  Royal  power,  and  the  Oxford  Uni- 
versity at  home,  had  gone  so  far  as  to  employ  in  writing  the  appellation 
of  "  Your  Majesty  ! "  This  occurred  before  the  title  was  in  use  to  Henry 
himself !  In  short,  it  actually  seemed  as  if  that  dominant  power  which 
had  reigned  so  long  over  all  Europe,  had  been  gathering  into  strength, 
and  lighting  on  the  head  of  one  man  in  England,  and  that  one,  merely 
an  ecclesiastic  raised  from  low  degree. 

In  these  circimistances,  could  any  event  have  been  more  improbable 
than  that  England  above  all  other  countries,  England  under  her  present 
monarch,  would  ever  be  separated  from  Rome  1  Independently,  however, 
of  all  the  past,  certain  events  in  the  year  1521  seemed  to  have  placed  such 
a  supposition  out  of  all  question.  Milan  had  then  been  rescued  from 
the  yoke  of  France,  and  no  one  was  more  overjoyed  than  the  reigning 
Pontiff,  Leo  the  Tenth  ;  but  in  a  few  days  after,  whether  from  joy,  or 
as  has  been  supposed,  by  poison,  on  the  1st  of  December  he  breathed  his 
last. 

Henry  had  missed  the  Imperial  crown,  but  now  came  his  Prime 
Minister's  opportunity  for  advancement.  No  sooner  had  the  intelligence 
arrived,  than  Wolsey  became  an  eager  candidate  for  the  papal  throne. 
His  royal  master,  in  pursuit  of  his  own  glory,  had  long  and  ardently 
desired  the  appointment  of  his  favourite.  The  Emperor  had  been 
sounded  before,  and  feigned  consent.  The  i:)receptor  of  Charles,  however, 
Plorent,  Bishop  of  Tortosa,  as  Adrian  VI.,  gained  the  day,  and  Wolsey 
had  to  content  himself  for  the  present,  with  the  prolongation  of  his 
Legantinc  authority.  Another  opportunity,  indeed,  soon  presented 
itself,  by  the  death  of  Adrian  in  1523.  Again  Wolsey  started,  with  ex- 
press orders  from  Henry  as  well  as  himself,  that  no  wealth  or  substance 
should  be  spai'ed  to  ensure  success.  But  again  he  was  doomed  to  bitter 
disappointment,  and  Julio  di  Medici,  once  Bishop  of  Worcester,  was 
chosen.  This  was  the  second  time  that  the  Emperor  had  deceived 
Wolsey, — and  the  effects  of  his  duplicity,  at  the  Cardinal's  hands,  he 
shall  feci  for  years  to  come.     In  the  meanwhile,  Julio,  under  the  name 


1. 500-2.3.]  STATE  OF  LITERATURE.  .0 

of  Clement  the  Seventh,  was  willing  to  do  all  in  his  power  to  secure  the 
allegiance  and  good  will  of  England.  To  Henry  he  had  sent  a  conse- 
crated rose  tree  of  fine  gold,  with  a  confirmation  of  his  title  "  Defender 
of  the  Faith,"  first  obtained  from  Leo.  To  Wolsey  he  sent  a  ring  from 
his  own  finger,  Avith  the  appointment  of  Legate  a  latere,  for  life. 

These  three  Sovereigns,  therefore,  with  Clement  VII.  as  Pontiff,  and 
last,  though  not  least,  Cardinal  Wolsey,  will  now  engage  attention  and 
occupy  theii"  own  conspicuous  places  in  the  great  drama,  for  years  to 
come. 

Such  had  been  the  chief  political  movements  up  to  the  year  1523, — 
but  was  there  no  stir  in  the  world  of  letters  ?  Certainly  there  was  ;  and 
in  England,  to  a  degree  hitherto  quite  unknown.  The  triiunph  achieved 
on  the  Continent,  had  already  shed  its  influence  on  our  detached  Island. 
The  road  to  Italy  had  not  been  unfrequented  by  our  countrymen,  influ- 
enced chiefly  by  thirst  for  such  learning  as  could  there  be  best  acquired. 
Hence  the  well  known  names  of  Grocyn  and  Linacre,  of  Colet  and  Lilly, 
of  Tunstal,  Wakefield,  William  Latimer,  and  Sii-  Thomas  More.  Wolsey 
himself  wished  to  be  regarded  as  a  scholar — and  so  did,  above  them  all  in 
his  own  esteem,  the  King  upon  the  throne  ;  though  neither  the  one  nor 
the  other  had  ever  beheld  an  Italian  sky.  Grocyn,  the  first  Englishman 
who  taught  Greek  at  Oxford,  and  Linacre,  at  once  physician  and  tutor  to 
Henry  VIIL,  had  spent  years  in  Italy  under  Politian  and  Chalcondyles, 
then  the  most  eminent  classical  scholars  in  Europe.  Colet,  though  only 
a  Latinist,  after  his  return  from  abroad,  became  the  founder  of  St.  Paul's 
school,  the  first  public  seminary  where  Greek  was  taught ;  having  chosen 
Lilly  for  the  head  master,  who  had  studied  the  language  for  five  years 
at  Rhodes,  under  the  refugees  from  Constantinople.  Tunstal,  an  eminent 
Latin,  as  well  as  a  good  Greek  and  Hebrew  scholar,  had  been  chosen 
Bishop  of  London  in  1522  ;  and  Sir  Thomas  More,  the  pupil  of  Grocyn, 
was  now  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons.  In  short,  the  court  of 
Henry  had  become  so  celebrated  for  an  awakened  attention  to  letters, 
as  to  be  eulogised  on  the  Continent  ;  and  the  company  rovmd  the  royal 
table  was  regarded  as  superior  to  any  academy  of  learning — at  least  so 
said  Erasmus,  though  he  was  rather  too  complimentary. 

At  this  crisis,  therefore,  an  important  question  naturally  presents 
itself.  Political  events  gave  no  promise  whatever  of  any  important 
change.  But  here  were  men  of  great  pretensions  to  polite  literature. 
Now,  among  aU  these  learned  men,  ah-eady  named,  or  not  named,  who 
gave  celebrity  to  the  court  of  Henry,  or  adorned  the  royal  table,  had  the 
idea  of  giving  the  Sacred  Volume,  translated  from  the  original,  into  the 
language  of  the  common  people,  once  been  mooted  ?  Had  the  learning 
they  had  acquired  ever  led  them  to  this  one  point,  and  as  to  one  that 
was  important,  incumbent,  or  necessary  \  So  far  from  it,  the  very  pro- 
posal would  have  made  them  tremble,  or  have  filled  the  majority  with 


10  STATE  OF  LITERATURE.  [boOK  I. 

indignation.  Colet,  a  man  to  bo  distinguished  from  all  others  then 
living,  might  perhaps  have  hailed  such  a  proposal,  though  decidedly 
attached  to  the  forms  then  existing,  but  his  opinions  had  rendered  him 
so  obnoxious,  that,  but  for  the  King's  personal  regard,  he  might  have 
suffered.  However,  he  died  in  1519,  and  Grocyn,  absorbed  in  Greek  only 
as  a  language,  died  of  palsy  the  same  year.  As  for  Linacre,  who  expired 
in  1524,  nothing  favoiirable  is  upon  record.  It  has  even  been  said,  that 
though  enjoying  the  fruit  of  several  ecclesiastical  preferments,  he  had  not 
begun  to  look  into  the  Greek  New  Testament  till  towards  the  close  of  life  ; 
and  on  reading  our  Lord's  beautiful  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  as  in  Matthew, 
coming  to  that  passage, — "  Swear  not  at  all,"  he  cast  the  book  aside, 
saying,  that  "  this  was  either  not  the  Gospel,  or  we  were  not  Christians."^ 
But  with  regard  to  the  rest  of  these  scholars,  when  the  Book  of  Life  in 
the  vulgar  tongue  once  comes  into  England,  Tunstal  and  More,  Wolsey 
and  the  King,  will  not  fail  to  render  themselves  conspicuous  as  its  bitter- 
est and  most  determined  opponents. 

Neither  tlie  political  nor  literary  condition  of  England, 
under  the  dominant  sway  of  Cardinal  AVolsey,  aftording  the 
slightest  indication  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  being  about  to  be 
given  to  the  people,  but  the  reverse ;  in  justice  to  that  event 
it  is  necessary  to  observe  also,  the  nature  of  that  connexion 
which  had  existed  for  ages  between  Britain  and  Rome,  more 
especially  since  it  was  now  as  intimate  and  powerful  as  ever. 
Indeed,  under  Henry  VII].,  it  arrived  at  its  climax.  This 
connexion  sustained  a  peculiarly  complicated  character.  There 
was  the  Annate,  or  first  fruits,  payable  by  the  Archbishop 
down  to  the  lowest  ecclesiastic,  upon  election  to  office — the 
Appeal  to  Rome — the  Dispensation  from  it — the  Indulgence 
— the  Legantine  levy — the  Mortuary — the  Pardon — the 
Ethelwolfs  pension — the  Peter's  pence  for  every  chimney 
that  smoked  in  England — the  Pilgrimage — the  Tenth — be- 
sides the  sale  of  trinkets  or  holy  wares  from  Rome  !  Here 
were  not  fewer  than  twelve  distinct  sources  of  revenue  I 
These  altogether  were  operating  on  the  inhabitants  without 
any  exception,  and  with  as  much  regularity  as  the  rising  and 
setting  of  the  sun.  It  was  a  pecuniary  connexion  of  immense 
power,  made  to  bear  upon  the  general  conscience,  which  knew 
no  pause  by  day,  no  pause  by  night ;  falling,  as  it  did,  not 
merely  on  the  living,  but  on  the  dying  and  the  dead  ! 

3  Cheke— "  I)c  iiromiiic.  GrsBcae  Linguae."    Fuller  indeed  tries  to  soften  this,  but  Clieke  was 
almost  a  contemiiorary. 


1500-23.]  WORCESTER  AND  CtLOUCESTER.  11 

In  no  other  country  throughout  Europe,  without  exception, 
was  it  so  probable  that  this  system,  in  all  its  oppressive  and 
fearful  integrity,  would  be  maintained.  Under  an  imperative 
Monarch,  originally  educated  as  an  ecclesiastic,  and  who  now 
gloried  in  his  acquaintance  with  scholastic  divinity ;  with  a 
Prime  Minister  so  well  known  to  every  foreign  Court,  and 
who  himself  breathed  with  ardour  after  the  Pontificate, 
England  had  become  the  right  arm  or  main-stay  of  this  sys- 
tem. Nay,  as  if  to  render  this  still  more  apparent,  and  so 
fix  the  eye  of  posterity,  the  King  upon  the  throne  had  resolved 
to  distinguish  himself  as  the  reputed  author,  in  support  of  this 
singular  power ;  and  he  became  at  once  the  first  and  the  only 
Sovereign  in  Europe  who  was  understood  to  have  lifted  his 
pen  in  defence  and  defiance.  For  this  feat  in  reply,  though 
not  an  answer  to  Luther,  it  is  well  known  that  Henry  had 
obtained  from  Leo  X.  his  highly  prized  title  of  "Defender 
of  the  Faith."  ^ 

If,  however,  the  reader  should  now  wish  to  know,  whether  there  was 
any  part  of  this  Island,  by  way  of  eminence,  where  the  power  and 
pressure  of  Rome  was  more  strikingly  apparent  ;  any  ground  which 
seemed  to  be  "  all  her  own  ;"  he  must  look  down  to  the  west  of 
England.  In  a  district  of  country,  extending  from  above  Kidderminster 
to  a  little  below  Bristol,  lay  what  was  then  styled  the  diocese  of  Wor- 
cester, Embracing  the  county  of  that  name,  as  well  as  the  whole  of 
Gloucestershire  to  the  borders  of  Somerset,  we  need  to  say  nothing  of 
its  beauty,  since  a  richer  variety  of  scenery,  or  finer  studies  of  the 
picturesque,  can  scarcely  even  now  be  found.  It  is  of  more  importance 
to  remark,  that,  even  at  this  early  period,  there  was  no  part  of  England 
in  a  better  state  of  cultivation,  if,  indeed,  there  was  any  to  equal  it. 
This  may  very  easily  be  imagined  from  the  fact,  that,  to  say  nothing  of 
the  Cathedral  at  Worcester,  with  all  its  appendages,  within  the  county 
of  Gloucester  alone  there  were  not  fewer  than  six  Mitred  Abbeys,  viz. 
Gloucester,  Cu-encester  and  Winchcombe,  Tewkesbury,  Hailes  and  Flax- 
ley  ;  the  three  first  Abbots  having  seats  in  Parliament  as  peers  of  the 


■*  The  title  of  "  Most  Christian  King,"'  taken  from  the  King  of  France,  had  actually  been 
conveyed  to  Henry,  by  the  warlike  Julius  II.,  through  Cardinal  Bainbridge.— Ri^wt'rV  Fcedera. 
But  Leo  professed  to  kno\y  nothing  of  this,  or  would  not  recognise  the  transaction,  and  annulled 
all  that  his  predecessor  had  done  against  Louis.  The  present  title  to  Henry  was  no  more  than 
that  which  James  IV.  of  Scotland  had  received,  fourteen  years  ago,  from  Julius.  Not  being 
hereditary,  it  had  died  with  him,  though  we  shall  find  James  V.  irritating  his  uncle,  by  assuming 
that  of  "  Defender  of  the  Chrislian  faith  ;"  intended,  perhaps,  as  a  hint  to  Henry,  after  his  de- 
fection. Neither  was  the  title  now  conveyed  to  England  meant  to  be  hereditary :  it  became 
so  only  by  an  Act  of  Parliament  in  1544,  and  though  the  statute  had  been  repealed,  the  title 
was  retained  even  by  Philip  and  Mary.     So  it  has  continued  to  the  present  hour. 


12  WORCESTER  AND  GLOUCESTER.  [boOK  I, 

realm.  But,  besides  these,  there  were  many  other  Houses,  styled  Re- 
ligious, of  almost  every  grade  and  denomination.  If,  from  the  days  of 
King  John  and  Henry  III.,  England  had  seemed  to  the  eye  of  the 
Pontiif,  like  a  "  garden  of  delight  and  an  unexhausted  well,"  no  judges  as 
to  the  most  pleasant  and  productive  spots,  were  superior  to  the  Monks  ; 
and  these  in  this  quarter  were  so  numerous,  as  to  have  given  rise  to  the 
common  and  profane  proverb — that  such  a  thing  was  as  certain,  as  that 
"  God  was  in  Gloucestershire."  And  who  were  the  Bishops,  then  in  full 
power  over  all  this  Goshen  or  Gerar,  and  enjoying  its  fruits  ?  Not  one 
of  them  an  Englishman,  resident  within  our  shores  !  Since  this  centui'y 
commenced,  or  rather  from  the  year  1497  to  1534,  they  were  actually 
four  Italians,  in  regular  succession.  The  two  first  had  been  resident 
with  a  witness  ;  but  as  for  the  two  last,  there  was  no  occasion,  since 
Wolsey,  the  Cardinal  and  Legate  of  England,  transacted  all  their  busi- 
ness. Indeed,  for  a  period  of  half  a  century,  or  from  1484  to  1534,  the 
connexion  of  this  district  with  Italy  is  particularly  worthy  of  notice, 
more  especially  on  account  of  what  then  and  there  took  place.  The 
reader  will  discover  presently,  that  there  is  one  important  reason  for 
his  attention  being  first  directed  to  these  Italian  Bishops,  and  to  their 
intimate  and  profitable  alliance  with  England. 

In  the  year  1484,  Innocent  VIII.  had  been  elected  Pontiff.  It  was 
by  his  authority  that  John  de  Lilius,  or  Giglis,  LL.D.,  an  Italian  of 
Lucca,  was  sent  into  England.  He  came  as  Questor,  or  Collector,  for 
the  Apostolic  Chamber,  and  it  was  not  long  before  he  had  thoroughly 
feathered  his  own  nest.  From  time  to  time  he  became  Rector  of 
Swaffam  in  Norfolk,  of  Langham  in  Suffolk,  and  of  St.  Michael,  Crooked 
Lane,  London  ;  Prebendary  of  St.  Paul's,  York,  and  Lincoln  ;  Pre- 
bendary, and  afterwards  Dean  of  Wells  ;  Archdeacon  of  London  and 
of  Gloucester,  or,  in  all,  ten  different  appointments ;  in  return  for  which, 
since  he  came  as  Questor-general  for  the  Pontiff  who  sent  him,  he  could 
have  done  little  else  than  collect  the  revenues.  From  Innocent,  more- 
over, de  Lilius  had  received  a  most  scandalous  commission  ;  authorising 
him  to  pardon  the  most  heinous  offences,  such  as  robbery  and  murder, 
usury,  simony  and  theft,  or  every  species  of  crime  ;  and  to  dispense 
with  the  wo»-restitution  of  goods  acquired  by  any  fraud,  upon  condition 
that  part  of  such  gain  should  be  handed  to  the  Pontiff's  commissioners 
or  their  deputies  !  Nor  can  we  suppose  this  man  to  have  been  negligent 
in  employing  this  power  to  his  own,  as  well  as  his  master's  emolument. 
At  last,  loaded  with  fruit,  it  was  time  to  return  to  Italy,  though  his  con- 
nexion with  England  was  not  to  be  broken  off;  so  far  as  emolument  was 
concerned,  far  from  it.  He  became  Henry's  Solicitor  in  the  Court  of 
Rome  ;  and  no  sooner  was  the  diocese  of  Worcester  vacant  by  the  death 
of  Robert  Morton,  than  de  Lilius,  the  Archdeacon  of  Gloucester,  became 
Lord  of  the  Sec.     To  this  he  was  appointed  by  Alexander  VI.,  on  the 


1.500-23.]  WOKCESTEIt  AND  GLOUCESTER.  13 

;30th  of  August  1497,  and,  aw  Bishop  of  Worcester,  he  died  at  Rome  on 
the  2,'jth  of  August  next  year. 

This  man,  however,  had  been  assisted  as  Collector  by  a  nephew,  Syl- 
vester de  Lilius,  who  had  remained  in  England  behind  him,  and  now  for 
his  usefulness  and  activity  in  this  employment,  he  was  advanced  by 
Alexander  VI.  to  succeed  his  uncle,  and  as  Bishop  of  Worcester,  at  once. 
Appointed  on  the  17th  March  1499,  he  continued  in  Enghmd  for  thirteen 
years ;  but  in  1512,  Julius  II.  having  summoned  the  fifth  Lateral 
Council,  Henry  VIII.,  "  the  head  of  the  Italian  league,"  could  not  do 
less  than  send  him  to  Rome.  What  then  could  become  of  his  occupa- 
tion in  England  or  of  his  see  1  There  was  no  difficulty  ;  here  was 
Cardinal  Wolsey  always  at  hand,  and  he  will  now  have  not  a  little  to  do 
with  the  Counties  of  Worcester  and  Gloucester,  as  long  as  he  lives.  He 
was  appointed  Commendatory  for  Sylvester,  and  farmed  the  diocese  for 
him.  The  Italian  never  returned  from  Rome,  where  he  soon  showed 
himself  to  be  a  most  base  and  ungrateful  chai'acter.  Continuing  to  re- 
ceive the  fruits  of  his  residence  and  appointment  in  England,  he  lived 
for  nine  years,  and  died  at  Rome,  16th  April  1521.  It  is  but  very  re- 
cently that  the  secret  has  been  discovered,  though  the  fact  appears  to  be, 
that  he  there  lived  to  subserve  the  purposes  or  pleasure  of  Wolsey,  his 
agent  in  England,  rather  than  those  of  the  King,  whose  orator  he  pro- 
fessedly was.  In  the  second  year  after  his  return  to  Rome,  the  English 
Cardinal  Bainbridge,  when  writing  to  Henry  direct,  has  the  following- 
passage  : — "  During  the  time  of  my  abode  here  in  this  Court,  I  neither 
can  nor  will  desist,  to  signify  unto  your  Highness,  such  things  as  I  shall 
perceive  that  be  dissonant,  either  to  your  Grace's  honour,  or  wealth  of 
your  realm.  As  touching  my  Lord  of  Worcester,  your  Grace's  orator,  he 
doth  use  continually  the  company  of  the  Protector  of  Prance,  both  in 
the  city,  and  also  in  Vines  (Vineyards)  and  Gardens  without  the  city,  both 
by  day  and  night,  whereof  right  honovu-able  men,  your  Grace's  friends, 
hath  at  sundry  times  advertised  me  ;  and  that  he  is  more  familiar  with 
him  than  with  any  cardinal  of  Rome.  It  is  perfectly  known  to  every 
Englishman  within  this  city,  that  nothing  can  be  more  odious  unto  him, 
than  to  hear  of  any  success  of  your  Grace's  causes,  or  for  to  hear  of  any 
honour  spoken  of  your  realm  or  subjects,  either  by  writing  from  England 
or  other  places,  upon  your  most  noble  acts  and  victories  obtained.  From 
Rome,  the  20th  day  of  May  1514."  Whoever  was  the  perpetrator,  the 
writer  of  this  letter  was  dead  in  less  than  two  months,  and  by  poison. 
The  real  date  of  Bainbridge's  death,  was  July  the  14th  ;  and  there 
can  be  no  question  now,  that  the  Italian  Bishop  of  Worcester  was  deeply, 
if  not  chiefly  concerned  in  the  mui'der  of  the  English  Cardinal.^  Wolsey 
succeeded  Bainbridge  as  Archbishop  of  York,  and  Sylvester  de  Lilius  at 

5  See  Ellis' Original  Letters,  I.,  pp.  99-113. 


14  COUNTY  OF  GLOUCESTER.  [bOOK  1. 

Rome  went  on  to  receive  the  fruits  of  his  bishopric,  till  his  death  in 
1521. 

De  Lilius  once  dead  in  Italy,  there  was  no  occasion  for  sending  another 
Italian  to  England.  The  Pontiff,  it  appears,  might  now  exercise  his  right 
of  nomination,  and  at  once  secure  the  see.  Under  Leo  X.  abroad,  and 
Wolsey,  as  farmer  of  the  district,  at  home,  the  transfer  was  easily  ad- 
justed. There  was  a  soldier  of  the  order  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  a 
Florentine,  who  had  been  raised  to  be  a  Cardinal.  He  was  not  only 
Archbishop  of  Narbon  and  Florence,  but  moreover  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Roman  Church  both  in  spirituals  and  temporals  ;  and  as  if  all  this  had 
not  been  more  than  sufficient,  the  English  vacancy  was  handed  over 
to  him  !  On  the  7th  of  June  1521,  Leo  X.,  by  his  provisory  Bull,  made 
him  Bishop  of  Worcester  in  England.  The  nod  of  the  PontiiF  was  all- 
sufficient  security,  and  therefore  the  very  next  day,  Leo  empowered 
Thomas  Wolsey  to  take  possession  of  the  see  for  him,  and  to  act  in  his 
name.  It  actually  seemed  as  if  all  the  most  conspicuous  men  in  the 
great  following  drama,  must  be  brought  into  contact  with  this  particular 
spot  in  England.  For  who  was  this  soldier  ?  It  was  no  other  than  the 
cousin  of  Leo,  Cardinal  (Julio)  di  Medici,  educated  by  Lorenzo  his 
uncle,  and  so  well  known  as  the  future  Pontiff',  Clement  VII. ! 

It  was  but  a  few  months  before  Julio  found  an  opportunity  of  serving 
the  English  administrator  of  his  English  diocese.  Leo  died  in  December 
1521,  when  the  most  active  in  Wolsey's  favour  to  procure  the  Pontiff's 
chair  itself,  were  the  Cardinals  di  Medici  and  Sion.  They  had  both 
left  the  army,  to  be  present  in  the  conclave  ;  but,  as  already  stated,  the 
ancient  preceptor  and  friend  of  Charles  V.  stood  in  the  way,  when  Wol- 
sey was  outvoted  by  Adrian  VI.  The  Italian  Bishop  of  Worcester  then 
thought  it  prudent  to  tender  his  resignation,  and  not  damage  his  re- 
putation or  influence  under  the  reigning  Pontiff ;  taking  care,  at  the 
same  time,  to  recommend  one  of  his  own  countrymen,  Jerome  de 
Ghinnuci,  already  Bishop  of  Asculum.  This  change,  however,  did  not 
take  place  till  the  27th  of  October,  nor  was  the  see  filled  up  till  the 
20th  of  February  1523,  when  it  was  conferred  on  Ghinnuci,  now 
domestic  Chaplain  to  Adrian,  and  Auditor-General  of  the  Apostolic 
Chamber.  Thus,  it  once  more  appeared,  as  if  this  district  of  country, 
in  particular,  must  ever  stand  in  close  and  profitable  union  with  a  man 
at  the  ear  of  the  Pontiff,  while  Wolsey  went  on  to  farm  it  as  before. 
Little,  however,  was  he  aware,  that  the  same  man  who  hail  professed  to 
be  so  warm  in  his  favour  at  Rome,  in  January  1522,  would  in  less  than 
two  years,  for  ever  cut  him  off  from  all  prospect  of  the  Pontificate. 
Julio,  the  former  Bishop  of  Worcester,  became  Clement  VII.  on  the 
25th  of  November  1523  ;  but  still  Cardinal  Ghinnuci  held  the  diocese, 
and  that  until  1534. 

In  these  transactions,  therefore,  and  within  the  compass  of  this  dis- 


1500-23.]  BIRTH  OF  TYNDALE  THERE.  15 

trict  alone,  the  reader  has,  singularly  enough,  met  in  his  way  not  fewer 
than  seven  Pontiffs,  from  Innocent  VIII.,  and  the  notorious  Alexander 
VI.,  down  to  Leo  X.,  and  his  nephew,  Clement  VII."  Here,  in  short, 
was  the  finest  spot  in  all  their  English  garden,  and  under  Wolsey,  as 
Cardinal,  and  Legate,  and  Commendatory,  it  had  now  certainly  ex- 
hibited the  climax  of  their  power.  In  no  other  diocese  of  all  England 
were  the  influence  and  authority  of  Pontiffs,  and  Cardinals,  and  foreign 
ecclesiastics  in  such  full  display.  By  way  of  eminence,  it  had  been,  as 
it  were,  given  up  to  Italy.  Added  to  all  this,  we  need  not,  must  not, 
dwell  on  the  shocking  immorality  which  every  where  reigned  triumph- 
ant, and  under  the  desecrated  name  of  religion.  A  specimen  has  al- 
ready been  given  in  the  vile  commission  granted  by  the  first  of  these 
Pontiffs.  "  The  mind,"  says  Tui-ner,  "  must  have  renounced  both  its 
judgment  and  its  conscience,  not  to  have  called  for  some  reform  ;"  but 
the  fact  was,  that,  in  the  language  of  sacred  writ,  "  both  the  mind  and 
conscience  were  defiled."  "  On  no  part  of  Europe,"  he  adds,  "  can  we 
fix  our  eye  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.,  but  we  meet  in  what  was  styled 
the  ecclesiastical  order,  with  the  same  picture  of  arraigned  depravity." 
But  as  far  as  our  own  island  was  concerned,  that  great  power  which 
ruled  the  earth,  filled  with  hostility  to  all  change,  and  more  especially 
to  the  "Word  of  God,  seems  to  have  gathered  itself  into  a  focus  before 
our  eyes,  while  it  rested,  like  an  incubus,  on  this  diocese  of  Worcester. 

Let  any  one  now  direct  his  attention  to  the  first  quarter  of 
the  sixteenth  century ;  let  but  the  state  of  our  native  laud  be 
surveyed,  but  more  especially  the  counties  of  Gloucester  and 
Worcester ;  and  so  far  from  there  being  any,  even  the 
slightest  token  of  the  Divine  Word  being  about  to  be  laid 
open  to  the  common  people ;  the  political  state  of  England, 
and  the  literary,  such  as  it  was,  but,  above  all,  her  intimate 
and  complicat(!d  connexion  with  Italy,  decidedly  forbade  the 
idea  of  such  a  thing.  Where,  then,  throughout  all  England, 
was  any  individual  to  be  expected,  sufficiently  bold  to  cherish 
the  noble  design  ? 

Now,  it  was  such  a  time  as  this ;  it  was  in  the  midst  of 
hostile  circumstances,  nay,  it  was  in  the  very  spot,  or  diocese, 
to  which  we  have  already  pointed,  that  a  man  according  to 
God''s  own  heart  had  already  been  found  !  It  was  in  the 
centre  of  this  diocese  that  he  was  born  !  From  about  the 
year  1484,  this  district,  above  all  others,  had  fallen  under 
the  power  of  Italy,  or,  like  a  ripe  fig,  into  the  mouth  of  the 

6  Or  Seven  Pontiffs,  in  only  fifty  years,  from  1484  to  1534. 


16  FAMILY  OF  TYNDALE.  [boOK  I. 

eater;   but  it  may  now  be  added,  "  about  which  time  William 
Tyndale  was  born."''' 

Great  characters  have  not  unfrequently  been  raised  from 
an  obscurity  which  has  baffled  all  research.  So  it  has  hap- 
pened emphatically  in  the  present  instance.  Not  only  are 
the  statements  hitherto  advanced  altogether  erroneous ;  but 
even  after  the  utmost  diligence,  whether  in  searching  the 
Parish  Registers  themselves,  the  Visitations  in  the  Herald's 
Office,  or  the  manuscript  stores  of  our  British  Museum,  still 
there  hangs,  at  least,  some  degree  of  obscurity  over  the  pre- 
cise year  of  Tyndale''s  birth,  as  well  as  his  immediate  parent- 
age. Without,  therefore,  encumbering  the  page,  we  now 
confine  attention  to  what  appears  to  be  morally  certain  ;  and 
for  the  additional  confirmation  of  our  narrative,  refer  to  an 
article  at  the  close  of  this  work. 

Among  the  picturesque  beauties  of  Gloucestershire,  where 
the  prospects  pointed  out  by  the  topographer  amount  to 
nearly  forty  in  number,  there  is  one  from  the  top  of  Stinch- 
comb  Hill,  fifteen  miles  south-west  of  the  city,  which  com- 
mands the  Severn,  from  Gloucester  to  Bristol ;  having  the 
Vale  of  Berkeley,  with  its  venerable  castle,  on  the  left  bank 
of  that  river,  and  the  Forest  of  Dean,  Chepstow,  and  the 
Welsh  mountains,  on  the  right.  From  this  point  more  than 
seven  counties  are  visible,  and  about  thirty  parish  churches ; 
but  to  every  admirer  of  England's  best  hope,  her  Sacred 
Volume,  the  spot  acquires  by  far  its  deepest  interest,  from 
his  having  immediately  below  his  eye,  the  birth-place  of  its 
original  Translator.  There  can  be  no  question  that  Tyndale 
was  born  within  the  hundred  of  Berkeley,  whether  at  the 
village  of  Stinchcomb  itself,  or  more  probably  at  North 
Nibley,  two  miles  to  the  left,  now  also  full  in  view.  His 
family,  however,  stands  long  in  connexion  with  both  villages. 

Before  the  birth  of  our  Translator,  his  progenitors,  for  two, 
if  not  three  descents,  had  lived  under  the  western  brow  of 
Stinchcomb  Hill,  where,  for  a  limited  period,  they  had  passed 
under  the  name  of  Hitchins.  The  removal  of  the  family  into 
Gloucestershire,  as  well  as  the  temporary  assumption  of  this 
name,  have  been  ascribed  to  the  wars  between  the  houses  of 
York  and  Lancaster,  and  such  may  have  been  the  occasion ; 
but  the  temporary  adoption  of  the  name  of  Hitchins,  may 
just  as  probably  have  arisen  from  a  deadly  local  family  feud 


1500-23.]  FAMILY  OF  TYNDALE.  17 

which  long  agitated  the  very  spot  where  they  now  dwelt. 
The  violence  of  the  civil  wars  had  loosened  the  authority  of 
government,  and  this  part  of  the  country  afforded  one  of  the 
most  striking  proofs  ;  for  though,  in  the  contentions  of  York 
and  Lancaster,  the  neighbouring  castle  of  Berkeley  had  no 
share,  yet  it  had  suffered  greatly  from  the  disputed  title  to 
its  possession,  between  the  heir  of  the  Barony,  and  Richard 
Beauchamp,  Earl  of  Warwick.  Perhaps  there  never  existed, 
in  the  history  of  England,  a  hereditary  family  contention 
equal  to  this ;  as  it  continued  to  smoulder  on  for  nearly  two 
hundred  years,  from  1417,  and  in  its  earlier  stages  burst  out 
with  great  violence.  Mutual  reprisals  had  been  made  again 
and  again,  till  a  final  period  was  put  to  such  a  mode  of 
settlement,  by  the  fierce  contest  on  Nibley  Green  in  March 
1470.''  This  is  indeed  the  only  event  by  which  the  village 
itself  has  hitherto  been  distinguished.  Now,  the  Tyndales 
were  then  living  at  Stinchcombe ;  and  as  the  number,  on 
both  sides,  amounted  to  1000  men,  most  of  whom  were 
gathered,  in  one  night,  from  the  lands  of  Berkeley  hundred, 
they  must  have  taken  part  in  the  fray.  AVhile,  therefore, 
the  quarrel  was  at  once  local  and  personal,  between  William, 
the  seventh  Lord  Berkeley,  and  Thomas,  Lord  Lisle,  then  liv- 
ing at  Wooton  under  Edge,  it  must  be  observed  that  the 
former  was  on  the  Lancastrian  side  of  politics,  and,  as  ten- 
ants at  least,  so  were  the  Tyndales,  The  consequence  was, 
that  although  Berkeley  was  victorious,  the  encounter  being 
fatal  to  Lord  Lisle  himself  and  150  more;  and  although 
Government  was   prevented  from   taking  cognizance  of  the 

7  It  was  after  the  death  of  Thomas,  the  fifth  Lord  Berkeley,  in  1417,  that  this  contest  be- 
gan. In  1418,  Richard  Beauchamp,  who  had  married  his  daughter,  and  sole  heiress,  "  lay 
before  Berkeley  Castle  with  an  armed  force,  fully  determined  to  destroy  it,  but  was  diverted 
from  his  purpose  by  the  intercession  of  the  Bishop  of  Worcester  and  the  neighbouring  gentry." 
— Prynn's  MS.  It  sustained  at  this  time  several  sieges,  which  were  as  frequently  raised. 
After  Warwick's  decease,  the  quarrel  became  hereditary.  All  decision  by  the  sword  termi- 
nated on  Nibley  Green  in  14/0,  but  the  tedious  process  of  law  continued  till  the  7th  of  James  I. 
1609-10,  or  193  years  from  the  commencement  of  the  dispute !  Meanwhile,  the  successful 
combatant  at  Nibley  did  not  fail  to  give  sufficient  proof  of  his  devotion  to  his  party  ;  for  in  De- 
cember 1487,  having  quarrelled  with  his  brother  Maurice,  on  account  of  his  marriage,  he  as- 
signed the  castle  and  manor,  with  other  Lordships,  to  Henry  VII.,  and  his  heirs-male,  so  that 
the  property  did  not  return  to  the  right  heirs  till  the  death  of  Edward  VI.  Still  the  legal  pro- 
cess went  on  till  its  settlement  under  James  I.  ;  and  yet,  even  now,  it  must  still  be  noticed.as 
a  notable  proof  of  "  the  glorious  uncertainty"  of  the  law  ;  that  if  modern  decisions  may  be  ap- 
plied to  the  subject,  the  Barony  of  Berkeley,  created  by  the  Writ  of  Summons  in  the  23d  Ed- 
ward I.  is  now  in  abeyance  between  the  descendants  and  representatives  of  the  three  daughters 
and  co-heirs  of  Elizabeth,  the  ancient  Countess  of  Warwick  ;  and  the  Barony  possessed  by  the 
present  Earl  of  Berkeley,  is  that  created  by  the  Writ  of  Summons  to  James  de  Berkeley  in 
1421,  or  9.  Henry  V.— Nicolas'  Synopsis,  pref.  xxi.xxx.  and  p.  CO.  See  the  printed  cases  of  the 
present  Earl  Fitzhardinge,  and  of  Sir  J.  S.  Sidney  on  the  Earls,  fur  all  the  facts  and  argu- 
ments on  the  subject. 

VOL.   I.  B 


IS  TYNDALKS  ANCESTORS.  [liOOK  I. 

result  at  the  time,  owing  to  the  far  greater  affairs  of  the  civil 
war,  still  afterwards  Lord  Berkeley  had  to  humbly  sue  for 
forgiveness  from  Edward  the  Fourth,  the  royal  head  of  the 
house  of  York.  At  all  events,  from  whatever  cause,  the 
nanie  of  Hitchin  had  been  assumed  by  this  branch  of  the 
Tyndale  family,  for  years,  as  will  appear  presently. 

The  family  of  our  Translator  is  to  be  traced  to  an  ancient 
Barony,  by  tenure,  which,  however,  in  his  name,  became  ex- 
tinct so  early  as  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century.^ 
From  the  second  son  of  Adam,  the  last  Baron  de  Tyn- 
dale and  Langeley,  in  Northumberland,  or  Robert  Tyndale, 
who  removed  southward  in  the  reign  of  Edward  I.,  who 
settled  at  Tansover,  or  Tansor,  near  Oundle  in  Northampton- 
shire, and  was  living  in  ]  288,  there  gradually  sprung  diffe- 
rent families ;  so  that,  by  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth 
century,  respectable  proprietors  of  the  name  of  Tyndale  were 
living  at  Tansover  and  Deane,  in  Northamptonshire ;  at 
Hockwold,  in  Norfolk ;  at  Pull  Court,  in  Worcestershire ; 
and  at  Stinchcombe  and  North  Nibley,  in  the  county  of 
Gloucester ;  as  there  were  soon  afterwards  at  Eastwood,  in 
the  same  county ;  at  Bathford  and  Bristol,  in  Somerset ;  at 
Mapplestead,  in  Essex,  and,  still  later,  at  Bobbing  Court,  in 
Kent.  All  these  families  claim  descent  from  Robert  of  Tan- 
sover ;  and  even  that  of  our  William  Tyndale  has  been  sup- 
posed, by  no  inferior  genealogist,  to  have  sprung  from  him.^ 
This  it  certainly  had  done,  though  in  a  very  remote  degree, 
as  we  shall  presently  meet  with  ground  to  believe  that  there 
was  some  affinity  between  it,  and  that  of  Tyndale  of  Pull 
Court,  a  branch  of  the  house  of  Tansover. 

Of  the  family  resident  at  Stinchcombe  and  North  Nibley, 
we  have  two  distinct  genealogies.  The  first,  under  the  head 
of  Hunt's  Courts  Nibley,  is  to  be  found  in  the  account  of  the 
hundred  of  Berkeley,  drawn  up  by  Mr.  S  my  the,  the  factor  of 
Lord  Berkeley,  resident  in  the  old  manor  house  of  Nibley. 
The  second  genealogy  is  founded  upon  a  deed  under  the  reign 
of  Henry  VI IL,  the  best  of  all  evidence  ;^"  while,  so  far  as  the 
latter  goes,  and  the  authority  quoting  it,  there  is  a  perfect 
agreement  with  the  former  as  to  the  descents,  viz. : — 

8  The  Barony  of  Tyndale  then  passed/io-e  nxoris  to  Nicholas  de  Boltehy,  wlio  died  in  1272, 
whose  son,  Adam,  died  in  1201.— See  Nicolas'  Synopsis,  and  the  admirable  genealogy  of  G.  B. 
Tyndale,  Esq.  of  Hayling,  in  Burke's  Hist,  of  the  Commoners,  iv.  p.  546. 

I'  Mr.  Jekyll's  genealogies,  qnotcd  in  the  Biog.  Brit. 

1"  Undiler's  Gloucester,  under  Stinchcomhe,  p.  69.5. 


1500-23.]  FAMILY  OF  TYNDALE.  19 

I.  Hugh  Tyndale,  fatlur  of  John,  f.  of  Thomas,  f.  of  Richard,  f-  of  Richard,  f.  of  Thomas. 
II.  Tliomas,  f.  of  Richard,  f.  of  Richard,  f.  of  Thomas. 

The  first  individual  mentioned  by  Mr.  Smytlie,  is  said  to 
be  Hugh  Tyndale,  alias  Huchens,  the  name  which,  for  a 
season,  the  family  had  adopted.  This  is  confirmed  by 
Tyndale  himself,  who,  in  his  first  publication,  gave  both 
names — "  William  Tyndale,  otherwise  called  Hitchins," — 
though  ever  after,  he  used  only  the  former.  Whether  John 
Tyndale  ever  resumed  the  name  without  the  alias,  we  have 
no  evidence;  but  to  a  certainty  Thomas  did,  and,  after  his 
example,  so  did  our  Translator.  "  Some  of  his  ancestors," 
says  Bigland,  "  having  taken  an  active  part  in  the  Lancas- 
trian cause,  migrated  to  Stinchcombe,  in  this  county ;  and,  as 
it  appears  from  the  Register  of  North  Nibley,  bore,  for  con- 
cealment, the  name  of  Hutchins  or  Hitchins,  but  resumed 
their  own  in  the  reign  of  Henry  the  Seventh." ^^ 

But  why  should  the  neighbouring  parish  of  North  Nibley 
be  introduced?  This  brings  us  to  the  deed  already  mentioned, 
or  the  second  genealogy,  and  the  following  fact.  "  Thomas 
Tyndale,"  the  first  man  of  that  name,  "  died  sometime 
before  the  83d  Henry  VIII.,  or  1541-2,  as  appears  "by 
a  deed  of  that  date,  to  which  Edward  Tyndale,  of  Pull 
Court  in  Worcester,  was  a  witness."'^  And,  still  using 
the  deed,  the  writer  proceeds, — "  By  Alicia  his  wife,  daughter 
and  sole  heir  of  Thomas  Hunt,  (of  Hunts'  Court,)  he  had 
five  sons,  Richard,  William,  Henry,  Thomas,  and  John,  and 
one  daughter,  Elizabeth. ^^ 

To  the  admirers  of  Tyndale,  it  would  no  doubt  be  gratify- 
ing, could  we  now  positively  affirm,  that  they  have  the  entire 
family,  parents  and  children,  before  them  ;  but  unfortunately 
owing  to  recent,  though  very  loose  assertions,  the  question 
may  return, — was  this  Thomas  Tyndale  his  brother  only, 
and   these  sons  his  nephews  ?     Or  have  we  thus  on  record. 


"  Bigland's  GIos.,  p.  293.  He  is  generally  one  of  the  best  authorities,  though  we  have  not 
been  able  to  verify  the  quotation,  the  Register,  as  now  examined,  not  extending  farther  back 
than  1J6(>.  We  have  stood  on  the  ground  still  pointed  out  as  the  site  of  Hunt's  Court,  in  the 
village  of  North  Nibley,  but  no  house  worthy  of  the  name  now  remains. 

'2  This  Edward  Tyndale  was  the  youngest  son  of  Sir  William  Tyndale  of  Hockwold,  and  he 
was  the  son  of  Sir  Thomas  Tyndale  of  Deane,  the  fifth  in  lineal  descent  from  the  first  Robert  of 
Tansover.  This  Edward,  too,  was  the  brother  of  Sir  John  of  Hockwold,  of  William  the  an- 
cestor of  the  Tyndales  of  Bathford,  as  well  as  of  Robert,  who  died  without  issue.  Thus,  as  far 
as  being  party  to  a  will  bespeaks  affinity,  there  is  ground  for  the  conjecture  of  Jekyll. 

13  The  writer,  as  already  quoted,  then  informs  us,  that  this  Thomas  was  father  of  Richard,  f. 
of  Richard,  f.  of  Thomas,  who  died  in  16.37,  as  appears  by  tlie  probate  of  his  uyill.  To  these  we 
can  now  add,  father  of  Thomas,  f.  of  William,  who,  at  the  age  of  8(»,  died  in  1748.  See  the 
A  rticle  on  the  Parentage  and  early  years  of  Tyndale  at  the  close  of  this  work. 


20  FAMILY  OF  TYNDALE.  [uoOK  I. 

the  Father  of  the  martyr,  and  of  his  brother  John,  who,  we 
shall  find,  was  persecuted  and  fined  by  Sir  Thomas  More  ? 
If  any  one  should  suppose  the  former  only,  then  there  is 
actually  no  positive  evidence  to  show  that  Thomas  had  a 
brother,  much  less  two,  and  these  named  William  and  John  ; 
while,  upon  the  other  hand,  this  family  of  Thomas  happens  to 
be  at  once  the^rs^  and  the  only  one,  throughout  this  genealogy, 
where  all  the  children  are  named.  Bigland  has  told  us,  that 
the  family  resumed  its  name  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VII.,  and 
therefore  after  his  accession  in  1485,  what  was  more  likely  to 
induce  the  change,  and  follow  in  the  train  of  this  marriage  ? 
The  Tyndales  had  been  upon  the  Lancastrian  side,  and  that 
was  now  finally  triumphant.  But  be  this  as  it  may,  here  is  the 
family  to  which  the  martyr  belonged,  and  from  it  we  are  able 
to  come  down,  without  any  obscurity,  nearly  to  the  present 
day.  The  estate  in  North  Nibley  was  sold  indeed,  in  the 
reign  of  King  William,  when  the  proprietor,  Thomas  Tyn- 
dale,  Esq.,  removed  into  Kent,  but  the  family  was  not  extinct 
till  so  recently  as  the  year  1748,  and  the  collateral  connexion 
is  still  traceable.  As  for  the  female  line,  from  a  great-grand- 
daughter of  the  first  Thomas  Tyndale,  a  descendant  is  now 
living  in  the  City  of  London — John  Roberts,  Esq.,  Temple. 

The  year  of  our  Translator's  birth,  could  it  be  positively 
ascertained,  might  help  us  to  fix  his  parentage ;  but  as  nearly 
as  it  can  be,  it  seems  to  harmonise  with  the  idea  of  Thomas 
being  his  father.  Tyndale  himself,  unrelentingly  persecuted, 
was  cautious  of  ever  saying  one  word  respecting  his  relatives. 
Even  his  younger  brother  John  became  involved,  in  conse- 
quence of  receiving  letters  from  him,  and  not  delivering  them 
up  .'  But  the  future  martyr  would  have  borne  the  pelting  of 
the  pitiless  storm  all  alone,  sooner  than  involve  his  family  in 
distress ;  and  more  especially  that  father,  to  whom  he  had 
been  indebted  for  the  expenses  of  his  education.  His  keen 
and  voluminous  opponent,  however,  Sir  Thomas  More,  pro- 
voked his  triumphant  answer;  and  if  we  knew  the  year  of  the 
Lord  Chancelloi-''s  birth,  Tyndale  himself  will  help  us  to  fix, 
very  nearly,  that  of  his  own.  In  the  course  of  his  writings 
there  may  be  some  other  references  ;  but  we  shall  quote  only  one 
passage  in  the  defence  of  his  translation,  quite  to  the  point. ^^ 

'<  We  do  not  refer  to  the  tract  published  by  Tyndale  in  April  1533,  on  the  "  Supper  of  the 
Lord,"  where  he  repeatedly  twits  Sir  Thomas  with  being  "  the  old  man,"  with  his  "  old  eyes 
and  spectacles;"  because  this  seems  to  be  nothing  more  than  his  retort  to  the  Chancellor,  for 
having  again  and  again  alluded  so  contemptuously  to  his  friend  Fryth,  as   '  the  young  man." 


1500-23.]  YEAH  OF  HIS  BIRTH.  21 

It  is  now  generally  understood,  that  Sir  Thomas  More  was 
born  in  1480,  and  most  probably  in  the  spring  of  that  year, 
as  this  harmonises  with  the  statement  of  Erasmus,  who  says 
1479,  their  year  running  on  to  the  25th  of  March.  In  1497 
More  was  sent  to  Canterbury  Hall,  Christ  Church,  Oxford, 
where  he  studied  Greek,  as  well  as  Latin,  under  Linacre  and 
Grrocyn,  for  two  years.  Now,  what  says  Tyndale,  when  de- 
fendino-  his  translation  of  the  New  Testament  from  the  Greek  ? 
"  He,"  Sir  Thomas,  "  rageth  because  I  turn  XH'^  i^to  favour 
and  not  grace  ;  and  that  I  use  this  word  knowledge  (in  the 
sense  of  acknowledge)  and  not  confession,  and  this  word  re- 
pentance and  not  penance.  In  all  which  he  cannot  prove  that 
I  give  not  the  right  English  unto  the  Greek  word.  These 
things  to  be  even  so,  M.  More  knoweth  well  enough ;  for  he 
understandeth  the  Greek,  and  he  Jcneic  them  long  ere  /."  Since 
then  Tyndale  was  brought  up  to  learning  from  his  youth, 
and  at  Oxford  afterwards,  there  can  be  no  question,  that  this 
is  the  language  of  a  junior  scholar,  at  least  by  four  or  five 
years,  and  that  consequently  the  birth  of  Tyndale  must  have 
been  correspondingly  later.  Now,  without  having  observed 
this,  it  is  rather  a  curious  coincidence,  that  the  first  gentle- 
man, well  qualified,  in  our  own  day,  and  most  solicitous  to 
ascertain  the  point,  has  fixed  upon  the  year  1484.  "  Pro- 
bably," he  says,  "  Tyndale  was  born  about  1484."  This  was 
the  younger  brother  of  Mr.  Roberts  just  mentioned,  or  Mr. 
Oade  Roberts  of  Painswick,  the  correspondent  of  Lysons; 
and  had  the  Mama  Britannia  been  finished  so  as  to  have  in- 
eluded  Gloucestershire,  a  place  would  have  been  found  for  his 
information.  Mr.  R.,  indeed,  imagined  in  1814,  that  Tyn- 
dale might  be  the  son  of  Hugh,  and  then  in  1818,  the  son  of 
John;  but  as  he  maintains,  not  merely  from  Bale,  Atkyns,  and 
other  authorities,  but  from  domestic  tradition  in  Gloucestershire, 
where  he  himself  resided,  that  our  Translator  was  born  at  North 
Nibley;  then,  if  we  are  to  believe  the  deed  already  quoted, 
and  so  attested,  we  seem  to  have  the  entire  family  of  Thomas 
Tyndale  once  more  brought  in  view.^^  A  very  strong  proba- 
bility, therefore,  is  now  presented,  that  our  first  and  eminent 
Translator,  was  the  son  of  Thomas  Tyndale,  by  Alicia  Hunt 


IS  We  quote  from  the  letters  of  Mr.  0.  Roberts,  in  the  British  Museum.     (Pee  Lyson,?'  Topog. 
Coll.  04511.  Pint.  fol.  .5!),  62.)     His  surviving  brother  informs  mo,  he  died  in  1821. 


22  NURTURED  UPON  CROWN  LAND.  [bOOK  I. 

of  North  Nibley ;  that  his  brother  John  was  the  youngest  son 
by  the  same  mother,  and  that  Tyndale  himself  was  born  in 
the  year  1484,  5,  or  6.  This  would  make  him  about  the  age  of 
fifty  at  his  death  ;  and  this  exactly  corresponds  with  the  full 
persuasion  of  old  John  Foxe  in  1573,  when  he  published  the 
works  of  Tyndale,  Fryth,  and  Barnes,  "  In  pursuing  where- 
of," says  he,  "  thou  shalt  find,  gentle  reader,  whether  thou 
be  ignorant,  what  to  learn ;  or  whether  thou  be  learned,  what 
to  follow,  and  what  to  stick  to.  Briefly,  whatsoever  thou  art, 
ii  thou  he  i/oun(j,  of  John  Fryth;  if  thou  be  middle  age,  of  Wil- 
liam Tyndale  ;  if  in  elder  years,  of  Dr.  Barnes,  matter  is  here  to 
be  found,  not  only  of  doctrine  to  inform  thee,  of  comfort  to  de- 
light thee,  of  godly  ensample  to  direct  thee;  but  also  of  special 
admiration,  to  make  thee  to  wonder  at  the  works  of  the  Lord." 

But  if  the  obscurity  of  our  Translator''s  parentage  must 
still  remain,  nay  form  emphatically  a  part  of  his  singular  his- 
tory, and  as  the  only  point  which  will  not  be  distinctly  proved, 
there  is  one  curious  fact,  of  which  there  is  now  no  doubt. 
As  the  Marquis  of  Berkeley  had  conveyed  his  castle  and 
estates  to  Henry  VIL,  descending  as  they  did  to  Henry 
VIII.,  Tyndale  was  nurtured  upon  ground  held  immediately 
by  the  crown,  which  was  afterwards  ywr?ngc?  for  Italian  bishops, 
by  Cardinal  Wolsey  !  And  before  he  is  driven  from  his  native 
county,  we  shall  find  him  brought,  by  persecution  at  least,  into 
remote  contact  with  the  most  conspicuous  characters,  who  were 
about  to  figure  even  in  the  great  drama  of  European  politics. 

The  education  of  our  Translator  was  now  to  be  provided 
by  his  parents,  and  being  afterwards  a  man  of  such  inflexible 
perseverance,  there  can  be  no  question  that  he  had  availed 
himself  of  every  literary  advantage  placed  within  his  reach. 
Owing,  however,  to  the  imperfect  view,  too  often  taken,  it  be- 
comes necessary  that  we  should  first  glance  at  those  oppor- 
tunities, then  so  providentially  presented  to  a  student,  and 
more  especially  to  one  so  ardent  in  pursuit  of  learning. 

It  has  been  dwelt  upon  by  Wtirton,  in  his  history  of  Poetry,  as  a 
historical  fact,  that  the  revival  of  classical  learning  gave  a  temporary 
check  to  vemacular  composition  in  England,  and  that,  in  the  commence- 
ment of  the  sixteenth  century,  the  culture  of  new  languages  introduced 
a  new  course  of  study.  This  "  temporary  check,"  however,  was  only 
with  a  view  to  further  progress,  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word,  and  Ox- 
ford as  well  as  Cambridge  will  present  up  with  illustrations. 


1500-23.]  ERASMUS  AND  OTHERS.  23 

About  the  year  1460,  the  disposition  to  acquire  Greek  and  Latin,  as 
well  as  to  promote  its  cultivation,  had  l)een  shown  by  William  Selling,  a 
Fellow  of  All  Souls,  Oxford,  the  man  who  afterwards  introduced  Linacre 
to  Politian,  at  Bologna.  On  returning  from  Italy,  he  brought  with  him 
no  inferior  collection  of  Greek  and  Roman  manuscripts,  which  he  had 
there  collected  ;  though,  to  his  regret,  they  were  soon  after  accidentally 
consumed  by  fire  at  Canterbury.  Cornellius  Vitellius,  an  Italian  from 
Tuscany,  first  taught  Greek  at  Oxford,  as  a  schoolmaster  in  Magdalen 
College.  Grocyn,  a  native  of  Bristol,  was  his  pupil,  and  after  visiting 
Italy,  where  he  perfected  his  knowledge  of  languages,  he  became,  on  his 
retui'n  to  Oxford,  the  first  voluntary  lectui'er  in  Greek,  before  the  yeai' 
1490.  Linacre  and  William  Latimer  followed  in  the  same  course,  and 
all  the  three  taught,  more  or  less,  within  the  walls  of  Magdalen. 

But  above  all  other  men,  Erasmus  from  Holland,  considering  what  he 
accomplished  in  1516,  cannot  be  overlooked.  He  first  reached  England 
in  the  close  of  1497.  He  had  come  to  commence  his  studies  in  Greek. 
Elated  with  what  he  had  found,  when  writing  to  a  friend  in  Italy,  in 
December  of  that  year,  he  says, — "  Here  I  have  met  with  humanity, 
politeness,  learning  ;  learning  not  trite  and  superficial,  but  deep,  ac- 
cui'ate,  true  old  Greek  and  Latin  learning  ;  and  withal  so  much  of  it, 
that,  but  for  curiosity,  I  have  no  occasion  to  visit  Italy.  In  Grocyn  I 
admire  an  universal  compass  of  learning.  Linacre's  acuteness,  depth, 
and  accm-acy,  are  not  to  be  exceeded."  Pm-suing  his  study  of  Greek, 
under  Grocyn,  throughout  1498  and  part  of  next  year,  he  was  now 
acquainted  with  Thomas  Wolsey,  just  appointed  Biu'sar  or  Treasurer  to 
Magdalen  College,  Avith  John  Claymond,  its  future  President,  and,  Jortin 
asserts,  with  Thomas  More,  now  at  Canterbury  Hall,  He  then  proceeded 
to  Paris,  where,  he  tells  us  himself,  that  his  application  to  Greek  had 
almost  killed  him.  In  a  letter  to  Dean  Collet  in  1504,  he  informs  him 
that  he  had  "•  closely  applied  to  Greek  for  the  three  last  years."  Two 
years  after  this  he  paid  a  visit  to  Cambridge,  and  in  1508  went  to  Italy. 
Returning  to  Cambridge  in  1509,  he  there  became  the  first  Greek  pre- 
ceptor in  that  University  ;  and  some  months  afterwards  we  find  him  in- 
forming Servatius,  the  Prior  of  a  Dutch  Convent,  where  he  had  once 
resided,  that  he  was  so  engaged.  He  explained  there  the  grammar  of 
Chrysoloras,  and  was  to  read  lectures  on  that  of  Gaza.  Four  intimate 
friends,  he  tells  us,  above  forty  years  of  age,  had  begun  to  study  Greek. 
Erasmus  remained  in  England  nearly  five  years,  or  till  the  beginning 
of  1514,  and  eight  years  after  this,  Richard  Croke,  who  had  been  the 
pupil  of  Grocyn,  succeeded  as  the  regular  Professor  of  Greek  in 
Cambridge.  This  residence  of  Erasmus  must  have  had  more  effect  than 
has  ever  been  fully  explained  ;  and  considering  how  certain  individuals 
acted  afterwards,  it  is  curious  to  see  how  high  he  stood  in  public  favoiu-. 
But  caressed  by  Henry  VIII.,  invited  to  Cambridge  by  the  Chancellor, 


24  ERASMUS  AND  OTHERS.  [book  I. 

Fisher  of  llochester,  patronised  by  Warham  the  Archbishop,  though  not 
one  of  them  foresaw  the  result ;  we  can  understand  the  ground  on  which 
Stilling-fleet  has  denied  that  Luther  or  Zuinglius  had  much  influence  in 
awakening  the  English  mind.  He  says,  "  it  was  Erasmus  especially 
among  us  in  England,"  and  here  he  certainly  appears  to  be  correct. 
The  credit  of  being  one  of  the  first  learned  men  in  Europe,  who  argued 
strongly  for  learning  being  cultivated,  with  a  view  to  the  benefit  and  in- 
struction of  the  common  'people,  can  never  be  taken  from  Erasmus. 

His  influence  in  England  may  be  estimated  by  the  opposition  dis- 
played against  him.  Lee,  afterwards  Archbishop  of  York,  and  Standish, 
provincial  of  the  Franciscan  friars,  the  future  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph,  were 
loud  and  bitter  opponents.  Invectives  against  the  learned  languages 
were  uttered  from  the  pulpit,  and  hence  the  proverb — "  Cave  a  Greeds, 
ne  fias  Ilaireticus ;  Fuge  literas  Ilebrceas,  ne  fias  Judceorum  similis." 
"  Beware  of  Greek,  lest  you  become  a  heretic  !  Fly  from  the  Hebrew 
letters,  lest  you  become  like  Jews  !"  Oroeculus  iste,  the  phi*ase  first  ap- 
plied by  Standish  to  Erasmus,  became,  for  a  long  time  afterwards,  the 
phrase  for  an  heretic.  All  these  men,  however,  were  proceeding  under 
the  guidance  of  a  higher  power  ;  for  even  Erasmus,  now  past  fifty,  and 
in  the  most  memorable  year  of  his  life,  or  1516,  speaks  with  timidity 
respecting  the  study  of  Hebrew — a  proof,  by  the  way,  that  it  was  culti- 
vated. After  observing  that  literature  began  to  make  a  great  and  an 
happy  progress ;  "  but,"  says  he,  "  I  fear  two  things  ;  I  fear  that  the 
study  of  Hebrew  will  promote  Judaism,  and  that  the  study  of  philology 
will  revive  Paganism  !"  And  by  this  time  thei-e  certainly  were  Italians, 
many  of  whom,  says  Jortin,  were  writing  in  the  style  and  manner  of 
Pagans.  The  fulness  of  the  time,  therefore,  was  now  come,  to  show 
what  the  vernacular  tongue,  the  tongue  of  the  common  people,  could  do. 

Meanwhile,  in  1516,  the  New  Testament,  in  Greek  and  Latin,  with  the 
notes  of  Erasmus,  had  come  forth,  printed  by  Froben  at  Basil.  It  soon 
spread  far  and  wide.  He  received  the  congratulations  of  his  friends, 
but  it  raised  vip  a  host  of  enemies  ;  and  one  of  the  colleges  in  Cam- 
bridge, though  only  one,  actually  forbade  it  to  be  brought  within  its 
walls  !  In  Oxford  no  such  fear  had  been  displayed,  though  even  there 
great  caution  was  demanded.  It  was,  however,  only  the  next  year, 
when  Fox,  the  Bishop  of  Winchester,  had  determined  to  found  his  col- 
lege at  Oxford,  that  of  "  Corpus  Christi,"  so  that  all  things  were,  at 
least,  working  together  for  good.  Two  Professors,  for  Latin  and  Greek, 
were  constituted,  with  competent  salaries.  The  books  in  Greek  were 
expressly  specified  by  the  Founder,  and  these,  says  Warton  and  others, 
"  were  the  purest,  and  such  as  are  most  esteemed,  even  in  the  present 
improved  state  of  ancient  learning."  The  Greek  lecturer  was  ordered 
to  explain  the  best  Greek  classics  ;  but  there  was  one  curious  circum- 
stance connected  with  this  foimdation,   and   especially  these   lectures, 


1500-23.]  GREEK  AND  HEBREW.  25 

which  must  not  be  omitted.  So  long  before  as  the  year  1311,  at 
Vienna,  in  Dauphine,  Clement  V.,  (the  man  who  first  appropriated  to 
himself  the  first  year's  revenue  of  all  the  benefices  in  England — the 
origin  of  the  first  fruits,)  from  a  superstitious  veneration  for  Hebrew 
and  Greek,  because  they  fonned  part  of  the  superscription  on  the  cross 
of  Christ,  "  enjoined  that  professors  in  Greek,  Hebrew,  and  Arabic, 
should  be  instituted  in  the  universities  of  Oxford,  Paris,  Bononia, 
(Bologna,)  Salamanca,  and  in  the  Court  of  Rome."  It  was  actually 
under  the  influence  of  this  injunction  that  one  of  the  Greek  exiles 
claimed  a  stipend  for  teaching  his  native  tongue  in  Paris  ;  and  Fox, 
therefore,  that  he  might  not  appear  to  be  countenancing  any  dangerous 
innovation,  was  obliged  to  cover  his  institution  under  the  mantle  of  this 
authority  !  The  reason  given  was  not  satisfactory  to  all,  but  learning 
floui'ished  ;  though  little  had  Clement  V.  imagined  what  effects  would 
follow  from  his  canonical  decree,  so  far  as  it  was  now  pled. 

With  regard  to  Hebrew  learning  at  this  early  period,  it  is  by  no 
means  sufficient  to  direct  the  eye  only  to  John  Reuchlin,  the  well-known 
promoter  of  this  language,  however  eminent  his  services.  Throughout 
the  year  1498,  he  remained  at  Rome,  perfecting  himself  in  Hebrew, 
under  Abdias,  a  Jew.  But  to  say  nothing  of  Hebrew  manuscripts,  in 
England  as  well  as  the  Continent,  the  art  of  printing  had  been  applied 
to  the  language  more  than  twenty  years  before  this,  in  the  Psalter  of 
1477.  Then  came  the  Pentateuch,  and  other  books  at  Bologna,  in  1482  ; 
the  Prophets,  at  Soncino,  in  1486  ;  the  Hagiographa,  at  Naples,  in  1487  ; 
and  in  1488,  there  was  printed  at  Soncino  the  first  edition  of  the  Heb- 
rew Bible  entire.  Nay,  within  the  compass  of  a  single  year,  and  that  so 
early  as  1494,  there  were  published  not  fewer  than  four  editions  of  the 
Hebrew  Bible,  which  almost  immediately  disappeared,  so  great  was  the 
interest  awakened  for  Hebrew  learning.  In  short,  and  without  mention- 
ing single  portions  of  the  Sacred  Volume,  by  the  year  1526,  there  had 
been  published  fourteen  editions  of  the  Hebrew  Bible,  in  foUo,  quarto, 
and  octavo,  with  and  without  points  ;  and  it  is  especially  to  be  re- 
membered, that  Divine  Providence  had  so  over-ruled  the  whole,  that  not 
one  of  the  Sacred  Originals,  whether  in  Hebrew  or  Greek,  had  ever  been 
restrained  by  any  Government,  however  absolute  !^^ 

Indeed,  at  this  moment,  so  far  from  such  restraint  being  imposed  in 
England,  it  was  quite  the  reverse  :  as  not  one  man  of  high  authority 


16  These  Bibles  are  dated,  Soncino,  1488;  three  in  14.04,  fol.  4'.  8\,  and  In  the  same  year  at 
Brescia,  an  octavo.  The  identical  copy  of  this  last,  from  which  L»/7(fr  translated,  is  still  pre- 
served in  the  Royal  Library  at  Berlin,  The  Complutensian  in  1515.  Then  followed  the  Son- 
cino of  1517,  three  editions  in  1518,  and  one  in  1521,  1524,  1525,  and  1526.  Not  fewer  than  the 
half  of  these,  from  1518,  were  printed  by  a  native  of  Antwerp,  the  first  printer  of  the  Christian 
profession,  in  this  language,  the  celebrated  Daniel  Bomberg,  whose  press,  almost  equally  with 
that  of  Aldus,  was  the  ornament  of  Venice.  He  is  said  to  have  retained  about  a  hundred  Jews, 
as  correctors  of  the  press,  the  most  learned  he  could  find.  Other  editions  need  not  be  here 
mentioned  ;  but  Bomberg  went  on  printing  till  his  death,  in  1540. 


26  EDUCATION  OF  TYNDALE.  [BOOK  I. 

appears  to  have  foreseen,  that  the  cultivation  of  the  original  languages 
would  inevitably  lead  to  a  translation  of  the  Sacred  Volume  into  the 
vulgar  toiiii'uc.  Wolsey  himself,  only  two  years  after  Fox,  had  begun 
to  encourage  classical  learning,  by  founding  at  Oxford,  in  1519,  not 
only  a  chair  for  Rhetoric  and  Latin,  but  one  for  Greek,  with  ample 
salaries  ;  while  his  royal  Master  was  also  favourable  to  the  progress  of 
letters.  Thus,  in  this  very  year,  we  know  from  the  epistles  of  Erasmus, 
that  a  preacher  having  harangued  at  Oxford,  with  great  violence, 
against  the  opinions  inculcated  by  the  new  Professors  ;  and  his  argu- 
ments having  been  keenly  canvassed  by  the  students,  a  just  detail  was 
laid  before  His  Majesty,  then  residing  at  Woodstock,  by  Sir  Thomas 
More,  and  Pace  of  Fox's  College,  when  Henry  interposed  his  authority, 
and  transmitted  to  the  University  a  royal  mandate,  commanding,  "  that 
the  study  of  the  Scriptures,  in  the  origiiml  languages,  should  not  only 
be  pemiitted  for  the  future,  but  received  as  a  branch  of  the  academical 
institution." 

We  have,  now,  however,  gone  over  the  precise  period  in  which  our 
first  and  future  translator  of  the  Scriptures  resided,  both  at  Oxford  and 
Cambridge.  Such  a  combination  of  advantages  fully  explain  the  source 
of  those  attainments  in  learning,  which  he  was  afterwards  to  turn  to 
such  powerful  account. 

Tyndale  was  brought  up,  from  his  earliest  years,  at  Oxford, 
and  as  a  schohir,  where,  after  a  lengthened  residence,  he  pro- 
ceeded in  "  degrees  of  the  schools;"'''  or,  as  Foxe  has  said — 
"  By  long  continuance,  he  grew  up  and  increased  as  well  in  the 
knowledge  of  tongues,  and  other  liberal  arts,  as  especially  in  tlie 
knowledge  of  the  Scriptures  ;  insomuch,  that  he  read  privily  to 
certain  students  and  fellows  in  Magdalen  College  some  parcel 
of  divinity,  instructing  them  in  the  knowledge  and  truth  of 
the  Scriptures."  His  education  "  in  grammar,  logic,  and 
philosophy,  he  received,"  says  Wood,  "  for  the  most  part,  in 
St.  Mary  Magdalen\s  Hall,"  immediately  adjoining  the  Col- 
lege of  that  name.  At  this  Hall,  first  called  Grammar  Hall, 
from  the  attention  paid  to  classical  learning,  and  where 
(Irocyn,  as  well  as  W.  Latimer  and  Linacre,  had  lectured, 
the  members  stood,  as  they  do  now,  on  tlie  same  footing  with 
those  of  the  other  Colleges ;  their  course  of  study,  tuition, 
length  of  residence,  examination,  and  degrees,  being  precisely 
the  same  as  the  rest  of  the  University.     In  those  early  days, 


17  "  Whether  he  took  a  dcgvcc,"  says  Wood,  "  cloth  not  appear  in  our  Registers,"  and  for  the 
hest  of  all  reasons— llic  Rigistcrs  di'  not  go  so  far  hack,  as  he  himself  has  told  us  elsewhere. 


1500-23.]  EDUCATION  OF  TYN])ALK.  27 

however,  these  Halls,  having  no  exhibitions  nor  endowments 
for  scholarships,  many  of  the  students  lived  at  their  own 
cliarge ;  and  since  no  man  has  ever  once  been  mentioned  as 
patronising  Tyndale,  throughout  his  whole  life,  the  presump- 
tion is,  that  his  expenses  while  at  College  must  have  been  de- 
frayed by  his  parents.'^  Tyndale's  zeal,  however,  had  at  last 
exceeded  the  endurance  of  his  contemporaries,  and  exposed 
him  to  some  danger.  There  is  no  ground  for  supposing  that 
he  was  expelled  ;  "  but,"  says  Foxe,  "  spying  his  time,  he  re- 
moved from  Oxford  to  the  University  of  Cambridge,  where 
he  likewise  made  his  abode  a  certain  space,"  and,  it  has  been 
vaguely  conjectured,  took  a  degree.  At  all  events,  his  resi- 
dence in  that  city  had  terminated  by  the  year  1519. 

Possessed  of  such  an  education  as  he  must  have  then  ac- 
quired, as  well  as  of  such  an  ardour  to  improve,  we  cannot 
here  disturb  the  narrative  by  any  discussion  as  to  its  merits 
or  extent.  Sufficient  evidence  of  both  will  occur  in  the  fol- 
lowing pages.  We  only  remark  here,  that  the  incontro- 
vertible proof  of  Tyndale's  erudition,  whether  as  a  Creek  or 
Hebrew  scholar,  is  to  be  found  in  the  present  version  of  our 
Bible,  as  read  by  millions.  "  The  circumstance  of  its  being 
a  revision  five  times  derived,  is  an  advantage  altogether  pecu- 
liar to  itself,  and  doubly  valuable  from  that  circumstance."'^ 
While,  notwithstanding  this  five-fold  recension  of  the  Creek 
and  Hebrew  original,  large  portions  remain  untouched,  or 
verbally  as  the  Translator  first  gave  them  to  his  country. 
It  is,  indeed,  extraordinary  that  so  many  of  Tyndale's  correct 
and  happy  renderings  should  have  been  left  to  adorn  our  ver- 
sion, while  the  terms  substituted,  in  other  instances,  still 
leave  to  him  the  palm  of  scholarship.  When  the  incorrect, 
not  to  say  injurious,  sense,  in  which  certain  terms  had  been 
long  employed,  is  duly  considered,  the  substitution  of  charity 
for  love,  as  Tyndale  translated,  of  grace  for  favour,  and  church 
for  congregation,  certainly  cannot  be  adduced  as  proofs  of 
superior  attainment  in  the  original  Creek. 

In  a  historical  point  of  view,  however,  and  independently 
of  his  merits  as  a  translator,  it  would  be  of  some  importance 


'8  From  inattention  to  dates,  and  in  the  absence  of  authentic  information,  many  wild  asser- 
tions have  been  hazarded  as  to  the  early  years  of  Tyndale.  Among  others,  it  has  been  said  that 
he  was  chosen  by  Cardinal  Wolsey  one  of  those  early  Canons,  selected  to  grace  the  opening  of 
Cardinal  College  !  By  the  time  of  this  selection,  Tyndale  was  beyond  seas,  in  iiossession  of  that 
learning  which  he  had  acquired  during  tlie  ausjiicious  period  at  which  we  have  glanced.  It  is  a 
distinguishing  feature  of  our  Translator's  history,  that  he  never  had  a  patron.        '*  Whitaker. 


28  EAULY  SENTIMENTS.  [book  I. 

if  we  could  ascertain  what  had  been  the  state  of  his  mind, 
even  before  leaving  the  University,  in  reference  to  that  great 
system  of  impiety  and  oppression,  which,  single  handed,  he 
was  afterwards  to  assail  with  such  decisive  effect.  Had  he 
already  seen  through  its  character?  Was  he  even  already 
engaged  in  marking  it,  as  he  never  after  ceased  to  do  ?  If  he 
was,  this  would  go  a  great  way  in  proving  him  to  have  been 
an  instrument  raised  up  by  Grod,  as  independently  of  Luther, 
as  were  Lefevre  and  Zuinglius.  His  lectures  at  Oxford,  which 
must  have  been  about  1517,  if  not  earlier,  and  his  being  ob- 
liged to  desist,  certainly  say  as  much  as  that  he  was  in  ad- 
vance of  the  age,  but  how  far,  fi'om  this  source,  we  have  no 
intimation.  If  Tyndale  himself  would  afterwards  give  us 
but  one  hint,  we  could  not  desire  better  evidence.  By  those, 
however,  who  are  familiar  with  his  writings,  it  must  have 
been  observed  that  he  very  seldom  has  introduced  his  own 
personal  feelings,  with  any  precision  as  to  dates,  not  caring  to 
establish  himself,  in  point  of  priority,  to  any  man :  and  yet 
there  is  one  passage,  with  which  he  casually  concludes  his 
Exposition  of  the  Epistle  of  John,  which  seems  to  glance  as 
far  back  as  the  year  1518,  if  not  to  some  time  before  it.  He 
had  been  exposing  the  policy  of  the  hierarchy,  in  raising  the 
cry  of  sedition  or  insurrection,  in  the  days  of  Wickliffe, — 
"  And  so,"  he  adds,  "  the  hypocrites  say  now  likewise,  that 
Grod's  Word  causeth  insurrection ;  but  ye  shall  see  shortly 
that  these  hypocrites  themselves,  after  their  old  wont  and  en- 
samples,  in  quenching  the  truth  that  uttereth  their  juggling, 
shall  cause  all  realms  Christian  to  rise  one  against  another, 
and  some  against  themselves.  Ye  shall  see,  then,  run  out, 
before  the  year  come  about,  that  which  they  have  been  in 
brewing,  as  I  have  marJced,  above  this  dozen  years.  This 
much  have  I  said,  because  of  them  that  deceive  you,  to  give 
you  an  occasion  to  judge  the  spirits." 

Now,  this  language  was  published  in  September  1581  ;  but 
"  above  a  dozen  of  years,"  brings  us  back  to  1518,  if  not  to 
an  earlier  period.  We  leave  the  reader  to  form  his  own  con- 
clusion ;  but,  at  all  events,  such  a  state  of  mind  was  in  per- 
fect consonance  with  the  course  which  Tyndale  so  immedi- 
ately pursued,  with  all  his  characteristic  vigour.^^ 

20  Let  it  here,  however,  be  observed,  by  the  way,  that  in  August  1518,  Martin  Luther  was 
quietly  awaiting  the  good  effects  which  he  imagined  his  submissive  letter  to  the  Roman  Pon- 
tiff was  calculated  to  produce.     He  had  not  seen  Melancthon  till  tlio  25th  of  that  month  ;  and 


1500-23.] 


RETURNS  TO  GLOUCESTERSHIRE. 


29 


Returning  to  his  native  county,  Tyndale  was  soon  actively 
engaged,  and  so  continued  to  be,  from  Stinchcombe-hill  down 
to  Bristol,  to  the  close  of  1.522.  As  the  place  where  he  lived, 
only  eight  miles  south  from  that  of  his  birth,  is  well  known ; 
nay,  and  the  house  under  whose  roof  he  spent  his  best  and 
zealous  exertions,  in  discussing  and  defending  the  Word  of 
God,  is  happily  still  in  existence, — to  all  such  as  may  take  an 
interest  in  the  following  history,  there  is  not  a  more  lieart- 
stirring  spot  in  all  England.  The  Halls  of  our  Colleges, 
wherever  they  stand,  have  never  given  birth  to  a  design,  so 
vitally  important  in  its  origin,  so  fraught  with  untold  benefit 
to  millions,  and  now  so  extensive  in  its  range,  as  that  which 
ripened  into  a  fixed  and  invincible  purpose,  in  the  Dining 
Hall  of  Little  Sodburv  Manor  House. 


It  was  in  this  house  that  Tyndale  resided  for  about  two 
years,  as  a  tutor ;  and  adjoining  to  it  behind,  there  still  stands, 
with  its  two  ancient  yew  trees  before  the  door,  the  little  Church 
of  St.  Adeline,  where  of  course  the  family  and  tenants  attend- 
ed. Foxe  has  said  of  Tyndale,  while  at  Antwerp,  that  when 
he  "  read  the  Scriptures,  he  proceeded  so  fruitfully,  sweetly. 


it  was  on  the  31st  that  he  wrote  in  admiration  of  him  to  Spalatin— "  I  can  wish  for  no  better 
Greek  master."  Of  course,  nothing  from  the  pen  of  Luther  had  yet  reached  England;  but 
Tyndale  has  been  giving  lectures,  some  time  before,  to  the  students  and  fellows  of  Magdalen 
College,  Oxford  ;  and  having  quitted  Cambridge  also,  is  now  on  his  way  to  Gloucestershire. 


30  THE  FAMILY  TUTOH  IN  [bOOK  I. 

and  gently,  much  like  unto  the  writing  of  John  the  Evangelist, 
that  it  was  a  heavenly  comfort  to  the  audience  to  hear  him;" 
and  so  it  may  have  been,  under  some  of  his  earliest  ett'orts, 
within  the  walls  of  this  diminutive  and  unpretending  place  of 
M'orship.  At  all  events,  let  it  be  observed,  when  his  voice 
was  first  heard,  Luther  had  not  yet  been  denounced  even  by 
Leo  X.  at  Rome,  much  less  by  Cardinal  Wolsey  in  England. 

"About  A.D.  1520,"  we  are  informed,  that  "William 
Tyndale  used  often  to  preach  in  Bristol."  This  he  did  on 
the  great  Green,  sometimes  called  the  Sanctuary,  or  St. 
Austin's  Green.  "  He  was  at  that  time  resident  with  Sir 
John  Walsh  at  Little  Sodbury,  as  tutor  to  his  children,  and 
on  Sundays  he  preached  at  the  towns  and  parishes  in  the 
neighbourhood,  and  frequently  he  had  debates  with  the  Abbots 
and  other  clergy  who  frequented  the  house.''-' 

This  small  parish,  with  its  manor  house  and  inmates,  thus 
become  objects  of  no  little  interest,  and  for  the  sake  not  of 
Tyndale  only,  but  especially  of  the  desiqn  there  formed,  as 
well  as  of  the  circumstances  that  led  to  it,  we  must  not  re- 
frain from  giving  some  farther  particulars. 

In  this  part  of  Gloucestershire  there  are  three  contiguous 
parishes  of  the  same  name — Old  Sodbury,  Chipping,  /.  e. 
Market  Sodbury,  and  the  third,  named  Little  Sodbury,  by 
way  of  distinction.  This  last,  consisting  of  about  900  acres, 
chiefly  in  pasture,  lies  on  the  side  of  Sodbury  hill,  and  extends 
to  its  summit.  On  the  edge  of  this  hill  is  a  strong  Roman 
camp  of  an  oblong  square,  where  first  Queen  Margaret,  and 
then  Edward  IV.  in  pursuit,  had  rested  before  the  battle  of 
Tewkesbury.  Immediately  below  this  camp,  on  the  side  of 
the  hill  fronting  south-westward,  stands  the  Manor  House,  an 
ancient  building,  from  which  there  is  a  beautiful  and  extensive 
prospect  over  the  vale,  as  far  as  the  Bristol  Channel.  Four 
clumps  of  large  trees  growing  above,  objects  very  observable, 
arc  taken  notice  of  throuah  a  larae  extent  of  country  on  that 


21  Memoirs  of  Bristol,  from  old  authorities,  by  Seyer,  vol.  11.,  p.  215.  This  House,  under 
Edward  II.  and  III.,  had  Ijeen  inhabited  by  the  Dcspenccrs ;  by  the  Stanshaws  under 
Ed.  IV.,  and  in  the  year  of  Henry  the  Seventh's  accession,  or  1405,  it  came  to  the  family 
of  John  Walshe  of  Olveston,  by  his  marriage  to  Elizabeth  Forstcr,  daushter  and  heir  of  the 
previous  proprietor.  Henry  VII.,  with  an  eagle  eye  to  property,  as  well  as  the  crown,  had 
prevailed  upon  Ann,  the  old  unfortunate  Countess  of  Warwick,  to  settle  the  greater  part  of 
her  large  inheritance  on  him  and  his  heirs.  Hence  it  was  that  Henry  VIII.,  through  the  Ber- 
keley family,  as  already  e\i)lained,  and  now  through  that  of  Warwick,  had  no  small  stake  in 
the  county  of  Gloucester.  Among  other  property,  the  manor  house  of  OhI  Sodbury  was  now  in 
his  gift,  and  hence,  along  with  his  knighthood,  we  shall  find  it  given  to  Sir  John.  It  may  be 
added,  that  this  explanation  accounts  for  themany  repeated  gifts  of  property  in  Gloucestershire 
afterwards,  both  by  Henry  VIII.  and  his  son  Edward,  move  especially  to  Sir  Ralph  Sadler. 


1500-23.] 


LITTLE  SODBURY  MANOR. 


31 


side  of  the  liills.  In  the  sketch  already  given,  one  of  these 
clumps  may  be  seen  on  the  left,  but  a  nearer  view  will  give  a 
better  idea  of  the  house  itself. 


Less  distant  "\'iev 


Inhabited  by  different  families  from  the  thirteenth  century, 
it  was  now  in  possession  of  Sir  John  Walsh,  Knight,  as  in- 
herited from  his  father.  Happening  to  have  been  Champion  to 
Henry  YIII.  on  certain  occasions,  and  to  please  his  royal  mas- 
ter, the  heir  of  Little  Sodbury  had  been  knighted,  and  received 
from  him  in  addition,  the  Manor  House  of  Old  Sodbury,  then 
in  the  gift  of  the  Crown.  Intimate  as  Walsh  had  been,  both 
with  the  young  king  and  the  court,  and  now  given  to  hospi- 
tality, his  table  was  the  resort,  not  only  of  the  neighbouring 
gentry,  but  of  the  Abbots  and  other  dignified  ecclesiastics, 
swarming  around  him.  Thus  it  was,  that,  whether  in  com- 
pany, or  alone  with  the  family,  where  he  was  treated  as  a 
friend,  Tyndale  enjoyed  one  of  the  best  opportunities  for  be- 
coming intimately  acquainted  with  the  existing  state  of  things, 
whether  civil,  or  ecclesiastical  so  called.  Sir  John  had  married 
Anne  Poyntz,  the  daughter  of  an  ancient  Gloucestershire 
family  in  the  neighbourhood,  a  lady  who  took  as  warm  an  in- 
terest as  her  husband  in  the  discussions  at  their  table.^^ 


22  Lady  Walsh  was  the  daughter  of  Sir  Robert  Poyntz  of  Iron  Acton,  by  Margaret,  dr.  of 
Anthony  Earl  Rivers,  after  whom  her  brother  was  named.  She  was,  therefore,  the  ancestor  in 
a  family  which,  in  the  male  line,  became  extinct,  only  the  other  day,  by  the  death  of  William 


32  MEMORABLE  DISCUSSIONS  THERE.  [boOK  I. 

"  This  gentleman,""  says  Foxe,  "  as  he  kept  a  good  ordinary 
commonly  at  his  table,  there  resorted  to  him  many  times, 
sundry  Abbots,  Deans,  Archdeacons,  with  divers  other  doctors 
and  great  beneficed  men  ;  who  there,  together  with  Master 
Tyndale  sitting  at  the  same  table,  did  use,  many  times,  to 
enter  into  communication.  Then  Tyndale,  as  he  was  learned 
and  well  practised  in  God's  matters,  so  he  spared  not  to  shew 
unto  them  simply  and  plainly  his  judgment ;  and  when  they 
at  any  time  did  vary  from  his  opinions,  he  would  shew  them 
in  the  book,  and  lay  before  them  the  manifest  places  of  the 
Scriptures,  to  confute  their  errors,  and  confirm  his  sayings." 
It  was  not  long,  however,  before  Sir  John  and  his  lady  had 
been  invited  to  a  banquet  given  by  these  great  Doctors. 
There  they  talked  at  will  and  pleasure,  uttering  their  blind- 
ness and  ignorance  without  any  resistance  or  gainsaying.  On 
returning  home,  both  Sir  John  and  his  lady  began  to  reason 
with  Tyndale  respecting  those  subjects  of  which  the  priests 
had  talked  at  their  banquet ;  one  decided  proof,  that  some 
considerable  impression  had  been  made.  Tyndale  firmly  main- 
tained the  truth,  and  exposed  their  false  opinions.  "  Well," 
said  Lady  Walsh,  "  there  was  such  a  doctor  there  as  may  dis- 
pend  a  hundred  pounds,  and  another  two  hundred,  and  another 
three  hundred  pounds  :  and  what !  were  it  reason,  think  you, 
that  we  should  believe  you  before  them  V^^  To  this,  Tyndale 
at  the  moment,  gave  no  reply,  and  for  some  time  after,  said 
but  little  on  such  subjects. 

He  was  at  that  moment  busy  with  a  translation  from  Eras- 
mus of  his  "  Enchiridion  Militis  Christiani,"  or  Christian 
Soldier's  Manual,  the  second  edition  of  which,  with  a  long 
and  pungent  preface,  had  appeared  at  Basil,  in  August  1518.^'* 
Once  finished,  Tyndale  presented  the  book  to  Sir  John  and 
his  lady.  "  After  they  had  read,"  says  Foxe,  "  and  well 
perused  the  same,  the  doctoi-ly  prelates  were  no  more  so  often 
invited  to  the  house,  neither  had  they  the  cheer  and  counten- 


Stephen  Poyntz,  Esq.,  of  Cowdray  Park  and  Midghara.     His  daughters  are  married  into  the 
noble  families  of  Clinton,  Spencer,  and  Exeter. 

23  The  wages  of  a  Haymaker,  under  Henry  VII.,  were  one  penny  a-day,  and  under  Henry 
VIII.  they  had  not  risen  above  threc-hdif-pence.  The  money  referred  to  by  Dame  Walsh,  was 
therefore  equal  to  from  £l50()  to  £4.5(X)  of  our  present  money. 

24  The  first  edition,  printed  in  150i,  was  composed  by  Krasmus  "  to  correct  the  error  of  those 
who  supposed  religion  to  consist  in  mere  ceremonies  and  bodily  service,  to  the  neglect  of  real 
piety."  Written  originally  at  the  request  of  a  lady,  with  a  view  to  her  husband,  it  was  now 
translating  into  English  for  another  couple,  on  whom  it  was  to  have  no  small  effect.  The  pre- 
face will  reward  the  perusal  of  any  Oxford  scholar  in  the  present  day. 


l.'>()()-23.]   TYNDALK  BEFORE  THE  CHANCELLOR. 


33 


Jince  when  tliej  came,  which  before  they  had."  This  they 
marked,  and  supposing  the  cliange  to  have  arisen  from 
Tyndale's  influence,  tliey  refrained,  and  at  last  utterly  with- 
drew. TJiey  had  grown  weary  of  our  Translator's  doctrine, 
and  now  bore  a  secret  grudge  in  their  hearts  against  him. 

A  crisis  was  evidently  approaching.  The  priests  of  the 
country,  clustering  together,  began  to  storm  at  ale-houses  and 
other  places  ;  and  all  with  one  consent,  against  one  man. 
Whether  the  existing  Chancellor  of  the  diocese  of  Worcester 
had  ever  feasted  at  Little  Sodbury,  does  not  appear ;  but  it 
cannot  be  long  before  Tyndale  will  have  to  stand  before  him. 
Fortunately  the  tutor  has  left  on  record  his  own  reflections 
as  to  this  period  of  his  life. 

"A  thousand  books,"  says  he,  "had  they  lever  (rather)  to  be  put  forth  against 
their  abominable  doings  and  doctrine,  than  that  the  Scripture  should  come  to 
light.  For  as  long  as  they  may  keep  that  down,  they  will  so  darken  the  right 
way  with  the  mist  of  their  sophistry,  and  so  tangle  them  that  either  rebuke  or  de- 
spise their  abominations,  with  arguments  of  philosojihy,  and  with  worldly  simili- 
tudes, and  apparent  reasons  of  natural  wisdom  ;  and  with  wresting  the  Scriptures 
unto  their  own  purpose,  clean  contrary  unto  the  process,  order,  and  meaning  of 
the  text ;  and  so  delude  them  in  descanting  upon  it  with  allegories  ;  and  amaze 
them,  expounding  it  in  many  senses  before  the  unlearned  lay  people,  (when  it 
hath  but  one  simple  literal  sense,  whose  light  the  owls  cannot  abide),  that  though 
thou  feel  in  thine  heart,  and  art  sure,  how  that  all  is  false  that  tliey  say,  yet 
couldst  thou  not  solve  their  subtile  riddles. 

"  Which  tliimi  only  mored  me  to  translate  the  New  Testament.  Because  I  had 
perceived  by  experience,  how  tliat  it  was  impossible  to  establish  the  lay  people  in 
any  truth,  except  the  Scrijyture  were  pilainly  laid  before  their  eyes  in  their  mother 
tonijue,  that  they  might  see  the  process,  order,  and  meaning  of  the  text :  for  else, 
whatsoever  truth  is  taught  them,  these  enemies  of  all  truth  quench  it  again — 
partly  with  the  smoke  of  their  bottomless  pit,  (whereof  thou  readest  in  Apo- 
calypse, chap,  ix.)  that  is  with  apparent  reasons  of  sophistry,  and  traditions 
of  their  own  making ;  and  pai'tly  in  juggling  with  the  text,  expounding  it  in 
such  a  sense  as  is  impossible  to  gather  of  the  text  itself." 

Accordingly,  "  not  long  after  this,"  says  John  Foxe,  "  there 
was  a  sitting  of  the  (Italian)  Bishop's  Chancellor  appoint- 
ed, and  warning  was  given  to  the  Priests  to  appear,  amongst 
whom  Master  Tyndale  was  also  warned  to  be  there.  Whether 
he  had  any  misdoubt  by  their  threatenings,  or  knowledge  given 
him  that  they  would  lay  some  things  to  his  charge,  is  uncer- 
tain; but  certain  this  is,  as  he  himself  declared,  that  he  doubt- 
ed their  privy  accusations ;  so  that  he,  by  the  way,  in  going 
thitherward,  cried  in  his  mind  heartily  to  God,  to  give  him 
strength  to  stand  fast  in  the  truth  of  his  word."  But  let  us 
hear  Tyndale's  own  expressions. 

VOL.   I.  V 


34  TYNDALE  BEFORE  THE  CHANCELLOR.  [boOK  I. 

"  When  I  was  so  turmoiled  in  the  country  where  I  was,  that  I  could  no  longer 
dwell  there,  the  process  wliercof  were  too  long  here  to  rehearse,  I  thiswise 
thought  in  myself, — this  I  suffer,  because  the  priests  of  the  country  be  unlearn- 
ed, as  God  knoweth,  there  are  a  full  ignorant  sort,  which  have  seen  no  more 
Latin  than  that  they  read  in  their  Portosses  and  Missals,  which  yet  many  of  them 
can  scarcely  read.  And  therefore,  because  they  are  thus  unlearned,  thought  I, 
when  they  come  together  to  the  ale-house,  which  is  their  preaching  place,  they 
affirm  that  my  sayings  are  heresy.  Besides  they  add  to,  of  their  own  heads, 
that  which  I  never  spake,  as  the  manner  is,  and  accused  me  secretly  to  the  Chan- 
cellor, and  other  the  Bishojy's  Officers." 

Here  then  was  Tyndale,  in  the  year  1522,  brought  to 
answer  for  himself;  and  having  ah*eady  had  so  many  discus- 
sions with  dignitaries  on  Sodbury  Hill,  as  well  as  arguments 
with  the  priests  in  other  places,  one  might  have  supposed 
that  something  decisive  was  on  the  eve  of  accomplishment ; 
but  it  turned  out  an  entire  failure, 

"  When  I  came  before  the  Chancellor,  he  threatened  me  grievously,  and  reriled 
me,  and  rated  me  as  though  I  had  been  a  dog;  and  laid  to  my  charge  whereof 
there  could  be  none  accuser  brought  forth,  as  their  manner  is  not  to  bi'ing  forth 
the  accuser;  and  yet,  all  the  Priests  of  the  country  were  there  the  same  day." 

Tyndale''s  future  footsteps  will  frequently  discover  him  to 
have  been  a  man,  who,  in  the  history  of  his  country  stood 
literally  alone  ,•  and  here,  it  should  seem,  this  peculiar  feature 
had  already  begun  to  discover  itself.  As  standing  before  the 
Chancellor  of  any  diocese,  we  read  of  no  second  individual,  in 
whose  appearance  there  were  so  many  curious  coincidences. 
The  reader  will  now  recollect  the  thoroughly  Italiatiised  cha- 
racter of  the  district,  as  formerly  described,  and  the  questions 
very  naturally  present  themselves — Who  was  this  Chancellor  ? 
Who  the  Cardinal  that  had  recently  appointed  him  ?  Who 
was  the  non-resident  Italian  Bishop  ?  nay,  and  who  the  reign- 
ing Pontiff  himself,  the  fountain  of  all  this  oppressive  autho- 
rity ?  The  Po?it/Jf  WSLS  Adrian  VI.,  who,  to  appease  Wolsey, 
had  recently  made  him  "  Legate  a  latere"  for  life  ;  the  Bishop 
was  Julio  di  Medici,  the  future  Clement  VII.,  and  who,  with- 
out even  visiting  England,  had  been  made  Bishop  of  Worces- 
ter by  Leo  X.  The  man  who  had  lately  appointed  the 
Chancellor  to  the  diocese  was  Wolsey  himself,  who  farmed  the 
whole  district  for  his  Italian  brother ;  and  the  Chancellor, 
who  had  raised  himself  to  this  unenviable  notoriety  by  so 
treating  the  man  destined  by  Divine  Providence  to  overcome 
all  above  him,  as  far  as  Rome  itself  was  concerned ;  was  a 
creature  of  the  English  Cardinal,  a  Dr.  Thomas  Parker,  who 


1500-23.]  REVILED   AND  THREATENED.  35 

lived  to  know  more  of  Tyiidale's  power  and  talents,  than  he 
then  could  comprehend.  Had  such  men  only  known  who  was 
then  within  the  Chancellor's  grasp,  with  what  eager  joy  would 
they  have  put  an  end  to  all  his  noble  intentions?-^ 

Escaping,  however,  out  of  Parker's  hands,  the  Tutor  de- 
parted homeward,  and  once  more  entered  the  hospitable  abode 
of  Little  Sodbury,  but  more  than  ever  firmly  resolved. 


Enti  ance  to  Little  Sodbury  M 


It  is  some  alleviation  to  find  that  every  man  in  the  country 
was  not  of  the  same  opinion  with  the  reigning,  if  not  furious 
Chancellor.  "  Not  far  off,"'''  continues  Foxe,  "  there  dwelt  a 
certain  doctor,  that  had  been  an  old  chancellor  before  to  a 
bishop,  who  had  been  of  old  familiar  acquaintance  with  Master 
Tyndale,  and  also  favoured  him  well.  To  him  Tyndale  went 
and  opened  his  mind  on  divers  questions  of  the  Scripture,  for 
to  him  he  durst  be  bold  to  disclose  his  heart.  To  whom  the 
doctor  said — '  Do  you  not  know  that  the  Pope  is  very  Anti- 

25  Owing  to  the  inaccuracy  of  several  authors,  there  is  some  danger  of  this  Chancellor  being 
mistaken  for  Dr.  Thomas  Bell,  the  future  Bishop  of  Worcester,  as  they  have  represented  him  to 
be  Chancellor  from  1518  to  1526.  This  is  a  mistake.  Bell,  who  in  1518,  had  succeeded  Hanihall, 
now  resident  in  Rome  as  Wolsey's  correspondent,  had  been  superseded  by  the  appointment  of 
Parker,  to  act  for  Julio  di  Medici,  and  lie  continued  to  act  as  Chancellor  or  Vicar-General  from 
1522  to  1535.— See  fVuod's  Fasti,  by  Bliss,  p.  70-8<1,  and  Green's  Hisl.  of  JVorcester.  No,  I'arker 
was  evidently  a  man  of  great  passion.  He  had  commenced  with  Tyndale,  and  afterwards  dis- 
played his  fury  on  another  memorable  occasion.  This  was  actually  the  same  man  who  dug  up, 
and  then  burnt  to  ashes,  the  body  of  William  Tracy,  Esq.  of  Todington  in  Gloucestershire.  This 
cost  him  a  great  sum,  as  will  appear  in  our  history  under  15.11;  but  he  was  not  removed  till  1,W5, 
when  Hiitih  Latimer  became  Bishop.     Parker  died  at  Salisbury  in  1518. 


36  TYNDALE'S  NOBLE  RESOLUTION.  [book  T. 

clirist,  whom  tlie  Scripture  speaketli  of  I  But  beware  what  you 
say ;  for  if  you  shall  be  perceived  to  be  of  that  opinion,  it  will 
cost  you  your  life  ; ""  adding,  '  I  have  been  an  officer  of  his ; 
but  I  have  given  it  up,  and  defy  him  and  all  his  works.' "'"'^'' 

It  was  not  long  after  this  that  Tyndale,  happening  to  be 
in  the  company  of  a  reputed  learned  divine,  and  in  conversa- 
tion having  brought  him  to  a  point,  from  which  there  was  no 
escape,  he  broke  out  with  this  exclamation,  "  We  were  better 
to  be  without  God's  laws,  than  the  Pope's  I"  This  was  an 
ebullition  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  state  of  the  country  at 
the  moment,  but  it  was  more  than  the  piety  of  Tyndale  could 
bear.  "  I  defy  the  Pope,"  said  he,  in  reply,  "  and  all  his  laws  ; 
and  if  God  spare  my  life,  ere  many  years,  I  will  cause  a  hoy 
that  drixeili  the  plough,  to  know  more  of  the  Scripture  than  you 
do  f''  It  was  one  of  those  significant  bursts  of  zeal,  which 
will  sometimes  escape  from  a  great  and  determined  mind.  It 
meant  even  more  than  met  the  ear,  for,  by  this  time,  Tyndale 
might  have  said,  with  Jeremiah  of  old,  and  perhaps  did  so, 
"  His  word  was  in  mine  heart,  as  a  burning  fire  shut  up  in  my 
bones,  and  I  was  weary  with  forbearing,  and  I  could  not  stay." 

Just  so,  th'  Omnipotent,  who  turns — the  system  of  a  world's  concerns. 
From  mere  minutice  can  educe — events  of  most  important  use  ; — 
But  who  can  tell  how  vast  the  j)lan— which  this  day's  incident  began? 

After  this,  as  might  have  been  anticipated,  the  murmuring 
of  the  priests  increased  more  and  more.  Such  language  must 
have  flown  over  the  country,  as  on  the  wings  of  the  wind. 
Tyndale,  they  insisted,  was  "  a  heretic  in  sophistry,  a  heretic 
in  logic,  and  now  also  a  heretic  in  divinity."  To  this  they 
added  that  "  he  bare  himself  bold  of  the  gentlemen  there  in  that 
country,  but  that,  notwithstanding,  he  should  be  otherwise 
spoken  to."^ 

It  was  now  evident  that  Tyndale  could  no  longer  remain, 
with  safety,  in  the  county  of  Gloucester,  or  within  the  Italian 
diocese  of  Worcester.  He  has  therefore  been  represented,  by 
Foxe,  as  thus  addressing  his  Master  :  "  Sir,  I  perceive  that  I 
shall  not  be  suffered  to  tarry  long  here  in  this  country,  neither 


20  Who  could  tliis  "old  familiar "  be,  if  not  William  Latimer  the  Greek  Scholar ?  He  retired 
to  Saintberry  and  Weston-Sub-Edge  as  Rector,  and  these  were  both  in  Gloucester  County. 

27  It  must  be  remembered  that  Tyndale  himself  was  the  son  of  a  respectable  family,  only 
eight  miles  distant;  that  he  was  now  under  the  roof  of  Henry's  Champion,  and  not  to  men- 
tion other  gentlemen,  that  Sir  John's  brother-in-law.  Sir  Anthony  Poyntz,  was  this  year  High 
Sheriftof  the  County. 


I 


1500-23.]  PROCEEDS  TO  LONDON.  37 

shall  you  be  able,  though  yoxi  tcould,  to  keep  me  out  of  the 
hands  of  the  spirituality ;  and  also  what  displeasure  might 
grow  thereby  to  you  by  keeping  me,  God  knoweth ;  for  the 
which  I  should  be  right  sorry."  Searching  about,  therefore, 
not  so  much  for  an  avenue  to  escape,  as  for  some  convenient 
place  to  accomplish  the  determined  purpose  of  his  heart,  by 
translating  the  Scriptures,  he  now  actually  first  thought  of 
Tunstal,  Bishop  of  London,  one  of  the  future  burners  of  his 
New  Testament!  From  Sir  John  Walsh's  intimate  knowledge 
of  the  Court,  there  was  no  difficulty  in  procuring  the  best  access 
to  him  ;  and  so  Tyndale  must  bid  farewell  for  ever  to  his  in- 
teresting abode  on  Sodbury  Hill."^  It  was  his  first  and  last, 
or  only  attempt  throughout  life  to  procure  a  Patron^  and  he 
will,  himself,  now  describe  his  own  movements. 

"  The  Bishop  of  London  came  to  my  remembrance,  whom  Erasmus  (whose 

28  Before  our  leaving  the  House,  however,  which  was  then  left  by  Tyndale  with  such  inten- 
tions for  his  country's  benefit  and  future  glory,  its  history  to  the  present  day  must  not  be  withheld 
from  the  reader.  Of  its  present  aspect  the  reader  has  already  seen  three  correct  views.  Sir  John 
Walsh  survived  to  the  year  1546,  when  he  was  succeeded  by  Maurice  Walsh,  Esq.,  the  pupil  of 
Tyndale,  then  in  his  seventh  year,  when  his  Tutor  left  Sodbury.  He  married  the  daughter  of 
Nicholas  Vaux  Lord  Harrowden  ;  but  in  1356  a  storm  fell  on  this  house.  The  lightning  having 
entered  at  the  parlour  door,  forced  its  way  out  at  a  window  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  room, 
supposed  to  have  been  that  part  of  the  buildin?  which  is  seen  on  the  left ;  one  of  the  children  was 
killed  on  the  spot,  and  the  father  himself,  with  six  others,  were  so  much  hurt  that  they  all  died 
in  less  than  two  months !  An  heir,  however,  survived,  Sir  Nicholas  Walsh,  and,  as  named  after 
his  grandfather  Lord  Harrowden,  probably  the  eldest  son.  The  manor,  as  well  as  that  of  Old 
Sodbury,  continued  in  the  family  till  1608,  when  both  were  purchased  by  Thomas  Stephens,  Esq., 
Attorney-General  to  the  Princes  Henry  and  Charles.  His  eldest  son,  Edward,  was  High  Sheriff 
in  16S4.  In  prospect  of  this  he  had  repaired  the  Manor  House  where  Tyndale  once  lived,  and 
hence,  on  the  chimney-piece  of  the  great  room  or  Dining  Hall,  we  have  the  family  arms,  having 
on  one  side  the  initials  of  his  father  and  mother,  T.  S  :  E.  S.,  on  the  other  those  of  himself  and 
his  lady,  ^-a.^-,  and  the  date  "  a.d.  16.13."  Both  houses  were  held  by  this  family  till  1728, 
when,  through  Sir  Henry  Winchcombe,  they  became  the  property,  and  Little  Sodbury  the 
abnilc  of  David  Hartley,  M.D.,  the  author  of  Observations  on  Man.  His  great-grandson, 
Winchcombe  Henry  Howard  Hartley,  Esq.,  of  Bucklcbury  House  and  of  Little  Sodbury,  being 
the  present  proprietor.     See  Rmhlcr,  Atkims,  Burke's  Commoners,  ^c. 

At  the  back  of  this  ancient  Manor  there  was  a  room  styled  the  Library,  which  the  writer, 
with  a  friend,  once  visited  ;  and  with  not  a  little  interest,  as  the  apartment  in  which  Tyndale 
may  have  often  sat,  with  his  pupils  around  him;  and,  as  Dr.  Hartley  is  described  by  his  son,  to 
have  been  "methodical  in  the  order  and  disposition  of  his  books  and  papers,  the  companions  of 
his  thoughts,"  here,  also,  he  may  have  mused  the  hours  away.  But  on  a^ubsequent  visit  this 
part  of  the  house  had  been  taken  down,  in  apprehension  of  its  falling !  Surely  it  is  to  be  hoped, 
although  the  house  at  iirescnt  be  inhabited  by  the  Farmer  on  the  Estate,  and  a  new  erection  is 
said  to  be  proceeding  on  still  higher  ground,  that  not  one  stone  more  will  be  removed.  There  is 
an  interest  said  to  be  attached  to  Bucklcbury  House,  Herts,  in  consequence  of  its  being  the  occa- 
sional residence  of  the  well  known  Lord  Bolingbroke,  but,  in  the  eye  of  thousands,  this  is  not 
to  be  mentioned  in  comparison  with  that  which  must  ever  be  associated  with  the  Farmer's  pre- 
sent abode.  Should  this  note  ever  meet  the  eye  of  the  present  respectable  proprietor,  we  have 
no  doubt  that  verbum  sapienti  sal  est. 

Upon  our  first  approach  to  this  house,  in  1839,  enquiring,  by  way  of  experiment,  of  a  little  girl 
who  answered  the  door— whether  she  had  ever  heard  of  a  man  named  Tyndale,  who  lived  long 
ago  ?  "  Yes,  Sir,"  she  replied,  "  he  lived  in  this  house,  and  translated  the  Bible  here."  And  in 
this  the  child  was  saying  nothing  more  than  our  eminent  antiquary  Camden  had  said,  for  so  even 
he  imagined—"  The  learned  William  Tyndale  lived  here  as  Tutor,  &c.,  and  here  translated  the 
Bible."  It  is,  however,  quite  possible  that  Sir  John  may  have  heard  him  read  here  some  speci- 
men of  what  he  was  bent  upon  accomiilishing. 


.38  APPLIES  TO  TUNSTAL.  [booK  I. 

tongue  maketli  of  little  gnats  great  elephants,  and  lifteth  up  above  the  stai's 
whoever  giveth  him  a  little  exhibition,)  praiseth  exceedingly,  amoiuj  other,  in 
his  Annotations  on  the  New  Testament,  for  his  great  learning.  Then,  thought 
I,  if  I  might  come  to  this  man's  service  I  were  happy." -9  Such  was  his  im- 
pression in  Gloucestershire,  when  moved  by  the  blind  superstition  of  his  country 
"  to  translate  the  New  Testament ; "  and,  till  now,  evidently  unacquainted  with 
the  state  of  the  metropolis  ;  for  "  even,"  says  he,  "  even  in  tlie  Bishop  of 
London's  house  I  intended  to  have  done  it ! " 

"  And  so  I  gat  me  to  London,  and  through  the  acquaintance  of  my  master 
came  to  Sir  Harry  Gilford,  the  King's  Grace's  Comptroller,  and  brought  him  an 
Oration  of  Isocrates,  which  I  had  translated  out  of  Greek  into  EnijUsh,  to  speak 
unto  my  Lord  of  London  for  me.  This  he  also  did,  as  he  showed  me,  and  willed 
me  to  write  an  epistle  to  my  lord,  and  to  go  to  him  myself,  which  I  also  did, 
and  delivered  my  epistle  to  a  servant  of  his  own,  one  William  Hebilthwayte,  a 
man  of  mine  old  acquaintance.  But  God,  which  knoweth  what  is  within  hypo- 
crites, saw  that  I  was  beguiled,  and  that  that  counsel  was  not  the  next  way  to  my 
purpose.  And  therefore  He  gat  me  no  favour  in  my  lord's  sight.  Whereupon 
my  lord  answered  me — '  his  house  was  full,  he  had  more  than  he  could  well  find, 
and  advised  me  to  seek  in  London,  where,  he  said,  I  could  not  lack  a  service.'" 

This  memorable  interview  between  these  two  individuals, 
happened  about  three  or  four  months  after  TunstaFs  conse- 
cration as  Bishop  of  London  ;  and  before  the  reader  has  pro- 
ceeded much  farther  in  these  pages,  he  will  discover  a  singu- 
lar propriety  in  Tyndale  having  first  called  upon  this  man, 
above  all  others,  previous  to  his  going  abroad.  All  parties 
agree  as  to  TunstaFs  attainments  in  learning — the  specimen 
presented  to  him  was  a  translation  from  the  Greek  of  Isocrates 
into  English ;  and,  after  receiving  it,  the  Bishop  replied, — 
"  Seek  in  London,  where  you  cannot  lack  a  service."  If 
there  was  any  meaning  in  the  words  employed,  it  was  this, — 
"  You  are  a  competent  translator  from  Greek  into  English." 
Tyndale,  it  is  true,  was  now  evidently  led,  like  a  blind  man, 


29  This  reference  to  Erasmus  is  at  once  curious  and  important.  His  writings  Tyndale  admir- 
ed, but  saw  througii  the  defects  in  his  character.  It  was  in  1530  that  Tyndale  thus  wrote. 
By  "  annotations"  he  could  not  refer  to  the  paraphrases  of  Erasmus,  which  were  not  yet  pub- 
lished, but  to  the  jirelirainary  matter  before  his  New  Testament,  or  to  the  Capita  arffumenlorum, 
&c.  But,  by  thus  writing,  he  incidentally  discovers  that  he  had  kept  his  eye  on  tlie  successive 
editions  of  Erasmus'  Greek  Now  Testament.  The  three  first  were  1516,  1519,  and  1522 ;  all  of 
which  he  may  have  seen  before  leaving  England,  but  in  ?>one  of  these  is  Tunstal  mentioned. 
He  is  first  introduced  by  Erasmus  among  his  Patrons  in  his  fourth  Ed.  of  1527;  but  this,  of 
course,  coitlil  not  influence  our  Translator  when  applying  to  the  Bishop  in  1523.  Tyndale  is 
therefore  to  be  understood  as  marking,  in  1530,  the  last  specimen  he  had  read — "  Whom  Eras- 
mus praiseth  among  other  in,"  &c.  They  were  the  other  commendations,  which  moved  him  in 
152.3.  Thus,  in  a  letter  to  Sir  T.  More,  as  early  as  1517,  Erasmus  makes  grateful  mention  of  his 
pecuniary  obligations  to  Tunstal,  and  in  another  that  year  he  says,  "  scarcely  one  man  in  many 
thousands  can  be  found  more  upright  and  obliging;"  in  one  of  151G  he  extols  him  for  his  know- 
ledge of  the  learned  languages.  All  this  requires  to  be  observed  in  connexion  with  a  note  in 
Russel's  edition  of  Tyndale's  works,  i.  p.  5(K) ;  as  well  as  with  another,  by  the  Editor  of  Foxe, 
as  lately  published  by  Seeley,  vol.  vii.  pp.  655,  656.  Erasmus  had  not  benefited  by  the  Com- 
plutensian  Testament  previous  to  his  edition  of  1527,  and  thus  Tyndale  discovers  that  he  pro- 
bably had  tlic  fourth  or  fifth  Edition  before  him,  lehen  correcting  his  Kcw  Testament  rt/1534. 


J  500-23.]  HIS  ABODE  IN  LONDON.  39 

bv  a  way  that  lie  knew  not ;  but  it  certainly  was  some- 
thing, to  have  received  such  an  answer  or  attestation  to  his 
scholarship  from  such  a  man,  before  he  proceeded  farther  with 
his  intended  work.  It  was  equal  to  the  Bishop  having  said. 
Go  foricard — though,  if  Tunstal  had  only  divined  what  was  the 
main  object  in  view,  no  such  answer  had  been  returned  ;  nay,  an 
authoritative  stop  would  have  been  put  to  all  farther  progress. 
Meanwhile,  and  on  the  contrary,  by  the  advice^  and  there- 
fore the  authority,  of  the  Bishop  of  London  himself,  Tyndale 
was  now  authorised  to  seek  for  some  situation  throughout  the 
metropolis.  No  ecclesiastic,  however,  afforded  him  any  per- 
manent abode ;  but,  in  a  little  time,  and  for  fully  the  last  six 
months  of  this  year,  namely,  1523,  he  was  most  kindly  enter- 
tained under  the  roof  of  Mr,  Humphrie  Munmouth,  a  wealthy 
citizen,  and  future  Alderman  of  Loudon,  when  he  used  to 
preach  at  St.  Dunstan's  in  the  West,  Fleet  Street.  Al- 
though he  sought  in  vain  for  a  situation,  "  almost  a  year," 
yet  the  residence  itself  was  not  without  its  value  in  future 
life.  It  had  a  similar  effect  upon  him,  which  a  visit  to  Rome 
had  upon  some  others,  and  tended  not  only  to  ground  him 
more  firmly  in  his  views  of  divine  truth,  but  to  inflame  his 
zeal  for  translating  the  Scriptures.  He  had  opportunity  for 
more  closely  observing  many  things  which  he  had  never  seen 
before ;  and,  in  reference  to  the  scene  around  him,  witness  his 
own  language,  in  1530  : — 

"  And  so  in  London  I  abode  almost  a  year,  and  marked  the  course  of  the  world, 
and  heard  our  preachers,  how  they  boasted  themselves  and  their  high  autho- 
rity ;  aud  beheld  the  pomp  of  our  Prelates,  and  how  busy  they  were,  as  they 
yet  are,  to  set  peace  and  unity  in  the  world  ;  though  it  be  not  possible  for  them 
that  walk  in  darkness  to  continue  long  in  peace  ;  (for  they  cannot  but  either 
stumble,  or  dash  themselves  at  one  thing  or  another,  that  shall  clean  unquiet 
all  together  ;)  aud  saw  things  whereof  I  defer  to  speak  at  this  time  ;  and 
understood,  at  the  last,  not  only  that  there  was  no  room  in  my  Lord  of  Lon- 
don's palace  to  translate  the  New  Testament,  but  also,  that  there  was  no  place 
to  do  it,  in  all  England,  as  experience  doth  now  openly  declare.''^ 

There  is  here  not  a  little  expressed,  but  far  more  implied, 
when  coming  from  such  a  man  as  Tyndale.  Had  he  been 
nothing  more  than  a  scholar,  and  merely  the  translator  of  the 
Scriptures,  it  would  have  been  out  of  place  to  have  noticed 

30  Preface  to  the  rentateuch,  1530.  Tyndale  drew  from  the  life,  or  from  what  he  had  seen, 
aiul  honce  the  power  of  all  his  writings.  He  was  now  publishing  his  "  Practice  of  Prelates," 
and  therefore  deferred  to  say  more  in  this  preface. 


40  STATE  OF  THE  NATION.  [boOK  T. 

other  affairs.  But  since  all  his  other  writings  were  so  power- 
ful at  the  moment,  as  to  excite  the  dread  of  these  very  Pre- 
lates, and  thus  enjoyed  the  honour  of  public  denunciation ; 
since  he  was  the  first,  if  not  the  only  man,  who  gave  such  a 
masterly  exposure  of  the  whole  policy  of  Wolsey,  and  now, 
without  knowing  it,  was  about  to  enter  on  a  twelve  years'" 
war  with  the  powers  of  darkness ;  we  owe  it  not  only  to  him- 
self, but  more  especially  to  the  Scriptures  he  translated,  to 
watch  the  course  of  Divine  Providence  in  the  world.  It  may 
only  be  remarked  here,  once  for  all,  that  for  seven  years  to 
come,  while  Henry  VIII.  had  one  object  in  view,  his  Prime 
Minister,  Cardinal  ^Volsey,  was  frequently  pursuing  another. 
There  was  almost  always  an  under-plot,  which  may  now  be 
detected ;  and  it  is  not  difficult  to  do  so,  throughout  this  pre- 
sent year,  or  1523. 

While  Tyndale  abode  in  London,  searching,  but  in  vain,  for  a  conve- 
nient place  or  opportunity  to  translate  the  Scriptures,  but  at  the  same 
time  "  marking  the  coiu'se  of  the  world, "  the  affairs  of  all  Europe  seem- 
ed to  hinge  mainly  upon  only  two  individuals,  one  abroad,  the  other  at 
home,  or  in  England.  The  former,  the  Duke  of  Bom'bon,  distinguished 
for  his  military  skill ;  the  other  we  need  scarcely  name,  Wolsey,  rising 
higher  still,  through  the  extent  of  his  ministerial  power.  The  former, 
unquestionably,  panted  for  the  throne  of  France,  the  latter  as  certainly 
for  the  Pontifical  Chair.  They  were  the  two  instruments  raised  up  by 
the  Supreme  Ruler  to  agitate  the  nations  at  this  time,  while  neither  the 
one  nor  the  other  was  ever  to  reach  the  object  of  his  ambition. 

It  was  in  the  beginning  of  this  year  that  Bourbon  was  agitated  into 
determined  treason,  not  without  great  provocation.  Though  the  ablest 
General  and  the  Constable  of  France,  the  King  having,  instead  of  him, 
preferred  to  the  command  of  his  army  the  Duke  of  Alen^on  ;  and  besides 
other  offences,  the  Lady  Regent,  as  nearest  of  kin,  having  claimed  the 
estates  of  his  deceased  wife,  which  would  have  reduced  him  to  poverty  ; 
Bom-bon  now  meditated  that  revenge  which  he  could  only  gain  by  revolt. 
The  resentment  once  felt,  was  soon  conveyed  to  the  ear  of  Wolsey,  and 
by  the  month  of  May,  he  had  concluded  that  treaty  by  which  the  Duke 
professedly  bound  himself  to  acknowledge  Henry  VIII.  as  King  of  France, 
and,  of  coijrse,  to  dethrone  his  own  Sovereign.  So  late  as  September  he  was 
again  oscillating  in  suspense,  but  at  last  he  decided,  and  in  the  fall  of  the 
year,  Henry  was  dreaming  in  the  hope  of  his  wearing  the  crown  of  France. 

The  subject  will  again  force  itself  on  our  notice,  and  before  the  arrival 
of  Tyndale's  New  Testament  ;  but  in  the  meanwhile,  as  for  Wolsey,  all 
this  was  merely  one  suliordinate  arrangement.    The  monarchs  of  Eiu'ojie, 


1500-23.]  HOSTILE  TO  TYNDALE'S  DESIGN.  41 

and  especially  the  Emperor  and  the  King  of  France,  wished  to  secure  or 
enlarge  their  dominions,  but  the  English  Cardinal  longed  to  rule  them 
all.  They  might  reign  over  the  bodies  of  men,  but  in  the  autumn  of 
1523,  he  was  in  ardent  expectation  of  ruling  both  sovereign  and  subject, 
in  mind  and  body.  Having  been  disappointed  of  the  Pontifical  Chair 
after  the  death  of  Leo  the  Tenth  in  1521,  before  that  Tyndale  left 
London  he  must  have  known  of  Wolsey's  second  failure  by  the  election 
of  Clement  the  Seventh  ;  not  that  the  Cardinal  had  given  up  all  hope 
of  the  prize,  but  blaming  the  Emperor,  his  suspicion  of  him  was  chang- 
ing into  positive  enmity.  He  must,  however,  conceal  his  resentment 
from  his  Royal  Master.  He  will  gi-adually  alienate  Henry's  affection 
from  the  Emperor,  but,  in  the  meanwhile,  actually  expressed  great  satis- 
faction with  the  elevation  of  Clement ! 

In  few  words,  the  world  was  hastening  into  greater  ferment.  The 
King  of  Denmark  and  his  family,  driven  from  the  throne  had  fled  into 
England,  and  news  had  arrived,  that  Solyman,  the  greatest  Emperor  the 
Turks  ever  had,  having  for  many  months  besieged  the  Isle  of  Rhodes, 
had  taken  it  by  storm.  This  island  being  the  great  resort  and  succour 
of  the  European  nations  when  sailing  to  the  east,  this  event  turned  out 
to  be  only  the  commencement  of  those  ulterior  operations  which  agitated 
all  Europe  ;  while  as  to  England  itself,  discontent  was  prevailing  through- 
out the  kingdom,  through  Wolsey's  determination  to  raise  immense 
pecuniary  supplies  for  foreign  war. 

But  before  that  Tyndale  embarked  for  the  Continent,  was 
there  no  other  step  already  suggested,  Avliich  might  operate 
in  direct  hostility  to  such  a  design  as  that  -which  he  con- 
templated ?  Yes,  there  was,  and  in  this  very  year,  one  of 
the  most  powerful  and  magnificent  character.  It  may  be  re- 
garded as  the  climax  in  the  triumph  of  literature,  or  as  a 
phalanx  in  opposition.  The  attempt  too  is  the  more  worthy 
of  notice,  since  it  has  often  been  loosely  regarded  as  the  only 
redeeming  trait  in  Wolsey's  character.  We  refer  to  the 
establishment  of  Cardinal  College,  Oxford.  "  He  patronised 
letters,"  it  has  been  said,  "  and  may  be  classed  among  the 
benefactors  of  the  human  mind."  But  even  in  the  cultivation 
of  letters,  we  must  observe  the  end  in  view,  and  in  order 
eftectually  to  secure  us  against  all  unfair  or  even  harsh  con- 
clusions, we  shall  take  the  explanation  from  the  best  of  all 
authorities  ;  or  from  the  devoted  friend  of  Wolsey,  the  Con- 
fessor of  Henry  VIII.  and  his  Almoner,  John  Longland,  the 
Bishop  of  Lincoln.     Immediately  after  explaining  Wolsey's 


4.2  STATE  OF  ENGLAND.  [book  I. 

whole  intentions  to  the  King,  his  letter  is  addressed  to  the 
Cardinal  himself,  and  dated  so  early  as  January  5,  1522,  i.  e. 
1523.     The  explanation  once  given,  he  proceeds  : — 

"  I  assure  your  Grace,  the  King  doth  consider  all  this  in  the  best  manner, 
and  so  doth  report  it  unto  your  Grace's  honor,  better  than  I  can  with  pen  ex- 
press. Saying  that  more  good  shall  come  of  this  your  honorable  foundation 
than  any  man  can  esteem  ;  with  many  good  words  much  rejoicing  in  the  same, 
as  I  doubt  not  but  he  will  express  at  length  unto  your  Grace  at  your  coming, 
which  I  shewed  him  should  be  on  Monday  next.  I  ascertained  him  over  this, 
your  pleasure  concerning  the  secret  search  ye  would  this  term  make  in  divers 
places,  naming  the  same  to  him,  and  that  at  one  time.  And  that  ye  would  be 
at  the  Cross,  (Paul's  Cross,)  having  the  Clergy  with  you,  and  there  to  have  a 
notable  Clerk  to  preach  before  you  a  Sermon  against  Luther,  the  Lutherans  and 
their  defaulters,  against  their  works  and  books,  and  against  introducing  their 
works  into  the  kingdom :  And  then  to  have  a  proclamation  to  give  notice  that 
every  person  having  any  works  of  Luther  or  of  his  fautors  making,  by  a  limited 
day  to  bring  them  in,  under  pain  of  the  greater  excommimication,  and  that  day 
past,  to  fulminate  the  sentence  against  the  contrary  doers ;  and  that,  if,  after 
that  day,  any  such  works  be  known,  or  found  with  any  person,  the  same  to  be 
convicted  by  abjuration  ;  and  if  they  will  contumatiously  persist  in  their  con- 
tumacy, then  to  pursue  them  by  the  law  (ad  ignem)  to  the  fire,  as  against  an  heretic. 
And  that  ye  purpose  over  this,  to  bind  the  said  Merchants  and  Stationers  in 
recognisance,  never  to  bring  into  this  Realm  any  such  books,  scrolls  or  writings. 
Which,  your  godly  purpose  his  Highness  marvellously  well  alloweth,  and  doth 
much  hold  with  that  recognisance,  for  that  some  and  most  will  more  fear  that, 
than  excommunication. 

"  And  his  Grace  thinks  my  Lord  of  Rochester  to  be  most  meet  to  make  that 
Sermon  before  you,  both  because  of  the  authority,  gravity,  and  doctrine  of  the 
person.  His  Highness  is  as  good  and  gracious  in  this  quarrel  of  God  as  can 
be  thought,  wished,  or  desired,  and,  for  the  furtherance  of  this  godly  purpose, 
as  fervent  in  this  cause  of  Christ's  Church,  and  maintenance  of  the  same,  as 
ever  noble  Prince  was." 

After  flattering  Henry  as  extolled  tliroughout  all  Christendom  for  his  "  notable 
wark  maad  agaynste  Luther,"  he  goes  oxi  to  say, — 

"  It  may  please  your  Grace,  of  your  merciful  goodness,  among  all  these  great 
affairs,  to  remember  this  matter  to  his  Highness,  to  animate  him  in  this  cause 
of  Christ,  of  Christ  and  his  Church,  for  the  depression  of  the  enemies  of  God. 
The  world  is  marrellousli/  bent  against  us,  and  it  is  the  Kimfs  Grace  and  you 
that  must  remedy  the  same.  God  hath  sent  your  Grace  amongst  us,  to  advance 
his  honor,  and  maintain  liis  Church  and  faith  ;  for  whom  we  are  all  most  bound 
to  pray,  and  for  your  most  noble  prosperous  estate  long  to  endure." 

The  same  day  after  dinner,  Longland  went  with  the  Lords  into  the  Queen's 
Chamber,  where  the  King  followed,  and  said  to  the  Queen, — "  Madam,  my 
Lord  of  Lincoln  can  show  of  my  Lord  Cardinal's  College  at  Oxford,  and  what 
learning  there  is  and  shall  be,  and  what  learned  men  in  the  same."  Upon 
which  signal  the  Bishop  went  over  the  same  ground  once  more,  and  amongst 
all,  continues  Longland : — 

"  I  shewed  her  of  the  notable  lectures  that  should  be  there,  and  of  the  ex- 
cercctations  of  learning,  and  how  the  Students  should  be  limited  by  the  Readers 
to  the  same ;  likewise  in  the  exposition  of  the  Bible.    And  her  Grace  was  marvellous 


J. 500-23.]  HOSTILE  TO  TYNDALE'S  DESIGN.  43 

glad  and  joyous  to  hear  of  this  your  notable  foundatiou  and  College,  speaking 
great  honor  of  the  same."  3' 

Wc  need  now  no  farther  explanation.  The  curtain  has  been  withdrawn  ;  we 
have  seen  into  the  interior,  and  as  far  as  the  Professor's  chaii-s.  The  Bishop 
has  exultingly  poured  out  all  his  incense,  and  the  sequel  will  more  fully  prove, 
that  we  have  had  before  us,  no  other  than  a  gi'and  systematic  attempt,  under 
the  guise  of  learning,  to  retain  the  human  mind  in  bondage  ;  to  prevent,  if 
possible,  the  entrance  of  divine  truth  into  England,  and  thus  so  far  retard  its 
progress  in  Europe.  Here,  it  will  be  found,  was,  in  embryo,  what  may  be 
styled  the  first  Jesuit  College  ;  projected,  too,  in  the  very  year  when  Ignatius 
Loyala  was  no  farther  than  Rome,  imploring  the  benediction  of  the  Pontiff,  and 
seven  years  before  he  came  begging  into  England.  Well  might  Lord  Herbert 
say,  that  the  Cardinal  thought,  "  since  pr'nttimj  could  not  be  put  down,  it  were 
best  to  set  up  learning  aijainst  learning,  and  by  introducing  able  persons  to 
dispute,  suspend  the  laity  betwixt  fear  and  controversy— as  this,  at  the  worst, 
would  yet  make  them  attentive  to  their  superiors  and  teachers  !"  The  remark 
will  force  itself  upon  us  again,  but  was  this  then  a  "  benefactor  of  the  human 
mind  ?"  On  the  contrary,  others  will  see  here  nothing  else  than  a  splendid  but 
vain  project  to  perplex  the  understanding,  nay,  to  blind  the  minds  of  them  that 
believed  not,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel  of  Clirist,  who  is  the  image  of 
God,  should  shine  unto  them. 

It  ought,  however,  to  be  here  observed,  that  all  the  dark 
purposes,  divulged  in  this  memorable  letter,  were  literally 
fulfilled.  There  was  the  secret  search^  and  at  one  time  ;  there 
was  the  sermon  delivered,  and  by  Fisher,  the  man  pointed 
out,  and  the  books  were  burnt ;  hut  then^  it  is  a  most  remark- 
able fact,  that  all  these  we  shall  see  deferred — nay,  deferred 
for  exactly  three  years,  or  till  immediately  after  Tyudale's 
New  Testaments  had  arrived  in  the  country  !  Wolsey,  it  is 
true,  will  have  quite  enough  to  divert  him  all  the  time,  but 
it  was  just  as  if  Providence  had  intended  that  the  writings  of 
no  human  being  should  have  the  precedence,  but  that  His  own 
Word,  being  so  treated,  should  thus  enjoy  the  distinction  of 
exciting  the  general  commotion  of  1526.  The  burning  of  the 
New  Testament  was  to  be  the  head  and  front  of  their  offending. 

We  have  now  done  with  Tyndale  upon  English  ground  ; 
and,  disappointed  of  employment,  he  also  was  done  with 
"  marking  the  pomp  of  our  Prelates,"  or  hearing  the  whole 
fraternity    "  boast  of  their  high  authority."     But  certainly 

3'  MS.  Cotton  Vitell,  B.  v.  p.  8.  Nor  must  the  character  of  the  writer  of  this  letter  be  for- 
gotten. No  wonder  than  he  wrote,  as  he  evidently  did,  con  amore.  This  was  the  same  man 
who,  in  I52I,  not  two  years  before,  had  tormented  his  whole  diocese ;  burning  all  such  as  had 
relapsed,  and  severely  punishing  those  who  were  convicted  of  reading  certain  parts  of  the  Sacred 
Scriptures,  in  English  manuscr'qit.  or  of  even  possessing  the  ten  commandments !  After  he  had 
written  this  letter,  he  was  down  at  Oxford  preparing  for  the  Cardinal's  buildings ;  and  while 
Tyndaie  was  busy  at  the  press  in  1525,  Longland  was  preaching,  on  the  foundation  stone  of 
Cardinal  College  being  laid.  Wood's  Anuals,  by  Gutch,  ii.  p.  24.  Wood's  Athcna>,  by  Bliss,  i.  p.  1(J4. 


44  MUST  LEAVE  HIS  COUNTRY.  [book  I. 

when  he  was  to  be  seen  walking  u^  Fleet  Street,  from  the 
hospitable  abode  of  Mr.  Humphrie  Munmouth,  to  preach  at 
St.  Dunstan^'s  in  the  West,  nothing  in  this  world  could  have 
been  more  improbable,  than  that  in  a  short  time  he  was  so  to 
agitate  the  whole  hierarchy  of  England,  and  the  city  which 
he  was  now  about  to  leave  for  ever  ! 

Here,  then,  and  before  he  embarks,  let  us  pause  for  a 
moment.  The  copies  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  in  the  English 
tongue,  now  far  exceed  in  number,  not  only  that  of  every  other 
nation,  but  they  have  been  supposed  to  surpass  the  number 
in  all  other  languages  when  put  together !  With  us  they 
are  familiarly  enumerated  by  millions,  and  myriads  of  our 
countrymen  have  lived  in  peace,  and  died  in  joy,  full  of  the 
genuine  consolation  thus  imparted  !  As  far,  therefore,  as 
human  agency  was  employed,  it  becomes  a  sacred  duty  to 
trace  this,  the  highest  favour  of  Heaven,  up  to  its  source  ; 
and  certainly  it  is  not  a  little  singular,  at  the  distance  of 
nearly  three  hundred  and  twenty  years,  that  we  should  be 
able  to  contemplate  the  origin  of  the  whole,  within  the  bosom 
of  one  disappointed  and  neglected,  if  not  despised  individual  ! 
There  was,  indeed,  one  young  man,  his  own  convert,  with 
whom  he  may  have  communed  on  the  subject,  John  Fryth, 
whether  in  London,  which  is  most  probable,  or  at  Cam- 
bridge, but  he  was  not  to  accompany  him ;  no,  nor  even  an 
amanuensis.  Solitary  and  alone  he  went  out  as  far  as  we  yet 
know,  and,  with  the  exception  of  the  port  to  which  he  sailed, 
like  the  patriarch  of  old,  "  not  knowing  whither  he  went." 
By  faith,  it  may  be  truly  said,  he  left  his  native  country,  not 
unmindful  of  it,  but,  on  the  contrary,  loaded  with  a  sense  of 
genuine  pity  for  its  inhabitants,  from  the  king  downward. 


SECTION    11. 

THE  NEW  TESTAMENT    IN    ENGLISH    PREPARING    BY  TYNDALE,    FOR  CIRCULA- 
TION IN  HIS    NATIVE   LAND  ;    AND     IN  TWO  EDITIONS  FROM  THE  PRESS  BY 

THE   CLOSE   OF    1525. STATE    OF  ENGLAND  IMMEDIATELY  BEFORE  THEIR 

RECEPTION. 

We  are  now  entering  upon  a  war  of  opinion,  and  one  of  para- 
mount importance  to  this  kingdom,  which,  as  far  as  our  first 


1524-.]  TYNDALE  LEAVES  ENGLAND.  45 

translator  of  the  Sacred  Volume  was  concerned,  lasted,  without 
one  moment''s  interruption,  for  twelve  years.  It  must  appear 
singular,  that  no  detail  of  such  a  contest,  ending  as  it  did,  has 
ever  been  written.  Such,  however,  being  the  fact,  and  such 
the  variety  of  character,  as  well  as  the  strange  incidents  in- 
volved in  the  struggle,  without  keeping  rigidly  to  our  narra- 
tive, year  hy  yem\  as  the  subject  never  has  been,  so  it  never 
can  be  understood. 

Tyndale,  though  strongly  attached  to  his  native  country, 
having  now  fully  resolved  on  going  abroad,  INIunmouth  "  helped 
him  over  the  sea.""  We  know  that  he  sailed  direct  for  Ham- 
burgh, and  the  question  is,  whether  he  did  not  there  remain 
for  more  than  a  year.  At  all  events,  a  period  of  about  fifteen 
months,  or  rather  two  years,  has  to  be  accounted  for,  from 
January  1524;  but  so  much  obscurity  has  rested  upon  it, 
owing  to  the  mere  affirmations,  both  of  friends  and  foes,  that 
it  becomes  necessary  to  call  for  proof,  and  to  proceed  no  farther 
than  it  will  carry  us. 

Two  general  assertions  have  been  hazarded,  and  too  long 
received.  One  is,  that,  upon  leaving  his  native  land,  Tyn- 
dale went  directly  to  Luther,  and  completed  his  translation 
in  confederacy  with  him.  The  other  is,  that  he  dwelt  at 
Wittenberg  while  thus  engaged. 

This  idea  of  Tyndale's  immediate  and  intimate  confederacy 
with  Luther,  and  his  dependence  upon  him,  originally  im- 
ported from  abroad,  through  men  who  were,  at  the  moment, 
under  the  torture  of  examination  in  England,  has  been  re- 
peated from  Sir  Thomas  More  and  John  Oochlseus,  two 
determined  enemies,  not  to  say  John  Foxe,  a  decided  friend, 
down  to  Herbert  Marsh  in  our  own  day  ;  but  it  is  more  than 
time  that  it  should  be  exploded.  Considering  that  these  are 
nothing  more  than  assertions,  it  is  strange  that  they  should 
have  prevailed  with  any,  after  Tyndale's  own  language  to 
Sir  Thomas  More. 

"  It  is  to  be  considered,"  said  More,  "  that  at  the  time  of  this  translation, 
Hychens  (that  is  Tyndale)  was  with  Luther  in  Wittenberg,  and  set  certain 
glosses  in  the  margin,  (alluding  to  the  edition  in  quarto,)  framed  for  the  setting 
forth  of  that  ungracious  sect  ;"  and  again — "  The  confederacy  between  Luther 
and  him,  is  a  thing  well  known,  and  plainly  confessed  by  such  as  have  been 
taken,  and  convicted  here  of  heresy,  coming  from  them." 

The  poor  men  who  fell  into  More's  hands,  and  on  whose 


■J-6  FOR  HAMBURGH.  [book  I. 

testimony  he  rests  his  assertions,  were  nu  doubt  willing,  na}^ 
glad,  to  confess  anything,  which  might  please  him,  and  favour 
their  escape.  But  what  says  Tyndale  himself  to  all  this,  in 
his  "  Answer  to  Sir  Thomas  More's  Dialogue  V  After  stat- 
ing that  he  had  already  answered  the  whole  of  his  Eighth 
Chapter,  Third  Book,  with  one  exception,  he  emphatically  adds, 
"  And  when  he  saith  Tyndale  was  confederate  with  Luther,  that 
is  not  truth  ,•'''  though  as  a  man  traduced,  and  then  persecuted, 
he  would  give  his  adversary  no  farther  positive  information. 

But  even  independently  of  this  pointed  denial,  was  he  even 
resident  in  Wittenberg,  nay,  in  any  part  of  Saxony,  during 
this  period  ?     If  not,  then  both  assertions  fall  to  the  ground. 

That  he  saw  and  conversed  with  Luther  at  some  period, 
may  be  supposed,  though  we  have  not  a  shadow  of  proof; 
but  that  he  had  done  either,  or  even  set  his  foot  in  Saxony, 
before  the  publication  of  his  New  Testament,  will  very  soon  ap- 
pear to  have  been  impossible,  in  the  nature  of  things.  On 
the  contrary,  if  we  are  to  depend  on  the  distinctly  recorded 
testimony  of  the  generous  man  with  whom  he  resided  in 
London  ;  delivered,  too,  in  very  peculiar — because  responsible 
— circumstances,  and  involving  pecuniary  transactions  with 
Tyndale  himself,  which  account  for  his  support,  a  different 
place  of  residence  must  be  assigned  to  him. 

On  the  14th  of  May  1528,  Munmouth  being  sent  for  by 
Sir  T.  More,  was  the  same  day  committed  to  the  Tower. 
His  petition  for  release,  on  the  19th,  is  addressed  to  Wolso}'^ 
and  the  King's  Council.  Now,  in  this  we  have  the  following 
evidence,  both  as  to  time  and  j(;/«cgof  residence,  throughout  1524. 

"  Upon  four  years  and  a  half  and  more,  I  heard  the  foresaid  Sir  William 
Tyndale  preach  two  or  three  sermons  at  St.  Dunstan's  in  the  West  in  London." 
Tyndale,  he  then  relates,  applied  to  the  Bishop  of  London,  and  was  refused  ; 
"  so  I  took  him  into  my  house  half  a  year.  I  did  promise  him  ten  pounds  ster- 
ling, to  pray  for  my  father  and  mother's  souls,  and  all  christian  souls.  I  did 
pay  it  him  when  he  made  his  exchange  to  Jlambunjh.  Afterwards  he  got  of 
some  other  men,  ten  pounds  sterling  more,  the  which  he  left  with  me  ;  and 
within  a  year  after,  he  sent  for  his  ten  pounds  to  me  from  Ilambun/h,  and 
thither  I  sent  it  to  him,  by  one  Hans  CoUenbeke,  a  Merchant  of  the  Stilyard."! 

'  Harleian  MS.,  Foxe,  and  copied  by  Strype. — It  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  Tyndale  had  left 
with  his  generous  host,  ^M'O  copies  of  the  Rnchiridioti  of  Erasmus,  which  he  had  translated  at 
Sodbury,  copies  of  the  sermons  he  had  preached  in  London,  besides  otlier  papers,  but  Mun- 
mouth became  intimidated,  and  after  Tunstal's  denunciation  of  the  New  Testament,  he  not  only 
delivered  it  up,  but  all  the  treatises  and  letters  that  Tyndale  had  sent  or  left  he  destroyed  !  "  I 
did  burn  them  in  my  house,  ior  fear  of  the  translator,  more  than  for  any  ill  that  I  knew  by  them.'' 
But  the  fact  is,  that  Munmouth  was  now  in  very  great  ./i'rtr  of  himself,  and  this  must  be  borne  in 


1524..]  AUIDES  IN  HAMBURGH.  47 

Thus,  iu  the  summer  of  1523,  Munmouth  heard  TNnidale 
preach  ;  he  dwelt  six  months  in  his  house,  and  probably  more, 
as  our  translator  himself  has  told  us,  that  in  London  he 
"  abode  almost  a  year  ;"  iu  the  beginning  of  1524  he  made 
his  "  exchange"  for  Hamburgh  ;  nearly  a  year  elapses  hefore 
he  sends,  from  Hamburgh  still,  for  his  second  ten  pounds,  and 
he  there  remains  till  he  received  it.  That  he  had  never  left  the 
spot,  will  presently  appear  still  more  evident. 

Until,  therefore,  other  evidence  to  the  contrary  can  be  pro- 
duced, we  have  accounted  not  only  for  Tyndale^s  residence  in 
Hamburgh  throughout  1524,  but  also  for  what  is  more  grati- 
fying, the  expense  of  his  support  for  even  a  longer  period.  It 
is  some  consolation  to  find  him  not  thrown  entirely  on  the 
hospitality  of  foreigners,  if  indeed  in  any  degree  ;  as  the  sums 
allotted  to  him,  when  put  together,  were  equal  to  fifteen  times 
the  amount  in  our  day,  or  about  ^£'300  sterling.^ 

We  presume  it  will  now  be  admitted,  that  the  residence  of 
Tyndale  at  Wittenberg,  has  been  nothing  more  than  an 
assumption,  serving  powerfully,  at  the  moment,  the  purpose 
of  Sir  Thomas  More,  his  calumniator.  The  evidence,  as  yet, 
is  distinctly  in  favour  of  Hamburgh,  and  as  for  "  confederacy 
with  Luther,"  that  has  been  pointedly  denied.  More  had 
affirmed  that  Tyndale  "  was  with  Luther  in  Wittenberg ;" 
and  Tyndale  replies,  "  that  is  not  truth."  Indeed,  these 
words  are  his  emphatic  answer  to  all  that  his  opponent  had 
either  of  malicious  purpose,  or  by  mistake,  asserted  in  both 
of  his  sentences,  already  quoted. 

We,  however,  now  know  the  movements  of  Luther  better 
than  did  Sir  Thomas  More ;  and  it  may  be  worth  while  to 
enquire  how  he  was  engaged  at  the  moment,  and  throughout 
the  greater  part  of  this  year.     Most  unfortunately  he  had 


mind  when  reading  his  confession.  That  he  gave  the  ten  pounds  to  Tyndale,  to  pray  for  his 
father  and  mother's  souls,  was  the  cant  language  of  the  day,  now  employed,  under  intimidation, 
to  justify  his  having  lent  him  assistance.  By  this  time  Tyndale  had  no  faith  in  such  prayers, 
and  it  is  even  questionable  whether  Munmouth  himself  had— but  certainly  not  wlien  he  made 
his  will  in  1537,  commending  his  soul  "  unto  Christ  Jesus,  my  Maker  and  Redeemer,  in  whom, 
and  by  the  merits  of  whose  blessed  passion,  is  all  >»>/  whole  trust  of  clean  remission  and  forgive- 
ness of  m;/  sins.     He  ordered  his  body  to  be  buried,  "  without  any  dirige  to  be  sung  or  said." 

2  Munmouth  mentions  far  larger  sums  that  he  had  given  away,  though  ten  pounds  was  then  a 
princely  donation.  "  Henry  VHI.  rewarded  Roger  Ascham  with  a  pension  of  ten  pounds 
annually,  a  sum  so  small,  that  it  may  appear  unworthy  of  enquiry  what  could  be  its  value  ;  but 
it  must  be  enquired  what  twenty  shillings  could  then  perform."  After  doing  so,  the  author 
adds — "His  pension,  therefore,  may  be  estimated  at  more  than  a  hundred  pounds  a  year." 
— Johnson's  Life  of  Ascham.— The  Doctor's  calculation  was  nearly  eleven  times,  but  we  abide 
by  fifteen,  as  more  correct. 


48  ABIDKS  IN  HAiMBUUGH.  [boOK.  I. 

just  fallen  out  violently  with  Carlostadt,  and  taken  that  step 
which  has  so  often  been  lamented  since,  as  a  memorable  in- 
stance of  human  imbecility.  It  only  requires  to  be  observed, 
that  the  time  of  Tyndale's  sailing  from  London,  and  that  of 
Carlostadt  leaving  Wittenberg,  were  simultaneous,  or  the  be- 
ginning of  1524.  The  vexatious  controversy  respecting  the 
Lord's  Supper  had  already  commenced.  Luther  was  posting 
after  Carlostadt,  and,  by  the  month  of  August,  at  Jena,  they 
were  pledged  antagonists,  after  which  the  latter  had  to  seek 
refuge  in  Strasburg.  The  approach  of  any  man  to  Luther, 
at  this  period,  who  was  not  of  his  opinion,  would  have  been 
fatal  to  any  advice  or  confederacy  with  him.  Now,  as  Tyu- 
dale  was  not  at  present,  nor  indeed  ever  was,  a  Lutheran,  and 
since,  as  a  scholar,  he  needed  neither  assistance  nor  advice, 
from  a  man  with  whom  he  could  have  conversed  only  through 
the  medium  of  Latin ;  to  send  him  into  Saxony  for  suck  pur- 
poses, and  at  suck  a  time,  was  equally  absurd.  On  the  con- 
trary, if  there  were  strong  reasons  for  seeking  no  such  inter- 
course at  this  moment ;  there  were  stronger  still,  gathered  by 
Tyndale  himself  from  the  state  of  England,  as  already  de- 
scribed, whether  in  Gloucestershire  or  in  London,  for  his  im- 
mediately sitting  down  to  his  work ;  and,  instead  of  hasten- 
ing away  from  Hamburgh  into  Saxony,  if  we  at  once  assume 
that  Tyndale  remained  in  this  city  throughout  1524,  as  Mun- 
raouth  has  told  us,  and  then,  in  J  525,  was  first  at  Cologne, 
and  then  at  Worms ;  we  shall  leave  the  reader  to  judge,  as 
he  proceeds,  whether  a  day  was  left  for  visiting  other  places, 
except  such  as  lay  in  his  way,  and  more  especially  one  so  far 
distant  as  the  usual  abode  of  Martin  Luther. 

To  return,  therefore,  to  our  history.  Tyndale  had  now 
entered,  with  great  vigour,  on  two  of  the  most  important 
years  of  his  existence ;  and  if,  when  his  productions  are  once 
discovered  in  England,  it  shall  come  out  in  evidence,  that,  in 
tkat  time,  he  had  translated  and  printed  first  an  edition  of 
the  gospel  of  Matthew,  then  another  of  the  gospel  of  Mark, 
with  two  editions  of  the  New  Testament ;  this  will  demon- 
strate, that  neither  his  residence,  nor  his  labours,  have  ever 
yet  been  understood. 

At  the  moment  of  Tyndale's  arrival  in  Hamburgh,  it  is 
not  unworthy  of  remark,  that  he  had  found  the  city  in  a  state 
of  great  excitement,  but,  at  the  same  time,  one  by  no  means 


1524..]  ABIDKS  IN  HAMBURGH.  49 

unfavourable  to  tlie  commencement  of  his  design.  Nor  was 
this  excitement  of  recent  origin.  In  1523,  tlie  burghers 
had  already  agreed,  in  a  body,  to  oppose  the  usurpations,  the 
taxes,  and  the  excommunications  of  the  Chapter,  while  they 
were  divided  in  their  opinions  respecting  points  of  belief  and 
ceremonies.  One  party,  and  that  supported  by  the  Senate, 
were  for  reforming  both.  A  Franciscan  friar,  named  Kempe, 
newly  come  from  Rostoc,  had  been  requested  to  preach  the 
gospel  in  its  purity,  and  was  now  so  engaged ;  with  better 
success  than  Henry  Zuphten,  who  had  been  burnt  alive  at 
Mchldorf,  by  a  decree  of  the  official  at  Hamburgh.^ 

But  if  Tyndale,  in  1524,  abode  in  this  city,  had  he  the 
benefit  of  any  assistance,  or  did  he  meet  with  an  amanuensis 
there  ?  With  regard  to  the  first  enquiry,  he  himself  informs 
us,  that  he  "  had  no  man  to  counterfeit,  neither  was  holpen 
with  English  of  any  that  had  interpreted  the  same,  or  such 
like  thing  in  the  Scripture  before  time."^  As  for  an  amanu- 
ensis, and  one  who  was  also  able  to  compare  the  text  with  him 
wlien  translated  ;  he  seems  to  have  had  first  one,  and  then 
another,  who  remained  in  his  service  for  a  considerable  time. 
The  first  of  these,  we  cannot  name,  though  he  was  highly 
esteemed  by  our  translator ;  the  second  was  William  Roye, 
a  friar  observant  of  the  Franciscan  order  at  Greenwich.  The 
truth  is,  that  the  only  authentic  explanation  of  this  period,  is 
to  be  found  in  a  passage  of  Tyndale''s  own  writing,  contained 
ill  the  preface  to  the  very  first  book  that  he  published  after 
his  New  Testament — "  The  Parable  of  the  Wicked  Mammon." 

"  While  I  abode,  a  faithful  companion,  which  now  hath  taken  anothei*  voj'age 
upon  him,  to  preach  Christ  where,  I  suppose,  he  was  never  yet  preached,  (God, 
which  put  in  his  heart  thither  to  go,  send  his  Spirit  with  him,  comfort  him, 
and  bring  his  purpose  to  good  effect !)  One  William  Roye,  a  man  some- 
what crafty,  when  he  cometh  unto  new  acquaintance,  and  before  he  be  thorough 
known,  and  namely,  when  all  is  spent,  came  unto  me  and  offered  his  help.  As 
long  as  he  had  no  money,  somewhat  I  could  rule  hira  ;  but  as  soon  as  he  had 
gotten  him  money,  he  became  like  himself  again.  Nevertheless,  I  suffered  all 
things  till  that  was  ended,  which  I  could  not  do  alone  without  one,  both  to 
write,  and  to  help  me  to  compare  the  texts  together.     When  that  was  ended, 


3  See  Essay  on  the  Hist,  of  Hamburgh,  translated  from  the  French,  by  M.  A.  Dathe,  London, 
1766,  in  which  there  are  some  curious  particulars,  Part  II.  chap.  2.  For  Zuphten's  affecting 
martyrdom,  see  D'Aubigne's  History,  vol.  iii.  p.  211. 

4  This  language,  which  accompanied  his  New  Testament,  might  surely  have  been  received 
as  a  sufficient  disclaimer  of  all  "confederacy"  with  any  man.  To  counterfeit,  in  that  age, 
meant,  "  to  follow  in  imitation,  as  an  example."  Thus—"  Every  Christian  man  ought  to  have 
Christ  always  before  his  eyes,  as  an  ensample  to  counterfeit  and  ioWovi."— Tyndale' s  ff'orks. 

VOL.   I.  D 


50  ABIDES  IN  HAMBURGH.  [booK  I. 

I  took  my  leave,  and  bade  him  farewell  for  our  two  lives,  and,  as  men  say,  a 
day  longer.  After  we  were  departed,5  he  went  and  gat  him  new  friends,  which 
thing  to  do,  he  passeth  all  that  ever  I  yet  knew.  And  then,  when  he  had 
stored  him  of  money,  he  gat  him  to  Argentine,  (Strasburg,)  where  he  pro- 
fesseth  wonderful  faculties,  and  maketh  boast  of  no  small  things.  A  year  after 
that,  and  now  twelve  months  before  the  printing  of  this  work,  (or  May  1526,) 
came  one  Jerome,  a  brother  of  Greenwich  also,  through  Worms  to  Argentine — 
which  Jerome,  I  warned  of  Roye's  boldness,  and  exhorted  him  to  beware  of  him, 
and  to  walk  quietly,  and  with  all  patience  and  long  suffering,  according  as  we 
have  Christ  and  his  apostles  for  an  ensample,  which  thing  he  also  promised  me." 

In  reference  to  the  place  of  Tjndale\s  abode,  when  Roye 
came  to  him,  we  have  to  regret  a  very  singular  hiatus,  as, 
perhaps,  he  prudently  wished  to  conceal  the  place.     "  While 

I  abode  ,  a  faithful   companion,"  &c. ;  but,  with  the 

trustworthy  testimony  of  Munmouth  before  us,  we  may 
surely  presume  that  the  words  to  be  supplied  are,  "  in  Ifam- 
hurgh.''''  Who  the  "  faithful  companion"  was,  we  have  not 
been  able  to  ascertain  ;  only  this  could  not  possibly  be  John 
Fryth,  according  to  the  vague  assertion  which  has  been  so 
often  and  so  long  repeated.  He  was  still  at  Cambridge,  as 
he  did  not  take  his  degree  at  that  University  till  December 
1525,  nor  escape  from  Oxford  to  the  Continent,  as  we  shall 
see  afterwards,  till  August  or  September  1526. 

But  it  is  with  Roye  we  have  especially  to  do ;  and,  with 
this  passage  before  us,  it  appears  that  he  came  to  Tyndale  at 
Hamburgh,  for  he  was  afterwards  with  him  at  Cologne,  and 
left  him  not  at  Worms,  "  till  that  was  ended,  which  he  could 
not  do  without  one."  Unable  to  procure  any  other  suitable 
individual,  once  hired,  Tyndale  was  evidently  shut  up  to 
the  necessity  of  retaining  Roye  in  his  service.  His  occupa- 
tion was,  in  a  great  degree,  mechanical ;  but  there  is  a  de- 
gree of  point  in  the  language  employed,  for  an  important 
reason,  which  will  be  fully  explained  when  we  come  to  the 
year  of  its  publication,  or  1527. 

With  regard  to  the  progress  actually  made  during  this 
year,  or  how  much  Tyndale  may,  if  not  must,  have  accom- 
plished in  Hamburgh,  there  has  never  been  any  distinct  in- 
formation. This,  however,  may  be  accounted  for  from  the 
fact  never  having  been  before  known,  that  previously  to  the 
publication  of  his  New  Testament ;  whether  in  quarto,  with 


*  J.  c.  separated;  a  word  long  employed  in  this  sense.—"  Depart  ye  to  me,  Saul  and  Barna- 
bas, into  the  work  to  which  I  have  taken  them." — fricliffe. 


1524..]  MATTHEW  AND  MARK  PRINTED.  '.51 

glosses,  or  in  octavo,  without  them  ;  Tyndale  had  printed  an 
edition  of  Mattliew,  as  well  as  of  Mark,  by  themselves,  al- 
though not  a  single  copy  has  ever  yet  been  identified.  In 
the  eager  search  for  the  Scriptures,  with  a  view  to  their  being 
destroyed,  they  may  have  been  sometimes  given  up,  to  sate  a 
Testament ;  but  there  can  be  no  question  that  we  have  here 
before  us  Tyndale's  earliest  effort  for  the  benefit  of  his  country. 

After  John  Foxe  had  printed  his  loose  statement  in  his 
Acts  and  Monuments,  when  he  came  to  publish  Tyndale's 
works,  in  1573,  he  glances  at  this  fact,  though  no  attention 
has  ever  been  paid  to  his  words.  In  his  life  of  Fryth,  talk- 
ing no  more  of  Saxony,  he  has  said — "  William  Tyndale  first 
placed  himself  in  Germany,  and  there  did  jirst  translate  the 
Grospel  of  St.  Matthew  into  English,  and  after^  the  whole 
New  Testament,""  &c.  His  mention  of  Matthew,  by  itself, 
certainly  appears  to  imply  some  distinction ;  but  the  real 
state  of  the  case  was  this — that  Tyndale  not  only  "  first 
translated  Matthew,"  but  printed  it,  and  the  Gospel  of  Mark 
also.  Both  of  these  we  shall  find  to  be  most  bitterly  denounced 
in  the  beginning  of  1527,  after  having  been  read  ;  and  as  a 
publication,  not  only  separate  from  the  New  Testament  with 
its  prologue,  but  as  printed  previously. 

It  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  Munmouth,  in  his  memorial  to 
Wolsey  and  the  Council,  who  had  been  in  possession  of  the 
earliest  New  Testament,  distinctly  confesses  that  he  had  "  re- 
ceived a  little  treatise,"  which  Tyndale  had  sent  to  him, 
"  when  he  sent  for  his  money,"  in  1524.  This,  at  least, 
shows  that  he  had  been  busily  engaged  in  the  city  where  he 
had  first  landed.  But  if  this  was  not  the  well-known  tract, 
which  was  ere  long  to  produce  such  effect,  entitled,  the 
"  Supplication  of  Beggars,"  by  Mr.  Fish,  it  may  have  been 
these  gospels,  or  one  of  them. 

We  do  not,  however,  farther  anticipate.  The  fact  of  both 
gospels  having  been  printed,  and  styled  emphatically,  "  the 
first  print,"  is  certain ;  and  we  simply  add,  that  the  place 
where  they  were  printed,  we  have  been  led  to  believe,  must 
have  been  Hamburgh.    Of  this  there  will  be  farther  evidence. 


Were  it  now  possible  to  relate,  in  full  detail,  the  history  of 
the  printing  of  the  two  first  editions  of  our  New  Testament  in 
the  English  language,  it  would  unquestionably  form  one  of  the 


52  PROCEEDS  TO  COLOGNE.  [book  I. 

most  striking  illustrations  of  the  superintending  providence  of 
God  over  his  own  Word;  and  only  exceeded  by  its  introduction 
into  England  and  iScotland,  immediately  after  being  printed. 
The  account,  however,  even  as  far  as  it  may  be  traced,  cannot 
fail  to  interest  all  those  who  desire  to  mark  the  hand  of  the 
Supreme  Being,  in  by  far  the  greatest  gift  which  He  has  ever 
bestowed  on  Britain. 

It  has  been  usual  to  represent  the  first  edition  of  Tyndale's 
New  Testament  as  printed  at  Antwerp  in  the  year  1526,  and 
so  dismiss  the  subject.  We  shall  have  occasion  to  show  that, 
though  not  printed  under  his  eye,  this  was  the  third  edition  ; 
and  that  the  history  of  the  two  first  editions,  printed  in  1525, 
by  Tyndale  himself,  elsewhere,  has  never  yet  been  properly 
understood.  Indeed,  so  defective  have  the  statements  hither- 
to been,  that  although  M'o  editions  were  distinctly  denounced, 
both  by  the  Bishop  of  London  and  the  Archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury, in  1526;  no  one  had  thought,  till  very  lately,  of  either 
enquiring  after  the  missing  book,  or  even  allowing  the  quarto 
edition  with  glosses,  to  have  then  existed.  Every  particular 
oircum stance,  therefore,  which  can  be  properly  authenticated, 
respecting  these  two  first  productions  of  Tyndale''s  own  hand, 
the  source  of  so  many  subsequent  editions  both  abroad  and  at 
home,  ought  to  be  recorded  ;  and  more  especially,  since  so 
diligent  was  the  "secret  search"  after  them,  and  so  frequent 
the  flames  which  consumed  them,  that,  of  the  octavo  impres- 
sion, only  one  copy  of  the  sacred  text  remains  complete,  one 
other  imperfect,  and  of  the  quarto^  nothing  more  than  a  vener- 
able fragment.  This  last,  however,  happily  includes  his 
original  prologue  entire,  or  the  very  first  sheets  thrown  off  at 
the  Cologne  press. 

We  proceed,  therefore,  to  give  a  general  statement  of  the 
movements  of  Tyndale,  explaining  it  more  fully,  and  confirm- 
ing it  afterwards.  Having  left  the  place  of  his  abode,  which 
we  have  assumed  to  be  Hamburgh  ;  he  arrived  at  Cologne 
on  the  Rhine,  in  the  end  of  April  or  beginning  of  May  1525, 
perhaps  earlier,  accompanied  by  his  amanuensis  William  Roye. 
He  commenced  his  labours  by  committing  to  the  press  his 
New  Testament,  in  the  form  of  a  quarto  volume.  Not  only 
was  the  entire  sacred  text  then  translated,  but  his  prologue, 
extending  to  fourteen  pages,  was  composed  before  he  began 
to  print.     This  appears  to  be  evident,  not  merely  from  the 


1525-3  FIRST  NEW  TESTAMENT.  53 

language  of  the  prologue  itself,  but  from  its  commencing  with 
sign  A  ij,  and  the  letters  running  on  regularly  through  the 
sacred  text. 

The  printers,  however,  had  only  proceeded  as  far  as  the 
tenth  sheet,  or  letter  K,  when  an  alarm  was  raised,  the 
authorities  of  the  place  informed,  and  the  work  interdicted. 
Tyndale  and  Roye  contrived  to  secure  the  sheets  printed  off, 
and  sailing  up  the  Rhine  to  Worms,  where  much  greater 
liberty  could  at  this  time  be  enjoyed,  they  proceeded  with 
their  undertaking.  This  interruption,  though  felt  to  be  most 
grievous  at  the  moment,  as  Tyndale  afterwards  obscurely 
hinted ;  far  from  damping,  only  inflamed  his  zeal,  and  the  re- 
markable result  was,  that  two  editions  were  accomplished  by 
him,  in  the  same  period  in  which  very  probably  he  had  con- 
templated only  one.  These  statements,  however,  admit  of 
ample  confirmation,  and,  on  account  of  the  confusion  which 
has  hitherto  prevailed,  they  demand  it. 

In  the  illustration  of  historical  truth,  except  attention  be 
paid  to  all  that  the  chief  opponents  have  written,  we  must 
occasionally  be  unable  to  recount  the  facts  as  they  occurred. 
Invaluable  information  may  be  drawn  from  an  enemy,  and  if 
his  statements  can  be  authenticated,  they  often  fill  up  a  chasm, 
and  explain  matters  which  otherwise  must  have  remained  in 
oblivion.  Besides,  in  all  instances  where  an  opponent  could 
have  no  motive  to  falsify,  his  narration  of  facts  should  be  the 
more  respected.  We  have  a  striking  illustration  of  these 
remarks  now  before  us. 

Perhaps  the  most  virulent  enemy  to  the  Word  of  God  being- 
translated  into  any  vernacular  tongue,  who  ever  breathed,  was 
John  Cochlffius.  He  at  least  rose  above  all  his  contemporaries 
of  the  sixteenth  century,  and  with  an  unwearied  perseverance, 
worthy  of  a  better  cause,  he  not  only  strove  to  prevent  the 
difiusion  of  the  Scriptures,  and  longed  to  strangle  every 
attempt  at  their  translation  in  the  very  birth,  but  even  gloried 
in  his  enmity  to  all  such  proceedings. 

Boru  at  Nuremberg,  in  the  year  1479,  he  died  at  the  age  of  73,  in  January 
1552, at  Breslaw;  and  from  the  year  152'2,  in  which  lie  publislied  his  "  Invective," 
down  to  1550,  his  fertile  pen  was  perpetually  busy,  and  his  tongue  as  much  so 
as  such  unwearied  writing  would  permit.  Although  his  History  of  the  Hussites, 
and  his  Commentary  on  the  Life  and  Writings  of  Luther  were  volumes,  his  gene- 
ral mode  of  warfare  consisted  in  small  publications.  Thus,  in  1528,  1530,  1534, 
1537,  he  published  seven  each  year,  in  1544,  nine,  and  in  1539,  eleven.     In  the 


54  INTERRUPTED  BY  COCHLjEUS.  [boOK  I. 

course  of  '28  years  we  have,  on  an  average,  above  one  publication  every  three 
months.  Our  list  of  the  whole  consists  of  one  hundred  and  twenty -two,  but  there 
must  have  been  more.  During  this  long  period,  he  had  printed  against  Luther, 
and  Melancthon,  Velenus  and  Pomeranus,  Zuinglius  and  Jonas,  Tyndale  and 
Ales,  Ambrose  and  Morbanus,  Musculus  and  BuUinger,  Bucer,  and  finally, 
Calvin.  Ceasing  not  to  publish  till  he  was  past  seventy  years  of  age,  he  died 
as  he  had  lived,  a  determined  enemy  to  the  circulation  of  the  Scriptures,  the 
only  point  in  his  character  with  which  we  have  here  to  do. 

Violently  opposed,  as  it  will  appear,  to  the  people  of  Scot- 
land, as  well  as  England,  receiving  the  Word  of  Truth  in  their 
mother  tongue,  the  inhabitants  of  both  countries  may  well 
mark  the  futility  of  all  his  efforts  ;  and  the  more  so,  as  we  are 
indebted  to  this  opponent  for  statements,  curious  and  minute, 
of  the  accuracy  of  which  there  will  be  no  reason  to  doubt, 
before  we  come  to  the  close  of  this  narrative. 

Certainly,  at  the  moment,  nothing  must  have  been  more 
lamented,  than  that  the  most  inveterate  living  opponent  on 
the  Continent  should  come,  nay,  be  driven  into  Cologne,  soon 
after  Tyndale  had  commenced  at  press  !  How  much  more  so, 
when  it  turned  out  that  Cochlseus  was  shut  up  to  the  necessity 
of  remaining  there  throughout  the  rest  of  the  year  1525  ! 
Such,  however,  was  the  fact;  but  what  was  the  result?  Why 
that,  whether  we  ascribe  it  to  his  opposition  or  not,  there  were, 
as  already  stated,  two  editions  of  the  New  Testament  printed, 
instead  of  one. 

According  to  Coclilseus,  the  "  two  English  apostates,"  as 
he  styles  Tyndale  and  Roye,  first  contemplated  an  edition  of 
six  thousand  copies,  but  for  prudential  reasons,  they  began 
with  three  thousand.  He  tells  us,  that  Pomeranus  had 
already  sent  forward  his  letter  to  the  saints  in  England,  and 
that  Luther  himself  had  written  his  conciliatory  letter  to 
Henry  VIII.  Now  this  letter,  we  know,  was  dated  the  1st 
of  September  1525.  He  then  adds,  that  it  had  been  antici- 
pated, this  English  New  Testament  in  quarto,  would  soon 
follow ;  but  that  the  Lutherans,  overjoyed,  broke  the  secret  be- 
fore the  time  :  or  in  other  words,  he  himself  ferreted  out  the 
secret,  as  will  be  seen  by  his  own  confession.  We  have  only, 
therefore,  to  verify  the  residence  and  occupation  of  this  oppon- 
ent during  1525  and  1526,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  precise 
period  to  which  his  account  refers.  During  the  year  1525, 
Cochlffius  was  actually  resident  in  Cologne,  but  not  in  1526. 
While   there,    he  was   as  usual,  busily  occupied  in  writing 


1525.]  INTERRUPTED  BY  COCHLjEUS.  55 

against  Melaucthon,  Volenus,  and  Luther,  as  well  as  in 
searching  after  the  writings  of  Rupert,  an  Abbot,  formerly  in 
the  Monastery  of  Deutz,  immediately  opposite  to  Cologne. 
This  Abbot,  who  flourished  four  hundred  years  before,  had 
written  certain  commentaries  on  the  Scriptures,  besides  seve- 
ral other  pieces ;  and  as  some  of  his  sentiments  were  thought 
to  be  favourable  to  the  cause  of  divine  truth,  its  friends  were 
eager  to  procure  any  of  his  works,  and  publish  such  of  them, 
with  notes,  as  might  at  once  serve  their  cause,  and  prove  that 
their  doctrines  were  not  so  new  as  their  opponents  represent- 
ed. One  of  his  little  pieces,  "  Of  the  Victory  of  the  Word  of 
God,"  had  been  already  printed,  with  annotations  by  Osiander 
of  Nuremberg,  and  the  Lutherans  were  actually  in  treaty  with 
the  then  Abbot  of  Deutz,  expecting  from  him  other  works  of 
Rupert,  intending  to  convey  them  for  examination  to  Nurem- 
berg. Oochlseus  interposed,  alarmed  the  Abbot,  and,  lest  the 
notes  and  prologues  of  his  opponents  should  make  Rupert 
appear  in  favour  of  their  doctrine,  contrived  himself  to  gain 
possession  of  the  whole.  He  had  then  to  engage  parties  will- 
ing to  publish,  and  though  he  found  considerable  difficulty,  at 
last  he  prevailed  on  Peter  Quentel,  and  Arnold  Byrckman, 
well  known  printers  of  the  place. 

Now  it  was  while  thus  engaged  at  Cologne,  in  1525,  that 
Cochlseus  discovered  this  first  impression  of  the  English  New 
Testament,  proceeding  briskly,  as  he  says,  or  swiftly  at  the 
press ;  yet,  with  such  caution  had  both  Tyndale  and  Roye 
conducted  themselves,  that,  although  Cochlseus  succeeded  in 
stopping  the  press,  he  was  never  able  to  meet  either  the  one 
or  the  other  ;  a  striking  proof,  by  the  way,  of  their  intimate 
acquaintance  with  his  character. 

On  making  the  discovery,  Cochlseus  says  that  he  was  agitat- 
ed by  fear  as  well  as  wonder  and  surprise ;  but  why  so  ? 
Let  it  be  observed,  that,  in  connexion  with  his  proposed  pub- 
lication of  Rupert's  works,  his  situation  was  a  very  critical 
one.  Before  his  arrival,  Tyndale  was  going  on  at  the  press, 
and  if  it  shall  turn  out  that  Byrckman,  as  well  as  his  brother, 
and  Quentel  were  at  all  concerned  in  kis  progress,  though  merely 
in  the  way  of  business,  what  is  Cochlteus  to  do  ;  or  how  is  he 
to  proceed  ?  As  for  Francis  Byrckman,  we  know,  that,  as  a 
bookseller,  he  had  connexions  with  Quentel,  and  also  with 
England.     Indeed,  for  such  an  early  period,  he  had  an  cxten- 


56  INTERRUPTED  BY  COCHLvEUS.  [book  I. 

sive  business,  having  a  warehouse  not  only  in  Paris  but  in 
London  ;  his  shop  was  then,  and  for  ten  years  before  this, 
"  in  cemiterio  Saucti  Pauli,""  in  St.  PauPs  Cliurch  Yard.^ 
But,  besides,  we  shall  present  the  strongest  presumptive,  if 
not  positive  evidence,  that  Qiientel  was  the  printer.  If,  there- 
fore, Cochlseus  now  aimed  at  the  interruption  or  suppression 
of  a  work  in  the  English  tongue,  to  the  printer  a  foreign 
one,  and  already  so  far  advanced  at  press  ;  Cochlseus  being 
not  even  a  citizen  of  Cologne,  but  only  an  exile,  and  but  re- 
cently arrived,  his  circumstances  were  embarrassing,  and  most 
probably,  he  had  a  very  difficult  game  to  play. 

Be  this,  however,  as  it  may,  Cochhisus  succeeded  dexterous- 
ly. Not  appearing  himself,  he  secretly  secured  the  ear  of  the 
well  known  Herman  Rincke  or  Ringe,  and  this  was  all-suffici- 
ent. Possessed  both  of  a  civil  and  a  military  capacity,  his 
authority  in  Cologne  was  great ;  and  besides  it  was  but  the 
revival  of  his  intercourse  with  a  court,  which  he  had  visited 
so  long  ago  as  1502,  when  Wolsey  was  nothing  more  than 
the  Rector  of  Lymington.^ 

Now,  as  we  shall  find  that  Cochljeus,  as  well  as  Rincke,  alarm- 
ed by  letter  Henry  VIII., theCardinal, and  Fisher  the  Bishopof 
Rochester,  their  eye  must  have  been  effectually  if  not  intensely 
fixed,  at  the  moment,  on  this  edition.  Yet  the  graphical  and 
minute  account  of  CochljEus,  has  never  been  given  complete 
by  any  English  author.  We  shall,  therefore,  first  present  it, 
entire,  and  then  corroborate  it,  particularly  as  to  the  time,  or 
year,  of  which  he  speaks. 

"  Two  English  apostates,  who  had  been  sometime  at  Wittenberg,  sought 
not  only  to  subvert  their  own  merchants,  (who  secretly  favoured  and  supported 
them  in  their  exile,)  but  even  hoped  that,  whether  the  king  would  or  not,  all 
the  peojjle  of  England  would  in  a  short  time  become  Luthei-ans,  by  means  of  the 
New  Testament  of  Luther,  which  they  had  translated  into  the  English  language. 
They  had  already  come  to  Cologne,  that  thence  they  might  convoy,  secretly, 
imdor  cover  of  other  goods  to  England,  the  Testament  so  translated,  and  multi- 
plied by  printers  into  many  thousands.  For  they  had  so  much  confidence  of 
managing  the  business  well,  that,  at  the  first  onset,  they  asked  fi'om  the  pruiters 


6  There  were  three  of  this  name  in  succession,  Francis,  Arnold,  and  John.  The  two  last  were 
printers  at  Cologne  as  well.     We  allude  to  the  first  as  a  bookseller. 

7  Kincke  had  been  sent  in  1502  by  the  Emperor  Maximilian  to  Henry  VII.,  on  an  important 
embassy,  in  reference  to  commercial  intercourse  between  Germany  and  England.  lie  was  the 
very  best  man  for  inomoting  the  nefarious  design  of  Cochla>us  ;  and,  it  deserves  notice,  that  im- 
mediately after //((iiperiod  he  becomes  the  confidential  correspondent  both  of  Henry  Vlll.  and 
(■I  Cardinal  Wolsey.  Hence  we  have  letters  to  both  parties  in  the  Museum,  to  which  emphatic 
leteieiice  will  be  made  under  the  vear  1521',  and  t\cii  laler. 


1525.2  INTERRUPTED  BY  COCHLiEUS.  5? 

six  thousand  to  be  given  from  the  press.  But  fearing  lest  they  should  meet 
with  a  very  heavy  loss,  if  any  thing  happened  unfortunately,  they  only  put  three 
thousand  to  the  press  ;  which,  if  they  should  happily  l)c  sold,  could  with  ease 
be  printed  anew.  Already  Ponieranus  had  sent  forward  letters  to  the  saints 
who  arc  in  England,"  and  Luther  himself  had  also  written  to  the  King.  And 
when  it  was  believed  that  the  New  Testament  was  about  to  follow  bj-  and  bye, 
so  great  joy  from  that  hope  seized  the  Lutherans,  and  inflated  them  with  the 
wind  of  vain  confidence,  that,  filled  with  delight,  they,  with  their  vain  boasting, 
broke  the  secret  before  its  time. 

"  At  that  time  John  Cochlteus,  Deacon  of  the  Church  of  the  Blessed  Virgin 
of  Frankfort,  lived  as  an  exile,  at  Cologne,  who,  by  his  host  George  Laver, 
Canon  to  the  Apostles,  intimately  acquainted  with  the  Abbot  of  Deutz,  when 
he  heard  that  certain  works  of  Rupert,  formerly  an  Abbot  of  that  Abbey,** 
were  to  be  sent  to  Nuremberg,  that  they  might  be  published  by  the  Lutherans, 
he  began,  with  the  greatest  eagerness,  both  to  dissuade  from,  and  to  hinder  that 
business.  For  the  Lutherans,  even  to  that  day,  after  they  had  diligently  search- 
ed and  turned  over  all  the  ancient  Libraries,  could  find  no  author  of  all  the 
Doctoi"s  of  the  Chui-ch  for  so  many  ages,  who  could  have  approved  of  the  doc- 
trines of  Luther.  At  last  a  little  work  of  that  Rupert,  who  had  lived  400  years 
before,  was  found. l"  The  title  of  it  was,  '  of  the  Victory  of  the  Word  of  God.' 
And  it  was  forthwith  published  by  the  Lutherans ;  because,  by  its  title,  it  so 
directly  pleased  all,  that  nothing  more  desirable  could  be  seen  than  that  author. 
In  the  meantime,  they  understood  from  Trithemius,  that  he  had  written  many 
little  pieces,  but  they  had  found  only  two  ;  of  which  one  was  inscribed  '  of  the 
power,'  the  other  'of  the  providence'  of  God.  In  their  edition,  Osiander,  a 
man-ied  priest  and  preacher,  applied  many  things  after  the  manner  of  Luther, 
by  which  he  attempted  to  make  the  pious  author  the  patron  of  that  infamous 
sect ;  and  now  they  were  treating  with  the  Abbot  of  Deutz  himself,  that  he 
might  send  the  rest  of  the  works  of  Rupert  to  Nuremberg,  to  be  printed.  He, 
however,  as  soon  as  he  heard  from  Cochlteus  what  great  danger  there  would 
be  in  that  matter,  if  he  delivered  the  pious  author  into  the  hands  of  the  impious, 
who  were  about,  not  only  to  basely  contaminate  him  by  impious  prefaces  and 
annotations,  but  even  to  pervert  his  upright  and  sound  opinions ;  and  of  an 
ancient  catholic  were  about  to  make  a  new  heretic,  who,  four  hundred  years 
before,  should  seem  to  have  approved  of  all  the  dogmas  of  Luther.  The  x\bbot, 
therefore,  good  man,  having  changed  his  opinion,  kept  by  himself  the  volumes, 
already  packed  up  into  a  lai'ge  bundle,  ready  to  be  conveyed  to  Nui'emberg. 
In  this  bundle  there  were  fourteen  books  on  the  Gospel  of  John,  twelve  on  the 
Revelations,  and  twelve  books  '  De  divinis  Officiis.' 

"  When,  however,  the  monks  were  not  to  be  at  rest,  unless  they  published 
these  works,  Cochlajus  earnestly  entreated  Peter  Quentcl  and  Arnold  Byrckman 
that  they  should,  on  their  joint  expense  and  pi-ofit,  undertake  their  publication  ; 
notwithstanding,  he  could  not  persuade  them,  till  at  length  he  had  promised 
them,  to  that  edition,  all  his  own  labour.  When  that  became  sufficiently  pro- 
fitable to  them,  they  no  more  recjuired  Cochlajus  to  urge  them,  but  themselves, 
of  their  own  accord,  sought  out  more  of  his  small  works,  renuesting  now  the 


8  "  Epistola  ad  Aiialos,"  1525.  Rcpiinttd  in  English,  loSG  ;  iieiies  me,  from  Hebcr.  Herberts 
Ames,  p.  154(j. 

9  Dfutz  Benedictine  Abbey,  connected  with  Cologne  by  a  bridge  of  boats. 

10  Rupert,  a  native  of  Ipres,  died  in  Feb.  1135,  aged  44.  His  works  full  of  roystieisni,  were  not 
only  now  printed  at  Cologne,  but  in  IB.'iS,  at  Paris  iu  2  volumes,  and  at  Venice,  1748-1752,  in  4 
vols,  folio.  — LVWfyc'<((. 


58  COCHLiEUS  SOUNDS  THE  ALARM  [bOOK  I, 

Abbot,  and  then  Cochlteus,  that  they  might  search  for  more  of  them  in  any 
quartei".  The  Abbot,  therefore,  thus  excited,  diUgently  searclied  out  of  the 
old  monasteries  of  St.  Benedict,  thirty- two  books  on  the  twelve  minor  Prophets, 
and  seven  on  the  Song  of  Solomon.  Cochlseus  found  at  Cologne,  in  the  Library 
of  the  Greater  Church,  nine  books  concerning  the  Glorification  of  the  Trinity, 
and  the  procession  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  in  the  School  of  Arts,  a  large  volume 
on  the  works  of  the  Trinity.  When,  however,  he  learnt  that  Rupert  was 
formerly  a  Monk  of  St.  Laurence  at  Leige,  he  wrote  to  Theodoric  Hezius,  a 
Canon  of  Leige,  whom  he  had  known  intimately  at  Rome,  after  the  death  of 
Adrian  VL,  (Sep.  1523,)  whose  private  secretai'y  he  had  been,  entreating  that 
he  would  search  out  in  that  monastery  whatever  remained  of  the  books  of 
Rupert.  He  found,  therefore,  a  work  greatly  esteemed — thirteen  books  on 
Matthew, '  of  the  gloi'y  and  honour  of  the  Son  of  Man.'  He  could  not,  however, 
send  the  original  to  Cologne,  except  he,  with  two  other  Canons,  wotild  j^ledge  in 
security  to  the  monks  all  their  goods,  for  the  restoration  of  the  copy  ! 

"  All  these  volumes,  therefore,  Cochlseus,  hei)i(/  called  away  to  Mentz,  carried 
with  him,  and  while  residing  there  prepared  them  for  publication,  and  sent  them 
back,  to  be  published  at  Cologne. "il 

Three  volumes  in  folio  were  accordingly  published  at  Cologne,  but  every  one 
of  them  in  the  year  1526.  Cochlseus,  however,  must  still  relate  more  cu'cum- 
stantially  what  had  occurred  in  the  previous  year,  when  he  was  an  exile  at  Cologne. 

"  Having  thus  become  more  intimate  and  familiar  with  the  Cologne  printers, 
he  sometimes  heard  them  confidently  boast,  when  in  their  cups,  that  whether 
the  King  and  Cardinal  of  England  would  or  not,  all  England  would  in  short 
time  be  Lutheran.  He  heard  also  that  there  were  two  Englishmen  Im'king 
there,  learned,  skilful  in  languages,  and  fluent,  whom,  however,  he  necer  could 
see  or  conterse  with.  Calling,  therefore,  certain  printers  into  his  lodging,  after 
they  were  heated  with  ^vine,  one  of  them,  in  more  private  discourse,  discovered 
to  him  the  secret  by  which  England  was  to  be  drawn  over  to  the  side  of  Luther 
—namely,  That  three  thousand  copies  of  tlie  Lutheran  New  Testament,  trans- 
lated into  the  English  language,  were  in  the  press,  and  already  were  advanced 
as  far  as  the  letter  K,  in  ord'ine  quaternlonem.  That  the  expenses  were  fully 
supplied  by  English  merchants ;  who  were  secretly  to  convey  the  work  when 
printed,  and  to  disperse  it  widely  through  all  England,  before  the  King  or  the 
Cardinal  could  discover  or  prohibit  it. 

"  Cochlseus  being  inwardly  affected  by  fear  and  wonder,  disguised  his  grief, 
under  the  appeai'auce  of  admiration.  But  another  day,  considering  with  him- 
self the  magnitude  of  the  grievous  danger,  he  cast  in  mind  by  what  method 
he  might  expeditiously  obstruct  these  very  wicked  attempts.  He  went,  there- 
fore, secretly,  to  Herman  Rinck,  a  patrician  of  Cologne  and  Military  Knight, 
familiar  both  with  the  Emperor  and  the  King  of  England,  and  a  Counsellor, 
and  disclosed  to  him  the  whole  affiiir,  as,  by  means  of  the  ivine,  he  had  received 
it.  He,  that  he  might  ascertain  all  things  more  certainly,  sent  another  person 
into  the  house  where  the  work  was  printing,  according  to  the  discovery  of 
Cochlseus ;  and  when  he  had  understood  from  him  that  the  matter  was  even 
so,  and  that  there  was  great  abundance  of  paper  there,  he  went  to  the  Senate, 
and  so  brought  it  about  that  the  printer  was  interdicted  from  proceeding  farther 


11  This  work  on  Matthew  last  mentioned  was  accordingly  _^Kt*74ed  at  press,  12tli  June  1526. 
That  on  John  and  the  Revelations  followed  in  the  same  year  ;  the  smaller  work  "De  div.  officiis," 
came  out  in  March  1527. — Panzer.  To  each  is  attached  the  name  of  Francis  Birckman,  a  proof 
that  he  was  deeply  concerned.  To  the  first  and  the  last  of  these  books  we  shall  have  to  make 
some  reference  presently. 


1.525.3  '^^  ^^^  ENGLAND.  59 

in  tliat  work.  The  two  English  apostates,  snatching  away  with  them  the  quarto 
sheets  2}riHted,  fled  by  ship,  going  up  the  Rhine  to  Worms,  where  the  people 
were  under  the  full  rage  of  Lutheranism,  that  there,  by  another  printer,  they 
might  complete  the  work  begun.  Rinck  and  Cochlseus,  however,  immediately 
advised  by  their  letters  the  King,  the  Cardinal,  and  the  Bishop  of  Rochester, 
that  they  might,  with  the  greatest  diligence,  take  care  lest  that  most  pernicious 
article  of  merchandise  should  be  conveyed  into  all  the  ports  of  England.''^^ 

Although  this  arch-enemy  had  never  written  another  word, 
there  can  be  no  question  as  to  the  period  of  this  vexatious 
interruption.  He  has  fixed  it  himself,  by  telling  us,  he  was 
then  an  exile  at  Cologne.  In  1523,  Oochlaeus  was  at  Rome, 
in  1524  he  was  at  Frankfort  and  Mentz,  and,  driven  from 
both,  he  fled  for  refuge  to  Cologne  in  1525.  There  he  re- 
mained stationary  till  the  beginning  of  1526,  when,  recalled 
to  Mentz,  he  went  in  June  to  the  Diet  of  Spire,  and  remained 
till  August.  Returning  to  Mentz,  he  paid  a  transient  visit 
to  Cologne  in  1527,  but  not  as  an  exile.  "  In  1525,"  says 
Dupin,  "  Cochloeus,  who  had  been  obliged  to  quit  first  Frank- 
fort and  then  Mentz,  because  of  the  popular  seditions  of  the 
cities,  was  at  Cologne,  where  Eckius  going  into  England,  had 
an  interview  with  liim."^^  Yes,  and  Eckius  not  only  went, 
but  would  no  doubt  enforce  all  that  both  Rincke  and  Coch- 
Ifeus  had  written.'^ 

Now,  with  regard  to  the  interruption  itself,  the  usual  mis- 
representations, of  Tyndale  translating  from  Luther  s  Testa- 
ment, and  at  Wittenberg,  being  once  deducted ;  we  have  here 
a  very  distinct  testimony  as  to  the  secrecy  and  prudence  Avith 
which  Tyndale  had  conducted  himself,  and,  moreover,  a  frank 
confession  from  Cochlseus.  He  was  bent  on  crushing  the 
work,  and  then  all  methods  were  fair.  He  intoxicates  the 
workmen,  and  gains  his  purpose  ;  a  method  in  perfect  keeping 
with  his  character,  and  in  1549,  or  twenty-four  years  after- 
wards, he  was  not  ashamed  to  make  the  avowal  ! 


12  Cochlaeus,  Com.  de  actis  et  scriptis  Martini  Lutheri  -Moguntium,  1549.  Or  Colonia  1568, 
pp.  153-15C.  CochlEeus  says  they  wrote  immediatdii,  though,  writing  from  memory,  he  had 
affirmed  that  Luther  had  already  sent  his  letter  to  Henry.  But  as  it  was  dated  1st  September, 
there  seems  to  have  been  some  little  delay  in  writing.  Be  this,  however,  as  it  may,  the  letter  of 
Luther,  we  shall  find  presently,  did  not  reach  Henry's  eye  till  ifix  months  after  its  date ! 

13  See  the  Nouvelle  Bibl.  of  Dupin,  1703,  vol.  xiv.  p.  185. 

1*  He  had  returned  from  England  after  the  departure  of  Cochlseus  to  Mentz,  and  was  publish- 
ing "De  Sacraficio  Missce.  Colonia  J.  Soter,  1526.  The  truth  is,  that,  in  1524  and  1525,  Lutheran- 
ism increasing,  established  itself  in  many  cities.  Thus  at  Frankfort,  the  people  rising,  dismissed 
the  two  Deacons  of  the  principal  churches,  viz.  Martorff  and  Coclilceiis  ;  broke  up  the  Monas- 
tery, and  remodelled  the  government  of  the  town.  The  same  cause  obliged  him  to  quit  Mentz, 
and  this  was  the  reason  of  his  being  an  unwilling  exileai  Cologne  in  1525,  for  at  least  nine  months. 


60  THE  KING  AND  OTHERS  INFORMED.  [booK  I. 

We  Hud,  however,  also  from  himself,  that  throughout  the 
whole  of  this  business  it  was  not  blind  zeal  only  by  which  he 
was  actuated.  He  had  not  only  notoriety,  but  gain  in  view, 
and  we  shall  see  him  sadly  mortified  in  obtaining  neither. 
Meanwhile,  no  means  are  left  untried  to  procure  distinction, 
and,  if  possible,  some  money  from  England ;  as  well  as  to 
secure  friends  at  Cologne,  after  what  he  had  done.  He, 
therefore  immediately  employs  Quentel  himself,  but  in  very 
different  work.^^  In  1526,  though  not  at  Cologne,  he  is 
writing  to  Rincke,  and  following  up  his  letters  to  England 
by  a  present  to  the  same  parties  to  whom  he  had  formerly 
written,  and  through  the  same  medium.  — "  The  said  Sir 
Herman  llynge  shewed  me  a  letter  that  he  had  received  from 
one  Doctor  Johannes  Oocleus,  containing  only  the  overthrow, 
without  any  mention  of  the  King,  and  those  of  Vienna  in 
Austria  be  greatly  afraid.  Also  he  shewed  me  to  have  re- 
ceived three  Books  from  the  said  Doctor,  the  one  for  the  King's 
Highness,  the  other  for  your  Grace,  and  the  third  for  my 
Lord  of  Rochester.'" ^"^  In  1527,  Cochheus  was  publishing- 
Luther's  letter  to  Henry  VIII.,  with  the  King's  Reply,  and 
his  own  virulent  comments,  intended  as  a  compliment  to  the 
English  Monarch,  and  then,  also,  he  must  flatter  both  Birck- 
man  and  Rincke.'^  But  all  was  in  vain.  Henry  VIII. 
communicated  only  with  Rincke,  and  never  even  answered 
Cochla^us,  or  sent  him  any  reward ;  a  mortification  which  he 
felt  the  more,  as  he  ever  afterwards  regarded  his  interruption 
of  Tyndale,  to  be  one  of  his  most  notable  and  praiseworthy 
exploits.     Again  and  again  did  he  refer  to  it  in  future  life. 


15  J.  CocIiIecus  adversum  Lutherum.  Colon'ice  Pdr.  Quentel,  1525.  See  K loss's  Catalogue  of 
Melancthou's  Books  and  MS.,  No.  2356.     Sold  by  auction  in  London,  May  li!,'i5. 

16  MS.  Cotton,  Vitcll.  B.  x.xi.  1(>,  b.  Sir  Jo.  Wallop  to  Wolscy,  ;i(tth  Sep.  1.526.  Sir  John, 
our  ambassador  to  France,  though  travelling,  was  this  year  resident  at  Cologne  for  some  time  ; 
at  least  his  letters  onward  to  3(lth  Nov.  arc  dated  from  thence.  The  first  allusion  of  Cochlieus 
is  to  the  progress  of  the  Grand  Turk  in  Europe,  and  the  consequent  overthrow  of  Hungary,  her 
King  being  drowned  in  his  flight  from  the  field.  The  three  huuks  were  most  ]irobably  the  Reply 
of  Cochlaeus  to  Pomeranus.  His  "  Epistle  to  the  faithful  in  England"  having  been  sent  over  iu 
1.52.';,  CochUcus  ])ublished  his  rcjily  in  1526.     Another  book  he  sent  to  the  King  in  1527. 

■  7  He  dedicates  this  thing  from  Mentz,  1st  March,  to  the  famous  bookseller,  Fr.  Birkmanu,  a 
citizen  of  Cologne — "  Seeing  that  you  are  a  Bookseller,  very  well  known  both  in  England  and 
Franco,  and  have  warehouses  well  furnished  every  where  by  the  Catholic  Doctors  of  the  Church, 
out  of  which,  as  from  fortified  arsenals,  you  conveniently  furnish  aims  to  those  who  arc  inclined 
to  fight  against  this  most  hideous  sect,  1  thought  these  things  ought  to  be  especially  sent  to  you  ; 
and  they  will  be  able  more  and  more  to  commend  the  Roi/id  Kpistle.  of  which  you  are  so  diligent 
a  publisher."  He  must  dedicate  this  also  to  Rincke,  styling  him  the  "  most  prudent  Councillor 
of  the  greatest  Sovereigns  ;"  and  finally  he  iiasses  down  to  Cologne  in  March,  and  dates  it  "  at 
tlie  house  of  tlio  honourable  citizen  I'eter  Quentell." — See  his  Kpistola  Slarlini  Ltitlari  ad 
II.  fill.,  iVc.  1.527. 


1525.]  THE  KING  AND  OTHERS  INFORMED. 


Gl 


for  which  wc  are  the  more  obliged  to  liini,  as  every  fresli  al- 
hisioii  only  corroborates  or  explains  the  movements  of  our 
Translator  of  the  Scriptures.  Whether  ho  be  writing  to 
Scotland,  England,  or  even  Poland,  Cochloeus  cannot  omit 
mention  of  the  subject. 

Thus,  in  writing  to  Scotland  on  the  8th  of  June,  1 533,  it 
is  his  boast,  that  he  had  eight  years  acfo  thus  interrupted  the 
printing  of  the  Scriptures,  which  had  been  commenced  by  an 
impression  of  three  thousand  copies,  after  the  ii'ar  of  the  pea- 
sants. By  this  expression  he  intends  to  mark  either  the  be- 
ginning of  May  1525,  when  the  great  battle  with  Muncer 
was  fought,  or  it  may  be  a  little  earlier,  when  the  commotion 
at  Cologne  in  particular  had  been  suppressed.'" 

The  allusion,  however,  to  his  interruption  of  Tyndale,  which 
must  have  been  most  mortifying  to  the  pride  of  Cochlieus,  was 
that  to  which  he  was  provoked  by  severe  chastisement,  in  ]  588. 
Cochlffius  before  then  had,  of  course,  chancied  his  opinion  of 
Henry  VIII,,  and  more  especially  since  he  had  neglected 
him.  Sir  Richard  Morysin,  one  of  our  ambassadors,  having 
in  his  "  Apomaxis,"  posted  Cochlffius  in  his  title  page,  as  "  a 
petty  professor  of  arts,  bold  in  sarcasm,  who  had  attempted 
to  attack  the  reputation  of  Henry  the  Eighth,"'^  Cochla?us 
then  published  his  "  Broom  of  Cochlwus,  versus,  the  coh-icehs  of 
Morysin  ;"-"  in  which  we  have  the  following  rejoinder. 

"  But,  Morysin,  I  was  not  slow  to  praise  your  King,  when  he  did  things  that 
were  worthy  of  praise  ;  and  I  could  immediately  write  against  him  a  charge  of 
ingratitude,  much  more  justly  than  you  can  against  our  excellent  Emperor  and 
most  sacred  Prince.  For  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  mdxxv.  when  I  was  poor,  and 
by  the  seditions  of  the  people  and  tumult  of  the  rustics  settled  an  exile  of  Cologne, 
not  only  did  I  discover  to  him,  by  a  private  epistle,  the  secret  wicked  machina- 
tions of  two  Englishmen  against  his  kingdom,  by  whom  the  New  Testament  (of 
Luther)  translated  into  the  English  language,  was  printed  at  Cologne,  that  it 
might  be  transmitted  secretly,  in  many  thousands  into  England :  But  I  also 
forthwith,  in  the  next  year,  publicly  dedicated  to  him  xii.  Books  of  Rupert  of 
Deutz,  on  the  Apocalypse  of  John,2i  and  I  sent  him,  as  a  present,  a  book,  well 


18  See  "  An  expediat  Laicis,  legere  Novi  Testamenti  libros  lingua  vernacula?  anno  1533," 
which  will  be  more  particularly  noticed  when  we  come  to  treat  of  Scotland.  Eight  years  ago 
was  June  1525. 

19  Apomaxis  Calvmniarvm— Authors  Ricardo  Morysino — Londini— Bertbeleti— an.  1538;  de- 
dicated to  CrannKr  12.  Calendis  Julii— 21  July  1538.  Tanner  and  Wood  assign  1537  as  the  year, 
and  so  does  Ames,  who  supposed  the  dedication  was  to  Crumwell ;  but  the  above  date  and 
dedication  are  on  the  book  itself. 

20  "  Scopa  Joannis  Cochlaei  Gcrmani,  in  Arancas  Ricardi  Morysini  Angli."  Lips.  1538  raense 
Martio  i.  e.  1539. 

21  Ruperti— in  Apoc.  Johannis — nunc  primum  impansis — Franc.  Birckmann— anno  152(j. 


62  FIRST  NEW  TESTAMENT  [boOK  I. 

bound,  consisting  of  the  greater  part  of  the  small  works  of  the  said  Rupert.22 
But,  notwithstanding  all  these  things,  he  still  remained  silent,  and  took  no  notice 
of  me,  altogether  unmindful  of  my  poverty  and  exile,  although  at  that  time  he 
was  a  most  determined  enemy  and  opposer  of  the  Lutheran  sect.  So,  then, 
even  in  his  own  estimation,  he  was  indebted  to  me,  for  that  discovery  of  mine, 
concerning  the  two  Englishmen,  plotting  wickedly  against  the  peace  of  his 
kingdom,  not  less  than  Ahasuerus  was  indebted  to  Mordecai,  for  the  discovery, 
which,  through  Esther,  he  unbosomed  to  the  King,  when  in  jeopardy  from 
his  two  eunuchs." 

The  evidence  thus  presented  by  Cochlgeus,  at  successive 
periods,  has  never  before  been  submitted  to  the  English 
reader.  Tliat  statements,  so  graphically  minute,  as  to  carry 
evidence  of  their  correctness  ;  so  pointed  as  to  the  year  and 
place  of  printing,  and  in  perfect  harmony  with  each  other ; 
should  have  been  disregarded  for  three  centuries,  only  shows 
how  little  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  subject :  but  this 
becomes  the  more  observable,  when  the  first  denunciations  of 
"  the  New  Testament  in  our  English  tongue,"  by  the  official 
authorities  next  year,  had  expressly  affirmed,  "  of  which  trans- 
lation there  are  many  books  printed,  some  with  glosses,  and 
some  without.''''  Instead  of  enquiring  after  these  Testaments 
vjith  glosses,  or  at  least  admitting  their  existence,  all  parties 
have  been  satisfied  with  having  it  erroneously  stated,  that 
there  had  been  but  one  edition,  and  that  said  to  be  printed  at 
Antwerp  in  1526,  or  the  same  year  in  which  it  was  denounced  ! 

To  some  persons,  no  doubt,  this  long  detail  must  have  ap- 
peared to  be  altogether  unnecessary,  and  to  others  tedious ; 
though  should  it  now  be  enquired  what  has  given  birth  to  it, 
every  reader  will  be  pleased  to  learn,  that  it  is  not  merely  the 
confusion  that  has  prevailed  hitherto ;  but  nothing  less  than 
the  recovery  from  oblivion  of  Tyndale's  first  pages  at  the 
Cologne  press,  after  the  lapse  of  tliree  hundred  and  ten  years — 
a  fragment  of  the  very  book  which  was  thus  interrupted  in  its 
progress,  by  Cochlseus,  and,  of  course,  the  only  remnant 
known  to  be  in  existence  ! 

The  history  of  the  discovery  is  not  the  least  curious  part  of  our  narrative. 
Mr.  Thomas  Rodd,  of  Great  Newport  Street,  a  respectable  bookseller  in  Lou- 


22  "  Ruperti  de  divinis  officiis."  The  dedication  to  Herman  Aiehbishop  of  Cologne,  who 
afterwards  renounced  the  authority  of  the  Pope,  is  dated  3d  idus  Martias  1526,  ('.  e.  13th  March 
1527.  Thus  CochliEiis  writes  to  Henry  in  ITiiS,  dedicates  a  folio  to  him  in  l.'>2(;,  and  transmits  a 
book  through  Herman  Rinck  as  already  noted,  and,  as  a.  fittal  attempt,  sends  him.  in  1527,  this 
work  of  Rupert.  He  succeeded,  unfortunately,  as  we  shall  see,  far  better  with  James  V.  of 
Scotland  than  with  Henry  VIII. 


1525.]  BUT   LATELY   DISCOVERED.  63 

don,  having  exchanged  with  a  friend,  wlio  did  not  recollect  how  he  came  by  it, 
a  quarto  tract  by  CEcolampadius,  without  any  covering,  there  was  attached  to 
it  by  binding  a  portion  in  the  English  language,  black  letter  ;  and  though  it  was 
evidently  the  gospel  of  Matthew,  with  "  the  pro/otjgc  "  of  fourteen  pages  preced- 
ing, neither  Mr.  Rodd  nor  his  friend  understood,  at  the  time,  what  it  actually 
was.  By  degrees,  however,  this  was  at  last  fully  ascertained.  "  The  acciden- 
tal discovery,"  says  Mr.  R.,  "  of  the  remarkable  initial  letter  Y.,  with  which 
this  page,  the  fii'st  of  the  prologue,  is  decorated,  in  another  book  printed  at 
Cologne  in  1 534,  first  led  me  to  search  other  books  printed  at  the  same  place, 
and  I  succeeded  in  finding  every  cut  and  letter,  with  the  exception  of  one,  in 
other  books  from  the  same  printing  office,  that  of  Peter  Quentel."  Again,  "  I 
have  found  the  type  in  which  this  portion  of  the  New  Testament  is  printed, 
and  the  cuts  with  which  it  is  decorated,  used  in  other  books  printed  at  Cologne 
from  the  year  1521  to  1540,  a  good  proof  that  the  book  was  commenced  in  that 
city."23  But,  again,  in  the  celebrated  poetical  satire  on  Cardinal  Wolsey, "  Rede 
me  and  be  not  wroth,"  which  was  afterwards  published  by  William  Roye, 
and  after  his  departure  from  Worms,  there  is  an  allusion  to  a  sentiment  of 
Tyndale,  the  echo  to  v;hich  is  onli/  to  be  found  in  this  prologue.  The  fact  is,  that 
though  the  tract  entitled  "  a  pathway  unto  the  Holy  Scriptures"  contains  the 
most  of  it,  the  prologue  was  never  printed  entire  in  any  subsequent  edition,  nor, 
above  all,  its  important  and  beautiful  introduction,  which  we  shall  give  presently. 
Independently,  however,  of  these  proofs,  there  is  incontrovertible  evidence 
presented  to  the  eye.  The  first  page  of  the  sacred  text  is  preceded  by  a  large 
spirited  cut  of  the  Evangelist  Matthew,  at  his  work,  dipping  his  pen  into  the 
inkstand,  held  to  him  by  an  angel ;  and  it  is  curious  enough,  that  by  this  speci- 
men, though  the  title  page  be  wanting,  wo  are  able  to  prove,  not  only  that  the 
printer  was  Peter  Quentel,  but  that  the  year  of  printing  was  1525.  The  mys- 
tical folios  of  Rupert  have  been  already  noticed.  His  commentary  on  Matthew, 
sent  from  Leige  to  Cologne,  a  closely-printed  folio  volume,  was  finished  at  Quen- 
tel's  press,  so  early  as  the  12th  of  June  152G.  Now,  as  far  back  as  the  begin- 
ning of  this  folio,  or  page  second,  we  have  the  identical  large  woodcut  of 
Matthew,  which  had  been  used  to  adorn  the  preceding  New  Testament ;  hut 
before  being  employed  in  the  work  of  Rupert,  better  to  fit  the  page,  the  block 
had  been  pared  down  so  as  to  deprive  it  of  the  pillar  on  the  left  side,  the  angel 
of  the  points  of  his  pinions,  and  both  pillars  of  their  bases^at  the  bottom.  Thus, 
also,  it  was  placed  on  the  title  page,  and  again,  next  year,  before  Matthew,  in  a 
beautiful  folio  Latin  Bible.  In  the  New  Testament  of  Tyndale,  on  the  con- 
trary, the  block  will  be  seen  entire,  consequently  it  must  have  been  the  prior 
publication,  and  must  Iiave  been  used  accordingly  in  1 525.24 

Here,  then,  unquestionably,  we  have  the  only  portion  now 
known  to  exist,  of  the  three  thousand  copies  of  the  first  and 
quarto  New  Testament,  commenced  at  Cologne ;  but  when 
once  the  reader  comes  to  witness  the  powerful  and  unceasing 
exertions  of  the  public  authorities  to  seize  these  books  and 
burn  them ;  as  well  as  the  rage  excited  against  this  prologue 
and  these  glosses ;   the  wonder  will  be  that   a   single  leaf 

23  Letters  to  the  Author  in  1836. 

24  Compare  with  this  statement  the  fac-similc  at  the  close  of  this  work,  where,  without  en- 
cumbering this  page,  the  preceding  account  will  be  fully  confirmed. 


64  TYNDALE    PROCEEDS   TO   WORMS.  [BOOK  I. 

escaped.  This  precious  relic  having  been  stitclied  up  at  the 
end  of  another  book,  might  more  easily  pass  unheeded,  or  it 
may  have  remained  abroad  till  long  after  the  fires  had  ceased 
to  rage  in  England.  Bound  up  in  blue  morocco,  with  as 
many  leaves  as  the  book  originally  composed,  it  now  adorns 
the  library  of  the  Right  Honourable  Thomas  Grenville ;  but 
before  leaving  the  place  where  it  was  printed,  we  give  the  col- 
lation of  all  that  has  yet  been  found. 

Title  A  i  wanting,  as  it  is  in  the  octavo.  The  prologge  commences  with 
A  ij,  and  occupying  seven  leaves,  ends  on  the  reverse  of  B  iiij.  The  first  page 
of  the  next  sheet,  or  letter  C,  contains  the  table  of  all  the  books  of  the  New 
Testament,  on  the  reverse  of  which  is  the  woodcut  of  Matthew,  as  exhibited 
in  our  fac-simile.  On  the  following  leaf,  therefore,  is  folio  C  iij,  continuing 
correctly  to  fol.  xxiiii,  where  the  fragment  terminates  in  the  2"2d  chapter 
of  Matthew.  The  type  is  a  German  Gothic.  Size  of  the  fi'ame-work,  in- 
cluding head-line,  5|  inches  ;  breadth,  5  inches  ;  but  the  breadth  of  the  pro- 
logue only  3.^  ;  includmg  the  head-line,  38  lines  in  a  page  ;  no  paper  mark. 
N.B.  Tyndale  being  on  the  point  of  placing  sheet  letter  L  in  the  press,  he  must 
have  been  pretty  far  advanced  in  the  gospel  of  Luke,  and  consequently  this 
fragment  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  gospel  of  Matthew  printed  previously, 
which,  at  the  same  time,  could  have  had  no  such  pwloijue,  nor  any  such  list  of 
all  the  books  in  the  New  Testament, 

Cologne,  therefore,  and  Oochlreus  also,  we  gladly  leave  for 
the  present ;  and,  with  increasing  interest,  now  follow  our 
Translator  to  his  next  place  of  abode. 

Tyndale  having  taken  up  his  residence  in  Worms,  remained 
there  till  the  year  1527, — a  far  more  favourable  place  for  the 
prosecution  of  his  design.  The  commotions  of  the  people, 
which  at  Frankfort  and  Mentz  had  ended  in  triumph  over 
the  old  opinions ;  at  Cologne,  on  the  contrary,  had  been  sub- 
dued, and  hence  it  was  that  Cochljeus  had  made  that  city  his 
refuge ;  for  at  Worms  he  could  not  then  have  effected  what 
he  had  done  at  Cologne.  Worms,  on  the  contrary,  Cochla?us 
has  told  us,  was  "  under  the  full  rage  of  Lutheranism,"  or,  in 
the  more  sober  style  of  Seckendorff,  "  was  already  wholly 
Lutheran."  So  much  the  better  for  our  Translator,  though 
not  a  Lutheran ;  for  his  enemy  will  turn  out  to  have  been 
only  promoting,  unintentionally,  the  very  undertaking  which 
he  meant  to  crush. 

We  have,  however,  now  come  to  a  period  in  the  labours  of 
Tyndale,  which  demands  some  notice,  of  all  previous  accounts. 
The  author  is  perfectly  aware  that  it  may,  and  will  be  said, 
by  those  who  have  ever  attended  to  the  subject,  or  been  con- 


J 


1525.]  AND  THERE  GOES  ON.  65 

versant  with  the  octavo  edition  of  Tyndale's  New  Testament, 
"  How  are  we  to  receive  all  this  account,  when  we  find  Tyndale 
himself,  in  his  address  '  To  the  Reader,'  at  the  end  of  the 
octavo  volume,  '  beseeching  them  tliat  are  learned  christianly, 
that  the  rudeness  of  the  work  now  at  the  first  time  offend  them 
not  V  "  Nay,  and  we  may  strengthen  the  objector''s  language, 
by  adding — How  arc  we  to  reconcile  the  previous  statements, 
with  the  first  words  of  Tyndale  in  his  preface  to  the  Penta- 
teuch ?  "  When  I  had  translated  the  New  Testament,  I  added 
an  Epistle  unto  the  latter  end.''''  For  more  than  a  hundred 
years  has  it  not  been  understood,  that  the  first  New  Testa- 
ment in  English  was  printed  most  probably  at  Antwerp  ? 
Have  not  Ames,  Herbert,  Panzer,  and  others,  all  assigned  it 
to  this  city  ?  Has  not  Mr.  Russel,  more  recently,  in  the  notes 
to  his  edition  of  Tyndale's  works,  even  specified  the  printer 
there,  as  being  Christopher  Endhoven?  Nay,  did  not  Dr. 
Gifford,  the  former  proprietor  of  the  only  perfect  copy  of  the 
octavo,  now  in  Bristol,  consider  the  words  "  now  at  the  first 
time,"  as  sufficient  evidence  that  nothing  had  been  printed 
before  ?  And,  finally,  have  not  almost  all  parties  agreed  as 
to  the  year  of  printing  having  been  1526  ? 

All  this  is  gi'anted,  and  yet  when  we  come  to  the  edition 
actually  printed  at  Antwerp,  in  1526,  and  by  0.  Endhoven  ; 
the  peculiarly  interesting  account  of  which  has  never  yet  been 
submitted  to  an  English  reader  ;  it  will  be  distinctly  proved 
to  have  been  the  next,  or,  as  we  nowaflirm,  the  third  edition. 
Nor  will  any  advocate  for  the  octavo,  printed  at  Worms,  under 
Tyndale's  own  eye,  have  much  ground  for  hesitation,  if  he 
finds  that  it  was  printed  in  1525  ;  since  it  was  being  read  in 
England  as  early  as  January  and  February  1526.  The  only 
mystery  to  be  solved  is,  that  of  the  octavo  being  "  now  at 
the  first  time"  perhaps  sent  out,  though  not  the  first  begun. 
For  although  the  quarto  turns  out  to  be,  as  it  certainly  was, 
the  commencement  of  Tyndale's  labours,  and  his  long  pro- 
logue at  the  beginning  of  it,  the  very  first  language  addressed 
by  him  to  the  Christians  of  England ;  nay,  and  finished  at 
press.,  before  ever  his  epistle  "  To  the  Reader,"  at  the  end 
of  the  octavo,  was  written  or  even  contemplated ;  there  did 
exist  an  all-powerful  reason  for  our  translator's  mode  of  pro- 
cedure, as  well  as  for  his  afterwards  referring  to  the  one 
edition,  in  preference  to  the  other.     Meanwhile,  whatever  of 

VOL.   I.  E 


66  SECOND  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [book  r. 

mystery  there  be  in  the  matter,  it  lias  yet  to  be  curiously 
contrasted  with  hotk  editions  being  upon  English  ground, 
nearly,  if  not  positively  at  the  same  period.  Yet  though  such 
be  the  fact,  and  to  be  abundantly  proved,  Tyndale''s  peculiar 
circumstances  this  year,  may,  even  now,  furnish  us  with  some 
explanation. 

Upon  his  arrival  at  Worms,  we  are  not  left  to  enquire, 
whether  he  lost  a  day,  as,  by  the  event,  we  know  full  well  that 
every  hour  had  been  improved.  Nor  is  it  difficult  to  perceive 
his  sagacity  in  his  mode  of  procedure.  His  quarto  Testament 
had  been  not  merely  interrupted,  but  exposed  by  a  malignant 
enemy,  whose  very  eye  he  had  evaded ;  the  book  had  been 
described.,  and  even  to  the  highest  authorities  in  England,  as 
well  as  marked  out  for  seizure,  if  possible.  Now,  in  the  face 
of  all  this,  would  it  have  been  prudent  to  have  proceeded  with 
this  book  alone  ?  Changing,  therefore,  the  size,  leaving  out 
the  prologue  and  the  glosses,  which,  by  the  way,  was  a  great 
improvement,  an  octavo  edition  must  have  been  immediately 
commenced  at  press,  though  certainly  the  quarto  was  not  con- 
signed to  oblivion.  No,  for  the  fact  is,  that  the  reader  will, 
before  long,  find  it  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  say,  which 
was  actually  i\\e  first  that  had  reached  the  shores  of  Britain, 
whether  of  England  or  Scotland.  Suffice  it  now  only  to  state, 
that  copies  of  these  precious  books,  it  will  appear,  were  beingread 
in  England  early  in  1526 ;  nay,  and  we  shall  find  the  quarto 
had  been  purchased,  and  "  read  thoroughly,"  in  the  spring  of 
that  year ;  eight  months  before  the  formal  denunciation  of 
Tunstal,  or  nine  months  before  that  of  W^arham  ;  when  both 
were  denounced,  and  said  to  abound,  not  only  in  the  diocese 
of  London,  but  throughout  the  province  of  Canterbury.  The 
reader  will  be  still  more  surprised  to  find  that  copies  of  one  edi- 
tion, if  not  both,  had  also  reached  Scotland  in  the  same  year  ! 

Tyndale,  at  all  events,  with  his  amanuensis,  had  now  found 
refuge  within  the  noted  city  of  Worms.  It  was  but  little 
more  than  four  years  since  Martin  Luther,  attired  in  his  friar''s 
frock  and  cowl,  and  seated  in  his  vehicle,  preceded  by  the  Em- 
peror^s  herald  on  horseback,  had  entered  the  same  place;  where 
the  Saxon  nobles  meeting  him  and  forming  in  procession,  two 
thousand  persons  accompanied  him  through  the  streets  to  his 
inn.  It  was  a  larger  assemblage  than  that  which  had  graced 
the  Emperor's  own  approach  to  the  Diet.    Then  too,  and  there. 


152.').]  SECOND  NEW  TESTAMENT.  67 

Cochlwus^  who  luitl  occasioned  our  English  Translator's  flight 
from  Cologne,  could  hold  up  his  head,  and  even  force  himself 
into  Lutller^s  presence ;  now,  he  dared  not  enter  the  place. 
With  this  memorable  scene  and  its  consequences,  Tyndale 
must  have  been  intimately  acquainted ;  but  when  discussing 
the  subject  on  Sodbury  hill,  how  strange  must  it  have  seemed 
to  him,  had  any  one  added  : — '•  And  you  too  must,  before  long, 
enter  Worms  ;  not  to  leave  it  in  haste  as  Luther  had  to  do, 
but  to  fulfil  the  desire  of  your  heart,  which  you  will  never  be 
able  to  accomplish  in  all  England  ! "  Yet  what  a  contrast 
have  we  between  Luther's  entrance,  surrounded  by  his  Elec- 
tors and  Princes,  and  the  humble  approach  of  Tyndale,  with 
his  bale  of  printed  sheets  !  This  becomes  still  more  striking, 
if  we  recollect,  that  four  years  ago,  it  was  from  this  very  city  that 
Luther,  hardly  escaping,  was  carried  o9"  to  his  Patmos,  or  his 
castle  on  the  heights  of  the  Wartburg,  there,  in  quiet  repose 
and  solitude,  to  translate  his  New  Testament.  Tyndale  now 
entered  to  print  his;  to  finish  also  in  Worms,  what  he  had  com- 
menced in  Cologne ;  and  to  pursue  his  design,  even  after  the 
Testaments  were  off  to  their  destination. 

Of  the  small  octavo  New  Testament  here  printed,  the  fruit- 
ful parent  of  so  many  editions,  only  one  perfect  copy  of  the 
text  remains,  and  no  place  of  safe  deposit  in  all  England  could 
be  more  appropriate  than  Bristol,  the  city  where  Tyndale 
himself  used  to  preach.  The  unique  fragment  of  the  quarto 
was  discovered  only,  as  it  were,  the  other  day  ;  but  the  history 
of  this  precious  small  octavo  volume  we  can  trace  for  more  than 
a  hundred  years — and  it  will  be  found  somewhat  curious. 
Above  a  century  ago  it  formed  one  of  the  volumes  in  the 
Harleian  Library  of  Lord  Oxford,  though  how  long  it  had 
been  there  is  not  known.  Mr.  John  Murray,  one  of  his  lord- 
ship's collectors,  had  picked  it  up  somewhere.  The  Earl  gave 
ten  guineas  for  the  book,  says  Mr.  Ames ;  twenty,  says  Dr. 
Gifford ;  but  both  agree  that  he  also  settled  i^20  a -year  for 
life  on  Murray,  who  had  procured  it.  The  Earl  of  Oxford 
died  in  1741,  without  male  issue,  and  his  Library  of  printed 
books  was  sold  to  Mr.  Thomas  Osborne  for  m  3,000.25  Tj^jg 
book,  therefore,  in  the  Harleian  Catalogue,  prefaced  by  Dr. 
Samuel  Johnson,  is  thus  described  : — 

25  A  dispersion  often  regretted  since.    His  Library  of  Manuscripts,  purchased  by  Government 
for  £lO,0(X),  forms  part  of  our  invaluable  treasures  in  the  British  Museum. 


fiS  SECOND  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [boOK  I. 

"  No.  420.  The  New  Testament,  black  letter,  ruled  with  red  lines,  and  all 
the  initial  letters  at  the  beginning  of  each  book,  representing  the  subject,  finely 
coloured,  as  likewise  all  the  capital  letters  to  each  chapter  throughout  the  book 
adorned  with  different  colours,  and  raised  with  gold,neatly  bound  in  red  morocco." 

After  such  a  description,  Mr.  Osborne,  much  to  his  own 
cost,  had  not  been  aware  of  the  rarity  and  value  of  his  book, 
for  after  thus  describing  it,  he  adds ; — "  In  this  book  no  date 
is  left,  but  it  appears  to  be  Tyndale's  version,  and  is  probably- 
one  of  the  editions  printed  in  Holland,  before  his  revisal "  in 
1 584.  Accordingly,  he  marked  the  price  at  no  more  than 
fifteen  shillinas!  At  this  price  Mr.  Ames  bought  it,  when  he 
not  only  congratulated  himself  on  purchasing  what  he  styled 
the  Phoenix  of  the  entire  Library ;  but  writes,  on  the  SOth  of 
June  1743,  in  a  letter  to  a  friend,  that  the  annuity  of  twenty 
pounds  was  yet  paid  to  Mr.  Murray,  he  being  still  alive.  One 
hundred  pounds  more,  however,  was  still  forthcoming,  for  the 
annuity  was  honourably  paid,  until  Murray ""s  decease  in  1 748 ! 
On  the  ISth  of  May  1760,  Mr.  Ames''  books  came  to  be  sold 
by  Mr.  Langford,  and  the  Testament  was  bought  for  fourteen 
guineas  and  a  half,  by  Mr.  John  Whyte  the  bookseller.  He 
possessed  it  sixteen  years  to  a  day,  having  sold  it  on  the 
13th  of  May  1776.  On  the  book  itself,  therefore,  there  is 
the  following  note  in  manuscript.  "  N.B. — This  choice  book 
was  purchased  at  Mr.  Langford's  sale,  1 3th  May  1 760,  by  me, 
John  Whyte  ;  and  on  the  13th  day  of  May  1776,  I  sold  it 
to  the  Rev.  Dr.  GifFord  for  20  guineas,  the  price  first  paid  for 
it  by  the  late  Lord  Oxford." ^e 

Before  proceeding  farther,  we  now  give  the  collation  of  this 
beautiful  and  unique  volume. 

The  book  commences,  like  the  quarto,  on  sign  A  ij.  The  Gospel  of  Matthew 
to  the  end  of  Revelation  occupies  cccliii  folios  ;  not  333  leaves  only,  as  it  has 
been  lately,  but  erroneously  stated.  On  the  reverse  of  the  last  is  the  epistle 
"  To  the  Reader,"  occupying  three  pages,  and  then  "  errours  committed  in  the 
printyng."  A  full  page  contains  thirty-three  lines.  N .B. — There  is  only  one 
other  copy  in  existence,  in  the  Library  of  St.  Paul's,  but  that  is  very  imperfect  ; 


26  Dr.  Andrew  Gitford,who  was  also  assistant  librarian  to  the  British  Museum,  had  accumulated, 
in  the  course  of  his  long  life,  oneof  the  most  valuable  collcctionsof  these  ancientBibles  and  New 
Testaments  then  in  the  kingdom,  besides  many  other  rare  books.  At  his  death,  l!)th  June  1784, 
in  the  84th  year  of  his  age,  the  whole  came,  by  his  bequest,  to  be  dei)0sited  in  the  Baptist  Museum 
in  Bristol,  his  native  city.  Leaving  them  to  the  denomination  in  which  he  himself,  as  well  as 
his  father  and  grandfatlier,  had  been  eminent  ministers,  they  in  Bristol  and  he  in  London,  the 
entire  collection,  with  various  additions,  have  been  admirably  preserved.  This  note  will  be  ex- 
cused, as  accounting  for  the  number  of  rare  Bibles  and  Testaments  to  be  found  in  our  List  at  the 
close  of  these  volumes. 


1525.]  FIRST  AND  SECOND  EDITIONS  COMPARED.  dQ 

defective  at  both  the  beginning  and  end,  and  wanting  twenty- five  leaves  in  vari- 
ous places,  or  forty-eight  in  all.  When  first  discovered  by  Dr.  Cotton,  it  was 
entitled  on  the  back,  "Lanfs  Testament,"  for  what  reason  has  never  been  divined. 
There  was  one  Richard  Lant,  chaplain  to  Queen  Anne  Boleyn,  but  this  does  not 
resolve  the  mystery.  It  had  been  recommended,  that  the  deficient  leaves  should 
be  made  up  in  manuscript,  and  the  book  elegantly  bound  ;  instead  of  which, 
and  as  it  was,  it  has  been  miserably  botched  in  the  binding  ! 

Here,  then,  are  two  separate  editions  of  the  New  Testament, 
both  finished  at  Worms  by  the  close  of  the  year  ]  525 ;  and 
printed,  we  believe,  by  Peter  Schoeffer,  son  of  the  associate  of 
Cruttemberg  and  Fust.^''  But  on  comparing  one  with  the 
other  we  are  furnished  with  several  important  remarks,  as 
corroborative  of  all  that  has  been  already  advanced. 

The  parties  in  opposition,  let  it  be  first  observed,  generally 
mark  out  the  quarto  with  glosses  ;  while  the  only  distinct  re- 
ference of  Tyndale  himself,  is  to  the  octavo,  without  them,  in 
his  preface  to  the  Pentateuch.  The  explanation  is  of  no  little 
importance.  The  prologue  and  glosses,  as  we  shall  see  pre- 
sently, excited  great  fear  in  the  breast  of  the  enemy.  Thus, 
when  Sir  Thomas  More  refers  to  the  period  of  Tyndale's  first 
efforts  in  translating,  he  will  have  it,  that  "  at  that  time  he 
set  certain  glosses  in  the  margin;''''  an  undoubted  fact,  though 
not  done,  as  he  affirms,  "  at  Wittenberg."  In  these  glosses, 
as  well  as  the  text  itself,  there  was  ample  room  for  denuncia- 
tion, if  typographical  errors  were  to  be  set  down  as  so  many 
heresies.  "  There  is  not  so  much,"  said  Tyndale,  "  as  one  i 
therein,  if  it  lack  a  tittle  over  his  head,  but  they  have  noted  it, 
and  number  it  unto  the  ignorant  people  for  an  heresy."  Tun- 
stal,  after  his  return  from  Spain,  or  late  in  1526,  had  busied 
himself  in  marking  these,  till  he  had  got  up  to  the  number  of 
2000  ;  although  more  than  ten  times  that  number  have  been 
found  in  one  of  our  Testaments,  printed  above  a  hundred  years 
later.  Now,  in  this  view,  the  precious  relic  lately  discovered, 
when  compared  with  the  octavo  in  Bristol,  affords  striking 
proof  that  the  quarto  sheets  must  have  been  Jirst  printed. 
The  spelling,  indeed,  even  of  the  octavo  is  irregular,  as  might 
be  expected  at  that  early  period,  but  still  the  two  editions 
admit  of  pointed  comparison.     Witness  the  following  words  : 


27  We  notice  one  other  book,  and  its  description,  in  proof  of  the  spot.  "  Alle  Propheten,  &c. 
8vo.  fVurms,  1527-"  "  In  the  same  type  as  the  edition  of  the  New  Testament  by  Tyndale,  com 
monly  called  the  first,  and  said  to  be  printed  at  Antwerp  in  1526,  but  certainly  at  (forms,  tlie 
year  before."— ^ee  Rodds  Catalogue,  1843. 


70  FIRST  AND  SECOND  EDITIONS  COMPARED.         [bOOK  I, 


1.   QlTARTO. 

:.'.  Octavo, 

1.  Quarto. 

2.  Octavo. 

propliettes 

pi'ophets. 

nioore 

more. 

nioththes 

niothes. 

pierles 

pearles. 

synners 

sinners. 

yooke 

yoke. 

moostc 

most. 

burthen 

bm-den. 

streached 

stretched. 

sekynge 

seking. 

In  every  other  case,  this  would  be  at  once  admitted  as  de- 
cisive evidence,  that  the  octavo  followed^  and  did  not  precede 
the  quarto.  That  Tyndale  should  improve,  as  in  the  octavo, 
was  natural ;  but,  although  it  has  actually  been  done,  to  sup- 
pose that  he  would  spell  as  in  the  quarto,  afterwards,  is  absurd. 
That  it  was  this  quarto  on  which  Tunstal  so  foolishly  expati- 
ated, next  year,  at  St.  Paul's,  after  having  issued  his  inhibi- 
tion, there  can  be  little  or  no  doubt.  For,  although  Le  Long 
merely  mistakes  one  year,  he  expressly  states,  that  "  his  lord- 
ship made  this  reflection  of  no  fewer  than  2000  texts,  on  an 
English  translation  of  the  New  Testament,  printed  at  Cologne 
and  Worms,  1526,  4to.''''  Lewis,  after  quoting  this,  adds  as 
the  only  reason  for  his  scepticism,  "  but  no  such  edition  ap- 
pearsT  Now,  however,  a  sufHcient  portion  of  it  has  appeared, 
nearly  a  century  after  Lewis,  or  above  three  hundred  years 
after  it  was  printed.  This  too,  as  already  noticed,  is  the 
identical  book  to  which  Roye  alludes,  when  treating  the  hyper- 
criticism  of  Tunstal  with  ridicule ;  it  is  from  this  prologue  that 
he  quotes,  and  it  is  the  burning  of  this  book  entire,  which 
Roye  so  graphically  describes  in  his  Satyre.  "It  is  reported," 
said  Cochlseus  at  the  close  of  A2S  statement,  "that  Lord  Cuth- 
bert  Tunstal,  a  most  eloquent  man,  then  Bishop  of  London, 
now  of  Durham,  when  he  had  obtained  one  of  these  copies,  pub- 
licly affirmed,  in  a  most  ample  oration  to  the  people  of  London, 
that  he  had  detected  above  2000  depravations  and  perversions 
in  this  one  work."  Tunstal,  after  all,  was  not  the  first  who 
took  alarm.  Far  from  it — he  was  not  in  England;  and 
though  we  must  not  anticipate,  there  is  coming  a  higher  de- 
nunciator of  this  Yery  book,  eight  months  before  the  Bishop, 
when  he  was  as  far  distant  as  Madrid. 

Tyndale,  on  the  contrary,  alludes  to  the  octavo  edition  with- 
out notes,  and  it  was  by  this  that  he  abode.  This  allusion, 
however,  let  it  be  observed,  was  made  in  the  year  1530. 
Now,  the  truth  is,  and  it  should  never  have  passed  without 
special  observation  by  posterity,  that  it  was  upon  this  ground, 
that  Tyndale  and  his  devoted  friend  Fryth,  had  then  long 


1525.]  TVNDALE'S   MEMORABLE  ALTERNATIVE.  71 

entrenched  themselves, — the  Scripture  without  note  and  com- 
ment, "  I  assure  you,"  said  Tyndale,  the  very  next  year  to 
his  Majesty's  ambassador,  then  hunting  for  him  on  the  Con- 
tinent,— "  I  assure  you,  if  it  would  stand  with  the  King's  most 
gracious  pleasure,  to  grant  only  a  bare  text  of  the  Scriptures  to 
he  put  forth  among  his  people,  I  shall  immediately  make  faithful 
promise  never  to  write  morey  And  so  afterwards,  in  ]  533,  said 
Fryth,  upon  English  ground,  to  the  Lord  Chancellor  More. 

"  But  this  hath  been  offered  you,  is  offered,  and  shall  be  offered.  Grant  that 
the  Word  of  God,  I  mean  the  text  of  Scripture,  may  go  abroad  in  our  Enghsh 
tongue  ;  and  my  brother,  William  Tyndale,  and  I  hate  done,  and  will  promise 
you  to  write  no  more.  If  you  will  not  grant  this  condition,  then  will  we  be  doing 
while  we  have  breath,  and  shew  in  few  words,  that  the  Scripture  doth  in  many, 
and  so  at  the  least  save  some." 

The  burning  zeal  of  no  two  men  born  in  Britain,  ever  had 
less  of  self,  and  private  interest  in  it,  than  theirs  had.  It 
was  not  for  glosses,  or  comments,  that  they  stood  and  fought 
so  nobly,  all  alone.  To  form  any  mere  sect,  they  never  longed, 
and  they  died  without  any  such  consequence  following  ;  an 
event  deeply  instructive,  and  one,  which  might  be  of  infinite 
importance  at  the  present  hour,  were  it  properly  understood. 
It  is  a  singular  fact,  that,  througliout  these  manuscripts,  the 
term  Tyndalian  occurs  only  once,  in  the  letter  of  an  enemy, 
but  it  never  took ;  and  Tyndale  left  the  world  without  leaving 
any  circle  of  mere  partizans  to  hand  down  his  name  to  posterity. 

Here,  then,  let  it  be  observed,  were  our  two  first  witnesses  ; 
the  two  men,  not  only  first  engaged  in  translating,  but  who 
led  the  van  in  pleading  for  the  Scriptures  "  going  abroad" 
without  note  or  comment.  And  is  there  now  no  tribute  im- 
peratively due  to  their  memory  and  character,  for  having  so 
done  ?  Let  the  mere  sectarian,  of  whatever  name,  throughout 
this  kingdom,  make  of  this  fact  what  he  may;  we  must  not, 
even  thus  early,  withhold  another,  which  is  never  to  be 
separated  from  it.  To  their  bold  and  first  appeal,  therefore, 
we  simply  add,  as  an  historical  axiom,  of  the  deepest  import, 
and  one  which,  for  three  hundred  years,  we  shall  have  occasion 
to  observe — that  the  ISacred  text.,  without  note  and  comment, 
has  proved  not  only  the  best  mode  of  procedure  for  meeting 
the  enemy ;  but  that  which  time  and  providence  have  distinctly 
sanctioned,  down  to  our  own  day  ;  when  it  has  prospered  to  an 
extent,   far,   very  far  beyond  the  anticipations    of  the  most 


72  FIRST  AND  SECOND   EDITIONS   COMPARED.        [^BOOK  1. 

sanguine.  Events  themselves,  during  that  long  period,  will 
often  speak,  and  say,  or  seem  to  say — "  He  that  hath  my 
word,  let  him  speak,"  and  disperse  "•  my  word  faithfully." 

If,  therefore,  there  had  been  even  unbroken  silence  on 
Tyndale's  part,  with  respect  to  the  quarto  Testament,  the  cir- 
cumstances we  have  already  explained,  would  sufficiently 
account  for  this.  His  silence,  we  should  have  said,  was 
prudential.  But  let  us  look  again,  for  the  sake  at  least  of 
accuracy  in  history  ;  let  us  only  once  enquire,  whether  there 
be  any  vestige  of  reference  to  the  vexatious,  but  providential 
interruption  of  the  quarto  book,  by  Oochlasus.  We  think 
there  is ;  and  though  it  be  in  measured  language,  there  is,  to 
us  now,  manifestly  more  to  be  understood,  than  Tyndale  chose 
to  express.  What  is  more  to  the  purpose,  this  reference  is 
to  be  found  in  this  very  epistle  "  To  the  Reader,"  at  the 
close  of  the  octavo  Testament  I  Here,  happily,  we  have  an 
allusion  to  the  past — an  allusion  to  some  catastrophe — to 
some  grievous  "  combraunce" — to  incessant  toil  after  it,  as  the 
result,  as  well  as  to  the  hope  cherished  of  foiling  his  opponents  ; 
though  he  will  not  hoast^  as  the  printers  at  Cologne  had  done, 
nor  will  he  rehearse  the  matter  distinctly.  He  then  puts 
this  epistle  "  To  the  Reader"  at  the  end  of  his  book ;  a 
strange  place,  but  having  the  advantage  of  contrast  with  the 
prologue  of  the  quarto,  at  the  beginning,  which  had  already 
been  reported  to  England ;  and  in  this  epistle  we  have  the 
following  passage,  now,  we  presume,  no  longer  so  ambiguous, 
as  it  has  been  regarded  hitherto. 

"  Them  that  are  learned  cliristiaiily  I  beseech,  forasmuch  as  1  am  sui'e, 
and  my  conscience  beareth  me  record,  that  of  a  pure  intent,  singly  and  faith- 
fully, I  have  interpreted  it  as  far  forth  as  God  gave  me  the  gift  of  knowledge 
and  undei'standing  :2fi  that  the  rudeness  of  the  work  now  at  the  first  time 
offend  them  not :  but  that  they  consider  how  that  I  had  no  man  to  counter- 
feit, neither  was  holpen  with  English  of  any  that  had  interpreted  the  same,  or 
such  like  thing  in  the  Scripture  beforetime.  Moreorer,  even  very  necessity 
and  cotnhraunce  (God  is  record)  above  strength,  which  1  idll  not  rehearse,  lest 
we  should  seem  to  boast  ourselves,  caused  that  many  things  are  lacking,  which 
necessarily  are  required.  Count  it  as  a  thing  not  having  his/«//  shape,  but,  as 
it  were  born  afore  his  time,  even  as  a  thing  begun  rather  than  finished." 

Now,  what  could  this  perplexity  or   embarrassment,    this 


28  Tlie  antecedent  in  this  sentence,  must  be  "  the  Scriptures,"—"  the  law,"—"  tlie  Gospel," 
tor  the  words  New  Trslammt  do  not  once  occur  throughout  this  epistle,— a  marked  distinction 
between  it  and  the  piologue  of  the  (juarto. 


1525.]  TYNDALE'S   FIRST  ADDRESS.  73 

vexatious  toil,  possibly  be,  this  comhraunce  above  strength,,  of 
which  God  was  witness,  if  not  that  which  we  have  detailed  ?^^ 
And  what  tliis/«//  shape,,  if  not  the  quarto  before  commenced, 
and  then  nearly  finished  I  And  what  this  boasting,,  if  not  the 
exultation  felt,  when  he  cherished  the  hope  of  baffling  his 
opponents,  by  sending  out  the  octavo  first,  it  not  being  the 
book  reported,  and  held  up  to  scorn  l  This  he  might  do,  and 
probably  did ;  but  it  was  only  like  a  man  inserting  the  thin 
end  of  a  wedge,  for  he  drove  it  home  immediately  with  his 
quarto.     In  his  epistle,  therefore,  he  had  added, — 

"  In  time  to  come,  if  God  hath  appointed  us  thereunto,  we  will  give  it  his 
full  shape — desiring  them  that  are  learned  and  able,  to  remember  their  duty, 
and  to  help  thereunto  :  and  to  bestow  unto  the  edlfi/ituj  of  Christ's  body,  which  is 
the  congregation  of  them  that  believe,  those  gifts  ichich  they  hare  received  of  God 
for  the  same  purpose." 

These  words  sufficiently  prove  that  the  quarto  was  intended 
to  follow ;  and  those  in  italic,  it  will  very  soon  be  observed, 
were  almost  the  same  which  he  had  previously  printed,  and 
with  direct  reference  to  the  quarto,  both  here  and  there. 

There  is  now  only  one  concluding  remark  forcibly  suggested 
by  comparison  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Reader  in  the  octavo,  with 
the  Prologue  prefixed  to  the  quarto.  The  former,  brief  in  itself, 
and  abrupt  in  its  commencement,  has  all  the  appearance  of 
eager  despatch ;  on  the  contrary,  the  opening  of  the  quarto 
Prologue,  wears  all  the  formality  and  precision  usually  adopted, 
when  introducing  to  the  reader  a  Jlrst  attempt.  Witness  the 
commencement  of  the  Epistle, — 

"  Give  diligence,  Reader,  (I  exhort  thee,)  that  thou  come  with  a  pure  mind, 
and,  as  the  Scripture  saith,  with  a  single  eye,  unto  the  words  of  health,  and  of 
eternal  life  :  by  the  which,  if  we  repent  and  believe  them,  we  are  born  anew, 
created  afresh,  and  enjoy  the  fruits  of  the  blood  of  Christ." 

Contrast  this  with  the  deliberate  and  formal  language  of 
the  Prologue,,  so  worthy  of  special  notice  now.  It  has  never 
before  been  presented  entire,,  and  as  it  stands,  since  the  day 
on  which  the  sheet  was  thrown  off  at  Cologne.  They  are  not 
a  few  who  will  admire  the  modesty,  the  diffidence,  not  to  say 
the  simple  beauty  of  the  following  sentences  : — 


29  As  to  the  import  of  combraiinee,  take  Tyndale's  own  explanation  elsewhere.  "  If  tliou  wert 
not  brought  sometime  into  combraunee,  whence  God  only  could  deliver  thee,  thou  shouldst 
never  see  thy  {■Aith."—T>/Hdalc's  JVorks,  fol.  p.  117. 


74  THE  OPENING  ADDRESS  [book  I. 

TYNDALE's  first  language  in  print  to  the  people  of  god  in  ENGLAND. 

/  have  here  translated,  brethren  and  sisters,  most  dear  and  teiuUrly  be- 
loved in  Christ,  the  Neio  Testament,  for  your  syiritxud  edifying,  consolation 
and  solace  :  Exhorting  instantly,  and  beseeching  those  that  are  better  seen 
in  the  tongues  than  I,  and  that  have  higher  gifts  of  grace  to  iiUerpret  the 
sense  of  the  Scripture,  and  meaning  of  the  Sinrit,  tlian  I,  to  consider  and 
ponder  my  labour,  and  that  with  the  s^nrit  of  meekness.  And  if  they 
perceive  in  any  pAaces  that  I  have  not  attained  the  very  sense  of  the  tongue, 
or  meaning  of  the  Scripture,  or  have  not  given  the  right  English  word, 
that  they  put  to  their  hands  to  amend  it,  remernhering  that  so  is  their  duty 
to  do.  For  we  have  not  received  the  gifts  of  God  for  ourselves  only,  or 
for  to  hide  them  :  but  for  to  bestow  them  unto  the  honouring  of  God  and 
Christ,  and  edifying  of  the  congregation,  which  is  the  body  of  Christ. 

"  The  causes  that  moved  me  to  translate,  I  thought  better  that  others  should 
imxigine,  than  that  I  should  rehearse  them.  Moreover,  I  supposed  it 
superfluous ;  for  who  is  so  blind  to  ask,  why  light  should  be  showed  to 
them  tlmt  loalk  in  darhiess,  where  they  cannot  but  stumble,  and  lohere  to 
stumble,  is  the  danger  of  eternal  damnation ;  either  so  despnteful  that  he 
would  envy  any  man  (I  speak  not  his  brother)  so  'necessary  a  thing  ;  or  so 
bedlam  mad  as  to  affirm  that  good  is  the  natural  cause  of  evil,  and  darkness 
to  proceed  out  of  light,  and  that  lying  should  be  grounded  in  truth  and 
verity  ;  and  not  rather  clean  contrary,  that  light  destroyeth  darkness,  and 
verity  reproveth  all  maniier  (of)  lying. 

"  After  it  had  pleased  God  to  put  in  my  mind,  and  also  to  give  me  grace 
to  translate  this  forerehearsed  (before  mentioned)  New  Testament  into  our 
English  tongue,  howsoever  vje  have  done  it,  I  supposed  it  very  necessary 
to  put  you  in  remembrance  of  certain  points^^ 

The  reader,  we  presume,  cauuot  but  be  gratified,  by  a  fac- 
simile of  these  words,  in  their  original  orthography.  He  will 
observe  the  letter  Y,  then  generally  used  for  I  ;  which  first 
led  to  the  discovery  of  what  the  fragment  is  ;  and  here  he 
may  contemplate  not  merely  the  first  page  of  text,  in  the 
first  sheet  of  a  work  thrown  off  at  press,  in  the  year  1525, 
at  Cologne ;  but  the  veritable  origin  of  all  those  millions  of 
English  Scriptures  now  reading  in  so  many  different  and  dis- 
tant parts  of  the  globe — parts,  utterly  unknown  to  our  immor- 
tal Translator,  when  he  sent  the  sheet  to  the  press — parts,  then 
untrodden  by  any  Englishman — parts,  then  undiscovered  !^^ 

The  last  sentence  of  our  extract,  however,  or  that  with 
which  the  next  page  of  the  prologue  begins,  is  full  of  meaning. 

30  The  rcBt,  with  some  verbal  alteration,  may  be  seen  in  his  tract  "  The  pathway  into  the  Holy 
Scriptures,"  as  printed  in  his  Works. 
3'  T^^K  facsimile  will  be  found  at  the  close  of  this  Work,  prectdini;  the  list  of  Bibles. 


I."i2,5.]  TO   HIS  COUNTRY.  75 

It  shows  that  Tyndale,  with  all  gravity,  recognised  no 
instigator  under  God,  and  ascribed  to  his  grace  alone,  the 
entire  glory  of  his  work.  Such  had  been  his  language  in 
print,  before  ever  Cochheus  had  set  his  foot  in  Cologne.  But 
now,  that  he  had  been  so  defamed  by  this  enemy ;  hear  his 
emphatic  disclaimer  from  Worms.  "  Beseeching  the  learned 
to  consider  that  he  had  no  man  to  follow  as  an  example, 
neither  was  holpen  with  English  of  any  that  had  interpreted 
the  same,  or  such  like  thing  in  the  Scripture  before  time,"  Sir 
Thomas  More  had  read  this,  though  he  did  not  choose,  as  it 
was  not  convenient,  to  believe  it.  But  surely,  if  any  individual 
of  that  age  may  be  regarded  as  an  agent,  walking  indepen- 
dently of  his  fellows,  it  will  turn  out  to  have  been  our  English 
exile. 

A  man  of  manners,  morals,  prudence,  parts, 
Unpatronis'd,  and  therefore  little  known, — 

a  man,  whose  character  and  powerful  talents  have  been  so 
grievously  misrepresented,  and  so  misimderstood,  up  to  the 
present  hour.  We  only  hope  that  the  following  pages  may 
have  some  effect  in  redeeming  his  memory  from  that  state  of 
mere  pupilage,  or  reliance  on  the  German  Reformer,  which  if 
not  true  in  point  of  fact,  ought  to  have  been  corrected,  at  least 
in  England,  long  ago  ;  as  well  as  from  that  "  confederacy  with 
Luther,"  first  forged  by  the  enemy  for  the  vilest  of  purposes, 
and  then  so  simply  received  and  retailed  by  his  countrymen, 
from  John  Foxe  downwards. 

We  are  now  just  upon  the  eve  of  returning  into  England, 
after  spending  two  years  abroad,  in  company  with  our 
Translator  ;  but  before  we  do  return — before  the  uproar  and 
the  consternation  begin — before  the  wrath  of  1526  burst  out — 
while  these  precious  volumes  are  only  coming  over  that  sea, 
which  Tyndale  had  passed  over  to  send ;  and  before  either  the 
quarto  or  octavo  had  arrived  in  our  native  laud  ;  there  is  one 
additional  event  which  must  not  be  omitted  even  here,  though 
it  has  to  be  explained  more  distinctly  three  months  hence,  at 
the  moment  of  its  occurrence. 

If  there  was  any  advantage  anticipated  by  Tyndale,  from 
sending  over  the  octavo  without  notes  "  now  at  the  first 
time" — if  it  was  indeed  so  sent — there  must  have  ensued  a 
second  momentary  disappointment.  If  there  was  any  device 
or  contrivance  adopted,  then  it  certainly  failed,    completely 


76  QUARTO  TESTAMENT  THE  FIRST  CONDEMNED.       [book  I. 

failed  !  This  quarto,  with  glosses,  had  been  the  first-born  of 
his  imao-ination,  and  we  have  seen  that  his  whole  heart  was 
set  upon  giving  the  sacred  text,  what  was  strangely  styled 
"  its  full  shaped  But  the  Divine  Author  will  as  distinctly 
say  nay  in  London,  as  he  had  already  done  at  Cologne  I  For, 
after  all,  we  shall  find  next  year,  that  this  quarto  book  was 
first  held  up  in  warning  to  the  people.  The  book  "  with 
glosses  and  prefaces'"  was  first  condemned, — condemned,  too, 
by  no  less  authority  than  that  of  Henry  VIII.  himself, 
with  Wolsey's  full  concurrence,  if  not  his  advice, — and  con- 
demned eight  months  before  either  Tunstal  or  Warham  held 
up  also  the  octavo,  without  notes,  for  destruction. 

Tyndale  certainly  intended  that  the  book  with  glosses  should 
follow  "  in  time  to  come,"  however  short.  Providence  caused 
it  to  precede^  and,  at  the  same  time,  over-ruled  it  as  a  decoy 
for  several  months  !  All  that  time,  therefore,  the  precious 
little  volume  must  have  been  fulfilling  its  commission,  and 
passing  into  its  hiding  place  in  unknown  directions  ! 

Nor  is  the  curious  fact  of  the  New  Testament  "  with  g-losses 
and  prefaces"  being  first  condemned,  and  then  passing  into 
oblivion  through  all  history,  for  above  three  hundred  years, 
an  event  carrying  no  instruction  or  monition.  Quite  the  re- 
verse. All  who  venerate  Divine  Revelation  in  its  purity, 
will  remember  that  this  was  the  commencement  of  a  new  era 
for  Britain,  more  important  than  she  had  ever  witnessed, 
or  in  truth  has  witnessed  since.  Comments,  therefore,  or 
glosses,  additions  of  man''s  devising,  professedly  to  make  the 
sacred  languase  more  intelligible  than  that  of  its  Divine 
Author,  or  turn  it  to  a  certain  meaning,  were  not  to  be  treated 
as  of  small  account.  As  matter  of  history  they  were  not,  and 
have  not  been  so  treated.  These  glosses  sunk  the  book  into 
the  shades ;  just  as  those  notes,  sometimes  styled  contemptu- 
ously the  Geneva  spectacles,  afterwards  operated  on  that 
otherwise  valuable  translation. 

Never,  then,  let  it  pass  unobserved,  how  soon,  and  how 
clearly,  Tyndale  and  Fryth  saw  through  this  ;  how  soon  our 
Translator  put  the  King  of  England  upon  the  alternative  of 
receiving,  or  not  receiving,  the  sacred  text  alone ;  or  how 
decidedly,  and  upon  English  ground,  Fryth  repeated  the  bold 
appeal  to  the  Lord  Chancellor,  Sir  Thomas  More.  The  war- 
fare was  at  once  reduced  to  a  single  point.    Receive^  or  not  re- 


1525.]  THE  FIRM  AND   FINAL  ALTERNATIVE,  77 

ceive,  the  Sacred  Volume,  without  note  or  comment ;  so  that 
we  have  now  to  witness  the  man  who,  by  way  of  eminence, 
fought  on  one  side,  and  the  men  who,  by  way  of  eminence,  or 
we  might  say  the  nation,  who  fought  against  him.  This  im- 
portant fact  not  only  affords  us  a  notable  commencement  to 
our  history,  but  it  will  connect  itself,  very  powerfully,  with  the 
close  of  tliis  work,  or  the  larger  movements  of  the  present  day. 
If,  then,  we  are  about  to  see  one  man  stand  up  in  such  a 
position  as  this,  can  it  be  necessary  to  bespeak  the  indulgence 
or  the  attention  of  any  reader,  to  every  movement  of  his  hand 
and  pen,  every  step  of  his  progress,  or  every  day  of  his  life ! 
To  do  him  justice,  however,  at  his  outset,  the  state  of  his 
native  country  since  he  left  it,  must  not  pass  unnoticed. 

Two  years  have  now  passed  away  since  Tyndale  left  his  country,  for  his 
country's  benefit,  and  the  day  drew  near,  when  she  was  about  to 

"  Receive  advantage  from  his  noiseless  hours, 
Of  which  she  little  dreamt." 

But  since  the  entrance  of  the  Word  of  God  into  this  kingdom  must  be 
regarded  as  an  event  superior  in  importance  to  every  other,  one  is  curious 
to  know  what  was  the  state  of  the  world  immediately  preceding  it ;  or  what 
had  taken  place  in  England  and  the  Continent,  since  Tyndale  left  London. 

If  we  first  look  abroad,  without  ofi'ence  to  the  sovereigns  of  the  day,  in- 
cluding the  Pontiff  himself,  Wolsey  and  Bourbon  must  still  be  regarded 
as  the  leading  characters.  Thus,  if  the  specious  plan  of  Boui'bon,  for 
the  overthrow  of  France,  in  the  autumn  of  1523,  entirely  failed,  there  is 
no  plausible  reason  to  be  assigned,  except  the  double  policy  of  the  Car- 
dinal, for  he  only  feigned  to  support  him.  At  one  time  abandoning  the 
King  of  France,  that  the  Emperor  might  exalt  him  to  the  Popedom,  he 
might  have  remained  steady  ;  but  Charles  having  had  good  reason  to 
suspect  the  sincerity  of  his  ambitious  expectant,  no  sooner  was  Clement 
VII.  chosen  from  the  Emperor's  party,  than  Wolsey  had  decidedly 
changed  his  policy.  "  This  blow,"  says  Tm-ner,  "  to  Wolsey's  dearest 
hopes,  which  he  had  taken  some  (if  not  great)  pains  to  prevent,  he  could 
neither  retrieve,  forgive,  nor  forget." 

As  he  proceeds,  therefore,  it  will  be  to  play  his  usual  double  game. 
Thus,  in  May  1524,  Avhen  another  plan  to  conquer  France  was  settled, 
and  Bourbon  was  called  to  take  the  oath  of  fealty  to  Henry  VIII.,  if 
England  and  the  Emperor  promise  to  supply  him  with  money ;  then 
Bourbon  must  engage  to  cross  the  Alps  with  his  army,  while  Henry  with 
his  troops  were  to  land  in  Picardy,  and  JMargaret,  the  Regent  of  the  Low 
Countries,  was  to  send  an  auxiliary  supply  from  Flanders.  As  early  as 
the  end  of  June,  not  only  Boiu-bon,  but  Richard  Pace,  our  ambassador, 


78  ENGLAND   JUST    BEFORE  [bOOK  1. 

then  also  with  this  army,  were  in  sanguine  hopes  of  success.  Urging 
Wolsey  to  fulfil  his  part  of  the  treaty, — "  If  ye  will  not  fetch  the  crown 
of  France,"  said  Pace,  "  we  will  bring  the  same  unto  you." — "  If  the 
King,"  said  Bourbon,  "  will  personally  enter  into  France,  I  will  give  his 
Grace  leave  to  pluck  out  both  my  eyes,  if  he  be  not  Lord  of  Paris,  before 
All  hallowtide  ;  and  Paris  taken,  all  the  realm  of  France  is  his."  In 
July,  Pace  is  still  more  urgent.  "  Sir,"  said  he,  even  to  Wolsey,  "  to 
speak  to  you  boldly,  if  ye  do  not  regard  the  premises,  I  will  impute  to 
your  Grace  the  loss  of  the  crown  of  France."  The  general  and  the  am- 
bassador were  alike  bent  on  a  straightforward  course,  according  to  previous 
agreement ;  but  this  being  a  path  in  which  Wolsey  never  trod,  he  hated 
both  the  advisers.  Immediately  rebuking  the  poor  ambassador,  he  drove 
him  into  poverty,  and  ultimately  to  madness,  for  he  died  a  lunatic. 
Nay,  so  far  from  co-operation,  Wolsey  was  cordially  settling  with  the 
Pontiff,  that  neither  Henry  nor  Charles  should  accomplish  their  object  ! 
The  Popedom  Wolsey  yet  might  reach,  but  France  and  England,  under 
one  crown,  would  have  been  too  much  for  any  Pope  to  manage  !  Yet, 
amidst  all  the  fray,  we  can  now  see  the  Almighty  making  the  wrath  of 
man  to  praise  Him  ;  for  this  very  hatred  of  Wolsey  to  the  Duke  of 
Bourbon,  was  the  occasion,  ere  long^  of  Rome  itself  being  sacked  by 
soldiers  of  the  Romish  faith,  and  the  Pope  imprisoned. 

There  were  few  men  then  living  who  saw  so  clearly  through  the 
double  dealings  of  Wolsey  as  did  William  Tyndale  ;  and  his  remarks 
written  during  the  Cardinal's  life-time,  and  published  in  the  year  of  his 
death,  are  the  more  to  be  respected.  "  We  sent  our  soldiers,"  says  Tyn- 
dale, "  two  STimmers  against  the  French,  unto  whose  captains  the  Car- 
dinal had  appointed,  how  far  they  should  go,  and  what  they  should  do  ; 
and  therefore  the  French  King  was  nothing  afraid,  but  brought  all  his 
power  against  the  Emperor  in  other  places  ;  and  so  was  the  Emperor 
ever  betrayed.  Thus  the  Cardinal  was  his  friend  openly,  and  the  French 
King's  secretly — for  no  love  that  he  had  to  France,  but  to  help  the  Pope, 
and  to  have  been  Pope  haply,  and  to  save  their  kingdom." 

It  is  singular  enough  that  this  extraordinary  course  of  perfidy  and 
dissimulation  on  the  part  of  Wolsey,  with  his  hireling  ambassadors,  has 
never  been  sifted  and  exposed,  with  any  precision,  till  our  own  day. 
Even  Strype,  without  a  word  of  reprobation,  strangely  called  it  "  his 
great  dexterity  in  the  managery  of  public  affairs,  and  the  fineness  of  his 
policy;"  but  in  February  1525,  Bourbon,  at  one  stroke,  exposed  the 
whole  to  public  view.  "  Before  this,  indeed,"  says  Tyndale,  "  all  the 
world  smelled  it,  but  it  brake  not  out  openly  to  the  eye  till  the  siege  of 
Pavia."  The  King  of  France,  at  the  head  of  his  army,  was  then  in 
Italy.  There  were  two  coui'ses  before  him,  either  that  of  pursuing  his 
enemy  wherever  he  found  him,  or  besieging  the  towns  he  had  fortified. 
Now  Bourbon  had,  with  great  success,  followed  the  former  course,  but 


1525.]  RECEIVING  THE  SCRIPTURES.  79 

failed  in  the  latter  at  Marseilles  in  1523.  Yet,  with  this  example  be- 
fore his  eyes,  and  even  wishing  to  follow  it,  as  if  infatuated  to  his  own 
ruin,  the  King  resolved  to  proceed  in  besieging  one  place  after  another. 
"  Thus  unto  the  siege  of  Pavia,"  says  Tyndale,  "  came  the  French  King 
personally,  with  sixty  thousand  men  of  war,  of  which  twelve  thousand 
were  horsemen,  and  ivith  motiey  enough;  while  the  Emperor's  host," 
(commanded  by  Bourbon,)  "  was  under  twenty  thousand,  of  which  were 
but  three  thousand  horsemen,  with  no  moiiey  at  (111."  But  though  the 
Pope  kept  back  his  men,  and  the  Cardinal  his  money,  the  French  army 
was  annihilated,  and  its  King  became  the  prisoner  of  the  Emperor  for 
nearly  thirteen  long  months.  "  And  there  came  out  all  the  Cardinal's 
privy  treason  ;  for  in  the  French  King's  tent  were  letters  found,  and  in 
the  French  King's  treasure,  and  in  all  the  host  among  the  soldiers, 
English  _<7oW,  which  had  come  a  thousand  miles  by  land  I"^^  Thus,  at 
last,  in  the  net  which  this  ambitious  man  "  had  hid,  was  his  own  foot 
taken  ;  he  was  snared  in  the  work  of  his  own  hands."  To  keep  up  the 
farce  a  little  longer,  it  is  true,  on  Sunday  the  12th  of  March,  there  was 
Henry  VIII.,  with  the  ambassadors,  at  St.  Paul's,  and  Wolsey  singing 
Mass  with  eleven  prelates  in  his  train,  and  the  choir  chanting  Te  Deum 
for  the  Victory  of  Pavia.  But  from  what  soon  followed,  we  may  "  con- 
jecture," says  Tyndale,  "  with  what  heart  ovir  spirituality,  with  their  in- 
visible secrets,  sang  Te  Deum." 

Before  this  event,  the  Emperor  had  suspected  Wolsey.  His  suspicions 
were  now  at  an  end  ;  for  though  the  Cardinal,  to  counteract  him,  craftily 
concluded  a  separate  peace  with  the  King  of  France,  in  September  1525, 
knitting  the  Pope  and  the  Venetians  together  with  him,  yet  after  the 
battle  of  Pavia,  the  power  of  this  ambitious  man  certainly  began  to 
wane.^  For  years  he  had  played  with  both  hands  ;  with  one,  he 
governed  the  Kings  of  Europe  ;  with  the  other,  the  Pope  himself,  and 
all  his  concerns.  By  his  enchantments  having  once  succeeded  in  re- 
ducing his  own  Sovereign  to  little  more  than  a  mere  puppet,  he  felt  that 
he  could  expatiate  on  a  wider  field.  In  papers  which  still  remain,  he 
professes  that  he  had  only  in  view  "  the  peace  and  harmony  of  Christen- 
dom ;"  his  real  object  was,  so  to  manage  the  powers  of  Europe,  as  that 
he  himself  might  ultimately  be  seated  in  the  papal  chair.  By  night 
and  by  day  this  was  his  undeviating  pursuit.  But,  in  the  end,  he  only 
exposed  himself  to  the  contempt  of  foreign  princes,  and  sunk  the  cha- 
racter of  his  own  government ;  while  as  for  the  Popedom,  Bourbon  was 
about  to  shew  that  his  sword  was  more  powerful  than  all  the  thunders 
of  the  Vatican,  or  even  the  pen  and  the  policy  of  Wolsey. 

32  The  coin  at  that  period  denominated  angels,  of  which  Tyndale  facetiously  says—"  But 
what  wonder— the  coin  had  wings  to  fly  into  far  countries,  and  to  mount  to  the  top  of  high  hills." 

33  Turner  could  find  no  letters  from  Charles  to  Wolsey  in  1525,  among  the  MSS.  in  the 
British  Museum.  The  first  after  the  battle  of  Pavia  is  dated  30th  November  1526.— It  is  a  com- 
plimentary reply  to  Wolsey. 


80  ENGLAND  JUST   BEFORE  [book  I. 

The  Cardinal  never  reached  the  summit  of  his  ambition,  but  he  may 
be  viewed  at  the  height  of  all  his  arrogance  just  before  this  decisive 
battle.  In  the  end  of  1524,  though  it  would  have  been  death  to  another 
man,  we  find  him  lectui'ing  and  upbraiding  the  Pope  himself,  till  he 
made  him  change  from  a  smile  to  a  sigh,  on  receiving  what  his  ambas- 
sador, the  Bishop  of  Bath,  called  "  sour  sauce  sweetly  potcdered,^'' — the 
Cardinal  reproached  him  with  all  his  leagues,  whether  offensive  or  de- 
fensive, and  said  by  them  God  had  stricken  and  sent  affliction  to  the 
holy  Church  !  In  short,  before  Wolsey,  at  this  period,  the  Popedom 
was  but  a  shadow  ;  doomed,  instead  of  obedience,  to  receive  lectures, 
till  he  made  Clement  stoop  to  apologise  from  that  chair,  before  which 
monarchs  had  so  often  trembled.  As  for  the  civil  jsowers,  in  the  spring 
of  1525,  his  insolence  knew  no  bounds.  He  had  not  only  used  sharp 
words  to  the  ambassadors  of  the  Emperor,  then  in  England,  and  insulted 
them,  but  styled  the  Emperor  "  a  liar,  observing  no  manner  of  faith  or 
promise" — his  aunt,  the  Lady  Margaret,  Regent  of  the  Low  Countries, 
he  said  was  a  "ribald" — his  brother  Ferdinand  was  a  "child,  and  so  go- 
verned," and  the  Duke  of  Boui-bon  "  a  traitor."  To  crown  all,  this  was 
language  spoken  of  parties  with  whom  he  and  his  Sovereign  were  pro- 
fessedly, and  by  treaty,  on  friendly  terms  !  What,  then,  must  have 
been  Wolsey's  mortification,  when  even  his  chosen  friend  Tunstal, 
Bishop  of  London,  as  well  as  Sir  Richard  Wingfield,  and  Dr.  Sampson, 
whom  he  had  sent  as  ambassadors  into  Spain,  were  obliged  to  convey  to 
him  such  severe  censures  from  the  imperial  mouth,  at  their  very  first  in- 
terview in  June  1525.  "  It  were  good,"  said  Tunstal,  "to  write  a  letter 
to  the  Emperor  of  your  own  hand,  to  declare  the  mistaking  of  the  mat- 
ter. It  were  good  to  give  them  good  words  for  good  words,  keeping  secret 
your  thoughts,  as  they  do."  And  this  was  a  Bishop's  advice  !  But  al- 
most all  Wolsey's  agents  were  practised  deceivers  as  well  as  himself. 

It  was  well,  therefore,  that  the  degradation  of  this  lofty  and  unprin- 
cipled man,  should  have  at  least  commenced  just  before  the  introduc- 
tion of  the  Word  of  God  into  our  country.  Divine  Providence  was  pre- 
paring the  way  for  its  entrance,  which  will  be  still  more  apparent  when 
we  turn  our  eye  for  a  few  moments  to  the  state  of  England. 

As  soon  as  we  look  at  home,  and  enquire  for  the  leading  features  of 
the  time,  in  1524,  and  especially  1525,  we  find  them  to  be  discontent 
and  agitation.  These  were  general  throughout  the  country,  but  espe- 
cially visible  in  London.  The  cause  is  easily  explained.  Part  of  the 
Cardinal's  policy  consisted  in  having  several  ambassadors  at  the  same 
Court ;  one  of  these  inferior  or  subordinate,  professedly  to  give  dignity 
to  the  others,  but  in  fact  a  creatui'e  of  his  own,  acting  at  once  as  an 
agent  to  advance  his  own  personal  interests,  and  as  a  spy  on  the  pro- 
ceedings of  his  companions  in  the  embassy.  These  ambassadors,  at 
every  foreign  Coiu-t,  had  to  send  double  despatches,  one  for  the  King, 


1525.']  RECEIVING  THK  SCRIPTURES.  SI 

his  nominal  master,  and  another  for  his  own  eye  alone  !  Abundance  of 
these  exist  in  the  British  Museum,  but  they  are,  in  no  case,  copies  of 
each  other.  These  men,  of  course,  were  all  to  be  upheld  in  their  dignity 
abroad  ;  while  he  himself,  at  home,  having  confessedly  an  extraordinary 
taste  for  building,  and  a  very  childish  one  for  the  most  extravagant  dis- 
play, required  immense  sums.  The  bribes,  therefore,  the  presents,  the 
pensions,  or  foreign  annuities,  which  he  contrived  to  secure  for  himself, 
can  never  be  enumerated.  But  we  have  yet  to  look  at  his  official  ex- 
penditure in  carrying  on  such  war  abroad.  Honesty,  in  every  sense,  is 
the  best  jjolicy,  and  so  it  is  the  cheapest  ;  but  the  double  policy  of 
Wolsey  would  have  beggared  more  kingdoms  than  his  own.  His  ulti- 
mate object,  no  doubt,  was  one — to  gain  the  Popedom  ;  but  in  order  to 
this,  it  seemed  to  him  essential  that  France  and  Spain  should  be  kept 
in  a  state  of  perpetual  discord  ;  that  his  own  master  nominally,  yet  him- 
self in  reality,  might  hold  the  balance  of  Europe.  But  if  the  game  was 
double,  both  parties  must  be  paid.  "  And  accordingly,"  says  Tyndale, 
"  the  Cardinal  lent  much  money  to  the  Emperor  openly,"  with  whom  he 
was  professedly  in  union,  "  but  gave  the  French  King  7nore  secretly," 
with  whom  he  was  professedly  at  war !  Such  a  course,  it  is  evident, 
must  have  been  enormously  expensive  ;  and  it  is  not  wonderful  that  the 
demands  became  so  exorbitant  as  to  exceed  the  power  of  endurance. 
If,  by  such  perfidious  policy  abroad,  AVolsey  was  sinking  the  moral  cha- 
racter of  his  country  ;  by  his  cruel  exactions  at  home,  he  was  goading 
the  people  into  such  a  state  of  discontent,  as  bordered  on  rebellion. 

The  Cai'dinal's  high  demands  for  pecuniary  supplies  had  commenced 
while  Tyndale  was  yet  sojourning  in  London.  Hitherto  he  had  dealt  in 
"  loans,"  taken  from  the  most  wealthy,  and  never  to  be  repaid  ;  but,  in 
1522,  having  tried  to  ascertain,  by  a  general  survey,  the  capability  of  the 
people  to  bear  taxation  ;  in  1523,  after  falsely  affirming  that  Henry  was 
driven  to  war  and  defence,  Wolsey  intimated  that  a  sum  of  not  less  than 
^800,000  was  wanted,  by  a  general  tax  out  of  the  fifth  part  of  every 
man's  land  and  goods.  It  was  still,  however,  denominated  a  loan,  and 
Sir  Thomas  More  finally  united  with  him,  saying,  that  "  of  duty  men 
ought  not  to  deny  to  pay  four  shillings  in  the  pound."  Ere  long,  com- 
mencing with  the  clergy,  after  haughtily  reprimanding  the  refractory 
members  of  the  Convocation,  Wolsey,  by  virtue  of  his  legantine  authority, 
overawed  the  whole  body ;  and,  coming  down  to  the  Commons,  demand- 
ed .£800,000  !  The  sum,  however,  was  alleged  to  exceed  the  entire  cur- 
rency of  the  realm,  and  nothing  is  more  probable,  for  all  things  considered 
it  was  equal  to  about  ten  or  twelve  millions  sterling  of  our  j^resent  coin  ! 
A  committee  was  appointed  to  remonstrate,  and  propose  the  half.  Wolsey 
at  once  dismissed  them,  and  came  down  again,  in  all  his  pomp  and  glory, 
to  intimidate  the  House  of  Commons.  This  led  to  a  discussion  which 
continued    for  sixteen  days  in   succession,   when    three-fourths   of  the 

VOL.    I.  F 


82  ENGLAND  JUST  BEF'ORE  [book  I. 

original  demand  were  ultimately  voted,  and  to  be  paid  in  foiu-  years. 
The  Cardinal,  however,  by  what  was  called  an  antici2Mtion,  compelled 
many  to  pay  the  lohole,  and  at  once,  and  never  summoned  another  Parlia- 
ment ;  nor  was  another  assembled  till  seven  years  afterwards. 

We  come  now  to  the  year  1525,  when,  certainly,  nothing  could  be 
more  contemptible — and,  if  the  consequences  had  not  been  so  serious, 
more  ridiculous — than  the  position  into  which  Wolsey  had  brought  his 
country.  It  was  a  crisis  occasioned  solely  by  his  mad  ambition  for  the 
chair  at  Rome.  On  the  12th  of  March,  as  already  noticed,  in  solemn 
mockery,  he  had  sung  Te  Deum  for  the  victory  at  Pavia,  and  a  despatch 
from  Bourl)on  himself  to  the  King,  four  days  after,  had  fully  confirmed 
all  the  fatal  results  of  that  battle.  The  embassy,  with  his  confidential 
friend  Tunstal  at  its  head,  must  be  despatched  into  Spain,  with  the  pro- 
fessed design  of  recovering  the  French  King  from  imprisonment ;  but 
the  escape  of  Praet,  the  Spanish  ambassador  at  our  court,  who  embarked 
for  Spain  while  Tunstal  was  waiting  for  a  fair  wind,  and  first  reached 
the  Emperor,  put  him  on  his  guard  against  all  delusion. 

Wolsey,  however,  must  go  on,  if  it  be  possible,  in  his  deceitful  course 
at  home,  as  well  as  abroad.  With  matchless  effrontery,  therefore,  he 
calls  the  Mayor  and  Aldermen  of  London,  with  some  principal  Common- 
ers ;  and  in  a  long  oration,  abounding  with  falsehood,  he  boasts  of  having 
sent  100,000  crowns  to  Bourbon  to  fight  this  battle  ;^  that  the  King, 
our  master,  thought  it  "  more  mastery  to  use  victory  gotten,  than  to  get 
it,"  so  that,  "  contrary  to  his  own  mind  and  will,  but  compelled  of  very 
force,  he  was  determined  to  enter  into  a  new  war," — "  that  an  army- 
royal  must  be  made,  and  he  in  person  pass  the  seas,  to  recover  his  right- 
ful inheritance,  and  the  crown  of  France  ! "  Of  course  he  spoke  not  a 
word  of  the  English  gold  sent  secretly  to  support  Francis  ;  and,  pro- 
bably, he  was  not  yet  aware  that  his  illicit  correspondence  with  him  had 
been  found  in  the  royal  tent,  after  the  battle  ;  but,  however,  seizing  the 
popularity  of  the  moment,  he  proceeded  by  illegal  commissions  to  extort 
more  money,  and  then  the  grand  and  final  pressure  came. 

Now,  every  man  was  to  be  valued  again,  and,  as  if  nothing  before  had 
been  exacted  from  him,  according  to  the  valuation  taken  in  152|.  Com- 
missioners, the  greatest  men  in  every  county,  were  appointed  by  Wolsey 
himself,  to  collect  the  sixth  part  of  every  man's  substance,  and  in  no 
wise  to  swerve  one  jot,  on  pain  of  their  lives  !  Commissioners  were  also 
sent  to  the  clergy,  for  iYiQ  fourth  part  of  their  lands  and  moveables  ;  but 
in  every  assembly,  the  priests  replied  that  they  would  pay  nothing,  except 


34  Tyndale  insists  that  the  money  was  withheld  by  Wolsey.  "  Howbeit  there  be  that  say,  that 
the  Emperor's  soldiers  so  threatened  Pace,  our  King's  ambassador,  that  he  was  fain  to  bargain 
with  merchants  for  money  in  the  King's  name  to  pay  the  soldiers  ;  wherefore  the  Cardinal  took 
from  him  all  his  promotion,  and  played  tormentors  with  him  when  he  came  home."  As  already 
stated,  Pace  died  insane. 


i 


1 52r>.]  IIECEIVING  THE  SCRIPTURES.  83 

it  were  ordered  hy  a  Convocation.  They  insisted  that  this  commission 
was  contrary  to  law,  and  that  the  Cardinal,  and  all  his  agents,  were 
enemies  to  the  King  and  the  commonwealth.  "  This  infamy,"  says  Hall, 
"  was  spoken  in  preachings  and  every  where."  The  Commissioners,  how- 
ever, were  still  sitting  in  March  and  April,  and  Wolsey  was  straining 
every  nerve  to  cajole  the  Londoners,  the  Common  Council,  and  the  Mayor. 
At  first  he  had  the  effrontery  to  say — "  Forsooth,  I  think  that  half  your 
substance  were  too  little,  not  meaning  that  the  King  so  asketh  ;"  yet 
after  this  he  must  crouch  and  flatter  them,  and  finally  come  down  in  his 
demands.  But  the  people  were  now  exasperated,  and  so  much  so,  that 
the  proposal  of  collecting  money  from  them  by  way  of  benevolence.,  sug- 
gested by  the  King  himself,  was  alike  in  vain.  The  Aldermen  and 
Council  were  in  a  fury — In  Kent,  the  people  muttered  and  grudged,  and 
said  that  they  would  pay  nothing — In  Essex,  they  would  not  appear 
before  the  Commissioners  except  in  their  own  way — In  Huntingdon, 
various  parties  would  not  allow  the  Commissioners  to  sit  at  all — In 
Norfolk,  its  Duke  remonstrated  with  the  insurgents,  desiring  an  explana- 
tion through  their  captain  ;  when  an  elderly  man  begged  permission 
to  reply,  and  commenced  his  sensible  address  thus,  "  My  Lord,  our 
Captain  is  Poverty,  he  and  his  cousin  Necessity  have  brought  us  to  this 
doing." — In  Suffolk,  there  was  open  insixrrection  !  In  short,  "  when  this 
matter  was  opened  in  England,"  says  the  contemporary  historian,  "  how 
the  great  men  took  it,  was  marvel  ;  the  poor  cursed,  the  rich  repugned, 
the  light  wits  railed  ;  but,  in  conclusion,  all  people  cursed  the  Cardinal 
and  his  co-adherents,  as  subversors  of  the  laws  and  liberty  of  England." 

At  last  the  King  interposed  ;  he  denied  the  knowledge  of  these  severe 
levies.  Wolsey  tried  to  exonerate  himself,  but  Henry  blamed  him  for 
all  this  turmoil,  and  ordered  the  Commissioners  to  cease.  "  I  will  no 
more  of  this  trouble,"  said  his  Majesty,  "  let  letters  be  sent  to  all  shires, 
that  this  matter  may  no  more  be  spoken  of.  I  will  pardon  all  that  have 
denied,  secretly  or  openly."  The  nobiUty  rejoiced,  and  the  people  shouted 
"  God  save  the  King,"  but  would  hear  no  praise  of  the  lofty  ecclesiastic. 
Thus  did  Hem-y  most  happily  prevent  "  that  disloyalty  and  danger,  which, 
in  the  events  that  followed,  might  have  overturned  his  throne." 

To  the  art  of  war,  with  all  its  horrors  and  bloodshed,  even  as  thus 
foully  conducted,  Wolsey  had  entertained  no  objection  whatever.  The 
enormous  expense  thus  entailed  upon  his  country,  was  to  him  of  no 
account,  so  long  as  he  could  govern  the  hostile  movements  by  his  pen. 
But  now,  the  art  oi printing^iSi^  made  him  tremble  ;  and,  though  a  scholar 
himself,  the  rising  republic  of  letters  was  to  his  eye  no  welcome  vision. 
He  must  try  and  provide  against  all  danger,  as  best  he  rdight ;  for  he  had 
penetration  suflacient  to  discern,  that  his  Cardinal's  hat,  nay,  the  hier- 
archy itself,  and  the  authority  of  the  Mass,  were  alike  in  jeopardy.  Hence, 
without  doubt,  his  intended  College  at  Oxford.     Amidst  all  the  toil  and 


84  ENGLAND   JUST    BEFORE  [boOK  I. 

tortuous  policy  of  these  two  busy  years,  he  had  never  lost  sight  of  it  ; 
hut  to  represent  him,  on  this  account,  as  the  beneficent  friend  of  learn- 
ing, would  discover  a  very  superficial  view  of  his  character.  Lord 
Herbert's  belief  as  to  Wolsey's  intentions,  was  certainly  the  only  correct 
one.  The  discovery  of  printing  having  contributed  greatly  to  the  revival 
of  learning  in  Europe,  Herbert  supposes  that  Wolsey  had  stated  the 
effects  of  this  new  art  to  the  Pontiff,  thus  ; — "  That  his  Holiness  could  not 
be  ignorant  what  divers  effects  this  new  invention  of  printing  had  pro- 
duced. For  as  it  had  brought  in  and  restored  books  and  learning,  so  to- 
gether it  had  been  the  occasion  of  those  sects  and  schisms,  which  daily 
appeared  in  the  world,  but  chiefly  in  Germany.  And  that  which  particu- 
larly was  most  to  be  lamented,  they  had  exhorted  lay  and  ordinary  men  to 
read  the  Scriftures,  and  to  pray  in  their  vulgar  tongue  ;  and  if  this  were 
suffered,  besides  all  other  dangers,  the  common  people  at  last  might  come 
to  believe  that  there  was  not  so  much  use  for  the  clergy.  For  if  men 
were  once  persuaded  that  they  could  make  their  own  way  to  heaven,  and 
that  prayers  in  their  native  and  customary  language  might  pierce  heaven, 
as  well  as  Latin,  how  much  would  the  authority  of  the  Mass  fall  %  How 
prejudicial  might  this  prove  to  all  our  ecclesiastical  orders  ?  For  this 
pui-jjose,  since  printing  could  not  be  put  down,  it  were  best  to  set  up 
learning  against  learning  ;  and  by  introducing  able  persons  to  dispute, 
to  suspend  the  laity  betwixt  fear  and  controversies.  This,  at  the  worst, 
would  yet  make  them  attentive  to  theii"  superiors  and  teachers."^ 

The  original  letter  of  Longland,  already  quoted,  fully  corroborates  the 
whole  of  this  statement  ;  and  besides  we  know  that  the  Pontiff  himself, 
formerly  Bishop  of  Worcester,  rejoiced  exceedingly  over  this  jjrojected 
College.  It  was  in  perfect  consonance  with  his  taste,  and  he  lent  it,  as 
we  shall  see,  his  most  cordial  and  effectual  aid. 

In  1523,  we  left  Henry  VIII.  and  his  Queen,  Longland  and  Wolsey, 
rejoicing  in  the  prospect  of  this  school  of  learning,  with  all  its  subtile 
advantages.  When  the  Cardinal  had  an  end  in  view,  he  was  not  long  in 
finding  means,  and  then  all  steps  were  lawful  in  his  estimation  ;  nay,  he 
had  a  method  of  his  own,  by  which  he  could  make  them  appear  to  be 
meritorious  at  the  moment.  Thus,  in  order  to  his  immediate  commence- 
ment of  the  projected  buildings,  he  applied  to  Rome  ;  "  where,"  says 
Burnet,  "  he  was  then  so  much  considered  as  a  Pope  of  another  world, 
that  whatever  he  desired  he  easily  obtained."  Therefore,  on  the  3d  of 
April  1524,  Clement,  by  a  Bull,  gave  him  authority  to  suppress  the 
monastery  of  St.  Frideswide  at  Oxford,  and  carry  the  monks  elsewhere, 
to  make  room  for  the  students.  To  this  the  King  assented  on  the  19th 
of  April. ^  In  trie  following  year  there  came  another  Bull,  giving  him 
leave  to  enrich  his  College  by  suppressing  tioenty-tioo  priories  and  nun- 


35  Herbert's  Henry  VHI.,  p.  147.  36  14  Reg..  2  Part.  Rot.  P:it. 


1525.]  RECEIVING  THE  SCRIPTURES.  85 

neries  ;  but  the  fact  is,  that  Wolsey  having  once  obtained  the  Pope's 
sanction,  was  resolved  to  proceed,  as  legate,  of  his  own  will,  and  he 
actually  went  on  till  he  had  dissolved  fo7't//-o')ie.  He  was  only  restrained 
by  an  admonition  from  the  King.  In  a  letter  to  the  Cardinal,  written 
with  his  own  hand,  and  still  extant,  Henry  says  : — 

"  As  touching  the  help  of  religious  houses  to  the  buihling  of  your  College,  I 
would  it  wove  more,  ho  it  he  lairfally ;  for  surely,  there  is  great  murmuring  of 
it,  throughout  all  the  realm,  both  good  aud  bad.  They  say,  not  that  all  that  is  ill- 
gotten,  is  bestowed  upon  the  College  ;  but  that  the  College  is  the  cloak  for  cover- 
ing all  mischiefs."  After  specifying  one  description  of  malversation,  the  King 
adds, — "  Wherefore,  you  thus  monished  by  him  who  so  entirely  loveth  you,  I 
doubt  not,  will  desist,  not  only  from  this,  but  from  all  other  things  which  should 
tangle  the  same." 

There  is  certainly  some  appearance  here  of  the  Royal  confidence  be- 
ginning to  shake,  but  the  King  was  pleased  with  his  design  on  the  whole, 
and  Wolsey  yet  continued  to  have  great  influence  over  him.  About  two 
years  must  pass  away  before  Hemy  used  these  remarkable  words, — "  The 
hand  that  made  him,  can  destroy  him  when  it  lists." 

So  much  with  regard  to  the  buildings  to  be  erected,  and  which  in  the  end, 
however,  were  never  completed  according  to  the  magnificent  scale  laid 
down.  But  the  men  to  be  selected,  the  men  with  whom  he  was  to  com- 
mence his  crusade  of  learning  against  learning,  had  already  engaged 
Wolsey's  most  earnest  solicitude,  and  all  his  discrimination  ;  as  it  was 
through  them  alone  he  could  gain  his  end.  Educated  in  Magdalen 
College,  Oxford,  and  where,  at  the  early  age  of  fifteen,  Wolsey  was  ad- 
mitted to  the  degree  of  bachelor  of  arts,  no  proofs  are  wanting  of  his  re- 
putation as  a  scholar.  He  Avas  therefore  well  able  to  ascertain,  who, 
among  all  that  came  before  him,  were  most  likely  to  serve  his  purpose. 
At  least  so  has  Shakespeare  sung  his  praise. 

"  He  was  a  scholar,  and  a  ripe  and  good  one  ; 
Exceedint;  wise,  fair  s]>oken,  and  persuading  ; 
Lofty  and  sour  to  them  that  loved  him  not. 
But  to  those  men  that  sought  him,  sweet  as  summer." 

Wolsey  commenced  l)y  naming  the  Dean,  Dr.  John  Hygdon,  and 
eighteen  canons,  men  of  reputed  learning  chosen  out  of  the  other 
colleges  at  Oxford.  Aided  by  Hygdon  and  Dr.  Capon,  afterwards  the 
head  of  his  school  at  Ipswich,  he  added  others  deliberately.  The  most 
expert  and  learned  were  alone  to  be  selected  as  students — the  kingdom 
was  searched,  and  in  1.524,  the  Cardinal  himself  having  j)aid  a  visit  to 
Cambridge,  that  University  had  to  yield  up  its  most  cl^oice  young  men. 
He  aimed,  in  short,  at  gathering  the  talent  of  England  into  one  focus, 
intending  to  maintain  or  promote  certain  ecclesiastical  purposes,  which 
lay  very  near  his  heart, — for  his  "  poor  College  at  Oxford,"  found  a  place 
among  the  wailincs  of  his  last  davs. 


86        ENGLAND  BEFORE  RECEIVING  THE  SCRIPTURES.      [^BOOK  I. 

By  a  comparison  of  Wood's  Annals  of  the  University  of  Oxford,  with 
his  Athenai  Oxoniensis,  and  Foxe's  Acts  and  Monuments,  we  find  the 
following  names  among  those  selected  from  1523  to  December  1525. 

Of  those  selected  in  Oxford,  we  can  only  specify  Thomas  Canner, 
Peter  Garsius,  a  foreigner,  John  Tooker,  Richard  Champion,  John  Pier- 
son,  Leighton ;  and  from  Boston,  Richard  Taverner ;  but  from  Cam- 
bridge, Robert  Sherton,  Thomas  Curthope,  Richard  Cox,  John  Clarke, 
John  Fryer,   Godfrey  Harman,  Henry  Sicmner,   William   Belts,   John 

Fryth,  William  Baily, Goodman,  Radley,  Michael  Drumm, 

and  Thonuis  Lawney?"^ 

If  the  eminence  to  which  most  of  these  students  rose  in  future  life  be 
observed,  it  affords  a  convincing  proof  that  the  Cardinal  had  made  no  mis- 
take as  to  talent ;  but  it  will  be  observed,  that  we  have  printed  most  of 
their  names  in  italic ;  the  reason  is,  that  these  men  will  appear  again,  and 
before  long,  all  in  one  group  ;  though  in  a  character  very  different  indeed, 
from  that  which  was  contemplated  by  the  founder  of  Cardinal  College. 

As  this  brief  survey  of  the  political  world  is  not  unimportant  in  itself, 
so,  in  the  result,  it  will  api:)ear  to  be  not  unconnected  with  the  introduc- 
tion of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  into  our  native  land.  It  has  shown  that  the 
character  of  their  grand  opponent,  and  who  seemed  to  possess  power  quite 
sufficient  to  have  excluded  them,  had  sustained  a  severe  shock  abroad, 
which  it  never  recovered.  His  pei"fidy  had  sunk  him  in  the  estimation 
not  only  of  the  Regent  of  the  Low  Countries,  but  in  that  of  her  subjects, 
from  whence  the  English  Scriptures  were  to  be  imported.  At  home,  among 
a  people  exasperated,  who  now  hated  him,  less  regard  would  be  paid  to 
his  thundering  anathemas  ;  and  as  for  his  favourite  school  of  learning, 
of  which  he  had  intimated  at  Oxford,  through  Longland,  while  Tyndale 
was  yet  in  London, — "  that  as  he  had  begun,  so  he  would  fovmd  a  College 
for  two  hundred  Students,  and  seven  Lecturers,  and  endow  them  with 
honest  and  comfortable  salaries,  and  make  then-  University  ?7?e  most  glori- 
ous 171  the  universe,^''  we  have  yet  to  see  whether  it  hindered  or  advanced 
the  cause  of  divine  truth,  which  Tyndale,  all  alone  upon  the  Continent, 
had  so  much  at  heart. 


37  It  may  be  observed,  that  double  the  number  of  canons  now  named  were  Cambridge  men. 
Fourteen  were  brought  from  Cambridfie,  Tyndale's  last  residence,  to  Oxfurd,  where  he  liad  ex- 
pounded Scripture  to  the  students  and  fellows  of  Magdalen  ColloKc  ;  or  the  College  where 
Wolsey  himself  had  formerly  studied,  and  where,  as  a  Master,  he  had  been  teacher  of  Magdalen 
Grammar  School ;  associating,  at  that  time,  with  Erasmus. 


I 


C    ST    ] 


SECTION   III. 

MEMOUABLE   INTRODUCTION   OF  THE   NEW  TESTAMENT  INTO   ENGLAND — THE 
TWO  FIRST  EDITIONS — THE  FIRST  ALARM  IN  LONDON,  OXFORD,  CAMBRIDGE 

THE   FIRST   BURNING  OF  BOOKS — NEW  TESTAMENT    DENOUNCED  BY  THE 

KING    AND    WOLSEY  —  THEN    BY    TUNSTAL   AND   WARHAM THE   THIRD 

EDITION VIOLENT    CONTENTION    RESPECTING    IT — BURNING    IT    ABROAD 

AND  AT  HOME — BUT  IN  VAIN. 

That  interesting  period  when  the  Word  of  God,  printed  in 
our  native  tongue,  was  first  found  in  England,  had  now  arrived. 
It  was  in  January  1526.  On  the  banks  of  the  Rhine,  Tyndale 
had  finished  his  New  Testaments  at  the  press,  but  how  was 
it  possible  for  them  ever  to  be  conveyed  into  our  country  ? 
Had  not  Rincke  and  Cochlwus  warned  the  Cardinal  himself, 
the  King,  and  the  Bishop  of  Rochester,  that  they  might  "  with 
the  greatest  diligence  take  care"  lest  one  of  them  should  come 
into  any  port  in  all  England  ?  They  certainly  had,  and  in 
good  time,  so  that  it  is  no  fault  of  theirs,  if  all  opposing  parties 
were  not  now  on  the  alert.  Yet  here  are  the  dreaded  books, 
and  upon  English  ground,  and  not  only  in  the  metropolis,  but 
in  both  universities,  to  say  nothing,  at  this  moment,  of  the 
country  at  large  ! 

It  is  natural,  however,  first  to  enquire  whether  there  were 
any  circumstances,  at  the  moment,  favourable  to  their  intro- 
duction. Of  all  other  men,  the  two  most  able  and  most  likely 
to  have  prevented  their  arrival,  or  immediately  suppressed 
them,  were  Wolsey  and  Tunstal,  the  Bishop  of  London.  But 
the  former  was  now  completely  engrossed  by  affairs  of  state 
policy,  both  abroad  and  at  home — abroad  he  was  urging,  nay, 
rousing  the  French  Cabinet  to  renewed  war  with  the  Emperor; 
at  home,  he  was  concluding  peace  with  Scotland,  and  also 
busily  engaged  in  reforming  his  master's  household,  or  framing 
what  were  called  "  the  Statutes  of  Eltham."  The  Bishop  of 
London  was  not  in  the  country,  liaving  been  happily  removed 
out  of  the  way  eight  months  before ;  he  was  still  ambassador 
in  Spain,  and  not  to  return  till  August  or  September  ;  so  that 
his  name  never  should  have  been  associated,  as  it  has  gener- 
ally been,  with  the^r^^  reception  of  Tyndale''s  New  Testament. 
More  than   this,  the  winter  was   peculiarly  unhealthy,   and 


88  FIRST  ARRIVALS.  [bouK  I, 

such  was  the  alanii  created  by  great  mortality,  that  the  courts 
had  been  adjourned — the  authorities  were  out  of  the  way-— the 
King  was  keeping  his  Christmas  at  Eltham,  in  private,  with  a 
few  friends,  "  for  in  the  King's  house,"  says  Halle,  "  this  was 
called  the  still  Christmas'" — and  Wolsey,  after  carousing  at 
Richmond  for  a  few  days,  had  to  attend  His  Majesty  on  busi- 
ness at  Eltham,  from  the  8th  to  the  2 2d  of  January. 

Such  a  conjunction  of  circumstances  but  seldom  occurred, 
and,  without  straining  a  point,  they  may  surely  be  regarded 
as  providential ;  for  they  afforded  certain  opportunities,  which, 
we  shall  find,  had  been  most  busily  improved.  So  easily  can 
the  Divine  Being  "  scatter  the  proud  in  the  imagination  of 
their  hearts,"  when  he  is  about  to  "  exalt  them  of  low  degree." 
The  country  had  been  first  long  harassed  by  oppressive  and 
vexatious  exactions,  to  carry  on  expensive  foreign  wars,  and 
now  it  is  assailed  by  disease  and  death  !  Such  was  the  period 
chosen  by  Infinite  Wisdom  to  introduce  the  Word  of  Life, 
that  "  sovereign  balm  for  every  wound  !"  England's  surest 
hope,  the  true  secret  of  all  her  future  stability,  and  the  only 
security  for  it  still. 

The  earliest  importations  of  these  precious  volumes  would 
furnish  a  very  curious  subject  of  enquiry.  The  various  methods 
adopted  for  several  years  in  order  to  secure  their  entrance  into 
this  country,  can  never  now,  indeed,  be  fully  detailed  ;  but 
the  conveyance  of  Tyndale's  New  Testaments  into  England 
and  Scotland,  with  other  books  illustrative  of  the  Sacred 
Volume,  coidd  only  the  half  be  told,  would  form  one  of  the 
most  graphic  stories  in  English  history.  No  siege,  by  sapping 
and  mining,  which  Britain  has  ever  since  achieved,  could 
furnish  the  tenth  part  of  the  incident,  or  evince  half  the 
courage,  by  which  she  was  herself  assailed.  But  the  materials 
have  never  yet  been  examined  and  compared,  with  that  re- 
gard to  accuracy  as  to  names,  and  succession  as  to  events, 
which  would  have  brought  out  some  of  the  finest  specimens  of 
faith  and  fortitude  and  persevering  zeal. 

From  what  particular  port  on  the  Continent  the  first  copies 
were  sent,  and  to  what  port  in  England  they  came,  may  re- 
main for  ever  a  secret.  The  probability  is,  that  some  came 
from  Antwerp,  while  others  were  sent  from  Worms  down  the 
Rhino  through  Holland,  and  so  from  difterent  places.  ]ie  this 
as  it  may.  we  know  for  certain  of  two  gentlemen,  who  engaged 


1520,]  FIRST  ALARM.  89 

in  very  early,  if  not  the  first,  active  measures  as  to  the  im- 
portation itself;  namely,  Simon  Fysh,  of  Gray's  Inn,  London, 
and  George  Herman,  a  citizen  of  Antwerp,  and  merchant  in 
the  English  house  there  ;  while,  during  this  month  of  Janu- 
ary 1526,  we  shall  find  that  not  a  few  of  the  most  learned 
young  men  in  England  were  eagerly  perusing  Tyndale\s  first 
productions.  Nothing  then,  however,  could  have  been  more 
unlikely,  than  that  London  and  both  the  Universities  should  be 
in  a  ferment  the  very  first  week  after  that  month  had  expired. 

It  was  on  the  2d  of  February,  that  an  insignificant  incident 
gave  birth  to  the  first  great  alarm.  It  well  deserves,  there- 
fore, to  be  noticed.  Simon  Fysh,  already  mentioned,  a  native 
of  Kent,  after  receiving  his  education  at  Oxford,  had  taken  up 
his  residence  as  a  lawyer  in  Gray's  Inn,  London.  A  play,  or 
tragedy,  as  Foxe  calls  it,  composed  by  a  Mr.  Roo  or  Row,  of 
the  same  Inn,  in  one  part  of  which  Wolsey  thought  himself 
deeply  impugned,  was  about  to  be  acted  in  private ;  and  this 
part,  after  others  through  fear  had  declined,  Fysh  undertook 
to  perform.  He  did  so  once,  but  never  could  a  second  time, 
for  "  the  same  night  that  this  tragedy  was  played,"  Fysh  was 
compelled  to  leave  his  own  house,  and  finally  escape  to  the 
Continent.  How  often  did  the  Cardinal,  with  all  his  sagacity, 
put  forth  his  hand  to  his  own  downfall  1  Though,  confessedly, 
a  deep  politician,  he  was  far  from  understanding  the  policy  of 
non-interference.  This  attempt  at  apprehension  must  have  oc- 
curred before  the  end  of  1523,  if  it  be  correct,  as  Foxe  affirms, 
that  "  the  nea^t  year  following"  he  composed  the  tract  entitled 
"  the  Supplication  of  Beggars."'  Mr.  Fysh  is  stated  to  have 
been  with  Tyndale  abroad,  and  if  so,  "  the  little  treatise"  which 
Munmouth  depones  that  Tyndale  "  sent  to  him  from  Ham- 
burgh in  1524,  when  he  sent  for  his  money,"  may  have  been 
this  publication,  if  it  was  not  the  gospel  of  Matthew.  But, 
whether  the  one  or  the  other,  the  "■'  Supplication"  must  have 
been  in  existence  in  1525,  from  what  we  know  of  its  history. 

In  the  shape  of  a  "  Supplication,"  addressed  "  to  the  King 


'  "  Scripsit,"  says  Tanner,  "  ad  regem  Henr.  VHI.  A.  mdxxiv."  "  Corapyled  by  Symon 
Fyshe,  anno  Mcccccxxrv.,"  is  printed  on  the  title  of  tlic  "  Supplication  of  the  poor  Commons, 
l.'>46." — Herbert's  Ames,  iii.  p.  15.')7.  John  Foxe,  with  all  his  assiduity,  was  no  chronologist. 
The  suhslaiice  of  his  narrative  often  furnishes  a  certain  key  to  the  precise  year,  but  a  few  years 
here  or  there  he  often  treats  in  his  own  quaint  style.  Thus,  in  the  narrative  respecting  Fyshe, 
which  is  after  ail  confused,  he  says,  "  the  missins  oi  afvtv  years  in  this  matter  breaketh  no  great 
s'niarr  in  our  story,  though  it  ))e  now  entered  here,  which  should  have  come  in  sij:  years  before." 


90  FIRST  ALARM  IN  LONDON.  [boOK  I. 

our  Sovereign  Lord,""  it  conveyed  the  most  wholesome  and 
astounding  advice  to  Henry  VIII.,  and  the  parties  interested 
were  so  very  fortunate  as  to  reach  his  ear  through  one  of  liis 
confidential  servants  or  footmen,  whom  Foxe  calls  Edmund 
Moddis.  This  man  had  read  the  book  himself,  and  told  his 
Majesty,  that  "  if  he  would  pardon  him,  and  such  men  as  he 
would  bring  to  his  grace,  he  should  see  such  a  book  as  was 
marvel  to  hear  of."  The  King  fixed  a  time,  and  thus  two 
merchants,  George  Eliot,  and  George  Robinson,  were  favoured 
with  a  private  audience.  His  Majesty,  whose  curiosity  had 
been  excited  by  the  representation  of  his  confidential  servant, 
patiently  listened  to  every  line,  as  it  was  read  to  him  by  Eliot.^ 

This  powerful  tract,  for  it  was  nothing  more,  written  in  a 
popular  style,  contained  an  unmeasured  attack  on  the  whole 
fraternity  of  "  Monks  and  Friars,  Pardoners  and  Sumners," 
into  whose  hands  an  immense  proportion  of  the  nation's  wealth 
had  already  passed.  Their  growing  power,  already  impairing 
and  threatening  to  destroy  that  of  the  Crown  itself,  was  de- 
nounced in  the  strongest  terms.  "  This  is  the  great  scab," 
said  Fysh,  "  why  they  will  not  let  the  New  Testament  go  abroad 
in  your  mother  tongue,  lest  men  should  espy  that  they,  by 
their  cloaked  hypocrisy,  do  translate,  thus  fast,  your  kingdom 
into  their  hands." 

At  the  close  of  its  being  read,  and  after  a  long  pause,  the 
King  is  reported  to  have  said,  "  if  a  man  should  pull  down 
an  old  stone  wall,  and  begin  at  the  lower  part,  the  upper  part 
thereof  might  chance  to  fall  on  his  head  ;"  then  taking  the 
book,  he  put  it  in  his  desk,  commanding  the  men  on  their 
allegiance,  that  they  should  not  disclose  to  any  one  that  he 
liad  seen  it. 

Copies  of  this  tract  must  have  been  possessed  by  not  a  few, 
when  the  King''s  own  servant  knew  its  contents  so  thoroughly. 
This,  however,  would  not  suffice,  and  so  it  had  been  determined 
that  the  people  at  large  sliould  read  it  for  themselves  ;  and, 
also,  tliat  no  doubt  should  remain,  whether  the  King  had  seen 
it.  John  Foxe,  therefore,  thus  describes  it — "  A  Libel  or  Book 
entitled,  the  Supplication  of  Beggars,  thrown  and  scattered 
at  the  procession  in  Westminster,  on  Candlemas  day,  before 


2  George  Eliot  or  Elyot,  a  man  well  known  afterwards  both  to  George  Constantyne  and  Lord 
Crumwell ;  and  referred  to  by  the  former,  under  1539. 


1526.]  FIRST  ALARM  IN  LONDON.  91 

King  Henry  the  Eighth,  for  him  to  road  and  peruse."  This 
was  on  Friday  the  2d  of  February  1526.  Many  copies  might 
be  tlius  dispo.sed  of,  but,  by  another  account,  they  had  been 
scattered  about  the  streets  by  night. 

The  moment  of  alarm  had  now  come.  This  very  trivial 
incident  had  excited  the  greatest  fear  and  dread  !  Wolsey 
immediately  went  to  his  Majesty,  complaining  of  "  divers 
seditious  persons  having  scattered  abroad  books  containing 
manifest  errors,  desiring  his  Grace  to  beware  of  them  ;"  but 
what  must  have  been  his  mortification,  when  the  King,  putting 
his  hand  into  his  bosom,  and  taking  out  one  of  these  very 
books,  delivered  it  into  his  hands  !  At  this  period  Henry 
was  not  a  little  gratified  by  any  information  which  he  could 
procure,  independently  of  his  domineering  Prime  Minister. 

Wolsey,  once  roused,  became  fully  awake  to  the  importance 
of  his  intentions  in  the  year  1523.  Engrossed  as  he  had  been 
with  political  affairs,  some  of  these  intentions  had  remained 
unfulfilled.  But  now  there  was  to  be  "  the  secret  search,''''  and 
in  divers  places  at  one  time,  and  a  sermon  to  be  preached,  by 
Fisher,  the  very  man  whom  Henry  had  then  named.  It  was 
resolved  to  strike  terror  into  the  heart  of  the  enemy,  and  give 
one  vital  stab  to  all  that  was  now  run  down  under  the  nick- 
name of  Lutherauism  ;  for  divine  truth  had  been  slowly  gain- 
ing its  way,  and  was  now  to  spread,  as  it  had  done,  independ- 
ently of  Luther.  The  fact  is,  that  the  crusade,  under  which 
our  country  long  groaned  and  bled,  was  about  to  begin  ;  and 
as  the  authorities  of  the  day  were  now  going  to  treat  the 
people  of  God  after  the  primitive  fashion,  when  they  first  put 
them  in  bear  skins,  and  then  baited  them,  a  word  of  terror  was 
wanting.  Lollard,  had  been  the  term  for  above  a  hundred 
years,  as  it  especially  was  under  Longland,  in  1521  ;  but 
Lutheranism  was  now  a  far  more  effectual,  because  opprobrious, 
epithet ;  involving  all  those  who  either  read  the  Scriptures, 
or  appealed  to  them  as  authority. 

Before,  however,  we  can  rightly  understand  the  course  of 
events,  the  evidence  afibrded  by  original  manuscripts,  by  Foxe 
and  Strype,  Bishop  Tanner  and  Anthony  Wood,  as  well  as 
two  or  three  other  authorities,  must  be  carefully  compared. 
After  this,  when  we  look  at  London,  Oxford,  and  Cambridge, 
as  well  as  the  country  at  large,  a  scene,  full  of  the  deepest 
interest,  opens  to  view. 


92  FIRST  ALARM  IN  LONDON.  [bOOK  I. 

Not  a  day  was  now  to  be  lost.  London,  thongh  ftir  from 
its  present  size,  was  large  enough  even  then  to  be  favourable 
to  secrecy  ;  but  London,  Cambridge,  and  Oxford,  must  all  be 
searched  at  one  time,  and  Cardinal  College,  too,  must  not  be 
overlooked.  Wolsey  could  not  have  been  with  the  King 
sooner  than  next  day,  Saturday  the  8d.  The  simultaneous 
orders  for  both  Universities  must  have  been  the  same  day,  as  the 
Sergeants-at-Arms  had  arrived  at  both  by  Monday  orTuesday. 

In  London  they  commenced  immediately.  Among  the  very 
first  places  where  the  "  secret  search''''  began,  was  a  narrow  lane 
in  Cheapside,  nearly  opposite  to  Bow  Church.  In  a  church 
there,  "  All  Hallows  in  Honey  Lane,"'*'  Robert  Forman, 
S.  T,  P.,  was  Rector,  and  Mr.  Thomas  Garret,  Curate. 
Strong  suspicions  rested  on  the  latter,  as  being  at  once  a 
receiver  and  distributor  of  books."^  The  articles  finally  ob- 
jected against  him,  are  to  be  found  only  in  the  first  edition  of 
John  Foxe's  Acts  and  Monuments,  a  book  which  compara- 
tively very  few  persons  in  this  country  have  ever  seen.*  We 
shall,  therefore,  give  those  items  which  refer  to  the  subject 
before  us,  as  they  furnish  an  important  link  in  the  follow- 
ing narrative. 

"  Articles  objected  against  Thomas  Garret,  Master  of  Art,  sometime  Parish 
Priest,  Curate  of  All  Hallows  in  Honey  Lane. 


3  In  one  document  he  subscribes  his  name  Gerardc,  and  so  he  is  sometimes  called.  Out  of 
eif,'hty-nine  churches  burnt  down  in  the  great  fire  of  1666,  this  of  All  Hallows  in  Honey  Lane 
was  one  of  those  v,-hich  was  not  rebuilt,  and  the  space  was  long  occujiied,  by  Act  of  Parliament, 
as  Honey  Lane  Market  ;  but  the  market  has  now  given  way  to  a  noble  school  "  for  the  religious 
and  virtuous  education  of  boys,  and  for  instructing  them  in  the  higher  brandies  of  literature  and 
all  other  useful  learning,"  for  such  are  the  terms  of  the  Act.  The  general  course  of  education  in- 
cludes English,  Latin  and  French,  writing,  arithmetic,  book-keeping,  mathematics  and  natural 
philosophy,  geography  and  natural  history,  ancient  and  modern  history,  with  lectures  on 
chemistry  and  experimental  philoso])hy.  A  sjiecial  course  superadds  Greek,  Hebrew,  German, 
Spanish,  and  drawing,  for  those  who  wish  any  of  them  ;  and  there  are  classes  even  superior,  for 
poetry,  antiquities,  &c.  It  is  curious  enough  that  this  fine  establishment  owes  its  existence  to 
the  bequests  of  an  eminent  London  citizen,  John  Carpenter,  who  lived  above  four  hundred  years 
ago,  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VI.  They  had  been  sadly  misapplied,  but,  through  the  "Commis- 
sioners of  Charities,"  have  been  now  happily  appropriated  to  invaluable  purposes,  of  which  the 
original  testator  never  dreamt.  The  erection  looks  towards  Milk  Street,  where  Sir  Thomas 
More  was  born,  and  who  succeeded  Wolsey  in  persecuting  all  those  who  read  or  possessed  the 
Testament  of  Tyndale.  One  distinct  provision  in  tlic  Act,  therefore,  is  worthy  of  notice,  viz. 
that  the  Sacred  Srriphtrr.i  are  to  be  "  nserl  and  taiiffht"  in  this  school.  Thus,  many  of  the 
sentences  which  Tyndale  first  printed  for  his  country,  will  here  be  read  daily  upon  the  very 
ground  where  men  of  other  days  firxl  searched  eagerly  for  books,  only  to  burn  them  !  It  is  an 
elegant  Gothic  building,  and  an  ornament  to  that  part  of  the  metropolis  ;  but  it  is  more  than 
probable  that  neither  Mr.  Warren  Hale,  (to  whom  the  city  is  so  much  indebted,)  the  Chairman, 
nor  any  member  of  "  the  Committee  of  the  City  of  London  Schools,"  has  been  before  aware  of 
the  interesting  character,  not  to  say  the  celebrity  of  the  spot,  on  which  their  building  stands. 

*  The  Colophon  is  "  Imprinted  at  London,  by  John  Day,  dwelling  over  Aldersgate,  benetli 
Saynt  Martins,  Anno  I.56.'i,  the  2(lth  of  March."  "  The  difficulty."  says  Mr.  Grenville,  "of  find- 
ing a  complete  cojiy  of  this  extremely  rare  edition  is  suihciently  known." — "  A  jieculiar  merit  of 
it  is,  that  it  contains  several  passages,  and  particularly  respecting  the  Protector  Somerset,  sup- 
pressed in  all  the  subsequent  editions."     A  ]ierlect  c<>i>y  was  sold,  in  182;},  for  £56. 


1520.]  FIRST   ALARM   IN   OXFORD.  }»3 

"  First,  for  bringing  divers  and  nuuiy  books,  treatises,  and  works  of  Martin 
Luther  and  his  sect,  as  also  for  dispersing  abroad  of  the  said  books  to  divers 
and  many  persons  within  tliis  realm,  as  well  Studcuts  in  the  University  of 
Oxford  (iiid  Camhrkhjc,  as  other  spiritual,  temporal,  and  religious  men,  to  the 
intent  to  have  advanced  the  said  sects  and  opinions.  Item,  for  having  the  said 
books  in  his  custody — for  reading  them  secretly  in  privy  places  and  suspect 
company,  declaring  and  teaching  here,  lies  and  errors  contained  in  them.  Item, 
for  that  in  his  own  person,  he  followed,  advanced,  and  set  forth  the  said  sect 
and  opinions,  and  also  moved,  stirred,  and  counselled  others  to  follow  and  ad- 
vance the  same,  not  only  within  tlie  C'Un  and  Dioceses  of  London  and  Lincoln, 
but  also  in  the  Universities  of  Oxford  and  Vmiibrid<je,  with  divers  other  places. 
Item,  that  he  knew  certain  religious  pci-sons  which  printed  Entjlifh  books,  or  some 
that  intended  to  print  such  books.  Item,  that  he  fled  away  in  a  layman's  ap- 
parel from  Oxford  to  Bedminstcr,  when  he  should  have  been  attached  for  heresy. 

"  For  these  articles,  and  such  like,  he  was  abjured  before  Cuthbert  (Tunstal) 
Bishop  of  London,  John  (Longland)  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  and  John  (Clark) 
Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells.  No  mention  made  of  the  year  and  time,  nor  yet 
of  any  penance  adjoined  him."-'' 

Such  were  some  of  the  charges  formally  brought  against 
Mr.  Garret,  and  not  without  reason  ;  but  among  all  the 
books  imported,  in  Latin  and  in  English,  we  have  now  to 
enquire  whether  there  was  not  one,  infinitely  above  them  all 
in  value,  though  at  the  first  unknown  to  the  authorities, 
namely,  Tyndale's  New  Testament, 

During  part  of  January,  Garret  must  have  been  busy  in 
the  City  and  Diocese  of  London,  but  in  the  beginning  or  first 
week  of  February,  when  sought  for  at  his  own  abode,  he  could 
not  be  found.  He  was  then  "  searched  for  through  all 
London,"  when  the  Cardinal  ascertained  that  "  he  had  a  great 
number  of  those  books,  and  was  gone  to  Oxford  to  make  sale 
of  them  there,  to  such  as  he  knew  to  be  lovers  of  the  Gospel." 
The  truth  is,  that  this  future  martyr  had  been  for  some  time 
in  the  habit  of  conveying  books  to  both  Universities,  and  of 
visiting  Oxford  personally.  He  was  down  there  at  the  pre- 
ceding Christmas,  and,  with  regard  to  the  present  occasion, — 
"About  the  year  1526,"  says  Foxe,  "•  Master  Garret,  Curate 
of  Honey  Lane  in  London,  came  unto  Oxford,  and  brought 
with  him  sundry  books  in  Latin,  treating  of  the  Scripture, 
with  the  first  part  of  "  Unio  disidentium,"  and  Tyndale  s  first 
translation  of  the  New  Testament  in  English^  the  which  books 


5  So  says  Foxe,  in  W^  first  edition,  p.  477-  These  articles,  thoush  rather  an  anticipation  of  our 
narrative,  afford  distinctness  and  certainty  to  what  follows.  As  for  the  penance,  the  abjuration, 
the  year  and  time,  there  is  no  uncertainty.  The  penance  will  come  before  us  presently,  and, 
alas  !  his  abjuration  at  the  close  of  the  year,  when  we  shall  glance  at  his  future  history. 


04.  FIRST  ALARM   IN   OXFORD.  [boOK  I. 

lie  sold  to  divers  scholars  in  Oxford/'  "  After  he  had  been 
there  a  while,  and  despatched  those  hooks,  news  came  that  he 
was  searched  for  through  all  London,  to  be  apprehended  and 
taken  as  a  heretic,  and  to  be  imprisoned  for  selling  those 
heretical  books,  as  they  termed  them."  Not  finding  him  in 
London,  "  they  had  determined  forthwith  to  apprehend  and 
imprison  him,  and  to  burn  all  and  every  his  foresaid  books, 
and  him  too,  if  they  could,  so  burning  hot  was  their  zeal." 
By  the  time,  however,  that  the  Sergeant-at-Arms  had 
arrived,  Cole  of  Magdalen  College,  who  was  afterwards  cross- 
bearer  to  the  Cardinal,  but  an  acquaintance  of  Garret's,  gave 
him  warning.  So  in  the  morning  of  "  Wednesday  before 
Shrovetide,"  on  the  7th  of  February,  he  left  Oxford,  but  re- 
turning again,  he  changed  his  dress  as  far  as  he  could,  and 
disappeared  on  Friday  night.  There  is  a  beautifully  graphic 
account  of  this,  part  of  which  we  must  quote ;  for  which  we 
are  indebted  to  Anthony  Dalaber,  one  of  the  students, 
devotedly  attached  to  Mr.  Garret. 

"  When  he  was  gone  down  the  stairs  from  my  chamber,"  says  he,  "  I 
straightways  did  shut  ray  chamber  door,  and  went  into  my  study,  and  took 
the  New  Testament  in  my  hands,  kneeled  down  on  my  knees,  and  with  many 
a  deep  sigh  and  salt  tear,  I  did,  with  much  deliberation,  read  over  the  tenth 
chapter  of  Saint  Matthew  his  gospel :  and  when  I  had  so  done,  with  fervent 
prayer  I  did  commit  imto  God,  that  our  dearly  beloved  brother  Garret,  earnestly 
beseeching  him,  in  and  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  his  only  begotten  Son,  our 
Lord,  that  he  would  vouchsafe  not  only  safely  to  conduct  and  keep  our  said 
dear  brother  from  the  hands  of  all  his  enemies  ;  but  also  that  he  would  endue 
his  tender  and  lately  born  Uttle  flock  in  O.rford,  with  heavenly  strength  by  his 
Holy  Spirit,  that  they  might  be  able  thereby  valiantly  to  withstand  to  his  glory 
all  their  fierce  enemies,  and  also  might  quietly  to  their  own  salvation,  with  all 
godly  patience,  bear  Christ's  heavy  cross  ;  which  I  now  saw  was  presently  to 
be  laid  on  their  young  and  weak  backs,  imable  to  bear  so  huge  a  burden, 
without  the  great  help  of  his  Holy  Spirit.   This  done,  I  laid  aside  my  book,  safe."^ 

In  this  first  attempt  to  escape,  however,  Garret  had,  most 
unwisely,    yielded    to  worldly  policy,  in  consequence  of  his 


6  That  this  was  a  copy  of  Tyndale's  English  Testament,  there  can  be  no  question,  although 
Foxe  in  his.^r*^  edition,  forgetful  of  what  he  said,  supposed,  in  a  note,  that  this  was  the  Testa- 
ment of  Erasmus  ;  a  book,  by  the  way,  which  was  nei-cr  denounced,  and  which  Delaber  had 
therefore  no  reason  to  hide  in  safety.  But,  then,  to  do  Foxe  justice,  he  left  this  note  o»/  of  sub- 
sequent editions,  having  no  doubt  discovered  his  mistake.  This  must  l)e  observed  by  the  readers 
of  the  new  edition  of  Foxe  published  by  Seelcy,  where  the  note  of  \X^  has  been  rcsfurcd,  without 
any  caveat.  The  laborious  author,  by  his  omissions,  certainly  sometimes  intended  to  convey  his 
change  of  opinion  after  more  accurate  information,  just  as  other  authors  have  done,  and  the  re- 
mark now  made  will  apply  to  some  other  passages.  Hence  the  republication  of  all  that  Foxe 
ever  printed,  becomes  a  very  ticklish  undertaking,  and,  without  warning,  may  prolong  the 
inaccuracy  of  history. 


1526.]  FIRST  ALARM   IN   OXFORD.  95 

friends  thinking  it  best  that  ho  sliould  change  liis  name,  and 
then  engage  himself  as  Curate  to  a  brother  of  Delaber's,  Parson 
of  Stalbridgc  in  Dorsetshire,  (though  known  to  be  a  decided 
enemy,)  till  the  first  opportunity  should  present  itself  of 
escaping  beyond  seas.  But  he  was  too  conscientious  a  man 
to  proceed  in  this  way,  and  so,  seized  with  fear,  he  returned 
to  Oxford  on  Friday  evening.  That  night  he  was  appre- 
hended, but  escaped  again,  and  was  finally  taken  at  Hinksey, 
about  two  miles  distant  ;  when  he,  and  all  besides,  who 
were  suspected  as  receivers  of  books,  were  very  soon  in 
safe  keeping ! 

We  have  now,  then,  to  witness  what  has  come  over  Cardinal 
College^  as  well  as  others ;  for  the  future  eminence  of  the 
young  men  now  imprisoned,  fills  the  present  story  with  no 
common  interest. 

"  Divers  others,  indeed,"  says  Foxe,  "  were  now  constrained 
to  forsake  their  colleges  and  seek  their  friends ;'"'  but  still  he 
favours  us  with  the  names  of  the  captured  ;  corroborated  and 
increased  by  Strype,  as  well  as  Wood.  Thus,  we  find  expressly 
mentioned,  John  Fryth,  with  the  Chaplain,  his  fellow  prisoner, 
Thomas  Lawney,  John  Clarke,  Godfrey  Harman,  Henry 
Sumner,    William  Betts,   Richard  Taverner,  Richard  Coxe, 

Michael  Drumm,  and Radley,  all  of  Cardinal  College ; 

Nicholas  Udall  and  John  Diot  of  Corpus  Christi  ;  Eeden  and 
others  of  Magdalen  College  ;  Goodman,  William  Bayley,  John 
Salisbury,  Robert  Ferrar,  of  Glo'ster,  Bernard  and  Mary''s 
Colleges  ;  Langport,  a  Monk  of  St.  Austin's  of  Canterbury, 
and  Anthony  Dalaber,  of  St.  Alban\s  Hall. 

Of  Fryth  we  need  say  nothing  more  at  present,  except  that  it  is  evident  he 
had  not  yet  left  Oxford,  nor  his  native  country  ;  and  that  consequently  the 
association  of  him  with  Tyndale  in  his  translation,  though  generally  current  to 
this  day,  is  nothing  more  than  an  unfounded  assumption.  Lawney,  his  fellow 
prisoner,  a  man  of  wit,  was  afterwards  chaplain  to  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  ; 
and  befriended  by  Cranmer,  he  was  often  about  his  person,  having  a  living  in 
Kent.  Clarke,  an  A.M.  of  Cambridge,  as  well  as  Oxford,  eight  or  ten  j'ears 
older  than  the  rest,  gave  lectures  in  divinity  to  these  and  other  young  men. 
Though  an  eminent  scholar,  he,  as  their  leader,  was  ejected  ;  but  he,  as  well 
as  ISumner  and  Bayley,  died  in  one  week,  and  Goodman  also  soon  followed 
them  to  the  grave  ;  all  in  consequence  of  the  severity  of  the  imprisonment 
about  to  be  noticed.  Harman,  afterwards  Fellow  of  Eton  College,  died  in 
15.'53.  Bctts  ultimately  went  to  Cambridge,  aud  was  afterwards  a  favourite 
chaplain  to  Queen  Anne  Boleyn.  "  A  good  man  and  zealous,"  says  Foxe, 
"  and  so  remained,"  till  his  death  in  1534,  when  he  was  succeeded  by  Matthew 
Parker.     Taverner  is  remembered  chiefly  by  the  Bibles,  very  neai'ly  the  same 


!)()'  FIRST   ALARM    IN    OXFORD.  [booK  I. 

as  Tyudale's,  which  he  afterwards  published.  Vuxe,y  twelve  years  after  this, 
was  one  of  the  Tutors  of  Edward  VI.,  and  ultimately  Bishop  of  Ely  ;  and  Drunim 
heeanie  one  of  the  six  Preachers  at  Canterbury  under  Cranmer.  Udall  is 
known  as  the  future  Master  of  Eton  and  Westminster  Schools,  as  well  as  one 
of  the  Translators  of  the  first  volume  of  Erasmus'  paraphrase.  Salishury,  a 
native  of  Wales,  and  Monk  of  St.  Edniondsbury,  who  died  Bishop  of  Maun  iu 
1573,  had  a  hand  in  translating  the  first  edition  of  the  Bible  into  Welsh  ;  and 
forty  years  after  this,  when  Dean  of  Norwich,  we  find  him  refer  to  this  im- 
prisonment by  Wolsey,  in  justification  of  his  orthodoxy  and  his  early  attach- 
ment to  the  Word  of  God."  He  is  not,  however,  to  be  confounded  with  Wm. 
Salesbury,  who  previously  had  published  the  Welsh  New  Testament.  Ferrar, 
who  became  chaplain  to  Cranmer,  who  was  for  a  short  time  Bishop  of  Sodor  and 
Mann,  and  then  of  St.  David's,  suffered  at  the  stake  in  Caermarthen  on  the 
30th  of  March  1555. 

Garret  and  Dalaber,  as  convicted  heretics,  were  made  to 
carry  a  faggot,  in  open  procession,  from  St.  Mary\s  to  Cardi- 
nal College  ;  the  former,  as  Master  of  Arts,  having  his  red 
hood  on  his  shoulders.  These  young  men,  besides  others  not 
named,  followed  in  procession,  all  of  whom  were  obliged,  in 
passing,  to  cast  a  hook  into  the  large  fire  which  had  been 
kindled  to  receive  them.^  Garret  and  Dalaber  were  then  in- 
carcerated at  Osney  Isle,  till  further  orders  from  London, 
when  the  former  was  called  up  to  appear  before  Tunstal,  as 
we  shall  see  towards  the  close  of  the  year. 

As  for  the  other  young  men,  along  with  Clarke,  they  were  all 
immured  in  a  deep  cell,  under  Cardinal  College,  the  common 
repository  of  their  salt  fish,  a  noisome  dungeon,  where  the  air 
and  food  together  proved  but  too  fatal.  Betts,  no  suspected 
books  being,  at  least,  detected  in  his  chamber,  through  en- 
treaty and  surety,  got  out  of  prison,  and,  as  soon  as  he  could, 
went  to  Cambridge.  Taverner,  though  deeply  implicated,  as 
having  concealed  Clarke's  books  under  the  floor,  being  skilful 
in  music,  was  excused  by  Wolsey ;  but  the  rest  remained  in 
this  most  miserable  abode  ;  where,  eating  nothing  but  salt- 
fish  from  the  beo;innin2,'  of  March  to  the  middle  of  August, 
four  of  them  died,  as  already  stated  !  After  this,  but  in  con- 
sequence only  of  a  letter  from  Wolsey,  they  were  all  released, 
on  condition  of  not  moving  above  ten  miles  from  Oxford. 
How  many  thus  continued  as  prisoners  at  large  does  not  ap- 
pear ;   but  John  Frijtli  being  so  far  at  liberty,  and  now  aware 


7  Who,  by  one  account,  was  not  so  long  in  prison,  not  being  suspected  till  July. 
B  MS.  Sermon,  Bibl.  Lambeth,  vol.  \VX     Willis"  Oath.  i.  p.  367,  4to.  1727. 
!'  Kindled  at  Carfax,  (qiiatrc  roirx.)  or  meeting  of  the  four  streets. 


1526.2  FIRST   ALARM    IN    OXFORD.  97 

of  the  treatment  of  (jliirret  and  Dalaber,  he  "  escaped  by 
flight  over  the  sea  to  Tyndale."  He  left  Oxford  for  the  Con- 
tinent, therefore,  in  August  or  September  1526. 

It  will  now  be  allowed  that  an  event  such  as  this,  so  rich 
in  incident,  and  so  fraught  with  consequences,  was  worthy  of 
being  fully  traced ;  though,  as  far  as  Tyndale's  New  Testa- 
ments were  concerned,  of  course  every  thing  depends  on  the 
time  in  which  all  this  took  place.  Fortunately,  however,  the 
period  can  be  fixed,  not  only  to  a  month,  but  to  a  day ;  and 
it  is  the  more  remarkable,  as  coinciding  with  the  same  month 
in  which  it  will  be  afterwards  deponed,  that  New  Testaments 
were  purchased  by  other  people.  Foxe  has  said  that  this  hap- 
pened about  1526;  Strype  says  about  1525  or  1526  ;  and  the 
fact  is,  that  being  in  February,  when  the  year  ran  on  to  the 
25th  of  March,  it  would  be  called  either  the  one  or  the  other. 
The  year  1526  is  pointedly  fixed  by  Wood,  for  to  any  one 
who  observes  the  early  history  of  these  eminent  young  men 
it  is  indubitable.  Thus,  "  Clarke  of  Cardinal  College  was 
incorporated  M.A.  of  Oxford  in  1525,  but  ejected  soon  after 
for  Lutheranism.'"  Udall  had  passed  B.A.  in  1524,  and 
"  two  years  after  supplicated  for  the  degree  of  A.M.,  but  in 
vain,  as  'tis  probable,  because  he  was  much  addicted  to  the 
opinions  of  Luther."  Taverner  escaped  imprisonment;  but 
being  in  disgrace,  did  not  pass  A.M.  till  21st  May  1527. 
Ferrar  was  a  canon  of  St,  Mary's,  "  where,"  says  Wood, 
"  I  find  him  in  1526,  in  which  year  T.  Garret  did  supply  him 
with  prohibited  books.'''" 

The  season  of  the  year,  the  month  and  day.,  are  no  less  cer- 
tain ;  as  it  was  on  "  the  Wednesday  before  Shrovetide"  that 
Garret  first  departed  from  Oxford.  Shrovetide,  this  year, 
fell  on  the  13th,  so  that  Wednesday  before  was  the  7th  of 
February.  This  date  must  be  observed  in  connexion  with 
what  took  place  at  Cambridge. 

As  for  the  whole  transaction,  there  need  be  no  surprise  at 
so  much  being  made  of  it  at  the  time.  In  the  year  1525, 
Rincke  and  Cochljeus  had  put  the  highest  authorities  on 
their  guard,  and  these  were  not  mistaken,  in  now  reffardino- 
this  as  no  trivial  affair,  no  inferior  triumph.  Students  drawn 
away  even  from  other  Colleges  was  sufficiently  mortifying ; 


'"  Wood's  Fasti,  and  Annals  of  Oxford. 
G 


98  FIRST   ALARM  [noOK  I. 

but  Cardinal  College,  a  favourite  project  of  Wolsey's,  was 
one  in  which  he  had  felt  almost  absorbed.  It  was  to  be  "  the 
most  glorious  in  the  world.''''  Every  other  College  had  been 
made  subservient  to  this,  and,  at  his  command,  had  yielded 
up  its  most  choice  young  men.  All  these  Canons  had  passed 
before  his  own  eye,  having  either  been  selected  or  approved 
by  himself,  on  account  of  the  eminence  of  their  attainments. 
What,  then,  must  have  been  his  disappointment,  when,  after 
all  his  pains,  he  saw  the  scale  turning  in  the  opposite  direc- 
tion from  that  which  he  had  all  along  intended  ?  And  what 
his  indignation,  when  such  a  proportion,  if  not  a  large  ma- 
jority, of  these  fine  young  men  were  found  to  be  infected  with 
that  new  learning,  as  it  was  termed,  which,  instead  of  yield- 
ing to  the  old,  was  ultimately  to  triumph,  and  maintain  its 
ground  in  spite  of  the  fiercest  opposition  ?  '^ 

Besides  all  this,  the  books  distributed  were  a  mighty  griev- 
ance in  addition,  and  they  were  now  gone  into  corners,  they 
knew  not  where ;  but  of  all  that  had  been  circulated  or  sold, 
there  were  none  to  be  compared  with  Tyndale's  New  Testa- 
ment. This  was  the  Word  of  Life,  and  felt  to  be  so.  We 
have  already  seen  it,  in  the  grasp  of  Dalaber,  to  have  been 
their  sheet  anchor  in  the  raging  storm.  It  is  therefore  well 
worthy  of  remembrance,  that  one  of  Tyndale"'s  earliest  blows, 
dashed  to  the  ground  the  insidious  design  of  the  lofty  Cardi- 
nal. It  was  an  attack  upon  the  lion  in  his  own  den ;  while 
as  to  the  young  men,  now  branded  as  heretics,  whether  caught 
or  escaped,  Tyndale  had  given  them,  not  a  book  of  new  learn- 


' '  Anthony  a  Wood,  tliough  born  more  than  a  hundred  years  after  this,  was  still  no  friend  to 
the  new  learning  thus  introduced,  and  therefore  he  could  not  sympathise  with  such  an  account 
as  the  preceding.  In  his  Athena?,  it  is  true,  he  records  the  transaction  under  Garret's  name— 
and  he  has  most  fully  corroborated  our  statement,  in  various  ways,  taken  from  other  places ; 
but  in  his  Annals  of  the  University  of  Oxford,  we  have  a  very  curious  substitute  for  this  period, 
which  is  worth  repeating—"  But  while  this  selected  Society  was  busy  in  preaching,  reading,  dis- 
puting, and  performing  their  scholastic  arts,  a  vehement  playtie  brake  forth  in  the  University, 
and  dispersed  most  of  them,  returning  not  till  the  year  following,  or  two  years  after!  And  of 
the  said  plague,  divers  persons  dying  near  the  halls  of  St.  Alban's,  Jesu,  Edmund,  and  Queen's 
Colleges,  the  Batchelors  of  those  places  were,  on  the  last  of  January  this  year,  dispensed  with 
for  performing  their  Determinations  in  the  public  schools  in  the  Lent  following.  Among  those 
thatyferf,  some  were  of  the  number  that  came  from  Cambridge,  which  caused  them  not  to  return 
again,  or  at  least  be  a  terror  to  others  from  coming  to  seek  promotion  !  Thus  was  this  (Cardinal) 
College  in  manner  settled,  and  soon  after  left  as  'twere  desolate— of  the  nobleness  and  magnifi- 
cence of  which,  the  University  took  oftentimes  an  occasion  to  make  mention,  in  their  courting 
epistles  to  the  Cardinal!"  And  thus  also,  no  doubt.  New  Testaments  were  carried  into  the 
country  .■  for  even  here.  Wood  affirms  that  Dalaber  betrayed  about  twenty-two  of  his  brethren 
who  favoured  Garret,  and  bought  his  books.  If  there  was  any  disease,  the  state  of  Oxford  only 
the  more  resembled  that  of  London  ;  but  what  had  happened  v/asplagne  sufficient  to  Cardinal 
Wolsey,  to  say  nothing  of  the  young  men,  confined  for  six  months  in  such  a  noisome  cell. 


]52().]  IN   CAMBRIDGE.  99 

ing  merely,  but  the  volume  of  Divine  Mercy — it  was  not  the 
owl  of  Athens,  but  Mount  Zion's  dove. 

Thus  it  happens,  whenever  Infinite  wisdom  employs  "  the 
things  that  arc  weak  to  destroy  the  mighty,"  and  men  of  no 
account,  to  bring  down  those  of  high  degree,  "  He  disap- 
pointeth  the  devices  of  the  crafty,  so  that  their  hands  cannot  per- 
form their  enterprise ;  He  taketk  the  wise  in  their  oicn  crafti- 
ness ;  and  the  counsel  of  the  froward  is  carried  headlong T 

If  Oxford  had  been  thrown  into  a  ferment  during  these  early 
days  in  February,  the  commotion  at  Cambridge  was,  if  pos- 
sible, still  greater ;  but  there  had  been  some  powerfully  ex- 
citing causes,  and  now  in  full  operation,  which  were  peculiar 
to  this  University.  A  very  brief  retrospect  will  explain,  as  well 
as  lend  additional  interest  to  the  present  burst  of  opposition. 

The  publication  of  the  Greek  Testament  by  Erasmus,  in 
1516,  was  one  of  the  most  important  events  in  the  progress 
of  letters  ;  but  Cambridge  seems  to  have  been  inferior  to  Ox- 
ford in  their  cultivation.  Even  the  Priests,  in  their  confes- 
sions of  young  scholars,  had  cautioned  them  against  the  ac- 
quisition of  Greek  and  Hebrew,  on  account  of  the  consequences 
they  dreaded.  Standish,  afterwards  Bishop  of  St.  Asapli,^^ 
was  one  great  promoter  of  this  hostility  ;  and,  upon  one  occa- 
sion, on  his  knees  before  the  King  and  Queen,  is  said  to  have 
conjured  them,  by  every  thing  sacred,  to  go  on  as  their  ances- 
tors had  done,  and  put  down  Erasmus.'''  When,  therefore, 
his  Testament  appeared,  at  Cambridge  it  was  absolutely  pro- 
scribed by  some  of  the  doctors  of  the  day,  and  one  College, 
as  already  hinted,  forbade  it  to  be  brought  within  the  walls  I 
Yet  the  book  they  had  thus  contemned,  was  the  laery  same 
by  which  God  intended  to  promote  his  own  designs,  and  in 
Cambridge  itself. 

Not  long,  therefore,  after  the  publication  of  this  Tes- 
tament, which  contained  the  Latin  and  Greek  in  parallel 
columns,  the  heart  of  one  student  was  smitten  with  it ;  and 
this,  in  the  hand  of  God,  was  sufficient  to  produce  a  great 
moral  change.     An  LL.D.,  and  Fellow  of  Trinity  Hall,'^  he 


'3  This  was  often  contracted  into  St.  Assi  when  no  ridicule  was  intended.  But  Standish  was 
an  ignorant  man  as  well  as  violent,  and  Erasmus  therefore  called  him,  "  Episcopum  a  sancto 
asino." 

13  Wood's  Athena  by  Bliss,  i.  p.  94. 

14  So  says  Kennet.  The  same  College  of  which  Stephen  Gardiner  was  now  master,  after 
having  been  bred  in  it. 


100  FIRST   ALARM  [boOK  I. 

had  already  excelled  in  the  study  of  the  Civil  and  Canon  Law, 
to  which  he  had  intended  to  devote  his  future  life  ;  but  falling 
into  great  distress  of  mind,  he  applied  to  the  Priests.  They 
appointed  him  fastings  and  watching,  with  the  purchase  of 
pardons  and  masses  ;  but  after  having  spent  almost  his  all  on 
these  ignorant  physicians  of  no  value,  it  had  fared  with  him, 
as  with  one  of  old,  to  whose  situation  he  compares  his  own ; 
for  "  he  was  nothing  the  better,  but  rather  grew  worse." 
His  case  is  the  more  interesting,  in  that  no  human  agent  was 
employed  to  relieve  him.  It  was  a  distinct  divine  interfer- 
ence for  the  promotion  of  his  own  cause ;  but  the  story  is 
so  full  of  simple  beauty,  that  the  student  must  be  allowed  to 
tell  part  of  it  himself: — 

"  But  at  the  last,"  says  he,  "  I  heard  speak  of  Jesus,  even  then  when  the 
New  Testament  was  first  set  forth  by  Erasmus.  Which,  when  I  understood 
to  be  eloquently  done  by  him,  being  allured  rather  for  the  Latin  than  for  the 
Word  of  God — for,  at  that  time,  I  knew  not  what  it  meant — I  bought  it  even 
by  the  providence  of  God,  as  I  do  now  well  understand  and  perceive.  And  at 
the  first  reading,  as  I  well  remember,  I  chanced  upon  this  sentence  of  St.  Paul, 
(0  most  sweet  and  comfortable  sentence  to  my  soul !)  in  his  first  Epistle  to 
Timothy,  and  first  chapter — '  It  is  a  true  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  men  to  be 
embraced,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  siiniers,  of  whom  I 
am  the  chief  and  principal.'  This  one  sentence,  through  God's  instruction  and 
inward  teaching,  which  I  did  not  then  perceive,  did  so  exhilarate  my  heart, 
being  before  wounded  with  the  guilt  of  my  sins,  and  being  almost  in  despair, 
that  immediately  I  felt  a  marvellous  comfort  and  quietness,  insomuch  that  my 
bruised  bones  leapt  for  joy. — Ps.  li.  JS. 

"  After  this  the  Scripture  began  to  be  more  pleasant  to  me  than  the  honey, 
or  the  honey-comb.  Wherein  I  learned  that  all  my  travels,  all  my  fasting  and 
watching,  all  the  redemption  of  masses  and  jiardons,  being  done  without  truth 
in  Christ,  who  alone  saveth  his  people  from  their  sins ;  these,  I  say,  I  learned 
to  be  nothing  else,  but  even,  as  Augustine  saitli,  a  hasty  and  swift  running  out 
of  the  right  way  ;  or  else  much  like  to  the  vesture  made  of  fig-leaves,  whei'e- 
with  Adam  and  Eve  went  about  in  vain  to  cover  themselves;  and  could  never 
before  obtain  quietness  and  rest,  till  they  believed  on  the  promise  of  God,  that 
'  Christ  the  seed  of  the  woman  should  tread  upon  the  Serpent's  head.'  Neither 
could  I  be  relieved  or  eased  of  the  sharp  stings  and  biting  of  my  sins,  before  I 
was  taught  of  God  that  lesson  which  Christ  speaketli  of  in  the  tliird  chapter  of 
John — '  Even  as  Moses  exalted  the  Serpent  in  the  desert,  so  shall  the  Son  of 
Man  be  exalted,  that  all  which  believe  on  him,  should  not  perish,  but  have 
life  everlasting.' 

"  As  soon  as  I  began  to  taste  and  savour  of  this  heavenly  lesson,  which  no 
man  can  teach,  but  only  God,  which  revealed  the  same  unto  Peter,  I  desii'ed 
the  Lord  to  increase  my  faith  ;  and,  at  last,  I  desired  nothing  more,  than  that 
I,  being  so  comforted  by  him,  might  be  strengthened  by  his  Holy  Spirit  and 
grace  from  above,  that  I  might  teach  the  wicked  his  ways,  which  are  mercy 
and  truth,  and  that  the  wicked  might  be  converted  unto  him  by  me,  who  some- 
time was  also  wicked." 


152().3  IN  CAMBRIDGE.  101 

This  was  no  other  than  Thomas  Bihiey,  the  future  martyr 
of  1531.  His  preaching  was  followed  by  great  and  powerful 
effects,  for  among  others,  Hugh  Latimer  and  Robert  Barnes 
owed  their  conversion  to  him.  So  early,  therefore,  as  1 523, 
before  Tyndale  went  abroad,  Cambridge  lay  under  strong 
suspicion  of  heresy ;  and  yet  it  is  curious  enough,  that  in  that 
year,  when  certain  Bishops  moved,  that  there  might  be  a 
visitation  appointed  to  go  down,  for  trying  who  were  "  the 
fautors  of  heresy "  there,  the  Cardinal  forbade  it !  "  Upon 
what  grounds,"  says  Burnet,  "  I  cannot  imagine."'''  It  seems 
to  have  been,  either  because  he  then  meditated  a  reform  of 
the  Church,  after  his  own  fancy,  as  already  disclosed  in  the 
letter  of  Longlaud,  and  of  which  his  own  sovereign  authority 
as  Legate,  should  appear  to  be  the  only  fountain ;  or  if  not, 
to  show  at  the  moment  his  authority  over  the  clergy.  His 
mind,  we  know,  was  then  engrossed  with  affairs  of  State, 
abroad  as  well  as  at  home.'^  At  all  events,  the  over-ruling 
hand  of  God  is  manifest,  in  preventing  all  interference  for  at 
least  three  years,  or  from  January  1523,  to  February  1526. 

The  order  for  Oxford  we  have  stated  to  be  the  third  of  this 
month  ;  that  for  Cambridge  must  have  been  at  the  same 
moment ;  but  in  this  case,  previous  information  through  Dr. 
Tyrell,  after-mentioned,  had  suggested  the  necessity  for  two 
individuals  being  sent.  One  Gibson,  the  Sergeant-at-Arms, 
a  creature  of  Wolsey''s,  hated  by  the  Aldermen  and  Common 
Council  of  London,  was  therefore  accompanied  by  Dr.  Capon, 
one  of  the  CardiuaPs  chaplains.  They  had  arrived  on  Mon- 
day, as  upon  Tuesday,  the  Sergeant  "  suddenly  arrested  Dr. 
Barnes  openly  in  the  Convocation-house,  to  make  all  others 
afraid ; "  and  by  Wednesday  evening,  (on  the  morning  of 
which.  Garret  first  escaped  from  Oxford),  Dr.  Barnes  stood 
before  Wolsey. 

Robert  Barnes,  born  near  Linn  in  Norfolk,  after  proceeding- 
through  the  schools  at  Cambridge,  had  entered  the  Monastery 
of  Augustine  Friars  there,  in  the  year  1514.  Having  then 
gone  to  Louvaine,  where  he  studied,  and  passed  as  Doctor  of 
Theology  ;  after  his  return  he  was  made  Prior  and  Master 
of  his  Monastery,  in   1523.      In  conjunction  with  another 


'"■  "He  obstructed  it,"  says  Kcnnet.  ■•not  in  favour  of  heresy,  but  in  support  of  his  own 
r.iiinidiiic  authority."— ;1/..S\,  Laiisdownc,  No.  W),  j>.  3(>. 


102  FIRST   ALARM  [buOK  I. 

Louvaine  scholar,  Mr.  Thomas  Parnel,  whom  he  had  brought 
over  with  him,  he  became,  says  Strype  and  others,  "•  the  great 
restorer  of  good  learning  at  Cambridge."  He  had  introduced 
the  study  of  the  classics,  and  was  reading  Terence,  Plautus, 
and  Cicero ;  but  being  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth 
through  Bilney,  he  proceeded  to  read  openly  with  his  scholars, 
the  Epistles  of  Paul.  Sometime  before  this,  Latimer  had 
been  also  enlightened  through  Bilney 's  preaching,  and  was 
proclaiming  the  truth  with  great  decision  and  effect.  Whether 
Latimer  was  actually  in  expectation  of  the  New  Testament  of 
Tyndale,  does  not  appear,  but  the  fact  is,  that  he  was  now 
powerfully  preparing  the  way  for  it ;  as  he  frequently  and  par- 
ticularly dwelt  on  the  great  abuse  of  locking  up  the  Scriptures 
in  an  unhiown  tonme.  Prior  Buckingham^  his  opponent,  in- 
veighed against  him,  and  insisted,  that  if  that  heresy  prevailed, 
we  should  soon  see  an  end  of  every  thing  useful !  This  man, 
Latimer  put  to  silence,  by  that  singular  vein  of  humour  for 
which  he  was  distinguished ;  while  Venetus,  a  foreigner, 
with  whom  he  reasoned  in  a  strain  full  of  gravity,  was  obliged 
to  leave  the  University.  Latimer's  opponents  finding  argu- 
ment fail,  resorted  to  authority  ;  and  West,  the  Bishop  of 
Ely,  after  hearing  him,  and  even  professing  to  be  charmed, 
ultimately  prohibited  him  from  preaching  in  any  of  the  churches 
belonging  to  the  University,  or  within  his  diocese !  The  Mona- 
stery of  Dr.  Barnes,  however,  was  happily  exempt  from  epis- 
copal jurisdiction,  an  exemption  indeed,  peculiar  to  almost  all 
the  Monasteries,  so  that  the  Prior  boldly  licensed  him  to 
preach  there.  The  place  was  unable  to  contain  the  crowds 
that  assembled,  and  Dr.  Barnes  having  been  requested  by  the 
parish  to  preach  at  St.  Edward's  Church  hard  by,  resolved  to 
comply.  This  was  a  memorable  evening  on  account  of  theeffects. 
It  was  in  fact  a  crisis,  though  never  sufficiently  marked  as  such. 
It  was  "  Christmas  eve,  and  on  a  Sunday,"  says  Foxe,  or  as 
Barnes  himself  explains, — "  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1525, 
the  24th  of  December."  Latimer  was  also  officiating  at  the 
Monastery  that  evening  ;  while  the  present,  says  Foxe,  was 
"  the  jirst  sermon  that  ever  Barnes  preached  of  this  truth." 
Understanding  now  the  Avay  of  truth  more  perfectly,  and  alive 
to  the  state  of  things  ai'ound  him,  he  had  resolved  to  be  openly 
explicit.  By  two  chaplains,  Drs.  Robert  Ridley  and  Walter 
Preston,  fellows  of  King's  College,  and  kinsmen  of  Tunstal, 


1526.]  IN  CAMBRIDGE.  103 

JJishop  of  Loudon,  he  was  immediately  accused  of  heresy. 
This  thoy  did  in  the  Regent-House,  before  the  Vice-Ohancellor 
Edmund  Natcres,  and  these  two  men,  assisted  by  three  others, 
viz.  Tyrell,  Watson,  and  Fooke,  having  gathered  up  certain 
articles  against  him,  desired  him  to  recant.  The  University 
as  a  body,  immediately  took  up  the  matter,  and  disputed  their 
authority.  His  adversaries,  however,  within  two  or  three 
days,  having  secured  another  meeting  before  the  Vice-Chan- 
cellor ;  by  fraud  and  intimidation,  they  "  so  entreated  and 
cozened  him,"  that  Barnes  agreed  to  yield  to  their  authority 
and  their  promised  clemency.  They  then  enjoined  him  to 
read  his  revocation  in  St.  Edward's  Church  next  Sunday. 
Barnes  consulted  with  eight  or  ten  of  his  learned  friends, 
among  whom  were  Stafford  and  Bilney,  and  then  declined ; 
but  he  had  already  ensnared  himself  in  these  private  inter- 
views, and  his  accusers,  aware  of  this,  desisted,  only  to  wait 
their  favourable  moment.  The  learned  of  at  least  seven  dift'er- 
ent  colleges  now  flocked  together  in  open  day  to  sermons, 
whether  at  the  Augustine  Monastery  or  St.  Mary's. 

"  The  names  of  some  of  them,"  says  Strype,  "  were  these : — Besides  Barnes, 
and  Stafford,  and  Bilney,  Dr.  Tliixstel  or  Thissel,  and  T.  Allan  of  Pembroke  ; 
Dr.  Farman,  of  Queen's  ;  Tooke  and  Loude,  of  Benet ;  Cambridge,  Field,  Col- 
nian,  Cocerdale,  Bachelors  of  Divinity  ;  Parnel  of  St.  Austin's,  under  Barnes  ; 
Thomas  Arthur,  Dr.  Warner,  Segar  Nicolson,  Rudolph  Bradford,  of  King's  ; 
Dr.  Smith,  of  Trinity ;  and  Latymer,  of  Christ's  Church." 

Disputations  were  held  during  the  whole  of  January,  at  a 
house  called  Germanyhy  way  of  derision,  and  "  this  tragedy," 
says  Foxe,  "  continued  in  Cambridge,  one  preaching  against 
another,  in  trying  out  of  God's  truth,  until  within  six  days 
before  Shrovetide,"  or,  in  other  words,  to  the  very  day  that 
Dr.  Barnes  stood  before  Wolsey, 

It  was  not,  however,  to  apprehend  Barnes  alone,  that  the 
Sergeant-at-Arms  had  arrived  at  Cambridge.  He  had  been 
charged  to  make  secret  search  for  books,  and  instantly  seize 
the  whole,  as  well  as  apprehend  all  who  possessed  them.  Not 
fewer  than  thirty  were  suspected,  and  spies  had  given  them 
precise  information  as  to  every  one  of  their  rooms  !  But  Dr. 
Forman  of  Queen's  College  had  happily,  at  the  first  moment, 
informed  all  the  parties  of  the  privy  search,  and  "  God  be 
praised,"  sa^'s  Foxe,  the  books  "  were  conveyed  away  by  the 
time  that   the    Sergeant-at-Arms,  the  Vice-Chancellor,  and 


1()4  FIRST  EXAMINATION.  [hook  I. 

the  Proctors  were  at  every  man's  chamber.''''  The  business 
of  Gribson  was  therefore  soon  accomplished,  and  Dr.  Barnes 
being  his  only  prey,  he  was  immediately  carried  to  London. 

We  return,  therefore,  to  Wolsey''s  gallery  at  Westminster, 
on  Wednesday  evening,  Gardiner,  his  Secretary,  and  Fox, 
being  the  only  parties  present  with  Barnes.  The  Cardinal 
soon  discovered,  that  he  was  not  unacquainted  with  what  Dr. 
Barnes  had  been  delivering  at  Cambridge,  telling  that  his 
noted  sermon  in  December,  was  "  fitter  to  be  preached  on  a 
stage  than  in  a  pulpit."  Certainly  it  was  very  different 
doctrine  from  that  with  which  almost  every  pulpit  was  filled  ; 
and  as  for  the  rest,  the  fact  is,  that,  whether  well  advised  or 
not,  Barnes,  unable  to  repress  his  indignation  at  the  gross 
abuses  of  the  times,  had  opened  up  before  the  people  Wolsey's 
extravagance.  To  him  belongs  the  distinction,  of  having  led 
the  way  in  boldly  and  publicly  exposing  the  gorgeous  and 
tyrannical  bearing  of  the  lofty  Cardinal.  This  accounts  for 
the  severity  with  which  he  was  now  treated,  for  both  Bilney 
and  Latimer  were  permitted  to  go  on  for  some  time  longer. 

Wolsey,  however,  read  the  articles  with  patience,  till  he 
came  to  one  personal  to  himself;  for  the  men  at  Cambridge, 
in  drawing  them  up,  knew  how  to  touch  him  at  the  quick. 
"  What,  Master  Doctor,'"  exclaimed  the  Cardinal,  "  had  you 
not  a  sufficient  scope  in  the  Scriptures  to  teach  the  people, 
that  my  golden  shoes,  my  pole  axes,  my  pillars,  my  golden 
cushions,  my  crosses  did  so  offend  you,  that  you  must  make 
us  redimdum  caput  before  the  people  1^^  We  were  jollily  that 
day  laughed  to  scorn.  Verily  it  was  a  sermon  fitter  to  be 
preached  on  a  stage  than  in  a  pulpit,  for  at  the  last  you  said — 
I  wear  a  pair  of  red  gloves,  I  should  say  bloody  gloves,  quoth 
you,  that  I  should  not  be  cold  in  the  midst  of  my  ceremonies.'" 
Whether  this  charge  was  correct,  does  not  appear,  but  Barnes, 
as  yet  unmoved,  replied,  "  I  spake  nothing  but  the  truth  out 
of  the  old  Doctors."  In  the  end,  he  delivered  to  the  Cardinal 
six  sheets  in  manuscript,  to  confirm  and  corroborate  all  that 
he  had  spoken.  Wolsey  smiling,  said,  "  we  perceive  that  you 
mean  to  stand  to  your  articles,  and  to  show  your  learning.'" 
"  Yea,'"''  said  Barnes,  "  that  I  do  intend,  by  God''s  grace,  with 
your  lordship's  favour.'"     Wolsey  enquired  if  he  did  not  know 


"!  Cnjitit,  the  hiplicst  C'<uincil  of  llic  University. 


1,52G.]  FIRST   RECANTATION.  105 

that  he  Mas  there  for  heresy^  and  whether  he  could  briug  six 
or  ten  doctors  of  divinity  to  swear  for  him?  Barnes  offered 
twentii  honest  men,  as  learned  as  himself,  if  not  superior — but 
these  would  not  suffice.  "  They  must  be  of  your  years  accord- 
ing to  law,"  said  Wolsey.  "  That,"  replied  Barnes,  "  is  im- 
possible.'''' "  Then,"'"'  said  the  Cardinal,  '•-you  must  be  burnt  I'''' 
At  the  close,  Wolsey  was  about  to  commit  him  to  the  Tower, 
but  Fox'^  and  Gardiner^^  interceded,  and  became  sureties  for 
his  appearance.  During  the  whole  night  he  was  engaged  in 
preparing  for  his  defence  before  the  Bishops,  to  whom  Wolsey 
had  committed  him.  Three  of  his  students,  Coverdale,  Good- 
win, and  Field,  having  followed  him  up  to  London,  were  also 
occupied  in  writing  to  his  dictation.  On  Thursday  morning, 
after  calling  at  York  Place,  (  Whitehall,)  for  Fox  and  Gardiner, 
the  Sergeant-at-Arms  conveyed  him  down  to  the  Chapter- 
House  at  Westminster.  He  was  now  in  the  presence  of  John 
Clark,  Bishop  of  Bath,  as  principal  judge,  who  treated  him 
with  marked  sevei'ity  ;  Henry  Standish,  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph, 
mIio  was  sure  to  be  an  enemy  and  not  a  judge ;  Islip,  the 
Abbot  of  Westminster  ;  the  Abbot  of  Bury ;  Dr.  Jeflrey 
Wharton ;  Dr.  Allen ;  and  Dr.  Gardiner.  After  this  ex- 
amination he  subscribed  his  articles,  and  was  then  committed 
to  Fleet  Prison,  but  no  one  to  speak  with  him.  On  Saturday 
at  three  o'clock,  when  called  to  appear  again,  a  long  roll  was 
shown  to  him,  which  he  must  promise  to  read  in  public,  with 
the  assurance  now,  that  he  would  not  add  one  word,  more  or 
less  !  They  exacted  this  promise  before  he  had  read  a  line  of 
it,  and  put  it  to  him  solemnly  three  times  !  Barnes  continu- 
ing firm,  was  desired  to  retire.  On  being  called  in,  they  had 
agreed  that  a  Notary  should  read  it  to  him,  and  as  Barnes 
listened,  he  felt  as  though  he  would  rather  die  than  agree. 
After  long  disputation,  threatening,  and  scorn,  it  was  now 
five  o'clock  ;  when  they  called  upon  him  to  know  whether  he 
would  abjure  or  burn.  Bai'nes  was  in  great  agony,  inclining 
rather  to  the  latter,  when  they  sent  him  again  to  take  counsel 
from  Fox,  and  Gardiner  alone  ;  and  they,  "  by  persuasions 
that  were  mighty  in  the  sight  of  reason  and  foolish  flesh,"''' 


'  '•  The  same  man,  wlio.  when  Bishop  of  Hereford,  had  Barnes  associated  with  him  in  Embassy 
froni  Henry  VIII.  to  the  Protestant  Princes  at  Smalcald,  in  15.35. 

18  The  very  person,  who,  fourteen  years  afterwards,  was  the  occasion  of  Barnes  and  Garret 
being  brought  to  the  same  flames,  two  days  after  Lord  Crumwell. 


106  FIRST  BURNING  [bOOK  I. 

brought  him  at  hist  to  yield  and  abjure  !  It  is  easy  for  us 
now  to  say,  that  lie  ought  to  have  stood  firm,  and  if  he  had, 
Barnes  would  have  led  the  van  at  least,  of  this  division  of 
martyrs,  for  the  Word  of  God  ;  but  neither  Garret  nor  he 
were  yet  able  to  bi'ave  the  horrors  of  the  stake. 

With  regard  to  Barnes,  in  particular,  the  sight  on  the  fol- 
lowing day,  was  indeed  most  humiliating,  and  to  his  adver- 
saries, must  have  seemed  a  great  triumph.  On  Sabbath  the 
4th,  in  his  pulpit  at  Cambridge,  and  on  the  next,  or  11  th, 
bearino-  a  fawo-ot  at  St,  Paul's  !  The  church  was  crowded  to 
excess,  and  there  sat  Wolsey  in  all  his  glory,  smiling,  no 
doubt,  over  the  pointed  replies  of  Thursday  evening,  while  he 
saw  Barnes  and  five  others.  Stilly ard  men,  humbled  before 
him.'^  So  mighty  and  so  important  was  the  occasion,  that,  ac- 
cording to  Foxe  : — 

"  The  Cardinal  had  a  scaffold  made  on  the  top  of  the  stairs  for  himself,  with 
six  and  thirty  Abbots,  mitred  Priors,  and  Bishops,  and  he,  in  his  whole  pomp, 
mitred,  which  Barnes  had  denounced,  sat  there  enthroned  !  His  Chaplains 
and  Spiritual  Doctors,  in  gowns  of  damask  and  satin,  and  he  himself  in  purple  ! 
And  there  was  a  new  pulpit  erected  on  the  top  of  the  stairs,  for  Fisher,  the 
Bishop  of  Rochester,  to  preach  against  Luther  and  Dr.  Barnes ;  and  great 
baskets  full  of  hooks,  standing  before  them  within  the  rails,  which  were  com- 
manded, after  the  great  fire  was  made  before  the  Rood  of  Northex'n,  Cor  large 
crucifix  at  the  north  gate  of  St.  Paul's),  there  to  be  burned  ;  and  these  heretics 
after  the  sermon,  to  go  three  times  round  the  fire,  and  cast  in  their  faggots." 

All  this  was  done  of  course,  and  much  more  that  was  humili- 
ating, Wolsey  retiring,  under  a  canopy,  in  all  his  pomp ;  and 
Fisher  declaring  to  the  people,  how  many  days  of  pardon  and 
forgiveness  of  sins  they  had,  for  being  present  at  that  Sermon  ! 
To  him,  as  well  as  Wolsey  and  Longland,  it  was  a  high  day, 
and  one  to  which  they  had  looked  forward  for  three  years.^ 

Here  then,  we  have  the  jfirst  of  a  series,  for  it  preceded 
Oxford  by  a  few  days,  in  which  books  were  committed  to  the 


'fl  Thus  the  results  of  the  "secret  search"  in  London  and  Cambridge  were  combined,  the 
scene  already  described  at  Oxford,  liajipening  also  before  the  end  of  the  week.  These  five 
German  Merchants,  called  Easterlings  or  Stilljard  Men,  or  Merchants  of  the  Hanse,  had  been 
examined  and  convicted  on  Thursday,  "  for  Luther's  bonks  and  LoUardy  ; "  Tyndale's  New  Testa- 
ment, as  well  as  his  subsequent  publications,  being  often  after  this  wrapt  u])  under  thisgeneral  title, 
or  that  of  Lutheranism.  These  German  Merchants,  who  imported  books  along  with  stcd  and 
other  goods,  dwelt  at  that  place  in  Thames  Street,  still  called  the  Steelyard.  By  the  Kings  of 
Kiiglarul  they  were  granted  certain  privileges,  which  were  continued  to  the  reign  of  Klizabeth. 

2»  This  Sermon  of  Fisher's,  from  Luke,  xviii.  42,  was  afterwards  published.  "I  have  put  forth 
this  Sermon,"  says  he.  "  to  be  read,  which, /o)-//(C/7)-«i<  noise  of  the  /x'ople  irilliiii  Ihc  Church  of  St. 
Paul's,  might  not  be  heard."  Tyndalc  severely  reproved  him  for  it  afterwards,  in  his  "Obe- 
dience of  a  Christian  Man." — See  Ti/ndole's  lyorks  \iy  Russet,  i.  pp.  2.')0-2r).5.  HerherC s  Antes, 
i.  p.  45!). 


1526'.]  OF  THE  SCRIPTURES.  107 

flames;  and  among  many  others,  upon  this  day,  the  11th  of 
February  1526,  copies  of  Tyndale's  New  Testament,  were  no 
doubt  for  the  Jirst  time  cast  into  the  fire,  as  they  were  at 
Oxford  in  the  same  week.  By  this  period  we  shall  yet  have 
curious  and  abundant  evidence  that  they  were  in  the  country  ; 
Garret  was  convicted,  as  we  have  seen,  for  conveying  books 
to  Cambridge  as  well  as  Oxford,  and  among  the  stores  of  the 
Stillyard  men,  now  accumulated  in  the  "  great  baskets,"  the 
London  stock  was  so  far  involved.  Lutheranism,  it  is  true, 
was  the  great  bug-bear  held  up  this  day  before  the  people,  but 
when  chastising  Fisher  afterwards,  for  the  sermon  he  had 
preached  and  printed,  Tyndale  himself  has  said  : — 

"  And  mark,  I  pray  you,  what  an  orator  he  is,  and  how  vehemently  he  per- 
suadetli  it  !  '  Martin  Luther  hath  burned  the  Pope's  decretals  ;  a  manifest 
proof,'  saith  he, '  that  he  would  have  burned  the  Pope's  Holiness  also,  if  he  had 
had  him.'  A  like  argument,  which  I  suppose  to  be  rather  true,  I  make. 
Rochester  and  his  holy  brethren  have  burnt  Christ's  Testament ;  an  evident 
sign,  verily,  that  they  would  have  burnt  Christ  himself  also,  if  they  had  had  him." 

These  words,  by  the  way,  may  now  be  received  as  the  best 
of  all  evidence,  that  the  New  Testament  was  there,  and  there 
consumed.  All  this,  however,  was  evidently  done  by  the 
Cardinal's  supreme  and  express  authority.  He  led  the  way, 
therefore,  so  that  it  is  not  correct  to  exonerate  him,  as  some 
authors  have  done,  by  affirming  that  this  was  an  after-thought 
of  the  Bishops,  when  Warham  and  Tunstal  commenced  their 
crusade  against  all  books  of  the  new  learning.  Even  then, 
Strype  affirms,  that  they  were  instigated  by  the  Cardinal ; 
but  upon  this  day,  Warham  was  not  present,  and  Tunstal  as 
far  distant  as  Madrid.  No,  stung  more  than  once,  and  in  one 
week,  by  what  had  been  detected  at  Oxford  and  Cambridge, 
as  well  as  in  London,  Wolsey  must  have  felt  exasperated  in 
the  highest  degree,  and  it  is  manifest  that,  by  all  this  parade, 
he  intended  to  produce  a  deep  and  general  panic. 

At  the  close  of  all,  poor  Barnes,  though  received  formally 
into  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  again,  was  remitted  to  the 
Fleet,  till  the  Lord  Cardinal's  pleasure  should  be  known;  but 
his  friends  were  permitted  to  visit  him,  and  he  there  relented. 

As  the  season  of  conviction  at  Oxford  and  Cambridge  had 
been  the  same,  so  also  was  that  of  relief  to  both  parties.  Per- 
haps the  sad  deaths  at  Oxford,  in  consequence  of  severe  treat- 
ment, led  to  this  ;   since  it  was  about  the  very  same  time  that 


108  ESCAPE   BEYOND  SEA.  [boOK  I. 

the  young  men  at  Oxford  were  released,  on  condition  of  not 
moving  above  ten  miles  distant,  that  Barnes  was  delivered 
from  the  Fleet ;  that  is,  at  the  end  of  six  months.  He,  how- 
ever, was  not  permitted  to  go  at  large,  even  to  the  same  ex- 
tent, but  was  committed  to  be  a  free  prisoner  at  Austin  Friars 
in  London  ;  and  from  evidence  which  will  come  out  in  1528, 
it  will  appear  that  he  was  here  as  busy  as  his  circumstances 
would  permit,  in  actually  disposing  of  copies  of  Tyndale's 
Testament  !  His  enemies,  therefore,  were  not  incorrect  in 
their  suspicions,  for  says  Foxe,  "  they  complained  again  to 
the  Lord  Cardinal,  whereupon  he  was  removed  to  the  Austin 
Friars  of  Northampton,  there  to  be  hurned^  By  a  most  un- 
worthy stratagem,  however,  feigning  himself  to  have  been 
droicned^  he  escaped  to  the  Continent.  His  enemies  searched 
for  him  seven  days,  but  they  dragged  the  pond  in  vain. 

Once  abroad,  and  having  time  for  reflection,  Barnes  must 
surely  soon  have  seen  the  evil  of  his  conduct  with  regret ;  for 
alas,  independently  of  its  own  sinfulness,  his  example  proved 
most  baneful  !  At  the  moment  it  must  have  been,  "  as  when 
a  standard-bearer  fainteth,"  or  rather  flies,  for  he  first  led  in 
a  path  which  cost  many  a  sigh  to  those  who  followed  him. 
His  fall  and  escape,  for  fall  he  did,  certainly  had  no  small 
influence  in  leading  to  the  sad  expedient  of  ahjuration^  instead 
of  resistance  unto  death — an  expedient  which  produced,  as  we 
shall  find  in  Bilney's  case  and  others,  mental  agony  to  a  de- 
gree, compared  with  which,  the  tortures  of  the  stake  were 
transient,  and  far  inferior .^^ 


21  It  was  not  long  before  Tunstal  knew  that  Barnes  was  not  drowned,  and  he  affirmed  that 
"  the  Lord  Cardinal  would  have  him  over  again,  or  it  would  cost  him  a  great  sum  of  monej'." 
On  which  Barnes  afterwards  replied  in  print : — "And  when  my  Lord  Cardinal,  and  he,  (Tunstal), 
would  spend  so  much  money  to  have  me  again,  I  have  great  marvel  of  it.  What  can  they  make 
of  me?  I  am  a  poor  simple  wretch,  and  worth  no  man's  money  in  the  world,  (except  theirs), 
not  the  tenth  penny  that  they  will  give  for  me.  And  to  burn  me,  or  to  destroy  me,  cannot  so 
greatly  profit  them  ;  for  when  I  am  dead,  the  sun  and  the  moon,  the  stars  and  the  elements, 
water  and  fire,  yea,  and  also  stones  shall  defend  this  cause  against  them,  raihcr  than  the  verity 
i.hoiiltl  perish."  All  this  was  nobly  said,  but  considering  the  eminence  of  his  character  at  Cam- 
bridge, and  the  notoriety  of  his  abjuration  in  London,  escaping  to  the  Continent  as  he  did,  and 
saying  this  there,  could  not  possibly  prevent  the  injurious  consequences  which  must  have  fol- 
lowed from  his  conduct. 

On  the  Continent,  Barnes  became  intimate  with  Luther  and  MeIancthon,and  other  reformers  ; 
as  well  as  with  the  Duke  of  Saxony  and  the  King  of  Denmark.  Sentby  the  latter  into  this  country, 
he  first  set  his  foot  upon  English  ground  after  Wolscy  was  in  his  grave,  in  the  time  of  Sir  Thomas 
More  being  Chancellor,  and  as  an  ambassador  to  Henry  VIIL,  with  the  Lubeckers ;  when  he 
lodged  with  their  Chancellor  at  the  Steelyard.  He  had  not  come,  however,  without  the  protec- 
tion of  a  safe-conduct,  which  More  would  have  most  willingly  infringed,  had  the  King  permitted. 
On  his  return  to  Germany  he  published  his  works,  and  after  More's  death  he  came  to  London, 
where  he  preached  for  some  time.  In  1535,  he  was  employed  as  envoy  from  the  King  to  the 
Elector  of  Saxony  and  the  Wirtembcrg  Divines,  in  reference  to  their  Convocation  at  Smalkald, 


1526.]  ANXIETY   OF   WARHAM.  lOit 

With  regard  to  this  entire  statement,  such  a  remarkable 
conjunction  of  circumstances,  has  never  before  been  traced, 
and  thougli  "the  Supplication  of  Beggars"  has  all  along  been 
familiar  to  the  readers  of  history,  they  cannot  have  been 
before  aware  of  the  mighty  stir  occasioned  by  the  distribution 
of  these  few  pages  of  letter-press,  on  Candlemas-day.  Lon- 
don, Oxford,  and  Cambridge,  the  subjects  of  Wolsey's  "secret 
search  and  at  one  time,"  were  ascertained,  in  February  1.526, 
to  be  impregnated  with  the  same  leaven ;  but  that  the  King 
himself,  and  before  all  this  uproar  began,  should  have  possess- 
ed and  read  this  powerful  tract,  to  the  Cardinal  especially, 
must  have  proved  not  a  little  galling. 

On  the  whole,  however,  it  may  have  been  observed,  that 
none  of  the  principal  or  leading  characters  in  Oxford,  similar 
to  Barnes  at  Cambridge,  had  been  called  up  before  Wolsey. 
Garret,  indeed,  had  been  apprehended  at  Oxford,  but  he  be- 
longed to  London,  and  they  were  young  men  only,  who  had 
been  incarcerated,  with  the  exception  of  Clarke,  and  even  he 
was  not  a  man  of  authority.  Still  07ie  or  two  of  a  higher 
grade,  had  been  there  suspected,  of  promoting  the  "  new  learn- 
ing."" The  month  of  February,  therefore,  had  not  expired, 
when  the  University  formally  applied  to  Warham  of  Canter- 
bury, then  their  Chancellor,  as  he  had  been  since  1.506.  He 
was  living  retired  at  Knolle,  but  might  not  be  so  fully  aware 
of  all  that  had  happened,  till  he  was  officially  thus  informed. 
Accordingly,  on  the  8tli  of  March,  we  have  a  cautious  and 
imploring  letter  from  him  to  the  Cardinal,  full  of  fear  and 
anxiety  as  to  Oxford  and  its  honour. 

"  The  university,"  he  says,  had  "  instantly  desii-ed  him  to  be  theii*  suitor  to 
his  Grace,  touching  the  examination  of  the  said  persons  suspected  of  heresy, 
that  the  University  rma  in  as  little  infamy  as  may  be,  after  the  quality  of  the 

though  chiefly  with  a  view  to  their  concurrence  in  the  affair  of  Henry's  divorce;  and  afterwards 
he  was  employed  in  the  negotiation  for  Anne  of  Cleves.  But  getting  himself  entangled  by  his 
opposition  to  Stephen  Gardiner,  then  in  high  favour,  and  Henry  being  at  last  incensed  against 
him,  he  fell  on  the  3(Hh  of  July  1540,  with  Garret,  and  Hierome  the  Vicar  of  Hackney,  under 
the  sanguinary  "  Six  Acts  "  of  that  period,  justly  styled  "  the  bloody  Statute." 

To  the  end  of  his  days,  and  even  at  the  stake  itself,  Barnes  was  uniform  as  an  advocate  for  the 
justification  of  a  sinner  by  faith,  without  the  works  of  the  law ;  but  being  destitute  of  moral 
courage  and  command  of  temper — to  use  his  own  terms,  he  "overshot  himself,"  more  than  once. 
His  works  were  published  by  Foxe,  along  with  those  of  Tyndale  and  Fryth,  in  one  folio  volume, 
and  thus  the  three  names  have  often  been  repeated  in  the  same  breath  ;  but  it  would  be  a  viola- 
tion of  all  propriety  to  regard  the  three  men  as  alike,  whether  in  point  of  general  character  or 
sentiment.  This  will  be  evident  as  we  proceed.  We  only  remark  here,  that  Barnes  was  a 
Lutheran,  which  neither  Tyndale  or  Fryth  ever  were.  Tyndale,  in  15.13,  even  warns  Fryth  to 
beware  of  him.  "Barnes,"  said  Tyndale,  "will  be  hot  against  you," — a  warning,  in  which  at 
once  his  temper,  and  peculiar  sentiments  with  regard  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  are  glanced  at. 


110  ANXIETY    OF  WARHAM.  [bOOK  I. 

offence — for  pity  it  were,  tlirougli  the  lewdness  of  oue  or  two  cankered  members, 
M'hicli,  as  1  understand,  liave  induced  no  small  number  of  young  and  inicircum- 
spect  fools  to  give  ear  to  them,  that  the  whole  University  should  run  in  the 
infamy  of  so  heinous  a  crime — the  hearing  whereof  would  be  right  delectable 
and  pleasant  to  the  oj)en  Lutherans  beyond  the  sea,  and  the  secret,  behither  : 
whereof  they  would  take  heart  and  confidence,  that  their  pestilent  doctrine 
should  increase  and  multiply ;  seeing  both  the  Universities  of  England  infected 
therewith  ;  whereof  the  one  hath  many  years  been  void  of  all  heresies,  and  the 
other  hath,  afore  now,  taken  upon  her  the  praise,  that  she  was  never  defiled  ; 
and,  nevertheless,  now,  she  is  thoiuiht  to  be  the  original  occasion  and  cause  of 
the  fall  in  Oxford." 

Warham  chiefly  intended  bj'  this  letter,  "  to  move  that  only  the  Capytaine 
of  the  said  erroneous  doctrines  be  punished,  to  the  fearful  example  of  all  other  : 
but  if  all  the  young  scholars  suspected  be  called  up  to  London,  it  should  engen- 
der great  obloquy  and  slander  to  the  University,"  at  home  and  abroad,  "  to  the 
sorrow  of  all  good  men,  and  the  pleasure  of  heretics." — "  It  is  thought,"  he 
adds,  "  the  less  bruit,  the  better;"  and  he  then  suggests  that  a  commission  should 
be  sent  down  to  Oxford  to  examine  "  not  the  heads,  which  it  may  please  your 
Grace  to  reserve  to  yotir  own  examination,  but  the  novices  which  be  not  yet 
thoroughly  cankered." 

"  Item,  the  said  University  have  desired  me  to  move  your  good  Grace  to 
command  my  Lord  of  Rochester  or  my  Lord  of  London,  to  note  out,  beside  the 
works  of  Luther  condemned  already,  the  names  of  all  other  such  writers  and 
fautoi's — and  these  names,  described  in  a  table,  to  be  sent  down  to  the  Univer- 
sity of  Oxford,  commanding  them,  that  no  man,  without  express  license,  have, 
keep,  or  read  any  of  the  same  books,  under  the  pain  of  excommunication."  22 

Thus  the  mortification,  we  have  presumed  to  exist,  was  dis- 
closed, and  it  must  have  been  extreme.  But  did  Warham, 
the  Chancellor  of  Oxford,  forget  that  he  might  be  now  tread- 
ing on  Wolsey''s  tender  toe  ?  Was  he  not  aware,  when 
denouncing  these  heretics,  that,  amongst  others,  he  had  de- 
nominated the  Canons  of  Cardinal  College,  who  were  all  of 
Wolsey's  selection,  "  a  number  of  young  and  uncircumspect 
fools  9''''  Irritated  Wolsey  had  been  already  by  Barnes,  but 
this  letter  was  certainly  not  calculated  to  allay  the  irritation. 

The  advice  given,  however,  was  not  taken.  Garret  and 
the  young  scholars  were  indeed  already  in  durance  vile,  but 
the  requests  here  made  were  never  granted.  Not  that  the 
Cardinal  was  already  cool,  or  unconcerned,  far  from  it  !  but 
he  will  take  his  own  way,  and  act  as  it  best  pleased  him. 
Nay,  he  will  watch  for  farther  revenge,  and  before  long  some- 
thing may  occur,  which  will  carry  even  the  King  fully  along 


22  MS.  Cotton  Califiula,  R.  vi.,  fcjl.  I71.  b.  Even  Garret  will  not  be  called  up  to  London,  till 
towards  the  end  of  the  year.  For  Oxford's  sake,  and  more  especially  the  Cardinal's  pH  College, 
"the  less  bruit  the  better."    So  far  Warham's  advice  was  followed. 


1520.]  WRATH  OF  THE  KING.  Ill 

with  him.  Accordingly,  so  it  happened  ;  for  in  less  tluan  a 
fortnight  after  this  letter,  and  little  more  than  a  month  after 
the  day  of  terror  at  St.  PauFs,  an  opportunity  was  presented, 
which  Wolsey,  with  the  Bishops,  did  not  fail  to  improve  for 
the  most  impious  of  all  purposes — the  burning  of  the  Sacred 
Scriptures,  and  to  be  burned  by  authority  of  the  King. 

Henry  the  VIII.  having  written  against  Martin  Luther's 
book  on  the  Babylonish  Captivity,  and  thus  procured  from 
Rome  the  title  of  "  Defender  of  the  Faith  ;"  Luther  in  1.521 
had  published  his  bold  and  very  rough  reply.  In  September 
1525,  however,  as  already  hinted,  no  matter  by  whose  advice, 
or  under  what  impression,  he  made  an  attempt  at  reconcilia- 
tion, by  addressing  a  letter  to  his  Majesty.  In  this  letter  he 
actually  confessed  that  at  the  instance  of  other  persons  he  had 
grievously  offended,  by  a  foolish  and  precipitate  publication, 
yet,  from  the  reported  clemency  of  the  King,  he  hoped  for  his 
forgiveness.  He  had  been  told  that  his  Majesty  was  not  the 
real  author  of  the  book  edited  under  his  name  ;  and,  at  the 
same  time,  though  denouncing  Wolsey  as  "  a  monster,  the 
general  odium  of  God  and  man,  and  the  plague  of  his  king- 
dom," he  yet  prayed  for  a  gracious  reply  !  Luther  pled  after- 
wards, that  he  had  been  urgently  pressed  by  Christiern  King 
of  Denmark  to  write  even  this  letter,  but  the  step  taken  no 
one  can  defend.  It  was  not  only  unworthy  of  his  character 
and  place,  but  at  variance  with  the  upright  integrity  of  any 
follower  of  Christ.  "  Who  knows,"  said  Luther,  "  but  in  a 
happy  hour  I  may  gain  the  King  of  England  V  A  little  of 
human  vanity,  therefore,  seems  to  have  been  lurking  in  his 
mind ;  but  at  all  events,  he  must  have  been  quite  in  the  dark 
as  to  the  existing  state  of  affairs  in  England,  when  he  could 
pen  and  print  such  a  letter.^^ 

Henry,  in  reply,  having  reproached  Luther  with  levity  and 
inconstancy,  as  well  as  his  marriage,  and  the  vilest  heresy. 


23  If  any  one  desire  to  have  another  proof  that  Tyndale  and  Luther  had  never  met,  as  yet, 
he  may  find  it  here.  Had  they  done  so,  they  must  have  conversed  over  the  state  of  England, 
and  the  close  alliance  then  subsisting  between  Henry  and  his  favourite  Minister  ;  for  with  this 
subject  Tyndale  was,  and  continued  to  be,  most  intimately  acquainted.  Now,  had  he  been 
"confederate  with  Luther,"  never  would  he  or  could  he  have  advised  or  sanctioned  such  a  foolish 
step  as  this.  For  though  he  afterwards  reprobated  the  rough  and  scurrilous  reply  of  Henry,  ho 
was  too  well  aware  of  the  state  of  parties  in  England  to  have  dreamt  of  such  a  communication 
being  successful.  No,  he  was  far  better  employed  upon  his  New  Testament  at  Worms,  than  in 
advising  at  Wittenberg,  a  letter  to  the  King  of  England  so  injudicious  as  this— and  well  was  it 
for  Tyndale's  cause,  as  we  shall  see  presently,  that  more  than  six  months  passed  away  before 
his  Majesty  even  saw  the  letter. 


112  ■      DENOUNCES  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [buck  I. 

represented  Wolsey  as  peculiarly  dear  to  him,  and  of  great 
value  in  preventing  the  contagion  of  the  Lutheran  heresy  ; 
of  which,  it  might  have  been  added,  he  had  lately  given  a 
flaming  specimen. 

A  remarkable  fact,  however,  respecting  this  letter  of  Luther's 
has  been  all  but  overlooked.  Though  dated  from  Wittenberg, 
on  the  1st  of  September  1525,  more  than  six  months  had 
elapsed  before  it  met  the  eye  of  the  King.  He  himself  pro- 
fesses that  he  only  received  it  on  the  20th  of  March  !  Its 
non-arrival  may  well  be  observed,  for,  had  the  same  wrath 
been  excited  by  the  end  of  1525,  the  entrance  of  books  at  that 
period,  and  in  January,  must  have  been  still  more  difficult 
than  it  was.  ]3ut  arriving  five  weeks  after  the  famous  burning 
at  St.  Paul's,  a  fine  opportunity  was  now  presented  for  excit- 
ing the  royal  indignation  against  the  English  New  Testament^ 
and  covering  it  with  all  the  odium  oi  Lutheranism,  the  assumed 
cant  of  the  day.  The  name  of  the  translator  not  being  yet 
known,  for  Oochl»us  had  not  mentioned  it,  no  doubt  it  was 
deemed  a  happy  thought,  boldly  to  assert  that  the  production 
was  the  device  of  Luther  himself !  Henry  must  have  been 
sufficiently  incensed  by  the  letter  of  Luther  alone,  and,  as  for 
any  additional  information,  both  he  and  Wolsey  must  have 
remembered,  too  late,  the  letters  of  Rincke  and  Cochlseus  ;  but 
the  following  is  the  language  of  the  King,  in  his  English  pre- 
face, addressed  to  his  "  dearly  beloved  people." 

"  So  came  it  then  to  pass  that  Luther  at  last  perceiving  wise  men  to  espy 
him,  learned  men  to  leave  him,  good  men  to  abhor  him,  and  his  frantic  favour- 
ers to  fall  to  wreck ;  the  nobles  and  honest  people  in  Almaygne  (Germany) 
being  taught  by  the  proof  of  his  ungracious  practice,  much  more  hurt  and  mis- 
chief to  follow  thereof,  than  ever  they  looked  after ;  devised  a  letter  to  us, 
written  to  abuse  them  and  all  other  nations,  in  such  wise  as  ye,  by  the  contents 
thereof,  hereafter  shall  perceive.  In  which  he  feigneth  himself  to  be  informed, 
that  wo  be  turned  unto  the  favour  of  his  sect.  And,  with  many  flattering  words, 
he  laboui'eth  to  have  us  content  that  he  might  be  bold  to  write  to  us,  in  the 
matter  and  cause  of  the  gospel :  and  thereupon,  ttithout  answer  had  from  us, 
not  only  published  the  same  letter  and  put  it  in  print,  of  purpose  that  his  ad- 
herents should  be  the  bolder  under  the  shadow  of  our  authority ;  but  also  fell 
in  device  with  one  or  two  lewd  24  persons,  born  in  this  our  realm,  for  the  trans- 
lating of  the  New  Testament  into  Engllah  ;  as  well  with  many  corruptions  of 
that  holy  text,  as  certain  prefaces  and  other  pestilent  glosses  in  the  margins,  for 
the  advancement  and  setting  forth  of  his  abominable  heresies,  intending  to 


24  Lcwd—i.  e.  unlearned  ;  ignorant.     For  the  gradual  cliangcs  in  the  meaning  of  this  word, 
see  .lamieson's  Dietionary,  or  that  of  .Tohnson  bv  Todd. 


i 


1526.]  IN    ITS   FIRST   EDITION.  113 

abuse  the  good  minds  and  devotion,  that  yon,  our  dcai'ly  beloved  people,  beai" 
towai'd  the  holy  Scripture,  and  infect  yon  with  the  deadly  corruption  and  con- 
tagious odour  of  his  pestilent  errors-S.")  In  the  avoiding  whereof.  We,  of  our 
special  tender  zeal  towai'ds  you,  have,  with  the  deliberate  advice  of  the  most 
reverend  father  in  God,  Thomas  Lord  Cardinal,  Legate  a  latere  of  the  See 
Apostolic,  Archbishop  of  York,  Primate  and  our  Chancellor  of  this  realm,  and 
other  reverend  fathers  of  the  spirituality,  determined  the  said  and  untrue  trans- 
lations to  he  burned,  with  fm'ther  sharp  correction  and  punishment  against  the 
keepers  and  readers  of  the  same,  reckoning  of  your  wisdom  very  sure  that  ye 
will  well  and  thankfully  perceive  our  tender  and  loving  mind  toward  you  therein, 
and  that  ye  will  never  be  so  greedy  of  any  sweet  wine,  be  the  grape  never  so 
pleasant,  that  ye  will  desire  to  taste  it,  being  well  advertised  that  your  enemy 
before  hath  poisoned  it."  20 

They  liad  burned  New  Testaments,  with  other  hooks,  on 
the  11th  of  February.  But  this  advice  given  by  Wolsey, 
and  cordially  sanctioned  by  the  King,  as  to  the  burning  of 
the  quarto  book,  the  only  edition  yet  marked  out,  must  have 
occurred  immediately  on  the  reception  of  Luther's  letter ;  and 
it  fully  prepares  us  for  the  more  formal  injunctions  of  Tunstal 
and  Warham,  which,  however,  did  not  come  out  till  towards 
the  end  of  the  year,  so  that  we  have  still  several  incidents  to 
record  before  then.     Tunstal  was  still  in  Spain. 

The  footsteps  of  Divine  Providence,  at  this  ever-memorable  period, 
were  marked  and  conspicuous.     Events  crowded  upon  each  other,  and, 

25  Here,  then,  was  evidently  Tyndale's  quarto  New  Testament,  n-itlt  glosses,  and  denonnced  so 
enrUi  as  the  2Wi  of  March  1526,  no  mention  being  yet  made  of  the  small  edition. 

26  See  the  book  itself,  or  Herbert's  Ames,  i.  pp.  2fl7-30n.  The  first  edition  of  Henry's  reply, 
in  the  original  Latin,  in  quarto,  and  without  date,  which  Stiype  by  mistake  placed  in  1525,  was 
not  published  till  towards  the  close  of  this  year  ;  a  second,  in  12mo,  came  out  dated  on  the  2d  of 
December  152G ;  but  so  eager  was  the  King,  that  it  had  been  translated  into  English,  and  by 
himself.  The  time  of  receiving  Luther's  letter  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Latin  editions,  but  in  the 
English  the  King's  answer  begins  thus  ;  "  Your  letters  written  the  first  September  (1525,)  we 
have  received  the  j:x  day  of  March."  But  a  still  more  curious  circumstance,  never  before  ob- 
served, is  this  :  that  the  copy  alluded  to  as  received  on  the  2nth  of  March,  was  certainly  not  that 
of  Luther's  own  hand- writing,  nor  in  manuscript ;  it  was  merely  a  copy  on  which  Sir  Thomas 
More  had  pounced  ;  and  the  original  letter  in  manuscript  had  either  been  miscarried,  or  never 
been  sent.'  Its  being  printed  before  the  King  conld  reply,  must  have  been  very  provoking,  and, 
therefore,  this  is  noticed  in  the  preceding  extract,  as  an  aggravation.  For  proof  of  what  we  have 
now  stated,  we  are  indebted  to  the  original  Manuscripts.  Thus,  in  a  letter  from  Dr.  Knight, 
then  the  King's  Secretary,  addressed  to  Wolsey,  so  late  as  the  2Ist  oi  August,  he  says  :  "As  for 
the  copy  of  Luther's  letter,  his  Grace  knoweth  none  other,  but  that  Sir  Thomas  More  hath  hit." 
— See  Wolsey's  Correspondence  in  the  Chapter  House,  vol.  vii..  No.  G2.  And  again,  in  a  letter 
from  Wolsey  himself,  to  Sir  T.  More,  towards  the  end  of  September,  where,  judging  of  other 
men  by  himself,  he  says—"  And  whereas  ye  notified  unto  me,  that  the  King's  pleasure  is,  that 
his  Grace's  answer  to  Luther's  letter  should  be  incontinently  set  forth  to  the  Princes  of  Almayne, 
(Germany)  without  abiding  or  tarrying  for  the  Copy  thereof,  me  seemeth  it  is  not  convenient  that 
this  should  be  done,  in  my  poor  opinion  ;  as  well  for  that  Luther,  who  is  full  of  subtilty  and 
craft,  hereafter  might  percase  deny,  that  any  such  letter  hath  been  sent  by  him  unto  the  King's 
highness,  as  that  the  said  answer,  not  having  the  saiil  copy  adjoined  thereunto,  should  be  for 
want  thereof,  to  the  readers  and  hearers  thereof,  somewhat  diminute  and  obscure."  Both  these 
letters  have  been  printed  in  the  Government  State  Papers.  18.30,  pp.  173-175.  As  for  Henry's 
letter,  in  the  copies  for  Germany  the  Emperor's  arms  fronted  the  title-page  :  and,  in  1.527,  Coch- 
Ia>us,  as  we  have  stated,  was  printing  it  with  his  own  characteristic  comments.     Sec  page  60. 

VOL.   I.  T[ 


114.  POLITICAL  AFFAIRS.  [^BOOK  l. 

no  doubt,  so  far  mitigated  the  severity  of  i^ersecution.  Political  affairs 
admitted  of  no  delay,  more  especially  as  Wolsey  was  now  often  di-agged 
along,  like  a  slave,  at  the  chariot-wheels  of  his  own  ambition.  "  The 
King,"  says  Hall,  "  this  summer  took  his  pastime  in  hunting  ;"  but  as 
for  the  Cardinal,  he  must  now  be  engrossed  in  a  deep  political  game, 
demanding  all  his  powers  ;  so  that  affairs  such  as  those  we  have  been 
describing,  could  not  possibly  be  piu'sued  without  inten'uption. 

The  Emperor  and  Francis  had  made  peace,  and  this  did  not  suit  with 
the  Cardinal's  taste  or  prospects.  His  enmity  to  the  foirmer  now  ex- 
tended to  his  aunt,  the  wife  of  his  own  Sovereign  ;  and  therefore  an 
embassy,  with  Sir  Thomas  Cheyney,  as  principal,  must,  in  the  month  of 
March,  be  sent  into  France.  This  had  for  its  design  a  double  object, 
namely,  to  induce  Francis  to  Ireak  his  oath  to  the  Emperor,  and  to  try 
and  secure  the  Duchess  of  Alen^on,  the  sister  of  the  King,  as  a  suitable 
Queen  for  Henry,  at  a  convenient  opportunity.  Thus  early  was  the 
Cardinal  insinuating  scruples  into  his  King's  mind  as  to  the  morality  or 
legality  of  his  marriage  f^  and  though  in  the  latter  object  he  failed, 
in  the  former  he  succeeded  ;  for  by  the  month  of  June,  Francis  was 
again  in  hostility  to  the  Emperor.  As  for  Wolsey,  he  was  ascribing  to 
his  own  government  the  merit  of  having  so  advised  ;  because  this  peace 
was  not  only  unreasonable  and  impracticable,  but  "  tending  to  the  pre- 
judice and  danger  of  all  Christendo-mf'' 

The  chief  author  of  this  new  war,  however,  was  our  former  Bishop  of 
Worcester,  the  Roman  Pontiff  himself,  who  had  been  actually  more  busy 
than  any  other  to  produce  it.  Having  once  sent  his  ambassadors  to 
France,  England,  and  Venice,  our  Cardinal  had  most  willingly  intrigued 
with  France  as  his  abettor ;  Clement,  the  Pontiff,  had  sent  Francis  a 
release  from  his  oath,  and  "  the  holy  league  of  Clement"  was  the  result ! 
But  never  were  two  men  more  infatuated  ;  as  "  in  few  instances  have 
the  authors  of  mischief  brought  down  on  themselves  the  retributory 
punishment  more  signally,  or  more  to  the  advantage  of  mankind,  than 
Clement  and  his  coadjutor,  Wolsey,  did,  by  the  hostilities  which  they 
thus  united  to  produce."  ^8 

The  Pope  had  announced  his  new  league  to  the  Emperor,  in  June, 
who  replied,  by  a  state  paper  of  twenty-four  sheets,  in  September.  In 
that  month  the  Pontiff  had  sent  to  Henry  VTII.  desiring  him  to  be 
"  Protector"  of  his  league.  The  King  declined,  while  Wolsey  stood  by, 
dreaming,  no  doubt,  that  he  had  the  balance  of  Europe  in  his  hands  :  but 
lo  !  on  the  20th  of  this  same  month,  Clement  himself  was  attacked  by 
one  of  his  own  Cardinals  !  Hatred  between  the  parties  having  risen  to  a 
great  height,  the  Bishop  of  Rome  had  said  that  he  would  "  take  away  his 
red  hat;'''  on  which  the  Cardinal  threatened,  if  he  did  so,  he  would  "put 

27  See  Turner's  Henry  VIII.  chaps,  xvi.  and  .\x.  -"  Turner. 


].'52G.]  PERSECUTION   RESUMED.  115 

on  an  helmet  to  overthrow  his  three  crow^is;"  and  now,  without  waiting 
for  the  indignity,  he  had  fulfilled  his  threat.  The  Pontiff  had  no  more 
than  time  to  retire,  with  his  attendants,  and  chief  citizens,  into  the 
castle  of  St.  Angelo,  but  with  no  more  provisions  than  would  last  for 
thi'ee  days.  Apprehensive  of  dying  from  famine,  he  was  forced  to 
capitulate  and  bow  to  Cardinal  Colonna.  Althovigh  even  this  was  but 
small  humiliation  to  that  Avhich  followed,  there  was  enough  here  to 
have  shewn  both  Clement  and  Wolsey,  that,  in  the  hands  of  an  over- 
ruling Providence,  their  "  turning  of  things  upside  down,  was  esteemed 
as  the  potter's  clay."  The  Bishop  of  Bath,  who,  in  February  last,  had 
sat  in  severe  judgment  upon  Barnes,  was  no  longer  singing  the  same 
song.  He  was  now  ambassador  at  Rome ;  and  in  a  letter  to  Wolsey, 
dated  the  5th  of  October,  he  says — "  They  cry  and  call  upon  the  King's 
highness,  and  your  Grace,  as  them  in  whom  is  now  all  the  help  and  stay 
of  Christendom  ;  for  the  Pope,  and  all  the  affairs  of  Italy,  they  are  in 
ruin  and  at  nothing  l"^^  Here,  therefore,  we  must  pause,  to  enquire 
after  the  state  of  other  matters  at  home. 

From  March  to  October,  whether  the  friends  of  truth  had 
enjoyed  a  breathing  time  or  not,  as  it  regards  the  prudential 
importation  and  circulation  of  Tyndale's  precious  volumes, 
certain  events  show,  that,  though  living  in  perilous  times, 
they  had  zealously  improved  them.  Thus,  when  the  "  Sup- 
plication of  Beggars  "  was  scattering  about  in  London,  at  and 
before  Candlemas,  the  author,  Mr.  Fyshe,  it  is  presumed, 
was  not  in  England,  otherwise  he  must  have  run  the  hazard 
of  being  amongst  the  first  victims.  Return,  however,  he  did, 
and  to  London,  where  he  not  only  sojourned  for  a  season 
during  this  summer,  but  was  useful  and  active  in  the  circula- 
tion of  Tyndale's  New  Testament.  It  seems  as  if  he  had  come 
for  the  purpose.  He  may  have  brought  over  copies  with  him  ; 
but,  at  all  events,  when  we  come  to  the  disclosures  upon  oath 
in  the  spring  of  1528,  we  shall  find,  that,  at  this  very  period, 
he  was  a  confidential  agent,  importing  the  Testament  from 
Mr.  Harman  of  Antwerp,  and  dealing  it  out  for  sale  to  such 
as  travelled  through  the  country  and  sold  them.  After  Tun- 
staFs  return,  he  again  fled  abroad,  not  returning  for  about 
two  years  and  a  half. 

Mr.  Rodolph  Bradford,  a  Fellow  of  King"'s  College,  Cam- 
bridge, coming  to  London,  by  the  help  of  Mr.  Jeffrey  Lome, 
the  Usher  of  St.  Anthony's  school,  and  confidential  agent  of 

29  MS.  Calig.  D.  ix.  p.  253. 


IIG  PERSECUTION   RESUMED.  [boOK  I, 

Mr.  Forman  of  Honey  Lane,  the  colleague  of  Garret,  "  he 
met  with  certain  New  Testaments,  translated  into  English 
by  Tyndale,  and  went  to  Reading  with  them,  out  of  a  godly 
zeal  to  disperse  them."^'^  There  he  delivered  them  to  a  cer- 
tain monk,  who  being  apprehended,  made  known  the  names  of 
him  and  others  from  Avhom  he  had  them.  Whereupon  letters 
were  sent  over  to  Cambridge  to  apprehend  this  Bradford,  now 
returned,  together  with  Dr.  Smith  of  Trinity  Hall,  Simon 
Smith  of  Gronville  Hall,  Hugh  Latymer,  and  Segar  Nicolson, 
a  stationer  there.  Bradford  escaped  to  Ireland,  but  was  taken 
and  imprisoned  two  years.  He  afterwards  returned  to  Cam- 
bridge, passed  as  D.D.  in  1534,  and  lived  and  died  Chaplain 
to  Latimer  when  Bishop  of  Worcester.^^ 

As  the  year  advanced,  however,  the  alarm  continued  to 
increase.  The  Pontiff  himself  seemed  to  be  in  jeopardy — 
Luther's  rash  letter  was  not  forgotten — Henry  was  printing 
his  Latin  reply,  and  translating  it  also  into  English  for  the 
press,  with  a  preface  to  his  people — the  Bishops  were  consult- 
ing— Tunstal  had  now  come  home^  and  something  must  be 
done.  In  what  particular  month  of  this  year  Tunstal  had 
arrived  from  Spain,  does  not  appear.  Wolsey  heard  in 
March,  says  Lord  Herbert,  that  he  was  on  his  way  home- 
wards, so  that  it  must  have  been  some  time  after  this ;  and 
then,  however  annoying  it  certainly  proved  to  such  a  man,  he 
could  not  remain  long  in  London,  before  he  found  it  necessary 
to  look  into  the  state  of  his  diocese ;  for  so  widely  were  both 
editions  of  the  Testament  now  circulated,  that  even  the  Arch- 
bishop of  Canterbury  must  examine  his  province.  The  Bishops 
were  assembled,  and,  according  to  Strype,  at  the  instigation  of 
Wolsey.  Of  this  consultation  we  have  no  record,  but  one 
curious  account  of  it  may  be  glanced  at  from  the  famous 
Satire  of  William  Uoye  against  the  Cardinal.  Being  abroad, 
he  could,  of  course,  only  write  according  to  the  report  that 
reached  him — and  this  was  incorrect  as  it  regarded  Wolsey 
— but  still  it  may  be  noticed  as  one  proof,  by  the  way,  of  the 
deep  interest  felt  in  all  the  public  proceedings  of  the  time. 


3*  The  books  at  Cambridge,  it  maybe  remembered,  were  concealed  in  time,  before  Wolsey's 
"  secret  search."     They  had  been  dispersed,  and  Bradford  comes  to  London  for  more ! 

3'  Voxc,  first  and  following  editions,  compared  with  Strype.  The  latter,  by  mistake,  in  one 
place  speaks  of  Lome  as  servant  to  Dr.  Farman  of  Cambridge,  instead  of  connecting  him  with 
Forman  of  Honey  Lane  in  London  :  and  ascribes  the  Testament  to  Frpth,  but  meaning  Tyndale. 


1526'.]  RECORDED  IN   RHYME.  117 

According  to  Roye,  it  was  Henry  Standish,  once  Guardian 
of  the  Franciscans,  and  now  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph,  already 
mentioned,  who  first  informed  VVolsey  of  the  Testament  being 
in  the  country,  imploring  him  most  earnestly  to  prevent  its 
circulation.  This  informer  Roye  designates  Judas,  and  mak- 
ing Wolsey  sustain  the  part  of  Pilate^  he  represents  him  as, 
at  the  first,  paying  but  little  regard  to  the  fury  of  Standish, 
and  even  saying — "  I  find  no  fault  therein."  But  when  once 
the  Bishops  had  assembled  as  a  body,  and  he  with  them,  to 
examine  and  determine  what  was  to  be  done ;  no  sooner  did 
Tunstal,  Bishop  of  London,  (or  Caiphas^)  deliver  his  opinion, 
than  the  Cardinal  assented,  and,  of  course,  all  the  rest — 
giving  judgment  that  the  book  should  be  sought  for,  and 
committed  to  the  flames.  In  Roye''s  estimation,  however,  it 
was  now  all  in  vain,  either  to  "  give  judgment  against  the 
Gospel,"  or  try  to  prevent  its  circulation.  Thus,  in  one 
place,  alluding  first  to  the  Saviour,  and  then  to  the  book  it- 
self, he  says,  in  his  own  uncouth,  but  nervous  rhyme — 

"  God,  of  his  goodness,  gnidg'd  not  to  die, 

Man  to  deliver  from  deadly  damnation, 
Whose  will  is,  that  we  should  know  perfectlie 

What  he  here  hath  done  for  our  salvation. 

O  cruel  Caiphas !  full  of  crafty  conspiration, 
How  durst  thou  give  then  false  judgment. 
To  hum  God's  word— the  holy  Testament. 

"  The  lewdness  of  living  is  loath  to  bear 

Christ's  gospel  to  come  unto  clear  light ; 
How  be  it,  surely  it  is  so  spread  far  and  wear. 

That  for  to  Id  it,  thou  hast  little  might ; 

God  hath  opened  our  dark  dimmed  sight 
Truly  to  perceive  thy  tyrannous  intent, 
To  burn  God's  word — the  holy  Testament. "^'^ 

Let  the  other  particulars  here  given,  with  the  exception  of 
Wolsey''s  indifi'erence,  be  as  they  might,  we  know  that  the 
Bishops  did  assemble  and  consult :  and  that  some  prohibitory 
instrument  was  issued  by  Wolsey  himself,  there  can  be  no 
doubt,  as  we  find  Fisher,  Bishop  of  Rochester,  acting  on  the 
strength  of  it,  in  January  1529.^  Whatever  it  was,  how- 
ever, this  was  in  his  own  name,  not  that  of  the  King,  nor 
does  there  seem  to  be  any  trace  of  it  remaining  in  existence. 


32  See  the  original  edition  in  the  British  Museum;  or  Harleian  Misc.,  vol.  i.\.  pp.  77.  81. 
Edit.  1812. 

33  Thus  in  the  Consistorial  Acts  at  Rochester  may  be  seen  a  rigid  process  against  the  precen- 
tor of  the  Benedictine  Priory,  Dr.  AVilliam  Mafelde,  for  retaining  an  English  Testament,  in 
disobedience  to  the  yeneral  injuneliun  of  Cardinal  fFolsey,  to  deliver  up  these  prohibited  books 
to  the  Bishops. 


118  INJUNCTION   OF  TUNSTAL.  [boOK  I. 

The  first  instrument  generally  known  to  have  been  pub- 
lished, was  the  prohibition  sent  out  by  Cuthbert  Tunstal ;  in 
which  it  will  be  observed,  that  both  editions  of  Tyndale's 
Testament,  already  dispersed  in  great  number,  are  now,  at  last, 
denounced,  and  Luther's  sect  falsely  employed,  as  the  con- 
venient word  of  terror. 

As  the  reader  may  be  curious  to  know  in  what  terms  the 
volume  was  first  spoken  of  by  men  professing  to  have  spiritual 
authority,  and  since  many  will  be  astonished  at  the  language 
of  a  man  calling  himself,  "  by  the  permission  of  God,  Bishop 
of  London,"  we  cannot  refrain  from  giving  the  injunction 
entire.  After  the  usual  introduction,  addressing  his  Arch- 
deacons, he  thus  proceeds  : — 


"  By  the  duty  of  our  pastoral  office,  we  are  bound  diligently,  with  all  our 
power,  to  foresee,  provide  for,  root  out,  and  put  away,  all  those  things,  which 
seem  to  tend  to  the  peril  and  danger  of  our  subjects,  and  specially  the 
destruction  of  their  souls  !  Wherefore,  we  having  understanding,  by  the  report 
of  divers  credible  persons,  and  also  by  the  evident  appearance  of  the  matter, 
that  many  children  of  iniquity,  maintainors  of  Luther's  sect,  blinded  through 
extreme  wickedness,  wandering  from  the  way  of  truth  and  the  Catholic  faith, 
craftily  have  translated  the  New  Testament  into  our  English  tongue,  intermingling 
therewith  many  heretical  articles,  and  erroneous  opinions,  pernicious  and 
offensive,  seducing  the  simple  people,  attempting,  by  their  wicked  and  perverse 
interpretations,  to  profanate  the  majesty  of  the  Scripture,  which  hitherto  hath 
remained  undefiled,  and  craftily  to  abuse  the  most  Holy  Word  of  God,  and 
the  true  sense  of  the  same  ;  of  the  which  translation  there  are  many  books  im- 
printed, some  loith  glosses,  and  some  uithout ;  containing  in  the  English 
tongue,  that  pestiferous  and  most  perniciotts  poison,  dispersed  throughout  all  our 
diocese,  in  great  number  :  which  truly,  without  it  be  speedily  foreseen,  without 
doubt  will  contaminate  and  infect  the  flock  committed  unto  us,  with  most 
deadly  poison  and  heresy,  to  the  grievous  peril  and  danger  of  the  souls  com- 
mitted to  our  charge,  and  the  offence  of  God's  Divine  Majesty  :  Wherefore  we, 
Cuthbert,  the  Bishop  aforesaid,  grievously  sorrowing  for  the  premises,  willing 
to  withstand  the  craft  and  subtlety  of  the  ancient  enemy  and  his  ministers, 
which  seek  the  destruction  of  my  flock,  and  with  a  diligent  care  to  take  heed 
unto  the  flock  committed  to  mj'  charge,  desiring  to  find  speedy  remedies  for  the 
premises.  Do  charge  you,  jointly  and  severally,  (the  Archdeacons,)  and  by 
virtue  of  your  obedience,  straightly  enjoin  and  command  you,  that,  by  our 
authority,  you  warn,  or  cause  to  be  warned,  all  and  singular,  as  well  exempt  as 
not  exempt,  dwelling  within  your  archdeaconries,  that  within  thirty  days'  space, 
whereof  ten  days  shall  be  for  the  first,  ten  for  the  second,  and  ten  for  the  third 
peremptory  term,  under  pain  of  excommunication,  and  incui'ring  the  suspicion 
of  heresy,  they  do  bring  in,  and  really  deliver  unto  our  Vicar- General,  (Geoffrey 
Wharton,)  all  and  singular  such  books,  as  contain  the  translation  of  the  New 
Testament  in  the  English  tongue  ;  and  that  you  do  certify  us,  or  our  said  Com- 
missary, within  tico  months  after  the  day  of  the  date  of  these  presents,  duly, 
personally,  or  by  your  letters,  together  with  tliese  presents  under  your  seals, 


152G,]  MANDATE   OF   WARHAM.  119 

what  you  have  done  m  the  premises,  under  pain  of  contempt !  Given  under  our 
seal,  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  October,  a.d.  1 526,  in  the  fiftli  year  of  our 
consecration."  34 

TunstaPs  orders  being  thus  issued  on  Wednesday  the  24th 
of  October,  a  copy  was  sent  to  the  Archdeacons  of  Middlesex, 
Essex  and  Colchester ;  and  eleven  days  afterwards,  or  the  3d 
of  November,  a  "  Mandate,"  in  nearly  the  same  terms,  was 
given  out  by  Warham,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  to  search 
his  entire  province.  Both  instruments  refer  simply  to  the 
New  Testament  of  Tyndale,  of  both  editions,  and  in  wide  cir- 
culation ;  no  other  hook  being  referred  to,  or  prohibited  at  the 
same  moment.  Tyndale,  therefore,  though  not  yet  expressly 
named,  enjoyed  the  honour  of  being  thus  exposed  alone,  and 
as  though  he  had  been  the  great  offender  of  the  day  ;  while  it 
will  be  observed,  that  the  work  here  carved  out  for  the  Arch- 
deacons, instead  of  being  finished  in  tivo  months,  occupied 
official  attention  for  years  to  come.^^ 

After  two  such  injunctions  as  these  had  been  issued,  it  was 
not  to  be  supposed  that  these  enemies  of  divine  truth  either 
had  been  or  would  remain  inactive.  Accordingly,  whether 
we  regard  the  Bishops  at  home,  or  the  King  and  Cardinal 
in  their  exertions  abroad,  they  are  all  alive,  and  equally  on 
the  alert. 

With  respect  to  proceedings  at  home,  Barnes,  it  must  be  re- 
membered, had  not  yet  left  the  country ;  but  he  had  been 
so  far  released  as  to  be  now  a  free  prisoner  at  St.  Augustine"'s  ; 
and  Garret,  though  he  had  endured  penance  sufficient  at  Ox- 
ford, had  not  been  so  publicly  cross-examined.  This  might 
elicit  some  farther  information.     Articles  havino"  been,  there- 


M  Foxe  says,  23d  Oct.,  and  Collier  has  it  the  18th  ;  but  this  would  have  been  the  fourth  year 
of  Tunstal,  as  he  was  installed  the  19th  Oct.  1522.  The  above  date  is  from  the  Register 
itself,  xxiiij. 

33  The  injunction  of  Tunstal  is  in  Foxe,  vol.  ii.,  p.  284,  ed.  1631  ;  and  the  Mandate  of  War- 
ham  in  Wilkin's  Concil.,  vol.  iii.,  p.  7116.  There  are  said  to  have  been  various  other  books 
prohibited  by  the  same  Mandate,  but  this  is  a  mistake,  as  no  other  book  is  named  in  it ;  and  as 
for  Foxe,  it  must  be  observed,  that  he  is  now  recapitulating  nmler  1530,  as  he  often  does.  Even 
Mr.  Todd,  in  his  excellent  "  Vindication,"  says, — "  It  may  be  proper  to  inform  some  readers  of 
the  title  of  other  English  books  prohibited  at  the  same  time,  and  in  the  following  order, — "  The 
Supplication  of  Beggars  —  Revelation  0/  Antichrist  —  the  New  Testament  of  Tyndale — The 
Wicked  Mammon— The  Obedience  of  a  Christian  7naJi— Introduction  to  Paul's  Epistle  to  the 
Romans,"  &c.  But  Mr.  T.  knows  well,  that  the  books  here  printed  in  italic,  were  not  in  existence, 
and  that,  therefore,  they  could  not  be  denounced  by  anticipation.  The  mistake  has  been  re- 
peated by  many,  but  fresh  alarms  were  the  occasion  of  other  denunciations,  when  all  these  and 
other  books  were  included,  which  will  come  before  us  at  their  respective  seasons.  The  intro- 
duction to  the  Romans  we  have  not  excluded,  as  we  shall  have  occasion  to  show  that  it  was 
already  in  existence,  though  not  as  yet  denounced. 


120  PERSECUTION   CONTINUED,  HbooK  I. 

fore,  vamped  up  against  him,  he  had  been  brought  up  from 
Osney  prison,  and  about  this  time  stood  before  Tuustal  and 
his  fellows,  as  already  narrated.  Following  the  sad  example 
set  him  by  Barnes,  he  at  last  abjured.^ 

Between  Oxford  and  Cambridge,  however,  there  has  ap- 
peared as  yet  one  material  difference  in  point  of  the  number 
of  convictions.  True,  the  students  at  Cambridge,  being  fore- 
warned, had  more  dexterously  concealed  their  books,  and  so 
escaped  detection  ;  but  there  were  Latimer  and  Bilney,  not  to 
say  others,  as  notorious  as  Barnes  ;  nay,  the  two  named  were, 
in  every  respect,  far  more  so.  It  may  have  seemed  strange, 
therefore,  that  they  at  least  were  not  ordered  up  to  London  at 
the  same  time.  It  must,  however,  be  remembered,  that 
Barnes  had  rendered  himself  most  obnoxious  at  that  moment, 
by  his  unceremonious  exposure  of  Wolsey  personally  :  yet 
engrossed  as  he  was  with  political  affairs,  after  a  season, 
neither  these  men,  nor  some  others,  had  been  overlooked. 

As  for  Latimer,  his  adroitness  of  reply,  and  vein  of  humour, 
were  often  of  service  to  him,  and  to  these,  perhaps,  he  was 
now  somewhat  indebted.  Various  complaints  had  been  made 
against  him ;  but  though  they  had  not,  it  is  evident  that  the  in- 
terdict of  West,  the  Bishop  of  Ely,  could  not  remain  unnoticed, 
however  unsupported  it  might  be  by  other  authorities.^ 
Wolsey,  therefore,  sent  for  Latimer,  to  appear  before  him  at 
York  House,  where  he  himself  examined  him.  Upon  his 
first  entrance,  the  Cardinal  seemed  surprised,  on  observing 
him  to  be  so  far  advanced  in  years.     Finding  him  also  to  be 


3«  Thomas  Garret,  perhaps  the  very  first  receiver,  but  certainly  the  first  distributor,  of  these 
dreaded  books,  was  originally  a  student  at  Oxford  ;  having  entered  in  1517,  taken  his  degree  of 
B.A.  in  1518,  and  that  of  A.M.  afterwards.  Upon  obtaining  these  volumes,  he  appears  to  have 
immediately  thought  of  his  former  abode,  with  which  he  still  kept  up  correspondence,  "  for  he 
took  them  down,"  says  Foxe,  "  to  such  as  he  knew  were  lovers  of  the  Gospel."  After  escaping 
from  Tunstal,  he  went  from  place  to  place  for  eight  or  nine  years;  but,  in  better  times,  he  was 
very  differently  regarded.  The  first  notice  to  be  found  of  him  is  in  1535.  At  that  period  the 
Marches  of  Calais  belonged  to  the  crown  of  England,  and,  in  a  letter  from  Cranmcr  to  Lord 
Crumwell,  dated  the  8th  of  October  in  that  year,  there  is  the  following  passage, — "  Inasmuch  as  I 
am  advertised  that  the  parsonage  of  St.  Peter's  beside  Calais  is  like  shortly  to  be  void,  and  in 
the  King's  Grace's  disposition,  I  beseech  you  either  to  obtain  the  same  for  3Iastcr  Garret,  whose 
learning  and  conversation  is  known  to  Ije  right  and  honest,  or  else  for  some  other,  as  is  so  able 
and  willing  to  discharge  the  same  as  he  is." — MS.  Chapter  House,  Westminster.  Queen  Anne 
Boleyn  also  solicited  preferment  for  him,  Todd's  Cranmer,  i.,  p.  138 ;  and,  what  was  singular 
enough,  on  the  14th  of  June  1537,  according  to  the  Register,  he  was  inducted,  though  under 
Stokesly,  and  as  Rector,  into  the  very  same  church  in  which  he  had  been  Curate,  in  the  days  of 
Wolsey!  He  was  so,  also,  in  consequence  of  the  resignation  of  Laurence  Cook,  the  man  who, 
in  153,3,  behaved  so  brutally  at  the  martyrdom  of  John  Fryth.  Here,  however.  Garret  was 
to  remain  only  three  years.  The  crown  of  martyrdom  awaited  him,  as  he  perished  in  the 
same  flames  with  Dr.  Barnes,  on  the  Sdtli  of  June  1540,  or  two  days  after  Lord  Crumwell. 

37  See  page  1(12. 


1520.]  BUT  IN   VAIN.  121 

at  once  acute,  learned,  and  ready  in  his  replies ;  surpassing 
in  accuracy  of  learning,  either  of  the  Doctors,  Capon  and 
Marshall,  now  in  Wolsey's  presence  ;  he  requested  him  to 
give  some  account  of  that  sermon  which  he  had  preached 
before  Dr.  West,  the  Bishop.  Latimer  did  so.  "  Then," 
said  the  Cardinal,  "  if  the  Bishop  of  Ely  cannot  abide  such 
doctrine  as  you  have  here  repeated,  you  shall  have  my  license, 
and  shall  preach  it  unto  his  beard,  let  him  say  what  he  will." 
Accordingly,  after  a  gentle  admonition  only,  the  Cardinal 
discharged  Latimer,  actually  giving  him  his  license  to  preach 
throughout  England !  A  most  singular  interposition  in 
favour  of  the  truth,  at  once  raising  the  man  above  the  malice 
of  his  enemies,  and  the  interdict  of  any  Bishop  in  the  land  I^ 

With  regard  to  Biluey,  who  had  preached  with  such  effect, 
not  only  at  Cambridge,  but  in  Suffolk  and  Norfolk,  and  even 
in  London,  whose  case  at  last  became  so  affecting,  he  made 
two  appearances.  The  first  has  been  generally  overlooked, 
perhaps  partly  owing  to  one  passage  in  the  first  edition  of 
Foxe  having  been  omitted,  and  the  fact  coming  out  incident- 
ally only  in  the  subsequent  editions.  But  of  the  fact  itself, 
there  can  be  no  doubt,  or  that  he  did  not  escape  as  Latimer 
had  done  ;  for  alas  !  he  then  first  got  entangled,  and  first  let 
go  his  integrity  !  At  the  close  of  this  first  appearance  he  had 
been  enjoined  "  not  to  preach  any  of  Luther's  opinions,  but 
to  impugn  them  everywhere  ; "  yet  afterwards,  taking  refuge 
merely  on  some  supposed  informality  in  the  oath  administered 
to  him,  he  had  gone  on  much  as  before.  It  was  on  this 
account  that  we  shall  find  him  come  before  them  in  November 
1527,  or  next  year,  charged  with  having  relapsed.  More  than 
this,  we  shall  find  afterwards,  that,  at  whatever  period  this 
first  appearance  of  Bilney  took  place,  there  was  another  man 
along  with  him,  Thomas  Arthur,  in  the  same  situation.  As 
for  any  other  Cambridge  men,  they  seem  to  have  been  merely 
admonished. 

The  mildness  hitherto  shown  to  men,  must  have  been  most 


38  MS.  Haileian,  No.  422,  fol.  85-86.  This  must  have  answered  the  purpose  of  Latimer  for  the 
present.  At  a  future  period,  when  the  authority  of  Wolsey  was  gone,  having  been  called  up  by 
Stokesly,  Bishop  of  London,  he  took  still  higher  ground  : — "  The  University  of  Cambridge,"  said 
he  "  hath  authority  Apostolic  to  admit  twelve  yearly  preachers,  of  the  which  I  am  one  :  and  the 
King's  Highness,  God  save  his  Grace!  did  decree  that  all  admitted  of  Universities,  should 
preach  throughout  all  his  realm,  as  long  as  they  preached  well,  without  dislreiite  of  any  man— 
my  Lord  of  Canterbury,  and  my  Lord  of  Durham,  with  such  other  standing  by  and  hearing  the 
deciec,  nothing  gainsaying  it,  but  consenting  to  the  same." 


122  THIRD   EDITION   OF  [bOOK  I. 

annoying  to  some  of  these  persecutors  ;  and  it  was  aftei'wards 
to  be  visited  on  the  head  of  Wolsey,  when  impeached,  that  he 
had  been  the  disturber  of  "  the  due  and  direct  correction  of 
heresies  ;'*'  but  as  for  zeal  in  the  burning  of  books,  the  Cardi- 
nal was  certainly  not  one  whit  behind  any  of  them.  Bj  the 
end  of  this  year,  therefore,  many  copies  of  the  New  Testament 
must  have  been  consumed  in  the  flames,  for  it  has  been  al- 
together a  mistake  to  confine  this  to  one  or  two  great  occasions. 
On  the  contrary,  in  the  very  first  month  of  next  year  we 
shall  presently  hear  the  ambassador  of  Henry,  in  the  Low 
Countries,  bringing  it  forward  as  an  argument  for  burning 
others  there,  that  this  had  been  doing  in  England  daily ! 

In  the  midst  of  all  this  determined,  though  vain  fury, 
against  the  reception  of  the  word  of  God  into  England,  it  is 
most  gratifying  to  find  that  the  friends  of  truth  abroad  had 
been  so  active.  It  was  there  that  the  King  and  the  Cardinal 
had  been  playing  their  part  in  this  tragedy,  and  to  them  we 
must  now  turn,  after  a  few  words  of  explanation  ;  for  we  are 
not  3^et  done  with  this  notable  year,  1526. 

The  editions  of  Tyndale's  Testament  have  been  hitherto  di- 
vided into  two  classes,  styled  the  genuine  and  spurious  ;  mean- 
ing by  the  former  such  as  he  himself  edited,  and  by  the  latter, 
such  as  were  printed  from  his,  by  others.  The  latter  were 
not  so  correct,  but  still  they  nobly  and  efiectually  served  their 
purpose,  enlightening  and  consoling  many  an  immortal  spirit. 

We  have  already  given  the  history  of  the  first  and  second 
editions  printed  in  1525,  and  issued  from  Worms.  We  now 
come  to  the  first  printed  at  Antwerp  by  Christopher  of  End- 
hoven,  or  the  third  edition.  The  whole  history  of  it  is  curious, 
giving  such  a  display  of  opposition  to  the  entrance  of  the 
Word  of  God  into  our  native  land,  as  is  nowhere  else  to  be 
found,  though  it  has  never  before  been  even  noticed  in  any 
printed  publication. 

The  two  months  formally  specified  in  TunstaFs  injunction 
for  calling  in  books  at  home,  were  not  permitted  to  expire 
before  it  becomes  evident  that  the  King  and  Wolsey,  as  well 
as  the  Bishops,  had  entered  fully  into  the  subject.  Finding 
that,  somehow  or  other,  copies  were  importing,  they  resolved, 
if  possible,  to  cut  off  the  supplies  from  abroad.  Well  aware 
that  it  was  from  the  Low  Countries,  Brabant,  that  all  these 
hated  Testaments  had  come,  no  stone  must  be  left  unturned 


i 


1526.]  THE   NEW  TESTAMENT.  123 

to  find  them  out.  All  the  energy  of  the  English  ambassador 
at  the  court  of  Lady  Margaret,  must  be  put  to  the  stretch, 
and  we  shall  now  have  one  striking  illustration  of  how  much 
in  earnest  were  all  parties — King,  Cardinal,  and  Bishops — 
to  arrest  the  progress,  and  prevent  the  triumphs  of  divine 
truth.  O  how  joyfully  would  they  have  consigned  the  last  leaf 
to  the  flames  !  And  this,  assuredly,  they  would  have  done, 
but  for  this  most  annoying  and  hated  "  new  invention  of 
printing."  While,  however,  they  were  burning  at  home,  others 
were  busy  at  the  printing  press  abroad,  and,  therefore,  the 
frenzy  of  the  enemy  must  extend  from  England  to  Brabant. 

How  providential  was  it,  that,  by  this  time,  the  power  and 
the  terror  of  Wolsey's  name  were  upon  the  wane  I  Only  a 
few  years  before,  the  Lady  Regent  of  these  countries,  Princess 
Margaret,  had  whispered  in  his  ear  the  sweet  sound  of  the 
Popedom,  and  her  own  wish  to  see  him  in  the  Papal  Chair ; 
nay,  and  proposed  to  write  to  the  Emperor,  her  nephew,  in 
his  favour .3^  Now,  however,  she  had  found  good  reason  to 
suspect  the  man."*"  High  words  had  passed  between  the  parties, 
and  also  with  Count  Hoogstrate,  one  of  the  Lady  Margarefs 
Council,  to  whom  application  was  about  to  be  made.  Wolsey, 
moreover,  had  insulted,  by  the  insolence  of  his  language. 
Monsieur  Bever,  the  Lord  of  Campvere  and  Admiral  of  Flan- 
ders, the  Emperor's  ambassador  to  England,  now  returned  to 
the  Low  Countries.  Added  to  all  this,  it  had  been  a  favourite 
project  of  the  Cardinal,  to  withdraw  the  English  merchants 
and  "  the  mart  for  goods,"  from  Antwerp  to  Calais.  All  these 
things  were  against  him ;  and  "  the  Lords  of  Antwerp,""  who, 
at  one  period,  not  long  past,  would  have  at  once  crouched 
before  him,  by  the  good  providence  of  God,  will  now  prove 
neither  so  pliant  nor  obsequious. 

Wolsey,  however,  fully  aware  of  all  these  circumstances, 
had  resolved  that  the  search  for  booJcs  upon  the  Continent 
should  commence  with  the  highest  authority  ;  and  he  must, 
therefore,  have  the  King  on  the  throne,  called  the  "  Defender 
of  the  Faith,"  to  command  the  destruction  of  the  Sacred 
Volume  !  The  ink  of  TunstaPs  injunction  was  scarcely  dry, 
before  Henry  had  signed  his  letters  ;  one  addressed  to  Princess 


39  MS.  Cotton,  Galba,  B.  vii.  p.  353,  354.  b.   And  the  Emperor  then,  in  Dec.  1521,  at  least  profess- 
ed readiness  to  serve  him  in  the  election,  after  the  death  of  Leo  X.— Galba,  B.  vi.  89,  b. 
<"  Galba,  B.  vi.  fo.  3,  0,  10. 


124  PERSECUTION  CARRIED  ABROAD.  [bOOK  I. 

Margaret,  and  the  other  to  the  Governor  of  the  Enc/lish  House 
at  Antwerp.  Wolsey's  letters,  also,  dated  the  31st  of  October 
and  3d  November,  were  directed  to  John  Hackett,  the  Agent 
for  the  Crown  and  English  Envoy  at  tliat  court,  and  all  Avere 
conveyed  by  the  same  messenger.'*^  At  a  formal  audience, 
on  Saturday  the  17th  of  November,  Hackett  delivered  the 
King's  letters  to  the  Lady  Margaret,  in  presence  of  the  Lords 
of  her  Council ;  and,  on  the  19th,  the  Princess  herself  replied 
to  Henry — "  She  cannot  sufficiently  praise  his  Majesty's 
virtuous  intentions  !  She  had  consulted  with  Hackett,  and 
since  the  reception  of  the  King's  letter,  she  had  pointedly 
commanded  her  officers  to  search  the  country  for  these  books, 
intending  to  proceed  in  all  rigour  against  those  whom  they 
found  culpable."''^  Two  days  after  this,  Hackett  informs 
Wolsey  of  his  cordial  reception  at  court,  and  that  he  had 
"  delivered  the  King's  letter  to  the  Governor  of  the  Merchant 
Adventurers,  who  promised  that  on  the  first  day  at  Barrow,'*^ 
he  would  shew  the  King's  highness  and  the  Cardinal's  mind 
and  pleasure  as  touching  these  new  imprinted  books,  and  shall 
do  his  best,  (and  so  imll  I,)  utterly  to  destroy,  and  bring  them 
to  nought."  Hackett  is  very  warm  in  the  cause,  for  if  it 
did  not  succeed,  he  thought  that  "  every  fool  would  think 
to  be  a  doctor  I "  ■** 

But  in  negociating  this  business,  our  ambassador  had  no 
easy  task  assigned  to  him.  Books  were  to  be  sought  for  in  the 
large  and  busy  city  of  Antwerp.  As  Envoy,  he  lived  fifteen 
miles  distant,  at  Mechlin,  where  the  reigning  Princess  held 
her  court.  In  Antwerp  itself,  the  Margrave,  as  representative 
of  the  Emperor,  resided ;  but  as  that  city  enjoyed  its  own  laws 
and  privileges,  of  which  the  "  Lords  of  Antwerp"  were  the 
guardians,  their  authority  was  paramount  to  all  others. 
Hackett  eagerly  desired  to  gratify  the  Cardinal  and  his 
English  Bishops,  but  then  he  was  about  to  meddle  with  the 
citizens  of  "  no  mean  city."  *^ 


^'  The  first  letter,  it  will  be  observed,  was  written  the  week  immediately  after  Tuiistars  in- 
junction, and  the  second  on  the  same  day  as  Warham's  mandate. 

43  Galba,  B.  ix.  fol.  33,  b. 

43  Barrow,  Barois,  Barrough,  all  refer  to  the  same  place,  now  known  as  Bergen-op-Zoom,  then 
in  immediate  contact  with  the  water. 

41  Galba,  B.  ix.  fol.  3.5. 

45  Antwkrp  was  then,  in  fact,  the  emporium  of  the  world  ;  Bruges  having  declined  for  the 
last  ten  or  fifteen  years,  while  Antwerp  was  increasing  daily.  All  the  English  merchants  had 
removed  to  it  by  1516.     According  to  Guicciardini,  500  craft  would  sail  and  arrive  in  one  da^/  ; 


1.52G.]  PERSECUTION  IN  ANTWERP.  125 

On  the  11th  of  December,  Henry's  Secretary,  Mr.  Brian 
Tukc,  sent  off  copies  of  TyndaWs  Testament^  as  an  index  to 
the  others,  now  sought  to  be  destroyed  ;  and  the  first  letter, 
reporting  progress,  is  directed  to  him  for  the  King,  dated  the 
17th,  before  Hackett  had  received  the  books.  The  second, 
expressing  great  anxiety  to  receive  them,  is  five  days  later, 
and  addressed  to  Wolsey.  This  seems  to  be  an  instance 
of  those  double  despatches  which  the  Cardinal  uniformly  re- 
quired ;  and,  as  it  presents  additional  information,  we  give 
the  passage  entire. — 

"  By  my  last  letters,  dated  the  17th  day  of  this  month,  I  wTote  to  Mr.  Brian 
Tuke,  how  that  the  Lords  of  the  town  of  Antwerp  showed  me  that  they  had 
submitted  themselves  as  touching  the  correction  of  this  neio  hook  in  English  ; 
to  be  ordered  after  the  discretion  and  advice  of  the  Lady  Margaret  and  her 
Council ;  and  after  this  conclusion  taken,  the  foresaid  Lords  came  to  the  Court 
where  I  was  present,  and  showed  to  the  said  Council  how  that  I  made  great 
diligence  to  see  the  foresaid  books  burnt,  and  the  (iraprimui's)  printers  to  be 
criminally  punished,  according  to  their  merits,  and  that  they  have  had  in  part 
the  examination  of  the  said  imprinter. 

"  But  considering  that  such  business  as  this  is,  touches  both  life  and  goods, 
the  said  Lords  of  Antwerp  declared  unto  the  foresaid  council,  that  they  thought 
not,  in  no  wise  to  judge  upon  the  example  of  another  judge's  judgment,  without 
they  have  perfect  knowledge  upon  the  foundment  and  reason,  that  they  may  do 
it:  Desiring  the  said  Council  that  they  might  have  the  said  (book)  translated 
into  Latin  or  Dutch,  so  that  they  might  understand  the  language — whereupon 
that  they  may  contrive  the  sentence,  to  the  which  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council 
would  lightly  (readily)  agree.  But  I  answered  upon  this  article,  that  it  were 
not  convenient  to  permit  that  such  translation  should  be  doue  on  this  side  of 
the  seas,  for,  lawfully,  I  would  suspect  him  that  would  meddle  in  the  same. 
They  answered  me,  that  they  ought  not  to  judge  without  they  knew  the  found- 
ment of  the  cause.     I  answered  them,  that  the  Kimj  my  Sovereign  Lord  and 

very  different  from  its  present  state,  when  in  the  course  of  the  year  there  may  only  be  about 
low.  Then  2500  vessels  might  be  seen  lying  in  the  Scheldt  before  the  city  at  one  time;  ten 
thousand  carts  were  in  constant  employment,  besides  hundreds  of  waggons  daily  with  passengers, 
and  500  coaches  used  by  persons  of  distinction. 

Merchant  Adventurers.  As  early  as  the  year  1296  our  Merchant  Adventurers  are  said  to 
have  established  a  factory  ;  but,  at  all  events,  the  Magazine  of  Wool  at  Antwerp  is  distinctly 
noticed  in  1314. — Foedera,  iii.,  p.  482.  The  RugJisli  Hvtise  there,  where  our  ambassadors  were 
lodged  on  their  journeys,  and  to  which  the  English  in  times  of  danger  and  disturbance  resorted, 
was  therefore  a  notable  spot  in  its  day.  In  what  part  of  Antwerp  it  stood,  before  the  Hotel 
Van  Lyere  in  Rue  Ncuve  was  ceded  to  them  in  155H,  we  cannot  state,  but  that  is  a  building  of 
85  feet  in  front,  by  60  in  height,  with  windows  4  feet  broad  by  ten  high.  It  is  at  present  a 
Military  Hospital  in  the  street  now  named  the  Rue  des  Princes.— Burffon's  Life  of  Grcsham. 
Ki.vu's  Merchant.  The  office  of  Agent  for  the  Crown,  or  King's  Merchant,  was  one  of  the 
highest  trust  and  importance.  One  of  the  earliest  men  who  sustained  it  was  Wm.  de  la  Pole, 
father  of  the  Earl  of  Suffolk,  who,  in  1338  from  Antwerp,  lent  Edward  III.  a  sum  equal  to  four 
hundred  thousand  pounds  of  our  present  money.  This  office,  as  already  stated,  was  now  filled 
by  Hackett,  sometimes  styled  Sir  John  Hackett,  with  the  additional  appointment  of  envoy  to  the 
court  of  Mechlin  or  Brabant.  But  both  Sir  John  himself,  and  the  English  merchants  abroad, 
with  our  higher  powers  at  home,  were  about  to  be  instructed  in  one  of  their  earliest  lessons  as  to 
the  liberty  of  the  subject ;  and  all,  be  it  remembered,  in  immediate  connexion  with  the  New 
Testament  of  Tyndale. 


1 2G  PERSECUTION  IN  ANTWERP.  [bOOK  ]. 

Master^s  letters  icere  sufficient  enough  for  the  defence  of  such  a  cause,  and  for  the 
condemnation  of  these  books,  and  all  such  other  like  heretic  Scriirtures  as  have 
been  condemned  and  burnt  in  England.  They  answered  me  again,  that  if  that 
the  King's  highness  or  your  Grace  had  sent  them  hither  of  every  work  one  of 
such  like  as  ye  have  burned  there,  that  finding  such  like  books  here,  they  would 
do  such  like  justice.  Yet  there  has  been  one  of  them  that  said — '  every  country 
have  their  own  laws,  and  that  the  judges  of  these  countries  ought  as  well  to 
know  whereupon  they  shall  judge,  as  our  judges  know  what  they  have  judged, 
and  upon  what  ground  it  stands.' 

"  But  to  come  to  a  conclusion,  after  many  arguments,  not  as  in  form  of  Coun- 
cil, but  mediately  to  bring  our  matter  to  an  effect ;  I  took  upon  me  to  write 
unto  your  Grace,  and  that  within  short  time  you  shall  send  to  the  Lady  Mar- 
garet, or  to  the  foresaid  Lords  of  Antwerp,  sufficient  certification,  with  one,  or 
tico,  or  three,  of  such  like  books  as  were  condemned  and  burnt  in  England  ;  as  I 
suppose  ye  have  kept  some  for  such  an  intent  ;  and  hereupon  the  Lords  of  the 
Privy  Council  deferred  the  translation  of  the  foresaid  book,  and  required  me  to 
write  unto  your  Grace  to  have  the  same ;  and  that  they  would  as  fain  do  the 
justice  upon  such  like  causes,  as  we  are  to  desire  it ;  and  that  as  soon  as  your 
Grace's  answer  comes,  that  they  will  administer  the  justice  in  such  form  and 
manner,  that  there  shall  be  sufficient  correction  done  upon  them  that  do  offend ; 
which  surely  I  certify  your  Grace,  it  is  very  necessary  and  time  to  be  done,  before 
the  end  of  this  Barrow  market.  But  the  first  beginning  and  execution  must  be 
done  in  the  town  oi  Antxcerp,  which  is  the  fountain  of  such  things,  and  here- 
with, all  other  places  will  take  an  example.  Considering  that  the  business  re- 
quires diligence,  I  send  this  'per  piost  purposely  unto  your  Grace,  to  have  your 
gracious  answer  and  instructions,  when  ye  think  the  time.  And  if  it  has  hap- 
pened that  your  Grace  had  not  received  some  other  books  of  this  translation,  as 
I  have  sent  you  here  before  now,  at  all  adventures,  I  send  you  with  this  inclosed, 
one  of  such  like  as  has  been  imprinted  in  the  said  town  of  Antwerp ;  of  the  which 
be  arrested  in  the  Justice's  hands,  nigh  a  three  hundred,  abiding  sentence.  If 
your  Grace  have  any  other  of  such  like  books,  it  were  necessary  to  send  me 
one  of  every  sort  hither,  to  the  condemnation  of  all  such  others  as  we  can  find 
in  these  parts. — From  Mechlin,  the  xxii  day  of  December  1526."  46 

Along  with  this  letter,  a  second  to  Brian  Tiike,  was  also 
sent  by  Hackett.  His  zeal  was  probably  in  part  professional, 
but  the  authorities  at  home  were  in  full  earnest  as  to  their 
anxiety  for  the  destruction  of  the  books.  Copies  of  the  Testa- 
ments had  therefore  been  sent,  before  he  wrote  for  them,  and 
they  had  arrived  a  few  days  after  his  letters  of  the  22d.  He 
then  addressed  the  following,  "  to  Mr.  Tuke,  one  of  the  King''s 
Secretaryes,"  dated  the  4th  of  January  1526,  i.  e.  7. 

"  My  last  writing  unto  your  Mastei'ship  was  dated  the  2'2d  day  of  December, 
with  letter  directed  in  post  to  my  Lord  Legate's  Grace,  only  for  the  recovering 
of  such  books  as  ye  have  sent  me  now,  with  your  writing,  dated  the  1 1th  day  of 
the  foresaid  month,  which  be  come  to  my  hand  on  Monday  last  was  (28th  Dec), 
at  after  dinner ;  and  suddenly  the  same  day,  betwixt  four  and  five  of  clock,  I 


4"  MS.  Cotton,  Galba,  B.  ix.  fol.  .^7• 


I 


152G.]  PERSECUTION   IN   ANTWERP.  127 

came  to  audience  in  the  Privy  Council.  And  after  I  shewed  them  a  part  of 
the  substance  of  your  writing  to  me  by  my  Lord  Legate's  commandment ;  and 
shewing  them  the  foresaid  books,  awanf?  signed  with  my  Loi-d  of  London's 
handwriting ;  the  Lord  of  Iloogstrate  and  Monsieur  de  Palermo,  ordained  and 
concluded,  that  my  Lady  should  write  to  the  Margrave  and  Council  of  the  town 
of  Antwerp,  to  do  justice  and  correction  upon  all  such  like  books  as  they  can 
find  in  their  limits  or  jurisdictions.  And  so  it  has  been  done,  and  I  delivered 
myself  the  said  Lady's  letters  to  the  foresaid  Margrave,  in  presence  of  the 
whole  Council  of  the  said  town  of  Antwerp.  And  after  that  they  had  the  read- 
ing of  the  said  letters,  thej'  answered  me  in  good  manner,  that  they  should  do 
their  devoir,  according  to  right  and  reason  ;  and  that  within  four  days  I  shall  know 
how  they  shall  proceed  in  the  business.     My  trust  is,  that  they  shall  do  well."48 

His  anticipations,  however,  after  all,  were  far  from  being 
fulfilled.  Matters  did  by  no  means  proceed  so  smoothly  as 
he  had  expected  ;  and  therefore  a  long  and  curious  detail  must 
be  forwarded  to  Wolsey,  after  the  delay  of  another  busy  week. 

"  Please  your  Grace  to  understand,  that  my  last  letter  unto  your  Grace  was 
dated  the  22d  day  of  Dec,  and  since,  I  have  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Bryan 
Tuke,  dated  the  1 1  th  day  of  the  said  month  ;  and  with  the  said  letter  I  received 
such  like  books  as  I  desired,  by  my  last  writing  unto  our  Gi'ace.  The  which 
books,  likewise,  I  have  written  to  the  said  Mr.  Tuke,  the  4th  day  of  this  present 
month,  and  true  it  is,  that  by  the  advice  of  these  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council,  I 
delivered  them  {three  distinct  editions, as  will  appear  presently),  with  the  Lady 
Margaret's  letters  unto  the  Lord  Margrave  of  Antwerp,  in  presence  of  all  the 
Lords  that  administer  the  laws  now  in  the  said  town  of  Antwerp.  And  after 
that  they  had  read  the  said  Lady's  letters,  and  visited  (viewed)  my  Lord  of 
Londoii's  verification  in  the  first  leaves  of  the  foresaid  books,  with  great  honour 
and  reverence  ;  they  made  answer  unto  me  that  they  would  gladly  do  their 
devoir,  and  that  within  three  or  four  days  thereafter,  I  should  know  their 
resolute  answer. 

"  Whereupon  I  desired  them,  in  the  King  my  Sovereign  Lord  and  Master's 
name,  for  the  increasing  and  preservation  of  our  Christian  faith,  and  for  the 
annihilation  and  extirpation  of  the  malicious  sect  Lutheran,  that  inasmuch  as 
it  appears  by  one  of  such  original  books  as  v/ere  condemned  and  burned  in 
England,  which  was  there  present  before  them  ;  and  that  it  appears  plainly 
that  there  is  no  difference,  neither  difficulty,  but  that  in  the  text  of  their  books 
that  be  imprinted  in  this  town,  there  contains  all  such  error  and  heresies  as 
are  contained  in  the  text  of  the  foresaid  condemned  and  burnt  books  ;  requir- 
ing them  that  they  should  do  upon  the  said  books  that  be  here,  such  correction 
and  punition  as  there  has,  and  daily  is  done  upon  such  like  heretic  books  in 
England.  The  said  Lords  answered  me  again,  that  within  the  space  aforesaid, 
I  should  know  their  entire  resolution. 

"  In  the  space  of  the  which  time,  the  Margrave  aforesaid,  as  the  Emperor's 
officer,  de[manded]  justice  to  be  done,  declaring  to  the  said  Lords  how  that  it 
appeared  by  the  verification  of  my  Lord  the  Bishop  of  London,  that  the  text  of 
the  books  that  be  imprinted  in  this  town,  contains  all  the  same  errors  and 
heresies,  as  is  contained  in  the  text  of  the  original  books,  that  were  condemned 


47  Sic.  finery,  a  warrant  or  attestation?  ■is  MS.  Cotton,  Galba,  B.  ix.  fol.  38. 


128  PERSECUTION   NOBLY  RESISTED.  [bOOK  I. 

and  burnt  in  England,  as  it  may  appeav  Ijy  one  of  the  said  original  books,  which 
is  now  liere  present,  and  ought  to  be  sufficient  proof  and  certification  to  colla- 
tion the  one  by  the  tother.  Wherefore,  and  considering  that  the  Emperor  had 
commanded  upon  pain  of  banishment,  and  to  lese  the  third  part  of  his  goods,  that 
should  imprime  such  errors  or  heresies  as  this  be  ;  that  the  imprimer  of  the 
said  book,  named  Christojiher  Endhoren,  ought  to  be  banished  out  of  all  the 
Emperor's  lands  and  countries,  and  that  the  third  part  of  all  his  goods  should 
be  confiscated  in  the  Emperor's  hands,  and  all  the  foresaid  English  books  burnt 
in  the  fire,  according  to  the  Emperor's  last  mandment  upon  such  like  heresies. 

"  And  there  being  present  the  inprimiire  of  the  foresaid  books,  his  attorney 
or  procurator  spoke  for  him,  saying: — '  That  he  had  not  offended  the  Emperor's 
mandment  ;  that  he  had  not  inprimed  no  (any)  book  with  heresies.  And  more 
said  forth,  that  the  Emperor's  subjects,  being  in  the  Emperor's  countries,  and 
in  a  land  of  justice,  ought  not  to  be  judged,  neither  condemned,  by  the  sentence 
or  condemnation  of  the  laws  or  judgment  of  any  other  countries :  concluding, 
by  the  law,  that  the  judges  of  these  countries  ought  not  to  give  any  blind  sen- 
tence, to  banish,  dishonour,  or  confiscate  any  man  or  his  goods,  without  they 
knew  right  well  themselves,  the  very  foundment  and  cause.  Sustaining  like- 
wise, that  without  that  the  Lord  Margrave,  as  the  Emperor's  officer,  can  shew, 
or  do  shew,  some  particular  articles  in  the  said  books,  where  these  foresaid  errors 
and  heresies  have  been  found ;  that  the  foresaid  Christopher,  inprimure,  ought 
to  be  enlarged  out  of]n-ison,and  to  do  his  pleasure  iciih  the  foresaid  books!' 

"  And  for  a  conclusion,  after  many  other  replies  and  duplies  done  on  both 
sides,  betwixt  the  Margrave,  and  the  said  malefactor  and  his  procurator — not- 
withstanding the  promises  that  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council  made  unto  me, 
when  I  sent  you  my  last  post — which  promises  were,  that  with  condition  that  I 
might  shew  them  here  any  of  such  like  books  as  have  been  condemned  and  burnt 
in  England,  that  they,  as  then,  should  order  and  command  altogether,  that  all 
other  such  like  books,  or  with  such  like  heresies,  as  might  be  found  in  these 
countries,  to  be  condemned  and  burnt  in  like  wise.  But  yet,  for  all  this, 
neither  for  my  Lady's  first,  second,  nor  third  letter,  which  were  written  in 
meetly  good  form,  the  Lords  of  Antwerp  have  given  for  their  sentence — that 
before  the  banishment  of  the  said  inprimure,  the  confiscation  of  his  goods, 
or  the  burning  of  his  books,  that  the  Margrave  aforesaid,  as  officer  for  the 
Emperor,  shall  shew  and  declare  some  articles  contained  in  the  said  books, 
where  these  errors  and  heresies  bo  found.  And  in  this  manner,  the  Margrave 
told  me,  that  he  could  proceed  no  further  in  this  business  ! 

"  Wherefore  I  have  turned  to  the  Court  again,  from  the  said  town  of  Antwerp, 
to  show  my  Lady,  and  the  Lords  of  her  Privy  Council,  the  denigation  of  justice, 
that  they  of  the  town  of  Antwerp  has  done  unto  me  at  this  time.  Thereupon, 
I  have  had  great  communication  with  the  foresaid  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council 
—showing  them,  with  fair  words,  that  I  had  great  marvel  of  the  first  deniga- 
tion of  justice,  that  they  of  Antwerp  did  unto  me  :  I  showing  them  the  effect 
and  substance  of  the  King  my  Sovereign  Lord's  letters,  presenting  them  the 
letters  of  my  Lady  Margaret,  conforming  (agreeing)  to  my  commission, — and 
now  that,  according  to  the  representation  that  they  made  unto  me,  which  was 
like  as  aforesaid  is, — That  if  I  had  here  to  show  any  such  book  or  books  as 
have  been  burnt  in  England,  and  finding  any  such  like  books  in  this  country, 
that  they  should  do  such  like  justice  of  them.  And  like  as  it  appears  of  truth 
that  they  have  had  the  visitation  of  the  said  books,  and  hare  seen  my  Lord  the 
Bishop  of  London's  verification  in  the  first  leaves  of  those  same  ;  which  books, 
with  the  Lady  Margaret's  second  and  third  letter,  to  them  of  Antwerp,  I  did 
deliver, — yet  f(n'  any  reason  that    I  might  show  beside,  neither  for  any  letter 


152().]  PERSECUTION   NOBLY   RESISTED.  J  29 

that  the  said  lady  could  write,  nor  for  any  af  ....  of  justice  that  the  Mar- 
grave of  Antwerp  did  desire — yet  could  I  have  no  other  justice  of  them,  but 
like  as  aforesaid  is. 

"  Whereupon  some  of  the  said  Lords  answered  me,  that  it  is  as  great  reason 
that  the  judges  of  these  countries  ought  as  well  to  know  what  they  sliall  judge 
here,  as  the  judges  of  our  country  know  what  they  judge  there.  I  answered  again, 
that  it  was  very  hard  to  make  a  man  understand  the  English  tongue  in  general, 
that  cannot  speak  it,  or  never  has  learned  it  in  jjarticular  ;  and  that  I  could 
find  no  difference  in  giving  of  correction  to  him  that  has  frst  forged  or  coined, 
far  more  by  him  that  secondly  has  forged  or  coined  the  such  like. 

"  They  answered  me,  that  it  is  because  they  have  not  the  perfect  knowledge 
whether  the/rs(  or  second  he  false  or  not,  and  that  they  will  dr>  their  best  to 
know  the  verity  in  this  country  ;  and  that  they  will  as  fain  do  good  justice  in 
this  country,  as  we  can  or  may  desire  it.  I  answered  them,  that  I  know  not, 
neither  I  am  assured,  that  there  is  not  in  all  the  Emperor's  hands  on  this  side 
the  seas,  such  sufficient  or  better  learned  men  to  determine  the  English  tongue 
from  the  Latin,  and  Latin  from  English,  than  such  Prelates,  Doctors,  and 
learned  men  of  the  King's  Council,  that  have  found  the  errors  and  heresies 
of  such  books  as  have  been  condemned  and  burnt  in  England. 

"  Hereupon  my  Lord  of  Palermo,  besides  my  Lord  of  Hoogstrate,  and  others 
of  the  said  lords,  required  me  to  be  pleased  that  these  matters  might  be  spoken 
of  yet  once  again  among  themselves,  and  after  that  they  may  know  the  Lords 
of  Antwerp's  accusations,  which  be  here  come  to  Court  for  such  an  intent. 
That  as  then,  by  my  Lady's  advice  and  deliljeration  of  Council,  they  trusted  to 
give  me  such  answer,  that  reasonably  I  should  have  no  cause  to  complain  ;  but 
what  it  shall  be,  I  cannot  tell.  Knowing  the  resolution,  I  will  send  your 
Grace  the  whole  declaration. 

"  Certifying  your  Grace  that  I  was  once  so  displeased  with  them  of  Antwerp, 
that  /  icas  purposed  to  hare  bought  up  all  the  foresaid  books,  and  to  hare  sent 
them  to  your  Grace,  there  to  burn  and  destroy  them  at  home,  like  as  all  such 
malicious  books  meritably  and  worthy  are  to  be  done  ;  but  afterward  that  my 
choler  was  descended,  and  by  counsel  of  a  good  fi-iend  of  mine,  I  thought  it  was 
better  to  advertise  my  Lady  and  her  Council  first,  to  know  and  see  finally  what 
remedy  they  should  do,  upon  my  complaint.  And  if  their  resolutions  liked  me 
not,  that  as  then  /  Kould  buy  all  the  foresaid  books,  or  as  many  as  I  could  find, 
and  send  them  you  there,  to  do  your  Grace's  pleasure,  like  as  I  will  indeed,  ifthsy 
do  not  here  better  justice. 

"  It  shall  please  your  Grace  to  understand,  that  where  there  was  two  inprimurs 
taken  prisoners,  there  is  but  one  of  them  that  was  found  guilty  in  the  inprimiug 
of  the  English  books,  which  is  named  Christopher  Endhoren,  as  aforewritteu  is." 

How  degraded  was  the  condition  of  London  then,  compared 
with  that  of  this  city  !  The  Lords  of  Antwerp  stand  here,  de- 
servedly, on  very  high  ground.  The  name  of  the  reigning  Prin- 
cess, or  even  that  of  the  Emperor  himself,  though  backed  by 
the  orders  of  the  "  Defender  of  the  Faith,"  and  his  mighty  Car- 
dinal, could  not  intimidate  them.  The  citizens  of  Antwerp 
were  not  to  be  priest-ridden  so  easily,  and,  for  a  season  at  least, 

Fair  liberty,  pursued  and  meant  a  prey 

To  lawless  power,  here  turu'd,  and  stood  at  bay. 


130  PERSECUTION    NOBLY   RESISTED.  [book  I. 

The  establishment  of  those  cities  whicli,  in  return  for  their 
opulence  or  commercial  power,  obtained  for  themselves  certain 
invaluable  privileges,  has  been  styled  "  the  commercial 
phenomenon  of  the  thirteenth  century."  It  was  one  of  those 
providential  arrangements  of  human  society,  which  infinite 
wisdom  occasionally  employed  afterwards,  for  the  protection 
of  civil  rights,  or  staying  the  vengeance  of  the  oppressor. 
But,  added  to  this,  there  was  yet  another  arrangement,  and 
in  favour  of  Britain, — the  establishment  of  English  factories 
within  those  cities,  known  by  the  title  of  "  the  English  house," 
or  Company  of  "  Merchant  Adventurers."  These  were,  in 
one  sense.  Normal  Schools,  where  our  countrymen  first  came 
to  understand  and  value  the  liberty  of  the  subject.  The 
English  merchants  resident  in  Antwerp  became  citizens,  and 
to  more  than  one  of  them,  England  stood  greatly  indebted  for 
the  importation  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures.  The  printer  now 
incarcerated,  Christopher  Endhoven,  a  respectable  citizen,  was 
well  known  to  some  of  them,  and  had  printed  frequently  other 
books  for  the  English  market.^"  But  Hackett  has  not  yet 
finished,  for  there  is  more  valuable  information  contained  in 
this  same  letter. 


"  I  have  received  a  letter  from  the  Governor  of  our  Merchant  Adventurers, 
dated  from  Barrow  the  Gth  day  of  this  month,  making  mention  that  he  has  pub- 
lished the  King's  letters  at  Barrow,  the  20th  day  of  December,  among  all  them 
that  wei'e  there  of  the  Company  at  that  time  ;  and  that  as  soon  as  the  ships 
should  come,  (which  be  arrived  six  days  agone,)  that  he  should  publish  the 
same  yet  once  again,  to  the  generality  of  the  said  nation,  according  to  his 
Highness'  commandment,  and  your  Grace's  instruction  unto  me. 

"  1  have  written  to  my  Lord  of  Barrow,  requiring  him,  in  tlie  King's  High- 
ness and  your  Grace's  name,  that,  for  the  preservation  of  the  Christian  faith, 
and  the  extirpation  of  the  abominable  sect  Lutherian,  that  he  would  see  justice 
to  be  done  in  his  town  upon  all  such  English  books,  entitled  "  The  Neic  Testa- 
ment" and  all  such  like  books  as  I  have  informed  the  Governor  of  our  nation, 
(i.  e.  the  head  of  "  the  Merchant  Adventurers,")  which  shall  show  his  Lord- 
ship the  effects  of  all  such  business. 

"  My  Lord  of  Valleyne  came  yesternight  to  this  town,  (Mechlin,)  and  showed 
me  by  mouth  that  my  said  Lord,  his  father,  recommended  him  unto  me,  and 
that  he  has  promised  surely,  that  he  will  see  such  justice  to  be  done,  that  the 
King's  Highness,  neither  your  Grace,  shall  have  no  cause  to  be  but  well  pleased 
with  him.     Desiring  me  that  I  might  come  myself  to  Barrow  as  soon  as  I 


*9  Thus,  in  1525  he  had  printed  a  beautiful  edition  of  Lindwood's  Constitutions  for  Francis 
Byrknian,  St.  Paul's  Church  Yard  ;  and  this  very  year  152G,  "  Maiiuale— Sarum— optimis  typis, 
non  sine  siugulari  industria  Antwcrpi  imprcssum,"  &c.,  for  Peter  Kaetz,  London. — Herbert's 
Ames,  iii.,  p.  1826-1827. 


i 


1526.]  TESTAMENTS   BURNT  ABROAD.  131 

shall  know  how  that  the  matters  between  me  and  the  Lords  of  Antwerp  shall 
be  determined. 

"  I  have  bognn  the  writing  of  this  letter  at  Antwerp,  and  finished  it  here  at 
Mechlin,  the  xiith  day  of  Jenner  152G,  {i.  e.  12th  Jan.  1527.)  After  this  letter 
was  written,  I  have  spoken  with  my  Lady  Margaret  tonching  these  English 
books,  and  she  promised  mo  surely,  that  afore  five  days  to  amend,  that  there 
shall  bo  such  justice  done  of  them,  that  I  shall  be  pleased  there  as  then. — 
'  p.  yor  hummyll  Bedesman,  John  Hackett.'"50 

In  the  abundance  of  his  zeal,  Hackett  not  only  visited 
Antwerp,  Barrow,  Zealand,  and  other  places,  but  made  "  privy 
inquisitions"  at  Ghent  and  Bruges,  at  Brussels,  Louvaine,  and 
elsewhere,  after  books,  which  was  all  in  obedience  to  Wolsey's 
instructions ;  so  that  he  thinks  forti/  marks,  which  he  had 
just  received,  should  be  allowed  him  for  "  expenses  extraordi- 
nary." ^^  Yet,  in  the  end,  notwithstanding  all  this  toil,  it  is 
gratifying  to  observe,  that  so  far  from  Christopher  Endhoven 
being  banished,  they  could  not  even  touch  his  goods.  Thanks 
to  his  residence  in  the  free  city  of  Antwerp  !  The  books, 
however,  so  far  as  detected  there  and  at  Barrow,  were  burned, 
though  happily  they  had  found  out  only  a  part.  Of  all  this 
Hackett  did  not  fail  immediately  to  inform  the  King's  Secre- 
tary ;  and  in  his  second  despatch  to  Wolsey,  dated  from  Mech- 
lin the  20th  of  February,  he  alludes  to  the  subject  again — 

'*  Please  your  Grace  to  understand,  that  since  my  last  writing  to  your  Grace, 
I  have  received  none  of  yours.  I  trust  by  this  time  your  Grace  has  ample 
information  of  such  execution  and  justice  as  has  been  done  in  the  towns  of 
Antwerp  and  Barrow,  upon  all  such  English  books  as  we  could  find  in  these 
countries,  similar  to  three  such  other  books  as  your  Grace  sent  unto  me  with 
my  Lord  the  Bishop  of  London's  signature."  52 

That  no  doubt  whatever  might  remain  as  to  the  species  of 
justice  to  which  Hackett  refers,  he  speaks  afterwards,  in  the 
same  letter,  of  having  caused  a  good  fire  to  be  made  of  the 
Testaments.  Even  this  much,  however,  had  been  accom- 
plished, it  is  evident,  with  no  small  difficulty,  and  it  was,  in 
the  end,  only  by  a  stretch  of  power.  Our  envoy,  therefore, 
felt  himself  under  the  necessity  of  adding — 

50  MS.  Cotton,  Galba,  B.  ix.,  fol.  40,  41,  42. 

51  Forty  marks,  or  £26,  13s.  4d.  Observe  this.  It  was  more  than  double  the  sum  which 
Tyndale  had  from  Munmouth.  It  was  equal  in  value  to  f  400  sterling  of  the  present  day,  for 
travelling  expenses,  in  hunting  after  English  New  Testaments,  to  burn  them,  as  soon  as  they 
had  been  printed  for  our  native  land  ! 

52  "  Three  such  books"  is  an  expression  worth  notice.  Why  three,  if  by  this  time  they  were 
not  in  possession  of  three  distinct  editions  ?  viz.  Tyndale's  quarto,  and  small  octavo  of  1525,  and 
the  Antwerp  edition  of  152G. 


132  THREE   EDITIONS  THUS  EARLY.  [bOOK  I. 

"  Tlie  Margrave  of  Antwerp,  and  tlie  Drossard  of  Bargliys,  required,  and 
pray  you,  if  it  were  possible,  to  cause  them  to  get  out  of  England  a  transliUion 
of  some  particular  articles  of  heresies  contained  in  the  said  hook,  by  the  which 
notification,  they  may  lawfully  not  only  burn  such  books,  but  also  to  correct 
and  punish  the  impriniurs,  buyers,  and  sellers  of  them,  both  in  body  and  in 
goods,  for  else,  according  to  the  laws  of  this  (place,)  they  may  not  punish,  nor 
make  correction  upon  the  foresaid  iiieti,  neither  upon  their  goods,  as  they  say."  53 

In  conveying  this  earnest  request,  Hackett  did  not  foresee 
the  consequences  to  himself  afterwards,  otherwise,  perhaps,  he 
would  have  been  silent,  for  we  are  not  done  with  him  yet ; 
though  we  have  slightly  trespassed  on  1527,  only  that  we 
might  finish  the  account  of  this  business,  and  bring  to  a  con- 
clusion the  important  transactions  of  the  preceding  year. 

All  this  turmoil  is  entirely  new  to  the  English  reader,  and 
certainly  it  lends  an  additional  and  peculiar  interest,  not  only 
to  the  two  first  editions  of  Tyndale,  but  to  the  first  imitation 
of  his  book,  or  the  third  edition.  No  printer  would  have 
ventured  on  such  a  thing,  without  the  prospect  of  a  ready 
sale,  even  in  the  face  of  royal  indignation.  For  could  a  copy 
of  this  first  print  at  Antwerp  now  be  identified,  then  might 
we  say  of  it — Here  is  the  volume,  printed  by  Endhoven, 
which  so  agitated  our  authorities  at  home  and  abroad ;  and 
engrossed  our  ambassador  as  eagerly  as  if  he  had  been  intent 
on  preventing  the  plague  from  entering  into  England.  We 
have,  however,  yet  to  see  whether  this  interference  was  to  his 
honour  or  disgrace.  Meanwhile,  although  we  can  by  no 
means  afiirm  that  we  have  found  out  the  book,  since  the  fol- 
lowing collation  refers  to  one  of  the  earliest  editions,  we 
give  it  entire — 

"  A  copy  is  in  Bishop  Cosin's  Library  at  Durham,  which  may  turn  out  to  be 
some  one  very  early  and  unknown.  The  title  is  in  a  small  compartment  of 
four  parts,  with  top  and  bottom  scriptural  subjects.  On  the  top,  the  creation 
and  birth  of  the  Saviour  ;  at  the  bottom,  Adam  and  Eve  beguiled,  and  the 
crucifixion.  The  volume  consists  of  446  leaves,  on  the  last  of  which  is  the 
Revelation  of  St.  Judas,  Jude.  There  are  "26  lines  in  a  full  page.  Matthew 
begins  on  folio  1 1  ;  and  the  volume  extends  to  R  r  in  eights.  The  chapters 
are  marked  into  portions  by  large  letters  on  the  margin  ;  and  there  are  a  few 
marginal  notes.     It  has  ornamented  capitals ;  the  first  T,  two  boys  carrying  on 


53  MS.  Cotton,  Galba,  B.  vi.  fol.  4.  The  entire  impression  of  this  book  must  have  been  from 
two  to  three  tliousand,  as  this  edition  and  the  next,  we  shall  find,  amounted  in  all  to  five  thou- 
sand. Many  may  have  been  exported  before  Hackett  seized  the  printer— and  the  delay  was 
favourable  to  their  being  put  out  of  the  way— so  that  probably,  after  all,  but  a  small  proportion 
was  actually  burnt. 


1526.]  THREE  EDITIONS  THUS  EARLY.  133 

a  stick  a  dead  stag,  with  the  head  upwards."    For  this  accouut,  the  editor  is  in- 
debted to  Dr.  Bandinel  of  the  Bodleian  Library  .^■* 

Should  tliis,  however,  prove  to  be  one  of  the  edition  now 
under  consideration,  there  is  another  copy,  and  of  a  more  ex- 
traordinary character,  in  the  collection  at  Norwood-hill.  Not 
only  is  it  in  the  original  hog-skin  binding,  which  would  be 
curiosity  enough,  but,  to  this  liour,  many  of  the  leaves  re- 
main not  yet  cut  open ! — a  peculiarity  not  to  be  expected  in  a 
book  nearly  three  hundred  and  twenty  years  old,  and  one 
which,  it  may  be  safely  presumed,  will  stamp  the  volume  as 
unique,  amongst  all  these  rare  early  editions. 

The  following  pages  will  throw  still  farther  light  on  this 
interesting  period,  but  we  have  now  done  for  the  present  with 
the  memorable  year  1526. 

Instead  of  having  to  be  satisfied  with  only  one  edition  of 
the  New  Testament,  and  that  of  doubtful  or  hitherto  disputed 
origin,  we  have  had  three  distinctly  before  us,  besides,  as  will 
be  more  fully  proved,  a  separate  impression  of  Matthew  and 
Mark,  circulating  through  the  country.  We  have  seen  all 
the  authorities,  from  the  King  downwards,  roused  in  opposi- 
tion, and  the  people,  though  in  secret,  were  reading  with 
avidity.  It  was  the  season  of  entrance  to  Britain's  greatest 
earthly  treasure  ;  and  one  should  have  imagined  that  it  would 
have  been  marked  in  our  calendar,  with  a  red  letter,  or 
fully  understood,  long  ere  now.  Viewing  these  first  printed 
volumes  in  their  ultimate  effects,  the  year  may  well  be  re- 
garded by  all  British  Christians,  as  by  far  the  most  import- 
ant, in  the  long  and  varied  history  of  their  native  land. 

A  fire  was  then  kindled  by  the  Almighty,  through  the  in- 


•■i*  LoAviides'  Bib.  Manual.  Following  the  authority  of  Lewis,  the  editor  has  dated  this  book 
in  1.5^7,  which,  if  it  turn  out  to  be  the  first  after  Tyndale,  is  a  year  too  late.  George  Joye  has, 
in  his  own  way,  professedly  given  an  account  of  these  early  editions;  and  it  has  been  the  only 
authority  by  which  others  have  been  guided.  Adopted  as  being  correct,  by  Lticis,  he  has  in- 
serted certain  years,  by  his  own  conjecture,  as  tlie  dcdes  of  printing.  We  need  scarcely  add, 
that  these  are  incorrect,  or  that  Joye's  account  is,  at  the  best,  confuseil.  It  must  ever  be  re- 
luembered,  too,  that  the  testimony  of  Joye  was  given  in  a  very  lame  vindication  of  his  having 
altered  another,  and  subsequent  copy  of  Tyndale's  Testament,  with  nothing  more  than  the 
nihjate  before  him.  But  his  words  may  be  quoted — "  Anon,  after,"  says  he,  "  the  Dutclim^n 
(Germans)  got  a  copy,  and  printed  it  again  in  a  small  volume,  adding  the  calendar  in  the  be- 
ginning, concordances  in  the  margin,  and  the  table  in  the  end.  But  yet  for  that  they  had  no 
Englishman  to  correct  the  setting ;  they  themselves  having  not  the  knowledge  of  our  tongue, 
were  compelled  to  make  many  more  faults  than  there  were  in  the  copy  ;  and  so  corrupted  the 
book,  that  the  simple  reader  might  oftimes  be  tarried,  and  stick."  It  is  stiii  questionable 
whether  this  small  volume  be  not  as  creditable  to  the  printers  as  that  which  was  corrected  by 
.love  himself,  seven  years  later. 


134  TYNDALE'S   PROGRESS.  [book  I. 

strunientality  of  his  servant,  which,  in  the  highest  exercise 
of  his  loving-kindness,  He  has  never  sutiered  to  be  extin- 
guislied ;  light  was  then  introduced,  which  He  has  never 
withdrawn  ;  and  a  voice  was  then  heard  by  the  people,  which 
has  sounded  in  the  ears  of  their  posterity  to  the  present  hour. 
For  whatever  may  be  said  of  men,  as  men,  it  is  to  the  word 
of  truth  in  the  vulgar  tongue  that  we  owe  everything  in  this 
liighly-favoured  country  I 

Many  of  these  volumes,  it  is  true,  were  consigned  to  the 
flames  ;  and  the  wonder  is  that  any  of  them  escaped  detec- 
tion. But  every  one  knows  with  what  avidity  men  will  read 
an  interdicted  book,  while  the  call  for  its  deliverance  up 
would  only  make  certain  minds  grasp  it  harder  still.  Be- 
sides, though  in  part  detected,  in  such  places  as  London  and 
Oxford — for  in  Cambridge  they  were  not — copies  had  gone, 
far  and  near,  into  the  hamlets  and  towns  in  the  country, 
where,  no  doubt,  they  were  enjoyed  by  stealth,  and  hid  with 
anxious  care. 

The  preceding  statements  are  not  hypothetical ;  the  reader 
has  been  entertained  neither  with  mere  conjectures  or  proba- 
bility only ;  and  as  subsequent  events  will  both  illustrate  and 
confirm  the  preceding,  we  presume  it  will  now  be  conceded, 
as  not  a  little  extraordinary,  that  more  than  three  centuries 
should  have  been  allowed  to  pass  away,  before  a  year  so  full 
of  incident,  nay,  of  peculiar  favour  to  Britain,  has  been  in- 
vestigated. We  have  said  Britain,  because  it  will  appear,  in 
its  proper  place,  that,  at  this  very  period,  Scotland  was  merci- 
fully visited  with  the  same  favour. 


SECTION   IV. 

THE    translator's    PROGRESS — HIS    EARLIEST    COMPOSITIONS — AGITATION 

OF  EUROPE SACK  OP  ROME CONSEQUENCES PERSECUTION  IN  ENGLAND 

OPPOSITION    TO    THE    NEW    TESTAMENT — WARHAM    AND    THE    BISHOPS 

BUYING    IT    UP FRESH    IMPORTATIONS — THE    FOURTH   EDITION — SCRIP- 
TURES SINGULARLY  INTRODUCED  ONCE  MORE. 

In    returning  to  Tyndale,    whom    wc  left  alone  at   Worms, 
after  having  completed  his  New  Testaments,  we  do  so  with 


1527.]]  TYNDALE'S   PROGRESS.  135 

abundant  evidence,  that  he  had  not  hiboured  in  vain.  Much 
has  vaguely  been  ascribed  to  Latin  works  then  imported  from 
the  Continent,  and  in  consequence  of  even  their  effects,  the 
"  spirituaHtj"  of  the  day  no  doubt  dreaded  almost  every  leaf ; 
but  the  history  already  given  clearly  shows,  that  the  New 
Testament  in  the  vulgar  tongue  was  the  great  object  of  appre- 
hension. While  yet  in  his  native  land,  Tyndale  "  had  per- 
ceived by  experience  how  that  it  was  impossible  to  stablish 
the  lay  people  in  any  truth,  except  the  Scriptures  were 
plainly  laid  before  their  eyes  in  their  mother  tongue,  that 
they  might  see  the  process,  order,  and  meaning  of  the  text  i" 
and  so  now,  as  the  Word  of  the  Lord  was  enlightening  the 
minds,  "  converting  the  soul,  and  making  wise  the  simple,"  it 
had  proved  also  "  like  a  fire  or  a  hammer, ^  and  was  breaking 
the  rocks  in  pieces. 

Very  soon,  through  whatever  medium,  Tyndale  was  made 
intimately  acquainted  with  the  storm  that  raged  in  England, 
and,  amidst  all  its  tumultuous  howling,  he  had  ample  en- 
couragement to  proceed  with  his  Old  Testament  from  the 
Hebrew;  but  in  the  year  1526,  he  must  have  been  also 
very  busy  in  preparing  for  the  press,  as  we  shall  find  that 
the  year  1527  was  distinguished  by  the  first  appearance  of 
two  publications,  namely,  his  exposition  of  "  the  Parable  of  the 
Wicked  Mammon,"  and  his  "  Obedience  of  a  Christian  man." 

Sometime,  however,  before  the  appearance  of  anything  else 
in  print,  we  may  now  safely  assert,  that  Tyndale  had  been 
favoured  by  the  company,  consolation,  and  assistance  of  his 
devoted  Christian  friend,  John  Fryth,  who  had  fled  from 
Oxford  to  the  Continent  about  September  1526,  and  no  doubt 
fully  reported  progress.  An  affection  subsisted  between  these 
two  eminent  men,  akin  to  that  between  Paul  and  Timothy  of 
old,  though  in  one  point  the  parallel  fails — the  youngest  died 
first.  Fryth  was  not  only  Tyndale's  own  son  in  the  faith, 
but  he  had  no  man  so  dear  to  him ;  and  as  all  parties,  even 
his  enemies,  agreed  in  bearing  testimony  to  the  attainments 
of  Fryth  as  a  scholar,  nothing  could  be  more  opportune  than 
his  arrival ;  but  before  saying  more  of  him,  some  notice  must 
be  taken  of  William  Roye,  whom  Tyndale  had  found  it 
necessary  to  dismiss  from  his  service  in  1525. 

In  1526,  as  already  hinted,  circumstances  having  suggested 
to  our  Translator,  the  necessity  of  encouraging  those  to  whom 


136  TYNDALE'S   PROGRESS.  [bOOK  I. 

it  had  been  sent,  by  some  exposition  of  his  own  views  of 
Divine  Truth,  he  commenced  by  writing  out  "  The  Parable 
of  the  Wicked  Mammon  ;"^  but  before  it  appeared,  there  had 
come  to  his  possession  the  copy  of  a  Dialogue,  translated 
out  of  Latin  into  English,  which  had  been  printed  at 
Strasburg  by  his  late  amanuensis,  with  a  prologue  of  his 
own  composition. 

This  singular  character,  Roye,  as  well  as  another  named 
Jerome,  were  two  Franciscan  friars  from  the  noted  monastery 
at  Greenwich,  close  by  the  favourite  palace  of  Henry  VIII. 
The  inmates  of  this  monastery,  as  well  as  of  another  at  Hich- 
mond,  with  whom  they  were  occasionally  in  league,  were  a 
great  annoyance  to  the  King.  Thus  the  residence  of  Roye 
and  Jerome,  in  immediate  vicinity  to  the  Court,  and  to  all 
the  gorgeous  feats  of  Henry  and  his  Cardinal,  aftbrded  such 
opportunities  as  fully  account  for  the  very  graphic  poetical 
satire  already  quoted,  and  to  which  we  now  refer.  After 
leaving  Tyndale's  service,  Roye  had  proceeded  to  Strasburg, 
where  he  published  his  "  Dialogue  between  the  Father  and 
the  Son,"  about  the  end  of  1526,  Soon  after  this  came  his 
"  Bede  me^  and  he  not  wrothe^''  or  Satire  on  Wolsey  and  the 
Monastic  orders,  frequently  denounced  as  "  The  burying  of  the 
Mass^'' — one  of  tlia  most  extraordinary  satires,  it  has  been 
said,  of  this  or  any  other  age.  It  was  first  published  in  small 
octavo,  black  letter,  with  a  wood-cut  of  the  CardinaFs  coat-of- 
arms.  Wolsey  was  so  annoyed  by  it,  that  he  spared  neither 
pains  nor  expense  to  procure  the  copies,  employing  more  than 
one  emissary  for  the  purpose.  Hence  its  extreme  rarity  ;  a 
copy  of  this  original  edition  having  been  sold  for  as  high  a 
sum  as  sixteen  or  twenty  guineas  !  It  is  reprinted,  however, 
in  the  Harleian  Miscellany  by  Park.^ 

'  The  prologue  to  the  Romans,  already  in  England,  will  come  before  us  afterwards. 

2  Vol.  ix.,  p.  1. — In  the  second  edition  printed  at  Wasel  in  1546,  the  edge  of  its  satire  is 
hlunted,  by  transferring  to  the  entire  prelacy,  sucli  lii.irges  as  were  originally  designed  only  for 
Wolsey.  It  is  there  said  to  have  been  printed  16  or  17  years  before,  which  places  its  first  ap- 
pearance in  1529  or  1530.  But  this  is  a  mistake.  Sir  Thomas  More,  when  writing  his  "  Dialogue," 
in  1.528,  was  well  acquainted  with  it,  so  that  it  must  have  been  printed  by  1527.    See  note  5. 

Roye's  rhymes  unquestionably  went  the  length  of  sinful  excess,  and  are  not  all  to  be  justified 
in  denonncing  any  man,  however  wicked  ;  but  tliey  are  not  to  be  confounded  with  those  "  godly 
rhymes"  which,  though  so  uncouth,  were  productive  of  great  cft'ect.  some  years  after,  at  least  in 
Scotland.  Besides  these,  Rnye  was  certainly  the  author  of  otlier  publications.  Sir  T.  More 
has,  by  mistake,  ascribed  to  him,  an  exposition  of  1  Cor.  viith  chapter,  (which  was  by  Tyndale  ;) 
and  the  Psalu.,  after  the  te.xt  of  Feline  or  Bucer,  under  the  feigned  name  of  Francis  Foxe,  not 
Foye,  as  it  has  frequently  been  copied  from  Lewis.  There  is,  however,  no  doubt  of  his  having 
been  the  autlior  of  a  book  against  the  Seven  Sacraments ;  and  these  four  publications  were  all 
included  among  the  hooks  early  denounced  in  England.    Whatever  may  be  said  of  the  man— for 


i 


1527.]  WITHOUT   ROYE.  137 

With  a  modesty  and  prudence,  highly  characteristic,  our 
Translator  had  put  forth  the  New  Testament  icithout  his  name, 
and  he  earnestly  wished  to  have  gone  on,  through  life,  with 
anonymous  publication  ;  but  the  sight  of  Roye's  Dialogue 
and  Prologue,  in  connexion  with  his  previous  conduct,  had 
fully  convinced  Tyndale  that  there  was  an  imperative  neces- 
sity, not  only  for  affixing  his  name  to  what  he  now  published, 
but  for  his  disclaiming  all  connexion  or  even  intercourse  with 
Roye,  after  a  certain  period.  This  accounts  for  the  pointed 
style  of  the  following  passage,  which  we  must  repeat  more 
fully  ;  and  for  his  very  marked  reference  to  a  period  of  two 
years  previously  to  the  publication  of  his  "  Parable." 

"  The  cause  why  I  have  set  my  name  before  this  little  treatise,  and  have  not 
rather  done  it  in  the  New  Testament,  is,  tliat  then  I  followed  the  counsel  of 
Christ,  which  exhorteth  men  to  do  their  good  deeds  se,-;.  rly,  and  to  be  content 
with  the  conscience  of  well-doing,  and  tliat  God  seetk  us;  and  patiently  to 
abide  the  reward  of  the  last  day,  which  Christ  hath  purchased  for  us :  and  now 
would  I  fain  have  done  likewise,  but  I  am  compelled  otherwise  so  to  do. 

"  While  I  abode  (;it  Hamburgh  ?)  a  faithful  companion,  which  now  hath  taken 
another  voyage  upon  him,  to  preach  Clirist,  wliere,  I  suppose,  he  was  never  yet 
preached — Go  !,  which  put  in  his  heart  thither  to  go,  send  his  Spirit  with  him, 
comfort  him,  and  bring  his  purpose  to  good  effect ! — one  William  Roye,  a 
man  somewhat  crafty,  when  he  cometh  unto  new  acquaintance,  and  before  he 
be  thorough  known,  namely,  when  all  is  spent,  came  unto  me  and  offered  his 
help.  As  long  as  he  had  no  money,  somewhat  I  could  rule  him  ;  but  as  soon 
as  he  had  gotten  him  money,  he  became  like  himself  again.  Nevertheless,  I 
suffered  all  things,  till  that  was  ended  which  I  could  not  do  alone  without  one, 
both  to  write  and  to  help  me  to  compare  the  text  together.  When  that  was 
ended,  I  took  my  leave,  and  bade  him  farewell  for  our  two  lives,  and,  as  men 
say,  a  day  longer.  After  we  were  departed  (separated,)  he  went  and  gat  him 
new  friends,  which  thing  to  do,  he  passeth  all  that  I  ever  yet  knew.  And  then, 
when  he  had  stored  him  of  money,  he  gat  him  to  Argentine  (Strasburg)  where 
he  professeth  wonderful  faculties,  and  maketh  boast  of  no  small  things. 

"  A  year  after  that,  and  now  twelve  months  before  the  printing  of  this  work, 
came  one  Jerome,  a  brother  of  Greenwich  aho,^  through  Worms  to  Argentine, 
(Strasburg,)  saying  that  he  intended  to  be  Christ's  disciple  another  while,  and 
to  keep  as  nigh,  as  God  would  give  him  grace,  the  profession  of  his  baptism, 
and  to  get  his  living  with  his  hands,  and  to  live  no  longer  idly,  and  of  the  sweat 
and  labour  of  those  captives,  which  they  had  taught  not  to  believe  in  Christ, 
but  in  cut  shoes  and  russet  coats.     Wliich  Jerome,  with  all  diligence,  I  warned 


his  character  appears,  at  the  best,  to  have  been  questionable— tliese  were  more  than  sufficient  to 
mark  him  out  as  an  heretic,  and,  as  such,  he  is  said  to  have  suffered  at  the  stake  in  Portugal,  the 
year  after  Wolsey's  death,  or  1531.  Yet  we  shall  find  him  in  England,  if  not  in  Lutulon,  next  year ! 
3  In  a  recent  account  of  Tyndale,  jjrefixed  to  the  reprint  of  his  New  Testament,  this  expres- 
sion is  quoted,  and  as  a  proof  of  Tyndale  himself  having  been  a  friar  !  But  there  is  here  evidently 
no  reference  whatever  to  himself.  "  First  came  Roye,  then  fawic  Jerome,  a  brother  of  Greenwich 
■ho,"  I.  e.  as  well  as  Roye.  This,  however,  is  decided  evidence  that  they  were  two  friars  from 
the  same  mon.istery,  as  well  as  that  Tyndale  in  1526  was  in  Worms,  and  not  at  Wittenberg,  as 
so  loosely  asserted. 


138  TYNDALE'S   PROGRESS.  [boOK  I. 

of  Roye's  boldness,  and  exhorted  him  to  beware  of  him,  and  to  walk  quietly, 
and  with  all  patience  and  long-suffering,  according  as  we  have  Christ  and  his 
Apostles  for  an  ensample ;  which  thing  he  also  promised  me. 

"  Nevertheless,  when  he  was  come  to  Argentine,  WilHam  Roye,  (whose  tongue 
is  able  not  only  to  make  fools  stark  mad,  but  also  to  deceive  the  wisest,  that  is, 
at  the  first  sight  and  acquaintance,)  gat  him  to  him,  and  set  him  a  work  to  make 
rhymes ;  while  he  himself  translated  a  Dialogue  out  of  Latin  into  English,  in 
whose  prologue  he  promiseth  more  a  gi'cat  deal  than,  I  fear  me,  he  will  ever 
pay.  Paul  saith,  '  the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive,  but  be  peaceable 
unto  all  men,  and  ready  to  teach,  and  one  that  can  suffer  the  evil  with  meek- 
ness, and  that  can  inform  them  that  resist ;  if  God  at  any  time  will  give  them 
repentance  for  to  know  the  truth.'  It  becometh  not  then  the  Lord's  servant 
to  use  railing  rhymes,  but  God's  word,  which  is  the  right  weapon  to  slay  sin, 
vice,  and  all  iniquity."  4 

It  is  a  curious  fact,  that,  notwithstanding  the  above  distinct 
explanation,  and  decided  disapprobation  of  all  such  rliyme^ 
Tyndale  for  a  year,  if  not  two,  lay  under  the  imputation  of 
being  actually  the  author  of  Roye"'s  Satire.  He  was  now,  by 
anticipation,  endeavouring  to  prevent  this,  and  the  event  fully 
justifies  all  the  pointed  severity  of  his  language.^ 

Here,  however,  in  Tyndale's  own  words,  we  have  the  com- 
mencement and  termination  of  Roye''s  intercourse  with  him 
very  distinctly  noted.  He  had  craved  employment  in  J  524, 
and  being  retained,  only  till  Tyndale  could  proceed  without 
his  aid  as  an  amanuensis,  he  left  his  service  at  Worms,  in 
the  summer  of  1 525.  The  precise  period  of  two  years,  count- 
ing backward,  so  particularly  stated  in  the  above  quotation, 
depends  on  the  time  of  publication,  and  we  have  stated  the 
summer  as  indubitable,  since  this  sufficiently  agrees  with  facts 
which  have  been  already  narrated.^ 


4  Pi-cface  to  the  Parable  of  the  Wicked  Mammon. 

5  Thus,  in  the  Dialogue  of  Sir  Thomas  More,  which  was  wr'dten  in  1528,  and  left  the  press  in 
.lune  1529,  having  alluded  first  to  the  New  Testament,  and  then  to  the  Satire,  this  question  is  put 
— "  But  who  made  that  second  book  ?  Forsooth,  quoth  I,  it  appeareth  not  in  the  book ;  for  the 
book  is  put  forth  nameless,  and  was  in  the  licginniii/i  reckoned  to  be  made  by  Ti/n<lalc  ;  and 
whetlier  it  be  so  or  not,  we  be  not  yd  very  sure.  Howbcit,  since  that  time,  Tyndale  hath  put  out 
in  his  own  name,  another  book  entitled  Mammona — and  yet  hath  he,  since  then,  put  forth  a  worse 
also,  named  '  The  Obedience  of  a  Christian  man. ' — In  the  preface  of  his  first  book,  called  Mam- 
mona, he  saith  that  one  Friar  Hierome  made  the  other  book  that  we  talk  of,  and  that  afterward 
he  left  him,  and  went  unto  Roye,  who  is,  as  I  think  ye  know,  another  Apostate ;"  that  is,  another 
Friar  as  well  as  Jerome.  Such  was  More's  language  then,  but  by  the  time  that  he  came  to 
publish  his  "  Supplication  for  souls  in  Purgatory,"  in  reply  to  Fyshe's  Supplication  of  Beggars, 
though  as  abusive  and  unfair  as  ever,  his  tone  is  altered,  and  he  gives  Tyndale  full  credit. 
Enumerating  the  books  in  order,  he  says — "  Sending  forth  Tyndale's  translation  of  the  New 
Testament— the  well-spring  of  all  their  heresies!  Then  came,  soon  after,  out  in  print,  the 
Dialogue  of  Friar  Roye  and  Friar  Hierome,  between  the  Father  and  the  Son,  against  the  Sacra- 
ment of  the  Altar,  and  the  blasphemous  book,  entitled,  '  the  Burying  of  the  Mass.'  Then  camo 
forth  Tyndale's  wicked  book  of  '  Mammona ;'  and  after  that  his  more  wicked  book  of  Obedience." 

"  In  Wood's  Athenae,  Oxon.  by  Bliss,  vol.  i.  p.  95,  the  date  of  the  Parable  is  stated  to  be  the 
!Uh  of  May  1527.    Lewis  gives  the  same  date.     Tanner  in  his  Bibl.  Britannico,  p.  40.5,  gives  the 


I 


1527.]  THE   WICKED  MAMMON.  139 

Tyndale  had  already  given  a  specimen  of  liis  scholarship. 
It  remained  now  to  be  discovered,  whether  he  was  to  be  at  all 
distinguished  as  a  judicious  man  ;  a  character  from  which  a 
mere  scholar  often  stands  at  a  great  distance.  One  is  curious 
to  hear,  what  he  had  got  to  sa, j  Jlrst,  and  especially,  if  to 
England,  from  the  city  of  Worms.  In  his  deliberate  judg- 
ment, it  becomes  evident,  that  most  of  the  evils  with  which 
his  native  country  was  now  infested,  were  to  be  traced  to  the 
love  of  money.  Hence,  even  the  title  of  this,  his  very  first 
treatise—"  The  Wicked  Mammon."  The  "  Spirituality"  of 
the  day,  so  called,  appeared  to  him  as  the  "  Successors  of 
Simon  Magits^''''  "  who  would  have  bought  the  gift  of  God  to 
have  sold  it  much  dearer."  Bred  up  as  Tyndale  had  been  in 
Gloucestershire,  it  was  quite  natural  that  he  should  feel  deeply 
for  the  people,  as  ground  down  or  pillaged,  by  exactions,  and 
"  spiritual  alms,"  falsely  so  denominated.  It  was  not,  how- 
ever, that  he  had  now  commenced,  by  a  lecture  on  covetous- 
ness.  Far  from  it.  But  the  title  having  once  attracted  the 
reader's  eye,  as  it  was  very  likely  to  do,  he  found  himself  at 
once  addressed  on  the  only  genuine  origin  of  all  vital  religion. 
Commencing  with  the  great  and  fundamental  subject  of  a 
sinner''s  acceptance  before  God  ;  believing  the  gospel  to  be  the 
ministration  of  righteousness  and  of  the  Spirit,  and  Christ 
alone  "the  great  store-house  of  mercy;"  he  magnifies  divine 
revelation  as  the  ground  of  all  certainty  in  matters  so  import- 
ant.^     A  few  of  his  own  expressions  must  not  be  omitted. 

"  This  is  a  plain  and  sure  conclusion,  not  to  be  doubted  of,  that  there  must  be 
first  in  the  heart  of  a  man  before  he  do  any  good  work,  a  greater  and  a  more 
precious  thing  than  all  the  good  works  in  the  world.  That  precious  thing  is 
the  Word  of  God,  wliich  in  the  gospel  preacheth,  proffereth,  and  bringeth  unto 


title,—"  The  Parabole  of  the  wycked  Mammon,  Script.  8th  Mail,  mdxxvii."  As,  however,  there 
were  second  editions  of  the  Parable  and  the  Obedience  published  on  the  same  day,  by  Hans  Luft, 
viz.  the  Itth  of  May  152!i,  it  is  not  improbable  that  this  may  have  led  Lewis,  and  Tanner,  and 
Bliss,  to  give  the  same  day  in  1527  ;  though  it  is  curious  enough,  that  Lewis  at  the  same  time,  in 
a  note,  asserts  that  Tyndale's  own  edition  was  in  quarto,  without  any  printed  date.  The  month, 
however,  is  of  less  moment,  as,  besides  these  authorities,  we  have  other  proof  of  the  year.  The 
"  Parable  "  preceded  the  "  Obedience  ;"  now  Tyndale  himself  has  informed  us  ichen  the  latter 
was  published.  In  the  conclusion  of  his  "  Practice  of  Prelates,"  dated  "  in  the  year  of  our 
Lord,  Mccccc  and  xxx."  we  have  these  words, — "And  let  them  remember,  that  I  well  toward 
three  years  agonc,  sent  forth  '  the  true  Obedience  of  a  Christian  man,'  "  that  is  in  lo27  ;  and  so 
Ames  expressly  mentions  an  edition  of  it,  dated  llth  December  1527-  But  then  the  Parable  pre- 
ceded even  this  ;  being  the  first  thing  to  which  Tyndale  affixed  his  name.  We  incline,  therefore, 
to  think  that  the  "  Parable  "  must  have  been  issued  sometime  in  the  summer,  at  the  latest,  if 
not  in  its  first  month,  as  already  noticed,  8th  May  1527. 

7  Hence  the  edition  of  this  tract  in  l,i36,  the  year  of  his  death,  by  J.  Nycholson  Southwark, 
is  entitled,  "a  Treatise  of  Justifycacion  by  Faith  only." 


140  THE   WICKED    MAMMON.  [bOOK  I. 

all  that  repent  and  believe,  the  favour  of  God  in  Christ. — Therefore  it  is  called 
the  Word  of  Life,  the  Word  of  Grace,  the  Word  of  Health,  the  Word  of  Re- 
demption, the  Word  of  Forgiveness,  and  the  Word  of  Peace.  He  that  heareth 
it  not,  or  believeth  it  not,  can  by  no  means  be  made  righteous  before  God. 

"  Christ  is  our  righteousness ;  and  in  him  ought  we  to  teach  all  men  to  tnist, 
and  expound  unto  all  men  the  Testament,  that  God  hath  made  to  us  sinners  in 
Christ's  blood. — By  the  natural  order,  first  I  see  my  sin ;  then  I  repent  and 
sorrow ;  then  believe  I  God's  promises,  that  he  is  merciful  unto  me  and  for- 
giveth  rae,  and  will  heal  me  at  the  last :  then  love  I,  and  then  prepare  myself 
to  the  commandment. 

"  When  the  gospel  is  preached  unto  us,  we  believe  the  mercy  of  God,  and  in 
believing,  we  receive  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  is  the  earnest  of  eternal  life,  and 
we  are  in  eternal  life  already,  and  feel  already  in  our  hearts  the  sweetness 
thereof ;  and  are  overcome  with  the  kindness  of  God  in  Christ,  und  therefore  love 
the  will  of  God  ;  and  of  love  are  ready  to  work  freely,  and  not  to  obtain  that 
which  is  given  us  freely,  and  whereof  we  are  heirs  already. 

"  As  a  whole  man,  when  he  is  athirst,  tarrieth  but  for  drink,  and  whe.i  he 
hungereth,  abideth  but  for  meat,  and  then  drinketh  and  eateth  naturally  ;  even 
so  is  the  faithful  ever  athirst  and  an-hungred  after  the  will  of  God,  and  tarrieth 
but  for  occasion.  And  whensoever  an  occasion  is  given,  he  worketh  naturally 
the  will  of  God  :  for  this  blessing  is  given  to  all  them  that  trust  in  Christ's 
blood,  that  they  thirst  and  hunger  to  do  God's  will.  He  that  hath  not  this 
faith  is  but  an  unprofitable  babbler — interpreting  the  Scriptures  which  speak 
of  faith  and  works,  after  his  own  blind  I'easou  and  foolish  fantasies,  and  not  of 
any  feeling  that  he  hath  in  his  heart." 

Selecting  a  great  variety  of  passages,  the  interpretation  of 
which  involve  a  deep  and  intimate  acquaintance  with  divine 
truth,  though  in  one  or  two  instances  he  has  not  hit  the  sense; 
yet  Tyndale  shows,  with  no  common  discrimination,  how 
they  all  perfectly  coalesce,  and  agree  with  the  general  doctrine, 
that  a  man  is  justified  before  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus, 
and  not  by  the  works  of  the  law.  The  corruption  of  certain 
passages  by  the  Doctors  of  the  day  is  not  forgotten.  Thus, 
for  example : — 

"  The  good  Samaritan  helped  the  poor  Jew,  and  shewed  mercy  as  long  as  he 
was  present,  and  when  he  could  be  no  longer  present,  he  left  his  money  behind 
him  ;  and  if  that  wei'e  not  sufficient,  he  left  his  credence  to  make  good  the  rest, 
and  forsook  him  not  as  long  as  the  other  had  need.  Then  said  Christ,  "  Go  and 
do  thou  likewise."  Neighbour  is  a  word  of  love,  and  signifieth  that  a  man  should 
be  ever  nigh  and  at  hand,  and  ready  to  help  in  time  of  need  !  But,  they  that 
will  interpret  parables  word  by  word,  fall  into  straits  oftimes,  whence  they 
cannot  rid  themselves — and  preach  lies  instead  of  truth.  As  do  they  who  in- 
terpret by  the  two-pence,  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New,  and  b_)  that  which 
is  bestowed,  opera  siqyerero(/antia.  Howbeit,  sniper  arroijantia  were  a  meeter 
term.  That  is  to  say,  deeds  which  are  more  than  the  law  requireth, — against 
which  exposition  I  nnswer  ;  first,  a  greater  perfection  than  the  law  there  is  not. 
A  greater  perfection  than  to  love  God  and  his  will,  with  all  thine  heart,  with 
all  thy  soul,  with  all  thy  strength,  with  all  thy  mind,  is  there  none  ;  and  to  love 
a  man's  neighbour  at.  himself  is  like  the  same. 


1527.]  THE  CHRISTIAN  OBEDIENCE.  141 

"  Again,  the  saying  of  Christ — '  Make  you  friends  of  the  wicked  Mammon,' 
and  so  forth, '  that  they  may  receive  you  into  everlasting  tabernacles,'  pertain- 
eth  not  unto  the  saints  which  are  in  heaven,  but  is  spoken  of  the  poor  and  needy 
which  are  here  present  with  us  on  earth.  As  though  he  should  say — What! 
bulkiest  thou  churches,  foundcst  abbeys,  chantries,  and  colleges,  in  the  honour 
of  saints — to  my  Mother,  to  St.  Peter,  Paul,  and  saints  that  be  dead,  to  make 
of  them  thy  fi'iends'  ?  They  need  it  not ;  yea,  they  ai'e  I'm  thy  friends,  but  theirs 
who  lived  when  they  did,  of  whom  thoy  were  holpen.  2'hi/  friends  are  the  poor 
which  are  now  in  thy  time,  and  live  witli  thee  ;  thy  poor  neighbours  who  need 
thy  help  and  succour.  Them  make  thy  friends  with  thy  unrighteous  Mammon, 
that  they  may  testify  of  thy  faith,  and  thou  mayest  know  and  feel  that  thy  faith 
is  right,  and  not  feigned." 

It  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  Tyndale,  even  thus  early,  had 
fully  laid  his  account  with  martyrdom. 

"  Some  man  will  ask,  peradventure,  why  I  take  the  labour  to  make  this 
work,  inasmuch  as  they  will  burn  it,  seeing  they  burnt  the  Gospel  ?  I  answer, 
— In  burning  the  New  Testament,  they  did  none  other  thing  than  that  I 
looked  for,  no  more  shall  theii  do  if  they  burn  me  also,  if  it  be  God's  will  it 
shall  be  so."  Thus  he  expressed  himself,  nine  years  before  his  death.  It  was 
spoken  from  Worms,  in  the  year  1 527  ;  and  reminds  us  of  him  ^\•ho  said — ■ 
"  Yea,  and  if  I  be  offered  up  for  the  sacrifice  and  service  of  your  faith,  I  joy 
and  rejoice  with  you  all." 

This  publication,  however,  in  Tyndale's  estimation,  was  not 
sufficient.  He  intended  to  be  open  and  explicit,  not  only  as 
to  doctrine,  but  the  Divine  precepts  ;  not  only  as  to  faith, 
but  obedience,  in  its  full  extent.  He  saw,  and  deeply  felt, 
that,  in  his  native  country,  the  whole  foundations  were  out  of 
course, — that  there  were  men  reigning  there,  falsely  called, 
nay,  and  calling  themselves  "  spiritual,"  who  not  only  had 
taken  away  the  very  key  of  knowledge,  and  taught  for 
doctrines  the  commandments  of  men;  but  who  had  broken  the 
bonds  of  all  human  society,  beggared  the  nation  by  their  exac- 
tions, and  sunk  it  into  a  state  of  pollution  and  depravity. 
This  accounts  for  his  able  exposition  of  duty  incumbent  on  all 
parties — the  obedience  of  children  to  parents,  of  servants  to 
masters,  of  wives  to  their  husbands,  of  subjects  to  their 
sovereign ;  not  forgetting  the  obligations  of  all  the  superior 
parties,  including  the  duty  of  kings,  of  judges  and  officers  of 
the  land.  That  false  and  usurped  spiritual  power  which 
undermined  and  destroyed  all  other,  is  then  particularly 
examined  and  reprobated.  In  his  compendious  rehearsal  at 
the  end  he  says — 

"  I  have  described  unto  you  the  obedience  of  children,  servants,  wives,  and 
subjects.     These  four  orders  are  of  God's  making,  and  the  rules  thereof  are 


142  THE  CHRISTIAN   OBEDIENCE.  [bOOK  I. 

God's  Wortl.  He  that  koepcth  them  sliall  bo  blessed  :  yea,  is  blessed  already, 
and  he  that  broaketh  thoni  sliall  be  cursed.  If  any  person  of  impatience,  or 
of  a  stubborn  or  rebellious  mind,  withdraw  himself  from  any  of  these,  and  get 
him  to  any  other  order,  let  him  not  think  thereby  to  avoid  the  vengeance  of 
God,  in  obeying  rules  and  ti'aditions  of  man's  imagination. 

"  All  bodily  service  must  be  done  to  man  in  God's  stead.  We  must  give 
obedience,  honour,  toll,  tribute,  custom  and  rent,  unto  whom  they  belong. — I 
shewed  you  of  the  authority  of  princes,  how  they  are  in  God's  stead,  and  how 
they  may  not  be  resisted,  do  they  never  so  evil — they  must  be  reserved  unto 
the  wrath  of  God.  Nevertheless,  if  they  command  to  do  evil,  we  must  then 
disobey,  and  say.  We  are  otherwise  commanded  of  God  :  but  not  to  rise  against 
them.  They  will  kill  us,  then,  say  you.  Therefore,  I  say,  is  a  Christian  called 
to  suffer  even  the  bitter  death  for  his  hope's  sake,  and  because  he  will  do  no  evil. 

"  I  pi'oved  also  that  all  men,  without  exception,  are  under  the  temporal 
sword.  The  Priests  of  the  old  law,  with  their  High  Bishop  Aaron,  and  all  his 
successors,  though  they  were  anointed  by  God's  commandment,  and  appointed 
to  serve  God  in  his  temple,  and  exempt  from  all  offices  and  ministering  of 
worldly  matters,  were  yet,  nevertheless,  under  the  temporal  sword,  if  they 
brake  the  laws.  Paul  saith — '  All  souls  must  obey.'  Here  is  no  exception,  Paul 
himself  is  not  exempt.  God  saith — '  Whosoever  sheddeth  man's  blood,  by  man 
shall  his  blood  be  shed  again.'     Here  is  no  exception. 

"  As  God  maketh  the  king  head  over  his  realm,  even  so  giveth  he  him  com- 
mandment to  execute  the  laws  upon  all  men  indifferently  (impartially  ;)  for 
the  law  is  God's,  and  not  the  king's.  The  king  is  but  a  servant,  to  execute  the 
law  of  God,  and  not  to  rule  after  his  own  imagination. — I  declared  how  the  king 
ought  to  rid  his  realm  from  the  wily  tyranny  of  the  hypocrites,  and  to  bring  the 
hypocrites  under  his  laws  :  yea,  and  how  he  ought  to  be  learned,  and  to  hear 
and  to  look  upon  the  causes  himself,  which  he  will  punish  ;  and  not  to  believe 
tlie  hypocrites,  and  give  them  his  sword,  to  kill  whom  they  will.— I  warned 
the  judges  that  they  take  not  an  ensamplc  how  to  minister  their  offices  of  our 
spirituality,  which  are  bought  and  sold  to  do  the  will  of  Satan  ;  but  of  the 
Scripture,  whence  they  have  their  authority.  Let  that  which  is  secret  abide 
secret,  till  God  open  it,  who  is  the  Judge  of  secrets. 

"  On  the  other  side,  I  have  also  uttered  the  wickedness  of  the  spirituality, 
the  falsehood  of  the  Bishops,  and  juggling  of  the  Pope  ;  and  how  they  have  put 
out  God's  Testament,  and  God's  truth,  and  set  up  their  own  traditions  and  lies, 
in  which  they  have  taught  the  people  to  believe,  and  thereby  sit  in  their 
consciences  as  God  ;  and  have,  by  that  means,  robbed  the  world  of  lands  and 
goods,  of  peace  and  unity,  and  of  all  temporal  authority  ;  and  have  brought  the 
people  into  the  ignorance  of  God,  and  have  heaped  the  wrath  of  God  upon  all 
realms  !  I  showed  how  they  have  ministered  Christ — King — and  Emperor,  out 
of  their  rooms  ;  and  how  they  have  made  them  a  several  kingdom  ;  w  hich  they 
got  at  the  first  in  deceiving  of  princes,  and  now  pervert  the  whole  Scriptui-e  to 
prove  that  they  have  such  authority.  And  lest  the  laymen  should  see  how  falsely 
they  allege  the  places  of  the  Scripture,  is  the  greatest  cause  of  this  j^ersecution. 
For  there  is  no  mischief  or  disorder,  whether  it  be  in  the  temporal  i-egiment, 
or  else  in  the  spiritual,  whereof  they  are  not  the  chief  causes,  and  even  the  very 
fountains  and  springs,  and,  as  we  say,  the  u-ell-head." 


This  publication  Tyndale  entitled  "  The    Obedience  of  a 
Christian  Man,  and  how  Christian  Rulers  oueht  to  oovern  : 


1527.]  AGITATION  OF  EUROPE.  143 

wherein  also  (if  thou  mark  diligently)  thou  shalt  find  eyes  to 
perceive  the  crafty  conveyance  of  all  Jugglers." 

Such,  with  his  name  affixed,  was  the  manifesto  of  William 
Tyndale,  published,  too,  at  the  very  season  in  which  God  was 
pleading  with  Britain  by  the  voice  of  his  mouth,  and  had 
risen  up  in  judgment  on  the  city  of  Rome.  After  this,  no 
man  could  affirm  that  he  did  not  plead  emphatically  for  prac- 
tical religion,  or  the  fruits  of  faith.  Nor  is  it  wonderful  if 
Henry  YIII.  himself  was,  at  one  moment,  moved  by  this 
publication,  as  we  shall  see  afterwards  ;  for,  to  every  impartial 
mind,  it  must  have  been  evident  that  Tyndale  was  not  only  a 
genuine  lover  of  his  country,  but  one  of  the  most  enlightened 
and  loyal  subjects  of  the  crown. 

Leaving,  however,  this  eminent  man,  for  the  present,  to  his  pui'suits 
abroad,  and  before  alluding  to  the  effect  of  his  labours,  now  so  visible  in 
England,  we  must  first  revert  to  the  state  of  the  world  in  general.  The 
distinguishing  feature  of  this  year,  (1527,)  was  agitation  and  perplexity, 
of  various  kinds,  throughout  Europe,  including  oiu*  own  country.  The 
"  holy  league  of  Clement,"  one  of  the  most  unprincipled  of  combinations, 
now  broke  with  vengeance  on  his  own  head.  The  double  policy  of  Wolsey, 
which  had  begun  to  be  practised  by  both  France  and  Spain,  produced 
all  that  perplexity  which  it  deserved  :  but  amidst  all,  one  event  occurred 
which,  as  the  effects  remain  to  the  present  hour,  fixed  in  amazement 
the  whole  civilized  world.  It  was  the  dreadful  sack  of  Rome,  and  the 
close  captivity  of  its  Pontiff.  The  humiliation  of  the  Pontiff,  last  year, 
by  Cardinal  Colloni,  was  a  trifle  compared  with  the  present,  and  feeble 
are  our  conceptions  now  of  the  deep  sensation  which  it  must  have  pro- 
duced. The  Man  of  the  Vatican,  or  St.  Peter's  Chair,  had,  for  ages, 
reigned  as  no  common  sovereign.  Kings  were  said  to  be  as  inferior  to 
him,  as  the  moon  is  to  the  sun  ;  he  reigned  in  what  was  called  "  the 
Eternal  City  ;"  nay,  he  had  opposed  and  exalted  himself  above  all  that 
is  called  God,  or  that  is  worshipped  ;  so  that  the  fear  and  the  dread  of 
him  had  not  only  sent  dismay  into  every  cabinet  in  Europe,  but  the 
hearts  of  the  people  had  often  moved  before  his  voice,  "  as  the  leaves 
of  the  trees  are  moved  before  the  wind."  His  curse  was  then  regarded 
as  omnipotent,  his  person  inviolable. 

A  mixed  multitude,  differing  from  each  other  in  language  and  manners, 
discontented,  and  ready  to  revolt  for  want  of  bread,  was  the  army  des- 
tined to  invade  and  plunder  the  City,  so  long  held  to  be  most  sacred. 
It  was  far  from  being  fonnidable,  except  in  the  person  of  its  commander, 
the  Duke  of  Bourbon.  Without  money  or  magazines,  without  artilleiy 
or  carriages,  they  were  distant  from  Rome  ;  interrupted  by  snow  and 


144  SACK   OF   ROME.  [book  I. 

the  crossing  of  rivers,  they  mutiuied  on  the  road  ;  but  rallied  and 
united  once  more,  through  the  powerful  influence  and  skill  of  their 
leader,  they  at  last  marched  to  the  prey,  at  the  rate  of  forty  miles  a  day. 
Starving,  wearied,  but  fearless  and  desperate,  they  arrived  before  this 
proud  city  to  the  number  of  about  thirty-three  thousand.  But  Rome 
was  at  that  period  a  strong  walled  jilace,  and  the  invading  army  had  no 
provisions — no  artillery  !  Bourbon  had  once  before  performed  wonders 
at  Pavia,  but  that  was  a  battle  in  the  open  fields  ;  this  was  an  assault, 
and  without  the  means. 

It  is  very  remarkable  that  almost  every  nation  in  Europe  was  repre- 
sented in  this  exploit.  The  army  itself  was  composed  of  Germans, 
Spaniards,  Italians,  and  a  mixed  multitude,  to  the  extent  of  thirteen 
thousand,  who  had  joined  them  on  the  road.^  Their  skilful  leader,  a 
Frenchman,  but  for  whom  the  enterprise  had  failed,  was  succeeded  in 
the  command  by  Philibert,  a  native  of  Burgundy.  This  was  an  army  of 
Catholics,  too,  by  profession,  though  the  Pontiff,  in  his  terror,  adopted 
the  foolish  expedient  of  pronouncing  his  curse  on  the  whole  army,  under 
other  characters — the  Germans  as  Lutherans,  the  Spaniards  as  Moors  ! 

Divine  Providence  having  summoned  these  men  together,  as  so  many 
witnesses  of  the  event,  seems  also  to  have  intended  that  the  system  which 
had  held  Europe  in  moral  bondage  for  ages,  should  put  forth  all  its 
strength,  and  stand  out,  in  full  display,  to  all  who  should  either  see,  or 
afterwards  hear  of  the  catastrophe.  On  Saturday  evening,  the  4th  of  May, 
just  before  the  setting  of  the  sun,  Boiu'bon  had  ajspeared  in  view,  yet 
so  secure  were  the  people  of  Rome,  that  no  one  apprehended  any  serious 
danger,  when  they  saw  his  troops  marching  into  the  meadows  around 
them.  On  that  day  the  Pontiff  had  dischai'ged  his  loudest  thunder,  ex- 
communicating Bourbon  and  all  his  army,  and  the  next  day  he  was 
himself  io  perform  high  mass  at  the  altar.  All  within  the  city  has  been 
compared  to  presumption  sleeping  on  a  bursting  volcano. 

The  army  lay  down  for  repose,  but  by  the  dawn  of  the  morning,  just 
as  the  stars  were  fading  from  the  sight,  they  rose  to  the  attack.  Bom-bon 
addressed  them  before  they  began,  and  these,  according  to  Boui-deille, 
from  his  Spanish  authorities,  were  some  of  his  expressions  : — "  My  Cap- 
tains !  all  valorous  and  brave  ;  and  you,  my  soldiers,  whom  I  love  ! 
Since  our  grand  destiny  has  led  us  here,  to  the  very  post  we  have  so 
long  wished  for  ;  after  such  villanous  roads,  such  vast  snows  and  intoler- 
able cold,  such  torrents  of  rain  and  bogs  of  mud  ;  amid  enemies  who 
allowed  us  no  rest ;  amid  hunger  and  thirst,  without  a  penny  to  buy  the 
means  of  allaying  them,  and  endui'iug  all  the  wants  that  natui-e  could 


8  In  this  mixed  multitude  it  is  quite  possible  there  may  have  been  Eiiglishmoi,  hut,  though  it 
has  been  often  asserted,  T/uinias  Crumwell  was  certainly  not  tliere.  He  was  in  Wolsey's  service 
as  early  as  1524,  and  in  August  of  this  year,  1527,  we  shall  find  Coverdale,  then  at  Cambridge, 
addressing  him  in  l^ondon.— See  Ellis's  orig.  Letters,  i.  218 ;  and  Gov.  State  Papers,  In.lfl,  ]).  2(31. 


I 


1527.]  SACK   OK   KOMK.  145 

make  us  suffer.  Now  is  the  time  in  which  we  may  shew,  by  achieving 
this  splendid  and  noble  enterprise,  the  courage,  the  spirit,  the  strength 
of  your  bodies.  Grain  what  you  i^ee,  and  every  hope  of  comfort,  honour, 
and  glory,  will  be  realised  by  your  victory  ;  for  then,  there  is  not  one 
of  your  enemies,  there  will  not  be  a  foreign  nation,  that  will  not  tremble 
at  your  names.  If  you  ever  desired  to  sack  a  City  for  its  wealth  and 
treasures,  behold  one  now  in  your  sight  ;  the  richest  of  them  all,  the 
Lady  of  the  World  !  Win  this  triumph,  and  you  will  be,  for  life,  opulent. 
Lose  it,  and  disgrace,  misery  and  ruin,  that  none  can  remedy,  will  be 
your  immediate  fate." 

They  began  by  attempting  assaults  in  various  parts,  while  Boui'bon 
directed  the  main  attack  in  the  vicinity  of  St.  Peter's  Church.  A  thick 
fog,  rising  with  the  dawn,  the  artillery  of  St.  Angelo  within,  could  no 
more  be  guided  by  the  eye.  This  was  in  favour  of  the  besiegers  ;  but 
still  in  attempting  to  scale  the  walls,  several  thousands  were  slain. 
Bourbon  had  thrown  over  his  armour  a  white  vestment,  that  he  might 
be  more  distinctly  seen  by  the  soldiers,  and,  as  a  specimen  of  daring 
resolution,  he  himself  seized  a  ladder,  and  placing  it  with  his  left  hand 
on  the  wall,  with  the  other  beckoned  to  all  who  saw  him  to  follow  his 
example  ;  when  the  shot  of  an  arquebuse,  but  too  well  aimed,  struck  his 
left  side,  and  passing  through  his  body,  extended  him  on  the  ground,  a 
dying  man,  at  the  early  age  of  thirty-five  !^  He  was  carried  off,  and 
desired  to  be  buried  at  Milan ;  but  his  men,  so  far  from  being  dispirited, 
now  rushed  on  with  desperate  revenge.  Philibert,  Prince  of  Orange, 
took  the  command,  but  in  the  heat  of  the  conflict  the  assault  began  to 
fail ;  when,  near  an  angle  of  the  wall,  a  port-hole,  which  had  been  used 
for  a  window  to  a  lower  room,  was  caught  by  a  Spaniard's  eye.  It  was 
but  slenderly  blocked  up,  and  only  required  the  pick-axe.  An  opening 
was  soon  made,  a  body  of  Spaniards  entered,  and  the  day  was  gained  ! 
Renzo,  the  very  commander  of  the  defence,  was  panic  struck  ;  and  ex- 
claiming aloud,  "  the  enemies  are  within  us,"  the  panic  spread.  Car- 
dinals and  prelates,  ladies,  nobles,  and  merchants,  great  and  small — all 
made  a  general  rush  to  the  Castle  of  St.  Angelo.  The  Pope  himself  was 
actually  at  mass,  when  the  German  soldiers  entered  the  church,  and 
slaying  some  of  his  guard,  he  made  his  escape  by  a  private  way,  also 
to  St.  Angelo. 

It  is  not  unworthy  of  notice,  that  this  was  Sunday,  or  rather  the 
day  of  the  Lord,  literally  so  called,  but  the  day  of  the  Lord  in  more 
senses  than  one.  The  cup  which  Rome  had  filled,  was  now  filled  to  her 
double.  How  much  she  had  glorified  herself,  and  lived  deliciously,  so 
much  torment  and  sorrow  were  given.  The  revolting  atrocities  we 
cannot    describe  ;    they   were  terrific  and  most  excruciating  ;   and  the 


fl  The  shot  has  been  ascribed  to  Bciiveiuito Cellini,  the  cclcbiated  Florentine  artist. 
VOT,.    I.  K 


lid  FALL  OF  ROME.  [bOOK  I. 

noise  within,  at  last  became  so  dreadful,  that  cue  historian  has  aflSrmed 
— "  even  thunder  would  have  rolled  unheard."'"  Such  was  the  day  of 
Jehovah's  vengeance  ;  a  time  of  recompense  for  the  controversy  of  Zion  ; 
a  day  that  looked  back  on  cruelties  known  only  to  God  himself ;  that 
looked  forward  to  blessings  which  are  yet  enjoyed  ; — it  was  the  battle  of 
ike  einancijjation  of  the  human  mind.  In  a  work  even  of  this  nature,  it 
could  not,  therefore,  be  passed  over  in  silence,  more  especially  as  the  event 
had  a  material  bearing  on  the  Sacred  Scriptures  being  laid  open  to  the 
people  in  their  vernacular  tongvie.  At  such  a  period  it  was  fit  that  the 
Lord  should  lift  his  arm  in  the  sight  of  all  the  nations,  and  that  "  the 
throne  of  iniquity  which  had  framed  mischief  by  a  law,"  should  receive 
one  decisive  blow. 

Nor  should  it  ever  be  forgotten,  that  this  was  a  day  which  Clement 
had  brought  upon  himself,  and  he  now,  as  Pontiff,  became  the  habitual  jest 
of  the  soldiery.  The  whole  ceremonial  of  his  system  was,  day  after  day, 
turned  into  ridicule  by  military  men,  pretending  to  perform  mass  in 
priestly  robes,  or  compelling  priests  and  prelates  to  do  so,  at  their 
pleasvire.  Clement,  kept  in  rigorous  confinement  in  his  castle  till  the 
8th  of  July,  was  then  obliged  to  yield,  from  the  fear  of  starvation. 
Corn  began  to  fail,  and  pestilence  ensued.  The  army  withdrew,  but 
the  Pontifi"  remained  in  bondage  till  the  last  month  of  the  year.  He 
escaped  fi'om  the  Castle  of  St.  Angelo,  in  the  disguise  of  a  merchant,  but, 
there  is  no  doubt,  with  the  cognizance  of  the  Emperor,  and  took  his  way 
to  Orvieto  on  the  10th  of  December." 

Shall  we  now  turn  away  from  this  scene,  to  the  other  states  of  Europe  1 
Then  do  we  see  little  else  than  the  reign  of  infatuation  ;  and,  in  its 
full  strength,  the  general  prevalence  of  duplicity.  Before  the  fall  of 
Rome,  the  policy  of  Wolsey  had  so  aifected  our  country,  that  he  was  in- 
fonued,  his  master  could  no  longer  be  trusted  by  the  Spanish  Court  ; 
though,  at  the  same  time,  the  Cardinal's  double-dealing  had  become  the 
order  of  the  day,  both  with  France  and  Spain  !  If  he  wished  to  foment 
division  between  these  two  powers,  this  was  met  by  the  Emperor  contriv- 
ing to  shake  the  supposed  ties  between  England  and  France.  Only 
six  days  before  Bourbon's  assault,  the  English  GoveiTiment,  who  had 
been  offering  itself  as  impartial  arbiter  between  the  Emperor  and 
Francis,  signed  a  treaty  of  perpetual  peace  with  the  latter,  the  conditions 
of  which,  if  not  gained,  involved  united  war  with  the  former  !  Nay, 
only  a  fortnight  before  this  treaty,  Wolsey,  through  the  English  am- 
bassador. Dr.  Lee,  had  been  paying  his  court  to  the  Emperor  ! 

But  the  fall  of  Rome  bred  new  and  unprecedented  thoughts  in  the 
minds  of  all  these  politicians.     It  was  like  a  blow  at  head  quarters,  and 


'0  Bourdeille,  the  A))ljot  of  Brantome. 

"  See  Halle's   Cluonicle,   but  particularly  Turner's  account,  grniiiulcd  on  the  liistorics   of 
Gnicciardini  and  Brantome,  and  the  Cotton  MSS. 


1527.]  FALL  OF  ROME.  147 

was  felt  not  only  by  the  three  great  jjowers,  but  by  the  others  who  were 
under  theii-  sway.     It  is  instructive  to  observe  the  change. 

On  the  arrival  of  this  intelligence  in  England  on  the  28th  of  May, 
which  was  fully  confii-med  on  the  2d  of  June,  the  King,  and  many 
prelates,  lamented  over  the  event.  As  for  Wolsey,  in  hon-or,  he  addressed 
his  master,  and  Halle,  in  his  chronicle,  has  preserved  the  expressions. 
"  Sii","  said  he,  "  by  the  only  calling  of  God,  you  be  made  Defender  of 
the  Christian  Faith  :  Now,  consider  in  what  state  the  Church  of  Christ 
standeth :  See  how  the  Head  of  the  Church  of  Rome  is  in  captivity : 
See  how  the  holy  fathers  be  brought  into  thraldom,  and  be  without  com- 
fort !  Now,  show  yom-self  an  aid,  a  Defender  of  the  Church,  and  God 
shall  reward  you."  But  the  King  answered, — "  My  Lord,  I  more 
lament  this  evil  chance  than  my  tongue  can  tell,  but  where  you  say  that 
I  am  Defender  of  the  Faith,  I  assure  you,  that  this  war  between  the 
Emperor  and  the  Pope,  is  not  for  the  faith,  hut  for  temjioral  i^osses- 
sions  and  dominions.  And  now,  since  Bishop  Clement  is  taken  by  men 
of  war,  what  should  I  do  ?  My  person,  nor  my  people,  cannot  bim 
rescue ;  but  if  my  treasure  may  help  him,  take  that  which  to  you  seemeth 
most  convenient."  On  his  knees  the  Cardinal  thanked  the  King,  and  in 
July  took  special  care  to  avail  himself  of  the  offer  now  made.  Mean- 
while, he  enjoined  solemn  processions,  fasting  and  prayer,  but  neither 
priests  nor  people  paid  regard  to  his  orders !  The  show  of  obedience 
was  little  else  than  a  mere  farce.  Opposition  to  the  papal  dominion 
was  rising,  and  had  gained  considerable  strength,  especially  among  the 
common  people.  "  The  commonality,"  says  Halle,  "  little  mourned  for 
it."  Nay,  in  their  own  blunt  way  they  said,  "  that  the  Pope  was  a 
ruffian,  and  not  meet  for  the  room, — that  he  began  the  mischief,  and  so 
he  was  well  served."  Wolsey,  however,  had  long  conceived  that  he  was 
perfectly  "  meet  for  the  room,"  and  it  should  seem  that,  the  sm-prise 
being  over,  a  new  idea  struck  him. 

"  As  soon,"  says  Tyndale,  "  as  the  Pope  was  taken,  the  Cardinal 
wrote  unto  the  Emperor  that  he  should  make  him  Pope.  And  when  he 
had  got  an  answer  that  pleased  him  not,  but  according  unto  his  deserv- 
ings  toward  the  Emperor,  then  he  was  furious  mad,  and  sought  all  means  to 
displease  the  Emperor, — and  wrote  sharply,  with  menacing  letters,  that 
if  he  would  not  make  him  Pope,  he  would  make  such  ruffling  between  the 
Princes,  as  was  not  this  hundred  years,  to  make  the  Emperor  repent : 
yea,  though  it  should  cost  the  whole  realm  of  England  ! "  In  the 
Emperor's  reply,  printed  both  in  Spanish  and  German,  among  many 
other  articles,  he  repeats  Wolsey's  threat  verhatim,  and  then  adds,  "  Ye  go 
about  to  give  your  King  another  wife,  which,  if  ye  do,  it  may  be  the 
next  way  to  cost  you  the  realm  of  England,"i2 — ^  shrewd  prediction,  and 
literally  fulfilled,  so  far  as  Wolsey  was  concerned. 


'-  Tyndale's  "  Practice  of  Prelates;"  to  be  noticed  in  due  time. 


14-8  WOLSEY  IN   FRANCE,  [book  I. 

In  the  course  of  the  spring,  before  the  captivity  of  Clement,  there  is 
no  question  that  Wolsey's  restless  mind  had  suggested  to  him  his  embassy 
into  France  ;  and  that  subjects  connected  with  Henry's  divorce,  formed 
an  important  part  of  his  intended  business  there,  is  equally  certain. 
Not  then  aware  of  the  preference  to  be  afterwards  given  to  Anne 
Boleyn,  and  the  Duchess  of  Alen^on  having  been  married  in  Januaiy 
to  the  King  of  Navarre,  he  had  thought  of  Renee,  the  sister  of  the  late 
Queen  of  France.  But  now  that  the  Pope  had  fallen,  the  historical 
allusion  of  Tyndale  more  fully  accounts  for  that  enmity,  both  to  his  own 
Queen,  and  the  Emperor  her  nephew,  to  which  the  Cardinal,  before  he 
embarked,  had  unquestionably  wrovight  up  his  feelings. 

By  the  destruction  of  Clement  as  a  temporal  prince,  the  Emperor's 
power,  though  not  greatly  in  the  ascendant,  was  now  rising ;  and  Charles 
no  doubt  intended,  that  whoever  was  Pope,  he  should  never  again  re- 
sume his  wonted  sway.  In  one  sense  he  never  could,  and  never  has. 
Far  from  being  the  terror  of  Europe,  as  he  had  often  been,  this  Pontiff 
was  now  in  the  view  of  the  world,  only  a  poor  mortal,  degraded,  insulted, 
and  threatened  daily.  In  June,  therefore,  we  find  the  King  of  France 
negociating  with  Charles  jjrivately,  for  his  own  interests,  notwithstand- 
ing his  treaty  with  England  !  The  critical  question  began  to  be  mooted 
on  the  Continent,  whether  obedience  to  a  Pope  in  ca/ptivity,  was  bind- 
ing ;  and  the  Spanish  Cabinet  found  out,  that  Francis  even  speculated 
on  throwing  ofi"  the  yoke,  establishing  a  new  system  in  France,  and  talked 
of  Wolsey  being  its  Patriarch  or  Pope.  To  frustrate  this,  the  Imperial 
Minister  suggested  to  the  Cardinal,  through  the  English  ambassador, 
though  no  doubt  in  vain  show,  the  Patriarchate  of  Lower  Gei-many. 
After  panting  so  long  for  the  See  of  Rome,  Wolsey  was  not  yet  so  sunk, 
as  to  leap  at  any  such  bait  ;  but  at  all  events,  Henry  VIII.  was  now 
alarmed  at  the  growing  power  of  the  Emperor,  and  Wolsey,  bent  upon 
one  bold  and  final  effort  to  rise  amid  the  confusion  of  Europe,  was  re- 
solved to  make  the  most  of  the  Pope's  thraldom. 

Into  France,  therefore,  in  the  beginning  of  Jvily,  he  went  with  a  pro- 
digious train,  in  all  that  pomp  and  foolish  extravagance,  which  need  not 
here  be  described  ;  providentially,  however,  carrying  with  him  out  of  the 
kingdom,  among  others,  two  opponents  of  divine  truth,  as  determined  as 
himself,  namely,  Tunstal,  Bishop  of  London,  and  Sir  Thomas  More.^^ 
Clement  had,  from  his  prison,  on  the  Gth  of  June,  written  to  Wolsey, 
that  on  him  alone  he  rested  all  his  hope  of  deliverance,  through  his  in- 
fluence with  Henry  ;  and  as  the  King  had  offlered  money,  the  Cardinal 
now  carried  with  him  to  the  amount  of  ^120,000  sterling,  or  equal  to 
one  million  eight  hundred  thousand  of  our  present  coin !  With  this  he 
intended  of  course  to  display  his  own  personal  magnificence,  as  the 
King's   Plenipotentiary,  and    Lieutenant-General,  for  he  actually  an- 


13  They  were  ,ill  sent  off  to  be  out  of  the  way. 


I527J  ^VITII  MORE   AND  TUNSTAL.  149 

nounced  himself  as  a  military  character  ;  hut  the  design  of  the  mission 
was  to  confirm  the  peace  with  France,  to  effect  the  Pope's  rescue,  to 
oppose  the  Emperor,  and,  as  the  poor  Cardinal  dreamt,  to  aid  his  Master, 
another  day,  in  the  affair  of  his  divorce. 

"My  Lord  Cardinal,"  says  Tyndale,  "  with  More,  his  sworn  Secretary,  and 
the  Bishop  of  London,  that  still  Satan,  the  imagiucr  of  all  raischiei^  went  to 
France  to  juggle  secretly,  and  carried  with  him  more  than  he  brought  home 
again.  This  is  of  a  truth,  that  he  carried  great  treasure  with  him.  The  French 
gallies  lay  long  in  Thames'  mouth,  and  not  for  nought.  The  fame  went  plain, 
yea,  and  /  know  also  one  that  saw  in  my  Lord  Cardinal's  court,  letters  scaled 
with  the  King's  great  seal,  wherein  was  contained,  that  the  French  King  should 
have  of  us,  money  sufficient  for  to  find  twenty  thousand  men  against  the  Em- 
peror in  Italy,  from  the  26.  day  of  July  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1527,  forward."l4 

But  where  was  the  negociation,  without  any  exception,  in  which  Wolsey 
ever  forgot  himself  ?  Thus,  if  he  could  not  actually  reach  what  was  called 
St.  Peter's  chair,  he  must  make  the  nearest  approach  to  it,  which  any 
man  ever  did  ;  and  the  Pope  being  a  prisoner,  was  in  favour  of  his  ambi- 
tion. While  in  France,  therefore,  he  applied  to  Clement  to  appoint  him 
"  the  universal  Vicar  of  the  Papacy  in  France,  England,  and  Germany."^^ 
This  was  asking  more  than  Clement  could  probably  convey  ;  but  at  last 
it  was  a  positive  article  of  one  treaty,  signed  on  the  19th  of  August,  that 
the  Cardinal  should  be  "the  Vicar-General  of  all  the  English  dominions," 
in  other  words,  the  Pope  ;  for  which  he  received  a  bull,  before  returning 
home.i''  Having  paid  the  French  army  two  months  in  advance,  and 
settled  other  matters,  he  confirmed,  as  he  supposed,  peace  with  France. 
After  landing  in  England,  about  the  12th  of  October,  he  boasted  of  his 
wonderful  negociation  ;  and  shewing  his  treaty,  signed  and  ratified,  with 
its  beautiful  seal  of  gold,  to  all  the  Nobility,  Prelates,  and  Judges,  the 
Lord  Mayor,  and  Aldermen,  he  told  them  in  the  Star  Chamber,  that  this 
was  a  peace,  in  secula  sectdorum  !  ^^  The  only  reply  of  many  was  a  smile 
of  contempt.  Francis,  however,  to  keep  up  the  farce,  sent  his  ambassa- 
dors, in  great  style,  into  England.  Henry  was  made  Knight  of  the  order 
of  St.  Michael,  and  he  in  return  made  Francis  Knight  of  the  Garter. 
The  ambassadors  being  entertained  at  a  rich  banquet,  and  as  an  ai)pro- 
priate  conclusion,  at  a  play,  returned. 

The  King  of  France  had  proved  more  than  Wolsey's  rival,  and  all 


14  Practice  of  Prelates.  '''  Guicciardiiii,  L.  10,  p.  78.  16  Halle,  p.  782. 

17  This  document,  which  Wolsey  handed  round  for  admiration,  may  still  be  seen  in  the  Chap- 
ter-House at  Westminster.  Written  on  ten  leaves  of  vellum,  signed  "  Francoys,"  it  has  been 
represented  as  one  of  the  most  beautiful  manuscripts  of  the  age  ;  and  this  it  certainly  is,  with  its 
illuminated  first  page,  and  finely  ornamented  margins.  We  have  also  admired  the  exquisite 
workmanship  of  this  seal— the  great  seal  of  France,  inclosed  in  a  magnificent  box  of  pure  gold. 
Still,  one  cannot  look  on  this  splendid  manuscript  and  seal,  without  remembering  that  we  have 
before  us  the  very  document  which  led  the  way  to  one  of  the  most  baneful  results,  namely,  the 
challenge  of  Francis  to  the  Emperor  to  fight  with  him  in  single  combat.  The  duel,  it  is  true,  was 
never  fought,  but  the  example  thus  set,  liad  a  prodigious  influence  in  promoting  the  absurd, 
cowardly,  and  worse  than  brutal  inactice  of  duelling  throughout  Europe. 


150  AV0L8EY   RETURNED.  [bOOK  I. 

along  had  been  fighting  him  with  his  own  long  practised  Aveapons.  The 
fact  was,  that  during  the  whole  three  months  of  the  Cardinal's  residence 
in  France,  and  even  now,  its  King  was  carrying  on  his  negociations  with 
the  Emperor  !  Nor  was  the  Pope  one  whit  behind  any  of  the  civil 
powers  in  duplicity. 

"  When  we  consider,"  says  Mr.  Turner,  "  the  double-dealing  and  hypocrisy 
which  the  one  ecclesiastical  and  the  three  great  civil  powers  of  Europe  were 
alike  acting  towards  each  other,  and  with  reciprocal  knowledge  of  each  other's 
practices,  we  are  surprised  that  no  one  discerned  the  real  inutility  of  the  simu- 
lating system.  What  could  be  gained  by  such  duplicity,  which,  as  each  side 
was  practising,  each  suspected  and  discerned,  and  which,  therefore,  never,  (ov 
but  seldom),  deluded  the  mutual  deceivers  ?  If  any  part  of  modern  history  can 
make  us  disgusted  with  dissimulation  and  duplicity,  it  must  be  the  statesman- 
ship and  diplomacy  of  the  first  portion  of  the  sixteenth  century.  Ancient  history 
presents  no  adequate  parallel  to  the  cabinet  transactions  of  that  period  in  Italy, 
France,  Spain,  and  even  England,  while  under  Wolsey's  administration."!** 

These  reflections  are  just,  though  the  reader  must  be  left  to  judge, 
whether  the  last  named  individual  did  not  sustain  the  nearest  resemblance 
to  the  father  of  lies.  To  describe  fully  the  labyrinth  referred  to,  is  more 
than  sufficient  to  baffle  the  skill  and  patience  of  any  human  pen,  and  the 
mind  would  grow  weary  in  tracing  such  tortuous  policy,  were  it  not,  that 
in  the  end  we  have  such  striking  evidence,  that  there  was  One  above 
overruling  all  for  his  own  glory.  The  powers  of  Europe  having  arrived  at 
a  certain  pitch  of  wickedness,  were  judgment-stricken  by  the  Sovereign 
Ruler  of  nations  ;  and  this  memorable  year,  as  well  as  others  that  follow, 
are  best  described  in  that  blessed  Book  which  they  all  despised.  "  With 
him  is  strength  and  wisdom  :  the  deceived  and  the  deceiver  are  his  :  He 
leadeth  councillors  away  spoiled,  and  maketh  judges  fools  :  He  removeth 
away  the  speech  of  the  trusty,  and  taketh  away  the  understanding  of  the 
aged  :  He  taketh  away  the  heart  of  the  chief  of  the  people  of  the  earth, 
and  causeth  them  to  wander  in  a  wilderness  wherein  there  is  no  way. 
They  gi'ope  in  the  dark  without  light,  and  He  maketh  them  to  stagger 
like  a  drunken  man." 

Upon  returning  home,  the  Cardinal  came  robed  in  a  higher  character 
than  even  that  in  which  he  had  left  England.  He  was  now  literally  at 
the  top  of  all  his  earthly  glory.  However  profane  the  application  was 
to  such  a  man,  nay,  or  to  any  man,  that  we  may  better  understand  his 
descent  into  ruin  and  disgrace,  let  us,  for  once,  clothe  him  in  the  titles 
now  ascribed  to  him — "  The  most  Reverend  Father  in  God,  Lord  Thomas, 
of  the  title  of  St.  Cicile,  Priest  Cardinal,  Bishop  of  Durham,  Archbishop 
of  York,  Primate  of  England,  and  Chancellor  of  the  same,  of  the  See 
Apostolic  Legate  a  Latere,'"  and,  to  crown  all,  "the Vicar-General  through- 
out all  the  King's  dominions  ! "     Yet  seldom,  if  ever,  in  the  whole  com- 

18  Tumor's  Henry  VI 11. 


1527.]  FIRST   TOKEN   OF   DECLINE.  151 

pass  of  English  history,  has  thcio  ocouncd  a  uiore  impressive  illustratiou 
of  that  passage  iu  Sacred  Writ — "  The  triumphing  of  the  wicked  is  but 
short,  and  the  joy  of  the  hypocrite  but  for  a  moment  ! "  Long  feared 
by  all,  and  loved  by  none,  Wolsey's  solitary  sujiport  lay  in  the  fascinating 
influence  or  power  which  he  had  for  many  years  possessed  over  the  King  ; 
but  the  first  instant  that  he  came  into  collision  with  his  passion  for  Lady 
Anne  Boleyn,  the  stafi"  on  which  he  had  long  leant,  a  broken  reed  at 
best,  began  to  fail  him.  During  his  absence  in  France,  the  preference  of 
Henry  for  this  lady  had  settled  into  a  feeling,  not  now  to  be  shaken  by  any 
human  being.  Wolsey  himself,  having  been  engrossed  abroad,  was  not  fully 
aware  of  this,  and  hence  the  very  month  of  his  arrival  had  not  expired 
before  he  met  with  proof,  that  even  his  power  of  persuasion  was  gone  ! 
Here  was  the  turning  point,  for  this  first  shock  happened  to  him  soon 
after  the  20th  of  October,  when  the  French  ambassadors  visited  this 
country.'^  Thus,  the  chief  agent  in  the  inception  of  the  divorce,  through 
the  Bishoji  of  Tarbes,  and  which  was  begun  and  at  first  pursued  without 
any  reference  whatever  to  Lady  Anne  Boleyn,  was  the  first  man  who  felt 
the  eflfects  of  the  idea  suggested.^*^ 

As  Vicar-General,  however,  he  must  now  try  to  give  some  demonstra- 
tion of  his  power.  To  carry  his  purpose  over  Warham,  the  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  (no  friend  of  his,)  as  well  as  all  the  other  clergy,  he  had 
taken  care  to  authorise  or  bind  himself,  by  an  article  in  one  of  his 
treaties,  to  regulate  all  ecclesiastical  affairs.  In  the  month  of  November, 
therefore,  he  called  all  the  clergy  to  Westminster,  saying,  that  now  "  all 
the  abusions  of  the  Church  should  be  amended  !  "  Accordingly,  it  was  on 
the  27th  of  this  month  that  he  presided,  in  form,  in  the  Chapter-house 
of  Westminster,  at  the  second  or  public  examination  of  Thomas  Bilney  ; 
Warham,  Tunstal,  and  other  Bishops  being  present.  But  no  wonder, 
now,  that  he  remitted  all  further  proceedings  to  Tunstal  ;  for  he  it  was, 
who,  by  his  art  of  ingeniously  tormenting,  inveigled  and  harassed  that 
worthy  man,  and  brought  that  horror  of  mind  upon  him  under  which  ho 
groaned  for  many  a  day  !  It  has  been  said,  indeed,  that  Wolsey  now 
abjured  Bilney,  Arthur,  Foster,  and  others,  but  all  this  was  done  by 
Tunstal  and  other  Bishops,  as  the  Commissaries  of  his  Legantine  or 
Vicar-General's  Court.  The  Cardinal  merely  opened  his  court  and  began 
with  Bilney,  but  he  was  too  busy  for  such  affair's  now,  and  had  other 
cogitations  to  fill  his  mind.  Awaked  from  his  long  dream  of  worldly 
power  and  splendour  iu  the  end  of  October  ;  by  the  5th  of  December,  in 
his  despatches  to  Rome,  he  was  straining  every  nerve  to  hasten  the 
divorce  of  Queen  Catherine  ;-^  though,  as  to  fully  reinstating  himself 
in  the  breast  of  Henry,  it  was  all  in  vain.  No,  the  tide  had  turned  in 
Septe^nber  when  the  full  extent  of  the  instructions  to  Rome,  through  Dr. 


13  CavenJish,  p.  13<).  20  Scc  Turner's  Henry  VIII.,  cliap.  xx. 

21   MS.  Cotton  Vitell,  B.  ix.,  fol.  2(0 ;  or  sec  Burnet  and  Fiddes. 


152  THE  WRATH   OF   THE    ENEMY.  [BOOK  1. 

Knight,  Henry's  own  ambassador,  was  concealed  even  from  Wolsey  ! 
Had  he  foreseen  all,  he  would  never  have  left  the  ear  of  his  master  ;  but 
now  there  was  no  remedy.  This  ambitious  man  must  descend  step  after 
step  to  a  miserable  and  ignoble  end. 

Having  noticed  the  leading  features  of  a  tempestuous  world  ;  it  is 
time  to  enquire  after  the  progress  of  the  Word  of  God  in  our  native 
land  ;  though,  after  all,  it  is  now  but  retiring  from  one  species  of  tempest 
to  another, — yet  another,  of  a  far  higher  character. 

Throughout  the  year  1527,  it  might  seem  next  to  impossible 
that  any  moment  was  left  to  attend  to  the  suppression  of 
Tyndale's  New  Testament,  or  the  persecution  of  those  who 
possessed  it.  But  if  there  was,  we  can  now  more  fully  esti- 
mate the  extent  of  that  apprehension  and  anxiety  which 
agitated,  even  at  such  a  time  as  this,  not  only  the  Bishops 
of  the  day,  but  all  the  votaries  of  "  the  old  learning." 

It  was  but  one  short  year  since  the  Sacred  Volume  had 
arrived  in  the  country  ;  and  yet  see  how  deeply  its  enemies 
were  moved.  The  first  inveterate  opponent  who  excites 
notice,  was  "  an  ancient  doctor,  called,  as  I  remember,"  says 
Cavendish,  "  Doctor  (Robert)  Ridley,  a  very  small  person  in 
stature,  but  surely  a  great  and  excellent  clerk  in  divinity  !" 
He  was  celebrated  as  a  canonist,  and  had  been  consulted  by 
Wolsey,  years  before  this,  respecting  the  prevention  of 
Lutheranism,     Related  to  Cuthbert  Tunstal,  he,  in  the  year 

1523,  had  made  him  Rector  of  St.  Botolph's,  Bishopgate,  in 

1524,  Prebend  (Mora)  of  St.  PauFs,  and  more  recently  Rector 
of  St.  Edmond's,  Lombard  Street.  Was  it  wonderful  that 
this  little  man  should  wax  warm  in  the  service  of  the 
hierarchy  ?  The  bitterness  of  his  zeal  would  exceed  belief, 
could  we  not  present  a  specimen  from  his  own  pen.  Yet  was 
he  no  other  than  the  uncle  of  the  learned  and  amiable  Nicholas 
Ridley,  the  future  martyr ;  and  gave  him,  at  his  sole  expense, 
his  fine  education  at  home  and  abroad  !  The  uncle  and 
nephew  have  occasionally  been  confounded,  though  no  two 
men  could  form  a  stronger  contrast.^^ 

The  following  singular  letter  of  Robert  Ridley*'s,  which  has 
never  been  printed  before,  we  give  entire,  with  the  exception 
of  a  very  few  words,  which  cannot  be  deciphered  in  the 
original  manuscript.     It  is  extremely  valuable,  not  only  on 

22  Even  Sir  James  Mackintosh  had  mistaken  the  one  for  the  other  ;  iniaf»ining  the  advocate 
of  Queen  Catherine  to  have  been  Nicholas,  his  nephew.— Hist,  ot  Eng.  vol   ii.,  \>.  \^\.~Notc. 


1527.]  TYNDALE   FIRST    EXPRESSLY    NAMED.  J  53 

account  of  the  information  it  conveys  respecting  Tyndale's 
first  publications  ;  but  as  a  specimen  of  the  spirit  of  the  times, 
and  of  that  precious  criticism,  which  no  doubt  was  then  hailed, 
as  at  once  masterly  and  acute.  The  letter  is  dated  24th 
February,  and,  as  will  appear  presently,  in  the  year  1527. 
It  is  addressed  to  Henry  Golde  at  Knolle,  and  as  chaplain  to 
Warham,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury. 

"  Master  Golde,  I  heartily  commend  me  unto  you,  as  concerning  this  common 
and  vulgar  translation  of  the  New  Testament  into  English,  done  by  Mr. 
William  Hichyns,  otherways  called  Mr.  W.  Tyndale,  and  Friar  William 
Roye,  manifest  Lutheranes,  heretics,  and  apostates,  as  doth  openly  appear, 
not  only  by  their  daily  and  continual  company  and  familiarity  with  Luther 
and  his  disciples  ;  but  much  more  by  their  commentaries  and  annotations  in 
Matthew  and  Mark  in  the  first  ^;riw« — also  by  their  preface  (prologue)  in  the 
SECOND  print — and  by  their  introduction  into  the  Fpistle  of  Paul  to  the  Romans 
— altogether  most  poisoned  and  abhorrable  heresies  that  can  be  thought.  He 
is  not  a  son  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  that  would  receive  a  gospel  of  such  danmed 
(condemned)  and  precised  heretics,  though  it  were  true  :  like  as  Paul,  and  our 
Saviour  Christ,  would  not  take  the  true  testimonial  of  evil  spirits  that  praised 
Christ,  saying  that  he  was  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  Paul  himself  was  a  servant 
of  the  true  God. 

"  As  for  errors,  if  ye  have  the  first  print  with  annotations,  Matthew  and 
Mark  ;  and  the  preface,  all  is  mere  frenzy.  He  saith  that  the  Gospel  is 
nothing  else  than  the  sweet  promise  of  grace — so  that,  by  that  means,  '  Do 
penance'  is  no  part  of  the  Gospel — the  Pater  Noster  is  no  part  of  the  Gospel 
— '  Depart,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,'  is  no  part  of  the  Gospel — but 
only  such  as  '  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand' — '  Ye  shall  find  rest  to  your 
souls.'  Also,  he  saith,  in  that  preface  (the  prologue)  and  annotations,  that 
there  is  no  difference  between  virginity  and  a  whoi'e  of  the  stews,  if  she 
come  to  repentance.  Also,  that  like  as  no  man  doth  evil  to  the  intent  that  he 
should  be  punished  or  hanged  therefor  ;  so  no  man  should  do  good  to  have 
any  reward  therefor."  [We  take  no  account  of  Ridley's  inaccuracies  through- 
out, but  the  doctrine  involved  being  above  his  sphere  of  judgment,  he  then 
regards  all  this  as  contrary  to  other  passages.]  "  To  that  in  the  Hebrews  con- 
cerning Moses,  '  for  he  had  respect  to  the  recompense  of  reward  ;'  and  that, 
'  Make  to  yourselves  friends  of  the  mammon,  that  when  ye  fail,  they  may  re- 
ceive you  into  everlasting  tabernacles.'  Also,  he  saith,  that  by  good  works  we 
do  nothing  merit,  in  opposition  to  that  in  the  Corinthians, — '  that  every  one 
may  receive  the  things  done  in  the  body,  according  as  he  hath  done,  whether 
good  or  evil,' — and  that  to  Abraham,  '  because  thou  hast  done  this  thing,'  &c. 
Also  that  in  Matthew,  '  Because  1  was  athirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  drink,' — also 
that,  '  Come  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,'  &c.  Also,  he  saith, '  that  he  that  doth 
anything  to  have  a  higher  place  in  heaven,  he  is  proud  as  Satan  and  Lucifer.' 

"  I  hare  none  of  these  books,  but  only  I  remember  such  things  I  read  in  the 
preface  and  annotations.  As  for  the  text  of  the  Gospel,  first,  the  title  is 
heretical,  saying  that  '  it  is  printed  as  it  was  written  by  the  Evangelists,' 
while  it  neither  agrees   with   the   ancient   translation,  nor  with    Erasmus." 

After  quoting,  but  inaccurately,  Tyndale's  version  of  Matthew  i.,  1,  19,  and 
Romans  v.  12,  he  repeats  that  he  had  rendered  "  peniteutiam  agite,"  most 
foolishly — Repent. 

"  By    this   translation  shall  wc  lose  all    these    Christian   words — penance, 


154  PERSECUTION  [book  I. 

charitii,  confession,  grace,  priest,  church,  which  he  always  callcth  a  congregation  ; 
as  if  so  many  Turks,  or  irrational  animals,  were  not  a  congregation,  except  he 
wishes  them  also  to  be  a  church.     Idolntrla,  calleth  he  '  worshipping  of  images.' 

"I  would  that  ye  should  have  seen  my  Lord's  (Tunstal's)  books.  As  for  the 
translation  in  French,  without  any  postile,  it  is,  for  certain,  condemned  in 
Paris,  by  public  decree,  though  it  be  there  done  :  condemned,  I  say,  that  it 
shall  not  be  lawful  to  publish  it  to  every  layman,  but  by  the  priests,  whose  lips 
keep  knowledge — and  so  it  was  in  the  old  law,  and  in  the  time  of  the  Apostles. 
Vide  '  Hiitorem  de  translatione  B'thluv.^-^ 

"  I  certify  you,  that  if  ye  look  well,  ye  shall  not  look  three  lines  without 
fault  in  all  the  book,  but  I  have  not  the  book  to  mark  them  out, — ye  should 
hate  had  leisure  yourself  to  have  done  it.  Howbeit,  it  becometh  the  people  of 
Chi'ist  to  obey  their  rulers,  which  hath  given  study,  and  is  learned  in  such 
matters,  as  their  people  should  hear  and  believe.    They  should  not  judge  the 

23  He  refers  to  Pierre  k  Couslurkr,  better  known  by  the  name  of  Peter  Sutor,  a  Doctor  of  the 
Sorbonne,  and  author  of  many  works,  one  of  which  was  entitled  "  De  translatione  Biblionini,  " 
in  folio,  1525.  And  so  would  this  little  virulent  man,  Ridley,  dispose  of  the  labours  of  the 
venerable  Le  Fevre,  the  translator  of  the  New  Testament  into  French,  of  which  the  first  edition 
had  been  published  in  1523,  and  two  editions  in  15:?4,  if  not  another  in  1525.  But  Jacobus  Faber 
Stapuleusis,  as  he  latinized  his  name,  was  possessed  of  both  genius  and  learning  far  above  his 
time.  Even  after  having  opposed  him  in  controversy,  it  was  of  him  that  Erasmus  said  in  1517, 
to  Cuthbert  Tunstal,  then  on  the  Continent, — "  A  man  who,  for  integrity  and  humanity,  has 
scarcely  his  equal  among  thousands — for  whom  it  is  my  desire  that  all  should  entertain  the  ut- 
most esteem."  True,  he  was  persecuted  by  the  Doctors  of  the  Sorbonne,  as  might  have  been 
expected.  "  It  was  a  thing  almost  natural  to  them,"  says  Sleidan,  "to  teaze  and  molest  men 
of  learning,  because  they  saw  themselves  despised  for  their  ignorance."  But  that  excellent 
woman,  Margaret  Queen  of  Navarre,  acquainted  her  brother  Francis,  the  king,  and  he,  though 
then  a  prisoner  in  Spain,  wrote  and  stayed  the  proceedings.  No  wonder  than  such  a  man  as 
Ridley  hated  him.  In  the  preface  to  his  New  Testament  he  had  said—"  Who  is  there  but  will 
esteem  it  proper  and  conducive  to  salvation  to  have  the  New  Testament  in  the  vtdijar  tongue  'f 
What  is  more  necessary  to  life  whether  temporal  or  spiritual  ?  If,  in  the  different  '  religious 
orders,'  they  ordain,  that  if  any  one  be  ignorant  of  Latin,  he  shall  have  the  rules  of  his  order  in 
the  vulgar  tongue,  carry  it  about  him,  and  commit  it  to  memory  ;  and  in  their  respective  chapters, 
frequently  explain  their  rides  to  them  ;  with  how  much  more  reason  ought  the  unlearned 
among  Christians  to  possess  the  Word  of  God,  the  Scripture  full  of  grace  and  mercy,  which  is 
ifteir  r?(?e,  and  which  rt/yHC  is  necessary,  for  only  0(ie  thing  is  needful.  This  Holy  Scripture  is 
the  Testament,  the  last  will  of  .Tesus  Christ,  the  Testament  of  our  Father  confirmed  by  his  death 
and  by  the  blood  of  our  Redeemer,  and  who  is  he  that  shall  forbid  the  eliihiren  to  have,  and  see, 
and  read  their  Father's  will  ?  It  is  then  highly  expedient  to  possess  it,  and  read  it,  and  hear  it, 
not  only  once,  but  often,  in  the  chapters  oi  i csns  Christ,  which  are  the  churches  where  all  the 
people,  unlearned  and  learned,  ought  to  assemble,  to  hear  and  honour  the  Word  of  God. 
And  such  is  the  intention  of  our  gracious  king,  (Francis  was  then  fsivourablc  ;)  a  design  which 
ought  to  inspire  all  in  the  kingdom,  with  courage  to  advance  in  true  Christianity,  by  following, 
understanding,  and  believing,  the  quickening  Word  of  God.  And  blessed  be  the  hour  when  it 
shall  be  accom]ilished  ;  and  blessed  be  all  those,  both  male  and  female,  who  shall  ]>rocurc  it  to 
be  canicd  into  efl'ect,  not  only  in  this  kingdom,  but  tltroxiph  all  the  vorld." 

The  King  of  France,  however,  like  our  Henry,  changed  his  mind,  for  on  this  subject,  both 
were  fickle  as  the  reed  shaken  by  the  wind ;  and  Le  Fevre,  like  Tyndale,  had  to  ])rint  in 
Antwerp.  His  version  of  the  entire  Bible  was  published  there  in  15.S0,  printed  by  the  same  man 
whom  Tyndale  employed  in  15.'i4.  It  was  not  unfrequcntly  called  the  Emperor's  Bible,  from 
the  printer's  name,  Martin  Emperour.  In  1530,  the  Queen  of  Navarre,  his  constant  friend,  in 
vited  Le  Fevre  to  Nerac,  where  he  lived  till  he  had  entered  into  the  102d  year  of  his  age,  in  1537  ! 

There  is  but  one  subject  of  regret.  He  was  deficient  in  that  moral  courage  to  which  he  had 
exhorted  others  in  the  days  of  Court  i'avour  ;  a  defect,  which  cost  him  such  agony  on  his  dying 
day.  "  On  the  day  of  his  death,  being  apparently  as  well  as  usual,  while  dining  w  ith  the  Queen 
and  some  learned  men,  whom  this  Princess  frequently  invited  to  spend  the  day  with  her,  Le 
Fevre  appeared  pensive  and  melancholy,  and  was  observed  to  shed  tears.  The  Queen  desired 
to  know  what  was  the  cause  of  his  sadness  ;  when  he  answered, — '  I  am  distressed  because  of 
the  enormity  of  my  crimes.  I  am  now  a  hundred  and  one  years  of  age  ;  and  though  1  have  lived 
a  chaste  life,  and  have  been  preserved  from  those  excesses  into  which  many  are  hurried  by  the 
violence  of  tlieir  passions,  yet  I  have  been  guiltyof  this  heinous  ofleiice— I  have  kn()wn  the  truth, 
and  have  taught  it  to  many  who  have  scaled  it  with  their  blood,  and  yet  I  have  had  the  weak- 
ness to  hide  myself  in  those  places  where  the  crowns  of  martyrs  are  never  distributed.'  Having 
said  this,  he  dictated  his  will,  viva  voce,  went  and  lay  down  on  his  bed,  and  died  in  a  few  hours  !  " 
—Brnt/sset.  Diet.  Hist.  ;  Clarke's  Bililinn.  Diet.  iii.  jip.  220-228 ;  Toinilrii's  Bil>.  Lit.  ii.  228  2.3-4. 


152?.]  EARNESTLY  ADVISED.  155 

doctrine  of  Paul,  nor  of  Paul's  vicars  and  successors,  but  be  judged  by  their 
learning,  as  long  as  they  know  nothing  contrary  God's  laws, — as  Saint  Bernard 
saith,  most  goodly  and  clerkly,  in  his  book,  '  De  dispensatione  et  precepto.' 
Vale,  in  all  haste,  your  own, 

"  Robert  Ridley,  Priest." 

"  Item,  that  of  Paul, — '  stultas  questiones  devita,'  &c., — '  beware  of  foolish 
problems  or  questions  in  the  schools.'  This,  without  doubt,  is  said  in  hatred 
of  the  scholastic  divinity,  and  of  the  Universities  !"  Such  a  thing  is  in  the 
translation,  though  it  be  not  in  the  same  words.24 

"  Shew  ye  to  the  people,  that  if  any  be  of  so  proud  and  stubborn  stomach, 

that  he  will  believe  there  is  no  fixult  nor  error,  except  it  be  declared  to  him 

that  he  may  see  it,  let  him  come  hither  to  my  Lord,  which  hath  profoundly 

examined  all,  and  he  shall  hear  and  see  errors,  except  that  he  be  blind,  and 

have  no  eye." 

«  -lith  Fehrmr;/. 

"  Ye  shall  not  need  to  accuse  this  translation.  It  is  accused  and  damned 
(condemned)  by  the  consent  of  the  Prelates  and  learned  men  ;  and  commanded 
to  be  burnt,  both  here  and  beyond  the  sea,  ichere  is  many  hundred  of  them  burnt; 
so  that  it  is  too  late  now  to  ask  reason  ti-hi/  that  be  condemned,  and  which  be 
the  faults  and  errors.25  Luther  and  his  school  teacheth,  '  that  we  do  not  co- 
operate with  the  grace  of  God,  but  are  only  passive  as  stones  or  blocks.'  Be- 
cause of  that,  this  text,  '  non  ego,  sed  gratia  dei  mecum,'  thus  is  translated — 
'  not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  in  me ' — which  how  heretically,  wickedly,  sediti- 
ously, and  falsely  it  is  ti-auslated,  he  who  does  not  perceive  is  stupid  !  -^ 

"  My  Lord,  your  master,  (Warham,)  hath  of  these  books  given  and  sent  to 
him,  by  my  Lord,  (Tunstal,)  my  master.  Shew  the  people  that  ye  be  come  to 
declare  unto  them  that  certain  books  be  condemned  by  the  council,  and  profound 
examination  of  the  Prelates,  and  fathers  of  the  Church.^? 

"  To  Master  Henri/  Golde,  Chaplain  to  mij  Lord  of  Canterbury,  at  Knolle."28 

24  He  quotes,  lie  tells  us,  from  memory,  and,  of  course,  is  inaccurate,  but  this,  as  far  as  the 
text  was  concerned,  is  a  vile  aspersion.  The  renderinR  of  Titus  3,  9,  10,  is—"  Foolish  questions, 
and  genealogies,  and  brawlings,  and  strife  about  the  law  avoid,  for  they  are  unprofitable  and 
superfluous.  A  man  that  is  the  author  of  sects,  after  the  first  and  the  second  admonition,  avoid." 
Tyndale,  however,  was  no  friend  to  the  scholastic  divinity  of  the  day,  where  sects  abounded,  and 
if  there  was  any  allusion  to  the  "  foolish  questions  in  the  schools,"  as  well  there  might,  then 
this  must  have  been  by  agtossin  the  mariiin  of  the  quarto  edition.  As  Ridley  has  not  referred 
at  all,  to  the  octavo,  without  glosses,  this  is  the  more  jirobable,  and  if  so,  this  may  be  regarded 
as  a  collateral  proof  that  he  had  gone  over  the  entire  quarto,  or,  in  other  words,  that  he  had  in 
his  eye  the  quarto  Testament  complete. 

25  He  was  evidently  well  informed  of  the  first  burning  at  Antwerp,  already  explained. 

26  But  this,  though  no  wickedness,  much  less  sedition,  be  visible,  was  only  another  aspersion. 
His  translation  of  1  Cor.  xv.  10.  was  as  follows—"  But  by  the  favour  of  God,  I  am  that  I  am.  And 
his  favour,  which  is  in  me,  was  not  in  vain  :  but  I  laboured  more  abundantly  than  they  all, — 
not  I,  but  the  favour  of  God,  which  is  with  me."  Tyndale  very  frequently  had  preferred  the 
term  favour  before  that  of  grace,  because  of  the  strange  and  hurtful  sense  in  which  the  latter 
had  been  employed. 

27  See  the  original  MS.,  Cotton,  Cleopatra,  E.  v.  fol.  362,  b.  Ridley,  who  took  such  a  deep 
interest  in  opposition  to  the  English  Scriptures,  both  now  and  hereafter,  was  anxious  to  rouse 
his  correspondent  to  the  same  pitch  with  himself,  and  thus  urge  on  the  Archbishop.  But  all 
this  was  quite  unnecessary,  for  though  Warham  did  not  belsh  out  in  this  manner,  he  was  as 
zealous ;  and  as  for  Golde,  he  proved  a  more  reckless  opponent  than  even  Ridley  himself  He 
was  at  last  deeply  implicated,  with  five  others,  in  the  affair  of  Elizabeth  Barton,  attainted  for 
high  treason,  and  executed  along  with  heron  the  21st  of  April  1.534.— Set;  Hulk,  Foxe,  and  Bur- 
net. Besides  being  the  confidcnti.al  agent  and  Chaplain  of  Warham,  Golde  is  designated  on  his 
trial  as  B.D.  and  Parson  of  Mdermarij,  in  Watling  Street.  The  modern  reader  may  know  this 
building  as  the  spot  where  the  venerable  Mr.  Wilkinson  so  long  ministered  every  Sabbath  after- 
noon ;  while  on  Tuesday  morning  his  voice  was  heard  in  St.  Bartholomews,  where  Coverdalo's 
body  lay  interred.  It  may  be  added,  that  the  .■iupposed  bones  of  the  latter  have  been  moved  to 
St.  Magnus  Church,  in  consequence  of  the  Exchange  being  burnt,  and  Bartholomews  taken  down. 

2"  In  the  British  Museum  Catalogue,  the  preceding  letter  is  supposeil  to  have  been  written  in 


156  THE    NEW  TESTAMENT.  [book  I. 

This  man  quotes  from  memory  and  at  random.  It  is  al- 
together unnecessary  to  trace  his  mistakes,  whether  wilful  or 
not ;  and  yet  this  strange  farrago,  however  inaccurate  and 
calumnious  in  its  blind  criticisms,  is  still  of  great  value,  as  a 
link  in  our  narrative,  and  as  lending  to  it  a  degree  of  pre- 
cision, hitherto  unobserved,  if  not  unknown.  Even  from  this 
document  alone,  there  can  be  no  question  now,  that  in  the 
year  1526,  Tyndale's  quarto  Testament,  with  the  prologue 
prefixed,  was  circulating  in  England.  We  now  learn,  how- 
ever, that  there  was  an  edition  of  Matthew  and  Mark  sepa- 
rately, which  he  designates  the  first  print.  That  he  was 
correct  in  this,  in  1528,  there  will  be  but  little  doubt;  to 
say  nothing  more  of  its  giving  such  emphasis  to  the  language 
of  Foxe,  already  noticed.  "  William  Tyndale  first  placed 
himself  in  Germany,  and  there  did  first  translate  the  gospel 
of  St.  Matthew  into  English,  and  after^  the  whole  New  Tes- 
tament." The  invaluable  fragment,  however,  of  the  quarto 
New  Testament,  lately  discovered,  and  now  in  the  possession 
of  Mr.  Grenville,  is  not,  as  before  hinted,  a  part  of  this  pub- 
lication. It  extends,  indeed,  no  farther  than  the  23d  chapter 
of  Matthew  ;  but  then  it  has  the  preface  or  prologue  prefixed, 
with  the  pages,  or  rather  letters,  running  on ;  and,  besides 
this,  the  list  of  all  the  canonical  books  of  the  New  Testament 
at  the  beginning.  There  is,  however,  little  or  no  necessity 
for  pointing  out  this  distinction,  when  the  reader  once  ob- 
serves, that  Ridley  has  been  quoting,  or  rather  misquoting 
from  Corinthians  and  Titus — a  decisive  proof  that  he  had 
had  the  quarto  Testament  entire  before  him.  From  this 
letter  we  also  learn  to  a  certainty,  that  the  Introduction,  or 
Prologue  to  the  Romans,  by  itself,  was  already  in  circulation. 
Herbert  was  therefore  correct  in  his  conjecture,  when  he 
placed  this  under  the  year  1526.^^     What  proofs  were  these, 


15.'i7,  and  by  some  person  it  has  been  so  marked ;  but,  by  tliat  time.  Guide  had  been  nearly 
three  years  in  his  grave,  and  Ridley  also  was  dead.  When  com])ared  with  another  letter  ad- 
dressed to  Warham  on  the  14th  of  June  15-27,  and  about  to  be  quoted,  it  will  be  evident  that 
this  singular  effusion  of  Ridley's  was  written  previnufli/,  on  the  24th  of  February,  or  only  four 
days  after  he  had  been  ajipointed  Rector  of  St.  Edmumls.  Next  year  he  uas  one  of  the  counsel 
for  Queen  Catherine,  and  must  have  been  a  favourite  of  Tunstal's.  Thus  his  prebend  of  Mura 
he  resigned  on  the  M  April  this  year,  and  was  on  that  day  collated  to  that  of  Pancras.  This 
he  resigned  about  the  3Ctth  October  ISSS,  being  on  that  day  ajipointed  to  his  prebend  of  Islcdon, 
and  had  no  less  than  the  sinecure  Rectory  of  Ftdhom  at  the  same  time !  Both  these,  as  well  as 
the  Rectory  of  St.  Edmund,  he  retained  to  his  dying  day,  in  June  153(). 

-9  "  A  compendious  introduction,  prologe.  or  jireface  vnto  the  pistle  oft'  Paul  to  the  Ro- 
ma.yns."— Herbert's  Ames,  iii.  ]>.  l,5a(>,  anno  1.526.  Tlie  late  Bishop  of  Peterborough,  Dr.  Her- 
bert Marsh,  profoundly  ignorant  of  Tyndale's  history,  took  for  granted  that  this  was  a  transla- 
tion from  the  German;  hut  there  was  no  occasion  for  Tyndale  to  acquire  that  language,  since 
the  preface  had  bccu  translated  into  Latin   by  Juslui  Jonas,  as  early  as  1522-,'),  and  was  to  be 


1527.]  TO   BE   BOUGHT   Ul'  l.')7 

that  Tyndale,  for  his  country's  best  interests,  must  have  been 
labouring  night  and  day  !^'* 

Notwithstanding  the  solemn  and  pointed  injunctions  of 
the  Bishop  of  London  and  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
issued  in  the  close  of  1526,  calling  in  both  editions,  both 
Bishops  had  found  that  the  possessors  of  the  Sacred  Volume 
were  by  no  means  disposed  to  surrender  it,  merely  for  being 
threatened  ;  and  as  for  the  copies  still  abroad,  if  the  influence 
of  Wolsey  over  Brabant  was  last  year  less  than  it  had  been, 
in  this,  of  course,  it  was  lower  still.  His  political  leanings 
were  now  better  known,  not  only  to  the  Emperor  and  the 
Lady  Margaret,  but  to  the  Lords  of  Antwerp,  and  all  tlie 
merchants.  Hackett  the  ambassador,  it  will  be  remembered, 
had  implored  a  list  of  heresies,  taken  out  of  the  Testament, 
to  be  translated  into  German,  that  he  might  proceed  at  Ant- 
werp or  other  places  with  more  rigour  and  despatch  ;  but 
Providence  intervening,  Wolsey  was  engrossed  in  far  diffe- 
rent employment ;  and  so  now,  it  seems,  if  any  more  Testa- 
ments are  to  be  obtained,  they  must  be  bought^  not  seized. 
The  ambassador  either  dared  not,  or  could  not,  play  the  same 
game  a  second  time. 

At  his  wits'  end,  as  we  have  already  seen,  Hackett  was 
the  first  who  suggested  the  idea  of  purchasing  and  burning, 
in  order  to  prevent  the  circulation ;  and  all  preceding  ac- 
counts hitherto  printed,  without  exception,  hold  up  Tunstal 
as  the  only  man  who  adopted  it.  But  this,  like  too  many 
others,  is  a  general  mistake,  as  for  two  years  to  come  he  did 
nothing  of  the  kind.  The  purchasing  began  with  a  higher 
ecclesiastical  authority  than  that  of  Tunstal ;  nor  should  the 
step  be  represented  as  merely  foolish,  even  although  it  actually 
furthered  the  work  it  was  meant  to  crush.  The  fact  was,  that 
these  Bishops  were  in  a  frenzy,  yet  none  of  them  were  so 


had  everj-where.  To  the  original,  Tyndale  added  nearly  one  half.  The  truth  is,  that  taking 
Luther's  preface  to  the  Romans,  he  translated  it  with  such  additions  and  variations,  that  he 
enlarged  almost  t're)\i/;)a»'(7(7ra;jA,  and  adding  additional  observations,  fitted  it  for  circulation 
in  England.  Like  any  other  man,  he  could  avail  himself  of  whatever  had  already  been  said ; 
but  in  thus  acting,  he  is  not  likely  to  have  been  confederate  with  his  German  contemporary, 
and  much  less  under  his  eye.  The  fact,  however,  of  this  prologue  being  so  early  in  circulation 
throughout  England  as  1526,  has  not  been  before  substantiated.  It  appears  to  rank,  in  point  of 
time,  next  to  the  New  Testaments  of  1525,  and  must  have  been  printed  in  Worms. 

30  It  is,  however,  curious  enough,  that  in  this  strange  epistle,  no  distinct  mention  is  made  of 
the  octnvo  edition,  so  long  regarded  as  X\\c  first.  This,  according  to  his  way  of  reckoning,  would 
have  been  the  third  print,  or  the  second  of  the  New  Testament ;  but  this  defect  will  very  soon 
be  supplied,  and  that  through  no  less  a  personage  than  the  primate  Warham  himself,  the 
master  of  this  Henry  Golde.     As  for  Ridley's  name,  it  has  occurred  before,  page  102. 


158  BY   WARHAM   AND  THE   BISHOPS.  [bOOK  I. 

far  gone,  as  to  purchase  without  a  reason.  Any  one  of  them, 
as  we  shall  see  presently,  was  not  disposed  to  be  at  more  ex- 
pense  than  what  was  absolutely  necessary :  but  they  were 
certainly  in  great  haste,  because  the  haste  of  fear,  and  so  the 
purchase  became  a  matter  of  necessity,  not  of  choice ;  since 
the  rights  of  the  subject  were,  at  this  moment,  far  better 
understood  at  Antwerp  than  in  England. 

It  was  Warham,  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  who,  in 
the  spring  of  1527,  had  busied  himself  in  procuring  what 
copies  could  be  found  out  abroad  of  Tyudale's  New  Testament; 
and  he  succeeded  in  purchasing  a  part  of  Tyndale''s  original 
editions  in  quarto  and  octavo,  though  there  might  be  some  of 
the  third  Antwerp  impression  among  them.  Wolsey  and 
Warham  were  not  far  from  being  as  much  at  variance,  as 
were  Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate,  in  the  days  of  old ;  but,  as 
opposition  to  the  Saviour  made  them  friends  for  the  moment, 
so,  in  opposition  to  His  Word,  these  modern  authorities  were 
cordially  united.  One  curious  letter,  never  printed,  still  re- 
mains, affording  a  most  miserable  picture  of  the  whole  fra- 
ternity at  this  period.  It  is  from  the  Bishop  of  Norwich  to 
the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  dated  the  14th  of  June  1527. 

"  In  right  humble  mannei-  I  commend  me  unto  your  good  Lordship,  doing 
the  same  to  understand  that  I  lately  received  your  letters  dated  at  ynur  Manor 
of  Lambeth,  the  2Gth  day  of  the  month  of  May,  by  the  which  I  do  perceive 
that  your  Grace  hath  lately  gotten  into  your  hands  all  the  books  of  the  New 
Testament  translated  into  English,  and  printed  beyond  the  sea  ;  as  well  those 
n-ith  the  glosses  joined  unto  them,  as  the  other  u-ithout  the  glosses  ;'"5l  by  means 
of  exchange  by  you  made  therefor,  to  the  sum  of  lxvi.  li,  ix.  s.,  iiii.  d.32 

"  Surely,  in  mine  opinion,  you  have  done  them  a  gracious  and  blessed  deed, 
and  God,  I  doubt  not,  shall  highly  reward  you  therefore !  And  when  in  your 
said  letters  ye  write  that  in  so  much  as  this  matter  and  the  danger  thereof,  if 
remedy  had  not  been  provided,  should  not  only  have  touched  you,  but  all  the 
Bishops  u-ithlii  your  prorince ;  and  that  it  is  no  reason  that  the  whole  charge 
and  cost  thereof  should  rest  only  on  you ;  but  that  they  and  every  of  them,  lor 
their  part,  should  advance  and  contribute  certain  siuus  of  money  toward  the 
same,  and  for  that  intent,  desire  me  to  certify  you  what  convenient  sum  I,  for 
my  part,  will  be  contented  to  advance  in  this  behalf,  and  to  make  payment 


31  Though  exulting  in  the  idea,  this  will  turn  out  to  be  a  great  misapprehension ;  it  was  a 
part,  or  it  might  indeed  Ije  all  they  found  in  that  particular  place ;  but  the  stock  was  wisely 
divided  into  various  parcels,  ready  for  e.\])ortation  from  diScrent  points  ;  and  some  of  them,  nay, 
not  a  few,  owing  to  the  sale  of  the  surrc|ititious  editions,  still  remained  more  than  two  years 
after  this  to  be  purchased  by  Tunstal. 

32  £(X),  9s.  4d.  If  we  multiply  only  by  ten,  this  would  be  £rm,  13s.  4d.  ;  but  this  is  far  too 
low  an  estimate.  We  have  throughout,  as  a  mcilititn,  fixed  on  fifteen  as  the  multiplier,  agreeing 
with  Sir  James  Mackintosh,  and  others.  The  sum  paid,  therefore,  by  Warham  was  equal  to 
no  less  than  £'.l'.)7  of  our  money  ! 


1527.]  TUNSTAL  SENT  ABROAD.  15!) 

thereof  to  Master  William  Potkyii,  your  servant ;  Pleaseth  it  you  to  understand, 
that  I  am  right  well  contented  to  give  and  advance  in  this  behalf  ten  marks, 
and  shall  cause  the  same  to  be  delivered  unto  the  said  Master  Potkyn,  shortly  ; 
the  wliich  sum  I  think  sufficient  for  my  part,  if  every  Bishop  within  your  said 
province  make  like  contribution  and  advancement,  after  the  rate  and  substance 
of  their  benefices.-'^  Nevertheless,  if  your  Gi-ace  think  this  sum  of  ten  marks 
not  sufficient  for  my  part  in  this  mattei-,  your  farther  pleasure  known  I  shall 
be  as  glad  to  conform  myself  thereunto  in  this,  or  any  other  matter  concerning 
the  Church,  as  any  other  subject  within  your  province— as  knows  Almighty 
God,  who  long  preserve  you,  to  his  most  pleasure,  and  your  heart's  desire.  At 
Hoxne,  in  Suffolk,  the  14th  day  of  June  1527. — Your  humble  obedicncer 
and  bondman.''  3-* 

Such  was  the  letter  of  Richard  Nikke  or  Nix,  dictated  in 
all  probabilitj,  for  he  was  literally  blind  for  a  considerable 
time,  and  now  about  seventy-seven  years  of  age  !  His  signa- 
ture has  all  the  appearance  of  a  blind  man's  mark.  Few  in- 
dividuals in  England  were  more  annoyed  by  the  circulation 
of  the  Scriptures  than  he  was.  We  shall  find  him  persecuting 
and  consigning  Bilney  to  the  flames  ;  for  he  lived  nine  years 
longer,  and  died,  as  he  had  lived,  blind  in  every  sense,  in 
January  1536,  at  the  advanced  age  of  at  least  86  !  But  we 
shall  meet  with  him  more  than  once,  before  his  death. 

If  Warham  was  busy  abroad,  Tunstal  was  not  loss  so  at 
home  ;  if  the  one  was  eager  to  prevent  importation,  the  latter 
had  not  relaxed  in  anxiety  to  obtain  all  those  books  that  were 
in  use.  He  seems,  however,  to  have  been  annoyed  by  a  double 
suspicion  ;  that  his  Archdeacons  were  either  remiss  in  obey- 
ing his  injunctions,  or  the  people  were  too  knowing  for  all 
their  research.  Both  suspicions  were,  in  fact,  not  without 
foundation.  Tunstal,  therefore,  instead  of  waiting  longer  for 
the  owners  of  the  Testaments  delivering  them  up,  resolved 
upon  a  strict  visitation  of  his  whole  diocese  this  summer. 
But  see  again  the  kind  interposition  of  a  gracious  providence! 
This  man,  as  well  as  Wolsey  and  Sir  Thomas  More,  must  all 
prepare  in  June  to  embark  for  France,  where  they  are  to  re- 
main till  the  month  of  October.  The  consequence  was,  that 
although  the  visitation  was  remitted  to  Geflrey  Wharton,  as 
his  Vicar,  little,  or  rather  nothing,  was  done  in  the  way  of 
persecution  till  TunstaPs  return. 


33  Witness  the  zeal  aiul  the  alarm  of  the  Bishop  of  Norwich.  His  donation  was  equal  to 
£l(H)  of  our  time;  and  no  doubt  there  were  others  cquallj  alarmed. 

^*  MS.  Cotton,  Vitcll,  B.  ix.,  fol.  117,  h-  This  letter  is  in  the  catalogue  inadvertently  assigned 
to  the  Bishop  of  St.  David's  ;  but  the  date  fixes  it.  The  Lordship  of  Hoxne  belonged  to  the 
Bishop  of  Norwich  down  to  the  year  154(),  when  it  was  aliened  to  Sir  Richard  Gresham,  father 
of  Sir  Thomas.^7'u?)7i('?-'s  Nutilia  ;  Suff.  xxvii. 


100  BILNEY    CALLED  UP.  [bOOK  I. 

After  liis  return,  however,  he  had  received  some  written 
information  against  certain  individuals ;  and  in  November,  as 
already  explained,  the  bishops  were  summoned  by  Wolsey,  as 
Vicar-General  of  all  England,  to  meet  him  at  Westminster.^ 
He  opened  his  court  in  this  character,  and  commenced  the  pro- 
ceedings, "  but  because,"  says  Foxe,  "  he  was  otherwise  occu- 
pied with  affairs  of  the  realni^  he  committed  the  hearing  of  the 
matter  to  the  Bishop  of  London,  and  to  other  Bishops  there 
present,  or  to  three  of  them,  to  proceed  against  all  men,  as 
well  spiritual  as  temporal,  as  also  against  writings  and  books 
— giving  them  full  power  to  determine  upon  them.'"^ 

"  Bilney  and  Arthur,  being  leading  characters,  the  court  was  opened  with 
their  examination,  and  this  was  their  second  appearance.  Bilney,  as  noticed 
last  year,  had  taken  refuge  merely  in  some  legal  informality  in  the  oath  admin- 
istered to  him,  and  was  now  to  be  charged  with  its  violation.  Barnes,  before 
him,  had  led  the  way,  and  then  left  his  followers  in  the  lurch  ;  for,  poor  good 
man,  Bilney's  '  salvo  jui'e,'  or  subterfuge,  was  now  of  no  avail.  Wolsey  had  a 
jierfect  knowledge  of  circumstances,  and  when  therefore  Bilney  was  called  in, 
at  the  very  commencement,  the  Cardinal  asked  him  before  all  the  Bishops, — 
'  whether  he  had  not  once  made  an  oath  before,  that  he  should  not  preach,  re- 
hearse, or  defend  any  of  Luther's  opinions,  but  should  impugn  the  same  every- 
where ? '  To  this  Bilney  answered,  that  '  he  had  made  such  an  oath,  but  not 
judicially.^  Whether  this  was  because  of  his  swearing  before  the  Cardinal 
alone,  or  any  other  informality,  Wolsey  warmed  at  the  reply,  and  immediately 
'  caused  him  to  swear,  to  answer  plaitdy  to  the  articles  and  errors  preached  and 
set  forth  by  him,  as  well  in  the  city  and  diocese  of  London,  as  in  the  diocese  of 
Norwich,  and  other  places  ;  and  that  he  should  do  it,  irithuut  any  craft,  qualifying 
or  leaving  out  any  part  of  the  truth."^ 


35  Page  151. 

36  Besides  many  other  divines  and  lawyers,  the  Bishops  present  were,  Fisher  of  Rochester, 
West  of  Ely,  (the  persecutor  of  Latimer ;)  Vesey  or  Harman  of  Kxder,  Uhe  predecessor  and 
successor  of  Coverdale,  for  Vesey  was  restored  by  Mary,  and  lived  to  about  the  age  of  one  hun- 
dred ;)  Longland  of  Lincoln;  Clark  of  Bath  and  fVclls,  lately  returned  from  Rome;  and 
Standish  of  St.  Asaph.  Warham  did  not  obey  the  Vicar  General's  summons;  and  whatever 
may  be  said  of  his  cruelties  in  earlier  life,  confessedly  severe,  or  of  Tunstal  being  more  mild  than 
he  was,  Warham  never  appears  as  a  persecutor  after  this.  Notwithstanding  his  IMandate,  it 
is  certain  that  he  held  no  such  courts  at  this  period,  within  his  province,  as  Tunstal  did  in  his 
diocese.  This  might  be  partly  in  resistance  to  Wolsey's  high  claimed  authority,  yet  such  was 
the  fact.  Indeed,  by  the  next  month  Wolsey  and  he  quarrelled  about  a  case  of  persecution  ; 
merely,  however,  because  Warham  thought  that  the  Cardinal  was  usurping  his  authority,  or 
neutralising  it. 

3'  Foxe,  vol.  ii.  p.  259,  Ed.  1631.  Beferring  to  this  appearance  :— "  The  whole  process,"  says 
Burnet,  "is  set  down  by  Foxe  in  all  jioints  according  to  Tunstal's  Register,  except  one  fault  in 
the  translation.  When  the  Cardinal  asked  Bilney,  whether  he  had  not  taken  an  oath  before, 
not  to  preach  or  defend  any  of  Luther's  doctrines,  he  confessed  he  had  done  it,  but  wot  judiciall;/, 
—J'idicialilei;  in  the  Register.  This,  Foxe  translates,  not  lnuful/>/.  In  all  the  other  jiarticulars 
there  is  an  exact  agreement  between  the  Register  and  his  Acts."  In  Foxe,  however,  there  is  at 
least  another  allusion  to  this  first  appearance.  On  the  13th  of  September,  1527,  or  above  two 
months  he/ore  this  second  examination,  in  the  written  accusation  given  in  by  Edmund  Peerson 
against  Richard  Bayfield,  he  affirms  that  Bayfield,  ".ibout  the  14th  of  October,  last  jiast,  had 
said,  that  Arthur  and  Bilney  were  better  men  than  he  (Peerson)  was,  or  any  of  them  that  did 
punish  Aithiir  and  iJ/7»c)/,"— plainly  referring  to  the  apprehension  and  the  oath  exacted  in 
W2G.—Foxe,  vol.  ii.  p.  325,  Ed.  1631. 


].)27.3  INVEIGLKD   UY  TUNSTAL.  1(71 

Arthur  was  then  called  in,  and  Wolsey  "  caused  him  to  take  tlie  like  oath 
that  Bilney  had  done,  for  he  had  acted  in  the  same  way."  He  then  asked  him, 
"  whether  he  had  not  once  told  Sir  Thomas  More,  that  in  the  sacrament  of  the 
altar,  there  was  not  the  very  body  of  Christ  ? "  This  Arthur  denied,  when 
Wolsey,  giving  him  time  to  deliberate  till  noon,  retired,  leaving  all  the  rest  to 
the  Bishops. 

To  show  their  zeal,  Tunstal,  West,  and  Fisher,  met  the  same  afternoon,  in 
the  house  of  that  bitter  persecutor,  the  Bishop  of  Norwich,  of  whom  we  have 
heai'd  enough  already.  When  Arthur  was  charged  by  the  Bishops,  with  having 
said, — "  I  mai/  preach,  first,  by  the  authority  of  my  Lord  Cardinal,  for  I  have 
his  license,"  he  confessed  that  he  "  so  spake  :  "  one  proof,  among  others,  that 
through  such  men  as  Latimer,  Bilnoy,  and  Arthur,  the  Cardinal  had  been  either 
counterworking  the  sway  of  the  Bishops,  or  showing  off  his  own — perhaps  he 
might  intend  both.  On  Monday,  however,  the  2d  of  December,  these  men 
again  met,  when  Arthur  abjured,  nor  do  we  ever  hear  of  him  agai)i.  With 
Bilney  it  was  otherwise.  He  seems  to  have  imagined,  that  he  could  mollify 
Tunstal  by  calm  and  tender  representations  in  writing.  The  beautiful  aud 
affecting  letters  which  he  had  written  to  him  from  prison,  and  which  may  be 
read  in  Foxe,  were  sufficient  to  have  melted  a  heart  of  stone  ;  but  no,  Tunstal 
coolly  delivered  them  all  up  as  so  much  evidence  against  him,  and  then  for/o?/r 
days  in  succession,  enjoyed  the  opportunity  of  exercising  his  art  of  ingeniously 
inveigling  and  tormenting  the  conscience  of  this  eminent  man  ;  but  we  must 
refer  to  Foxe  for  further  particulars.  The  sequel  is  well  known,  Bilney  ab- 
jured on  Saturday  the  7  th,  bare  a  faggot  on  his  shoulder  at  St.  Paul's  next  day, 
and  was  remanded  to  "a  prison  appointed  by  the  Cardinal,  till  he  should  be  by 
him  released."  Like  Peter  of  old,  he  fell,  but  like  him  he  also  repented,  though 
not  so  soon;  and  like  him  he  then  also  "  wept  bitterly."  The  amount  of  his 
distress  can  never  be  estimated,  but  some  account  of  it  will  come  before  us 
afterwards,  at  the  proper  time. 


It  has  never  been  before  observed,  aud  it  may  now  scarcely  be 
believed,  that  these  proceedings  were  going  on  in  London  amidst 
general  and  extreme  misery,  through  the  very  high  price,  and, 
in  many  instances,  the  absolute  want  of  food.  Such,  however, 
was  the  fact ;  and  so  burning  hot,  as  Foxe  would  say,  was 
their  zeal.  What  with  the  distress  of  the  people  for  the 
necessaries  of  life,  and  this  formidable  array  of  men,  calling 
themselves  Bishops,  sitting  in  judgment  under  their  lately 
promoted  Yicar-General,  as  if  the  power  of  Rome  had  now 
been  concentrated  in  England  ;  so  far  as  it  regarded  the  pro- 
gress and  circulation  of  the  Divine  Word,  the  horizon  could 
scarcely  become  darker.  The  hand  of  God  was  certainly  not 
unseen  in  its  first  introduction  ;  but  then  these  blind  and  cruel 
authorities  were  scattered  by  the  plague;  and  though  they 
had  been  forewarned  by  the  common  enemy,  they  were  not 
then  upon  their  guard.  Now  they  are  "  gathered  together," 
and  literallv  "  takino-  counsel"  on  the  verv  subject.     But  let 


1()2  FRESH   IMPORTATIONS.  \jBOOK  I. 

US  see  what  happened  ;  and  observe  also,  whether  the  God  of 
Nature,  and  the  Governor  among  the  Nations,  be  not  also 
the  God  of  the  Bible. 

Nothing,  it  is  true,  could  be  more  unlikely,  than  that  any 
more  copies  of  the  Sacred  Volume  should  arrive  in  this  country 
at  such  a  crisis ;  it  might  seem  altogether  impossible.  We 
have  already  seen,  that  throughout  the  whole  year,  England, 
under  Wolsey\s  influence,  was  fomenting  war  with  the  Em- 
peror, and  consequently  with  the  Low  Countries  or  Flanders, 
but  courting  alliance  with  France.  In  the  latter,  there  were, 
of  course,  no  Englisli  Scriptures ;  in  the  former,  copies  were 
lying  ready  for  being  introduced  here  confidentially,  with 
secrecy  and  silence.  But  if  there  should  be  a  bar  to  mer- 
chandise in  general,  and  the  merchants  of  Flanders  and 
England  cannot  exchange  goods,  how  w'as  there  any  chance 
of  conveying  the  "  Book  of  God  "  with  them,  or  under  their 
cover?  It  had  come  through  this  medium  before,  but  how 
could  it  by  any  possibility  do  so  now  ? 

The  reader  may  recollect,  that  the  year  1527  was  intro- 
duced by  severe  disease.  Immediately  after  this,  in  conse- 
quence of  "  the  great  rains  which  fell  in  the  sowing  time,"  by 
the  fall  of  the  year,  bread  advanced  to  such  a  price,  that  the 
people  were  in  danger  of  starvation.  Wheat,  at  last,  not 
only  had  risen  from  sixteen  shillings,  to  one  pound  six  shillings 
and  eightpence  the  quarter,  but  ere  long  it  was  not  to  be  ob- 
tained for  money.  Commissioners  were  sent  into  every  county 
to  enquire  what  wheat  remained  in  the  realm  ;  but  at  the  same 
time  to  enjoin^  that  none  should  be  conveyed  from  one  county 
to  another.  The  consequence  was,  Lond'On  at  last  so  felt  the 
pressure,  that  the  Mayor  and  Aldermen  came  to  Wolsey  on 
his  return  from  France,  and  told  him,  "  either  the  people 
must  die  from  famine,  or  else  they,  with  strong  hand, 
will  fetch  corn  from  them  that  have  it."  He  cared  little  for 
any  man's  life,  when  his  path  was  crossed,  and  put  them  off 
with,  no  doubt,  a  daring  falsehood  ! — that  the  King  of  France 
had  said  to  him,  that  "  if  he  had  but  three  bushels  of  wheat, 
England  should  have  two,  so  much  he  loveth  and  regardeth 
this  realm!"  This  was  at  least  acknowledging,  that  while 
he  was  abroad,  the  scarcity  was  well  known  to  him,  amidst 
all  his  gorgeous  parade.  The  people  then,  from  day  to  day, 
looked  for  French  wheat,  but  none  came ;   and  what  is  more 


1527.11  SINGULARLY  INTRODUCED.  163 

observable,  even  sucli  as  the  English  merchants  had  bought 
and  shipped  in  Normandy  and  other  places,  was  there  re- 
strained, so  that  all  relief  from  these  parts  entirely  failed  ! 
And  what  then  ?  Let  the  old  contemporary  chronicler  of  the 
day,  tell  the  rest : — 

"  But  the  gentle  merchants  of  tlie  Stilyard  brought  from  Dantzic,  Bremen, 
Hamburgli,  and  other  places  great  plenty  ;  and  so  did  otlier  merchants  from 
Flanders,  Holland,  and  Frisland,  so  that  wheat  was  better  cheap  in  London, 
than  in  all  England  over.  Then  the  people  said, — '  See  how  we  had  been  served 
by  the  Frenchmen  in  our  necessity,  if  the  Emperor's  subjects  had  not  holpen 
us.'  For  this  kindness,  the  common  people  loved  the  Emperor  the  better,  and 
all  his  subjects.  Henry  the  VIII.,  however,  hearing  of  the  stoppage  of  the 
French  wheat,  lent  the  city  a  thousand  quarters.  '  Then  within  short  space, 
the  mei'chants  of  London  so  diligently  made  provision  in  all  places  for  wheat 
and  rye,  that  after  Christmas  they  lacked  none,  and  all  the  parties  adjoining 
to  them  were  fain  to  fetch  wheat  of  them,  and  none  to  them  was  denied,  not- 
withstanding the  unkind  commandment  given,  that  the  Londoners  should  none 
have  of  them." 

And  thus  it  was,  that  a  way  was  opened  for  the  introduction 
of  more  books  I  On  board  of  these  vessels  with  grain,  there 
must  have  been  various  importations  of  Tyndale's  New  Testa- 
ment ;  but  one  is  too  remarkable  to  be  passed  over  in  silence, 
as  it  included  not  less  than  five  hundred  copies  by  one  man. 
Yes,  notwithstanding  all  the  fury  of  Hackett,  and  the  impri- 
sonment of  Endhoven,  another  printer  in  Antwerp  had  already 
finished  another  edition  !  This  was  now  the  second  in  that 
place,  or  the  fourth  in  all.  The  fact  comes  out,  incidentally, 
about  four  months  after  this,  in  the  examination  of  a  distri- 
butor, before  Tunstal.  He  had  been  charged  with  going  about 
to  buy  a  great  number  of  New  Testaments,  when  he  emits  the 
following  answer ; — "  That  about  Christmas  last,  (Dec.  1527), 
there  came  a  Dutchman,  being  now  in  the  Fleet  prison,  which 
would  have  sold  this  respondent  two  or  three  hundred  of  the 
said  New  Testaments  in  English,  which  this  respondent  did 
not  buy,  but  sent  him  to  Mr,  Fysh."^^  Connect  this  with  the 
following  entry  in  Foxe's  list  of  persons  abjured  in  1528. 
"  John  Rainiund,  a  Dutchman,  for  causing  fifteen  hundred  of 
Tyndale's  New  Testaments  to  be  printed  at  Antwerp,  and  for 
bringing  five  hundred  into  England."  There  is  but  one  mis- 
take here,  in  the  name  of  the  Dutchman,  as  he  is  called.    Every 

3"  Halle,  ]).  "i'M.  39  Fysh  seems  to  have  ^airl  another  flying  visit. 


l()-t  FOURTH   NEW  TESTAMENT.  [book  I. 

one  at  all  acquainted  with  Foxe,  knows  how  inaccurate  and 
irregular  he  is  in  the  orthography  of  proper  names.  Hans 
van  Roemundt  is  the  name  of  the  Antwerp  printer  as  given 
by  Panzer  and  Le  Long.  The  name  in  English  ought  to  have 
been  John  Ruremonde.'*" 

One  distin2:uishino-  feature  of  this  edition  consists  in  certain 
woodcuts.  It  is  thus  referred  to  by  Joye,  as  the  second  Dutch 
edition — •"  They  printed  it  again.,  also,  without  a  corrector,  in 
a  greater  letter  and  volume,  with  i\\e  figures  in  the  Apocalypse, 
which  were  much  falser  than  their  first ;"  and  alluding  then 
to  the  former  impression,  he  adds,  "  there  were  of  them  both 
about  five  thousand  books  printed."  One  copy  of  this  book, 
which  appears  to  have  been  reprinted  from  the  quarto  edition 
of  Tyndale,  is  supposed  to  be  in  the  library  of  Emanuel 
College,  Cambridge. 

"  There  is  a  copy  of  tliis  edition,"  says  Dr.  Waterland  to  Mr.  Lewis,  "  be- 
longing to  Emanuel  College,  marked  i.  5-66.  I  have  it  now  in  my  hand.  I 
make  this  judgment  from  the  figures,  that  is  cuts,  drawings,  in  the  Apocalypse. 
It  is  imperfect,  both  beginning  and  end,  torn  out.  It  is  a  large  12nio,  if  it 
may  not  be  called  a  small  8vo.  The  titles  and  chaptei's  are  in  red  lettei*. 
There  is  a  part  of  '  the  prologe  unto  the  Neic  Testament,^  at  the  beginning."4i 

Another  account  states — "  It  is  printed  in  black  letter,  within  border  lines  of 
red  ink ;  and  the  head  line  throughout,  the  head  of  each  book  and  chapter,  the 
notation  marks,  and  most  of  the  initial  letters,  are  also  in  red.  The  volume 
has  marginal  references,  a  small  woodcut  at  the  beginning  of  most  of  the  books, 
and  larger  ones  in  the  Revelations,  also  glosses  at  the  end  of  the  chapters.  It 
commences  on  iii.,  in  the  middle  of  '  A  prologue  unto  the  Newe  Testament.' 
It  has  no  folios,  and  a  full  page  contains  37  lines,  exclusive  of  the  head  line."42 

The  fact  was,  and  it  is  animating  to  discover  it  even  now, 


*o  In  those  early  days,  men  were  very  often  named  after  the  town  or  place  of  their  birth. 
Myles  Coverdale,  in  our  own  country,  seems  to  be  an  instance  of  this.  Eymlhoven  and  Rurc- 
monde,  (where  Mercator  the  geographer  was  born),  were  two  considerable  towns  in  the  Nether- 
lands, as  well  known  then  as  they  are  now.  Christopher  Eyndhoven,  therefore,  already  men- 
tioned, and  John  and  Christopher  Ruremonde,  must  have  been  natives  of  these  towns.  Having 
come  to  Antwerp,  they  were  all  printers  there  at  the  same  period  ;  intimately  connected  in  busi- 
ness, and  printing  other  things  for  the  London  market.  Hence  in  1525,  we  find  the  names  of 
both  attached  to  the  same  book.  Both  of  these  Christophers  left  widows,  who  continued  their 
respective  presses.  As  for  John,  the  fact  is,  he  had  been  printing  at  least  two  editions  of  the 
New  Testament  in  1.W6,  one  in  German,  and  the  above  in  Kiiglisli.  Compare  Panzer,  vi.  pp. 
111.3,  with  Herbert's  Ames,  iii.  pp.  15,34,  1827-8-0-33. 

41  Cotton's  List,  App.  p.  129. 

42  Lowndes'  Bib.  Man.  p.  179.3.  Dr.  Cotton  and  Mr.  Lowndes,  following  the  supjiosition  of 
Lewis,  gave  for  the  year  of  this  edition  1528  or  9.  The  time  of  printing,  it  will  appear  presently, 
was  the  spring  of  1527.  With  regard  to  Christopher  Ruremande,  he  also  was  printing.  There 
is  now  before  the  writer  a  Dutch  New  Testament  of  this  period,  only  four  inches  by  three  in 
size,  and  36  lines  in  a  page,  having  the  vood-ciits  in  the  Revelation  ;  with  this  colophon,  "  By 
my  ghreduct  Christoffel  ran  Ruremund  op  dye  Lombard  vistc,"  1.528.  Without  glosses  or 
prologue. 


1527.]  BV  OTHER  PRINTERS.  165 

that  such  a  book  was  printing  in  Antwerp  at  the  very  time  when 
Endhoten  was  suffering ;  for  so  early  as  the  preceding  May, 
and  just  about  the  time  that  Warham  was  rejoicing  over  his 
purchase  of  Testaments,  the  printer  had  completed  the  volume ! 
Thus,  after  all  the  toil  of  Master  Hackett,  he  was  then  the 
subject  oi  fresh  alarm.  On  the  23d  of  May  1527,  therefore, 
he  wrote  to  AVolsey  as  follows  : — 

"  And  now  it  shall  please  your  Grace  to  understand  that  the  21st  day  of  this 
month,  at  Mechlin,  I  was  advertised  for  truth  that  notwithstanding  any  cor- 
rection that  has  been  done  in  these  parts  before,  yet  now  of  the  new,  some 
new  printers  of  the  town  of  Antwerp  have  brought  to  be  sold  to  this  Barrow 
market  divers  English  books  entitled  '  T/ie  New  Testament ;'  for  the  which 
cause  I  have  come  hither,  to  see  correction  and  punishment  to  be  done  upon 
the  said  books  ;  of  which  I  have  found  24  in  one  man's  hand.  We  seek  for 
more,  and,  doubtless,  I  trust  shortly  to  see  them  burned,  and  as  many  such  like 
as  I  can  find  in  these  countries." 

He  then  urges  once  more  the  necessity  for  a  specific  list  of  heresies  to  be 
sent  him,  that  he  might  punish  the  printers  personally,  as  well  as  burn  the 
books  ;  and,  by  way  of  enforcing  this,  he  has  more  heavy  tidings  to  convey — 

"  I  hear  say  that  there  has  been  at  the  last  Frankfort  (spring)  market,  more 
than  two  thousand  such  like  English  books  !  but  there,  like  as  I  hear  say,  they 
favour  greatly  Luther's  acts,  and  sustain  that  he  writeth  the  truth !  and  leave 
all  good  old  customs."  43 

Under  all  these  circumstances  it  is  now  almost  evident  that 
part  of  this  fourth  edition  had  found  its  way  into  England,  by 
the  end  of  1527;  for  that  Testaments  did  arrive  at  this  gloomy 
and  necessitous  period,  there  can  now  be  no  question.  Men 
are  but  too  apt  to  overlook  the  footsteps  of  a  particular  pro- 
vidence, but  the  arrival  of  books  through  such  a  medium, 
and  at  such  a  period,  was  too  remarkable  an  event  to  be  passed 
over  in  silence.  Could  it  fail  to  be  observed  with  gratitude  at 
the  time?  After  turning  "  a  fruitful  land  into  barrenness," 
and  the  people  were  "  brought  low,  through  oppression,  afflic- 
tion, and  sorrow ; "  with  bread  corn  came  the  bread  from 
heaven.  Through  these  very  channels,  the  Sacred  Volume 
had  come  before,  and  now,  notwithstanding  all  the  wrath  and 
rage  in  high  places,  it  came  again.  The  bread  that  perisheth 
must  rise  in  price,  and  finally  fail,  that  the  bread  of  life  may 
come.  He  who  appointed  a  way  for  his  anger,  was  at  the 
same  moment  preparing  a  way  also  for  the  reception  of  His 
Word.     In  wrath  he  remembered  mercy.     Well  might  the 


«  Ualha,  B.  ix. ,  .W-fl. 


16G  TYNDALE   AND   FKYTH.  [^BUOK  I. 

people  have  said — "  Whoso  is  wise,  and  will  observe  these 
things,  even  they  shall  understand  the  loving  kindness  of 
the  Lord." 


SECTION   V. 

TYNDALE  AND  FKYTH — ENGLAND  AND  SPAIN ENGLAND  AND  ITALY — RE- 
TROSPECT  PRESENT  PERSECUTION  IN  ENGLAND ARRESTED  BY  PRE- 
VAILING DISEASE PERSECUTION    IN   ANTWERP NOBLY   WITHSTOOD   AND 

DEFEATED WOLSEy's    PURSUIT    AFTER    TYNDALE    AND    OTHERS — ALL   IN 

VAIN. 

In  the  course  of  the  year  1528,  we  have  no  distinct  account 
of  any  thing  new  having  issued  from  the  press,  translated  or 
composed  by  Tyndale ;  although  some  of  his  smaller  tracts, 
without  date,  may  have  been  printed.  There  were,  however, 
fresh  editions  of  his  two  publications,  already  mentioned.  Of 
"  the  Parable,"  there  was  one  if  not  two  editions,  and  of  "  the 
Obedience"  certainly  two,  the  first  of  which  is  dated  in  May, 
and  the  second  in  October  of  this  year.  That  the  books  had 
been  read  or  purchased  with  avidity,  and  were  in  growing  de- 
mand;  this,  especially  in  those  early  days,  is  proof  sufficient ; 
but  not  one  of  these  were  printed  at  Worms.  Tyndale  and 
Fryth  had  now  certainly  removed  elsewhere.  All  these  pieces 
were  printed  at  one  place  and  by  the  same  man — Hans  Luft, 
a  favourite  printer  "  at  Malborough  in  the  land  of  Hesse,"  or 
Marburg,  the  capital  of  Upper  Hesse.  To  our  Translator, 
within  the  last  eighteen  months,  this  place  must  have  become 
strongly  attractive.  There  is  no  intimation  or  even  hint  of 
any  visit  yet  paid  to  Wittenbei'g ;  it  was  still  200  miles 
distant,  and  it  becomes  more  than  doubtful  whether  Tyndale 
was  ever  there.  Marburg,  the  ancient  Mattium,  is  situate  on 
the  right  bank  of  the  Lahn,  a  tributary  of  the  Rhine,  41  miles 
north  from  Frankfort. 

A  school  of  learning,  of  a  new  or  unprecedented  character,  had  been  estab- 
lished here  ;  in  fact,  a  University  which  is  still  in  existence.  Many  colleges 
had  been  founded  even  in  the  fourteenth  century,  and  the  fifteenth  had  been  so 
distinguished  for  the  formation  of  Academical  foundations,  that,  according  to 


i 


1528.]  TYNDALE   AND   FRYTH.  167 

the  account  given  by  Zopt,  the  uuiiibcr  of  Universities,  after  that  of  Turin  in 
1405,  had  amounted  to  twenty-seven.  But  the  University  of  Marburg  was  the 
first  of  a  class  differing  from  all  preceding  it.  However,  it  may  have  gone  on 
since  then,  and  however  unpretending  it  was  in  its  origin,  it  was  by  no  means 
the  object  here,  "to  set  learning  ctijainst  learning,"  in  the  sense  which  was  pro- 
posed at  Cardinal  College,  Oxford.  The  result  of  individual  zeal,  and  thirst  for 
mental  improvement,  it  owed  nothing  whatever  to  lloyal  or  Pontifical  favour 
or  countenance.  That  of  the  Pontiff  was  never  to  be  sought.  Founded  in 
1 526,  by  Philip,  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse,  next  year  various  Pi'ofessors  had 
been  appointed,  and  among  these  were  men,  who,  so  far  from  frowning  on 
Tyudale  and  Fryth,  were  sure  to  bid  them  God  speed.  Not  to  name  others, 
here  were  Lambert,  Lonicerus,  and,  before  long,  Rudelius.l  The  art  of  print- 
ing also  had  been  introduced  at  Marburg  last  year,  or  1527  ;  and  the  only 
press  known  to  have  existed,  is  that  which  Tyndale  and  Fryth  employed, 
throughout  this  year,  and  part  of  the  following — a  circumstance  which  indi- 
cates that  they  were  on  the  spot.  From  the  number  of  things  issuing  from 
the  same  press,  in  English,  even  the  printer  seems  to  have  been  more  inter- 
ested in  the  design  than  any  other  that  had  been  yet  employed.  But,  above 
all  other  men  at  Marburg,  here  also  was  one  youth  of  no  common  promise, 
deeply  interesting  to  Fryth  and  Tyndale,  as  coming  from  the  same  island. 
This  was  no  other  than  Patrick  Ilamclton  from  Scotland,  the  proto-martyr  j 
and  but  for  the  strong  affection  felt  for  him  by  Fryth,  we  might  have  known 
but  little  about  him,  as  will  appear  afterwards.  In  short,  Marburg  held  out 
advantages,  inviting,  and  far  superior  to  the  mere  protection  which  had  been 
happily  enjoyed  at  Worms. 2 

Nor  are  we  at  any  loss  to  understand  how  Tyndale  was 
here  engaged.  It  must  have  been  a  mighty  addition  to  his 
comfort,  for  such  a  man  as  Roye  to  be  succeeded  by  John 
Fryth.  The  former  once  dismissed,  in  1526  Fryth  had 
reached  his  friend  and  father  of  the  same  opinions.  Equally 
interested  in  the  translation  of  the  Scriptures  for  their  native 
land,  from  day  to  day  this  subject  had  fully  engrossed  their 
minds.     But  at  present  we  refrain  from  saying  more  till  the 

'  Francis  Lambert  of  Avignon,  an  eloquent  preacher,  and  author  of  various  expositions  of 
Scripture,  is  well  known.  After  being  at  Wittenberg,  he  was  now  Divinity  Professor  at  Mar- 
burg. About  a  year  after  Tyndale's  removal  from  the  place,  he  died  in  1530,  aged  only  43. 
But  John  Lonicerus  survived  to  the  age  of  70,  in  150'!t.  For  forty-two  years  he  taught  here  as 
Professor  of  Greek,  and  for  fourteen  years  from  153(i,  also  the  Hebrew  tongue.  Nor  should 
John  Rudelius  be  forgotten,  as  he  left  behind  him  one  monument  of  his  industry  and  scholar- 
ship, too  little  known.  At  the  press  of  Quentel  in  Cologne,  it  will  be  remembered  that  Tyn- 
dale was  succeeded  by  his  foe  Cochlaeus ;  but  Rudelius,  last  year,  succeeded  him,  and  to  far 
better  purpose,  by  a  beautiful  folio  Latin  Bible,  "Jiiuta  Hebraicain  et  Gracam  verilatem."  It 
has  been  praised  for  its  correctness  ;  but  by  the  copy  now  before  the  writer,  there  is  another 
circumstance  more  remarkable.  It  is  dated  from  Cologne  as  early  as  the  8th  of  April  1527,  or 
above  nine  months  before  the  first  edition  of  Papninus  at  Lyon,  and  seven  years  before  the 
version  of  Sebastian  Munstcr.  Some  farther  notice  may  be  taken  of  this  book  when  we  present 
an  impression  of  the  wooden  block  of  the  Evangelist  Matthew,  used  by  Queutel  in  the  service 
of  all  the  three. 

2  While  the  University  of  Cologne  is  now  reduced  to  a  gymnasium,  and  that  of  Wittenberg 
was  in  1815  almost  broken  up,  or  rather  merged  in  the  University  of  Halle,  that  at  Marburg  still 
remains.  We  cannot  give  its  present  state  ;  but  in  1829,  the  students  were  above  350  in  number, 
and  the  library  contained  above  100,000  volumes.  Its  annual  revenue  being  nearly  ^6000,  the 
half  is  supjilied  by  the  Government  of  Hesse  Cassel. 


lf>8  TYNDALE  AND   FRYTH.  [boOK  I. 

books  of  the  Pentateuch  were  printed.  As  Fryth,  however, 
is  the  only  man  who  can  certainly  be  associated  with  Tyndale 
in  his  present  engagements,  it  is  necessary  that  he  should  be 
now  more  fully  introduced  to  the  notice  of  the  reader. 

John  Fryth  was  born  in  J  503,  at  Westerham,  a  market- 
town  in  Kent,  near  the  head  of  the  Darent,  a  tributary  of 
the  Thames.  His  father,  Richard,  as  an  inn-holder,  lived 
afterwards  at  Sevenoaks,  near  the  same  stream.  It  was  al- 
lowed, even  by  his  enemies,  that  Fryth  was  an  excellent 
scholar,  after  the  advantages  he  had  enjoyed,  first  at  Cam- 
bridge, and  then  at  Oxford,  thus  reversing  the  order  of  Tyn- 
dale^s  education.  As  Fryth,  however,  received  his  Univer- 
sity education  at  King's  College,  Cambridge,  he  must,  of 
course,  also  have  been  a  scholar  at  Eton.  It  was  while  pro- 
ceeding in  his  studies,  that  Tyndale  was  at  Cambridge,  and 
through  his  instrumentality,  as  Foxe  expresses  it,  Fryth 
"  first  received  into  his  heart  the  seed  of  the  gospel,  and 
sincere  godliness."  Such  being  the  case,  it  is  a  circumstance 
not  to  be  forgotten  in  our  future  history,  that  Fryth  had  for 
his  tutor  no  other  than  Stephen  Gardiner,  the  future  Bishop 
of  Winchestei'.  Some  time  in  1523,  when  Tyndale  was  in 
London,  it  is  next  to  certain  his  much-loved  friend  must  have 
been  with  him,  since  before  they  were  separated,  and  Fryth 
remained  behind,  it  has  been  stated,  that  they  used  to  con- 
verse respecting  the  necessity  for  the  Scriptures  being  "  turned 
into  the  vulgar  speech,  that  the  poor  people  might  also  read 
and  see  the  simple  plain  Word  of  God."  In  this  case,  Fryth 
must  have  looked  and  longed  for  success  to  attend  the  enter- 
prise of  the  man  he  most  loved  upon  earth. 

Tyndale,  however,  sailing  for  Hamburgh,  Fryth  was,  ere 
long,  selected,  for  his  acquirements,  as  a  Cambridge  scholar  ; 
and  called  away  to  Oxford  by  Wolsey,  became,  as  we  have  seen, 
a  canon  in  Cardinal  College.  Having  already  proceeded  as 
13. A.  at  Cambridge,  he  was  admitted  to  the  same  degree  at 
Oxford  in  December  1525.^  Fryth  could  not  have  been  idle 
in  advancing  his  opinions,  for  those  young  men  from  Cam- 


3  "  Conceditur  D'no  Fryth,  questioiUHtae  in  artibus,  ut  admissio  sua  stet  pro  complcto  gradu, 
eo  quod  electus  in  socium  collcgii  Canlinalis  Oxon.  proximis  comitiis  intercsse  non  potest  sic 
quod  satisfaciat  otficiariis."— flcor.  Acad.  Cantahr.  "December?.  1525,"  says  A.  Wood,  "he 
was,  with  other  Cantabrigians,  (Sumner,  Coxe,  Bctts,  Allen.)  incorporated  in  the  same  decree 
of  Batchelor." 


1528.]  TYNDALE  AND  FRYTH.  109 

bridge,  already  mentioned,  were  much  of  his  mind.  But  in 
two  months,  even  to  a  day,  after  he  had  taken  his  degree, 
not  only  he,  but  they,  had  incurred  high  displeasure.  These 
men  might  have  been  styled  "  the  hope  of  the  nation,"  though 
we  have  heard  old  Warham  rate  them,  in  his  letter  to 
Wolsey,  as  nothing  more  than  "  a  number  of  young  uncir- 
cumspect  fools."  Fools  they  might  be  called  by  the  Primate 
of  England,  but  uncircumspect  was  not  the  right  word. 
Generally  speaking,  they  were  looking  in  one  direction,  and,  at 
the  moment,  saw  farther  than  their  calumniator.  Here  at  least 
was  Fryth  ;  but  little  did  Wolsey  imagine,  that  in  selecting 
him,  and  most  probably  by  his  tutor  Gardiner's  recommenda- 
tion, he  had  laid  his  hand  on  the  ardent  admirer  of  that  man 
whom  he  was  afterwards  so  eager  to  apprehend  on  the 
Continent.  Left  behind  in  England,  Fryth  had  proved, 
among  his  fellows,  an  expectant  of  whatever  Tyndale  should 
be  able  to  accomplish ;  and  one  can  more  easily  conceive  than 
express  how  he  must  have  hailed  the  arrival,  and  the  very  first 
sight  of  the  New  Testament  at  Oxford.  It  certainly  had 
been  longed  for,  and  it  came  at  last. 

Fryth  was  then  twenty-three  years  of  age,  and  not  only  a 
lover  of  learning,  but  acute  and  eminent  in  talent.  Yet,  once 
aware  of  the  cruelties  practised  on  Dalaber  and  Garret,  as 
already  detailed,  and  being  so  far  at  liberty,  he  effected  his 
escape,  and  landed,  like  his  forerunner,  on  a  foreign  shore. 
This  could  not  possibly  be  before  the  autumn  of  1526,  so  that 
the  undivided  credit  of  translating  the  New  Testament,  and 
forwarding  it  to  his  country,  remains  with  Tyndale  alone. 
The  flight  of  Fryth  has  been  placed  much  later,  even  in 
1528,  but  it  is  evident  that  he  durst  not  have  remained  so  long. 
That  he  ever  revisited  England  before  he  came  to  die  at  the 
stake,  we  have  no  certain  evidence ;  but  we  now  see  him  as 
the  able  coadjutor  of  his  elder  brother  for  yeai's. 

When  we  turn  away  from  these  two  men,  the  greatest  benefactors  of 
Britain  then  living,  to  the  disgraceful  and  oiFensive  state  of  public 
affairs,  a  general  idea  of  the  whole  year  may  be  attained  by  observing 
the  policy  of  England,  first  in  connexion  with  Spain  and  the  Low 
Countries,  and  then  with  Italy. 

The  Emperor  Charles  V.  was  unquestionably  ambitious,  and  now  more 
than  ever  anxious  to  reach  his  own  pinnacle  of  earthly  glory  ;  but  no 


170  ENGLAND   AND   SPAIN.  [boOK  I. 

one  can  charge  him,  at  this  period,  with  the  same  duplicity  which  Wol- 
sey  practised,  to  his  own  permanent  disgrace. 

By  the  treaty  of  Madrid,  when  the  King  of  France  was  allowed  to  re- 
turn from  captivity,  his  two  sons  were  sent  into  Spain,  as  hostages  for 
its  fulfilment.  Charles  was  now  willing  to  relax,  and  even  set  these 
children  at  liberty,  provided  that  Francis  would  restore  Genoa,  and 
withdraw  his  army  from  Italy.  The  Emperor  had  written,  demanding 
a  definite  answer  by  the  31st  of  January  ;  but,  before  that  day  arrived, 
the  French  ambassadors  had  shown  to  him  the  articles  concluded  with 
Wolsey  at  Amiens,  in  August  last ;  and  what  wonder  that  Charles  im- 
mediately fired,  and  was  in  great  fury  ?  His  remonstrating  with  the 
English  ambassador  availed  nothing,  for  he  "  discreetly "  professed 
ignorance  !  The  Emperor  complained  loudly  of  his  uncle  Henry's 
hostility  to  him,  but  he  remained  inflexible.  So  at  last,  on  the  22d  of 
January,  by  the  express  counsel  of  our  Cardinal,  Guienne  for  France, 
and  Clarencieux,  as  King-of-Arms  for  England,  bade  defiance  to  the 
Emperor  in  open  court.  When  the  defiances  were  made,  the  nobles  of 
Castile  drew  theii'  swords,  and  replied — "  Sire,  if  the  despite  of  this  de- 
fiance be  unrevenged,  the  infamy  and  rebuke  thereof  shall  remain  to  us 
and  our  heirs  for  ever."  The  Spaniards,  in  general,  were  averse  from 
war  with  England — blamed  only  the  Cardinal  and  Francis — "  but  wrung 
themselves  by  the  beard,  and  sware  that  their  lands  and  goods  should 
be  spent  for  the  honour  of  the  Emperor."  "  God  grant,"  said  the 
Emperor,  "  that  I  may  not  have  better  reason  to  defy  Heniy,  than  he 
has  to  defy  me.  Can  I  pass  over  the  indignity  with  which  he  threatens 
my  aunt,  by  his  application  for  a  divorce,  or  the  insult  which  he  has 
offered  to  me,  by  soliciting  me  to  marry  a  daughter,  whom  he  now  pro- 
nounces to  be  a  bastard  ?  But  I  am  ^;er/i?crf?/  aware  from  whom  these 
suggestions  proceed.  I  would  not  satisfy  the  rapacity  of  the  Cardinal 
of  York,  nor  employ  my  forces  to  seat  him  in  the  chair  of  St.  Peter ; 
and  now  in  return,  he  has  sworn  to  be  revenged,  and  now  seeks  to  fulfil 
his  purpose.  But  if  war  ensue,  let  the  blood  that  must  be  shed  fall  on 
the  head  of  him  who  is  the  origiiud  instigator  of  it." 

The  English  merchants  in  Spain  were  of  coiu'se  attached,  and  put  in 
safe  custody.  The  ambassadors  were  honourably  treated  ;  but  a  rumour-, 
real  or  pretended,  reached  England,  that  the  Emperor  had  acted  other- 
wise, and  even  thrown  them  into  prison.  Wolsey  in  his  fury,  on  the 
12th  of  February,  imprisoned  Don  Mendoza,  the  Spanish  ambassador,  and 
the  next  day,  in  the  Star  Chamber,  gave  a  long  address,  by  no  means 
palatable  to  those  who  heard  it.  Some,  indeed,  scruijled  not  to  say  "  he 
lieth  ;"  and  as  for  the  people,  in  general,  they  deeply  lamented  and 
deprecated  any  war  between  Henry  and  the  Emperor.     Such  was  the 

^  Le  Grand. 


1.528.]  ENGLAND   AND  SPAIN.  171 

result  of  Wolsey's  pompous  aud  expensive  embassy  to  France  !  The 
'■^golden  seaV  could  not  now  be  held  up  to  admiration,  and  that  "  per- 
petual peace"  of  which  he  boasted,  thus  ended  in  war,  at  the  distance 
of  less  than  five  months  ! 

The  ships  of  Flanders  at  our  ports  were  immediately  arrested  ;  and 
the  declaration  of  war,  once  known  to  the  Lady  Margaret,  she  caused 
the  English  there,  with  their  goods  and  ships,  to  be  restrained.  But  a 
very  short  time  had  elapsed  before  it  was  known  that  the  Emperor  had 
all  along  acted  most  honourably  to  our  ambassadors,  when  Wolsey  re- 
leased the  Spanish  representative.  Mendoza  felt  the  indignity,  but 
concealed  this,  and  remained.  At  this  crisis,  strong  suspicions  rested 
on  the  Cardinal  with  regard  to  all  this  confusion.  By  way  of  apology 
to  Mendoza,  he  had  the  effrontery  to  affirm,  that  "  the  King  was  in- 
formed by  the  French  ambassador,  that  the  ambassadors  of  both  princes 
were  put  in  prison,"  and  then,  with  the  most  cruel  audacity,  he  added — 
"  that  Clarencieux  had  made  the  defiance  of  the  Emperor  without  the 
King's  commandment — that  he  did  it  otdy  by  the  motion  of  the  French 
ambassadors,  to  accompany  the  French  herald — and  that  for  this  pre- 
sumptuous act,  he  should  suffer  death,  at  Calais,  on  his  return !"  All 
this  Mendoza  wrote  down  and  sent :  his  letters,  providentially  for 
Clarencieux,  were  opened  and  copied  at  Bayonne,  as  the  post  passed  that 
way.  "  When  Clarencieux  was  returning  homeward,  the  Captain  of 
Bayonne,"  says  Halle,  "  gently  shewed  to  him  the  copy  of  the  letters 
that  the  Emperor's  ambassador  had  written."  Dismayed,  he  went  on, 
however,  to  Boulogne,  when  hearing  again  of  his  danger,  without  going 
to  Calais,  he  immediately  sailed  from  thence  to  Rye,  got  to  Hampton 
Court  secretly,  and  through  Sir  Nicholas  Carew,  Master  of  the  Horse, 
obtained  audience  of  Henry,  before  Wolsey  wist  of  his  return  !  When 
he  showed  the  three  letters  which  the  Cardinal  had  sent  him,  charging 
him  to  make  the  defiance — he  then  declared  how  courteously  he  had 
been  treated,  and  exhibited  his  chain  of  gold,  valued  at  500  ducats, 
given  him  by  the  Emperor.^  When  the  King  had  heard  all,  he  mused 
for  a  great  while,  and  then,  not  without  profanity,  exclaimed — "  0 
Lord  Jesu,  he  that  I  trusted  most,  told  me  all  these  things  contrary! 
Well,  Clarencieux,  I  will  be  no  more  of  so  light  credence  hereafter  ;  for 
now  I  see  perfectly,  that  I  am  made  to  believe  the  thing  that  was 
never  done." 

The  invention  of  Wolsey  was  now  nearly  exhausted.  He  had  in  one 
sense  finished  his  career  ;  for  he  never  again,  with  all  his  address,  could 


s  Cotton  MS.  Vespas.,  c.  iv.  p.  231. 

G  This  Clarencieux,  King-of-Arms,  was  Tliomaa  Buuolt,  afterwards  befriended  by  Heniy. 
He  died  in  1534,  "  and  his  monument,"  says  Stowe,  "  remains  at  this  day,  1st  May  17l>3,  in  St. 
Helen's  Church  in  Bishopsgate  Street."  In  the  Harkian  Collection,  his  figure  as  Clarencieux 
may  be  seen,  as  taken  from  the  tomb. 


172  ENGLAND   AND    ITALY.  [boOK  I. 

regain  what  was  gone  for  ever.  He  might,  and  he  did,  continue  near 
the  person  of  the  King  for  eighteen  months  longer ;  but  Henry  retained 
him  merely  to  accomplish  a  selfish  and  determined  purpose,  in  pursuing 
which  the  Cardinal  only  sunk  himself  deeper  still.  It  was  a  lingering, 
but  a  just  judgment,  that  this  proud,  unprincipled,  and  ambitious  man 
should  live  for  a  season  in  habitual  apprehension  and  chagrin,  and  in 
the  very  sphere  where  his  influence  had  been  so  powerful.  "  The  King," 
says  Halle,  "  sent  for  the  Cardinal,  and  privily  talked  with  him  ;  but 
whatsoever  he  said  to  him,  the  Cardinal  was  not  very  merry,  and  after 
that  time,  (February  1528,)  the  King  mistrusted  him  ever  after.'''' 

If  the  reader  feel  any  surprise  at  this  nefarious  conduct  of  Wolsey,  on 
turning  to  his  negociations  with  Italy,  he  must  not  expect  to  meet  with 
anything  less  revolting. 

The  Pontiff,  after  being  reduced  to  such  extremity  that  he  had  to  live 
on  asses  flesh,  had  been  released  from  conflnement  by  the  Emperor  in 
December  1527,  but,  of  coui-se,  not  without  a  full  understanding  between 
the  parties  as  to  future  proceedings.  The  Cardinal,  on  hearing  this,  was 
filled  with  transport,  not  fully  aware  that  the  Pope  now,  was  nothing 
more  than  a  prisoner  at  large.  He  must,  however,  in  usual  mockery, 
sing  "  Te  Deum"  on  the  5th  of  January  at  St.  Paul's  ;  representing  that 
Clement  had  escaped,  and  that  this  was  the  effect  of  the  prayers  of  good 
Christian  people  !  But  as  soon  as  the  people  knew  that  the  deliverance 
was  simply  the  effect  of  "  composition,"  they  said  of  Wolsey  that  "  he 
could  not  leave  his  lying." 

The  Cardinal's  documents,  drawn  up  last  December,  in  four  distinct 
and  artful  papers,  sent  with  two  envoys,  John  Casalis  and  Dr.  Knight, 
to  procure  the  divorce  of  Henry  and  his  Queen,  only  requii'ed  the  Pope's 
signature.  He  at  last  subscribed  with  a  trembling  hand,  but  through 
fear  of  the  Emperor,  restricted  Henry  from  acting  at  present ;  and  im- 
ploring the  King  and  Wolsey  not  now  to  precipitate  him  for  ever  !  The 
fact  was,  that  before  being  released  from  prison,  he  was  bound  by  the 
Emperor,  not  to  sanction  any  such  procedure.  But  what  was  to  be 
done  %  Wolsey  himself  began  to  be  as  much  afraid  of  being  "  precipitat- 
ed "  as  the  Pope ;  at  least  so  he  pretended,  and  not  a  moment  was  to  be 
lost.  On  the  10th  of  February,  therefore,  having  despatched  Stephen 
Gardiner,  his  Secretary,  and  Edward  Fox,  then  the  King's  almoner,  they 
went  by  way  of  France,  and  secured  the  concurrence  of  Francis,  as  well 
as  his  influence  with  the  Pontiff ;  they  had  arrived  at  Orvietto,  on  the 
20th  of  March.  Wolsey  wished  such  a  commission  to  be  obtained  as 
would  enable  him  to  rise  in  favour,  and  to  secui'e,  by  one  stroke,  the  gra- 
titude of  Henry  and  his  intended  Queen  ;  and  if  he  could  only  be  ap- 
pointed Judge  to  try  the  divorce  for  which  his  Master  panted,  such 
might  be  the  eftect  of  his  intended  decision.  Gardiner  and  Fox  had 
therefore  been  selected,  and  especially  the  former,  to  use  intimidation  if 


1528.]  ENGLAND  AND   ITALY.  173 

necessary.  Accordingly,  with  all  the  determined  energy  of  his  charac- 
ter, Gardiner  at  length  not  only  drew  tears  and  regret  from  the  Pontifl", 
making  him  at  other  times  to  "sigh  and  wipe  his  eyes,"  but  wrung  from 
him  his  signature  to  a  commission,  which,  when  Fox  had  brought  it 
home  in  May,  after  all  did  not  answer  the  wishes  of  our  Cardinal !  And 
to  what  low  and  deceitful  expedient  will  he  now  resort  ?  Immediately 
addressing  Gardiner  and  Bryan,  he  orders  them  to  jjretend  that  the 
Pope's  policitation  had  been  so  obliterated  and  spoiled  by  water  in  the 
carriage,  that  a  duplicate  must  be  sent  forthwith.  They  were,  after  this, 
to  allege  that  they  remembered  the  very  tcords  of  the  former  document, 
and  so  could  dictate  them  to  the  officer,  who  was  to  prepare  it  again  ; 
but  in  doing  this  they  were  then  to  introduce  such  expressions  of  en- 
larged power  as  Wolsey  had  marked  !  !  Accordingly  the  Pope  actually 
signed  this  fresh  document ;  but  still,  after  all  this  labour  time  and  ex- 
pense, the  biter  was  bit.  Within  a  few  months,  and  without  any  hesita- 
tion, Clement  violated  the  whole  subscribed  engagement  ! 

The  change  as  it  regarded  what  was  called  St.  Peter's  Chair,  was  now 
certainly  most  glaring,  and  sufficient  to  have  opened  the  eyes  of  all,  save 
the  wilfully  blind.  The  same  man,  whose  predecessor  had  impiously 
styled  himself  "  Sovereign  of  the  Universe,"  is  now  openly  degraded,  and 
in  bondage  still.  During  these  negociations  he  actually  wished,  for 
the  wealth  of  Christendom,  that  Queen  Catherine  was  in  her  grave  ;  and 
at  another  time,  though  no  prophet,  he  added  these  emphatic  words,  "  I 
think,  like  as  the  Emperor  hath  destroyed  the  temporalities  of  the  Church, 
so  shall  she  be  the  cause  of  the  destruction  of  its  spiritualities''' — and  such 
was  the  event,  as  it  regarded  England.  It  was  fit  and  pi'oper,  that  the 
power  which  had  so  long  been  distinguished  by  arrogantly  " forbidding 
to  niarry^''  should  be  tamed,  tormented  and  abased,  even  by  a  licentious 
Monarch,  disturbing  all  Eui-ope  for  years  about  himself  and  his  wife, — 
the  Queen  all  the  while  remaining  a  devoted  adherent  of  the  Roman 
See,  and  the  King,  her  husband,  as  vain  as  ever  of  his  title,  received  from 
Rome — the  Defender  of  the  Faith  ! 

The  farce,  however,  must  proceed,  by  Gardiner  bringing  with  him 
another  Legate,  Campeggio.  He  and  Wolsey,  two  most  licentious  men, 
were  to  sit  in  judgment  on  the  legality  of  Henry's  marriage  ;  but  the 
former,  who  though  commissioned  in  April  did  not  set  ofi"  till  July,  then 
affected  to  be  so  infirm  and  diseased  on  the  road,  that  even  Gardiner 
could  not  drag  him  on.  They  were  not  less  than  three  months  in  joui*- 
neying  from  Italy.  The  real  cause  of  the  delay  was  simply  this,  that 
Clement  and  his  Cardinals  had  not  yet  exhausted  all  their  wit  and  cun- 
ning. Campeggio  had  been  urged,  again  and  again,  to  delay  his  jour- 
ney as  long  as  possible,  so  that  before  his  arrival  in  England,  his  secret 
instructions  were  to  try  and  reconcile  the  King  and  Queen  ;  or  endea- 
vour to  persuade  the  latter  that  she  should  retire  and  spend  what  they 


174  ENGLAND  AND   ITALY.  [^BOOK  I. 

called  a  "  religious"  life  !  in  other  words  to  enter  some  nunnery  ;  but  at 
all  events,  he  was  to  decide  nothing  !  And  why  so  1  Merely  because 
Clement,  like  all  the  rest,  had  been  watching  on  the  times.  When  Cam- 
peggio  left  home,  a  French  army  remained  in  Italy  ;  the  predominant 
power  of  the  Emperor  there,  was  therefore  not  finally  decided  ;  so  that 
till  the  middle  of  August  this  disgusting  and  litigious  process  of  divorce 
seemed  to  hang  in  suspense,  on  what  ?  Merely  the  capture  of  Naples  ! 
Should  the  Emperor's  arms,  defending  it,  be  defeated,  then  the  Pope 
might  once  more  do  as  he  pleased :  but,  in  thirty  days,  not  less  than 
twenty-one  thmismul  of  the  French  army  died  of  disease  ;  on  the  17th  of 
August,  Lautrec,  the  French  General  himself  expired,  the  remainder 
dispersed,  Charles  was  triumphant ;  and  therefore  Campeggio  must  de- 
cide nothing  ! 

After  this  it  is  curious  enough  to  see  the  mock-trial  commence  on  the 
28th  of  October.  On  the  8th  of  November,  Wolsey's  speech  against  the 
Emperor  seemed  to  please  his  Master.  The  just  indignation  of  Cathe- 
rine burst  out  aloud  upon  the  Cardinal,  but  the  drama  went  on  ;  and  not- 
withstanding all  this,  the  Monarch  and  his  Queen,  with  such  a  scene  be- 
fore them  both,  were  together  "  keeping  open  festivities"  still,  at  the  end 
of  the  year ! 

It  is  trvie,  that  during  the  summer  months,  while  waiting  for  this 
Italian  Cardinal,  the  King  and  his  subjects  with  him,  had  got  something 
else  to  think  of,  as  both  the  court  and  the  country  had  been  thrown  in- 
to consternation,  by  the  prevalence  of  disease  ;  but  this  will  be  noticed 
with  more  effect  afterwards,  since  it  followed  in  immediate  connexion 
with  the  persecutions  of  this  year,  to  which  therefore  we  first  attend. 

At  the  commencement  of  1528,  according  to  the  preceding 
history,  the  New  Testament  of  Tyndale  had  now  been  intro- 
duced into  England  for  the  space  of  two  years,  a  fact  which 
will  be  abundantly  confirmed  by  the  disclosures  of  the  present 
period.  Speaking  generally  of  these  times,  Strype  has  said, 
— "  the  New  Testament  translated  by  Hitchen,  that  is  Tyn- 
dale, was  in  many  hands,  and  read  with  great  application  and 
joy  ;  and  they  had  secret  meetings,  in  which  they  instructed 
each  other  out  of  God's  Word  ;"  but  after  carefully  examin- 
ing the  minute,  though  scattered  details,  a  far  more  interest- 
ing and  graphical  account  now  comes  out,  not  only  of  these 
two  years,  but  of  the  years  preceding. 

From  tlie  days  of  John  Wickliffe,  if  not  Richard  Fitzralph, 
the  disciples  of  Christ  were  much  in  the  same  situation  with 
those  Israelites  in  the  days  of  Elijah,  whom  God  "  reserved 
to  himself."     Hidden  and  unknown,  their  number  can  never 


1528.]  RETROSPECT.  175 

be  ascertained,  otherwise  it  probably  would  surprise  us,  as 
much  as  the  "  seven  thousand''''  did  the  desponding  prophet 
of  old.  But  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  portions  of  the 
Scriptures  in  manuscript  were  read  in  secret,  and  by  many 
with  great  profit,  notwithstanding  all  the  virulent  opposition. 
Our  only  key  to  the  extent  of  this,  is  to  be  found  in  the 
opposition  displayed.  Mere  gleams  of  light  obtained  from 
the  Sacred  Word,  wore  sufficient  to  bring  down  the  wrath  of 
the  oppressor.  During  the  fifteenth  century,  various  cases  of 
abjuration  and  burning  for  heresy  had  occurred,  but  from  the 
commencement  of  the  sixteenth,  as  light  increased,  the  op- 
position became  more  determined  and  systematic.  Particular 
periods  are  then  to  be  marked  as  seasons  of  persecution.  To 
say  nothing  of  the  first  ten  years,  though  disgraced  by  not  a 
few  instances  of  great  cruelty  ;  the  years  1511  under  War- 
ham  of  Canterbury  and  Smith  of  Lincoln;  1509  to  1517 
under  Fitzjames  of  London;  and,  above  all,  1521,  under  Long- 
land  of  Lincoln,  were  so  many  seasons  of  the  most  determined 
opposition  to  the  Word  of  God.  Nor  should  it  be  unobserved 
that  all  these  persecutions,  including  even  the  last,  were  on 
account  of  opinions,  not  gathered  or  received  from  any  foreign 
land  or  Continental  Christian.  Whatever  those  opinions 
were,  they  were  indigenous  to  this  country,  and  are  mainly  to 
be  ascribed  to  certain  portions  of  the  Sacred  Writings  in 
English  manuscript.  Before,  and  even  long  before  the  name 
of  Luther  was  heard  of  by  the  people,  these  opinions  were 
sifted,  debated,  and  maintained;  nay,  as  late  as  1521,  though 
the  writings  of  the  German  Reformer  were  then  publicly 
denounced,  they  were  as  yet  locked  up  in  Latin,  so  that, 
amidst  all  the  barbarities  of  that  year,  under  Longland,  we 
hear  of  no  punishment  inflicted  for  Lutheranism  so  called. 
It  is  certainly,  therefore,  to  be  regretted,  that  even  British 
historians,  in  too  many  instances,  should  have  so  hastily 
looked  over  to  Germany,  as  accounting  for  the  commencement 
and  progress  of  all  that  occurred  in  their  own  country  in  the 
first  quarter  of  the  sixteenth  century.  After  an  examination 
of  the  official  records  of  the  day,  and  other  original  manuscripts, 
more  patient  and  laborious  than  that  in  which  any  man  has 
ever  since  engaged,  it  is  not  surprising  that  John  Foxe  should 
dwell  on  the  retrospect  with  delight,  and  confess  his  inability 
to  do  it  justice  ;  while  he  as  distinctly  ascribes  this  work  of 


176  READING  OF  [boOK  T. 

God,  to  liis  own  Word  in  the  vernacular  tongue,  and  to  this 
alone,  though  not  yet  in  print. 

We  have  glanced  at  all  this  as  justly  due  to  what  may  be 
styled  the  age  of  manuscript.  But  as  the  invention  of  print- 
ing was  itself  an  era,  so  assuredly  was  that  of  the  reception  of 
the  Sacred  Scriptures  in  print  into  Great  Britain.  This 
might  be  fairly  inferred  from  the  history  already  given  ;  but 
it  is  now  worthy  of  special  notice,  that  for  three  or  four  years 
before  the  arrival  of  Tyndale^s  fii'st  editions,  a  people  seem  to 
have  been  signally  prepared  for  their  reception.  We  could 
not  with  propriety  notice  them  at  an  earlier  period,  as  it  is 
chiefly  by  the  severities  of  the  present  year,  that  they  come 
out  to  view.  From  the  examinations  upon  oath,  about  to  be 
noticed,  we  could  now  enumerate  above  a  hundred  of  these 
people  by  name,  and  state  their  places  of  abode,  but  these 
were  merely  the  persons  detected,  exposed,  or  punished. 
Many,  many  more  there  must  have  been,  whose  record  is  on 
high.  They  met  together,  chiefly  in  London,  but  also  at 
different  places  in  the  counties  of  Essex,  Suftblk,  Norfolk,  and 
Buckingham.  They  called  each  other  Brother.,  and  said  that 
they  were  Brothers  in  Christ.  They  had  the  four  Gospels 
separately  and  in  one  volume ;  some  of  PauFs  Epistles  in 
another ;  the  Epistles  of  Peter  and  that  of  James ;  all  in 
English  manuscript,  however  inferior  the  translation,  or  in- 
accurate, through  frequent  transcription.  In  regard  to  the 
Epistle  of  James.,  in  some  parts  it  was  a  great  favourite,  and 
far  from  startling  at  it,  as  the  German  Reformer  himself  did 
at  first,  and  for  some  time,  they  could  repeat  it  from  memory ; 
even  one  young  woman  was  detected  who  could  say  the  whole. 
Their  high  esteem  for  the  Oracles  of  God,  was  to  be  seen  in 
the  price  paid  for  them  in  whole  or  in  part. 

These  friends  in  London  seem  to  have  held  their  meetings 
from  about  1523,  very  frequently  in  the  house  of  one  William 
Russel  in  Coleman  Street,  at  the  gate  of  Bird's  Alley,  over 
against  St.  Stephen's  Church ;  when  Father  John  Hacker,  as 
they  called  him,  and  sometimes  others,  read  and  explained  the 
Scriptures.  We  have  already  pointed  out  the  spot  to  which 
the  authorities  first  sent  to  seize  books  \'  and  it  is  now  not 
unworthy  of  notice  that  y^x^  near,  and  even  round  it,  not- 


Honey  Lane,  Clieapside,  nearly  opposite  to  Bow  Church,  p.  !)2. 


1528.]  THK  SCRIPTURES.  177 

withstanding  "  the  secret  search,"  the  Word  of  God  continued 
to  be  read  and  prized — it  even  "  grew  and  multiplied."  The 
great  fire  in  London  of  1666,  it  is  true,  consumed  all  those 
parts,  but  of  the  eighty-nine  churches  burnt  down,  at  least 
fiftj-four  were  rebuilt,  and  on  the  same  ground.  Bird's  Alley 
is  gone,  but  the  church  remains  where  it  was  ;  and  if  any  one 
wish  to  stand  on  the  same  spot  where,  amidst  all  the  wrath 
and  blasphemy  of  the  day,  the  Sacred  Volume  was  then 
perused  with  the  keenest  interest,  he  has  only  to  walk  along 
that  part  of  King's  Arms  Yard  which  yet  remains,  till  he 
come  "  over  against"  St.  Stephen's  Church,  Coleman  Street.^ 

Similar  meetings  were  held  in  Essex.  The  largest  was  in 
Colchester  itself,  but  there  were  friends  at  Witham,  Brain  tree. 
Saffron  Walden,  and  Birdbrook,  as  well  as  at  the  Friary  of 
Clare,  or  Stokeclare,  in  Suftblk.''  In  the  north  of  Essex  the 
parish  of  Bumstead  was,  as  the  persecutors  would  have  said, 
a  hot-bed  of  heresy.^** 

So  early  as  September  1526,  two  plain  country  men  from 
thence  came  to  London,  in  search  of  the  new  printed  Testa- 
ments, and  going  to  Austin  Friars,  there  met  with  Dr. 
Barnes,  who,  it  may  be  remembered,  was  then  a  prisoner  at 
large.  One  of  these  men  had  been  in  possession  of  Tyndale's 
New  Testament,  which  he  procured  from  Colchester  about 
the  month  of  April  before.  These  men  reported  the  curate 
of  this  parish,  Richard  Foxe,  as  favourable  to  enquiry,  and 
begged  a  letter  from  Barnes  to  him.  He  gave  them  one,  sold 
a  Testament  to  each,  and  after  their  return,  the  curate,  and 
even  two  friars,  Topley  and  Gardiner,  seemed  to  be  making 
progress ;  but  besides  them  there  were  a  number  of  per- 
sons, male  and  female,  scattered  throughout  these  parts, 
still  farther  advanced.  It  will  be  remembered  that  Myles 
Coverdale,  one  of  Barnes''  students,  came  up  to  London  after 
him,  at  the  time  of  his  melancholy  abjuration  in  February 
1526.  We  shall  trace  him  now  preaching  in  this  part  of 
Essex,  in  company  with  Richard  Foxe.  Thus,  on  the  29th  of 
March  1528,  one  of  these  friars,  Thomas  Topley,  heard  him 


8  In  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  house,  where  lived  for  many  years,  the  late  venerable  John 
Newton.  9  Afterwards  the  favourite  retreat  of  Parker,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury. 

'0  Called  5<cc/)?e  Bumstead,  being,  says  Norden,  the  first  place  in  these  parts  that  had  one, 
and  to  distinguish  it  from  an  adjoining  parish  of  the  same  name,  Helion  Bumstead.  The  former 
was  styled  also  Bumstede  ad  Turrim,  as  having  one  of  those  ancient  round  towers  which  abound 
in  Suffolk  and  Norfolk. 

VOL.   I.  M 


178  READERS   PERSECUTED.  [bOOK  I. 

preach  at  Biimstead  church,  and  such  doctrine  as,  in  connexion 
with  subsequent  conversation,  shook  his  mind  with  regard  to 
various  superstitions.  But  the  persecutions  we  are  now  about 
to  notice  must  have  scattered,  for  a  season,  all  these  groups  in 
this  county,  as  well  as  the  meetings  in  London ;  more 
especially  as  Wharton  the  Vicar-General  of  Tunstal  moved 
down  into  Essex  in  July  this  year,  searching  after  his  prey. 
It  is  then  that  we  shall  hear  more  of  Coverdale. 

Many  of  those,  however,  throughout  the  land,  who  had 
either  purchased  or  perused  the  Testament  of  Tyndale,  were 
now  about  to  find  that  it  was  "through  much  tribulation  they 
must  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  ;"  and  it  would  have 
been  well  if  then  the  brother  had  not  betrayed  his  brethren, 
the  husband  his  wife,  and  the  father  his  child  !  Not  three 
months  before,  the  country  had  been  in  the  greatest  extremity, 
through  scarcity  amounting  to  famine,  and  not  a  few  had  pined 
away  in  disease.  London,  also,  as  we  have  seen,  had  more 
especially  felt  the  pressure,  but  no  sooner  had  plenty  re- 
turned by  the  importation  of  foreign  grain,  and  bread  had 
fallen  in  price,  than  the  same  city  became  the  seat  of  bitter 
and  sifting  persecution.  The  country  at  large  had  just 
suffered  severely,  through  the  crooked  and  ambitious  policy 
of  Wolsey  ;  and  now  the  best  of  his  Majesty's  subjects,  simple 
hearted  and  unoffending  people,  are  to  be  molested  through 
the  cool  malignity  of  Tunstal.  He  had  before  this  preached 
his  sermon,  in  which  he  boasted  that  he  had  found  more  than 
2000  errors  in  the  printed  New  Testament.  TunstaPs  in- 
famous injunction  also,  of  October  1526,  had  hung  over  the 
people  for  fourteen  months,  without  being  rigorously  followed 
up,  but  we  have  accounted  for  this  forbearance.  It  was  un- 
avoidable, as  he  had  been  so  engrossed  by  foreign  political 
affairs.  It  was,  therefore,  in  the  opening  of  1528,  that  one 
feature  of  his  character  began  to  be  more  fully  developed,  of 
which  in  general  a  very  strange,  not  to  say  erroneous,  esti- 
mate has  been  given.  Sir  T.  More  and  he  were  united,  as  men 
familiarly  say,  like  hand  and  glove ;  and,  therefore,  it  was  to 
be  expected,  that  he  should  pronounce  him  to  be  inferior  to 
none  "  in  the  integrity  of  his  principles,  and  the  sweetness  of 
his  disposition."  Godwin  saj'^s  that  "  he  was  a  very  rare  and 
admirable  man,  with  nothing  wrong  but  his  religion^  and  yet 
he  was  a  profound  divine^  as  many  of  his  works  yet  do  testify.'" 


1528.]  READERS  PERSECUTED.  179 

"  He  had,"  says  even  Gilpin  in  his  life  of  Ridley,  "  true  notions 
of  the  genius  of  Christianity  I  He  considered  a  good  life  as 
the  end,  and  faith  as  the  means  ;  and  never  branded  as  an 
heretic  that  person,  however  erroneous  his  opinions  might  be, 
in  points  less  fundamental,  who  had  such  a  belief  in  Christ  as 
made  him  live  like  a  Christian.  He  was  just,  therefore,  the 
reverse  of  his  early  patron  Warliam ;"  and  he  concludes  by 
affirming,  "  that  Tunstal  i\\o\Ji^\i  pei'secution  one  of  the  things 
most  foreign  to  his  function  ! "  We  allow  that  the  reverse  of 
this,  in  some  points,  was  the  character  of  Warham;  but  was  it 
less  so  of  Tunstal  ?  Both  were  men  of  learning  and  talent,  and 
TunstaPs  taste  in  letters  was  superior  to  most  of  his  contempo- 
raries; but  let  any  one  hold  fast  opinions  which  they  conceived 
would,  even  ultimately,  affect  the  hierarchy,  and  neither  of  them 
scrupled  for  a  moment  in  proceeding  to  the  greatest  extremity. 
Tunstal,  it  is  true,  was  still,  and  of  quiet  behaviour,  cautious, 
and  had  great  command  over  his  passions ;  a  worldy-wise- 
man,  who  contrived  to  thread  his  way  through  those  difficult 
times,  so  that  he  died  in  his  bed,  at  the  advanced  age  of  85. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  works  bear  witness,  by  these  he 
must  be  judged.  What  signifies  learning,  however  eminent, 
except  it  be  applied  to  some  laudable  and  beneficial  purpose  1 
And  though  it  should  be  accompanied  with  apparent  sedate- 
ness,  and  much  sagacity  in  worldly  affairs  ;  all  these  in  union, 
so  far  from  concealing  great  and  radical  defects  in  moral 
character,  only  render  them  the  more  atrocious.  To  say 
nothing  of  the  violence  of  TunstaFs  language  when  writing  to 
Erasmus,  in  earlier  life,  or  of  the  incontinence  with  which  he 
has  been  charged  ;  certainly  no  man  who  was  so  frequently  em- 
ployed by  Wolsey,  and  served  his  purpose  so  well,  could  by 
any  possibility  hold  fast  his  integrity,  or  walk  uprightly ; 
and  Tunstal  being  most  celebrated  as  a  courtier,  and  at  snch 
a  time,  the  reader  may  be  left  to  judge  of  his  veracity.  As 
for  humanity,  what  though  he  might  have  an  aversion  from 
shedding  blood,  or  rather  a  dread  of  shedding  it  I  What 
shall  we  say  as  to  his  cool  barbaritj'^  in  sifting  and  cross- 
examining,  then  threatening  and  re-examining,  till  the  poor 
creature  quivered,  and  became  perplexed,  trembled,  and  ab- 
jured ?  Not  satisfied,  see  him  seize  on  the  abjured  parties, 
and,  through  his  sophistry,  compel  them  at  last  to  expose  and 
even  accuse  their  nearest  and  dearest  relatives  and  friends  ! 


180  READERS  CROSS-EXAMINED.  [bOOK  I. 

No,  he  was  an  ingenious  tormentor,  distinguished  for  his 
patient  dexterity  in  producing  mental  misery ;  and  we  may 
rely  on  it,  that  Tyndale,  who  knew  his  doings  well,  though 
he  did  not  charge  him  with  shedding  so  much  blood,  had  good 
reason  for  designating  him  as  he  did, — "  that  still  Satan,  the 
imaginer  of  all  mischief.""  "  Cursed,"  said  Jortin,  when 
speaking  of  him,  "  cursed  are  those  theological  principles, 
which  produce  such  sad  effects  even  in  good-tempered  men, 
and  eat  up  so  much  of  their  honour  and  humanity  !"  The 
only  mistake  in  this  exclamation,  is  that  of  styling  such 
principles  theological.  The  truth  was,  that  none  of  those  men, 
even  the  mildest,  understood  the  sacred  rights  of  conscience, 
because  their  own  was  "  seared  with  a  hot  iron,"  They  were, 
for  the  time,  the  "  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world," 
while  the  praiseworthy  people  whom  they  tried  to  devour  or 
exterminate,  were,  in  fact,  however  poor  and  despised,  a 
chosen  band  of  wrestlers  "  against  spiritual  wickedness  in 
high  places." 

At  all  events,  whatever  Warham  had  been  in  days  that 
were  past,  we  shall  find  that  Tuustal  was  "  the  grand  In- 
quisitor" in  1528.  In  January  his  underlings  were  busily  pre- 
paring for  his  sitting  in  judgment ;  and  then  followed  tliose 
numerous  cases,  from  February  to  May  inclusive,  which  are 
upon  record,  in  his  Register. 

The  shrewd  and  systematic  method  adopted  by  Tunstal 
seems  to  have  been,  to  find  out  the  most  intelligent  or  influ- 
ential men,  among  these  people  who  were  to  be  cross-examin- 
ed, and  by  effectually  threatening  them,  so  detect  many  of  the 
rest.  In  January  or  the  beginning  of  February  one  man  was 
found,  and  before  long  other  two  if  not  three.  In  the  midst 
of  these  harassing  times,  it  was  not  to  have  been  expected, 
that  all  would  prove  faithful ;  but  surely  these  early  read- 
ers of  the  printed  New  Testament  upon  English  ground,  had 
not  anticipated  that  any  of  their  leaders  would  fail  and  betray 
them  !  Yet  so  it  was,  for  poor  Hacker,  the  first  man  referred 
to,  being,  as  Strype  says,  "hard  set  upon,  made  a  discovery,  by 
interrogatories  put  to  him  upon  oath,  of  a  great  many  of  his 
friends  and  followers  both  in  Essex  and  London."  Followinof 
out  this  clue,  at  least  three  other  men  followed  the  sad  exam- 
ple ;  John  Pykas  of  Colchester,  with  John  Tybal  and  Thomas 
Hempsted  of  tlie  parish  of  Bumstead.     These  poor  men  now 


1528.]  AND   PERSECUTED.  181 

stood  in  the  character  of  "  Persecutor's  evidence,"  and  were  to 
be  called  upon,  whenever  it  was  found  necessary  !  Hacker,  to 
save  himself,  had  betrayed  at  least  forUj  of  his  friends,  with 
whom  he  had  often  read  the  Scriptures,  the  majority  of  whom 
resided  in  London,  and  the  others  as  many  more,  in  the  coun- 
ty of  Essex  alone,  as  amounted  to  above  a  hundred  in  all ! 
Happily,  these  were  but  a  part  of  the  whole  ;  but  here  was  a 
field,  quite  sufficient  for  the  Bishop  and  his  Vicar-General. 
The  former  required  only  to  assemble  his  deeply  prejudiced 
assistants,  and  the  reader  may  be  curious  to  know  who  were 
those  men,  who  first  sat  in  judgment  upon  Tyndale's  transla- 
tion, and  the  earliest  possessors  of  the  precious  volume. 
Tunstal  had  taken  care  to  secure  round  him  more  than  a  do- 
zen of  men  to  preside,  either  all  together,  or  by  turns,  and  they 
are  styled  in  the  Register  "  all  learned  men,"  of  course.  Be- 
sides Greftrey  Wharton,  D.D.  his  Vicar-General,  and  John 
Darel,  B.D.  Wharton's  official,  Matthew  Grafton  and  Henry 
Bonsfel,  Notaries  ;  there  were  Robert  Ridley,  D.D.  and  John 
Royston,  Professor  of  Theology,  Richard  Sparchforde,  M.A., 
Thomas  Forman,  S.T.P.,  John  Tunstal  and  Thomas  Chambre, 
Chaplains,  Nicholas  Tunstal,  Thomas  Dowman,  Thomas  Pil- 
kington,  and  James  Multon. 

Wharton^  to  do  him  justice,  would  seem  to  have  been  not 
so  bitter  as  some  others ;  he  died  next  year.  Royston  had 
been  far  more  indebted  to  Humplirie  Munmouth,  than  even 
Tyndale.  Yet  Munmouth  is  about  to  be  molested  and  im- 
prisoned, and  Royston  is  here  !  Sparchforde  had  been  pro- 
moted in  1 522  to  the  living  of  Hackney ;  but  the  most  con- 
spicuous of  these  assistant  persecutors  was  Robert  Ridley,  al- 
ready noticed.  The  Tunstals,  as  well  as  Ridley,  were  related 
to  the  Bishop. 

In  now  turning  to  the  disclosures  made  by  persecution  in 
the  early  part  of  this  year,  Ave  shall  find  them  doubly  import- 
ant as  to  evidence  on  one  point,  namely,  the  period  in  which 
the  New  Testaments  of  Tyndale  were  first  introduced  into 
England.  Independently  of  the  abundant  proof  already  given, 
they  show  that  Tyndale's  quarto  and  octavo  editions  were  pur- 
chased and  perused  throughout  the  year  1526;  and  that 
Tunstal's  injunction,  in  October  of  that  year,  was  not  ground- 
less, when  it  affirmed  that  they  were  spread  throughout  "  all 
his  diocese,  in  great  number." 


182  READERS  CROSS-EXAMINED,  [book  I. 

From  the  Register  itself  we  select  only  such  cases  as  bear 
directly  on  the  Testaments  first  printed  by  Tyndale,  with 
two  from  other  sources,  equally  authentic." 

I.  February  2\,  1528. — "Dr.  Geffrey  Wharton,  aforesaid,  sat  judicially,  in  the 
long  Chapel  of  St.  Paul's  Church,  London,  near  the  Northgate.  And  then  ap- 
peared before  him  Sir  Sebastian  Herris,  curate  of  the  parish  Church  of  Ken- 
sington ;  who  confessed  that  he  had  two  books  ;  viz.  the  New  Testament  in  the 
vulgar  tongue,  translated  by  William  Hotchin,  Priest,  and  Friar  Roye  ;  and 
'  Unio  Dissidentium,'  containing  in  it  the  Lutheran  heresy.  But  Herris  being 
by  the  said  Wharton,  Vicar-General,  absolved  from  the  sentence  of  excommuni- 
cation, that  had  been  by  the  canon  passed  against  him,  he  enjoined  him,  by 
oath  upon  the  holy  Gospels,  that  he  should  not  for  the  future  keep  any  of  the 
said  books,  or  any  other  containing  heresy  in  it  ;  nor  knowingly  read,  sell,  pawn, 
or  any  other  way  dispose  of  such  books  ;  nor  knowingly  converse,  or  hold  fami- 
liarity with  any  person  suspected  of  heresy,  nor  favour  them.  And,  moreover, 
he  enjoined  the  said  Sir  Sebastian,  under  pain  of  excommunication,  that  after 
he  had  obtained  license  to  depart,  he  should  not  tarry  nor  abide  within  the 
City  of  London  (beiiuj  so  dangerous  a  place  to  be  infected  icith  heresy^  above  a 
day  and  a  night  ;  but  go  thence  else  where,  and  not  approach  near  the  city  any 
where,  four  miles  in  circuit,  for  the  space  of  two  years."  We  have  no  trace 
left  as  to  what  became  of  this  man  ;  but  it  is  cheering  to  observe  that  there  ap- 
pears to  have  been  no  abjuration  on  his  part.  He  was  thus  banished,  for  pos- 
sessing the  English  New  Testament,  but  as  no  mention  is  made  of  the  precise 
period  in  which  he  acquired  it,  we  pass  on  to  the  next,  or  one  of  the  earliest  in- 
stances in  proof  of  this  point. 

II.  March  2. — John  Pykas  of  Colchester,  with  Thomas  Matthew  and  Henry 
Rayland  from  the  same  place,  appeared  before  the  Vicar-General,  being  cited 
to  answer  to  certain  articles,  and  next  day,  Tuesday  the  3d  of  March,  Tunstal 
himself  appeared.  "  Cuthbert,  Bishop  of  Loudon,  sitting  judicially,  in  the  cha- 
pel within  his  palace  at  London,  ministered  in  word  against  John  Pykas,  the 
articles  which  were  ministered  to  John  Hacker,  and  all  things  contained  in  the 
same ;  adding,  that  he  had,  and  retained,  in  his  keeping,  the  New  Testament  in 
the  vulgar  tongue,  translated  by  William  Hotchyn  and  Friar  Roy,  notwith- 
standing the  condemnation,  publication  and  monition  made  thereupon.  Upon 
the  ministering  of  which  and  other  things,  the  same  reverend  father  took,ex  ojicio 
sua,  for  witnesses,  John  Boughton  of  Colchester  and  John  Hacker!"  "  March  7. 
John  Pykas  made  answer  to  the  articles  ministered  to  him,  before  the  said 
Bishop,  sitting  judicially  in  the  chapel  of  his  palace  in  London," — which  an- 
swer was  to  this  tenor  : — "  That  about  five  years  last  past,  at  a  certain  time,  his 
mother,  then  dwelling  at  Bury,  sent  for  him  ;  and  moved  him  that  he  should 
not  believe  in  the  Sacraments  of  the  Church,  for  that  was  not  the  right  way. 
And  then  she  delivered  to  this  respondent,  one  book  of  Paul's  Epistles  in  Eng- 
lish (manuscript  ;)  and  bid  him  hve  after  the  manner  and  way  of  the  said  Ejiis- 
tles  and  Gospels,  and  not  after  the  way  tliat  the  Church  doth  teach." — "  Also 
about  a  tvo  years  last  past  /"  (or  March  1526,)  "  he  bought  in  Colchester  of  a 
Lumbard  of  London,  a  Neio  Testament  in  English,  and  paid  for  it  four  shillings, 
which  JVew  Testament  he  kept,  and  read  it  through  many  times," 

'  1  The  industrious  Strype,  in  quoting  the  instances  from  March,  forgetting  that  the  year  an  on 
to  the  '25th,  has  placed  them  under  1527  instead  of  1528. 


1528.]  AND  PERSECUTED.  183 

This  instance,  so  early  in  point  of  date,  is  also  vei-y  distinct,  carrying  us  back 
to  March  if  not  February  1520" ;  and  from  the  price  ])aid,  equal  to  between  two 
and  three  pounds  sterling,  seems  to  have  been  Tyndale's  largest  Testament. 
But  the  fact  was,  that  Pykas  was  not  merely  the  purchaser  of  one  copy,  but  the 
seller  of  others,  as  will  appear  in  the  next  case.  This  poor  man,  a  baker  by 
trade,  aged  thirty-thi'ee,  having  abjured  ;  "  after  this,"  says  Strype,  "  Pykas 
and  Hacker,  the  chief  leaders  of  the  rest,  were  thus  sifted,  and  by  imprisonment, 
severities,  and  threatening,  brought  to  confess  all  the  '  known  men  and  women,' 
as  they  were  then  called,  even  tlicir  friends,  their  lirelltren,  their  nearest  relations, 
and  those  that  themselces  had  broinjht  into  those  opinions  ;  they  were  enjoined  pen- 
ances, and  abjui'ed  and  sworn  to  be  witnesses  against  others,  and  to  betray  all !" 

III.  With  this  first  distinct  testimony  before  us,  it  is  curious  enough,  that 
it  was  upon  this  very  day  that  Tunstal  issued  his  well  known  "  License  to  Sir 
Thomas  More,  Lord  Chancellor  of  England,  to  read  and  retain  the  books  con- 
taining the  Lutheran  heresy."  The  date  in  his  Register  is  as  follows — "  Dat.  vij 
die  Martii  anno  domini  millesimo  quingentesimo  xxvij,  et  nostre  cons,  se.vto," 
that  is,  7tli  March  1528  ;  as  he  became  Bishop  of  London  in  Oct.  1522,  and 
their  year  ran  on  to  the  25th  of  March.  This  was  the  most  unfortunate  step 
that  More  ever  took.  The  license  was  granted  mainly  with  a  view  to  the  re- 
futation of  Tyndale's  translation  and  other  writings,  as  will  appear  by  the  event. 
Tunstal,  in  high  spirits,  expected  that  he  would  "  play  the  Demosthenes"  in 
English,  as  he  had  done  in  Latin  ;  but  we  have  yet  to  see  what  became  of  two 
Lords  Chancellor,  in  succession,  Wolsey  and  More,  when  brought  under  the 
power  of  Tyndale's  pen. 

IV.  April  20. —  This  confession  is  formally  entitled,  "  Confessio  Johamiis 
Tyball  de  Bumstede  ad  Turrim,  facta  et  recognita  per  eundem  Johannem 
coram  Reverendo  in  Christo  Patre  Dno.  Cuthberto.  London,  Episcopo,  in 
capella  infra  palaciam  London,  xxviii.  die  mensis  Aprilis,  anno  Dni.  mill" 
quingen™o-  xxviii.  Quam  postea  signavit." — "  Examined,  he  saith, '  that  about 
two  years  agone,  (or  April  1526,)  he  companied  with  Sir  Richard  Fox,  curate 
of  Bumstead,  and  shewed  him  all  his  books  that  he  had  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  Neio 
Testament  in  English ;  the  Gospel  of  Matthew  and  Mark  in  English;  which  he 
had  of  John  Pykas  of  Colchester  ;  a  book  expounding  the  Pater-noster,  the  Arc 
Maria,  and  the  Credo;  certain  of  Paul's  Ei)istles  after  the  oM  translation. — 
And  so  in  process  of  time,  by  reason  of  things  contained  in  the  said  books,  and 
disputing  and  instructing,  he  brought  Sir  Richard  Fox  to  his  learning  and 
opinions.  Furthermore,  he  saith  that  at  Michaelmas  last  past  was  tu-elve  months, 
(September  1 526,)  this  respondent  and  Thomas  Hilles,  came  to  London  to  Friar 
Barnes,  then  being  at  the  Friars  Augustines  in  London,  to  buy  a  New  Testa- 
ment in  English,  as  he  saith.  And  they  found  the  said  Friar  Barnes  in  his 
chamber ;  where  there  was  a  merchantman  reading  in  a  book,  and  two  or  three 
more  present.  And  when  they  came  in,  the  Friar  demanded  them  fi-om 
whence  they  came ;  and  they  said  from  Bumstede,  and  so  forth  in  communica- 
tion they  desired  the  said  Friar  Barnes  that  they  might  be  acquainted  with 
him — because  they  would  have  his  counsel  in  the  New  Testament,  which  they 
desii'ed  of  him.  And  he  saith  that  the  said  Friar  Barnes  did  perceive  very 
well  that  Thomas  Hilles  and  this  respondent  were  infected  with  opinions,  be- 
cause they  would  have  the  New  Testament.  And  then  farther  they  shewed 
the  said  Friar,  that  one  Sir  Richard  Fox,  curate  of  Bumstede,  by  their  means, 
was  well  entered  in  their  learning  ;  and  said,  that  they  thought  to  get  him  whole, 
in  short  s[)ace.     Wherefore  they  desired  the  said  Friar  Barnes  to  make  a  letter 


18-i  READERS   CROSS-EXAMINED,  [book  I. 

to  him,  that  ho  would  continue  in  tiiat  he  had  begun :  which  Friar  did  pi'omise 
so  to  write  to  him  a  letter  at  afternoon,  and  to  get  them  a  New  Testament. 

"After  that  communication,  the  said  Thomas  Hilles  and  this  respondent  shewed 
the  Friar  Barnes,  of  certain  old  books  that  they  had  :  as  of  the  four  Evangelists, 
and  certain  Epistles  of  Peter  and  Paul  in  English  ;  which  books  the  said  Friar 
did  little  regard,  and  made  a  twit  of  it,  and  said — '  a  point  for  them  !  for  they 
be  not  to  be  regarded  toward  the  new  prhded  Testament  in  English  ;  for  it  is 
of  more  cleaner  English.'  And  then  the  said  Friar  Barnes  delivered  to  them 
the  said  New  Testament  in  English,  for  which  they  paid  iii.  sh.,  ii.  d.  ;  and  de- 
sired them  that  they  should  keep  it  close,  for  he  would  be  loath  that  it  shotdd  he 
known,  as  he  now  remembereth.  And  after  the  deliverance  of  the  said  New 
Testament  to  them,  the  said  Friar  Barnes  did  liken  the  New  Testament  in 
Latin  to  'a  cymbal  tinkling  and  brass  sounding  ;'  but  what  farther  exposition 
he  made  upon  it,  he  cannot  tell.  And  then,  at  afternoon,  they  fetched  the  said 
letter  of  the  said  Friar,  which  he  wrote  to  Sir  Richard,  and  read  that  openly 
before  them  ;  but  he  doth  not  now  remember  what  was  in  the  same  ;  and  so 
departed  from  him  ;  and  did  never  since  speak  with  him,  or  write  to  him,  as 
he  saith.  Also  he  saith  that  about  a  half  year  agone  (November  15-27)  he  de- 
livered the  said  New  Testament  to  Friar  Gardyner,  which  he  never  had  again. 
Also  he  saith  that  Helen  Tyball,  his  mother,  and  Alice  Tyball,  his  icife,  be  guilty 
in  all  the  foresaid  articles,"  &c. 

Here  there  is  a  very  distinct  reference  to  all  the  books  mentioned  by  Ridley. 
The  New  Testament ;  Matthew  and  Mark,  separately  ;  and  even  the  Introduc- 
tion to  the  Romans  ;  for  the  fact  is,  that  at  the  end  of  the  Introduction  we  have 
«  Here  followeth  a  treatise  of  the  Pater-noster,  very  necessary,  and  profitable, 
wherein,  yff  thou  marke,  thou  slialt  perceave  what  prayer  is,  and  all  that  be- 
longeth  to  prayer."  Here,  also,  the  New  Testament  was  possessed  in  April, 
and  another  copy  purchased  in  September  1526  ;  but  this  last  purchase  is  the 
more  interesting,  as  it  corroborates  the  statement  already  given,  that  Barnes  was 
at  this  very  season  a  free  prisoner  at  Austin  Friars  ;  as  well  as  acting  in  the 
way  which  brought  him  again  under  suspicion.l2  As  for  Tybal  himself,  we 
know  not  when  he  died,  but  we  can  trace  him  five  years  after  this  period. 
The  season  of  John  Fryth's  imprisonment  must  have  been  one  of  great  excite- 
ment among  the  friends  of  truth  every  where.  Tybal  had  then  come  up  to 
London,  and  one  evening,  the  19tli  of  April  1533,  he  was  seized,  (tlii-ough  a  vile 
informer.  Holt,  the  King's  tailor,)  in  company  with  Ilewet,  the  future  fellow- 
martyr  of  Fryth  ;  Hewet  was  sent  to  the  Lollard's  tower,  but  Tybal  was  bound 
with  ropes  and  carried  to  the  Bishop's  house,  put  into  a  close  room,  and 
watched  by  a  priest's  servant.  The  next  day  Stokesley  came  in  from 
Fulham,  and  examined  him  and  others.  He  had  been  four  times  in  prison 
already,  and  therefore,  says  Foxe,  he  was  "  five  times  in  bonds  for  Christ," — 
"  but  by  God's  provision  he  was  delivered  out  of  prison,  although  he  could  not 
enjoy  his  house  and  lands.  The  tenor  of  his  injunction  was,  that  he  should  not 
come  within  seven  miles  of  his  own  house,  which  made  him  fain  to  sell  cdl  that 
he  had  in  Es^ex  .'" 

Tybal  speaks  of  a  companion  named  Thomas  Hilles,  and  we  have  found  his 
confession  in  full,  among  the  Harleian  Manuscripts.  Though  merely  entitled, 
"  the  confession  of  a  Lollard,"  it  agrees  so  exactly  with  the  story  of  Tybal  that 
there  can  be  no  question  as  to  the  "  Lollard,"  being  this  very  man. 13    He  states 


12  Sec  anno  1526,  p.  108. 

'3  MS.  Harl.  no.  421,  fo.  34.     Hilles  states  the  time  of  their  journey  to  London  as  being  about 
fVhitsunday  twelve  months ;  but  they  could  not  then  have  found  Dr.  Barnes  in  London,  since  by 


1528.]  AND  PERSECUTED.  185 

tiiat  lie  also  pvirchased  a  Testament,  vvliich  he  read  from  house  to  house,  aud 
retained  till  March  1528,  when  he  sold  it  to  Richard  Fox. 

V.  There  is,  however,  one  paragraph  worth  quoting  from  this  last  confessor. 
"  Furthermore,  he  confesseth,  that  the  said  Sir  Richard  Fox,  this  respondent, 
and  sometime  John  Tybal,  Friar  Gardyncr,  and  Friar  Tojiley,  used  to  resort 
sometime  to  Bower  Hall,  &e. ;  and  there,  sometimes  Sir  Richard,  sometimes 
this  respondent,  and  sometimes  John  Smith,  would  read  chapters  of  Scripture, 
and  in  the  New  Testament,  in  English,  in  presence  of  them  and  their  house- 
hold." From  this  aclcnowledgcment,  tliere  can  be  no  question  that  tlie  "  new 
learning  "  had  so  far  been  welcomed  by  the  Beiidhh  family.  Bower  Hall,  the 
manor-house  of  the  estate  of  Bumstead,  known  to  this  day  by  the  same  name, 
was  possessed  for  centm-ies  by  the  family  of  Bendish,  which  only  became  extinct 
in  171 7,  by  the  death  of  Sir  Heni'y  Bendish,  Bart.i4  For  any  one  to  have  the 
New  Testament  read  below  his  roof,  and  especially  to  his  family  assembled,  w^as 
then  a  great  offence  against  the  Church  so  called  !  Had,  therefore,  the  inmates 
of  Bower  Hall  been  poor  or  insignificant  persons,  we  should,  beyond  all  doubt, 
have  had  their  confessions  also  ;  but  in  the  spirit  of  persecution,  there  is  always 
inherent  the  most  glaring  and  odious  partiality. 

VI.  Thomas  Toplei/,  an  Augustine  friar  of  Stoke-clare,  already  named,  must 
not  be  passed  over,  though  no  New  Testament  was  detected.  "  Moreover,"  said 
he,  "  it  fortuned  about  half  a  year  ago,  that  the  said  Sir  Richard  Fox  went  forth, 
and  desired  me  to  serve  his  cure  for  him  ;  and  as  I  was  in  his  chamber,  I  found 
a  certain  book,  called  '  Wickliff's  Wicket,'  whereby  I  felt  in  my  conscience  a 
great  wavering  for  the  time  that  I  did  read  upon  it,  and  afterwards  also,  when 
I  remembered,  it  wounded  my  conscience  very  sore.  Nevertheless,  I  consented 
not  to  it,  till  I  heard  him  preach,  and  that  was  upon  St.  Anthony's  day.  Yet 
my  mind  was  still  much  troubled  with  the  said  book,  (which  did  make  the  sacra- 
ment of  Christ's  body,  in  form  of  bread,  but  a  remembrance  of  Christ's  passion), 
till  I  heard  Sir  Miles  Coxerdale  preach,  and  then  my  mind  was  sore  withdrawn 
from  the  blessed  sacrament,  insomuch  that  I  took  it  then  but  for  the  remem- 
brance of  Christ's  body.  Furthermore,  he  said  and  confessed,  that  in  the  Lent 
last  past,  as  he  was  walking  in  the  field  at  Bumstead,  with  Sir  Miles  Coverdale, 
late  friar  of  the  same  order,  going  in  the  habit  of  a  secular  pinest,  who  had 
preached  the  fourth  Sunday  in  Lent,  (2Qi\\  March  1528),  at  Bumstead,  they  did 
commune  together  of  Erasmus'  works,  and  also  upon  confession.  This,  Sir 
Miles  said,  and  did  hold,  that  it  was  sufficient  for  a  man  to  be  contrite  for  his 
sins,  betwixt  God  and  his  conscience,  without  confession  made  to  a  priest,  which 
opinion,  this  respondent  thought  to  be  true,  and  did  affirm  and  hold  the  same 
at  that  time.  Also,  he  saith,  that  at  the  said  sermon  by  the  said  Sir  Miles 
Coverdale,  at  Bumstead,  he  heard  him  preach  against  worshipping  of  images  in 
the  church,  saying,  that  men  in  no  wise  should  honour  or  worship  them,  which 
likewise  he  thought  to  be  true,  because  he  had  no  learning  to  defend  it." 

VII.  Uiles  Coverdale,  here  mentioned,  is  the  name  of  a  man  so  very  con- 
spicuous afterwards,  that  any  authentic  notice  of  him  becomes  important,  and 


that  time  he  had  escaped,  so  that  Tybal  is  most  correct.     On  the  margin  of  this  manuscript 
there  is  a  date— loth  October. 

'■*  A  descendant  of  tlie  proprietor  at  tliat  time,  perhaps  his  grandson,  was  among  the  earliest 
Baronets,  created  in  Ifill.  His  son,  who  was  ambassador  to  the  Porte  for  many  years,  was  in- 
terred at  Bumstead,  in  1(>74. 


186  READERS  CROSS-EXAMINED,  [bOOK  I. 

the  more  so,  from  his  early  history  being  not  as  yet  understood.  This,  too,  is 
the  next  historical  hint  respecting  him,  since  we  first  met  with  him  in  the  train 
of  Robert  Barnes,  just  before  his  sad  and  pernicious  step,  in  abjuring  pubHcly 
at  St.  Paul's.  These  men  now  before  Tunstal,  it  is  to  be  feared,  had  been  too 
much  influenced  by  his  example ;  at  least,  he  had  led  the  way  in  the  downward 
path  of  dissimulation  and  mental  reserve,  and  what  wonder  if  his  former  in- 
mate, Miles  Coverdale,  should  have  been  induced  only  too  far  to  follow  the 
Prior  of  his  Monastery,  though  he  did  not  abjure  ?  But  why,  at  all  events,  is 
he  not  even  called  before  Tunstal  to  be  examined,  after  such  a  distinct  exposure 
as  that  we  have  read  I  There  must  have  been  some  powerful  preventive  ;  more 
especially,  as  there  can  be  no  question  now,  that  both  he  and  Barnes  were  in- 
terested in  the  dispersion  of  Ti/ndale's  JS/ew  Testaments ;  that  both  had  been 
benefited  by  them,  and  strongly  recommended  their  diffusion.  But  Coverdale 
must  tell  his  own  tale,  he  must  speak  for  himself,  and  not  another  respecting 
him.  An  original  manuscript  comes  to  our  aid,  and  gives  us  the  earliest  indi- 
cation of  that  course,  which,  to  the  injury  of  his  own  mind,  he  had  begun  to 
piu-sue.  He  was  at  least  safe  from  any  public  exposure.  The  following  letter 
is  addressed  to  the  "  Right  worshipful  Thomas  Crumwell,"  thus  early  and  high 
in  the  confidence  of  Cardinal  Wolsey,  then  absent  in  France,  while  Crumwell 
was  so  busy  in  the  suppression  of  monasteries,  with  a  view  to  the  building  of 
Cardinal  College  at  Oxford. 

"  Right  honourable  master,  in  my  most  lowly  manner,  I  commend  me  unto 
you,  evermore  desiring  to  hear  of  the  preservation  of  your  prosperity.  So  it  is, 
I  was  required  by  Mr.  George  Lawson,  to  deliver  this  writing  to  your  master- 
ship mine  own  self  ;  notwithstanding,  such  an  impediment  hath  chanced,  that  I 
must  desire  favour  on  your  behalf  for  my  excusation.  For  Master  jWoor's  kins- 
man is  not  all  well  at  ease,  for  he  labours,  it  is  certainly  thought,  under  fever, 
the  fever  being  of  that  species,  that  in  regard  to  food,  he  foolishly  turns  away 
from  it  like  a  lunatic,  but  now  it  is  discovered  that  he  is  almost  rid  of  it.  Where- 
fore, I  beseech  you  to  have  me  excused,  and  if  I  knew  that  ray  coming  to  Loudon 
might  stand  with  your  favour,  truly  the  bird  was  never  gladder  of  day,  than  I 
would  be  to  come.  But  brevely,  I  am  ready  at  your  commandment,  for  it  re- 
mains with  you  to  command,  as  yo^i  iclll,  the  abilities  of  your  Miles. 

"  As  for  the  rest,  there  is  nothing  divulged  with  us  that  is  now,  except  the 
rumour  among  our  order,  that  one  of  our  masters  is  accused  of  homicide,  another 
is  dilated  for  heresy,  and  a  third  is  reported  of  a  base  crime,  namely  Master 
Stocks,  junior  ;  of  which  affair  I  will  certify  you  afterwards,  on  its  being  made 
manifest."  Having  nothing  more  to  say,  he  concludes, — "  Ex  Cantabrigia,  27 
die  raensis  Augusti,  anno  dni.  27,  supra  sesqui  milesimum.  (27th  Aug.  1527.) 
Tuus  quantus  quantus,  Milo  Coverdalus."i5 

After  this  letter,  there  can  be  no  question  that  Coverdale  was  already  serving 
Crumv/ell  in  his  vocation.  Under  Wolsey,  the  latter  now  held  the  Stewardship 
of  the  lands  of  the  monasteries  then  dissolving,  and  Lawson  was  a  man  after- 


•5  Crumwell's  Corresp.  MS.,  copied  from  the  State  Paper  Office.  The  name  of  Sir  T.  More 
was  then  very  frequently  spelt  Hloor,  and  from  a  subsequent  letter,  there  is  little  or  no  doubt 
that  he  is  here  referred  to  ;  hence  the  lespect  whicli  Crumwell  would  pay  to  the  "  excusation." 
Stokes,  junior,  must  have  been  the  son  of  John  Stokes,  Trovincial  of  the  Augustine  Friars. 
Wood's  Fasti,  by  Bliss,  p.  35.  Though  Coverdale  had  been  wearing  the  dress  of  a  secular  priest, 
at  Bumstead,  if  he  did  not  resume  his  dress  as  a  friar,  he  was  now  and  afterwards  writing  his 
letters  as  one,  in  alternate  sentences  of  Latin  and  English.  It  was  Wolsey's  rule  in  151!)  for  the 
canons  of  St.  Augustine,— "That  the  brethren  shall  usually  converse  in  Latin  or  French  :"  and 
three  or  four  years  after  this,  we  shall  find  Coverdale,  in  writing  to  Crumwell,  subscribe  himself 
Friar  from  St.  Augustincs  in  London. 


1528.]  AND  PERSECUTED.  187 

wards  employed  by  Crumwcll,  wlien  he  came  into  far  gi*eater  power.";  As  for 
Coverdale,  he  had  entered  on  tliat  course  of  subserviency  to  Crumweli,  whicli 
ended  only  with  the  death  of  the  latter ;  and  whatever  he  may  have  already 
said  or  done,  we  shall  find  him  to  be  quite  secure  from  the  wrath,  whether  of 
Tunstal  or  of  Sir  Thomas  More. 

By  the  beginning  of  May,  Tunstal  had  removed  from  the 
chapel  in  his  palace,  down  to  one  near  Charing  Cross,  in  the 
manor  of  Nix,  the  Bishop  of  Norwich,  of  whose  temper  and 
spirit  we  have  had  such  ample  evidence.  On  the  11th,  he 
was  still  sitting  in  judgment  on  the  poor  people  from 
Essex ;  but  the  spirit  of  persecution  was  now  gathering 
strength,  and,  on  the  14th,  Sir  Thomas  More  comes  in  view. 
On  that  day,  he  and  Sir  William  Kingston,  Constable  of  the 
Tower,  as  members  of  the  Privy  Council,  sent  for  Humfrie 
Munmouthe,  as  he  subscribes  his  name.  He  was  far  too  im- 
portant a  character  to  be  passed  over ;  and  his  being  so,  is  a 
proof  that  there  had  not  been,  till  this  year,  any  severe 
search  after  supposed  oflfenders.  Not  satisfied,  they  went 
with  him  to  his  house,  and  examined  all  his  letters  and 
books.  This  generous  man,  with  whom  Tyndale  had  lived, 
who  corresponded  with  him  afterwards,  and  aided  him  all  the 
time  he  remained  in  Hamburgh,  was  now  committed  to  the 
Tower,  "  on  suspicion  of  heresy,  for  some  books  found  in  his 
house."  Five  days  after  this,  on  Tuesday  the  J  9tli  of  May, 
he  addressed  a  petition  to  the  King's  Council.  It  is  entitled 
— "  Unto  the  most  honourable  Lord  Legate  and  Chancellor  of 
England,  and  to  the  honourable  Council  unto  your  Sovereign 
Lord,  King  Henry  VIII.,  the  19th  of  May,  and  in  the  20th 
year  of  his  reign ;  beseeching  your  Grace,  and  all  my  Lords 
and  Masters,  to  have  pity  on  me,  poor  prisoner  in  the  Tower 
of  London,  at  your  pleasure."  In  this  petition,  he  confesses, 
among  other  books — 

VIII.  "  Also  I  delivered  (to  the  father  confessor  of  Zion)  a  book  of  the  New 
Testament,  the  which  boolv  my  Lord  of  London  had.  Also  I  had  a  little 
treatise  that  the  priest,  Tyndale,  sent  me,  when  he  sent  for  his  money,"  /.  e. 
from  Hamburgh  in  the  close  of  1524.  "  And  all  those  books,  save  the  books 
of  the  New  Testament,  lay  openly  in  my  house,  for  the  space  of  tiro  j-ears,  or 
more,  th&t  every  man  might  read  on  them  that  would  at  their  pleasure." 

Munmouth's  testimony  brings  us  to  the  same  period  with 
that  of  Pykas  ;  but  as  for  the  Testament,  no  doubt,  Tyndale 

16  MS.  Calig.  B.  iii.  fo.  150,  dated  1533.     Sec  also  Gov.  State  Papers,  iv.  p.  636  640. 


1S8  READERS  CROSS-EXAMINED,  [booK  I. 

would  take  care  that,  if  possible,  his  generous  patron  should 
have  one,  at  least,  as  soon  as  Garret  was  carrying  them  from 
London  to  Oxford,  in  January  ]526.  It  may  here  be  added, 
that  in  earlier  life  Munmouth  had  visited  Rome  itself,  which 
may  have  had  a  similar  effect  on  him  as  it  had  on  some 
others.  When  the  times  improved,  he  was  an  Alderman  of 
London,  and  served  as  Sheriff  there  in  1535.  His  will  is 
dated  16th  November  1537,  by  which  he  leaves  a  silver  cup, 
and  gilt,  equal  in  value  to  ^£'120  sterling,  to  Crumwell,  that 
he  might  be  kind  to  three  preachers  there  mentioned,  among 
whom  was  Dr.  Barnes.  Soon  after  this,  Munmouth  died, 
having  commended  his  soul  unto  Christ  Jesus,  "  my  Maker 
and  Redeemer,  in  whom,  and  by  the  merits  of  whose  blessed 
passion,  is  all  my  whole  trust  of  clean  remission  and  forgive- 
ness of  my  sins." 

But  of  all  the  confessions  now  made,  the  following  is  not 
the  least  important.  It  includes  the  disclosures  of  a  man 
who  had  been  very  active  before  this,  and,  notwithstanding, 
as  much  so  as  he  could,  even  afterwards.  This  was  Robert 
Necton.  By  him  we  learn  that  Mr.  Fyshe,  whose  tract, 
"  the  Supplication  of  Beggars,"  had  created  such  commotion 
in  February  1526,  had  actually  returned  to  London,  and  was 
living  there^  long  before  that  year  had  expired.  We  now  find 
also  Mr.  Richard  Harman,  an  English  merchant  at  Antwerp, 
had  acted  in  concert  with  Fyshe,  and  had  contrived  modes  of 
secretly  conveying  the  Sacred  Volume  into  England.  The 
account  which  Necton  gives  of  his  first  engaging  in  the  busi- 
ness of  sale  and  circulation,  is  no  less  curious,  from  its  being 
at  the  instigation  of  such  a  man  as  George  Constantyne,  who, 
though  originally  bred  a  surgeon,  by  this  time  had  entered 
the  Church,  and  hence  is  styled  Vicar.  Of  course,  therefore, 
he  had  to  proceed  with  the  greatest  caution.  He  would  not 
go  direct  to  Fyshe  himself,  but  informs  Necton,  and  then 
from  liim^  he  bought  whatever  copies  he  wished.  Constan- 
tyne, one  of  the  most  singular  characters  of  the  day,  survived 
the  present  period,  at  least,  thirty-two  years.  At  certain 
periods,  doing  all  that  in  him  lay,  to  promote  the  circulation 
of  the  Word  of  God  ;  at  another,  betraying  the  whole  cause ; 
he  is  here  introduced  incidentally,  for  the  first  time,  but  he 
will  come  before  us  again  and  again,  when  some  notice  must 
be  taken  of  his  singular  and  varied  life. 

The  reader  now  only  requires  to  be  reminded,  that  such  a 


1528.]  AND  PERSECUTED.  18.9 

man  as  this  Robert  Nectoii,  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  poor  and 
dependent,  perambulating  the  country  to  obtain  his  bread  by 
selling  books — far  from  it ;  the  occupation  was  too  hazardous 
then  for  any  mere  hireling.  Thus,  Necton  speaks  of  living 
at  his  brother  s  house  in  Norwich,  and  this  was  no  other  than 
the  Sheritt'  of  the  city,  as  Avill  appear  in  1531.  His  confes- 
sion was  as  follows  : — 

TX.  "  He  bought,  at  sundry  times,  of  Mr.  Fyshe,  dwelling  by  the  White  friars, 
in  London,  17  many  of  the  New  Testaments  in  English  ;  that  is  to  say,  now  five, 
and  now  ten  ;  and  sometimes  more,  and  sometimes  less,  to  the  number  of 
twenty  or  thirty  in  the  great  volume.  The  which  New  Testaments,  the  said 
Mr.  Fyshe  had  of  one  Harmand,  (Harman,)  an  Englishman,  being  beyond  sea  ; 
but  how  many  he  had,  this  respondent  cannot  tell. 

"  And  this  respondent  saith,  that  about  a  year  and  a  half  ago  (1526)  he  fell 
in  acquaintance  with  Vicar  Constantyne,  here  in  London  ;  which  shewed  this 
respondent  first,  that  the  said  Mr.  Fyshe  had  New  Testaments  to  sell ;  and 
caused  this  respondent  to  buy  some  of  the  said  N.  Ts.  of  Mr.  Fyshe.  And  the 
said  Mr.  Fyshe,  at  the  desii'e  and  instance  of  Vicar  Constantyne,  brought  the 
said  N.  Ts.  home  to  this  respondent's  house.  And  before  that  V.  Constantyne 
caused  this  respondent  to  buy  some  of  the  said  N.  Ts.,  he  had  none,  nor  no 
other  books,  except  the  chapters  of  Matthew. 

"  And,  moreover,  this  respondent  saith,  that,  about  the  same  time,  (1526,) 
he  sold  five  of  the  said  New  Testaments  to  Sir  William  Furboshore,  singing- 
man,  in  Stowmarket,  in  Suffolk,  for  seven  or  eight  gi'oats  a-piece  :  also,  two  of 
the  same  Testaments  in  Bury  St.  Edmonds,  for  the  same  price. 

"  Also,  he  saith.  Vicar  Constantyne,  at  divers  times,  had  of  this  respondent 
about  fifteen  or  sixteen  of  the  New  Testaments,  of  the  bigyest :  and  this  respon- 
dent saith,  that  the  said  Vicar  Constantyne,  divers  times,  bought  of  him  certain 
of  the  said  New  Testaments,  and  this  respondent  likewise  of  him.  Also  he 
sold  Sir  Richard  Bayfield  two  New  Testaments,  unbound,  about  Christmas 
last,  (1527,)  for  the  which  he  paid  three  shillings,  four  pence.  18  Furthermore, 
he  saith,  that  he  hath  sold  five  or  six  of  the  said  New  Testaments  to  divers 
persons  of  the  city  of  London,  whose  names,  or  dwelling-places,  he  doth 
not  remember. 

"  Moreover,  he  saith,  that  since  Easter  last,  he  bought  of  Jeffrey  (Lome,) 
Usher  of  St.  Anthony's,i9  with  whom  he  hath  been  acquainted  by  the  space  of 
a  year  or  thereabout,  (by  reason  he  was  Mr.  Forman,  the  Parson  of  Honey 
Lane,  his  servant,  and  for  that  this  respondent  did  much  resort  to  the  said 
parson's  sermons,) ^o  eighteen  New  Testaments  in  English,  of  the  small  volume  ; 
and  of  which  New  Testaments,  since  Easter,  this  respondent  carried  fifteen  of 
them  to  Lynn,  to  sell ;  which  he  would  have  sold  to  a  yoimg  man  there — but 


17  On  the  south  side  of  Fleet  Street,  between  the  Temple  and  Salisbury  Court.    The  Library, 
and  other  parts  of  this  priory,  were  granted  to  Sir  Richard  Morysine  by  Henry  VIII.,  in  1540. 
"*  The  fourth  part  of  a  mark,  or  equal  to  £2,  Ids.  sterling  of  the  present  day. 

19  St.  Anthony's  School,  on  the  north  side  of  Threadneedle  Street,  where  afterwards  stood 
tlie  French  Church. 

20  Robert  Forman,  S.T.P.,  the  Rector  of  All  Hallows  Church,  Avhere  Thomas  Garret  had 
been  Curate.  During  this  visitation,  on  the  19th  of  March,  Forman  had  been  interdicted,  be- 
fore Tunstal,  from  preaching  jnibliely  before  the  people,  and  was  therefore  still  under  inhibition. 
As  to  Garret,  see  anno  1526. 


100  READERS  CROSS-EXAMINED,  AND   PERSECUTED.  [boOK  I. 

he  would  not  meddle  with  them,  because  they  were  prohibited  ;  and  so  this  re- 
spondent left  the  said  books  at  Lynn,  till  his  returning  thither  again. 

"  To  the  1 0th  article  against  him,  beginning — '  that  he  went  about  to  buy  a 
great  number  of  New  Testaments,'  he  saith,  that  about  Christmas  last,  there 
came  a  Dutchman,  helnxj  note  in  the  Fleet  prison,  which  would  have  sold  this 
respondent  two  or  three  hundred  of  the  said  N.  Testaments  in  English,  which 
this  respondent  did  not  buy,  but  sent  him  to  Mr.  Fyshe  to  buy  them  ;  and 
said  to  the  Dutchman,  '  look,  what  Mr.  Fyshe  doth,  I  will  do  the  same.'  But 
whether  Mr.  Fyshe  bought  any  of  them,  he  cannot  tell ;  for  the  which  three 
hundred  he  should  have  paid  £16 — 5  shillings  ;  after,  ixd.  a-piece.2l 

«  To  the  20th  article  he  saith,  that  since  Easter  last,  (12th  April  1528,)  he 
was  at  Norwich,  at  his  brother's  house,  where  one  had  complained  of  this 
respondent  to  (Nix)  my  Lord  of  Norwich,  because  he  had  a  New  Testament. 
Wherefore  his  brother  counselled  this  respondent  to  send  or  deliver  his  said 
N.  T.,  and  said  to  him,  if  he  would  not  deliver  it,  my  Lord  of  Norwich  would 
send  him  to  my  Lord  of  London.  And  so  afterwards  he  sent  it  to  London  by 
the  cari'ier. 

"  To  the  21st  article — '  that  contrary  to  the  prohibition  (October  152G)  he 
hath  kept  the  N.  Testament' — he  confesseth,  that  after  he  had  knowledge  of 
the  condemnation  of  the  said  N.  Testament,  by  the  space  of  a  year  or  more, 
(i.  e.  in  fact,  nearly  a  year  and  a  half,  or  from  23d  Oct.  1526,  to  the  12th  April 
1528,  as  already  confessed,)  he  hath  had  in  his  custody,  ke2?t  and  studied  the 
same  Testament,  and  has  read  it  thoroughly  ttiany  times.  And  also  has  read 
it  as  veil  ivithin  the  city  and  diocese  of  London,  as  icithin  the  city  and  diocese 
of  Nonpich,  and  not  only  read  it  himself,  hut  read  and  taught  it  to  divers 
others. — Per  me,  Robert  Necton." 

There  is  no  account  left  as  to  the  time  of  Necton's  death  ;  but  after  being  now 
released,  he  continued  to  go  on,  much  as  ho  had  done,  for  two  or  three  years, 
when  he  was  again  apprehended.  His  exposure  of  Constantyne  rendering  it 
unsafe  for  him  to  remain  in  London,  he  escaped  to  Brabant,  where  he  occasion- 
ally practised  his  first  acquired  profession,  that  of  a  surgeon,  but  passed  and 
repassed  the  sea,  importing  books,  till  1530,  when  he  was  caught.  During  this 
period,  as  Necton  had  supplied  him  with  books,  so  now  he  had  supplied  Necton, 
and  that  with  many.  But  Constantyne,  once  cruelly  used  and  in  fear  of  his  life, 
not  only  exposed  his  old  acquaintance,  but  different  other  individuals  !  "  It  is 
well  known,"  says  Sir  Thomas  More,  "  that  Necton  had  himself,  and  a  man  of 
his  also,  sold  many  such  books  of  heresy  ;"  and,  again,  "  Richard  Necton  was, 
by  Constantyne's  detection,  taken  and  committed  to  Newgate,  where,  except  he 
happen  to  die  before  in  prison,  he  standeth  in  great  peril  to  be  burned  ere  it  be 
long,  for  his  falling  again  to  Tyndale's  heresy."^^  This  was  printed  of  him  in 
1532,  but  we  never  read  of  his  coming  to  this  painful  yet  glorious  death. 

X.  Jeffrey  Lome,  the  usher  of  St.  Anthony's  School,  was  referi'ed  to  in 
1526,  as  having  sold  Testaments  to  Bradford,  even  though  both  Garret  and 
Barnes  were  in  prison,  and  he  has  just  been  alluded  to  by  Necton.  As  an 
usher  at  such  a  school, — for  it  was  then  eminent, — he  had  been  employing  him- 
self in  the  cause,  and  it  is  evident  that  Forman,  Garret,  and  he,  were  zealously 


21  Fyshe  must  have  gone  abroad  again,  as  soon  as  this  visitation  began  in  earnest.  The  Dutcli- 
men,  as  they  then  designated  all  the  natives  of  Brabant,  were  evidently  striving  to  undersell 
each  other— a  good  proof  of  a  ready  sale  and  growing  demand  ;  but  there  must  be  some  mistake 
in  the  sums  here  specified.  Three  hundred  for  £l6,  5s.  being  at  the  rate  of  i/iMeen  pence.  If 
they  were  nineyiencc  each,  there  must  have  been  4o(l  copies.  But,  at  all  events,  these,  and 
many  other  hundreds,  were  got  into  England.        22  More's  Confutation,  1532,  Preface. 


1528.]  SUMMARY.  191 

united  in  its  promotion.  When  called  up,  therefore,  he  was  not  only  charged 
with  having  and  dispei'sing  certain  books  of  Luther,  but  with  translating  certain 
chapters  of  his  book  "  dc  bonis  Opcribus," — for  holding,  that  Christian  men 
ought  to  worship  God  only,  and  no  saints,  &c.  Though  now  confessed,  he  did 
not  afterwards  desist  from  circulating  Testaments.  St.  Anthony's  Free  School, 
on  the  north  side  of  Threadnecdle  Street,  "  kept  equal  credit,"  says  Stowc, 
with  that  of  St.  Paul's,  both  which  had  the  greatest  reputation  in  former  times. 
It  was  here  that  Sir  Thomas  More  had  received  the  rudiments  of  his  education. 

It  is  presumed  that  each  of  these  cases  may  be  considered 
as,  in  itself,  interesting ;  but  that  one  object,  for  which  they 
have  all  been  introduced,  is  now  sufficiently  established.  For, 
if  we  now  pause  for  a  few  moments,  and  take  in  the  whole  of 
the  evidence  laid  before  the  reader,  in  regard  to  a  period  so 
important,  and  respecting  which  not  only  the  greatest  un- 
certainty, but  confusion  has  hitherto  prevailed — what,  and  how 
much  has  been  established  ? 

That  in  January  1526,  Thomas  Garret,  at  least,  received 
from  abroad  copies  of  the  New  Testament,  printed  in  the 
English  language — that  he  immediately  had  given  them  out 
in  London,  sent  them  down  to  Cambridge,  and  carried  them 
himself  to  Oxford,  in  that  very  month — that  notwithstanding 
the  grand  burning  of  books  at  St.  PauFs,  on  the  lltli  of 
February  1526,  and  the  anathemas  of  Fisher  on  that  day, 
nay,  and  the  burning  at  Oxford  soon  after,  when  the  Testa- 
ment, amongst  other  books,  was  involved  in  the  flames,  still 
the  work  went  on — that  even  Fyshe  himself  was  soon  after 
in  London,  and  remained  in  it,  receiving  from  abroad,  and 
dispersing  the  precious  volumes  for  a  considerable  time. 
Then  come  up  these  men  from  Essex,  and,  along  with  Mun- 
mouth,  all  agree  in  their  testimony.  Put  upon  their  oath, 
not  one  among  them  could  have  any  motive  to  falsify  in  re- 
gard to  the  length  of  the  time  in  which  these  Testaments 
had  been  in  their  possession.  On  the  contrary,  could  such 
an  idea  have  occurred  to  any  one  of  them,  the  temptation 
must  have  been  to  shorten,  not  extend  the  period ;  for  the 
longer  it  was,  so  much  the  more  guilty  must  they  have  ap- 
peared in  the  eye  of  their  judges.  But  in  receiving  their 
united  testimony,  how  far  does  it  carry  us  ?  That  as  early 
as  February,  and  downwards  to  October  1526,  Tyndale's 
Testaments,  both  quarto  and  octavo,  as  well  as  the  first 
separiite  edition  of  Matthew  and  Mark,  were  upon  English 
ground,  and  reading  with  eagerness,  not  only  in  the  metropolis. 


1.92  PERSECUTION   AT   HOME.  [bOOK  I. 

but  the  surrounding  counties, — that,  notwithstanding  the 
fulminations  from  London  and  Canterbury,  and  "  the  secret 
search,  at  one  time,"  the  precious  books  were  retained  and 
read  in  secret  still.  Nay,  we  have  seen  one  man,  Necton, 
immediately  afterwards  commence  his  cautious  operations — 
mentioning  very  distinctly,  first,  the  quarto  of  Tyndale,  or 
the  large  volume,  then  the  octavo  edition,  and  finally  another 
edition,  printed  at  Antwerp,  as  already  described.  Doubtless 
there  had  been  other  men  before  him  so  employed,  as  there 
were  others  afterwards,  including  himself  again. 

But  the  purposes  of  Infinite  Wisdom  in  thus  trying  the 
faithful,  and  purifying  his  cause,  were,  for  the  present  at 
least,  accomplished.  Tunstal,  it  may  have  been  observed, 
had  shifted  his  seat,  from  his  own  palace,  near  the  old  bridge 
of  London,  down  to  Charing  Cross,  and,  for  ought  we  know, 
this  might  be  ivovafear ;  but  such  cool  and  deliberate  cruelty 
must  not  continue  either  in  London  or  Westminster,  and  so 
the  persecution  seems  to  have  been  cut  short  by  a  Sovereign 
hand,  or  the  immediate  visitation  of  God.^^ 

That  fearful  disease,  stA^led  by  foreigners,  the  Sudor  Angllcus 
on  account  of  the  violence  with  which  it  seized  this  nation, 
or,  as  the  English  themselves  called  it,  the  "  sweating  sick- 
ness," broke  out  in  the  end  of  May.  The  patient  expired  in 
a  few  hours,  and  often  in  two  or  three.  By  the  7th  of 
June,  above  two  thousand  had  died  in  London,  and  by  the 
30th,  forty  thousand  had  been  affected,  of  whom  died  at  least 
two  thousand  more.  Early  in  June,  the  King  himself  became 
alarmed  ;  the  disease  entered  the  Royal  household,  and  proved 
fatal  in  at  least  three  cases ;  and  before  the  month  ended,  it 
had  entered  Wolsey's  establishment.  Henry  kept  himself 
shut  up,  had  his  household  reduced  to  the  smallest  number 
permitted  by  the  statutes  of  Eltham,  and  his  fear  increased.^"* 


23  But  why  suppose  this,  except  the  evidence  be  strong?  May  it  not  be  said  that  Tunstal 
had  to  be  otherwise  engaged  ?  Was  he  not  directed  by  Wolsey  to  attend  the  King  on  political 
business,  relating  to  the  truce  with  Flanders  and  France?  MS.  Cotton,  Galba,  B.  vii.,  p.  373. 
He  was,  but  this  was  on  the  10th  of  June.  The  disease  had  made  him  desist,  a  month  before 
this  ;  and  it  deserves  notice,  that  though  his  Vicar-General,  Wharton,  pursued  the  same  course 
in  June,  yet  then,  he  tveni  down  into  Usse.i;  and  most  probably  to  escape  the  malady  which  so 
raged  in  London. 

24  "  The  King's  Majesty  is  much  troubled  with  this  disease — for  this  night  there  is  fallen  sick 
My  Lord  and  Lady  Marquis  (of  Dorset,)  Sir  T.  Cheney,  Mr.  (Sir  Henry)  Norris,  Mr.  (Sir  John) 
Wallop,  be  recovered  ;  but  Mr.  (Sir  Francis)  Poyntz,  (recent  ambassador  to  Spain)  is  departed. 
This  day  the  King  removeth  to  Bps.  Hatfield,  and  hath  very  few  with  him— as  few  as  he  may  ;" 
alluding  to  the  Statutes,  the  number  being  15.— MS.  Chapter-house,  Westminster,  vol.  x.,  no.  2.'>. 


1528.]  ARRESTED   BY  DISEASE.  193 

In  July,  on  the  5tli,  still  more  apprehensive,  he  directs 
Wolsey  "  to  cause  general  processions  to  be  made,  universally 
through  the  realm,  as  well  for  good  weather  to  the  increase  of 
corn  and  fruit,  as  also  for  the  plague  that  now  reigneth.'''"'^-'  By 
the  9th,  lie  had  made  his  will,  advises  Wolsey  to  follow  his 
example,  and  desires  to  hear  from  him  every  second  day. 
"  He  confessed  himself  every  day,"  say  Le  Grand  and  Jiurnet; 
"  the  Queen  did  the  same,  and  so  did  Wolsey." 

This  was  the  fourth  visitation  of  that  singular  disease,  of 
which  the  English  only  died  ;  and  which  has  been  described  so 
accurately  by  Armstrong,  both  in  its  operation  and  its  effects — • 

"'  O'er  the  mournful  land 
The  infected  city  pour'd  her  hurrying  swarms — 
Others,  with  hopes  more  specious,  cross'd  the  main, 
To  seek  protection  in  far  distant  skies ; 
But  none  they  found.     It  seem'd  the  general  air 
From  pole  to  pole,  from  Atlas  to  the  East, 
Was  then  at  enmity  with  English  blood ; 
For,  but  the  race  of  England,  all  were  safe 
In  foreign  climes  ;  nor  did  this  fury  taste 
The  forcifin  blood  that  England  then  contained. "28 

During  the  prevalence  of  this  malady,  however,  it  does  not 
appear  that  the  Cardinal  was  so  much  afraid  of  it,  as  of  for- 
feiting the  entire  confidence  of  his  Master.  He  had  appointed 
an  Abbess  to  the  Abbey  of  Wilton,  which  had  ruffled  Henry's 
temper ;  for  ever  since  the  disclosures  of  Clarencieux  as  to 
Spanish  affairs,  he  was  more  suspicious  and  apt  to  take  offence. 
But  Wolsey  once  more  mollified  him  ;  by  August  the  disease 
had  passed  away,  and  all  went  on  as  before.  The  King  was 
hunting  in  September,  and  inviting  Wolsey  to  take  part  with 
him  in  the  sport.  All  was  bustle  and  preparation  for  the 
arrival  of  Cardinal  Campeggio,  and  Henry  wished  to  have 
the  use  of  Hampton  Court  for  three  or  four  days  to  receive 
him  there.^^     But  we  now  return  to  more  important  affairs. 

Though  the  cruel  proceedings  of  Tunstal  and  his  coadju- 
tors, seem  to  have  been  cut  short  by  frightful  disease ;  in  the 
course  of  the  examinations  held,  the  persecutors  had  obtained 

25  MS.  Chapter  Iiouse,  Westminster,  vol.  x.,  no.  :?5. 

2R  This  disease,  first  known  in  the  army  of  Henry  VII.  in  1583,  revisited  England  five  times, 
and  always  in  summer;  in  1485,  in  150C,  and  in  1517,  when  a  number  of  the  higher  ranks 
died.  This  was  the  fourth  time,  and  the  last  was  in  1551,  when,  in  Westminster,  it  carried  off 
120  in  a  day.  The  poet  is  very  nearly  correct ;  for  it  never  entered  Scotland,  but  was  confined  to 
the  English  and  the  Anglo-Hibernian  colonists,  in  all  the  in.stances.  It  prevailed,  however,  once, 
when  England  was  free,  and  this  was  in  the  year  after  the  present  time  ;  for  in  1529itbroke  out  in 
Hamburgh  and  Antwerp,  and  spreading  through  the  Netherlands  and  Germany,  proved  very  fatal. 

27  MS.  Chapter-house,  Westminster,  vol.  v.,  no.  24.  Campeggio  arrived  at  Dover  29th  September. 
VOL.   I.  N 


litl-  PERSECUTION   ABROAD    REVIVED.  [j500K  I. 

several  pieces  of  iuformation,  far  too  important  in  their  eyes, 
to  be  either  forgotten  or  neglected.  Tyndale  and  Roye, 
(erroneously  supposed  to  be  still  with  him,)  were  now  con- 
spicuously before  them.  One  gentleman  in  particular,  Mr, 
Harman,  had  been  mentioned  as  actively  engaged  in  import- 
ing English  Testaments,  and  neither  George  Constantyne  nor 
Mr.  Fyslie  could  pass  unnoticed.  Meanwhile,  since  Tyndale"'s 
writings  had  obtained  such  circulation  in  our  country,  it  seem- 
ed necessary  that  an  attempt  should  be  made  to  answe7'  them  ; 
and  so  by  way  of  adding  greater  horror  to  the  heresies  said  to 
be  contained  in  them,  as  we  have  already  seen,  it  was  during 
the  very  period  when  Tunstal  was  busy  with  his  cross-examin- 
ations, that,  with  all  due  solemnity,  he  had  issued  his  official 
license  to  Sir  Thomas  More,  that  he  might  retain  and  read 
those  troublesome  publications,  and,  with  all  his  skill  in  so- 
phistry, write  them  down. 

As  for  Cardinal  Wolsey,  after  these  examinations  in 
London,  he  was  bent  on  seizing  the  Men  abroad,  and  three 
persons  in  particular,  though  other  two  were  also  specified. 
In  June,  therefore,  he  had  written  to  Hackett,  requesting 
that  the  Lady  Margaret  would  sanction  the  delivery  of  these 
f.hire^  with  a  view  to  their  being  immediately  sent  into  Eng- 
land. But  on  the  28th  of  that  month,  the  envoy  informed 
him,  that  after  many  arguments  "  debated  pro  et  contra,  they 
to  me  and  I  to  them,'"'  tlie  Privy  Council  had  concluded,  that 
even  the  Emperor  himself  might  not  send  any  heretic  out  of 
his  dominions  as  a  prisoner,  except  his  first  examination  was 
held  abroad,  where  he  was  ;  and  even  after  that,  the  trans- 
mission of  the  party  must  be  by  the  advice  of  the  Inquisitors 
of  the  Faith  there.  They  had,  however,  resolved  that  all  the 
foresaid  three  heretics,  when  they  could  be  found,  should  be 
taken  prisoners,  they  and  their  books  with  them  ;  but  the 
Council  requested  one  or  two  learned  men  to  be  sent  abroad 
to  confront  them.  If  they  should  be  "  confounded  or  found 
guilty,"  they  would  either  be  sent  over  to  Wolsey,  or  punished 
there,  according  to  their  deeds.  ^ 

The  names  of  these  obnoxious  men  were  not,  as  yet, 
mentioned  b}^  Hackett,  but,  as  the  reader  proceeds,  he  will 
have  no  doubt  that  Tyndale,  Roye,  and  Harman,  were  tJie  three 


2a  (ialba,  B.  ix.,  iol.  12C. 


1528.]  TYNDALE,   ROYK,  AND   HARjMAN,  NAMKD.  195 

parties.  George  Constant}aie  and  Mr.  Fyslie  may  appear  to 
have  been  the  other  two,  if  Jerome  Barlow^  soon  to  be  noticed, 
was  not  the  fifth  individual.  Fourteen  days  they  busily 
searched,  but  JMr.  Harman  alone  could  be  found,  when 
Hackett  once  more  addresses  Wolsey  on  the  14th  of  July. 

"  Unto  your  Grace  I  sent  my  last  letters,  the  28th  of  June,  in  post,  with  a 
servant  of  mine — and  since  that  time  my  Lady  has  caused  great  diligence  to 
be  made  for  the  apprehension  of  the  three  persons,  named  unto  me,  by  your 
Grace's  last  writing  ;  and  after  long  attendance,  considei'ing  that  the  tivain 
of  the  said  three  might  not  be  found  ;  the  12tli  day  of  this  month,  I  caused 
Richard  Harman  to  be  taken  prisoner  at  Antwerp,  and  tlie  Margrave  has 
caused  his  wife  to  be  taken  with  him,  as  greatly  suspected  of  such  like  faction 
as  her  husband  is — and  all  their  goods  have  been  inventorysed  in  the  Em- 
peror's hands." 

This  man,  Hackett,  was  a  most  convenient  tool  in  the  hands  of  Wolsey. 
Having  no  principle,  and  acting  fully  on  the  maxim  that  no  faith  was  to  be  kept 
with  heretics,  he  now  had  the  baseness  to  add,  in  this  same  letter — 

"  I  would,  if  it  might  be,  that  your  Grace  had  this  Richard  Harman  there  in 
England  ;  for,  as  I  hear,  he  is  a  Itoethe  of  great  raischief.-9  And  to  get  him 
out  of  these  countries,  I  know  no  better  means  at  this  time,  than,  if  the  King's 
Highness  have  any  action  of  treason  at  him,  that  his  Highness,  or  your  Grace, 
write  a  good  letter  to  my  Lady,  that  she  should  send  you  the  foresaid  Harman, 
as  traitor  to  the  King — leaving  the  heresy  beside,  to  the  correction  of  these 
countries,  if  your  Grace  think  so  good  ;  and  in  this  manner  we  may  have  two 
strini/s  to  our  bow  :  for  I  doubt  greatly,  after  the  statutes  of  these  countries, 
that,  revoking  his  heresies,  for  the  first  time  he  will  escape,  with  a  slender 
punishment  ;  but  for  treason  to  the  King,  they  cannot  pardon  him  in  these 
parts,  after  the  statutes  of  our  Intercourse,  dated  the  year  L50.5.30  I  certify 
your  Grace,  that  it  were  a  good  deed,  and  very  convenient,  to  chastise  these 
Lutherans,  that  be  accused  of  heresy,  that  they  were  as  well  comprehended  in 
the  '  Intercourse'  as  traitors  be  :  for  as  soon  as  they  be  past  the  seas,  they 
know  no  more  God,  neither  Kimj  !"^^ 

Hackett,  however,  is  now  somewhat  afraid.  He  had  found 
considerable  difficulty,  when  dealing  with  Christopher  End- 
hoven,  the  German  printer,  in  the  end  of  1 526 ;  but  now  that 
an  English  merchant  and  a  gentleman  has  been  seized,  should 
the  "  Lords  of  Antwerp"  still  remain  firm  to  their  purpose,  as 
then  expressed ;  in  the  end,  at  least,  our  officious  ambassador 
may  find  his  interference  to  be  followed  by  greater  trouble 
and  disgrace.     Antwerp  was  still  the  staple^  and,  for  commerce 

29  An  unmanageable  fellow  ?    Royci,  wild,  irregular,  unmanageable. — Jamieson. 

30  Hackett  here  alludes  to  the  treaty  of  Henry  VII.,  ISO.i,  which  the  Flemings  used  to  call 
intercursiis  mains.  "  In  this  treaty,  there  was  an  express  article  against  the  reception  of  the 
rebels  of  either  prince  by  the  other  ;  purporting,  that  if  any  such  rebel  should  be  required  by 
the  prince  whose  rebel  he  was  of  the  prince  confederate,  that  forthwith  the  prince  confederate 
should  by  proclamation  command  him  to  avoid  the  country  :  which  if  he  did  not,  within  fifteen 
days,  the  rebel  was  to  stand  proscribed,  and  be  put  out  of  protection."— jBat'OwV  Henry  VII. 

31  Galba.  B.  ix..  fnl.  129. 


19G  HARMAN   IN    PRISON,  [bOOK  I. 

sake,  their  English  merchants  must,  if  possible,  be  protected ; 
but  to  England  for  protection  it  was  in  vain  to  look.  She 
was  not  then,  what  she  has  often  been  since, — and  thanks  to 
the  Sacred  Volume  alone  ! — "  the  refuge  of  the  oppressed  ;" 
so  that  the  Emperor  himself  must  be  applied  to.  He  was, 
accordingly,  and  by  two  petitions,  in  the  Flemish  language, 
on  behalf  of  the  EmfUsh  prisoners.  Both  are  now  in  the 
British  Museum,  dated  July  1528,  and  the  substance  of  them 
may  be  thus  summed  up — 

"  Richai'd  Harman  being  in  prison,  for  having  sold  New  Testaments  to  Eng- 
lish merchants,  having  been  sevt  to  him  out  of  Germany,  as  also  being  accused 
for  lodging  in  his  house  certain  Lutherans,  (as  all  Bible  men  were  then  nick- 
named,) and  for  eating  flesh  on  Sunday,  does  plead  for  himself,  petitioning  the 
Emperor  :  He  desires  that  he  and  his  irife  might  be  let  out  upon  sufficient  bail, 
to  recover  his  debts  upon  the  breaking  up  of  the  fair  ;  lest  losing  that  which 
is  due  to  him,  ho  should  not  be  able  to  give  satisfaction  to  his  creditors."32 

Wolsey,  however,  was  not  slow  to  act  upon  tlie  vile  sug- 
gestion of  his  correspondent,  and,  accordingly,  in  the  month 
of  August,  Hackett  had  actually  obtained  letters  from  Henry 
the  Eighth,  to  seize  Mr.  Harman  as  a  traito?' ;  but  the 
reigning  Princess  wished  to  be  informed  what  were  the  par- 
ticular acts  of  treason.  Great  interest  was  then  made  for 
Harman,  who  had,  for  many  years,  been  a  burgess  of  Antwerp. 
Hackett  implores  Commissioners  to  be  sent  from  England ; 
and,  little  knowing  the  secret  politics  of  our  Cardinal  at  the 
moment,  which  had  destroyed  his  influence  in  the  Imperial 
Cabinet,  he  is  eager  that  the  Emperor  should  be  requested 
to  write  to  Lady  Margaret ;  otherwise,  he  fears  that  "  the 
preat  purse  of  Antwerp"  would  prove  the  deliverance  of  Har- 
man," his  victim.^  And,  by  the  10th  of  September,  he  is 
obliged  to  confess,  that  "  notwithstanding  the  Kincfs  patent 
letters,  the  Lady  Margaret  and  her  Council  would  not  deliver 
up  the  heretics."^* 

Our  poor  ambassador  was  now,  certainly,  in  no  very  enviable 
plight.  A  pause  of  more  than  four  months  took  place  in  his 
correspondence.  Month  after  month  passed  away,  and  no 
fresh  instructions  nor  assistance  arrived,  for  both  Wolsey  and 
his  Master  were  completely  engrossed  in  a  very  different  sub- 
ject— the  royal  divorce.     At  last,  in  despair,  Hackett  having 

32  Galba,  B.  ix.,  fol.  I;il.     3:i  Idem.  fol.  177  :  dated  Mechlin,  28th  Aug.  \rr2B.    34  Idem,  fol.  180. 


1528. J  OUR  AMBASSADOR  IN   ANXIETY.  197 

written  to  the  King  himself,  on  the  17th  of  November,  we 
have  then  one  curiously  earnest  and  complaining  epistle, 
addressed  to  Friar  West  of  Greenwich,  of  whom  Ave  shall  hear 
more  presently,  dated  from  Mechlin  on  the  last  day  of  the 
year,  or  31st  December  1528. 

"  My  ghostly  father,  Friai*  West,  I  heartily  recommend  me  unto  you,  having 
received  your  last  letter,  written  at  Greenwich,  the  21  st  day  of  November ;  by  the 
which  T  perceive,  by  other  great  businesses  of  importance,  that  my  Lord  Grace, 
(the  King),  had  no  leisure  to  malce  answer  to  any  letters  of  mine,  nor  attend  to 
your  verbal  declaration  touching  Richard  Harman's  business.  But  yet,  if  it 
had  pleased  his  Grace  to  command  Master  Tuke,  or  some  other  to  write  me 
some  little  word  of  his  mind,  it  should  be  comfortable  to  me,  and  the  better  I 
might  answer  in  our  cause." 

He  is  now  much  afraid  that  Mr.  Harman  and  his  lady  will 
escape.  From  time  to  time  he  had  prolonged  the  continuance 
of  their  imprisonment,  and  the  last  term  ordained  by  the  law 
of  Antwerp,  had  expired  on  the  fourth  of  December,  so  that 
he  felt  himself  now  personally  concerned. 

"  Of  a  certainty  I  may  certify  to  juu,  that  it  were  too  prolix  a  thing,  to  write 
the  great  solicitations,  diligences,  and  labours,  that  the  Lords  of  Antwerp,  with 
the  said  Harman  and  his  friends,  do,  and  have  done,  day  by  day,  to  clear  him 
of  our  said  action  of  treason,  if  they  might. 

"  But,  considering  that  I  esteem  this  matter  of  more  importance,  than  me- 
thiuks  we  set  by  it  there  at  home  ;  marking,  that,  in  four  months  and  more,  I 
have  had  no  manner  of  answer  to  any  letters  that  I  have  written  thitherward, 
touching  this  business  and  others.  For  the  best  resolution  and  surest  way, 
with  some  little  labour,  but  not  without  great  difficulty,  I  have  obtained  from 
my  Lady  and  her  Council,  a  new  term  of  sorcyans  of  justice,  to  bi-ing  our  proofs 
forward  out  of  England,  by  writing  or  by  other  probations  ;  which  term  finishes 
and  expires  the  last  Friday  of  February  next  coming ;  by  the  which  time,  I  trust 
in  God,  by  your  solicitation,  that  the  King's  Highness  and  my  Lord  Legate's 
Grace  shall  send  me  some  good  information  and  instruction,  how  I  may  best 
proceed  in  this  business  ;  for  I  assure  you,  that  this  is  such  a  matter  that  sees 
farther  than  it  seems." 

After  mentioning  his  strong  suspicion  that  Mr.  Harman's  ^'  ])urse  may  largely 
suffer  penance,  but  as  touching  his  ;)t';-so«,  he  doubts  he  will  be  favoured."  He 
proceeds, — "  I  am  informed  that  Richard  Harman  says,  that  his  prisonment  has 
cost  him  above  two  thousand  guilders,  a,\\A  that  he  trusts  to  recover  his  damages, 
and  slander  upon  them  that  have  kept  him  long  wrongfully  in  prison ;  and  that 
we  have  nothing  to  lay  to  his  charge  but  suspicions  and  naked  words  ;  but  as 
for  this  article,  [f  I  may  have  my  Lord's  advice  and  good  information,  I  trust 
he  shall  miss  his  meaning  and  intention — (but)  without  we  have  good  infor- 
mation out  of  England,  it  shall  be  hard  to  bring  him  to  penance  :  for  he  denies 
all  his  acts  of  heresies,  and  we  find  not  here  sufficient  proofs,  to  prove  his 
(delycttcs)  offences,  and  because  also,  as  you  know  well  enough,  the  most  part 
of  Antwerp  be  as  good  Christian  men  as  they  be  in  Almany  (Germany)  ;  where- 
fore he  has  not  the  less  favour."' 


198  IIAUMAN    RELEASED.  [booK  I. 

On  the  2(1  of  January,  he  addresses  Mr.  Brian  Tuke  as 
Treasurer  of  the  King's  Chambers,  and  one  of  his  Council,  in- 
forniin"'  him  of  his  having  written,  by  duplicate,  letters  to 
West ;  but  complains,  whether  "  I  write  east  or  West,  I  can 
have  no  manner  of  answer — yet  for  the  reputation  of  the 
King's  patent  letters,  we  ought  to  take  the  better  regard."  On 
the  20tli  he  writes  again,  imploring  that  Friar  West  may  be 
sent  to  his  aid,  but  all  in  vain.^  The  fact  was,  that  at  such 
a  time,  neither  Henry  nor  the  Cardinal  could  expect  to  have 
the  smallest  influence  with  the  Emperor  or  the  Princess 
Margaret.  No  proofs  or  probations,  therefore,  having  arrived, 
the  term  finally  granted  to  Hackett,  expired  on  the  26th  of 
Februarv,  and  consequently  Mr.  Harman  and  his  wife,  after 
an  imprisonment  of  above  seven  months,  were  released  ! 

This  interference,  however,  on  the  part  of  our  English 
Envoy,  was  one  which  "  the  Lords  of  Antwerp  "  could  by  no 
means  brook.  The  ttcaiu  of  the  three  men  named  to  him,  he 
could  not  find,  but  he  was  to  have  perplexity  all-sufficient,  in 
consequence  of  touching  with  only  one  of  the  three;  and  though 
we  trespass  a  little  on  the  year  1529,  we  must  not  here  lose 
sio-ht  of  Mr.  Harman  and  his  lady.  Hackett  must  now  abide 
the  consequences,  and  Harman  waited  his  proper  time  for  re- 
dress. Though  the  ambassador  was  resident  at  Mechlin,  it 
was  not  long  before  an  opportunity  presented  itself ;  and  the 
story  is  far  too  good  to  withhold,  since  it  comes  from  Hackett''s 
own  pen,  addressed  to  Wolsey  from  Brussels,  ISth  April  1529. 

" I  being  at  Antwerp  the  7th  day  of  this  month,  after  that  I  executed 

mine  exploit  upon  William  Cley  the  rebel  ;36 — Richard  Harman  caused  me  to 
be  arrested,  for  all  the  costs  and  charges  that  he  suffered  in  prison,  at  my  in- 
stance and  solicitation  as  the  King's  ambassador  ;  considering  that  for  lack  of 
our  particular  declarations  of  his  (delictts)  offences,  the  law  of  Antwerp  here 
aforetime  declared  him,  by  their  sentence,  absolute  free  and  frank,  of  all  such 
actions  as  the  Margrave  or  the  Scout  of  Antwerp,  as  officers  of  the  Prince,  by 
n)y  information,  laid  unto  his  charge. 

"  The  8th  day,  in  the  morning,  to  answer  to  my  cause  I  appeared  afore  the 
Lords  of  the  said  town  ;  shewing  unto  them  that  at  the  request  of  the  rebel 
Richard  Harman  there,  being  present,  that  I  was  arrested  by  their  officer, 
named  the  Amant,37 — declaring  unto  them  that  if  the  said  Harman,  or  any 


•^5  This  friar  had  been  over  and  with  him  in  September,  though  in  vain  jiursuit,  as  will  appear 
])rescntly,  but  he  could  not  be  sent  a  second  time. 

3B  Accordingly  wc  have  in  this  same  volume  "  A  recognisance,  in  French,  taken  before  a  No- 
tary by  which  William  Clee,  a  merchant,  engages  to  appear  in  Knijland:"  dated  Antwerp,  7th 
April  152!).     Galba,  B.  ix.,  fo.  16fi.     For  what  alleged  crime,  is  not  stated. 

37  This  fine  city,  which  was  only  humbled  by  the  rising  of  Amsterdam,  long  governed  by  its 
own  laws,  had  a  Senate  of  its  own.    Tliis consisted  of  a  Praetor,  the  Amant,  Consuls,  and  bciia- 


1528.]  AMBASSADOR  ARRESTED.  190 

other  in  this  country,  could  lay  any  thing  to  my  charge,  as  John  Hackttt,  that 
I  presented  myself  there,  ready  to  answer  for  myself.  But  if  the  said  llarinan 
has  caused  me  to  be  arrested  as  Ambassador  to  my  Sovereign  Lord  the  King, 
that  I  would  not  answer  to  their  laws,  nor  to  any  particular  Town's  justice  ; 
and  that  I  knew  in  this  country  no  Judge  upon  me  as  Ambassador,  but  that  I 
submit  myself  to  my  Lady  and  the  Emperor's  Privy  Council. 

"The  said  llarman's  Procurator  answered,  that  I  was  arrested  as  Ambassador, 
and  causer  of  the  said  Harman's  imprisonment,  and  of  his  destruction  and  de- 
famation ;  which  Ilarman  was  purged  clear,  free,  and  frank,  Ijy  the  Justice  of 
Antwerp, — desiring  the  said  Justice  that  I  might  be  condemned  to  pay  all  the 
said  Harman's  costs  and  damages,  according  to  the  law  and  privilege  of  the 
said  Town.  Whereto  I  replied,  that  I  was  not  bound  to  answer  to  their  laws, 
and  desired  sentence  upon  my  declaration. 

"  The  Lords  having  regard,  after  long  consultation,  declared  me  free  and  quit 
of  the  said  arrest,  u-ith  condition  that  1,  or  my  Procurator,  should  appear  again, 
when  the  said  Lords,  by  their  letter,  would  advertise  me,  and  in  this  manner  I 
departed  from  Antwerp. 

"At  my  coming  here  in  Court  I  advertised  my  Lady  and  her  Council  how  1 
was  intretted ;  of  the  v\hich  intrettement  the  said  Lady  and  Council  shewed 
themselves  highly  displeased,  and  immediately  caused  to  write  letters  in  post 
to  the  Amant  and  Lords  of  Antwerp,  to  appear  afore  her  Council  personally 
here  at  Brussels,  to  answer  to  that  she  would  lay  to  their  charge. 

"  The  1 2th  day  of  this  month  (yesterday)  the  Amant  and  Lords  of  Antwerp 
appeared  in  this  Town  afore  the  Emperor's  Privy  Council,  when  they  were 
highly  reviled  and  rebuked  for  the  exploit  that  they  did  upon  me, — and  that 
the  Amant  should  ask  my  pardon  and  forgiveness  of  his  misuse  that  he  has 
done  ;  and  to  him  I  answered  that  the  said  fault  was  not  done  to  ray  person, 
but  that  it  was  done  to  the  King  my  Sovereign  his  authority  ;  and  that  foras- 
much as  touched  me,  and  that  the  King  my  Master  be  pleased,  that  I  forgive  it 
him  cordially.  As  touching  this  matter  your  Grace  may  perceive  that  my 
Lady  and  her  Council  have  done  their  (devoyer)  duty." 

Hackett  had  certainly  not  added  to  hi.s  popularity  by  his 
first  attempt  upon  Endhoven  the  Antwerp  printer  ;  but  his 
imprisonment  of  Mr.  Harman  was  followed  by  lasting  conse- 
quences to  himself.  He  had  stood  out,  on  his  privilege  as  be- 
ing "  Ambassador,""  but  in  this  character,  his  leaving  Antwerp 
only  under  a  condition  was  sufficiently  humiliating,  if  it  did 
not  also  betray  some  degree  of  cowardice.  He  might  now 
crow,  in  writing  to  the  Cardinal  next  day,  but  the  transaction 
had  cost  him,  at  least,  a  change  of  residence.  His  letter,  it 
will  be  observed  is  dated  from  Brussels,  It  was  the  first  he 
ever  wrote  from  thence,  and  there  he  must  remain.  Before 
this,  his  letters  were  uniformly  dated  from  Mechlin,  Antwerp, 


tors.  The  power  of  the  two  former  was  perpetual,  or  for  life  ;  that  of  tlie  latter  was  annual. 
The  Senate,  which  was  chosen  from  the  men  of  rank  or  patricians,  the  Lawyers  and  Merchants, 
was  renewed  or  proroc;ued  annually  in  the  month  of  May.—"  Notitia  Marcliionatiif,  &c.,  of 
Jacnbi)  li-  Roy,  If;7»." 


200  REMOVES  TO  BRUSSELS.  [^noOK  I. 

or  Barrow  ;  but,  with  the  exception  of  two  from  Mechlin,  the 
week  after  this,  wlien  he  came  to  remove,  they  are  dated  from 
Brussels  ever  after,  and  for  five  years  to  come :  and  though 
he  lived  on  the  Continent,  the  presumption  is  that  he  never 
again  was  a  welcome  guest  in  Antwerp,  At  all  events,  his 
meddling  with  the  man,  who  had  taken  a  benevolent  interest 
in  sending  the  Word  of  God  into  his  native  country,  eventually 
removed  this  ambassador  to  a  distance ;  and  if  Antwerp  is  to 
have  a  British  resident  in  or  near  it,  some  other  than  John 
Hackett  must  now  be  found.  The  overruling  providence  of 
God  will,  before  long,  be  here  also  very  manifest.  Had  such 
a  man  as  this  remained,  when  Tyndale  himself  came  to  reside 
in  Antwerp,  never  had  he  spoken  of  him,  as  his  successor  will 
be  found  to  have  done. 

As  for  Mr.  Harman,  we  shall  hear  of  him  again,  but  it 
will  not  be  till  five  years  after  this,  or  in  1534;  in  which 
year  his  persecutor,  Hackett,  died  at  Douay,  and  in  debt.^ 
But,  before  then,  Mr.  Harman,  it  will  appear,  had  returned 
to  England — was  commended  for  his  zeal — was  restored  to 
favour,  as  well  as  all  his  privileges  connected  with  "  the 
English  House"  at  Antwerp,  and  at  the  express  request  of 
the  Queen  of  England. 

This  gentleman  had  been  a  devoted  friend  of  Tyndale's  ob- 
ject and  design,  as  well  as  of  Tyndale  himself,  in  which  his 
wife  had  cordially  joined  with  him.  The  printers  of  Antwerp 
managed  their  own  business,  and,  by  various  means,  im- 
ported their  editions  into  England,  which,  of  course,  had 
afiiected  the  sale  of  Tyndale's  books  ;  but  the  Testaments 
with  which  Mr.  Harman  was  charged,  were  said  to  be  sent  to 
him  out  of  Germany.  Warham,  the  Archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury, must  therefore,  to  his  great  mortification,  have  very 
soon  perceived,  that  he  had  not,  as  he  at  first  supposed,  pur- 
chased all;  and,  therefore,  even  in  Aiittcerp,  where  Hackett 
had  so  raged,  we  shall  actually  find  Tyndale  himself ;  and 
when  his  finances  were  at  the  lowest  ebb,  selling  the  re- 
mainder, with  great  advantage,  next  year.  Nay,  selling 
them  to  Tunstal,  who,  in  1524,  had  thought  that,  as  a  Greek 
scholar,  Tyndale  "  could  not  fail"  to  find  some  situation  ! 

In  the  midst  of  all  this  turmoil  at  Antwerp,  however,  the 


3R  r.alba,  B.  x.,  48,  54. 


1528.]  PURSUIT  AKTER  TYNDALE.  201 

truth  was,  that  Wolsey  had  been  far  from  inattentive  to  the 
information  received  from  Hackett,  although  he  had  seemed  to 
be  remiss  in  not  answering  his  letters.  On  the  contrary,  as 
soon  as  he  understood  by  his  letter  of  the  14th  of  July,  that 
"  the  twain  of  the  three,"  or  Tyndale  and  Roye,  Avere  not  to  be 
found  in  Antwerp,  or  its  vicinity,  the  Cardinal  had  bethought 
himself,  and  resolved  to  apply  elsewhere  in  pursuit  of  them. 
But,  at  such  a  time,  how  striking  was  the  display  of  Wolsey's 
enmity  to  the  Sacred  Volume  !  How  great  his  fear  of  him- 
self, and  of  the  hierarchy  !  His  alarm  is  more  worthy  of 
notice,  as  this  was,  perhaps,  his  final  official  eftort  in  this  war- 
fare. Let  it  only  be  remembered,  that  sickness  had  been 
raging  in  the  land  throughout  June  and  July,  nor  had  it  en- 
tirely ceased  at  the  moment  of  which  we  speak — that  disease 
of  which  the  poet  said — 

•'  "Twas  all  the  business  then. 

To  tend  the  sick,  and  in  their  turns  to  die. 
In  heaps  they  fell,  and  oft  one  bed,  they  say. 
The  sick'ning,  dying,  and  the  dead  contain'd." 

Besides  this,  Wolsey  had  scarcely  recovered  the  favour  of  his 
Master,  after  having  ruffled  his  temper,  by  one  false  step,  al- 
ready noticed  ;  nor  had  they  yet  met.^^  Notwithstanding,  so 
important  was  the  capture  of  these  two  men,  that  not  a  day  was 
to  be  lost.  The  New  Testament,  and  the  two  pointed  publi- 
cations of  Tyndale,  Avere,  it  is  true,  not  the  only  things  rank- 
ling in  his  mind ;  the  bitter  Satyre  of  Roye  and  Jerome  had, 
by  this  time,  begun  to  annoy  him,  as  it  greatly  did,  and  no  ex- 
pense must  be  spared  in  buying  it  up.  Tyndale,  wishing  it  to 
be  known,  that  he  had  no  connexion  with  Roye,  had  said,  in 
print,  that  these  two  men  (Jerome  and  Roye)  were  "•  Friars 
from  Greenwich ;"  and  who  then  so  fit  to  ferret  them  out,  as 
a  shrewd  Friar  Observant,  from  the  same  monastery  I  And 
to  whom  could  the  Cardinal  now  apply  on  the  Continent  more 
likely  to  be  of  service,  than  the  man  whom  Cochlseus  had  at 
first  roused  in  1525 — Counsellor  Herman  Rincke  of  Cologne? 
Accordingly,  as  early  as  the  5tli  of  August,  Wolsey  sat  down 
in  Hampton  Court  palace,  and  addressed  him.  In  Rincke, 
he  had  a  determined  enemy  to  the  "  new  learning,"  and  a 
man,  in  some  respects,  quite  to  his  own  heart.     His  letter 

30  Page  193. 


202  PURSUIT  AFTER  TYNDALE.  [BOOK  I. 

finished,  a  suitable  agent  was  found  in  the  person  of  Friar 
Jolin  West  of  Greenwich,  ah'eady  mentioned.  He  had  been 
instructed  to  proceed  by  way  of  Antwerp,  and  consult  with 
Hackett ;  and  from  him  we  have  some  farther  information 
upon  West  leaving  that  city  on  the  11th  of  September — 

"  Yesterday,"  says  he,  "  at  after  dimiei",  Friar  West  departed  hence  towards 
Cologne,  with  another  Friar  of  his  order,  named  Friar  Flegh,  (Flegge,)  an  Eng- 
lishman born,  and  with ,  a  singular  good  true  man,  for  their  guide  to 

Cologne,  to  whom  I  have  given  money  to  pay  for  their  costs  ;  and  I  shall  fur- 
nish the  said  Friar  according  to  your  Grace's  desire,  of  all  such  money  as  he 
shall  require  me  to  furnish  by  his  commission  ;  for  whom  I  have  already  paid 
upon  a  three  pounds,  40  and  will  let  him  lack  no  time,  to  bring  his  enterprise 
to  a  good  perfection,  as  I  trust  he  shall  ;  for  his  intent  is,  at  his  coming  to 
Cologne,  to  change  raiment." -ii 

On  their  arrival  at  Cologne,  Rincke  was  absent  from  home, 
at  the  autumn  fair  in  Frankfort ;  but  the  letter  was  imme- 
diately conveyed  to  him  by  a  sicift  messenger ;  and,  by  the 
4th  of  October,  we  have  his  reply,  sent  by  the  same  Friar. 
It  is  in  Latin  ;  and  though  defective  in  several  words,  enough 
remains  to  render  it  an  interesting  and  important  document. 
A  literal  translation  of  the  greater  part,  must  not  be  with- 
held from  the  reader — 

"  The  letters  of  your  Grace  to  me,  given  by  Master  John  West,  Priest  of 
the  Observant  Order  of  St.  Francis,  written  the  fifth  of  August,  at  Hampton 
Court,  in  your  Grace's  palace,  were  sent  and  conveyed  to  me  from  Cologne  to 
Frankfort  in  two  days,  by  a  swift  messenger,  the  2d  (•22d)  of  September  ;  with 
regard  to  buying  up,  every  where,  books  printed  in  the  English  language,  and 
as  to  the  apprehension  of  Moye  and  Hutch yn,  i.  e.  Tyndale.  But  neither  they, 
nor  their  accomplices,  have  been  seen  in  the  fairs  at  Frankfort  since  (paschate) 
the  r2th  of  April,  or  even  (proximus  quadragesimus)  the  first  of  March  ;  and 
[we  cannot  find  out]  neither  [their  abode]  whether  they  remain,  or  whether 
they  be  dead,  nor  has  John  (Schoot)  Scott  of  Argentine  (i.  e.  Strasburg)  said 
that  he  knew  them,  or  their  printers.  But  their  books  are  full  of  heresy,  and 
against  the  mctgnifcence  and  honour  of  your  Grace,  [which  they  treat  with  con- 
tempt] and  vith  reproach.     They  are and  very  wicked,  and  opposed  to 

Christian  charity,  [as  well  as  to]  his  Highness,  my  most  gracious  Lord,  my 
generous  and  illustrious  Prince  ;  they  render  [themselves  odious]  to  all  the 
worshippers  of  Christ." 

He  then  states  that  lie  had  been  at  Frankfort  "  with  ready 
money,  labouring  himself  personally  to  the  utmost — but 
John  Scott,  the  printer,  besides  a  pledge  to  be  given  to  the 

■">  Equal  to  £-ir>. 

<"  Cotton  MS..  Galba,  B.  ix..  fol,  Iflfi,  "  from  Mechlin,  l-'th  ot  Sep.  iry2H,"  though  in  the  Cata- 
lo"Ue  l.i2ft  bv  mistake. 


i:)28.]  PURSUIT   AKTER  TVNDAI.K.  203 

Jews,  demanded  also  the  reward  of  lii.s  own  labour,  and  the 
expense  of  the  paper ;  and  said  that  he  would  sell  them  to 
him  who  would  offer  him  most  moneyy 

"  When,  therefore,"  continues  Rincke,  "  your  Grace  sent  me  your  letters 
and  commands  from  England,  straightway  I  spared  neither  my  person,  money, 
nor  diligence,  as  in  duty  bound  ;  but  having  made  use  of  the  licenses ybj-jMcr^,;/ 
received  from  his  Imperial  Majesty  to  awe,  by  (fifts  and  presents  I  attached 
to  me  the  Frankfort  Consuls,  as  well  as  some  Senators  and  Judges  ;  so  that  I 
gathered  together  and  packed  up  all  the  books  from  every  quarter,  and  in 
three  or  four  places.  Thus  I  hope  that  as  many  of  such  books  as  were  printed, 
ai'e  held  by  me,  except  two,  which  your  Grace's  Commissary,  John  West, 
wished  and  received  from  me — and  for  the  use  and  advantage  of  his  Royal 
Highness  and  your  Grace,  I  gave  him  two  books,  as  I  found  him  both  faithful 
and  diligent  for  your  Grace,  whom  he  has  often  served,  and,  without  doubt, 
will  serve  henceforth.  But  these  books,  (unless  I  had  found  them  out  and  in- 
terposed,) must  have  been  bound  in  parchment  and  concealed,  and  inclosed  in 
packages,  artfully  covered  over  with  flax  ;  they  would  in  time,  without  any 
suspicion,  have  been  transmitted  by  sea.  Into  Scotland  and  Entjland,  as  to  the 
same  place  ;  and  would  have  beeu  sold  as  merely  clean  paper  ;  hut  very  few  or 
none  of  those  carried  away  and  sold  [have  been  found  ?] 

"  Moreover,  with  the  utmost  diligence,  I  shall  also  take  care  as  to  the  fore- 
said Roye  and  Hutchyn,  and  other  rebels,  envious  against  the  King's  Grace 
and  yours,  both  as  to  aj)prehending  them,  and  observing  what  places  they 
frequent — As  Mr.  John  West,  and  my  son,  Herman  Rincke,  and  John  Gcil- 
kyrche,  my  servant,  will  testify  by  mouth,  and  in  your  presence,  to  whom  your 
Grace  may  give  credit  as  much  as  to  myself ;  for  they  will  conceal  and  keep 
quiet  the  whole  matter,  whatsoever  your  Grace  may  commit  to  them — whom 
I  specially  send  over  into  the  presence  of  the  King  and  your  Grace,  for  the 
more  convenient  despatch  of  this  very  business,  that  I  may  explain  and  execute 
the  matter  in  a  way  which  may  be  acceptable  to  the  King's  grace  and  yours." 

He  then  proceeds  to  enhance  the  value  of  his  services,  re- 
ferring to  his  correspondence  with  Henry  VIII. ;  but  as  one 
transaction  had  occurred  before  Wolsey''s  high  degree,  he 
must  remind  him  of  former  days,  and  then  apply  the  whole 
to  the  case  in  hand — 

"  Besides,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord,  1502,  in  the  month  of  August,  I  had 
the  pleasure  to  obtain  from  his  Imperial  Majesty  (Maximilian)  the  most  ex- 
tensive license  of  his  royal  favour  towards  England,  and  the  intercourse  of 
merchants  granted  with  the  greatest  liberality."  He  forgets  not  to  add,  that 
he  had  delivered  his  license  and  credentials  before  the  whole  Court  at  West- 
minster, and  moreover,  that  he  was  the  bearer  of  ten  thousand  jMunds,  given 
by  Henry  VII.  to  be  conveyed  to  the  Emperor  .-is     This  prepares  the  way  for 

*-  This  was  a  grant  of  £'I0,()0()  to  Maximilian,  for  enabling  him  to  oppose  the  Turks  on  tlio 
side  of  Hungary,  where,  at  the  moment,  they  were  pushing  on  their  conquests.  On  this  ac- 
count, the  Pontiff  laboured  to  excite  all  the  European  princes  to  contribute;  and  certainly  tliis 
was  a  large  contribution,  more  csi)ecially  when  the  avaricious  character  of  Henry  VII..  towards 
the  end  of  his  reign,  is  remembered.— ?ce  Fa'ilera,  vol.  xiii.,  p.  9.  The  sum  was  equal  to 
,i'l.')0,(H)ll  of  the  jircscnt  day. 


204  PURSUIT  AFTER  TYNDALE  AND  OTHERS.        [l300K  I. 

the  following  proposal — "  That  a  license  should  be  granted  to  him,  with  the 
concui'rence  of  Charles  V,,  of  the  largest  extent."  "  In  my  judgment,  it  is  fit 
to  be  continued,  that  as  throughout  the  whole  Roman  Empire,  so  especially  in 
Germany,  those  annoying  the  King  of  England,  and  the  traitors  against  the 
same,  ought  not  to  be  protected  or  endured  ;  much  less  heretics,  stin-ing  up  a 
seditiou  among  the  Christians  of  the  whole  English  kingdom.  On  account  of 
the  force  and  legality  of  a  similar  license,  Edmund,  Duke  of  Suffolk,  was 
ordered  by  King  Philip,  as  was  said,  to  be  brought  into  England.  Then  also 
William  Roye,-13  Williaji  Tyndale,  Jerome  Barlow,  Alexander  Barklay, 
and  their  adherents — also  George  (Constans)  Constantyne,  and  many  others, 
ought  to  be  taken,  punished,  and  exposed,  both  for  destroying  the  Lutheran 
heresy,  and  to  confirm  the  Christian  faith  !"  But  again  he  must  repeat  the 
efforts  he  had  already  made,  with  the  following  curious  enlargement — 

"  1  lately  brought  the  printer  himself,  John  (Schoot)  Scott,  before  the  Con- 
suls, Judges,  and  Senators  of  Frankfort.  I  put  him  upon  oath,  that  he  should 
confess  whatever  books  he  had  printed  in  the  English  language,  the  German, 
Fi'ench,  or  any  other  idiom.  Then,  upon  his  said  oath,  he  confessed  that  he 
had  printed  only  one  thousand  (sc.i'  quaternlonum,)  and,  as  yet,  one  thousand 
books  {norem  quaternionnm,)  and  this  by  the  order  of  Roye  and  Hutchyn,  who, 
wanting  money,  were  not  able  to  pay  for  the  books  printed — and  much  less 
could  they  be  printed  iu  other  languages.  Wherefore,  /  hare  inirchased  them, 
almost  all,  and  note  hare  them  in  my  house  at  Coloijne.  I  trust  that  my  son  will 
persuade  your  Gi'ace,  and  he  will  desire  that  your  Grace  send  me  more  certain 
instructions  from  his  Majesty,  what  he  wishes  to  be  done  with  the  books  pur- 
chased, then,  with  all  diligence,  it  shall  be  completed.  And  as  to  myself  and 
mine,  by  the  favour  of  God,  possibly  there  may  be  an  opportunity  for  his  Koyal 
Higlmess  and  your  Grace  to  recompense  us.  May  your  Grace,  therefore, 
prosper  mauy  happy  years. — Given  at  Cologne  the  4th  of  the  nones,  October, 
ill  the  year  1528,  &c.     Signed  Herman  liinck,  M."-14 

After  this,  no  one  will  question  the  anxiety  or  eager  desire 
of  Cardinal  Wolsey  to  seize  Tyndale,  and  especially  this 
Friar  Roye.  How  deeply  he  was  stung  by  the  stanzas  of 
"  Bede  me,  a?id  be  not  u-j-othe,''''  is  now  apparent.  But  this 
strange  letter,  in  connexion  with  the  past,  suggests  several 
curious  considerations.  We  are  now  at  Frankfort  great  fair, 
and  the  reader  may  recollect  of  Hackett  the  ambassador  in- 
forming Wolsey,  that  he  heard  of  Netc  Testaments,  to  the 
number  of  two  thousand,  having  been  for  sale  at  the  spring 
fair  of  last  year ;  but  now,  when  Scott  is  apprehended  and 
examined,  he  demands  a  pledge  to  be  given  to  the  JEw^s•,  in 
security  for  their  concern  in  such  traffic,  "  to  Scotland  and 
England  as  to  the  same  place.''''  No  doubt  the  Jews  were  there 
last  year,  as  well  as  this  ;  and  it  certainly  would  be  a  very 
singular  and  memorable  coincidence,  if  the  Jeics,  for  hire  or 


43  It  is  very  observable,  that  throughout  this  letter  Eui/e  takes  the  lead.  There  was  reason 
for  this.  His  Satyre  was  a  personal  offence,  and  it  was  one  under  the  lash  of  which  the  mighty 
Cardinal  himself  now  writlicil.  -ii  Cotton  MS..  Vittlius,  B.  xxi.,  fol.  4-3. 


1528.]  ALL  IN   VAIN.  205 

gain,  had  assisted  in  such  importations  !  And  yet,  what  else 
can  be  inferred,  from  Scott's  exaction  or  demand  ?  But  if  so, 
the  descendants  of  Abraham,  to  whom  were  committed  "  the 
Oracles  of  God,"  as  recorded  in  the  Old  Testament,  may  have 
been  unconsciously  conveying  to  this  Island,  as  an  article  of 
merchandise,  "  the  living  oracles,""  as  recorded  in  the  New  : 
and  doing  this  too  at  a  period,  when  the  nation,  as  such,  was 
up  in  arms  against  the  undertaking  !  To  this  people,  under 
God,  we  stand  indebted  for  a  Saviour,  and  the  Bible,  but  we 
know  not  that  it  has  ever  been  conjectured  of  any  other  nation, 
that  the  Jeus  had  any  concern,  however  remote,  in  giving  or 
conveying  to  it  the  New  Testament.'*^ 

We  are  not,  indeed,  to  suppose,  that  our  Translator  either 
had  been  at  Frankfort,  or  that  any  of  Ms  publications  are  here 
referred  to  as  printed  at  Strashurg ;  much  less  that  any  con- 
nexion whatever  now  existed  between  him  and  Roye.  With 
regard  to  Tyndale  at  this  moment,  or  Fryth,  of  whom  no 
notice  is  taken,  happily  IMr.  Counsellor  Rinck  was  altogether 
oflF  the  scent.  Forty-five  miles  to  the  north,  at  Marburg, 
they  were  busily  engaged,  both  with  the  pen  and  the  press ; 
yet  is  it  quite  possible  that  some  of  Tyndale\s  productions 
may  have  passed  through  this  Frankfort  fair.  Rinck,  how- 
ever, had  certainly  laid  hold  of  the  printer  employed  by  Roye, 
and  these  as  certainly  were  Ids  publications  to  which  reference 
is  made.  Perhaps  no  great  dependence  can  be  placed  on  the 
accuracy  of  Scott's  disclosure,  even  upon  oath ;  but  still  there 
can  now  be  little  or  no  doubt  that  we  have  found  in  him  the 
printer  of  the  celebrated  Satyre  on  Cardinal  Wolsey,  a  point 
hitherto  unhioivn.  Rinck  expressly  states  of  some  of  the 
books,  that  they  were  "  against  the  magnificence  and  honour 
of  his  Grace."^« 


45  Although  this  sinsular  probability  cannot  be  more  fully  established — under  its  influence,  O 
let  this  ancient  people  only  be  the  more  commiserated  now.  Woe  to  that  nation,  whicli,  at  this 
day,  helps  on  their  affliction,  and  blessed  that  people  who  compassionate  them.  For  all  such 
kindness  there  is  in  store  an  ample  repayment,  and  why  should  not  Britain,  above  all  other 
nations,  take  the  lead? 

46  As  connected  with  that  strange  production,  the  Satyre,  there  is  one  coincidence  here,  which 
must  not  pass  unnoticed.  Tyndale  had  affirmed  that  one  Jcnmie  was  the  maker  of  these  rhymes  ; 
and  here  wo  have  a  man  named  .Icrome  Barlotv  associated  with  Roye.  Now,  in  the  recantation 
of  Bishop  Barlow,  he  says, — "  I  have  made  certain  books,  and  have  suffered  them  to  be  imprint- 
ed ;  as  the  treatise  of  the  burial  of  the  Mass,"  &c.,  which  was  another  title  by  which  the  Satyre 
went,— "and  in  these  treatises  I  ])creeive  and  acknowledge  myself  grievously  to  have  erred,  dis- 
allowing the  Mass,  with  slanderous  infamy  n/my  Lord  Cardinal,"  &c.  In  Roye's  introductoi^ 
address,  also,  the  rhymes  are  represented  as  having  been  sent  out  of  Eiui/and  to  he  printed.  The 
Bishop's  name,  however,  was  fl'illiam,  and  though  ho  acted  a  strange  part,  it  has  been  supposed 


200  WOLSEY'S  PURSUIT.  [iiooK  T. 

George  Oonstantyne,  it  .should  seem,  had  soon  fled  from 
England,  and  most  probably  during  TunstaFs  cross-examina- 
tions in  the  spring,  when  his  name  was  mentioned.  He  might 
not  return  while  Wolsey  lived,  except  it  were  with  books  ;  but 
we  shall  meet  with  him  again  in  the  hands  of  Sir  Thomas  More, 
a  persecutor  of  a  higher  grade  than  the  Cardinal  ever  was. 

Most  providentially,  however,  by  the  time  that  West  and 
his  companions  arrived  in  England  with  this  letter,  Wolsey, 
so  far  from  prospering  "  many  happy  years,"  as  Rinck  had 
prayed,  probably  never  had  one  day  of  unmiugled  enjoyment. 
The  confidence  of  his  own  Royal  Master  had  begun  to  decline, 
and  Rinck  but  little  knew  the  game  that  Wolsey  was  playing 
at  that  moment  with  the  Emperor ;  otherwise,  neither  he  nor 
Hackett  could  have  expected  him  to  have  any  influence,  upon 
any  subject,  with  Charles.  Thus  the  remainder  of  the  Cardi- 
naPs  wrath  was  restrained,  and  happily  Rinck  never  obtained 
the  license  or  Commission  for  which  he  panted  ;  besides,  his 
politics  must  have  soon  changed  with  the  times.  His  son  had 
been  in  England  before,  and  now  that  he  came  a  second  time, 
he  has  been  supposed  to  have  remained  for  some  time,  though 
of  this  we  have  found  no  positive  evidence. 

As  for  Friar  West,  he  entirely  failed  in  apprehending  any 
of  the  men  pointed  out.  It  must  have  been  still  more  morti- 
fying to  him  that,  while  he  was  wandering  on  the  Continent, 
in  his  disguised  habit,  Roye,  the  very  man  whom  Wolsey 
wished  to  have,  above  all  others,  had  actually  paid  a  visit  to 
England;  and  to  crown  all.  West,  upon  returning  to  his 
monastery,  not  only  received  no  thanks  for  all  his  toil,  but 
very  soon  found  it  a  great  deal  too  hot  for  him.  The  "  new 
learning ""  had  begun  to  spread  even  there  !  He  might,  as 
we  have  found,  write  to  Hackett  in  November,  telling  him 
how  the  King  and  the  Cardinal  were  engrossed,  and  could 
not  answer  his  letters ;  but  by  the  next  month,  he  himself 
could  not  gain  access  even  to  Wolsey,  and  was  at  his  wits'  end. 

that  this  recantation  was  prescribed  to  him,  and  that,  from  fear  of  Gardiner,  he  signed  it.  Still 
tlie  coincidence  is  remarkable,  and  at  all  events,  this  Jerome  Barlow  must  liave  been  the  man 
to  whom  Tyndalc  alluded.  Alexander  Earklay  is  also  named;  most  probably  the  ]ioet,  the 
author  of  "  the  Ship  of  Fools,"  wlio  it  seems  had  the  honour  to  be  ranked  among  the  heretics. 
John  Scott  of  Strasburg,  the  nephew  of  Mentcl  in  that  city,  was  generally  known  on  the  Conti- 
nent. A  sjiirited  printei-,  he  was  quite  ready  for  any  controversial  or  satirical  publication.  This 
is  the  same  man  who  gave  such  offence  to  Entsnuis  by  i)nnting  for  Hutten,  against  him.  In  15;>4, 
Erasmus  had  written  two  pressing  letters  to  the  Magistrates  of  Strasburg,  insisting  on  his  punish- 
ment, and  he  became  displeased  with  Hcdio,  simjily  because  he  would  not  take  his  part  against 
Scott,  with  whom  the  magistrates  would  not  interfere. —See  Joriiii's  Life  (>/  Kra.i)inis. 


ITj-iS.]  AT   AN    KNI).  207 

There  is  a  curious  letter,  describing  his  miseries,  addressed  to 
some  "  Iliglit  Worshipful  Sir,"  perhaps  Brian  Tuke,  dated 
the  17th  of  December.  It  forms  an  appropriate  conclusion  to 
this  vain  pursuit. 

"  Sir,  the  cause  of  my  writing  unto  your  Mastership  at  this  time,  is  tiiis  : 
Our  father  minister,  who  is  Fatlier  William  Robbynson,  Warder  of  Greenwich, 
were  yesterday,  or  this  day,  at  my  Lord's  Grace  to  complain  upon  me,  and  that 
my  Lord  should  take  away  the  commission  from  me  ;  and  all  because  they  will 
not  let  me  come  to  London,  and  to  seek  for  them  that  my  Lord  knoweth  of,  and 
to  enquire,  xohere  Roye  was,  when  he  was  in  England  with  his  mother,  and  for 
other  sort  of  business  according  to  my  commission.  And  they  have  great  in- 
dignation at  me,  because  I  have  sped  so  well,  and  because  there  is  more  of  them 
guilty  in  the  matter  of  Lutheryans.  And  they  cannot  speak  among  them  a 
good  word  of  my  Lord's  Grace  and  the  King's.  And  because  I  do  reprove 
them  of  their  ill-sayings,  they  go  about,  all  that  they  can,  to  put  me  to  trouble 
and  vexations,  and  desolations,  that  I  am  almost  weary  of  my  life  among  them. 
And  they  have  taken  away  my  fellow  traveller  that  came  with  me  from  beyond 

sea,  and  they  have  sent  him  in in  a  ship  alone,  without  a  fellow — (most 

probably  the  "  good  true  man  "  that  Ilackett  sent  with  him  from  Antwerp) ; 
and  all  because  that  T  [went]  about  none  of  my  business,  but  they  will  know 
it.     Also  they  will  not  obey  the  King's  Broad-Sheet. 

"  Therefore,  I  pray  your  worship,  for  the  passion  of  Christ  sake,  as  to  be  so 
good  unto  me,  as  favour  me  with  the  dispensation,  as  shortly  as  it  may  be  pos- 
sible, and  if  you  think  it  cannot  be  afore  Christmas,  I  pray  you,  get  me  a  [let- 
ter] of  an  obediencie,  under  my  Lord's  broad  seal  for  me  Friar  John  Weston, 
preacher  and  confessor,  and  for  my  fellow,  Cornelius  Hewtsone  a  Dutchman, 
which  I  intend  to  take  for  the  season,  because  he  can  (speak)  but  little  English, 
and  so  that  I  may  do  my  matters  the  more  secretly.  The  letter  of  obediencie 
you  may  get  of  Mr.  Steward,  he  that  is  master  of  my  Lord's  faculties,  and  what 
you  pay  unto  him  for  it,  I  sliall  see  you  be  contented  :  for  I  am  so  desolate, 
that  without  your  help,  that  I  might  come  to  the  speech  of  my  Lord's  Grace, 
they  will  pitt  me  in  prison.^7  Wherefore  I  pray  you  to  help  now,  as  my  special 
trust  is  in  you,  and  the  sooner  the  better.  I  f  you  can  get  the  obediencie,  send 
it  me  to  Greenwich,  by  one  of  your  servants,  and  that  he  delivers  it  to  no  man, 
but  to  myself,  for  I  am  weary  of  my  life  among  them,  and  all  because  I  see 
them  that  they  be  willing  to  maintain  these  rebels  or  heretics  in  their  mis- 
chief, and  they  pray  to  God  that  they  [may  succeed.]— At  Greenwich,  at  our 
convent  the  xvii.  December,  A.  Dni.  15"28."4" 

The  poor  Friar  had  no  doubt  many  weighty  reasons  for 
wishing  once  more  to  go  abroad,  but  they  were  all  in  vain. 
Wolsey,  by  this  time,  had  his  hands  full.  Henry  was  absorpt 
in  his  own  affair.  Our  Envoy,  indeed,  wrote  in  January,  im- 
ploring that  the  Friar  might  be  sent  to  his  aid,  but  we  hear 


■>^  CrumivcU  held  •'  tlie  Stewardship"  of  the  monastery  lands  now  confiscated.  Perhaps  he  is 
here  referred  to,  and  it  will  be  well  if  he  does  not  follow  in  pursuit,  after  Wolsey's  death. 

■lo  Cotton  MS..  Vitelius,  B.  x.,  fol.  171-  In  this  letter  only,  the  name  is  Westow,  which  seems 
to  be  a  clerical  error,  as  in  all  the  others,  it  is  West. 


208  TYNDALE'S  PROGRESS  [book  i. 

nothing  more  of  Father  West,  and  Hackett  will  never  obtain 
any  farther  orders.  The  chase  was  now  over  till  Henry  him- 
self began,  for  thus  ended,  at  least,  the  CardinaPs  hunt 
after  heretics  so  called  I  After  this,  he  will  have  quite  enough 
to  do,  in  taking  care  of  himself.  It  was  Providence  ruling 
and  over-ruling  all  things,  for  the  sake  of  His  own  Word. 


SECTION   VI. 

TTNDALE'S  progress  in  the   old   testament PERSECUTION   IN  ENGLAND 

THWARTED  ONCE    MORE TUNSTAL  AT   ANTWERP WOLSEy's  CAREER • 

TYNDALe's    influence     in    the    PALACE CRANMER    FIRST    EMPLOYED 

WOLSEy's    FALIi LORD    CHANCELLOR   MORE RISE   OF    CRUMWELL — PAR- 
LIAMENT ASSEMBLED COMMOTION  THERE MORE,  THE  BISHOPS,  AND  THE 

KING,  IN  LEAGUE    AGAINST   THE  SCRIPTURES — COVERDALE  SENT  TO    HAM- 
BURGH  ANOTHER  OR  FIFTH  EDITION  OF  THE  TESTAMENT. 

In  the  denunciation  of  the  English  New  Testament  by  Tun- 
stal  and  Warham,  in  1526,  we  then  noticed  one  curious  omis- 
sion, that  of  T3aidale's  name ;  at  that  time  they  appear  not 
to  have  known  it,  but  we  have  already  seen,  that  very  soon 
after  the  names  of  Tyndale  and  Roye  were  distinctly  known 
to  one  of  TunstaFs  chaplains.  Dr.  Robert  Ridley,  prebend  of 
St.  PauFs ;  and  he  may  have  been  the  first  individual,  who, 
in  writing  at  least,  denounced  the  Translator  by  name  as  well 
as  his  invaluable  work.  Tyndale's  frank  acknowledgement  of 
his  authorship  in  ]  527,  made  this  more  generally  known;  and, 
the  confirmation  was  comjDleted,  by  the  examinations  held  be- 
fore the  Bishop  of  London  during  the  last  spring.  It  was  then, 
too,  that  one  of  the  ablest  scholars,  said  to  be  the  greatest 
(jienius,  if  not  the  onhjicit  in  all  England  obtained  license  from 
his  friend,  the  bishop,  first  to  read  Tyndale,  and  then  to 
write  in  reply.'  Ever  since  his  license  in  March  last.  More,  as 
he  tells  us  afterwards,  had  been  busy  "  night  and  day,"  and 
this  year  we  find  him  bring  out  his  first  controversial  publi- 
cation, consisting  of  above  one  hundred  and  twenty  folios,  or 
250  pages,  printed  by  John  Rastell,  his  brother  in-law.^ 

1  On  the  authority  of  Erasmus,  we  are  told  that  Dean  Colet  thought  Sir  Thomas  JHore  "  the 
only  wit  in  the  Island,"  and  "the  greatest  genius  in  England." 

2  Its  original  title  discovers  the  importance  which  was  now  attached  to  the  exertions  of  Tyn- 
dale.    "  A  dyaloge  of  Syr  Tlioinas  More,  knyghte  :  one  of  the  Connsayll  of  nur  Souvrayne  Lorde 


152!).]  IN   THE  OLD  TESTAMENT,  20iJ 

If,  therefore,  Tyndale  wished  to  go  on  with  his  labours,  it 
had  now  become  more  tlian  ever  necessary  that  he  should  use 
precautions  for  the  safety  of  his  person  :  and  removal  from 
place  to  place  seems  to  have  been  one  of  these.  Before,  how- 
ever, adverting  to  these  places,  let  us  first  return  and  mark  the 
course  of  his  engagements. 

With  regard  to  the  translation  of  the  Old  Testament  in 
which  T3^ndale  had  for  some  time  been  employed,  with  all  the 
aid  which  young  Fryth  was  so  well  fitted  to  lend,  we  have 
now  some  tangible  proof  of  his  progress. 

It  has  been  customary  to  speak  of  Tyndale"'s  Pentateuch  as 
published  in  15-30,  but  this  is  incorrect.  The  five  books  might 
be  afterwards  bound  uj),  but  originally  they  were  neither 
printed  at  the  same  press,  nor  published  together,  but  separate- 
ly. In  the  order  of  importation,  at  least,  the  account  of  the 
creation  and  the  early  history  of  mankind  in  Genesis,  seems 
to  have  been  followed  by  Deuteronomy,  that  compendious  re- 
petition or  summary  of  the  law,  with  explanatory  additions. 
At  all  events  before  the  end  of  their  year  1529,  or  the  25th 
of  March,  1530,  these  two  books  are  among  those  publicly  de- 
nounced ;  and  those  alone  under  the  following  titles  : — "  The 
Chapters  of  Moses,  called  Genesis — the  Chapters  of  Moses, 
called  Deuteronomos."  When  we  come  to  the  spring  of  1530, 
the  five  books  of  Moses  will  be  more  fully  noticed. 

During  this  year,  the  state  of  his  native  land  had  continued 
to  oppress  the  mind  of  Tyndale.  However  modest  and  unpre- 
tending in  his  character,  as  he  could  not  be  unacquainted  with 
the  great  eflects  produced  by  what  he  had  already  done,  so  he 
must  have  felt  that  he  was  raised  up  for  a  certain  purpose ; 
and  that  with  the  progress  of  events  or  the  condition  of  his 
country  he  must  endeavour  to  keep  pace  with  his  pen.  The 
correctness  and  celerity,  as  well  as  power,  with  which  he  did 
so,  will  appear  alike  remarkable. 

One  distinguishing  feature  of  our  Translators  character,  was 
loyalty  to  his  King,  blended  with  love  to  his  country.     The 


the  King,  and  chauncellore  of  hys  duchy  of  Lancaster.  Wheryn  be  trcatyd  dyuers  maters,  as  of 
the  veneracyion  and  worshyp  of  ymagg.s  and  reliques,  praying  to  sayntis  and  goynge  on  pylgry- 
mage.  Wyth  many  other  thyngya  touchyng  the  pestylent  secte  of  Lutlier  and  Ttmrlale,  by  the 
tnne,  bygone  in  Saxony,  and  by  the  tother,  labori/d  to  be  brought  in  to  Eiifjltmd."  There  was  a 
second  cdilion  to  which  was  added  :  "Newly  over  sene  by  the  sayd  Syr  Thomas  More,  Chaun- 
ccUour  of  England,  1.530."  In  his  works  reprinted,  we  are  told  that  this  Diologue  was  "made 
ill  the  year  ],5i'8." 

vol..  1.  o 


210  TYNDALE'S  PROGRESS.  [book  I. 

latter  he  had  discovered  by  commencing  with  "  the  Parable 
of  the  unrighteous  Mammou,"  and  the  former,  or  rather  both, 
by  his  next  publication,  "  the  Obedience  of  a  Christian  man." 
Deeply  interested  as  he  was,  however,  in  the  best  interests  of 
the  reigning  monarch,  he  would  not  stoop  to  flatter  him, 
much  less  wink  at  the  course  he  now  pursued.  Hence  this 
year  his  small  publication  on  the  subject  of  matrimony,  and 
his  exposition  of  1  Corinthians,  vii.  chapter.  The  former, 
a  warning  as  to  its  abuse,  the  latter,  illustrative  of  the  sin 
attending  its  gross  violation — an  abounding  evil  of  the  age.'"* 

Marriage  was  then  a  question  of  vital  importance  to  the 
virtue  and  happiness  of  his  country  ;  dreadfully  trampled  on 
and  invaded  by  the  priesthood  of  the  day,  and  now,  by  the 
highest  authorit}^  of  the  land,  in  his  own  person,  threatened 
to  be  dissolved.  It  became,  therefore,  such  a  man  as  Tyndale 
to  take  up  the  subject.  His  voice  was  solitary  indeed,  but  it 
had  now  a  power,  which,  probably,  lie  had  never  anticipated ; 
it  went  also  through  the  land,  for  whatever  he  now  published 
was  sought  for  and  read  ;  and  not  the  less  so,  that  every  thing 
he  put  forth  was  so  denounced. 

Fryth  was  engaged  about  this  time  in  translating  from  the 
German  a  small  work,  entitled,  "  The  Revelation  of  Anti- 
christ," one  of  the  first  books  printed  in  English  against  the 
Roman  Pontiff.  He  published  it,  with  a  long  prefatory 
epistle  and  an  antithesis  at  the  end,  under  the  assumed 
name  of  Richard  Brightvvell.  It  was  printed  "  at  Malborow, 
in  the  land  of  Hesse,  the  ]2tli  day  of  July  J  529,  by  me 
Hans  Luft." 

About  this  period  both  Tyndale  and  Fryth  had  removed 
from  Marburg;  and  by  the  month  of  August,  in  Antwerp 
itself,  a  negociation  with  Tunstal,  respecting  books,  there  took 
place,  which  will  be  narrated  presently,  after  we  have  noticed 
other  contemporary  movements  in  England.'* 


3  This  exposition  liad  a  brief  translation  from  Erasmus  prefixed,  and  is  tlius  entitled,  "  An 
exhortation  to  the  diligent  study  of  Scripture,  made  by  Erasmus,  Rotcrodamus,  and  translated 
into  English.  An  exiiosition  into  tlie  seventli  chajiter  of  the  first  eiiistle  to  the  Corinthians." 
This  was  at  first  sometimes  ascribed  to  Koye,  then  at  Strasburg ;  but  this  was  a  mistake,  as 
may  be  seen  by  the  colophon,  "  At  Malborow  in  the  land  of  Hesse,  1529,  xx  day  of  June,  by 
me  Hans  Luft."    Hvo. 

•*  The  well  known  Conference  at  Marhuro  between  Luther  and  Ztinngle,  commenced  on 
the  30tli  of  September.  Here  was  a  convenient  opportunity  for  Tyndale  to  have  met  with  both. 
Uut  by  that  time  he  was  in  Antwerp.  We  make  no  comment  here,  but  request  the  reader  to 
observe  what  is  said  of  Tyndale  and  such  meetings,  under  \r>Xi. 


1529.3  PERSECUTION   IN   ENGLAND.  211 

With  regard  to  tlie  pi'ogress  of  that  noble  cause  in  England, 
for  which  Tyndale  onW  lived  and  at  last  died,  it  must  be  read, 
as  before,  in  the  opposition  displayed.  Wolsey  may  be  re- 
moved, but  enemies,  in  reality  more  bitter  and  determined, 
will  remain,  nay  still  flourish  and  rise  in  royal  favour. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  abroad,  Hackett,  the  British 
ambassador,  had  been  affronted  at  Antwerp,  and  resenting 
the  indignity,  had,  in  April,  conveyed  the  intelligence  to 
England.  In  the  same  month,  at  home,  Tunstal  was  again 
busy  at  his  last  year's  employment,  and  firmly  pushing  his 
victims  to  abjure.  He  seems  as  though  he  had  resolved  that 
the  spring  of  the  year  should  be  so  distinguished,  and  happy 
would  he  have  been  to  have  rooted  up  the  seed  sown  by  other 
hands  ;  but  this  season  the  number  of  persons  caught  was 
comparatively  few.  Last  year,  Hacker,  and  Pykas,  and 
Tyball,  had  sadly  fallen,  by  exposing  so  many  of  their  friends, 
but  happily  no  one  now  followed  their  example.  Among  those 
who  were  examined,  the  most  eminent  was  that  of  a  respect- 
able citizen  and  leather-merchant  of  London,  John  Tewks- 
bury.  His  case  was  the  more  interesting  from  his  having 
possessed  a  manuscript  copy  of  the  Bihle^  and  his  openly  de- 
poning that  he  had  been  studying  in  the  holy  Scriptures  from 
the  year  1512,  He  professed,  however,  that  he  had  been 
brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  by  the  reading  of 
"  Tyndalis  New  Testament^''  and  his  subsequent  publication 
or  exposition  of  the  Parable  of  the  Wicked  Mammon.  "  In 
the  doctrine  of  justification,""  says  John  Foxe,  "  and  all  other 
articles  of  his  faith,  he  was  very  expert  and  prompt  in  his 
answers,  in  such  sort  as  Tunstal  and  all  his  learned  men  were 
ashamed,  that  a  leather-seller  should  so  dispute  with  them, 
with  such  power  of  the  Scriptures,  and  heavenly  wisdom,  that 
they  were  not  able  to  resist  him." 

The  number  of  Bishops  presiding  at  the  examination  of  this 
good  man,  proves  at  once  the  importance  of  his  case,  and  the 
extent  to  which  their  alarm  and  hatred  had  now  gone.  Be- 
sides Tunstal  himself,  there  was  West  of  Ely,  and  Clark  of 
Bath,  with  Standish  of  St.  Asaph,  and  Longland  of  Lincoln. 
These  men  had  the  truth  told  them  on  this  occasion,  and 
were  even  warned.  Amongst  other  things,  Tewksbury  had 
the  boldness  to  say, — "  I  pray  God  that  the  condemnation  of 
the  Gospel  and  translation  of  the  Testament,  be  not  to  your 


212  BUT  STAYED  ONCE   MORE.  [BOOK  I. 

shame,  and  that  ye  be  not  in  peril  for  it,"  They  continued 
disputing  with  him  day  after  day,  for  more  than  eight  or  ten 
days  together ;  his  first  appearance  being  on  the  loth  of  April. 
At  last  he  abjured,  though,  like  Bilney,  only  for  the  present. 

As  old  Thomas  Fuller  said — "  it  takes  more  to  make  a 
valiant  man,  than  being  able  to  call  another  coward,"  though 
in  reporting  such  abjurations,  one  cannot  but  revert  to  the 
first  grand  and  public  recantation  of  Barnes,  at  St.  PauFs. 
He  might,  before  that  year  ended,  be  selling  New  Testaments 
confidentially,  and  in  private,  but  this  could  never  compensate 
for  the  mischief  he  had  done,  by  his  great  and  sad  failure. 
Its  influence  must  have  been  yet  felt,  in  preventing  that  bold 
decision  which  would  have  been  followed  by  the  crown  of 
martyrdom.  Thus,  this  worthy  man  Tewksbury,  only  re- 
quired another  to  precede  him,  in  the  year  1531,  when  we 
shall  find  him  gather  courage,  deeply  repent,  and  follow  with 
sreat  and  determined  couraoe  to  the  stake. 

How  criminal  was  that  man,  who,  with  cool  deliberation, 
thus  spent  his  days  in  laying  a  snare,  or  in  weaving  a  net  for 
the  feet  of  these  saints  ?  By  him,  indeed,  they  were  not  put 
to  death  ;  they  were  left  by  him  for  Stokesly  to  butcher, 
though  the  guilt  of  this  righteous  blood  must  ever  rest  upon 
Tunstal,  as  well  as  his  successor. 

But  again,  and  that  a  third,  if  not  the  fourth  time,  a  gra- 
cious Providence  interposed.  This,  too,  was  about  the  very 
same  month  as  in  the  two  preceding  years ;  not  by  disease, 
indeed,  as  last  year,  but  by  a  method  as  effectual,  the  occupa- 
tion of  Tunstal  abroad.  In  1526  the  authorities  were  scattered 
by  prevailing  sickness.  In  1527  they  were  so  again  by 
political  affairs.  In  1528  they  were  scared,  as  we  have 
seen,  by  the  "  Sudor  Anglicus,"  and  this  year  they  are 
again  diverted  from  their  prey  by  pressing  affairs  of  state. 
These  men  could  discern  some  of  the  signs  of  the  times,  but 
they  could  not,  or  rather  would  not,  observe  the  finger  of  God. 

Tunstal,  cool  and  fresh,  was  ready  to  engage  whenever  state 
policy  demanded  his  services,  and  the  proof  of  his  being  as  yet 
the  leading  persecutor  of  the  truth,  is  plainly  seen  in  this, 
that  when  once  he  departed,  the  storm  in  a  great  degree  sub- 
sided. In  a  very  short  time,  however,  far  from  forgetting 
Tyndale's  operations,  we  shall  find  him  fully  as  busy,  in 
another  way,  abroad,  as  he  had  been  at  home. 


1 


1529.]  TUNSTAI.   AT  ANTWERP.  213 

At  an  ciulj  period  of  this  year  the  aspect  of  foreign  affairs  had  begun 
to  excite  uneasiness  in  the  English  cabinet.  France,  having  but  feeble 
hope  of  any  success  in  Italy,  seemed  disposed  to  some  friendly  alliance 
with  the  Emperor.  The  French  army,  it  will  be  remembered,  had  been 
last  year  almost  annihilated  by  disease  ;  its  scattered  remains  had,  in- 
deed, rallied  under  Count  de  St.  Pol,  but  in  June  he  was  finally  defeated, 
so  that  the  Emperor's  power  abroad  was  now  in  the  ascendant.  So  early 
as  the  5th  of  April  he  had  deputed  his  aunt  the  Lady  Margaret,  Regent 
of  the  Low  Countries,  to  meet  with  Lady  Louisa,  the  mother  of  Francis, 
to  settle  finally  the  treaty  of  Madrid,  so  often  and  so  long  suspended 
through  Wolsey's  interested  interposition  ;  in  consequence  of  which  the 
two  children,  exchanged  as  hostages  for  their  father,  the  King  of  France, 
had  never  been  restored.^  The  Lady  Margaret,  on  the  22d  of  May,  ap- 
prised Wolsey  of  this  meeting,  and  on  the  6th  of  June,  Henry  himself  f 
Hackett,  by  the  same  post,  stating  that  Cambray  had  been  fixed  on  as 
the  place  of  meeting.^ 

On  tlie  oOtli  of  June,  Tunstal  and  Sir  Thomas  More,  with 
Dr.  Knight,  the  King's  Secretary,  received  their  commissions, 
and  left  England  for  Cambray,  where  Hackett  met  them.  Al- 
together they  watched  over  their  own  King's  interest,  so  far 
as  it  was  involved  in  the  treaty  of  Cambray ;  remaining  in 
attendance  till  the  5th  of  August,  when,  what  was  called 
"  the  Women's  or  the  Ladies'  peace,"  was  finally  concluded. 
It  has,  however,  been  but  seldom  observed,  that  at  the  same 
time  and  place,  another  treaty  was  signed,  betwixt  our  King 
and  the  Lady  Margaret,  in  the  name  of  the  Emperor ;  Tun- 
stal^ More^  and  Hackett^  being  the  commissioners.  It  embraced 
"  the  continuation  of  traffic  for  merchants  between  the  two 
countries,  and  the  forbidding  to  print  or  sell  any  Lutheran 
books  on  either  side.''''^ 

Thus  it  is  that  we  are  introduced,  very  naturally,  to  the 
period  when  Tunstal's  zeal  for  the  burning  of  the  Scriptures 
emphatically  began  to  display  itself.  No  doubt  he,  as  well  as 
the  Bishop  of  Norwich,  had  cheerfully  borne  his  share  of  the 
first  purchase  by  Warham  in  1527 ;  but  he  was  eager  to  seize 
this  line  and  favourable  opportunity  of  proving  his  own  zeal. 
He  was  now  in  the  north  of  France,  and  could  easily  take 
Antwerp  on  his  way  home.    With  three  such  men,  all  equally 


^  Cotton  MS.,  Galba,  B.  ix.,  2(i2.  «  Idem,  fol.  121.  '  Idem,  fol.  Mu 

«  Idem,  fol.  Hid.     Lord  Hcrhcvt's  Henry  VIII.,  p.  3Ki. 


•21 4>  PURCHASES   iNEW  TESTAMENTS.  [_B0OK  1. 

hostile,  the  subject  of  heretical  books  must  have  been  fully 
canvassed,  involved  as  they  were  in  a  formal  treaty.  The 
first  Avas  bent  on  burm'nr/  them  ;  he  had  licensed  the  second  to 
read  them,  only  that  he  might  write  them  down,  and  his  first 
production,  written  in  1528,  had  just  come  out  as  he  left 
London  ;  and  as  for  the  third,  John  Hackett,  he  had  first 
suggested  both  burning  and  persecution,  and  not  as  yet  suc- 
ceeded to  the  extent  of  his  wishes ;  though  it  was  only  four 
months  since  he  had  been  affronted  at  Antwerp,  and  so  deeply 
felt  the  indignity.  The  high  privileges  of  Antwerp,  however, 
remained  inviolate,  for  they  had  been  fully  and  expressly  re- 
cognised in  the  recent  treaty,  as  well  as  those  of  all  the  other 
Hanse-towns  under  the  Emperor's  sway.'*  No  choice  being 
thus  left,  as  to  the  mode  of  procedure,  the  policy  o? purchasing 
books  in  order  to  burn  them,  and  thus  prevent  progress,  was 
discussed.  This,  indeed,  might  ultimately  promote  the  cause 
they  desired  to  damage,  and  More  shrewdly  suspected  it 
certainly  would.  "  So  much,"  said  he  to  George  Constantyne, 
afterwards,  "  so  much  I  told  the  Bishop,  before  he  went  about 
it."  TunstaPs  zeal,  however,  could  not  thus  be  quenched. 
Knight  proceeded  to  Italy  on  the  Kings's  business ;  More  re- 
turned home  ;  Tunstal  went  by  way  of  Antwerp,  and  the 
following  story  of  his  "  exploit"  there,  is  worthy  of  notice,  on 
account  of  its  natural  consequences.  It  is  introduced  by  Halle 
immediately  after  the  treaty  of  Cambray,  and  it  is  copied  by 
Foxe,  as  happening  in  the  year  1529.  We  give  the  narrative 
with  an  eye  on  both  authors. 

"  Here,  it  is  to  be  remembered,  that  at  this  present  time,  one  Augustine 
Packingtoii,  a  mercer  and  mercliant  of  London,  the  same  time  was  in  Antwerp, 
ichere  the  Bishop  then  was ;  and  this  Packington  was  a  man  that  highly  favoured 
Tyndale,  but  to  the  Bishop  shewed  the  contrary.  The  Bishop,  desirous  to  have 
his  purpose  brought  to  pass,  communed  of  the  New  Testaments,  and  how  gladly 
lie  would  buy  them.  Packington  then  hearing  him  say  so,  said — '  My  Lord,  if 
it  be  your  pleasure,  I  can  in  this  matter  do  more,  I  dare  say,  than  most  of 
the  merchants  of  England  that  are  here,  for  I  know  the  Dutchmen  (i.  e.  Ger- 
mans) and  strangers  that  have  bought  them  of  Tyndale,  and  have  them  here  to 
sell  ;  so  that  if  it  be  your  Lordship's  pleasure  to  pay  for  them,  for  otherwise  I 
cannot  come  by  them,  Imt  I  must  disburse  money  for  them — I  will  then  assure 
you  to  have  every  book  of  tliem  that  is  imprinted,  and  is  here  unsold.'  The 
Bishop  said — '  Gentle  Mr.  Packington,  do  your  diligence  and  get  them  ;  and, 
with  all  my  heart,  I  will  pay  for  them,  whatsoever  they  cost  you  ;  for  the  books 


3  Very  thrciitcniii),'  iilacarils,  however,  were  issued  by  tlic  Kmperor  after  this  treaty. 


J 


1521).]  TUN8TAL   RETURNS   HOME.  215 

are  erronooii.-i  and  nouglit,  and  I  intend  s^urely  to  destroy  tJiem  all,  and  to  burn 
them  at  Paul's  Cross.'  Augustine  Packington  then  came  to  Tyiidalc,  and  said — 
'  William,  T  know  thou  art  a  poor  man,  and  hast  a  heap  of  New  Testaments 
and  bovks  by  thee,  for  which  thou  hast  both  endangci'ed  thy  friends,  and 
beggared  thyself ;  and  1  have  now  gotten  thee  a  merchant,  which,  with  ready 
money,  shall  despatch  thee  of  all  that  thou  hast,  if  you  think  it  profitable  for 
yourself.' — 'Who  is  the  merc/iantT  said  Tyndalc.  'The  Bishop  of  London,' 
said  Packington.  '  O,  that  is  because  he  will  burn  them,'  said  Tyndale.  '  Yes,' 
quoth  Packington.  '  I  am  the  gladdci-,'  said  Tyndale,  '  for  these  two  benefits 
shall  come  thereof — 1  shall  get  money  to  bring  myself  out  of  debt,  and  the 
whole  world  will  cry  out  against  the  burning  of  God's  Word — and  the  overplus 
of  the  money  that  shall  remain  to  me,  shall  make  me  more  studious  to  correct 
the  said  New  Testament,  and  so  newly  to  imprint  the  same  once  again,  and  I 
trust  the  second  will  much  better  like  (please)  you,  than  ever  did  the  first'  So, 
forward  went  the  liargain — the  Bishop  had  the  books — Packington  had  the 
thanks — and  Tyndale  had  the  money  !" 

This  story  may  be  allowed  to  remain  substantially  correct, 
though  the  latter  words  put  into  the  mouth  of  Tyndale,  must 
be  received  as  the  embellishment  of  Packington,  or  rather, 
perhaps,  of  the  old  chronicler  Halle,  who  was  fond  of  a  good 
story.  Certainly  Tyndale  never  expressed  himself  precisely 
in  these  terms.  "  After  this,''''  says  Foxe,  "  Tyndale  corrected 
the  same  New  Testament  again,  and  caused  them  to  be  new 
imprinted,  so  that  they  came  thick  and  threefold  over  into 
England!"  The  further  illustration  of  this  assertion  will 
occur  before  long.  In  the  meanwhile,  the  books  purchased  by 
Tunstal  were  sent  home,  but  they  were  not  committed  to  the 
flames  till  it  could  be  done  with  the  greatest  effect. 

Tunstal  and  More  having  both  returned  to  London,  the 
proceedings  at  Cambray  were  reported  and  highly  approved. 
Before  Sir  Thomas  was  sent  into  France,  the  King  had  sound- 
ed him  as  to  the  divorce.  He  was  then  opposed  to  it,  and  as 
much  so  now ;  but  as  he  had  succeeded  to  admiration  in  pro- 
curing more  money  from  the  Emperor  than  had  been  expected, 
and  Henry  might  anticipate  that,  like  most  men,  he  only  had 
his  price,  and  would  come  round,  he  was  about  to  elevate  him 
to  the  Chancellorship.  Cardinal  Wolsey  and  Sir  Thomas 
More  had  never  cordially  agreed,  for  in  many  points  they  were 
perfect  contrasts.  Under  the  auspices  of  the  latter,  amiable 
in  domestic  life,  having  no  thirst  for  pomp  or  display,  and 
superior  to  the  love  of  money,  some  great  change  was  at  hand. 
A  new  order  of  things,  whatever  that  might  be,  was  inevitable. 

The  concluding  months  of  the  year  1529,  require,  therefore, 
to  be  particularly/ ohserved,  forming  as  they  did,  an  epoch,  both 


21 G  WOLSEY'S  CAREER.  [^BOOK  I. 

in  civil  and  ecclesiastical  affairs,  as  well  as  in  the  history  of 
persecution.  But  before  that  period  can  be  understood,  it 
becomes  necessary  to  return,  and  take  a  very  brief  survey  of 
the  CardinaFs  last  year  of  office. 

The  reader  may  have  been  already  more  than  satiated  with  the  covirse 
of  Wolsey's  policy,  but  his  career  is  now  hastening  to  its  termination. 
We  have  seen  him  "  in  great  power,  and  spreading  himself  like  a  green 
bay  tree,"  so  that  we  owe  it  to  a  righteous  providence  to  mark  his  decline 
and  fall.  Though  now  fifty-eight  years  of  age,  and  within  only  twenty 
months  of  his  death,  gradually  sinking  in  the  favour  of  his  Master,  and 
long  despised  by  many  around  him,  the  ruling  passion  of  the  now  unhappy 
man,  for  the  unenviable  chair  of  the  Pontiff,  was  still  as  strong  as  his 
feeble  and  broken  constitution  would  admit.  Henry  again  recommended 
him,  but  it  must  have  been  only  from  a  desire  to  remove  him  to  a  dis- 
tance, and  there,  perhaps,  exact  from  him  favours  in  return  for  all  the 
past.  Glad,  no  doubt,  would  he  have  been,  to  have  for  ever  left  the 
country  where  he  had  reigned  as  Lord-paramount ;  but  his  starting  for 
the  long-craved  prize  now,  when  in  the  act  of  sinking  in  his  "  sea  of 
glory,"  resembled  only  the  drowning  man  catching  at  a  straw.  It  was 
the  dangerous  illness  and  expected  death  of  Clement  at  the  end  of  Janu- 
ary, that  had  roused  his  old  ambition  ;  but  the  Pontiff  recovered,  nay, 
outlived  him  for  nearly  four  years,  and  the  Cardinal  must  therefore  do 
his  best  with  affairs  at  home. 

It  certainly  affords  a  most  striking  proof  of  the  wild  and  contradictory 
passions  by  which  the  wicked  are  agitated,  that  at  this  very  time,  Wolsey 
was  holding  in  defiance  and  contempt  the  authority  of  the  very  tiara, 
the  treble  crown,  for  which  he  had  panted  so  long  !  Both  the  one  and 
the  other  were  thus  displayed. 

At  Christmas  last,  (1528),  it  may  be  remembered,  that  we  left  Henry 
and  Catherine  keeping  open  festivities  together  still !  Wolsey  immedi- 
ately after  this,  through  Fox,  Gardiner,  and  Brian,  exercised  all  his  in- 
genuity, in  negociating  with  the  Pontiff,  to  effect  the  divorce,  and  thus 
secure  his  Master's  favour  ;  though,  at  the  same  time,  he  was  carrying 
on  another  and  a  secret  correspondence  with  Rome.  Hitherto  he  had 
failed  in  his  policy,  as  well  as  lost  Henry's  confidence,  by  his  doings  in 
Spain.  As  a  final  attempt,  on  the  25th  of  January  this  year  he  des- 
patched Gardiner  once  more,  secretly,  to  Italy,  to  hasten  the  divorce  of 
the  two  parties,  and  minister  to  the  impatience  of  the  monarch.  As  his 
last  expedient,  Gardiner  was  instructed  to  threaten,  as  well  he  could, 
that,  without  immediate  compliance  with  the  forther  reqviests  then  made, 
the  King  would  ivithdraw  his  obedience,  also  intimating  that  the  nobles, 
as  well  as  his  Majesty,  would  decline  subjection  !  In  the  disruption 
which  after  some  time  took  place,  there  was  therefore  iumixed,  not  one 


1529.]  THE  ROYAL  DIVORCE.  217 

grain  of  correct  moral  principle.  The  passions  of  a  licentious  prince, 
were  the  secret  and  first  moving  cause,  while  the  Supreme  disposer  of 
all  events,  was  over-ruling  the  thraldom  and  impetuosity  of  sin  in  the 
monarch,  for  the  mental  freedom  of  his  entire  kingdom.  In  such  strange 
circumstances,  the  glory  and  the  happiness  of  whatever  change  took 
place  afterwards,  ought  therefore  the  more  emphatically  to  he  ascribed 
to  God  over  all,  and  to  Him  alone. 

The  Cardinal's  long  and  laboured  negociations,  addressed  to  Rome, 
were,  however,  all  in  vain,  though  in  them  he  had  put  forth  all  his 
powers,  and  these,  in  truth,  were  of  no  common  order.  His  rivals  at 
home,  the  Dukes  of  Norfolk  and  Suffolk,  were  secretly  undermining  him, 
by  hinting,  if  they  could  not  expose,  his  delay.  Delay  was  ruinous,  so 
that  the  once  favourite  minister  of  the  King,  by  his  own  perplexities 
involved,  could  now  stand  only  as  the  stag  at  bay. 

In  Wolsey's  long  despatch  of  the  6th  of  April,  he  charges  the  am- 
bassadors, Gardiner,  Brian,  and  Cassalis,  to  gain  admission  to  the  Pontiff, 
though  he  should  be  at  the  point  of  death,  as  he  was  actually  supposed 
to  have  been  but  recently,  and  insist  upon  two  things, — one  was,  that  he 
should  command  all  the  European  Princes  to  agree  to  a  cessation  of 
arms  under  pain  of  censure,  for  war  no  longer  served  Wolsey's  pur- 
pose ;  the  other  was  to  press  the  King's  business,  granting  all  that  they 
requested.  But,  in  the  meanwhile,  to  satisfy  the  King's  imjjatience,  to 
save  himself,  and,  if  possible,  foil  his  enemies,  he  must  proceed  with  the 
judicial  drama. 

On  the  31st  of  May,  therefore,  Henry,  by  a  wai'rant  under  the  great 
seal,  gave  the  Legates  leave  to  execute  their-  commission ;  that  is,  he 
authorised  two  of  the  most  licentious  men  then  alive,  (for  Campeggio 
was  not  one  Avhit  behind  Wolsey),  to  sit  in  judgment  once  more  on  the 
legality  of  his  own  marriage  ;  while  they,  of  course,  "  made  deep  pro- 
testations of  the  sincerity  of  their  minds,  that  they  should  proceed  justly 
and  fairly,  without  favour  or  partiality  I  "  On  the  21st  of  June,  when 
both  King  and  Queen  appeared  in  coiu-t,  the  latter  most  solemnly  ^vo- 
tested  and  appealed  to  the  Pontiff,  and  upon  her  retiring,  Henry  gave 
her  one  of  the  best  of  characters  ;  but  as,  in  the  eye  of  Campeggio,  delay 
was  the  object  in  view,  a  convenient  expedient  was  sought  for,  and  at 
last  suggested  by  him.  The  courts  of  Rome,  merely  on  account  of  the 
danger  to  health  ixoTtxihQ  malaria,  or  Roman  atmosphere,  always  adjourned 
from  July  to  October,  and  therefore  they  also  must  suspend  proceedings 
during  the  same  period  !  The  truth  was,  that  the  Emperor  now  governed 
the  Pontiff,  and  he  Campeggio.  His  red  hat,  as  Cardinal,  was  gone,  and 
with  it  all  hope  of  the  Popedom,  (of  which  he  stood  the  first  chance),  if 
he  now  disobeyed  ;  but  as  for  the  poor  English  Cardinal,  he  must  consent, 
simply  because  he  could  do  nothing  else,  and  so  he  sunk  into  disgrace. 

"  The  peculiar  character  of  Henry  rendered  him  often  a  scrupulous 


218  WOLSEY  SINKING.  [noOK  I. 

observer  of  rules,  without  mvich  regard  to  their  principles.  The  forms 
of  law  stood  higher  in  his  eye  than  the  substance  of  justice  ;  this  pecu- 
liarity aflfords  the  best  key  to  his  proceedings  relating  to  the  divorce  of 
which  he  was  desirous."'*'  A  legal  divorce,  however  cruel,  and  substan- 
tially unjust,  would  have  satisfied  his  coarse  and  licentious  mind,  and 
might  have  so  far  hushed  the  minds  of  others,  but  the  royal  patience 
was  now  exhausted.  Campeggio  departs  for  Italy  ;  Wolsey,  for  the  last 
time,  saw  his  royal  Master  in  September,  who  convicted  him  afresh  of 
some  double  dealing,  by  producing  his  own  hand- writing  ;  '^  so  that  now 
his  enemies  might  do  what  they  pleased,  as  to  the  speediest  mode  of 
getting  rid  of  him. 

Since  the  month  of  October  1527,  the  Cardinal  miist  have  frequently 
been  filled  with  anxiety,  and  intimations  of  his  declining  influence  must 
have  often  mortified  him  extremely  ;  for,  before  matters  had  arrived  at 
this  decisive  conclusion,  there  had  been  various  collisions  between  him, 
and  his  once  confiding  monarch. 

His  gorgeous  and  fruitless  embassy  to  France,  was  the  zenith  of  his 
glory.  From  that  period,  his  sun  began  to  descend,  and  the  clouds  were 
always  returning  upon  him,  after  the  rain.  There  had,  indeed,  been 
some  trifling  misunderstanding  so  early  as  1525,  but  that  was  soon  buried 
in  oblivion.'^  The  decisive  change  seems  to  have  commenced  with  his 
interference  as  to  Lady  Anne  Boleyn,  and  his  attempt  to  divert  the  King 
from  attention  to  her.'"'  This  was  followed  by  his  intended  cruelty  to 
the  Earl  of  Kildare,  whom  Henry  saved  from  his  grasp.  Then,  in  the 
spring  of  last  year,  came  his  duplicity  as  to  Spanish  aft'airs,  which  com- 
pletely shook  the  confidence  of  his  King  ;'*  and  in  July,  he  ofiended  again 
by  his  appointment  of  the  Abbess  of  Walton.'^  Yet  after  all  this,  tak- 
ing advantage  of  Henry's  temper,  upon  his  escape  from  alarm  under  the 
"  Sudor  Anglicus,"  we  find  him,  upon  the  6th  of  October  last,  and  the 
first  Jiour  he  had  learned  that  Fox,  Bishop  of  Winchester  was  dead,  ply- 
ing the  King  for  his  own  appointment  to  that  more  lucrative  situation, 
nay,  and  actually  proposing  that  his  own  place,  as  bishop  of  Durham, 
should  be  conferred  on  Winter,  his  natural  son  I""  Such  was  the  man 
of  unwearied  ambition.  It  was  "  the  character  of  his  mind  to  retrieve 
his  innate  presumptuousness,  at  the  first  instant  after  the  clouds  of  ad- 
versity had  begun  to  pass  away."'^ 

Throughout  this  last  year  of  declining  influence,  vexations 
in  quick  succession,  awaited  the  Cardinal.     About  May  he 

10  Mackintosh's  Hist,  of  England,  anno  152!). 

11  This  was  said  to  be  part  of  his  secret,  correspondence  with  Rome,  nhich  had  been  sent  home 
by  Sir  Francis  Brian,  then  one  of  the  ambassadors. 

12  Harleian  MS.,  No.  7'1''55,  p.  174.    It  was  a  supposed  invasion  of  the  King's  pierogative,  and 
now  revived,  it  will  form  one  of  the  /o;  I'j-fiinr  articles  of  impeachment. 

13  See  paRC  l.ll.  14  Sec  page  I7I.  is  Sec  page  in.'t. 

">  State  papers,  vol.  i.,  p.  :\2i\-^.  17  Government  State  papers. 


1520.]  TYNDALli'S  POWERFUL   INFLUENCE.  219 

had  wished  to  proceed  once  more  into   France,  upon  a  mis- 
sion to  Canibray,  (on  which  we  have  found  that  Tunstal  and 
More  were  sent  in  June,)  but  the  King  pointedly  refused, 
as   he  could  no   longer  confide   in   him.'^      Again,   Sir  T, 
Cheney,  for  having  in  some  way  oftcnded  the  Cardinal,  had 
been   excluded   from    the    Court,  when  Lady  Anne  Boleyn 
interposed  and   secured   his  return,  whether  Wolsey  would 
or  not.^^     But  finally,  and  as  if  to  crown  all,  and  after  we 
have  witnessed  how  eager  he    had   been  to  apprehend  Tyn- 
dale,  he  must  be  brought  in  contact  with  one  of  his  publica- 
tions.    The  story,  in  full,  is  to  be  found  in  Foxe's  manu- 
scripts, now  in  the  Museum,  and  it  has  been  quoted  by  Strype. 
Lady  Anne  Boleyn  had  been  in  possession  of  a  copy  of  Tyn- 
dale's  "  Obedience  of  a  Christian  man,"  for  though  the  time 
drew  nigh,  it  had   not  then    been    pointedly  condemned  by 
Royal  authority.     She  had  lent  this  book  to  one  of  her  female 
attendants,  named  Gainsford  ;   but  one  day  as  she  was  reading- 
it,  a  young  gentleman,  also  in  the  service  of  Lady  Anne,  Mr. 
Zouch,  father  to  the  knight,  afterwards  of  that  name,  snatch- 
ed the  book  away,  and  was  very  unwilling  to  restore  it.     He 
had  been  induced  to  read  it,  and  was  so  affected,  that,  as  the 
story  goes,  "  he  was  never  well  but  when  he  was  reading  of 
that  book."     Wolsey  had  ordered  all  about  the  Court  to  take 
special  care,  and  prevent  such  writings  from  being  circulated 
there,  lest  they  should  chance  to  come  into  the  hands  of  the 
King ;  but  this  very  caution  proved  the  means  of  bringing  to 
pass,  what  he  most  dreaded  !     The  Dean  of  the  Chapel-  Royal, 
Dr.  Sampson,  saw  this  publication  in  the  young  man''s  hands, 
who  was  reading  it  in  the  chapel,  not  improbably  tired  of  the 
unmeaning  service.     Calling  Zouch,  he  took  the  publication 
from  him,  and  delivered  it  to  the  Cardinal.     In  the  meantime, 
Lady  Anne,  enquiring  for  her  book,  the  attendant,  fearful  lest 
her  Mistress,  as  well  as  herself,  should  come  into  trouble,  fell 
on  her  knees,  and  told  her  all  the  circumstances.     Her  Mis- 
tress expressed  no  displeasure  with  the  parties  in  her  service, 
but  replied  with  emotion, — "  Well,  it  shall  be  the  dearest  book 
that  ever  the  Dean  or  the  Cardinal  took  away."     Lady  Anne 
forthwith  applied  to  Henry,  and  upon  her  knees,  "  desired  the 
King's  help  for  her  book."     Upon  the  King's  toJcen  it  wasde- 


IR  Bayoniu's  letter  in  Le  Grand,  p.  33.i.  '9  F.c  rJrand,  |).  20*). 


220  TYNDALES    POWERFUL    INFLUENCE.  [boOK  I. 

livered  up,  and  Lady  Anne  carrying  the  volume  or  tract,  to  his 
Majesty,  requested  that  he  would  read  it.  The  King  did  so, 
and  professing  to  be  pleased  with  the  contents,  added  "  this 
book  is  for  me,  and  all  Kings,  to  read." 

This  story  is  fully  confirmed  by  Wyatt,  with  some  slight 
variation.  Lady  Anne  "  was  but  newly  come  from  the  King, 
when  the  Cardinal  came  in  with  the  book  in  his  hands,  to  make 
complaints  of  certain  points  in  it,  that  he  knew  the  King- 
would  not  like,  and  withal  to  take  occasion  with  him,  against 
those  that  countenanced  such  books  in  general,  and  especially 
women ;  and  as  might  be  thought,  with  mind  to  go  farther 
against  Lady  Anne  more  directly,  if  he  had  perceived  the 
King  agreeable  to  his  meaning.  But  the  King,  that  somewhat 
before  distasted  the  Cardinal,  finding  the  notes  Lady  Anne 
had  made,  all  turned  the  more  to  hasten  his  ruin,  which  was 
also  furthered  on  all  sides."^'^ 

This  incident  therefore  must,  in  substance  have  occurred ; 
although  Foxe  goes  on  to  build  by  far  too  much  upon  it.  The 
words,  in  Henry's  mouth,  were  probably  nothing  more  than 
a  compliment  to  the  lady ;  or  at  best,  they  expressed  only  a 
transient  feeling,  similar  to  one  of  old,  in  the  mind  of  King 
Herod  towards  John  the  Baptist.  But  be  this  as  it  might, 
Campeggio  was  off  to  Italy,  and  the  sun  of  royal  favour  had 
set  upon  Wolsey  for  ever. 

At  this  moment,  the  situation  of  his  Majesty  was  critical  in  the  ex- 
treme. His  kingdom  was  in  a  state  of  transition  similar  to  no  other  in 
Europe,  and  he  could  only  steer  a  course,  as  it  Avere,  between  Scylla  and 
Charybdis.  New  advisers  had  become  absolutely  necessary,  but  where 
were  they  to  be  found  ? 

After  the  cunning  pause  as  to  the  divorce,  made  by  the  Romish 
Cardinal,  Henry,  in  no  small  perplexity,  was  travelling  in  Essex,  to 
dissipate  his  vexation  ;  and  while  at  Waltham,  in  the  month  of  August, 
with  no  other  prospect  before  him  except  the  avocation  of  his  cause  to 
Rome,  Fox,  his  Almoner,  and  Gardiner,  as  Secretary,  were  with  him. 
The  royal  suite  filling  up  every  apartment,  these  two  lodged  at  the 
house  of  a  Mr.   Cressy  in  the  neighbourhood.     At  supper,  the  royal 


20  He  shows  that  Tyndale's  writings  had  been  read  within  the  royal  palace,  perhaps  as  care- 
fully as  in  any  other  place.  Speaking  of  Lady  Anne's  copy  of  "  the  Obedience,"  he  adds— "  which 
as  her  iimniivr  was,  she  having  read,  she  had  also  noted  with  her  nail,  as  of  matter  worthy  the 
King's  knowledge."  His  only  mistake  is  in  placing  the  occurrence  after  Lady  Anne's  marriage, 
or  at  least  speaking  of  her  as  Queen,  by  which  time  Wolsey  had  been  two  years  in  his  grave. 
See  Wyatt's  Memoir,  printed  from  manuscript,  in  Cavendish's  life  of  Wolsey  by  Finger,  vol  ii., 
)).  202-20,5. 


1529.]  CRANMEU  FIRST   EMPLOYED.  221 

marriage  became,  as  it  was  everywhere,  the  subject  of  conversation. 
The  tutor  in  this  family  expressed  surprise,  that  there  should  be  any 
hesitation  as  to  the  mode  of  procedure.  He  was  pressed  to  explain 
himself,  when  he  suggested  that  there  was  but  one  truth  in  the  matter, 
which  should  be  tried  on  the  authority  of  the  Word  of  God  ;  the 
Universities  abroad  as  well  as  at  home  should  be  at  once  cousidted, 
and  a  decision  come  to,  hidependently  of  the  Pontiff  at  Rome.  This,  it 
is  well  known,  was  Thomas  Cramner,  then  in  the  fortieth  year  of  his  age. 
Educated  at  Cambridge,  he  had  been  fixed  upon  in  1524,  as  one  of  the 
Canons  for  Cardinal  College,  Oxford,  and  had  actually  given  his  con- 
sent ;  but,  acting  under  advice,  he  afterwards  drew  back,  and  had  re- 
mained at  Cambridge  till  last  year.  The  refusal  is  understood  to  have 
given  gi'eat  offence. 

Next  morning  Cranmer's  advice  was  reported  to  his  Majesty,  when 
all  at  once  it  pleased  his  fancy  ;  under  the  impression,  no  doubt,  that 
the  Scripture  either  spoke,  or  would  be  affirmed  to  speak,  in  favour  of 
his  wishes.  Before  this,  it  is  true,  that  Henry,  at  Wolsey's  suggestion, 
and  even  Wolsey  himself,  had  been  consulting  learned  men,  abroad  as 
well  as  at  home,  but  this  by  no  means  amounted  to  the  advice  now  given 
by  Cranmer.  He  was  sent  for  instantly  by  the  King  ;  and  though  he 
went  with  apparent  reluctance,  refusal  was  in  vain.  Henry  was  pleased  ; 
and  feeling,  at  the  moment,  as  a  man  relieved  from  a  dilemma,  he  im- 
mediately appointed  Cranmer  to  be  one  of  his  chaplains,  and  ordered 
him  to  write  upon  the  subject.  Cranmer  having  also  professed  himself 
to  be  ready  to  plead  the  cause  even  before  the  Pontiff  at  Rome,  Henry 
said  that  he  would  send  him  ;  but  commanded  that  he  should  first  be 
accommodated  in  the  house  of  Sir  Thomas  Boleyn,  and  there  compose 
his  treatise.^^ 

The  time  had  now  arrived  when  it  was  by  no  means  difficult  to  over- 
whelm Wolsey,  although  no  com-se  of  proceeding  could  be  more  unfair 
than  that  which  was  about  to  be  adopted.  It  was  for  his  doings  as  Legate 
within  the  King's  dominions.  But  all  these  had  been  sanctioned  by  the 
King's  own  license  ;  so  that  Henry  was  going  to  make  "  the  privilege  of 
his  letters  patent  a  crime  ;  to  sue  against  his  own  license  ;"  and  to 
bring  the  once  aspiring  Cardinal  under  severe  forfeiture  for  making  use 
of  the  royal  authority  !  He  had  been  all  along  acting  under  the  eye  of 
his  ungrateful  Master  ;  and  yet  the  very  honour  of  which  he  was  so  vain, 
and  that  in  which  he  gloried,  when  brow-beating  Dr.  Barnes,  tkree  years 
and  a  half  ago,  as  well  as  upon  many  other  occasions,  was  now  to  furnish 
the   ostensible  ground  of  criminal   charges  against   him !     From   the 


21  His  book  is  lost !  And  it  happens  singularly  enough,  that  his  only  composition  extant,  on 
the  question,  is  of  a  directly  opposite  tendency ;  being  a  long  letter  to  the  Earl  of  Wiltshire, 
father  of  Anne  Boleyn,  in  which  he  details,  with  much  commendation,  the  arguments  used  by 
Reginald  Pole,  in  support  of  Queen  Catherine's  marriage,  with  nothing  on  his  own  side,  beyond 
a  brief  expression  of  dissent."  -Jciiki/n's  Rfiiinins  of  Cranmer,  i.,  p.  i). 


222  FALL   OF   WOLSKY.  [bOOK  I. 

Kiug's  cause  respecting  his  determined  divorce,  Wolscy  must  now  turn 
to  that  of  his  own  impeachment. 

On  the  9th  of  October  his  prosecution  commenced,  by  the  King's 
Attorney-General  presenting  an  indictment  against  him,  in  the  Court  of 
King's  Bench,  upon  the  statute  of  provisors,  "  for  procui'ing  Bulls  from 
Rome  without  the  King's  license," — an  accusation  which  if  it  had  been 
literally  true,  that  is,  without  the  King's  knowledge,  would  have  sub- 
jected him  to  impeachment  for  high  treason.  But  this  was  merely  the 
beginning  of  sorrows.  Upon  Simday  the  17th,  the  Dukes  of  Suffolk  and 
Norfolk  came  and  demanded  the  Great  Seal,  which  he  declined  to  deliver 
up  without  a  written  order  from  the  King,  but  his  spii'it  was  now  abeady 
gone.  "  I  have  been  to  see  the  Cardinal,"  said  the  French  ambassador 
Bellay,  on  that  very  day  ;  "  he  has  shewn  me  his  case  with  the  most 
deplorable  rhetoric  I  ever  saw  ;  for  both  his  heart  and  his  spirit  entirely 
failed  him.  I  can  say  nothing  more  striking  than  his  face,  which  has  lost 
half  its  proper  size."  Next  day  the  Dukes  retm-ned  with  the  written 
demand,  when  Wolsey  delivered  up  the  seals,  and  they  ordered  him,  in 
Hem-y's  name,  to  retii-e  to  Esher  in  Surrey. 

As  his  best  security  against  the  prosecution  raised  against  him,  Wolsey 
had  confessed  his  offence  against  the  statute  of  premunire.--  The  Court 
then  pronounced  "  that  he  was  out  of  the  protection  of  the  law — that 
his  lands,  goods,  and  chattels  were  forfeited,  and  his  person  lay  at  the 
mercy  of  the  King."  Before,  therefore,  now  leaving,  what,  in  the  days 
of  his  grandeur,  he  occasionally,  in  mock  humility,  styled  "  his  j[)oor 
house  at  Westminster,"  he  took  a  particular  account  or  inventory  of  all 
its  contents,  to  be  delivered  over  to  his  Majesty;  and  one  of  the  identical 
catalog-ues,  of  forty  folio  pages,  may  still  be  seen  in  the  British 
Museum.^^  To  say  nothing  of  the  tables  covered  with  massive  gold  and 
silver  plate,  which  was  of  immense  value,  although  pewter  had  been 
generally  used  before  the  days  of  Henry  the  Eighth  ;  "  there  was," 
says  Turner,  "  of  all  sorts  of  arras,  velvets,  carpets,  hangings,  curtains, 
silks,  rich  cloths,  linen,  beds  and  furnitui'e,  enough  to  have  set  up 
many  a  substantial  tradesman,  besides  completing  a  nobleman's  palace  !" 
For  one  article  he  left  of  the  most  splendid  taj^estry,  above  one  himdred 
and  thirty  pieces,  from  21  to  27  feet  long  by  12  feet  deep.-'*  The 
entire  value  within  the  walls  has  been  estimated  at  half  a  million  ster- 
ling of  the  present  day  ! 

Upon  Wolsey's  departure,  by  water,  a  thousand  boats  were  on  the 
river,  the  people  expecting  to  enjoy  the  gratification  of  seeing  him  con- 
veyed to  the  Tower,  but  this  was  never  proposed  ;  and  though  the  very 

22  25  Ed.  3.  i.,  especially  16  R.  2.  c.  5.  Whereby  a  penalty  was  incurrable,  as  infringing  some 
statute  ;  or.  in  other  words,  the  party  had  incurred  the  forfeiture  of  their  moveable  estate,  be- 
sides imprisonment  at  discretion.  23  MS.  Harleian,  No.  .W9. 

24  The  only  remains  of  this  tapestry,  known  to  exist,  note  adorn  the  walls  of  that  large  room, 
tlie  Board  of  Green  Cloth,  at  Hampton  Court. 


i 


1529.]  LORD  CHANCELLOR   MORE.  223 

next  day,  the  li)th,  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  before  a  meeting  of  the  Lords 
assembled  in  the  Star  Chamber,  announced  the  Cardinal's  dismissal  from 
all  his  offices  ;  on  the  21st  the  King  granted  him  his  protection. 

Meanwhile,  a  successor  must  be  appointed.  The  King  had  requested 
Warham  to  re-accept  the  seals  of  office,  for  he  had  been  Chancellor 
before  Wolsey  ;  but  he  declined,  probably  from  age,  and  as,  therefore, 
not  equal  to  the  burden  of  office.  This  must  have  happened  on  or 
before  the  21st  of  the  month,  as  the  French  ambassador  apprised 
his  Coiu-t  by  letter,  on  the  22d,  that  he  foresaw  "  that  j^riests  would  be 
made  Chancellors  no  more.'"-''  On  Saturday  the  23d  Henry  consulted 
about  a  successor ;  next  day  he  fixed  on  Sir  Thomas  More,  and  on 
Monday  the  25th  he  was  led  into  Chancery  by  the  Dukes  of  Norfolk  and 
Suftblk,  the  determined  enemies  of  the  fallen  Cardinal. 

Although  Cranmer  had  been  already  engaged  to  serve  the  King,  it 
was  only  in  a  subordinate  capacity,  at  least  for  more  than  two  years  to 
come,  and,  dm-ing  this  period,  almost  solely  abroad  ;  so  that  some  other 
man  was  still  grievovisly  Avanted  at  home,  and  especially  before  Parlia- 
ment should  assemble  on  the  3d  of  November.  Upon  Sir  Thomas  More, 
though  chosen  Chancellor,  as  already  hinted,  no  dependence  could  be 
placed  in  relation  to  Heni-y's  favourite  project.  Yet  the  very  last  day 
of  October  had  ended,  and  no  one  appeared.  It  was  only  next  morning 
that  a  thought  was  expressed  by  one  of  Wolsey's  confidential  servants, 
for  such  he  was.  This  was  Thomas  Crumwell.-*'  The  son  of  a  black- 
smith, and  born  at  Putney,  near  London,  he  had  lived  on  the  Continent 
for  a  number  of  years,  and  visited  Rome  as  early  as  1.510.  When  Eras- 
mus had  published  his  Latin  New  Testament,  Crumwell,  it  is  said,  had 
made  himself  intimately  familiar  with  its  contents  ;  for  his  having  com- 
mitted the  whole  to  memory,  though  frequently  asserted,  may  be  al- 
lowed to  pass  merely  as  a  flourish  of  the  pen.  This  acquaintance  with 
the  Sacred  Volume,  however,  preceded,  as  it  had  been,  by  residence  at 
Rome,  could  not  fail  to  have  a  powerful  effect  on  his  mind  ;  and,  at  all 
events,  these  were  two  soui'ces  of  instruction  and  experience,  of  which 
his  predecessor,  Wolsey,  knew  little  or  nothing.  He  had  never  beheld 
the  city  and  court,  so  falsely  styled  sacred  ;  he  had  but  rarely  looked 
into  the  sacred  page,  and  then  only  to  serve  a  purpose.  As  to  Crum- 
well's  real  character  or  sentiments,  at  this  moment,  we  affirm  nothing, 


25  Sir  H.  Ellis  has  said,  "  It  does  not  seem  to  have  been  known  to  our  historians,  that  upon 
Wolsey's  fall,  Henry  pressed  Cranmer  to  take  the  Chancellorship  more  than  once,  before  he 
offered  it  to  Sir  Thomas  iXori:."- -Original  Letters,  vol.  ii.,  p.  47.  But  Erasmus,  who  is  then 
quoted,  expressly  says,  the  Archbishop  of  Cantcrhurii,  which  Warham  was,  till  his  death  in 
1532.  As  for  Cranmer,  he  was  already  engaged  to  start  for  Rome,  employed  by  the  King  about 
the  divorce. 

26  Never  was  any  monarch  so  indebted  to  men  of  the  same  name.  He  had  lost  Thomas 
Wolsey  ;  but  now  he  had  got  Thomas  More.  Thomas  Crumwell,  and  Thomas  Cranmer,  besides 
Thomas  Howard,  (Duke  of  Norfolk,)  and  Thomas  Boleyn.  (Earl  of  Wiltshire,)  engaged  in  his 
service.     Thomas  Audley.  and  Thomas  Wriothsley  followed  in  succession  as  Lords  Chancellor. 


224  RISE   OF   CRUMWELL.  [boOK  I. 

but  merely  notice  these  cii-cumstances  as  accounting,   so  far,  for   the 
course  he  is  about  to  ptu'sue. 

But  it  here  becomes  necessary,  if  not  also  very  important,  to  observe, 
that  the  once  favourite  Cardinal,  in  the  exercise  of  his  own  peculiar 
ambition,  by  his  last  and  highest  office,  as  Vicar-General,  had  brought 
into  this  kingdom  a  species  of  authority  altogether  unknown.  His  au- 
thority, as  Legate,  was  high,  but  this  was  one  step  higher  ;  so  that  he 
had  begun  to  act  absolutely  as  the  English  Pontiff.  But,  in  doing  this, 
he  had  put  a  cup  to  the  lips  of  his  Royal  Master,  and  afforded  him  one 
taste,  for  the  first  time,  of  the  sweetness  of  dominion  over  all  the  clergy 
in  his  kingdom.  This,  if  not  a  new  thing  in  the  earth,  was  an  elevation 
peculiar  to  Henry  among  his  fellow  princes  of  Europe.  The  moment 
that  Wolsey  began  to  exercise  his  functions  as  Vicar-General,  of  course, 
the  King  felt  the  position  which  he  thus  occupied  ;  and  yet,  high  as 
Wolsey  then  thought  himself,  he  was  never  so  completely  in  the  King's 
power  !  It  was  even  the  time  of  which  Henry  had  sjioken,  when  "  the 
hand  that  made  him,  could  unmake  him  when  it  listed."  Wolsey, 
therefore,  once  fallen,  Crumwell  is  now  about  to  step  into  his  shoes,  and 
will,  before  long,  afford  his  Majesty  a  ftiU  draught  of  that  pleasure, 
which  he  had  only  begun  to  taste. 

The  elevation  of  this  man  was  however  not  a  little  extraordinary  ;  as 
it  affords  a  striking  proof  of  how  far  Henry  could  sacrifice  his  prejudices 
to  his  reigning  passion  at  the  moment.  From  what  he  had  heard  of 
Crumwell,  he  was  deeply  prejudiced  against  him  ;  and  but  for  the  ear- 
nest counsel  of  Russel,  Earl  of  Bedford,  whom  Crumwell  had  once  saved 
from  being  murdered,  or  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  the  French,  he 
might  never  have  been  admitted  to  the  royal  ear. 

It  was  upon  a  Monday  morning,  the  1st  of  November,  and  therefore 
only  two  days  before  Parliament  met,  that  Crumwell  had  resolved  on 
the  course  he  shovild  take.  He  saw  nothing  but  ruin  before  him,  if  he 
remained  in  Wolsey's  household  ;  and  so  that  morning,  addressing  him- 
self to  the  Gentleman  Usher,  George  Cavendish,  he  said — "  I  intend, 
God  willing,  this  afternoon,  when  my  Lord  hath  dined,  to  ride  to 
London,"  (from  Esher,)  "  and  so  to  the  Court,  where  I  shall  either  make 
or  mar,  or  I  come  again."  The  very  next  day,  Crumwell  was  at  Court ; 
and  having  sought  an  audience  of  the  King,  it  was  granted  him.  "  After 
most  loyal  obeisance,"  he  completely  succeeded,  for  every  word  was  most 
welcome.  He  suggested  one  mode  by  which  Henry  might  accomplish 
his  divorce — which  was  nothing  short  of  his  taking  the  authority  into 
his  own  hands,  by  declaring  himself  Head  of  the  Church,  within  his  own 
realm.  Having  also  explained  how  his  Majesty's  "  princely  authority" 
was  invaded  and  abused  by  the  "  spirituality,"  CruniAvell  had  taken  care 
to  have  a  copy  of  their  oath  to  the  Pontiff  in  his  pocket ;  and,  in  ex- 
plaining it,  he  ventured  so  far  as  to  affirm,  that  thus  Henry  "  was  but 


I 


152y.]  RISE  OF  CRUMWELL.  225 

half  a  King,  and  they  only  hcdf  his  subjects."  They  had,  besides,  all 
acted  under  Wolsey,  as  Legate,  and  therefore,  since  he  had  bowed,  they 
now  lay  at  the  royal  mercy  ;  Crumwell  "  declaring  thereupon,  how  his 
Majesty  might  accumulate  to  himself  great  riches,  if  it  so  pleased  him 
to  take  the  occasion  now  offered.''''  The  King  listened  attentively  to  all 
that  fell  from  his  adviser,  or,  as  Foxe  has  it — "  following  the  vein  of  his 
counsel,  took  his  ring  off  his  finger,  admitting  him  into  his  service." 
According  to  another  authority,  he  was  so  well  pleased,  that  he  thanked 
him,  and  admitted  him  to  the  dignity  of  a  Privy  Councillor.^''  That  he 
at  once  succeeded  in  gaining  Henry's  entire  confidence,  is  evident,  from 
his  not  merely  stepping  into  Parliament,  as  we  find  he  did,  immediately, 
but  speaking  there  with  such  boldness,  from  the  beginning.  Without 
royal  sanction,  this  course  would  have  proved  his  ruin. 

The  fact  was,  that  from  the  moment  when  legal  proceedings  were 
commenced  against  Wolsey,  Crumwell  had  three  weeks  to  ruminate 
over  the  whole  procedure.  It  was  substantially  unfair,  and,  in  other 
days,  Wolsey  would  have  stood  upon  his  defence,  and  triumphed.  But 
he  knew  the  temper  of  his  Master,  and  therefore,  first  yielding  up  his 
entire  personal  estate  to  the  King,  to  conciliate  his  royal  mercy,  he 
craved  only  his  ecclesiastical  revenues  for  the  time  to  come.  But,  then, 
if,  on  these  terms,  Wolsey's  submission  had  been  accepted,  there  were 
behind  him  many  other  delinquents.  The  clergy,  to  a  man,  having 
acted  under  him  as  Legate,  were  exposed  and  iinsafe.  Crumwell,  there- 
fore, saw  his  advantage,  and,  in  one  day,  and  that  the  day  before  Par- 
liament assembled,  dexterously  improved  it. 

From  this  hour,  the  path  was  plain,  though  still  considerable  address 
was  required  ;  but  for  all  this,  Crumwell  was  peculiarly  qualified.  The 
concurrence  of  the  clergy  was  essential  to  Henry's  intended  progress  ; 
but  he  now  saw  how  very  easily,  at  a  convenient  opportunity,  he  could 
slip  on  the  collar  of  his  authority,  and  snap  the  lock  ;  as  well  as  the 
wealth  which  must  accrue  to  him  in  the  process.  Still  it  will  be  pass- 
ing strange,  if  an  old  servant  of  Wolsey's,  who  was  about  to  soften  his 
master's  fall,  should,  ere  long,  be  the  very  man  selected  to  control  and 
punish  that  entire  body  of  men  so  devoted  to  Rome  ;  and  all  this  to 
gTatify  the  cupidity,  the  vanity,  and  the  lust  for  dominion  over  them, 
in  their  "  Defender  of  the  Faith." 

This  shrewd  adviser,  however,  discerned  both  "  time  and  judgment." 
Henry  had  one  favour  to  obtain,  through  this  "  spirituality,"  in  1530, 
which  will  occupy  most  of  the  year,  and  therefore  a  compass  must  be 
fetched,  before  Crumwell's  advice  can  be  followed.  Meanwhile,  he  had 
placed  the  lash  in  the  hands  of  his  royal  Master  ;  and  the  moment  he  is 
commanded,  Crumwell  will  not  be  slow  to  act  with  boldness  and  de- 


27  Singer  has  mentioned  this  fact,  from  Pole,  as  Crumwell's  own  ^\»Xexacxi\..  — Life  of  Wolsey 
,  p.  19.5, 

vor,.  I.  p 


226  RISE  OF  CRUMWELL.  [BOOK  I. 

cision.  Immediately  he  must  secure  a  seat  in  the  House  of  Commons  ; 
but  after  such  an  audience,  this  could  be  no  very  difficult  matter.  Ac- 
cordingly, a  son  of  Sir  Thomas  Rugh,  already  returned,  gave  way  to  him. 
"  He  obtained  his  room,"  says  Cavendish,  "  and,  by  that  means,  put  his 
foot  into  the  Parliament  House." 

On  the  21st  of  October,  as  formerly  hinted,  the  King  had  thrown  his 
shield  over  Wolsey  ;  and  on  the  evening  before  he  saw  Crumwell,  he 
had  sent,  by  Sir  John  Russel,  a  kind  message  to  him.  The  day  after 
Crumwell  had  his  audience,  or  Wednesday  the  3d  of  November,  Parlia- 
ment assembled,  in  which  Henry  had  now  jjermitted  the  Cardinal  to  sit ! 
Thus  he  at  once  eluded  the  censure  of  such  as  thought  the  late  proceed- 
ings had  been  severe,  and  seemed  to  place  the  power  of  farther  pimish- 
ment  in  the  hands  of  Parliament.  Should  the  Upper  House  once  pro- 
ceed against  Wolsey,  and  ground  their  accusations  against  him  as 
Legate,  nothing  will  so  exactly  answer  Henry's  pui-pose. 

There  had  been  no  Parliament  held  since  1 523  !  These 
were  troublesome  assemblies,  and  had  by  no  means  suited  the 
speed  of  Wolsey \s  chariot  wheels  ;  so  that  now,  when  such 
an  assembly  as  had  not  been  convened  for  six  years,  was  about 
to  deliberate,  very  much  will  depend  upon  the  general  spirit 
and  temper  of  the  new  Lord  Chancellor.  All  things  had 
been  regulated  by  that  strange  anomaly, — Legantine  authority: 
they  were  now  to  be  discussed  professedly  by  a  legislative 
Assembly  of  Lords  and  Commons,  so  that  some  change,  for 
better  or  worse,  must  await  the  country. 

On  Wednesday  the  Sd  of  November,  at  the  Chamber  in 
Blackfriars,  Parliament  met ;  when  Lord  Chancellor  More,  in 
his  eloquent  oration,  gave  the  first  overtures  of  the  King's  in- 
tentions. The  CardinaPs  fall, — the  state  of  the  Church, — and 
the  "  new  learning,''''  formed  the  pith  of  this  opening  speech. 
The  King  was  present  when  the  Cardinal  was  glanced  at,  and 
in  no  courteous  terms.  It  was  only  sixteen  days  since  he 
had  been  sent  to  Esher,  and  the  orator  had  only  been  chosen 
in  his  room  ten  days  before ;  yet,  along  with  a  fulsome 
compliment  to  Henry,  as  having  "  seen  through  him,  both 
within  and  without,"  though  Wolsey  had  so  often  led  him  as  a 
child ;  Sir  Thomas  having  compared  Henry  VIIL  to  a  shep- 
herd, and  his  people  to  a  JiocJc,  then  referred  to  "  the  great 
wether  which  is  of  late  fallen,  as  ye  all  know," — "who  so 
craftily,  yea,  and  so  untruly  juggled  with  the  King  ! "  There 
was  truth   here,  unquestionably,  but   though  such   language 


1529.]  PARLIAMENT  ASSEMBLED.  227 

from  a  judge,  from  a  Lord  Chancellor,  referring  to  his  prede- 
cessor, might  pass  in  those  days ;  in  later  times  it  would,  of 
course,  have  been  regarded  as  the  height  of  indecency.  It 
was  much  worse,  when  it  is  remembered,  that  though  the 
great  seal  had  been  taken  from  Wolsey,  still  he  had  been 
summoned  to  attend  this  Parliament,  and  actually  sat  in  the 
House  after  this  among  his  peers,  when  the  Bills  were  dis- 
cussing durino-  November.  But  it  becomes  a  great  deal  more 
difficult  to  characterise  this  false  and  fulsome  compliment  to 
Henry's  sagacity,  when  it  is  observed,  that  only  on  the  Mon- 
day week  before  this,  or  the  25th  of  October,  when  first 
brought  into  Chancery,  where  the  King  was  not  prese?it,  More, 
though  alluding  to  Wolsey's  fall,  had  spoken  in  a  far  different 
style.  "  And  now,"  said  he,  "  when  I  look  on  this  seat,  and 
recollect  how  great  persons  have  filled  it  before  me, — when  I 
contemplate  who  sat  in  it  last, — a  man  of  such  singular  wisdom, 
such  skill  in  business,  blest  with  such  long  and  pi'osperous 
fortune,  and  visited  at  last  with  so  high  and  inglorious  a  fall, 
I  cannot  but  see  the  difficulty  of  my  situation.  For  it  is 
difficult  to  succeed  with  approbation,  to  one  of  such  genius, 
wisdom,  authority,  and  splendour,  or  to  trace  his  footsteps 
with  an  equal  pace.  It  seems  as  if  we  should  light  a  taper, 
after  gazing  on  the  setting  sun  !"  More  might  say  that  he 
eulogised  only  Wolsey's  talents,  and  blamed  his  want  of  in- 
tegrity ;  but  his  whole  procedure  was  unworthy  of  himself, 
nor  can  it  ever  be  justified,  much  less  admired. 

As  for  the  various  subjects  then  styled  ecclesiastical,  they 
were  incorporated  or  interwoven  with  civil  affairs.  The  abuses, 
says  Herbert,  having  now  come  at  last  to  the  King's  know- 
ledge, he  remitted  their  redress  to  the  Lower  House  of  Parlia- 
ment. The  Mortuaries,  or  the  exactions  from  the  children  of  de- 
ceased parents, — the  enormous  expense  of  Probates,  or  proofs 
of  wills, — Pluralities  to  the  extent  of  eight  or  ten  livings,  en- 
grossed by  one  man, — abounding  non-residence, — Priests  being 
Surveyors,  Stewards  of  estates,  Farmers,  and  Graziers  in 
every  county, — Priors,  and  other  ecclesiastics,  being  the 
buyers  and  sellers  of  Wool,  of  Cloth,  and  all  kinds  of  mer- 
chandise.    Such  were  the  grievances  then  to  be  redressed. 

Three  bills  were  therefore  drawn  up,  by  the  appointment  of 
the  Burgesses  of  Parliament, — the  first  relating  to  Mortuaries, 
the  second  to  Probates,  and  the  third  embracing  all  the  other 
evils. 


228  COMMOTION  THERE.  [bOOK  I. 

The  first,  when  sent  up  to  the  Lords,  was  rather  courteously 
received;  the  second,  concerning  Probates,  followed  in  two 
days  ;  but  on  this,  Warham,  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
and  all  the  other  bishops  frowned.  Fisher,  the  Bishop  of 
Rochester,  spoke  with  greatest  violence  and  warmth.  In  the 
parliament  chamber,  says  the  contemporary  chronicler,  he 
said  openly  these  words, — '"  My  Lords,  you  see  daily  what 
bills  come  hither  from  the  Common  house,  and  all  is  to  the  des- 
truction of  the  Church  ;  see  what  a  realm  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia 
was,  and  when  the  Church  went  doicn,  then  fell  the  glory  of  the 
kingdom, — now  with  the  Commons  is  notliing  but  doxcn  with 
the  Church, — and  all  this,  me  seemeth,  is  for  lack  oi  faith  only." 

These  last  expressions  once  reported  to  the  Commons,  they 
sent  their  speaker.  Sir  Thomas  Audley,  with  thirty  members, 
to  the  King.  Henry,  also  dissatisfied,  promised  to  call  for 
the  Bishop,  and  send  them  reply.  Accordingly,  Warham 
and  six  of  his  brethren,  besides  Fisher,  had  to  appear,  when 
the  latter  apologised,  saying,  he  meant  "  the  doings  of  the 
Bohemians  were  for  lack  of  faith."  The  King  received  his  re- 
presentation, but  the  Commons  were  still  by  no  means  satis- 
fied with  this  "  blind  excuse." 

After  this,  the  Commons  referred  to  the  laws  and  constitu- 
tions of  the  Church,  as  enforcing  these  bills,  but  the  "  Spiritu- 
ality" defended  the  existing  state  of  things  by  "presumption 
and  usager  One  commoner,  a  gentleman  of  Gray*'s  Inn,  had 
the  courage  to  reply, —  "The  usage  hath  ever  been  of  thieves,  to 
rob  on  Shooter's  hill,  er'io — is  it  lawful  !"^^  Of  course  very 
great  offence  was  taken  at  the  comparison,  as  if  the  fees  for 
Probates  were  to  be  considered  robbery.  The  Commons 
stood  firm,  and  the  temporal  Lords  began  to  lean  to  their 
side,  but  the  bills  could  not  yet  pass. 

Meanwhile  the  Lords  assented  to  a  bill  of  their  own,  and  sent 
it  down  to  the  Commons,  which  will  remind  the  reader  of 
years  gone  by,  as  it  referred  to  measures  introduced  by  Wolsey, 
and  ultimately  supported  by  the  present  Chancellor,  then 
Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons.  This  was  a  bill  releasing 
the  King  of  all  such  sums  as  he  had  borrowed  fi-om  his  sub- 
jects, in  the  fifteenth  year  of  his    reign.     The  measure,  of 

28  Sir  Thomas  Audley  is  said  to  have  been  the  gentleman.  Perhaps  he  saw  the  road  to  pre- 
ferment, and  may  become  Lord  Chancellor,  when  Sir  Thomas  More  retires. 

29  Yet  only  the  year  before,  when  Sir  W.  Conipton,  one  of  the  King's  household,  died  of  the 
disease  then  raging,  the  fees  exacted  by  WoIscy  and  Warham,  or  the  Probate  to  his  will, 
amounted  to  lOOf)  marks,  ».  c.  iiWo,  1.3s.  4d.,  which,  if  multiplied  by  15,  would  be  exactly  £lO,000  .' 


1529.]  FALL  OF  WOLSKY.  229 

course,  was  felt  severely  by  the  Commons,  and  the  more  so,  as 
it  would  render  them  unpopular  with  their  constituents  ;  but 
as  the  majority  of  members  were  the  King's  servants,  and 
others  were  gained  over,  the  bill  passed. 

By  way  of  gratitude  in  return,  the  King  granted,  with 
certain  exceptions,  a  general  pardon  of  oft'ences,  and  aiding 
the  Commons  for  the  redress  of  their  grievances,  he  caused  two 
new  bills  to  be  presented  afresh  to  the  Lords,  to  which  they 
at  last  assented,  although  that  in  reference  to  the  probate  of 
wills  was  peculiarly  offensive  to  the  Bishops. 

The  Counnons  then  sent  up  their  third  bill,  in  reference  to 
pluralities,  non-residence,  farming,  &c.  At  this  the  Priests 
not  only  railed  on  the  Commons  as  heretics,  but  the  Bishops, 
in  the  Upper  House,  says  Hall,  "  would  in  no  ways  consent." 
At  last  the  King  interposed.  Causing  eight  members  from 
each  House  to  meet  and  confer  in  the  Star  Chamber,  the 
Temporal  Lords  present  united  with  the  Commons,  and  next 
day  the  bill,  somewhat  qualified,  passed  into  a  law. 

As  almost  all  these  abuses  had  grown  up  to  this  height  under  Wolsey's 
administration,  their  Lordships  at  least  imagined  that,  notwithstanding 
his  recent  humiliation,  he  must  again  be  dealt  with.  Accordingly,  on 
the  first  of  December,  the  Lords,  with  Sir  Thomas  More  at  their  head, 
presented  their  address  to  the  King,  containing  not  fewer  than  forty-four 
articles  against  the  Cardinal,  and  grounding  all  these  "  notable,  high, 
and  grievous  offences,"  upon  his  usurped  authority  as  "  Legate  de  latere." 
In  the  Upper  House,  the  fallen  Minister,  who  had  made  France  and  Spain 
tremble,  and  the  Pontiff  himself  to  sigh  and  wring  his  hands,  was  now 
almost  friendless  ;  but  when  the  charges  were  sent  down  to  the  Commons, 
defended  with  great  ability  and  boldness  by  his  old  servant,  Crumwell, 
the  accusation  of  treason  fell  to  the  ground.  The  clouds,  however,  will 
never  again  disperse. 

In  the  fall  of  Wolsey,  his  country  in  general,  or  at  least  the  best  of 
his  Majesty's  subjects,  were  fully  prepared  to  rejoice.  For  a  long  series 
of  years  he  had  pandered  to  the  vices  of  his  Sovereign,  as  well  as  rioted 
in  luxury  himself,  and  it  was  fit  that  he  should  fall.  Time  there  was, 
when  he  sat  at  the  King's  right  hand,  and  when,  with  a  household 
amounting  to  hundreds,  he  entertained  his  Master  with  a  splendour 
superior  to  the  throne  itself ;  when  he  drunk  only  out  of  silver  and  gold 
plate,  and  had  the  highest  nobility  of  the  land  rejoicing  to  wait  upon 
him.^^     "Then  he  made  the  King  doat  upon  him,  more  than  ever  he 

30  The  manuscripts  differ  in  stating  the  number  of  his  household.  One  has  it  as  low  as  180, 
another  as  high  as  800 ;  Cavendish  says,  "  the  number  was  about  the  sum  of  500  persons,  accord- 


230  PARLIAMENT   UNANIMOUS.  [bOOK  I. 

did  upon  any  lady  or  gentleman  ;  so  that  the  King  followed  him,  as  he 
before  followed  the  King.  What  he  said,  that  was  wisdom ;  what  he 
praised,  that  only  was  honourable." ^^  But  of  late  he  had  stood  in  slip- 
pery places,  and  one  false  step  taken,  he  was  cast  down  into  destruction. 
That  divorce,  the^^rs^  idea  of  which,  certainly  originated  with  him — the 
Legantine  Court  which  he  had  himself  contrived — with  an  assistant 
Legate  from  Rome,  as  he  had  himself  suggested,  brought  him  to  his  ruin. 
Wolsey,  says  Turner,  "  could  not  believe  in  the  possibility  of  his  fall ; 
but  long  dreaded  by  many,  fall  at  last  he  did,  like  a  loosened  avalanche 
from  its  mountain-svimmit  of  power  and  intimidation,  never  to  be  re- 
placed or  dreaded  any  more."^-  He  had  "  swallowed  down  riches,"  but 
must  "  vomit  them  up  again  ;"  and  now  that  his  judgment  is  come*,  and 
"  destruction  is  ready  at  his  side,"  though  "  his  excellency  mounted  up 
to  the  heavens,  and  his  head  reached  unto  the  clouds,  he  shall  flee  away 
as  a  dream,  and  shall  not  be  found,  yea,  he  shall  be  chased  away  as  a 
vision  of  the  night."  He  had  indeed  about  one  year  more  to  live,  but 
this  will  only  sink  him  in  deeper  misery  and  disgrace  ! 

After  this  precedent,  matters  were  preciseli)  in  that  state,  which  both 
the  King  and  Crumwell  wished.  In  the  royal  pardon  now  granted,  there- 
fore, all  transgressions  against  the  statutes  of  provisors  and  premunire 
were  excepted^  Not  one  priest  was  safe.  All  who  had  appeared  in 
Wolsey's  courts,  and  all  who  had  suits  there  were  thus  involved — the 
whole  body  of  the  priesthood  now  lay  at  Henry's  mercy  I  Only  it  was 
not  yet  time  to  proceed. 

It  is  of  importance  now  to  observe,  that  before  this  Parlia- 
ment was  prorogued,  on  the  17th  of  December,  there  was 
one  other  measure  respecting  which  there  was  no  dissension 
among  the  Bishops,  nor  any  division  between  the  two  Houses, 
and  this  was  how  to  deal  with  the  new  learning  come  into  the 
land.  "  It  had  been,"  says  Lord  Herbert,  "  secretly  admitted 
into  many  places  of  this  kingdom  with  much  approbation,  so 
that  even  the  most  ignorant  began  to  examine  whether  the 
errors  then  ordinarily  controverted,  did  belong  to  the  doctrine 
or  the  government  of  the  Church."  This  subject,  it  should  be 
remembered,  had  been  noticed  among  the  "  overtures  of  the 
King's  intentions,"  in  this  short  session,  and  whether  suggested 
by  the  new  Chancellor,  must  appear  by  what  followed.  Sir 
Thomas  More  might  smile  at  TunstaFs  simplicity,  in  having 

ing  to  his  checker  roll."  This  last  may  be  regarded  as  a  moderate  computation,  for  even  when 
shorn  of  his  grandeur,  Wolsey's  train,  in  travelling  to  York  next  year,  amounted  to  160  persons. 

31  Tyndalc,  as  quoted  hy  Turner.  32  See  his  Henry  VIII.,  c.  xx. 

33  There  was  one  curious  exception,  of  "  all  those  who  had  dug  down  crosses  on  the  highway," 
—highly  significant  (if  tl\c  state  of  the  pcoi)lc's  mind. 


1529.]  AGAINST  THE  TRUTH.  231 

purchased  books  at  Antwerp  to  burn  them  in  London,  by  and 
bye;  but  at  the  same  time,  whatever  his  pen  or  his  power  could 
do,  was  now  to  be  employed  against  the  authors  and  the  pos- 
sessors of  all  such  publications.  With  his  pen  he  had  been 
busy  ever  since  he  was  licensed,  in  March  last  year;  and  now, 
as  Lord  Chancellor,  he  will  enjoy  the  gratification  of  employ- 
ing his  power,  and  immediately  upon  his  entrance  into  office. 

Sir  Thomas  More  has  certainly  been  fortunate,  even  to  a 
proverb,  in  his  biographers.  At  once  the  pride  and  the  pet 
of  the  literary  world,  they  have  drawn  his  character  on  this 
principle — that  "  what  offends  the  eye  in  a  good  picture,  the 
painter  casts  discreetly  into  shades ;"  so  that  any  writer  laid 
under  the  necessity  of  bringing  to  light  the  generally  concealed 
features  of  the  man,  nmst  run  the  risk  of  being  charged  with 
a  sin  against  taste.  It  is,  however,  chiefly  with  his  official 
character,  and  as  the  opponent  of  Tyndale  and  Fryth,  that 
we  have  here  to  do.  His  official  movements  against  them, 
are  matter  of  history,  and  as  for  his  sentiments  and  feelings, 
there  is  no  necessity  for  calling  witnesses  to  prove  what  they 
were.  Plentifully  were  they  expressed  by  himself,  through 
many  folio  pages. 

Wolsey  being  degraded,  had  the  spirit  of  persecution  rested 
only  in  Jiis  breast  as  Prime- Minister,  of  course  it  must  now 
have  abated  under  his  successor.  Notwithstanding,  therefore, 
the  prodigious  faults  of  the  fallen  Cardinal,  let  us  enquire, 
and  render  him  impartial  justice. 

It  must  have  been  observed,  that  the  criminal  charges  pre- 
ferred against  Wolsey  by  the  Lords,  were  presented  to  the 
King,  with  More  at  their  head  ;  and  that  the  43d  article  in- 
cluded these  words, — "  besides  all  his  other  heinous  offences, 
the  said  Lord  Cardinal  hath  been  the  impeacher  and  disturber 
of  due  and  direct  correction  of  heresies,  being  highly  to  the 
danger  and  peril  of  the  whole  body  and  good  Christian  people 
of  this  realm."  The  neglect  of  Warham's  letter  was  now  no 
doubt  remembered  ;  ^  but  they  specially  referred  to  W  olsey's 
inhibiting  the  Bishops  who  desired  to  repair  to  Cambridge,  in 
1523,  for  the  correction  of  such  errors  as  were  said  to  reign 
among  the  students  and  scholars  there ;  in  consequence  of 
which,  they   now  affirmed,   these    errors  had    "  crept    more 

34  See  pages  U«,  llo. 


232  MORE  AND  THE   BISHOPS  [book  I. 

a'>roacl,  aud  took  greater  place."^^  This  was  a  charge  which, 
when  the  whole  article  is  read,  evidently  came  warm  from  the 
heart  of  all  the  prelates  who  were  present;^  and  Wolsey, 
in  various  instances,  certainly  had  not  allowed  them  to  run 
riot,  to  the  extent  they  demanded ;  his  own  interests,  at  the 
moment,  forbidding  the  gratification  of  their  malice.  The 
loftier  flight  of  his  own  personal  ambition  had  so  engrossed  his 
mind,  that  the  fiery  and  unmitigable  zeal  of  these  men  must 
have  frequently  been  felt  by  him  as  an  annoyance,  retarding  his 
progress ;  and  now,  that  he  is  to  be  crushed,  they  were 
rejoicing  in  hope  of  other  days  under  his  successor — better  in 
their  estimation,  but  bitter  days  and  nights  to  those  who 
either  stood  in  their  way,  or  dared  to  oppose  them. 

As  it  regarded,  therefore,  what  the  Bishops  longed  so  much 
to  enjoy — "  the  direct  correction  of  heresies,""  the  reader  will 
bear  in  mind  the  embassy  on  which  More  with  Tunstal  had 
been  lately  sent  ;  but  more  especially  the  closing  treaty  at 
Cambray,  which  they  had  arranged  and  signed.  It  was  the 
first  amicable  arrangement  of  any  kind,  between  the  Emperor 
and  Henry,  for  a  considerable  time  past.^  Charles,  before 
this  period,  had  twice  issued  what  were  styled,  "  Placards," 
throughout  his  dominions,  and,  in  fulfilment,  it  seems,  of  this 
treaty,  on  the  14th  of  October  he  had  issued  a  third.  By 
this,  all  those  who  had  relapsed  after  abjuration,  were  to  be 
\)\xv\\i — as  for  others,  men  were  to  die  by  the  sword — women 
to  be  buried  alive  !  All  were  warned  against  receiving  any 
heretic  to  their  houses,  on  pain  of  death  and  confiscation  of 
goods  !  Suspected  persons  were  to  receive  no  honourable 
employment ;  and,  in  order  to  find  out  heretics,  one-half  of 
their  estates  was  promised  to  informers  !^^ 

Was  there  then  no  echo  in  England  to  this  ferocious 
placard?  or  did  More  and  Tunstal  pay  no  regard  to  the 
treaty  they  had  signed  I  So  far  from  this,  the  subject  was 
one  to  which  both  immediately  bent  all  their  energies.  For 
months  past,  indeed,  the  pen  of  More,  dipped  in  gall,  had 
been  busy  on  the  subject  of  suppressing  heresy ;  arguing  for 
persecution  unto  death,  in  his  strange  and  characteristic 
"  Dialogue ;"  and    the    first  time  he    opens    his    mouth    in 


35  See  before,  under  1526,  p.  101.  36  See  Herbert,  .'iOl. 

3-  MS.  Cotton,  Galba,  B.  ix.,  204,  )).,  and  p.  1!)G.  ^^  Brandt,  anno  1.5iO. 


1.529.]  IN   LEAGUE  AGAINST  THE  TRUTH.  233 

Parliament  as  Chancellor,  he  has  it  among  the  overtures  of 
the  King's    intentions.     His  appearance  in   print,  since  the 
month  of  June,  as  the  determined  opponent  of  Tyndale,  had 
fully  shown  the  man,  for  five  months  before  his  elevation  to 
the  Great  Seal;  and  the  spirit  now  displayed  by  him,  afforded 
no  comfortable  prospect  for  those  who  had  espoused  the  truth, 
and  were  promoting  its  diffusion  at  great  hazard  and  expense. 
"  As  soon,'''  says  Burnet,  "  as  More  came  into  favour,  he 
pressed  the  King  much,  to  put  the  laws  against  heretics  in 
execution,  and  suggested  that  the  Court  of  Rome  would  be 
more  wrought  upon  by  the  Kings's  supporting  the  Church, 
and   defending  the  faith  vigorously,   than  by   threatenings  : 
and,  therefore,  a  long  proclamation  was  issued  out  against  the 
heretics,  many  of  their  books  were  prohibited,  and  all  the  laws 
against   them  were  appointed  to  be  put  in  execution,  and 
great  care  was  taken  to  seize  them  as  they  came  into  England. "^^ 
The    facts   of  the    case    may    be    more    distinctly    stated. 
Tunstal,  as  well  as  More,  must  perform  his  part ;  and  War- 
ham  also,  now  that  Wolsey  is  out  of  the  way,  has  no  objec- 
tions to  go  all  lengths  with  his  fellows.     Accordingly,  before 
the  opening  of  this  Parliament,   the   Convocation  had  been 
summoned  to  meet.     They  did  so  on  the  5th  of  November, 
when  at  their  Jirst  meeting  a  reformation  of  abuses  was  pro- 
posed ;    and    with    that    an    enquiry   was    made    concerning 
heretical  booh.     A  Committee  of  Bishops  was  appointed  with 
relation  to  heretics.     On  the  19th  of  December,  two  days  after 
Parliament  had  risen,  secrecy  was  enjoined,  and  again  a  second 
time,  on  pain  of  excommunication,  so  eager  were  they  to  catch 
the  prey.     They  closed  their  Convocation  on  the  24th,  or  a 
week  after  Parliament,  and  then  came  out  that  proclamation 
which,  as  Foxe  says,  was  made  throughout  all  England,  the 
year  of  our  Lord  1529,  and  the  21st  year  of  Henry  VIIT.  ; 
commencing,  "  The  King  our  ISovereign  Lord,''"'  &c. — "  The 
Bishops,""  he  tells  us,   "  were  the  procurers  of  this  fierce  and 
terrible  proclamation,  devised  and  set  out  in  the  King''s  name;" 
but  there  can  be  no  question  that  the  Chancellor's  influence 
was  united  with  theirs  in  this  matter.     Indeed,  the  style  in 
several  places  will  show,  that  it  must  have  been  their  joint 
production.     More  and  Tunstal,  no  doubt,  drew  it  up  ;  and 

39  Burnet,  edit.  1720,  lib.  ii.,  p.  159. 


234  THE  KING  COINCIDES  [book  I. 

as  the  Chancellor's  hand  is  so  visible  throughout,  this  con- 
sequently may  be  regarded  as  about  the  first  of  his  official 
papers.     A  few  of  the  items  must  not  be  omitted. 

"  First — that  no  man  within  the  King's  realm,  or  other  dominions  subject 
to  his  highness,  hereafter  presume  to  j>reach,  teach,  or  inform,  any  thing  openly 
or  privily,  compile  and  write  any  hooh,  or  keep  any  school,  contrary  to  the  de- 
termination of  Holy  Church.  That  no  man  willingly  favour  or  maintain  any 
such  person.  That  all  persons  having  such  books  and  writings  deliver  them 
up,  within  fifteen  days. 

"  Furthermore,  if  any  person  be  convicted,  before  the  Bishop  or  his  Commis- 
sary, in  any  case  above  expressed,  the  Bishop  may  keep  in  prison  the  said 
pei'son  or  persons,  as  it  shall  seem  best  to  his  discretion,  and  may  set  a  fine,  to  be 
paid  to  the  behoof  of  the  Kitig,  except  where  the  said  persons  ought  totally  to 
be  left  to  the  secular  power. 

"  Also,  if  any  person  within  this  realm  do  abjure,  and  after  their  abjuration 
relapse,  they  ought  to  be  relinquished  to  the  jurisdiction  secular — wherein /ai^A 
is  to  be  given  to  the  Bishop,  or  his  Commissary.  The  Sheriff  oi  the  county, 
or  Mayor  of  the  city,  town,  or  burgh,  to  be  present  at  the  seutence  given  by  the 
Bishop  or  his  Commissary,  and  receive  the  said  persons  to  further  execution. 

"  Also,  the  Chancellor,  the  Treasurer  of  Emjland,  the  Justice  of  the  one  Bench 
and  of  the  other,  Justices  of  Pecvce,  Sheriffs,  Mayors,  Bailies,  and  other  officers, 
shall  make  oath  on  taking  their  charge,  to  give  their  whole  power  and  diligence, 
to  put  away,  and  make  utterly  to  cease  and  destroy,  all  heresies  and  errors 
commonly  called  LollardiesA*^  They  shall  assist  the  Bishops  and  their  Commis- 
saries— shall  favour  and  maintain  them  as  often  as  requii'ed  by  them. 

"  Moreover,  the  Justices  of  the  Kimfs  Bench,  Justices  of  Peace  and  of  Assize, 
shall  enquire  at  their  Sessions  of  all  those  that  hold  errors  or  heresies,  and  vfho 
be  their  maintainors,  the  common  writers  of  books,  as  also  of  their  schools, 
sermons,  &c. 

"  Furthermore,  as  all  offenders  '  appertain  to  the  Judge  of  Holy  Church  and 
not  to  the  Judge  secular,'  they  be  delivered  to  the  Bishops  or  Commissaries, 
by  indenture  between  them,  to  be  made  within  ten  days,  or  sooner,  after 
their  arrest ;  if  those  persons  be  not  indicted  for  other  things,  whereof  the 
knowledge  belongs  to  the  Judge  secular.  In  which  case,  after  they  be  acquitted 
before  the  latter,  that  they  be  conveyed  in  safe-guard  to  the  Commissaries, 
there  to  be  acquitted  or  convicted  after  the  laws  of  Holy  Church. 

"  That  no  person  is  henceforth  to  bring  into  this  realm,  or  to  sell,  receive, 
take,  or  detain,  any  book  or  work,  printed  or  written,  against  the  faith  Catholic — 
the  decrees,  laws,  and  ordinances  of  Holy  Chm-ch — or  in  reproach,  rebuke,  or 
slander  of  the  King,  his  coimsel,  or  the  Lords  spiritual  and  temporal.  In  case 
they  have  any  such  books  they  shall  immediately  bring  them  to  the  Bishop  of 
the  diocese,  without  concealment  or  fraud  :  or  if  they  know  any  person  having 
any  of  the  said  books,  they  shall  detect  them  to  the  said  Bishop,  all  favour  or 
affection  laid  apart,  and  that  they  fail  not  thus  to  do  as  they  will  avoid  the 
living's  high  indignation  and  displeasure." 

That  no  man  might  pretend  ignorance,  a  list  of  the  books  restrained  or  for- 
bidden, specially  named  by  the  Bishops,  was  also  pubUshed ;  including  ninety- 


■*"   Luther's  influence  is  nut  noticed,  but  certain  <)i)inions  indigenous  to  the  country. 


1529.]  WITH  HIS  PARLIAMENT.  235 

four  distinct  tracts  or  books  in  Latin,  and  at  least  twenty-four  in  English,  tlio 
great  majority  of  which  were  by  Tyndale  or  his  friends,  viz.— - 

By  Tijndale.  The  New  Testament — The  Parable  of  the  Wicked  Mammon — 
The  Obedience  of  a  Christian  Man — Introduction  to  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Ro- 
mans— Exposition  of  1  st  Cor.,  vii.  chapter — The  chapters  of  Moses  called  Genesis 
— The  chapters  of  Moses  called  Deuteronomy — The  Matrimony  of  Tyndale. 

B}'  Fryth.  The  Revelation  of  Antichrist,  with  an  Epistle  to  the  Christian 
Reader.  By  Fyshe.  The  Supplication  of  Beggars  —  The  Sum  of  Scripture. 
By  Roye.  A  Dialogue  between  the  Father  and  the  Son — The  Satyre  on  Wolsey, 
or  Burying  of  the  Mass.  Besides  various  others,  "  Godly  Prayers  " — The 
Psalter — Hortulus  anirace,  in  English — The  Primer,  or  A.  B,  C.  against  the 
Clergy.     &c. 

"  The  Bisliops,"  says  Foxe,  "  had  that  now  which  they 
would  have  ;  neither  did  there  lack,  on  their  part,  any  study 
unapplied,  any  stone  unremoved,  any  corner  unsearched,  for 
the  diligent  execution  of  the  same."'^^ 

Here,  then,  we  have  the  first  Royal  proclamation  interdict- 
ing printed  books,  and  pursuing  the  importers,  the  possessors, 
or  authors  of  them  to  death  by  fire.  This  was  one  of  the 
first  fruits  of  the  neii'  administration,  and  it  marks  the  present 
period  as  an  era  in  the  history  of  persecution  for  conscience"* 
sake  ;  since  the  government  of  the  country,  that  is,  the  King 
and  his  Council,  were  now  fully  committed.  The  only  formal 
public  instruments  hitherto  issued,  were  the  injunctions  of 
Warham,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  Tunstal,  Bishop  of 
London,  in  the  close  of  1526;  and  up  to  December  1529,  this 
persecution  had  been  an  affair  of  the  "  Spirituality"  alone. 
The  King,  it  is  true,  had  approved  of  what  they  did  in  1526, 
and,  before  then,  was  himself  writing  to  the  Netherlands,  and 
eager  about  the  burning  of  books.  But  his  name,  as  Sove- 
reign, had  never,  till  this  period,  been  employed  to  strike  terror 
into  the  hearts  of  his  own  subjects,  to  make  heresy  and  treason 
convertible  terms,  and  lay  the  entire  civil  power  at  the  feet 
of  the  Bishops. 


41  Though  there  be  no  date  to  this  proclamation  and  list  of  books,  it  is  not  difficult  to  fix  the 
period.  The  21st  year  of  Henry  ended  on  the  21st  of  April  1530,  and  the  year  ]52f»,  by  their 
reckoning,  ran  on  to  the  25th  of  March  ;  consequently  the  proclamation  framid  before  the  24th 
of  December  must  have  been  issued  soon  after.  In  the  Kegister  of  Tunstal  there  is  a  copy  of 
this  proclamation,  and  then  a  list  of  books  had  been  inserted,  from  whence  Foxe  took  his  ac- 
count ;  but  as  the  "  Practice  of  Prelates  "is  there  mentioned,  this  must  have  been  copied  later 
in  the  year  1530,  as  that  book  could  not  possibly  be  in  England  so  early  as  March.  Foxe,  how- 
ever, in  his  vague  manner,  is  recapitulating  under  1531.  These  proceedings  are  not  to  be  con- 
founded with  the  next  measure  of  the  Chancellor  and  the  Bishops,  when  the  King  met  them 
two  months  after,  on  the  24th  of  May  1530,  and  Tyndale  was  held  up  by  name,  to  the  whole 
nation,  as  the  arch-heretic  of  the  day. 


236'  SPIRIT  OF    PERSECUTION  [bOOK  I. 

Wolsey,  unquestionably,  had  great  influence  over  his  Ma- 
jesty, but  he  had  never  employed  it  in  persuading  him  thus 
publicly  and  personally  to  embrue  his  hands  in  the  blood  of 
his  subjects  on  English  ground  ;  this  was  reserved  to  distin- 
guish the  administration  of  Sir  Thomas  More ;  so  that  the 
chief  redeeming  point  in  the  character  of  the  lofty  and  over- 
bearing Cardinal,  must  stand  in  contrast  with  the  greatest 
blot  in  that  of  his  unostentatious  and  learned  successor, 

O,  Avlien  writing  his  Utopia^  in  earlier  life,  or,  as  Sir  James 
Mackintosh  has  described  it,  "  his  admirable  discussions  on 
criminal  law,  his  forcible  objections  to  capital  punishment  for 
ofiences  against  property,  his  remarks  on  the  tendency  of  the 
practice  of  inflicting  needless  sufiering  on  animals,  in  weaken- 
ing compassion  and  affection  towards  our  fellow-men,"  and  his 
extraordinary  latitude  of  toleration  as  to  the  mind  ;  had  any 
one  said  to  him — "  I  know  the  evil  and  the  cruelty  thou  wilt 
yet  inflict  on  the  people  around  you," — would  he  not  have 
replied,  "  What  !  is  thy  servant  a  dog  that  he  should  do  this 
thing  \ "  But  now,  it  seems  the  only  answer  might  have  been, 
"  Thou  shalt,  one  day,  be  Lord  Chancellor  of  England,"  and 
then ! 

But  before  then,  and  only  just  before,  he  had  himself  al- 
ready given  a  fearful  omen  to  his  country,  of  what  might  have 
been  anticipated  from  his  administration.  His  appearance 
this  year  as  a  controversialist,  must  have  been  hailed  by  the 
entire  hierarchy,  licensed  or  hired  as  he  had  been  by  high 
prelatical  authority  ;  and  certainly  the  English  language  had 
never  been  so  prostituted  before  he  took  up  his  pen.  Even 
in  the  eulogised  "  Utopia"  of  his  early  days,  it  should  never 
be  forgotten  that  he  there  stood  forth,  more  than  insinuating 
the  lawfulness  of  suicide ;  and  now,  alas,  he  must  appear  as 
regarding  with  equal  indifference  the  blood  of  others.  The 
proclamation  already  quoted,  which  was  to  be  read  throughout 
all  the  land,  was  in  him  but  the  natural  result  of  the  senti- 
ments he  had  already  expressed  in  print ;  and  now  the  civil 
authority,  from  the  Lord  Chancellor  of  England  down  to  the 
lowest  Bailiff  of  a  burgh  town,  bound  by  oath,  must  make 
official  enquiry  after  "  heretics."  "  The  prelates,"  he  had 
already  said,  in  print,  "  ought  temporally  to  destroy  those 
ravenous  wolves  ;"  they  were  by  arietous  punishment  to  be  re- 
pressed in  the  beginning,  and  the  sparkle  ifell  qiienched,  ere  it 


152,9.]  STRONGER  THAN    EVER.  237 

was  suffered  to  grow  to  over  great  a  fire  ! "  But  once  in 
possession  of  power,  the  mace  as  well  as  the  pen  must  be  em- 
ployed to  prevent  the  progress  of  the  "  new  learning ; "  so  that 
if  Wolsey  had  chastised  the  people  with  whips,  More,  as  led 
by  these  Bishops,  seems  determined  to  do  so,  with  scorpions. 

And  what  was  the  existing  condition  of  this  prelatical  cause, 
which  the  new  Lord  Chancellor  was  so  eager  to  defend  and 
maintain?  It  consisted  mainly  of  priests,  and  according  to 
his  own  admission  in  his  "  Dialogue,'''' — "  he  wot  well  that 
many  were  very  lewd  and  naught,'''' — but  "  let  the  priest  be 
never  so  vicious,  and  so  impenitent,  and  so  far  from  all  purpose 
of  amendment,  that  his  prayers  are  rejected  and  abhorred  ;  yet 
the  profit  of  his  mass  was  to  every  one  else,  just  as  good  as  if 
he  were  the  most  virtuous  man  ?''  And  again, — "  If  the 
Church  say  one  thing,  and  the  Holy  Scriptures  another  thing, 
the  faith  of  the  Church  is  to  be  taken  as  the  word  of  God^  as 
well  as  the  Scripture,  and  therefore  to  be  believed."'''  These 
are  a  few  of  his  own  express  words  ;  but  no  solitary  selected 
expressions  can  convey  an  adequate  idea  of  the  virulence,  not 
to  say  the  verbosity,  and  fallacious  reasoning  of  this  writer. 
It  certainly  would  exhaust  the  patience  of  most  readers,  in 
the  present  day,  to  wade  through  his  folio  Dialogue. 

Such  was,  in  part,  the  state  of  things  in  England  at  the 
close  of  this  year  and  commencement  of  the  next.  It  was 
purely  with  a  view  to  enlighten  and  bless  his  country  and  to 
deliver  it  from  thraldom,  that  Tyndale  had  hitherto  laboured, 
assailing  only  what  was  positively  sinful,  and  worthy  of  de- 
struction. No  English  writer  had  drawn  his  pen  against  him 
till  this  summer,  when  Sir  Thomas  More  put  forth  his  labori- 
ous Dialogue.  Tyndale's  translation  of  the  New  Testament, 
he  had  severely  condemned,  artfully  apf  roving  of  a  new  trans- 
lation, to  meet  the  pressure  from  without, — a  translation  of 
course  by  the  Bishops  ;  one,  of  which  Cranmer  said  about  eight 
years  after  this,  that  he  had  no  idea  of  its  being  accomplished 
"  till  one  day  after  Doomsday.*" 

No  choice  therefore  was  now  left  to  Tyndale,  but  to  encoun- 
ter this  "ornament  of  the  Pontifical  chair,"''' — " one  of  the  great- 
est prodigies  of  wit  and  learning,"  according  to  Anthony  Wood, 
"  that  this  nation  ever  before  his  time  had  produced."'"'  Tyndale, 
however,  entertained  no  fear  of  him,  and  he  will  not  long;  re- 
main  without  a  sufficient  answer.     On  the  whole,  it  is  now 


238  COVERDALE  SENT  TO  HAMBURGH  [bOOK  I. 

evident  that  this  had  been  a  most  busy  season,  nor  is  it  diffi- 
cult to  perceive  the  occasion  or  cause  of  all  the  turmoil.  For 
while  the  "  nether  house  of  parliament,"  as  Foxe  calls  it,  had 
been  "  communing  of  their  griefs  wherewith  the  spirituality 
had  before  time  grievously  oppressed  them  ;"  the  Convocation 
had  been  communing  also,  with  mingled  grief  and  indignation, 
over  the  "  neio  learning'''  come  into  the  land.  Some  might  say 
that  the  hand  of  Tyndale  was  in  all  this,  and  in  one  sense  it 
was,  but  then  he  was  not  in  the  country.  Properly  speaking, 
the  commotion  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  Word  of  God,  however 
denounced,  which  he  had  translated,  and  sent  home,  to  fight 
its  own  way. 

Before  the  close  of  this  year,  however,  if  we  look  abroad 
once  more,  we  are  cheered  by  observing  that  the  great  cause 
went  on.  The  Government  at  home  had  been  absorpt  in 
human  legislation,  and  confounded  by  its  perplexities.  All 
the  while,  Tyndale  had  been  diligent  in  preparing  more  of 
the  divine  law  for  his  countrymen,  and  it  will  be  home  pre- 
sently. He  had  been  employing  the  press  at  Marburg,  but 
had  left  it  himself,  for  Antwerp,  as  already  explained.  It 
is  in  reference  to  this  period  that  we  find  a  statement  by 
John  Foxe.  He  had  already  narrated  the  negociation  at 
Antwerp  with  Tunstal,  through  Packington ;  but  in  his 
story  of  William  Tyndale,  he  presents  the  following  infor- 
mation, under  1529  : — 

"  At  what  time  Tyndale  had  translated  the  fifth  book  of  Moses,  called  Deu- 
teronomy, minding  to  print  the  same  at  Hamhiinjh,  he  suffered  shipwreck,  by 
which  he  lost  all  his  books,  writings,  and  copies,  and  so  was  compelled  to  be- 
gin all  anew,  to  his  hindrance  and  doubling  of  his  labours.  Thus,  having  lost 
by  that  ship  both  money,  his  copies,  and  time,  he  came  in  another  ship  to 
Hamburgh,  where,  at  his  appointment,  Master  Corerdale  tarried  for  him,  and 
helped  him  in  the  translation  of  the  whole  five  books  of  Moses,  from  Easter  to 
December,  in  the  house  of  a  worshipful  widow,  Mistress  Margaret  Van  Em- 
merson,  anno  1529 — a  great  sweating  sickness  being  the  same  time  in  the 
town.  So  having  despatched  his  business  at  Hamburgh,  he  returned  after- 
ward to  Antwerp  again." 

This  story,  though  fully  charged  with  inaccuracy,  has 
passed  current  up  to  the  present  hour ;  yet  is  it  so  pointed 
throughout,  that  there  is  no  choice  left  but  to  concede  the 
fact,  that  Covcrdale  actually  had  sailed  for  Hamburgh,  and 
there  "  tarried"  for  Tyndale.  That  Ooverdale  may  have 
written  to  our  Translator,  and  that  he  might  fix  a  place  of 


1529.]  TO  SOUND  TVNDALE.  239 

meetinj^ ;  that  the  latter  had  endured  distressing  calamity, 
and  that  they  both  met,  we  may  admit,  but  little  or  nothing 
more.  If  so,  it  is  a  circumstance  the  more  to  be  observed, 
not  only  because  Coverdale  could,  as  yet,  render  him  no  as- 
sistance whatever,  as  a  translator ;  or  because  this  was  the 
first  interview,  and  almost  to  a  certainty  tlie  last  they  ever 
had ;  but  because  there  are  other  circumstances  which  will 
explain  the  real  intent  and  purpose  of  Coverdale's  voyage. 
The  language  of  Foxe  confirms,  indeed,  the  truth  of  Tyndale 
being  at  Antwerp  in  1529,  it  brings  him  from  thence,  and 
makes  him  return  thither  again ;  but  as  the  negociation, 
through  Packington,  could  not  be  before  August,  of  course 
Tyndale  had  not  resided  in  Hamburgh  from  Easter,  or  April 
to  December.  Nor  is  it  at  all  likely  that  even  Coverdale  did, 
though  he  might  be  in  waiting.  After  he  had  disposed  of  his 
books,  that  Tyndale  should  immediately  depart  from  Ant- 
werp, was  to  be  expected,  since  it  could  not  be  safe  for  him 
to  remain  where  he  was  ;  not  merely  after  such  a  negociation, 
and  after  all  that  had  occurred  between  John  Hackett  and 
Mr.  Harman,  but  more  especially  on  account  of  the  Em- 
peror''s  "  placard  "  after  the  treaty  of  Cambray.  Hamburgh, 
too,  on  the  contrary,  was,  at  this  moment,  in  a  very  different 
state,  and  quite  favourable  for  his  reception.**^  But  to  repre- 
sent Coverdale,  at  this  period,  as  helping  Tyndale  in  trans- 
lating, is  prej)osterous,  since  he  was  not  qualified  to  do  any- 
thing of  the  kind.  About  two  years  have  yet  to  pass  away, 
when  we  shall  find  him  intimate  to  Crumwell,  that  he  had 
then  only  "  begun  to  taste  of  Holy  Scripture,"  and  was  then 
only  "  set  to  the  sweet  smell  of  holy  letter ;"  but  that  to 
the  knowledge  of  •■'  holy  and  ancient  doctors,  he  could  not  at- 
tain, without  diversity  of  books."  "  They  once  had,"  he 
would  sit  down,  and  do  CrumwelFs  pleasure.  Then  as  for  the 
idea  of  Tyndale  himself  now  only  "  translating  the  five  books 
of  Moses,"  it  will  appear  presently,  or  in  the  opening  of  next 
year,  to  be  a  mere  fiction.  Whatever  assistance  Tyndale  had 
received  in  preparing  the  Pentateuch,  was  derived  from  Fryth. 
What,  then,  could  possibly  be  the  object  of  Coverdale's 


■42  Pomeranus,  or  John  Bugeuhagius,  was  there.  A  scholar  and  a  gentleman,  distinguished 
among  the  Germans  lor  his  meekness  and  humility  ;  he  had  come  by  invitation  of  the  citizens, 
whose  freedom  of  thinking  demanded  a  judicious  adviser  in  reference  to  their  jjrofession  of 
Christianity.  In  1525,  he  had  written  to  the  saints  in  England,  and  in  him  Tyndale  might  find 
an  intelligent  friend.— See  Bathe's  Hut.  of  Hamhimjh . 


240  TESTAMENT,   FIFTH    EDITION.  [bOOK  I. 

voyage  ?  We  have  only  to  advert  to  the  state  of  England, 
and  observe  how  far  Tyndale  had  already  proceeded.  Wolseifs 
pursuit  after  heretics  had  terminated  in  December  last  year, 
and  throughout  the  present,  the  kingdom  was  in  a  state  of 
transition  as  to  its  rulers.  Tyndale's  masterly  exposure  of 
"  the  Practice  of  Prelates,"  and  his  triumphant  "  answer  to 
Sir  Thomas  More's  Dialogue,"  had  not  yet  appeared.  Two 
Lords  Chancellor,  in  succession,  were  before  him,  and,  for  the 
sake  of  divine  truth,  both  of  them  must  be  met,  next  year. 
At  this  moment,  therefore,  a  different  course  was  about  to  be 
tried  with  Tyndale,  which  we  shall  see  followed  up  after- 
wards. The  first  object,  then,  was  to  induce  our  Translator 
to  return  into  England ;  so  that  if  Coverdale  now  actually 
proceeded  to  Hamburgh,  it  could  only  be  to  present  to  Tyn- 
dale the  first  tender  of  a  professedly  different  style  of  policy. 
Crumwell,  as  we  have  seen,  had  succeeded  in  gaining  entire 
ascendancy  over  Coverdale ;  and,  at  this  critical  moment,  it 
was  of  no  small  importance  to  ascertain,  whether  Tyndale 
was  a  practicable  man.  At  all  events,  Coverdale  returned  to 
England,  and  Tyndale  went  on  his  way.  At  the  same  time, 
it  ought  to  be  noticed,  that  we  have  no  confirmation  of  this 
meeting  between  these  two  men,  by  a  single  hint  or  expres- 
sion from  Tyndale  himself;  nor  any  other  authority  than 
that  of  Foxe ;  nay,  it  is  curious  enough,  that  in  the  whole  of 
Tyndale's  or  of  Frytli's  writings,  whatever  was  the  cause,  we 
have  not  the  shadow  of  a  reference  to  Coverdale,  more  than  if 
he  had  never  existed  ! 

In  conclusion  of  this  year,  we  have  been,  and  will  con- 
tinue to  be,  cautious  of  a  imitting  into  these  pages  any  loose 
conjecture.  But  after  all  that  we  have  read,  it  would  be 
difficult  to  believe  that  the  Antwerp  press  had  stood  still, 
either  last  year  or  the  present.  An  edition  of  Tyndale's 
Testament  has  been  long  assigned  to  about  this  period, 
though  we  are  not  able  to  fix  it,  by  adducing  such  curious  evi- 
dence, as  in  preceding  cases.  Hackett,  however,  as  early  as 
May  1527,  has  hinted  at  as  many  as  2000  having  been  for 
sale  at  Frankfort ;  and  Joye  affirms  that  the  Dutch,  as  he  calls 
them,  had  printed  it  a  tJm^d  time.  We  may,  therefore,  with 
all  safety,  put  down  another,  or  the  ffth  edition,  to  152.9. 
It  is  quite  possible  that  there  might  have  been  one  last  year, 
as  well  as  this ;  but,  at  all  events,  Tyndale  himself  will  re- 
print his  Testament  next  year. 


1530.]  TYNDALK'S   IMIOGIIKSS.  241 


SECTION   VII. 

TYNDALE's  progress  in  the  OliD  TESTAMENT — PRACTICE  OF  PRELATES — 
STATE  OF  ENGLAND — WOLSEy's  FINAL  RUIN,  SICKNESS,  DEATH — PERSE- 
cution goes  on king  and   prelates  denounce  the  scriptures 

Latimer's  bold  remonstrance — new  testaments  burnt — another, 

THE  sixth  edition VIGOROUS  IMPORTATION DEATH  OF  S.  FYSHE. 

We  have  come  to  a  more  noted  period  in  our  Translator's 
eventful  life.  From  the  variety  and  importance  of  his  pub- 
lications which  had  now  appeared  in  print,  it  is  evident  that 
the  past  and  the  present  had  been  years  of  great  and  incessant 
activity  on  his  part ;  nor  were  his  opponents  less  active.  The 
bench  of  Bishops,  now  headed  by  the  civil  power,  were  firmly 
leagued  together,  and  arrayed  against  him.  Considering  all 
that  Tyndale  already  knew,  it  is  quite  apparent  from  his 
writings,  that  he  had,  long  before  this  time,  been  prepared  in 
spirit  for  martyrdom.  Resolved  to  tell  the  whole  truth,  and, 
as  far  as  he  knew,  nothing  but  the  truth,  his  path  lay  right 
before  him.  When  pressed  out  of  measure,  he  might  and  did 
seek  for  quiet  and  safety,  that  he  might  pursue  his  work  ;  but 
he  was  of  one  mind — and  no  peril,  no  prospect  of  danger,  could 
turn  him.  Depending  on  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  for  success, 
and  feeling,  as  he  had  translated,  that  "  the  wrath  of  the  God 
of  heaven  appeareth  against  all  ungodliness  and  unrighteous- 
ness of  men,  who  icithhold  the  truth  in  unrighteousness,"  he 
must  have  resolved  to  suppress  nothing,  or  sooner  "  die  upon 
his  shield," — a  better  than  that  of  the  ancient  warrior,  because 
the  shield  of  faith. 

Tyndale's  translations  of  the  five  books  of  Moses  were  soon 
in  circulation  through  his  native  country.  His  treatise  en- 
titled "  The  Practice  of  Prelates,"  was  also  this  year  in 
England  ;  and  his  "  Answer  to  the  Dialogue  of  Sir  Thomas 
More,"  will  follow.  After  disposing  of  Wolsey  and  the  pre- 
lates in  general,  he  had  taken  up  the  production  of  Wolsey's 
successor  in  office.  Two  Lords  Chancellor  against  one  poor 
expatriated  Exile,  might  seem  to  be  fearful  odds,  but  time 
will  show  who  gained  the  victory. 

That  portion  of  the  Sacred  Volume  now  sent  into  England, 
lias  frequently  been  referred  to  by  previous  authors,  as  being 

VOL.   I.  Q 


24.2  THE   OLD   TESTAMENT.  [^BOOK  I. 

"  tlie  first  edition  of  Tyndale's  Pentateuch  ,•"  but  that  this  is 
incorrect,  will  at  once  appear  from  the  following  collation. 

Genesis,  in  black  letter,  7G  leaves,  with  this  colophon  at  the  end, — "  Emprented 
at  Marlborow,  in  the  land  of  Hesse,  by  me,  Hans  Luft,  the  yere  of  our  Lorde, 
M.D.xxx.,  the  xvii  dayes  of  Jannarii."  Exodus,  in  roman  letter,  76  leaves  ; 
Leviticus,  roman  letter,  52  leaves  ;  Numbers, in  hlackXeiier,  67  leaves  ;  Deuter- 
onomy, in  roman  letter,  63  leaves.  There  is  a  separate  title  and  a  prologue  to 
each  book  ;  at  the  end  of  Genesis,  Exodus,  and  Deuteronomy,  and  at  the  be- 
ginning of  Numbers,  are  tables  expounding  certain  words.  There  are  a  few 
notes  in  the  margins,  and  throughout  the  whole,  ten  wooden  cuts.  There  is  no 
colophon  or  date,  except  that  already  given,  attached  to  Genesis.  From  all  this, 
but  especially  from  inspection,  it  is  evident  that  these  five  books  were  printed 
at  separate  presses ;  Genesis  for  certain,  and  probaljly  Numbers,  at  Marburg. 
Deuteronomy,  and  for  aught  we  know,  Exodus  and  Leviticus,  at  Hamburgh. 
That  they  were  circulated  at  first,  separately,  in  England,  is  evident,  because 
they  were  thus  distinctly  denounced  ;  first.  Genesis  and  Deuteronomy,  and  then 
the  whole  five  books,  but  still  distinctly  noted.  At  the  same  time,  when  the 
whole  were  finished,  Tyndale  meant  them  to  be  bound  together,  as  he  then 
printed  a  general  preface,  which  may  have  led  to  the  popular  description  of 
"  the  Pentateuch,  first  edition." 

The  rarity  of  these  five  books,  entire,  is  almost  equal  to  that  of  the  first 
octavo  New  Testament  of  1525.  Only  one  perfect  copy  is  known  to  exist,  which 
once  belonged  to  Mr.  Wilkinson,  and  is  now  in  the  library  of  the  Right  Hon. 
Thomas  Grenville.  The  next  best  copy,  as  it  has  been  completed,  in  the  finest 
fac-simile,  from  the  preceding,  once  belonged  to  Mr.  Tutet.  It  was  purchased 
at  the  sale  of  his  books,  by  the  late  Mr.  Heber,  and  from  his  collection  by  Mr. 
Grenville  ;  who  only  seems  to  have  parted  with  it,  on  obtaining  his  present 
unique  perfect  book.  We  know  not  what  the  perfect  copy  cost,  but  this  second 
was  advertised  for  sale  in  1836,  by  Thorpe  of  London,  at  fifty  guineas.  Little 
did  Tyndale  imagine  that,  at  the  distance  of  more  than  three  centuries,  the 
labour  of  his  hands  would  be  so  highly  estimated. 

Besides  these  two,  all  the  other  copies  known  to  exist,  are  incomplete.  That 
in  the  Museum  at  Bristol,  wants  the  book  of  Genesis  ;  that  in  Zion  College,  pre- 
sented by  Mr.  Lewis,  the  book  of  Deuteronomy,  and  besides,  the  marginal  notes 
are  cut  off,  as  directed  by  Act  of  Parliament  in  January  1543!  The  copy  in 
the  British  Museum  wants  the  first  and  last  and  two  other  leaves ;  the  one  at 
Cambridge  is  also  imperfect.  In  the  Bodleian  library  at  Oxford,  there  is  a 
beautiful  copy  of  Genesis  alone. 

Tyndale's  next  publication  was  "The  Practice  of  Prelates  ;" 
and,  as  far  as  it  regards  the  subjects  introduced,  as  well  as  the 
manner  in  which  they  are  handled,  it  is,  in  some  respects,  the 
most  remarkable  of  all  his  controversial  writings.  More  than 
ever  bent  upon  the  emancipation  of  his  country  from  mental 
bondage,  he  longed  to  see  the  throne  established  in  righteous- 
ness ;  but  he  could  entertain  no  hope  of  this  until  the  power 
behind  it,  which  had  risen  above  the  throne  itself,  was  laid 
prostrate.      "  If  that   King  of  the  grasshoppers,"  said   he, 


1530.]  PRACTICE  OF   PRELATES.  24-3 

"which  devouretli  all  that  is  green,  were  destroyed;  then 
were  the  kingdom  of  our  caterpillars  at  an  end."  In  his  able 
exposure  of  this  noxious  system,  he  explains  it  to  his  readers, 
in  one  place,  by  the  following  graphic  parable  : — 

"  To  see  how  our  holy  Father  came  up,  mark  the  ensample  of  an  lr>y  tree. 
First,  it  springeth  out  of  the  earth,  and  then  a  wliile  creepeth  along  by  the 
ground,  till  it  findeth  a  great  tree  :  then  it  joineth  itself  beneath  alow'  unto  the 
body  of  the  ti'ec,  and  creepeth  up  a  little  and  a  little,  fair  aud  softly.  And  at 
the  beginning,  while  it  is  yet  thin  and  small,  that  the  burden  is  not  perceived, 
it  seeraeth  glorious  to  garnish  the  tree  in  winter,  and  to  bear  off  tlie  tempests 
of  the  weather.  But  in  the  mean  season,  it  thrusteth  roots  into  the  bark  of  the 
tree,  to  hold  fast  withal  ;  and  ceaseth  not  to  climb  up,  till  it  be  at  the  top,  and 
above  all.  And  then,  it  sendeth  his  branches  along  by  the  branches  of  the  tree, 
and  overgi'oweth  all,  and  waxeth  great,  heavy,  and  thick  ;  and  sucketh  the 
moisture  so  sore  out  of  the  tree  and  his  branches,  that  it  ehoaketh  aud  stifleth 
them.  And  then  the  foul  ivy  waxeth  mighty  in  the  stump  of  the  tree,  and  be- 
cometh  a  seat  aud  a  nest  for  all  unclean  birds,  aud  for  blind  owls  which  hawk 
in  the  dark,  and  dare  not  come  at  the  light. 

"  Even  so  the  Bishop  of  Rome,  at  the  beginning,  crope  along  upon  the  earth, 
and  every  man  trod  upon  him  in  this  world.  But  as  soon  as  there  came  a 
Christian  Emperor,  he  joined  himself  unto  his  feet,  and  kissed  them,  and  crope 
up  a  little  with  begging, — now  this  privilege,  now  that, — now  this  city,  now  that ; 
to  find  poor  people  withal  and  the  necessary  ministers  of  God's  word. — And  the 
alms  of  the  congreijatioii,  which  was  the  food  and  patrimony  of  the  poor  and 
necessary  preachers,  that  he  called  St.  Peter's  patrimony, — St.  Peter's  rents, — 
St.  Peter's  lands, — St.  Peter's  right ;  to  cast  a  vain  fear  and  superstitiousness  into 
the  liearts  of  men  ;  that  no  man  should  dare  meddle  with  whatsoever  came  once 
into  their  hands,  for  fear  of  St.  Peter,  though  they  ministered  it  never  so  evil  ; 
and  that  they  which  should  think  it  none  alms  to  give  them  any  more,  (because 
they  had  too  much  already,)  should  yet  give  St.  Peter  somewhat,  to  purchase  an 
advocate  aud  an  intercessor  of  St.  Peter  ;  and  that  he  should,  at  the  first  knock, 
let  them  in. 

"  And  thus,  with  flattermg  and  feigning,  and  vain  superstition,  under  the  name 
of  St.  Peter,  he  crept  up  and  fastened  his  roots  in  the  heart  of  the  Emperor  ; 
and  with  his  sword  climbed  up  above  all  his  fellowships,  and  brought  them  under 
his  feet.  And  as  he  subdued  them  with  the  Emperor's  sword,  even  so,  by  sub- 
tility  and  help  of  them,  after  that  they  were  sworn  faithful,  he  climbed  above 
the  Emperor  and  subdued  him  also  ;  and  made  him  stoop  unto  his  feet,  and  kiss 
them  another  while.  Yea,  Ccelestinus  crowned  the  Emperor  Henry  the  Fifth, 
holding  the  crown  between  his  feet.  And  when  he  had  put  the  crown  on,  he 
smote  it  off"  with  his  feet  again,  saying — that  he  had  might  to  make  emperors 
and  put  them  down  again." 

Then,  "he  made  a  constitution,  that  no  htijman  should  meddle  with  their 
matters,  nor  be  in  their  councils,  or  wit  what  they  did  ;  that  the  pope  only 
should  call  the  council,  and  the  empu-e  should  but  defend  the  pope,  provided 
alway,  that  the  council  should  be  in  one  of  the  pope's  towns,  and  where  his 
power  was  greater  than  the  Emperor's.  Then,  under  a  pretence  of  condemn- 
ing some  heresy,  he  called  a  General  Council,  where  he  made  one  a  patriarch. 


1  The  converse  to  our  alnft. 


244  PRACTICE   OF   PRELATES.  [booK  I. 

another  cardinal,  another  legate,  another  primate,  another  archbishop,  another 
bishop,  another  dean,  another  archdeacon,  and  so  forth,  as  we  now  see. 

"  And  as  the  Pope  played  with  tlie  Emperor,  so  did  his  braiic/ies  and  his  mem- 
bers, the  bishops,  play  in  every  kingdom,  dukedom,  and  lordship  ;  insomuch, 
that  the  very  heirs  of  them  by  whom  they  came  up,  hold  now  their  lands  of 
them,  and  take  them  for  their  chief  lords.  And  as  the  Emperor  is  sworn  to  the 
Pope  ;  even  so,  every  king  is  sworn  to  the  Bishops  and  Prelates  of  his  realm  ; 
and  they  are  the  chiefest  in  all  Parliaments.  Yea,  they  and  their  money,  and 
they  that  be  sworn  to  them,  and  come  up  by  them,  rule  altogether. 

"  And  thus, — the  Iri/  tree  hath  under  his  roots,  throughout  all  Christendom, 
in  every  village,  holes  for  foxes,  and  nests  for  unclean  birds,  in  all  his  branches) 
— and  promiseth  unto  his  disciples  all  the  promotions  of  the  world." 

But  it  was  when,  in  the  same  pubhcation,  he  came  down  to 
what  he  styled  "  the  practice  of  our  time,"  and  "  the  cause  of 
all  that  ice  have  suffered  these  twenty  years,""  that  Tyndale's 
powerful  sentences  were  so  deeply  felt.  Other  men,  before  this 
year  was  done,  might  sing  a  requiem  over  the  grave  of  Wolsey, 
but  before  he  died,  this  despised  and  unpatronised  exile  had  al- 
ready exposed  to  public  view  his  entire  policy  ;  and  withal,  so 
ably,  that  it  is  still  quoted  by  the  best  of  our  historians.  By 
Burnet  and  Strype  in  former  times  ;  by  Turner  and  Tytler  in 
our  own  day. 

Wolsey,  it  is  true,  we  shall  soon  see,  was  descending  to  the 
tomb,  but  what  did  that  signify  I  Sir  Thomas  More,  had  just 
come  into  power.  He  had  opened  the  first  Parliament  which 
had  been  held  for  years,  and  with  what  was  said  to  be,  an  elo- 
quent oration.  What  then  must  have  been  his  surprise  and 
regret,  if  not  his  indignation,  to  find  the  man  whom  he  had 
laboured  to  overwhelm  by  his  sophistry,  and  all  the  quip  and 
merry  turns  in  his  Dialogue,  reviewing  this  very  session  of 
Parliament,  and  the  first  bills  that  were  passed  under  his  ad- 
ministration ?  Exposing  the  proceedings  as  only  so  many 
strokes  of  policy,  Tyndale  showed  that  they  had  been  merely 
clearing  away  the  brushwood,  or  lopping  the  branches  of  a  tree, 
which  would  grow  again,  while  it  ought  to  have  been  uprooted 
from  the  soil  of  England.  "  The  root  yet  left  behind,  whence 
all  that  they  have  for  a  time  weeded  out,  Avill  spring  again,  by 
little  and  little,  as  before ;  if  they,  as  their  hope  is,  may  stop 
this  light  of  God's  word  that  is  now  abroad.  These  few  last 
words  show  the  soul  of  our  Translator.  The  authority  of  the 
Divine  word,  was,  in  his  mind,  paramount  to  every  other  con- 
sideration, and  this  was  the  cause  of  his  now  speaking  out  so 
boldly  ;  but  it  certainly  was  no  common  proof  of  talent  and  of 


J  530.]  PRACTICE  OF  rilELATES.  245 

an  eulai-ged  mind,  that  so  early  after  Parliament  rose,  Tyn- 
dale  should  be  able  to  send  such  a  publication  into  England ; 
embracing,  as  it  did,  not  merely  the  corruption  of  past  ages 
traced  to  its  source,  but  the  national  doings  of  the  day,  down 
to  the  end  of  March  in  the  present  year,  if  not  later.  Glan- 
cing, too,  at  what  he  styles  ^  the  blasphemies  of  More  in  his 
Dialogue,""  he  reserves  himself  for  a  full  answer  before  long. 

And  «  whence,"  said  he  "  cometh  all  this  mischief?  Verily,  it  is  the  hand  of 
God,  to  avenge  the  wantonness  of  great  men,  which  will  walk  without  the  fear 
of  God  ;  following  the  steps  of  the  high  prelates,  contrary  to  their  profession  ; 
and  to  aremje  also  the  wron<js,the  blasphemli.s  and  subtle  persecatituj  of  his  word." 

One  of  the  latest  eulogists  of  Sir  Thomas  More  is  Sir 
James  Mackintosh,  and  a  more  able  and  fascinating  pen  could 
not  have  been  employed ;  but  in  his  just  indignation  at  the 
brutality  of  Henry  in  putting  More  to  death,  and  his  warm 
admiration  of  the  Chancellor,  he  is  not  the  first  who  has  shot 
rather  beyond  the  mark.  "  He  was,*"  says  he,  "  the  first  Eng- 
lishman who  signalised  himself  as  an  orator,  the  first  writer  of 
a  prose  which  is  still  intelligible,  and  probably  the  first  layman 
since  the  beginning  of  authentic  history,  who  was  Chancellor 
of  England."^ 

It  is  not  improbable  that  Sir  James  had  never  thought  of 
looking  into  the  pages  of  More's  opponent  in  controversy. 
Tyndale's  prose,  however,  in  one  sense,  it  must  never  be  for- 
gotten, has  been  read  in  Britain  ever  since,  and  that  too  "every 
Sabbath  day  ;"  for  notwithstanding  all  the  confessed  improve- 
ments made  on  our  translation  of  the  Bible,  large  portions  in 
almost  every  chapter  still  remain  verbally  the  same  as  he  first 
gave  them  to  his  country.  In  this,  it  is  true,  he  was  merely  a 
translator,  but  then  the  style  of  his  translation  has  stood  the 
test  of  nearly  ten  generations.  It  has  been  their  admiration 
all  along,  and  it  will  continue  to  be  admired  while  the  lan- 
guage endures. 

But  independently  of  his  translation,  the  purity  of  his  na- 
tive language  was  maintained  by  Tyudale  in  as  high  a  degree 
as  by  any  of  his  contemporaries.  We  have  already  given  one 
specimen  from  his  present  publication.     And  even  as  to  his 


2  Hist,  of  England,  ii.,  p.  179.  To  such  an  able  jud(;e,  the  "  oratory"  may  be  conceded  ;  but 
as  for  lay  Chancellors  there  had  been  at  least  six  before  Sir  Thomas  More.  The  last  had  been 
Sir  Thomas  Beaufort,  under  Henry  IV..  but  authentic  history  had  certainly  begun  long  before 
then.  The  clerical  Lords  Chancellor  since,  form  an  index  to  ecclesiastical  power,  now  on  the 
decline.     The   •  intelligible  prose"  must  be  noticed  above. 


24()  PRACTICE   OF    PRELATES.  QboOK  I. 

opponent,  it  may  safely  be  questioned,  if  in  the  wide  compass 
of  More''s  controversial  writings  there  is  one  passage  to  be 
compared  with  the  following,  whether  as  to  pathos  or  simple 
beauty.  It  was  abundantly  intelligible  in  the  year  1530,  it 
must  have  gone  with  a  knell  to  the  heart  of  the  King's  new 
adviser,  and  it  will  speak  for  itself,  even  now.  It  is  the 
solemn  appeal  of  Tyndale  to  his  King  and  Country,  after 
Parliament  and  the  Bishops  had  drawn  the  sword  of  perse- 
cution from  its  sheath,  and  placed  it,  naked,  in  the  hands  of 
their  Sovereign. 

"  I  beseech  the  King's  most  noble  grace,  therefore,  to  consider  all  the  ways 
by  which  the  Cardinal  and  our  holy  bishops  have  led  him,  since  he  was  first 
King  ;  and  to  see  whereunto  all  the  pride,  pomp,  and  vain  boast  of  the  Cardi- 
nal is  come,  and  how  God  hath  resisted  him  and  our  prelates,  in  all  their 
wiles.  We,  having  nothing  to  do  at  all,  have  meddled  yet  in  all  matters  ;  and 
have  spent  for  om*  prelates'  cause,  more  than  all  Christendom,  even  unto  the  ut- 
ter beggaring  of  ourselves  ;  and  have  gotten  nothing  but  rebuke,  and  shame, 
and  hate,  among  all  nations  ;  and  a  mock  and  a  scorn  thereto,  of  them  whom 
we  have  most  holpen.  For  the  Frenchmen  of  late  days,  as  the  saying  is,  made 
a  play  or  disguising  at  Paris,  in  which  the  Emperor  danced  with  the  French 
King,  and  wearied  them,  the  King  of  England  sitting  on  a  high  bench  and  look- 
ing on.  And  when  it  was  asked,  why  he  danced  not,  it  was  answered,  that  he 
sat  there  but  to  pay  the  minstrels  their  wages  only  !  As  who  should  say,  we 
paid  for  all  men's  dancing  ! 

"  And  I  beseech  his  Grace  also,  to  have  mercy  on  his  own  soul,  and  not  to  suf- 
fer Christ  and  his  Holy  Testament  to  be  pei'secuted,  under  his  name  any  lon- 
ger, that  the  sword  of  the  wrath  of  God  may  be  put  up  again,  ijchich  for  that 
cause,  no  doubt,  is  most  chiefly  drawn, 

"  And  I  beseech  his  Grace  to  have  compassion  on  his  poor  subjects,  which 
have  ever  been  unto  his  Grace,  both  obedient,  loving,  and  kind  ;  that  the 
realm  utterly  perish  not,  with  the  wicked  counsel  of  our  pestilent  prelates.  For 
if  his  Grace,  which  is  but  a  man,  should  die,  the  Lords  and  Commons,  not  know- 
ing M'Ao  hath  most  right  to  enjoy  the  crown,  the  realm  could  not  but  stand  in 
great  danger. 

"  And  I  exhort  the  Lords  temporal  of  the  realm,  that  they  come  and  fall  be- 
fore the  King's  Grace,  and  humbly  desire  his  Majesty  to  suffer  it  to  be  tried, 
who  of  right  ought  to  succeed,  and  if  he  or  she  fail,  who  next,  yea,  and  who 
third.  And  let  it  be  pi'oclaimed  openly.  And  let  all  the  Lords  temporal  be 
sworn  thereto,  and  all  the  Knights,  and  Squires,  and  Gentlemen,  and  the  Com- 
mons above  eighteen  years  old,  that  there  be  no  strife  in  the  succession.  For 
if  they  try  it  by  the  sword,  I  promise  them,  I  see  none  other  likelihood,  but  that, 
as  the  Cardinal  hath  prophesied,  it  will  cost  the  realm  of  England. 

"And  all  that  be  sworn  unto  the  Cardinal,  I  warn  them  yet  once  again,  to 
break  their  oaths,  as  I  did  in  '  the  Obedience.'  And  all  my  Lord  Cardinal's 
privy  secretaries  and  spies,  by  ivhom  he  worketh  yet,  I  warn  them  to  beware  be- 
time.'J      My  Lox'd  Cardinal,  though  he  have  the  name  of  all,  yet  he  wrought 

3  Thus  Tyndale  was  not  improbably  the  first  to  inform  his  country  of  what  turned  out  to  bo 
the  fact,  that  in  1530  Wolscy  was  forming  consjiiracics  against  the  Kovernment,  both  in  England 
and  with  Knmc.  to  revenge  his  fall.  See  Harl.  MS.  No.  2.%,  V-  'ill-  Halle,  ji.  77'5-  Turner's 
Henry  VHI.  chiii>.  xxv. 


1530.]  PRACTICE  OF  PRELATES.  24? 

not  all  of  his  own  brain ;  but  of  all  wily  and  exercised  in  mischief,  he  called 
unto  him  the  most  expert,  and  of  their  counsel  and  practice,  gathered  that 
which  most  seemed  to  serve  his  w'ickcd  purpose. 

"  And  all  that  be  confederate  with  the  Cardinal,  and  with  the  Bishops,  upon 
any  siecret  appointment,  be  they  never  so  great  ;  I  rede  them  to  break  their 
bonds,  and  to  follow  right  by  the  plain  and  open  way,  and  to  be  content,  and  not 
too  ambitious  ;  for  it  is  now  evil  climbing,  the  boughs  be  brittle.  And  let  them 
look  well  on  the  practice  of  Bishops,  how  they  have  sei'ved  all  other  men  in 
times  past,  and  unto  what  troubles  they  have  brought  them  that  were  quiet. 
Many  a  man,  both  great  and  small,  have  they  brought  to  death  in  England, 
even  in  my  days,  beside  in  time  past,  whose  blood  God  will  seek  once.  Let 
them  learn,  at  the  last,  that  it  is  but  the  cast  of  the  Bishops,  to  receive  the 
sacrament  with  one  man,  secretly  upon  one  purpose,  and  with  another  man, 
as  secretly  upon  the  contrari/,  to  deceive  all  parties.  For  of  perjury  they  make 
as  much  conscience  as  a  dog  of  a  bone  ;  for  they  have  power  to  dispense  with 
all  things,  think  thej'. — And  unto  all  subjects  I  say,  that  they  repent ;  for  the 
cause  of  evil  rulers  is  the  sin  of  the  subjects,  as  testifieth  the  Scripture  ;  and 
the  cause  of  false  preachers  is,  that  the  people  have  no  love  unto  the  truth, — 
2  Thess.  ii. — We  be  all  sinners,  an  hundred  times  greater  than  all  that  we  suf- 
fer. Let  us,  therefore,  each  forgive  the  other,  remembering,  the  greater  sinners 
the  more  welcome,  if  we  repent,  according  to  the  similitude  of  the  riotous  Son. 
For  Christ  died  for  sinners,  and  is  their  Saviour,  and  his  blood  their  treasure  to 
pay  for  their  sins, — and  his  merits,  that  goodly  raiment  to  cover  the  naked 
deformities  of  our  sins. 

"  These  be  sufficient  at  this  time,  although  I  could  say  more,  and  though 
other  have  deserved  that  I  more  said  :  yea,  and  I  could  more  deeply  have  en- 
tered into  the  practice  of  our  Cardinal,  but  I  qjare,  for  divers  considerations, — 
and  namely,  for  his  sake  which  iiet-er  spared  me,  nor  any  faithful  friend  of  his  own, 
nor  any  that  told  him  trath  ;  nor  sparetli  to  persecute  the  blood  of  Christ,  in  as 
clear  light  as  ever  was,  and  under  subtle  colom'  of  hypocrisy,  as  ever  was  any 
persecution,  since  the  creation  of  the  world." 

Thus  did  Tyudale  prove,  that  he  was  intimately  acquainted 
with  all  that  was  going  on  in  England,  up  to  the  moment  of 
his  publication,  as  well  as  able  to  give  sound  advice  ;  an  evi- 
dence of  such  talent  that  Sir  T,  More  could  not  but  recognise 
it,  two  years  afterwards,  though  he  affects  to  despise  the 
writer.  "Then,"  says  he,  "have  we  '  the  Practice  of  Prelates,' 
wherein  Tyndale  had  wente  to  have  made  a  special  show  of  his 
high  worldly  wit ;  and  that  men  should  have  seen  therein  that 
there  was  nothing  done  among  princes,  but  that  he  was  fully 
advertised  of  all  the  secrets ;  and  that  so  far  forth,  that  he 
knew  the  privy  practice  made  between  the  King's  highness, 
and  the  late  Lord  Cardinal,  and  the  reverend  father,  Cuthbert, 
then  Bishop  of  Loudon,  and  me.""*     A  facetious  vein  of  style 


4  The  idea  which  Sir  Thomas  would  very  fain  turn  to  ridicule  was  this,  — that  Wolsey,  iu  bow- 
ing, as  we  have  found  him  do,  to  the  storm  which  hurst  uiioii  him,  did  so,  with  some  lingcrins 
hope  of  restoration  to  favour  or  power  in  some  way  or  other ;  and  certainly  nothing  was  more 
likely,  even  supposing  that  there  was  no  secret  underslaiiding  between  any  jiarties. 


24-8  PRACTICE   OF   PRELATES.  [bOOK  I. 

continued  to  be  the  favourite  mode  of  Sir  Thomas.  Perhaps 
he  preferred  it  for  effect,  or  saw  no  necessity  for  any  other ; 
but  Tyndale  was  ever  in  earnest,  to  the  end. 

"  And,  finally,  if  the  persecution  of  the  Kiiufs  Grace,  and  of  other  temjwral 
Lords,  conspiring  with  the  Spirituality,  be  of  ignorance,  I  doubt  not  but  that 
their  eyes  shall  be  opened  shortly,  and  they  shall  see,  and  repent,  and  God 
shall  show  them  mercy.  But,  and  if  it  be  of  a  set  malice  against  the  truth,  and  of 
a  grounded  hate  against  the  late  of  God  by  the  reason  of  a  full  consent  they  have 
to  sin,  and  to  walk  in  their  own  ways  of  ignorance  ;  whereunto,  being  now  past 
all  repentance,  they  have  utterly  yielded  themselves,  to  follow  with  full  lust, 
without  bridle  or  snaffle,  which  is  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Spirit :  then,  ye 
shall  see  even  shortly,  that  God  shall  turn  the  point  of  the  sword,  wherewith 
they  now  shed  Christ's  blood,  homeward  to  shed  their  own  again,  after  all  the 
ensamples  of  the  Bible. 

"  And  let  them  remember  that  I,  well  toward  three  years  agone,  to  prevent 
all  occasions  and  all  carnal  beasts  that  seek  fleshly  liberty,  sent  forth  '  the  true 
Obedience  of  a  Christian,'  which  yet  they  condemned,  btU  after  they  had  con- 
demned the  Neic  Testament  as  right  was,  whence  the  Obedience  hath  his  au- 
thority. Now,  then,  if  when  the  light  is  come  abroad,  in  which  their  wickedness 
cannot  be  hid,  they  find  no  such  obedience  in  the  people  unto  their  old  tyranny, 
whose  fault  is  it  ?  This  is  a  sure  conclusion  :  any  obedience  that  is  not  of  love, 
cannot  long  endure  ;  and  in  your  deeds  can  no  man  see  any  cause  of  love  : 
and  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  for  whose  sake  only  a  man  would  love  you,  though 
ye  were  never  so  evil,  ye  persecute.  Now,  then,  if  any  disobedience  arise,  are 
ye  not  the  cause  of  it  yourselves  ?     /Say  not,  but  that  ye  he  teamed." 

As  far,  therefore,  as  intelligent  and  skilful,  though  pungent, 
warning  could  go,  Tyndale  had  thus  nobly  done  his  duty.  He 
had  fully  exposed  the  once  aspiring  Cardinal,  now  sinking  into 
ruin,  and  the  enormous  expense  entailed  on  the  country  by 
his  tortuous  administration ;  he  had  faithfully  warned  his 
Sovereign,  and  put  the  country  on  its  guard,  as  to  the  state 
persecution,  which,  we  have  seen  that  the  new  Chancellor  as 
well  as  the  prelates  had  advised.  Few  men,  if  indeed  any 
one  of  that  age,  could  have  written  such  an  exposition  of  the 
times,  as  Tyndale  had  just  given  ;  and  yet  his  labour  for  this 
year  was  not  at  an  end.  He  had  commenced  his  reply  to  Sir 
Thomas  More's  Dialogue,  and  in  the  printed  edition  of  his 
works  it  is  said  to  have  been  made  in  1580  ;  but  as  it  certain- 
ly did  not  appear  in  print  till  next  year,  Ave  defer  till  then  say- 
ing more  of  a  production  which  Henry  the  VIII.  was  so  eager 
to  see,  that  a  part  of  it  at  least  was  actually  xoritten  out,  by 
his  Envoy  in  Brabant,  and  sent  him  for  perusal  before  its  pub- 
lication. This,  too,  as  we  shall  find,  was  done  without  Tyn- 
dale's  knowledge,  and  it  is  mentioned  now  simply  as  a  proof 


1530.]  STATK  OK   ENGLAND.  240 

of  his  powerful  influence,  as  well  as  the  interest  attached  to 
any  thing  which  might  conic  from  his  pen. 

Upon  returning  to  England,  before  we  advert  again  to  the  fiery  op- 
position of  the  hierarchy,  and  the  decided  progress  in  the  cause  of  truth 
notwithstanding  all,  two  individuals  demand  notice.  First,  the  King, 
and  then  Wolsey,  his  fallen  minister. 

Cranmer  must  soon  have  felt  that  he  had  entered  into  the  service  of 
an  impetuous  and  impatient  Master ;  and,  whatever  were  his  own 
opinions,  it  is  strange  if  he  did  not  see  also,  a  very  licentious  one. 
His  treatise  once  finished,  in  the  beginning  of  this  year,  no  time  was 
to  be  lost  in  making  use  of  it,  abroad,  as  well  as  at  home.  And  now 
the  greater  part  of  1530  was  to  witness  the  strange  spectacle,  of  an 
English  monarch  consulting  all  Europe,  respecting  the  legitimacy  of  his 
marriage,  with  a  Queen  to  whom  he  had  been  united  above  twenty 
years,  and  the  possibility  of  his  being  separated  from  her.  A  spectacle 
the  more  glaring  from  the  manifest  pui'pose  of  the  King,  as  well  as  the 
steps  taken  to  effect  it.  The  PontiiF,  and  the  Emperor,  and  the  foreign 
Universities,  were  all  to  be  moved  on  the  question.  Charles  remained 
firm  on  the  one  side,  and  Henry  on  the  other,  while,  with  regard  to  the 
Universities,  as  well  as  learned  individuals,  money  was  about  to  be  em- 
ployed on  hoth  sides,  as  well  as  other  means.^  Such  was  the  sphere  in 
which  Cranmer  first  moved. 

So  early  as  December  last,  Sir  Thomas  Boleyn,  Drs.  Lee,  Stokesly, 
Cranmer,  and  various  others,  had  been  deputed  by  Henry  to  obtain  the 
attestation  of  foreign  Universities  in  favour  of  his  wishes ;  these  opinions 
being  intended  to  affect  the  Lords  and  Commons  in  Parliament,  as  well 
as  the  rest  of  his  subjects,  many  of  whom  were  still  decidedly  opposed. 
Sir  Thomas  Boleyn,  however,  must  first  be  created  Earl  of  Wiltshire  and 
Oimond  ;  when  he  and  his  pai-ty  were  instructed  to  repair  first  to  the 
Pontiff,  then  to  Charles  V.  at  Bologna,  and  there  plead  the  cause. 
Upon  their  arrival,  with  the  long  wonted  ceremony  of  kissing  the  Pole's 
foot,    compliance   was    declined    or   omitted  ;   most   probably   the  first 


5  As  to  money  having  been  employed,  there  can  he  no  question,  however  anxious  Burnet  was 
to  diminish  the  amount.  Any  one  who  turns  over  only  one  volume  in  the  British  Museum, 
Vitellius,  B.  xiii.,  will  be  fully  satisfied  on  this  point.  "  I  doubt  not,"  says  Dr.  Croke  in  one 
letter,  "  but  all  Christian  Universities,  if  they  be  tvcllhaiulled,  will  earnestly  conclude  ^vit}l  your 
Highness;"  but  then  again,  "Caesar,  by  threats,  prayers,  money,  and  sacerdotal  influence, 
terrifies  our  friends,  and  coiifirmshis  own." 

s  "  Henry,"  says  Lord  Herbert,  "  wrote  letters  with  his  own  hand  to  (Ghinucci)  the  Bishop 
of  Worcester,  and  Sir  Gregory  Casalis,  then  at  Bologna,  that  he  had  sent  Sir  Thomas  Boleyn, 
newly  created  Earl  of  Wiltshire  and  Ormond,  with  John  Stokesly  and  Edward  Lee,  as  his  am- 
bassadors to  the  Emperor,  and  that  they  should  advise  together  what  was  to  be  done."  The 
letters  were  dated  8th  Dec.  1529;  and  Barnct  adds,  that  "  Cranmer  went  nnth  them,  to  justify 
his  book  in  both  these  Courts.  This  Jerome  do  Ghinucci,  once  Auditor  of  the  Apostolic 
Chamber,  was  the  same  man  who,  in  1518,  summoned  Luther  to  appear  at  Rome  within  sixty 
days.  He  was  afterwards,  as  already  stated,  made  Bishop  of  Worcester,  of  which  he  was  de- 
prived four  years  after  this,  on  the  ground  of  his  not  residing  in  England.     He  had  never  seen  it." 


250  THE   ROYAL  DIVORCE  [book  I. 

instance  for  many  hundred  years,  and  it  is  curious  enough  that  it  should 
have  fallen  to  the  lot  of  Lady  Anne's  father.  To  send  him,  however, 
on  such  an  errand,  Avas,  to  say  the  least,  a  strange  and  indelicate  pro- 
ceeding ;  and,  accordingly,  it  exposed  him  to  the  cutting  irony  of  the 
Emperor,  who  was  still  at  Bologna,  since  his  coronation  on  the  24th  of 
February.  After  intimating  to  the  Earl  his  repugnance  to  receive,  in  such 
a  case,  a  party  so  interested  as  himself,  Charles  said  that  "  he  was  resolved 
not  to  abandon  his  aunt,  the  Queen  of  England,  whose  cause  was  that  of 
truth  and  justice,  and  whom  he  was  bound  in  honour  to  defend."  The 
Earl  could  only  reply,  "  that  he  attended  not  as  a  father,  but  as  his 
Sovereign's  minister  ;  and  that  no  ill-humour  from  his  Spanish  Majesty 
would  jn-event  the  execution  of  what  Henry  intendedr"^ 

As  for  Clement,  he  was,  at  first,  more  cautious,  but,  in  the  end,  to 
oblige  Charles,  by  the  7th  of  March  he  issued  an  order,  commanding 
Hemy,  during  the  process,  to  treat  Catharine  as  his  wife,  and  not  to 
marry  another  ;  informing  him  that  he  had  been  cited  to  appear  before 
the  Consistory  at  Rome,  where  "  he  would  hear  the  matter  disputed,  and 
according  to  right  do  justice."  Nor  could  any  other  reply  be  given  by 
one  who  was  simply  a  prisoner  at  large,  and  could  act  only  as  the 
Emperor  dictated.  Lord  Wiltshire  and  Dr.  Lee  returned  home  by  way  of 
Paris,  but  Stokesly  went  on  to  Padua,  and  Cranmer  to  Rome  itself,  where 
he  remained  for  months  ;  but  where,  however,  Clement  took  care  never 
to  hear  him  "  dispute  the  matter."  By  way  of  empty  compliment, 
indeed,  he  gave  to  Cranmer  the  title  of  "  Penitentiary  for  all  England." 
It  was  only  strange  that  he  should  accept  it  ;  but  if  this  was  the  first, 
it  would  have  been  well  had  it  been  the  last  of  those  inconsistencies 
which  remain  attached  to  him.  In  history,  however,  to  palliate  or 
conceal  the  defects  in  any  character,  would  be  to  rob  jjosterity  of  all 
its  benefit. 

It  may  easily  be  imagined,  that  all  this  was  a  great  deal  too  much  for 
the  heated  impatience  of  the  English  Monarch  ;  and  had  his  subjects 
only  been  now  ready  to  have  gone  along  with  him,  it  is  almost  certain  that 
he  would  not  have  waited  for  any  foreign  party.  While,  therefore,  the 
Bishojjs  were  brooding  over  fresh  measures,  and  still  stronger,  as  we 
shall  explain  presently,  with  regard  to  the  destruction  of  the  Scrijytures, 
a  very  difi"erent  subject  engrossed  the  cogitations  of  Henry  ;  and  it 
seems  not  at  all  improbable,  some  will  say  evident,  that  he  actually  had 
gone  so  far  as  he  did,  with  their  measures,  in  order  to  seciu-e  more  fully 
their  concurrence  with  his  own,  immediately  afterwards.  This  was  an 
address,  by  way  of  intimidation,  to  Clement.  The  opinions  of  certain 
foreign  Universities,  and  of  learned  individuals,  in  favour*  of  Henry's 
separation,  were  arriving,  and,  by  the  month  of  June,  this  letter  or 

7  Bishop  of  Taibcs  kttcr,  in  Lc  Grand. 


1.j3(».]  ON'CE  more.  251 

address  being  ready,  it  was  to  be  sent  off  as  soon  as  signatures  could  be 
obtained.  The  Pontiff  was  here  very  pointedly  informed,  that  if  he  de- 
layed longer  what  they  styled  justice,  some  otiier  retnedy  would  certainly 
be  tried.  The  reader,  of  course,  has  not  forgotten  that  the  idea  of 
Henry  himself  being  "  Head  of  the  Church,"  had  already  been  suggested 
by  Crumwell,  and  that  it  had  taken  full  possession  of  his  mind  ;  but  his  sub- 
jects were  not,  as  yet,  prepared  for  such  a  step ;  though  the  hierarchy  and 
all  its  dependences  lay  at  his  feet,  as  they  are  to  feel,  in  time  convenient. 

The  signatvires  to  this  document  are  of  some  importance,  as  affording 
some  light  with  regard  to  Henry's  critical  situation  at  the  moment. 
After  Wolsey's  degradation  and  banishment  from  the  court,  for  months, 
one  should  not  have  supposed  that  his  name  would  have  been  regarded 
as  any  ornament  ;  but  then  it  might  still  have  great  weight  at  Rome,  and 
here  it  stands  at  the  top  of  the  list.  Though  so  late  in  the  year,  nothing 
positive  seems  as  yet  to  have  been  suspected  of  him.  At  all  events,  so 
eager  was  the  King  to  have  the  Cardinal's  name,  that  Brereton,  one  of 
his  privy  counsellors,  and  Wriothsley,  King-at-Arms,  were  sent  down 
from  London  ;  and  arriving  at  Wolsey's  on  the  15th  of  June,  he  was 
raised  out  of  his  bed,  near  the  dead  of  the  night  to  sign  this  letter,  that 
they  might  reach  the  Earl  of  Shrewsbury  before  the  morning.*'  But 
though  the  Cardinal  of  York  had  subscribed,  here  we  find  only  four 
Bishops  ;  Longland  of  Lincoln  being  the  only  one  of  eminence.^  As  for 
others,  they  took  part  with  the  Queen.  Fisher,  West,  and  Standish 
were  of  her  council ;  and  Tunstal,  though  formerly  with  the  King,  seems 
to  have  so  far  changed  his  opinion.  The  number  of  Abbots  might  seem 
to  compensate  for  this,  as  they  had  great  influence,  and  were  very 
wealthy  ;  but  had  they,  by  this  time,  only  suspected  that  the  dissolution 
of  monasteries  was  so  near,  assuredly  there  had  not  been  so  many  of  their 
signatures.  We  look  in  vain  for  the  new  Lord  Chancellor's  name. 
Eighty-one  signatures  were  ultimately  obtained.^^ 

This  letter  was  not  long  despatched,  before  Wolsey's  artful  proceedings 
had  excited  apprehension  ;  nor  was  the  influence  of  Catharine,  at  the 
Court  of  Rome,  undreaded.  As  a  precautionary  step,  something  more 
must  be  done  than  merely  wait  for  any  reply  to  this  menacing  epistle. 
On  the  16th  of  September,  therefore,  a  proclamation  was  issued  "pro- 

8  See  the  graphical  account  of  this  in  Cavendish's  life  of  Wolscy,  hy  Singer,  vol.  i.,  p.  -ICti. 
Wolsey  signed  with  great  good  will  apparently,  but  most  probably  as  a  blind,  "and  gave  each  of 
them  four  old  sovereigns  of  gold,  desiring  them  to  take  it  in  grcc"  (good  will)  "  saying  that  if  he 
had  been  of  greater  ability,  their  reward  should  have  been  better."  But  they  were  not  contented, 
and  Cavendish  was  far  from  being  pleased  with  their  accepting  the  money  "so  disdainously." 

9  The  other  three  were  Sherburn  of  Chichester,  Kite  of  Carlisle,  and  Rawlins  of  St.  Davids. 
">  Namely— The  two  Archbishojis.  four  Bishoi)s,  and  twenty-two  Abbots,  two   Dukes,  two 

Marquises,  thirteen  Earls,  twenty-five  Barons,  eleven  Knights  and  Doctors,  or  about  fifty  laymen 
out  of  eighty-one.  Herbert  and  Turner  date  this  letter  on  the  30th  of  July,  and  represent  it  as 
proceeding  from  the  Lords  and  Commons  in  Parliament.  But  there  was  no  Parliament  sitting, 
as  Burnet  has  remarked,  and  the  letter  was  sent  about  for  signature.  He  also  asserts  that  the 
letter  bears  date  the  1.3th.  whieh  is  most  probable,  as  the  King  was  gathering  signatures  by  the 
middle  of  J  une.    The  name  of  Sir  Tlxtmas  Afore,  though  Lord  Chancellor,  is  not  fiiliscril^ed  here. 


252  WOLSEY'S   PINAL    RUIN.  [boOK  I. 

hibiting  any  person  to  purchase  from  Rome,  to  publish  or  divulge  any 
thing,  heretofore  within  this  year  j>ast  purchased,  or  to  be  purchased 
hereafter,  prejudicial  to  Henry's  royal  prerogative,  or  to  the  hindrance 
of  his  noble,  virtuous,  and  intended  purposes  l''^  Such  a  step  could  not 
pass  unheeded.  "  It  was,"  says  Halle,  "  much  mused  at,  and  every  word 
of  the  same  well  noted.  Some  said  it  was  made  because  the  Queen  had 
purchased  a  new  Bull,  for  the  ratification  of  her  marriage  ;  others  said, 
it  was  made  because  the  Cardinal  had  purchased  one,  to  curse  the  King, 
if  he  would  not  restore  him  to  his  old  dignities,  and  suffer  him  to  correct 
the  Spirituality,  and  he  (the  King)  not  meddle  with  the  same."  It 
was  no  doubt  an  effectual  stop-gap  against  Ijoth  parties  ;  but  "  this  last 
conjecture,"  Halle  adds,  "  sounded  most  like  the  truth  ;"  and  the  sequel 
will  show  how  far  it  was  correct  or  well  grounded. 

It  was  in  these  circumstances  that  the  once  aspiring  Cardinal  was  fast 
approaching  his  tombless  grave,  and  so  far  from  restoration  to  his  "  old 
dignities,"  he  was  soon  to  bid  farewell, — "a  long  farewell  to  all  his 
greatness."  Whatever  were  the  misdemeanours  with  which  Wolsey  had 
been  charged  in  the  close  of  last  year,  Henry,  on  the  12th  of  February, 
had  granted  him  a  free  pardon,  assigned  to  him  a  liberal  donation, 
amounting  in  money  and  moveables  to  above  jfGOOO  sterling  ;  and  had 
left  him  in  possession  of  the  revenues  of  Winchester  and  York. 

From  Esher  he  had  removed  to  Richmond  park,  in  March,  and  from 
thence,  ultimately  took  up  his  abode  at  Cawood  Castle,  twelve  miles  from 
York.  Still,  however,  it  was  not  in  Wolsey's  nature  to  remain  passive 
under  disgrace.  He  was  gaining  most  effectually  on  the  hearts  of  the 
people,  carrying  himself  to  all  ranks,  as  Shakspeare  said,  "sweet  as 
summer  ;"  and  thus  there  seems  to  be  too  much  reason  to  believe,  laying 
a  train  by  which  he  might  influence,  if  not  overawe  the  King.  The  first 
suspicious  of  Wolsey's  policy  and  proceedings,  appear  not  to  have  come 
to  a  point  till  the  very  time  when  this  proclamation  was  issued  ;  but 
even  as  early  as  the  18th  of  August,  Crumwell,  in  about  the  last  letter  he 
ever  wrote  to  him,  had  warned  him  very  seriously  of  their  existence. 

"  Sir,  some  there  be  that  doth  allege  that  yoiu"  Grace  doth  keep  a  great 
house  and  family,  and  that  ye  are  continually  building.  For  the  love  of 
God,  therefore,  I  again,  as  I  oftentimes  have  done,  most  heartily  beseech 
yoiu'  Grace  to  have  respect  to  every  thing  ;  and,  considering  the  time,  to 
refrain  yourself,  for  a  season,  from  all  manner  (of)  building,  more  than 
mere  necessity  requireth  ;  which,  I  assure  your  Grace,  shall  cease,  and 
put  to  silence  some  persons  that  much  speaketh  of  the  same."  He  then 
adds  significantly, — "  In  my  opinion,  your  Grace  being  as  ye  are,  I  sup- 
pose ye  would  not  be  as  ye  ivere,  to  win  a  hundred  times  as  much  as  ever 
ye  were  possessed  of."" 

' '  Wolsey's  Con  cspondcnco  in  the  Chapter  House,  vol.  iii.,  No.  80. 


1530.]  WOLSEY'S   PINAL   RUIN.  253 

In  short,  as  his  secret  movements  in  Enghmd,  and  his  correspondence 
with  Rome  were  detected,  he  was  arrested  for  high  ti'eason  by  the  Earl 
of  Northumberland  and  Sir  Walter  Walsh,  and  ordered  up  to  London 
for  trial.  By  various  historians  it  has  been  supposed,  that  this  step  was 
adopted  with  the  view  of  rendering  Wolsey  more  conformable  to  the  di- 
vorce. But  had  he  not  subscribed  the  threatening  address  to  Clement  ? 
and  except  it  was  actvially  found  out  that  this  was  only  a  stroke  of  policy, 
how  could  he  seem  more  conformable  ?  He  was  arrested  on  Friday  the 
4th  of  November,  and  on  the  6th  he  was  upon  his  way  to  London  ; 
the  very  day  he  had  fixed  for  his  being  enthroned  at  York,  as  Arch- 
bishop. "The  Lords  of  Norfolk  and  Suffolk  have  told  me,"  said 
the  Freuch'ambassador,  in  writing  to  his  court  on  the  10th  of  November, 
"  that  they  have  many  important  matters  against  him,  and  many  grave 
accusations  ;  and  among  these,  as  the  King  informed  me,  that  he  has 
been  machinating  against  his  Majesty,  both  in  the  kingdom  and  abroad  ; 
and  has  mentioned  to  me  where  and  how  ;  and  that  one  of  his  own 
servants  had  discovered  it,  and  laid  the  accusation.  These  new  things 
much  aggravate  the  old  ones.  I  greatly  lament  his  misfortune,  but 
cannot  remedy  it."^- 

Wolsey  professed  himself  to  have  no  fear,  but  he  could  not  disguise 
it  ;  the  shock  was  unexpected  at  the  moment,  and  he  soon  sunk  under 
it ;  for  though  he  set  out  on  his  journey  in  safe  keeping,  he  could  move 
no  farther  than  Leicester  Abbey.  The  most  melancholy  feature  of  his 
dying  hour  was,  that  he  literally  expired  with  the  language  of  a  persecu- 
tor on  his  lips.  Addressing  himself  to  Sir  William  Kingston,  the  Con- 
stable of  the  Tower,  whom  Henry  had  sent  down  to  convey  him,  he  said  : 
— "  Well,  well.  Master  Kingston,  I  see  the  matter  against  me,  how  it  is 
framed  ;  but  if  I  had  served  God  as  diligently  as  I  have  done  the  King, 
He  would  not  have  given  me  over  in  my  grey  hairs.  I  pray  you,  with 
all  my  heart,  to  have  me  most  humbly  commended  unto  his  royal 
Majesty.  And  say  furthermore,  that  I  request  his  Grace,  in  God's  name, 
that  he  have  a  vigilant  eye  to  depress  this  new  sect  of  Lutherans,  that  it  do 
oiot  iiicrease  within  his  dominions  through  his  negligence,  in  such  a  sort, 
as  that  he  shall  be  fain  at  length  to  fiut  harness  wpon  his  back  to  siihdue 
them ;"  and  after  exhausting  himself  by  a  long  harangue  in  the  same 
style,  referring  to  Wickliffe  and  Sir  John  OldcastJe,  he  closed  with  these 
words, — "from  the  which  mischief,  God,  of  his  tender  mercy  defend  tis  f 
Master  Kingston,  farewell.  I  can  no  more,  but  wish  all  things  to  have 
good  success.  My  time  draweth  on  fast.  I  may  not  tarry  with  you. 
And  forget  not,  I  pray  you,  what  I  have  said  and  charged  you  withal : 
for  when  I  am  dead,  ye  shall  peradventure  remember  my  words  much 


'2  Le  Grand  3,  p.  52!).  This  was  evidently  the  langnage  of  sympathy  and  regret,— it  was  that 
of  his  former  friend  and  inmate.  Giovanni  Joacchino  Passano,  commonly  called  Joachin,  and 
afterwards  Seigneur  de  Vaux,  originally  a  Genoese  merchant. 


2.54.  WOLSEY'S  ILLNESS,  AND   DEATH.  [book  1. 

better."  "  And  even  with  these  words,"  adds  Cavendish,  "  he  began  to 
ilraw  his  speech  at  length,  and  his  tongue  to  fail  ;  his  eyes  being  set  in 
his  head,  his  sight  failed  him." 

He  had  arrived  at  this  Abbey  only  on  Satm-day  evening,  and  now 
breathed  his  last,  at  eight  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  Tuesday,  the  29th 
of  November.  The  body  was  dressed  in  his  robes,  and  in  less  than 
twenty-two  hoxirs  committed  to  the  grave  ;  for  by  six  o'clock  on  Wednes- 
day morning.  Cavendish,  his  confidential  servant,  and  the  other  parties, 
had  left  for  London. 

Thus  the  man  who  had  been  literally  clothed  in  purple  or  scarlet  and 
fine  linen,  and  fared  sumi^tuously  every  day, — having  daily  in  his  hall 
three  special  tables  spread  for  his  principal  officers  ;  who  had  the  highest 
nobility  for  his  household  servants  ;  his  steward,  treasurer,  and  comp- 
troller in  waiting,  with  their  white  robes,  as  in  the  King's  palace  ;  his 
master-cook,  in  damask  satin,  with  a  chain  of  gold  round  his  neck  ;  with 
hundreds  of  individuals,  of  various  ranks,  in  daily  attendance  on  his 
person  :  This  man  who  had  a  most  penetrating  judgment,  in  consequence 
of  a  well  furnished  mind  ; — who  had  raised  himself  from  humble  rank  to 
the  highest  degree  of  power,  of  wealth,  and  of  worldly  dignity,  which 
had  ever  been  enjoyed  by  any  English  subject ; — who  had  not  only 
governed  England  for  the  space  of  twenty  years,  but  influenced  the  most 
important  affairs  of  Europe  ;  and  dui-ing  that  period,  had  been  courted, 
flattered,  caressed,  by  the  Kings  of  the  civilized  world; — this  man 
dies,  not  merely  in  obsciu'ity,  but  disgrace  ;  and  though  the  charge 
of  high  treason  hung  over  him  unrefuted,  with  his  last  breath  he 
enforces  persecution  !  ! 

In  vain  had  he  for  years,  been  preparing  for  himself  a  monument  of 
brass,  of  exquisite  workmanship  and  at  great  expense.  He  may  be  buried 
in  an  abbey,  but  the  very  grave  will,  before  long,  be  so  treated,  that  no 
man  in  England  shall  be  able  afterwards  to  point  to  the  spot  where  his 
bones  were  laid  !  Since  1524,  or  in  other  words,  for  the  las  six  years 
of  his  prodigious  power,  though  uncertain  whether  he  should  be  interred 
in  Italy  or  England,  Wolsey  had  been  preparing  for  posthumous  glory. 
"  He  had  begun,"  says  Lord  Herbert,  "  a  monument  for  himself  long 
since,  (wherein,  as  appears  by  our  records,  he  had  not  omitted  his  own 
image),  which  one  Benedetto,  a  statuary  of  Florence,  took  in  hand  in 
1524,  and  continued  till  1529,  receiving  for  so  much  as  was  already  done 
4250  ducats  ;  the  design  whereof  was  so  glorious,  that  it  exceeded  far 
that  of  Henry  the  Seventh.  Nevertheless,  dying  in  this  manner,  King 
Henry  made  use  of  so  much  as  he  found  fit,  and  called  it  his.  Thus  did 
the  tomb  of  the  Cardinal  partake  the  same  fortune  with  his  college,  as 
being  assumed  by  the  King." 

Wolsey  was  the  man  with  whom  the  dissolution  of  monasteries  origin- 
ated, employing  Crumwell  as  one  subordinate  agent ;  and  it  is  a  singular 


1530.3  HIS   GRAVE   UNKNOWN.  255 

fact,  that  he  had  thus  hiid  the  train  for  his  final  resting-place  being  very 
soon  disturbed.  In  less  than  seven  years  after  this,  and  by  this  same 
Crumwell's  iiuthority,  his  servant  and  successor,  Leicester  Ahhey  was  dis- 
solved— the  very  place  where  Wolsey  was  now  interred,  had  been  be- 
reaved of  all  its  ornaments  and  plate,  its  lead  and  bells  ;  and  the  visitors 
were  only  waiting  one  word  fi-om  Crumwell  to  deface  the  buildings.'^ 

A  hundred  years  after  this,  Corbet,  the  Bishop  of  Norwich,  supposing 
he  had  found  the  spot,  in  his  own  uncouth  rhyme,  exclaims  : — 

"  And  though  from  liis  own  stove  WoIscy  might  have 
A  Palace  or  a  College  for  his  grave, — 
Yet  here  he  lies  interr'd,— as  if  that  all 
Of  him  to  be  rememhcr'd,  were  his  fall. 
Nothing  but  earth  to  earth,  nor  pompous  weight 
Upon  him,  but  a  pebble  or  a  quoit."!-* 

Abovit  the  year  1716,  the  very  place  of  interment  could  not  be  ascer- 
tained. "  That  great  lover  of  antiquity.  Brown  Willis,  Esq.,"  says  Carte 
the  English  historian,  "  having  an  extraordinary  veneration  for  Cardinal 
Wolsey  as  the  original  founder  of  Christ  Church  in  Oxford,  desired  me 
to  try  if  I  could  find  out  the  sepulchre  of  the  Cardinal,  which  I  did, 
hoping  that  when  I  had  provided  tools  and  labourers,  some  others  would 
have  contributed  with  me  to  the  expense  ;  but  finding  that  only  one 
person  would  contribute  iwelve-'pence,  I  desisted." 

"In  the  year  1787,"  says  the  Cambridge  Chronicle  of  the  2d  of  June, 
"  as  a  laboiu-er  was  digging  for  potatoes  upon  the  spot  where  the  high 
altar  was  supposed  to  stand,  he  found  a  human  skull,  with  several  other 
bones,  all  perfect.  From  the  situation  of  the  place,  and  other  circum- 
stances, it  was  conjectured,  at  the  time,  that  this  might  be  the  identical 
skull  of  Wolsey  ! " 

Thus,  when  he  died,  he  carried  nothing  away,  neither  did  his  glory 
descend  after  him.  Perhaps  there  never  was  another  instance  in  the 
history  of  this  country,  which  reminds  one  so  strongly  of  that  "great 
power  "  which  the  King  of  Israel  said  he  saw  "  spreading  like  a  green 
bay  tree, — yet  he  passed  away,  and  lo,  he  was  gone  :  yea,  I  sought  him, 
but  he  covild  nowhere  be  found  !"  Monuments,  indeed,  he  left  behind, 
which  still  remain  as  proofs  of  his  taste  in  that  age,  as  well  as  of  his  pro- 
digious wealth  ;  nor  is  the  nation,  even  at  this  moment,  entirely  free  of 
a  peculiar  influence,  which,  as  Yicar-General,  he  first  imparted  to  Henry 
the  Eighth.  This  will  be  explained  hereafter,  when  once  Crumwell  has 
stepped  into  his  shoes,  as  the  second,  and  far  more  influential,  but  the 
last  Vicar-General. 

The  virulent  opposition  now  manifested  to  Tyndale's  trans- 
lation of  the  Scriptures,  and  his  other  writings,  it  will  he  un- 

13  Cotton  MS.  Clcop.  E.  iv.  fol.  21.5.  H  Corbet's  Northern  Journey. 


256  PERSECUTION  GOES  ON.  [book  t. 

derstood,  could  only  refer  to  his  publications  before  this  year ; 
so  that  what  we  are  now  going  to  relate,  may  be  regarded  as 
no  slender  testimony  to  their  powerful  effects  upon  his  native 
country.  As  for  the  "  Practice  of  Prelates,"  as  soon  as  it  be- 
gins to  be  known  and  felt,  we  shall  find  other  measures  resort- 
ed to,  besides  that  of  denunciation  in  England. 

The  first  person  who  excites  notice  in  1530,  was  that  poor 
old  and  blind,  literally  blind  man,  the  Bishop  of  Norwich  once 
more.  He  felt  sorely  annoyed  by  the  circulation  and  effects 
of  these  English  books.  Three  years  ago,  he  had  contributed, 
with  great  good  will,  towards  the  purchase  made  by  Warham, 
of  Tyndale\s  New  Testaments, — a  vain  expedient,  as  might 
have  been  anticipated,  to  prevent  their  getting  into  the  hands 
of  the  people.  But  he  was  as  warm  in  the  cause  as  ever,  and 
his  own  words  will  best  display  the  spirit  with  which  he  was 
agitated,  though  now  in  the  eightieth  year  of  his  age  !  His 
letter  is  addressed,  as  before,  to  his  friend,  the  Archbishop. 

"  After  most  humble  recommeudations,  1  do  your  Grace  to  understand,  that 
I  am  aceumbered  with  such  as  keepeth  and  readeth  these  erroneous  books  in 
English,  and  believe  and  give  ci'edence  to  the  same,  and  teaeheth  others,  that 
they  should  so  do.  My  Lord,  I  have  done  that  lyeth  in  me  for  the  suppression 
of  such  persons  ;  but  it  passeth  my  power,  or  any  '  spiritual'  man  for  to  do  it. 
For  divers  saith  openly  in  my  diocess,  that  the  King's  Grace  would  that  they 
should  have  the  said  erroneous  books,  and  so  raaintaineth  themselves  of  the 
King.'i^  Whereupon  I  desired  my  L.  Abbot  of  Hyde,l6  to  shew  this  to  the 
King's  Grace,  beseeching  him  to  send  his  honourable  letters,  mider  his  seal, 
down  to  whom  he  pleases  in  my  diocess  ;  that  they  may  show  and  publish  that 
it  is  not  his  pleasure,  that  such  books  should  be  had  or  read,  and  also  punish 
such  as  saith  so. — The  said  Abbot  hath  the  names  of  some  that  cracketh  in  the 
King's  name,  that  their  false  opinions  should  go  forth,  and  will  die  in  the  quar- 
rel ;  that  their  ungracious  opinions  be  true  ;  and  trusteth  by  Michaelmas  daj' 
there  shall  be  more  that  shall  believe  of  their  opinion,  than  they  that  believeth 
the  contrary.  If  I  had  known  that  your  Grace  had  been  at  London,  I  would 
have  commanded  the  said  Abbot  to  have  spok«n  with  you  ;  but  your  Grace 
may  send  for  him,  when  ye  please,  and  he  shall  show  you  my  whole  mind  in 
this  matter,  and  how  I  thought  best  for  the  suppression  of  such  as  holdeth 
these  erroneous  opinions  ;  for  if  they  contimce  any  time,  I  think  they  shall 

UNDO  us  ALL  ! 

"  The  said  Abbot  departed  from  me  on  Monday  last ;  and  sith  that  time  I 


'5  This  may  seem  strange,— but  it  is  by  no  means  unaccountable.  The  reader  may  call  to 
mind  the  anecdote  respecting  "  Tlie  Obedience,"  \t.  219.  Henry  was  a  strangely  capricious  being, 
saying  one  thing  to  day,  and  doing  another  to-morrow.  Any  of  his  loose  expressions  of  favour 
would  be  eagerly  caught  up,  and  often  repeated,  so  that  nothing  was  more  likely  to  follow  than 
the  impression  of  which  Nix  here  complains.  But  ere  long  the  Lords  of  Parliament,  led  on  by 
the  Bishops,  will  try  to  fix  his  Majesty,  and  make  the  royal  trumpet  give  a  certain  sound. 

"i  John  Salcot,  alias  Capon,  D.D.  Abbot  of  Hyde,  who  was  made  Bishop  of  Bangor  afterwards 
at  Croydon  by  Cranmer  19th  April  1534,  when  he  surely  must  have  professed  other  sentiments. 


l.'}30.]  THE   KING   AND  THE  PRELATES.  2.>7 

have  had  much  trouble  and  business  witli  others  in  like  mattei's  ;  as  they  say, 
wheresoniever  they  go,  tliey  hear  say,  that  the  King's  pleasure  is,  flie  New  Tes- 
tament ill  Etiijlish  shall  go  forth,  and  men  should  hare  it,  and  read  it.  And, 
from  that  opinion,  /  can  by  no  means  turn  them,  but  (except)  I  had  greater  au- 
thority to  punish  them  than  I  have.  Wherefore,  I  beseech  your  good  Lord- 
ship to  advertise  the  King's  Grace,  as  I  trust  the  said  Abbot  hath  done  before 
this  letter  shall  come  inito  your  Grace,  that  a  remedy  may  be  had. 

"  But  now  it  may  bo  done  well  in  my  diocess ;  for  the  gentlemen  and  the 
commonality  be  not  greatly  infected  ;  but  merchants,  and  such  that  hath  their 
abiding  not  far  fi-om  the  sea.  The  said  Abbot  of  Hyde  can  shew  you  of  a 
Curate,  and  well  learned,  in  my  diocess,  that  exhorted  his  parishioners  to  be- 
lieve contrary  to  the  Catholic  faith.  There  is  a  College  in  Cambridge,  called 
Gunnel  Hall,  of  the  foundation  of  a  Bishop  of  Norwich.'?  I  hear  of  no  clerk 
that  hath  come  out  lately  of  that  College,  but  saTottreth  of  the  fryimj-pan, 
though  he  speak  never  so  holily.18 

"  I  beseech  your  Grace  to  pardon  me  of  my  rude  and  tedious  writing  to  you  : 
the  zeal  and  love  that  I  owe  to  Almighty  God  cause  me  this  to  do  !  And  thus 
Almighty  God  long  preserve  your  Grace  in  good  prosperity  and  health.  At 
Hoxne,  the  xiiii  day  of  May  1530,  Your  obediensary  and  daily  orator.""* 

But  there  was  no  occasion  for  this  miserable  old  man  beiuff 
so  urgent.  Little  did  he  know  how  deeply  Warliam  and  his 
brethren  were  impressed  with  the  impending  danger,  if  these 
books  were  not  seized  and  burnt.  The  highest  authorities 
were  now  all  alive  to  the  perils  of  tlie  hierarchy.  For  some 
time,  the  united  strength  of  the  most  able  opponents  in  the 
kingdom — Lord  Chancellor  More,  Warham,  Tunstal,  and 
Gardiner,  had  been  employed  in  framing  an  authoritative  list 
of  all  the  heresies  detected  in  Tyndale's  writings,  with  a  de- 
nunciation of  them  all.  Tyndale's  name,  too,  in  connexion 
with  his  New  Testament  and  Pentateuch,  was  now  still  more 
distinctly  branded,  even  by  royal  authority.  These  prelates 
and  their  assistants  had  contrived  to  find  out  about  two  hun- 
dred heretical  sentences  in  only  six  publications,  of  which  one 
hundred  and  seven  were  charged  upon  "  Tyndale  and  Fryth.''"' 

"  All  which  great  errors  and  pestilent  heresies,  being  contagious  and  dam- 
nable, with  all  the  books  containing  the  same,  with  the  translation  also  of 
Scripture  corrupted  by  William  Tyndal,  as  well  in  the  Old  Testament  as  in  the 
Neir,  and  all  other  books  in  English  containing  such  errors  ;  the  King^s  Highness 
present  in  person,  by  one  whole  advice  and  assent  of  the  Prelates  and  clerks,  as 
well  of  the  Universities,  as  of  all  other  assembled  together,  determined  utterly 
to  be  repelled,  rejected,  and  put  away  out  of  the  hands  of  his  people,  and  not 
to  be  suffered  to  get  abroad  among  his  subjects." 

'"  Referring  to  Gonvill,  now  Gonville  and  Caius  College. 

'"  These  men  seem  to  insinuate  that  they  literally  s]iifll  a  heretic,  for  it  was  a  cant  phrase 
among  them.  AVest,  the  Bishop  of  Ely.  applied  it  to  Dr.  Barnes.  Indeed,  a  similar  style  was 
as  old  as  the  days  of  Chaucer — "  /  smell  a  Loller  in  tJie  whifi." 

13  Cotton  MS.,  Cleopatra.  E.  v..  fol.  .3fi0. 

VOI,.    I.  R 


2.>8  THE    KINU   AND    IU8HOP.S  [jBOOK  I. 

After  this  followed  a  long  "  Bill  in  English  to  be  published  by  the  Preachers," 
that  his  Highness'  pleasure  and  determination  should  be  known  in  "  all  his 
Realm."  From  this  it  is  worth  while  to  quote  a  few  significant  sentences  and 
phrases,  as  some  index  to  the  virulence  of  the  whole — 

"  Wherefore,  you  that  have  the  books  called — '  The  Obedience  of  a  Chi'istian 
Man — the  Sum  of  Scripture — the  Revelation  of  Antichrist — the  Supplication  of 
Beggars — Mammon — the  Matrimon}'  of  Tyndale — the  New  Testament  in  Eng- 
lish, of  the  translation  that  is  now  printed,'  and  such  other  books  in  English — 
detest  them- — abhor  them — keep  them  not  in  your  hands — deliver  them  to  the  supe- 
riors, such  as  call  for  them  :  And  if  by  reading  of  them  heretofore,  any  thing  re- 
mains in  your  breast  of  that  teaching,  either  forget  it,  or,  by  ivformation  of  the  truth, 
expel  it.  This  you  ought  to  do  ;  and  being  obstinate,  the  Prelates  of  the  Church 
ought  to  compel  you  ;  and  your  Prince  to  punish  and  correct  you,  not  doing  the 
same.  Finally,  it  appeared  that  having  of  the  whole  Scripture  is  not  necessary 
to  Christian  men  ;  and  like  as  the  having  of  the  Scripture  in  the  rulgar  tongue 
and  in  the  conuaon  peopjWs  hands,  hath  been  bj-  the  Holy  Fathei'S  of  the  Church 
in  sometimes  thought  meet  and  convenient,  so,  at  another  time,  it  hath  been 
thought  not  expedient  to  be  communicate  amongst  them.  Wherein,  forasmuch 
as  the  King's  Highness,  by  the  advice  and  deliberation  of  his  council,  and  the 
agreement  of  great  learned  men,  thinketh  in  his  conscience  that  the  divulging 
of  this  Scripture,  at  this  time,  in  the  English  tongue,  to  be  committed  to  the 
people,  should  rather  be  to  the  farther  confusion  and  destruction,  than  the  edi- 
fication of  their  souls.  And  it  was  thought  there,  in  that  assembly,  to  all  and 
singular  in  that  congregation,  that  the  King's  Highness,  and  the  Prelates,  in  so 
doing,  not  suffering  the  Scripture  to  be  divulged  and  communicate  to  the  people 
in  the  English  tongue,  at  this  time,  doth  u-ell.  '  And  /  also  think'  (was  the 
preacher  to  say)  '  and  judge  the  same  ;  exhorting  and  moving  you,  that  in  con- 
sideration his  Highness  did  there  openly  say  and  protest,  that  he  would  cause 
the  New  Testament  to  be  by  learned  men  faithfully  and  purely  translated  into 
the  English  tongue :  to  the  intent  he  might  have  it  in  his  hands  ready  to  be 
given  to  his  people,  as  he  might  see  their  manners  and  behaviour  meet,  apt, 
and  convenient  to  receive  the  same.'  " 

At  the  close  it  is  said,  "  his  Grace's  Highness  being  in  person  in  the  Chapel 
called  the  Old  Chapel,  which  sometime  was  called  St.  Edward's  Chamber,  sat 
on  the  east  side  of  the  Parliament  chamber,  within  his  Grace's  Palace  at 
Westminster,  upon  the  24th  day  of  May,  the  year  of  our  Lord  1530,  and  in  the 
twenty-second  year  of  our  reign.  And  then  and  there,  in  the  presence  of  all 
the  personages  there  assembled,  required  three  Notaries  to  make  public  and 
authentic  instruments,  and  set  to  thereunto  onr  seal  accordingly."  The  Notaries 
attesting  were  Thomas  Ashley,  Richard  Watkyns,  and  Matthew  Grafton  ;  the 
last  of  whom  had  been  frequently  employed  by  Tunstal  in  1 .528. 

This  original  document,  closely  written  on  eight  skins  of 
parchment,  may  still  be  seen  in  the  Library  at  Lambeth 
Palace.^'^  At  the  end  there  is  an  array  of  twenty  names, 
pointing  out  the  most  noted  persons  present  on  this  occasion, 
to  which  they  add,  "  with  many  more  learned  men  of  the  said 


20  It  is  eiiRTossed  in  Warham's  Reg.  fol.  188,  and  in  Wilkins,  vol.  iii.,  p.  72?.  The  heresies, 
falsely  so  called,  are  well  answered  by  Foxc  ;  and  the  "  Bill  to  be  jmblished  by  the  Preachers," 
is  {jivcn  by  Collier,  without  a))ridgnient. 


l."i;3(>.]  DENOUNCK  THK  SCRIPTUKES.  '2;59 

Universities,  in  a  great  niunber  assembled,  then  and  there 
together  witness  to  the  premises  required  and  adhibited." 
But  although  the  language  employed  was  no  doubt  intended 
to  convey  the  idea,  it  by  no  means  follows,  that  they  indi- 
tidually  assented ;  far  from  it.  A  minority  there  was,  we 
know  from  other  sources,  though  we  cannot  give  their  names. 
More  and  Warham,  Tunstal  and  Gardiner,  the  framers  of  the 
whole,  besides  others,  of  course  cordially  approved  of  every 
word ;  but  Hugh  Latimer'  was  among  the  number  present,  and 
this  has  perplexed  or  misled  more  critics  than  one.^^  Perhaps 
he  had  no  business  to  be  there,  however  anxious  to  know  what 
was  going  on  ;  but  the  occasion  of  his  being  in  such  bad 
company  admits  of  explanation,  after  which  he  will  appear  in 
his  noblest  character. 

Latimer  had  been  preaching,  ever  since  he  saw  Wolsey  at 
Whitehall,  and  before  then  he  had  argued  for  the  Scriptures 
being  given  to  all.  For  some  time,  also,  before  the  present 
period,  it  had  been  in  his  favour,  that  his  old  opponent,  AVest, 
the  Bishop  of  Ely,  took  part  with  Queen  Catherine,  and  was 
one  of  her  Advocates.  Henry,  eager  to  have  the  assent  of 
the  University  of  Cambridge  to  his  divorce,  had  sent  down 
Dr.  Butts,  the  physician,  to  promote  this  object.  Latimer, 
whatever  may  be  said,  approved  of  the  divorce,  and,  therefore, 
so  pleased  if  not  aided  the  Doctor,  that  he  invited  him  to  ac- 
company him  to  London.  Introducing  him  to  the  King,  he  had 
been  officiating:  before  him  at  Windsor  in  the  month  of  March. 
In  the  afternoon  of  Sunday  the  27th,  while  Latimer  was 
preaching,  the  Vice-Chancellor  of  Cambridge,  Dr.  William 
Buckmaster,  arrived  with  the  University's  letters  for  his  Ma- 
jesty .^^  The  King  was  not  altogether  satisfied  with  their  de- 
cisions, but  Latimer  was  already  high  in  favour.  "  At  after- 
noon," says  Buckmaster  himself,  "  I  came  to  Windsor,  and 
also  to  part  of  Mr.  Latimer's  sermon,  and  after  the  end  of 


i^i  One  of  these,  Henry  Wharton,  under  the  assumed  name  of  Anthony  Harmer,  was  very 
severe.  In  liis  criticii-ms  on  Burnet,  he  says,  "  Latimer  was  one  of  those  divines,  who,  (being 
deputed  by  the  University  of  Cambridge,)  joined  with  Archbisliop  Warham,  and  other  Bishops 
and  divines,  iu  condemning  all  English  translations  of  the  Scripture;  and  solemnly  subscribed 
this  determination,  the  pubiicatiun  of  the  H.  Scripture  in  the  vulgar  tongue,  is  not  necessary  to 
Christians;  and  the  King's ^rajcsty  and  tl(e  Bishops  do  url!  injbrbidilii,^  to  the  jieojile  the  common 
use  of  the  H.  Scripture  in  the  English  tongue.  This  was  done  in  the  year  1530."  Wharton  ought 
to  have  known  better  than  this.  No  one  subscribed  but  the  three  Notaries.  Latimer  was  not 
dejmted  by  the  University.  But  more  than  this,  the  whole  representation  is  not  only  incorrect, 
but  the  reverse  of  the  truth. 

--  Not  Dr.  Edmonds,  as  erroneously  stated  bv  some  writers. 


260  LATIMER  TO  THE   KING.  |^BOOK  I, 

the  same,  I  spake  with  Mr.  Secretary — and  so  after  even- 
song I  delivered  our  letters  in  the  chamber  of  presence,  all 
the  Lords  beholding.  His  Highness  gave  me  there  great 
thanks,  and  talked  with  me  a  good  while.  But  by  and  bye, 
he  greatly  praised  Mr.  Latimer's  sermon,  and,  in  so  praising, 
said  on  this  wise  :  '  This  displeaseth  greatly  Mr.  Vice-Chan- 
cellor  yonder.  Yon  same,'  said  he  unto  the  Duke  of  Norfolk, 
'  is  Mr.  Vice-Chancellor  of  Cambridge,"'  and  so  pointed  to 
me."^^  The  next  day,  after  another  conversation  with  Henry, 
the  King  having  told  him  that  he  would  have  their  final  and 
a  better  decision,  Buckmaster  was  dismissed  home  after  Easter; 
but  Latimer  still  remained,  and  continued  preaching. 

Meanwhile,  Warham's  party  were  already  sitting  in  council 
at  Westminster,  and  Latimer,  not  having  left  London,  was 
present  among  others,  on  the  24th  of  May,  but  his  account  of 
the  meeting  afterwards  was  this.  Referring  his  Majesty  to  that 
very  day,  he  tells  him,  "As  concerning  your  last  proclamation, 
prohibiting  such  books,  the  very  true  cause  of  it,  and  chief  coun- 
sellors were  they,  whose  evil  living  and  cloaked  hypocrisy  these 
books  uttered  and  disclosed.  And  howbeit  that  (although) 
there  were  three  or  four  that  would  have  had  the  Scripture  to 
go  forth  in  English,  yet  it  happened  there,  as  it  is  evermore 
seen,  that  the  most  part  overcometh  the  better  ;  and  so  it 
might  be  that  these  men  did  not  take  this  proclamation  as 
yours,  but  as  theirs,  set  forth  in  your  name  ;  as  they  have 
done  many  times  more,  which  hath  put  this  your  realm  in 
great  hindrance  and  trouble,  and  brought  it  in  great  penury." 

These  proceedings,  says  Burnet,  were  printed  in  June,  but 
when  once  they  were  sent  forth  through  the  country,  so  far 
from  having  assented  to  them,  they  proved  the  urgent  motive 
to  one  of  the  noblest  acts  of  Latimer's  varied  life — his  well 
known  letter  to  Henry  the  VIIL,  of  this  year.  The  words 
already  quoted  are  taken  from  it,  and  though  it  be  an  antici- 
pation, by  way  of  despatching  all  we  require  to  say  of  Latimer 
at  present,  a  few  sentences  more  will  explain  his  views  and 
feelings,  as  to  these  Bishops  and  their  doings. 

"  Your  Grace,"  says  he,  "  may  see  what  means  and  craft  the  Spirituahty  (as 
they  ifill  be  called)  imai^ine  to  break  and  withstand  the  acts,  which  wei'c  made 

2''  MS.  c.  c.  c.  Burnet's  Rtlorm.  iii.,  a]i]>.  p.  S.'i.  cd.  1715. 


l.-)80.]  LATIMKR   TO   THE   KING.  261 

in  your  Grace's  last  Parliament,  against  their  superfluities.  Wherefore  they 
that  thus  do,  your  Grace  may  know  them  not  to  be  true  followers  of  Christ." 24 

Alluding  then  to  the  results  of  this  proclamation,  he  goes  on  to  say,  "  There- 
fore pleaseth  it  your  good  Grace,  to  return  to  this  golden  rule  of  our  Master 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  this,  'by  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them.' 
For  whei-e  you  see  persecution,  there  is  the  Gospel,  and  there  is  truth  ;  and 
they  that  do  persecute,  be  void  and  without  all  truth  ;  not  caring  for  the  clear 
light  which  '  is  come  into  the  world,'  and  which  shall  utter  and  shew  forth  every 
man's  works.  And  they  whose  works  be  nought,  dare  not  come  to  this  light, 
but  go  about  to  stop  it  and  hinder  it,  letting  (obstructing)  as  much  as  they  may, 
that  the  Holy  Scripture  should  not  be  read  in  our  mother  tovijue,  saying  that  it 
would  cause  heresy  and  insurrection  ;  and  so  they  persuade,  at  the  least  way  they 
woidd  fain  persuade,  your  Grace  to  keep  it  back.  But  here,  mark  their  shameless 
boldness,  which  be  not  ashamed,  contrary  to  Christ's  doctrine,  to  gather  figs  of 
thorns,  and  grapes  of  bushes,  and  to  call  light  darkness,  and  darkness  light, 
sweet  sour,  and  sour  sweet,  good  evil,  and  evil  good,  and  to  say,  that  that  which 
teacheth  all  obedience,  should  cause  dissension  and  strife.  But  such  is  their 
belly  wisdom,  wherewith  they  judge  and  measure  every  thing,  (in  order)  to 
hold  and  keep  still  this  wicked  Mavimon,  the  goods  of  this  world  which  is  their 
God  ;  and  hath  so  blinded  the  eyes  of  their  hearts,  that  they  cannot  see  the 
clear  light  of  the  Sacred  Scripture,  though  they  babble  never  so  much  of  it. 

"  But  as  concerning  this  matter,  other  men  have  showed  your  Grace  their 
minds,  hoic  necessary  it  is  to  hare  the  Scripture  in.  En(jlish.  The  which  thing  also 
your  Grace  hath  promised  by  your  last  proclamation  :  the  which  promise,  I 
pray  God  that  your  gracious  Highness  may  shortly  perform,  even  to-da)'  before 
to-morrow.  Nor  let  not  the  icickedness  of  these  irorldly  men  detain  you  from 
your  godly  purpose  and  promise. 

Nor  was  Tyndale's  New  Testament,  or  even  the  Pentateuch  only  arrived  this 
year,  forgotten  on  this  occasion.  "  For  what  marvel  is  it,"  says  he,  "  that  they 
being  so  nigh  of  your  Council,  and  so  familiar  \\  ith  your  Lords,  should  provoke 
both  your  Grace  and  them  to  prohibit  these  books,  which  before,  by  their  own 
authority,  have  forbidden  the  New  Testament,  under  pain  of  everlasting  damna- 
tion ?  For  such  is  their  manner  ;  to  send  a  thousand  men  to  hell,  ere  they  send 
one  to  God  :  and  yet  the  New  Testament,  and  so  I  think  by  the  other,  (the 
Pentateuch  or  the  old)  was  meekly  offered  to  every  man  that  would  and  could, 
to  amend  it,  if  there  were  any  fault."  Thus  repeating  to  Henry  the  precise 
language  of  our  Translator,  though  now  so  denounced  by  name. 

Even  the  Lord  Chancellor  More  was  not  sjiared.  "  And  take  heed  whose 
counsels  your  Grace  doth  take  in  this  matter.  For  there  be  some  that  for  fear 
of  losing  their  worldly  worship  and  honour,  will  not  leave  their  opinion  ;  which 
rashly,  and  that  to  please  men  withal,  by  whom  they  had  great  promotion,  they 
took  upon  them^  to  defend  by  writing,  so  that  now  they  think  that  all  their  felicity, 
which  they  put  iu  this  life,  should  be  marred,  and  their  wisdom  not  so  gi-eatly 
regarded,  if  that  which  they  have  so  slanderously  oppressed,  should  be  )tow  put 
forth  and  allowed. 

"  Wherefore  they  be  sore  drowned  in  worldly  wisdom,  that  think  it  against 
their  worship  to  acknowledge  their  ignorance :  whom  I  pray  to  God  that  your 
Grace  may  espy,  and  take  heed  of  their  worldly  wisdom,  which  is  foolishness 
before  God  :  that  you  may  do  that  which  God  commandeth,  and  not  that  which 
seemeth  good  in  your  own  sight,  without  the  Word  of  God  :  that  your  Grace 


24  Tlie  acts  in  reference  to  mortuaries,  pluralities,  and  non-residence,  at  the  close  of  1529. 


-2(y2  NKVV   TESTAMENTS  CONSUMED.  [buok  i. 

may  be  found  acceptable  in  his  sight,  and  one  of  the  memherx  of  Ilis  Churcli ; 
and  according  to  the  office  that  he  hath  called  your  Grace  unto,  that  you  may 
be  found  a  faithful  minister  of  his  gifts,  and  not  a  defender  of  his  ftiilh  ;  for  He 
icill  not  have  it  defended  bi/  man,  or  man^s  power,  but  by  His  Word  only,  by 
the  which  He  hath  evermore  defended  it ;  and  that  by  a  way  far  above  man's 
power  or  reason,  as  all  the  stories  of  the  Bible  make  mention. 

"  Wherefore,  gi'aeious  King,  remember  yourself.  Have  pity  upon  j'our  soul, 
and  think  that  the  day  is  even  at  hand  when  you  shall  give  account  of  your 
office,  and  of  the  blood  that  hath  been  shed  by  your  sword.  In  the  which  day, 
that  your  Grace  may  stand  stedfastly,  and  be  not  ashamed,  but  be  clear  and 
read}'  in  your  reckoning,  and  to  have,  as  they  say,  your  quietus  est  sealed  witli 
the  blood  of  our  Saviour  Christ,  which  only  serveth  at  that  day,  is  my  daily 
prayer  to  Him  that  suffered  death  for  our  sins,  which  also  pi-ayeth  to  his 
Father  for  grace  for  us  continually.  To  whom  be  all  honour  and  praise-  for 
ever.  Amen.  The  Spirit  of  God  preserve  your  Grace.  Anno  Domini  1530, 
Inio.  die  Decembris." 

Certainl}^  no  nionarcli  was  ever  more  pointedly  addressed, 
or  more  seasonably  and  faithfully  warned.  It  seems,  there- 
fore, unaccountable  that  Latimer  should  have  ever  been  sup- 
posed to  assent  to  such  proceedings,  merely  because  his  name 
was  mentioned  as  being  present.  The  calumny,  however,  no 
doubt  unwittingly,  has  been  bound  up,  even  with  the  reprint 
of  Tyndale''s  New  Testament,  in  our  own  day.  At  that  mo- 
ment, indeed,  the  Bishops  might  think  it  fortunate  to  have 
such  a  name  appended,  but  had  they  foreseen  the  result,  it 
had  never  been  there.  Meanwhile,  Latimer  had  done  what  ho 
could  to  damage  this  Royal  and  prelatical  Ball, 

To  return,  however,  to  these  Bishops  as  a  body ;  having  in 
May  secured  their  object,  in  so  far  as  a  Royal  proclamation 
could  go,  it  seems  to  have  been  with  a  view  to  greater  effect, 
that  a  second  grand  and  more  public  hook-fire  was  then  de- 
termined. The  first  had  been  tbe  result  of  Wolsey's  "  secret 
search"  in  1526;  the  present  was  the  consequence  of  the 
negociation  at  Antwerp  last  year.  Warham's  purchase 
in  1527,  was  disposed  of,  or  consumed,  without  show;  but 
Tunstal  had  reserved  his  books  till  now.  Tyndale  by  name, 
and  his  translation,  had  both  been  branded  by  royal  authority, 
and  the  Bishop,  no  doubt,  thought  it  a  fortunate  moment  for 
fulfilling  his  purpose.  "  I  intend,  surely,"  said  he  at  Ant- 
werp, "  to  destroy  them  all,  and  to  burn  them  at  Paul's 
Cross."  Accordingly,  says  Halle,  "  this  year  in  May,  the 
Bisliop  of  London"  (formerly,  now  of  Durham)  ''  caused  all 
his  New  Testaments  which  he  had  bought,  with  many  other 
books,  to  be  brought  into   Paul's  Churcli  Yard,   in   London. 


i53(».]  NEW    TESTAMENTS  CONSUMED.  2«)3 

and  there  were  openly  burned."-^  That  Tunstal  was  acting 
for  Stokesly,  till  his  return  from  the  Continent,  and  recording 
what  was  doing  in  the  diocese  till  then,  is  evident  from  several 
documents  at  the  close  of  his  Register.^'' 

There  was,  however,  a  great  difference  between  the  efi'ects 
of  this  burning,  and  that  in  the  year  lo2G.  Then  the  people, 
generally,  were  not  aware  of  the  value  of  what  they  saw  con- 
sumed :  but  it  was  far  otherwise  noti\  and  this  alone  is  a  proof 
that  the   cause  of  Divine  Truth,   which  the   Bishops  M'ould 

2a  Strype,  and  several  other  writers,  erroneously  have  ascribed  this  burning  of  books  to 
Stokesly,  as  he  was  then  Bishop  of  London  ckct,  but  all  this  was  Tunstal's  doing  alone.  Stokesly 
was  then  in  Italy,  as  alreadv  noticed.  Tunstal  had  been  translated  to  Durham,  by  a  bull  dated 
18th  Feb.  15311,  and  confirmed  to  that  See  on  the  2.")th  of  TAa.Tc\\.—Rinner,  xiv.  p.  3(;4.  Before 
his  removal,  it  may  be  added,  he  had  bestowed  much  money  in  furnishing  a  library  in  Cam- 
bridge, both  of  printed  books  and  manuscripts;  but  the  printed  ScrqAures  in  Knglixh,  with 
other  good  liooks,  he  had  separated  for  destruction,  and  most  cordially  would  he  act  for  Stokesly, 
till  became  home.  Wood  in  one  place  represents  Stokesly  as  installed  on  the  19th  of  July. 
but  this  he  could  not  be.  In  June  he  was  at  Bologna,  very  busy  in  Henry's  service,  and  there 
is  a  despatch  from  him  as  late  as  23d  September.  — i/i')-6(')-^  p.  .329.  Probably  he  did  not  arrive 
in  England  for  some  time  after  this,  as  he  was  not  installed  Bishop  of  London  till  the  2(lth  of 
December.  — /^Fiwf  .J  Fasti.  And  hence  it  is,  that,  when  he  consigned  Bayfield  to  the  flames, 
on  the  2Uth  Nov.  1531,  he  dates  it  "  ike  first  year  of  our  consecration." 

2«  One  of  these  documents  has  rather  perplexed  some  inspectors  of  the  Register.  It  is  the 
bull  of  Leo  the  Tenth,  against  Luther  and  his  doctrines,  though  dated  as  far  back  as  I'yH),  which 
has  been  formally  copied  and  inserted  in  1530.  The  fact  is,  that  in  most  of  these  ancient 
Registers,  from  that  of  Baudake,  beginning  in  1306,  down  to  that  of  Compton  in  17'J0,  there  are 
various  instruments  to  be  found,  bearing  date  before  the  lime  of  their  respective  Bishops.  Some 
cause,  in  the  Bishop's  estimation,  called  for  the  exhibition  of  the  original  document,  and  hence 
its  insertion  at  a  later  period,  even  though  not  recorded  at  the  time.  Without  attention  to  this, 
the  most  ridiculous  blunders  may  be  committed.  Thus,  here  we  have  a  bull,  though  dated  in 
1520,  inserted  ten  years  later,  or  immediately  after  certain  proceedings  against  Dr.  Edward 
Crome  in  1530,  and  before  others  agiiinst  Latimer.  But  this  insertion  is  highly  significant,  and 
the  mystery  admits  of  an  easy  solution.  It  is  notorious  that  Tuubtal  and  Sir  Thomas  More  were 
at  once  zealous  and  united  in  the  persecution  of  men  called  heretics,  as  well  as  violently  opposed 
to  the  books  they  had  published  ;  the  Bishop's  famous  license  to  Sir  Thomas  also  preceding  this 
document :  and  though  Tunstal  saved  his  own  head,  no  one  Bishop  was  more  slow  in  the  admis- 
sion of  Henry's  assumed  supremacy,  so  that  we  shall  find  him  hesitating  even  next  year. 
Both  these  men  persecuted,  without  the  King's  writ,  and  Tunstal  being  thus  busy  for  years, 
preferred  at  this  juncture,  the  bull  of  Leo,  as  the  ground  and  warrant  of  his  proceedings,  to  that 
of  Henry's  sanction  as  "  Head  of  his  Church."  It  will  be  reccdlected  that  neither  Tunstal's  nor 
More's  name  were  affixed  to  the  letter  sent  to  the  Pontiif. 

This  view  is  strengthened,  or  rather  confirmed,  by  a  list,  or  column  of  names,  written  on  the 
last  leaf  of  this  copy  of  the  bull.  There  are  nineteen  foreigners,  beginning  with  Luther  and  his 
adherents,  and  three  Englishmen,  or  Tyndale,  Brightwell,  and  Roy.  These  are  the  names 
of  those  very  authors  whose  books  had  been  proscribed  and  condemned  in  15,30.  The  transla- 
tions, expositions,  and  tracts,  of  at  least  fifteen,  out  of  these  twenty-two  living  writers,  "im- 
ported into  the  City  of  London,"  had  just  been  condemned,  as  given  by  Foxe.  In  this  list  of 
names  we  observed  the  ink  to  be  faded,  and  therefore  it  had  been  written  afterwards,  but,  by 
internal  evidence,  not  long  after.  Thus,  the  three  Englishmen,  who  are  placed  by  themselves, 
last  in  the  list,  and  marked  Angli  on  the  right,  are  "  Willmus  Tyndall,  Willmus  Roy,  Apostata, 
Ricus  Brightwell."  Here  Roy  alone  is  distinguished  as  apostate,  he  alone  being  a.  friar,  and 
belonging  to  the  Monastery  of  "  Grenewyche,"  as  marked  on  the  left,  and  agreeably  to  the  in- 
formation furnished  by  Tyndale  himself,  in  his  first  edition  of  the  "  Wicked  Mammon."  But 
the  last  appellation.  Briphtwell,  being  that  which  was  affixed  by  Fryth  to  his  first  publication, 
"  the  Revelation  of  Antichrist  in  1529,"  shows  that  "  Richard  Brightwell"  was  stilt  supposed  to 
be  the  real  name  of  some  person.  This  fixes  the  time  of  writing  to  about  1531,  at  the  latest. 
The  strangely  mistaken  use  made  of  this  list,  in  a  recent  sketch  of  Tyndale,  occasioned  a  reviewer 
in  the  Christian  Observer  of  18.'iC  no  little  research,  without  his  being  able  to  arrive  at  any 
distinct  solution.  The  length  of  this  note  may  therefore  be  excused.  Another  instance  of  an 
old  document  copied  into  this  Register,  and  in  connexion  with  one  of  the  men  who  finally  ap- 
prehended Tyndale,  will  occur  afterwards,  in  its  proper  )ilatc. 


264-  NEW  TESTAMENTS   IMPORTING.  [BOOK  I. 

fain  have  crushed,  was  making  decided  progress.  This  burning 
"  had  such  an  hateful  appearance  in  it,  being  generally  called  a 
burning  of  the  Word  of  God,  that  people  from  thence  concluded, 
there  must  be  a  visible  contrariety  between  that  booh,  and  the 
doctrines  of  those  who  handled  it ;  by  tdiich  both  their  prejudice 
against  the  clergy,  and  their  desire  of  reading  the  New  Testa- 
ment was  increased?'^ 

In  corroboration  of  this  statement,  it  is  certain  that  neither 
the  purchase  at  Antwerp,  nor  the  burning  at  PauFs  Cross, 
had  any  effect  on  the  importations  into  this  country,  except 
the  reverse  of  what  was  intended  and  desired  by  tlie  enemy ; 
and  before  long  Tunstal  himself  was  fully  sensible  of  this. 
"  Afterwards,"  says  Halle,  "  when  more  New  Testaments 
were  imprinted,  they  came  thick  and  threefold  into  England, 
the  Bishop  of  London,"  (now  of  Durham,)  "  hearing  that  still 
there  were  so  many,  sent  for  Augustine  Packington,  and  said 
to  him — '  Sir,  how  cometh  this,  that  there  are  so  many 
New  Testaments  abroad,  and  you  promised  and  assured  me 
that  you  had  bought  all?'  Then,  said  Packington — '  I 
promise  you,  I  bought  all  that  then  was  to  be  had ;  but  I 
perceive  they  have  made  more  since,  and  it  will  never  be  better, 
as  long  as  they  have  the  letters  and  stamps  ;  therefore,  it  were 
best  for  your  Lordship  to  buy  the  stamps  too  I  and  then  you 
are  sure.'  The  Bishop  smiled  at  him,  and  said — '  Well, 
Packington,  well ;'  and  so  ended  the  matter." 

And  so,  perhaps,  ended  the  device  of  purchasing  books  in 
order  to  burn  them  ;  but  it  will  not  be  long  before  we  find  these 
enemies  proceed  to  men  themselves,  and,  with  a  bitter  zeal, 
still  more  inflamed,  consign  thein  to  the  fire;  for  very  soon  after 
this,  seizing  and  burning  men  instead  of  their  productions,  or 
the  books  in  their  possession,  became  the  order  of  the  day. 
But  it  is  with  books  we  have  now  to  do,  and  there  is  no  doubt 
that  while  WoLsey  was  descending  to  the  devouring  grave, 
and  the  Bishops,  with  the  King  at  their  head,  were  imagin- 
ing a  vain  thing,  the  printing  press  was  as  busy  as  ever. 
Another  edition  of  Tyndale's  New  Testament  was  executed 
tliis  year,  and  it  is  the  more  worthy  of  notice,  that  there  ap- 
pears to  have  been  a  positive  connexion  between  him  and  it. 
The  author  is  perfectly  aware  that  the  edition  of  1 534,  has 


1.530.]  DEATH   OF  SIMON    PYSHE.  205 

been  styled  the  second  genuine  edition  of  Tyndale,  but  so 
many  mistakes  have  been  detected  already,  that  one  need  not 
feel  any  surprise  if  this  should  prove  another. 

It  has,  indeed,  been  often  stated,  that  with  the  money 
received  from  Tunstal,  Tyndale  reprinted  the  New  Testament, 
and  Hamburgh  has  also  been  mentioned  as  the  place  where 
one  edition  was  printed.  Tyndale  had,  as  we  have  seen, 
gone  to  Hamburgh,  and  there  is  no  evidence  to  be  found  of  his 
having  returned  to  Antwerp  during  the  whole  of  this  year. 
But  whether  it  was  executed  in  Hamburgh  or  elsewhere,  of 
his  having  now  printed  an  edition,  though  he  had  no  time  as  yet 
to  revise  the  version,  there  can  be  little  or  no  doubt.  Foxe,  and 
Strype,  and  Tanner,  expressly  assign  this  edition  to  Tyndale, 
the  last  stating  Marburg  as  the  place  of  printing.  But  there 
are  corroboratino-  circumstances  as  to  the  book  itself.  It  is 
not  till  the  close  of  this  year,  or  rather  the  following  spring, 
that  we  hear  of  Tyndale  having  a  hrolhei\  and  resident  in  Lon- 
don ;  and  if  the  records  of  the  Star  Chamber  are  to  be  received 
as  evidence,  it  is  there  distinctly  stated,  that  he  "  sent  the 
Testaments,  and  divers  other  books,  to  his  brother,  John 
Tyndale,  a  merchant  in  London."  This  impression,  too,  has 
been  pronounced  to  be  more  correct  than  the  Antwerp  editions, 
at  least  so  said  the  late  Bishop  Tomline  :  and  when  we  come 
to  John"'s  apprehension  and  appearance  before  Sir  Thomas 
More,  as  well  as  the  importations  by  Richard  Bayfield,  little 
doubt  will  remain  as  to  this  reprint  coming  from  the  original 
translator,  although  he  had  not  found  leisure  as  yet  to  im- 
prove the  translation. 

About  the  end  of  this  year  an  incident  occurred,  which 
may  seem  unaccountable,  as  out  of  keeping  with  the  usual 
current  of  events ;  were  it  not  that  the  capricious  temper  of 
the  monarch  admitted  both  of  words  and  actions,  directly  at 
variance  with  each  other.  Mr.  Fyshe,  the  author  of  "  the 
Supplication  of  Beggars,"  we  found  had  been  in  London 
in  the  summer  of  1526,  as  well  as  in  1528  ;  and,  according 
to  his  Avife's  representation,  in  Foxe,  "  he  had  been  absent 
now  the  space  of  two  years  and  a-half."  His  tract,  as  we 
have  seen,  had  interested  Henry,  when  first  he  saw  it  in 
1526  ;  and  this  excellent  woman  havino'  o-ained  access  to  the 
Kino-,  he  enoaoed  that  her  husband  should  "  come  and  ao 
safe,  without  peril,  and  that  no  man  should  do  him  harm,"''' 


26(i  TYNDALE'S   PROCtRESS.  [bOOK  I. 

if  she  brought  him  to  the  royal  presence.  Emboldened  by 
the  King's  words,  she  went  and  brought  him.  His  Majesty 
conversed  with  him,  it  is  said,  for  above  three  hours,  and,  in 
the  end,  desired  him  to  take  his  wife  home,  for  she  had  taken 
great  pains  for  him.  Fyshe  had  fled  formerly  for  fear  of  the 
Cardinal,  and  now  he  replied — "  he  durst  not  so  do,  for  fear 
of  Sir  Thomas  More  the  Chancellor,  and  Stokesly  the 
Bishop  of  London."  The  King,  taking  the  signet  from  his 
finger,  recommended  him  to  the  Lord  Chancellor,  charging 
him  not  to  molest  him.  More  received  the  signet  as  a 
sufficient  safe-guard,  of  course,  but  enquired  if  he  had  any 
discharge  for  his  wife  ?  She  had  displeased  the  friars,  by 
not  allowing  them  to  say  their  Gospels  in  Latin  in  her  house, 
as  they  did  in  others,  and  insisted  that  they  should  say  them 
in  English.  Next  morjiing.  More  actually  sent  his  man  for 
her,  but  her  young  daughter  being  sick  of  the  plague,  pre- 
vented his  approach,  as  well  as  any  farther  molestation. 
Within  six  months  after  this,  Mr.  Fyshe  himself  died  of  the 
same  disease,  and  was  interred  in  St.  Dunstan''s,  the  very  same 
church  where  Tyndale  had  been  accustomed  to  preach  in  1523. 
The  Chancellor,  in  his  loose  and  mendacious  style,  represented 
him  as  recanting  before  he  died,  of  which  there  is  not  the 
sliffhtest  evidence.  His  widow  was  afterwards  married  to  a 
gentleman  of  the  same  profession  as  her  first  husband,  Mr. 
Baynham,  of  whom  we  shall  hear  before  long.-^ 


SECTION  vin. 

FORMIDABLE    OPPOSITION PURSUIT    AFTER    TYNDALE     BY    THE    KING    AND 

CRUMWELL STILL  IN  VAIN TYNDALe's  ANSWER  TO  SIR  T.  MORE EPIS- 
TLE OF  JOHN    EXPOUNDED JONAH,  WITH  A    PROLOGUE CRITICAL  STATE 

OP    ENGLAND RENEWED    PERSECUTION BROTHER  OF  TYNDALE BILNEY 

— BAYFIELD MANY  BOOKS  IMPORTING CONSTANTYNE  CAUGHT — ESCAPES 

—PERSECUTION     ABROAD POWERFUL     REMONSTRANCE     FROM     ANTWERP 

WITH  CRUMWELL,  INCLUDING  THE  KING  AND  THE  LORD  CHANCELLOR. 

The  principal  feature  of  the  present  year  was  that  of  deter- 

■28  See  Wood's  Ath.  by  Bliss,  i.,  p.  59-60,  and  Foxe's  "  Story  of  Simon  Fyshe."  The  latter  is 
full  of  mistakes  as  to  years,  a  not  unusual  fault,  but  the  substance  of  his  narrative  often  supplies 
the  corrective.  Foxe  traces  the  hand  of  Anne  Boleyn  in  this  transaction,  and  this  is  not  im- 
probable. But.  at  the  same  time,  it  is  particularly  worthy  of  remark,  that  the  incident  took 
place  just  at  the  i)cri(id  when  Henry  had  received  the  noble  letter  of  Ldlhner  already  referred 
to.  and  //  may  be  allowed  to  have  produced  some  temporary  impression.     Surely  it  must. 


I.J3I.]  (tOveknment  persecution.  2f)7 

mined  opposition  to  Divine  truth,  abroad  as  well  as  at  home  ; 
for  although  one  man  had  been  raised  up  by  Grod  to  lead  on 
the  faithful,  unquestionably  it  was  truth  alone  which  occa- 
sioned all  the  uproar,  not  the  opinions  of  men.  And  as  to 
our  native  land  especially,  if  we  should  still  farther  discrimi- 
nate, it  was  through  the  JBook  of  God,  in  our  native  language, 
that  Divine  truth  now  penetrated  into  the  heart  of  this  country. 
Last  year  had  witnessed  the  Royal  denunciation  of  our  Trans- 
lator by  name,  as  well  as  all  that  lie  had  then  published ;  but 
since  then,  by  his  "  Practice  of  Prelates,"  he  had  advanced 
one  step  farther,  in  combating  the  darkness  and  superstition 
which  covered  the  land.  That  tract  had  been  read  by  men  of 
every  grade,  from  the  palace  itself,  down  to  the  hamlet ;  by 
citizens  of  London,  and  husbandmen  in  Essex,  in  Suflblk,  and 
elsewhere.  Here  he  had  not  only  implored,  but  warned  the 
King  to  beware  of  persecution,  and  faithfully  gave  his  judicious 
opinion  with  regard  to  the  divorce  ;  that  miserable  question 
still  in  discussion  throughout  Europe.  By  this  year,  however, 
Henry  had  nearly  got  this  question  framed,  according  to  his 
own  liking,  and  as  he  was  soon  to  bring  it  before  Parliament, 
he  must  have  felt  incensed  by  Tyndale's  reference  to  its  pro- 
ceedings, not  to  say  that  the  next  would  lie  open  to  a  second 
review.  Besides,  Sir  Thomas  More  had  but  lately  come 
into  office,  and  he,  with  the  Bishops,  had  cordially  concurred 
in  advising  persecution,  having  secured  the  royal  name  to 
sanction  and  enforce  their  measures.  The  safety  of  Tyndale, 
therefore,  was  now  in  far  greater  hazard,  than  it  ever  had 
been  in  the  days  of  the  Cardinal.  Wolsey  had  been  roused 
from  his  lair,  chiefly  by  the  Satyre  of  Roye,  and  his  chase 
of  the  prey  had  ended  with  his  own  downfall ;  but  the  truth 
and  good  sense  contained  in  Tyn dale's  last  production,  was 
like  a  spur  by  far  too  sharp  for  the  passions  and  the  pride  of 
such  a  man  as  Henry  the  Eighth.  His  anxiety  to  seize 
the  man,  or  allure  him  into  the  kingdom,  will  be  found  to 
harmonise  with  the  growing  ferocity  of  his  character.  Tyn- 
dale"'s  escapes,  during  this  year,  must  have  illustrated  the  ten- 
der care  of  a  gracious  Providence;  but  the  mystery  now  is,  how 
he  had  contrived  to  make  such  progress  at  the  press.  Yet 
once  enoao;ed  he  had  determined  not  onlv  to  maintain  his 
ground,  but  advance  in  the  prosecution  of  his  great  enterprise. 
This  year  was,  therefore,  distinguished  by  the  appearance  of  not 


2G8  PURSUIT  AFTER  TYNDALE   RENEWED,  [BOOK  I. 

fewer  than  tliree  distinct  pieces.  His  answer  to  Sir  Thomas 
More's  Dialogue  ;  his  Exposition  of  the  First  Epistle  of  John ; 
and  his  translation  of  the  Prophet  Jonah,  with  a  long  preface 
or  prologue. 

The  annoyance  and  persecution  of  Tyndale  personally,  how- 
ever, preceded  the  appearance  of  any  of  these  pieces,  and  it  is 
due  to  their  contents  that  this  should  first  be  noticed.  De- 
nunciation of  the  Scriptures,  and  of  all  that  he  had  published, 
would  now  no  longer  suffice.  The  King  was  incensed,  and  be- 
fore the  summer  of  this  year,  would  have  dealt  with  anything 
of  Tyndale\s,  as  Jehoiakim  did  of  old  with  Jeremiah's  roll. 
The  Priests  of  the  day  also,  as  in  the  case  of  another  ancient 
Prophet,  had  thought  of  the  man,  if  not  said, — "  the  land  is 
not  able  to  bear  all  his  w^ords."  The  strong  arm  of  power  must 
be  stretched  out  to  reach  him  if  possible,  and,  no  doubt,  there 
were  not  a  few  who  imagined,  that  his  days  were  now  numbered. 
Amidst  all  other  aftairs,  the  apprehension  of  Tyndale  at  this 
period,  held  a  place  in  point  of  importance,  which  has  never  be- 
fore been  fully  explained.  It  would  certainly  be  too  severe,  to 
ascribe  all  the  measures  adopted  to  Henry  alone,  even  though 
he  should  appear  most  conspicuous,  and  engaged  in  eager  pur- 
suit, through  the  instrumentality  of  three,  if  not  four,  indivi- 
duals ;  for  still  the  head  and  hand  of  Sir  Thomas  More,  and 
the  hearts  of  the  Bishops,  sanctioned  all ;  but  it  will  be  far 
more  melancholy,  if  Crumwell,  so  lately  come  into  power, 
should  appear  to  be  a  most  willing  agent,  and  even  Cranmer, 
for  many  a  day,  nay,  throughout  the  whole  of  Tyndale's  life- 
time, evince  no  sympathy  whatever  ! 

The  Government  persecution  of  our  Translator,  which  had 
now  commenced,  lends  a  peculiar  emphasis  to  every  page  he 
had  already  emitted,  but  more  especially  to  the  publications 
of  the  present  year. 

In  December  last,  the  aunt  of  Charles,  Lady  Margaret,  or 
Regent  of  the  Low  Countries,  had  died,  and  the  Emperor 
had  nominated  his  sister,  Mary,  Queen  of  Hungary,  to  suc- 
ceed. She,  however,  did  not  assume  the  reins  of  govern- 
ment till  October  of  this  year.  Whether  this  interregnum 
was  deemed  favourable  to  the  apprehension  of  Tyndale,  is  not 
distinctly  expressed  ;  but  certainly  no  time  was  lost  in  tak- 
ing advantage  of  it ;  and  it  was  during  this  season  that  he 
was  next  so  keenly  pursued.     Hackett,  who  is  already  well 


1531,]  PURSUIT   AFTER  TYNDALE   RENEWED.  209 

known  to  the  reader,  returned  to  England  after  Lady  Mar- 
garet"'s  decease,  bearing  a  letter,  dated  3d  January  1531,  from 
the  Emperor  to  Henry;--'  but  he  was  sent  abroad  again  that 
same  year,  and  had  an  audience  in  June,  at  Ghent,  witli 
Mary,  the  new  Regent.*'  Most  gladly  would  he  have  appre- 
hended the  Translator  of  the  books  he  had  so  repeatedly 
burned ;  but,  independently  of  him,  or  immediately  after  the 
death  of  Margaret,  if  not  before,  it  had  been  resolved  to  send 
two  accredited  Envoys  to  the  Low  Countries,  one  of  whom,  if 
not  both,  were  charged  with  special  instructions  in  reference 
to  Tyndale.  The  first,  Mr.  Stephen  Vaughan,  was  much 
emplo3'ed  in  commercial  and  pecuniary  negociations,  down  to 
as  late  a  period  as  1546.  The  second  was  Thomas  Wrioths- 
ley,  uncle  to  the  first  Earl  of  Southampton,  afterwards  Lord 
Chancellor,  and  the  second  Earl.  The  first,  by  far  the  most 
candid  of  the  two,  was  stationed  at  Barrow  and  Antwerp, 
and  the  second,  a  uniform  enemy  of  the  truth,  repaired  to 
Brussels.^^  The  draught  of  their  credentials  afterwards, 
upon  Lady  Mary''s  appearance,  and  as  corrected  by  Henry's 
oicn  hand,  is  now  in  the  Museum. ^^ 

So  early  as  the  22d  of  January,  Vaughan  writes  to  Crum- 
well ;  and,  on  the  26th,  we  have  his  first  letter  to  the  King 
himself,  the  whole  of  which  will  disclose  how  much  in  earnest 
his  Majesty  had  been,  to  lay  hold  on  this  eminent  man,  or 
get  him  within  his  grasp.  The  reader  will  have  to  bear  with 
the  style  of  his  Majesty''s  correspondent,  as  well  as  his  ful- 
some anxiety  to  please  his  royal  Master ;  but  there  is  no  his- 
tory to  be  compared  with  letter  history,  whether  in  regard  to 
the  evolution  of  character,  or  the  actual  state  of  things — 

"  Most  excellent  Prince,  and  my  most  redoubted  Sovereign,  mine  humble 
observation  due  unto  your  Majesty — My  mind  continually  labouring  and  thirst- 
ing, most  dread  and  redoubtable  Sovereign,  with  exceeding  desire  to  attain  llie 
knowledge  of  such  things  as  yoiir  Majesty  commanded  me  to  learn  and  practice 
in  these  parts,  and  thereof  advertise  you,  from  time  to  time,  as  the  case  should 
requii-e.  And  being  often  dismayed  with  the  regard  of  so  many  mischances, 
as  always  obviate  and  meet  with  my  labours  and  policies,  whereby  the  same 
(after  great  hope  had,  to  do  something  acceptable  unto  your  Highness'  pleasure) 
turn  suddenly  to  become  frustrate,  and  of  none  effect,  bringing  me,  doubtless, 


29  Cotton  MS.  Galba,  B.  ix.,  fol.  234.  so  Idem,  fol.  238. 

31  Vaughan,  in  short,  was  the  successor  to  Hackett,  as  King's  agent  or  royal  merchant,  at  a 
salary  of  twenty  shillings  per  day,  the  usual  sum  to  ambassadors ;  and  equal  to  about  ^5(  ( (I 
per  annum,  of  the  present  time.     This  man  will  prove  to  have  been  an  ^levc  of  Crumwell's. 
32  Galba.  B.  x..  fol.  3fi,  no  date. 


270  PURSUIT   AFTKU   TVN'DALK  QbOOK  I. 

into  right  gi'eat  sorrow  and  iiuiiiietude,  considei-ing  tliat.  Wherefore,  lately, 
1  ha^'e  written  three  sundry  letters  unto  Willyam  TyndaJl,  and  tlie  same  sent, 
for  the  more  surety,  to  three  sundry  places — to  Frankfort,  Haniljurgh,  and 
Marleborough,  {I.  c.  Marburg  ;)  I  then  not  being  assured  in  which  of  the  same 
he  was.  I  had  very  good  hope,  after  I  heard  say  in  England,  that  he  would, 
upon  the  promise  of  your  Majesty,  and  of  your  most  gracious  safe-conduct,  be 
content  to  repair  and  come  into  England,  that  I  should,  partly  therewith,  and 
partly  with  such  other  persuasions  as  I  then  devised  in  my  said  letters,  and, 
finally,  with  a  promise  which  I  made  him — that  whatsoever  surety  he  would 
reasonably  desire,  for  his  safe  coming  in  and  going  out  of  your  realm,  my 
friends  should  labour  to  have  the  same  granted  by  your  Majesty — (but)  that 
now,  the  bruit  and  fame  of  such  things  (as  since  my  writing  to  him)  hath 
chanced  within  your  realm,  should  provoke  the  man,  not  only  to  be  minded  to 
the  contrary  of  that  whereunto  I  had  thought,  without  difficulty,  to  have  easily 
brought  him,  but  also  to  suspect  my  persuasions  to  be  made  to  his  more  peril 
and  danger  ;  than,  as  I  think,  if  he  were  verily  persuaded  and  placed  before 
you,  (your  most  gracious  benignity,  and  piteous  regard  natural,  and  custom 
always  had,  towards  your  humble  subjects  considered,  and  specially  to  those, 
which,  (ac)knowledging  their  offences,  shall  humbly  require  your  most  gracious 
pardon,)  he  should  ever  have  need  to  doubt  or  fear.  Like  as  your  Majesty 
as  well  by  his  letter,  written  with  his  own  hand,  sent  to  me  for  answer  of  my 
said  letters  ;  as  also  by  the  copy  of  another  letter  of  his,  answering  some  other 
person,  whom  your  Majesty  perhaps  had  commanded  to  persuade  by  like  means 
may  plain  apperceive — which  letters,  like  as  together  I  received  from  the 
party,  so  send  I,  herewith  inclosed  to  your  Highness. 

"  And  whereas  I  lately  apperceived,  by  certain  letters  directed  to  me  from 
Mr.  Fitzwilliam,33  Treasurer  of  your  household,  that  I  should  endeavour  my- 
self, by  all  the  ways  and  means  I  could  study  and  devise,  to  obtain  you  a  copy 
of  the  book,  which  I  wrote  was  finished,  by  Tyndall,  answering  to  a  book  put 
forth  in  the  English  tongue  by  my  Lord  Chancellor,  and  the  same  should  send 
to  your  Majesty,  with  all  celerity — I  have  undoubtedly  so  done  and  did,  before 
the  receipt  thereof.  Howbeit,  I  neither  can  get  any  of  them,  nor,  as  jet,  (is  it) 
come  to  my  knowledge  that  any  of  them  should  be  put  forth  ;  but  being  put 
forth,  I  shall  then  not  fail,  with  all  celerity,  to  send  one  unto  your  Highness. 

"  My  business  is  such,  during  the  marts,  as  giveth  me  little  or  none  occasion 
to  go  abroad,  whereby  1  might,  by  chance,  hear  some  things  meet  for  your 
gracious  knowledge. — From  Barrow,  the  26  January,  anno  1530,"  i.e.  1.531.34 

Vaughan,  before  he  became  irritated,  was  extremely  solici- 
tous to  please  the  King,  and  was  therefore  anxious  about  the 
favourable  reception  of  this,  his  first  despatch  ;   he  therefore 


33  Sir  William  Fitzwilliam  is  meant,  aftuvwards  Earl  of  youthani])ton,  the  nci)how  of 
Wriuthsley,  already  mentioned.  The  occasion  of  his  being  knighted,  as  reported  by  Stowe,  was 
curious  enough.  He  was  one  of  those  wlio  subscribed  the  articles  against  Wolsey,  but  after  his 
downfall,  or  in  April  last,  he  entertained  him  most  kindly  at  his  house  in  the  country  near  Peter- 
borough. "  Ueinf;  called  before  the  King,  and  demanded  how  he  durst  entertain  so  great  an 
enemy  to  the  State?  His  answer  was  that  he  had  not  contemptuously  or  wilfully  done  it,  but 
only  because  he  had  been  his  master,  and  partly  the  means  of  his  greatest  forlunes. "  The  King 
was  so  well  pleased  with  his  answer,  that,  saying,  "himself  had  too  few  such  servants,"  im- 
mediately he  knighted  him,  and  afterward  made  him  a  Privy  Counsellor. -Slowe's  Loiuhiii. 
He  died  before  his  uncle,  or  in  1542,  and  Wriothsley  himself,  one  of  the  ambassadors  now  before 
us,  was  then  created  Karl  of  Southampton,  under  King  Edward,  or  immediately  after  Henry  was 
laid  in  his  grave.  M  Cotton  MS.  Galha,  B.  x..  fol.  42. 


1531.]  BY    rilK   KING  AND   CRUMVVELL.  271 

accompanied  it  witli  the  following — "  To  his  Right  Worship- 
ful Mr.,  Master  Thomas  Crumvvell,  in  London;"  who  had 
recommended  him  to  his  Majesty's  notice. 

"  Sir, — Here  see  you  my  rudeness  and  inability  to  be  a  Avriter  to  so  gi'eat  a 
Prince,  but  his  gracious  benignity  encourageth  thus  to  do  ;  wliich  chancing  to 
be  acceptable  to  his  Majesty,  shall  be  to  me  an  exceeding  pleasure,  and  other- 
wise, the  contrary.  Wherefore,  I  most  heartily  pray  you  to  wait  a  time  for 
the  delivery  thereof,  to  be  taken  when  you  think  his  Highness  will  imuaediatcly 
look  upon  them  ;  for  then  may  it  chance,  if  any  fault  be,  your  goodness  towards 
me  will  excuse  the  same  in  the  best  manner. 

"  Herewith  I  send  you  the  copy  of  one  of  Tyndalle's  letters,  which  he  sent 
to  me  ;  the  other,  for  lack  of  leisure,  I  could  not  copy,  being  so  long  a  matter. 
The  '  Dialogue  of  Okhani,'  I  have  delivei-ed  to  Mr.  Tuke,  who  will  bring  you  it 
in  his  mail,  and  will  depart  within  four  days  next.  35  I  pray  you  let  me  know 
how  the  King  taketh  my  letters,  as  soon  as  it  is  possible. 

"  It  is  unlikely  to  get  Tyndall  into  England,  when  he  daily  heareth  so  many 
things  from  thence  which  feareth  him.  After  his  book,  answering  my  Lord 
Chancellor's  book,  be  put  forth,  I  think  he  will  write  no  more  !  The  man  is  of 
a  greater  knowledge  than  the  Khufs  Highness  doth  take  him  for,  which  icell  ap- 
peareth  by  his  works.     Would  God  he  were  in  England." 

This  envoy  of  Henry''s,  it  may  have  been  observed,  alludes 
to  some  other  person  who  had  also  written  to  Tyndale,  and  to 
whom  he  had  replied.  This  could  not  be  Wriothsley,  other- 
wise he  would  have  named  him ;  but  Vaughan's  impression 
evidently  was,  that  various  individuals  were  now  out  in  pur- 
suit, and  had  been  commissioned  to  seize  the  same  man,  or 
entice  him  into  England.  Tyndale  also  had  replied  to 
Vaughan,  though  still  he  could  not  find  him  out.  In  the 
meanwhile,  chancing  to  meet  with  a  part  of  the  intended 
answer  to  Sir  Thomas  More,  in  manuscript,  he  immediately 
informs  Crumwell,  and  actually  sits  down  to  copy  it  out  for 
the  King.  February  and  March  had  passed  away,  when  at 
last,  and  most  unexpectedly,  Tyndale  himself  gave  him  the 
benefit  of  a  personal  interview.  Still  more  deeply  interested, 
without  loss  of  time,  on  the  next  day,  or  18th  of  April, 
Vaughan  despatches  the  following  letter  to  his  royal  Master, 
from  Antwerp,  where  Tyndale  then  was  : — 

35  ••  A  dialogue  bet\vei.-n  a  kiiip;ht  and  a  clerk,  concerning  the  power  spiritual  and  temporal." 
Thus  early  was  this  dialngue  published  abroad,  which  was  afterwards  printed  by  Berthelet,  cum 
prtfilfpiu  of  Henry  VIII.  William  of  Ockham,  so  called  from  the  village  of  that  name,  in  Surrey 
where  he  was  born,  the  author  of  this  dialogue,  written  in  tliebcpiiuiinfj  n/ the  fourteenth  centurii, 
was  the  pupil  of  Duns  Scotus,  and  afterwards  his  acute  opj)onent,  as  head  of  the  Nominalists. 
This  notable  little  tract  was  written  about  1305,  to  aiiswer  or  silence  the  Clergy  of  the  day,  that 
the  Roman  Pontift'  might  exerci.se  any  jurisdiction  over  the  temporalities  of  Princes;  or  the 
Church  so  c.illed,  be  exempted  from  contributing  in  time  of  need,  either  for  the  relief  of  the 
poor,  or  the  security  of  the  nation  where  they  abide.  See  Oldy's  British  Librarian,  p.  5.  Should 
Tyndale  yet  escape,  this  was  a  book  quite  to  CnniiiniVs  titsU',  as  to  other  men  at  home. 


272  PURSUIT    AFTKR   TYNOALE  [boOK  I. 

"  Please  it  your  Majesty  to  bo  advertised,  how  that  of  hvte  I  obtained  a  copy 
of  one  part  of  Tyndale's  booli,  answering  to  the  booli  put  forth  by  My  Lord 
Cliancellor  ;  whereof  immediately  I  gave  knowledge  to  my  Master,  Mr.  Crum- 
well,  and  him  required  thereof  to  advertise  your  Highness,  as  appertained  (to 
him.)  Which  copy  being  rudely  written,  interlined,  and  difficult  to  be  read, 
methought  uncomely  and  not  meet,  in  so  vile  array,  to  be  sent  to  the  hands  of 
your  Majesty.  The  regard  whereof  moved  me  to  write  it  again,  tliat  it  might 
come  to  your  most  gi-acious  hands,  the  more  legible  and  easy  to  your  reading. 
Which  part  I  have  herewith  sent  unto  your  highness  ;  thinking  that  the  matter 
therein  contained,  (for  the  modest  order  thereof,)  in  regard  of  his  former  writ- 
ing, will  somewhat  better  like  you,  tlian  some  other  of  his  woi-ks,  which  he  hath, 
with  less  advisement,  more  rashness,  and  ruder  spirit,  put  forth  before  this  time. 
This  part,  which  your  Grace  receives  now,  is  but  a  tb.ird  or  fourth  part  of  his 
sole  work  ;  but  comprehcndeth,  in  effect,  the  substance  and  pith  of  the  other 
parts  ;  where  he  particularly  answereth  to  every  chapter  of  my  Lord's  book, 
with  such  grounds  as  he  hath  laid  in  his  first  part,  though  he  use  in  it  a  larger 
circumstance.  The  second  part,  I  have  in  likewise  obtained,  which  I  will 
in  likewise  write,  and  send  unto  your  Grace,  with  all  convenient  speed  and 
celerity. 

"  The  day  before  the  date  hereof,  (17tli  of  April,)  I  spake  with  Tyndale  with- 
out the  town  of  Antwerp  ;  and  by  this  means.  He  sent  a  certain  person  to  seek 
me,  whom  he  had  advised  to  say,  that  a  certain  friend  of  mine,  unknown  to  the 
messenger,  was  very  desirous  to  speak  with  me  ;  pi'aying  me  to  take  pains  to 
go  unto  him,  to  such  place  as  he  should  bring  me.  Then  I  (said)  to  the  mes- 
senger,— '  What  is  your  friend,  and  where  is  he  V  '  His  name  I  know  not,'  said 
he,  '  but  if  it  be  your  pleasure  to  go  where  he  is,  I  will  be  glad  thither  to  bring 
you.'  Thus  doubtful  what  this  matter  meaut,  I  concluded  to  go  with  him,  and 
followed  him,  till  lie  brought  me  without  the  gates  of  Antwerp,  into  a  field 
lying  nigh  unto  the  same,  where  was  abiding  me  this  said  Tyndale. 

"  At  our  meeting — '  Do  you  not  know  me  V  said  this  Tyndale.  '  I  do  not  well 
remember  you,'  said  I  to  him.  '  My  name,'  said  he  '  is  Tyndale.'  '  But,  Tyn- 
dale,' said  I,  'fortunate  be  our  meeting  !'  Then  Tyndale — '  Sir,  I  have  been  ex- 
ceeding desirous  to  speak  with  you.'  '  And  I  with  you  ;  what  is  your  mind  ?' 
'  Sir,'  said  he, '  I  am  informed  that  the  King's  Grace  taketh  great  displeasure 
with  me,  for  putting  forth  of  certain  boolis,  which  I  lately  made  in  these  parts  ; 
but  specially  for  the  book  named  "  The  Practice  of  Prelates,"  whereof  I  have  uo 
little  marvel, — considering  that  in  it,  I  did  but  warn  his  Grace,  of  the  subtle  de- 
meanour of  the  Clergy  of  his  realm,  towards  his  person  ;  and  of  the  shameful 
abusions  by  them  practised,  not  a  little  threatening  the  displeasure  of  his  Grace, 
and  weal  of  his  realm  :  in  which  doing,  I  showed  and  declared  the  heart  of  a 
true  subject,  which  sought  the  safe-guard  of  liis  royal  person,  and  weal  of  his 
Commons  :  to  the  intent,  that  his  Grace  thereof  warned,  might,  in  due  time, 
prepare  his  reniedies  against  their  subtle  dreams.  If,  for  my  pains  therein  taken, 
— if  for  my  poverty, — if  for  mine  exile  out  of  mine  natural  country,  and  bitter 
absence  from  my  friends, — if  for  my  hunger,  my  thirst,  my  cold,  the  great 
danger  wherewith  I  am  every  where  compassed  \ — and  finally,  if  for  innumer- 
able other  hard  and  sharp  fightings  which  I  endure,  not  yet  feeling  of  their 
asperity,  by  reason  (that)  I  hoped  witli  my  laboui'S,  to  do  honour  to  God,  true 
service  to  my  Prince,  and  pleasure  to  his  Commons  ; — how  is  it  that  his  Grace, 
this  considering,  may  either  by  himself  think,  or  by  the  persuasions  of  others, 
be  brought  to  think,  that  in  this  doing,  I  should  not  show  a  pure  mind,  a  true 
and  incoi'rupt  zeal,  and  affection  to  his  Grace  ?     Was  there  in  me  any  such 


l.OSl.]  13Y   THK   KING  AND   CRUMWKLIi.  273 

mind,  when  I  warned  his  Grace  to  beware  of  his  Cardinal,  whose  iniquity  he 
shortly  after  proved,  according  to  my  writing  ?     Doth  this  deserve  hatred  ? 

"Again,  may  his  Gi*acc,  being  a  Christian  prince,  be  so  unkind  to  God, 
which  hath  commanded  his  Word  to  be  spread  throughout  the  world,  to  give 
more  faith  to  wicked  persuasions  of  men,  which  presuming  above  God's  wisdom, 
and  couti-ary  to  that  which  Christ  expressly  commanxleth  in  his  Testament,  dare 
say,  that  it  is  not  lawful  for  the  people  to  have  the  same,  in  a  tongue  that  they 
understand ;  because  the  purity  thereof  should  open  melt's  eyes  to  see  their  wicked- 
ness'! Is  there  more  danger  in  the  King's  subjects,  than  in  the  subjects  of  all 
other  Princes,  which,  in  every  of  their  tongues  have  the  same,  under  privilege 
of  their  sufferance  ?  As  I  now  am,  rery  death  were  more  pleasant  to  me  than  life, 
considering  man's  nature  to  be  such  as  can  bear  no  truth.' 

"Thus,  after  a  long  communication  had  between  us,  for  my  part,  making 
answer  as  my  poor  wit  would  serve  me,  which  was  too  long  to  write  ;  I  assayed 
him  with  gentle  persuasions,  to  know  whether  he  would  come  into  England ; 
ascertaining  him  that  means  should  be  made,  if  he  (only)  thereto  were  minded, 
without  his  peril  or  danger,  that  he  might  so  do  :  And  that  what  surety  he 
would  devise  for  the  same  purpose,  should,  by  labour  of  friends,  be  obtained 
of  your  Majesty.  But  to  this  he  answered — that  he  neither  would,  nor  durst, 
come  into  England,  albeit  your  Grace  would  promise  him  never  so  much  surety  ; 
fearing  lest,  as  he  hath  before  written,  your  promise  made,  should  shortly  be 
broken,  by  the  persuasion  of  the  Clergy  ;  which  would  affirm,  that  promise 
made  with  heretics  ought  not  to  be  kept. 

"  After  this,  he  told  me  how  he  had  finished  a  work  against  my  Lord  Chancel- 
lor's book,  and  would  not  put  it  in  print,  till  such  time  as  your  Grace  had  seen 
it  ;  because  he  perceiveth  your  displeasure  towards  him,  for  hasty  putting  forth 
of  his  other  works,  and  because  it  should  appear  that  he  is  not  of  so  obstinate 
mind,  as  he  thinks  he  is  reported  unto  your  Grace.  This  is  the  substance  of 
his  communications  had  with  me,  which,  as  he  spake,  I  have  written  to  your 
Grace,  word  for  word,  as  near  as  I  could  by  any  possible  means  bring  to  re- 
membrance. My  ti'ust,  therefore,  is  that  your  Grace  will  not  but  take  my 
labours  in  the  best  part.     I  thought  necessary  to  be  written  to  your  Grace. 

"  After  these  words,  he  tlien,  being  something  fearful  of  me  lest  I  would 
have  pursued  him,  and  drawing  also  towards  night,  he  took  his  leave  of  me, 
and  departed  from  the  town,  and  I  towards  the  town — saying, '  I  should  shortly, 
peradventure,  see  him  again,  or  if  not,  hear  from  him.'  Howbeit,  T  suppose, 
he  afterward  returned  to  the  town  by  another  way,  for  there  is  no  likelihood 
that  he  should  lodge  without  the  town.  Hasty  to  pursue  him,  I  was  not,  be- 
cause 1  had  some  likelihood  to  speak  shortly  again  with  him  ;  and  in  pursuing 
him,  I  might  perchance  hay e  failed  of  my  purpose,  and  put  myself  in  danger. 

"  To  declare  to  your  Majesty,  what,  in  my  poor  judgment,  I  think  of  the 
man,  I  ascertain  your  Grace,  I  have  not  communed  with  a  man "  36 


But,  thus  abruptly,  does  the  manuscript  break  off.  The 
character  about  to  be  given,  no  doubt,  from  what  we  have 
read,  a  favourable  one,  was  most  probably  more  than  Henry 
could  bear  ;  and  it  would  only  have  been  in  perfect  conformity 


38  Cotton  MS.  Titus.  B.  i.,  fol.  t)7,  dated  at  "  Antwerp  the  18th  day  of  April,"— as  appears  by 
C'runiwell's  reply. 

VOL.    I.  S 


274  PURSUIT  AFTER  TYNDALE  [boOK  I. 

with  his  passionate  manner,  if  he  tore  it  oft',  and  burnt  it ; 
for  the  conchision  is  nowhere  else  to  be  found.  Sufficient, 
however,  remains,  to  render  the  reception  of  such  a  letter, 
at  this  time,  and  from  his  own  envoy,  rather  remarkable. 
Vaughan,  it  is  evident,  was  above  all  things  anxious  to  please 
his  royal  Master,  but  he  must  have  been  sadly  out  of  his 
reckoning,  if  he  imagined  that  such  a  communication  as  this, 
would  prove  at  all  acceptable.  His  copying,  with  his  own 
hand,  a  part  of  Tyndale's  answer  to  More,  may  be  excused, 
as  explaining  the  impatience  of  Heniy  to  see  it;  but  that  he 
should  send  to  the  King,  Tyndale's  remonstrance^  even  in  such 
terms  as  he  had  now  penned  it,  was  certainly  one  false  step, 
as  it  regarded  his  own  advancement  in  royal  favour;  and 
the  character  given  at  the  close,  must  have  been  a  second. 
However,  since  the  letter  was  sent  and  received,  it  is  obvious 
to  remark,  that,  after  Latimer''s  sterling  counsel,  not  four 
months  ago,  and  that  of  Tyndale  himself  now,  if  Henry  goes 
on  to  sin,  it  must  be  with  his  eyes  open. 

Tyndale's  having  sent  for  Vaughan,  is  also  worthy  of  notice. 
His  predecessor,  Hackett,  would  have  apprehended  Tyndale 
immediately,  nay,  and  from  what  we  have  read,  would  have 
consigned  him  to  his  native  land,  without  a  sigh,  not  as  a 
heretic  only,  but  as  a  traitor.  Hackett,  however,  had  been 
providentially  removed  from  Antwerp,  and  Vaughan  will  turn 
out  to  be  a  man  of  a  very  different  stamp  ;  though  certainly 
he  does  not  seem  to  have  been  aware  that  he  was  acting;  with 
too  much  temper  and  candour,  to  secure  the  approbation  of 
his  fiery  and  impetuous  sovereign.  But  be  this  as  it  may,  in 
his  next  letter,  very  soon  after  this,  Vaughan  had  made 
mention  of  John  Fryth  also,  wishing  to  know  from  his  Majesty 
what  was  his  pleasure  in  regard  to  him,  if  he  should  happen 
to  meet  with  him. 

We  have  already  hinted  that  Vaughan  was  an  eleve  of 
Crumweirs,  and  it  will  now  be  very  apparent.  The  envoy 
was  acting  in  a  manner  too  mild  or  straightforward,  ever  to 
rise  in  the  royal  favour ;  and,  therefore,  this  letter  of  the 
18th  of  April,  as  well  as  that  which  followed,  demanded  im- 
mediate notice,  lest  he  should  go  farther  wrong.  The  policy 
which  Crumwell  himself  was  pursuing  may  with  all  safety  be 
inferred,  from  the  style  in  which  he  tutors  this  man  ;  while  at 
the  same  time  the  entire  letter  discovers  to  us  a  view  of  his 


1.531.]  BY   THE    KING  AND  GRUMWELL.  275 

character   at   this  moment,  whicli  wc  leave  the  production 
itself  first  to  explain. 

"  Stephen  Vaughan,  I  commend  me  unto  yon,  and  have  received  yoitr  letters 
dated  at  Antwerp  the  1  !Uh  day  of  April,  with  also  that  part  of  Tyndale's  book, 
inclosed  in  leather,  which  ye,  with  your  letters,  directed  to  the  King's  Highness. 
After  the  receipt  whereof,  I  did  repair  unto  the  court,  and  there  presented 
the  same  unto  his  Royal  Majesty,  who  made  mc  answer  for  that  time ;  that 
his  Highness,  at  opportune  leisure,  would  visit,  oversee,  and  read  the  contents, 
as  well  of  your  letters,  as  also  the  said  book.  And  at  my  next  repair  thither 
it  pleased  his  Highness  to  call  for  me — declaring  unto  me  as  well  the  contents 
of  your  letters,  as  also  much  of  the  matter  contained  in  the  said  book  of  Tyn- 
dale.  And  albeit  that  I  might  well  perceive  that  his  Majesty  was  right  well 
pleased,  and  right  acceptably  considered  your  diligence  and  pain  taken,  in 
the  writing  and  sending  of  the  said  book,  as  also  in  the  persuading  and  exhort- 
ing of  Tyndale  to  repair  into  this  realm ;  yet  his  Highness  nothing  liked  the 
said  book,  being  filled  with  seditious  slanderous  lies,  and  fantastical  opinions, 
shewing  therein  neither  learning  nor  truth.  And  farther  communing  with 
his  Grace,  I  might  well  conjecture  that  he  thought,  that  ye  bear  much  affection 
towards  the  said  Tyndale  ;  whom,  in  his  manners  and  knowledge  in  worldly 
things,  ye  undoubtedly  in  your  letters  do  much  allow  and  commend  :  Whose 
works  being  replete  with  so  abominable  slanders  and  lies,  imagined  and  only 
feigned  to  infect  the  people,  declareth  him  botli  to  lack  grace,  virtue,  learning, 
discretion,  and  all  other  good  qualities  ;  nothing  else  pretending  in  all  his 
works,  but  to  seduce  and  deceive. 

"  The  King's  Highness,  therefore,  hath  commanded  me  to  advertise  you,  that 
his  pleasure  is  that  ye  should  desist,  and  leave  any  farther  to  persuade,  or  at- 
tempt the  said  Tyndale  to  come  into  this  realm.  Alleging  that  he,  perceiving 
the  malicious,  perverse,  imcharitable,  and  indurate  mind  of  the  said  Tyndale, 
is  in  manner  without  hope  of  reconciliation  in  him,  and  is  very  joyous  to  have 
his  realm  destitute  of  such  a  person — than  that  he  should  return  into  the  same  ; 
there  to  manifest  his  errors  and  seditious  opinions,  which  (being  out  of  the 
realm  by  his  most  uncharitable,  venomous,  and  pestilent  books,  crafty  and  false 
persuasions,)  he  hath  partly  done  already.  For  his  Highness  right  prudently 
considereth,  if  he  were  present,  by  all  likelihood  he  would  shortly,  (which  God 
defend)  do  as  much  as  in  him  were,  to  infect  and  corrupt  the  whole  realm,  to 
the  great  inquietation  and  hurt  of  the  common-wealth  of  the  same. 

"  Wherefore,  Stephen,  I  heartily  pray  you,  in  all  your  doings,  proceedings, 
and  writing  to  the  King's  Highness,  ye  do  justly,  tinily,  and  without  dissimula- 
tion, shew  yourself /a's  true,  loving,  and  obedient  subject;  bearing  no  manner 
(of)  favour,  love,  or  affection  to  the  said  Tyndale,  nor  to  his  works,  in  any 
manner  of  ways,  but  utterly  to  contemn  and  abhor  the  same.  Assurmg  you, 
that  in  so  doing,  ye  shall  not  only  cause  the  King's  Royal  Majesty,  whose  good- 
ness at  this  time  is  so  benignly  and  graciously  minded  towards  you,  (as  by  your 
good  diligence  and  industry  to  be  used  to  serve  his  Highness,  and  eschewing 
and  avoiding  to  favour  and  allow  the  said  Tyndale  his  eiToneous  works  and 
opinions,)  so  to  set  you  forwards,  as  all  your  lovei-s  and  friends  shall  have  great 
consolation  in  the  same.  And  by  the  contrary  doing,  ye  shall  acquire  the  in- 
dignation of  God  ! — displeasure  of  your  Sovereign  Lord,  and,  by  the  same  cause, 
compel  your  good  friends,  which  have  been  ever  glad,  prone,  and  ready  to 
bring  you  into  his  gracious  favours,  to  lament  and  sorrow,  that  their  suit  in 
that  behalf,  should  be  frustrate  and  not  take  effect,  according  to  their  good 


276  PURSUIT  AFTER  TVNDALE  [[boOK  I. 

intent  and  purpose.  Having,  therefore,  firm  ti'ust,  that,  for  the  love  ye  owe 
to  yourself,  me,  and  your  friends,  ye  will  beware  from  henceforth  to  enter  into 
any  opinions,  whereby  any  slander,  dishonesty,  danger,  or  suspicion,  might 
ensue  towards  you,  whereof,  I  promise  you,  I  would  be  as  sorry  as  your  natu- 
ral father. 

"  As  touching  Fryth,  mentioned  in  your  said  letters,  the  King's  Highness 
hearing  tell  of  his  towardness  in  good  letters  and  learning,  doth  much  lament 
that  he  should  in  such  wise  as  he  doth,  set  forth,  shew,  and  apply  his  learning 
and  doctrine,  in  the  semination  and  sowing  such  evil  seeds  of  damnable  and 
detestable  heresies ;  maintaining,  bolstering,  and  advancing  the  venomous  and 
pestiferous  works,  ei-roneous  and  seditious  opinions  of  the  said  Tyndale,  and 
other  such.  Wherein  his  Highness,  like  a  most  virtuous  and  benign  Prince 
and  governor,  having  charge  of  his  people  and  subjects ;  and  being  very  soiTy 
to  hear  tell  that  any  of  the  same  should,  in  such  wise,  run  headlong  and  digress 
from  the  laws  of  Almighty  God,  and  wholesome  doctrine  of  holy  Fathers,  into 
such  damnable  heresies  and  seditious  opinions ;  and  being  ever  inclined,  willing, 
and  greatly  desirous  to  foresee  and  provide  for  the  same ;  and  much  desiring 
the  reconcihation  of  the  said  Fryth,  firmly  trusting  that  he  be  not  so  far  as  yet 
inrouted  in  the  evil  doctrine  of  the  said  Tyndale  and  others ;  but  that,  by  the 
grace  of  God,  loving,  charitable,  and  friendly  exhortations  and  advertisements 
of  good  people,  he  may  be  called  again  to  the  right  way ;  hath  willed  me  to 
write  unto  you,  that  ye,  therefore,  with  your  friendly  persuasions,  admonitions, 
and  wholesome  exhortations,  counsel  and  advise  the  said  Fryth — if  ye  may  con- 
veniently speak  with  the  same— to  leave  his  wilful  opinions,  and,  like  a  good 
Christian,  to  return  into  his  native  country,  where  he  assuredly  shall  find  the 
King's  Highness  most  merciful  and  benignly,  upon  his  conversion,  disposed  to 
accept  him  to  his  grace  and  mercy.  Wherefore,  eftsones  {again)  I  exhort  you, 
for  the  love  of  God,  not  only  utterly  to  forsake,  leave  and  withdraw  yom'  affec- 
tion from  the  said  Tyndale,  and  all  his  sect,  but  also,  as  much  as  ye  can,  politicly 
and  charitably  to  allure  the  said  Fryth,  and  other  such  persons,  being  in  these 
parts,  which  in  any  ways  ye  shall  know,  or  suppose  to  be  fautors  and  assistants 
to  the  same,  from  all  their  erroneous  minds  and  opinions.  In  which  doing  ye 
shall  not  only  highly  merit  in  Almighty  God,  but  also  deserve  high  thanks  of 
the  King's  Royal  Majesty,  who  will  not  forget  your  devoir  and  labours  in 
that  behalf,  so  that  his  Majesty  may  evidently  perceive  that  ye  effectually  do 
intend  the  same." 

Crumwell  then  closes  liis  letter  by  enforcing  on  Vaughan 
a  vigilant  attention  to  certain  shipments  of  grain, — to  the 
Eraperor''s  affairs, — the  advance  of  the  Turk  into  Germany, — 
the  abiding  of  the  Emperor  in  the  Low  Countries, — his  agree- 
ment with  the  Princes  of  Germany  ;  and  if  in  all  these  things 
Vaughan  can  only  make  his  allegiance  and  service  apparent 
unto  his  Majesty, — then  Crumwell  doubts  not  that  it  will  be 
to  his  "singular  profit  and  advancement."''^ 

This  communication  is  so  corrected,  and  recorrected,  in  the 
original  draught,  that  it  has  been  no  easy  matter  to  decipher 
it ;   but  the  above  is  word  for  word  as  nearly  as  might  be, 

37  Cotton  MS.  Galba,  B.  x.,  fol.  XSi. 


1531.]  BY   THE  KING   AND  CRUMWELL.  277 

the  letter  as  it  must  have  been  seut.^"  It  is  in  vain  to  say 
that  it  is  any  thing  else  than  the  production  of  a  crafty, 
heartless,  and  time-serving  politician  ;  fearful,  it  may  be,  that 
his  own  credit  mioht  suffer,  throuah  Vauohan"'s  defect  in  what 
was  then  styled  "  politic  handling."  After  the  letter  was  fin- 
ished, however,  it  must  be  observed  that  Crumwell  added  a 
postscript  or  saving  clause,  apparently  softening  his  stern  com- 
mands as  to  Tyndale ;  but  in  fact  only  suggesting  another 
snare,  by  which,  if  possible,  to  entrap  him.  Of  this  last  pas- 
sage Vaughan  immediately  availed  himself;  and  as  the  King*'s 
business  demanded  haste,  he  writes  in  reply  on  the  20th  of 
May,  or  only  two  days  after  receiving  the  above. 

"  Pleaseth  it  youi-  Royal  Majesty  to  be  advertised  how  upon  the  receipt  of  certain 
instructions  lately  sent  to  me  from  my  Master,  Mr.  Crumwell,  at  the  command- 
ment of  your  Majesty, — I  immediately  endeavoured  to  learn  such  things  as  were 
contained  in  the  said  instructions  ;  and  although  the  time  since  the  receipt  of  the 
said  instructions,  which  was  but  two  days  before  the  date  hereof,39  is  so  shurt,  as 
were  right  hard  for  me  therein  fully  to  answer  to  yoiu'  Majesty  to  every  of  the 
same,  yet  hath  it  seemed  to  me  not  necessary,  for  lack  of  knowledge  of  the 
whole  to  desist  and  leave  to  write  such  part  as  I  have  already  learned." 

He  then  intimates  his  having  heard  that  the  Turk  and  King  Ferdinand  have 
made  peace, — that  "  the  Germans  and  the  Emperor  agree  not,  nor  are  likely, 
considering  the  earnest  labour  of  the  same  Germans  made  to  the  Emperor,  for 
the  stablishing  and  advancement  of  their  doctrine,  and  the  deaf  ears  of  the  Em- 
peror, nothing  inclined  to  hear  or  regard  the  same," — that  Brabant  and  Flan- 
dei-s  have  offered  to  give  the  Emperor  twelve  hundred  thousand  crowns  on  cer- 
tain conditions, — that  Mary,  Queen  of  Hungary  will  be  "Goveruante"  of  these 
Low  Countries,  and  that  the  Emperor  will  remain  in  these  parts ; — after  which 
he  thus  proceeds : — 

"  As  touching  a  young  man  being  in  these  parts  named  Frithe,  of  whom  I 
lately  advertised  your  Majesty,  by  my  former  letters,  and  whom  your  Royal 
Majesty  giveth  me  in  commandment,  with  friendly  persuasions,  admonitions, 
and  wholesome  counsels,  to  advertise  to  leave  his  wilful  opinions  and  errors,  and 
to  return  into  his  native  country.  I  shall  not  fail  according  unto  your  most 
gracious  commandment  to  endeavour,  to  the  uttermost  of  my  power,  to  persuade 
him  accordiuglj',  as  soon  as  my  chance  shall  be  to  meet  with  him.  Howbeit,  I 
am  informed  that  he  is  very  lately  married  in  Holland,  and  there  dwelleth,  but 
in  what  place  I  cannot  tell.  This  marriage  may,  by  chance,  hinder  my  persua- 
sions. I  suppose  him  to  have  been  thereunto  driven  tlu'ough  poverty,  which 
is  to  be  pitied,  his  qualities  considered." 

Whatever  Vauohan  might  think  of  the  ireueral  tenor  of 


38  It  has  been  asserted  that  the  King  himself  corrected  this  letter,  but  this  is  a  mistake.  There 
is  nothing  of  his  hand-writing  here,  nor  is  it  probable  that  lie  ever  saw  either  the  draught  or  copy. 
It  is,  in  fact,  a.iicold  from  Crumwell  to  a  person  of  inferior  authority,  though  he  will  before  long 
discover  himself  to  be  a  man  of  spirit.     Vaughan  was  not  to  be  brow-beat,  even  by  Crumwell. 

38  Consequently  the  preceding  letter  of  Crumwell's  must  have  been  dated  before  the  18th  nf 
May.     And  Vaughan  immediately  tries  to  please,  nay  flatter,  his  Royal  Master. 


278  PURSUIT  AFTER  TYNDALE.  [book  I. 

CrumweH's  thundering  letter,  he  had  resolved  immediately  to 
avail  himself  of  the  artfully  softened  conclusion  or  postscript, 
already  referred  to.  He  knew  not  where  Fryth  was  to  be 
found,  but  Tyndale  was  still  at  hand.     He  therefore  goes  on  : — 

"  I  have  again  been  in  hand  to  persuade  Tyndale  ;  and  to  draw  him  the 
rather  to  favour  my  persuasions,  and  not  to  think  the  same  feigned,  I  showed 
him  a  clause  contained  in  Master  Crumwell's  letter,  containing  these  words  fol- 
lowing— *  And  notwithstanding  other  the  premises,  in  this  my  letter  contained, 
if  it  were  possible,  by  good  and  wholesome  exhortations,  to  reconcile  and  con- 
vert the  said  Tyndale  from  the  train  and  affection  which  he  now  is  in,  and  to 
excerpte  and  take  away  the  opinions  sorely  rooted  in  him,  I  doubt  not  but 
the  King's  Highness  would  be  much  joyous  of  his  conversion  and  amendment ; 
and  so,  being  converted,  if  then  he  would  return  into  his  realm,  undoubtedly 
the  King's  Royal  Majesty  is  so  inclined  to  mercy,  ^nty  and  compassion,  that  he 
refuseth  none,  which  he  seeth  to  submit  themselves  to  the  obedience  and  good 
order  of  the  world.'  In  these  words  I  thought  to  be  such  sweetness  and  virtue, 
as  were  able  to  pierce  the  hardest  heart  of  the  world  :  and  as  I  thought,  so  it 
came  to  pass.  For  after  sight  thereof,  I  perceived  the  man  to  be  exceeding  al- 
tered, and  to  take  the  same  very  near  unto  his  heart,  in  such  wise  that  water 
stood  in  his  eyes ;  and  he  answered,  'what  gi'acious  words  are  these  !'  '  I  assm-e 
you,'  said  he, '  if  it  would  stand  with  the  King's  most  gracious  pleasure  to  gi'ant 
only  a  hare  text  of  the  Scripture  to  he  put  forth  among  his  people,  like  as  is  put 
forth  among  the  subjects  of  the  Emperor  in  these  parts,  and  of  other  Christian 
Princes, — be  it  of  the  translation  of  what  person  soever  shall  please  his  Majesty, 
I  shall  immediately  make  faithful  promise  never  to  write  more,  nor  abide  two 
days  in  these  parts,  after  the  same  ;  but  immediately  repair  into  his  realm,  and 
there  most  humbly  submit  myself  at  the  feet  of  his  Royal  Majesty,  offering  my 
body,  to  suffer  what  pain  or  torture,  yea,  what  death  his  Grace  will,  so  that  this 
be  obtained.  And  till  that  time,  I  will  abide  the  asperity  of  all  chances,  what- 
soever shall  come,  and  endure  my  life  in  as  much  pains  as  it  is  able  to  bear  and 
sufier.  And  as  concerning  my  reconciliation,  his  Grace  may  be  assured, — that 
whatsoever  I  have  said  or  written,  in  all  my  life,  against  the  honour  of  God's 
Word,  and  (if)  so  proved ;  the  same  shall  I  before  his  Majesty  and  all  the  world  ut- 
terly renounce  and  forsake, — and  with  most  humble  and  meek  mind  embrace 
the  truth,  abhorring  all  error  soever, — at  the  most  gracious  and  benign  request 
of  his  Royal  Majesty,  of  whose  wisdom,  prudence,  and  learning  I  hear  so  great 
praise  and  commendation,  than  of  any  creature  living  !  But  if  those  things 
which  I  have  written  be  true  and  stand  uith  God^s  word,  why  should  his  Majesty, 
having  so  excellent  a  gift  of  knowledge  in  the  Scriptures,  move  me  to  do  any 
thing  against  my  conscience?' — with  many  other  words,  which  were  too  long  to 
write.40 

"  I  have  some  good  hope  in  the  man,  and  would  not  doubt  to  bring  him  to 
some  good  point,  were  it  that  something  now  and  then  might  proceed  from 
your  Majesty  towards  me,  whereby  the  man  might  take  the  better  comfort  of 
ray  persuasions.  I  advertised  the  same  Tyndale  that  he  should  not  put  forth 
the  same  book,  till  your  most  gracious  pleasure  were  known  :  whercunto  he  an- 


■•o  All  this  language,  however,  put  in  the  mouth  of  Tyndale,  it  must  be  borne  in  miud,  came 
from  a  man  who  was  exceedingly  eager  to  please  his  royal  Master.  No  one,  therefore,  can  now 
imagine  that  Tyndale's  words  were  correctly  given. 


153J.]  ALL  IN   VAIN.  279 

swered, — mine  advertisement  canio  too  late,  for  lie  feared  lest  one  thai  had  his 
copy,  would  put  it  very  shortly  in  print  which  he  would  let  if  he  could  ;  if  not, 
tliere  is  no  remedy.  /  shall  stay  it,  as  much  as  I  can.  As  yet  it  is  not  come 
forth,  nor  will  not  in  a  while,  by  that  I  perceive. "■11 

Here,  however,  and  perhaps  unexpectedly  by  the  reader, 
the  subject  drops  for  months ;  but,  for  the  best  of  all  reasons. 
Tyndale  had  something  else  to  do,  than  to  continue  in  conver- 
sation with  this  man.  He  retires  from  public  view,  and  pro- 
ceeds with  vigour  in  his  work.  His  letters,  here  mentioned,  as 
sent  to  England,  we  have  been  unable  to  find.  They  must 
have  added  greatly  to  our  interest,  as  well  as  enabled  us  to 
correct  some  of  the  expressions  which  Vaughan  has  evidently 
put  into  the  mouth  of  Tyndale,  to  please  the  King,  since 
Crumwell  had  so  enjoined.  His  offer  to  Henry  of  "  a  hare  text 
of  the  Sacred  Volume,''''  as  a  "  sine  qua  non,"  was  all-important; 
only  that  text  must  be  a  genuine  and  intelligible  one,  otherwise, 
Tyndale  was  to  pursue  his  own  path.  But  although  we  can- 
not follow  our  Translator  to  the  exact  place  of  his  retreat,  we 
now  come  with  far  greater  advantage,  to  whatever  he  may 
publish.  He  had  a  character  to  maintain,  which  was  still 
most  shamefully  traduced,  and  traduced  alike  by  his  opponent 
in  controversy,  by  Master  Crumwell,  and  the  King.  The 
Scriptures  he  had  translated,  besides  the  cause  of  God  and 
his  truth,  which  he  had  so  promoted  in  England,  alike  re- 
quired him  to  speak  out ;  while  the  account  now  given, 
must  not  only  set  the  courage  and  energy  of  the  man  in  a 
stronger  light,  but  lend  additional  emphasis  to  every  page. 

We  have  witnessed  Henry's  apprehension  and  anxiety  re- 
specting Tyndale's  answer  to  Sir  Thomas  More.  He  would 
have  rejoiced  in  its  suppression  ;  but  the  fact  was,  it  had  been 
much  farther  advanced  at  press,  than  the  author  himself  sup- 
posed. It  was  actually  in  England  before  Tyndale  himself 
was  aware,  or,  as  will  appear  afterwards,  by  the  month  of 
April  this  year,  and  therefore,  it  now  demands  some  notice. 

This  new  Lord  Chancellor,  the  admiration  of  foreign 
countries  as  well  as  his  own,  had  employed   sarcasm   and 


•*l  Cotton  MS.  Galba,  B.  x.,  fol.  5,  G.  If  we  could  rely  upon  the  testimony  of  George  Joyc,  tlie 
individual  to  whom  Tyndale  now  referred  was  Fryth,—vi\io  he  says,  corrected  Tyndale's  Answer 
to  Sir  T.  More  at  the  press,  printing  it  in  AmsUrdam.  The  same  young  man  who  before  long, 
will  meet  the  Lord  Chancellor  personally,  as  well  as  the  Bishops  assembled  ;  and  answer  them 
all,  in  a  style  such  as  neither  Crumwell  or  the  King  now  anticipated. 


28U  TYNDALE'S   ANSWER  ^BUOK  I. 

sophistry  throughout  tliree  hundred  folio  pages,  chiefly  against 
Tyndale  and  his  translation.  But  why  such  a  laborious  and 
wordy  production,  if  manifest  error,  and  only  one  solitary 
heretic  were  all  the  host  to  be  devoured  1  Yet  thus  unwisely 
did  Sir  Thomas  proclaim  the  power  of  his  opponent ;  while 
one  page  after  another  only  proved,  that  he  was  contending 
for  victory,  and  not  for  truth. 

In  commencing  his  answer  to  this  dialogue,  a  form  which 
was  evidently  adopted  with  a  view  to  effect,  Tyndale  singles 
out  or  describes  the  readers,  to  whom  he  addressed  himself. 

"  The  grace  of  our  Lord,  the  light  of  his  Spirit,  to  see  and  to  judge,  true  re- 
pentance towards  God's  Law,  and  a  fast  faith  in  the  merciful  promises  that  are 
in  our  Savioiu'  Christ,  fervent  love  toward  thy  neighbour,  after  the  ensample  of 
Christ  and  his  saints,  be  with  thee,  O  reader,  and  with  all  that  love  the  truth, 
and  long  for  the  redemption  of  God's  elect." 

Of  the  subtle  and  vague  or  indefinite  style  of  More's  pro- 
duction, Tyndale  had  frequently  just  reason  to  complain  ;  and 
in  one  place  he  thus  describes  these  great  defects  r — 

"  M.  More  declareth  the  meaning  of  no  sentence,  he  describeth  the  proper 
signification  of  no  word,  nor  the  difference  of  the  significations  of  any  term  ;  but 
runneth  forth  confusedly,  in  unknown  words  and  general  terms.  And  where 
one  word  hath  many  significations,  he  maketh  a  man  sometime  believe  that  many 
things  are  but  one  thing  ;  and  sometimes  he  leadeth  from  one  signification  unto 
another,  and  mocketh  a  man's  wits.  As  he  juggleth  with  his  term  Church, 
making  us  in  the  beginning  understand  all  that  believe,  and  in  the  conclusion,  the 
Priests  only.  He  telleth  not  the  office  of  the  Law,  he  describeth  not  his  Penance, 
nor  the  virtue  thereof,  nor  use  ;  he  declareth  no  sacrament,  nor  what  they  mean, 
nor  the  use  ;  nor  wherein  the  fruit  of  confession  standeth  ;  nor  whence  the 
power  of  absolution  cometh,  nor  wherein  it  resteth,  nor  what  Justifyingmeaneth." 

Besides  all  this  artful  caution  on  More''s  part,  he  evidently 
placed  great  reliance  on  the  power  of  his  wit  or  drollery,  his  rib- 
baldry,  and  downright  abuse;  supposing,  in  the  employment  of 
all  these  in  turn,  that  every  man  would  be  affected  by  repartee, 
as  powerfully  as  he  was  himself.^^  But  he  knew  not  the  man 
whom  he  had  now  thus  assailed.  Tyndale,  it  is  true,  was  no 
cynic,  and  he  had  no  objection  to  an  occasional  sally  of  wit, — 


•*-  He  even  showed  mercy  to  one  man,  whose  name  was  Silver,  when  he  was  just  about  to 
consign  him  to  the  flames;  but  simply  for  a  stroke  of  wit!  More,  in  conveying  him  to  be 
burnt,  punned  on  his  name,  as  if  he  had  no  heart,  at  a  moment  so  distressing  to  every  natural 
sensibility.  "  Silver  must  be  tried  in  the  fire,"  said  he.  It  was  the  lucky  thought  of  the  man  to 
answer — "  Ay  r  bnt  <iiifckrsilver  will  not  abide  it."  This  paronomasia  had  the  effect  which  reason 
and  pity  had  failed  to  produce.  More  was  delighted  with  it,  and  dismissed  him  !  So  little  had 
ininciple,  in  tliis  instance,  to  do  with  pcrsevut'ion.— SI ri/pe — Turner. 


1531.]  TO  MORE'S  DIALOGUE.  281 

"  A  Cliristian'B  wit,— that  inoffensive  light. 

A  beam  that  aids,  but  never  grieves  the  sight." 

But  since  the  antagonist  had  chosen  to  be  playful  and  profane, 
as  well  as  low  and  foul  by  turns,  Tyndale  would,  of  course,  by 
no  means  descend  to  his  level.  On  the  contrary,  he  seems, 
in  his  reply,  as  though  he  had  resolved  that  his  short  and  pithy 
sentences  should  stand  out  in  bold  contrast  to  the  wire-drawn 
and  verbose  sophisms  of  his  opponent.  He  twits  him  occa- 
sionally with  what  is  facetiously  styled  his  "  poetry,"  but 

"  still  he  was  serions  in  a  serious  cause. 
And  understood  too  well  the  weighty  terms 
That  he  had  ta'cn  in  charge.     He  would  not  stoop 
To  conquer  him  by  jocular  exploits, 
Whom  truth  and  soberness  assailed  in  vain." 

And  certainly,  in  a  few  lines,  he  often  demolishes  an  entire 
folio  page  of  "  the  first  Englishman  who  signalised  himself 
as  an  orator." 

The  translation  of  the  New  Testament  into  the  vernacular 
tongue  was,  however,  the  great  eye-sore  to  Sir  Thomas,  though 
what  he  styled  the  wickedness  of  Tyndale's  other  productions, 
was  plentifully  denounced.  Tunstal  had  boasted  of  his  having 
found  two  thousand  errata,  and  More  had  spoken  of  a  thousand 
texts  by  tale,  as  being  erroneous,  but  now  they  are  all  reduced 
to  the  general  rendering  of  about  six  words.  Tyndale  had 
translated  ecclesia  into  Congregation,  and  not  church, — he  used 
elder,  and  not  priest, — knowledge  or  acknowledge,  and  not 
confession, — repentance,  and  not  penance, — favour,  and  not 
grace, — love,  and  not  charity.  These  were  his  mighty  of- 
fences, and  no  wonder  than  More  at  lea^^i prof essed  to  be  shocked 
and  offended,  for  certainly  these  simple  and  faithful  renderings, 
once  read  in  their  connexion,  shook  to  its  very  foundations 
that  fabric  which  the  Chancellor  had  strained  all  his  powers  to 
defend.  We  have  said  professed,  as  there  is  so  much  evidence 
that  Sir  Thomas  was  still  a  free-thinker  to  his  dying  hour. 

In  reply,  Tyndale  appealed  to  the  Greek  original,  and  to 
More's  acquaintance  with  the  language,  before  himself,  and 
completely  triumphed.  At  the  commencement,  when  refer- 
ring to  the  very  first  controverted  word,  "  congregation,"  he 
lent  his  opponent  a  blow,  which  he  afterwards  showed  that  he 
felt  exceedingly,  but  could  not  parry.  Erasmus  and  More 
were  bosom  friends ;  and  as  the  latter  had  published  the 
Greek  and  Latin  New  .Testament  in  parallel  columns,  eight 


282  TYNDALE'S  ANSWER  TO  MORE'S   DIALOGUE.       [bOOK  I. 

years  before  this ;  and  had,  under  More*'s  own  roof,  written 
Moria,  or  "  The  Praise  of  Folly,"  a  satire  on  the  very  sys- 
tem which  he  now  defended,  Tyndale  enquires — 

"  But  how  liappeth  it  that  M.  More  hath  not  contended  in  Hkewise  agamst 
his  darling  Erasmus  all  this  Ion(/  xchile  ?  Doth  he  not  change  this  word  ecclesia 
into  congregation,  and  that  not  seldom  in  the  New  Testament  ?  Peradventure 
he  oweth  him  favour,  because  he  made  '  Moria '  in  his  house — which  book,  if 
it  were  in  English,  then  should  every  man  see,  how  that  he  then  w&s  far  other- 
tcise  minded  than  he  now  writeth." 

When  he  came  to  the  other  terms  complained  of,  Sir 
Thomas  was  still  as  pointedly  answered.  For  example, 
inetanoia,  Repentance — 

"  He  cannot  prove  that  I  give  not  the  right  English  unto  the  Greek  word. 
But  it  is  a  far  other  thing  that  paineth  them,  and  biteth  them  by  the  breasts. 
There  be  secret  pangs  that  pinch  the  very  heart  of  them,  whereof  they  dare 
not  complain.  The  sickness  that  makcth  them  so  unpatient  is,  that  they  have 
lost  their  juggling  terms.  These  things  to  be  even  so,  31.  More  knotceth  well 
enough  ;  for  he  understandeth  the  Greek,  and  he  knew  them,  long  ere  1.  But  so 
blind  is  covetousness,  and  drunken  desire  of  honour.  43  So  now  the  cause  why 
our  Prelates  thus  rage,  and  that  which  moveth  them  to  call  M.  More  to  help, 
is,  not  that  they  find  just  causes  in  the  translation,  but  because  they  have  lost 
their  juggling  and  feigned  terms,  wherewith  Peter  prophesied  they  should  make 
merchandise  of  the  people." 

In  this  "  Answer  to  Sir  Thomas  More's  Dialogue,"  there 
are  to  be  found  some  interesting  passages  illustrative  of  Tyn- 
dale*'s  sentiments  as  to  Christian  doctrine.  Thus,  in  refe- 
rence to  the  doctrine  of  Paul  and  James  with  regard  to 
justification  being  in  perfect  harmony,  he  says — 

"  When  Paul  saith,  faith  only  justifieth,  and  James,  that  a  man  is  justified 
by  works,  and  not  by  faith  ;  there  is  a  great  difference  between  Paul's  only  and 
James's  only.  For  Paul's  only  is  to  be  understood,  that  faith  justifieth  in  the 
heart  and  before  God,  without  help  of  works,  yea,  and  ere  I  can  work.  But 
James's  only  is  this  wise  to  be  understood,  that  faith  doth  not  so  justify,  that 
nothing  justifieth  save  faith — for  deeds  do  justify  also.  But  faith  justifieth  in 
the  heart  and  before  God,  and  the  deeds  before  the  world  only,  and  maketli 
the  other  seen,  as  ye  may  see  by  the  Scriptures — Rom.  iv.  And  the  same 
mayest  thou  see  by  James,  when  he  saith — '  Abraham  offered  his  son,  and  so 
was  the  Scripture  fulfilled,  that  Abraham  believed  God,  and  it  was  reckoned 
unto  him  for  righteousness,  and  he  was  thereby  made  God's  friend.'  How  was 
it  fulfilled  ?  before  God  ?  Nay,  it  was  fulfilled  before  God  many  years  before, 
and  he  was  God's  friend  many  years  before,  even  from  the  first  appointment 
that  was  made  between  God  and  him.     But  it  was  fulfilled  before  xis,  who  can- 


43  Covetousness,  on  the  part  of  the  Bishops— desire  of  honour,  on  the  part  of  the  Chancellor. 


1.531.]  TVNDALE'S  SENTIMENTS.  283 

not  see  the  heart — wliicli  can  see  nought  in  Abi'aham  more  than  in  other  men, 
save  by  his  works. 

"  And  what  (ro)A-.s  meant  James  ?  Verily  the  works  of  mercy.  As  if  a 
brother  or  a  sister  lack  raiment  or  sustenance,  and  ye  be  not  moved  to  com- 
passion, nor  feel  their  diseases,  what  faith  have  ye  then  ?  No  faith,  be  sure, 
that  feeleth  the  mercy  that  is  in  Christ — for  they  that  feel  that,  be  merciful 
again  and  thankful.  But  look  on  the  works  of  our  Spii'ituality,  which  will  not 
only  be  justified  with  works  before  the  world,  but  also  before  God.  They  have 
had  all  Christendom  to  rule  these  eight  hundred  years ;  and  as  they  be  only 
anointed  in  the  head,  so  have  thci/  only  been  King  and  Empei'or — and  have 
had  all  power  in  their  hands — and  have  been  the  doers  only,  and  the  leaders 
of  those  shadotcs  that  have  had  the  name  of  Princes — and  have  led  them 
whither  they  would — and  have  breathed  into  their  brains  what  they  listed. 
And  they  have  wrought  the  woi'ld  out  of  peace  and  unity,  and  every  man  out 
of  his  welfare — and  are  become  alone  well  at  ease — only  free — only  at  liberty 
— only  have  all  things,  and  only  do  nought  therefore — only  lay  on  other  men's 
backs,  and  bear  nought  themselves.  And  the  good  works  of  them  that  have 
wrought  out  of  faith,  and  gave  their  goods  and  lands  to  feed  the  poor,  them 
devour  they,  also  alone.  And  what  leorks  preach  they  ?  Only  those  that  are 
to  them  profitable,  and  whereby  they  reign  in  men's  consciences  as  God :  to 
offer — to  give — to  be  prayed  for — and  to  be  delivered  out  of  purgatory — and 
to  redeem  your  sin  of  them — and  to  worship  ceremonies — and  to  be  shriven — 
and  so  forth. 

"  When  Mr.  More  is  come  to  himself,  and  saith,  '  the  first  faith  and  the 
first  justifying  is  given  us  without  our  deserving.'  God  be  thanked  !  and  I 
would  fain  that  he  would  describe  me  what  he  meaneth  by  the  second  justify- 
ing. I  know  no  more  to  do,  when  I  have  received  all  mercy  and  all  forgive- 
ness of  Christ  freely,  than  to  go  and  pour  out  the  same  upon  my  neighbour." 

Before  leaving  this  controversy  for  the  present — one  which 
interested  and  agitated  so  deeply  at  the  time,  and  the  effects 
of  which  remain  to  the  present  hour — it  may  be  remarked, 
that,  independently  of  his  sound  reasoning,  there  was  in  Tyn- 
dale"'s  style  and  manner,  a  solemnity,  of  which  the  Lord  Chan- 
cellor was  more  than  half  afraid,  and  which  he  knew  neither 
how  to  manage  or  evade.  This  grave  style  of  writing  some- 
times referred  to  himself,  sometimes  to  the  translation,  and 
at  others,  to  the  parties  in  opposition. 

In  reference  to  himself,  More  having  said — "  When  Tyndale  was  apposed  of 
his  doctrine,  ere  he  went  over  sea,  he  said  and  sware  he  meant  no  harm."  To 
this  Tyndale  replies — "  He  sware  not,  neither  was  there  any  man  that  re- 
quired an  oath  of  him ;  but  he  now  sweareth  by  Him,  whom  he  trusteth  to  be 
saved  by,  that  he  never  meant,  or  yet  meaneth  any  other  harm,  than  to  suffer 
all  that  God  hath  prepared  to  be  laid  on  his  back,  for  to  bring  his  brethren 
unto  the  light  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  ;  which  the  Pope,  through  falsehood,  and 
corrupting  such  poets  as  ye  ai-e,  leadeth  in  the  darkness  of  death." 

Referring  to  the  subject  of  translations  in  the  mother 
tongue,  so  hardly  driven  was  the  Chancellor,  that   he   had 


284  TYNDALE'S   SENTIMENTS.  [booK  I. 

the  weakness  to  insinuate  that  there  were  ancient  translations, 
(Saxon  or  English,)  which  it  was  not  unlawful  to  read  ! 

"  As  foi'  otlier  old  ones,"  he  had  said, "  that  were  before  Wickllffe^s  days,  remain 
lawful,  and  be  in  some  folks  hands  had  and  read." — "  What,"  replies  Tyndale, 
"  may  not  M.  More  say  by  authority  of  his  poetry  ?  There  is  a  lawful  trans- 
lation that  no  man  knoweth  !  which  is  as  much  as  no  lawful  translation.  Why 
might  not  the  Bishops  shew  ichich  were  the  lawful  translation,  and  let  it  be 
printed  ?  Nay,  if  that  might  have  been  obtained  of  them  with  large  money,  it 
had  been  printed,  ye  may  be  sure,  long  ere  this.  But,  sir,  answer  me  here- 
unto— How  happeneth  it  that  ye  defenders  translate  not  one  yourselves,  to 
cease  the  murmur  of  the  people,  and  put  to  your  own  glosses,  to  prevent  here- 
tics ?  Ye  would,  no  doubt,  have  done  it  long  since,  if  ye  could  have  made  your 
glosses  agree  with  the  text  in  every  place.  And  what  can  you  say  to  this,  how 
that,  besides  they  have  done  their  best  to  disanmd  all  translatimj  by  Parliament, 
they  hate  disputed,  before  the  Ki'iu/s  Grace,  that  it  is  perilous,  and  not  meet,  and 
so  concluded  that  it  shall  not  be,  under  a  pretence  of  deferring  it  for  years — 
where  M.  More  was  their  special  orator,  to  feign  lies  for  their  purpose. 

And  as  for  all  the  parties  now  in  oj^position — "  Mark,"  says  Tyndale  to  his 
reader,  at  the  outset — "  Mark,  whether  it  were  ever  truer  than  now  ;  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees,  Pilate,  Herod,  Caiaphas,  and  Annas,  are  gathered  to- 
gether against  God  and  Christ :  but  yet,  I  trust,  in  vain  ;  and  he  that  brake 
the  counsel  of  Ahitophel,  shall  scatter  theirs.  Mark,  whether  it  be  not  true, 
in  the  highest  degree,  that  for  the  sin  of  the  people,  hypocrites  shall  reign  over 
them.  Wherefore,  it  is  time  to  awake,  and  to  see,  every  man  with  his  own 
eyes,  and  to  judge,  if  we  will  not  be  judged  of  Christ  when  he  cometh.  And 
remember,  that  he  which  is  warned,  hath  none  excuse,  if  he  take  no  heed. 
Herewith,  farewell  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whose  Spirit  be  thy  guide  and 
doctrine,  and  the  light  to  judge  withal." 

But  even  this  answer  was  not  sufficient  in  Tyndale's  ap- 
prehension. He  regarded  Sir  Thomas  as  the  official  attor- 
ney in  their  spiritual  court ;  and  as  he  had  put  forth,  after 
this  Dialogue,  another  thing  in  folio,  entitled,  "  the  Supplica- 
tion of  Souls,"  &c.,  by  way  of  reply  to  the  notable  tract  of 
Fyshe — "  the  Supplication  of  Beggars,"  it  must  not  be  al- 
lowed to  pass,  although  Tyndale  did  not  choose  to  name  Sir 
Thomas.  It  was  this  piece  which  led  him  to  designate  More 
as  "  the  Proctor  of  Purgatory,"  elsewhere ;  and  as  he  had 
resolved  to  print  an  exposition  of  the  first  Epistle  of  John,  he 
there,  without  any  controversial  form,  met,  most  judiciously, 
even  more  than  had  been  advanced  by  the  Lord  Chancellor, 
in  relation  to  purgatory  and  the  worship  of  saints,  image  wor- 
ship, and  other  evils  ;  explaining  to  the  people  how  they  might 
detect  false  teachers. 

From  these  two  consecutive  publications,  one  is  at  no  loss 
to  ascertain,  what  wore  Tyndale's  sentiments  on  two  important 


1531.]  TYNDALE'S  SCHOLARSHIP.  28a 

points  :  the  existing  state  of  literature  among  the  priests,  and 
the  condition  of  those  who  at  least  professed  to  be  Christians. 
With  regard  to  literature,  and  addressing  himself  to  More 
directly,  having  asserted  that  "  out  of  the  ceremonies  sprang 
tlie  ignorance  of  the  Scriptures,"  he  then  proceeds, — 

"  For  as  soon  as  the  prelates  had  set  up  such  a  rabble  of  ceremonies,  they 
thought  it  superfluous  to  preach  the  plain  text  any  longer,  and  the  law  of 
God,  faith  of  Christ,  love  toward  our  neighbour,  and  the  order  of  justifying  and 
salvation  ;  forasmuch  as  all  such  things  were  played  before  the  people's  faces, 
daily  in  the  ceremonies,  and  every  child  wist  the  meaning — until  at  the  last, 
the  lay  people  had  lost  the  meaning  of  the  ceremonies  ;  and  the  prelates,  the 
understanding  of  the  plain  text,  and  of  the  Geeek,  Latin,  and  especially  of  the 
Hebrew,  ichkh  is  most  of  need  to  be  known,  and  of  all  phrases,  the  proper 
manner  of  speakings,  and  borrowed  speech  of  the  Hebrews.  Remember  ye 
not  how,  within  this  thirty  years  and  far  less,  and  yet  dureth  to  this  day,  the 
old  barking  curs,  Dun's  disciples,  and  the  like  draff,  called  Scottists,  the  children 
of  darkness,  raged  in  every  pulpit,  against  Greek,  Latin,  and  Hebrew  ;  and 
what  sorrow  the  schoolmasters,  that  taught  the  true  Latin  tongue,  had  with 
them  ?  Some  beating  the  pulpit  with  their  fists  for  madness,  and  I'oaring  out 
with  open  and  foaming  mouth — that  if  there  were  but  one  Terence  and  Virgil 
in  the  world,  and  that  same  in  their  sleeves,  and  a  fire  before  them,  they 
would  burn  them  therein,  though  it  should  cost  them  their  lives  ;  affirming 
that  all  good  learning  decayed,  and  was  utterly  lost,  since  men  gave  them  to 
the  Latin  tongue.  Yea,  and  I  dare  say,  that  there  be  ticenty  thuumnd  priests 
curates  this  day  in  England,  and  not  so  few,  that  cannot  give  you  the  right 
English  unto  this  text  in  the  Pater-noster,  Flat  voluntas  tua  sicnt  in  coelo  et  in 
terra,  and  answer  thereto.  "44 

Then,  as  to  the  condition  of  the  people,  before  his  exposition 
of  the  Epistle  of  John,  having  laid  down  this  axiom — "  The 
knowledge  of  our  baptism  is  the  key  and  the  light  of  the 
Scripture,  for  to  understand  it,  is  to  understand  the  Law  and 
the  Gospel."     He  then  remarks — 

*4  After  such  a  passage  as  this,  and  many  others  might  be  adduced  from  the  writings  of  Tyn- 
dale,  that  such  an  author  as  M 'Knight,  wlicn  introducing  his  translation  of  the  Epistles,  could  re- 
present Tyndale  as  little  more  than  acquainted  with  Latin,  and  therefore  translating  from  the 
Vulgate,  must  appear  strange  ;  but  throughout  he  labours  to  depreciate  former  translations,  as 
if  to  recommend  his  own.  If  he  did  not  choose  to  inform  himself,  he  had  much  better  have  been 
sitting  at  Tyndale's  feet,  to  learn  the  meaning  of  "  justification  through  the  righteousness  of 
Christ."  Dr.  Herbert  Marsh,  the  late  Bishop  of  Peterborough,  has  been  still  more  unfortunate. 
Though  quite  ignorant  of  Tyndale's  character  and  attainments,  he  determined  to  be  more 
pointed,  and,  descending  to  i)articulars,  he  would  insist  that  Tyndale  translated  from  the  Ger- 
man  !  Doles  were  far  too  insignificant  to  engage  his  notice,  and  so  he  laboured  on,  to  prove  that 
Tyndale  was  much  more  of  an  adept  in  languages  than  he  actually  was.  By  his  theory,  Tyndale 
had  gone  to  Germany,  and  to  Luther,  and  acquired  his  language  so  perfectly,  as  to  be  able  to 
translate  our  New  Testament  from  it!  But  for  all  this,  there  was  left  only  one  year,  or  little 
more  ! !  He  has  been  triumphantly  refuted  in  two  successive  letters  by  Professor  Walter  of  the 
East  India  College,  Herts.  The  Bishop,  however,  never  had  the  grace  to  confess  his  mistake,  but 
kept  on  reprinting  his  blunders  to  the  end  of  life.  The  Germanisms  he  thought  he  had  found 
in  Tyndale,  he  might  have  found,  in  abundance  also,  in  the  style  of  Sir  Thomas  More  himself, 
who  certainly  knew  nothing  of  German.  It  is  singular  enough,  that  no  English  prelate 
should  have  ever  made  himself  acquainted  with  the  history,  character,  and  acquirements  of 
William  Tyndale. 


28()  EPISTLE   OF  JOHN.  [noOK  I. 

"  Now,  we  be  all  baptised  :  but,  alas  !  not  one,  from  the  highest  to  the 
lowest,  ever  taught  the  profession  or  meaning  thereof.  And,  therefore,  we 
remain  all  blind  generally,  as  well  our  great  Rabbins,  for  all  their  high  learn- 
ing which  they  seem  to  have,  as  the  lay  people  :  yea,  and  so  much  the  more 
blind  are  our  great  clerks,  that  where  the  lay  people,  for  a  great  number  of 
them,  are  taught  nought  at  all,  they  be  all  wrong  taught — so  that  the  light 
which  they  bring  with  them  to  understand  the  Scripture  withal,  is  utter  dark- 
ness, and  as  contrary  unto  the  Scripture,  as  the  devil  unto  Christ.  By  reason 
hereof,  the  Scripture  is  locked  up,  and  become  so  dark  to  them,  that  they  grope 
for  the  door,  and  can  find  no  way  in,  and  it  is  become  a  maze  unto  them,  in 
which  they  wander  as  in  a  mist. — It  is  become  a  turn-again  lane  unto  them, 
which  they  cannot  go  through,  nor  make  three  lines  agree  together.  And 
finally,  the  sentences  of  the  Scripture,  are  nothing  but  very  riddles  unto  them, 
at  the  which  they  cast,  as  the  blind  man  doth  at  a  crow  ;  and  expound  by 
guess,  an  hundred  doctors  an  hundred  ways  ;  one  man  in  twenty  sermons 
alleging  one  text  after  twenty  fashions,  having  no  sure  doctrine  to  cleave  unto  ; 
and  all  for  lack  of  the  right  knowledge  of  the  profession  or  meaning  of  our  baptism. 

"  Another  conclusion  is  this  :  As  he  which  ever  creepeth  along  by  the 
ground,  and  never  climbeth,  cannot  fall  from  on  high  ;  even  so  no  man  that 
hath  the  profession  of  his  baptism  written  in  his  heart,  can  stumble  in  the 
Scriptui'e,  and  fall  into  heresies,  or  become  a  maker  of  divisions  and  sects,  and  a 
defender  of  wild  and  vain  opinions.  For  the  whole  and  only  cause  of  heresies 
and  sects  is  pride. 

"  Now,  the  Law  of  God,  truly  interpreted,  robbeth  all  them  in  whose  hearts  it 
is  written,  and  maketh  them  as  bare  as  Job,  of  all  things  whereof  a  man  can  be 
moved  to  pride.  And,  on  the  other  side,  they  have  utterly  forsaken  themselves, 
with  all  their  high  leai'ning  and  wisdom ;  and  are  become  the  servants  of  Christ 
only,  which  hath  bought  them  with  his  blood  ;  and  have  promised  in  their 
hearts  unfeignedly  to  follow  Him,  and  to  take  Him  only  for  the  author  of  their 
religion,  and  His  doctrine  onlii  for  their  wisdom  and  learning,  and  to  maintain 
it  in  word  and  deed,  and  so  keep  it  pure  ;  to  build  no  strange  doctrine  there- 
upon, and  to  be  the  highest  never,  but  fellow  with  their  brethren  ;  and  in  that 
fellowship  to  wax  ever  lower  and  lower,  and  every  day  more  fervent  unto  his 
weaker  brethren,  after  the  example  and  image  of  Christ,  after  his  commandment 
and  ordinance,  and  not  in  feigned  words  of  the  Pope." 

And  still  addressing  himself  to  his  reader,  or  the  people  at 
large,  having  quoted  that  passage :  "all  the  Scripture  was 
given  of  God  by  inspiration,  and  is  good  to  teach  withal,  to 
improve  and  so  forth ;"  he  proceeds  : — 

"  Ye  see  by  the  example  of  Christ  and  the  Apostles,  how  they  confounded 
the  Jews,  with  the  same  Scripture  which  they  had  corrupt,  and  understood  them 
amiss  after  their  own  darkness ;  and,  ye  see,  by  the  example  of  us  now  also,  how 
we  have  manifestly  improved  the  hypocrites  in  an  hundi-ed  texts  which  they 
had  corrupt,  to  prove  their  false  opinions,  brought  in  besides  the  Scripture,  and 
have  driven  them  off.  And  they  be  fled,  and  openly  confess  unto  their  shame, 
that  they  have  no  Scripture,  and  sinri  another  song,  and  sag  they  received  them  by 
the  month  of  the  Ajiostlcs  ! 

"  Unto  which  I  answer  here  grossly,  seeing  they  are  answered  before ; — 
'  That  as  he  were  a  fool,  which  would  trust  him  to  tell  his  money  in  his  absence, 


1531.]  SCRIPTURE  AND  TRADITION.  287 

that  hath  picked  liis  purse  before  his  face  ;  even  so,  sith  ye  have  corrupt  the  open 
Scripture  before  our  eyes,  and  (are)  taken  in  the  manner  which  ye  cannot  deny  ; 
we  were  mad  to  believe  that  that  which  hath  Lain  fifteen  hundred  years,  as  ye 
say,  in  your  rotten  maws,  should  now  be  wholesome  for  us.  Can  ye  bear  us  in 
hand,and  persuade  us,  think  ye,with  your  sophistry,  to  believe  thatyeshould  min- 
ister your  secret  tradition!',  icithotit  (ground  truly,  when  we  see  you  minister  the 
open  Scrij>ti(re  falsely  ?  Can  ye  bewitch  our  wits  with  your  poetry,  to  believe 
that  ye  should  minister  your  secret  traditions  for  our  profit,  when  we  see  you 
corrupt  the  open  Scripture  to  the  loss  of  our  souls,  for  your  profit?  Nay,  it  is 
an  hundred  times  more  likely  that  ye  should  be  false  in  secret  things  than  in 
open.  And  therefore,  in  the  very  sacraments,  which  the  Scriptux-e  testifieth 
that  Christ  himself  ordained  them,  we  must  have  an  eye  unto  your  hand  how 
ye  minister  them.  As  we  restore  the  Scripture  unto  her  right  under- 
standing, FROM  YOUR  FALSE  GLOSSES,  EVEN  SO  DELIVER  WE  THE  SaCRAMENTS  UNTO 
THEIR  RIGHT  USE,  FROM  YOUR  ABUSE. 

So  spake  this  alumnns  of  Oxford,  above  three  hundred  and 
ten  years  ago  ;  while  at  the  same  time,  one  idea,  then  broached 
by  his  enemies,  and  especially  by  his  controversial  opponent,  he 
wished  his  countrymen  to  mark,  as  an  old  and  hackneyed  device. 

"  The  light  that  rebuketh  them,  they  call  seditious;  that  it  maketh  subjects  to 
rise  against  their  Princes, — which  thing  the  hypocrites  laid  sometimes  to  the 
Prophets,  as  ye  may  see  in  the  Old  Testament ;  and  at  last  they  laid  it  unto 
Christ's  charge,  as  ye  may  see  in  the  gospel,  and  to  the  charge  of  the  Apostles, 
as  ye  may  see  in  the  Acts.  But  at  all  such  times,  the  hypocrites  themselves 
stirred  up  such  a  sword  to  maintain  their  falsehood,  that  evermore  a  great  part 
of  the  world  perished  through  their  own  mischievous  incensing  and  provoking 
Princes  to  battle.  They  laid  to  Wickliffe^s  charge,  and  do  yet,  that  his  doctrine 
caused  insurrection, — and  so  they  say  noxo  likewise,  that  God^s  Word  causeth  in- 
surrection ;  but  ye  shall  see  shortly  that  these  hypocrites  themselves,  shall  rise 
one  against  another,  and  some  against  themselves.  Ye  shall  see  them  I'un  out  be- 
fore the  year  come  about,  that  wliich  they  have  been  brewing,  as  I  hare  marked, 
above  this  dozen  years." 

Hackett,  when  at  Antwerp,  first  lent  such  base  counsel  to 
Wolsey,  and  we  have  seen  how  readily  Henry  himself  had 
followed  it,  to  the  disgrace  of  his  ambassador.  The  idea,  or 
device,  of  constructive  treason  had  been  fully  sanctioned  by  the 
Bishops  and  Sir  Thomas  More,  and  now  also  Crumwell  had 
joined  in  the  cry.  Among  other  passages,  the  preceding  was 
intended  for  all  these  parties,  as  well  as  to  arm  the  people  with 
that  fortitude,  which  must  be  added  to  faith. 

The  concluding  expression,  however,  as  formerly  hinted,  is 
an  important  one,  in  relation  to  Tyndale  himself.  He  kept 
himself  much  in  the  background,  and  it  is  only  by  such  inci- 
dental hints,  that  any  one  can  ascertain  how  earlt/  his  mind 
had  been  enlightened,  as  to  the  corruptions  reigning  around 


288  JONAH   TRANSLATED.  [book  I. 

liim  ;  and  so  enlightened,  as  to  be  engaged  in  "marking""  tliein. 
The  expression  seems  to  go  a  great  way  towards  establishing 
the  character  of  Tyndale,  as  that  of  a  man  whose  heart  God 
himself  had  moved,  independently  of  cdl  influence  from  his 
contemporaries,  whether  at  home  or  abroad/^ 

But  to  crown  all  in  the  year  1531,  nothing  could  possibly 
have  been  more  seasonable  or  appropriate,  than  "  Jonah  ,•"  that 
book  of  sacred  writ,  which  Tyndale  now  printed  for  his  country. 
The  critical  position  of  England,  and  the  situation  of  the  Trans- 
lator himself,  sufficiently  account  for  its  appearance,  at  this 
moment.  Tyndale  was  now  getting  fast  into  the  heat  of  the 
battle.  The  Bishops  of  England,  as  a  body,  with  Tunstal  the 
ablest  of  them  all,  were  against  him  ;  the  Lord  Chancellor,  as 
a  man  and  as  a  licensed  writer,  was  against  him,  nay,  the 
wrath  of  the  King,  as  "  the  roaring  of  a  Lion,"  was  against 
him.  On  high  principle,  for  the  sake  of  Divine  truth  alone,  he 
had  to  encounter  an  entire  people  in  the  persons  of  its  rulers ; 
nor  was  he  slow  to  advance.  The  book  of  Jonah  spoke  alike 
to  the  peasant  and  the  prince.  It  contained  the  memorable 
example  of  a  great  King  bowing  before  the  majesty  of  the 
Voice  of  God.  "  The  people  of  Nineveh  believed  God — from 
the  greatest  of  them,  even  to  the  least  of  them  ;"'"'  and  this  was 
precisely  what  Tyndale  longed  for  the  people  of  England  to 
do ;  and  would  their  haughty  and  licentious  monarch  have 
now  only  risen  from  his  throne,  and  laid  aside  his  robes,  like 
the  King  of  Nineveh,  and  urged  his  subjects  "  to  cry  mightily 
to  God,"  saying,  "  let  them  turn  every  one  from  his  evil  way, 
and  from  the  molence  that  is  in  their  hands,'''' — nothing  could 
have  filled  the  Translator  with  higher  delight.  The  Ninevites 
"  repented  at  the  preaching  of  Jonas,"  but  for  more  than  five 
years  the  New  Testament  had  been  in  England,  and  even 
Scotland,  and  "  a  greater  than  Jonas  was  there."  Tyndale 
besides,  to  evince  the  ardour  of  his  mind,  had  prefixed  a  long- 
prologue  to  the  book, — an  admirable  production,  and  peculiarly 
adapted  for  the  moment,  in  which  he  once  more  boldly  cried 
to  his  country. 

"  As  the  envious  Philistines  stopped  the  wells  of  Abraham,  and  filled  them 
up  with  earth,  to  put  the  memorial  out  of  mind,  to  the  intent  that  they  might 
challenge  the  ground  ;  even  so  the  fleshly-minded  hypocrites  stop  up  the  veins 


*5  See  before,  page  28. 


I  0,3  I.]  TYNJ)ALK  TO   1II«  COUNTRY.  289 

of  life,  wliich  are  in  the  Scripture,  witii  the  earth  of  their  traditions,  false  simili- 
tudes, and  lying  allegories ;  and  that,  of  like  zeal,  to  make  the  Scripture  their 
own  possession  and  merchandise,  and  so  shut  up  the  kingdom  which  is  in  God's 
Word ;  neither  entering  in  themselves,  nor  suffering  them  that  would."  To 
induce  his  countrymen  to  search  the  Divine  Word  for  themselves,  he  then  adds 
— "  The  Scripture  hath  a  body  without,  and  within  a  soul,  spii'it,  and  life.  It 
hath  without  a  bark,  a  shell,  and  as  it  were  an  hard  bone  for  the  fleshly  minded 
to  gnaw  upon  :  but  within  it  hath  pith,  kernel,  marrow,  and  all  sweetness  for 
God's  elect  whom  he  hath  chosen,  to  give  them  his  Spirit,  to  write  his  Law 
and  the  faith  of  his  Son  in  their  hearts."  But  still  to  lead  the  nation  to  Re- 
pentance, was  now  his  main  object,  and  hence  we  have  many  forcible  appeals — 

"  Since  the  world  began,  wheresoever  repentance  was  offered,  and  not  re- 
ceived, there  God  took  cruel  vengeance  immediately.  As  ye  see  in  the  flood 
of  Noah,  in  the  overwhelming  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  all  the  country 
about ;  and  as  ye  see  of  Egypt,  of  the  Amorites,  Canaanites,  and  afterwards  of 
the  very  Israelites  ;  and  then  at  the  last  of  the  Jews  too,  the  Assyrians,  and 
Babylonians,  and  so  throughout  all  the  empires  of  the  world. 

"  Gildas  preached  repentance  to  the  old  Britons  that  inhabited  England  : 
they  repented  not ;  and  therefore  God  sent  in  their  enemies  upon  them  on  every 
side,  and  destroyed  them  uj),  and  gave  their  land  to  other  nations  ;  and  great 
vengeance  hath  been  taken  in  that  land  for  sin,  since  that  time.46  WicMiffe 
preached  repentance  unto  our  fathei"s  not  long  since  :  they  repented  not,  for 
their  hearts  were  indm-ate  ;  but  what  followed  ?  They  slew  their  true  and  right 
king,  and  set  up  three  wrong  kings  in  a  row,  under  which  all  the  noble  blood 
was  slain  up,  and  half  the  commons  too  ;  what  in  France,  and  what  with  their 
own  sword,  in  fighting  among  themselves,  for  the  crown  ;  so  the  cities  and  towns 
decayed,  and  the  land  was  brought  half  into  a  wilderness,  in  respect  of  that  it 
was  before."  Tyndale,  however,  would  arrogate  nothing  to  himself;  but  in  re- 
ference to  the  Word  of  God,  now  and  formerly  sent,  he  then  adds — 

"  And  now  Christ,  to  preach  repentance,  is  risen  yet  once  again  out  of  his 
sepulchre,  in  which  the  Pope  had  buried  him,  and  kept  him  down  with  his  pillars 
and  pole-axes,  and  all  disguisings  of  hypocrisy- — with  guile,  wiles,  and  false- 
hood, and  with  the  sword  of  all  princes,  which  he  had  blended  with  his 
false  merchandise.  And  as  I  doubt  not  of  the  ensamples  that  are  past,  so  I  am 
sure  that  great  wrath  wiU  follow,  except  repentance  turn  it  back  again  and 
cease  it."  47 


■IS  Gildas  is  no  favourite  with  one  of  our  modern  historians  ;  yet  he  concludes  by  saying — 
"  There  is  too  much  reason  to  fear,  that  many  of  the  deformities,  (which  his  coarse  daubing  has 
distorted  almost  into  incredibility,)  degraded  the  character,  and  accelerated  the  downfall  of  our 
ancient  British  predecessors." — Turner's  Aiiq.  Saxons. 

■17  Dr.  Marsh,  in  pursuing  his  blind  theory,  was  unable  to  imagine  any  other  reason  for  Tyn- 
dale publishing  Jonah  at  this  critical  period,  except  that  Luther  had  translated  it  into  German 
before  him  !  Referring  every  thing  to  Luther,  was  the  artful  cant  of  the  sixteenth  century,  to 
answer  every  cruel  and  evil  purpose;  and,  without  any  malicious  feeling,  the  practice  has  been 
too  often  blindly  followed  to  the  present  day  ;  but  it  would  have  been  worthy  of  all  the  Bishop's 
talents  rather  to  have  searched,  and  then  exposed  the  mistaken  bias.  Professor  Walter,  in 
meeting  this  idea,  has  the  following  curious  note — '•  It  is  only  from  the  connexion  between 
the  mission  of  Jonah,  and  endeavours  to  reform  the  religion  of  Slates,  that  I  can  account  for 
the  long  list  of  separate  editions  of  this  Prophet,  published  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth 
century.  In  Mash's  Le  Long,  Iwenty-two  editions,  with  Latin  versions,  or  paraphrases,  are 
enumerated,  besides  the  vernacular  translations."  It  is  only  strange  that  in  the  letters  of  Mr. 
Walter,  any  doubt  should  have  been  expressed  as  to  the  translation  of  the  prophet  into  English, 
having  accomjianied  the  Prologue  !  Without  this,  the  entire  Prologue  would  have  been  unin- 
telligible, while  it  contains  abundant  internal  evidence  that  the  prophetical  book  was  appended. 
It  was  the  "  Prologue  ?o  the  Prophet  Jonas,"  and  went  with  it,  that  all  might  "read  Jonas 

VOL.    I.  T 


2!.)0  STATE    OF   ENGLAND.  [uOOK  1. 

But  now,  and  notwithstanding  all,  as  it  is  well  known, 
neither  Heniy  nor  his  advisers  were  to  be  moved  from  their 
course.  It  was,  as  we  shall  find,  a  year  of  most  savage 
cruelty,  though  Tyndale  was  now  "  pure  from  the  blood  of 
all  men,  having  not  shunned  to  declare  to  them  the  whole 
counsel  of  God." 

After  this  brief  and  very  imperfect  survey  of  the  present 
year"'s  exertions,  let  the  reader  only  contemplate  the  state  of 
his  native  land.  He  remembers  the  restless  ambition,  and 
but  recent  death,  of  her  fallen  Prime  Minister.  Let  him 
now  mark  the  one  subject  which  engrossed  her  monarch's 
mind  ;  the  furious  counsels  and  blind  infatuation  which  occu- 
pied the  united  strength  of  her  government,  and  then  say, 
whether  the  value  of  such  a  man  as  our  Translator  has  ever 
been  fairly  appreciated.  But  was  there  no  one  at  home,  not 
one  man  in  all  En2:land  to  lift  the  warnino-  voice  ?  "  None  to 
guide  her  among  all  the  sons  she  had  brought  forth  ?  There 
was  Hugh  Latimer,  it  is  true,  but  if  his  voice  was  now 
drowned,  then  was  there  not  even  one,  save  and  except 
this  exiled  Christian  patriot  I  Yet  he,  as  we  have  seen,  had 
been  already  denounced  by  name,  and  in  the  foulest  terms, 
by  the  highest  authority,  under  the  desecrated  name  of 
Christianity,  as  doing  Clod  service  !  Nay,  and  he  had  been 
so  harassed  by  emissaries,  that,  as  he  himself  expressed  it, 
"  very  death  would  have  been  more  pleasant  to  him  than  life." 

Such  was  his  reward  from  man^  but  liis  work  was  not 
finished  ;  and  that  God  whom  he  so  served,  though  He  did  not 
as  yet  put  to  silence  "  the  lying  lips,  which  spake  grievous 
things,  proudly  and  contemptuously,  against  the  righteous ;" 
yet  did  He,  in  a  most  wonderful  manner,  "  hide  the  object 
of  their  hatred,  in  the  secret  of  his  presence,'"  from  the  pride 
and  the  power  of  man.     Tyndale  had  yet  five  years  to  live. 


fruitfully,  and  not  as  a  poet's  fable,  but  as  an  ohligaUon  between  God  and  the  soul."  Sir  Thomas 
More  does  not  even  glance  at  the  Prologue.  "  Then  have  we  Jonas,  made  out  by  Tyndale," 
which  he  could  not  mention  without  another  specimen  of  his  usual  facetiou.sness.  That  no 
copy  of  this  edition  is  known  to  exist,  is  not  surprising.  Dr.  Cotton  suggests,  that,  in  the  days 
of  burning,  it  may  have  been  given  up,  to  save  a  New  Testament ;  but  be  this  as  it  may,  since 
there  was  no  evidence  of  the  qrtarlo  New  Testament,  printed  in  1525,  till  only  the  other  day, 
a  copy  of  the  first  "  Jonas  "  may  yet  transpire.  In  reference  to  Tyndale,  the  J'atican  has  never 
yet  been  searched.  Let  this  hint  suffice,  and  some  one  of  our  countrymen,  when  in  Rome, 
remember  it.  The  proof  of  the  existence  of  .lonas,  and  upon  English  ground,  tins  i/ear,  is  to 
be  found  in  the  list  of  bonks  denounced  by  Stokesly,  on  the  ,3d  of  December,  which  will  come 
before  us  presently.  It  is  the  last  on  the  list—"  Jonas  in  Kniilis}i."—See  Lambeth  MS..  No. 
:m.  fol.  C5. 


1.531.]  STATE  OF   ENGLAND.  291 

Upon  returniug  into  England,  and  before  adverting  to  the  spirit  of 
persecution  properly  so  called,  at  the  coramenccnieut  of  this  year  the 
reader  has  only  to  recollect  the  counsel  that  Crumwell  gave  to  Henry 
VIII.,  at  his  first  interview  with  hira.  It  was  then  observed  that  there  was 
something  to  be  first  obtained  from  the  clergy,  in  the  matter  of  Henry's 
divorce  ;  and  on  this  account  it  was  politic  to  fetch  a  compass  through- 
out the  whole  of  last  year,  before  the  advice  could  be  followed  out. 
About  the  end  of  that  year,  (1530)  the  King  saw  that  he  could  now  carry 
his  purpose  :  he  and  Crumwell  understood  each  other,  and  the  latter  was, 
of  course,  ready  to  act.  There  certainly  was  a  consistency  of  character  in 
Crumwell  at  this  period,  if  we  include  his  own  advancement  as  the  end 
in  view,  and  desire  to  please  the  sovereign  as  the  means  of  effecting  it ; 
so  that  while  seeking  to  ensnare  the  Translator  of  the  Scriptures  abroad, 
he  was  every  whit  as  anxiovis  to  humble  the  clergy  at  home.  Parliament 
had  been  opened  on  the  6th  of  January,  and  the  Convocation  assembled 
the  next  day.  But  before  this,  as  a  preliminary  step  to  what  the  King 
and  his  adviser  intended,  the  Attorney-General  had  filed  a  bill  of  indict- 
ment in  the  Court  of  King's  Bench,  against  the  whole  body  of  the  clergy, 
for  having  acknowledged  Cardinal  Wolsey's  legantine  authority,  and 
acted  under  him  !  When  the  Convocation  met,  they  must  have  soon  re- 
solved not  to  appear  in  court,  by  counsel,  since  they  never  did ;  but  they 
were  eager  to  compound  for  a  pardon.  Wolsey,  unfortunately  for  the 
entire  body,  had  yielded  up  the  whole  of  his  property  to  the  King  ;  but 
this  was  a  fearful  precedent.  And  if  it  was  fearful  now,  it  had  been  not 
less  vexatious  to  these  men  from  the  day  he  thus  acted.  When  the  said 
statute  of  Provisors  was  passed,  power  had  been  conferred  on  the  Crown 
to  dispense  with  its  operation,  and  thus  save  any  party  from  incurring  a 
premunire.  Wolsey  had  not  acted  so  blindly  as  not  to  procure  from  his 
Master  a  permission,  under  the  great  seal,  by  which  he  was  empowered 
to  do  all  he  ever  did.  Had  he  then,  we  repeat,  only  acted  with  spirit, 
he  would  have  stood  on  his  defence  ;  but  instead  of  doing  this,  he 
crouched,  from  fear  of  bodily  harm,  and  gave  up  all  ! 

The  moment,  therefore,  had  now  come,  when  Hem-y  could  send  Crum- 
well, with  his  own  signet,  to  the  Convocation.  "  Crumwell,  coming  boldly 
into  the  clergy  house,  and  there  placing  himself  among  the  Bishops, 
began  to  make  his  oration — Declaring  unto  them  the  authority  of  a  King, 
and  the  office  of  subjects  ; — and  especially  the  obedience  of  Bishops  and 
Churchmen  under  public  laws,  necessarily  provided  for  the  profit  and 
quiet  of  the  Commonwealth  :  which  laws,  notwithstanding,  they  had  all 
transgi-essed,  and  highly  offended  in  derogation  of  the  King's  royal 
estate,  falling  under  the  law  of  Premunire, — in  that  they  not  only  had 
consented  to  the  power  legantine  of  the  Cardinal,  but  also  in  that  they 
had  also  all  sworn  to  the  Pope,  contrary  to  the  fealty  of  their  Sovereign 
Lord  the  King, — and  therefore  had  forfeited  to  the  King  all  their  goods 


292  THE   BISHOPS   IN   TROUBLE.  [bomK  I. 

and  chattels,  lauJs,  possessions,  and  whatsoever  livings  they  had  ! "  The 
Bishops  remonstrated,  of  course,  but  it  was  all  in  vain  ;  only,  as  they  de- 
sired a  respite,  they  were  allowed  time  to  consider  what  they  should,  or 
rather  mvxst,  do.  Thus  the  precedent  of  Wolsey,  in  sacrificing  all  that 
he  had,  proved  like  a  mill-stone  round  the  neck  of  every  man  who  had 
been  under  him  !  He  had,  in  past  days,  been  the  idol,  the  boast,  and 
glory  of  his  order  ;  but  what  would  they  not,  or  did  they  not,  say  of  him 
now  1  Still,  whatever  might  have  been  the  principles  or  opinions  of  these 
men,  the  reader  must  be  fully  aware,  from  what  has  been  already  stated, 
that  nothing  could  be  more  harsh  or  inconsistent,  nay  unjust,  if  not 
illegal,  on  the  part  of  Henry,  than  the  entire  proceeding,  even  although 
it  had  ended  here  :  but  here,  neither  the  King  nor  Crumwell  intended 
it  should  end.  Meanwhile,  the  southern  province,  or  that  of  Canterbury, 
agreed  to  ofter  the  King  not  less  than  one  hundred  thousand  pounds, 
or  £20,000  annually  for  five  years  to  come.  The  northern  province,  or 
that  of  York,  some  time  after,  compounded  for  eighteen  thousand  eight 
hundred  and  forty  pounds.'*^ 

Such  was  the  advantage  taken  of  Wolsey's  last  step,  so  far  as  his 
brethren  were  concerned  :  but  this  was  not  all  he  left  behind  him,  by 
way  of  legacy  or  precedent,  to  his  country  at  large.  He  had  introduced 
into  England  a  species  of  authority  or  power,  called  spiritual,  superior 
even  to  that  of  a  Legate  a  latere.  He  had  arrived  from  France  under 
the  higher  character  of  V icar- General ;  and  his  Sovereign  having  en- 
joyed only  a  transient  gratification,  in  ruling  the  clergy,  through  such  a 
medium,  it  will  not  surprise  the  reader  if  that  had  only  provoked  his 
appetite.  Crumwell  had  improved  vipon  this  idea  ;  and  now  money  alone 
will  not  suffice.  The  men  who  were  to  pay  it,  must  do  so  under  a  new 
character.  They  had  agreed  to  offer  this  immense  sum  ;  but  the  far 
more  serious  question,  now  pressing  for  consideration,  was,  to  whom  were 
they  to  pay  it  1  To  the  King  of  course  ;  but  then,  under  what  charac- 
ter 1  As  King  only,  or  as  any  thing  more  %  If  they  either  petitioned  or 
addressed  him,  in  mitigation  of  punishment, — how  ivere  they  to  ad- 
dress him  % 

And  so  now  a  question  rose,  compared  with  which,  the  entire  substance 
of  the  whole  body — their  goods  and  chattels,  their  lands  and  livings 
— were  but  like  the  drop  of  a  bucket,  or  the  small  dust  of  the  balance — 
a  question  which  was  to  affect  not  England  alone,  but  Great  Britain  and 
Ireland,  with  all  their  dependences  in  other  quarters  of  the  world,  for 
many  generations.     The  fact  was,  that  the  anticipated  moment  had  now 


*8  "This  was  a  prodigious  fine,"  says  CoUier,  "at  that  time  of  day,  and  'tis  probable,  was 
twenty  times  the  value  of  the  same  sura  .it  present."  We  calculate  the  amount,  however,  at 
only  fifteen  times,— and  even  this  makes  it  £1,782,600  sterling!  Thus  did  Henry  recover  to 
himself  almost,  if  not  all  the  money  that  Wolsey  took  with  him  to  France,  in  1527,  professedly 
to  U|)liold  the  Pontiff. 


1531.3  HENRYS  SUPREMACY.  293 

arrived,  when  it  was  conveuieut  to  divulge  that  no  subsidy  ivoitld  be 
accepted,  unless  his  Majesty  were  acknowledged  in  the  petition  or 
address,  as  "  Head  of  the  Church." 

The  moral  deportment  of  these  two  men,  the  King  and  Crumwell,  who 
were  now  pressing  this  question  to  its  decision,  we  need  not  describe. 
They  are  both  before  the  reader,  and,  by  succeeding  acts,  their  characters 
will  be  farther  developed.''^  Crumwell,  of  course,  sought  only  his  own 
personal  advancement,  at  least  this  secretly  prompted  all  his  advice  ; 
and  as  for  the  office  of  Vicar-General  or  Vicegerent,  of  what  was  about  to 
be  denominated  the  Church  of  England,  whether  he  thus  early  had  it  in 
view  for  himself,  or  not,  it  is  certain  that  he  alone  at  last  reached  it ;  and, 
moreover,  that  the  office  also  died  with  him,  as  being  no  longer  neces- 
sary, either  for  the  sup])ort  or  security  of  the  King.  The  title,  as  gained 
by  Wolsey,  and  its  effects,  may  have  first  suggested  the  idea  of  its  con- 
tinuance, upon  English  ground,  but  the  anomalous  office  was  no  longer 
needed,  when  the  superior  was  once  securely  seated.  As  for  Henry, 
granting  that  he  was  at  present  only  the  advised  party,  never  was  advice 
more  willingly  accepted,  nor  more  eagerly  pursued. 

The  acknowledgement,  as  first  proposed  to  be  inserted  in  the  petition 
or  preamble  to  the  Bill  of  Subsidy  was  this — "  Henry  the  Eighth,"  &c., — 
"  the  Protector  and  Supreme  Head  of  the  Church  and  the  Clergy  of 
England."  To  this  opposition  was  made,  and  the  subject  was  put  off 
to  another  day.  The  article  being  expressed  in  such  general  terms, 
they  were  afraid  it  might  be  misunderstood  in  future  ages,  and  inter- 
preted or  wrested  to  an  immoral  or  presumptuous  sense.-''''  Warham 
of  Canterbury,  however,  at  last  supported  the  designation,  and  even 
Fisher  of  Rochester  consented  upon  one  condition,  that  these  words  be 
added — "  et  qvMntum  per  legem  Christi  licet" — "  as  far  as  by  the  law 
of  Christ  is  lawful."  But  this  addition  being  reported  to  Henry,  he 
at  once  replied,  that  he  would  have  "  no  tcmtum  or  quantum  in  the 
business,  but  let  it  be  done  out  of  hand."  The  words  in  addition  certainly 
admitted  of  every  variety  of  opinion,  and  even  the  Headship  was  very 
differently  interpreted.  Some,  according  to  Burnet,  "  understood  this 
headship  to  be  only  a  temporal  authority,  even  in  ecclesiastical  matters  ; 
and  they  thought  that  by  the  laws  of  Christ,  the  secular  authority  ought 
not  to  meddle  in  ecclesiastical  matters."  But  others  thought  that  the 
magistrate  had  a  full  authority,  even  in  ecclesiastical  matters  ;  but  that 
the  administration  of  this  was  so  limited  by  the  laws  of  the  Gospel,  that 


49  Crumwell,  though  not  present  at  the  sack  of  Rome,  is  said  to  have  certainly  been  there  in 
earlier  life,  when  soliciting  pardons  for  the  people  of  Boston,  in  company  with  one  Geffrey 
Chambers.  His  contrivance  for  gratifying  the  palate  of  Julius  II.  in  \bliK  by  certain  presents  of 
jelly,  made  after  the  English  fashion,  might  be  true  ;  but  if  so,  he  was  now  about  to  furnish 
Clement  VII..  the  quondam  Bishop  of  tyorccsler,  with  a  course  of  proceeding  by  no  means 
)>Ieasing  to  his  taste,  or  that  of  any  future  Pontiff. 

.50  ■'  Ne  termini,  &c.,  in  sensum  improVium  traherentur." — Journal  of  Convocation . 


2!>4.  HENRY'S   SUPREMACY.  QboOK  I. 

it  did  not  warrant  him  to  command  anything,  but  what  was  conform  to 
these,  — "  so  that  the  words  being  equivocal,  were  differently  understood 
even  by  those  who  subscribed  and  afterwards  swore  them  !"  They  had 
"  great  reasoning  among  themselves,"  but  Crumwell  and  the  Judges 
coming  to  them  in  February,  by  the  11th  of  that  month  the  article  was 
thus  expressed, — "  We  recognise  his  Majesty  to  be  the  singular  (sole) 
protector  of  the  Church  and  Clergy  of  England,  and  our  only  Sovereign 
Lord,  and,  as  far  as  by  the  law  of  Christ  is  lawful,  also  oui-  Supreme 
Head."^^  The  form  being  thus  agreed  on,  War  ham  oiFered  it  to  the 
whole  body — all  were  silent  :  on  which  he  said,  "  Whosoever  is  silent, 
seems  to  consent  ;"  and  to  this  one  replied,  "  then  we  all  are  silent  !" 
Thus  the  Bill  of  Subsidy  passed  the  Upper  House  ;  but  lo,  on  its  being  in- 
troduced to  the  Commons,  they  demurred.  The  fact  was,  that  they 
were  afraid  of  themselves,  and  wished  to  be  included  in  the  pardon 
granted  :  upon  which  Henry,  in  a  rage,  now  disclosed  all  the  baseness 
of  his  character.  "  Wherefore,"  said  he  to  the  Speaker,  "  since  you  have 
denied  your  consent  to  the  pardon  of  the  Clergy,  I  must  inform  you  that 
such  consent  is  not  necessary  ;  I  can  pass  it  under  my  Great  Seal ;  and, 
look  ye,  I  shall  be  well-advised,  before  I  pardon  those  who  endeavour  to 
restrain  my  liberty,  and  compel  my  mercy  !"  .The  Commons  were 
terrified,  when  Henry  sent  them  a  pardon,  through  his  Attorney-General, 
having  now  brow-beat  and  conquered  both  Houses. 

After  all  this  violent  turmoil,  however,  the  work  of  Henry  was  not  yet 
finished, — his  title  not  yet  generally  acknowledged.  Tunstal  of  Dur- 
ham, who  belonged  to  the  province  of  York,  with  some  others  in  the 
north,  professed  to  have  serious  objections  and  great  difliculty  at  this 
crisis.  That  they  did  not  understand  the  sacred  prerogatives  of  the  Re- 
deemer is  certain,  or  that  He  alone  is  the  Prophet,  the  Priest,  the 
King  of  his  Church  on  earth,  it  being  the  earth  especially  to  which 
these  offices,  as  revealed,  apply.  But  still,  as  the  invasion  of  the  Saviour's 
Supremacy,  and  especially  of  his  priestly  ofiice,  by  a  Priest  in  Italy,  was 
now  to  be  abjured,  for  on  this  point,  Tunstal,  at  present,  professed  him- 
self to  be  quite  clear, — so  now  he  and  others  expressed  great  difiiculty, 
in  knowing  how  to  transfer  the  same  homage  to  the  invasion  of  his  office 
as  King.  There  was  another  difficulty  in  the  j^jerson  of  the  monarch,  who 
could  trample  on  laws,  both  human  and  divine,  and  whose  example,  as 
a  man,  was  filling  the  air,  as  it  continued  to  do,  with  its  pestilential  ex- 
halations ;  an  objection,  however,  which  could  be  stated  only  at  the 
risk  of  liberty,  or  of  life  itself.  But  the  other  was  put  forth  by  Tunstal 
in  a  formal  Protest. 

"  If,"  said  he,  "  the  words  hold  fortli  no  more  than  this  meaning,  tliat  the 


51  — '«  Ecclcsiae  ct  clcii  AiiRlicani  cujus  siiigulaicm  protectorem  Unicumet  SiipremMii  Domi- 
num,  et  quantum  per  Christi  legem  lifct,  etiam  .SurnEMiM  cAPI't  ipsiKS  Majcstalem  recog- 
nosoimus."— iJ//Hifc,  xiv.,  p.  414. 


1 531.2  TUNSTAL'S   PROTEST.  29.5 

King  is,  under  Christ,  supreme  head  in  his  dominions,  and  particularly  of  the 
English  Clergy,  in  temporal  matters  :  this,  as  it  is  nothing  more  than  we  are 
all  willing  to  acknowledge,  so  to  prevent  all  misconstructions  from  heretics,  the 
clause  should  be  put  in  clear  and  decisive  language.  But,  on  the  other  side,  if 
we  are  to  understand  that  the  King  is  supreme  head  of  the  Church  both  in 
spirituals  and  temporals,  and  that  this  supremacy  is  conferred  upon  him,  by  the 
laws  of  the  gospel  ;  for  thus  some  heterodox  and  malevolent  persons  construe  the 
proviso, — '  quantum  per  Christi  legem  licet,' — then  this  construction  being  re- 
pugnant, as  I  conceive,  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Catholic  Church,  I  must  dissent 
from  it.  And  notwithstanding  the  clause  of  quantum,  &c.  may  be  taken  by 
way  of  limitation  and  restriction,  yet  because  the  proposition  is  still  somewhat 
involved,  I  think  it  ought  to  be  still  farther  discharged  from  ambiguity.  For 
'  Supreme  Head  of  the  Church,'  carries  a  complicated  and  mysterious  meaning  : 
for  this  title  may  either  relate  to  spirituals  or  temporals,  or  both.  Now  when 
a  proposition  is  thus  comprehensive,  and  big  with  several  meanings,  there  is  no 
returning  a  single  and  categorical  answer.  And,  therefore,  that  we  may  not  give 
scandal  to  weak  brethren,  I  conceive  this  acknowledgement  of  the  King's 
supreme  headship,  should  be  so  carefully  expressed,  as  to  point  wholly  upon  civil 
and  secular  jurisdiction.  And  with  this  explanation,  the  English  Clergy,  and 
particularly  myself,  are  willing  to  go  the  utmost  length  in  the  recognition.  But 
since  the  clause  is  not,  at  present,  thus  guarded  and  explained,  I  must  declare 
my  dissent,  and  desire  my  protestation  may  be  entered  upon  the  Journal  of  the 
Convocation." 

Henry  professed  great  respect  for  Tunstal,  and  therefore  replied  to  this, 
through  cue  of  his  Casuists.  But  there  were  other  similar  protests,  so  that 
several  months  had  to  elapse,  before  they  could  be  over-ruled.  The  Clergy 
of  the  province  of  York,  and  especially  Tunstal,  on  the  principle  already 
pursued,  were  equally  exposed  to  instant  prosecution,  and  yet,  it  is  very 
observable,  they  were  never  molested ;  a  clear  indication  that  the  whole 
affair  was  only  a  dexterous  stroke  of  hand,  meant  to  intimidate  the 
Roman  Pontiff,  but  not,  as  t/et,  absolutely  to  separate  from  him. 

To  return,  however,  for  one  moment,  to  the  first  Bill  of  Subsidy  ;  it  was 
presented  to  the  King  on  the  1st  of  April. — But  after  all,  cautious  to 
avoid  the  imputation  of  forfeiture,  the  money  was  here  granted  under 
the  form  of  a  "benevolence"  or  "  gratuity,"  and  the  Clergy  do  this  by 
way  of  gratitude,  particularly  for  the  King's  having  written  his  book 
against  Luther  !  his  having  suppressed  heresies,  and  checked  the  insults 
on  their  body  !     It  was  like  a  retaining  fee  to  a  persecutor. 

Yet  still,  Henry  had  now  assuredly  gained  his  object ;  for  if  Rome  had 
given  him  one  title  for  his  Authorship,  this  Convocation  had  added  a  second, 
and,  as  they  chose  to  express  it,  partly  for  the  same  work.  The  bill,  even 
as  amended,  at  once  gratified,  and  answered  the  design  of  the  monarch  ; 
"  which  was  to  take  this  unsuspected  opportunity  of  insinuating  an  ap- 
pellation, pregnant  with  pretension,  amidst  the  ancient  formularies  and 
solemn  phraseology  consecrated  by  the  laws,  and  used  by  the  high  as- 
semblies of  the  commonwealth.      The  new  title,  full  of  undefined  but 


2.9G  FRESH    FURY.  [^BOUK  I. 

vast  claims,  soou  crept  from  petitions  of  the  Convocation,  into  the  heart 
of  Acts  of  Parliament."-^^ 

After  an  organic  change  such  as  this,  whatever  might  be  sanctioned 
by  authority,  and  now  took  place  within  the  shores  of  England,  could 
never,  with  propriety  or  truth,  be  laid  to  the  charge  of  nrxj  foreign  power 
or  influence  ;  and  the  reader,  therefore,  must  be  curious  to  enquire  what 
were  the  consequences,  or  current  of  events,  during  the  rest  of  the  year  ; 
more  especially,  as  the  very  same  Convocation  which  acknowledged  the 
King's  supremacy,  still  continuing  to  sit,  gave  a  tone  to  the  times. 

If  we  were  to  believe  Crumwell,  when  writing  to  the  Con- 
tinent, in  April,  soon  after  the  Convocation  of  this  year  had 
adjourned,  as  far  as  the  King  was  concerned,  he  could  not  now 
appear,  except  as  clothed  in  the  white  robes  of  innocence  and 
peace.  When  trying  to  entice  Tyndale  into  England,  as  into 
a  sanctuary,  he  had  talked  of  "  the  most  gracious  benignity" 
— "  the  piteous  regard  naturaV — "  the  mercy  and  grace"  of 
that  "  most  virtuous  and  benign  Prince  and  Governor,"  Henry 
the  Eighth  !  Let  the  events  immediately  preceding  and  fol- 
lowing such  language,  now  be  observed. 

The  Convocation  having  not  only  yielded  so  far  to  Henry ""s 
ambition,  but  given  him  the  promise  of  a  sum  equal  to  above 
dP350,000  annually,  for  five  years  to  come ;  perhaps  he 
thought  that,  by  way  of  courtesy  in  return,  he  must  comply 
with  the  wishes  of  this  body  ;  but  be  this  as  it  may,  we  shall 
presently  find  the  Clergy  and  the  Star  Chamber,  in  perfect 
harmony.  It  was  the  triumphant  reign  of  Sir  Thomas  More, 
for  the  one  party,  and  of  Stokesly,  Bishop  of  London,  for  the 
other. 

Immediately  after  agreeing  to  the  preamble  of  the  Bill  of 
Subsidy,  or  in  the  50th  Session  of  the  Convocation,  enquiry 
had  commenced,  at  Stokesly*'s  motion,  into  the  opinions  of 
Latimer^  Bilney  and  Crome ;  and  by  the  69tli  Session  War- 
liam  was  examining  John  Lambert  before  two  notaries.  In 
the  intermediate  space,  finding  no  living  victim,  the  very 
bones  of  the  dead  did  not  escape  them  ;  but  emulating  the 
example  of  1428,  when  they  dug  up  the  bones  of  Wickliffe, 
they  pronounced  judgment  on  the  deceased  William  Tracy, 
Esq.  of  Todington,  because  in  his  last  will  he  had  committed 

52  Sir  .Tames  Mackiiitosli. 


1531.]  TYNDALE'S  BROTHER.  297 

his  departing  Spirit  to  Grod,  through  Jesus  Christ  alone,  and 
left  no  part  of  his  property  to  the  priests,  to  pray  for  his  soul.'^^ 

It  was  while  these  transactions  were  going  on,  Sir  Thomas 
More  and  Mr.  Brian  Tuke  introduced  the  business  of  Henry's 
divorce  before  Parliament,  by  laying  before  it  the  sentence  of 
certain  Universities,  and  the  opinions  of  individuals,  amount- 
ing to  a  hundred,  in  its  favour,  soon  after  which  the  House 
was  prorogued,  and  the  Convocation  also  dissolved,  to  the 
month  of  October, 

But  before  then,  two  of  the  earliest  victims  of  the  present 
year  had  been  apprehended  and  punished ;  and  just  as  if  the 
entire  honour  of  this  arduous  contest  must  redound  to  the 
praise  of  our  first  Translator,  these  were  no  other  than  his 
own  younger  brother,  John,  and  a  devoted  friend,  Thomas 
Patmore,  both  merchants  in  London.  They  appear  to  have 
enjoyed  the  double  honour  of  passing  through  the  hands  of 
Sir  Thomas  More  and  Stokesly,  or  the  Star  Chamber,  and 
the  Bishop's  Court. 

With  regard  to  the  first  court,  the  following  statement  is 
from  Foxe's  manuscript,  which  seems  fully  to  ratify  the  idea 
that  Tyndale  had  reprinted  his  New  Testament  in  1530. 

"  There  were  soon  after  the  coming  over  of  the  New  Testaments  in  Englisli, 
translated  by  WilHam  Tyndale,  which  he  sent  to  his  brother,  John  Tyn- 
dale, a  merchant,  apprehended,  tlie  said  John  Tyndale,  and  Thomas  Patmore, 
a  merchant,  and  a  young  man  that  dwelt  about  London  Bridge,  by  the  Bishop 
of  London,  and  brought  before  Sir  Thomas  More,  being  the  Chancellor,  and  by 
him  committed  to  ward.  After  they  were  brought  forth  before  the  Lords  in  the 
Star  Chamber,  and  there  were  charged  with  the  receiving  of  Tyndale's  Testa- 
ments, and  divers  other  books,  and  delivering  and  scattering  the  same  abroad 
in  divers  places  of  the  city  of  London,  which  they  confessed,  and  therefore  had 
judgment — That  they  should  be  sent  to  the  Counter  of  London,  and  there  to 
remain  until  the  next  market-day,  and  then  each  of  them  to  be  set  upon  a 
horse,  and  their  faces  to  the  horse's  tail,  and  to  have  papers  upon  their  heads, 
and  upon  their  outward  apparel,  that  is  to  say,  upon  their  gowns  or  cloaks,  to 
be  tacked  or  pinned  thick  with  the  said  JSetc  Testaments  and  other  books.  And 
at  the  Standard  in  Chepe  (Cheapside)  should  be  made  a  great  fire,  whereinto 


53  The  sentence,  however,  had  proceeded  no  farther  than  that  of  removal  from  the  grave- 
yard;  but  Parker,  the  Chancellor  of  Worcester,  in  the  heat  of  his  zeal,  applying  for  no  writ, 
burnt  the  body  to  ashes.  Both  Tyndale  and  Fryth  commented  powerfully  on  this  transaction  : 
and  Richard  Tracy,  Esq.,  well  known  as  an  author  afterwards,  the  son  of  William,  raised  a  prose- 
cution against  Parker  for  exceeding  his  commission.  Burnet  has  stated  erroneously,  that  "  he 
was  turned  out  of  his  office,  and  fined  £400."  He  continued  Chancellor  till  1535  ;  "  but  he  was 
now  fined,"  says  Strype,  "  in  a  great  sura."  "  It  cost  him,"  says  HuUc,  "  three  hundred  pounds 
to  procure  his  pardon. "  This  was  very  well— as  it  was  equal  to  about  £4500  of  the  present  day. 
So  much  for  the  officious  man,  who,  after  entering  upon  (iffiee,  had  raltd  Tyndale  as  thoviih  he 
hail  been  a  dog. See  anno  1,522,  or  page  34. 


2,98  BILNEY.  [book  I. 

evei-y  of  them  (the  three)  should  throw  their  said  books  ;**  and,  farther,  to 
abide  such  fiues,  to  be  paid  to  the  King,  as  should  be  assessed  upon  them  ; 
which  penance  they  observed."  Foxe  then  adds — "  this  is  extant,  to  be  seen 
in  the  records  of  the  Star  Chamber." 55 

At  this  period  it  was  not  unusual  for  More,  when  he  suspect- 
ed his  victims  might  be  condemned  for  any  thing  else,  to  deliver 
them  over,  by  an  indenture,  into  the  paw  of  the  Bishop  of 
London,  but  at  all  events,  both  these  worthy  men  now  fell 
into  Stokesly's  hands.  Tyndale  was  punished  by  him  "  for 
sending /»g  marks  to  his  brother  William  Tyndale  beyond  the 
sea,  and  for  receiving  and  keeping  with  him,  certain  letters  from 
his  brother  !"  As  for  Patmore,  who  was  charged  with  saying 
"  that  the  truth  of  Scripture  hath  been  kept  from  us  a  long 
time,  and  hath  not  appeared  till  now,"  &c. — "  he  had  long 
hold  with  the  Bishop.  First,  he  would  not  sware — then  he 
would  appeal  to  the  King  ;  but  all  would  not  serve.  He  was 
so  wrapt  in  the  Bishop's  nets,  that  he  could  not  get  out ;  but 
at  last  he  was  forced  to  abjure,  and  was  fined  to  the  King,  an 
hundred  pounds."^'' 

In  the  month  of  May,  a  second  edition  of  Sir  Thomas 
More's  "Dialogue"  was  published;  and  now,  during  the 
rest  of  the  year,  persecution  became  general.     Stokesly  and 


64  The  Lord  Chancellor  could  not  forbear  to  indulge  his  drollery  even  on  this,  as  upon 
other  occasions,  and  no  doubt  was  gratified  in  having  the  translation,  which  he  could  not  write 
into  disrepute,  thus  treated ;  but  by  ordering  these  reputable  men  to  the  Standard,  once 
situate  close  by  Bow  Church,  or  opposite  to  Honey  Lane,  Cheapside,  he  meant  to  fix  a  stigma, 
similar  to  that  which  belonged  to  the  "  place  of  skulls  "  in  the  days  of  old.  The  Standard  had 
been  notorious  as  the  place  of  occasional  execution,  for  more  than  two  hundred  years. 

65  MS,  Harleian,  No.  425,  fol.  1.5.  There  is  a  strange  mistake,  which  has  run  through  diffe- 
rent histories,  from  the  days  of  the  industrious  Strype,  to  the  present  moment,  in  regard  to  the 
line  imposed  on  these  London  merchants— insomuch  that  we  have  found  it  broadly  stated 
in  a  publication,  of  wide  circulation,  and  dated  lll.'!(i,  that  "  they  were  condemned  to  pay  the 
enormous  sum  of  eighteen  thousand  pounds,  equal  to  Iti'o  hundred  thousand  pounds  at  the  pre- 
sent day  !"  Some  others  before,  startled  at  the  sum,  have  merely  said  that  the  fine  was  enor- 
mous. The  origin  of  the  mistake  may  amuse  the  reader.  On  the  margin  of  the  original  manu- 
script by  John  Foxe,  in  the  Museum,  and  as  given  above,  there  is  the  following  notandum — 
"  A  foul  faute,  page  1105,  for  this  some  (sum)  xviii  thousand  viii  c.  xl  pounds  and  x  pence,  ye 
have  printed  xviii  c.  xl  pounds  and  x  pence."  Strype,  seeing  this,  but  very  unlike  his  usual 
accuracy,  took  upon  him  to  add,  in  his  Memorials  of  Cranmer,  immediately  after  the  word 
"observed" — "  The  fine  set  upon  them  was  heavy  enough,  viz.  eighteen  thousand  eight  hun- 
dred and  forty  pounds  and  ten  pence— a*  ivas  exlani  to  be  seen  in  the  records  of  the  Star  Cham- 
ber.'" thus  adding  the  note  at  the  foot  of  the  MS.,  applicable  only  to  the  authority  for  his  story, 
as  though  it  verified  the  ])rodigious  sum  on  the  margin.  The  fact,  as  the  reader  may  begin  to 
suspect,  is,  that  the  sum  referred  to  was  that  which  tlie  '.rhole province  o/  York  agreed  to  pay  to 
the  King  ;  see  page  2.12  ;  and  in  the  note,  Foxe  is  simply  correcting  "  a  foul  faute,"  or 
misprint  of  the  York  subsidy !  As  for  the  fine,  now  referred  to,  it  seems  as  if  it  had  been  left 
to  the  "  Spirituality."  except  they  were  fined  twice;  and  if  it  was  £l(X)  each,  as  may  appear 
presently,  even  then  it  will  be  allowed  by  all  to  have  been  "  heavy  enough,"  being  equal  to 
£'1500  each  at  the  present  time. 

6'J  Such  is  Foxe's  record  in  his  Acts  and  Monuments.  lie  states  no  sum  for  Tyndale,  but  we 
have  supposed  it  could  not  be  more.  The  one  case,  Foxe  dates  1.5,30,  the  other  !.5.'il.  So  that 
most  probably  they  both  occurred  before  the  2,5th  of  March  1.531,  as  15;10  ran  on  to  that  day. 


1531.]  BILNEY'S  MARTYRDOM.  2!)^ 

the  Lord  Chancellor,  in  London ;  Warham,  and  Fisher,  and 
Longland,  elsewhere,  were  all  busy  ;  and  by  the  month  of 
August,  it  seemed  as  if  Henry  and  his  advisers  had  stepped 
into  blood,  and  would  have  struck  down  any  man  who  pre- 
sumed to  question  or  oppose  their  measures.  We  might  re- 
peat the  sad  tale  of  many,  but  select  only  a  few  cases,  as 
being  peculiarly  characteristic  of  the  times.  The  particulars 
are  at  once  humiliating  and  painful.  We  have  to  read  them 
also  amidst  the  fires  that  were  now  kindled  in  England ; 
though,  amidst  all  the  lurid  glare,  it  is  easy  to  perceive  the 
rapid  and  decided  progress  of  truth,  or  the  glorious  extent  of 
that  cause,  for  which  Tyndale  only  lived,  and  at  last  died. 

The  first  victim  to  the  flames  was  Bilney.  For  though  he 
had  fallen,  and,  in  his  own  apprehension,  past  redemption,  to 
him  was  given  the  honour  of  leading  the  way  in  England  at 
this  period,  of  resistance  "  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin." 
If  we  except  the  case  of  John  Hitton,  of  which  we  know  little, 
he  was  the  first  burnt,  after  the  burning  of  the  Scriptures,  for 
more  than  five  years  past.  How  long  he  had  remained  in 
prison  after  his  abjuration,  cannot  distinctly  be  ascertained  ; 
but  after  his  release  and  return  to  Cambridge,  he  was  in  the 
deepest  distress  of  mind  for  a  long  season.  His  agony  of 
mind  was  so  great,  that  Latimer  affirms,  "  his  friends  dared 
not  suffer  him  to  be  alone,  day  or  night.  They  comforted 
him  as  they  could,  but  no  comforts  would  serve  !  And  as  for 
the  comfortable  places  of  Scripture,  to  bring  them  to  him,  was 
as  though  a  man  should  run  him  through  the  heart  with  a 
sword  !"  It  was  Tunstal  who  had  been  the  tempter,  and  the 
instrumental  cause  of  all  this  mental  anguish.  At  last,  how- 
ever, his  conscience  was  quieted  only  by  the  same  blood  of 
atonement,  which  at  first  had  given  him  such  peace  and  joy. 
And  ere  long,  determined  no  more  to  dissemble  or  conceal  the 
truth,  he  took  farewell  of  his  friends  at  Trinity  Hall,  Cam- 
bridge, saying  that  he  must  now  go  up  to  Jerusalem!''^  He 
then  went  into  Norfolk,  preaching  first  from  house  to  house, 
and  then  in  the  open  fields.  Making  no  secret  of  his  former 
abjuration,  he  warned  all  to  beware  of  following  his  example. 
He  appears  then  to  have  gone  down  through  Essex,  and  not 
improbably  visited  London  itself,  as  the  "  Jerusalem"  he  had 


57  Acts  XX.,  22-24. 


300  BILNEY  a   MARTYRDOM.  QboOK  I. 

referred  to  ;  for  at  one  period,  six  weeks  before  his  apprelien- 
sioii,  we  find  liim  as  near  to  it  as  Greenicich.  There  he  com- 
mitted four  of  Tyndale's  New  Testaments,  with  a  budget  of 
books,  to  a  faithful  friend,  Laurence  Staple,  who  conveyed 
them  to  Cambridge,  and  was  afterwards  called  to  sharp  ac- 
count for  so  doing.^^  But  at  last  Bilney  proceeded  to  Norwich 
itself;  and  having  given  a  New  Testament  of  Tyndale's,  and 
his  book  on  "  Obedience,"  to  a  convert  residing  there,  he  was 
soon  apprehended  by  authority  of  the  old  Bishop.  He  im- 
mediately sent  up  to  Sir  Thomas  More  for  a  writ ;  and  if  it 
be  correct,  as  generally  stated,  it  must  have  been  with  his 
wonted  hilarity  that  he  replied — "  Go  your  ways,  and  burn 
him  first,  and  then  afterwards  come  to  me  for  a  bill  at  my 
hand."  At  all  events,  Bilney  was  soon  condemned  to  die  at 
the  stake,  and  delivered  to  the  Sherifts ;  one  of  whom  was  no 
other  than  Thomas  Necton^  the  brother  of  Robert,  already 
mentioned  as  a  great  distributor  of  books.  From  dread  of 
the  Chancellor  and  the  Friars,  Necton  officially  was  obliged 
to  receive  him  ;  when  he  implored  Bilney''s  forgiveness,  and 
was  not  present  at  his  death.  The  night  before  his  execu- 
tion, the  dying  martyr,  quite  composed,  resigned,  and  even 
cheerful,  among  other  passages  of  Scripture,  dwelt  much  on 
this  one — "  Fear  not ;  far  I  have  redeemed  thee,  I  have  called 
thee  by  thy  name^  thou  art  mine.  When  thou  passest  through 
the  waters,  I  will  be  with  thee:  and  through  the  rivers,  they 
shall  not  overfloic  thee:  when  thou  walkest  through  the  fire,  thou 
shalt  not  be  burnt ;  neither  shall  the  flame  kindle  upon  thee.'''' 
It  was  not  that  Bilney  expected  any  other  than  mental  sup- 
port, or  that  he  superstitiously  anticipated  exemption  from 
pain  ;  but  "  a  pain  for  the  time,"  said  he,  "  whereon,  not- 
withstanding, followeth  joy  unspeakable."  At  the  stake,  he 
closed  his  devotions  with  the  beginning  of  the  143d  Psalm  ; 
and  the  second  verse — "  Enter  not  into  judgment  with  thy  ser- 
vant, for  in  thy  sight  shall  no  flesh  living  be  justified  " — he  re- 
peated, in  deep  meditation,  three  times.  He  had  been  led 
through  the  Bishop's  gate  to  this  spot,  called  the  Lollard's 
pit,  and  there  expired  in  the  flames,  on  Saturday  morning, 
the  19th  of  August,  amidst  the  most  cruel  enemies,  and  not  a 
few  decided  friends.^^ 


5B  See  his  confession  before  Stokesly  in  Foxe. 

S!'  The  day  nf  Bilncy's  death  has  been  stated  with  strange  variety.     Foxe  and  Collier  arc  <or- 


l.)3l.]  BILNEY'S   LATIN    lilliLE.  301 

Thus,  altliough  Bilney's  progress  in  divine  knowledge  may 
liave  scarcely  surmounted  the  superstition  of  the  mass,  his 
views  of  divine  truth,  on  the  points  of  the  sinner's  acceptance 
before  God  through  the  righteousness  of  Christ  alone,  were 
clear  and  most  decided,  so  that  he  died  a  martyr  for  the  truth 
of  God.  All  Sir  Thomas  More's  sad,  if  not  unprincipled, 
attempts  to  blacken  his  memory,  as  though  he  had  recanted 
at  the  stake,  only  recoiled  in  ultimate  disgrace  upon  himself. 
It  was  a  favourite,  though  weak  device  of  the  Ohancellor''s, 
when  he  vainly  attempted  to  answer  Tyndale  next  year,  to 
represent  the  martyi-s  as  recanting  before  death. 

If  the  reader  is  not  aware  of  the  fact,  he  will  be  gratified 
in  knowing  that  the  identical  copy  of  the  Latin  Bible  once 
belonging  to  Thomas  Bilney  is  still  in  existence.  At  least  it 
is  said  to  be  in  one  of  the  libraries  at  Cambridge.  Many  annota- 
tions are  inscribed  upon  its  pages  with  his  own  hand ;  and  it 
is  certainly  an  interesting  circumstance  that  the  passage  in 
Isaiah,  already  quoted,  which  consoled  the  owner  of  the  book 
when  in  prospect  of  the  flames,  is  particularly  distinguished 
with  a  pen,  in  the  margin.  The  words  if  not  so  marked 
with  his  own  hand,  must  have  been  by  others  at  the  time, 
for  they  received  the  words  as  the  legacy  of  a  martyr ;  they 
had  them  fairly  written  on  tables  or  in  books,  and  derived 
comfort  from  them  till  their  dying  day. 

Among  the  persecutions  under  Stokesly  of  this  year,  there 
is  one  which  deserves  notice,  as  one  more  illustration  of  the 
connexion  between  Antwerp  and  London.  "  Christopher," 
says  Foxe,  "  a  Dutchman  of  Antwerp,  for  selling  certain  New- 
Testaments  in  English  to  John  Row,  book-binder,  a  French- 
man, was  put  in  prison  at  Westminster,  and  there  diedy 
This  could  not  have  been  Christopher  Ruremiind,  already 
mentioned,  as  he  continued  in  business  to  1541 ;  nor  is  it  at  all 
likely  to  have  been  Endhoven,  of  whom  we  heard  so  much. 
Christopher  was  a  common  name,  but  it  was  quite  in  charac- 
ter with  the  times  thus  to  treat  a  foreigner,  for  simply  im- 
porting the  Word  of  Life,  in  the  language  of  the  people. 

We  have  no  design  merely  to  harrow  up  the  feelings,  by 


Tect.  Burnet  says  the  10th  of  November,  perhaps  confounding  it  with  an  execution  on  the  2(lth, 
at  London.  Even  a  note  in  Tunstal's  Register,  the  31st  of  August,  is  incorrect.  Foxe  fixes  the 
date,  by  saying  it  was  "  St.  Moynus  day,  and  on  a  Saturday:"  now  in  1531,  St.  Magnus  day,  the 
19th  August,  was  Saturday. 


302  MARTYRDOM    OF    BAYFIELD.  [uOOK  I. 

the  recital  of  brutal  treatment,  having  a  more  important  and 
profitable  object  in  view ;  which  is  to  ascertain,  as  nearly  as 
may  be,  the  precise  state  of  things,  the  rate  of  progress,  and 
the  extent  to  which  the  cause  of  truth  had  by  this  time  arri- 
ved. We  have  one  valuable  illustration  in  the  exertions  of 
Mr.  Richard  Bayfield,  whose  history  cannot  fail  to  gratify 
the  reader ;  as,  among  the  very  hazardous,  yet  innumerable 
instances  of  the  importation  of  books,  he  occupied  a  conspicu- 
ous place. 

Blest  himself,  at  a  very  early  period,  with  a  copy  of 
Tyndale's  New  Testament,  he  laboured  for  a  considerable 
time  to  bring  them  into  the  country,  along  with  other  valu- 
able books ;  and  now,  when  examined  by  Stokesly,  with  what 
view  he  had  done  all  this,  he  at  once  replied — "  To  the  intent 
that  the  Grospel  of  Christ  might  be  set  forward,  and  God  the 
more  glorified  in  this  realm  among  Cliristian  people." 

The  year  and  place  of  Bayfiekrs  birth  cannot  be  ascertain- 
ed, but  by  his  own  confession  he  entered  the  monastery  of 
St.  Edmondsbury  as  a  monk  in  1514,  and  took  orders  as  a 
priest  in  1518.  After  the  return  of  Dr.  Barnes  from  Lou- 
vain  to  Cambridge  in  1523  he  used  to  visit  a  Dr.  Rufiam, 
then  in  that  monastery,  who  had  been  one  of  his  fellow  stu- 
dents abroad,  and  Bayfield,  being  chamberlain  of  the  house, 
became  interested  with  the  conversation  of  the  visitor.  From 
him  he  ere  long  received  a  copy  of  the  New  Testament  in 
Latin,  but  two  citizens  of  London,  Maxwell  and  Stacy,  who 
were  zealous  for  the  circulation  of  the  Scriptures,  and  went 
round  the  country,  with  this  in  view,  presented  him*  with 
Tyndale's  English  New  Testament.  From  the  subsequent 
history  of  his  life,  it  is  evident  that  this  must  have  been  one 
of  the  earliest  copies  given  away  in  tlie  country  parts.  After 
being  at  Cambridge  with  Barnes,  he  seems  to  have  not  re- 
turned to  his  abbey,  but  proceeding  to  his  friends,  Maxwell 
and  Stacy,  in  London,  he  remained  there  in  concealment  for  a 
short  time  in  the  close  of  1526.  At  this  early  period,  as 
appears  by  Foxe,  he  was  a  suspected  person.  It  is  true  he 
talks,  in  a  vague  way  of  Bayfield  suffering  imprisonment  and 
cruel  treatment  for  two  years  and  nine  months,  but  this  was 
merely  an  anticipation,  or  rather  loose  summing  up  of  all  his 
trials.  At  all  events,  he  fixes  the  period  of  his  first  escape 
beyond  sea ;  Dr.  Barnes  being  then  in  the  Fleet  for  God''s  Word, 


1531.]  MARTYRDOM    OP   BAYFIELD.  303 

which  continued  till  August  1.526  ;  though  Bayfield  remained, 
in  fact,  two  months  longer. 

On  his  first  going  abroad,  Foxe  says,  "  this  Bayfield 
mightily  prospered  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  was  bene- 
ficial to  Master  Tyndale  and  Mr.  Frythe,  for  he  brought  sub- 
stance with  him,  and  was  their  own  hand,  and  sold  all  their 
works,  both  in  Fiance  and  England."  This  is  a  general  de- 
scription of  Bayfield's  life  and  services,  during  at  least  four 
dift'erent  voyages  to  the  Continent,  within  the  last  five  years. 
His  first  return  to  England  was  sometime  in  the  year  1,527. 
It  had  so  happened  that  in  October  1526,  just  before  leaving 
England,  he  met,  in  Lombard  Street,  with  three  parsons  of 
his  own  standing,  Edmund  Pierson,  James  Smith,  and  Miles 
Garnet,  when  some  conversation  ensued,  by  no  means  plea- 
sant to  their  ears,  but  sufficiently  explicit  as  to  Bayfield's 
sentiments.  Having  therefore  now  returned,  it  must  have 
been  but  a  very  short  time  before  Pierson  detected  him,  as  by 
the  13th  of  September  1527,  we  find  his  accusation  against 
Bayfield  recorded  at  full  length  in  Foxe's  history. 

Once  brought  before  Tunstal,  in  1528  he  was  enjoined  for 
penance  "to  go  before  the  cross  in  procession,  in  the  Parish 
Church  of  St.  Botolph's,  Billingsgate,  and  to  appear  before  the 
Bishop  again  on  the  25th  of  April,"  1529.  The  first  part  he 
fulfilled,  but  not  the  latter.  He  had  o-one  to  the  Continent, 
but  what  may  seem  strange,  he  did  appear,  and  presented  him- 
self before  Tunstal  on  the  20th  of  June  :  and  it  was  still  more 
so,  if  he  then  had  brought  over  with  him  any  books  of  the 
"  new  learning."'''^'  However,  there  being  no  fresh  witnesses 
against  him,  the  Bishop  merely  pronounced  upon  him  sentence 
of  banishment  from  the  city  and  diocese  of  London.  But  in 
the  face  of  this,  as  Bayfield  now  entertained  no  reverence  for 
their  ecclesiastical  authority,  he  went  on  more  determined 
than  before.  In  May  or  June  15.80,  he  arrived  at  Colchester, 
with  a  cargo  of  books,  which  were  all  successfully  sold  or  cir- 
culated :  an  importation  specially  to  be  noted,  as  it  was  imme- 


oo  This  is  by  no  means  improbable  ;  though  truly  no  dependence  can  be  placed  on  Sir  Thomas 
More,  except  he  be  confirmed  by  other  circumstances  or  other  authorities.  He  actually 
abounds  in  unmeasured  mendacity  when  speaking  of  such  men.  But  he  says  that  Bayfield 
"  was  occupied  in  (wo  things  at  once— in  suing  for  pardon  for  bringing  in  books  and  selling 
them  here  secretly,  and  sending  over  for  more."  At  the  same  time  this  was  pardon  for  his 
former  charges,  as  already  noted,  which,  though  it  included  nineteen  distinct  articles  by  Pier- 
son, never  once  alludes  to  books. 


304  MARTYRDOM   Uh'   BAYFIELD.  [book  i. 

diately  after  the  "  burning'"  at  St.  Paur.s,  if  not  at  the 
moment ;  immediately  after  the  Royal  proclamation  had  been 
framed,  which  Latimer  so  reprobated;  and  it  is  one  among  other 
proofs  of  books  then  coming  thick  and  threefold  into  England, 
to  the  annoyance  of  Tunstal.  Abroad  once  more,  Bayfield 
returned  with  a  second  importation  in  November,  but  landing 
at  St.  Oatharine''s,  the  whole  parcel  fell,  as  a  coveted  morsel, 
into  the  hands  of  Sir  Thomas  More.  Nothing  daunted,  and 
at  the  very  season  when  Vaughan  and  Crumwell  were  trying 
to  inveigle  Tyndale  into  England,  Bayfield  had  another  cargo 
upon  English  ground.  These  he  landed  safely  in  Norfolk, 
about  the  beginning  of  April,  and  not  being  detected,  they 
were  of  course  circulated  far  and  wide,  to  the  forther  vexation 
of  the  poor,  infirm,  and  literally  blind  Bishop  of  Norwich,  as 
well  as  his  brethren.  But  at  last,  in  the  fall  of  this  year, 
coming  to  his  old  friend  Mr.  Smith  in  Bucklersbury,  the  fre- 
quent receiver  of  his  books,  he  was  betrayed ;  and  being 
traced  to  his  book-binder's  in  Mark  Lane,  he  was  first  com- 
mitted to  the  Lollard's  Tower,  where,  and  afterwards  in 
the  Bishop's  coal-house,  he  was  most  barbarously  treated. 
Being  now,  however,  stedfast  in  faith,  he  had  made  up  his 
mind  to  die ;  and  though  tortured  to  accuse  others  who  had 
bought  his  books,  and  three  times  in  the  consistory  of  St. 
Paul's  put  to  his  trial,  as  to  whether  he  would  abjure,  he  re- 
mained unmoveable.  From  such  men  as  now  bore  sway,  he 
could  expect  no  mercy,  and  he  received  none;  indeed,  Stokesly 
displayed  all  the  ferocity  of  his  character,  and  behaved  in  the 
most  brutal  manner.  Being  condemned,  actually  upon  a 
Lord's-day,  the  1 9th  of  November ;  on  Monday,  when  he 
came  to  be  degraded,  as  they  phrased  it,  not  satisfied  with  the 
mere  ceremony,  Stokesly  with  a  blow  of  his  crosier,  struck 
with  such  violence  on  the  breast  of  Bayfield,  that,  falling 
backward,  his  skull  was  almost  fractured,  and  he  swooned 
away  !  When  once  he  recovered  himself,  the  good  man 
"  thanked  God  that  he  was  (not  degraded  but)  delivered  from 
the  malignant  Church  of  Antichrist,  and  that  he  was  come  into 
the  sincere  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  militant  here  on  earth  ; 
and  "  I  trust  anon,"  said  he  "  to  be  in  heaven  with  Jesus 
Christ,  and  the  Church  triumphant  for  ever."  Nor  was  he 
mistaken,  for  that  day  he  was  in  paradise.  After  this  outra- 
geous conduct,  he  was  led  forth  to  Newgate,  and  in  about  an 


l.'JSl,]]  RICH    liMPORTATION   OF    BOOKS.  305 

hour  afterwards  coniiiiitted  to  the  flames.  He  remained 
alive  for  so  long  as  half  an  hour,  but  continued  in  prayer  to 
the  end  without  movinj^  ! 

How  many  persons,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  had  been,  or 
were  now  engaged  in  the  importation  of  books,  it  is  impossible 
to  say ;  but  if  we  take  this  one  valuable  agent  as  an  index, 
and  refer  merely  to  his  last  successful  adventure,  it  will  be 
evident,  tliat  amidst  all  the  fury  of  opponents,  a  tide  had  set 
in,  which  it  was  beyond  the  power  of  man  to  stem. 

According  to  the  list  of  books  exhibited  against  Bayfield,  at  the  head  of  the 
whole,  in  point  of  number,  we  have  William  Tyndale.  This  zealous  importer 
had  brought  this  year — The  five  books  of  Moses,  in  distinct  tracts  or  volumes 
— The  New  Testament,  including  the  prologue  to  the  Romans — The  parable 
respecting  Mammon — The  Obedience  of  a  Christian  Man — The  Practice  of 
Prelates,  and  even  The  Answer  to  More  ;  or  ten  diff"erent  publications  in  all. 
There  was  also  one  of  Fryth's  on  Purgatory.  We  give  the  principal  names 
of  the  authors,  with  the  number  of  publications  by  each. 

By  Tyndale  there  were  at  least  ten,  all  in  Eiigllsh,  and  in  Latin  we  find 
By  Luther,   .     .     5         By  (Ecolampadius,  4  By  Pomeranus,  3 

—  Melancthon,      5         —  F.  Lambert,   .     4  —  Capito,      .     '2 

—  Bucer,  .  .  5  —  Brentius,  .  .  4  —  Zuinglius,  1 
Besides  eight  others  by  various  authors — and  the  Sum  of  Scripture — The 
Primer — The  Psalter^ — The  A.  B.  C.  against  the  Clergy — and  The  Dialogue 
between  a  Gentleman  and  a  Ploughman.  There  were,  in  short,  fifty-seven 
distinct  publications — "  of  all  which  books,"  Bayfield  is  charged  with  having 
brought  "  a  great  number  into  this  realm  of  England." 

On  the  3d  of  December,  or  only  a  fortnight  after  having  tortured  and 
murdered  this  excellent  man,  Stokesly  proceeded  to  the  denunciation  of  books. 
"  The  first  Sunday  of  Advent,"  says  the  manuscript,  "  in  the  year  of  our  Lord 
one  thousand  five  hundred  and  xxxi.,  these  books  following  were  openly  at 
Paul's  Cross,  by  the  authority  of  my  Lord  of  London,  under  authentical  seal, 
by  the  Doctor  that  day  preached,  prohibited  and  straitly  commanded  of  no 
manner  of  man  to  be  used,  under  pain  of  suspension,  and  a  greater  pain,  as 
more  largely  appeareth  in  foresaid  authority."  This  list  of  books  is  valuable, 
as  verifying  the  present  history.  We  therefore  give  it  verbatim,  only  arrang- 
ing the  books  under  their  respective  authors.      No  Latin  works  arc  mentioned. 

By  Tyndale The  New  Testament  in  English,  with  an  introduction  to  the 

Epistle  to  the  Romans  fii — The  first  book  of  Moses  called  Genesis — A  prologue  in 
the  iid  book  of  Moses  called  Exodus — A  prologue  in  the  third  book  of  Moses 


61  This  list  is  important,  as  confirmatory  of  Tyndale  having  reprinted  the  New  Testament  in 
1530.  None  of  the  Antwerp  editions  as  yet  had  the  Prologue  to  the  Romans  inserted,  but  this 
had.  Bilney,  it  has  been  supposed,  had  a  copy  of  this  impression  ;  but  we  know  for  certain  that 
it  was  among  the  importations  of  Bayfield  this  year,— here  it  is  formally  interdicted,  and  John 
Tyndale  as  well  as  Patmore  having  been  so  treated  ;  all  these  circumstances  leave  but  little  or 
no  hesitation  that  Tyndale  reprinted  his  New  Testament  in  1530,  though  he  had  not  time  as  yet 
to  revise  the  translation.  In  the  valuable  List  of  Lowndes"  Bib.  Manual,  Tyndale's  edition  of  15.34 
is  represented  as  the  first  that  had  the  Prologue  to  the  Romans  inserted — but  this  now  seems 
to  be  a  mistake.     He  appears  to  have  inserted  it  first  in  his  reprint  of  1530. 

VOL.    I.  U 


306  GEORGE  CONSTANTYNE  [bOOK  1. 

called  Leviticus — A  prologue  in  the  iiijth  book  of  Moses  called  Numeri — A 
prologue  in  the  vth  book  of  Moses  called  Deuterononiye — The  Parable  of  the 
Wicked  Mammon — The  Obedience  of  a  Christian  Man — An  Exposition  into 
the  viith  chapter  to  the  Corinthians — The  Matrimony  of  Tyndale — The  Prac- 
tice of  Prelates — An  "Answer  of  Tyndale  to  Sii*  Thomas  More's  Dialogue,  in 
English — Jonas,  in  English. 

By  Frytli. — The  Revelation  of  Antichrist — A  Disputation  of  Purgatory. 

By  Fyshe. — The  Supplication  of  Beggars — The  Sum  of  Scripture. 

By  Roye. — The  Disputation  betwixt  the  Father  and  the  Son — The  Burying 
of  the  Mass,  in  English,  in  rhyme — A  book  against  the  Seven  Sacraments. 

A.  B.  C.  against  the  Clergy — Ortulus  Anime,  in  English — A  book  against  St. 
Thomas  of  Canterbury — A  book  of  Thorpe  or  of  John  Oldcastle — The  Primer 
in  English — The  Psalter  in  English,  by  Joye — A  Dialogue  between  the  Gentle- 
man and  the  Ploughman.fi^   N.B .  all  Enylish,  for  they  formed  the  heavy  artillery. 

In  the  course  of  only  eight  or  ten  days  after  this  interdict, 
both  Stokesly  and  More  were  busy  with  another  martyr.  The 
reader  may  remember  Jb/m  Teri-ksbury,  who,  in  1529,  on  being 
examined  before  Tunstal,  answered  so  well,  but  getting  en- 
tangled by  his  sophistry,  abjured.  Moved  now  by  the  noble 
example  of  Bayfield,  he  resolved  to  confess  the  truth  at  all 
hazards.  On  Saturday  the  16th  of  December,  Stokesly  being- 
down  at  Chelsea,  condemned  him  on  the  spot,  in  the  house  of 
the  Chancellor,  and  they  delivered  him  to  the  sheriffs. 
Stokesly  had  been  consecrated  or  installed  Lord  BisJiop  of 
London  on  the  20th  of  December  last ;  and  so  whether  it  was 
to  give  the  anniversary  some  farther  celebrity,  or  as  an  ap- 
propriate memorial  of  the  day — yet  so  it  was — the  sheriffs 
delivered  this  worthy  man  to  the  stake,  and  he  perished  in 
the  flames  at  Smithtield,  on  St.  Thomas'  Eve,  the  20th  of 
December  ! 

Before  concluding  this  first  year  of  Henry's  supremacy, 
among  the  men  apprehended,  we  must  on  no  account  omit 
George  Constantyne^  were  it  only  on  account  of  the  consequences. 
We  first  heard  of  him  in  1528,  when  the  examination  of 
Robert  Necton  occasioned  his  flight.  Since  that  time  he  had 
been  in  Brabant,  and  having  been  originally  bred  a  surgeon, 
he  had  there,  by  his  own  account,  practised  as  such.  At  the 
same  time,  he  evidently  had  taken  a  deep  interest  in  the  im- 
portation of  books,  and  coming  over  himself  this  year,  had, 
as  well  as  Bayfield,  brought  books  with  him  ;  but  he  was  not 


8^  See  Lambeth  MSS.,  No.  3()6,  folio  65.    The  Exposition  of  the  Epistle  of  John  by  Tyndale  had 
not  yet  fallen  into  their  hands.   The  Satire  on  Wolsey  is  here  styled  "  the  Burying  of  the  Mass." 


1531.]  FAILING  THROUGH  FEAR.  307 

possessed  of  similar  fortitude,  nor  was  he  ever,  like  him,  to 
wear  the  crown  of  martyrdom. 

Falling  into  the  hands  of  Sir  Thomas  More,  he  appears 
evidently  (by  More's  own  expressions  in  the  preface  to  his  next 
folio  against  Tyndale)  to  have  been,  in  some  degree,  smitten 
with  the  man  and  his  shrewdness.  He  must  have  con- 
versed with  him  frequently,  and  at  great  length,  as  will 
appear  presentl3^ 

"  After  divers  communications,  amongst  other  things,  Master  More  asked  of 
him,  saying — '  Constantyne  !  T  would  have  tliee  be  plain  with  me  in  one  tiling 
that  I  will  ask  ;  and  I  promise  thee,  I  will  shew  thee  favour  in  all  other  things, 
whereof  thou  art  accused.  There  is  beyond  the  sea,  Tyndale,  Joye,  and  a  great 
many  of  you  :  I  know  they  cannot  live  without  help.  There  are  some  that 
help  them,  and  succour  them  with  money  ;  and  thou,  being  one  of  them,  hadst 
thy  part  thereof,  and,  therefore,  knowest  from  whence  it  came.  I  pray  thee, 
tell  me  who  be  they  that  help  them  thus  V — '  My  Lord,'  quoth  Constantyne, 
'  I  will  tell  you  truly  :  it  is  the  Bishop  of  London  that  hath  holpen  us  ;  for  he 
hath  bestowed  among  us  a  great  deal  of  money  upon  New  Testaments,  to  burn 
them  ;  and  that  hath  been,  and  yet  is,  our  only  succour  and  comfort.' — '  Now, 
by  my  troth,'  quoth  More, '  I  think  even  the  same  ;  for  so  much  I  told  the 
Bishop  before  he  went  about  it.'  "  63 

The  communications  of  Constantyne  at  this  moment,  there 
is  now  no  doubt,  had  excited  great  attention.  Crumwell  will 
be  seen,  presently,  to  ground  h\^fo7'eign  correspondence  upon 
them  ;  and,  by  the  man's  own  account  in  15^9,  the  King 
himself  had  conversed  particularly  with  him.  "  His  Majesty 
reasoned  with  me  himself  almost  nine  years  ago," — and  Con- 
stantyne then  presumed  to  form  his  own  opinion  of  the  dejAh 
of  the  King's  learning.  But  More  was  the  chief  cross- 
examinator,  and  Constantyne,  very  harshly  treated,  was  now 
at  the  lowest  point  of  degradation  throughout  his  varied  life. 
Very  strange  indeed  were  the  changes  that  took  place  in  these 
times.  How  astonished  would  the  Chancellor  have  been, 
could  he  have  been  informed  of  the  future  path  of  the  person 
he  then  held  in  irons  !  But  Sir  Thomas  was  not  aware  that 
he  was  now  conversing  with  a  man  who  should  return  to  Eng- 
land after  his  death  ;  who  should  get  into  the  service  of  Sir 
Henry  Norris,  and  thus  become  intimately  acquainted  with 
the  Court ;  who  should  be  present  at  the  death  of  Henry's 


"3  Halle  and  Foxe.  This  refers  to  TunstaVs  exploit  at  Antwerp  in  1329,  though  it  be  evident 
that  Constantyne  is  now  stretching  a  point,  for  the  sake  of  the  joke— a  style  of  reply,  with 
which  he  well  knew  that  More  was  often  fascinated. 


308  PERSECUTION   AGAIN,  [boOK  I. 

now  intended  Queen;  and,  moreover,  whose  son-in-laic  should 
rise  to  be  Archbishop  of  York,  (the  very  place  that  Wolsey 
himself  once  occupied,)  nay,  and  become  President  of  Queen 
Elizabeth's  Council  for  the  North  of  England  !  ^^ 

The  Chancellor  is  represented  by  one  manuscript,  as  having 
put  Constantyne  in  the  stocks  ;'^  but  by  a  subsequent  letter  it 
will  appear,  that  this  was  another  way  of  expressing  that  he  was 
in  irons.  Sir  Thomas,  by  his  official  severity,  it  will  be  proved, 
at  last  constrained  the  man,  through  fear,  to  affirm  much 
more  than  he  could  have  substantiated,  respecting  people 
abroad,  including  even  Mr.  Vaughan,  the  English  Envoy, 
himself;  and  as  these  forced  confessions  came  out,  they  soon 
found  their  way  across  the  sea.  The  Chancellor,  it  will  soon 
be  evident,  had  an  evil  eye  fixed  upon  Vaughan,  as  having 
been  far  from  that  rigour  which  would  have  gratified  him  ; 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Envoy  displeased  with  the 
freedom  now  used  with  his  character,  immediately  wrote  to 
Crumwell  on  hearing  the  first  rumours. 

"  I  am  informed  that  George  Constantyne  hath  of  late  declared  certain  things 
against  me,  before  my  Lord  Chancellor.  If  it  be  true,  I  pray  you  let  me  know 
what  things  they  be.  Be  you  hereof  assured,  that  he  can  declare  nothing 
against  me  that  is  truth,  to  hurt  me.  Peradventure  he  hath  declared  that  I 
spoke  with  Tyndale.  If  so  he  have  done,  what  hath  he  herein  declared,  that  I 
myself  have  not  signified  to  the  King's  Highness  ?  Peradventure  he  hath  also 
declared,  that  I  laboured  Tyndale,  upon  the  King's  safe-conduct,  to  come  into 
England.  This  also  I  have  signified  to  his  Highness.  What  other  thing  soever 
he  have  declared  against  me,  being  true,  I  care  not  for  it.  If  otherwise, 
Veritas  liberavit."S6 

Crumwell  himself,  however,  now  writes  to  Antwerp,  once 
and  again  counselling  the  Envoy  ;  as  men  of  violent  spirit 
abroad,  alone  could  satisfy  the  violent  at  home.  But  in  the 
meanwhile,  to  the  no  small  mortification  of  our  Lord  Chan- 
cellor, Constantyne  contrived  to  escape  from  his  iron  chain, 
and  sailing  for  the  Continent,  he  arrived  in  safety  at  Ant- 
werp, on  the  6th  of  December  ! 

Vaughan,  by  this  time,  was  efi"ectually  roused,  and  he  will 
now  disclose  to  us,  very  graphically,  what  had  been  the  actual 


"^  All  these  curious  particulars  will  come  before  us  in  due  course. 

"s  Manuscript  life  of  More,  edited  by  Dr.  Wordsworth. 

68  Cotton  MS.,  Titus,  B.  i.,  fol.  368.  Strype  affirms  that  '•  he  disingenuously  confessed  to  Sir 
Thomas,  several  of  his  companions,  and  disclosed  the  shipmen,  who  brought  over  many  of  these 
books,  and  the  marks  of  the  fardles,"  or  bundles. 


1531.]  REACHING  TO  ANTWERP.  309 

state  of  England  for  the  last  nine  months.  The  following  in- 
teresting, and,  in  some  respects,  noble  letter,  from  which 
Crumwell,  at  this  crisis,  might  well  have  taken  many  a  hint, 
Vaughan  despatched  to  him,  only  three  days  after  Constan- 
tyne  had  reached  his  home,  his  wife,  and  his  children. 

"  Right  worshipful,  your  humble  commendations  premised. — The  6th  day  of 
this  px'csent  month,  at  mine  entrance  into  the  English  house  in  Antwerp  from 
Tournay,  I  received  your  letters  which  I  long  looked  for,  with  certain  copies 
inclosed  thei'ein,  which  I  desired  to  receive. — 

"  And  whereas  in  the  same  your  letters,  among  other  things  therein  contained 
you  signify  unto  me  the  taking  of  George  Coustantyne,  and  the  doubt  which  your 
friends  putteth,  that  the  said  George  will  accuse  me,  not  only  to  be  a  fautor  and 
adherent  to  the  Lutheran  sect,  but  also  to  have  given  help  for  and  towards  the 
setting  forth  of  such  books  and  works  as  be  erroneous  and  suspected  :  And 
therefore  cease  not,  after  your  accustomed  manner,  with  many  friendly,  loving, 
earnest,  and  discreet  exhortations,  to  move,  stir,  and  persuade  me  to  be  circum- 
spect ;  and  clearly  separating  and  alienating  myself  from  such  sects  and  erroneous 
opinions  ;  only  to  apply  and  endeavour  myself,  truly  and  unfeignedly,  to  serve 
the  King  his  Majesty,  in  such  things  as  his  highness  hath  tiiistily  commended 
unto  me  in  these  parts.  Promising  me  thereby  the  increase  of  my  laud,  praise, 
and  commendation,  with  other  things  too  long  to  write, 

"  To  these  things  before  rehearsed,  pleaseth  your  benignity  to  receive  mine 
answer  in  these  words  following.  If  Constantyne  have  accused  me  to  be  of  the 
Lutheran  sect,  a  fautor  and  setter-forth  of  erroneous  and  suspected  works,  I  do 
not  thereat  marvel,  for  two  causes  specially.  One  is,  for  that  my  Lord  Chancel- 
lor, in  his  examination  of  the  said  Geoi'ge,  and  of  all  other  men;  (as  I  am 
credibly  informed,)  being  brought  before  him  for  cases  of  heresy,  doth  deeply 
enquire  to  know,  what  may  be  said  of  me  ;  and  in  the  examination  thereof, 
shoicetk  evidfiit  and  clear  desire,  in  his  countenance  and  behaviour,  to  hear  some- 
thing of  me,  whereby  an  occasion  of  evil  might  be  fastened  against  me  ;  which, 
no  doubt,  shall  soon  be  espied  in  the  patient  whom  he  examineth, — who  per- 
ceiving his  desire  in  that  behalf,  and  trusting,  by  accusing  of  me,  to  escape  and 
avoid  his  present  danger,  of  pure  frailty  and  weakness,  spareth  not  to  accuse 
the  innocent.  The  other  is,  for  that  George,  besides  the  imminent  peril  and 
danger  in  which  he  was,  abiding  prisoner  in  my  Lord's  house,  was  vehemently 
stirred  and  provoked.  What  with  the  remembrance  of  his  poor  wife  remain- 
ing here,  desperate,  bewashed  with  continual  tears,  and  pinched  with  houi'ly 
sorrow,  sighs,  and  mourning,  and  the  sharp  and  bitter  threatenings  of  his  poor 
(state)  and  condition,  likely  to  be  brought  unto  an  extreme  danger  of  poverty-  ; 
and  more  hard  than  the  first,  by  the  excess  of  his  misery,  to  accuse  whom  they 
had  longed  for,  rather  than  to  be  tied  by  the  leg,  with  a  cold  and  heavy  iron,  like 
a  beast, — as  appeared  by  the  shift  he  made  to  undo  the  same,  and  escape  such 
tortures  and  punishments.  Will  not  these  perils,  fears,  punishments,  make  a 
son  forget  the  father  which  begat  him  1  And  the  mother  that  bear  him,  and  fed 
him  with  her  breasts  ?  If  they  will,  who  should  (wonder)  though  he  would  ac- 
cuse me,  a  thousand  times  less  deal*  to  him  than  either  father  or  mother,  to  rid 
him  out  of  the  same  ? 

"  Would  God  !  it  might  please  the  King's  Majesty  to  look  into  these  kinds  of 
punishments  ;  wliich,  in  my  poor  opinion,  threateneth  more  hurt  to  his  realm, 
than  those  that  be  his  ministers  to  execute  the  same  tortures  and  punishments 


•110  VAUGHAN'S   NOBLE   REMONSTRANCE  [book  I. 

do  tliiiik  or  conjeetui'e  :  and  by  this  reason  only, — It  shall  (will)  constrain  his 
subjects,  in  great  number,  to  forsake  his  realm,  and  to  inhabit  strange  regions 
and  countries,  where  they  will  not  practise  a  little  hurt  to  the  same.  Yea,  and 
whereas,  they  (the  King's  ministers)  think  that  tortures,  punishments,  and  death, 
will  1)0  a  mean  to  rid  the  realm  of  erroneous  opinions,  and  bring  men  in  such 
fear,  that  they  will  not  once  be  so  hardy  to  speak  or  look, — Be  you  assured,  and 
let  the  King's  Grace  be  thereof  adrertised  at  my  mouth,  that  his  highness  (shall) 
will  duly  prove,  that  in  the  end,  it  will  cause  the  sect  to  wax  greater,  and  those 
errors  to  be  more  plenteously  sowed  in  his  realm,  than  ever  afore.  For  who  have 
so  mightily  sowed  those  errors,  as  those  persons  which,  for  fear  of  tortures  and 
death,  have  fled  his  realm  ?  Will  they  not,  by  driving  men  out  of  his  realm, 
make  the  roxcnt  (irruption)  and  company  greater  in  strange  countries,  and  will 
not  many  do  more  than  one  or  two  ?  Will  not  four  write  where  one  wrote  afore  ? 
Counsel  you  the  King's  Highness,  as  his  true  subject,  to  look  upon  this  matter, 
and  no  more  to  trust  to  other  men's  policies,  which  threateneth,  in  mine  opinion, 
the  weal  of  his  realm  ;  and  let  me  no  longer  be  blamed  nor  suspected  for  my 
true  saying. 

"  That  I  write  I  know  to  be  true  ;  and  daily  do  see  experience  of  that  I  now 
write,  which,  between  you  and  me,  I  have  often  said  and  written,  though  per- 
adventure,  you  have  little  regarded  it.  But  tarry  a  while,  and  you  will  be 
learned  by  experience.     I  see  it  begun  already. 

"  To  some  men  it  will  seem,  by  this  my  manner  of  writing,  that  I  being,  (as 
they  suppose,  and  as  I  have  been  falsely  accused  to  be)  one  of  the  sect,  do  write 
in  this  manner,  because  I  woidd  that  both  I  and  the  same  sect  should  be  suf- 
fered without  punishment.  Nay  truly — But  rather  I  would  that  an  evil  doer 
should  be  charitably  punished,  and  in  such  manner  as  he  might  thereby  be  won 
with  other,  than  lost  with  a  great  many.  And  let  his  llajesty  be  farther  assxired, 
that  he  will,  icith  no  policy,  nor  with  no  threate.nings  of  tortures  and  punishments 
take  away  the  opinions  of  his  people,  till  his  Grace  shall  fatherly  and  lovingly 
reform  the  Clergy  of  his  realm.  For  there  springeth  the  opinion.  From  thence, 
riseth  the  grudge  of  his  people.  Out  of  that,  men  take  and  find  occasions  to 
complain.  If  I  say  truth,  let  it  be  for  such  received.  If  otherwise,  I  protest, 
before  God  and  the  World,  that  whatsoever  I  here  write,  I  mean  therein  nothing 
but  honour,  glory,  and  surety  of  my  only  Prince  and  sovereign,  and  the  public 
weal  of  his  realm. 

"And  as  to  mjself,  and  the  fame  and  opinion  of  some  men  had  of  me. — Let  all 
men  know,  whatsoever  the  world  babble  of  me,  that  I  am  neither  Lutheran  nor 
yet  Tyndalian, — nor  have  them  or  any  other,  or  esteem  them  and  any  other, 
for  my  Gods, — nor  for  the  persons  in  whom,  or  in  whose  learning  I  have  any 
trust. — Nor  j-et  do  trust  in  the  doctrine  and  learning  of  any  earthly  creatures, 
for  all  men  be  liars — in  quantum  homines,  as  Scripture  saith  :  and  again  "male- 
dictis  qui  confdit  in  hominem."  Christ's  Church  hath  admitted  me  ...  a  learn- 
ing sufficient  and  infallible,  and  by  Christ  taught,  which  is  the  Holy  Scripture ; 
let  the  world  brawl,  T  am  sure  to  have  no  other.  I  find  not  myself  deceived,  nor 
I  trust  shall  be.  As  the  world  goeth,  men's  learnings  are  not  to  be  ti'usted  ; 
God's  learning  cannot  deceive  me  (if)  that  I  embrace  it  humbly  and  with  rever- 
ence :  His  learning  is  an  only  truth  in  the  World  ;  and  among  men,  besides 
that,  is  there  found  no  truth  ;  but  the  contrary,  sin,  untruth,  corruption,  and 
wretchedness. 

"  And  as  to  my  truth  to  my  Prince  and  Sovereign,  and  my  service  towards 
his  Grace,  be  not  afraid,  nor  think  that  any  worldly  thing  can  cori-upt  my  mind, 
nor  move  my  body  or  any  member  thereof,  once  to  think  or  do  any  manner  of 


1531.2  AVITH   CRUMWELL.  311 

thing,  tliat  shall  not  both  become  a  Christian  man,  and  also  a  true  and  faithful 
subject  to  his  Prince.  If  I  were  of  another  sort,  and  as  the  more  part  are,  I 
might  by  chance  obtain  more  favour.  But  whatsoever  I  do,  or  shall  do  to  my 
Prince,  I  do  it  not  for  any  reward,  nor  thereby  seek  reward,  which,  with  half 
an  eye,  ye  may  perceive  :  And  whether  I  be  rewarded  or  not  rewarded,  it  is 
all  one  to  me;  I  will  nevertheless  do  my  duty.  God  hath  eyes  to  see,  and  his 
I'eward  prepared,  and  will  prepare  a  living  for  me,  wheresoever  I  be  come,  no 
less  than  he  doth  for  those  his  ci'catures  which  neither  sow  nor  mow. 

"  I  am  unkindly  handled,  to  have  such  shai'p  inquisitions  made  of  me  in 
mine  absence  :  I  am  (rude)ly  handled  for  my  service.  Such  stripes  and  bitter 
rewards  would  faint,  and  make  weak  the  heart  of  some  men  towards  their 
Prince ;  but  I  am  the  stronger,  because  I  know  my  truth,  and  am  at  defiance 
with  all  men  pretending  the  contrary.  What  !  should  I  be  longer  in  declaring 
my  mind  ?  Receive  you  the  sum  thereof,  in  short  words.  I  will  not  be  un- 
true to  my  Prince,  though  he  were  the  douhlest  person  of  his  realm,  though 
his  governance  were  such  as  should  offend  both  heaven  and  earth  :  as  his  Grace 

is  the  very  contrary,  most  noble,  gracious,  benign,  and  Am  I 

not  commanded  by  God,  to  be  obedient  to  my  Prince  ?  Do  I  not,  by  the  con- 
trary, break  God's  ordinance  ?  Am  I  ignorant  in  these  things,  supposeth  the 
world,  whose  eyes  are  covered  with  ambition,  dissimulation,  and  such  like  ?  1 
can  no  longer  forbear  but  shew  you  my  mind — it  presseth  my  heart,  like  a 
deadly  wound,  when  I  hear  that  I  am  otherwise  meant.  I  had  much  rather 
forsake  my  natural  country,  my  most  dear  friends  and  family,  and  wander  into 
some  strange  region  and  country,  there  to  lead  the  rest  of  my  short  life,  than 
thus  to  be  handled  for  my  true  service,  and  my  good  mind — considering  that 
truth  hath  no  better  estimation,  insomuch  that  it  staudeth  in  such  danger,  and 
is  so  vilely  reputed. 

"  I  hear  every  tchere,  how  diligently  my  Lord  Chancellor  euquireth  of  all 
those  (whom)  he  examineth  in  cases  of  heresy,  for  me.  What  are  my  manners  ? 
my  opinions  ?  my  conversations  ?  my  faith  ?  finally,  what  is  my  life  entirely  ? 
And  besides  him,  there  be  others  deputed  for  such  like  examinations,  which 
also  make  like  inquisitions.  Wherefore  take  they  so  great  pains  ?  What  think 
they  to  hear  ?  Or  what  think  they  that  I  am  less  than  they  ?  As  concerning 
my  creation — a  man,  a  sinner,  a  vessel  conceived  in  sin  ;  finally,  a  wretched 
creature,  barren  and  devoid  of  goodness — and  this  might  they  consider,  without 
so  great  pains-taking.  Who  so  miserable  a  creature  as  I  am  !  beholding  him- 
seK  to  be  threatened  with  men  so  puissant,  would  not  think  himself  to  be  in 
great  danger  ?  Who  so  unkindly  and  unchristianly  entreated,  may  not  wofully 
sing  the  verses  painted  in  your  stained  cloth,  resembling  the  evertion  of  Italy- 
changing  the  feminine  into  the  masculine — Et  sola  et  mediis  herens  in  Jtuctibus, 
ecce,  me  miseram  quantis  undique  pressa  malls. 

"  I  see  there  is  no  remedj- — but  I  must  depart  out  of  this  country.  I  am 
here  suspected  above  all  men.  I  would  it  might  please  his  Grace  to  license  me 
to  come  into  his  realm,  and  no  longer  to  be  occupied  in  these  things  which  so 
dangerously  threaten  my  displeasure.  I  shall  be  contented  to  live  in  a  corner 
of  his  realm,  far  from  the  company  of  men,  and  there  to  pass  the  residue  of 
my  short  time," 

It  may  here  be  called  to  mind  that  we  have  already  seen 
one  English  envoy  in  no  small  perjilexity,  and  forced  to  move 
from  his  ground,  in  consequence  of  his  zeal  in  opposing  this 
great  cause  ;   but  here  we  have  the  second,  and  in  greater  per- 


312  VAUGHAN'S   NOBLE   REMONSTRANCE  [book  I, 

plexity  still.  Eager  to  gratify  his  impetuous  Sovereign,  and 
his  no  less  temporising  superior,  Master  Crumwell,  the  man 
had,  in  truth,  been  only  doing  his  utmost.  But  being  at  once 
no  favourite  of  Sir  Thomas  More's,  (nor  he  assuredly  of 
Vaughan's,)  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  pupil  of  Crumwell, 
by  whom  he  had  been  recommended  to  Henry  ;  between  the 
two,  this  ambassador  was  now  in  a  maze.  After  such  sound 
advice  as  he  had  tendered  to  his  King,  and  all  around  him ; 
after  such  fine  sentiments  as  he  had  now  so  well  expressed  ; 
one  cannot  but  regret  to  find,  in  the  end,  that  he  had  been 
only  one  of  those  of  whom  the  Scriptures  speak — "  their  webs 
shall  not  become  garments,  and  there  is  no  judgment  in  their 
goings :  they  have  made  them  crooked  paths  :  whosoever 
goetli  therein,  shall  not  know  peace."  But  the  secret  comes 
out  at  last,  and  he  is  frank  enough  to  tell  it  plainly ;  well 
knowino;,  as  he  must  have  done,  that  to  such  a  man  as  Crum- 
well  now  was,  it  would  be  no  blot  in  his  character — for  thus 
he  proceeds — 

"  I  have  too  much  laboured  in  truth.  My  policies  have  been  here  divers. 
My  conversation  amongst  men,  like  unto  theirs.  Amongst  Christian  men  I 
have  been  a  Christian.  Amongst  Jews,  alike  to  them.  Amongst  Lutherans,  a 
Lutheran  also.  What  can  I  here  do,  without  such  policy  ?  Shall  such  policies 
hurt  me,  because  I  used  them  to  compass  other  things  ?  Then,  either  think 
they  that  they  sent  a  fool,  or  me  constrain  they  to  think,  that  they  have  no 
'  discrete  perceveraunce  ! ' 

"  Another  thing  that  most  grieveth  me  is  this,  that  by  this  mean  I  should 
lose  a  most  dear  friend  and  special  good  Master  of  you,  as  I  have  been  lately 
informed.  And  that  you  have  excused  you  to  the  King's  Majesty  for  roe,  and 
showed  to  hiui,  that  you  are  very  sorry,  that  ever  you  commended  or  advanced 
me  to  his  Majesty, — considering  that  I  am  one  of  such  sort  as  I  am,  and  that 
you  were  greatly  deceived  by  me  ;  supposing  that  I  had  been  far  otherwise  dis- 
posed than  I  now  am.  Thus  saith  my  Lord  Chancellor,  and  so  it  is  reported 
to  me,  of  his  mouth.  If  you  have  so  done,  then  again  increase  my  troubles  into 
a  more  bitter  passion  than  ever ;  and  think  not  that  whatsoever  you  have  said, 
or  shall  say,  have  done,  or  shall  do,  it  can  yet  turn  my  heart  from  you,  of 
whom  I  have  received  far  greater  pleasures,  than  these  displeasures. — But 
rather  I  will  owe  you  all  my  powers,  (besides  that  part  which  belongeth  to  God,) 
while  I  live,  and  will  not  be  driven  from  you,  though  my  body  should  extremely 
suffer.  I  speak  it  not  feignedly,  intending  by  such  colour  and  manner  of  writ- 
ing to  win  your  favour,  or  to  gape  for  your  gift, — having  no  need  thereof ;  nor, 
God  willing,  shall  have,  being  right  able,  par  tout,  as  the  Frenchman  saith,  to 
get  my  living.  But  I  declare  by  this  my  writing  unto  you,  the  earnest  meaning 
of  my  heart,  and  that  thereunto  your  exceeding  merits  have  drawn  me,  nolens 
volens.  Here  leave  I,  to  write  any  farther  of  this  matter,  till  I  hear  either  from 
you,  or  some  other  of  my  friends." 

After  informing  Crumwell  of  his  doings  at  Tournay,  and  the  Emperor's  move- 
ments, he  then  adds  — "  George  Constantync  came  to  Antwerp,  after  his  break- 


1531.^  WITH   CRUMWELL.  313 

iiig  from  my  Lord  Chancellor,  the  vi.  day  of  December.  With  him,  nor  with 
none  other  such,  trill  I  meddle  or  ham  to  do,  considering  that  /  aia  beaten  iciih 
mine  oicn  labonm.  And  thus,  with  most  humble  heart  I  bid  you  farewell,  &c.- — 
from  Antwex'p  the  ix.  day  of  December  1531. — Your  answer,  if  it  so  stand  with 
your  pleasure.     Your  humble  and  true  servant,  *S'.  Vautjhau.''^'! 

It  may  only  be  stated  here  that  Constantyne  again  went  on, 
importing  books  :  but  it  will  be  remembered  that  we  have  given 
these  instances,  merely  as  a  characteristic  specimen  of  this 
sad  year.  "  For  why  stand  I  here,"  says  Foxe  in  one  place, 
"  numbering  the  sand  V  And  again, — "  So  great  was  the 
trouble  of  those  times,  that  it  would  overcharge  any  story  to 
recite  the  names  of  all  them,  which  during  those  bitter  days, 
before  the  coming  in  of  Queen  Anne,  either  were  driven  out 
of  the  realm,  or  were  cast  out  from  their  goods  and  houses,  or 
brought  to  open  shame  by  abjuration.  Yet,  nevertheless,  so 
mightlUi  the  power  of  GocVs  gospel  did  work  in  the  hearts  of  good 
men,  that  the  number  of  them  did  nothing  lessen  for  all  this  vio- 
lence and  policy  of  the  adversaries ;  hut  rather  increased  in  such 
sort,  as  our  story  almost  suffereth  not  to  recite  the  particular 
names  of  all  and  singular  such  as  then  groaned  under  the  perse- 
cution of  those  daysT  But  still  besides  those  whose  names  are 
given,  there  must  have  been  many  who  were  never  detected. 

By  these  furious  proceedings,  the  deep  interest  abroad,  not 
one  whit  diminished,  was  increased,  and  in  more  places  than 
one,  for  of  course  the  parties  molested  fled  to  difierent  ports. 
But  on  the  80th  of  December  Vaughan  concludes  the  year,  by 
giving  us  the  result,  so  far  as  his  own  residence  and  neighbour- 
hood were  concerned.  His  letter,  as  before,  is  addressed  to 
Crumwell. 

"  I  hear  of  divers,  as  well  men  as  women,  whose  persons  or  names  I  know 
not,  nor  will  know,  to  be  fled  out  of  England,  for  fear  of  punishment ;  bringing 
with  them  all  that  ever  they  can  make.  So  that  by  this  means,  it  is  likely, 
that  new  Tyndalcs  shall  spring,  or  worse  than  he.  I  am  unwise  thus  to  \n'ite, 
being  so  unkindly  treated  in  England  in  examinations :  so  that  it  seemeth  my 
poor  house,  my  body,  and  finally  my  life,  standeth  only  in  the  untrue  reports  of 
any  evil  disposed  person  in  the  King's  realm  ;  which  being  examined  of  me,  by 
chance  evomite  or  spit  out  any  venom  against  me,  whereby  he  may  trust  to  es- 


67  Cotton  MS.,  Galba,  B.  x.,  fol.  21. — For  several  of  tlie  incidents  before  and  afterwards  men- 
tioned as  to  Constantyne,  sec  his  own  curious  memorial  to  Lord  Crumwell,  dated  19th  August 
1539,  with  its  introduction  and  notes,  as  first  printed  in  the  Archa'ologia  of  1831,  or  vol.  xxiii., 
pp.  .50-78.  "  The  caustic  Imniour  with  which  his  rem.-irks  abound,"  says  Mr.  Amyot,  "serves 
to  give  them  addition.il  point  and  effect."  Some  farther  information  furnished  by  Constantyne 
will  occur  under  the  years  1530  and  1039. 


314.  VAUGHAN   DISGUSTED  WITH   PERSECUTION.  (^BOOK  I. 

cape  himself.  Doth  such  uiikindness,  trow  you,  move  me  to  use  my  policy  with 
these  maimer  of  people,  or  to  go  about  any  thing  which  by  chance  might  either 
help  or  ease'?  Nay,  truly  ;  but  much  rather  I  am  utterly  determinefl,  henceforth, 
never  to  intermeddle,  or  to  have  any  communication,  with  any  one  of  them ; 
but  shall  rather  give  place  to  some  other  man,  which,  peradventure,  shall  have 
better  luck,  than  I  hitherto  have  had ;  whom  they  go  about  thus  unkindly  to 
threaten,  beat,  rend,  and  tear  for  my  service.  I  marvel  of  their  exceeding  thrift 
to  bring  me  in  danger,  which  never  offended  them.  What  Job  could  here  have 
patience  ?    What  mind,  so  quiet,  will  here  not  be  troubled  ? 

"  Let  their  manners,  their  behaviours,  their  meanings,  their  communications, 
their  companies,  their  oj)inions,  their  conversations,  the  orders  of  their  livings 
in  all  things,  be  as  nearly  examined  as  mine  ;  as  subtilly  searched  and  tried  as 
mine  ;  by  so  many  sundry  persons  as  mine  ; — And  what  think  you  ?  they  shall 
be  found  Innocents  ?  Nay,  nocentes,  the  worse,  peradventure,  than  He,  of  whom 
they  so  greatly  examine.  I  would  they  all,  which  so  greatly  examine,  did  know, 
I  am  no  heretic,  nor  for  them  all,  will  be  made  one.  I  neither  have  so  corrupt 
a  mind,  so  evil  a  conscience,  nor  so  little  understanding,  as  it  seemeth  they 
would  I  had,  which  seek  ways  to  destroy  the  innocent.  I  pray  God  amend 
them  !"68 

Vaughan,  it  is  evident,  was  now  tliorouglily  frightened,  yet 
he  need  not  have  greatly  "  niarvelled."  The  reports  respecting 
him,  must,  of  necessity,  have  been  very  contradictory,  and  the 
miserable  plight,  of  which  he  complained  so  loudly,  was  nothing 
more  than  the  natural  result  of  those  '■'■divers  policies,''''  which 
he  had  dreamt  to  be  the  fruit  of  wisdom,  or  the  evidence  of  his 
superior  talent.  He  only  adds  in  this  letter, — "  If  in  any 
part  of  this  my  writing,  I  have  erred  or  offended,  I  ask  thereof 
pardon.  My  passion  is  so  great,  I  cannot  resist.  And  thus, 
&c. — from  Antwerp  the  30th  day  of  December  1531."  Nor 
did  he  ever  write  again  on  this  subject.  The  truth,  was,  he 
was  at  once  alarmed  for  himself,  and  disgusted  with  the  pro- 
ceedings at  home ;  yet  he  retained  his  station,  long  survived 
Sir  Thomas  More,  and  remained  on  the  Continent  for  years. 
But  if  Henry  the  Eighth  be  still  resolved  to  have  other  agents 
out  in  pursuit  after  Tyndale,  he  must  find  some  other  man  than 
Mr.  Vaughan.  Already  we  have  seen  a  Friar,  and  two  Am- 
bassadors, completely  foiled,  and  disappointed  of  their  prey; 
though  still  the  long  pursuit  is  not  even  yet  at  an  end  !  In 
the  persons  of  her  rulers  at  this  period,  no  nation  upon  earth 
had  surpassed  Britain,  in  her  opposition  to  Divine  truth. 

snOalba,  B.  x.,  fol.  25. 


[     3\5      ] 


SECTION    IX. 

TYNDALE'S  PKOGRESS EXPOSITION   IN  MATTHEW UIS  SENTIMENTS    UNDER 

PEIISECUTION THE    KING    NOT    APPEASED RENEWED    PURSUIT    OF   TYN- 

DALE NOW  BY  SIR  THOMAS  ELYOT STILL  IN   VAIN STATE  OF  ENGLAND 

PARLIAMENT THE   BISHOPS    FINED THE  KINo's    AFFAIRS PERSECU- 
TION  GOES    ON BAINHAM LATIMER MORE  AGAINST    TYNDALE FRYTH 

ARRIVES    IN    ENGLAND IN  PERIL IN  THE  TOWER WRITING    THERE    IN 

DEFENCE  OF  THE  TRUTH,  AND  ADDRESSING  THE   CHRISTIANS  IN  ENGLAND, 

Had  Tyndale  been  only  left  unmolested,  or  left  to  proceed 
with  the  Scriptures,  he  would,  unquestionably,  have  had  some 
additional  portion  finished  at  press ;  but  since  the  year  1528 
the  reader  may  now  judge  of  his  situation.  Already  he  had 
given  the  New  Testament,  the  Pentateuch,  and  the  Prophet 
Jonah,  to  his  native  land.  The  work  of  Translation,  or  the 
joy  of  his  heart,  he  still  pursued,  but  without  due  deliberation, 
he  would  not  employ  the  press.  Our  English  exile  fled  for 
protection  to  no  foreign  prince  ;  nor  had  he  the  aid  of  eminent 
literary  assistants,  like  his  contemporary,  Martin  Luther.  If 
he  had  hitherto  enjoyed  the  assistance  and  fellowship  of  only 
John  Fryth,  this  was  soon  to  be  withdrawn,  by  his  journey 
to  the  martyr's  stake  in  England;  and  though  labouring  under 
the  frown  of  his  own  monarch,  as  well  as  that  of  all  his  coun- 
sellors and  bishops,  on  he  went. 

Meanwhile,  he  had  one  solitary  encouragement.  He  well 
knew  that  whatever  he  put  forth  from  the  press,  excited  im- 
mediate notice  ;  for,  in  fact,  every  thing  he  had  yet  published, 
had  enjoyed  the  honour  of  being  denounced  in  England,  and 
interdicted  both  by  royal  and  priestly  authority.  The  only 
piece  unnoticed  as  not  being  so,  his  "  Exposition  of  the  Epistle 
of  John,"  was  this  year  added  to  the  catalogue,  and  reprobated 
in  print,  by  the  Lord  Chancellor. 

Our  Lord's  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  in  the  gospel  by  Matthew, 
now  engaged  Tyndale's  attention,  as  demanding  to  be  ex- 
pounded, owing  to  the  errors  which  still  reigned  triumphant ; 
and  his  exposition  first  came  out  sometime  this  year.  In  this 
fundamental  portion  of  the  Sacred  Volume,  he  represents  the 
Saviour  as  "  opening  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  which  the 
enemies  "  had  shut  up,  that  other  men  should  not  enter." 


316  TYNDALE'S   VIEWS  OF  [book  I. 

"  He  restoreth  the  key  of  knowledge  which  they  had  taken  away,"  having 
also  "  broken  the  wards,  with  wresting  the  text  contrary  to  its  due  and  natural 
course,  with  their  false  glosses.  He  plucketh  away  from  the  face  of  Moses,  the 
veil  which  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  had  spread  thereon,  that  no  man  might 
perceive  the  brightness  of  his  countenance.  He  weedeth  out  the  thorns  and 
briars  of  their  pharisaical  glosses,  wherewith  they  had  stopped  up  the  narrow 
way  and  strait  gate,  that  few  could  find  them." 

Before  this,  we  have  had  occasion  to  observe  that  Tyndale 
was  almost  immediately  in  possession  of  whatever  was  trans- 
acted in  England ;  more  especially  by  the  King,  and  his  ob- 
sequious or  subdued  Parliament ;  and,  of  course,  he  must  have 
been  fully  aware  of  their  doings  in  the  spring  of  last  year. 
His  opinion  of  the  change  for  which  Henry  and  Orumwell  had 
been  so  eager,  may  be  inferred  from  various  passages  now  put 
forth.  Already  he  had  shown  himself  a  most  loyal  subject, 
and  an  ardent  admirer  of  good  government ;  in  desiring,  above 
all  things,  that  his  King  and  country  should  be  rescued  from 
spiritual  thraldom  :  but  in  desiring  this,  he  was  no  less  ardent 
in  drawing  the  line  of  distinction  between  the  icorld  and  the 
Church.  As  to  the  latter,  he  longed  for  its  restoration  to  its 
original  spirituality,  and  simple  grandeur ;  and  as  to  his  much 
loved  native  land,  that  the  throne  should  be  established  on  a 
safe  and  righteous  basis.  A  few  sentences  will  explain  his 
views  of  both  subjects. 

"  When  Christ,  which  is  the  door,  the  way,  and  the  ground  or  foundation  of 
all  the  Scripture,  is  lost,  concerning  the  chiefest  fruit  of  his  passion,  and  no  more 
seen  in  his  own  likeness  ;  then  is  the  Scripture  locked  up,  and  henceforth  ex- 
ti'eme  darkness  and  amaze  ;  wherein  if  thou  walk,  thou  wottest  neither  where 
thou  art,  nor  canst  find  any  way  out !  It  is  a  confused  chaos,  and  a  mingling 
of  all  things  together  without  order  ; — every  thing  contrary  to  another.  It  is 
an  hedge  or  grove  of  briars,  wherein  if  thou  be  caught,  it  is  impossible  to  get  out, 
but  that  if  thou  lose  thyself  in  one  place,  thou  art  tangled  and  caught  in 
another  for  it. 

"  This  wise  was  the  Scripture  locked  up  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  that 
the  Jews  could  not  see  Christ  when  he  came,  nor  yet  can.  And  though  Christ, 
with  these  three  chapters,  did  open  it  again  ;  yet  by  such  glosses,  for  our  un- 
thankfulness'  sake,  that  we  had  no  desire  to  live  according,  have  we  lost  Christ 
again,  and  the  understanding  of  the  most  clear  text,  wherewith  Christ  exj^ound- 
eth  and  restoreth  the  law  again. 

"  For  the  hypocrites  have  so  riijfied  and  tawjJed  the  temporal  and  sjnritual 
regiment  tu<iethcr,  and  made  thereof  such  confusion,  that  no  man  can  know  the 
one  from  the  other  :  to  the  intent  that  they  would  seem  to  have  both  by  the 
authority  of  Christ,  \\hic-h  never  usurped  temporal  regiment  unto  him — Go  to, 
then, — and  read  here  the  words  of  Christ,  with  this  exposition  following,  and 
thou  shalt  see  the  law,  faith  and  works  restored,  each  to  his  right  use  and  true 


1532.]  TFIE  KINGDOM   OF  CHRIST.  317 

meaning.  And  thereto  the  clear  difference  between  the  spiritual  regiment  and 
the  temporal,  and  shalt  liave  an  entrance  and  open  way  into  the  rest  of 
all  the  Scripture." 

"  Ye  must  understand  there  be  two  states  or  degrees  in  this 
world.  The  kingdom  of  heaven^  which  is  the  regiment  (the 
establislied  government)  of  the  Gospel ;  and  the  Jcingdom  of 
this  worlds  which  is  the  temporal  regiment. 

"  In  the  first,  or  spiritual  state,  there  is  neither  Father,  Mother,  Son, 
Daughter  ;  neither  master,  mistress,  maid,  man-servant  ;  nor  husband,  nor 
wife,  nor  Lord,  nor  subject,  nor  man,  nor  woman  :  But  Christ  is  all,  and  each 
to  other  is  Christ  himself.  There  is  none  better  than  other — all  brethren,  and 
Christ  only,  is  Lord  over  all. 

"  Every  man  then  may  be  a  common  Preacher,  thou  wilt  say,  and  preach 
everywhere  by  his  own  authority.  Nay,  verily :  no  man  may  yet  bo  a  common 
Preacher,  save  he  that  is  called,  and  chosen  thereto  by  the  common  ordinance 
of  the  congregation,  as  long  as  the  Preacher  teacheth  the  true  word  of  God. 
But  every  private  man  ought  to  be  in  virtuous  living,  both  light  and  salt  to  his 
neighbour  ;  insomuch  that  the  poorest  ought  to  strive  to  overrun  the  Bishop, 
and  preach  to  him  in  eiisample  of  living.  Moreover,  every  man  ought  to  preach 
in  word  and  deed  unto  his  household,  and  to  them  that  are  under  his  gover- 
nance. And  though  no  man  may  preach  openh-,  save  he  that  hath  the  office 
committed  unto  him,  yet  ought  every  man  to  endeavour  himself,  to  be  as  learned 
as  the  Preacher,  as  nigh  as  it  is  possible.  And  every  man  may  privately  inform 
his  neighbour,  yea,  and  the  Preacher  and  Bishop  too,  if  need  be.  For  if  the 
Preacher  preach  wrong,  then  may  any  man,  whatsoever  he  be,  rebuke  him, 
first  privately,  and  then,  if  that  help  not,  to  complain  farther.  And  when 
all  is  proved,  according  to  the  order  of  charity,  and  j-et  none  amendment 
made  ;  then  ought  every  man  that  can  to  resist  him,  and  to  stand  by  Christ's 
doctrine,  and  to  jeopardy  life,  and  all  for  it.  Look  on  the  old  ensamples,  and 
they  shall  teach  thee. 

"  The  Gospel  hath  another  freedom  with  her,  than  the  temporal  regiment. 
Though  every  man's  body  and  goods  be  under  the  King,  do  he  right  or  wrong, 
yet  is  the  authority  of  God's  Word  free,  and  above  the  King  :  so  that  the 
lowest  in  the  realm  may  tell  the  King,  if  he  do  him  wrong,  that  he  doth  nought, 
and  otherwise  than  God  hath  commanded  him,  and  so  warn  him  to  avoid  the 
wrath  of  God,  which  is  the  patient  avenger  of  all  unrighteousness.  May  I 
then,  and  ought  also,  to  resist  father  and  mothei",  and  all  temporal  power 
with  God's  Word,  when  they  wrongfully  do  or  command  that  which  hurteth  or 
killeth  the  body  ?  And  have  I  no  power  to  resist  the  Bishop  or  Preacher, 
that,  with  false  doctrine,  killeth  the  souls  for  which  my  Master  and  Lord,  Christ, 
liath  shed  his  blood  ?  Be  we  otherwise  under  our  Bishops,  than  Christ  and 
his  Apostles,  and  all  the  other  Prophets  were  under  the  Bishops  of  the  old  law  ? 
Nay,  verily  :  and  therefore  may  we,  and  also  ought  to  do  as  they  did,  and  to 
answer  as  the  Apostles  did.  Acts  v.,  We  must  rather  obey  God  than  men." 

"  Whosoever  studieth  to  destroy  one  of  the  commandments  following,  and 
teach  other  men  even  so,  in  word  or  ensample,  whether  openly  or  under  a 
colour,  and  through  false  glosses  of  hypocrisy  ;  that  same  doctor  shall  all  they 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  abhor  and  despise,  and  cast  him  out  of  their  company, 
as  a  seething  pot  doth  cast  up  her  foam  and  scum  and  purge  herself.     So  fast 


318  SPIRITUAL  DISTINGUISHED  [bOOK  I. 

sliall  they  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  cleave  unto  the  pure  law  of  God,  without 
all  men's  glosses.  But  whosoever  shall  first  fulfil  them  himself,  and  then  teach 
others,  and  set  all  his  study  to  the  furtherance  and  maintaining  of  them,  that 
doctor  shall  all  they  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  have  in  price — and  follow  him 
and  seek  him  out,  as  doth  an  eagle  her  prey,  and  cleave  to  him  as  burs.  For 
these  commandments  are  but  the  vei'y  law  of  Moses,  interpreted  according 
to  the  pure  Word  of  God,  and  as  the  open  text  compelleth  to  understand  them, 
if  ye  look  diligently  thereon. 

"  The  '  kingdom  of  heaven,'  take  for  the  congregation  or  Church  of  Christ. 
And  to  be  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  is  to  know  God  for  our  Father,  and  Christ 
for  our  Lord,  and  Saviour  from  all  sin.  And  to  enter  into  this  kingdom  it  is 
impossible,  except  the  heart  of  men  be  to  keep  the  commandments  of  God 
purely,  as  it  is  written — '  If  any  man  will  obey  his  will,  that  is  to  say,  the  will 
of  the  Father  that  sent  me,  (saith  Christ)  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine  ;  whether 
it  be  of  God,  or  whether  I  speak  of  mine  own  head.'  For  if  thine  heart  be  to 
do  the  will  of  God  ;  he  will  give  thee  a  pure  eye,  both  to  discern  the  true  doc- 
trine from  the  false,  and  the  true  doctor  from  the  howling  hypocrite.  And 
therefore  he  saith — '  For  1  say  unto  you,  except  your  righteousness  exceed  the 
righteousness  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.'  For  the  righteousness  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  cannot  enter  into 
the  kingdom.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  the  true  knowledge  of  God  and 
Christ :  ergo,  the  righteousness  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  neither  knoweth 
God  nor  Christ.  He  that  is  willing  to  obey  the  will  of  God,  understandeth  the 
doctrine.  But  to  obey  the  will  of  God,  is  to  seek  the  glory  of  God.  For  the 
glory  of  a  master  is  the  meek  obedience  of  his  servants  ;  The  glory  of  a  Prince 
is  the  humble  obedience  of  his  subjects  ;  the  glory  of  a  husband  is  the  chaste 
obedience  of  his  wife ;  the  glory  of  a  father  is  the  loving  obedience  of  his 
children  ;  but  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  have  no  desire  to  obey  the  will  of  God  : 
ergo,  they  seek  not  the  glory  of  God." 

"  In  the  TEMPORAL  regiment,  (government,)  is  Husband,  Wife ;  Father, 
Mother;  Son,  Daughter;  Master,  Mistress;  Maid,  Man-servant;  Lord  and 
subject. 

"  In  the  first  regiment,  thou  art  a  person  for  thine  own  self,  under  Christ  and 
his  doctrine,  and  mayest  neither  hate  nor  be  angry,  and  much  less  fight  and 
avenge.  But  must,  after  the  ensample  of  Christ,  humble  thyself,  forsake  and 
deny  thyself,  and  hate  thyself,  and  cast  thyself  away,  and  be  meek  and  patient, 
and  let  every  man  go  over  thee,  and  tread  thee  under  foot,  and  do  thee  wrong 
— and  yet  love  them,  and  pray  for  them,  as  Christ  did  for  his  crucifiers.  For 
love  is  all,  and  what  is  not  of  love,  that  is  damnable  and  cast  out  of  that  kingdom. 

"  In  the  temporal  regiment,  thou  art  a  person  in  respect  of  another.  Thou 
art  an  husband,  father,  mother,  master,  misti'ess,  lord,  ruler — or  wife,  son, 
daughter,  servant,  subject. — And  there  thou  must  do  according  to  thine  ojice. 
Now,  to  our  purpose,  whether  a  man  may  resist  violence,  and  defend  or  avenge 
himself.  I  say  nay,  in  the  first  state,  where  thou  art  a  person  for  thyself 
alone,  and  Christ's  disciple.  There  thou  must  love,  and  of  love,  do,  study,  and 
enforce  ;  yea,  and  suffer  all  things  (as  Christ  did)  to  make  peace,  that  the  bless- 
ing of  God  may  come  upon  thee,  which  saith^ — ■"  Blessed  be  the  peace  makers, 
for  they  shall  be  the  children  of  God.'  If  thou  suffer  and  keepest  peace  in  thy- 
self alone,  thy  blessing  is  the  possession  of  this  world  ;  but  if  thou  so  love  the 
peace  of  thy  brethren,  that  thou  leave  nothing  undone  or  unsuffered,  to  further 
it,  thy  blessing  is,  thou  shalt  be  God's  son,  and  consequently  possess  heaven. 

"  But  in  the  worldly  state,  where  thou  art  no  private  man,  but  a  person  in 


1532.]  FROM   CIVIL   GOVERNMENT.  319 

respect  of  others,  thou  not  only  niayest,  but  also  must,  and  art  bound,  undei* 
pain  of  condemnation,  to  execute  thine  office.  Of  thy  servants,  thou  must  exact 
obedience  and  fear,  and  mayest  not  suffer  thyself  to  be  despised. 

"  And  where  thou  art  a  Rnlcr  thereto  appointed,  thou  must  take,  prison,  and 
slay  too  ;  not  of  malice  and  hate  to  avenge  thyself,  but  to  defend  thy  subjects, 
and  to  maintain  thine  office.  Concerning  thyself,  oppress  not  thy  subjects  with 
rent,  fines,  or  custom  at  all  ;  neither  pill  them  with  taxes,  and  such  like,  to 
maintain  thine  own  lusts  ;  but  be  loving  and  kind  to  them,  as  Christ  was  to 
thee,  for  they  be  his,  and  the  price  of  his  blood.  But  those  that  are  evil  doers 
among  them,  and  vex  their  brethren,  and  will  not  know  thee  for  their  judge, 
and  fear  not  thy  law,  them  smite,  and  upon  them  draw  thy  sword,  and  put  it 
not  up  till  thou  hast  done  thine  office." 

At  this  very  early  period,  the  distinction  between  spiritual 
and  civil  government  was  understood  by  scarcely  any  man, 
and  probably  no  one  then  alive  could  have  drawn  the  line  so 
clearly ;  nor  is  it  at  all  to  be  wondered  at,  if,  in  the  end, 
Tyndale  himself  should  so  far  entangle  the  two  re^itnents  with 
each  other.  This  he  does,  however,  in  a  way  then  peculiar 
to  himself — and  in  a  way,  also,  which,  it  will  be  now  observed, 
could  never  harmonise  with  the  supremacy  so  lately  acceded 
to,  seeing  it  was  merely  forced  from  a  spirituality,  falsely  so 
called,  and  one  which  this  writer  still  laboured  to  level  with 
the  dust — 

"  Moreover,  when  I  say  there  be  two  regiments,  the  spiritual  and  temporal  ; 
even  so  I  say  that  every  person  baptized  to  keep  the  law  of  God,  and  to  be- 
lieve in  Christ,  is  under  both  the  regiments,  and  is  both  a  spiritual  person  and 
also  a  temporal,  and  under  the  officers  of  both  the  regiments  :  so  that  the  King 
is  as  deep  under  the  spiritual  officer,  to  hear  out  of  God's  Word,  what  he  ought 
to  believe,  and  how  to  live,  and  how  to  rule,  as  is  the  poorest  person  in  his 
realm.  And  even  so  the  spiritual  officer,  if  he  sin  against  his  neighbour,  or 
teach  false  doctrine,  is  under  the  King's  or  temporal  correction,  how  high 
soever  he  be.  And  look  how  damnable  it  is  for  the  King  to  withdraw  himself 
from  the  obedience  of  the  spiritual  officer ;  that  is  to  say,  from  bewaring  his 
duty,  to  do  it,  and  from  hearing  his  vices  rebuked,  to  amend  them  ;  so  dam- 
nable is  it  for  the  spiritual  officer  to  withdraw  himself  from  the  King's  correc- 
tion, if  he  teach  false,  or  sin  against  any  temporal  law." 

But  the  truth  was,  that  the  King  was  yet  to  be  born 
whom  Tyndale  wished  to  see.  When  he  comes  to  expound 
the  last  clause  of  the  Lord"'s  prayer,  he  says — 

"  Finally,  no  King,  Lord,  Master,  or  whatever  ruler  he  be,  hath  absolute 
power  in  this  world,  nor  is  the  very  thine/  which  he  is  called,  for  then  they  cease 
to  be  brethren,  neither  could  they  sin  whatsoever  they  commanded.  But  now 
their  authority  is  but  a  limited  power." 

Such  were  some  of  Tyndale's  views  on  a  subject,  which,  at 
this  period,  agitated  all  England.     If  they  have  been  partly 


320  TYNDALE'S  SENTIMENTS  [boOK  r. 

the  occasion  of  his  memory  being  permitted  to  sleep  in  ob- 
livion ;  if  he  had  measured  out  "  meat  too  strong "  for  the 
ao"e  in  which  he  lived ;  we  leave  his  sentiments,  without  com- 
ment, to  the  consideration  of  his  countrymen  now  living, 
after  more  than  three  hundred  years  have  passed  over  the 
land.  And  we  leave  them  to  enquire  what  might  be  his  own 
feelings,  as  a  persecuted  man,  and  still  to  be  pursued.  Here 
they  are  in  the  same  publication — 

"  Blessed  are  ye,  when  they  revile  you  and  persecute  you,  and  say  all  man- 
ner of  evil  sayings  ar/ainst  you  for  my  sake,  and  yet  lie.  Rejoice  and  be  glad,  for 
your  reward  is  great  in  heaven.  Even  so,  verily,  they  persecuted  the  j^rophets  that 
were  before  yoii.  Here  seest  thou  tlie  uttermost  that  a  Christian  must  look  for. 
It  is  not  enough  to  suffer  for  righteousness  ;  but  that  no  bitterness  or  passion 
be  left  out  of  thy  cup,  thou  shalt  be  reviled  and  railed  upon  ;  and  even  when 
thou  are  condemned  to  death,  then  be  excommunicate  and  delivered  to  Satan, 
deprived  of  the  fellowship  of  holy  Church,  the  company  of  the  angels,  and  of 
thy  part  in  Christ's  blood  ;  and  shalt  be  cursed  down  to  hell,  defied,  detested, 
and  execrate  with  all  the  blasphemous  railings  that  the  poisonful  heart  of  hypo- 
crites can  think  or  imagine  ;  and  shalt  see  before  thy  face,  when  thou  goest  to 
thy  death,  that  all  the  world  is  persuaded  and  brought  in  belief,  that  thou  hast 
said  and  done  that  thou  never  thoughtest,  and  that  thou  diest  for  that  (which) 
thou  art  as  guiltless  of  as  the  child  that  is  unborn. 

"  Well,  though  iniquity  so  highly  prevail,  and  the  truth  for  which  thou  diest, 
be  so  low  kept  under,  and  be  not  once  known  before  the  world,  insomuch,  that 
it  seemeth  rather  to  be  hindered  by  thy  death  than  furthered,  (which  is  of  all 
griefs  the  greatest,)  yet  let  not  thine  heart  fail  thee  ;  neither  despair,  as  though 
God  had  forsaken  thee,  or  loved  thee  not.  But  comfort  thyself  with  old  en- 
samples,  how  God  hath  suffered  all  his  old  friends  to  be  so  entreated  ;  and  also 
his  only  and  dear  son,  Jesus,  whose  ensample,  above  all  other,  set  before  thine 
eyes,  because  thou  art  sure  he  was  beloved  above  all  other,  that  thou  doubt  not 
but  thou  art  beloved  also  ;  and  so  much  the  more  beloved,  the  more  thou  art 
like  to  the  image  of  his  ensample  in  suffering. 

"  Did  not  the  hypocrites  watch  Him  in  all  his  sermons,  to  trap  Him  in  his 
own  words  ?  Was  He  not  subtilly  apposed,  whether  it  were  lawful  to  pay 
tribute  to  Crosar  ?  Were  not  all  His  words  wrong  reported  ?  Were  not  His 
miracles  ascribed  to  Beelzebub  ?  Said  they  not,  He  was  a  Samaritan,  and  had 
a  devil  in  him  ?  Was  He  not  called  a  breaker  of  the  Sabbath — a  wine-drinker 
— a  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners  1  Did  He  aught,  wherewith  no  fault  was 
found,  and  that  was  not  interpreted  to  be  done  for  an  evil  purpose  ?  Was  not 
the  pretence  of  His  death,  the  destroying  of  the  temple,  to  bring  him  into  the 
hate  of  all  men  ?  Was  He  not  thereto  accused  of  treason,  that  He  forbade  to 
pay  tribute  to  Caesar,  and  that  He  moved  the  people  to  insurrection  ?  Railed 
they  not  on  Him,  in  the  bitterest  of  all  His  passion,  as  he  hanged  on  the  cross, 
saying, '  Save  thyself,  thou  that  savest  others,  come  down  from  the  cross,  and 
we  will  believe  in  thee.'  Yet  He  was  beloved  of  God,  and  so  art  thou.  His 
cause  came  to  light  also,  and  so  shall  thine  at  the  last ;  yea,  and  thy  reward  is 
great  in  heaven  with  him,  for  thy  deep  suffering. 

"  And,  on  the  other  side,  as  they  be  cursed  which  have  righteousness  desti- 
tute, and  will  not  suffer  therewith  ;  so  are  they  most  accursed  which  know  the 


1532.]  UNDKR  PERSECUTION.  321 

truth,  and  yet  not  only  flee  therefrom,  because  they  will  not  suffer  ;  but  also 
for  lucre  become  the  most  cruel  enemies,  and  most  subtle  persecutors,  and 
most  falsely  lie  thereon  also." 

The  power  of  Tyndalo's  Meriting  lay  in  his  drawing  from 
the  life,  and  his  discerning,  with  superior  judgment,  the 
precise  moment  when  certain  truths  required  to  be  pressed 
upon  the  notice  of  his  country.  His  views,  whether  of  civil 
government,  or  the  Church  of  God,  were  far  above  his  age, 
and  few  there  must  have  been  who  could  then  understand  him ; 
but  apart  from  these  subjects,  many  passages,  besides  that  last 
quoted,  were  peculiarly  well  timed.  The  preceding  page, 
and  several  others,  were  evidently  intended  to  nerve  the  minds 
of  the  martyrs  and  confessors  in  England  ;  to  raise  them 
above  all  the  fury  of  the  Chancellor,  or  Stokesly,  or  any  other 
Bishop.  Hitherto  it  seems  as  if  all  ivho  had  been  apprehended 
and  examined,  from  Barnes  down  to  the  present  hour,  had  ab- 
jured} And  though  the  fire  had  been  now  prepared  for  the 
bodies  of  men,  as  well  as  the  books  they  read,  still  the  methods 
of  Tunstal  and  More,  for  perplexing  the  mind  or  tormenting 
the  conscience,  were  preferred  in  the  first  instance.  The  stake 
was  the  last  resort,  merely  on  this  account,  that  abjuration 
and  recanting  not  only  saved  appearances,  but  served,  in  some 
degree,  to  bolster  up  the  reigning  superstition. 

If,  then,  England  herself  could  furnish  the  enemy  with  no 
man  of  eminence,  who  had  courage  sufiicient  to  act  fully  up  to 
his  principles  on  the  first  call ; — a  man,  in  whom  there  should 
be  no  wavering,  no  subterfuge,  no  compromise  or  concession, 
not  one  faltering  word  ; — one  who  should  first  triumph  in 
argument  before  the  Bishops  assembled,  and  abide  firm  by 
every  syllable  of  his  noble  confession  ; — then  such  a  man  must 
come  to  London  from  abroad.  The  time  is  drawins;  near  for 
his  arrival  in  the  kingdom,  though  little  did  Tyndale  imagine, 
when  thus  addressing  the  faithful  in  England,  that  the  ex- 
ample which  he  now  enforced,  was  to  be  first  given  by  his 
own  bosom  friend — Fryth  ! 

But  it  is  with  Tyndale  himself  we  have  to  do  at  present.  It 
was  now  six  years  since  his  translation  of  the  New  Testament 
had  been  denounced  and  committed  to  the  flames ;  and  not 


'  Thomas  Hitton,  to  whom  Tyndale  has  once  alluded,  might  possibly  be  a  solitary  exception. 
He  was  put  to  death  by  Warham,  but  we  know  not  all  the  particulars. 

VOL.   I.  X 


322  THE  KING  NOT  APPEASED.  [bOOK  I. 

less  than  four,  since  his  person  had  been  in  danger.  By  the 
authorities  in  England,  from  the  3'ear  1 528,  he  had  been  a 
man  sought  for,  but  never  yet  seized.  His  pursuers  too,  seem 
to  rise  in  point  of  rank,  as  we  proceed.  The  first  was  Friar 
West,  who,  but  for  his  commission  from  Wolsey,  had  remained 
in  oblivion.  Hackett,  most  gladly,  would  have  sent  Tyndale 
to  England,  even  by  the  foulest  means,  and,  according  to  his 
own  logic,  as  a  traitor ;  but  he  could  never  find  him.  Vaughan 
was  incapable  of  so  base  an  action,  though  Tyndale  favoured 
him  with,  at  least,  two  interviews ;  and  from  what  we  have 
read,  it  may  safely  be  inferred,  that  he  would  never  more  en- 
gage in  hunting  after  heretics, — having,  according  to  his  own 
confession,  been  "  so  beaten  with  his  own  labours."  He  well 
deserves,  however,  to  be  remembered  as  the  only  man  of  the 
age,  who  lifted  up  his  voice  against  the  extreme  folly  of  per- 
secution for  opinion.  Henry  had  no  man  near  him  so  enlight- 
ened at  the  moment,  or  if  he  had,  not  one  who  dared  to  speak 
out,  not  even  Orumwell  himself;  for  though  so  pointedly 
charged  by  Vaughan,  it  may  be  presumed  that  he  never  had 
shown  that  envoy's  letter,  or  reported  its  contents,  to  the  King. 
But  be  this  as  it  may,  Henry  was  not  appeased.  Tyndale 
had  gone  on  to  publish,  it  is  true,  and  besides  his  Answer  to 
Sir  Thomas  More,  his  translation  of  Jonah  was  now  in  Eng- 
land; but  his  Majesty  was  no  admirer  of  the  King  of  Nineveh, 
nor  were  his  ministers  like  the  nobles  of  that  great  city.  The 
person  now  put  in  commission,  and  by  the  King  himself,  to 
pursue  the  best  of  his  subjects,  was  no  other  than  the  well 
known  Sir  Thomas  Elyot,  a  literary  man,  author  of  "  The 
Governor,"  and  other  publications.  Vaughan  had  been 
patronised  by  Orumwell,  yet  thought  for  himself;  but  Elyot 
was  the  very  intimate,  if  not  bosom  friend  of  Sir  Thomas  More, 
as  well  as  a  favourite  of  the  King"'s,  so  that  no  zeal  can  be 
lacking  now,  even  if  Tyndale  should  not  be  apprehended. 
In  all  the  histories  yet  published,  Elyot  is  first  mentioned  as 
sent  by  Henry  the  VIII.  to  Rome,  about  his  divorce  in  1532; 
but  he  was  on  the  Continent  last  year.  He  was  with  the 
Emperor  in  November  at  Tournay,  and  had  then  been  abroad 
some  time.  Vaughan  had  met  him  there  ;  and  on  the  9th  or 
19th  of  December  1531,  he  writes  to  Orumwell : — 

"  Maister  Ellyot,  the  King's  Ambassador,  this  day  sent  me  a  letter  from 


1532.]  RENEWS   PURSUIT  OP  TYNDALE.  323 

Tournay,  with  another  enclosed  to  you,  wherein  I  think  he  desireth  you  to  be 
a  solicitor  to  the  King's  Majesty  and  to  liis  honourable  council  for  him,  that 
he  may  from  time  to  time  have  answer  of  his  letters,  and  be  made  thereby 
more  able  to  do  the  King  honour  in  those  parts.  It  is  not  well  done  that  he 
should  be  so  long  without  letters.'- 

The  Emperor,  leaving  the  Low  Countries  in  the  beginning 
of  January  this  year,  directed  his  journey  towards  Ratisbon, 
in  order  to  hold  a  diet  there.  Taking  Mentz  on  his  way,  he 
had  not  arrived  till  February  or  the  beginning  of  March,  but 
to  this  city  Elyot  followed  him.  Whether  his  correspondence 
had  been  still  neglected,  as  both  Henry  and  Orumwell  were 
absorpt  in  Parliamentary  affairs  at  home,  does  not  appear, 
but  the  ambassador  had  been  anxious  to  revisit  England. 
This  desire,  however,  could  not  be  gratified,  and  on  the  14th 
of  March,  we  have  the  following  letter,  dated  from  (Regens- 
burgh)  Ratisbon,  addressed  to  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  the  suc- 
cessor of  Wolsey,  as  Prime  Minister  of  England,  and  as 
determined  an  enemy  as  the  Cardinal  ever  was. 

"  My  duty  remembered,  with  most  humble  thanks  unto  yoiu'  Gi-ace,  that  it 
pleased  you  so  benevolently  to  remember  me  unto  the  King's  Highness,  con- 
cerning my  return  into  England.  Albeit  the  King  willeth  me,  by  his  Grace's 
letters,  to  remain  at  Brussels,  some  space  of  time,  for  the  apprehension  of  Tyn- 
dale,  which  somewhat  miuisheth  my  hope  of  soon  return  ;  considering  that 
like  as  he  is  in  \\it  moveable,  semblably  so  is  his  person  uncertain  to  come  by. 
And,  as  far  as  I  can  perceive,  hearing  of  the  King's  diligence  in  the  apprehen- 
sion of  him,  he  witlidraweth  him  into  such  places  where  lie  thinketh  to  be 
farthest  out  of  danger.  In  me  there  shall  lack  none  endeavour.  Finally,  as 
I  am  all  the  King's,  except  my  soul,  so  shall  I  endure  all  that  shall  be  his 
pleasure,  employing  my  poor  life  gladly,  in  that  which  may  be  to  his  honour,  or 
wealth  of  his  realm. 

"  Pleaseth  it  your  Grace,  according  as  I  have  written  to  the  King's  Highness, 
the  Emperor  being  yet  sore  grieved  with  a  fall  from  his  horse,  keepeth  himself 
so  close,  that  Mr.  Cranmer  and  I  can  have  none  access  to  his  Majesty,  which 
almost  grieveth  me  as  much  as  the  Emperor's  fall  grieveth  him." 3 

Every  one  who  has  paid  any  attention  to  these  times,  can- 
not fail  to  be  excited  by  the  mention  of  Elyofs  companion 
and  associate,  and  more  especially  as  this  is  the  earliest  dis- 
tinct notice  of  Cranmer  when  abroad,  which  appears  on  the 
face  of  these  manuscripts.  He  had  been  at  Rome  for  some 
time  in  1530,  but  returned  to  England  in  1531,  where  we 
find  him  at  Hampton  Court  in  June,  and  in  close  attendance 


Cotton  MS.,  Galba,  B.  x.,  fol.  24-5.  »  Cotton  MS.,  Vitell.,  B.  xxi.,  fol.  54. 


324  THROUGH  A  THIRD  AMBASSADOR.  [BOOK  I. 

upon  his  Majesty  there.  As  busy  as  ever  in  Henry's  one 
affair,  from  thence,  on  the  13th  of  that  month,  he  dates  a  long 
letter  to  Lady  Anne's  father,  the  Earl  of  Wiltshire,  criticis- 
ing the  book  of  Cardinal  Pole,  on  this  business  ;  *  and  as  ho 
remained  at  home  till  January,  he  could  not  fail  to  be  in- 
timately acquainted  with  all  the  sad  occurrences  of  last  year. 
In  that  very  period  the  fatal  fires  had  been  kindled,  and  were 
blazing  in  England.  Then  the  martyrdoms  of  Bilney,  of 
Bayfield,  and  of  Tewksbury,  had  taken  place  ;  there  were  the 
grievous  cross  examinations  and  cruelties  of  More  and  of 
Stokesly ;  and  the  public  denunciation,  by  the  latter,  of  Tyn- 
dale's  writings,  in  December ;  and  yet  here  is  Cranmer,  asso- 
ciated as  ambassador  and  fellow  traveller  with  the  man  who  has 
been  charged,  by  their  King,  to  seize  the  Author  !  But  still  it 
were  nothing  short  of  an  injury  done  to  posterity,  to  represent 
any  man,  whoever  he  may  have  been,  as  interested  in  a  cause 
before  he  really  was,  even  so  far  as  to  evince  sympathy  for  the 
cruelty  and  death  endured  in  it ;  and  the  truth  of  history 
does  not  furnish  us  with  even  a  vestige  of  such  interest  or 
feeling  in  Cranmer,  for  some  time  to  come.  One  eminent 
service  in  relation  to  the  Scriptures,  he  will  perform  for  his 
country,  which  will  come  before  us,  in  its  proper  place,  five 
years  hence ;  but  at  this  momentous  period,  let  the  men  who 
bore  the  brunt  of  this  never-to-be-forgotten  contest ;  the  men 
who  died  with  their  face  to  the  foe — 

"  Who  neither  fear'd  the  darkest  hour. 
Nor  trembled  at  the  tempter's  power ;" 

let  them  enjoy  the  place  to  which  they  alone  are  entitled  ; 
an  eminence  unapproached  by  others,  whether  from  shame  or 
fear,  from  worldly  policy  or  criminal  ignorance.  No  unbiassed 
writer  can  now  wittingly  confound  Tyndale  and  Fryth  with 
any  other  men,  who  in  the  days  of  peril,  persecution,  and 
universal  obloquy,  either  dared  not,  or  could  not,  speak  one 
word  ;  nor  will  he  allow  their  characters  to  be  obscured  by 
any,  Avho  never  came  forth  till  after  the  battle  of  eleven  years' 


*  Sir  W.  H.  MS.,  printed  in  Strype's  Cranmer,  App.,  No.  1.  But  Strype  has  mistaken  the  year 
for  LWO,  when  Cranmer  was  at  Rome.  Mr.  Todd  in  his  Life  gives  the  correct  date,  vol.  i.  p.  38. 
What  was  called  a  houk  by  Cranmer  might  be  nothing  more  than  a  long  argument  in  manuscript, 
which  Pole  had  presented  to  the  King,  his  cousin.  Book  and  letter  were  then  occasionally 
used  as  synonymous  terms.  This  book  or  argument,  however,  is  not  to  be  confounded  with 
Pole's  subsequent  publication—"  Pro  Ecclesiastics?  Unitatis,"  which  lie  sent  to  Henry  in  l&'JC. 
See  note  21,  page  221. 


1532.]  CRANMEK   WITH   IlIiM.  32j 

duration  was  fought  and  won.  Since  the  year  1526,  Divine 
truth,  like  concealed  leaven,  had  been  in  vigorous  operation, 
enlightening,  saving,  and  sanctifying  the  souls  of  men  ;  but 
the  Translator,  after  his  long  unaided  warfare,  had  washed 
his  robes  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb, 
before  that  Cranmer  had  ever  once  expressed  his  approbation 
of  the  translation.  It  will  not  be  till  in  a  moment  of  sur- 
prise, and  after  finding  himself  in  a  dilemma,  that  he  will 
speak  out.  But  even  this  will  not  occur  till  five  years  more 
have  passed  away. 

It  was  on  the  24th  of  January  this  year  that  Oranmer  had 
received  his  credentials  as  ambassador  to  the  Court  of  the 
Emperor,  when  he  immediately  left  England,  and  must  have 
overtaken  Elyot  somewhere  on  the  Rhine.^  The  letter,  from 
which  we  have  already  quoted,  narrates  their  progress  towards 
Ratisbon,  and  as  it  contains  some  curious  information  respect- 
ing the  places  where  they  stopped  and  made  enquiries,  another 
extract,  illustrative  of  the  times,  must  not  be  omitted. 

"  I  have  promised  to  the  King,"  says  Elyot,  "  to  write  to  your  Grace,  the  or- 
der of  things  in  the  town  of  Nurenburg,  specially  concerning  the  faith.  But 
first,  I  will  rehearse  some  other  towns,  as  they  lay  in  our  way.  The  City  of 
Worms  for  the  more  part,  and  almost  the  whole  is  possessed  with  Lutherans 
and  Jews;  the  residue  is  indifferent,  to  be  shortly  the  one,  or  the  other. 
Ti'uth  it  is,  that  the  Bishop  keepeth  well  his  name  of  BjAscopxs,  which  is  in 
English  an  overseer,  and  is  in  the  case  tliat  overseers  of  testaments  be  in  Eng- 
land ;  for  he  shall  have  leave  to  look,  so  that  he  meddle  notfi  Yet  sometime 
men  calleth  him  overseen,  that  is  drunk, — when  he  neither  knoweth  what  he 
doeth,  nor  what  he  ought  to  do.  The  City  of  Spire  keepeth  yet  their  faith  well, 
except  some  say  thei'e  be  many  do  eiT  in  taking  so  largely  this  article  sanctorum 
communionem,  which  hath  induced  more  charity  than  may  stand  with  honesty. 
All  towns  ensuing,  be  rather  worse  than  better,  but  I  pass  them  over  at  this 
time.  Touching  Nurenburg  it  is  the  most  proper  town,  and  best  ordered  public- 
weal  that  ever  I  beheld.  There  is  in  it  so  much  people,  that  I  marvelled  how 
the  town  might  contain  them,  besides  them  that  followed  the  Emperor  :  and  not- 
withstanding there  was  of  all  victual  more  abundance  than  I  could  see  in  any 
place,  although  the  country  adjoining  is  very  barren.  I  appointed  to  lodge  in 
an  Inn,  but  Sii'  Laurence  Staber,  the  King's  servant,"  (an  ecclesiastic  in  Henry's 
pay,)  "  came  to  me  desiring  me  to  take  his  house,  whereunto  I  brought  with 
me  the  French  Ambassador,  where  we  were  well  entertained. 

"  Although  I  had  a  chaplain,  yet  could  not  I  be  suffered  to  have  him  to  sing 
mass,  but  was  constrained  to  hear  theirs,  which  is  but  one  in  a  church,  and  that 


s  Stryi)e  has  said  1.').31,  and  others  have  followed  him.  It  is  true  the  commission  in  which 
Cranmer  is  styled  "  Consiliarus  Regius  et  Ca^sarem  Orator,"  bears  date  24th  January  l.'iSl,  but 
as  their  year  ran  on  to  the  25th  of  March,  this  is  1532.  This  was  Craiinier's  second  journev  In 
the  Continent,  and  in  a  higher  character  than  before.  o  gee  pages  228,  229. 


326  SIR  THOMAS   ELYOT  \jiOOK  I. 

is  celebrated  iu  form  following.  The  Priest,  in  vestments  after  our  manner, 
singeth  every  thing  in  Latin  as  we  use,  omitting  suffrage  ;  the  epistle  he  readeth 
iu  Latin.  In  the  Meantime  the  sub-deacon  goeth  into  the  pulpit  and  readeth 
to  the  people  the  epistle  in  their  mdijar.  After,  they  peruse  (perform  ?)  other 
tilings  as  our  Priests  do.  Then  the  Priest  readeth  softli/  the  gospel  in  Latin, 
In  the  mean  space  the  Deacon  goeth  into  the  pulpit  and  readeth  aloud  the  gos- 
pel in  the  Almayne  (German)  tongue.  Mr.  Cranmer  saith  it  was  shewed  to 
him  that  in  the  epistles  and  gospels  they  kept  not  the  order  that  we  do  ;  but  do 
peruse  every  day  one  cltapter  of  the  New  Testament ;  afterwards  the  Priest  and 
the  choir  do  sing  the  Credo,  as  we  do.  The  day  after  our  coming,  the  Senate 
sent  gentlemen  to  show  us  their  provision  of  harness,  ordinance  and  corn,  &c. 
— Written  at  Regensburgh  the  xiiii  day  of  March."'' 

For  about  six  months  Cranmer  continued  to  reside  chiefly 
at  Nuremberg,  and  Elyot  at  Eatisbon.  In  prospect  of  the 
Turkish  invasion,  Charles  was  now  in  treaty  with  the  German 
Protestant  Princes  to  secure  their  co-operation  against  the 
common  enemy  of  Europe,  who  proudly  insisted  that  no  man 
should  be  called  Emperor  except  himself.  These  negociations 
commencing  in  April  terminated  on  the  23d  of  July  at  Eatis- 
bon, on  which  day  Elyot  wrote  again  to  the  Duke  of  Norfolk.^ 

This  letter,  however,  conveyed  no  very  welcome  news  to 
Henry  at  least ;  though  the  Princes  (seven  in  number,  and 
twenty-four  Cities,)  regarded  it  as  the  first  religious  peace  in 
Germany.  None  were  now  to  be  molested  on  account  of 
opinions  till  the  meeting  of  a  General  Council ;  all  judicial 
processes  relating  to  religion  were  to  be  suspended,  and  all  law 
suits  for  the  restoration  of  Church  property  were  null  and  void ; 
concessions  which  were  published  throughout  Germany,  by 
imperial  proclamation.  These  were  measures,  too,  in  perfect 
accordance  with  those  which  Vaughan  had  urged  upon  Henry 
the  Eighth,  through  Crumwell ;  yet  so  bent  was  our  English 
Monarch  upon  his  favourite  project,  and  the  gratification  of  his 
own  will,  that  even  the  prospect  of  such  relief  to  thousands  of 
the  best  minds  in  Europe,  had  no  charms  for  him  ;  and  Cran- 
mer had  been  engaged  to  employ  all  his  skill  in  presenting  such 
enjoyment !  He  had  been  "  instructed  to  make  a  secret  visit 
to  the  court  of  Saxony,  to  deliver  letters  both  to  the  Elector 


7  Cotton  MS.,  Vitell.,  B.xxi.,  fol.  54,  &c.,  endorsed,  "from  Sir  T.  Elyot  to  my  Lord  of  North- 
folke's  grace."  This  and  another  long  epistle,  dated  11th  Aug.  1531,  are  mi.squotcd  in  the  cata- 
logue, as  addressed  to  Wolsey,  and  the  former,  as  if  dated  in  153(t.  But  he  was  in  disgrace  all 
that  year,  and  died  before  it  ended.  Both  letters  were  written  in  1532;  the  first  is  proving  that 
they  were  ]>repared  for  the  Turkish  invasion  ;  but  the  other  parts,  here  quoted,  are  very  curi- 
ous, as  addressed  to  Norfulk,  who  was  now  the  head  of  the  ohl  ledrninp  party. 

"  Harberfs  Hen.  Vill.    The  pacification  was  ratified  in  August  at  Nuremberg. 


1532.]  AND  CRANMER.  327 

and  the  other  Princes  who  had  joined  the  Protestant  league, 
and  to  assure  them,  by  conversation  also,  of  his  Sovereign's 
friendship.  Henry  was  disposed,  like  the  French  King,  to 
foment  between  these  confederates  and  the  Emperor  any  ill 
humour.  It  was  his  project  of  revenge  for  the  Imperial  oppo- 
sition to  the  divorce;  but  it  had  no  important  result.  The 
pacification  of  Nuremberg  indeed  was  effected  within  a  few 
days  after  this  efibrt  to  impede  it,  and  Cranmer  had  to  relate 
to  his  Sovereign,  instead  of  dissension,  the  principal  terms  of 
that  memorable  treaty,"^ 

How  long  before  the  14th  of  March,  Elyot  had  been 
charged  with  his  commission  from  the  King  to  seize  Tyndale, 
does  not  appear ;  but  as  he  chose  to  say,  that  he  was  "  all  the 
King''s  except  his  soul^''''  from  the  first  moment  he  must  have 
been  on  the  look  out ;  and  as  he  had  been  moving  from  place 
to  place  for  about  two  months  before  he  arrived  at  Ratisbon, 
he  could  then  speak  from  some  experience  of  Tyndale  "  with- 
drawing" himself,  "as  far  as  he  could  perceive.  Now,  however, 
he  was  far  distant  from  Brussels,  and  there  he  must  remain. 
Providentially,  for  Tyndale  at  least,  he  was  detained  month 
after  month  ;  and  if  Cranmer  failed  in  his  "  secret  visit,"  so 
did  Elvot  as  to  his  "  commission,"  from  the  Kins:.  A  storm 
was  gathering  in  the  East  which  occasioned  eveiy  monarch  in 
Europe  to  pause  and  think  ;  it  was  the  invasion  of  Solyman, 
the  grand  Turk,  with  an  army  of  three  hundred  thousand  men. 
Elyot's  letters,  therefore,  were  now  full  of  little  or  nothino; 
else,  if  we  may  judge  by  his  very  long  epistle  to  Norfolk  on  the 
llth^°  of  August.  And  thus  was  he  diverted  from  a  pursuit 
which  must  have  for  ever  disgraced  his  memory,  if  it  had 
ended  in  the  apprehension  of  England's  greatest  benefactor. 
Tyndale  has  yet  four  years  to  live. 

Upon  retm-ning  to  England,  in  the  year  lo32,  two  parties  engage  our 
notice.  The  King  and  Crumwell  on  the  one  hand,  and  in  connexion 
with  Italy  ;  More  and  Stokesly  on  the  other,  in  relation  to  affairs  at 
home.  The  former,  still  busy  with  Parliamentary  affau-s  and  those  of 
the  Clergy  ;  the  latter  more  than  ever  opposed  to  freedom  of  opinion 
and  the  progress  of  Divine  Truth. 

In  the  beginning  of  January,  certain  parties  having  resolved  to 
present  Henry  with  new  year's  gifts,  the  total  sum,  according  to  the 


9  Todd's  Life  of  Cranmer,  I.,  41.  42.  '"  Cotton  MS.,  Vitell.,  B.  xxi.,  fol.  64. 


328  STATE  OF  ENGLAND.  [boOK  I. 

Burghley  Manuscript,  was  £11\,  10s.  lOd.,  or  above  £11,000  of  our 
money.  This  is  worthy  of  remark,  merely  as  a  proof  of  the  Clergy's 
earnest  desire  to  please  their  new  Head.  He  had  exacted  from  them 
no  small  amount  ^j^r  annum,  for  five  years  to  come,  and  yet  thus  early 
they  come  forward  with  a  new  year's  gift !  If  they  imagined  that  such 
a  trifle  would  slake  his  supremacy's  thirst  for  gold,  or  retard  his  onward 
progress,  they  were  soon  to  learn  their  mistake.  Of  this  sum,  however, 
they  had  subscribed  nearly  £600,  the  nobility  and  others  only  £174. 
Strype  supposes  that  this  was  done  to  siveeten  the  Sovereign,  or  prevent 
farther  provocation. 

But  then  Parliament  had  been  summoned  to  meet  on  the  15th  of 
January,  and  the  first  business  of  the  Commons'  House  was  to  present 
their  "  Supplication" — a  regular  digest  of  their  grievous  oppressions  by 
the  Clergy.  It  was  laid  before  the  King  by  their  Speaker,  Sir  Thomas 
Audley.  The  reader  may  now  call  to  mind  the  strong  and  complicated 
connexion  which  had  subsisted  for  ages  between  Britain  and  Rome. 
It  is  even  worth  repeating.  There  was  the  Annate  or  first-fruits,  payable 
by  the  Archbishop  downwards  to  the  lowest,  upon  election  to  office  ;  the 
Appeal ;  the  Dispensation  ;  the  Indulgence  ;  the  Legantine  levy ;  the 
Mortuary ;  the  Pardon  ;  the  Ethelwolf's  pension  ;  the  Peter's  pence  for 
every  chimney  that  smoked  in  England  ;  the  Pilgrimage  ;  the  Tenth  ; 
besides  the  sale  of  trinkets  or  holy  wares  from  Rome,  or  twelve  distinct 
sources  of  revenue  !  Had  it  been  resolved  that  all  these  baneful  and 
unceasing  drains  on  the  country  should  cease,  or  be  abandoned,  the 
round  dozen  might  have  been  soon  disposed  of :  but  this  was  not  now 
the  qviestiou.  That  was  merely,  wliicli  should  be  abandoned,  and  which 
transferred  into  other  hands,  or  from  Italy  to  England,  that  is,  from  the 
Pontifi"  to  Henry.  The  Mortuary  and  the  Appeal  had  been  dealt  with 
already  ;  the  Annate  or  first-fruits  now  came  before  Parliament.  A  bill 
was,  accordingly,  introduced  into  the  House  of  Lords,  then  sent  through 
the  Commons,  and  received  the  Royal  assent,  with  this  proviso,  that  the 
King  should  either  annul  or  confirm  it  within  two  years.  That  is, 
Henry  was  first  to  use  it  in  threatening  the  Pontiff,  and,  in  case  of 
failure,  by  transferring  the  payment,  he  will  so  far  enrich  himself. 
The  bill  was  confirmed  in  July  next  year.  From  this  source  alone,  there 
had  passed  out  of  the  kingdom  to  Rome,  dui'ing  the  last  forty-five  years, 
or  since  the  second  of  Henry  VII.,  a  siun  equal  to  £160,000,  or  nearly  two 
millions  and  a  half  sterling  of  the  present  day. 

This  Parliament,  which  had  been  prorogued,  met  again  in  April,  when 
the  principal  grievance  complained  of  by  the  Commons  had  to  be  con- 
sidered. The  Bishops  made  canons  by  their  sole  authority,  which  was 
represented  as  at  once  an  invasion  of  the  royal  prerogative,  and  a  source 
of  vexation  to  the  King's  subjects.  The  Clergy  resolutely  evaded  or 
resisted  as  long  as  they  could,  but  they  were  no  match  for  Henry's  de- 


1532.3  HENRY   AND  THE  BISHOPS.  329 

terminatiou.  He  was  displeased  with  the  whole  Bench,  and  especially 
with  Stephen  Gardiner,  whom  he  had  but  very  recently  made  Bishop 
of  Winchester.  His  Majesty  referred  again  to  the  oaths  they  had  taken, 
and  insisted  that  they  were  but  half  what  he  desired,  or  halt  his  sub- 
jects. Rising  in  his  demands,  he  then  pressed  upon  them  that  they 
must  neither  attempt  to  enforce  the  old,  nor  enact  any  new  canons. 
The  King,  however,  finally  contented  himself  with  the  last  restriction, 
though  this  concession  was  only  to  serve  till  a  more  convenient  season. 

The  truth  is,  that  throughout  the  whole  of  this  contention  about  secu- 
lar affairs,  and  which  was  to  continue  for  some  time  to  come,  any  im- 
partial witness  can  behold  nothing  else  on  the  part  of  the  King  and  these 
Bishops,  except  a  course  of  proceedings  distinguished  only  for  chicanery 
and  deceit.  The  latter,  straining  every  nerve  on  behalf  of  their  order 
and  emoluments, — the  former  resolved  to  look  after  his  own  pecuniary  in- 
terest, his  personal  gratification,  and  his  power.  Individually  and  col- 
lectively, the  whole  Bench  did  what  they  could  to  retain  all  they  had  ; 
but  the  day  of  their  decline  had  arrived,  and  their  ancient  power  and 
privileges  were  fast  waning.  One  expiring  effort  indeed  may  be  seen  on 
the  part  of  their  Archbishop,  Warham,  only  six  months  before  his  own 
death.  He  had,  last  year,  agreed  to  Henry  being  "  Head  of  their 
Church,"  with,  no  doubt,  mental  reservations  lingering  in  his  mind,  ac- 
cording to  the  deceitful  fashion  of  the  times.  He  saw  now  the  gather- 
ing or  impending  storm,  though  he  could  not  avert  it.  While,  therefore, 
Henry  was  proceeding,  by  degrees,  in  his  own  aggrandisement,  Warham 
on  the  9th  of  February,  was  recording  in  his  official  Register,  the  follow- 
ing powerless  protestation, — "  that  whatsoever  statutes  had  passed,  or 
were  to  pass  in  this  irresent  Parliament,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  Pope  or 
the  Apostolic  See,  or  that  derogated  from,  or  lessened,  the  ecclesiastical 
authority,  or  liberties  of  his  See  of  Canterbury,  he  did  not  consent  to  them, 
but  disowned  and  dissented  from  them  !"  This,  though  done  quietly 
perhaps,  was  no  secret,  as  Burnet  has  imagined.  The  three  notaries 
and  four  witnesses  present  at  Lambeth,  were  allsufficient  to  have  ren- 
dered the  thing  actionable  another  day,  if  circumstances  had  turned  out 
otherwise.^^  And  this  is  Warham  !  The  man  who  seemed  so  forward 
in  the  House  of  Lords  last  year,  nay  took  the  lead  !  But  the  prot&ct  was 
of  no  moment,  the  Archbishop  died  in  August,  and  Cranmer  will,  by 
and  bye,  be  ready  to  fulfil  all  Hem-y's  pleasure,  and  seat  the  Monarch 
more  firmly  in  his  chair. 

Symptoms  of  the  plague  now  appearing  in  London,  Parliament  was  pro- 
rogued on  the  14th  of  May.  Two  days  after.  Sir  Thomas  More,  alive  to 
the  onward  progress  of  events,  thought  it  was  time  for  him  to  take  some 
step  ;  and  therefore,  suddenly,  without  acquainting  any  one  of  his  in- 


•1  See  the  Register  itself,  or  Wilkins"  Concil.  III.,  746. 


330  HENRY'S   VEXATIOUS  QUESTION.  \jiOOK  I. 

tention,  on  the  Kith  of  May  having  tendered  his  resignation  of  the  great 
seal,  it  was  committed  on  the  20th  to  Sir  Thomas  Audley,  with  the  title 
of  Lord-Keeper  ;  and  in  September  following,  when  a  new  seal  was  given 
to  him,  it  was  still  with  no  higher  title.  The  fact  has  generally  been  over- 
looked, that  Sir  Thomas  More  continued  to  act  as  a  Law  oiBcer  throughout 
the  rest  of  the  year,  and  the  title  of  Lord  Chancellor  was  not  transferred 
from  him  to  Audley,  till  January  next.  But  the  preceding  transactions  at 
home,  will  acquire  additional  interest  when  viewed  in  connexion  with  Italy. 

During  the  whole  of  the  present  year,  as  well  as  the  following,  it  is 
evident  that  both  Henry  and  the  PontiiF  were  straining  every  nerve  to 
excite  each  other's  fears.  England,  for  that  blind  and  slavish  obedience, 
which,  compared  with  other  nations,  she  performed  to  the  See  of  Rome, 
having  been,  by  Italians  and  other  foreigners,  not  unfitly  termed — the 
Pope's  Ass  ;  Clement  was  very  reluctant  to  his  being  dismounted  ;  but, 
watched  and  ruled  by  the  Emperor,  he  had  often  felt  it  difficult  to  retain 
his  seat,  and  the  time  was  now  fast  aj^proaching  when  he  must  so  ride 
no  more.  On  the  other  hand,  Henry  had  to  take  care  of  his  ascendancy, 
and  even  the  security  of  his  throne  ;  many  of  his  subjects  being  by  no 
means  in  favour  of  the  course  on  which  he  was  bent,  whether  relating  to 
the  divorce  of  his  Queen,  or  the  place  he  had  recently  arrogated  to  him- 
self, in  reference  to  the  clergy.  On  his  part,  therefore,  a  degree  of  wari- 
ness or  caution,  very  unlike  his  natural  temper,  is  observable  throughout. 
His  Parliamentary  measures  were  carried  in  such  a  style  as  to  excite  alarm 
at  Rome,  and  in  the  meanwhile,  lead  on  his  subjects,  if  they  should  pass 
into  positive  statutes.  On  his  part,  they  wore  somewhat  of  the  appear- 
ance of  reluctance,  while,  at  the  same  moment,  they  chimed  in  with  the 
complaints  of  his  Commons. 

With  regard  to  Clement,  on  the  other  hand,  Queen  Catherine  having 
informed  him  of  her  banishment  from  court,  as  well  as  the  royal  jiresence, 
for  some  time  past,  and  claimed  his  protection  ;  the  Pontiff,  in  January, 
had  transmitted  a  letter  to  the  King,  trying  to  awaken  in  him  a  sense  of 
shame  and  fear,  as  to  his  conduct.  In  the  very  same  month,  Henry  had 
despatched  Dr.  Bennet,  as  ambassador,  to  enforce  at  Rome  the  sentences 
received  from  the  Universities  and  Lawyers  in  favour  of  his  separation  ; 
and  in  February,  Sir  Edward  Karnes  followed  as  excusator,  to  say  that, 
as  King,  he  could  not  and  would  not  appear  before  Clement.  In  March, 
the  King  of  France,  as  his  ally  and  professed  friend  at  the  moment,  sent 
an  urgent  if  not  a  warning  letter  to  Rome,  by  the  hands  of  Cardinal  de 
Gramont,  Bishop)  of  Tarlte  ;  and  the  very  next  intelligence  which  arrived 
there,  related  to  these  Bills  in  Parliament.  To  this  it  was  added,  that 
a  man  who  had  been  convicted  of  heresy  before  Warham,  had  been  re- 
leased, in  consequence  of  his  appeal  to  the  King,  as  "  Head  of  the  Church 
of  England."  Besides  all  this,  Henry,  now  finding  that  the  Emperor 
and    Clement  were  in  such  firm   alliance,  resolved  to  meet  this  by   a 


1532.]  PERSECUTION   GOES  ON.  331 

stricter  amity  with  Francis.  He  proposed,  therefore,  to  visit  France 
himself ;  and  taking  Anne  Boleyn  in  his  company,  who  had  lately  been 
created  Marchioness  of  Pembroke,  the  two  Sovereigns  met  at  Boulogne, 
in  October.  A  treaty,  akin  to  that  of  Wolsey's  in  1527,  was  the  result, 
and  Henry  returned  by  Calais  to  England  in  November.  In  the  same 
month  also,  Cranmer  arrived  from  the  Emperor's  court,  having  been  re- 
called to  fill  the  place  of  Warham  as  Archbishop  of  Canterbury. 

By  way  of  return  for  this  course  of  proceeding,  Clement  had  prepared 
a  Bull,  positively  prohibiting  the  King  from  all  intimacy  with  the  new 
made  Marchioness.  It  was  ready  by  the  15th  of  this  month  of  November, 
as  it  was  originally  framed  on  that  day,  but  by  an  additional  note,  it  is 
dated  the  23d  of  December  ;  or,  in  other  words,  it  was  drawn  up  at  Rome, 
and  now  finished  at  Bologna,  where  Clement  had  arrived  to  meet  his 
master,  the  Emperor.  It  is  worthy  of  noting,  merely  as  illustrative  of 
the  duplicity  of  the  man  who  then  professed  to  send  out  his  thunder ; 
for  on  the  very  next  day,  Bennet,  the  English  ambassador,  not  yet  aware 
of  the  step  taken,  lamenting  to  the  Pontiff  himself  that  no  means  could 
be  found  to  satisfy  his  royal  master, — Clement  rejilied  "  that  he  would, 
it  had  cost  him  a  joint  of  his  hand,  that  such  a  way  might  be  excogi- 
tated." "  And  here  speaking  of  the  justness  of  your  cause,  he  called  to 
remembrance  the  thing  which  he  told  me  two  years  past,  that  the 
opinions  of  the  lawyers  were  more  certain,  favoiirable,  and  helping  to 
yoiu-  cause,  than  the  opinions  of  divines," — adding,  that  he  would  "im- 
print the  same  in  the  Emperor's  head  !"^^  The  people  said  of  Wolsey, 
that  "he  could  not  leave  his  lying;"  and  Clement  also  pursued  the 
same  course  to  his  dying  day. 

But  enough  of  these  tortuous  movements,  whether  secular  or  political. 
They  are  here  of  no  other  value  than  to  show  the  course  of  the  world  at 
the  moment. 

Sir  Thomas  More  and  Stokesly  still  went  on  as  the  most 
eminent  and  busy  persecutors  of  the  Truth.  In  December  last, 
a  gentleman  of  his  own  profession,  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of 
the  Chancellor ; — Mr.  James  Bainham,  the  son  of  Sir  Alex- 
ander Bainham,  a  knight  of  Gloucestershire,  who  had  married 
the  widow  of  Mr.  Fjshe,  already  noticed.  He  had  been  seized 
by  the  Sergeant-at-arms,  and  carried  out  of  the  Middle  Temple 
down  to  More's  own  house  at  Chelsea.  This  was  another 
victim  to  console  him  for  the  recent  escape  of  Geor'^e  Con- 
stantyne.  Imagining  that  there  must  have  been  others  of  the 
profession  who  had  imbibed  the  same  opinions,  the  Chancellor 


'2  Bciitiet,  to  the  Xinp;.     MS.  State  Paper  Office. 


332  PERSECUTION    UNTO    DEATH.  [BOOK  I. 

particularly  degraded  himself  by  his  cruelty  to  this  excellent 
man  ;  for  after  being  shamefully  handled  under  his  own  roof, 
if  not  also  in  his  own  garden,  he  was  afterwards  conveyed  to 
the  Tower,  and  there,  in  his  presence,  tortured  by  the  rack  till 
he  was  lamed.  He  would,  however,  neither  accuse  any  gentle- 
men of  his  acquaintance  in  the  Temple,  nor  disclose  where  his 
books  lay  concealed.  His  worthy  partner  in  life  also,  no 
more  able  to  see  the  face  of  Henry,  and  who  might  have  been 
repulsed  though  she  had,  now  fell  into  trouble.  Denying  the 
books  to  be  at  her  husband's  house,  she  was  thrown  into  Fleet 
Prison,  and  their  goods  confiscated.  After  all  this  torment, 
Bainham  was  handed  over  to  Stokesly  ;  and  some  parts  of  his 
examination  before  him,  at  Chelsea,  on  the  1 5th  of  December 
last,  are  well  worthy  of  being  recorded.  They  will  be  found 
at  once  honourable  to  the  confessor,  illustrative  of  the  times, 
and  of  the  positive  enmity  now  reigning  against  the  truths  of 
Divine  revelation. 

Being  asked — "Whether  he  believed  there  were  any  purgatory  of  souls  hence 
departed  1"  He  simply  answered — "  If  we  walk  in  light,  even  as  He  is  in  light, 
we  have  society  together  with  Him,  and  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son,  hath 
cleansed  us  from  all  sin.  If  we  say  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and 
the  truth  is  not  in  us.  If  we  confess  our  sins.  He  is  faithful  and  just,  and  will 
forgive  us  our  sins,  and  will  purge  us  from  all  our  iniquities." 

Being  then  asked — "  Whether  the  saints  hence  departed  are  to  be  honoured 
and  prayed  unto,  to  pray  for  us  ?"  Again  he  answered — "  My  little  children,  I 
write  this  unto  you,  that  ye  sin  not.  If  any  man  do  sin,  we  have  an  advocate 
with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  just,  and  he  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins, 
and  not  only  for  our  sins,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world." 

It  was  enquired  what  he  had  meant  by  affirming  "that  the  truth  of  holy 
Scripture  hath  been  hid,  and  appeared  not  these  eight  hundred  years,  neither 
was  known  before  now  ?  "  To  this  he  said  "  That  he  meant  no  otherwise,  but 
that  the  truth  of  holy  Scripture  was  never,  these  eight  hundred  years,  so  plainly 
and  expressly  declared  unto  the  people,  as  it  hath  been  within  these  six  years." 
[Bainham  here  reckons  from  Janviary  l.'iGC,  the  very  season  when  Tyndale's 
Testaments  first  arrived.] 

He  was  demanded  further — "  For  what  cause  holy  Scripture  hath  been  better 
declared  within  these  six  years,  than  it  hath  been  these  eight  hundred  years 
before  ? "  He  answered — "  To  say  plainly,  he  knew  no  man  to  have  preached 
the  Word  of  God  sincerely  and  purely,  and  after  the  vein  of  Scripture,  except 
Master  Crome,  and  Master  Latimer. — And  he  said,  that  the  Neio  Testament  note 
translated  into  English  doth  preach  and  teach  the  Word  of  God,  and  that  before 
that  time  men  did  preach  only  that  folks  should  believe  as  the  Church  believe  ; 
and  then,  if  the  Church  should  err,  men  should  err  too.  Howbeit  the  Church  of 
Christ  cannot  err,  and  that  there  were  two  Churches,  that  is  the  Church  of 
Ciirist  militant,  and  the  Church  of  Antichrist ;  and  that  this  Church  of  Antichrist 
may  and  doth  err,  but  the  Church  of  Christ  doth  not." 

Lastly,  for  his  books  of  Scripture,  and  his  judgment  of  Tyndale,  because  he 


1532.]  PERSECUTION    UNTO   DEATH.  333 

was  urged  to  confess  the  truth,  he  said — "  That  he  had  had  '  the  New  Testament 
translated  into  the  Englisli  tongue  by  Tyndale,'  (till)  within  this  month,  and 
thought  he  offended  not  God,  in  using  and  keeping  the  same,  notwithstanding  that 
he  knew  the  King's  proclamation  to  the  contrary,  and  that  it  was  prohibited  in 
name  of  the  Cliurch,  at  Paul's  cross  ;  but  for  all  that,  he  thought  the  Word  of 
God  had  not  forbid  it.  Confessing,  moreover,  that  he  had  in  his  keeping, 
(till)  within  this  month,  these  books — The  Wicked  Mammon, — the  obedience 
of  a  Christian  Man, — the  Practice  of  Prelates, — the  Answer  of  Tyndale  to 
Thomas  More's  Dialogue, — the  Book  of  Fryth  against  Purgatory, — the  Epistle 
of  George  Gee,  alias  Gierke.''' — Adding,  that  in  all  these  books  he  never  saw 
any  errors  ;  and  if  there  were  any  such  in  them,  then,  if  they  were  corrected, 
it  were  good  that  the  people  had  the  said  books.— And  as  concerning  the  New 
Testament  in  English,  he  thought  it  utterly  <jood,  and  that  the  people  should  have 
it,  as  it  is." 

Notwithstanding  all  this,  it  is  to  be  lamented  that  Bainhani 
began  to  waver  in  a  state  of  doubtful  perplexity,  between  life 
and  death ;  so  that,  after  two  months"'  confinement,  he  read 
his  abjuration,  was  fined  twenty  pounds  (equal  to  J^'SOO  now) 
to  the  King,  and  being  released  on  the  1 7tli  of  February,  was 
dismissed  home.  He  was,  however,  scarcely  a  month  at  large 
before  he  lamented  his  conduct  most  bitterly ;  and  the  terms 
in  which  his  penitence  are  recorded,  deserve  special  notice. 

"  He  was,"  says  Foxe,  "  never  quiet  in  mind  and  conscience,  until  the  time 
he  had  uttered  his  fall  to  all  his  acquaintance,  and  asked  God  and  all  the  world 
forgiveness,  before  the  Congregation  in  those  days,  in  a  icarehouse  in  Bow 
Lane.  The  next  Sunday  after,  he  came  to  St.  Austin's,  with  '  the  New 
Testament  in  English '  in  his  hand,  and  '  the  Obedience  of  a  Christian  Man '  in 
his  bosom,  and  stood  up  there  before  the  people  in  his  pew,  there  declaring 
openly,  with  tears,  that  he  had  denied  God  ;  and  prayed  all  the  people  to  forgive 
him,  to  beware  of  his  weakness,  and  not  to  do  as  he  had  done, — '  for,'  said  he, 
'  if  I  should  not  retm-n  again  to  the  truth  (having  the  New  Testament  in  his 
hand,)  this  Word  of  God  would  damn  me,  both  body  and  soul,  at  the  day  of 
Judgment.  And  then  he  prayed  every  one  rather  to  die,  by  and  bye,  than  to 
do  as  he  had  done  ;  for  he  would  not  feel  such  a  hell  again  as  he  did  feel,  for 
all  the  world's  goods.'  He  wrote  a  letter  also  to  the  Bishop  of  London,  so  that 
shortly  after,  he  was  apprehended,  and  again  committed  to  the  Tower.  On  the 
19th  of  April  he  was  examined,  and  again  on  the  20th,  in  the  Church  of  All- 
Saints,  Barking,  Tower  Street,  after  which  he  was  condemned.  On  being 
brought  to  the  stake  on  the  1st  of  May,  he  addressed  all  present,  in  the 
following  words  : — 

"  I  come  hither,  good  people !  accused  and  condemned  for  an  heretic ;  Sir 
Thomas  More  being  my  accuser  and  my  judge.  And  these  be  the  articles  that 
I  die  for,  which  be  a  very  truth,  and  grounded  on  God's  Word,  and  no  heresy. 
They  be  these  :  First,  /  sarj  it  is  hmful  for  every  man  and  woman,  to  hare  God's 
book  in  their  mother  tongue.  The  second  article  is, — that  the  Bishop  of  Rome  is 
Antichrist,  and  that  1  knotc  no  other  keys  of  heaven-gates  but  only  the  preaching 


'3  These  were  two  names  assumed  by  George  Joye,  of  whom  afterwards. 


334  THE  CONGREGATION   IN    BOW   LANE.  [book  I. 

of  the  Law  and  the  Gospel;  and  that  there  is  no  other  purgatory,  but  the  purga- 
tory of  Christ's  blood ;  and  the  purgatory  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  which  is  all  per- 
secutions and  afflictions  ;  and  no  such  purgatory  as  they  feign  of  their  own  im- 
agination :  for  oui-  souls  immediately  go  to  heaven,  and  rest  with  Jesus  Christ 
for  ever,  &c." 

The  City  clerk,  Pave,  having  spoken  cruelly  to  him. — "  Thou  heretic,"  said 
he,  "  set  fire  to  him  and  burn  him."  "  God  forgive  thee,"  cried  Bainham, "  and 
shew  thee  more  mercy  than  thou  shewest  to  me  ;!■*  the  Lord  forgive  Sir  Thomas 
More  !  and  pray  for  me  all  good  people."  He  died,  and  according  to  his  own 
statement,  even  when  half  consumed  in  the  flames,  without  any  pain. 

In  this  accouut,  painful  so  far  as  the  enemies  of  Bainham 
were  concerned,  there  is,  however,  one  expression,  which  should 
not  escape  notice  ; — "  The  Congregation,  in  those  days,  meeting 
in  Boic  Laner  What  was  this  \  Tliat  it  was  the  assembly  to 
which  Bainham  first  resorted  to  bewail  his  conduct,  and  ask 
forgiveness,  is  evident ;  but  why  did  he  there  resort  first,  ex- 
cept it  was  that  against  that  Congregation  he  thought  he  had 
more  especially  offended  I  It  may  never  have  been  observed, 
or  if  so,  accounted  worthy  of  notice  before ;  and  yet,  if  the 
proper  definition  of  a  Church  is  alloAved  to  be — "  a  Congrega- 
tion of  faithful  men," — in  such  a  connexion  as  the  present, 
there  seems  to  be  no  slight  evidence,  that  upon  this  spot,  there 
assembled  "  in  those  days,"  perhaps  the  earliest  resemblance 
of  a  Christian  Church,  upon  English  ground,  in  the  sixteenth 
century.  That  there  was  such  a  congregated  body  of  people, 
in  London,  by  this  time,  will  be  rendered  more  interesting,  if, 
before  the  close  of  this  year,  we  find  its  character  for  Chris- 
tianity described,  by  the  man,  who,  of  all  then  in  England,  was 
best  qualified  to  judge. 

In  the  early  part  of  this  year,  however,  there  w^as  another 
instance  of  cruelty,  too  notable  to  pass  unnoticed,  although  it 
did  not  terminate  fatally.  This  referred  to  no  other  than 
Hugh  Latimer,  and  Stokesly  Avas  the  prime  mover.  He  had 
summoned  Latimer  to  appear  before  him,  but  he  contemned 
the  message,  referring  to  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury  as  his  or- 
dinary. Stokesly  then  applied  to  Warham,  and  Latimer  was 
summoned  to  appear  before  him  on  the  29th  of  January. 
According  to  Latimer's  own  statement,  the  case  was  remitted 
to  five  or  six  Bishops,  and  he  appeared  before  them  thrice 
every  week.     Firm  and  resolute  for  some  time,  he  refused  to 


'4  Pave  [lied  the  week  iollowiiig,  by  his  own  hands 


1532.2  EVEN   LATIMER  FAILING.  335 

subscribe  the  articles  they  presented.  For  this  he  was  de- 
clared contumacious,  and  afterwards  excommunicated.  In 
order,  however,  to  bring  him  to  some  submission,  it  was  re- 
solved, to  take  ojf  the  sentence,  if  he  Avould  sign  two  of  the 
articles,  namely,  one  respecting  the  observation  of  Lent,  and 
another  concerning  the  crucifix  and  the  lawfulness  and  pro- 
fit of  images  in  Churches,  for  the  worship  of  Jesus  Christ  and 
his  Saints  !  Foxe  is  in  doubt  whether  Latimer  submitted ; 
and  Gilpin  in  his  Memoir  roundly  asserts  that  he  did  not  re- 
cant ;  but  the  fact  is  put  beyond  all  question,  by  the  minutes 
of  the  Convocation  in  March  and  April  1532.  His  words 
were — "  My  Lords,  I  do  confess,  that  I  have  misordered  my- 
self very  far,  in  that  I  have  so  presumptuously  and  boldly 
preached,  reproving  certain  things,  by  which  the  people  that 
were  infirm  have  taken  occasion  of  ill.  Wherefore  I  ask  for- 
giveness of  my  misbehaviour,  I  will  be  glad  to  make  amends. 
And  I  have  spoken  indiscreetly  in  vehemence  of  speaking, 
and  have  erred  in  some  things,  and  in  manner  have  been  in 
a  wrong  wa}',  lacking  discretion  in  many  things." 

After  this  confession,  which  it  may  be  said,  did  not  amount 
to  a  retractation  of  opinions,  he  desired  absolution.  This, 
however,  was  deferred  to  the  10th  of  April,  when  he  subscrib- 
ed the  two  articles  already  mentioned,  and  a  further  hearin<>- 
was  appointed.  Unwilling  to  let  him  go,  when  the  day  arri- 
ved a  new  complaint  was  produced,  respecting  a  letter  he  had 
written  to  one  Greenwood  of  Cambridge,  upon  which  Latimer 
appealed  to  the  Kin^  as  head  of  the  Church  of  England,  and 
was  ultimately  restored  to  his  functions. ^^ 

Alas  !  that  Latimer  should  have  so  far  identified  himself 
with  the  train  of  those  who  had  gone  before  him,  from  Barnes 
to  the  present  hour — for  there  was  none  like  him  in  all 
England  !  It  was  at  the  last  Convocation  that  AVarham  at- 
tended, before  his  death  in  August ;  and  Latimer,  it  is  true, 
will  not  forget  all  this ;  but  another  day.,  in  St.  Paulas  itself, 
Stokesly  will  have  to  sit  still,  and  listen  to  certain  awful 
truths,  by  way  of  reminiscence,  to  Avhich  his  ears  had  never 
been  accustomed.  John  Foxe,  in  his  narrative,  tries  to  palli- 
ate this  whole  affair  by  saying — "  whether  he  subscribed,  no 


'5  See  the  Convocation  Journal  and  the  Bishop's  Register.   Or  Foxe,  compared  with  the  Lite 
of  Latimer,  by  Watkins,  prefixed  to  "  The  Sermons  of  Latimer."     1824. 


336  MORE   STILL    WRITING  [boOK  I. 

great  matter  or  marvel,  considering  the  iniquity  of  the  times  :" 
but  this  is  far  from  the  manner  of  sacred  writ,  in  the  biogra- 
phy of  its  highest  characters.  No,  however  painful,  besides 
too  many  others,  we  have  seen  Barnes,  and  Bilney,  and  now 
even  Latimer  at  the  first  onset,  blench  and  falter  through 
fear  of  death  ;  so  that  at  this  special  period,  to  the  impartial 
writer,  there  seems  to  be  nothing  left  for  him,  but  to  look  out 
for  John  Frytli.  He  will  revive  the  spirit  of  any  reader,  and 
give  a  new  tone  to  the  cause  of  God  and  his  truth.  He  was 
just  about  arriving  in  England,  but,  as  a  controversialist,  Sir 
Thomas  More  first  stands  in  our  way. 

If  the  laborious  Lord  Chancellor  had  been  busy  in  persecut- 
ing his  fellow  subjects  at  home,  he  had  been  no  less  so  with  his 
pen,  in  opposition  to  Tyndale  abroad.  His  friend.  Sir  Thomas 
Elyot,  might  be  "  doing  his  best  endeavour^'  to  seize  the  man, 
but  More  was  determined  to  overwhelm  and  expose  him  as  a 
writer  and  translator.  His  huge  publication  being  now,  in 
part,  ready,  must  be  put  forth.  The  first  three  books  of  it, 
with  a  long  preface,  printed  by  the  son  of  his  brother-in-law, 
Rastell,  appeared  with  this  title,  "  the  confutation  of  Tyndale''s 
answer,  made  b}'^  Sir  Thomas  More,  knight.  Lord  Chancellor 
of  England, — cum  privilegio."  He  had  six  books  more  to 
come,  although  the  present /0//0  extended  to  363  pages,  thirty- 
seven  of  which  filled  his  preface  !  This,  it  will  be  observed, 
was  printed  before  he  had  resigned  the  seals,  in  May ;  so  that 
between  cross  examinations  of  worthy  men,  on  the  one  hand, 
and  proof  sheets  against  Tyndale  on  the  other,  he  must  have 
been  engrossed  indeed.  In  his  preface  he  took  care  to  shield 
himself  under  the  authority  of  his  royal  Master. 

"  Now  seeing  the  King's  gracious  purpose  in  tliis  point,  I  reckon  that  being 
his  unworthy  Chancellor,  it  appertaineth  unto  my  part  and  duty,  to  follow  the 
ensample  of  his  noble  Grace,  and  after  ray  poor  wit  and  learning,  with  opening 
to  his  people,  the  malice  and  poison  of  those  pernicious  books,  to  help  as  much 
as  in  me  is.  Toward  the  help  whereof,  am  I,  by  mine  office  in  virtue  of  mine 
oath,  and  every  officer  of  justice  through  the  realm  for  his  rate,  right  specially 
bounden,  not  in  reason  only,  and  good  congruence,  but  also  by  plain  ordinance 
and  statute. "l** 

In  the  outset,  evidently  vain  of  his  powers,  he  very  un- 
advisedly, boasted  great  things.     He  was  only  putting  on  his 

l"  Alluding  to  the  proceedings  of  1530,  tio  douht  of  his  own  framing. 


1532.]  AGAINST  TYNDALE.  337 

harness,  and  so  afterwards  had  to  pubHsli  his  apology  when 
putting  it  off".     At  present,  Iiowever,  he  is  full  of  triumph. 

"  And  for  because  the  matter  is  long,  and  my  leisure  short,  I  cannot,  as  I  fain 
would,  send  out  all  at  once, — I  send  out  now,  therefore,  of  this  present  work, 
these  three  books.  And  now,  shall  I,  God  willing,  at  my  next  leisure  go  far- 
ther in  his  (Tyndale's)  book,  and  come  to  the  very  breast  of  all  this  battle,  that 
is  to  wit,  the  question,— w7«u'A  is  the  Church, — for  that  is  the  point  that  all 
these  heretics  labour  to  make  so  dark,  that,  by  their  wiles,  no  man  shall  wit  what 
they  mean.  But  I  trust  to  draw  the  serpent  out  of  his  dark  den;  and  as  the  poets 
feign  that  Hercules  di-ew  up  Cei-berus,  the  mastiff  of  hell,  into  the  light,  where 
his  eyes  dased  ;  so  shall  1,  with  the  grace  of  that  light  which  illumineth  every 
man  that  cometh  into  this  world,  make  j'ou  that  matter  so  lightsome  and  so 
clear  to  every  man,  that  1  fhall  leave  Tyndale  never  a  dark  corner  to  creep  into, 
able  to  hide  his  head  in." 

Even  in  this  first  part,  however,  Sir  Thomas  thought  it 
was  time  to  admit  the  talents  of  his  opponent ;  and,  therefore, 
though  jesting,  as  usual,  he  affirms,  that  he  had  "  an  eagle"'s 
eye,"  that  he  was  "  cunning  enough,  and  can,  I  assure  you, 
make  as  much  poetry  upon  any  part  of  Scripture,  as  any 
poet  can  in  England,  upon  any  part  of  Virgil." '''  But 
then  Tyndale's  views  and  wishes  were  the  subject  of  his 
professed  apprehension. 

"  As  evil  as  I  like  the  man,  in  such  things  as  he  saith  nought,  that  is  almost 
in  all,  yet  would  I  find  no  fault  with  him  in  that  he  said  well.  But  now  he 
saith  not  that  some  things  be  misordered  somewhere,  but  that  there  is  none  other. 
For  Tyndale  can  be  pleased  with  no  fashion  ;  neither  Cathedral  church,  nor 
Parish  church,  nor  Chapel,  nor  Monks,  nor  Friars,  nor  Nuns,  neither  Greenwich, 
Zion,  nor  Charter-House.  So  that  I  see  well  no  fashion  can  please  Tyndale  but 
his  own  :  as  he  neither  crieth  out,  nor  halloweth,  nor  baiteth,  nor  buzzeth  in 
any  service — saying ;  for  as  they  say,  that  know  him,  he  saith  none  at  all, 
neither  matins,  evensong,  nor  mass." 

The  rest  of  this  Confutation,  falsely  so  called,  as  well  as 
More''s  apology,  will  come  before  us  next  year,  so  that  we 
refrain  from  farther  remark  till  he  has  done.  In  the  mean- 
while, another  opponent  had  started  up,  and  fretted  him  not  a 
little.  Fryth's  publication  had  arrived,  and  was  now  greedily 
read  in  England,  and  the  Chancellor  must  tell  us,  beforehand 
also,  how  he  meant  to  dispose  of  him.  Like  Goliath  of  old, 
he  looked  round,  and  disdained  him,  for  he  was  but  a  young- 
man,  of  fine  person,  and  of  a  fair  countenance ;  but  certainly 


'"  Tyndale  appears  to  have  either  known  or  suspected  that  Sir  Thomas  was  rather  vain  of 
hispofir.v,  and  hence  he  had  twitted  him  with  it  repeatedly.     This  is  More's  retort. 

VOL.   I.  Y 


;J38  KRYTH   ARRIVES  [BOOK  I. 

it  was  rather  mortifying  if,  in  meeting  three  such  seniors, 
(as  Fisher,  More,  and  Rastell,)  Fryth  was  to  overthrow  them 
all,  and  convert  one  of  them,  and  that  one,  the  brother-in- 
law  of  the  Lord  Chancellor.  He  speaks  of  him,  however, 
with  an  air  of  affected  pity,  and  would  fain  have  weaned  him 
from  his  spiritual  father  ;  only  they  were  bound  together  by  a 
tie  of  which  the  unhappy  Chancellor  bad  no  conception.  In 
the  preface,  already  quoted,  referring  to  the  "  breast  of  all 
this  battle,"  the  Church,  he  says — 

"  Then  after  that  I  have  so  clearly  confuted  Tyndale  concerning  that  point, 
before  I  go  farther,  I  purpose  to  answer  good  yoking  father  Frytli,  which  now 
Cometh  forth  so  sagely,  that  three  old  men,  my  brother  Rastell,  the  Bishop  of 
Rochester,  and  I,  matched  with  father  Fryth  alone,  be  now  but  very  babes, 
and,  as  he  calleth  us,  insipientes.  But  thus  goeth  the  world  forth,  between  Fryth 
and  us.  He  increaseth,  I  see  well,  as  fast  as  we  decayA^  For  once,  I  ween,  the 
youngest  of  us  three,  three  dajs  ere  father  Fryth  was  born,  had  learned  within 
a  little  as  nuich  as  father  Fryth  hath  now.  Howbeit  I  shall  leave  young  father 
Fryth  in  his  pride  and  glory  for  the  while.  But  when  Tyndale  is  once,  in  the 
article  touching  the  Church,  confuted  ;  then  hath  Fryth  already,  concerning  pur- 
gatory, clearly  lost  the  field,  and  all  his  well  beloved  book  is  not  worth  a  button, 
though  it  were  all  as  true  as  it  is  false.  For  then  is  the  faith  of  the  Church  in 
that  point  infallible,  or  at  the  least,  unculpable,  were  there  Scripture  there  for,  or 
not.i9 — And  yet  shall  I,  for  all  that,  go  fai'ther  with  young  father  Fryth,  and 
touch,  if  God  will,  every  part  of  his  fresh  painted  book  ;  and  so  shall  T  pluck  off,  I 
trust,  the  most  glorious  feathers  of  his  peacock's  tail,  that  I  shall  leave  him,  if 
he  have  wit  and  grace,  a  little  less  delight  and  liking  in  himself,  than  he  seemeth 
now  to  have,  which  thing  hath  hitherto  made  him  to  stand  not  a  little  in  his  own 
light.^o  I  pray  God  heartily  send  that  young  man  the  grace  to  bestow  his  wit 
and  learning,  such  as  it  is,  about  some  better  business  than  Tyndale  mis-bestoweth 
it  now.  For  now  is  Fryth 's  wit  and  learning  nothing  but  Tyndale's  instrument, 
whereby  he  bloweth  out  his  heresj'.  Finally,  after  that  I  shall  have  answered 
Fryth,  I  purpose  to  return  again  unto  Tyndale's  book,  and  answer  him  in  every 
chapter — I  think  that  no  man  doubteth,  but  that  this  work  both  hath  been,  and 
will  be,  some  pain  and  labour  to  me,  and,  of  truth,  so  I  find  it." 

We  have  thus,  for  once,  fairly  allowed  tbe  old  gentleman  to 
expectorate  all  his  vanity,  of  which  it  seems  to  be  too  evident, 
his  breast  was  full.  Covetousness  and  vanity  are  sins,  which, 
in  some  men,  are  eminently  conspicuous  in  old  age.  Of  the 
former,  every  one  will  cheerfully  exonerate  the  Chancellor  ; 
as  for  the  latter,  and  more  especially  when  contrasted  with 


'8  A  truth  in  itself,  as  it  regarded  the  respective  causes  of  the  two  parties,  though  now  uttered 
in  contempt,  and  one  too,  which  we  shall  find  Sir  Thomas  more  than  half  admit,  before  he  died. 

19  "  For  tee  have  compelled  More,  with  shame,  to  fit  from  the  Scripture."  So  says  Tyndale, 
including  Fryth,  as  we  shall  find  next  year. 

20  We  have  seen  how  the  enemy  attempted  to  separate  Fryth  from  Tyndale,  as  possibly  not  so 
fixed  in  his  princii)les.  Whether  hypocritical  pacific  proposals  had  again  been  held  out,  we 
have  not  ascertained,  but  something  of  this  kind  seems  to  be  insinuated. 


).>;32.]  IN    ENGLANJ).  33!) 

the  close  of  the  combat,  we  need  say  nothing  more  at  present, 
and  yet  this  is  but  a  specimen.  In  early  life,  the  stream  of 
human  depravity  has  several  channels,  but  in  its  later  stages, 
those  channels  are  in  a  manner  dried  up,  by  the  decay  of  the 
natural  powers,  when  the  whole  current  flows  in  one  direction  ; 
and  then,  as  ambition  is  often  associated  with  blood,  so  is 
vanity  with  venom.  The  bitterness  and  contempt  which  dis- 
tinguished Sir  Thomas  on  these  subjects,  can  only  be  imagined 
by  those  who  have  the  patience  to  wade  through  his  folio  pages, 
while  he  goes  on  consigning  every  one  to  perdition,  for  opinions 
which  have  long  distinguished  the  British  population.  Utopia 
was  the  blossom  of  his  youth,  but  there  had  been  little  congenial 
moisture  within  him,  and  so  it  dropped  off".  His  tedious  con- 
troversial writings  were  the  fruit  of  his  mature  age,  and  they 
remain,  to  any  who  look  upon  them,  the  saddest  memorial 
of  his  falling  into  the  yellow  leaf. 

In  the  meanwhile,  it  may  here  be  remarked,  that  it  would 
have  been  prudent  in  Sir  Thomas,  to  have  let  Fryth  alone, 
as  the  interference  only  exposed  him,  in  the  end,  to  a  double 
defeat.  Even  Tyndale  was  younger  than  himself,  and  he  was 
more  than  his  match  ;  but  John  Fryth  was  only  twenty-eight 
years  of  age,  when  his  book  was  published,  last  year.  Besides, 
the  Chancellor  had  crowed  by  far  too  soon,  as  he  had  then  no 
idea  that  in  a  few  months  after,  Fryth  himself  would  come 
over,  and  not  only  confront  him  upon  English  ground,  though 
writing  from  a  dungeon  ;  but  overcome  in  argument  the 
Bishops  assembled,  with  Oranmer  at  their  head. 

It  is  not  possible  to  ascertain  in  what  month  of  this  year 
Fryth  had  arrived  in  England,  but  from  what  we  are  about 
to  relate,  it  may  have  been  as  early  as  July  or  August. 
Having  been  absent  from  his  native  country  for  six  years,^^ 
he  was  first  heard  of  at  Reading  in  Berkshire,  a  place  into 
which  the  Divine  Word  had  found  an  entrance,  at  least  four 
or  five  years  before  this.  In  1528,  we  have  read  of  Rodolph 
Bradford  carrying  New  Testaments  there  from  London,  and 
by  the  next  year  even  the  Prior  of  that  abbey  was  a  suspected 
man,  and  had  been  placed  in  confinement. 

"  Tlie  King's  Highness  willed  me,"  says  Stephen  Gardiner,  then  his  secretary, 


21  Foxe,  indeed,  says  in  one  place  only  two  years,  and  in  another  three ;  but  the  period  is  as 
stated  above,  viz.  from  August  or  September  1526,  to  about  the  same  time  this  vcar. 


340  FRYTH    IN    PERIL.  [boOK  I. 

to  Wolsey  ou  the  7tli  of  September  1 529,  "  to  write  unto  your  Grace,  that  suit 
being  made  unto  him,  in  favour  of  the  Pi'ior  of  Reading,  who,  for  Luther's 
opinion,  (tlic  phrase  of  the  day,)  is  now  in  prison,  and  hath  been  a  good 
season,  at  your  Grace's  commandment  ;  that  unless  the  matter  be  much  not- 
able and  very  heinous,  he  desireth  your  Grace,  at  his  request,  to  cause  the 
said  Prior  to  be  restored  to  liberty,  and  discharged  of  that  imprisonmeut."22 

We  have  noticed  this  man,  as  one  purpose  for  which  it  is 
said  Fryth  came  over,  was  to  obtain  some  pecuniary  aid  from 
him,  or  rather  induce  the  Prior  to  accompany  him,  on  his 
return  to  the  Continent ;  a  movement  to  which  he  miglit  be 
more  disposed,  after  such  usage.  In  one  place,  indeed,  Foxe 
states  that  Fryth  came  over  at  the  Prior's  request ;  but  be 
this  as  it  may,  his  account  is  as  follows  : — 

"  Being  at  Reading,  it  happened  that  he  was  there  taken  for  a  vagabond,  and 
brought  to  examination,  where  the  simple  man,  loath  to  utter  himself  what  he 
was,  and  unacquainted  with  their  manner  of  examination,  and  they  greatly  of- 
fended with  him,  committed  him  to  the  stocks,  whore,  when  he  had  sitten  a 
long  time,  and  was  almost  pined  with  hunger,  and  would  not  for  all  that  declare 
what  he  was ;  at  last,  he  desired  that  the  schoolmaster  of  the  town  might  be 
brought  unto  him,  which,  at  that  time,  Mas  one  Leonard  Coxe,  a  man  very  well 
learned.  As  soon  as  he  came  to  him,  Fryth  by  and  bye,  in  the  Latin  tongue, 
began  to  bewail  his  captivity.  The  schoolmaster,  being  overcome  with  his 
eloquence,  did  not  only  take  pity  and  compassion  upon  him,  but  also  began  to 
love  and  embrace  such  an  excellent  wit  and  disposition  uulooked  for,  especially 
in  such  state  of  misery.  Afterward  they,  conferring  more  together  upon 
many  things,  as  touching  the  universities,  schools,  and  tongues,  fell  from  the 
Latin  tongue  to  the  Greek;  wherein  Fryth  did  so  inflame  the  love  of  the  school- 
master towards  him,  that  he  brought  him  into  a  marvellous  admiration,  especially 
when  he  heard  him,  by  heart,  rehearse  Homer's  verses,  out  of  his  first  book  of 
Iliad.  Whereupon  the  schoolmaster  went,  with  all  speed,  unto  the  Magistrates, 
grievously  complaining  of  the  injury  which  they  did  shew  to  so  excellent 
and  innocent  a  young  man.  And  so,  through  the  help  of  the  said  schoolmaster, 
the  said  Fryth  was  freely  set  at  liberty  without  punishment." 

The  "  stocks"  in  England  had  certainly  never  before  been 
so  honoured,  whatever  they  were  afterwards  ;  nor  should 
the  worthy  and  learned  schoolmaster  be  forgotten.^^  Thus 
enlarged,  we  hear  nothing  of  the  Prior,  and  he  might  have 
removed  after  this  outrage ;  but  Fryth  proceeded  to  London 


22  Wolsey's  Correspondence  in  the  Chapter-house,  vol.  v.,  no.  102. 

23  Leonard  Coxe,  a  native  of  Caerleon,  Monmouth,  who  had  studied  at  Cambridge,  was  an 
early  popular  philolosical  writer,  under  Henry  VIII.,  from  whom  he  had  a  house  in  Reading,  and 
an  annual  pension  of  ten  pounds.  He  became  a  great  traveller,  and  was  well  known  on  the  Con- 
tinent. He  defended  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  in  Christ.  The  intimate  of  Erasmus, 
he  translated  his  paraphrase  of  the  E])istle  of  Titus  into  English,  and  was  living  in  the  reign  of 
Edward  VI.  His  "  Art  or  Crafte  of  Rhetoricke,"  printed  so  early  as  1524,  is  dedicated  to  Hugh 
Farringdon,  a  patron  of  critical  studies,  and  the  last  Abbot  of  lieailit)(f,  who  was  ere  long  to  fall, 
under  Crumwcll's  hands,  to  satisfy  tlie  craving  of  his  Royal  Master. 


1532.]  FRYTII   IN  PERIL.  341 

itself,  and  there  saw  those  friends  of  truth,  to  whom  Bainham 
had  first  made  his  confession,  a  few  months  before.  The 
danger,  however,  was  extreme — but  there  was  to  be  no  more 
any  tiling-  bordering  upon  abjuration — no  more  halting  be- 
tween two  opinions,  or  between  life  and  death — in  Fryth's 
case.  He  had  come  to  read  a  lesson  to  the  Martyrs  of  England^ 
and  he  read  it  nobly,  by  his  tongue,  nay  by  his  pen,  and 
finally  by  the  flames.  It  was  altogether  a  sight  which  had 
never  been  seen  in  England  since  the  days  in  which  he  him- 
self had  been  reading  the  first  imported  Testament,  or  was 
immured  in  the  dungeon  at  Oxford.  Yet  though  of  so 
decided  a  character,  that  he  afterwards  astonished  both 
friends  and  foes,  Fryth  still  accounted  it  his  imperative 
duty  to  avoid  apprehension  if  he  could;  and,  according  to  the 
Divine  commandment,  first  fled  from  place  to  place,  rather 
than  his  enemies  should  be  involved  in  the  guilt  of  blood. 
He  changed  his  raiment  and  place  of  abode  again  and  again, 
but  could  not  remain  long  anywhere,  even  among  friends. 
Sir  Thomas  More  had  now  heard  of  his  being  in  England, 
and  "  beset,"  says  Foxe,  "  all  the  ways  and  havens,  yea,  and 
promised  great  rewards,  if  any  man  could  bring  any  tidings 
of  him."24 

While,  however,  he  was  yet  at  large,  there  was  a  Christian 
brother,  of  whom  Fryth  says,  "  for  his  commendable  conver- 
sation, and  sober  behaviour,  he  might  better  be  a  bishop,  than 
many  that  wear  mitres,  if  the  rule  of  St.  Paul  were  regarded 
in  their  election."  He  had  applied  to  Fryth  for  his  opinions 
respecting  the  Lord"'s  Supper,  and  after  complying  with  his 
earnest  request,  "  he  desired  me,"  he  adds,  "  to  entitle  the 
sum  of  my  words,  and  write  them  for  him,  because  they 
seemed  over  long  to  be  well  retained  in  memory.  This  was 
done  with  no  intention  of  its  being  read,  except  by  select  or 
choice  friends,  Avho  had  already  received  the  truth;  "  for  they 
knew  the  spiritual  and  necessary  eating  and  drinking  of  his 
body  and  blood,  which  is  received  but  with  the  ears  and  faith, 
and  only  needed  instruction  in  the  outward  eating ;  which 
thing,"  adds  Fryth,  "  I  only  declared."  By  this  time.  More 
especially,  if  not  Stokesly,  had  various  spies  on  the  look-out 


2<  One  evidence  that  he  was  still  acting  officially  as  I.urd  Cliancellor.  tlimif^hno  longer  Keeper 
-it  the  Great  Seal. 


342  FKYTH   IMPRISONED  [book  I. 

in  London ;  base  men,  who  insinuated  themselves  among  the 
best  of  the  city.  Two  of  these  are  named — one  Withers,  and 
William  Holt,  the  foreman  of  Mr.  Malte,  tailor  to  the  King. 
The  latter  was  the  guilty  man,  who  betrayed  confidence. 
Having  seen  the  manuscript  of  Fryth,  he  begged  a  perusal  of 
it,  and  once  obtained,  he  carried  it  forthwith  to  the  Chancellor. 
But  two  other  copies  were  conveyed  to  him  by  similar  men, 
which  gave  Fryth  occasion  to  warn  his  friends,  from  the 
Tower,  afterwards, — 

"  Saint  Paul  protesteth  that  he  was  in  peril  among  false  brethren,  and  surely 
I  suppose  that  we  are  in  no  less  jeopardy.  For  if  it  be  so,  that  his  Mastership 
had  received  one  copy,  and  had  a  couple  of  copies  more  offered  in  the 
meanwhile,  (as  More  had  printed,)  then  may  ye  be  sure  that  there  are  many  false 
brethren,  which  pretend  to  have  knowledge,  and  indeed  are  but  pick-thanks, 
providing  for  their  belly.  Prepare  ye,  therefore,  cloaks,  for  the  weather  waxeth 
cloudy,  and  rain  is  like  to  follow.  I  mean  not  false  c.rcuses  and  forswearing  of 
yourselves,  but  that  ye  look  substantially  upon  God^s  Word,  that  you  may  be 
able  to  answer  their  subtle  objections  ;  and  rather  choose  manfully  to  die  for 
Christ  and  His  Word,  than  cowardly  to  deny  Him,  for  this  vain  and  transitory 
life  ;  considering  that  they  have  no  farther  power  but  over  this  corruptible 
body,  which,  if  they  put  it  not  to  death,  must  yet,  at  the  length,  perish  of  itself. 
But  I  trust  the  Lord  shall  not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  you  may 
bear  ;  but  according  to  the  Spirit  that  he  shall  pour  upon  you,  shall  he  also 
send  you  the  scourge,  and  make  him  that  hath  received  more  of  the  Spirit,  to 
suffer  more,  and  him  that  receiveth  less  thereof,  to  suffer  according  to  his  talent." 

Sir  Thomas  More,  however,  as  if  conscious  of  his  incompe- 
tence to  answer  "  the  young  man,"  for  so  he  generally  called 
him,  had  now  become  more  cautious,  though  it  was  only  a 
few  months  since  his  vaunting  preface  was  abroad.  This  must 
have  been  the  more  mortifying,  when  Fryth  let  out  the  secret ; 
for  referring  to  his  manuscript,  he  tells  us, — 

"  Mr.  More,  which  of  late  hath  busied  himself  to  meddle  in  all  such  matters, 
(of  what  zeal  I  will  not  define,)  hath  sore  laboured  to  confute  it  ;  but  some 
men  think  that  he  is  ashamed  of  his  part,  and  for  that  cause  doth  so  diligently 
suppress  the  work  which  he  jyrinted  ;  for  I  myself  saw  the  work  in  print,  in  my 
Lord  of  Winchester's  house,  upon  St.  Stephen's  day  last  past,  ("26111  Dec.  1532.) 
But  neither  1,  neither  all  the  friends  I  could  make,  might  attain  any  copy, 
but  only  one  written  copy,  which,  as  it  seemed,  was  drawn  out  in  great  haste. 
Notwithstanding,  I  cannot  well  judge  ^l•hat  tlie  cause  should  be  that  his  book  is 
kept  so  secret  ;  but  this  I  am  right  sure  of,  that  he  never  touched  the  founda- 
tion that  my  treatise  was  builded  upon.  And,  therefore,  since  my  foundation 
standeth  so  sure  and  invincible — I  will  thereupon  build  a  little  more. "-5 


25  Preface  to  his  Answer  to  More. 


1532.]  SIR  THOMAS    MOKE'S   ADMISSION.  Si.3 

From  this  passage  it  is  evident  that  Frytli  was  not  only 
in  safe  keeping,  and  under  examination  by  tliis  month  of 
December,  but  that  More  had  replied  to  his  manuscript,  and 
in  print,  and  therefore  he  must  have  been  in  England  for 
some  months.  He  had  been  apprehended,  says  Foxe,  at  a 
place  called  Milton  Shore,  in  Essex,  where  he  had  gone  with 
a  view  to  embark  for  the  Continent,  and  after  that  had  been 
committed  to  the  Tower.  The  last  six  months  of  his  valuable 
life  will  come  before  us  in  due  time. 

But  with  regard  to  that  great  cause,  for  which  Fryth  was 
now  in  prison,  and  Tyndale  had  been  pursued  for  years,  there 
was  no  possibility  of  stopping  its  onward  progress.  The  im- 
portation of  the  Scriptures,  as  well  as  other  books,  went  on. 
A  tide  had  set  in,  which  no  vigilance,  no  power  upon  earth, 
could  either  stop  or  turn  aside.  Though  it  be  in  vulgar,  and 
even  profane  language,  by  far  the  finest  eulogium,  on  this 
department  of  exertion,  was  pronounced  by  Sir  Thomas  More 
himself,  and  in  this  very  year.  He  would  not,  it  is  true, 
open  his  eyes  to  the  fact,  that  there  was  a  thirst  for  the  Word 
of  Truth,  and  that  a  market  or  demand  had  been  created  in 
England,  in  spite  of  all  opposition  ;  and,  therefore,  he  is  in- 
coi'rect  as  to  the  way  in  which  money  was  raised,  or  rather 
capital  embarked,  but,  in  other  respects,  his  denunciation  in- 
volves the  very  highest  praise  which  could  have  been  elicited. 

"  There  be  fled  out  of  this  realm  for  heresy,  a  few  ungi-acious  folk  ;  what 
manner  folk,  their  writing  and  their  living  sheweth."  And  so,  after  pointing  at 
Tyndale  by  name,  he  goes  on — "  These  fellows  that  nought  had  here,  and, 
therefore,  nought  carried  hence,  nor  nothing  finding  there  to  live  upon,  be 
yet  sustained  and  maintained  with  money  sent  them  by  some  evil-disposed  per- 
sons out  of  this  realm  thither,  and  that  for  none  other  intent  but  to  make  them 
sit  and  seek  out  heresies,  and  speedily  send  them  hither. 

"  Which  books,  albeit  that  they  neither  can  be  there  printed  icithout  great 
cost,  nor  here  sold  without  great  adventure  and  peril :  yet  cease  they  not  with 
money  sent  from  hence,  to  print  them  there,  and  send  them  hither,  by  the  ichole 
tatts-full  at  once.  And,  in  some  places,  looking  for  no  hicre,  cast  them  abroad 
by  night;  so  great  a  pestilent  pleasure  have  some  devilish  people  caught,  ii-ith 
the  labour,  travel,  cost,  charge,  peril,  harm,  and  hurt  of  themselves,  to  seek  the 
destruction  of  other.  As  the  devil  hath  a  deadly  delight  to  beguile  good 
people,  and  bring  their  souls  into  everlasting  torment,  without  any  manner 
winning,  and  not  without  final  increase  of  his  own  eternal  pain  :  ISo!  So  do 
these  heretics,  the  devil's  disciples,  bysett  their  whole  pleasure  and  study,  to 
their  own  final  damnation,  in  the  training  of  simple  souls  to  hell,  by  their 
devilish  heresies !  "26 


'i'>  Pifface  to  More's  "  Coiil'ulatioii." 


344  FRYTH   STILL  WRITING  "  j^BOOK  I. 

Such  was  the  language  of  Sir  Thomas  More,  and  the  same 
spirit  reigns  throughout  his  pages.  It  was  the  testimony  of 
an  enemy,  addressed  to  enemies,  which  is  the  strongest  of  all, 
and  therefore  includes  the  higher  commendation  of  unwearied 
zeal  in  the  cause  of  God  and  his  truth.  And  certainly  it  was 
a  marvellous  thing,  that  one  of  those  "  fellows,"  with  his 
junior  companion,  "  who  nought  had  here,  and  therefore  nought 
carried  hence,"  should  be  able  to  kindle  such  a  fire  in  England. 
They  were  but  "  earthen  vessels,"  it  is  true  ;  persecuted,  but 
not  forsaken  ;  as  unknown,  and  yet  well  known  ;  as  poor,  yet 
making  many  rich  ;  for  their  friends,  by  this  time  described  as 
"  evil-disposed  persons  within  this  realm,"  had  already  become 
more  than  two  bands.  But  now,  since  our  only  controversialist 
thought  so  badly  of  them,  we  must  hear  the  opinion  of  a  better 
judge. 

We  have  alluded  to  a  Congregation  of  these  people,  meeting 
in  London,  but  there  were  groups,  in  secret,  throughout  differ- 
ent counties.  John  Fryth  had  seen  those  in  London,  and 
then  proceeded  from  place  to  place,  before  he  was  to  address 
them  all  from  his  prison.  He  had  worshipped  God  along  with 
them,  and  expounded  the  Sacred  Volume  they  held  so  dear ; 
and  what  was  his  deliberate  opinion  of  those  people,  whom  the 
Chancellor  and  the  Bishops  so  defamed  I  Here  it  is  in  a 
Letter  addressed  to  them,  "  whilst  he  was  prisoner  in  the 
Tower  of  London,  for  the  Word  of  God— anno  1532."-'7 

"  It  cannot  be  expressed,  dearly  beloved  in  the  Lord,  what  joy  and  comfort 
it  is  to  my  heart,  to  perceive  how  the  Word  of  God  hath  wrought,  and  con- 
tinually worketh  among  you  ;  so  that  I  find  no  small  number  walking  in  the 
ways  of  the  Lord,  according  as  he  gave  us  commandment,  willing  that  we  should 
love  one  another,  as  he  loved  us.  Now  have  I  experience  of  the  faith  which  is 
in  you,  and  can  testify  that  it  is  without  simulation  ;  that  ye  love,  not  in  word 
and  tongue  only,  but  in  work  and  verity. 

"  What  can  be  more  trial  of  a  faithful  heart,  than  to  adventure,  not  only  to 
aid  and  succour  by  the  means  of  others,  which  without  danger  may  not  be  ad- 
mitted unto  us,  but  also  personally  to  visit  the  poor  oppressed,  and  see  that 
nothing  be  lacking  unto  them,  but  that  they  have  both  ghostly  comfort  and 
bodily  sustenance,  notwithstanding  the  strait  inhibition  atid  terrible  menacing  of 
these  worldly  rulers  ;  even  ready  to  abide  the  extreme  jeopardies  that  tyrants 
can  imagine  ? 

"  This  is  an  evidence  that  you  have  prepared  yourselves  to  the  cross  of 
Christ :     This  is  an  evidence  that  ye  have  cast  your  accounts,  and  have  where- 


*7  Fryth's  Works.     As  tlieir  year  ran  on  to  the  Sfltli  of  March,  this  letter  was  written  in  the 
beginning  of  1533,— or  at  all  events,  before  that  day. 


1532,3  THOUGH   IN  THE  TOWER.  345 

with  to  finish  the  tower  which  ye  have  begun  to  build.  And  I  doubt  not  but 
tliat  He,  which  hath  begun  to  work  in  you,  shall,  for  his  glory,  accomplish  the 
same,  oven  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  which  shall  give  unto  every  man  ac- 
cording to  his  deeds.  And  albeit  God,  of  His  secret  judgments,  for  a  time  keep 
the  rod  from  some  of  tliem  that  ensue  his  steps ;  yet  let  them  surely  reckon  upon 
it,  for  tliere  is  no  doubt  but  all  which  will  devoutly  live  in  Christ,  must  suffer 
persecution  ;  for  'whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  correcteth,  and  scourgeth  every  child 
that  he  receiveth  ;'  for  what  child  is  that,  whom  the  Father  chastiseth  not  ? — 

"  Of  these  things,  God  had  given  me  the  sjieculation  before  ;  and  now  it  hath 
pleased  Him  to  put  them  in  use  and  practice  upon  me.  /  erer  thought,  and  ijet 
do  think,  that  to  walk  after  God's  Word  would  cost  me  my  life,  at  one  time  or 
another.  And  albeit  that  the  King's  Grace  should  take  me  into  his  favour,  and 
not  to  suffer  the  bloody  Edomites  to  have  their  pleasures  upon  me  ;  yet  will  I 
not  think  that  I  am  escaped  :  but  that  God  hath  only  deferred  it  for  a  season, 
to  the  intent  that  I  should  work  somewhat  that  he  hath  appointed  me  to  do  and 
so  to  use  me  unto  his  glory .2« 

"  And  I  beseech  all  the  followers  of  Clinst  to  arm  themselves  with  the  same 
supposition,  marking  themselves  with  the  sign  of  the  cross  ;  not  frovi  the 
cross,  as  the  superstitious  multitude  do,  but  rather  to  the  cross,  in  token  that 
they  be  ever  ready,  willingly  to  receive  the  cross,  when  it  shall  please  God  to 
lay  it  upon  them.  The  day  that  it  cometli  not,  count  it  clear  won,  giving  thanks 
to  the  Lord  which  hath  kept  it  from  you  ;  and  then  when  it  cometh,  it  shall 
nothing  dismay  you,  for  it  is  no  new  thing,  but  even  that  which  ye  have  con- 
tinually looked  for. 

"  And  doubt  not  but  that  God,  which  is  faithful,  shall  not  suffer  you  to  be 
tempted  above  that  which  ye  are  able  to  bear,  but  shall  ever  send  some  occa- 
sion, by  the  which  ye  shall  stand  stedfast ;  for  either  He  shall  blind  the  eyes 
of  your  enemies,  and  diminish  their  tyrannous  power,  or  else,  when  he  hath 
suffered  them  to  do  their  best,  and  that  the  dragon  hath  cast  a  whole  flood  of 
watei's  after  you.  He  shall  cause  even  the  very  earth  to  open  her  mouth  and 
swallow  them  up.  So  faithful  is  He,  and  careful  to  ease  us,  what  time  the 
vexation  should  be  too  heavy  for  us. 

"  He  shall  send  a  Joseph  before  you  against  ye  shall  come  into  Egypt ;  yea. 
He  shall  so  provide  for  you,  that  ye  shall  have  an  hundred  fathers  for  one ;  an 
hundred  mothers  for  one ;  an  hundred  houses  for  one ;  and  that  in  this  life,  as 
I  HAVE  PROVED  BY  EXPERIENCE  ;  aud  after  this  life,  everlasting  joy  with  Christ 
our  Saviour." 

Such  were  the  fruits  of  the  Sacred  Word,  printed  in  the 
vulgar  tongue  !  In  the  outset,  it  was  but  like  an  handful  of 
corn,  sown  in  a  most  unpromising  soil,  on  the  top  of  a  moun- 
tain ;  jet  now  that  one  of  the  sowers  has  come,  "  it  cannot  he 
expressed,  what  joy  aud  comfort  it  was  to  his  heart,  to  per- 
ceive" far  more  than  the  green  blade  above  the  ground.  The 
commendation  is  worthy  of  being  written  in  letters  of  gold, 
and  especially  that  closing  sentence. 


28  For  the  feeble  hope  of  escape  here  expressed,  tliere  was  some  ground,  which,  when  the 
time  comes,  will  be  explained ;  but  this  is  a  proof  that  the  Utter  was  written  between  the  month 
of  January  and  the  25th  of  March. 


34G  FRYTII   STILL   WRITING  [bOOK  r. 

That  a  Christian  shouhl  receive  an  hundred-fold  of  temporal 
good,  with  persecutions,  has  often  seemed  to  be  a  mystery,  and 
the  passage  has  so  perplexed  the  expositors  of  more  peaceful 
times,  that  they  have  felt  obliged  to  escape  to  the  supposition 
of  celestial  gratifications.  How  a  man  should  leave  one  house 
and  find  an  hundred,  in  the  days  when  mere  professors  are 
loth  to  leave  any  thing  for  Christ,  has  appeared  to  be  im- 
possible; although  the  Saviour  expressly  confines  the  hundred- 
fold to  this  life.  But  the  exuberant  love  and  hospitality  of 
the  primitive  Christians  untie  the  knot,  and  explain  the  pro- 
mise.29  On  the  part  of  our  Redeemer,  it  was  indeed  a  most 
extraordinary  intimation  ;  informing  the  earliest  age,  not  only 
that  Christianity  should  gain  ground,  but  prevail  in  such 
power  over  its  believers  and  all  that  they  possessed ;  and  it 
remained  for  John  Fryth  especially  to  come  over,  and  draw 
out  the  proof  that  primitive  Christianity  had  efi'ectually  taken 
root  in  England.  All  the  believers'  houses  had  been  open  to 
entertain  him,  and  there  was  he  treated  with  all  a  father's,  or 
a  mother's,  a  brother's  or  a  sister's  kindness.  Now  that  he 
was  in  bonds,  lie  was  overcome  with  joy,  by  finding  that  such 
was  their  concern  for  him,  and  that  they  felt  his  private  or 
personal  suffering  as  a  general  calamity,  or  a  public  wrong. 

Of  this  fine  epistle,  so  well  worthy  of  the  man,  we  have  only 
given  this  extract,  and  yet  we  must  not  omit  to  notice  how 
anxious  Fryth  was,  even  still,  to  be  of  service  to  those  who 
had  shown  him  such  kindness  for  his  Master's  sake,  and  the 
books  of  sacred  writ,  translated  by  his  dearest  friend. 

"  The  Father  of  glory,"  he  concludes,  "  give  us  the  spirit  of  wisdom,  under- 
standing and  knowledge,  and  lighten  the  eyes  of  our  mind,  that  we  may  now 
his  ways,  praising  the  Lord  eternally.  If  it  please  any  of  our  brethren  to  write 
unto  us,  of  any  such  doubts  as  peradventure  may  be  found  in  our  books, 
(Tyndale's  or  his  own,)  it  should  be  very  acceptable  unto  us,  and,  as  I  trust,  not 
unfi-uitful  for  them.  For  I  will  endeavour  myself,  to  satisfy  them  in  all  points, 
by  God's  grace,— to  whom  I  commit  to  be  governed  and  defended  for  ever, 
Amen.  John  Fryth,  the  pinsoner  of  Jesus  Christ,  at  all  times  abiding 
His  pleasure." 

And  now  that  the  year  is  ended  what  can  be  said,  as  to  the 


*!•  "  It  is  beyond  imagination,  to  what  excess  the  Christians  carry  their  profusion  on  these  oc- 
casions," namely  of  persecution.  "  They  esteem  each  other  indiscriminately  as  brethren,  and 
all  goods  are  in  common  with  them  ;"— a  remarkable  testimony  in  even  the  profane  hiirian'f 
I'hilopalris.    He  died  anno  214,  aged  !)li. 


1532.]  THOUGH  IN  THE  TOWER.  3i7 

Old  man  and  the  Young  ?  tlie  Chancellor  and  his  prisoner  'i 
What  else  than  that  "  wisdom  excelleth  folly,  and  as  far  as 
light  excelleth  darkness  ;"  or  that  "  the  wise  man's  eyes  are 
in  his  head,  and  that  it  is  the  infatuated  only,  who  walk  on 
in  darkness  V 

By  the  mercy  of  God,  however.  Sir  Thomas  More  must 
noAv  Avithdraw.  He  had  resigned  the  Great  Seal  in  May,  but 
still  had  acted  officially  till  towards  the  close  of  the  year ;  in 
a  few  weeks  hence  he  will  be  entirely  dismissed,  and  left  free, 
and  at  leisure  to  go  on  with  his  voluminous  controversy, 
though  this  should  only  be  to  his  final  overthrow. 

We  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  the  precise  object  of 
Fryth's  journey  into  England,  at  a  period  so  fraught  with 
danger.  It  must  have  been  something  of  importance  in  his 
own  apprehension,  as  well  as  in  that  of  Tyndale.^^'  The  latter 
had  no  other  man  like-minded,  no  other  companion,  properly 
so  called,  upon  earth.  For  years  together,  he  himself  had 
been  pursued  on  the  Continent,  but  Fryth  was  now  in  Eng- 
land itself.  One  can,  therefore,  easily  conceive  what  trem- 
bling anxiety  must  have  been  felt  by  our  Translator,  in  his 
absence ;  and  we  liave  one  fine  letter  of  judicious  counsel, 
before  he  knew  the  worst — that  Fryth  was  apprehended,  and 
in  the  Tower  of  London.  By  way  of  precaution,  he  addresses 
his  friend  under  the  name  of  Jacob,  though  he  does  not  con- 
ceal his  own : — 

"  The  grace  of  our  Saviour  Jesus,  his  patience,  meekness,  humbleness,  cir- 
cumspection, and  wisdom,  be  with  your  heart,  amen  !  Dearly  beloved  brother, 
mine  heart's  desire  in  our  Saviour  Jesus  is,  that  you  arm  yourself  with 
patience,  and  be  cool,  sober,  wise,  and  circumspect  ;  and  that  you  keep  you 
alow  31  by  the  gi'ound,  avoiding  high  questions  that  pass  the  common  capacity. 
But  expound  the  law  truly,  and  open  the  veil  of  Moses,  to  condemn  all  flesh, 
and  prove  all  men  sinners,  and  all  deeds  under  the  law,  before  mercy  have 
taken  away  the  condemnation  thereof,  to  be  sin  and  damnable.  And  then,  as 
a  faithful  minister,  set  abroach  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  and  let  the 
wounded  consciences  drink  of  the  water  of  him.  Then  shall  your  preaching  be 
with  power,  and  not  as  the  doctrine  of  the  hypocrites,  and  the  Spirit  of  God 


30  In  one  brief  account  of  Fryth,  It  is  said — "  At  the  last,  he,  being  driven  to  necessity  and 
lack  of  money,  was  forced  secretly  to  return  over  into  this  realm,  to  be  relieved  of  his  friends, 
namely,  of  the  Prior  of  Reading;  and  it  was  thought  he  purposed  to  have  had  the  Prior  over 
with  him."  The  last  might  be  his  wish  ;  but  the  entire  strain  of  Tyndale's  letters  forbids  the 
idea  of  his  having  come  merely  for  personal  assistance.  Foxe  states,  that  "  he  came  over  at 
the  request  of  the  Prior  of  Reading,"  not  the  Abbot,  as  has  been  vaguely  stated.  Testaments 
had  been  distributed  at  Reading  seven  years  ago,  (see  page  Ufi,)  but  we  have  no  account  of  who 
this  Prior  was. 

3'  The  contrast  to  our  term  a!o/l,  still  retained. 


348  TYNDALE'S  SYMPATHY  [book  i. 

shall  work  with  you,  and  all  consciences  shall  bear  record  unto  you,  and  feel 
that  it  is  so.  And  all  doctrine  that  casteth  a  mist  on  these  two,  to  shadow  and 
hide  them,  I  mean,  the  law  of  God  and  mercy  of  Christ,  that  7-esist,  with  all  your 
jMwer.  Sacraments  without  signification,  refuse.  If  they  put  significations  to 
them,  receive  them,  if  you  see  it  may  help,  though  it  be  not  necessary. 

"  Of  the  presence  of  Christ's  body  in  the  sacrament,  meddle  as  little  as  you 
can,  that  there  appear  no  division  among  us.  Barnes  will  be  hot  against  you.32 
The  Saxons  be  sore  in  the  affirmative,  whether  constant  or  obstinate,  I  omit  it 
to  God.  Philip  Melancthon  is  said  to  be  with  the  French  King.  There  be  in 
Antwerp  that  say,  they  saw  him  come  into  Paris  with  150  horses,  and  that 
they  spake  with  him.  If  the  Frenchmen  receive  the  Word  of  God,  he  will 
plant  the  affirmative  in  them.  33  George  Joye  would  have  put  forth  a  treatise 
of  that  matter,  but  I  have  stopt  him  as  yet :  what  he  will  do,  if  he  get  money, 
I  wot  not.  I  believe  he  would  make  many  reasons,  little  serving  to  the  pur- 
pose. 34  My  mind  is,  that  nothing  be  put  forth  till  we  hear  how  you  have  sped. 
I  would  have  the  right  use  preached,  and  the  presence  to  be  an  indifferent 
thing,  till  the  matter  might  be  reasoned  in  peace,  at  leisure  of  both  parties. 
If  you  be  required,  shew  the  phrases  of  the  Scripture,  and  let  them  talk  what 
they  will.  For  as  to  believe  that  God  is  everywhere,  hurteth  no  man  that 
worshippeth  him  nowhere  but  within,  in  the  heart,  iu  spirit  and  verity ;  even 
so  to  believe  that  the  body  of  Christ  is  everywhere,  (though  it  cannot  be 
proved,)  hurteth  no  man  that  worshippeth  him  nowhere,  save  in  the  faith  of 
his  gospel.  You  perceive  my  mind  ;  howbeit,  if  God  shew  you  otherwise,  it  is 
free  for  you  to  do  as  he  moveth  you. 

"  I  guessed  long  ago,  that  God  would  send  a  dazing  into  the  head  of  the 
Spirituality,  to  catch  themselves  in  their  own  subtilty  ;  and  I  trust  it  is  come 
to  pass.  And  now,  methinketh,  I  smell  a  Council  to  be  taken,  little  for  their 
profits,  in  time  to  come.  But  you  must  understand,  that  it  is  not  of  a  pure 
heart,  and  for  love  of  the  truth,  but  to  avenge  themselves,  and  to  eat  the  har- 
lot's flesh,  and  to  suck  the  marrow  of  her  bones.  35  Wherefore,  cleave  fast  to 
the  rock  of  the  help  of  God,  and  commit  the  end  of  all  things  to  Him  ;  and  if 
God  shall  call  you,  that  you  may  then  use  the  wisdom  of  the  world,  as  far  as 
you  pei'ceive  the  glory  of  God  may  come  thereof,  refuse  it  not ;  and  ever 
among  thrust  in,  that  the  Scripture  may  be  in  the  Mother  tongue,  and  learning 
set  up  in  the  Universities.  But  and  if  ought  be  required  contrary  to  the  glory 
of  God  and  his  Christ,  then  stand  fast,  and  commit  yourself  to  God,  and  be  not 
overcome  of  men^s  persuasions,  which  haply  shall  say,  we  see  no  other  way  to 
bring  in  the  truth. 

"  Brother  Jacob,  beloved  of  my  heart,  there  llveth  not,  iu  whom  I  have  so 
good  hope  and  trust,  and  in  whom  mine  heart  rejoiceth,  and  my  soul  coniforteth 


32  Barnes,  we  shall  find,  was  now  in  England,  and  he  a  Lutheran,  as  to  the  Lord's  Supper. 
Neither  Tyndale  or  Fryth  ever  were,  and  their  works,  in  strict  propriety,  ought  never  to  have 
been  printed  in  the  same  volume,  as  Foxe  did.  It  may  be  but  small  consolation  to  the  pub- 
lishers of  the  beautiful  modern  edition  of  Tyndale's  and  Fryth's  works,  by  the  Rev.  T.  Kusscl, 
that  they  were  interrupted  in  their  progress,  intending,  as  they  did,  to  print  the  works  of  some 
other  men ;  but  there  was  great  propriety  in  stopping  where  they  did,  as  Tyndale  and  Fryth, 
among  the  earliest  writers,  truly  stand  alune,  or  in  a  i)lace  and  position  peculiar  to  themselves. 

33  This  was  a  mistaken  rumour.  Melancthon  never  went  to  Paris.  By  the  affirinative,  Tyn- 
dale refers  to  Consubstantiation,  the  dogma  of  Luther,  and  it  is  hinted  at  here,  evidently,  in 
the  way  of  regret. 

34  So  uniformly  had  Tyndale  deprecated  the  subject  of  Christianity  being  hastily  absorpt  in 
an  intemperate  war  of  opinion  respecting  one  of  its  positive  institutions. 

35  He  foresaw,  or  anticipated  the  dissolution  of  the  monasteries,  long  before  the  subject  was 
mooted  in  Parliament  by  Crumwcll. 


1532.]  WITH    FRYTII.  3VJ 

herself,  as  in  you  ;  not  the  thousandth  part  so  much  for  your  learning,  and 
what  other  gifts  else  you  have,  as  that  you  will  creep  alow  by  the  gi'ound, 
and  walk  in  those  things  that  the  conscience  may  feel,  and  not  in  the 
imaginations  of  the  brain  ;  in  fear,  and  not  in  boldness  ;  in  open  necessary 
things,  and  not  to  pronounce  or  define  of  hid  secrets,  or  things  that  neither 
help  nor  hinder,  whether  they  be  so  or  no  ;  in  unity,  and  not  in  seditious 
opinions  :  insomuch,  that  if  you  be  sure  you  know  ;  yet  in  things  that  may 
abide  leisure,  you  will  defer,  or  say,  mcthinks  the  text  rcquireth  this  sense  or 
understanding  ;  yea,  and  if  you  be  sure  that  your  part  be  good,  and  another 
hold  the  contrary,  yet  if  it  be  a  thing  that  maketh  no  matter,  you  will  laugh 
and  let  it  pass,  and  refer  the  thing  to  other  men,  and  stick  you  stiffly  and 
stubbornly,  in  earnest  and  necessary  things. 

"  And  I  trust  you  be  pei-suaded  even  so  of  me.  For  1  call  God  to  record, 
against  the  day  tee  shall  ajrpear  before  our  Lord  Jesus,  to  gire  a  reckoning  of  our 
doings,  that  1  never  altered  one  syllable  of  God's  Word  against  my  conscience, 
(as  Sir  Thomas  More  had  insinuated,)  nor  would  this  day,  if  all  that  is  in  the 
earth,  trhether  it  be  pleasure,  honour,  or  riches,  might  be  giren  me.  IMoreover,  I 
take  God  to  record  to  my  conscience,  that  I  desire  of  God  to  myself  in  this 
world,  no  more  than  tliat  (liberty  ?)  without  which  I  cannot  keep  his  laws. 

"  Finally,  if  there  were  in  me  any  gift  that  could  help  at  hand,  and  aid  you, 
if  need  required,  I  promise  you  I  would  not  be  far  off,  and  commit  the  end  to 
God  :  my  soul  is  not  faint,  though  my  body  be  weary.  But  God  hath  made  me 
evil-favoured  in  this  world,  and  without  grace  in  the  sight  of  men,  speechless 
and  rude,  dull  and  slow-witted  :  your  part  shall  be  to  supply  that  which  lacketh 
in  me — remembering,  that  as  lowliness  of  heart  shall  make  you  high  with  God, 
even  so  meekness  of  words  shall  make  you  sink  into  the  hearts  of  men.  Nature 
giveth  age  authority,  but  meekness  is  the  glory  of  youth,  and  giveth  them 
honour.     Abundance  of  love  maketh  me  exceed  in  babbling." — 

No  one  can  for  a  moment  mistake  this  lowliness  on  the 
part  of  Tyndale,  for  lack  of  ability ;  though  it  discovers  the 
very  high  ojiinion  which  he  entertained  of  Fryth  and  his 
talents,  both  as  a  Christian  and  a  scholar. 

— "  If  you  perceive  wherein  we  may  help,  either  in  being  still,  or  doing  some- 
thing, let  us  have  word,  and  I  will  do  mine  uttermost.  My  Lord  of  London 
hath  a  servant,  called  John  Tisen,  with  a  red  beard,  and  a  black -reddish  head, 
and  was  once  my  scholar :  he  was  seen  in  Antwerp,  but  came  not  among  the 
Englishmen.     Whether  he  is  gone  an  ambassador  secret,  I  wot  not. 

"  The  mighty  God  of  Jacob  be  with  }ou,  to  supplant  his  enemies,  and  give 
you  the  favour  of  Joseph ;  and  the  wisdom  and  the  spirit  of  Stephen  be  with 
your  heart  and  with  your  mouth,  and  teach  your  lips  what  they  shall  say,  and 
how  to  answer  to  all  things.  He  is  our  God,  if  we  despair  in  ourselves  and 
trust  in  Him ;  and  his  is  the  glory.  Amen.  William  Tyndale.  I  hope  our  re- 
demption is  nigh." 

But  whatever  Tyndale  might  intend  by  his  last  expression 
to  Fryth,  it  was  not  long  before  he  heard  of  his  being  in  the 
hands  of  Sir  Thomas,  and  also  in  the  Tower ;  for,  however 
impossible  it  had  ever  been  to  find  Tyndale's  abode,  it  is  re- 
markable that  no  circumstances  could  ever  impede  his  imme- 
diate   communication   with    England.     Thou2:h    FrA'th    had 


.350  ONE    DISTINGUISHING   FEATURE  [bOOK  I. 

found  it  difficult  to  procure  a  copy  of  More's  reply  to  him- 
self, either  that,  or  some  other  copy,  was  soon  in  Tyndale's 
possession,  when  he  immediately  discovered  all  that  deep  in- 
terest which  he  had  already  expressed  so  warmly  in  his  letter. 
Before  this,  too,  he  had  also  received  the  Chancellor's  vaunted 
Confutation,  so  that,  according  to  More's  own  concession,  he 
could  now  "  pry  upon"  them  both,  "  narrowly,  and  with  such 
eagle's  eyen  as  he  hath."  By  a  single  passage,  at  the  outset, 
which  will  be  noticed  presently,  he  effectually  damaged  the 
fame  of  the  knight's  "  Confutation ;"  but  the  perilous  situa- 
tion of  Fryth  demanded  haste,  and  Tyndale  immediately  did 
his  "uttermost"  for  him,  as  he  had  promised.  Whether  he 
left  Antwerp  to  superintend  the  press,  is  not  certain,  but  it  is 
more  than  probable,  for  it  is  curious  enough  that  his  pointed 
production  was  printed  at  Nuremberg  by  Nicolas  Townson, 
and  was  finished  by  the  beginning  of  April.  It  is  entitled — 
"  The  Supper  of  the  Lord  " — after  the  meaning  of  John,  vi. 
and  1st  Corinthians,  xi.  — "  wherein,  incidentally.  Master 
More's  letter  against  John  Fryth  is  confuted."-^'' 

For  fresh  events  we  must  now,  therefore,  look  forward  to 
the  next  year. 


SECTION   X. 

ONE  DISTINGUISHING   FEATURE    OF    TTNDALE'S    COURSE   AND   CHARACTER   AS 

COMPARED  WITH  HIS  CONTEMPORARIES HIS  ANSWER    TO   SIR    T.  MORE 

HIS    LETTER  TO  FRYTH    IN   PRISON STATE    OF  ENGLAND FRYTH'S  VOICE 

FROM  THE  TOWER STRANGE  CONDITION  OF  ENGLAND THE  KING  MAR- 
RIED  CRANMER's  PROCEDURE — GARDINER  ROUSED FRYTH'S  EXAMINA- 
TION   BEFORE    THE    BISHOPS   ASSEMBLED HIS  TRIUMPH    IN  ARGUMENT 

MARTYRDOM ENGLAND  AND  THE    CONTINENT ONE    EFFECT    OF    FRYTh's 

DEATH SIR  T.  MORE  WRITING  STILL ONE  POWERFUL  OPPONENT  AT  HOME 

MORE   AS    A    CONTROVERSIALIST HIS    PRODIGIOUS    EXERTIONS OTHER 

QUALITIES— FINALLY  OA'ERCOME THE  PROSPECT  BRIGHTENING. 

Before  recurring  to  Tyndale's  last  publication,  we  are  con- 


36  "  Imprinted  at  Nornburg,  by  Nicolas  TwoiiBOii,  5  April,  An.  IflSS."  It  was  reprinted, 
with  a  preface,  Iiy  Crawley,  in  1551.  Herbert,  in  reporting  this,  had  said,  that  the  original  edi- 
tion had  no  printer's  name,  but  when  he  came  to  his  third  vol.  he  had  found  his  mistake,  and 
gives  it  as  above. — Herbert's  ^-Jmcf,  iii.,p.  1541.  In  the  Harleian  Catalogue,  vol.  i..  No.  2896, 
the  editor  had  loosely  said,  "  set  forth  by  Mylcs  Coverdale  ;"  and  Watts,  in  his  Bibl.  Brit.,  mis- 
taking this  for  authorship,  inserted  the  piece  under  Coverdale's  name.  In  consequence  of  this, 
it  has  recently  been  placed  in  a  list  at  the  head  of  Coverdale's  IVorks  !  Heicouhi  mil  have  so 
utiarked  More,  nor  edited  it,  at  siieh  n  time,  no,  not  for  any  consideration  in  the  world. 


1.533.]  IN   TYNDALE'S   COURSE   AND   CHARACTER.  3i>l 

strained  to  [jause  tor  a  few  moments,  and  observe  more  distinctly 
one  marked  or  distinguishing  feature  in  his  character.    His  one 
object  in  life,  was  to  gain  over  his  native  land  to  the  faith  of 
the  Mediator.     The  foundation  of  all  his   hope  of   success, 
rested  on  the  Word  of  God  itself.     With  its  translation  into 
English  he  began,  and  laboured  in  it  to  his  dying  day.     And 
having  once  conveyed  the  Neiv  Testament  to  England,  as  con- 
taining truth  without  any  mixture  of  error  ;   he  might,  indeed, 
because  banished  from  the  soil,  assail  the  love  of  the  world  or 
covetousness,  in  those  who  had  arrogated  to  themselves  the 
title  of   "  the  Spirituality,"  in    his  parable  of  "  the   Wicked 
Mammon  ;''"'    he    might    lay    down    the    law    of    "  Christian 
Obedience,''''  but  built  on  that  faith  which  he  had  already  ex- 
plained ;   might  expose  the  hypocritical  "  Practice  of  Prelates,'''' 
who  had  sunk  his  country  into  immorality,  licentiousness  and 
debt ;   or  warn  the  whole  nation  by  Jonah  and  his  prologue. 
These  were  great  subjects,  and  worthy  of  his  pen  ;  but  when 
once  he  found  a  Preacher  upon  English  ground,  in  whom,  and 
in  whose  doctrine,  he  reposed  unlimited  confidence,  and  came 
to  explain  the  course  which  he  thought  that  Preacher  should 
pursue,  his  ideas  are  worthy  of  observation  in  any,  or  rather 
in  every  age.     He  himself  had  been  "  about  a  great  work  and 
would  not  come  down,"  and  so  he  would  have  Fryth  to  act. 
His  weapons  were  to  be  only  two, — the  Law  and  the  Gospel ; 
subjects  to  which  the  conscience  would  respond ;   and  hence 
his  fervent  anxiety  that  he  would  commend  himself  to  every 
man's  conscience,  as  in  the  sight  of  God ;   or  only  "  walk  in 
those  things  that  the  conscience  might  feel."     He  thought  that 
matters  of  essential  6^//^' should  first  be  received  in  England, 
and  fii-st  settled  in  all  cases,  before  those  of  obedience  should 
be  enforced  ;  that  the  souls  of  men  should  first  have  in  pos- 
session that  rest  which  Christ  c/ives,  before  his  gentle  yohe  could 
be  assumed  ;  that  men  should  first  be  disciples,  and  then  taught 
all   things  whatsoever  Christ  has  commanded.     During   his 
entire  residence  on  the  Continent,  from  this  fixed  judgment 
he  had  never  swerved,  though  amidst  many  temptations  so  to 
do,  and  this  it  is  which  should  procure  for  him,  in  the  eye  of 
posterity,  one  distinguishing  eminence  among  all  his  contem- 
poraries.    There  is  actually  not  a  second  man  to  be  placed  by 
his  side,  except  the  prisoner  respecting  whom  he  is  now  so 
concerned.     In  consequence  of  pursuing  a  course  all  his  own. 


352  ONE  DISTINGUISHING   FEATURE  []b00K  I. 

at  no  Conference,  Diet,  or  Assembly  can  we  ever  hear  of  him, 
nor  do  we  find  any  references  to  these,  in  his  writings.  There 
was  in  1524,  the  Diet  at  Nuremberg,  the  Assembly  at  Ratis- 
bon  in  July,  and  another  afterwards  at  Spire.  In  1526  the 
Conference  at  Baden  against  Zuingle  in  May,  and  the  Diet  at 
Spire  in  June.  In  1527  the  Conference  of  Bern,  not  to  say 
the  provincial  Councils  at  Bruges  and  Paris.  In  1529  the 
Diet  in  March  held  at  Spire,  then  the  Protestation^  and  then 
the  Conference  in  October,  at  Marburg,  between  the  Lutherans 
and  Zuinglians.  In  1530  there  was  the  Diet  of  Augsburg; 
to  deliberate  on  the  Ausburg  Confession,  or  the  articles  of  Tor- 
gau,  including  what  they  called  "  Sacraments,""  and  "religious 
ceremonies"  and  then  the  league  at  Smalkald.  In  1531 
the  Assembly  again  at  Smalkald,  and  afterwards  at  Frank- 
fort. But  at  not  one  of  these  do  we  hear  of  Tyndale  being 
present ;  an  absence  or  retirement  so  uniform,  that  it  could 
only  have  sprung  from  some  fixed  determination,  more  espe- 
cially as  his  talents  would  have  secured  a  chair  for  him,  on  any 
such  occasions. 

And  as  he  frequented  no  public  conferences  or  disputations, 
so  he  courted  the  patronage  of  no  German  circle,  of  no  Duke 
or  Elector,  no  Landgrave  or  Counsellor,  but,  to  use  his  own 
expression,  "  kept  aloio  by  the  ground."  His  rejection,  at 
first,  by  the  Lord  Bishop  of  London,  actually  seems  to  have 
made  an  impression  which  never  left  him,  and  six  years 
afterwards  he  refers  to  it,  as  though  it  had  governed  him  ever 
since, — "  God  saw,''''  says  he  "  that  I  was  beguiled,  and  that 
that  Counsel  was  not  the  next  way  unto  my  purpose  ;  and 
therefore  he  gat  me  no  favour  in  my  Lord's  sight. ^  After 
that  period  he  seems  to  have  felt,  as  Johnson  did  in  modern 
times,  that  a  Patron  would  only  have  "encumbered  him  with 
help  ;"  or  he  was  not  willing  that  posterity  should  consider 
him  as  owing  that  to  any  earthly  protector,  which  Providence 
enabled  him  to  accomplish,  without  one  smile  of  court-favour 
from  his  country.  In  short,  Tyndale's  lack  of  protection  from 
princes,  and  assistance  from  learned  men,  taken  in  connexion 
with  the  course  which  he  had  so  steadily  pursued,  form  a  forci- 
ble contrast  to  the  path  and  circumstances  of  all  his  contem- 


'  He  refers  to  Sir  Henry  Guilford,  who  had  counselled  him  as  to  the  best  mode  of  apiiroachiriR 
Tunstal ;  or  with  a  translation  from  the  Greek. 


1533.2  IN   TYNDALE'S   COURSE   AND   CIIAKACTER.  353 

poraries.  If  these  statements  be  observed,  thej  may  so  far 
account  for  the  fact,  tliat  during  the  last  nine  years,  with  a 
sound  and  discriminating  judgment,  Tyndale  had  stedfastly  de- 
precated the  Bellum  Sacramentai'ium,  and  never  more  so  than 
at  this  period,  as  he  himself  has  already  explained.  It  had 
commenced  about  the  very  time  of  his  arrival  at  Hamburgh, 
in  1 524,  and,  upon  fixed  principles,  he  had  kept  out  of  it,  from 
year  to  year.  This  of  itself  alone,  was  quite  sufficient  to  have 
preserved  him  from  personally  combining  with  Luther;  a  confe- 
deracy, which  he  himself  denied  after  six  years'  residence  on  the 
Continent;^  and  one,  which,  owing  to  the  violence  of  the  Saxons, 
could  not  possibly  have  taken  place  since.  But,  now  that 
Tyndale's  dearest  friend  upon  earth,  his  "  own  son"  in  the 
faith,  is  incarcerated,  and  in  danger  of  his  life, — now  that  he 
has  fallen  into  the  hands  of  these  English  Philistines, — now 
that  both  Providence  and  Christian  friendship  call  him  to  speak 
out,  having  no  choice,  he  will  not  be  slow,  or  rather  was  not, 
so  to  do. 

And  never  was  triumph  more  complete,  than  that  of  Tyn- 
dale and  Fryth  over  Sir  Thomas  More  on  the  subject  of  the 
Lord's  Supper,  though  on  their  part  it  was  entirely  unprovoked. 
Fryth,  it  must  be  observed,  was  precisely  of  Tyndale's  opinion ; 
that  Repentance  and  Faith,  or  matters  of  essential  belief,  should 
be  first  propounded  and  settled,  previously  to  discussing  any 
Christian  ordinances ;  that  the  former  were  to  be  testified  to 
the  w'orld  at  large ;  the  latter,  settled  within  the  Church  it- 
self: that  the  messenger  of  God  to  guilty  men,  was  to  preach 
and  might  print  on  the  former,  but  as  to  the  latter,  beware  of 
the  printing-press.  The  latter  were  to  be  "  reasoned  in  peace 
and  at  leisure,"  among  believers  alone,  or  within  the  Church. 
Oh,  had  the  counsel  of  the  "  first  two"  been  taken,  what  a 
different  aspect  had  the  Church  of  God  exhibited  by  this  time  ! 
And  why  may  not  some  invaluable  instruction,  even  now,  be 
drawn  from  this,  the  very  spring-head  of  religious  controversy? 

It  must  be  remembered,  therefore,  that,  believing,  as  he 
did,  in  the  plainness,  and  all-sufficiency  of  the  Sacred  Oracles, 
Fryth  had  been  exceedingly  averse  from  putting  pen  to  paper, 
and  that  when  he  did  so,  it  was  only  in  compliance  with  the 
urgency  of  a  beloved  Christian  brother.     But  this  was  only  a 


2  A  confederacy  which  he  might  have  denied  all  along. 
VOL  I,  Z 


.354  TYNDALE   IN   ANSWER  TO  MORE.  [book  I. 

manuscript^  and  one  sacredly  intended  only  for  the  eye 
of  believers^  in  whose  faith  Fryth  had  already  found  such 
reason  to  rejoice.  In  these  circumstances,  the  Chancellor 
stepped  out  of  his  way,  to  his  own  discomfiture  ;  and  so  in- 
fatuated was  he,  that  he  must  print  in  reply,  though  he  after- 
wards laboured  to  suppress  It.  Copies,  however,  having  gone 
out,  Fryth  must  not  shrink  from  confuting  him,  and  Tyndale 
having  received  it  also,  neither  does  he.  Throughout  this 
piece.  Sir  Thomas  having  contemptuously  styled  Fryth  "  the 
young  man,"  this  it  was  which  led  Tyndale  frequently  to 
place  the  Lord  Chancellor  in  contrast  as  "  the  old  man ;" 
and  he  will  now  require  to  put  on  his  spectacles  once  more. 

In  the  outset  of  his  attack  on  Fryth,  the  Chancellor  had 
insisted  that  in  the  sixth  chapter  of  John  the  Saviour  had  re- 
ferred literally  to  the  Lord's  Supper. 

"  After  this  text,"  says  Tyndale,  "  tlms  ii-isely  proved  to  be  understood  in 
the  hteral  sense,  with  carnal  Jews,  and  not  in  the  allegoric  or  spiritual  sense, 
with  Christ  and  his  Apostles  :  the  whole  sum  of  More's  confutation  of  "  the 
young  man"  standetli  upon  this  argument.  A  posse  ad  esse.  That  is,  to 
wit,  God  may  do  it,  ergo,  it  is  done  !  Christ  may  make  his  body  in  many, 
or  in  all  places,  at  once,  ergo,  it  is  in  many,  or  in  all  places,  at  once.  Which 
manner  of  argumentation,  how  false  and  naught  it  is,  every  sophister,  and 
every  man  that  hath  wit,  perceiveth.  A  like  argument.  God  may  shew  More 
the  truth,  and  call  him  to  repentance,  as  he  did  Paul,  for  persecuting  his 
Church  :  ergo.  More  is  converted  to  God  ! — or  God  may  let  him  run,  of  an  ob- 
durate heart  with  Pharaoh,  and  at  last  take  an  open  and  sudden  vengeance 
upon  him,  for  persecuting  His  Word,  and  burning  His  poor  members  :  ergo,  it 
is  done  already  ! — But  let  us  return  to  our  purpose.  To  dispute  of  God's  al- 
mighty absolute  power,  what  God  may  do  with  his  body,  it  is  great  folly,  and  no 
less  presumption  to  More.  But,  Christian  reader,  be  thou  content  to  know  that 
God's  will,  his  word,  and  his  power,  be  all  one,  and  repugn  not.  The  glory 
of  his  Godhead  is  to  be  present,  and  to  fill  all  places  at  once,  essentially  with  his 
almighty  power  ;  which  gloi'y  is  denied  to  any  other  creature,  himself  say- 
ing by  his  prophet,  '  I  will  not  give  mj'  glory  to  any  other,' — but  to  attribute 
to  his  manhood  that  propei'ty  which  onfi/  is  appropriated  to  his  Godhead,  is  to 
confound  both  the  natures  of  Christ. 

"  But  M.  More  saith  at  last,  '  if  God  would  tell  me,  that  He  would  make 
each  of  their  bodies  two,  (meaning  the  young  man's  body  and  his,)  to  be  in 
fifteen  places  at  once,  I  would  believe  him,  that  he  were  able  to  make  his 
words  true  in  the  bodies  of  both  twain,  and  never  would  I  so  much  as  ask  him, 
whether  he  would  glorify  them  both  first,  or  not  :  but  I  am  sure,  glorified  or 
unglorified,  if  he  said  it,  he  is  able  to  do  it.'  Lo  !  here  may  ye  see  what  a 
fervent  faith  this  '  old  man'  hath,  and  what  an  earnest  mind  to  believe  Christ's 
words,  if  he  had  told  hhn.  But  I  pray  you,  Mr.  More,  what  and  if  Christ  never 
told  it  you,  nor  said  it,  nor  never  would,  would  you  not  be  as  hasty  not  to 
believe  it?" 

But   Tyndale   was  shocked   with   such  light   and   profane 


1 


1533.]  KESFECTINCt   TJIE   LORD'S  SUPPER.  355 

language,  on  a  subject  so  sacred  ;  lie,  therefore,  pauses,  to  add 
with  solemnity — "  Sir,  ye  be  too  busy  with  God's  almighty 
power,  and  have  taken  too  great  a  burthen  upon  your  weak 
shoulders  ;  ye  have  overladen  yourself  with  your  own  harness 
and  weapons ;  and  young  David  is  likely  to  prevail  against  you, 
with  his  sling  and  stone.  God  hath  infatuated  your  high 
subtle  wisdom.  Your  crafty  conveyance  is  spied.  God  hath 
sent  your  Church  a  meet  cover  for  such  a  cup,  even  such  a 
defender  as  ye  take  upon  yourself  to  be,  that  shall  let  all  their 
whole  cause  fall  flat  in  the  mire,  unto  both  your  shames  and 
utter  confusion.     God,  therefore,  be  praised  ever.     Amen." 

It  was  within  the  compass  of  last  year  that  Sir  Thomas 
had  printed  against  both  Tyndale  and  Fryth,  and  yet  he 
palpably  contradicted  himself.  When  he  attacked  Fryth,  he 
forgot  what  he  had  printed  against  Tyndale.  This  did  not 
escape  the  latter,  whom  he  fondly  dreamt  he  had  already 
confuted. 

"  At  last  note,  Christian  reader,  that  M.  More,  in  the  third  book  of  his  con- 
futation of  Tyndale,  to  prove  St.  John's  Gospel  imperfect  and  insufficient, 
(for  leaving  out  so  necessary  a  point  of  our  faith,  as  he  calleth  the  Supper  of 
Christ  his  Maunday,)  saith,  that  John  spake  notliiiuj  at  all  of  this  sacrament. 
And  now,  see  again,  in  these  his  letters  against  Fryth,  how  himself  bringeth 
in  John,  the  sixth  chapter,  to  impugn  Fryth's  writing,  and  to  make  all  for 
the  sacrament,  even  thus  :  '  My  flesh  is  verily  meat,  and  my  blood  drink.' 
Belike  the  man  had  there  over-shot  himself  foul  :  the  young  man  here  causmg 
him  to  put  on  his  spectacles,  and  pore  better  and  more  wisely  with  his  old 
eyes,  upon  St.  John's  Gospel,  to  find  that  thing  there  written,  which  before 
he  would  have  made  one  of  his  nmcritten  verities.  Thus  may  ye  see  how  his 
words  fight  against  himself  into  his  own  confusion." 

It  is  unnecessary  to  notice  every  corner  out  of  which  he 
dragged  his  opponent,  or  the  chain  of  argument  by  which  he 
bound  him  ;  but,  at  the  close,  Tyndale  did  not  finish  without 
giving  intimation  that  he  was  quite  prepared  to  meet,  not 
merely  the  Chancellor,  but  all  who  either  believed  or  dis- 
sembled with  him. 

"  If  our  scholastical  sophisters  will  object  and  make  answer  to  this  Supper 
of  the  Lord,  bringing  in  for  them  their  unwritten  words,  deeds,  and  dreams, 
{for  ire  have  compelled  More  icith  shame  to  flit  from  the  Scripture,)  strewed  with 
their  vain,  strange  terms,  which  Paul  damneth,  and  giveth  Timothy  warning 
of ;  I  shall,  by  God's  grace,  so  set  the  almighty  Word  of  God  against  them, 
that  all  Christians  shall  see  falsehood  and  deceit  in  this  (their)  sacrament ; 
and  so  disclose  their  devilish  doctrine  and  sleighty  juggling,  that  all  that  can 
read  English,  shall  see  the  truth  of  God's  Word  openly  bear  down  their  tin- 


G.Or)  THK    LORD'S   SUPPER.  [book  I. 

written  lies.  For  it  is  verily  the  thing  that  I  desii-e,  even  to  be  written  against 
in  this  matter.  I  have  the  solution  of  all  their  objections  ready,  and  know  right 
well,  that  the  more  they  stir  in  this  sacrament,  the  broader  their  lies  bo  spread, 
the  more  shall  tlieir  falsehood  appear,  and  the  more  gloriously  shall  the  truth 
triumph  ;  as  it  is  to  see  this  day,  how  More,  his  lies,  utter  (spi-ead)  the  truth 
every  day,  more  and  more." 

In  conclusion,  Tyndale  longs  for  the  day,  when  this  ordin- 
ance of  Christ  shall  be  "  restored  unto  the  pure  use,"  as  the 
Apostles  used  it  in  their  time  ;  giving  a  particular  account 
of  the  manner  in  which  he  wished  it  to  be  observed.  The 
preacher  was  to  appoint  certain  days  after  his  discretion  and 
godly  zeal,  on  each  of  which,  his  flock  was  to  "  come  together 
to  celebrate  the  Lord's  Supper."  On  which  occasions  after 
propounding  1  Oor.  xi. — 

"  The  bread  and  the  wine  set  before  them  in  the  face  of  the  Church,  upon  the 
table  of  the  Loi-d,  purely  and  honestly  laid,  let  him  declare  to  the  people  the 
signification  of  those  sensible  signs  ;  what  the  action  and  deed  moveth,  teacheth, 
and  exhorteth  them  unto." — "  Then  let  this  preacher  exhort  them  lovingly  to 
draw  near  unto  this  table  of  the  Lord,  and  that  not  only  bodily,  but  also,  their 
hearts  purged  by  faith,  garnished  with  love  and  innocency,  every  man  to  forgive 
each  other  unfeignedly." — "  This  done,  let  him  come  down,  and  accompanied 
honestly  with  other  ministers,  come  forth  reverently,  the  congregation  now  set 
round  about  it,  and  also  in  their  other  convenient  seats,  the  pastor  exhorting 
them  all  to  pray  for  grace,  faith,  and  love." — After  reading  out  of  the  sixth  of 
John,  and  1  Cor.  xi., — Exhortation, — Prayer,  "  which  done,  let  him  take  the 
bread,  and  eft  the  wine,  in  the  sight  of  the  people,  hearing  him  with  a  loud  voice, 
with  godly  gravity,  and  after  a  Christian  religious  reverence,  rehearsing  dis- 
tinctly the  words  of  the  Lord's  Supper  in  their  mother  tongue  ;  and  then  dis- 
tribute it  to  the  ministers,  which  taking  the  bread,  with  great  reverence,  will 
divide  it  to  the  congregation,  every  man  breaking  and  reaching  it  forth  to  his 
next  neighbour  and  member  of  the  mystical  body  of  Christ. — Other  ministers 
following  with  the  cups,  pouring  forth,  and  dealing  them  the  wine — All  together, 
thus  being  now  partakers  of  one  bread  and  one  cup,  the  thing  thereby  signified 
and  preached,  printed  fast  in  their  hearts.  But  in  tliis  meanwhile,  must  the 
minister  or  pastor  be  reading  the  communication  that  Christ  had  with  his 
disciples  after  his  Suppei-,  beginning  at  the  washing  of  their  feet ;  so  reading 
till  the  bread  and  wine  be  eaten  and  drunken,  and  all  the  action  done.  And 
tiien  let  them  all  fall  down  on  their  knees,  giving  thanks  highly  unto  God  the 
Father,  for  this  benefit  and  death  of  his  Son,  whereby  now,  by  faith,  every  man 
is  assured  of  remission  of  his  sins. — This  done,  let  every  man  commend  and 
give  themselves  whole  to  God,  and  depai't." 

Such,  it  may  be  presumed,  was  the  form  which  Tyndale 
would  hold  forth  to  the  "  Conoreoration  meetino;  in  Bow  Lane, 
Cheapside,"  or  elsewhere. 

But  now,  whetlier  Tyndale  had  been  to  Nuremberg,  where 


1533.]  TYNDALKS   LAST  LKTTER  TO   KRYTll.  3.3? 

this  was  printed,  or  not,  he  had  heard  in  May  of  Fryth's 
dangerous  condition  in  the  Tower,  and  was  in  Antwerp  again 
at  that  time.  Certainly  he  had  not  sojourned  in  this  city 
since  January,  where  he  must  have  heard  much  sooner,  or  if 
there  was  an  earlier  communication  from  him  to  England  it 
is  irrecoverable.  His  whole  soul,  however,  was  now  moved 
with  intense  feeling,  and  he  poured  it  forth  in  the  follow- 
ing final  epistle : — 

"  The  grace  and  peace  of  God  our  Fatlier  and  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  be 
with  you,  Amen.  Dearly  beloved  brother  John  !  I  have  heard  say,  how  the 
hypocrites,  now  that  they  have  overcome  that  great  business  which  letted  them, 
or  at  the  least  way,  have  brought  it  to  a  stay,  they  return  to  their  own  nature 
again.3  The  will  of  God  be  fulfilled,  and  that  which  He  hath  ordained  to  be, 
ere  the  world  was  made  :  that  come,  and  his  glory  reign  over  all ! 

"  Dearly  beloved,  however  the  matter  be,  commit  yourself  wholly  and  only 
unto  your  most  loving  Father,  and  most  kind  Lord,  and  fear  not  men  that  threat, 
nor  trust  men  that  speak  fair  ;  but  trust  Him  that  is  true  of  promise,  and  able 
to  malie  His  word  good.  Your  cause  is  Christ's  gospel,  a  light  that  must  be  fed 
with  the  blood  of  faith.  The  lamp  must  be  dressed  daily,  and  that  oil  poured 
in  every  evening  and  morning,  that  the  light  go  not  out.  Though  we  be  sinners, 
yet  is  the  cause  right.  If,  when  we  be  buffetted  for  well-doing,  we  suffer 
patiently  and  endure,  that  is  acceptable  to  God  ;  for  to  that  end  we  are  called. 
For  Christ  also  suffered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  his 
steps,  who  did  no  sin.  Hereby  have  we  perceived  love,  that  He  laid  down  his 
life  for  us  ;  therefore  we  ought  also  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren. 
Rejoice  and  be  glad,  for  great  is  jour  reward  in  heaven.  For  we  suffer  with 
Him,  that  we  may  also  be  glorified  with  Him  ;  who  shall  change  our  vile  body, 
that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  his  glorious  body,  according  to  the  working, 
whereby  He  is  able  even  to  subject  all  things  unto  him. 

"  Dearly  beloved,  be  of  good  courage,  and  comfort  your  soul  with  the  hope 
of  this  high  reward,  and  bear  the  image  of  Christ  in  your  mortal  body,  that  it 
may,  at  his  coming,  be  made  like  to  his  immortal  ;  and  follow  the  example  of 
all  your  other  dear  brethren,  which  chose  to  suffer  in  hope  of  a  better  resur- 
rection. Keep  your  conscience  pure  and  undefiled,  and  say  against  that,  no- 
thing. Stick  at  necessary  things,  and  remember  the  blasphemies  of  the  enemies 
of  Christ,  saying,  they  find  none  hut  that  will  abjure,  rather  than  suffer  the  ex- 
tremity. Moreover,  the  death  of  them  that  come  again,  after  they  have  once 
denied,  though  it  be  accepted  with  God,  and  all  that  believe,  yet  it  is  not  glorious, 
for  the  hypocrites  say,  '  he  must  needs  die  ;'  denying  (then)  helpeth  not.  But 
might  it  have  holpen,  they  would  have  denied,  five  hundred  times,  but  seeing 
it  would  not  help  them,  therefore  of  pure  pride  and  malice  together,  they  speak 
with  theii"  mouths,  that  their  conscience  knoweth  false. 

"  If  you  give  yourself,  cast  yourself,  yield  yourself,  commit  youi-self,  wholly 
and  only,  to  your  loving  Father  ;  then  shall  his  power  be  in  you,  and  make 
you  strong,  and  that  so  strong,  that  you  shall  feel  no  paiu,  which  should  be 
to  another  present  death  ;  and  his  Spirit  shall  speak  in  you,  and  teach  you 
what  to  answer,  according  to  his  promise.     He  shall  set  out  His  truth  by  you, 

3  Alhiding  to  the  divorce  of  Queen  Katherine. 


358  TYNDALE'S  AFFECTION   AND   ANXIETY  [book  I. 

wonderfully,  and  work  for  you,  above  all  that  your  heart  can  imagine  :  yea, 
and  you  are  not  yet  dead,  though  the  hypocrites  all,  with  all  that  they  can 
make,  have  sworn  your  death. 

"'  Una  scitits  victis,  mdlam  fperare  salutem.''  [The  only  safety  for  the  van- 
quished, is  not  to  hope  for  safety.]  To  look  for  no  man's  help,  bringeth  the 
help  of  God,  to  them  that  seem  to  be  overcome  in  the  eyes  of  the  hypocrites  : 
Yea,  it  shall  make  God  to  carry  you  through  thick  and  thin,  for  his  truth's  sake, 
in  spite  of  all  the  enemies  of  his  truth.  There  falleth  not  a  hair,  till  his  hour 
be  come ;  and  when  his  hour  is  come,  necessity  carrieth  us  hence,  though  we 
be  not  willing.     But  if  we  be  willing,  then  have  we  a  reward  and  thanks. 

"  Fear  not  the  threatening,  therefore,  neither  be  overcome  of  sweet  words  : 
with  which  twain,  the  hypocrites  shall  assail  you.  Neither  let  the  persuasions 
of  worldly  wisdom  bear  rule  in  your  heart :  No,  though  they  be  your  friends 
that  counsel  you.  Let  BUney  he  a  warning  to  you.  Let  not  their  visor  beguile 
your  eyes.  Let  not  your  body  faint.  lie  that  endureth  to  the  end  shall  be 
saved.  If  the  pain  be  above  your  strength,  remember — '  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask 
in  my  Name,  I  will  give  it  you,' — and  pray  to  jour  Father,  in  that  Name,  and 
he  shall  ease  your  pain  or  shorten  it.  The  Lord  of  peace,  of  hope,  and  of  faith, 
be  with  you.  Amen.      ^Villiam  Tyndale." 

He  then  adds  the  following  i^ostscript.  "  Two  have  suffered  in  Antwerp, 
unto  the  great  glory  of  the  Gospel ;  (which  must  have  been  during  his  absence,) 
four  at  Rysels  (Brussels  ?)  in  Flanders,  and  at  Lucca  (or  Luke — Laken?)  hath 
there  one  at  least,  and  all  the  same  day.  At  Roane  (Rouen)  in  France  they 
persecute,  and  at  Paris  are  five  doctors  taken  for  the  Gospel.  See,  you  are  not 
alone  ;  be  cheerful,  and  remember,  that  among  the  hard-hearted  in  England, 
there  is  a  number  reserved  by  grace  ;  for  whose  sakes,  if  need  be,  you  must 
be  ready  to  suffer.  Sir,  if  you  may  write,  how  short  soever  it  be,  forget  it  not, 
that  we  may  know  how  it  goeth  with  you,  for  our  heart's  ease.  The  Lord  be 
yet  again  with  you,  with  all  his  plenteousness,  and  fill  you  that  may  flow  over. 
If  when  you  have  read  this,  you  may  send  it  to  Adrian,  do,  I  pray  you,  that 
he  may  know  how  that  our  heart  is  with  you.4 

"  George  Joye,  at  Candlemas,  being  at  Barrow,  printed  two  leaves  of  Genesis, 
in  a  great  form,  and  sent  one  copy  to  the  King,  and  another  to  the  new  Queen, 
(Anne  Boleyn,)  with  a  letter  to  N.  (Norris  ?)  for  to  deliver  them  ;  and  to  pur- 
chase license,  that  he  might  so  go  through  all  the  Bible.  Out  of  this  sprung 
the  noise  of  the  new  Bible  :5  and  out  of  that  is  the  great  seeking  for  English 
books,  at  all  printers  and  bookbinders  in  Antwerp,  and  for  an  English  Priest 
that  should  print.     This  chanced  the  9th  day  of  May. 

"  Sir,  your  wife  is  well  content  with  the  will  of  God,  and  would  not,  for  her 
sake,  have  the  glory  of  God  hindered.      William  Tyndale.''' 

In  both  these  letters  the  reader  has  beheld  the  ardent 
affection  of  Tyndale  for  his  friend  ;  but  see,  in  the  last,  how 
strong  his  supreme  regard  for  the  truth  of  God !  The  young- 
man  was  dear  to  him  as  his  own  soul,  yet  had  he  prepared 


4  One  "  John  Byrt,  alias  Adrian,  alias  Bookbinder,"  is  mentioned  by  More.  Adrian  was 
liieiuUy,  and  perhaps  a  binder  of  their  books  in  EnRland. 

s  And  hence,  perhaps,  also  the  mistake  of  some  historians,  that  a  Bible  was  jmnted  in  15.32  ; 
as  well  as  the  equally  groundless  conjecture,  that  these  two  leaves  had  any  connexion  with  the 
Bible  afterwards  issued  by  Miles  Coverdalc.  It  was  a  proposal  which  came  to  nothing.  Before 
long,  Joye  will  have  to  retire  from  Antwerp,  as  well  as  Barrow. 


1533.]  FOR  FRYTII  IN   PRISON.  359 

his  mind  for  the  severe  trial,  and  given  him  up,  though  now, 
evidently,  in  a  state  of  great  agitation ;  but  it  was  one  of 
breathless  anxiety  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  subordinate 
glory  of  his  friend's  character^  rather  than  his  life.  Tyndale 
was  in  that  frame  of  mind,  which  no  man,  without  a  martyr's 
heart,  such  as  he  truly  possessed,  can  fully  appreciate  ;  nor  is 
the  wife  of  the  prisoner,  to  whom  he  had  been  but  recently 
united,  less  to  be  admired.  This  letter,  which  was  "  delivered 
to  Frytli  in  the  Tower,"  must  have  proved  most  welcome  ; 
although,  ere  long,  we  shall  find  that,  strengthened  by  the 
power  and  grace  of  his  Redeemer,  he  had  needed  no  human 
counsel  to  die  with  all  the  heroism  of  Stephen,  the  first 
martyr  to  Christianity. 

Here,  then,  we  must  leave  Tyndale  for  a  season,  and  return 
to  the  field  of  battle  in  England. 

Before  the  insidious  and  cruel  proceedings  against  Frytli  can  be 
understood  and  felt,  as  they  ought  to  be,  the  preceding  events  of  this 
year  requii'e  to  be  noticed. 

Notwithstanding  Henry's  ardent  thirst  for  dominion  in  all  things, 
and  his  having  been  acknowledged  Head  of  the  Church  of  England,  he 
still  found  that  he  was  not  able  to  make  an  ArMisliop  ;  at  least  such  a 
one  as  the  Prelates,  and  even  the  people,  would  at  once  acknowledge  ; 
and  therefore  he  applies  to  Rome  once  more.  This  he  must  have  done 
pretty  early  in  January,  since  the  Bulls  for  Cranmer  to  succeed  War- 
ham  are  dated  from  the  21st  of  February  to  the  2d  of  March.^  These 
were  not  fewer  than  eleven,  and  all  connected  with  this  one  appoint- 
ment ;  the  wonted  charge  for  which  had  been  15,000  florins,  or  ,£3375; 
but,  on  this  occasion,  it  is  said,  no  more  was  demanded  than  900  ducats  ! 
or  £180  !  After  all  he  had  done  in  forwarding  his  Royal  master's  de- 
sign as  to  his  divorce,  no  man  could  be  more  objectionable  to  the  Pon- 
tiff" than  Cranmer  ;  so  that  this  compliance,  and  at  so  loiv  a  rate,  must 
have  been  with  some  view  to  retain  Henry  ;  though  assm-edly  Clement  was 
now  outwitted,  or  dreaming  in  forgetfulness  of  the  thunder  he  had 
issued  on  the  23d  of  December,  forbidding  intercourse  with  Lady  Anne 
Boleyn.  In  January,  however,  lo  !  that  Bull  arrived,  when  his  Majesty, 
highly  incensed,  determined  at  once  to  put  an  end  to  the  long  debated 
question.  This  he  did  on  the  morning  of  St.  Paul's  day,  or  the  25th  of 
January,  by  being  married  to  Lady  Anne  Boleyn,  Marchioness  of  Pem- 
broke, and  daughter  to  the  Earl  of  Wiltshire.     The  ceremony  was  per- 


6  Burnet,  indeed,  says  it  was  in  the  end  of  January  that  the  King  apjilied  to  Clement.  If  so, 
it  was  immediately  after  his  marriage  ;  but  the  22d  of  Feb.,  in  return,  setnis  to  be  inconsistent 
with  so  late  a  date. 


;3()()  STATE  OF   ENGLAND.  [uooK  I. 

formed  iu  private,  by  Rowland  Lee,  one  of  the  Royal  Chaplains,  after- 
wards Bishop  of  Chester.  No  distinct  motive  has  been  assigned  for  this 
privacy  ;  but  it  is  very  easy  to  see  one  now,  in  the  request  sent  to  Rome, 
before  the  Pontiif 's  indignation  was  known.  In  the  game  now  playing, 
few  things  could  be  more  important,  at  this  moment,  to  Henry,  than 
Cranmer's  elevation  ;  but  had  Clement  only  divined  what  his  Majesty 
was  about,  certainly  no  such  Bulls  had  ever  reached  England.  How- 
ever, they  did  arrive  safely — they  exactly  answered  Henry's  purpose 
and  intentions — and  were  the  last  for  which  he  ever  ajiplied.  Cranmer 
was  not  present  at  this  marriage,  nor,  by  his  own  account,  was  he  aware 
of  it  for  about  a  fortnight."^ 

Of  Lady  Anne,  we  have  hitherto  taken  no  notice,  nor  do  we  even  now 
refer  to  the  very  discordant  statements  respecting  her.  The  faii'est  way 
will  be  to  wait  till  we  come  to  the  close  of  her  brief  career,  when  we 
shall  be  better  able  to  estimate  a  character  which  has  been  so  differently 
represented. 

We  cannot  affirm  that  there  was  any  positive  connexion 
between  the  marriage  of  Henry  to  Lady  Anne  Boleyn  and 
the  resignation  of  the  Chancellorship  by  More  ;  but  still  it  is 
very  observable,  that  the  next  day,  or  January  26th,  Sir 
Thomas  Audley,  Lord  Keeper  of  the  Great  Seal,  delivered  it 
to  the  King ;  when  his  Majesty,  retaining  it  only  a  quarter 
of  an  hour,  re-delivered  it  to  him,  with  the  title  of  Lord 
Chancellor.^  Thus,  though  Sir  Thomas  More  had  resigned 
the  Seals  in  May,  he  had  been  acting  as  an  officer  of  the 
Crown  till  about  this  period.^  We  have  seen  him,  long  after 
May,  active  in  the  pursuit  and  persecution  of  Fryth ;  but 
the  mace  being  gone,  he  must  now  wield  only  the  pen.  It 
was  the  solitary  instrument  left  him  to  carry  on  his  warfare ; 
and  with  this  he  continued  more  busy  than  ever,  throughout 
the  whole  of  this  year. 

This  new  appointment  is  worthy  of  notice,  chiefly  on  one 


7  It  would  be  vain  to  look  for  principle  in  any  part  of  Henry's  progress;  but  it  is  curious 
enough,  nor  should  it  pass  unnoticed,  that  in  thus  marrying  Queen  Anne,  he  was  so  far  simply 
following  the  opinion  and  advice  which  had  been  given  him  by  the  Pontiff  himself,  in  Janu- 
ary 1.528,  or  precisely  five  years  ago.  "  If  the  King,"  he  had  said,  "  found  the  matter  clear  in 
his  own  conscience,  (in  which  no  doctor  in  the  whole  world  could  resolve  the  matter  better 
than  the  King  himself,)  he  should,  without  more  noise,  make  judgment  be  given,  and  marry 
another  wife,  and  then  send  for  a  legate  to  confirm  the  matter.  And  it  would  be  easier  to  ratify 
all,  when  it  was  once  dnw,  than  to  go  on  in  a  process  from  Rome."— Cotton  MS.,  Vitellius,  B. 
X.,  fol.  35. -From  Sir  G.  Casulis'  Rome,  13th  Jan.  1528. 

8  Bymer's  Feed.,  xiv.,  p.  440. 

9  The  powers  of  a  Lord-Keeper  were  not  defined  till  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  in  the  person  of 
.Sir  N.  Bacon.  Lord-Keei)ers,  at  present,  had  no  authority  annexed— did  not  hear  causes,  nor 
preside  in  the  House  of  Lords— .so  that  Sir  Thomas  More  had  merely  retired,  last  May,  from 
putting  the  seals  to  such  writs  or  patents  as  went  in  cour.se. 


1.533.]  STATE  OK  ENGLAND.  361 

account.  An  immediate  relaxation  took  place  as  to  Frytli, 
in  his  imprisonment.  In  the  earlier  stage  of  his  confinement 
here  was  his  situation — "  I  am,  in  a  manner,  as  a  man  bound 
to  a  post,  and  cannot  so  well  bestow  me  in  my  play,  as  if  I 
were  at  liberty ;  for  I  may  not  have  such  books  as  are  neces- 
sary for  me ;  neither  yet  pen,  ink,  nor  paper,  but  only 
secretly,  so  that  I  am  in  continual  fear  both  of  the  Lieu- 
tenant and  of  my  keeper,  lest  they  should  espy  any  such 
thing  by  me.  And,  therefore,  it  is  little  marvel  though  the 
work  be  imperfect ;  for  whensoever  I  hear  the  keys  ring  at  the 
doors,  straight  all  must  be  conveyed  out  of  the  way — and  then, 
if  any  notable  thing  had  been  in  my  mind,  it  was  clean  lost."^" 

But  nov/,  though  Sir  Thomas  Audley  was  as  much  dis- 
posed to  please  Henry  as  any  of  the  time-servers  round  his 
person,  he  felt  and  acted  very  differently  from  his  predeces- 
sor, as  to  the  "  neic  learning ;"  and  Crumwell,  who  perhaps 
had  profited  by  the  sound  advice  of  Vaughan,  is  stated  to 
have  been  disposed  to  show  favour  to  the  prisoner."  In 
short,  had  there  been  no  deep  and  too  successful  intrigue 
afterwards  employed,  Fryth  might  have  been  permitted  to 
depart  from  England.  But  still,  in  the  meanwhile,  there 
was  a  pause — a  suspension  of  that  violence  and  severity,  which 
had  run  on  during  the  reign  of  the  last  Chancellor.  The  very 
keeper  of  Fryth  in  the  Tower  greatly  relaxed ;  and,  "  upon 
condition  of  his  own  word  and  promise,  let  him  go  at  liberty 
during  the  night,  to  consult  with  good  men."  One  happy  re- 
sult of  all  this  was,  that  Frytli  was  enabled  to  write  his  full 
refutation  of  the  Lord  Chancellor,  from  the  very  Tower  to 
which  he  had  committed  him,  besides  several  other  things, 
afterwards  printed  in  his  works. 

Under  these  circumstances,  Fryth  was  not  idle,  nor  did 
Sir  Thomas  escape  with  impunity.  "  For  though  More 
wrote  with  as  much  wit  and  eloquence  as  any  man  in  that 
age  did,  and  Fryth  wrote  plaiidy  without  any  art ;  yet  there 
is  so  great  a  difterence  between  their  books,  that  whoever 
compares  them,  will  clearly  perceive  the  one  to  be  the  in- 
genious defender  of  an  ill  cause,  and  the  other  a  simple  as- 
sertor  of  truth." ^      The  palm  for  "  wit  and  eloquence"  has 


'0  In  his  answer  to  Rastel).  "  See  Vaughan 's  letters,  n«»iO  1531. 

1^  Burnet ;  though  he  did  not  observe  the  intermission  of  rigour  which  we  have  pointed  out. 

Tliis  continued  from  February  to  April  inclusive,  and  the  bouks  quoted  by  Fryth,  prove  the  fact. 


362  FRYTH'S  NOBLE  TESTIMONY  [BOOK  I. 

been  at  once  assigned  to  Sir  Thomas,  upon  all  occasions ; 
but  if  any  one  desires  to  see  the  "  eloquent  orator"  and  the 
"  simple  assertor  of  truth  "  in  contrast,  he  has  only  to  con- 
sult Fryth,  who  certainly  does  him  justice,  by  quoting  the 
eloquence,  verbatim,  such  as  it  was,  before  he  confutes  it — 

"  Fryth,  tlie  young  man,  '  teacheth  in  a  few  leaves  shortly,  all  the  poison 
that  Wickliffe,  CEcolampadius,  Huskyn,  Tyndale,  and  Zuinglius  have  taught  in 
all  their  books  before,  concerning  the  blessed  sacrament  of  the  altar  ;  not  only 
affirming  it  to  be  very  bread  still,  as  Luther  doth,  but  also,  as  these  other 
beauts  do,  saitli  it  is  nothing  else.'' — These  dregs  hath  he  drunken  of  Wickliffe, 
CEcolampadius,  Tyndale,  and  Zuinglius,  and  so  hath  all  that  he  argueth  here 
before  ;  which  four,  what  manner  folk  they  be,  is  meetly  well  perceived  and 
known,  and  God  hath  in  part,  with  his  oj^en  tengeance,  declared." 

To  this  Fryth  immediately  gives  the  following  memorable 
answer — 

"  I  do  neither  affirm  nor  deny  any  thing,  because  Luther  so  saith,  but  because 
the  Scripture  of  God  doth  so  conclude  and  determine.  I  take  not  Luther  for 
such  an  author  that  I  think  he  cannot  err  ;  but  I  think  verily  that  he  both  may 
err,  and  doth  err,  in  certain  points,  although  not  in  such  as  concern  salvation 
and  damnation  ;  for  in  these,  blessed  be  God  !  all  these,  whom  ye  call  heretics, 
do  agi'ee  right  well.  And  likewise,  I  do  not  allow  this  thing,  because  Wickliffe, 
CEcolampadius,  Tyndale,  and  Zuinglius,  so  say,  but  because  I  see  them  in  that 
place  more  purely  expound  the  Scripture,  and  that  the  process  of  the  text  doth 
more  favour  their  sentence. — And  where  ye  say  that  it  is  '  meetly  well  known 
what  manner  [of]  folk  they  be,' — After  vindicating  the  other  three  individually^ 
he  adds,  as  to  his  dearest  friend  upon  earth  : — 

"  And  Tyndale,  I  trust,  liveth,  well  content  with  such  a  poor  Apostle's  life,  as 
God  gave  his  Son  Christ,  and  his  faithful  ministers  in  this  world,  which  is  not 
sure  of  so  many  mites  as  ye  be  yearly  of  pounds ;  although  I  am  sure  that,  for 
his  learning  and  judgment  in  Scripture,  he  were  more  worthy  to  be  promoted 
than  all  the  Bishops  in  England.  I  received  a  letter  from  him,  which  was 
written  since  Christmas,  wherein,  among  other  matters,  he  writeth  thus — '  I  call 
God  to  record,  &c.''3  Judge,  Christian  readei",  whether  these  words  be  not 
spoken  of  a  faithful,  clear,  innocent  heart.  And  as  for  his  behaviour,  it  is  such, 
that  I  am  sure  no  man  can  reprove  him  of  any  sin ;  howbeit,  no  man  is  innocent 
before  God,  which  beholdeth  the  heart." 

Thus,  the  one  in  exile,  and  the  other  in  prison,  testify  to 
the  blameless  integrity  of  each  other ;  though  no  two  men 
were  so  despised  and  respected,  so  hated  and  beloved,  in  the 
age  in  which  they  lived.  We  quote  only  one  other  specimen 
of  the  01iancellor''s  style,  since  it  is  in  immediate  connexion 
with  the  Sacred  Scriptures. 


13  Sec  the  letter  itself,  page  349. 


1533.]  FliOM   THE   TOWER.  303 

"  And  would  God  for  liis  mercy,"  saith  M.  More,  "  that  since  there  can 
notlduij  refrain  their  study  from  devising  and  compassing  of  evil  and  ungracious 
writing  ;  that  they  would  and  could  keep  it  so  secrethj  tliat  never  man  should  see 
it,  but  such  as  are  so  far  corrupted  as  never  would  be  cured  of  their  canker  !" 
To  which  Fryth  rejoins  : — 

"  It  is  not  possible  for  him  that  hath  his  eyes,  and  seeth  his  brother  which  laek- 
eth  sight,  in  jeopardy  of  perishing  at  a  perilous  pit,  but  that  he  must  come  to  him, 
and  guide  him,  till  he  is  past  that  jeopardy  ;  and  at  the  least  wise,  if  he  cannot 
come  to  him,  yet  will  he  call  and  cry  to  him,  to  cause  him  choose  the  better 
way,  except  his  heart  be  cankered  with  the  contagion  of  such  hatred,  that  he  can 
rejoice  in  his  brother's  destruction.  And  even  so,  is  it  not  possible  for  us,  which 
have  received  the  knowledge  of  God's  Word,  but  that  we  must  cry  and  call  to 
others,  that  they  leave  the  perilous  paths  of  their  own  foolish  fantasies  ;  and  do 
that  only  to  the  Lord,  that  He  commamleth  them, — neither  adding  anything,  or 
diminishing.  And  therefore,  until  we  see  some  means  found,  by  the  which  a 
reasonable  reformation  may  be  had  on  the  one  part,  and  sufficient  Instruction  for 
the  poor  commoners,  I  assure  you,  1  neither  will  nor  can  cease  to  speak ;  for  the 
Word  of  God  boileth  in  my  body  like  a  fervent  fire,  and  will  needs  have  issue, 
and  breaketh  out  when  occasion  is  given. 

"But  this  hath  been  offered  you,  is  offered, and  shall  he  offered.  Grant  that  the 
Word  of  God,  I  mean  the  text  of  Scripture,  may  go  abroad  in  our  English  tongue, 
as  other  nations  hate  it  in  their  tongues,  and  my  brother  William  Tyndale  and  1 
hare  done,  and  tcill  promise  you  to  xcrite  no  more  :  If  you  will  not  grant  this 
condition,  then  will  tee  be  doing,  while  we  have  breath,  and  shoic  in  few  'words 
that  the  Scripture  doth  in  many ;  and  so,  at  the  least,  save  some." 

In  his  progress,  Fryth  not  only  defended  his  opinions  by 
express  quotations  of  Scripture,  with  a  clear  interpretation  of 
their  meaning ;  but  he  went  on  by  quoting  Tertullian  and 
Augustine,  Origen  and  Ambrose,  Jerome  and  Chrysostom, 
Fulgentius  and  Eusebius,  &c.  These  he  gives  in  Latin,  with 
a  translation  in  English ;  bringing  forward  "  all  these  old 
doctors,  that  his  opponents  might  be  ashamed'"'  from  hence- 
forth to  call  it  '•'•new  learning."  All  the  Prelates,  therefore, 
with  "  Mr.  More,  which  taketh  upon  him  to  be  their  proctor," 
were  called  upon  now  to  speak  out  and  answer,  if  it  was  a 
question  to  be  settled  by  fair  reasoning ;  and  they  were 
specially  bound  to  have  done  so  by  the  manner  in  which 
Fryth  summed  up  his  arguments  at  the  close.  Besides,  the 
pointed  strictures  of  Tyndale  had  also  arrived  in  England : 
but  there  could  be  no  ansicer,  properly  so  called,  though  More 
will  not  refrain  from  some  reply. ^^ 

But  we  have  still  to  trace  the  events  that  immediately  pre- 
ceded the  cruel  but  glorious  martyrdom  of  this  fine  young 


'1  The  foolish  remarks  printed  by  one  John  Gwinnctli,  uiion  Fryth's  learning,  o/tcr  his  death, 
are  totally  unworthy  of  notice. 


3G4  STRANGE   STATE  OF   ENGLAND.  [book  I. 

man  :  one  of  which,  or  the  furious  opposition  to  Henry ''s  late 
marriage,  by  the  base  and  perfidious  use  made  of  it,  through 
Stephen  Gardiner,  became  the  remote  occasion  of  his  death. 

About  the  day  on  which  Craumer  was  informed  of  the  King's  marriage, 
Parliament  was  opened,  or  on  the  4th  of  February  ;  so  that  he  must  have 
perfectly  understood  the  purport  and  design  of  a  bill  then  introduced, 
and  passed  into  an  Act,  "  against  all  appeals  to  Rome."  The  preamble 
bears,  that  the  crown  of  England  was  imperial,  and  that  the  nation  was 
a  complete  body  within  itself,  with  full  power  to  give  justice  in  all  cases 
spiritual  and  temporal, — that  all  causes,  whether  relating  to  the  King, 
or  any  of  his  subjects  were  to  be  determined  within  the  kingdom,  not- 
withstanding any  apjjeals  to  Rome,  or  "  inhibitions  or  Bulls  from  it." 
There  was  here  no  disguise  ;  both  Houses  of  Parliament  had  thus  declared 
for  Henry  and  shielded  him,  as  well  as  prevented  Queen  Katherine,  so 
cruelly  used,  from  moving  one  step.  Whatever  she  had  done,  or  could 
now  do,  was  thus  rendered  altogether  in  vain. 

This  act  too,  it  should  be  observed,  was  discussing  and  passed  during 
that  very  season,  when  the  King  was  in  waiting  for  Bulls  from  Clement, 
without  which  Cranmer's  appointment  might  have  been  disjiuted  or  with- 
stood ;  or  without  which,  at  all  events,  he  could  not  so  triumphantly 
have  taken  his  seat.  But  the  documents  waited  for,  arrived  in  March, 
and  they  were  then  employed  to  answer  their  intended  purpose,  in  a  way 
sufficiently  contemptuous  to  the  beguiled  Pontiif,  and  with  what  credit 
to  the  i^arties  concerned,  let  the  reader  judge. 

That  a  perfect  understanding  already  existed  between  the  King  and 
Cranmer  as  to  the  entire  procedure,  will  be  very  evident.  Henry  could 
not,  as  has  been  supposed  by  some,  be  now  in  any  hesitation,  as  to  his 
own  singular  supremacy,  for  in  this  he  boasted,  and  expressed  it  roundly 
with  his  own  hand  ;'^  and  Cranmer,  more  than  a  month  before  this,  was 
resolved  to  be  Archbishoj)  of  Canterbury.^''  But  here  the  first  difficulty 
presented  itself,  which  must  be  surmounted.  The  Bulls  were  sent,  of 
course,  to  Cranmer,  but  he  cannot  receive  them  from  the  Pontiff,  and 
therefore  hands  them  to  his  Majesty.  These  Bulls  involved  a  customary 
oath,  nay  two,  to  the  Pontiff ;  the  very  same  about  which  Henry  had 
been  so  furious  with  all  the  Bishops,  from  Warham  downwards  ;  since  that, 
having  taken  them,  "  they  were,"  it  had  been  said,  "  but  half  his  subjects 
and  he  half  their  King  !"  Cramuer  had  set  ovit  in  his  career  by  denying 
the  authority  of  Rome,  merely  in  a  case  which  he  imagined  the  law  of 
God  had  decided  ;  but  now  he  denied  the  authority  of  the  Pontiff  alto- 
gether, and  more  particularly  in  the  appointment  to  any  office  in  the 


IS  Hail.   MS.,  No.  2(«,  fol.  !»7. 

i«  Cotton  MS.,  Vtspns.  V.  xiii.,  fol.  75.     This  oiigliial  letter  to  C'liimwcll  is  ilaled  as  early  as 
Hth  February  and  subscribed,— 7V(o»irt*  &7w/  nfCanterlmri/. 


1533.]  CRANMER  MADE  ARCHBISHOP.  30\') 

Church.  Nothing  of  course  could  be  more  palatable  to  his  Majesty  than 
such  a  sentiment  ;  but  how  was  this  oath  or  these  oaths  to  be  disposed  of, 
if  the  Bulls  cannot,  or  must  not  be  laid  aside  1  Henry  then  consulted  the 
Canonisttt,  particularly  one  Dr.  Oliver,  " hoAV  he  might  bestow  the  Arch- 
bishopric, salving  Cranmer's  conscience  !"  They  suggested  that  Cranmev 
should  take  a  protestation  against  the  oath,  before  he  took  it,  by  which  ex- 
pedient, he  might  save  his  liberty,  nay  renounce  every  clause  of  it,  and 
by  this  solvo,  he  might  afterwards  do  his  duty  to  God,  his  King  and 
country  !  Strange  to  say,  with  this  Craumer  was  satisfied,  and  proceeded  ! 
But  it  is  more  than  strange,  that  he  should  have  found  apologists,  to  the 
present  day,  for  such  a  step.  As  no  sophistry  can  justify  it,  so  it  is  al- 
lowing partiality  for  any  man  to  proceed  much  too  far  to  palliate  the 
proceeding.^7  If  upon  application  to  Rome,  no  such  protestation  could  then 
be  sent,  the  protestation  at  home  being  private  or  public,  was  a  matter  of 
moonshine,  except  it  had  been  immediately  sent  to  Clement,  who  imposed 
the  oaths,  and  time  allowed  to  know  whether  all  the  documents  were  to 
stand  good.  But  no  such  course  would  have  carried  the  day,  or  met  the 
urgency  and  haste  of  the  impetuovis  Monarch  ;  so  that  the  entire  pro- 
ceeding was  worthy  of  the  days  of  Wolsey. 

As  for  Cranmer  himself,  "  if  any  man  may  vary  the  meaning  of  an  oath 
which  he  takes,  to  something  different  from  its  verbal  terms,  of  what  use 
is  an  oath  ?  ""^  Besides,  the  step  was  ominous,  and  led  to  others,  as  we 
shall  see  too  soon.  "  This  first  deviation  from  integrity,  as  is  almost 
always  the  case,  drew  after  it  many  others  ;  and  began  that  discreditable 
course  of  temporising,  and  undue  compliance,  to  which  this  prelate  was 
reduced  for  the  rest  of  Henry's  reign.'' '^ 

Cranmer  became  Archbishoj)  of  Canterbury  on  the  30th  of  March,  and 
three  days  after  entered  the  Convocation  then  sitting.  The  points  on 
which  the  divorce  of  the  King  were  made  to  hinge,  had  been  discussed, 
or  rather  fixed,  two  years  ago,  so  that  it  was  only  for  the  sake  of  some 
new  form,  that  on  the  26th  of  March,  they  had  tabled  the  subject  once 
more  ;  though  considering  what  Henry  had  actually  done,  two  months  be- 


'7  "If,"  says  Burnet,  "  Cranmer  did  not  wholly  save  his  integrity,  yet  he  intended  to  act  fairly 
aiulabove  board."  But  replies  Collyer, — "  To  act  aboi'c  board  is  not  always  defensible  :  it  is  some- 
times an  aggravation  of  a  fault.  Besides,  how  a  man  can  act  /airly  and  yet  »o(  save  his  integrity, 
is  farther  than  I  can  discover.  And  therefore,  it  must  be  said  there  was  something  of  human  in- 
firmity in  this  management."  But  of  the  amount  of  human  infirmity,  let  the  reader  judge  for 
himself.  In  his  protestation,  he  declared  that  he  jii^'H(/((r«o^  to  bind  himself  to  do  oh.v  thing  con- 
trary to  the  King's  prerogative.— the  commonwealth  and  statutes  ;  nor  from  speaking  freely  as  to 
the  reformation  and  thegovernmcnt  of  the  Church  of  England.  And  then  he  took  the  oaths, — pro- 
mising, "  from  this  hour  forward  I  shall  be  faithful  and  obedient  to  St.  Peter  and  the  Church  of 
Rome.  The  papacy  of  Rome  and  regalities  of  St.  Peter  I  shall  help,  retain,  and  defend  against  all 
men,— the  rights,  honours,  privileges  and  authorities  of  the  Po]ie  ,nnd  his  Successors,  I  shall  cause 
to  be  conserved,  aiigmeiiteil,  and  jn-omoted.  I  shall  not  be  in  counsel  against  him— heretics,  schis. 
matics,  and  rebels  to  our  holy  Father,  I  shall  resist  and  persecute.  I  shall  not  sell  my  possessions 
without  the  Pope's  Council.  So  God  me  help  and  the  holy  evangelists  !"  Compare  all  this,  too, 
with  the  Acts  already  passed  in  Parliament.  And  yet  has  it  actually  been  averred,  that  "  the 
oath  and  the  protest  are  qnite  consistent  with  each  other!"  And  that  in  a  modern  publication, 
widely  circulated.  is  Turner.  lu  Hallam. 


3GG  CRANMER'S  PROCEDURE.  [book  I. 

fore,  nothing  coulil  be  so  prejiosterous.  Aftei*  Cranraer  had  taken  his  seat, 
on  the  2d  of  April,  the  discussion  went  on,  and  the  subject  again  settled, 
a  public  instrument  was  drawn  up  for  the  King's  satisfaction.  To  carry 
on  this  strange  drama,  on  the  11th  of  April,  Cranmer  writes  a  letter  to 
his  Majesty. 

"  That  whereas  your  Grace's  great  cause  of  matrimony  is,  as  it  is  thought, 
through  all  Christianity  (Christendom)  divulgated,' and  in  the  mouths  of  tlie 
rude  and  ignorant  common  people  of  this  your  Grace's  realm  so  talked  of,  that 
few  of  them  do  fear  to  report  and  say,  that  thereof  is  likelihood  hereafter  to  en- 
sue great  inconvenience,  danger,  and  peril,  to  this  your  Grace's  realm,  and 
much  uncertainty  of  succession  ;  by  which  things  the  said  iijnorant  people  be 
not  a  little  offended."20  He  then  implores  the  King  that  he,  as  Archbishop, 
may  proceed,  officially, to  such  measures  as  may  put  an  end  to  all  this  murmuring. 

The  answer  to  this  was  immediate,  a  long  and  foi-mal  letter,  in  which  his  Ma- 
jesty highly  applauds  Cranmer's  "good  mind  and  fervent  zeal  to  do  justice,  accord- 
ing to  his  office."2l  "  The  answer  of  the  King,"  says  Todd,  "  was  in  perfect  ac- 
cordance with  the  primate's  suggestion  ;  in  which  he  forgot  not  to  maintain  the 
supremacy, — saying  that  being  your  King  and  Sovereign  we  do  recognise  no  su- 
perior on  earth,  but  only  God,  not  being  subject  to  the  laws  of  any  earthly  crea- 
ture ;  yet  because  you  be  under  us,  by  God's  calHng  and  our's,  the  most  princi- 
pal minister  of  our  spiritual  jurisdiction  within  this  our  realm,  we  will  not  there- 
fore refuse  your  humble  request." 

The  outrageous  absurdity  of  these  proceedings  must,  however,  it  seems, 
be  preserved  in  perfect  keeping  ;  and,  therefore,  on  the  self-same  day  on 
which  Henry  received  this  letter  from  Cranmer,  he  allows  not  the  day  to 
close,  without  taking  another  step  in  advance.  "  Queen  Anne  that  even- 
ing went  in  state  to  her  closet  openly  as  Queen,"  says  Halle  ;  "  on 
Easter  Eve  (12th  of  April)  she  was  declared  Queen  of  England,"  says 
Burnet ;  and  the  coronation  was  fixed  for  the  1st  of  June  :  so  that 
Cranmer  must  now  proceed  to  sit  in  judgment,  whether  the  first  mar- 
riage was  null  and  void,  after  the  second  had  been  thus  openly  acknow- 
ledged !  Meanwhile  application  had  been  made  to  Queen  Katherine, 
to  lay  aside  her  title  as  Queen,  since  there  could  not  be  two  Queens  in 
one  realm,  but  Sir  T.  Vaux  informed  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  on  the  18th 
of  April,  that  to  this  she  would  on  no  account  accede.^^  On  the  23d, 
Henry  was  keeping  the  day  of  St.  George  at  Greenwich,  "  fully  attended 
by  lords  and  knights,  with  all  solace  and  pleasure,"  and  Cranmer  had 
gone  down  to  repose  a  few  days  at  his  "  manor  of  Mortlocke,"  before 


20  Harleian  MS.,  6148,  fol.  2. 

21  Idem,  283,  fol.  97.  These  letters  are  printed  in  the  Government  State  Papers,  vol.  i.,  p.  390, 
3!)'2.  Henry's  reply  is  to  Cranmer's  second  letter,  for  it  is  curious  enough  that  Cranraer,  all-com- 
pliant, had  to  write  two  letters  on  the  same  day.  The  first  had  not  pleased  his  Majesty.  There 
must  he  no  reference  to  the  laws  of  holy  Ch\irch,  as  in  the  first  letter,  but  only  to  Henry's  own 
supremacy,  as  in  the  second.  This  last,  only,  is  that  which  is  inserted  by  Cranmer's  Secretary  in 
his  book  of  copies  ;  but  both  the  manuscripts  bear  the  marks  of  having  been  folded,  and 
sealed,  and  received,  by  the  King.  In  short,  no  previous  concert  between  two  parties  was  ever 
more  glaring.  "2  MS.  Otho,  c.  x.,  fol.  177. 


1530.3  '^"^  FRIARS  AT  GREENWICH.  367 

proceeding  to  hold  his  court  at  Dunstable,  to  which  Katherine  was  to  be 
summoned.  But  lo  !  on  Sunday  the  1st  of  May,  a  storm  of  great  vio- 
lence burst  out,  in  his  Majesty's  presence,  and  from  the  pulpit,  at 
Greenwich. 

The  Observant  Friars  of  Greenwich,  Richmond,  and  Canterbury,  were 
generally  in  favour  of  Queen  Katherine,  but  the  contending  opinions 
had  been  discvissed,  with  as  much  bitterness  on  both  sides,  within  the 
monastery  at  Greenwich,  as  any  where  else,  although  the  inmates  dwelt 
immediately  under  Henry's  own  eye.  Thus,  Robinson,  the  father  of  the 
monastery,  of  whom  we  have  heardj^"^  was  eager  to  have  preached 
openly  at  Paul's  Cross,  in  favour  of  Queen  Katherine  ;  but  the  preacher 
on  the  1st  of  May  was  her  own  confessor.  Friar  Peto.  Though  in  the 
King's  Chapel,  the  preacher,  pretending  a  divine  commission,  denounced 
heavy  judgments  upon  Henry  to  his  face — told  him  that  his  second  mar- 
riage was  unlawful,  adding,  that  many  lying  prophets  had  deceived  him, 
and  that  it  was  the  greatest  misery  of  princes  to  be  daily  so  abused  by 
flatterers.  The  King  it  is  said,  betrayed  no  signs  of  commotion,  but 
took  care  that  another  man  should  officiate  next  Sunday,  to  justify  his 
proceedings.  This  was  Dr.  Curwin,  then  one  of  the  Royal  Chaplains.^* 
He  defended  the  King,  and  condemned  Peto  as  a  rebel,  a  slanderer,  and 
a  traitor — called  out  for  Peto  by  name,  and  challenged  him  to  defend  his 
intemperate  discourse.  There  was  no  reply  ;  when  Curwin  denounced 
him  for  cowardice.  But  here,  again,  another  Friar,  Elstow,  stood  up  in 
the  gallery,  and  proceeded  to  justify  all  that  his  brother  had  said.  The 
fact  was,  that  whether  from  fear,  or  designing  to  follow  up  his  denoun- 
ciations,  Peto  had  gone  to  attend  a  provincial  council  (of  their  order)  at 
Canterbury,  for  there  was  a  confederacy  among  the  Friars  to  preach  in 
the  same  strain  through  the  kingdom.  Elstow  then  spoke  with  such 
vehemence,  that  no  one  could  silence  him,  till  the  King  rose,  and  com- 
manded him  to  hold  his  peace.  The  next  day,  both  these  men  were 
summoned  before  the  Privy  Council,  and  severely  reprimanded.  The 
Monastery  of  Greenwich  did  not  long  survive,  and  these  Franciscan  Ob- 
servant Friars,  with  all  the  rest  of  their  order,  were  shortly  after  banished 
the  kingdom.^^ 

It  was,  however,  about  this  period,  if  not  on  the  very  same  8th  day 
of  May,  that  Stephen  Gardiner,  Bishop  of  Winchester,  succeeded  with 
his  cruel  and  malicious  counsel.     An  excellent  scholar,  though  a  bad 


23  See  the  letter  of  West,  p.  207. 

24  He  was  afterwards  made  Dean  of  Hereford  ;  then  Archbishop  of  Dublin  by  Queen  Mary, 
and,  ultimately,  at  his  own  request.  Bishop  of  Oxford,  under  Elizabeth. 

25  Peto,  though  obliged  to  fly,  afterwards  returned,  and  was  Confessor  to  Katherine's  daughter. 
Queen  Mary.  He  was  ultimately  made  a  Cardinal,  but  never  allowed,  in  that  character,  to 
enter  England  ;  as  one  Cardinal  was  thought  quite  sufficient  for  England,  viz.  Mary's  own 
cousin,  Reginald  Pole.  There  seems  to  have  been  an  inhibition  of  "  seditious  preaching  con- 
cerning the  King's  mai-riage"  after  this,  which  was  repeated  next  year.  Strype  alludes  to  the 
former  in  his  life  of  Cranmer,  and  the  latter  may  be  seen  in  the  Harl.  MS.,  6148,  fol.  2n. 


•368  STEPHEN   GARDINER   ROUSED.  [book  I. 

man,  he  had  actually  been  one  of  the  tutors  of  Fryth,  when  at  Cam- 
bridge, and  now  he  most  craftily  plotted  his  death.  No  man  was  better 
ac(|uainted  with  Henry's  temper  than  Gardiner.  He  knew  as  well  how 
to  excite  his  wrath,  as  to  calm  the  storm  of  his  fury.^^  Fryth  had  been 
examined  in  Winchester's  house  as  early  as  December  last,  and  yet  since 
January  treated  with  greater  lenity.  So  at  a  fit  season  for  infusing 
violent  counsel,  Gardiner  and  others  "  devised,"  says  Foxe,  "  to  seek  the 
destruction  of  Fryth,  by  putting  the  King  in  remembrance  that  the  said 
Fryth  was  in  the  Tower  there  stayed."  Curwin,  therefore,  thus  insti- 
gated, "  very  sore  inveighing  against  the  Sacramentaries,"  (as  they 
them  termed,)  he  brake  out  thus  far  and  said, — "  It  is  no  marvel  though 
this  abominable  heresy  do  much  prevail  amongst  us  ;  for  there  is  one 
now  in  the  Tower  of  London,  so  bold  as  to  write  in  the  defence  of  that 
heresy,  and  yet  no  man  goeth  about  his  reformation" — meaning  John 
Fryth.  This  was  all-sufficient.  Fryth  was  long  and  well  known  to  the 
King,  who,  so  far  from  yet  approving  of  his  sentiments,  was,  adds  Foxe, 
"  a  perverse  stout  adversary."  After  this,  Henry  ordered  Cranmer  and 
Crumwell  "  foi-thwith  to  call  Fryth  into  examination,  so  that  he  might 
either  be  compelled  to  recant,  or  else  hi/  the  law  to  suffer  condign 
punishment  y^'^ 

But  there  was  one  cause  for  delay,  paramount  to  all  other  orders. 
The  aiFairs  personal  to  his  Majesty  must,  of  course,  be  first  hastened  ; 
though  it  was  certainly  a  singular  circumstance,  that  the  sentiments  and 
present  painfu.1  condition  of  this  eminent  young  man,  should  have 
crossed  even  the  royal  path,  and  at  such  a  moment  as  this. 

On  the  very  same  day  that  Curwin  was  preaching  at  Greenwich, 
Cranmer  came  to  Dunstable,  with  his  assistants,  where  they  remained 
fifteen  days.^^  In  the  Priory  there,  within  four  miles  of  Queen  Katherine, 
they  held  their  court.  It  opened  on  the  10th,  and  closed  on  the  2.3d  of 
May.  The  Queen  was  summoned,  and  the  proceedings  were  reported, 
from  time  to  time,  ])oth  to  Henry  and  Crumwell.    The  King  was  anxious, 

26  Gardiner's  character  has  been  graphically  summed  up  by  an  old  writer  in  the  Harlcian  MS. 
His  eminences  were  three,  1.  Reservedness  ;  2.  Boldness  ;  >3.  Eloquence.  Rescrveilness.  Where- 
by he  never  did  whatheaimedat— never  aimed  at  what  he  intended— never  intended  what  he  said 
—and  never  said  what  he  intended  :  whereby  he  carried  it  so,  that  others  should  do  Iiis  business, 
when  they  opposed  it ;  and  he  should  undermine  theirs,  when  they  seemed  to  promote  it.  A 
man  that  was  to  be  traced  like  the  fox,  and  read  like  Hebrew.  If  you  would  know  what  he  did, 
you  must  observe  what  he  did  not. 

-'7  Slotir's  Annals,  anno  ISS.'i.  Foxe,  App.  at  the  end  of  liis  Acts.  Foxe  represents  Curwin's 
sermon  as  being  in  Lent.  But  Cranmer  was  not  Archbishop  till  the  fifth  Sunday  in  Lent,  and 
so  late  as  the  11th  of  April  he  was  applying  to  Henry,  for  the  fhst  time,  to  act  ofiiicially  ;  and 
therefore  he  could  not  have  l)een  so  commanded  by  the  King  till  after  this.  Besides,  Burnet 
speaks  of  Fryth  being  apprehended  in  Mai/,  which,  though  not  correct,  evidently  points  to  the 
very  time  of  this  sermon  :  and,  as  Stowe  expressly  says—"  the  next  Sunday,  being  the  8th  of 
May,  Di-.  Curwin  preached  in  the  same  place ;"  we  presume  that  Friars  and  Sacramentaries 
were  involved  in  the  same  tirade.  It  was  a  fine  opportunity  for  Gardiner's  purpose :  and  so  we 
shall  find  Fryth's  examination  commence,  as  soon  as  Cranmer  could  find  a  spare  day  ;  when, 
however,  notwithstanding  what  Foxe  here  states,  Crumwell  was  not  present. 

2«  Harl.  MS.  614H.  fol.  2.3.  The  assistants  were  Loiigland,  Gardiner,  six  Doctors,  including 
OUret;  with  Bedell  and  others,  as  Counsellors  for  the  King. 


1533.]  CRANMER'S   PROCEDURE.  3GiJ 

so  was  Crumwell,  and  as  for  the  court,  it  evidently  eat  in  a  state  of  ap- 
prehension from  day  to  day  ;  since  the  coronation  of  Queen  Anne  was 
fixed  for  the  first  of  June.  Seldom  has  the  Judge  trembled  lest  the 
party  summoned  should  appear,  but  whether  Cranmer  did  so,  his  own 
words  to  Crumwell,  on  the  17th  of  May,  will  best  explain. 

"  For  divers  considerations  I  do  think  it  riglit  expedient,  that  the  matter  and 
the  process  of  tlie  same  be  kept  secret  for  a  time ;  therefore,  I  pray  you  to  make 
no  rekition  thereof,  as  1  know  well  you  will  not.  For  if  the  noble  lady  Catherine 
should,  by  the  bruit  of  this  matter  in  the  mouths  of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
country,  or  by  her  friends  or  counsel  hearing  of  this  bruit,  be  counselled  or 
persuaded  to  appear  afore  me  in  the  time,  or  afore  the  time  of  sentence,  I  should 
be  thereby  greatly  staijed  and  let  in  the  process,  and  the  King's  Grace's  counsel 
here  present  shall  be  much  uncertain  what  shall  be  then  farther  done  therein. 
For  a  great  bruit  and  voice  of  the  people  in  this  behalf,  might  perchance  move 
her  to  do  that  thing  herein,  which  peradventure  she  would  not  do,  if  she 
shall  hear  little  of  it.  And,  therefore,  /  pray  you  to  speak  as  little  of  this 
matter  as  ye  may,  and  to  move  the  King's  highness  likexcise  so  to  do,  for  the  con- 
siderations above  recited."  29 

But  the  Archbishop  might  have  been  perfectly  calm  and  collected, 
had  he  only  known  ;  for  Catherine  was  detennined  never  to  yield,  and 
more  especially  never  to  acknowledge  Iiis  authority  as  an  Archbishop. 

On  the  23d,  Cranmer  pronounced,  not  a  sentence  of  divorce,  properly 
so  called,  but  a  judicial  sentence,  that  the  marriage  of  Henry  to  Catherine 
had  been  void  from  the  beginning,  being,  as  they  said,  contrary  to  the 
Divine  law.  On  the  28th,  at  Lambeth,  he  judicially  confinned  the 
King's  recent  marriage,  and  from  the  29th,  to  Sunday  the  first  of 
June,  London  and  Westminster  were  filled  with  all  the  pageantry  of 
the  coronation. 

An  official  conference  was  held  with  Catherine  after  this,  on  the  third  of 
July,^  and  another  in  the  following  year,  but  they  were  alike  in  vain.-*' 

Ten  days  had  not  elapsed  after  Queen  Anne's  coronation, 
before  Cranmer,  in  servile  obedience  to  his  royal  Master, 
must  proceed  with  a  widely  different  scene.  The  martyrdom 
of  Fryth  has  never  been  sufficiently  marked  in  English  history, 
as  there  are  several  points  of  distinction  between  it  and  any 
preceding  act  of  cruelty,  in  Henry's  reign.  In  1530,  it  is 
true,  he  had  fully  authorised  a  liery  persecution,  but  to  this 
measure  he  had  been  strongly  advised  by  the  last  Lord  Chan- 


29  Cotton  MS.  Otho,  c.  x.  166.  30  Hail.  MS.,  No.  283,  lol.  112,  b. 

31  Atthislast,  oiithe20thMay  1534,  Tunstal  and  Lee  being  sent  to  her  again,  officially,  Catherine 
intimated  with  great  warmth,  that  she  still  accounted  herself  his  Majesty's  lawful  wife,  "  in 
which  opinion  she  would  persist  till  death,"  that  "  she  would  never  leave  the  name  of  Queen" — 
and.  as  they  reported  to  Henry — "  My  Lord  of  Canterbury  she  called  a  shadow."  Collycr  has 
dated  this  letter,  by  mistake,  15.3.3.     See  Government  State  Papers,  vol.  i.,  p.  419. 

VOL.   I.  2   A 


370  THE  KING  ORDERS  [boOK  I. 

cellor  ;  and  the  cruelties  ensuing  had  never  commenced  with 
liim,  nor  had  he  yet  personally  sanctioned  the  last  sentence  of 
the  law.  Bilney  and  Bayfield,  Tewkshury  and  Jiennet,  had 
been  first  seized  and  examined  by  the  Bishops,  and  then  put 
to  death  without  any  writ  from  his  Majesty.  The  statute  of 
Henry  IV.,  and  the  warrant  of  Sir  Thomas  More,  had  been 
regarded  as  sufficient,  and  Henry  only  did  not  interpose.  But 
Sir  Thomas  had  now  retired,  and  Chancellor  Audley  was 
not  a  persecutor.  The  examination  of  Fryth  was  Henry's 
own  deed,  and  though  the  blood  of  the  innocent  was  already 
upon  him,  so  far  as  explained,  he  now  first  degraded  himself 
personally  to  the  rank  of  a  Murderer. 

The  importance  attached  to  this  reckless  proceeding  may 
be  seen,  in  the  eminence  of  the  parties  expressly  appointed  by 
the  King  to  examine  Fryth.  These  were  Cranmer,  Gardiner, 
and  Stokesly,  the  Lord  Chancellor,  the  Duke  of  Suftolk,  or 
Henry's  own  brother-in-law,  and  the  Earl  of  Wiltshire,  The 
story  altogether,  is  one  of  the  most  afi"ecting,  and  graphic,  in 
the  history  of  the  times. 

"  Fryth's  long  confinement  in  the  Tower,  without  examination,  was  so 
heinously  taken  of  the  King,  that  now  my  Lord  of  Canterbury  with  other  Bishops 
and  other  learned  men,  were  at  once  appointed  to  examine  him.  And  for  that 
there  should  be  no  concourse  of  citizens  at  the  said  examination  :  my  Lord  of 
Cantei'bury  removed  to  Croydon,  unto  whom  resorted  the  rest  of  the  Commis- 
sioners. Now,  before  the  day  of  examination  appointed,  my  Lord  of  Canterbury 
sent  one  of  his  gentlemen  and  one  of  his  porters,  whose  name  was  Perlebean, 
a  Welshman  born,  to  fetch  John  Fryth  from  the  Tower  to  Croydon.  This 
gentleman  had  both  my  Lord's  letters,  and  the  Kimfs  ring,  unto  my  Lord 
Fitzwilliams,  (first  Earl  of  Southampton)  constable  of  the  Tower,  (then  living 
in  Cannon  Row,  at  Westminster,  in  extreme  anguish  and  pain  from  a  disorder,) 
for  the  delivery  of  the  prisoner.  Fitzwilliams,  more  passionate  than  patient, 
understanding  for  what  purpose  my  Lord's  gentleman  was  come,  damned  and 
cursed  Fryth  and  other  heretics,  saying — '  Take  this  my  ring  unto  the  Lieu- 
tenant of  the  Tower,  and  receive  your  man,  your  heretic,  with  you,  and  I  am 
glad  that  I  am  rid  of  him.' 

"  When  Fryth  was  delivered  to  my  Lord  of  Canterbury's  gentleman,  they  twain 
with  Perlebean,  sitting  in  a  wherry,  and  rowing  towards  Lambeth  :  the  said 
gentleman,  much  lamenting  in  his  mind,  the  infelicity  of  the  said  Fryth,  began 
in  this  wise  to  exhort  him — '  To  consider  in  what  estate  he  was,  a  man  alto- 
gether cast  away  in  this  world,  if  he  did  not  look  wisely  to  himself.  And  yet, 
though  his  cause  was  never  so  dangerous,  he  might  somewhat,  in  relenting  to 
authority,  and  so  giving  place  for  a  time,  both  help  himself  out  of  trouble,  and 
when  opportunity  and  occasion  should  serve,  prefer  his  cause,  which  he  then 
went  about  to  defend  :  declaring  farther,  that  he  had  many  wellwillers  and 
friends,  which  would  stand  on  his  side,  so  far  forth  as  possible  they  then  were 
able,  an<l  dnrst  do  :     Adding  hereunto,  that  it  were  great  pity,  that  he,  being 


1533.]  FRYTirs   EXAMINATION.  371 

of  such  singular  knowledge  both  in  the  Latin  and  Greek  ;  both  ready  and  ripe 
in  all  kind  of  learning,  as  well  in  the  Scriptures,  as  in  the  ancient  doctors  ; 
should  now  suddenly  suffer  all  those  singular  gifts  to  perish  with  him,  with 
little  commodity  or  profit  to  the  world,  and  less  comfort  to  his  wife  and  children, 
and  others,  his  kinsfolk  and  friends.' — '  This  1  am  sure  of,'  quoth  the  gentleman, 
'  that  my  Lord  Crumwell,  and  my  Lord  of  Canterbury,  much  favouring  you, 
and  knowing  you  to  be  an  eloquent  learned  young  man,  and  now  towards  the 
felicity  of  your  life,  young  in  years,  old  in  knowledge,  and  of  great  forwardness 
and  likelihood  to  be  a  most  profitable  member  of  this  realm,  will  never  permit 
you  to  sustain  any  open  shame,  if  you  u-iU  someirhat  be  adrised  by  their  coun- 
sel. On  the  other  side,  if  you  stand  stiff  to  your  opinion,  it  is  not  possible 
to  save  your  life.  For  like  as  you  have  good  friends,  so  have  you  mortal  foes 
and  enemies.'  " 

Such  was  the  commencement  of  those  "sweet  words,"  to 
which  Tyndale  had  alhided,  and  of  which  he  had  given  such 
solemn  warning ;  but  there  was  no  occasion.  Fryth  felt  the 
solemnity  and  importance  of  his  position,  to  a  degree  such  as 
no  man  in  England  had  ever  yet  reached. 

" '  I  most  heartily  thank  you,'  quoth  Master  Fryth, '  both  for  your  good  will, 
and  for  your  counsel,  by  the  which  I  well  perceive  that  you  mean  well  unto  me. 
Howbeit,  my  cause  and  conscience  is  such,  that  in  no  wise  I  maj'  not,  nor  cannot 
for  any  worldly  respect,  without  danger  of  damnation,  start  aside,  and  fly  from 
the  true  knowledge  and  doctrine  which  I  have  conceived  of  the  Supper  of  the 
Lord,  or  the  communion,  otherwise  called  the  sacrament  of  the  altar  :  for  if  it 
be  my  chance  to  be  demanded  what  I  think  in  that  behalf,  I  must  needs  say 
my  knowledge  and  my  conscience,  as  partly  I  have  written  therein  already, 
though  I  should  presently  lose  twenty  lives,  if  I  had  so  many.  And  this  you 
shall  well  understand,  that  I  am  not  so  unfurnished,  either  of  Scripture  or 
ancient  doctors,  schoolmen  or  others,  for  my  defence  ;  so  that  if  I  may  be  in- 
differently (impartially)  heard,  I  am  sure  that  mine  adversaries  cannot  justly 
condemn  me,  or  mine  assertion,  but  that  they  shall  condemn  with  me,  St. 
Augustine  and  the  most  part  of  the  old  writers  ;  yea,  the  very  Bishops  of  Rome 
of  the  oldest  sort  shall  also  say  for  me,  and  defend  my  cause.' 

" '  Yea,  marry,'  quoth  the  gentleman, '  you  say  well,  if  you  might  be  indiffer- 
ently heard.  But  I  much  doubt  thereof,  for  that  our  Master,  Christ,  was  not 
indifferently  heard ;  nor  should  be,  as  I  think,  if  He  were  now  present  again  in  the 
world,  specially  in  this  your  opinion  ;  the  same  being  so  odious  in  the  world,  and 
we  so  far  off  from  the  true  knowledge  thereof.' 

" '  Well,  well,'  quoth  Fryth  then  unto  the  gentleman, — '  I  know  very  well 
that  this  doctrine  of  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  which  I  hold  and  have  opened 
contrary  to  the  opinion  of  this  realm,  is  very  hard  meat  to  be  digested,  both  of 
the  clergy  and  laity  thereof.  But  this  I  will  say  to  you,  (taking  the  gentleman 
by  the  hand,)  that  if  you  live  but  twenty  years  more,  whatsoever  become  of  me, 
you  shall  see  this  whole  realm  of  mine  opinion  :  namely,  the  whole  estate  of  the 
same,  though  some  sort  of  men  particularly  shall  not  be  fully  persuaded  therein  : 
and  if  it  come  not  so  to  pass,  then  account  me  the  vainest  man  that  ever  you 
heard  speak  with  tongue. 

"'  Besides  this,  you  say  that  my  death  would  be  sorrowful  and  uncomfortable 
unto  my  friends.    I  grant,  that  for  a  small  time  it  would  be  so  ;  but  if  I  should  so 


372  FRYTH'S  .JOURNEY  [book  I. 

mollify,  qualify,  and  temper  my  cause,  in  such  sort  as  to  deserve  only  to  be  kept 
in  prison,  that  would  not  only  be  a  much  longer  grief  unto  me,  but  also  to  my 
friends  would  breed  no  small  unquietness,  both  of  body  and  mind.  And,  there- 
fore, all  things  well  and  rightly  pondered,  my  death  in  this  cause  shall  be  better 
unto  me  and  all  mine,  than  life  in  continual  bondage  and  penuries.  And 
Almi<'hty  God  knoweth  what  He  hath  to  do  with  his  poor  servant,  whose  cause 
I  now  defend,  and  not  my  oim ;  from  the  which  I  assuredly  do  intend,  God 
willing,  never  to  start,  or  otherwise  to  gire  ])lace,  so  lon<j  as  God  will  (jire  me  life.' 
"  This  communication,  or  like  in  effect,  my  Lord  of  Canterbury's  gentleman 
and  Fryth  had,  coming  in  the  wherry  on  the  Thames,  from  the  Tower 
to  Lambeth. 

"  Now  when  they  were  landed,  after  some  repast  by  them  taken  at  Lambeth, 
the  gentleman,  the  porter,  and  Fryth  went  forward  towards  Croydon,  (nearly 
ten  miles)  on  foot.  This  gentleman  still  lamenting  with  himself,  the  hard  and 
cruel  destiny  of  Fryth,  if  he  once  came  among  the  Bishops  ;  and  now  also  per- 
ceiving the  exceeding  constancy  of  Fryth,  devised  with  himself  some  way  or 
means  to  convey  him  clean  out  of  their  hands  ;  and  therefore,  considering  that 
there  were  no  more  persons  there,  to  convey  the  prisoner,  but  the  porter  and 
himself,  he  took  in  hand  to  win  the  porter  to  his  purpose. 

"  Said  the  gentleman  to  Perlebean,  (walking  by  themselves  without  the 
hearing  of  Fryth,) — '  You  have  heard  this  man  I  am  sure,  and  noted  his  talk 
since  he  came  from  the  Tower  ?' — '  Yea,  that  I  have,  right  well,'  quoth  the  porter, 
'  and  I  never  heard  so  constant  a  man,  nor  so  eloquent  a  person.' — '  You  have 
heard  nothing,'  quoth  the  gentleman,  'in  respect  of  both  his  knowledge  and  elo- 
quence ;  if  he  might  liberally  (freely)  either  in  university  or  pulpit  declare  his 
learning.  You  would  then  much  more  marvel  at  his  knowledge.  I  take  him 
to  be  such  a  one  of  his  age  in  all  kind  of  learning,  and  knowledge  of  tongues, 
as  this  realm  never  yet,  in  mine  opinion,  brought  forth.  And  yet  those  singular 
gifts  in  him,  are  no  more  considered  of  our  Bishops,  than  if  he  were  a  very  dolt 
or  an  idiot ;  yea,  they  abhor  him  as  a  devil  therefore,  and  covet  utterly  to  ex- 
tinguish him  as  a  member  of  the  Devil,  without  any  consideration  of  God's 
special  gifts.' 

" '  Marry,'  quoth  the  porter,  '  if  there  were  nothing  else  in  him  but  the  con- 
sideration of  his  personage,  both  comely  and  amiable,  and  of  natural  dispositions, 
gentle,  meek,  and  humble,  it  were  pity  he  should  be  cast  away.'  32 

" '  Cast  away,'  quoth  the  gentleman, '  he  shall  be  sure  cast  away,  if  we  once 
bring  him  to  Croydon  ;  and  surely,'  said  he,  'before  God  T  speak  it,  if  thou, 
Perlebean,  were  of  my  mind  we  would  never  bring  him  thither.' — '  Say  you  so?' 
quoth  the  porter  :  '  I  know  that  you  be  of  a  great  deal  more  credit  than  1  am, 
in  this  matter  ;  and  therefore,  if  you  can  devise  honestly,  or  find  some  reason- 
able excuse,  whereby  we  may  let  him  go,  and  provide  for  himself,  T  will,  with 
all  my  heart,  condescend  to  your  device.' — '  As  for  that,'  quoth  the  gentleman, 
'  it  is  already  invented  how,  and  which  ways,  he  shall  convey  himself,  without 
any  great  danger  or  displeasure  taken  towards  us,  as  the  matter  shall  be  handled. 
You  see,  quoth  the  gentleman,  yonder  hill  before  us,  named  Bristow  (Brixton) 
Causeway,  (three  miles  from  London,)  there  are  great  woods  on  both  sides  : 
when  we  come  there,  we  will  permit  Fryth  to  go  into  the  woods  on  the  left  hand 
of  the  way,  whereby  he  may  convey  himself  into  Kent  among  his  fi-iends,  for  he 


M  The  porter  only  agrees  with  general  report, — that  Fryth  was  a  fine  looking  young  man,  of 
good  manners,  and  amiable  dispositions  ;  while  foes  and  friends  agreed  as  to  his  superior  attain- 
ments in  learning. 


I  ,3.33.]  TO    CROYDON.  373 

is  a  Kentish  man  ;  and  when  he  is  gone,  we  will  linger  an  hour  or  two  about  the 
highway,  until  that  it  draw  towards  the  night.  Then,  in  gi-eat  haste,  we  will 
approach  to  Streatham,  which  is  a  mile  and  a  half  farther  on,  and  make  an  out- 
cry in  the  town,  that  our  prisoner  is  broken  from  us  into  the  woods  on  the  right 
hand,  towards  Wandsworth,  so  that  we  shall  draw  as  many  as  we  may,  to  search 
the  country  that  way  for  our  prisoner,  declaring  that  we  followed  above  a  mile 
or  more,  and  at  length  lost  him  in  the  woods,  because  we  had  no  more  company  : 
And  so  we  will,  rather  than  fail,  lie  out  one  night  in  seai'ching  for  him,  and 
send  word  from  Streatham,  to  my  Lord  of  Canterbury  at  Croydon,  in  the  evening, 
of  the  prisoner's  escape,  and  to  what  coast  he  has  fled.  So  that  by  the  morning, 
if  he  have  auy  good  luck  at  all,  ho  will  so  provide  for  himself  that  the  Bishops 
shall  fail  of  their  purpose.' — '  I  assure  you,'  quoth  Perlebean, '  I  like  very  well 
the  device  herein  ;  and  therefore,  go  ye  to  Fryth,  and  declare  that  we  have  de- 
vised for  his  delivery,  for  now  we  are  almost  at  the  place.' 

"  When  my  Lord  of  Canterbury's  gentleman  came  nigh  to  the  hill,  he  joined 
himself  in  company  with  Fryth,  and  callhig  him  by  his  name  said — 'Now,  Master 
Fryth,  let  us  twain  commune  together  another  while.  You  must  consider 
that  the  journey  which  I  have  now  taken  in  hand  thus  in  bringing  you  unto 
Croydon,  as  a  sheep  to  the  slaughter,  so  grieveth  me,  and,  as  it  were,  over- 
whelmeth  me  in  cares  and  sorrows,  that  I  little  mind  what  danger  I  fall  in, 
so  that  I  could  find  the  means  to  deliver  you  out  of  the  lion's  mouth.  And 
yet,  yonder  good  fellow  and  I  have  devised  a  means,  whereby  you  may  both 
easily  escape  from  this  great  and  imminent  danger  at  hand,  and  we  also  be  rid 
from  any  vehement  suspicion.'  " 

One  cannot  conceive  of  any  gentleman  going  so  far  as  this, 
without  some  understanding  with  those  above  him,  or  good 
security  that  the  escape  would  be  winked  at.  Crumwell  and 
Cranmer  might  wish  that  Fryth  were  out  of  the  loay^  but  the 
man  first  apprehended  by  More,  was,  as  a  Christian,  of  a 
superior  grade  to  any  who  had  yet  suffered.  He  could  be 
no  party  to  falsehood,  of  which  high  and  low  made  so  little 
account ;  to  say  nothing  of  his  now  regarding  himself  as  set 
for  the  defence  of  the  truth. 

"  When  Fryth  had  diligently  heard  all  the  matter  concerning  his  delivery, 
he  said  to  the  gentleman,  with  a  smiling  countenance — '  Is  this  the  effect  of 
your  secret  consultation,  thus  long,  between  you  twain  ?  Surely,  surely,  you 
have  lost  a  great  deal  more  labour  in  times  past,  and  so  are  you  like  to  do  this. 
For  if  you  should  both  leave  me  here,  and  go  to  Croydon,  declaring  to  the 
Bishops,  that  you  had  lost  Fryth  ;  I  would  surely  follow  as  fast  after  as  I  might, 
and  bring  thera  news,  that  I  had  found  and  brought  Fryth  again.  Do  you 
think,'  said  he, '  that  I  am  afraid  to  declare  my  opinion  to  the  Bishops  of  Eng- 
land in  a  manifest  truth  ?' 

" '  You  are  a  foolish  man,'  quoth  the  gentleman,  '  thus  to  talk ;  as  though 
your  reasoning  with  them  might  do  some  good.  But  I  do  much  marvel,  that 
you  were  so  willing  to  fly  the  realm,  before  jou  were  taken,  and  now  so  un- 
willing to  save  yourself  ! ' 

" '  There  was,  and  is,  a  great  diversity  of  escaping,  between  the  one  and  the 
other,'  said  Fryth.     '  Before,  I  was  indeed  desirous  to  escape,  because  I  was 


374  FRYTH    BEFORE   THE    BISHOPS.  [boOK  I. 

not  attached,  but  at  liberty— which  liberty  I  would  fain  have  enjoyed,  (for  the 
maintenance  of  my  study  beyond  the  sea,  where  I  was  reader  in  the  Greek 
tongue,)  according  to  St.  Paul's  counsel.  Howbeit,  note,  being  taken  by  the 
higher  powers,  and,  as  it  were,  by  Almighty  God's  permission  and  providence, 
delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  Bishops,  only  for  religion  and  doctrine's  sake, 
such  as  in  conscience,  and  under  pain  of  damnation  I  am  bound  to  maintain 
and  defend :  If  I  should  now  start  aside,  and  run  away — I  should  run  from 
my  God,  and  from  the  testimony  of  his  holy  Word — worthy  then  of  a  thousand 
hells.  And,  therefore,  I  most  heartily  thank  you  both,  for  your  good  will  to- 
ward me,  beseeching  you  to  bring  me  where  I  was  appointed  to  be  brought, 
for  else  1  will  go  thither  all  alone.'  And  so  with  a  cheerful  and  merry  counte- 
nance he  went  with  them,  spending  the  time  with  pleasant  and  godly  com- 
munication, until  they  came  to  Croydon,  where  for  that  night  he  was  well  en- 
tertained in  the  Porter's  lodge. 

"  On  the  morrow  he  was  called  before  certain  Bishops  and  other  learned 
men,  sitting  in  commission  with  the  Lord  of  Canterbury,  to  be  examined,  where 
he  shewed  himself  passing  ready  and  ripe,  in  answering  to  all  objections,  as 
some  then  reported,  incredibly,  and  contrary  to  all  men's  expectations.  His 
allegations,  both  out  of  Augustine,  and  other  ancient  fathers  of  the  Church, 
were  such,  that  some  of  them  much  doubted  of  Augustine's  authority  in  that 
behalf :  insomuch  that  it  was  reported,  by  them  who  were  nigh  and  about  the 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  that  when  they  had  finished  their  examination,  the 
Archbishop,  conferring  with  Dr.  Heath,  privately  between  themselves,  said — 
'  This  man  hath  wonderfully  laboured  in  this  matter,  and  yet,  in  mine  opinion, 
he  taketh  the  doctors  amiss.' — '  Well,  my  Lord,'  said  Dr.  Heath,  *  there  is  no 
man  who  can  do  away  his  authorities  from  Augustine.'  He  then  began  to 
repeat  them  again,  inferring  and  applying  them  so  strongly,  that  my  Lord 
said — '  I  see  that  you,  with  a  little  more  study,  will  easily  be  brought  to 
Fi'yth's  opinion.'''^ 

"  This  learned  young  man  being  thus  thoroughly  sifted  at  Croydon,  to  under- 
stand what  he  could  say  and  do  in  his  cause,  there  was  no  man  tnlling  to  prefer 
him  to  answer  in  open  disputation." 

Here,  therefore,  a  pause,  of  several  days,  ensued  ;  which 
Cranmer  himself  helps  us  to  explain.  What  we  have  already 
narrated  had  taken  place  between  the  lOtli  and  ]5tli  of  June, 
and  before  the  1  7th,  Fryth  had  been  sent  back  to  London.  After 
his  examinations  were  over,  and  before  his  return  to  London, 
Cranmer  had  called  for  him  repeatedly,  and  tried  to  turn  him, 
but  in  vain,  and  the  Archbishop  must  now  speak  for  himself. 
On  the  17th  he  writes  a  long  letter  to  Archdeacon  Hawkins, 
his  successor,  as  ambassador,  at  the  Emperor's  court ;  in 
which  it  must  be  confessed  that  he  seems  far  more  elated  by 


33  Nicholas  Heath  or  Hethe,  poor  man,  though  once  praised  by  Melancthon,  halted  between 
two  opinions  all  his  days.  Now  a  parson  in  Sussex,  he  was  successively  Bishop  of  Rochester  and 
Worcester,  under  Henry  VIII.  He  was  deprived  under  Edward  VI.  but,  under  Mary,  became 
Archbishop  of  York,  and  Lord  Chancellor,  and  as  such  signed  the  writ  for  Cranmer' s  e\CQ\ii\o\\ ! 
Cranmer,  on  the  other  hand,  was  more  open  to  conviction,  thoush  it  was  not  till  fourteen  years 
after  this,  or  1517,  when  he  was  signally  indebted  to  the  writings  of  the  very  man  whom  he 
is  now  fain  to  consign  to  Stokcsly. 


1533.J  CKANMER'S    REPORT.  ST-i 

"  the  gorgeous  and  sumptuous""  display  at  the  Queen's  corona- 
tion, than  depressed  by  the  tragedy,  in  which,  immediately 
afterwards,  he  had  also  played  his  part.  Of  the  former  he  gives 
a  long  and  minute  account ;  descending  to  the  guns  fired — the 
dresses  worn — the  order  of  cavalcade.  "  Now,  then,  on  Sunday, 
(1st  June,)  was  the  coronation,"  when  he,  with  six  Bishops 
and  twelve  Abbots  "  all  revestred  in  their  pontificalibus,  with 
their  crosses  and  crosiers,  walked  in  procession  into  the  church 
of  Westminster,'"  where  "  I  did  put  the  crown  upon  her  head, 
and  then  was  sung  Te  Deum^''  It  is  in  this  very  letter, 
after  finishing  his  account,  that  Fryth  is  introduced,  and  in 
the  following  terms  : — 

"  Other  news  have  we  none  notable,  hut  that  one  Fryth,  which  was  in  the 
Tower  in  prison,  was  appointed  by  the  King's  Grace  to  be  examined  before  me, 
my  Lord  of  London,  my  Lord  of  Winchester,  my  Lord  of  Suffollc,  my  Lord 
Chancellor,  and  my  Lord  of  Wiltshire — whose  opinion  was  so  notably  erroneous, 
that  we  could  not  despatch  him,  but  was  fain  to  leave  him  to  the  determination 
of  his  ordinary,  which  is  [iitokesly)  the  Bishop  of  London.  His  said  opinion  is 
of  such  natiu-e  that  he  thought  it  not  necessary  to  be  believed  as  an  article  of 
our  faith,  that  there  is  the  very  corporal  presence  of  Christ  within  the  host  and 
sacrament  of  the  altar,  and  holdeth  of  this  point  most  after  the  opinion  of 
CEcolampadius.  And  surely  I  myself  sent  for  him  three  or  four  times  to  per- 
suade him  to  leave  that  his  imagination,  but  for  all  that  we  could  do  therein,  he 
would  not  apply  to  any  counsel.  Notwithstanding  now  he  is  at  a  final  end  with 
all  examinations,  for  my  Lord  of  London  hath  given  sentence  and  delivered 
him  to  the  secular  power,  where  he  looketh  every  day  to  go  unto  the /re.  And 
there  is  also  condemned  with  him,  one  Andrew  (Hewet,)  a  tailor  of  London,  for 
the  said  selfsame  opinion."  He  then  turns  to  other  secular  affairs,  dating  his 
letter,  "  from  my  manor  of  Croydon  the  17th  day  of  June." 

Surely  Cranmer  could  scarcely  intend  to  speak  contemp- 
tuously ;  but  a  new  made  Archbishop,  who  had  just  been 
crowning  a  Queen,  when  writing  to  an  Ambassador  and  tell- 
ing the  story,  might  imagine  that  "  one  Fryth,"  was  only  in 
good  keeping  with  such  high  affairs ;  though  in  the  lips  of 
Cranmer,  to  say  the  least,  it  was  an  unfortunate  slip  of  the 
pen  ;  as  if  he  had  never  heard  of  him  before,  and  his  friend  as 
little  !  "  One  Fryth," — the  Eton  scholar  of  King''s  College, 
Cambridge  ;  the  Canon  selected  for  Cardinal  College,  Oxford, 
when  Cranmer  declined ;  the  man  known  to  Wolsey,  whom 
the  King  himself  and  Crumwell,  and  foreign  agents,  had  been 
so  eager  to  decoy  into  England ;  the  same  man  whom  the  late 
Lord  Chancellor  pursued  with  such  eagerness  till  he  caught 
him  ;  who  had  just  overthrown  his  lordship  in  argument,  and 
now  silenced  the  Bishops,  including  Cranmer  himself;   in  short 


37 ()  FRYTH'S  MARTYRDOM.  [book  I. 

the  bosom  friend  and  associate  of  Tyndale,  who  had  agitated 
the  councils  of  England,  before  Thomas  Cranmer  was  known  ; 
but  enough.  Only  it  had  been  well  for  "  one  Cranmer,"  had 
he  ever  exhibited  the  same  undaunted  fortitude,  and  died  a 
death  so  glorious  and  unsullied,  as  that  of  "  one  Fryth." 

Notwithstanding  what  the  primate  had  here  said,  it  was  not 
till  three  days  after,  or  Friday  the  20th  of  June,  that  Fry  th  came 
to  his  final  appearance  before  the  Bishops  of  London,  (Stokes- 
ly,)  Lincoln,  (Longland,)  and  Winchester,  (Gardiner,)  in  St. 
Paul's.  His  constancy,  self-possession  and  Christian  fortitude 
never  forsook  him  for  one  moment ;  and  when  the  question 
was  finally  put,  whether  he  would  subscribe  his  answers,  he 
took  up  the  pen,  and  with  his  own  hand  wrote  these  words — 
"  Ego  Frithus  ita  sentio,  et  quemadmodum  sentio,  ita  dixi, 
scripsi,  asservi  et  afRrmavi,"  &c, — "/,  Fryth.,  thus  do  tlihik^ 
and  as  I  thiiik^  so  have  I  said,  icritten,  defended  and  avowed, 
and  in  my  hooJcs  have  published.'''' 

Sentence  being  passed,  and  read  against  him,  by  Stokesly, 
he  was  handed  over  to  the  Mayor  and  Sheriffs.  By  them  he 
was  committed  to  Newgate,  and  put  into  a  dark  dungeon  under 
the  gate.  There,  laden  with  irons,  as  many  as  he  could  bear, 
and  his  neck  made  fast  to  a  post,  with  a  collar  of  iron,  he  could 
neither  stand  upright,  nor  stoop  down  !  Yet  even  here,  by 
candle-light,  for  no  other  came  into  the  place,  was  he  continu- 
ally engaged  in  writing ;  the  letter  to  his  friends,  concerning 
his  troubles,  which  was  afterwards  printed  in  his  works,  being 
his  first  effort. 

Such  was  the  power  of  Fryth's  example,  that  another  in- 
dividual, Andrew  Hewet,  (also  betrayed  by  Holt,  the  miscreant 
already  mentioned,)  who  had  been  first  examined  in  April,  and 
was  now  brought  up  again,  resolved  to  follow  his  steps.  The 
Bishops  used  many  persuasions  to  allure  him  from  the  truth, 
but  in  vain.  His  heart  was  one  with  Fryth's,  and  he  told 
them  firmly,  that  he  would  do  as  he  had  done.  He  was  there- 
fore condemned. 

And  now  at  the  last,  that  Henry  might  have  his  full  share 
of  the  guilt  and  shame  of  such  a  martyrdom,  on  the  Sd  of 
July  it  was  noted  to  him,  officially,  by  Stokesly,  sealed  with 
his  own  seal,  how  the  matter  stood, — but  there  was  no  reply, 
and  therefore  full  consent !  Next  morning  Fryth  and  his  com- 
panion were  led  forth  to  Smithfield, 


1533.3  ENGLAND   AND   THE   CONTINENT.  377 

Being  both  bound  to  the  stake  "  there  was  present,'"'  says 
Foxe,  "  one  Dr.  Cooke,  that  was  parson  of  the  Church  called 
All-hallows,  in  Honey-lane,  situate  in  the  midst  of  Cheapside.-'^ 
The  said  Cooke  made  open  exclamation,  and  admonished  the 
people,  that  they  should  in  no  wise  pray  for  them,  any  more 
than  they  would  for  a  dorj.  At  these  words,  Fryth,  smiling, 
prayed  the  Lord  to  forgive  him  !  The  Doctor"'s  words,  how- 
ever, "  did  not  a  little  move  the  people  to  anger,  and  not  with- 
out cause.  The  wind  made  his  death  somewhat  longer,  as  it 
bore  away  the  flame  from  him  to  his  fellow ;  but  Fryth's  mind 
was  established  with  such  patience,  that,  as  though  he  had  felt 
no  pain,  he  seemed  rather  to  rejoice  for  his  fellow  than  to  be 
careful  for  himself  I"  This  painful  event  was  felt  and  lamented 
far  and  near ;  and  in  fact  it  marks  an  era^  which  will  be  noticed 
more  particularly,  after  we  have  briefly  glanced  at  foreign 
affairs  for  the  next  six  months. 

The  King  of  Eugland  having,  as  we  have  seen,  so  strangely  employed 
the  Bulls  of  Clement  sent  to  Cranmer,  in  such  a  way  as  to  suit  his  own 
immediate  purpose,  while  he  had  treated  that  against  himself  with  con- 
tempt and  defiance,  the  reader  may  naturally  wish  to  know  what  was 
the  result  abroad. 

So  early  as  the  17  th  of  June,  Cranmer,  immediately  after  he  had  in- 
formed Hawkins  respecting  John  Fryth,  tells  him  that  the  Duke  of 
Norfolk,  the  Prime  Minister  ;  Lord  Rochford,  the  brother  of  Queen 
Anne  ;  Sir  Francis  Bryan,  Sir  A.  Brown,  with  Drs.  Goodrich,  Aldrich, 
and  Thirlby,  had  been  sent  as  ambassadors  to  the  King  of  France — 
"  and,  as  I  suppose,  they  go  from  him  to  the  Pope,"  to  Marseilles.  In 
July,  Hawkins  obtained  one  conference  with  the  Emperor,  but  he  re- 
mained inflexible.  "  The  matter  was  none  of  his ;" — but  "  she,"  Qvieen 
Catherine,  "  was  his  aunt,  and  an  orphan.  He  must  see  for  her,  and 
her  daughter  was  his  cousin."  The  envoy,  therefore,  soon  after  return- 
ed to  England. 

In  June,  probably  before  he  knew  all  that  had  occvirred  in  England, 
the  Pontiif  was  eager  to  keej)  both  Henry  and  the  Emperor  satisfied,  if 
possible,  but  the  latter  had  the  entire  control,  and  became  urgent ;  so 
that,  by  the  11th  of  July,  Clement  annulling  at  once  the  judgment 
given  by  Cranmer,  a  provisional  excommunication  of  Henry  was  issued, 
unless  he  separated  from  his  new  Queen  before  September,  or,  at  the 


s-i  The  identical  spot  to  wliichtlie  eiiemj-  first  ran  tosearcli  after  heretical  books aDd  Tyndale's 
Testaments  !  sec  anno  1526.  And  here  is  the  successor  of  Forman  and  Garret,  who  once  minis- 
tered there.  It  is,  however,  remarkable  that  this  man,  Laurence  Cooke,  resigned  in  June  15.')7, 
when  Garret  again  succeeded,  and  as  Hector,  where  he  remained  till  his  martyrdom  in  1540. 
—  Rco.  Slokesly  ct  Bonner. 


378  ENGLAND  AND  THE  CONTINENT.  [boOK  I. 

latest,  by  the  end  of  October.  The  King  then  recalled  the  Duke  of 
Norfolk  and  Lord  Rochford  from  France,  and,  on  the  30th  of  the  same 
month,  signed  an  appeal  from  the  condemnation  of  the  Pope  to  a  Gene- 
ral Council.  It  so  happened  that  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  a  boy  of  fifteen, 
the  second  son  of  Francis,  was  about  to  be  married  at  Marseilles,  to 
Catharine  de  Medici,  the  niece  of  Clement,  when  the  French  King  and 
the  Pontiff  were  to  meet  at  the  marriage.  The  resolute  Stephen  Gar- 
diner was  instructed  to  be  present,  as  his  Sovereign's  representative,  to 
watch  proceedings  ;  Sir  P.  Bryan,  and  Sir  J.  Wallop  were  also  sent ; 
but,  as  resolute  as  Gardiner,  and  more  fierce  withal,  Edmund  Bonner 
was  there  also  as  ambassador.  In  August,  Henry  had  forwarded  to  the 
latter  his  appeal  to  a  general  Council,  which  was  to  be  communicated 
at  the  jjroper  time.  At  the  commencement  of  this  meeting,  in  October, 
the  Pontiff,  not  being  with  Charles,  began  to  oscillate  once  more.  Eng- 
land he  would /cm'h  have  retained,  by  any  means,  foul  or  fair  ;  and  so  he 
hinted  that  he  would  now  annul  the  first  marriage  of  Henry,  if  he 
would  only  send  a  proxy  thither.  Nay,  he  deliberately  confessed  to  the 
King  of  France,  that  he  thought  Henry's  marriage  with  Catherine,  and 
the  dispensation  granted  by  his  predecessor,  were  both  null  and  void  in 
law  ;  but  then  he  was  governed  by  the  imperial  power,  which,  of  course, 
he  actually  hated. 

When  November  came,  however,  Bonner  thought  it  was  now  time  for 
him  to  present  and  read  his  papers,  and  this  he  effected,  to  the  no  small 
annoyance  of  Clement.^^  The  subject  matter  was  unwelcome,  and  the 
manner  of  Bonner  so  peremjjtory  and  offensive,  that  our  former  Bishop 
of  Worcester,  the  Pontiff,  once  enraged,  threatened  to  throw  him  into  a 
cauldron  of  melted  lead,  or  to  burn  him  alive  !  It  was  time  for  Edmund 
then  to  make  his  escaj^e,  or  withdraw  and  return  to  England. 

This  meeting  of  Francis  and  Clement,  in  its  effects,  was  a  most  melan- 
choly one  for  France.  The  King,  it  is  true,  "  there  comj^leted  the  nup- 
tials between  his  own  son  and  the  Pontiff's  niece  ;"  but  there,  also,  "  he 
made  that  secret  compact  with  him,  which,  being  adopted  and  pursued 
by  other  princes  in  his  own  country,  and  elsewhere,  filled  the  most  en- 
lightened parts  of  Europe  with  terror,  blood,  flames,  commotion,  and 
misery,  for  above  a  century  !"  Henry  was  abandoning  the  connexion, 
but,  "  unhappily  for  his  kingdom,  Francis  plunged  into  it  more  deeply 
than  ever — an  event  the  more  extraordinary,  that,  before  this  time,  he 
had  talked  of  curtailing  the  Pontiff's  power  in  his  dominions,  and  even 
of  receding  from  it,  and  had  for  some  time  permitted  his  beloved  sister, 
(the  Queen  of  Navarre,)  and  her  religious  friends,  to  enjoy  and  diffuse 
their   opinions.      This   miserable   and   infatuated   change   of  conduct. 


■"iS  Cranmer  also  had  apiicalcd  from  the  autliority  of  Rome,  to  a  General  Council,  requesting 
Bonner  to  intimate  this  ;  but  it  seems  most  ))robable  that  the  request  came  too  late.— See  Cran- 
mer's  Harmins  by  Jcnhyiis,  vol.  i,,  p.  71. 


1533.]         THE  TRUE   DIVISION   OF  THE    COMMUNITY.  379 

made  his  country,  for  several  generations,  a  region  of  mourning,  battle, 
and  death!" 36 

With  regjird  to  that  war  of  opinion,  now  effectually  kindled 
in  England,  which  wo  have  seen  burst  forth  so  decidedly  in 
February  1526,  and  continue  without  intermission,  it  was  more 
than  ever  on  the  advance  ;  but  it  has  now  become  more  neces- 
sary to  discriminate^  if  we  are  to  keep  pace  with  the  actual 
state  of  the  country.  The  positive  progress  of  Divine  truth, 
must  on  no  account  be  confounded  with  certain  opinions  de- 
bated, and  movements  settled,  whether  in  Parliament  or  the 
Convocation.  In  England  were  two  distinct  parties,  with 
views  and  intentions  as  distinct  as  heaven  and  earth,  or  as 
Divine  truth  is,  from  mere  political  expediency.  The  former, 
was,  properly  speaking,  the  cause  of  God ;  the  latter  party, 
though  overruled  by  Him,  involved  chiefly  the  passions  and 
feelings  of  but  one  man,  or  the  Monarch,  with  his  obsequious 
advisers.  The  former  cause,  apparently  without  one  powerful 
friend  on  earth,  was  certainly,  as  yet,  without  a  visible  leader 
in  England.  Notwithstanding  both  fire  and  fury,  the  rage  of 
Henry,  and  the  vain  imaginations  of  his  prelates,  that  cause 
had  been  feeling  its  way,  silently  but  effectually,  in  a  thou- 
sand directions ;  and  the  parties  benefited,  were  scattered 
among  the  people,  as  "  a  dew  from  Jehovah,  which  tarrieth 
not  for  man,  nor  waiteth  for  the  sons  of  men."  With  regard 
to  other  men,  in  all  the  discussions  between  the  Pontiff  and 
Henry,  on  the  one  hand,  and  between  the  latter  with  his 
Parliaments  or  Convocations,  on  the  other,  though  religion 
was  mrhally  connected  with  them,  all  hated,  and  all  as  yet, 
had  equally  persecuted,  the  Truth.  Yet  feeble  and  unprotect- 
ed as  the  cause  of  God  might  seem,  it  was  essentially  the 
cause  of  all  that  happened.  All  the  other  movements  were 
but  the  ground  swell ;  so  that  while  human  passions  and 
worldly  interests  were  in  agitation,  the  Almighty  looked  down 
from  heaven,  and  in  the  things  wherein  they  dealt  proudly 
or  cruelly.  He  was  above  them.  In  short,  if  the  names  of 
men  are  to  be  mentioned,  the  cause  of  Tyndale  and  Fryth 
was  that  of  England''s  best  hope,  and  the  most  untoward 
events  were  overruled  to  advance  it. 


38  Turner's  Qiiccn  Elizabeth,  chap,  xviii. 


380  EFFECT  OF   FRYTIFS  DEATH.  [book  I. 

One  illustration  must  not  here  be  omitted,  as  it  is  connect- 
ed with  the  martyrdom  of  Fryth.  To  the  outward  eye,  this 
was  nothing  more  than  the  death  of  an  interesting  young  man, 
burnt  to  ashes  in  Smithfield,  but  it  proved  a  decisive  event. 
Burnet  has  said,  indeed,  that  "  this  was  the  last  act  of  the 
clergy's  cruelty  against  men's  lives," — but  from  the  account 
already  given,  this  has  appeared  to  be  not  quite  correct.  No 
doubt  the  Bishops  concerned  were  guilty  to  a  man,  and  espe- 
cially Gardiner,  who  intrigued  and  hunted  for  the  life  of  his 
finest  pupil,  and  who,  with  Stokesly  and  Longland,  consigned 
him  to  the  flames.  But  the  King  was  as  deeply  implicated 
as  any  one  man — nay,  most  of  all,  as  with  him  lay  the  power 
of  mercy,  which,  with  his  pen,  or  his  ring,  he  could  have  ex- 
tended in  a  moment.  But  he  commanded  the  final  examina- 
tions, and  when  the  victim  was  on  the  borders  of  destruction, 
though  distinctly  informed  of  this,  he  made  no  repl}'^  !  No, 
the  martyrdom  of  Fryth  stands  by  itself  in  history,  not  only 
as  the  first  perpetrated  directly  by  the  King  and  the  Clergy 
in  union  ;  but  as  distinguished  from  those  of  preceding  years, 
and  from  all  the  violent  deaths  which  were  inflicted  in  Eng- 
land, for  five  years  to  come.  The  preceding  martyrdoms  had 
certainly  been  for  the  truth,  and  were  accomplished  by  the 
Bishops  and  the  Lord  Chancellor,  without  any  King's  writ,  or 
direct  orders  from  the  throne,  although  Henry  winked  at  them 
all :  the  deaths  that  ensued,  for  years  to  come,  were  state 
murders  by  Henry  himself.^  The  preceding  cruelties  and 
death,  however,  it  must  be  observed,  were  inflicted  on  men 
who  had  abjured.,  and  who  knew  they  must  die ;  but  Fryth 
had  called,  at  once,  both  the  King  and  his  prelates  to  the 
mark,  and  they  slew  him.  The  former,  no  doubt,  had  their 
effects,  in  gradually  inspiriting  the  cause,  and  advancing  its 
moral  courage ;  but  Fryth's  calm  and  unflinching  intrepidity, 
his  clear  and  pointed  replies,  his  refusing  either  to  flee  or  yield, 
astonished  even  his  bitterest  enemies.  As  for  the  people,  they 
had  never  excited  to  any  of  these  deeds  of  blood  :  over  them 
all,  many  had  deeply  lamented,  but  with  the  death  of  Fi-yth 
they  were  shocked.  They  had  seen  him  embrace  the  stake, 
and  suffer  with  mildness  and  patience,  full  of  faith,  and  hope, 
and  joy ;  and  not  a  few  afterwards  burned  with  indignation 

3'  Until  we  come  to  the  maityrdom  of  Lambert  in  li)38,  when  tlic  power  of  tliese  Bishojjs, 
cnntrary  even  to  law.  bi-Ran  to  revive,  to  the  close  of  the  rciyn. 


1.533.]  EFFECT  OF  FRYTII'S  DEATH.  381 

against  his  persecutors.  Tliis  in  short,  was  the  climax  of 
these  earlj  martyrdoms  on  English  ground,  and  it  was  the 
more  deeply  lamented  as  involving  the  death  of  the  dearest 
friend  and  assistant  of  Tyndale  himself.  Yet  was  it  fit  that 
he  should  occupy  such  a  place  in  this  noble  warfare.  The  ef- 
fect was  felt  in  Parliament,  and  at  its  first  sitting,  on  the 
simple  petition  of  a  poor  prisoner,  the  subject  was  taken  up  ; 
not,  indeed,  by  the  Lords  or  ]}ishops ;  not  by  the  King,  but 
by  that  instrument  of  national  good,  corrupt  and  servile  though 
it  was — the  Hou§e  of  Commons.  It  was  then,  as  we  shall  see, 
that  heretics  were  taken  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Bishops,  and 
then  that  no  man  was  to  be,  as  many  had  been,  immured  in  a 
dungeon,  on  suspicion  of  heresy.  Even  now  the  Scriptures 
were  let  alone,  at  least  not  burnt ;  nor  was  any  one  confined 
or  burnt,  for  reading  or  believing  them.  It  was  not  a  little 
remarkable,  nor  should  it  now  be  forgotten,  that  such  a  season 
succeeded  the  martyrdom  of  Fryth, 

In  conjunction  with  this  event,  however,  we  do  not  forget 
the  favourable  consequences  of  the  marriage  of  the  King  ;  for 
whatever  may  be  said  of  that  step,  the  results  being  matter 
of  history,  of  these  the  reader  will  be  able  to  judge  for  himself, 
as  he  proceeds.  We  only  remark  here,  that  the  enemies  of 
the  new  learning,  or  of  mental  freedom,  need  not  have  been 
so  incensed  with  Henry  for  the  step  he  had  taken,  since  no 
English  monarch  ever  gave  such  proofs  of  devoted  attachment 
to  their  cause,  as  the  "  Defender  of  the  Faith;"  nor  was  he 
now  weaned  from  discovering  that  attachment,  nay,  nor  yet 
will  be,  to  his  dying  hour.  As  for  the  new  Queen,  it  should 
also  be  observed,  that  of  the  three  ladies  which  had  been  laid 
out  for  the  King,  whichever  he  had  married,  the  same  conse- 
quences would  have  ensued.  The  Princess  Margaret,  the 
sister  of  Francis  I.,  and  Princess  Renee,  the  sister  of  his 
deceased  Queen,  had  been  thought  of,  in  succession,  and  by 
Wolsey  himself.  Either  of  these  would  have  had  his  full 
concurrence,  if  it  had  so  pleased  the  King,  and  the  matter 
might  then,  in  all  probability,  have  been  much  earlier  settled ; 
but  it  is  remarkable  that  all  the  three  were  of  similar  senti- 
ments !  In  any  one  of  these  three,  the  Monarch  would  have 
found  a  check-mate,  in  the  bloody  game  which  he  had  begun 
to  play  against  the  new  learning. 

Although,  however,  from  June  1 533  the  storm  was  begin- 


382  SIR  THOMAS   MORE   ASSAILED  [bOOK  I. 

ning  to  subside,  opposition  to  the  truth  was  by  no  means  at 
an  end.  On  the  contrary,  so  far  as  the  pen  and  the  press  were 
concerned,  the  present  year  stands  most  of  all  conspicuous. 
We  have  noticed  the  slight  inaccuracy  of  supposing  that  Sir 
Thomas  More  retired  to  a  life  of  study  and  retirement,  when 
lie  resigned  the  Great  Seal  in  May  last,  as  for  seven  months 
afterwards  he  continued  active  as  a  persecutor.  Even  then, 
he  had  been  writing;  but  it  was  during  this  year  especially, 
that  he  put  forth  all  his  strength,  and  must  have  been  busy, 
night  and  day,  with  little  or  nothing  else  thaii^his  great  contro- 
versy. Had  "  abundance  of  words"  been  only  reckoned  a 
mark  of  greatness.  Sir  Thomas  must  have  seemed  a  giant  in 
literature  ;  but  now,  the  amount  of  his  exertions  in  this  war- 
fare, can  only  be  placed  among  its  most  melancholy  curiosities. 

We  have  already  noticed  the  first  part  of  his  "  Confutation 
of  Tyndale,"  so  called,  consisting  of  363  folio  pages;  and  now 
came  the  remainder,  or  five  books,  of  573  pages  more,  or  936 
in  all !  Of  these  ponderous  volumes,  150  pages  were  against 
Barnes,  and  786  in  opposition  to  Tyndale  !^^ 

Sir  Thomas  was  partial  to  bold  assumptions,  and  must  have 
one,  even  in  his  title,  as  the  word  "  Confutation"  was  nothing 
else ;  for  now,  if  any  man  has  the  perseverance  to  wade  through 
his  folio,  he  will  find  the  old  Latin  proverb  fully  apply  to 
many  a  page — Gratis  anhelans^  multa  agendo  nihil  agens.  It 
may  be  truly  said,  that  the  Lord  Chancellor,  whether  in  or 
out  of  oftice,  was  out  of  breath  to  no  purpose,  and  very  busy 
about  nothing  of  any  value  whatever.  To  reply  to  Tyndale 
had  certainly  cost  him  prodigious  labour;  but  the  Chancellor, 
however  witty,  was  not  the  man  to  answer  him,  much  less 
overcome  ;  and  as  for  the  spirit  and  tendency  of  his  writ- 
ings, we  must  yet  have  a  little  patience,  for  he  is  far  from 
being  done  ! 

An  important  diversion  from  Tyndale  personally,  now, 
however,  ensued:  his  cause  was  gathering  strength.  Of  these 
two  huge  publications,  the  last  had  scarcely  come  from  the 


33  Barnes,  after  having  published  a  hook  on  "  the  Church,"  had  come  over  to  England  last 
year  with  the  Lubeckers,  as  an  envoy,  under  a  safe  conduct  from  Henry.  More  would  have 
violated  this,  and  argued  for  it,  saying,  that  the  time  was  expired.  This  was  not  true,  as  no 
period  was  stated  ;  and  Fryth,  having  seen  the  document  itself,  severely  reprehended  More's 
conduct  and  language,  as  degrading  to  his  Sovereign.  "  Thanks  be  to  God,"  said  he,  "  which 
gave  you  such  grace  in  the  sight  of  our  Sovereign,  that  he  shortly  wiOulrtw  your  pnwer."  All 
this  was  now  reading  in  England. 


1533.]  BY   ANOTHER  OPPONENT.  383 

press,  when  there  sprung  up  another  writer,  and  upon  EnaUsh 
ground,  who  disturbed  the  self-complacency  of  Sir  Tliomas 
not  a  little.  He  w\as  of  the  Chancellor's  own  profession, 
though,  in  other  respects,  a  very  different  man.  An  Oxford 
scholar,  he  had  entered  the  Inner  Temple,  had  long  been 
eminent  as  a  counsellor;  and,  as  a  man,  highly  esteemed.  A 
Christian,  too,  he  was  a  great  admirer  of  the  Sacred  Volume, 
as  appeared  by  his  habitual  use  of  it.  "  Every  night,  after 
his  business  was  past,  he  read  a  chapter  of  the  Bible  to  those 
that  belonged  to  his  house,  and  the  substance  thereof  he  ex- 
pounded to  them."  It  was  natural  for  such  a  man  to  take  a 
deep  interest  in  the  times.  This  year,  therefore,  he  published 
anonymously  "  The  Pacifier,  or  the  Division  between  the 
Spirituality  and  the  Temporality,"  printed  by  Berthelet.^^  It 
was  distinguished  for  its  temperate  language,  and  formed  a 
perfect  contrast  to  the  controversial  style  of  Sir  Thomas.  He 
was,  therefore,  the  more  censured  for  the  violence  of  his 
writing,  as  well  as  his  tedious  verbosity.  The  anonymous 
writer  was  held  up  to  him  as  a  pattern.  Excited  once  more, 
he  must  commence  again  ;  but  he  ran  on  to  580  pages  duo- 
decimo, entitled,  "  The  Apology  of  Sir  Thomas  More,  after 
he  had  given  over  the  office  of  Lord  Chancellor  of  England." 
Here  he  very  candidly  gives  us  the  popular  feeling  against 
himself,  for  after  all  his  toil,  his  Confutation  was  not  read  ! 
So  far  from  the  high-sounding  term  "  Confutation,"  the 
author  has  now  come  down  to  an  Apology. 

"  They  find  first,  for  a  great  fault,  that  my  wTiting  is  over  long,  and,  there- 
fore, too  tedious  to  read, — farther,  that  such  places  as  are  looked  on  by  those 
that  are  learned,  and  can  skill,  be  soon  perceived  for  nought,  and  my  reasons 
of  little  force.  And  over  this,  they  find  a  great  fault  that  I  handled  Tyndale 
and  Barnes,  with  no  fairer  words,  nor  in  no  more  courteous  manner.  And  over 
this  I  write,  they  say,  in  such  wise,  that  I  shew  myself  suspect  in  the  matter, 
and  partial  toward  the  clergy.  And  then,  they  say,  that  my  works  were 
■worthy  much  more  credence,  if  I  had  written  more  indifferently,  (impartially,) 
and  had  declared  and  made  open  to  the  people  the  faults  of  the  clergy.  And 
in  this  point  they  lay  for  a  sample,  the  goodly  and  godly,  the  mild  and  gentle 
fashion  used  by  him,  whosoever  he  was,  that  now  lately  wrote  the  book  of '  the 
Division  between  the  Temporality  and  the  Spirituality  :'  wliich  charitable, 
mild  manner,  they  say,  that  if  I  had  used,  my  works  would  have  been  read 
both  of  many  more,  and  with  much  better  will.  And  yet,  they  say,  besides  all 
this,  that  I  do  but  pike  out  pieces  at  my  pleasure,  such  as  I  may  most  easily 
seem  to  soil,  and  leave  out  what  me  list,  and  such  as  would  plainly  prove  the 

39  There  seems  to  have  been  a  second  edition,  printed  by  Redman. 


384  SIR  THOMAS  MORE.  [boOK  I. 

matter  against  me.  But,  finally,  they  say  farther  yet,  that  I  have  not  fulfilled 
my  promise.  For  I  promised,  they  say,  in  my  preface  of  my  Cunfutation,  that 
I  would  prove  the  Church,  and  that,  they  say,  1  hare  not  done." 

But  even  when  vanquished,  More  could  argue  still ;  though 
certainly  a  more  candid  statement  of  faults  found,  has  never 
been  given  by  any  author,  from  that  day  to  this.  It  is 
valuable,  as  descriptive  of  the  taste  and  feeling  of  many ;  it 
is  honourable  to  his  opponent,  but  it  proves  that  the  Bishops 
had  better  never  have  employed  Sir  Thomas  More  as  their 
English  Demosthenes.  After  all,  our  author^s  self  esteem  was 
not  exhausted;  he  proceeds  to  boast  that  some  men  had  read 
his  book  three  times,  and  then  goes  on  with  his  Apology. 

The  retired  Chancellor's  tone,  however,  was  now,  for  a 
short  season,  more  subdued ;  though  whenever  he  touched  on 
the  Spirituality,  so  called,  his  irritability  returns.  Referring 
to  Tyndale  and  others,  he  says — "  as  for  wit  and  learning,  I 
nowhere  say  that  any  of  them  have  none'''' — but  now  this  new 
writer,  by  his  matter  and  manner  combined,  greatly  puzzled 
him.  He  could  not  believe  so  good  a  man  could  be  an  enemy 
to  the  Spirituality,  and  yet  "  he  says  nothing  good  of  them."" 
Faults,  and  these  alone,  are  specified,  so  that  he  must  be  sur- 
rounded by  some  "  wily  shrews,  who  have  filled  liis  ear  with 
such  statements."  Still,  to  the  manner  of  this  writer,  he 
must  concede  the  superiority,  though  he  could  not  imitate  it. 
"  The  pacifier  can  yet  use  his  words  in  fair  manner,  and 
speak  to  each  man  gently.  I  cannot  say  but  that  is  very 
true.  Howbeit,  every  one  hath  not  like  wit,  nor  like  inven- 
tion in  writing ;  for  he  findeth  many  ways  of  calling  evil 
matter  in  good  words,  which  I  never  thought  upon,  but  am  a 
simple  plain  body,  much  like  the  Macedonians." 

As  soon  as  this  Apology  came  out,  which  was  chiefly 
against  the  Pacifier ;  he  published  an  octavo  pamphlet  of  200 
pages,  entitled,  "  Salem  and  Bizance" — a  dialogue  between  two 
Englishmen,  in  reply.  Sir  Thomas,  still  fond  of  an  assum- 
ing title,  then  printed  his  "  Debellation  of  Salem  and  Bizance," 
extending  to  above  280  pages  in  folio  !  This  was  followed  by 
the  "  Apology  against  Sir  Thomas,"  who  said  no  more.'*" 

This  anonymous  writer  was  Christopher  Saintgerman.  More 
could  scarcely  fail  to  know  the  name ;  but  the   times  were 


■to  This  last  jiublication  is  sometimes  printed  to  instead  o(  ajinlust. 


]:)33.2  AS   A   CONTROVKItSlAL    WRITEK.  38;> 

rapidly  changing — Saintgerman  was  twenty  years  older  than 
liimself,  and  so  highly  respected,  that  when  Sir  Thomas  referred 
to  him,  he  had  thought  it  prudent  to  do  so  under  the  appella- 
tion of  the  Pacifier,  or  Sir  John  Some.  This  gentleman,  who 
lived  to  the  age  of  80,  and  died  in  1540,  is  better  known  as 
the  author  of  "  Two  Dialogues  on  the  Laws  of  England,  and 
the  grounds  of  those  Laws" — or  of  "  The  Doctor  and  Student, 
Dialogues  between  a  Doctor  of  Divinity  and  a  Student  of 
Law."  The  first  had  been  published  in  Latin  ten  years  be- 
fore this,  and  both  together  in  English  in  1528,'*^  His  ob- 
servations oh  Law — on  "  the  law  of  natural  reason — of 
lieavenly  revelation — and  of  man,  that  is  of  a  Prince  or 
any  secondary  governor  that  hath  power  to  bind  his  sub- 
jects," discover  a  mind  far  above  his  age ;  while,  as  a  lawyer, 
he  was  sapping  the  foundations  of  the  reigning  superstition. 

We  have  noticed  him  the  more  particularly  on  one  account. 
It  is  by  no  means  improbable  that  he  came  forward  this  year, 
not  only  from  principle,  but  from  feelings  of  friendship,  if  not 
of  kindred.  His  mother's  name  originally  Avas  An7ie  Tyn~ 
dale ;  he  being  the  son  of  Sir  Henry  Saintgerman,  a  knight 
of  Warwickshire,  by  Anne,  the  daughter  of  Thomas  Tyn- 
dale,  Esq.  We  have  not  been  able  to  trace  the  relationship, 
but  his  mother  may  have  been,  in  some  remote  degree,  related 
to  our  Translator. 

Sir  Thomas,  we  have  remarked,  said  no  more  to  Mr.  Saint- 
german. The  reason  may  have  been  that,  not  knowing  when 
he  was  beat,  he  felt  as  if  called  away  to  battle,  once  more, 
with  his  first  and  able  antagonist.  By  the  month  of  August, 
at  the  latest,  Tyndale's  defence  of  Fryth  against  More,  and 
Fryth's  letter  to  him,  which  he  had  penned  in  the  Tower, 
had  arrived  in  print,  from  abroad.  The  retired  Chancellor 
then  put  forth  his  reply  to  Fryth,  such  as  it  was ;  which, 
though  in  prmt  since  December  last,  he  had  kept  back,  he 
says,  "  more  than  a  year ;"  and  then  he  fell  upon  Tvndale, 
but  for  the  last  time.  The  brief  and  unexceptionable  treatise 
of  Tyndale,  entitled,   "  The  Supper  of  the  Lord,"  fee,  from 


*i  This  book,  which  has  been  mentioned  with  respect  by  Blackstone,  Sir  W.  Jones,  and  other 
legal  authorities,  has  since  passed  through  above  tu'cnty  editions,  the  last  being  in  1810,  which 
is  more  than  can  be  said  of  any  other  publication  of  that  day.  <m  anv  subject  whatever  save 
and  except  the  translation  of  Tyndale. 

<2  Again.  William  Tyndale,  the  son  of  Sir  Thomas  Tyndatf  nf  IlncK-wolil,  married  the  only 
daughter  of  Sir  Ambrose  St.  Germain. 

VOT,.   I.  2   B 


386  MORES   PRODIGIOUS   EXERTIONS  [boOK  I. 

which  we  have  already  quoted,  was  an  octavo  tract  of  about 
60  pages.  Sir  Thomas,  in  his  usual  style,  replied,  in  the 
same  size,  to  the  tune  of  282  pages,  besides  his  preface  I  It 
was  printed,  he  tells  us,  "  and  many  of  them  gone,  before 
Christmas."''^ 

This  was  a  final  effort,  and  every  way  worthy  of  the  close 
of  such  a  stormy  tempest.  It  is  painful  to  quote  his  lan- 
guage ;  but,  without  noticing  it,  no  just  or  adequate  idea  can 
be  formed  of  the  battle  which  was  fought  for  the  truth  of 
God,  and  the  emancipation  of  the  human  mind ;  nor,  conse- 
quently, of  the  obligations  of  this  country  to  the  man  who, 
for  England's  lasting  benefit,  triumphed,  and  then  went  on 
with  his  work. 

Through  the  whole  of  this  interminable  controversy,  vindic- 
tive as  it  was  from  the  beffinninw  a  climax  is  observable  in 
the  violence  of  the  writer.  When  only  Speaker  of  the  House 
of  Commons,  and  having  no  judicial  authority,  an  expression 
would  drop  from  him,  very  different  from  those  that  soon  fol- 
lowed, though  still  it  was  given  in  his  own  wild,  not  to  say 
profane,  manner.  "  By  my  soul,"  said  he  in  his  "  Dialogue," 
"  I  would  all  the  world  were  all  aiireed  to  take  all  violence 
and  compulsion  away,  upon  all  sides,  Christian  and  heathen ; 
and  that  no  man  were  constrained  to  believe,  but  as  he  could 
be,  by  grace,  wisdom,  and  good  works,  induced ;  and  then  he 
that  would  go  to  God,  go  on,  in  God's  name,  and  he  that  will 
go  to  the  Devil,  the  Devil  go  with  him  !  There  be  many 
more  to  be  won  to  Christ  on  that  side,  than  to  be  lost  from 
him  on  this  side.'''^  But  once  he  is  a  little  older,  and  in  pos- 
session of  power,  what  a  change  for  the  worse  is  visible  ! 
"  There  should  have  been,"  says  he,  "  more  burned,  by  a 
great  many,  than  there  have  been  within  this  seven  year  last 
passed  :  the  lack  whereof,  I  fear  me,  will  make  more  burned, 
within  this  seven  year  next  coming,  than  else  should  have 
needed  to  have  been — in  seven  score .'"  The  next  year  he  is 
more  outrageous ;  going  so  far  as  to  assure  his  readers,  that 
the  Saviour  will  pronounce  Tyndale  to  be  accursed,  at  the 
last  day,  because  he  liad  derived  all  his  heresies  from  the 


^^  See  his  letter  of  explanation  and  apology  to  Crumwell,  on  his  being  suspected  of  writing 
something  obiio?tions,  ofler  this,  asjainst  "certain  articles  late  put  forth  by  the  King's  Council." 
The  printer  had  dated  his  bodk  by  mistake  1534.— Sec  his  Enslish  Works,  p.  1422. 

'•■'  A  sentence  which  has  been  quoted  in  modern  times,  as  a  proof  of  true  iolcralion  in  Sir 
Thomas  .More,  witliont  (ihserving  tlie  general  tenor  of  all  (hat  followed. 


1,533.]  AS   A   CONTHOVKRSIAL    WHITKK.  387 

I'atlier  of  lies ;  wliile  this  is  expressed  in  terms  by  far  too 
coarse  lor  repetition.  And  now  tliat  lie  is  come  to  tlie  last 
tract,  -vvlncli  he  so  defamed,  but  could  not  .answer,  we  liave 
the  last  dregs  of  his  gall  of  bitterness. 

Tyndale,  it  is  granted,  both  now  and  before,  had  laid  bare 
the  positive  vices  of  living  hypocrites,  who  held  offices  called 
sacred  ;  and,  as  Sir  Thomas  could  not  fasten  sin  upon  his 
opponent  in  return,  he  must  at  last  draw  upon  bedlam,  nnd 
the  infernal  regions. 

Tyndale's  book,  he  says,  "  was  blasphemous — it  was  bedlam-ripe,  made  by  a 
mad  fool," — nay,  "  a  madman  would  wax  red  with  shame  to  write  so."  All  the 
men  who  liad  forsaken  the  old  system,  "  had  an  hot  fire  of  hell  in  their  hearts." 
"  All  should,  both  by  word  and  countenance,  shew  themselves  plainly  to  hate, 
and  detest,  and  abhor  utterly  the  pestilent  contagion  of  all  such  smoky  com- 
munication,"— "  no  one  should  bid  them  good  speed,  or  good  morrow."  Even 
before  this,  in  the  stories  he  introduced,  he  had  gone  so  far  as  to  be  obscene  ; 
and  now  his  language  is  profane  to  the  last  degree. 

For  want  of  active  exertion  no  man  could  now  blame  Sir 
Thomas,  although  all  his  biographers  seem  to  have  been  cau- 
tious of  pointing  to  the  amount  of  his  herculean  labours  this 
year.  This,  however,  being  descriptive  of  character,  should 
not  be  withheld.  Some  part  he  may  have  composed  in  the 
few  preceding  months,  but  at  all  events,  in  this  year  alone, 
there  issued  from  the  press,  of  his  composition,  more  than 
8-50  pages  in  folio,  .580  in  duodecimo,  and  282  in  octavo  ;  or 
above  1700  pages  in  all  !  So  gigantic  were  the  last  year's 
exertions  of  this  controversialist.  It  must  seem  strange  that 
all  he  had  said  was  reprinted  in  his  English  works,  but  then 
this  was  in  the  days  of  Queen  Mary.  Though  in  a  smaller 
type,  the  folio  volume  amounts  to  1 458  pages,  of  which  his 
controversy  occupies  above  a  thousand  !  It  was  now  nearly 
five  years  since  More  had  begun.  He  had  been  writing  for 
the  King  and  the  priesthood  entire  ;  but  the  crowning  vexa- 
tion must  have  been,  that  all  this  mighty  stir  had  been 
occasioned  by  only  one  of  those  unpatronised  exiles,  who,  he 
said,  "  nought  had  here,  and  nought  carried  hence  ;"  and  one, 
too,  whom  neither  Wolsey  nor  the  King,  neither  More  nor 
Crumwell,  or  their  agents,  had  been  able,  as  yet,  to  apprehend. 

Such,  however,  was  the  great  and  voluminous  advocate  for 
"the  old  learning;""  though  it  now  becomes  due  to  his  memory 
to  observe,  that  it  was  only  after  he  became  such,  or  while  so 


38S  Ills  OTHER  (.QUALITIES.  [liuOK  i. 

engaged,  that  lie  displayed  such  a  temper,  and  seemed  to  labour 
nnder  a  sort  of  black  inspiration.  For  oh,  what  a  change  had 
come  over  the  spirit  of  this  man,  within  the  last  ten  years  ! 
It  was  but  a  little  before  then  that  Erasmus  drew  his  charac- 
ter, with  graphic  minuteness,  and  so  beautifully.  If  only  the 
half  had  been  true,  and  there  is  no  reason  for  questioning  the 
general  portrait,  one  can  scarcely  believe  that  it  was  the  same 
individual  who  lived  on,  under  the  same  name.  But  when 
writing  his  Utopia,  or  rather  when  lecturing,  in  earlier  days, 
to  a  crowded  audience,  on  Augustine's  work,  '•'-De  cititate  Dei^^ 
More  was  one  man ;  and  when,  approaching  to  50,  after 
that  he  attacked  "  the  new  learning,''  he  was  another.  The 
course  on  which  he  entered  in  1528,  is  also  the  more  deeply  to 
be  lamented  from  the  fact,  that  there  still  continued  to  be  re- 
deeming points  in  his  character,  standing  out  in  bold  contrast. 
The  rights  of  persons  and  property  he  well  understood  ;  to  the 
human  mind  only,  would  he  allow  none  whatever.  More's 
superiority  to  the  love  of  money,  and  his  sterling  integrity  as 
Chancellor,  in  all  civil  causes,  were  alike  remarkable ;  nor 
was  his  despatch  of  business  less  conspicuous.  Coming  into 
Chancery,  which  was  clogged  with  suits,  some  of  which  had 
been  there  nearly  twenty  years,  at  the  end  of  his  second  year 
not  one  was  depending.*''  Sir  Thomas  Audley,  his  successor, 
was  far,  very  far,  from  being  a  man  of  such  despatch.  In 
these  causes,  too,  More  would  not  have  known  his  mother's 
children  ;  for,  on  various  occasions,  he  nobly  shook  his  hand 
from  receivhig  of  bribes,  or  presents  in  money  or  plate,  to 
any  amount,  or  of  whatever  description.  When  he  retired 
from  the  Chancellorship,  he  did  so  most  honourably  poor. 
Nay,  when  the  Bishops  came  to  offer  him  a  sum  of  four  or 
five  thousand  pounds,  as  their  grateful  return  for  these  wordy 
exertions  in  their  favour,  he  not  only  declined  its  acceptance, 
but,  on  the  hint  of  their  wish  to  present  the  money  to  his 
family,  he  replied,  "  I  had  rather  see  it  all  cast  into  the 
Thanief«,  than  that  I,  or  any  of  my  family,  should  have  a 
penny  of  it." 


4S  If  the  following  lines  were  written  on  the  occasion,  as  it  lias  Vjecn  said,  they  at  lonst  mark 
the  public  admiration— 

"  When  More  two  years  liad  Chancellor  heen. 
No  more  suits  did  remain  ; 
The  same  shall  never  more  be  seen, 
Til!  Move  be  there  again." 


1,533.]  BLT    FINALLY    OVERCOME.  389 

Had  the  unsuccessful  controversialist  only  not  suffered  his 
vanity  to  be  flattered  by  Tunstal,  when  he  called  on  him,  with 
mock  solemnity,  by  his  prclatic  license,  to  "  play  the  Demos- 
thenes in  English,'"'  as  he  had  done  in  Latin,  and  write  down 
Tyndale  and  his  translation  ; — had  he  only  kept  to  his  Bench, 
and  judged  between  parties  in  civil  causes,  he  had  retired 
with  such  honour,  that  there  had  been  not  one  individual 
among  the  King's  servants,  who  would  have  stood  so  high  in 
the  eye  of  posterity.  But  it  is  a  dangerous  thing  for  any  man 
to  set  himself  in  opposition  to  Divine  Revelation,  or  attempt 
to  mingle  with  it,  the  chaff  of  human  tradition.  Sir  Thomas, 
however,  had  taken  his  ground,  and  the  consequence  was,  that 
he  wrought  himself  into  such  a  fury,  that  even  the  violent  death 
of  his  antagonist  would  not  have  allayed  it.  Too  like  one  of 
old,  who  "  thought  scorn  to  lay  hands  on  Mordecai  alone,  for 
they  sliowed  him  the  people  of  Mordecai  ;"  so  the  Chancellor 
must  not  only  write  himself  into  obloquy,  but  wash  his  hands 
in  the  blood  of  those  who  believed  as  his  opponent  did  ;  that  is, 
in  the  blood  of  any  man,  Avho  saw  farther  than  himself,  or  went 
not,  with  him,  into  the  depths  of  superstition.  For  him,  it 
was  truly  an  evil  hour,  when  he  delivered  himself  up  to  the 
blind  rage  of  an  infatuated  priesthood  ;  for  now,  in  the  end, 
what  did  it  all  avail  ?  Independent!}'  of  his  interference  proving 
an  entire  failure  as  to  argument,  the  same  want  of  brevity  hav- 
ing distinguished  his  writings  to  the  very  close,  the  same  con- 
sequences followed,  with  those  Avhich  he  has  himself  detailed, 
after  his  Confutation  was  finished.  He  was  not  read  !  Some 
curious  peculiarities  of  the  times,  may,  indeed,  be  picked  out 
of  these  writings,  here  and  there,  but  it  may  be  safely  affirmed 
that  few  men  have  ever  read  his  controversy  through.  Per- 
haps not  one  man  ever  will. 

It  is,  however,  now  not  unworthy  of  enquiry,  whether  Sir 
Thomas  More  was  not  writing  throughout  the  whole  of  this 
tedious  warfare,  under  the  influence  of  apprehension,  as  well 
as  professed  hot  displeasure ;  and  that  from  his  penetrating 
more  deeply  than  others,  into  the  signs  of  the  times.  If  we 
are  to  depend  upon  a  remarkable  conversation  with  his  own 
son-in-law.  Roper,  there  seems  to  be  some  good  ground  for  the 
supposition.  "It  fortuned,"  says  Roper,  "-before  the  matter  of 
the  said  matrimony  was  brought  in  question,  when  I,  in  talk 
Avith  Sir  Thomas  More,  conmiended  unto  him  the  happy  estate 


.•5!)()  CLOSE   OF  THIS   CONTEST.  [boOK  I. 

of  this  realm,  that  had  so  catholic  a  prince  that  uo  heretic 
durst  show  his  face ;  so  learned  a  clergy,  so  grave  and  sound 
a  nobility,  and  so  loving  obedient  subjects,  all  in  one  faith 
agreeing  together  ! "" — "  Troth  it  is  indeed,  son  Roper,"  quoth 
he,  "  and  yet  I  pray  God,"  said  he,  "that  some  of  us,  as  high 
as  we  seem  to  sit  upon  the  mountains,  treading  heretics  under 
our  feet  like  ants,  live  not  the  day  that  we  would  gladly  wish  to 
be  at  league  and  composition  with  them ;  to  let  them  have  their 
churches  quietly  to  themselves,  so  that  they  ivoidd  be  contented  to  let 
us  have  ours,  quietly  to  ourselves.'''' 

In  conclusion,  the  peroration  was  worthy  of  the  entire 
controversy.  To  compensate  for  his  extreme  prolixity.  Sir 
Thomas  intended  to  print  a  ninth  book  to  his  Confutation,  as 
a  summary  of  the  whole.  He  commenced  and  went  on  so  far, 
but  at  last  he  grew  weary,  or  faltered,  and  never  finished  it ! 
The  fragment,  more  than  twenty  years  after  his  death,  was 
inserted  in  his  Works.  And  so  ended  all  his  efforts  against 
the  man  whom  he  had  now  confessed  to  be  "  the  Captain  of 
our  English  heretics."  Tyndale's  advantage  lay  in  his  being 
the  advocate  of  truth ;  but  it  was  no  mean  proof  of  his  power 
as  a  writer,  that,  from  motives  of  the  purest  patriotism,  he  had 
so  successfully  exposed  one  Lord  Chancellor,  and  from  his  zeal 
for  the  diffusion  of  the  Word  of  God,  now  so  effectually 
opposed  a  second. 

Whether  there  had  been  another  edition  of  Tyndale's  New 
Testament,  since  his  reprint  of  1530,  we  have  not  been  able  to 
ascertain.  Owing  to  his  residence  in  Antwerp  itself,  and  the 
promise  of  his  revising  the  translation,  the  printers  were  pro- 
bably restrained.  By  this  time,  however,  there  were  the  tokens 
of  increasing  demand,  perhaps  not  altogether  unconnected  with 
the  reigning  Queen  of  England  ;  but,  from  whatever  cause,  the 
prospect  of  a  large  and  ready  sale  will  prove  by  far  too  strong 
for  these  Antwerp  printers  to  remain  still.  Let  the  market 
be  never  so  inviting,  among  all  the  English  printers,  of  course, 
not  one  dared  to  move;  but  to  these  foreign  workmen,  George 
Joye  represents  himself  as  saying, — "  If  Tyndale  amend  it 
(the  translation)  with  so  great  diligence  as  he  promiseth,  yours 
will  never  be  sold." — "  Yes,"  they  replied,  "  for  if  he  print 
two  thousand,  and  we  as  many,  what  is  so  little  a  number  for 
all  England  i  And  we  will  sell  ours  better  cheap,  and  there- 
fore we  doubt  not  of  the  sale." 


1j3J.]  the  PHUSPE(JT  brightening.  391 

Thus,  iiotwithstaudiug  the  martyrdom  of  Fryth  iu  June, 
nay,  all  that  the  ]3ishop,s  had  yet  done  to  terrify  the  people  at 
home,  or  the  King  and  his  ministers,  to  prevent  importation 
of  books  from  abroad ;  notwithstanding  all  that  Sir  Thomas 
More  had  written  and  published ;  and  though  there  was  yet 
no  symptom  of  any  favourable  regard,  on  the  part  of  even  one 
official  man  in  all  England;  it  becomes  evident  that  there  was 
to  be  no  wisdom,  nor  counsel,  nor  might,  which  should  be  able 
to  resist  a  tide  which  had  now  set  in  with  greater  power  than 
ever. 


SECTION    XL 

TYNDALE  ALL  ALONE  AFTER    PRYTH's    DEATH GENESIS,  SECOND  EDITION 

FRESH    ISSUE    OF     THE    PENTATEUCH SURREPTITIOUS    EDITION    OF    THE 

NEW  TESTAMENT  BY  JOYE THE    CORRECTED  AND  IMPROVED    EDITION  BY 

TYNDALE JOYE's    INTERFERENCE    EXPLAINED STATE     OF    ENGLAND 

PARLIAMENT      ASSEMBLED  — SEPARATION      FROM      ROME CONSTRUCTIVE 

TREASON MORE  AND    FISHER  IN    TROUBLE THE    PONTIFF's    SUPREMACY 

AT  AN  END THE    IMPORT  OF  THAT    EVENT  EQUALLY    MISUNDERSTOOD    IN 

ENGLAND,   BY    SOVEREIGN  AND    SUBJECT DIVINE    TRUTH  IN    PROGRESS 

HARMAN   IN  LONDON RESTORED  TO  FAVOUR  BY  THE  QUEEN GLANCE  AT 

THE  PAST  AND    PRESENT THE  NEW  TESTAMENT    IMPORTING    IN  SEVERAL 

EDITIONS,  IN  FORCIBLE  CONTRAST  WITH  THE  IDLE    DREAMS    OF    THE  CON- 
VOCATION, 

In  returning  to  Tyndale  at  the  commencement  of  this  year, 
it  is  impossible  to  do  so  without  feelings  of  sympathy.  By  a 
cruel  death,  and  in  the  prime  of  life,  on  the  4th  of  July,  he 
had  been  bereft  of  that  companion  who  was  dearer  to  him  than 
any  man  living.  That  stroke  must  have  been  deeply  felt  still, 
and  long  would  the  feeling  of  bereavement  return  upon  him, 
more  especially  when  he  sat  down  to  his  beloved  employment. 
He  had,  indeed,  toiled  in  this  hazardous  undertaking  before 
Fryth  came  to  him  from  England,  but  having  for  years  en- 
joyed his  company  and  aid,  as  well  as  so  highly  prized  them 
both,  it  must  have  demanded  no  inferior  decree  of  Christian 
submission  and  fortitude,  now  to  plough  through  the  deep  all 
alone.  Tyndale  actually  had  no  man  like-minded,  and  the 
place  of  Fiyth  was  never  to  be  supplied.      We  by  no  means 


392  TYNDALE  ALL  ALONE  AFTER  FRYTH'S  DEATH,    [buuk  I, 

forget  another  valuable  agent,  John  Roger,  into  whose  hands- 
came  all  that  Tyndale  had  translated ;  and  who  proved  so 
admirable  a  posthumous  friend. 

But  still,  in  the  death  of  Fryth,  there  were  alleviating 
circumstances,  as  there  always  have  been  in  the  afflictions  of 
the  faithful.  Such  a  glorious  exit  was  well  fitted  to  prepare 
Tyndale  for  his  own,  and  to  render  it  so  much  the  easier,  nay, 
welcome,  Avheu  it  arrived.  We  have  seen  how  intensely  anxious 
he  was  for  the  character  of  his  friend,  and  in  this  he  might  now 
well  exult.  That  young  man  had  fought  a  good  fight,  had 
finished  his  appointed  course ;  and  above  all,  had  preserved  his 
fidelity.  He  had  come  home  from  beyond  sea,  and  shown  to  all 
England,  how  a  martyr  for  the  truth  of  God  ought  to  die,  if 
he  must.  Nothing  remained  for  him  but  the  Christian"'s  great 
metropolis,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  the  palace  of  the  Great 
King ;  into  which  he  had  entered,  no  doubt,  with  joy  upon 
every  side.  In  him  there  had  been  no  mis-giving,  not  a  single 
word  of  hesitation,  no  shift  or  evasion,  no  halting  between  two 
opinions,  no  love  of  life,  no  fear  of  death.  His  crown  of 
martyrdom  was,  unquestionably,  by  far  the  brightest  which 
had  yet  been  won  upon  English  ground,  ever  since  this  war  of 
opinion  had  commenced.  As  Stephen  of  old  had  fallen  asleep 
amidst  the  shower  of  stones  at  Jerusalem ;  so  Fryth,  also 
praying  for  his  enemies,  had  done  the  same,  in  the  midst  of 
the  flames  at  London.  But,  besides  all  this,  there  were  the 
noted  eff"ects,  the  impression  his  Christian  heroism  had  pro- 
duced, and  the  season  that  almost  immediately  ensued.  The 
sky  had  begun  to  clear  over  England  for  a  little  season,  and  this 
was  quite  sufficient  to  convey  fresh  vigour  to  our  Translator. 
It  was  this  year,  therefore,  that  there  appeared  a  second  im- 
pression of  Genesis,  and  an  improved,  because  a  revised  edition 
of  the  New  Testament,  both  of  which  now  deserve  notice. 

That  it  was  the  fixed  and  unalterable  intention  of  Tyndale 
to  print  an  edition  of  the  entire  sacred  text,  there  can  be  no 
question.  He  had  already  commenced  with  "  the  first  book 
of  Moses  called  Genesis,""  newly  corrected  and  amended  by 
W.T.  MDxxxim.  His  initials  were  now,  of  course,  perfectly 
sufficient  to  point  out  the  author ;  and  thus,  in  the  very  teeth 
of  a  tempest  of  more  than  eight  years'  standing,  he  modestly 
intimated  his  firm  determination  to  proceed  as  he  had  begun. 
Of  the  four  other  books  of  the  Pentateuch,  copies  being  still 


],>34.]  FRESH   ISSUE   OF  THE   PENTATEUCH.  393 

on  hand,  these  five  being  frequently  bound  up  together,  form 
what  has  frequently  been  styled  the  second  edition  of  the 
Pentateuch. 

By  other  local  circumstances  in  Antwerp  itself,  however, 
Tyndale  was  now  imperatively  called  away  to  the  revision  and 
improvement  of  his  New  Testament;  and  these  circumstances, 
hitherto  but  very  imperfectly  understood,  deserve  as  well  as 
demand  some  explanation.  Although  Tyndale  himself  was 
somewhat  annoyed  by  them,  an  ardent  and  growing  desire  in 
England  for  his  translation  of  the  Scriptures,  formed  the  sole 
cause  of  all  that  took  place.  We  have  already  alluded  to  the 
printers  and  George  Joye  communing  on  this  subject.  This 
they  had  done  very  cautiously,  unknown  to  Tyndale,  and  as 
Joye  was  now  in  Antwerp,  it  is  necessary  to  glance  at  his 
previous  history. 

George  Joye,  alias  Gee,  alias  Clarke,  a  native  of  Bedford- 
shire, a  Scholar  and  Fellow  of  Peter-House,  Cambridge,  had 
fled  from  persecution  in  1527,  and  resided  at  Strasburg,  till 
he  came  to  Barrow,  early  in  1532.  By  his  then  printing  two 
specimen  leaves,  in  folio,  he  is  supposed  to  have  been  aiming 
after  an  edition  of  the  Bible  for  the  English  market.'  Before 
this  he  had  been  translating  from  the  Latin^  as  he  was  compe- 
tent for  nothing  more,  and  since  1530  he  had  put  forth  three 
such  translations.^  Tyndale  having  been  necessarily  engrossed 
elsewhere,  with  his  tract  in  reply  to  Sir  Thomas  More,  and  on 
behalf  of  Fryth  in  prison,  relating  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  Joye 
came  into  closer  conference  with  the  printers  at  Antwerp.  He 
then  engaged  in  correcting,  after  his  own  opinion,  from  the 
Vulgate,  an  edition  of  T3'ndale''s  New  Testament,  now  passing- 
through  the  press.  Christopher  Eudhoven,  of  whom  we 
heard  so  much,  seven  years  ago,  being  now  dead,  the  business 
was  carried  on  by  his  widow.  This,  it  will  be  remembered, 
was  the  press  at  which  the  first  surreptitious  edition  had  been 
executed ;  and  the  progress  of  the  present  one  had  been  very 

'  See  Tyndale's  letter  to  Fryth,  p.  3.58.     A  proposal  which,  of  course,  came  to  nothinf!. 

*  These  were  the  Psalter,  Isaiah,  and  Jeremiah.  1.  "The  Psalter  translated  from  the  Latin 
version  of  Feline,  (or  Martin  Buccr)  Argentine  [i.e.  Strasburg)  by  Francis  Foxc,"  not  Foye,  as 
written  by  Waterland  to  Lewis,  and  repeated  by  all  who  have  copied  Lewis.  The  Colophon  is 
"  emprintcd  at  Argentine  in  the  ycare  of  oure  Lorde  15.30,  the  ICth  day  of  January  (15,31  ?)  by 
me  Francis  foxe."  2.  "The  Prophete  Isaye,"  translated  into  English  by  George  Joye  :  printed 
at  "Strazburg,  by  Balthasser  Beakeneth,  15.31."  3.  "Jeremy  the  Prophete,  with  the  song  of 
Moses,  translated  by  G.  Joye,  1534,  in  the  monethe  of  May."  No  place  or  printer's  name.  In 
1545  he  printed,  at  Geneva,  "an  Expositiun  of  Daniel,"  talcen  from  Melancthon  and  others,  but 
translated  no  more.    Keturning  at  last  to  England,  he  died  in  1553. 


S'Ji  SURREPT1T10L.S  AND   GENUINE  QllOOK  1. 

carefully  kept  secret  from  Tyndale,  even  after  his  return  to 
Antwerp.  This  volume,  in  16mo,  with  a  title  in  rubrics,  which 
was  finished  at  press  in  August  1534,  is  now  exceedingly  rare. 

Colhitiun.  "  The  New  Testament  as  it  was  written  and  caused  to  be  written 
by  them  which  herde  yt,  whom  also  our  Saueoure  Christ  Jesus  commaunded 
that  they  sliulde  pi'each  it  unto  al  creatures." — Title,  at  the  back  of  which  is 
an  "  ahnanacke  for  xviii.  yeres."  The  signatures  run  a  to  z.  A  to  H.  Then 
the  Epistles  of  the  Apostle  St.  Paul,  on  sign  Aai,  and  extend  to  Ccc.  At  the 
end  of  the  Revelation  is  this  Colophon — "  Here  endeth  the  Newe  Testament, 
diligently  ouersene  and  corrected,  and  printed  now  agayn  at  Antwerpe  by  nie 
Widowe  of  Chrystoffel  of  Endhoue,  in  the  yere  of  oure  Lorde  mccccc.  and 
xxxiiii  in  August." 

A  copy  of  this  book,  in  fine  condition,  was  once  in  the 
possession  of  George  Paton,  Esq.,  of  the  Custom  House, 
Edinburgh.^  When  his  books  were  sold,  the  present  writer 
well  remembers  seeing  it  fetch  thirty  guineas  at  public  sale. 
The  late  bookseller,  Mr.  Constable,  gave  for  it  double  the 
money,  and  at  last  it  found  its  way  into  the  Grenville  collec- 
tion, where  it  now  is.     We  are  unable  to  mention  another  copy. 

Meanwhile,  Tyndale  was  very  busily  occupied  in  revising 
and  improving  the  translation  of  his  New  Testament,  and  in 
three  months  only  after  this,  it  was  ready  for  circulation. 
Out  of  England  itself,  too,  ere  his  first  sheet  had  gone  to 
press,  there  had  come  to  him  a  species  of  encouragement,  al- 
together unprecedented.  This  arose  from  his  tried  friend  Mr. 
Harman  having  gone  to  London,  and  the  consequences  will 
meet  us,  as  soon  as  we  return  home  from  Antwerp.  But 
before  saying  more  of  the  book,  or  of  Joye"'s  interference,  we 
first  present  a  brief  collation. 

"  The  Newe  Testament  dylygently  corrected  and  compared  with  the  Greek  by 
Willy  am  Tiudale,  and  fyneshed  in  the  yere  of  our  Lorde  God  a  md  and  xxxiiij. 
in  the  moneth  of  November."  This  title  is  within  a  wood  border,  at  the  bottom 
of  which  is  a  blank  shield.  "  W.  T.  to  the  Christen  reader,"  1 7  pages.  "  A 
prologe  into  the  iiii  Evangelystes,"  4  pages.  "  Willyara  Tindale,  yet  once  more, 
to  the  Christen  i-eader,"  9  pages.  Then  a  second  title — "  The  Newe  Testa- 
ment, imprinted  at  Antwerp  by  Marten  Emperowr,  Anno  MDXXxiiij."  Matthew 
begins  on  folio  ii. ;  Revelation  on  ccclv. ;  and  afterwards  follow  "  the  Epistles 
taken  out  of  the  Old  Testament,"  running  on  to  folio  cccc.  A  table  of  the 
Epistles  and  Gospels  for  Sundays,  16  pages — with  "  some  things  added  to  fill 
up  the  leffe  with  all,"  5  pages.  The  signatures  run  in  eights,  and  a  full  page 
has  33  lines.  It  has  wood-cuts  in  the  Revelations,  and  some  small  ones  at  the 
beginning  of  the  Gospels,  and  several  of  the  Epistles. 


3  IKibcifs  Ames,  iii  ,  yt.  1831. 


1.>;U.]  ElHTlUiNS   OF   THE    xNEW   TESTAMENT.  3.').") 

The  second  address  of  Tyndale  to  the  Christian  Reader 
forms  a  caveat  with  reference  to  Joye's  interference  ;  and  there 
can  be  little  doubt  that  the  first  title  with  his  name  inserted 
in  full,  and  as  having  compared  the  Sacred  Text  once  more 
with  the  Greeh^  was  owing-  to  the  same  cause.  The  occur- 
rence, which  could  not  fail  to  be  felt  at  the  moment,  is  to  be 
valued  now  thus  far,  that  it  gave  occasion  for  Tyndale  to 
speak  out,  and  discover  whether  he  had  not  all  along 
translated  from  the  original^  and  was  laudably  jealous  over 
the  precise  terms  of  his  translation.  When  he  alludes  to 
Joye,  it  is  in  the  language  of  a  scholar,  Avho  could  not  but 
regard  him  as  rash  and  incompetent;  and,  in  point  of  fact,  he 
soon  discovered  himself  to  be  a  man  of  very  inferior  caliber, 
whether  in  regard  to  learning  or  sound  judgment.  Placed  in 
such  critical  circumstances  as  Tyndale  had  been  for  years, 
while  every  imrd  of  his  translation  had  been  so  carefully 
scanned,  and  a  controversy  was  actually  in  dependence  at  the 
moment  with  the  Lord  Chancellor  of  England,  with  regard  to 
certain  terms,  there  was  certainly  no  trivial  occasion  both  for 
alarm  and  offence.  The  important  word  "  Resurrection,'''' 
Joye  had  very  strangely  altered  to  "  the  life  after  this  ,•"  and, 
in  reference  to  the  book  generally,  "  I  wot  not,"  says  Tyn- 
dale, "  what  other  changes,  for  I  have  not  yet  read  it  over." 
This  word,  an  all-important  one,  was  especially  so  at  that 
season,  and  occasioned  Tyndale  solemnly  to  profess  his  faith 
in  the  resurrection  from  the  dead  ;  having  observed  that  the 
word  was  not  so  rendered  as  Joye  had  done,  "  neither  by  him, 
nor  by  any  other  translator  in  any  language."  But  the  altera- 
tions were  far  from  being  confined  to  a  single  word.  In  one 
place,  indeed,  Joye  speaks  as  if  he  had  mended  only  "  a  feio 
certain  doubtful  and  dark  places,"  but  the  truth  comes  out 
when  he  adds,  "  I  say  I  have  made  many  changes."  This 
becomes  manifest,  from  his  very  simple  explanation  of  what 
had  been  his  procedure. 

"  For  as  for  me,  I  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  printing  thereof,  but  corrected 
their  copy  only,  (and,  most  probably,  one  of  the  spurious  editions,)  as  ^^  here  I 
found  a  word  falsely  printed,  I  mended  it ;  and  wlien  I  came  to  some  dark 
sentence,  that  no  reason  could  be  gathered  of  them,  whether  it  was  by  the  ig- 
norance of  the  first  translator,  or  of  the  printer,  I  had  the  Latin  text  by  me,  and 
made  it  plain !!    And  gave  many  words  their  pure  and  natiee  signification  !"•! 


"i  If  he  liad  become  competent  even  for  this,  with  his  Latin  text  only  before  him,  he  had 


gnC  JOYE'S   INTERFEREN'CE  EXPLAINED.  [book  J. 

The  better  way,  however,  will  be,  to  let  Jove  speak  for 
himself;  though  the  "  Apology  made  by  him  to  satisfye,  if 
it  may  be,  W.  Tyndale,"  &c.,  dated  the  28th  of  February, 
(1535,)  in  itself  a  contemptible  production,  became  peculiarly 
offensive,  from  its  being  put  forth  after  our  Translator  had 
been  actually  and  at  last  apprehended,  and  in  prison  !^  But 
still  let  us  hear  him.  By  his  own  confession  he  had  "  made 
many  changes,"  though  there  was  one  of  which  he  was  not  a 
little  vain,  and  this  will  serve  sufficiently  for  illustration. 
Tyndale's  corrected  New  Testament  was  now  out,  and  gone 
to  England,  but  says  Joye, — 

"  Ere  he  (Tyndale)  eaine  to  one  place  of  the  Testament  to  be  last  corrected, 
I  told  his  scribe,  that  there  was  a  place  in  the  beginning  of  the  vith  chapter  of 
the  Acts,  somewhat  darkly  translated  at  first,  and  that  /  had  mended  it  in  my 
correction,  and  bade  him  shew  it  Tyndale  to  raend  it  also.  But  yet,  because  1 
found  the  fault,  and  had  corrected  it  before,  Tyndale  had  lever  to  let  it  stand, 
as  he  did  for  all  my  warning,  still  darkly  in  his  new  cori'ection,  whereof  the 
reader  might  take  a  wrong  sense,  than  to  have  mended  it.  Which  place, 
whether  it  standeth  now  clearer  and  truer,  in  my  correction  than  in  his,  let  the 
learned  judge !" 

That  the  learned,  therefore,  may  judge,  we  must,  on  no  ac- 
count, withhold  this  clearer  and  truer  passage.     It  was  this — 

"  In  those  dayes,  the  nombre  of  the  disciples  grewe  there  arose  a  grudge 
amonge  the  grekes  agaynste  the  ebrues,  because  theyr  pore  nedy  were  neglege 
in  the  dayly  almose  dealinge  !" 

To  say  nothing  of  one  word  left  out,  of  course  Tyn- 
dale had  not  substituted  poor  needy  for  "  widows,"  nor  alms- 
dealing  for  "  ministration ;"  but  such  officious  intermeddling 
with  a  living  author's  work,  crowned  by  such  an  Apology, 
and  put  forth  at  such  a  time,  could  not  fail  to  be  deeply  of- 
fensive to  many,  as  the  event  proved.  The  fact  was,  that 
Joye,  in  his  ignorance,  was  contributing  to  the  corruption  of 
the  Sacred  Text ;  and,  in  one  sense,  to  a  greater  degree  than 
the  Antwerp  printers,  who,  though  they  had  erred  occasion- 
ally, as  foreigners  to  the  language,  still  rose  quite  above  the 

made  vast  improvement  within  these  three  years.  Speaking  of  his  Isaiah,  published  in  1531, 
Or.  Cotton  has  said—"  The  spelling  is  generally  very  incorrect,  so  that  the  modern  reader  will 
scarcely  be  disposed  to  agree  with  George  Joye,  that  it  is,  "  Isaye,  speakinge  playne  Englysshe." 
Thus,  no  doubt,  "  llie  simple  rcdrr  miciht  ofte  tymcs  he  iarycd  and  sticke,"  as  Joye,  even  now, 
Iiad  the  modesty  to  say  of  the  widow's  husband,  or  the  press  where  he  had  just  printed,  while 
labouring  to  give  many  words  their  "  pure  signification  !"' 

5  There  appears  to  have  been  but  one  edition  of  the  Apology,  though  it  has  been  vaguely 
dated  both  in  lii'SA  and  l.'i.Ti,  by  Walt,  in  his  Bibl.  Brit.  In  that  from  which  wc  copy,  the  month 
is  decisive  of  its  not  appearing  till  l.'i.'i.'i. 


1531-.]  J()YF/S   INTHdFKRKNCE  EXPLAINED.  397 

specimens  which  Joyc  had  before  furnished  from  Strasburg. 
Not  a  little  conceited  of  his  powers,  he  had  been  dabbling  witii 
the  translation,  and  with  the  Vulgate  only  before  him,  as  he 
said,  to  make  it  plain  !  Now,  the  whole  public  life  of  Tyn- 
dale  has  been  not  unfitly  described,  as  "  a  series  of  hostilities 
against  the  defenders  of  the  Latin  Vulgate.""  But  it  became 
much  worse  wdien  Joye  was  takinir  liberties  with  the  Vuliiate 
itself,  and  was  quite  nettled  because  our  Translator  would  not 
imitate  him  in  his  rash  folly.  In  frowning,  therefore,  upon 
such  interference,  Tyndale  only  showed  his  discernment ; 
though,  after  all,  poor  George  Joye  may  now  be  cordially 
forgiven,  for  a  petulance  even  tinged  with  malignity,  owing 
to  a  few  terms  in  which  he  expressed  himself.  He  it  is  who 
contributed  his  mite,  to  establish  the  scholarship  of  our  origi- 
nal Translator,  and  to  an  extent  but  little  known  to  some  of 
our  moderns.  "  I  am  not  afraid,"  said  he,  in  one  place,  "  I 
am  not  afraid  to  answer  Master  Tyndale  in  this  matter,  ybr 
all  his  high  learning  in  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Latin,  &c." 
What  other  tongues  he  referred  to,  we  cannot  say ;  but  after 
this  testimony,  though  uttered  in  a  miserable  spirit,  we  have 
no  occasion  to  draw  upon  the  high-flown  compliment  paid  to 
Tyndale,  but  by  no  mean  judge,  after  he  had  communed  with 
him  at  Worms.  AVe  refer  to  Herman  Buschius,  the  friend 
of  Spalatinus.  He  mentions  other  languages,  though  not 
German,  as  Herbert  INIarsh  imagined  ;  but  Hebrew,  Greek, 
and  Latin,  with  which  he  begins,  are  quite  sufficient.'' 

In  his  history  of  translations,  Lewis,  not  knowing  all  the 
circumstances,  has  misrepresented  Tyndale,  by  saying,  that, 

s  We  may,  however,  quote  tlic  passage—"  Dixit  nobis,  Buschius,  fFormatia  sex  mille  exem- 
plaria  Novi  Testamenti  Anplice  excusa.  U  ojjei  is  versum  esse  ab  Anglo,  iliic  cum  duobus  aliis 
Britannis  divertente,  jta  septem  linsjuarum  perito,  llehraico',  Graca,  Lnlince,  Italicse,  His- 
panicae,  Britannicae,  Gallica>.  ut,  quamcunque  loquatur,  in  ea  natura  putes.  Anglos  enini, 
quamvis  reluctante  et  invito  Rege,  tamen  sic  suspirare  ad  Evangelion,  ut  afirment,  sese  emp- 
turos  Novum  Testamentum,  etiamsi  centenis  millibus  aeris  sit  redimendum.  —  Schellhornii 
Amanitales  literarke,  iv.,  pp.  431,  4.32.  Kxcerpta  qiiadam  e  Dlario  Georgii  Spalafini  jMS'"" 
This  is  given  under  uiino  152f),  by  which  time  the  Testaments  of  Tyndale  had  created  such  com- 
motion in  England.  Six  thousand  copies  corresponds  with  the  number  given  by  Coch]a3us,  as 
first  contemidated  at  Cologne,  which,  he  adds,  was  afterwards  reduced  to  three  thousand. 
But  Buschius  now  speaks  of  fVvrms.  Are  we,  then,  given  to  understand  here,  that  Tyndale 
went  on  with  his  three  thousand  quartos,  and  adding  as  many  in  octavo,  made  the  number  six 
thousand?  So  it  should  seem.  We  have  no  confirmation  to  present;  but  such  a  number  may 
account  for  Tyndale  having  so  many  to  dis]iose  of,  through  Packington,  at  Antwerp,  in  ]:>2{}. 

This,  however,  was  certainly  ntt  the  only  time  that  Buschius  met  with  Tyndale.  They  mav, 
if  not  must,  have  had  many  conversations  together  at  Marburg.  Buschius  was  Professor  of 
Poetry  and  Oratory  there,  and  was  in  the  press,  too,  at  the  same  moment,  with  both  Tyndale 
and  Fryth.  The  sensible  tract  of  Buschius — "  De  singulari  auctoritate  Veteris  et  Novi  Instru- 
mcnti,  sacrorum,  &c.,"  is  dated,  "  Marpurgi,  4.  Idus  Aprilis,"  or  Hnh  April  1529.  But,  as  al- 
ready noticed,  Tyndale  was  publishing  here  in  June,  and  Fryth  in  .Tuly,  immediately  following. 


3J)8  JOVE'S   INTERFERENCE   EXPLAINED.  [book  I. 

in  his  preface,  his  language  expresses  a  great  deal  too  much 
passion  and  resentment  against  Jove ;  the  best  refutation  of 
which  is  to  be  found  in  Tyndale's  own  words — 

"  William  Tyndale,  yet  once  more,  to  the  Christian  reader.  Thou  shalt 
understand,  most  dear  reader,  when  I  had  taken  in  hand  to  loolv  over  the  New 
Testament  again,  to  compare  it  with  the  Greek,  and  to  mend  whatsoever  I 
could  find  amiss,  and  had  almost  finished  my  labour  :  George  Jove  ?ecrctlrf 
took  in  hand  to  correct  it  also,  by  what  occasion  his  conscience  knoweth,  and 
prevented  (went  before)  me,  insomuch,  that  his  correction  was  printed  in  great 
number,  (most  of  the  sheets)  ere  mine  began.  When  it  was  sjrled,  and  word 
brought  me,  though  it  seemed  to  divers  others,  that  G.  Joye  had  not  used  the 
office  of  an  hone-st  man,  seeing  he  knew  that  I  was  in  correcting  it  myself ; 
neither  did  walk  after  the  rule  of  love  and  softness,  which  Christ  and  his  dis- 
ciples teach  us  ;  how  that  we  should  do  nothing  of  strife  to  move  debate,  or  of 
vainglory,  or  of  covetousness,"  &c.7 

This,  it  will  be  allowed,  is  a  very  mild  commencement ; 
and  whatever  expressions  follow,  appear  to  have  been  dictated 
by  zeal  for  the  purity  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  such  as  be- 
came any  man,  with  whose  language  such  freedoms  had  been 
taken.  After  this,  the  "  Apology"  of  Joye  made  matters 
woi'se.  It  involved  little  else  than  an  unfair,  not  to  say  in- 
temperate and  unfeeling  attack  on  the  original  translator. 
Thus,  for  example,  he  talks  of  Tyndale\s  lo}i^  sleeping  since 
his  last  edition.  Sleeping !  So  thought  not  Henry  the 
Eighth ;  so  felt  not  Sir  Thomas  More,  whom  he  had  kept 
thoroughly  awake  for  years ;  although  both  the  King  and 
the  Chancellor  would  have  been  most  happy,  had  Tyndale 
then  only  drawn  the  curtains  and  retired  to  rest.  Of  Tyn- 
dale's  eminently  laborious  life,  Joye  could  not  be  altogether 
ignorant,  though  it  may  have  been  above  his  comprehension ; 
but  there  could  be  no  excuse  for  the  absence  of  gratitude, 
much  less  for  the  presence  of  any  evil  feeling ;  and  if  this 
Apology,  so  called,  did  not  come  out  till  after  Tyndale  was 
in  prison,  as  there  is  reason  to  apprehend,  then  no  wonder 
that  the  writer  was  very  soon  made  to  feel  the  consequences. 
The  public  feeling,  at  the   moment,  clearly  proves   that  he 


7  Joye,  however,  fully  acquitted  himself  of  the  last  motive  here  imputed  to  him.  The  prin- 
ters offered  him  only  three  pence  for  correcting  every  sheet  of  32  pages.  He  compounded  for 
three  stivers,  or  about  four])encc  halfpenny.  "  So  that,  in  all,  I  had  for  my  labour  but  four- 
teen shillings  Flemish  ;  which— had  not  the  goodness  of  the  deed  compelled  me— I  would  not 
have  done  for  five  times  as  much."  "  Vain-glorious"  seems  to  have  been  the  correct  imputa- 
tion ;  for,  uot  a  little  vain  himself,  he  actually  could  not  conceive  of  Tyndale's  disapprobation 
as  arising  from  any  other  source  ;  while  .loyc  could  not  clear  himself,  or  even  apologise  for  hav- 
ing first  made  such  alterations  in  the  sacred  text,  and  then  published  them  as  under  Tyndale's 
name.     Theie  was  no  other  tiani-lator  of  the  Knglish  New  Testament. 


1534.]  TYNDAI.K'S   PROTK-STATION.  3.99 

must  have  been  blameworthy  both  in  temper  and  conchiot ; 
for  the  fact  was,  though  never  known  before,  that,  for  some 
months,  Joye  lay  under  the  imputation,  both  in  England  and 
Antwerp,  of  having  been  concerned  in  the  appi^ehension  of 
Tyndalc  !  This  turned  out  to  be  a  gross  aspersion,  as  wo 
shall  hear  next  3'ear ;  but  still,  as  "  the  mercliants  of  Ant- 
werp, and  many  others  that  were  his  friends,  did  greatly 
blame  him,"  there  must  have  been  something  very  reprehen- 
sible. "  At  this  juncture,"  says  one  author,  "  he  does  not 
appear  to  have  possessed  that  conscientious  integrity  which 
would  have  added  Christian  dignity  to  his  character ;  and  it 
is  to  be  regretted,  that  whilst  he  (at  other  times)  defended 
the  Truth,  the  Truth  does  not  seem  to  have  made  him  free 
from  guile  and  deception."^  It  was  the  sin  of  the  age,  when 
almost  every  man  was  taught  equivocation  from  his  youth. 
We  have  onl}'-  to  add,  that  Joye  could  not  remain  in  Ant- 
werp, but  removing  as  far  distant  as  Emden,  he  there  pub- 
lished a  small  duodecimo — "  The  subversion  of  More's  false 
foundation."  But  we  shall  hear  of  him  again,  after  Tyn- 
dale's  apprehension. 

Few  things,  however,  happened  to  our  Translator  which 
did  not  bring  out  the  character  of  the  man  more  fully,  and  to 
great  advantage.  But  for  what  had  taken  place,  we  should 
never  have  had  his  noble  protestation,  with  regard  to  his 
secret  motives,  as  well  as  the  grand  object  he  had  kept  in 
view,  ever  since  he  began  to  translate.  The  words  may  be 
regarded  in  the  light  of  a  peroration,  for  they  mark  the  close 
of  his  labours,  while  still  at  liberty.  Not  that  he  is  about  to 
die,  but  they  were  among  the  last  words  he  had  printed  before 
his  apprehension,  and,  as  such,  become  the  more  memorable — 

"  Moreover,  I  take  God,  which  alone  seeth  the  heart,  to  record  to  my  con- 
science, beseeching  him  that  my  part  be  not  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  if  I  wrote 
of  all  that  I  have  written,  throughout  all  my  books,  ought  of  an  evil  purpose, 
of  envy  or  malice  to  any  man,  or  to  stir  up  any  false  doctrine  or  opinion  in  the 
Church  of  Christ ;  or  to  be  author  of  any  sect;  or  to  draw  disciples  after  me  ; 
or  that  I  would  be  esteemed,  or  had  in  price,  above  the  least  child  that  is  born  ; 
save  only  of  pity  and  compassion  I  had,  and  yet  have,  on  the  blindness  of  my 
brethren,  and  to  bring  them  into  the  knowledge  of  Christ ;  and  to  make  every 
one  of  them,  if  it  were  possible,  as  perfect  as  an  angel  of  heaven  ;  and  to  weed  out 
all  that  is  not  planted  of  our  heavenly  Father  ;  and  to  bring  down  all  that  lifteth 
up  itself  against  the  knowledge  of  the  salvation  that  is  in  the  blood  of  Christ. 


8  Townlcy's  Biblical  Literature,  vol.  ii.,  p.  .'KM. 


400  STATE   OF   ENGLAND.  [bOOK  I. 

"  Also,  my  part  be  not  in  Clirist,  if  mine  heart  be  not  to  follow  and  live  ac- 
cording as  I  teach  ;  and  also,  if  mine  heart  weep  not  night  and  day  for  mine 
own  sin,  and  other  men's — beseeching  God  to  convert  us  all,  and  to  take  his 
wrath  from  us,  and  to  be  merciful  as  well  to  all  other  men,  as  to  mine  own  soul — 
caring  for  the  wealth  of  the  realm  I  was  born  in,  for  the  King,  and  all  that  are 
thereof,  as  a  tender-hearted  mother  would  do  for  her  only  son. 

"  As  concerning  all  I  have  translated,  or  otherwise  written,  I  beseech  all 
men  to  read  it  for  that  purpose  I  wrote  it :  even  to  bring  them  to  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Scripture.  And  as  far  as  the  Scripture  approveth  it,  so  far  to  al- 
low it ;  and  if  in  any  place  the  Word  of  God  disallow  it,  then  to  refuse  it,  as 
I  do  before  our  Saviour  Christ  and  his  congregation.  And  where  they  find 
faults,  let  them  shew  it  me,  if  they  be  nigh,  or  write  to  me,  if  they  be  far  off ; 
or  write  openly  against  it  and  improve  it ;  and  I  promise  them,  if  I  shall  per- 
ceive that  their  reasons  conclude,  I  will  confess  mine  ignorance  openly." 

Such,  while  yet  at  liberty,  was  nearly  the  impressive  conclu- 
sion of  Tyndale's  labours.  His  enemies  were  now  thirsting, 
more  than  ever,  for  his  blood  ;  though  still  he  has  yet  nearly 
two  vears  before  him.  But  the  base  and  artful  traitors  have 
already  embarked  from  England — they  are  almost  in  sight  I 
With  them,  and  the  long  eagerly  pursued  victim,  very  soon, 
we  must  repair  to  the  castle  of  Vilvorde  ! 

At  the  close  of  this  year,  however,  we  shall  have  occasion 
to  revert  once  more  to  the  various  editions  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, which  had  issued,  in  only  a  few  months,  from  different 
presses  in  Antwerp  ;  but,  at  present,  we  first  return  home 
to  our  native  land,  and  observe  the  leading  occurrences  by 
which  the  period  was  so  distinguished. 

In  England,  the  political  events  of  this  year  were  at  ouce  important 
and  decisive  ;  while,  as  it  regarded  the  Scriptures  and  their  dispersion, 
a  separate  department  of  history,  and  altogether  as  distinct  as  ever,  the 
change  was  not  less  remarkable.  Not  that  there  was  any  change  on  the 
Monarch,  except  that  of  going  on  from  bad  to  worse  :  but  we  shall  see 
him  in  trouble  respecting  his  own  personal  safety,  adopting  such  mea- 
sures as  fear  suggested,  and  at  the  same  time  pursuing  his  career  after 
power,  with  an  ultimate  view  to  the  acquisition  of  wealth,  by  whatever 
means.  For  what  though  the  clergy  were  still  paying  up  the  price  of 
their  pardon  ?  These  monasteries  and  religious  houses,  full  in  view,  were 
rich,  and  Henry  still  was  poor. 

In  December  last,  the  English  Council  had  settled  their  mode  of  pro- 
cedure with  regard  to  Clement,  after  he  had  so  threatened  if  not  fright- 
ened Master  Bonner.  They  came  to  nineteen  resolutions,  and  the  Duke 
of  Norfolk,  though  so  decided  a  friend  to  the  claims  of  the  Pontiff,  had, 
as  Minister,  to  conve}'  the  intelligence  to  France,  then  in  the  closest  al- 


1534:J  PARLIAMENT  ASSEMBLED.  40  [ 

liance  with  Rome.  It  was  still  only  tlie  system  of  intimidation  that  was 
pursued,  as  the  English  Monarch  partook  of  certain  leanings,  very  much 
akin  to  those  of  Norfolk,  his  prime  Minister,  He  wished  to  retain  some 
undefined  connexion  with  the  Pontiff,  perhaps  from  fear  of  his  subjects  ; 
while  he  was  still  bent  on  reigning  with  unlimited  sway,  as  Head  of  the 
Church  of  England.  The  Council  therefore  had  decided  that  Henry's 
subjects  should  now  be  fully  infoiTaed  of  his  having  appealed  to  a  General 
Council ;  and  it  must  be  preached  throughout  the  land  that  the  authority 
of  a  General  Council  was  superior  to  that  of  the  Pontiff,  who,  in  England, 
had  now  no  more  than  that  of  any  other  foreign  Bishop.  The  King  of 
France  thought  that  this  was  going  too  far,  as  well  as  too  fast.  His  able 
courtier,  De  Bellay,  well  acquainted  with  England  by  his  residence  of 
two  years  as  Ambassador,  and  now  a  Cardinal,  offered,  as  a  final  effort, 
still  to  negociate  at  Rome,  if  any  grounds  were  fui-nished  to  him.  By 
way  of  carrying  on  the  double  game,  Hem-y  actually  desired  him  to 
certify,  that  if  the  Pontiff  would  now  supersede  the  sentence  he  had 
already  given,  that  is  the  Bull  of  last  year,  and  grant  to  him  only  im- 
partial judges,  to  sit  at  Cambray  in  France,  then  the  King  would  still 
submit  his  Avhole  conduct  to  their  deliberate  decision.  De  Bellay  posted 
to  Rome,  amidst  the  rigoiu'  of  winter,  Henry  having  also  said,  that  he 
would  send  after  him,  sufficient  authority  to  confirm,  on  his  part,  as 
much  as  should  be  granted.  Here,  however,  we  must  leave  Italy  till 
March,  that  the  curious  contrast,  furnished  by  the  proceedings  in  Eng- 
land, may  be  first  observed. 

On  the  15th  of  January,  Parliament  sat  down,  and  the  Convocation 
assembled  about  the  same  time.  In  the  latter  there  was  now  no  more 
discussion  respecting  the  burning  of  heretics  ;  whUe  in  Parliament, 
the  Upper  and  the  Lower  Houses  were  exchanging  bills  with  each  other, 
characteristic  of  the  times.  On  the  4th  of  February,  the  Commons  sent 
up  a  bill  in  mitigation  of  those  who  might  be  charg-ed  with  heresy, 
which  will  be  glanced  at  presently  ;  the  Upper  House,  on  the  same  day, 
sending  down  the  clergy's  submission  bill,  to  which  the  Convocation  bowed, 
and  the  Commons  readily  agreed.  This  passed  on  the  28th  of  March, 
when  the  clergy,  entering  into  new  bonds,  acknowledged  that  all  con- 
vocations should  be  henceforth  assembled  by  the  King's  writ, — that  they 
should  make  no  new  canons  without  the  royal  assent, — that  a  committee 
should  sit  on  all  present  canons  prejudicial  to  the  ¥Jm^?,  prerogative,  and 
that  all  grievances  in  the  Archbishop's  court,  might  be  apiyealed  to  the 
King. 

On  the  21st  of  February,  that  strange  impostm-e  of  the  Nun  of  Kent, 
a  young  woman  of  Aldington  in  that  county,  named  Elizabeth  Barton, 
was  brought  before  Parliament.  She  had  been  playing  her  part  for  the 
long  period  of  nine  years.  Tyndale  had  alluded  to  the  case  as  a  device 
of  the  Priests,  so  early  as  1527,  and  but  for  them  certainly  she  had  soon 

VOL.  1.  2  r 


402  SEPARATION   FROM    ROME.  [bOOK  I. 

sunk  into  oblivion.  The  King  himself  had  once  consulted  Sir  Thomas 
More  on  the  subject,  long  since.  He  then  professed  to  wink  at  the 
affair,  as  unworthy  of  notice,  and  then  it  might  be  so  ;  but  afterwards, 
from  such  men  as  Warham,  Fisher,  and  himself,  as  well  as  many  others, 
holding  communication  with  her,  there  can  l)e  no  doubt  that  the  matter 
had  grown  into  some  treasonable  conspiracy,  under  the  fostering  care  of 
those  who  were  friends  to  "  the  old  learning,"  and  to  priestly  dominion. 
It  was  well  for  Archbishop  Warham,  that  he  was  gone,  otherwise  he  had 
now  fallen  into  disgrace ;  or  at  least,  been  implicated,  as  Fisher  and 
More  were  ;  but  on  the  question  being  put,  whether  they  should  be  ex- 
amined in  the  Star  Chamber,  Audley  and  Crumwell  prevailed  with  the 
King,  and  More's  name  was  struck  out.  John  Fisher,  once  so  high  in 
Henry's  esteem,  for  concealment  of  what  he  knew,  was  found  guilty ;  but 
a  heavier  storm  soon  awaited  More,  as  well  as  him.  One  man,  however, 
the  Parson  of  Aldermary,  once  chaplain  to  Warham,  Henry  Oolde,  of 
whom  we  have  heard  before,  was  now  deeply  involved.^  He  used  to  in- 
terpret the  ravings  of  the  Nun,  (who  uttered  what,  of  course,  she  was 
taught,)  and  also  report  progress  to  Queen  Catherine.  So  far  back  as  the 
beginning  of  this  year,  Cranmer  was  examining  him,  and  requesting 
Crumwell  to  do  the  same.^^  In  the  end,  the  poor  woman,  with  six  men, 
including  Golde,  being  convicted  of  high  treason,  against  the  King's  life 
and  crown  ;  the  whole  with  one  exception,  (Rich,  an  observant  friar,) 
were  executed  at  Tyburn  on  the  20th  of  April. 

On  the  26th  of  March,  a  Bill  had  passed  through  both  Houses,  dis- 
charging Henry's  subjects  from  all  dependence  on  the  Court  of  Rome. 
On  the  same  day,  Parliament  again  confirmed  the  King's  marriage,  as 
well  as  the  succession  to  the  crown,  and  then,  on  the  30th,  adjourned  to 
the  third  of  November.  During  the  whole  session,  a  Bishop  had  preached 
at  Paul's  Cross,  every  week,  that  "  the  Bishop  of  Rome  had  no  authority 
in  England  ;"  and  yet,  notwithstanding  all  these  measures,  there  was  still 
a  pause  in  giving  i\xQ  formal  royal  assent ;  a  sort  of  avenue  left,  however 
narrow,  in  case  of  any  conciliatory  intelligence  arriving  from  Clement. 

His  Majesty,  however,  had  not  long  to  wait  ;  for  at  the  moment  that 
his  Parliament  was  thus  proceeding  on  their  way,  the  Cardinals,  in 
conclave,  were  sitting  in  judgment  upon  him.  Clement  had  certainly 
been  as  cautious  for  years,  as  Henry  had  been  pertinacious  and  perse- 
vering ;  but  at  last  the  former  was  surprised  into  an  act,  of  which,  on 
the  spot,  he  at  once  repented.  On  the  23d  of  March,  the  imperial 
Cardinals,  in  the  Rota,  carried  the  day  by  a  large  majority,  and  Clement 
yielding,  pronounced  a  final  sentence — "  That  Henry's  first  marriage 


9  See  the  strange  letter  from  Dr.  Ridley  addressed  to  liim,  anno  I'lS?.     Rhlley  was  yet  alive, 
but  dared  to  write  in  the  same  strain  no  more,  as  he  had  done  then.     See  p.  l.W. 
•u  Crumwell's  Cor.,  Chapterhouse,  Westminster,  letter  of  Gth  January 


1534.]  HKRESY  EXCHANGING  FOR  CONSTRUCTIVE  TREASON.  4-03 

was  valid,  that  he  should  be  compelled  to  live  with  Queen  Catherine, 
and  be  for  ever  silent  on  the  subject  .'"^^  Clement  actually  sat  up  all 
night  to  consider  of  a  remedy,  but  there  was  none — though  "  he  was  so 
annoyed  and  tormented,"  says  De  Bellay,  "  that  it  was  not  possible  he 
should  be  more  so."  The  King  of  France,  after  all,  is  supposed  to  have 
been  pleased  with  this  decision  ;  as  for  the  Emperor,  he  had  pressed  it 
sharply,  acriter,  on  the  Pontiff  so  long  ago  as  the  8th  of  January.  The 
Cardinals  wished  the  sentence  to  be  sent  off  immediately,  but  Clement 
delayed  it  for  ten  days.  The  decision  must  stand,  and  the  Emperor  was 
made  the  executor  of  it  ;  thus  leaving  Henry,  after  his  long  delay  and 
many  expedients,  in  a  predicament  sufficiently  foolish.  He  had  sent  on 
Dr.  Carne,  and  Dr.  Revet,  towards  Rome,  but  they  met  De  Bellay,  now 
retui-ning  from  Italy,  and  the  game  of  years  was  at  an  end  for  ever. 

Thus  was  there  only  one  path  left  open  in  England.  But  who  de- 
vised it  ?  Not  the  King,  certainly  ;  for  he  had  been  long  brooding  over 
some  crooked  path  of  his  own,  which  no  writer  can  well  explain,  and  for 
the  best  of  all  reasons — Henry  did  not  actually  know  it  himself.  But 
at  all  events,  no  man  can  now  dream  that  religion,  in  any  sense,  had 
ever  the  shadow  of  an  influence,  with  either  party,  in  these  wearisome 
negotiations.  On  the  contrary,  and  so  far  as  England  was  concerned, 
we  shall  find  her  Monarch  waxing  worse  and  worse,  to  the  day  of  his 
death.  But  it  was  the  will  of  God  that  the  connexion  should  come  to 
an  end,  and  so  says  Halle,  the  earliest  historian  of  the  times,  "  God  be 
everlastingly  praised  therefore." 

Parliament  being  now  prorogued,  one  feature  of  the  time 
is  worthy  of  notice.  It  was  the  exchange  of  the  fear  of  heresy, 
for  the  fear  of  treason.  That  bill  in  mitigation  of  the  treat- 
ment of  any  who  were  suspected  of  the  former,  is  worthy  of 
remark,  as  its  success  has  been  partly  ascribed  to  feelings 
excited  by  the  death  of  Frytli}^  One  Thomas  Philip,  who 
had  been  delivered  by  Sir  Thomas  More  to  Stokesly,  of  Lon- 
don, by  indenture,  in  1530,  had  been  cruelly  detained  in 
prison  by  him  ever  since  !  Of  Philip,  who  had  appealed  to 
the  King,  but  could  not  gain  access  to  him,  an  account  is 
given  by  Foxe,  with  an  interesting  letter  of  exhortation  to 
firmness,  from  "the  Congregation,"  or  those  followers  of  Christ 
who  met  in  Bow  Lane,  Cheapside  ;  but  Foxe  concludes  by 
saying,  that  he  knew  not  what  became  of  him.  The  truth 
is,  that,  at  last,  he  complained  to  the  House  of  Commons 
against  Stokesly,  and  as  the  Bishop  would  not  appear  at  their 


' '   The  Rota.     Such  was  the  name  of  the  Court.     It  has  been  said,  from  the  marble  pavement 
of  the  apartment  where  it  assembled,  resembling  a  wheel.     '2  By  Southey ;  and  see  pp.  381-401. 


404  MORE  AND   FISHER.  [book  i. 

bar,  to  answer  for  his  conduct,  the  Commona"'  House  framed 
their  bill,  which  had  now  passed. 

It  repealed  the  statute  of  Henry  IV.,  by  which  Bishops 
might  commit  to  prison  on  suspicion  of  heresy ;  heretics  were 
only  to  be  proceeded  against,  by  two  witnesses,  and  to  answer 
in  open  court ;  if  guilty,  the  King's  writ  must  be  obtained, 
before  any  sentence  could  be  executed  ;  but  it  was  declared 
that  none  should  be  troubled  upon  any  of  the  Pontiff's  canons 
or  laics,  or  for  speaking  or  acting  against  him. 

This  act  was  generally  regarded  by  the  people  as  an  especial 
blessing,  since  it  not  only  delivered  them  in  a  great  degree 
from  the  paw  of  ecclesiastical  tyranny,  but  immediately 
brought  some  of  the  most  worthy  characters  from  their  dun- 
geons. Not  only  did  Philips,  who  had  been  there  for  years, 
escape,  but  Thomas  Patmore,  who  had  been  confined  as  long, 
obtained  a  commission  from  Audley,  Crumwell,  and  Cranmer, 
to  enquire  into  "  the  injurious  and  unjust  dealings"  of  both 
More  and  Stokesly.  Patmore,  who  was  most  probably  a 
relation  of  that  gentleman  who  had  been  so  shamefully 
treated  for  importing  and  dispersing  Tyndale's  New  Testa- 
ments, in  1531,  seems  to  have  been  restored  to  his  former 
living.  Thus,  after  a  long  season  of  most  reckless  cruelty, 
here  now  was  the  dawning  of  a  day  of  retribution,  and  as  such, 
should  not  pass  unobserved. 

It  will  be  remembered,  that  immediately  on  Sir  Thomas  More  coming 
into  power  he  began  by  urging  Henry  to  follow  up  the  persecution  of 
heretics,  so  called,  with  rigour,  and  that,  too,  as  one  method  of  advanc- 
ing his  influence  at  the  court  of  Rome.^^  Upon  his  successor,  Sir  Thomas 
Audley,  being  nominated,  he  certainly  advised  no  violence  of  any  descrip- 
tion ;  and  yet  this,  as  well  as  the  following  years,  became  polluted  with 
blood,  nay,  the  very  month  after  Parliament  rose,  had  furnished  one 
palpable  instance.'*   But  then  this  was  not  the  blood  of  reputed  heretics, 


'3  "  It  is  hard  to  say  what  were  More's  orisinal  sentiments  about  the  divorce.  In  a  letter  to 
Crumwell,  he  speaks  of  himself  as  always  doubtful.  But,  if  his  disposition  had  not  been  rather 
favourable  to  the  King,  would  he  have  been  offered,  or  have  accepted  the  Great  Seal  ?  We  do 
not,  indeed,  tind  his  name  in  the  letter  of  remonstrance,  signed  by  the  nobility  and  chief  com- 
moners in  IS.'iO ;  but  in  March  1531,  he  went  down  to  the  House  of  Commons,  to  declare  the 
King's  scruples  about  his  marriage,  and  to  lay  before  them  the  opinions  of  the  Universities.  In 
this  he  perhaps  thought  himself  acting  ministerially.  But  the  King  did  not  look  upon  him  as 
hostile,  even  so  late  as  1^)3-2,  for  Dr.  Bennet,  the  envoy  at  Rome,  proposed  that  the  cause  should 
be  tried  by  four  commissioners,  of  whom  the  King  should  name  one,  either  Sir  Thomas  More, 
or  Stokesly,  Bishop  of  London."— //^rtajjiV  Cunsliliitional  Histori). 

'4  In  the  course  of  last  year  we  have  seen  five  men  perish  at  the  stake  in  London,  hut  on  the 
20th  of  April  this  year,  as  already  stated,  five  were  put  to  death  in  one  day.  The  former  were 
friends  to  the  new  learning,  the  latter  the  adherents  of  the  ol<l. 


1534.]  MORE  AND   FISHER.  405 

nor  was  heresy  laid  to  the  charge  of  any  Englishmen  who  were  put  to 
death  for  four  years  to  come.'^  The  charges  now  are  those  of  treason, 
constructive  treason,  misprision,  or  the  concealment  of  known  treason. 
But  treason  was  the  very  charge  which  Sir  Thomas  More  had  laboured, 
throughout  his  writings,  to  fix  upon  men  branded  with  heresy,  and  more 
especially  on  Tyndale. 

What  then,  if  the  Monarch,  whom  the  retired  Chancellor  once  so  pressed 
to  pursue  such  a  course,  shall  now  turn  round,  and  either  from  personal 
apprehension,  or  from  having  tasted  of  blood,  which  he  had  urged  him 
to  shed,  shall  become  indifferent  to  his  own,  as  well  as  that  of  others  ? 
What,  if  he  shall  now  deal  chiefly  in  charges  for  treason,  and  cease  per- 
secuting his  subjects  for  heresy  ?  When  writing  out  his  folio  pages, 
early  and  late,  More  could  not  foresee  such  a  change ;  otherwise  he  would 
certainly  have  spared  his  ink,  and  spent  his  wit  on  some  other  subject. 
But  such  was  the  fact.  Heresy  had  been  the  death-word  before  ;  it  is 
now  changed  for  another,  and  that  word  is  treason.  Once  on  a  time, 
the  busy  Chancellor  would  have  rejoiced,  if  heresy  and  treason  had  been 
convertible  terms  ;  but  now,  in  England,  heresy,  so  called,  is  to  be  let 
alone  for  its  season,  and  treason  is  to  be  the  imputation.  Nay,  more  than 
this,  treason  shall  now  be  the  denial  of  Henry's  supremacy,  as  Head  of 
the  Church  ;  although,  some  time  before,  it  would  have  been  fatal  for 
any  subject  to  have  asserted  this  ;  and  before  this  year  comes  to  an  end, 
it  shall  be  treason  in  any  man  to  call  the  King  a  heretic,  notwithstanding. 
For  five  years  his  Majesty  had  been  dealing  with  heresy,  so  called,  and 
even  attempting  to  convert  it  into  treason  ;  and  though  not  put  to  death 
himself,  for  so  doing,  yet,  for  as  many  years  after,  the  charges  of  treason 
shall  bear  upon  himself,  and  almost  all  involve  the  idea  of  fear  for  his  own 
personal  safety.  Without  doubt,  Henry  was  often  not  a  little  afraid. 
He  had  been  setting  himself  against  the  truth,  nay,  against  the  King  of 
Zion,  and  the  reaction  will,  by  and  bye,  shake  his  kingdom  to  its  centre. 

It  was  after  Parliament  rose,  that  the  oaths  of  allegiance  to  the  King, 
to  the  lawfulness  of  his  marriage,  and  the  succession  to  the  crown,  came 
to  be  tendered  to  all  parties.  Sir  Thomas  More,  and  Bishop  Fisher, 
hesitating,  they  were  committed  to  the  Tower,  till  the  meeting  of  Par- 
liament. Henry  was  greatly  irritated  against  both  :  and  it  being  ap- 
prehended, if  they  had  books  and  paper,  that  they  would  write  against 
the  King's  marriage,  or  his  supremacy,  these  were  denied  them.  Thus 
it  was,  emphatically,  that  More's  controversial  career  came  to  an  end. 

The  remaining  political  events  of  this  year  may  be  soon  told.  In 
April,  an  "  Inhibition "  of  all  seditious  preaching,  or,  in  other  words, 
saying  any  thing  contrary  to  the  acts  just  passed,  was  sent  out  by  Cran- 


15  The  sufferers  for  heresy,  next  year,  were  the  only  escejition  ;  but  they  were  natives  of 
Holland,  called  Sacramcntaries,  or  Anahaptists,  and  as  to  them  some  fear  was  entertained  of 
their  iwlUical  influence,  and  hence  all  other.s  were  ordered  to  leave  the  country. 


406  THE   PONTIFF'S  SUPREMACY  [book  I. 

mer.'*"  In  June  there  was  a  public  proclamation  against  the  supremacy 
of  the  Pontiff.  In  August,  the  observant  Friars  of  St.  Francis,  strongly 
suspected  of  opposition  to  the  supremacy  of  Henry,  were  unhoused,  when 
many  of  them  took  their  departure.  This  was  a  preliminary  feeler,  put 
forth  with  an  ultimate  view  to  the  Monasteries,  and  all  other  religious 
houses  throughout  the  kingdom.  In  September,  Clement  died  at  Rome, 
sui'viving  his  sentence  against  Henry  only  six  months.  He  was  succeeded 
by  Farnese,  or  Paul  III.  In  October,  Secretary  Crumwell  was  made 
Master  of  the  Rolls,  and  on  the  third  of  November,  Parliament  again 
sat  to  the  18th  of  December. 

All  preceding  Acts  of  Parliament  bearing  upon  the  great  controversy 
with  Rome,  were  now  fviUy  recognised  and  confirmed.  It  was  made 
treason  for  any  one  not  only  to  deny  the  King's  dignity,  but  his  attend- 
ant title,  as  "  Head  of  the  Church  of  England  ;"  nay,  once  calling  him 
heretic,  schismatic,  tyrant,  infidel,  or  usurper  of  the  croAvn,  subjected 
every  man  to  the  same  imputation  !  By  this  Parliament  also,  both  Sir 
Thomas  More  and  Bishop  Fisher  were  attainted  for  misprision  of 
treason,  so  that,  in  six  months  hence,  we  shall  see  them  come  to  their 
unhappy  end. 

And  now  that  the  year  has  closed,  its  political  events  were  un- 
questionably pregnant  with  meaning  ;  but,  above  all,  there  was  one 
loaded  with  significance,  and  intended  as  a  lesson  to  the  Nation 
entire.  The  great  body  of  the  people,  still  sunk  in  ignorance,  could 
not  be  expected  to  understand  this  lesson.  The  guilt  of  not  doing  so, 
lay  with  the  better  informed.  The  pen,  indeed,  was  busy,  including 
that  of  the  King  himself,  that  all  might  be  infoi-med  concerning  "  the 
Pontiff's  usurped  supremacy,"  for  such  was  the  phrase  employed  ;  and 
Richard  Sampson,  Dean  of  the  Royal  Chapel,  published  for  the  learned 
everywhere,  his  Latin  Oration  on  the  subject. ^7  He  said  of  the  Pontiff's 
supremacy,  what  certainly  could  not  be  affirmed  of  Henry's, — "  With  a 
certain  secret,  or  still  consent  of  men,  the  Bishop  of  Rome  crept  into 
this  realm," — adding,  however,  that  which  was  manifestly  not  true, — 
"  but  now  is  it  enacted,  with  an  open  and  universal  consent,  that  ye 
should  no  more  be  subject  to  this  foreign  power," 

To  this  crisis  the  King  of  England  had  driven  on,  and  to  this  strain 
of  writing,  he  and  his  satellites  were  now  shut  up  ;  for,  with  regard 
to  the  separation  of  this  country  from  Rome,  it  has  already  been 
demonstrated,  that  Henry  the  Eighth  had  no  credit  whatever.  At  the 
moment,  "  he  meant  not  so,"  neither  did  he  in  his  heart  so  intend. 
Could  he  only  have  moulded  the  Pontiff  to  his  will,  no  such  event  had 
happened  during  his  administration  ;  and  had  Clement  not  been  under 


10  Hail.  MS.,  No.  G148,  fol.  20. 

W  Tliis  was  replied  to  afterwards,  iji  his  usual  style,  by  Coclilaus,  who  was  now  as  busy  as 
ever,  but  more  especially  against  ScoUaml,  as  we  shall  see  in  its  (iroper  plate. 


1534.]  TRANSFERRED  TO  THE   KING.  407 

the  control  of  the  Emperor,  Ilcury  wouki  have  been  an  adherent  still  ; 
as,  in  ojiinion,  if  he  had  any  opinions,  he  remained  to  the  end  of  his  life. 
But  although  the  Monarch  was  unteachable,  although  he  acquired  no 
wisdom,  and  absolutely  learnt  nothing  ;  still  this  great  and  significant 
event,  as  it  was  calculated,  so  was  it  intended  to  teach  his  subjects — 
Not  surely  that  they  should  turn  away  from  one  presumptuous  official 
human  being,  the  Pontiff  at  a  distance,  to  any  other,  and,  more  especially, 
to  such  as  the  King,  at  home ;  but  to  Tlim  alone,  who  is  "  wise  in  heart, 
and  mighty  in  strength,  and  who,  if  He  will  not  withdraw  his  anger, 
the  proud  helpers,"  sooner  or  later,  must  "  stoop  under  him."  If  a  man, 
such  as  Clement,  very  well  informed,  who  was  possessed  of  no  inferior 
abilities — "  Naturally  grave,  diligent,  assiduous  in  business,  and  averse 
from  pleasures  ;  orderly  and  regulated  in  all  things  ;  in  his  conduct 
serious,  circumspect  and  self-conquering ;" — for  such  is  the  character 
given  of  him  by  Guicciardini ; — if  such  a  man  had  been  pushed  about 
and  trampled  on  ;  had  been  agitated  in  his  official  proceedings,  and  not 
unfrequently  made  to  wring  his  hands  with  vexation  ;  if,  within  the 
City  called  Eternal,  he  had  been  almost  starved  to  death,  in  durance 
vile,  and  mocked  by  a  brutal  soldiery,  till  he  was  daily  in  terror  of  his 
life ;  if,  robbed  of  his  temporal  sovereignty,  he  remained  a  mere  puppet 
under  his  conqueror,  and  was  befooled,  in  turn,  by  all  the  great  sovereigns 
of  Europe  to  his  dying  day  ;  then,  certainly,  if  ever  there  was  a  voice  in 
the  providential  treatment  of  any  one  man,  styled  Pontiff,  upon  earth, 
there  had  been  one  here.  And  what  did  that  voice  say  to  the  King  of 
England  personally,  if  it  did  not  say — "  Beware  especially  of  treading  in 
his  footsteps,  in  matters  called  religious ;  but  be  wise,  and  be  instructed  % " 
And  what  to  all  his  stohjects  if  it  did  not  amount  to  this — "  If  any  man 
defile  or  destroy  the  Temple  of  God,  him  shall  God  destroy  1 "  But 
however  loud,  and  however  distinct  might  have  been  the  voice  of  warn- 
ing to  both  King  and  people,  it  was  disregarded  ;  emphatically  dis- 
regarded by  both  :  nor  was  the  Divine  Word  once  appealed  to  for 
guidance  at  such  a  crisis  ;  though  it  was  tortured  by  professed  theolo- 
gians to  answer  their  purpose.  Henry  and  his  Council  were,  indeed, 
for  ever  dabbling  in  something  called  religion,  but  "  the  natural  man 
discerneth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  neither  can  he  know 
them,  for  they  are  spiritually  discerned  ;"  and  we  must  not  expect  to 
find  his  Majesty  have  any  discernment,  or,  consequently,  any  taste  for 
these  things,  nor  even  his  leading  advisers. 

This  year,  amidst  all  the  policy,  and  even  the  wrath  of 
statesmen,  still  absorpt  in  their  own  affairs,  concurring  events, 
in  which  the  overruling  hand  of  God  had  been  conspicuous, 
were  favourable  to  the  progress  of  Divine  Truth  in  Britain. 
That  cause,  continued  to  be  one  by  itself,  and  still  certainly 


1-08  DIVINE  TRUTH   IN   PROGRESS.  j^BOOK  I. 

without  auy  visible  Head  in  England.  There  had  been 
frowns,  and  proclamations,  and  denunciations  ;  there  had  been 
solemn  warnings,  and  martyrdoms  ;  but  never  one  smile  from 
the  Throne,  no  sanction  from  the  Privy  Council,  not  one  voice 
in  Parliament.  But  what  did  all  this  signify  ?  We  observe 
edition  upon  edition  of  the  New  Testament,  as  well  as  the 
Law  of  God,  prepared  at  a  distance,  for  English  eyes.  The 
cause  was  Gfod's  ;  by  way  of  emphasis,  His.  He  alone  had 
carried  it  on,  in  defiance  of  all  the  power  and  policy  of  the 
nation ;  and  He  will  continue  to  do  so,  after  the  same  marked 
and  peculiar  manner,  until  the  Sacred  Volume  He  was  now 
giving  to  this  favoured  country,  shall  be  completed  ;  but  that 
will  not  be  till  three  years  hence. 

Yes,  it  will  bear  to  be  repeated,  that  this  cause  had  been 
advanced,  in  a  manner  altogether  different  from  every  thing 
else,  whether  in  this,  or  in  any  other  country,  at  the  moment ; 
and  no  historical  error  can  be  much  greater  than  that  of  merg- 
ing it,  in  what  was  doing  in  any  other  European  nation. 
The  greater  error  would  be  to  represent  it,  as  merely  an  effect 
or  consequence  of  contemporaneous  movements  elsewhere. 
Correctly  speaking,  it  was  the  Almighty,  employing  human 
agency  after  a  peculiar  fashion  ;  while,  with  that  unpretend- 
ingness,  and  without  that  show  of  authority,  which  is  all  his 
own.  He  was  drawing  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  land  which  lie 
purposed  to  favour  so  highly.  After  all  we  have  related,  and 
what  is  yet  to  come,  it  was  a  course  of  procedure  to  be  ob- 
served, with  veneration  and  adoring  gratitude,  by  the  posterity 
of  Britain  to  the  latest  age. 

Little  more  than  ten  years  ago,  William  Tyndale  was 
walking  towards  St.  Dunstan's,  near  Temple  Bar,  to  proclaim 
the  Word  of  Truth,  having  indeed  one  kind-hearted  friend, 
who  had,  from  sympathy,  invited  him  to  abide  under  his  roof, 
but  who  was  afterwards  called  to  a  sharp  account  for  having 
so  done.  To  "  withdraw  man  from  his  purpose,  and  to  hide 
pride  from  man,"  God  sent  his  chosen  instrument  abroad,  and 
employing  him  to  prepare  the  boon,  with  a  very  few  others, 
of  no  note  whatever,  to  convey  it ;  He  himself  had  been  the 
breaker  up  of  the  way  into  England,  and,  as  we  shall  find, 
into  Scotland  too.  After  this,  there  was  no  Boanerges  in 
any  quarter  of  the  entire  Island :  influential  or  commanding 
human  voice,  there  was  none ;  nor,  for  all  these  years,  was 


1.534.]  RICHARD  HARMAN   RESTORED  400 

any  such  dciuauded.     No,  but  as  we  have  seen,  the  good  seed 
had  been  sown  by  a  higher  hand. 

"  Jehovah  here  resolved  to  show. 

What  his  Almighty  Word  could  do."— 

Among  all  the  wonders  He  hath  wrought  for  this  favoured 
Island,  and  they  are  now  numerous  as  the  sand  upon  her  sea 
shore,  there  is  not  one  to  be  compared  with  His  conveyance 
of  the  Bible  to  its  inhabitants ;  nor  should  the  way  in  which 
he  did  so,  be  confounded  with  other  passages  in  English  his- 
tory; much  less  be  "  buried  in  forgetfulness,  or  in  oblivion  die." 

Thus  much  it  was  incumbent  to  repeat  here,  in  point  of  jus- 
tice to  the  past,  and  before  we  find  one  ray  of  approbation 
coming  from  any  one,  in  what  is  styled  an  influential  station 
of  life;  though  even  this  will  pass  away,  like  a  transient 
gleam,  before  the  clouds  return  ;  when  the  hostility  of  certain 
men  in  England,  will  burst  out  afresh,  till  at  last  it  proves 
fatal  to  the  man  whom  God  had  employed  from  the  beginning. 

But  to  proceed.  After  such  efforts  made  in  printing  the 
Scriptures  in  Antwerp,  and  to  the  extent  which  we  have  al- 
ready witnessed,  it  may  naturally  be  expected,  that  we  shall 
discover  in  England  itself,  at  least  some  of  the  grounds  of  en- 
couragement. The  intelligence  of  all  that  was  transacted  in 
Parliament,  of  course,  went  to  Antwerp  immediately,  for 
there  was  no  city  on  the  Continent,  where  every  thing  pass- 
ing in  London  was  better  known,  or  so  soon.  The  bill  intro- 
duced by  the  Commons,  which  would  have  the  effect  of  taking 
any  who  were  suspected  of  heresy,  out  of  the  hands  of  the 
Bishops,  was  of  itself  ominous  of  better  days.  Originating  in 
a  complaint  against  the  late  Lord  Chancellor  and  the  present 
Bishop  of  London,  and  this  complaint  terminating  in  such 
a  cure,  was  better  still.  There  must  have  been  various  other 
encouraging  circumstances,  of  which  we  have  no  account ;  but 
there  was  one  party  now  in  England  of  whom,  till  now,  we 
have  heard  nothing  so  tangible  and  distinct. 

The  reader  is  fully  aware  that  five  3^  ears  ago,  a  gentleman 
of  Antwerp,  Mr.  Harman,  was  grievously  molested  by  Hac- 
kett  the  English  envoy  ;  that  he,  and  his  wife,  equally  zealous 
with  himself,  were  confined  in  prison  for  months,  and  had  been 
seriously  injured  through  the  furious  enmity  of  both  Hackett 
and  Wolsey.  Such  a  change  had  taken  place,  that  he  was 
now  arrived  in  London,  and  to  seek  redress  !     It  is  worthy  of 


410  BY   THE  QUEEN.  [bOOK.  I. 

remark,  that  he  did  not  apply  to  Audley,  the  Lord  Chancel- 
lor of  the  day,  though  certainly  a  very  different  man  from 
either  of  his  predecessors  ;  nor  to  Oranmer ;  nor  to  Orumwell ; 
but  to  the  Queen  herself.^"  The  writings  of  Tyndale  had  been 
for  years  well  known  to  her ;  and  that  she  had  stolen  a  march 
upon  his  Majesty,  with  one  of  his  publications,  cannot  be  for- 
gotten.^^ Unhappy  man  !  It  apparently  interested  him  for 
the  moment,  but  it  was  only  as  the  voice  of  John  did  the  ear 
of  Herod,  or  that  of  Paul  the  ear  of  Agrippa ;  since  all  such 
impressions,  for  Henry  was  not  without  them,  like  the  morn- 
ing cloud  or  the  early  dew,  passed  away.  The  Queen,  how- 
ever, though  she  had  been  in  no  favourable  situation,  had 
been  interested,  and  now,  it  is  quite  evident,  more  than  ever. 
At  all  events,  Mr.  Harman  or  Herman  fully  succeeded  in  his 
application,  and  fortunately,  the  very  letter  written  on  his 
behalf,  by  Anne  Boleyn  herself,  has  been  preserved.  The 
following  is  a  copy. 

By  the  Queen. 
Anne  the  Queen. 

Trusty  and  right  well  beloved,  we  greet  you  well.  And  whereas  we  be  credi- 
bly informed  that  the  bearer  hereof,  Richard  Herman,  merchant  and  citizen 
of  Antwerp,  in  Bi-abant,  was,  in  the  time  of  the  late  Lord  Cardinal,  put  and  ex- 
pelled from  his  freedom  and  fellowship,  of  and  in  the  English  house  there,  for 
nothing  else  (as  he  affirmeth,)  but  only  for  that  he,  still  like  a  good  clu-istian 
man,  did  both  with  his  goods  and  policy,  to  his  great  hurt  and  hinderance  in 
this  world,  help  to  the  setting  forth  of  the  New  Testament  in  English  :  We 
therefore  desire  and  instantly  pray  you,  that,  with  all  speed  and  favour  conveni- 
ent, ye  will  cause  this  good  and  honest  naerchant,  being  my  Lord's  true,  faithful, 
and  loving  subject,  to  be  restored  to  his  pristine  freedom,  liberty,  and  fellow- 
ship, aforesaid,  and  the  sooner  at  this  our  request,  and  at  your  good  leisure  to 
hear  him  in  such  things,  as  he  hath  to  make  further  relation  unto  you  in  this  be- 
half. Given  under  our  signet,  at  my  Lord's  manor  of  Gi'eenwich,  the  xiiii  day 
of  May.  To  our  trusty  and  rujht  well  belored,  Thomas  Crumicell,  Squire,  Chief 
Secretary  unto  my  Lord  the  King's  llighnessfi^ 

Whatever  may  be  said,  whether  to  the  praise  or  disparage- 

'8  At  this  moment,  or  in  the  same  month,  if  not  the  same  day,  the  style  of  Cranmer  when  en- 
forcing one  of  his  Oicn  requests,  is  wortliy  of  quotation — "And  albeit  I  may,  if  I  would,  obtain  the 
Kinf^'s  Grace's  favourable  letters,  and  the  Queen's  Grace's  also,  for  the  furtherances  and  accom- 
plishment of  this  request,  yet  for  as  much,"  &c.  Harl.  MS.  G148,  fol.  18. — Cranmcr's  Remainshy 
Jenki/ns,  I.  IKK  19  See  page  21!). 

20  Cotton  MS.,  Cleop.  E.  v.,  fol.  330.  We  observed  the  pen  has  been  drawn  acro-ss  the  words, 
"still  like  a  f/ood christian  man."  Strype  has  omitted  the  words,  and  Sir  H.  Ellis  has  put  them 
in  a  note  at  the  bottom,  but  we  restore  them,  under  the  impression  that  "an  enemy  hath  done 
this."  The  Queen  never  could,  nor  would  she  liaveio  sent  her  letter,  sealed  with  her  own  signet, 
to  the  Secretary  of  State,  nor  would  such  terms  occur  to  any  cojiyist.  Though  only  the  month 
be  given,  that  the  letter  was  written  this  year  is  evident.  The  year  before,  Anne  was  engrossed 
by  her  coronation,  and  bv  the  1 4th  of  May  1535,  the  situation  of  Tyndale  and  other  circumstances 
entirely  forbid  the  idea  of  such  a  letter  being  sent  then. 


]53i.]  THE   PAST  AND    PRESENT.  411 

ment  of  Anne  Boleyn,  it  should  not  now  pass  unnoticed  tliat 
no  man,  either  of  influence  or  office  in  all  England,  ever  so 
expressed  himself,  lohile  Tyndale  lived.  Nor  is  this  merely  a 
letter  of  authority  ;  the  sentiments  of  the  writer  appear 
throughout,  and  it  also  conveys  some  information.  From  one 
expression  it  is  evident  that  Mr.  Harman  had  done  much  more 
than  coolly  import  the  volumes.  "  With  his  goods  and  policy 
to  his  great  h'mderance  in  this  world,""  he  had  done  this.  Every 
one  acquainted  with  the  history  of  the  Hanse  towns,  knows 
how  much  had  been  involved  in  the  forfeiture  of  his  privileges 
as  a  merchant  adventurer.  The  "English  house,"  like  all 
these  towns,  exercised  a  judicial  superintendence  over  its 
members,  and  punished  them  by  a  species  of  commercial  ex- 
communication. Mr.  Harman  had  evidently  been  suffering 
under  this  for  years.  He  had  been  a  friend  of  the  cause,  and 
therefore  the  friend  of  Tyndale. 

As  Crumwell  had  been  appointed  "  chief  Secretary  of 
State,"  only  one  week  before  the  date  of  the  preceding  letter, 
this  must  have  been  one  of  his  earliest  acts  in  that  capacity. 
But  the  tide  is  turning  for  a  short  season,  and  so  does  the 
"  chief  Secretary"  with  it. 

On  the  whole,  what  sinoular  recollections  does  such  an  in- 
cident  as  this  suggest  ?  What  a  striking  difference  between 
even  the  letter  of  Cranmer,  only  eleven  months  ago,  and  the 
present  \  That  involved  the  death  of  "  one  Frytli  going  to  the 
fire,"  Tyndale's  friend  and  assistant ;  this  is  in  vindication 
of  all  that  Tyndale  had  done  !  We  glance  at  the  contrast, 
only  in  justice  to  the  change  which  had,  for  this  year,  taken 
place,  but  there  is  one  other  reflection  which  seems  to  be 
forced  upon  us. 

Tunstal,  that  early  opponent,  once  of  great  power,  was  yet 
alive,  and  what  would  he  have  said,  or  not  have  said,  in  1526, 
to  such  a  document,  from  the  Queen  of  England  ?  He  is  now 
professedly  approving  of  the  Pontifl's  entire  exclusion  from  this 
country,  nay,  and  preaching  this  to  the  people ;  while  there  is 
no  word  now  of  "  the  crafty  translation  of  the  New  Testament 
in  the  English  tongue,  containing  that  pestiferous  and  most 
pernicious  poison,  dispersed  throughout  all  our  diocese  of  Lon- 
don, in  great  numbers."^.l     But  this  is  the  book  itself,  and 


21  See  his  proclamation  or  injunction,  anno  IMG. 


412  THE  SCRIPTURES  IMPORTING.  [book  i. 

this  is  one  of  the  very  men,  who  to  his  damage  and  loss,  had 
so  heartily  imported  it.  The  writer  had  these  days  in  her  eye, 
when  she  took  up  her  pen  ;  and  yet,  says  the  Queen,  Harman 
was  only  acting  in  character,  and  doing  only  what  he  ought 
to  have  done,  "  as  a  good  Christian  man."  Wolsey  and  War- 
ham  were  in  their  graves.  Sir  Tliomas  More  and  Bishop 
Fisher  were  in  the  Tower.  Tunstal  and  Gardiner  and 
Stokesly  are  muzzled.  Norfolk,  the  Prime  Minister,  must 
wink  hard.  The  Secretary  of  State  is  requested  to  proceed 
forthwith,  "  the  sooner  at  this  our  request ;"  while  Henry 
himself,  wilful,  wayward,  and  reckless  as  he  was,  is,  at 
tlie  least,  occasionally  now  kept  in  check  by  the  writer  of  this 
letter. 

It  was  fit  that  the  very  book  which  had  been  so  vilified,  so 
trampled  on  and  burnt,  by  the  King,  Wolsey,  Warham,  and 
Tunstal ;  which  had  been  fastened  in  derision,  by  Sir  Thomas 
More,  to  the  garments  of  Tyndale's  brother,  or  the  men  who 
were  then  marched  to  the  spot,  where  they  must  cast  it  into 
the  flames ; — nay,  the  book  which  had  been  denounced  from 
the  Star  Chamber  by  the  King  himself,  should  at  last  meet 
with  some  such  notice  as  this;  and  that  it  should  proceed  from 
the  pen  of  one,  who,  at  this  moment,  could  turn  the  heart  of 
even  such  a  Monarch.  The  Translator  himself  should  never 
be  forgotten,  but  he  never  set  his  foot  on  English  ground 
again  ;  the  change  was  the  work  of  no  human  hand,  and  more 
than  the  finger  of  Providence  was  here.  Is  it  too  much  to  say, 
that  for  the  sake  of  His  Blessed  Word,  first  its  entrance  into 
this  country,  and  then  its  effects,  God  had  shown  strength  with 
his  arm,  and  scattered  the  proud  in  the  imagination  of  their 
hearts? — had  put  down  the  mighty  from  their  seats,  and 
honoured  a  man  of  low  degree?  Nor  had  the  word,  so 
singularly  introduced,  returned  to  him  void.  Think  of  the 
many  whom  Fryth  had  met  with  in  England  before  his  death, 
and  of  the  high  character  he  gave  them.  God  had  filled  his 
own,  however  poor,  with  gladness,  though  of  the  rich,  there 
was  only  one  at  this  moment  to  justify  the  whole  proceeding, 
and  thus  far  espouse  the  hated  though  uninjured  cause. 

This  token  of  regard,  on  the  part  of  Queen  Anne,  was  not 
unfclt  by  Tyndale.  He  must  have  known  her  sentiments  as 
well  as  most  men,  and  been  fully  apprised  of  her  influence ; 
an  influence  which  had  been  at  once  deprecated  and  dreaded 


1534.]  CONVOCATION    IN   CONTRAST.  4.13 

by  the  old  school.  He  had  learnt  also  of  this  incident  in 
sufficient  time  for  him  to  lay  down  at  the  press,  one  copy  of 
his  corrected  New  Testament,  on  vellum.  Beautifully  printed, 
with  illuminations,  it  was  bound  in  blue  morocco,  and  the 
Queen's  name,  in  large  red  letters,  equally  divided,  was  placed 
on  the  fore-edges  of  the  top,  side,  and  bottom  margins :  thus, 
on  the  top,  Anna  ;  on  the  right  margin  fore-edge,  Regina, 
and  on  the  bottom,  Angli.e — Anne  Queen  of  England. 

The  Translator,  when  he  put  forth  his  first  edition,  in  that 
spirit  which  Christianity  alone  inspires,  sunk  his  own  name  ; 
and  would  have  done  so  afterwards,  but  for  the  character 
and  writings  of  his  amanuensis,  Roye ;  and  this  year  the  inter- 
ference of  Joye ;  but  here  he  does  so  once  more.  Even  his 
name  is  withdrawn,  and  with  great  propriety,  all  prefatory 
matter  is  omitted.  Tyndale  was  no  sycophant.  There  is  no 
dedication^ — no  compliment  paid,  as  there  never  ought  to  be, 
to  any  human  being,  along  with  God's  most  holy  Word.  The 
history  of  this  beautiful  book,  since  it  was  handled  by  Anne 
Boleyn,  above  three  hundred  years  ago,  would  have  interested 
any  reader ;  but  all  that  can  here  be  stated  is,  that  the  last 
private  individual  into  whose  possession  it  had  come,  was  the 
late  Rev.  Clayton  Mordaunt  Cracherode.  After  his  death,  in 
April  1799,  the  volume  came  into  its  proper  place,  when, 
with  his  large  and  valuable  library,  it  was  bequeathed  to  the 
British  Museum. 

The  Scriptures,  as  translated  by  Tyndale,  were  now  coming- 
more  freely  into  England,  and  were  reading  in  various  places 
with  all  eagerness.  No  man  was  now  molested  abroad,  as  Mr. 
Harman  had  been,  nor  was  any  man  to  be  tormented  at  home, 
for  selling  or  buying,  possessing  or  reading  them,  as  had  been 
the  fashion  too  long.  For  the  moment  at  least,  the  storm  was 
changed  into  a  comparative  calm,  and  it  is  curious  to  contrast 
all  this,  with  the  doings  of  the  Convocation,  which  sat  in 
November  and  December.  By  their  own  journal,  it  appears 
that  they  addressed  the  King  before  rising.^^  This  was  on  the 
19th  of  December,  aud  exhibited  a  striking  proof  of  a  house 
divided  against  itself.  Their  resolution  passed  both  Houses 
of  Convocation,  in  which  they  all  agreed  that  Cranmer  should 
make  instance,  in  their  names,  to  the  King,  that  his  Majesty 


22  Journal  of  the  Convocation,  fol.  ( 


-l.]4  CONVOCATION   IN   CONTRAST   WITH  [book  I. 

would  vouchsafe,  for  tlie  increase  of  the  faith  of  his  subjects, 
to  comniaud  that  all  his  subjects  in  wliose  possession  any  books 
of  suspected  doctrine  were,  especially  in  the  vulgar  language, 
imprinted  beyond  or  on  this  side  the  sea,  should  be  warned, 
within  three  months  to  bring  them  in,  under  a  certain  pain, 
to  be  limited  by  him  !  And  that,  moreover,  his  Majesty  would 
vouchsafe  to  decree,  that  the  Scriptures  should  be  translated 
into  the  xulgar  tongue  by  some  honest  and  learned  men,  to  be 
nominated  by  the  King,  and  to  be  delivered  to  the  people 
according  to  their  learning ! 

The  ^rst  request  exhibits  the  influence  of  Gardiner  and 
Stokesly  in  the  Convocation,  the  latter  that  of  Cranmer ;  and 
it  seems  to  be  evident  that  the  two  parties  must  have  come  to 
a  compromise,  for  the  sake  of  each  party  securing,  if  possible, 
its  favourite  request ;  or  this  might  be  a  feeler,  put  forth  to 
ascertain  more  precisely  the  existing  state  of  their  masters 
mind.  At  all  events,  the  two  requests  exhibit  glai'ing  in- 
consistency, since  the  books  of  suspected  doctrine  might  be 
made  to  include  all  the  Scriptures  ever  yet  printed.  How 
Cranmer  acquitted  himself  with  the  King,  is  not  upon  record. 
There  was,  however,  no  interdict,  no  collecting  of  books ;  but 
the  reader  must  not  fail  to  observe  next  year,  when  Cranmer 
comes  to  attempt  a  translation  of  the  New  Testament,  by 
actually  employing  these  Bishops,  what  was  the  result,  and 
how  they  wrangled. 

Meanwhile,  dreaming,  as  some  of  these  men  in  this  Convo- 
cation were,  about  the  Scriptures  being  translated,  for  it  was 
but  a  dream ;  what  a  singular  contrast  is  presented  in  the 
editions  of  Tyndale  printed  this  year,  and  the  vindication  of 
Harman,  by  the  Queen  herself,  for  importing  them  eight  years 
ago  !  And  now,  if  at  last,  after  such  long  and  vigilant  pursuit, 
Tyndale  himself  was  about  to  be  betrayed  into  the  snare  so 
basely  laid  for  him,  his  seizure  will  only  add  renewed  vigour 
to  the  press.  Besides  the  Testament  by  Joye,  we  have  already 
mentioned  Tyndale's  own  corrected  edition  finished  only  in 
November ;  but  their  year  ran  on  to  the  25th  of  March,  and 
before  that  day  we  have  not  fewer  than  three  impressions  all 
dated  in  1 534.  The  books  being  nearly  of  one  size,  rather 
less  than  Tyndale's  own,  may  be  mistaken  for  the  same  edition, 
but  there  are  various  points  of  distinction. 


l'33i-.]  THE  SCRIPTURES  NOW  PRINTING.  -ilo 

I.  "  The  Newe  Testament,  Anno  mdxxxiiii."  printed  witliin  an  ornamented 
compartment ;  at  tlie  top,  Jesus  preachinf?  an  the  Mount  ;  on  the  right  side,  the 
brazen  Serpent ;  on  tlie  left,  Moses  witli  the  two  tables,  and  at  the  bottom  G.  H. 
on  a  shield,  perhaps  the  initials  of  the  printer ;  the  name,  if  found  out,  will  appear 
in  our  list.  TI.  "The  Newe  Testament,  Anno  .mdxxxiiii."  also  in  black  letter, 
but  not  in  a  compartment,  nor  having  any  such  initials  affixed.  These  two 
books  have  been  compared.  The  first  is  in  the  collection  of  Earl  Pembroke  at 
Wilton  house,  the  second  is  in  that  of  Lea  Wilson,  Esq.  They  are  in  the  same 
type,  but  the  folios  of  the  first  are  paged  throughout,  the  second  is  not  paged  at 
all ;  and  there  are  various  characteristic  differences,  both  in  the  orthography  and 
the  disposition  of  the  pages.  III.  "  The  New  Testament,  Anno  mdxxxiiii."  also 
in  a  compartment  with  G.  H.  &c.  This  edition,  imperfect,  is  in  the  Bodleian,  and 
as  described  by  Herbert  p.  154;5,  and  Di-.  Cotton  p.  131,  might  be  mistaken  for 
the  first  mentioned.  But  this  book,  though  the  numbering  of  the  folios  be  of- 
ten incorrect,  runs  from  Matt.  fol.  i. — ccclx.  falsely  numbered  ccclxii.  ;  whereas 
the  Testament  at  Wilton-House  runs  only  from  Matt.  fol.  i. — cccxlvii.  This  third 
book,  however,  owing  to  what  Dr.  Cotton  has  said,  we  have  ranked  under  15-35, 
(see  p.  455,)  though  perhaps  the  above  might  have  been  also  placed  there. 

Besides  these,  there  is  in  the  Bristol  Museum  a  Newe  Testament  in  quarto, 
dated  on  the  back  1534 — certainly  ancient,  but  the  title-page  is  gone.  Dr.  Gif- 
ford  thought  it  might  have  been  printed  in  Scotland,  as  Lewis  did,  of  one  in 
1536  ;  but  an  acquaintance  with  the  interesting  state  of  Scotland,  as  about  to  be 
given,  precludes  every  such  conjecture.23 

In  justification  of  the  anxiety  felt  by  Tyndale  respecting  the  reprints  of  his 
translation  by  others,  it  deserves  notice,  that  in  both  the  Testaments  first 
mentioned,  there  is  an  omission  which  unfortunately  hecsixne parent  of  the  same 
mistake  in  not  a  few  subsequent  editions.  It  is  in  1  Cor.  xi.  The  words — 
"  This  cup  is  the  New  Testament  in  my  blood"  are  left  out !  The  omission, 
though  significant  at  such  a  time,  could  scarcely  be  intentional,  as  it  could 
answer  no  end  ;  but  it  occasioned  the  leaf  to  be  reprinted  in  various  instances 
afterwards. 

Thus  the  contrast  between  the  Convocation  held  in  Eng- 
land and  these  busy  men  abroad,  furnishes  one  of  the  most 
observable  features  of  the  time.  It  was  like  a  flag  of  defiance 
hoisted  in  Antwerp,  to  signalize  the  moment,  or  the  conse- 
quences, of  Tyndale's  apprehension. 


23  With  reference  to  these  Testaments  dated  in  1534,  it  should  here  he  ohserved,  that  in 
describing  Lord  Pembroke's  copy,  Lewis  (pp.  7y>  8ii, )  has  confounded  it  with  the  edition  by 
Joye,  already  mentioned  ;  and  Lowndes,  apparently  thus  misled,  has  attached  to  it  the  widow 
of  Endhoven  as  the  printer,  thus  representing  another  New  Testament  as  coming  from  the 
same  press,  in  the  same  month  of  the  same  year,  with  that  of  George  Joye!  Until  another 
copy  be  found,  that  of  Jove's  in  the  Grenville  Library  must  be  regarded  as  unique.  There  is 
no  such  book  at  Wilton-House,  in  the  Bristol  Museum,  or  St.  Paul's  Library. 


I      41(j      ] 


SECTION  XII. 

TYNDAIiE'S    APPREHENSION    AT    ANTWERP — IMPRISONMENT    IN   THE    CASTLE 

OF    VILVORDE DISTINCT    INFORMATION     CONVEYED    TO    CRUMWELL    AND 

CRANMER THE    STRENUOUS    EXERTIONS    OF    THOMAS    POYNTZ — RISKINO 

HIS   OWN    LIFE,    BUT    IN    VAIN — TYNDALE's    PROGRESS  IN  PRISON — STATE 

OF   ENGLAND KEY    TO    ITS    COMMOTION — HENRY's    SUPREMACY — FISHER 

AND  MORE  FALL    BEFORE   IT THE  ODIUM   ENSUING THE  VISITATION   OF 

MONASTERIES — CRANMER    AND   THE   BISHOPS — CRANMER  AND    GARDINER 

IN  COLLISION — THE  LATTER   OFFENDING HIS  DEXTERITY  OR  ADDRESS 

HE    IS   TRANSLATING   LUKE  AND  JOHN  ! — GARDINER  AND   POLE SPAIN 

PRANCE GERMAN    STATES,    AND    BARNES    AS    ENVOY THE    BISHOPS    AP- 
PLIED   TO   FOR  A  TRANSLATION   OF    THE   NEW   TESTAMENT — A    FRUITLESS 

ATTEMPT AND    IN    CONTRAST    ONCE    MORE,    WITH    FRESH     EDITIONS    OF 

TYNDALE'S  TRANSLATION,  PRINTED  AND  IMPORTING  THIS  YEAR. 

The  last  year  turned  out  to  be  nothing  more  than  a  brief 
respite,  or  a  transient  gleam  of  sunshine.  The  present  was 
distinguished  throughout,  by  the  imprisonment  of  Tyndale 
abroad;  by  the  agitation  and  perplexity  of  public  men,  as 
well  as  by  cruelty  and  bloodshed  at  home.  The  former  was 
an  exhibition  of  enmity  to  the  truth  on  the  part  of  its  oppo- 
nents ;  the  latter,  gave  decided  proof  of  fear  for  the  safety  of 
the  throne.  But  before  adverting  to  the  peculiar  state  of  af- 
fairs in  England,  we  first  proceed,  as  in  previous  years,  to  en- 
quire respecting  the  Translator  of  the  Scriptures. 

After  a  thorough  investigation  of  this  period,  there  can  re- 
main no  liesitation  in  ascribing  the  apprehension  of  Tyndale, 
to  the  influence  and  authority  of  the  old  party  in  England,  in 
alarm  at  the  steady  progress  of  the  "  new  learning."  "  A 
plan  was  laid,"  says  Foxe,  "  for  Tyndale  being  seized  in  nante 
of  the  Emperor."  By  the  name  of  the  Emperor,  as  now  men- 
tioned, could  be  meant  nothing  more  than  the  authority  of 
the  persecuting  decrees  he  had  sanctioned;  but  from  any 
share  in  this  plan,  Henry,  in  i\\e  first  instance,  must  be  en- 
tirely exonerated  ;  as  the  chief  agents  employed  will  turn 
out  to  have  been  as  great  enemies  to  the  King  of  England, 
and  his  royal  progress,  as  they  were  to  Tyndale  and  his  pro- 
vidential one.  For  years,  it  is  true,  Tyndale  had  been  deem- 
ed a  man  of  such  importance,  that  he  had  enjoyed  the  dis- 


J535.]  TYNDALES  APPREHENSION.  417 

tinction  of  having  been  pursued  by  the  agents  of  Wolsey  the 
Cardinal,  and  of  the  King  himself — of  Sir  Thomas  More  the 
Lord  Chancellor,  and  even  Crumwell,  the  future  vicegerent ; 
but  in  the  final  seizure,  his  Majesty  had  no  concern  what- 
ever ;  though  at  last  he  will  certainly  come  in  for  his  full  share 
in  the  guilt  of  Tyndale's  death.  In  the  concealment  of  this 
plot  from  Henry  before  it  commenced  or  succeeded,  we  descry, 
not  improbably,  the  existing  powerful  influence  of  the  Queen, 
Anne  Boleyn.  Had  she  been  apprised  of  it,  and  moved  the 
King,  this  might  have  proved  fatal  to  the  scheme. 

Up  to  this  hour,  it  has  all  along  been  generally  supposed, 
that  there  was  only  one  man  hired  to  apprehend  our  Trans- 
lator ;  but  there  was  a  second,  of  far  greater  note  as  to  charac- 
ter, joined  with  him,  both  in  counsel  and  action  ;  and  so,  says 
Halle,  "  he  was  betrayed  and  taken,  as  many  said,  not  without 
the  help  and  procurement  of  some  Bishops  of  this  realm." 
The  help^  partly  consisting  in  money,  of  which  we  shall  find, 
presently,  there  was  no  lack,  is  to  be  traced,  therefore,  to  this 
source.  The  Bishops,  in  1 527,  had  leagued  together  under 
Warham,  and  contributed  to  the  strange  and  fruitless  project 
of  buying  up  the  New  Testaments  to  burn  them  ;  and  now, 
though  Warham  be  gone,  several  survivors  of  the  same  temper, 
were  still  more  eager  to  consign  the  Translator  himself  to  the 
flames.  That  Stephen  Gardiner,  the  Bishop  of  Winchester, 
who  had  succeeded  against  Fryth,  was  in  the  secret,  and 
deeply  concerned  in  the  intrigue,  there  will  be  little  or  no 
doubt  presently ;  but  if  so,  he  may  have  been  the  chief  for 
such  was  the  well  known  temper  of  the  man.  "  Unless,"  says 
Bonner,  who  knew  him  well,  "  unless  he  was  the  only  and 
chief  inventor  of  any  matter,  he  would  have  thwarted  it." 
Tutored  and  bred  up  under  Wolsey,  though  the  King  and 
the  Cardinal,  Sir  Thomas  More  and  Crumwell,  had  not  suc- 
ceeded, and  though  abroad  neither  Hackett  or  West,  Sir 
Thomas  Elyot  or  any  other  agent,  had  been  able  to  apprehend 
Tyndale ;  yet  intimately  acquainted  with  all  circumstances, 
with  persons  and  places,  and  of  great  address,  there  was 
no  man  now  alive,  who  excelled  Gardiner  in  gaining  his  end, 
by  secret  and  circuitous  methods.  As  his  strength  and  skill 
lay  in  fetching  a  compass,  like  the  gyrations  of  a  hawk  be- 
fore pouncing  on  its  prey,  so  was  he  much  more  likely  to  suc- 
ceed in  ensnaring  Tyndale  than  any  one  who  had  previously 

VOL.  I.  2d 


418  TYNDALES  APPREHENSION.  [boOK  I. 

attempted  it.  At  least,  no  other  individual  knew  so  well  how 
to  take  advantage  of  the  rising  discontent  of  monks  and  friars. 

The  men  in  England  selected  on  this  occasion,  were  Henry 
Phillips,  belonging  to  Poole  in  Dorset,  on  the  borders  of  Gar- 
diner's diocese ;  and  the  other  individual,  in  counsel  with 
him,  hitherto  altogether  nnknoAvn,  was  Gabriel  Donne  or 
Dunne,  a  monk  from  Stratford  Abbey,  who  had  proceeded 
to  Louvain.  The  former,  a  good-looking  young  man,  acted 
as  the  gentleman,  and  the  latter  in  disguise,  as  his  counsel- 
.lor  and  servant. 

The  apprehension  of  Tyndale  has  been  sometimes  supposed 
to  have  happened  at  the  end  of  last  year  ;  but  as  his  confine- 
ment before  death  has  been  limited  even  to  a  year  and  a  half, 
it  seems  to  have  commenced  not  sooner  than  the  beginning 
of  the  present  year.  Certain  parts  of  the  story  cannot  be 
better  told  than  in  the  words  of  Foxe  ;  but  we  shall  now  inter- 
weave a  variety  of  other  particulars,  hitherto  unnoticed  by  any 
histoi-ian,  and  not  a  few  of  them  altogether  unknown. 

"William  Tyndale,  being  in  the  towu  of  ytntwerp,  had  been  lodged  about 
one  whole  year  in  the  house  of  Thomas  Povmz,  an  Englishman,  who  kept 
tliere  a  house  of  English  merchants  ;l  about  which  time  came  thither  one  out  of 
England,  whose  name  was  Henry  Phillips,  his  father  being  a  customer  (belong- 
ing to  the  custom-house)  of  Pool,  a  comely  fellow,  like  as  he  had  been  a  c/entle- 
inan,  having  a  serrant  with  him  :  but  wherefore  he  came,  or  for  what  purpose 
lie  was  sent  thither,  no  man  could  tell. 

"  Master  Tyndale  divers  times  was  desired  forth  to  dinner  and  supper  amongst 
merchants  ;  by  means  whereof  this  Henry  Phillips  became  acquainted  with  him, 
so  that  within  short  space  Master  Tyndale  had  a  great  confidence  in  him,  and 
brought  him  to  his  lodging,  to  the  house  of  Thomas  Poyntz ;  and  had  him  also, 
once  or  twice  with  him,  to  dinner  and  supper  ;  and  further  entered  such  friend- 
ship with  him,  that  through  his  procurement  he  lay  in  the  same  house  of  the 
said  Poyntz;  to  whom  he  showed,  moreover,  his  books,  and  other  secrets  of  his 
study,  so  little  did  Tyndale  then  mistrust  this  traitor ! 

"Poyntz,  having  no  great  confidence  iuthe  fellow, asked  Tyndale  how  he  be- 
came acquainted  with  this  Phillips.  Tyndale  answci'ed,  that  he  was  an  honest 
man,  handsomely  learned,  and  very  conformable.  Then  Poyntz,  perceiving  that 
lie  bare  such  favour  to  him,  said  no  more,  thinking  that  he  was  brought  ac- 
quainted with  him,  by  some  friend  of  his.  The  said  Phillips  being  in  the  town 
three  or  four  days,  upon  a  time,  desired  Poyntz  to  walk  w  itli  him  forth  of  the 
town,  to  show  him  the  commodities  thereof ;  and  in  walking  together  without 
the  town,  had  communication  of  divers  things,  and  some  of  the  King's  affairs  ; 
by  which  talk,  Poyntz,  as  yet  suspected  nothing,  but  after,  by  the  sequel  of  the 
matter,  he  perceived  more  what  lie  had  intended.     Iii  the  meantime,  this  lie 


'  Tliis  seems  to  be  Foxc's  mode  of  expressing  that  Mr.  Poyntz  was  an  linRlish  niercliant-ad- 
vcntiirer,  bclonRing  to  "the  English  house"  of  Antwerp. 


1,535.]  AT   ANTWliUr.  I-IO 

well  perceived,  that  he  bai'e  no  great  favour,  either  to  the  setting  forth  of  any 
good  thing,  or  to  the  proceedings  of  the  King  of  England.  But  after,  when  the 
time  was  past,  Poyntz  perceived  this  to  be  his  mind  ;  to  feel,  if  he  could  perceive 
by  him,  whether  he  might  break  with  him  in  the  matter,  for  lucre  of  monej',  to 
help  him  to  his  purpose  ;  for  he  perceived  before  that  he  was  monied,  and  would 
that  Poyntz  should  think  no  less ;  but  Oi/  whom,  it  was  unknown.  For  he  had 
desired  Poyntz  before,  to  help  him  to  divers  things,  an<l  such  things  as  he  named, 
he  required  might  be  of  the  beH, '  for,'  said  ho  '  I  have  money  enough  :'  but  of 
this  talk  came  nothing  but  that  men  should  think  he  had  some  things  to  do.  So 
it  was  to  be  suspected,  that  Phillips  was  in  doubt  to  move  this  matter  to  any  of 
the  rulers  or  officers  of  the  town  of  Antwerp,  for  doubt  it  should  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  some  Englishmen,  and  by  the  means  thereof  Tyndale  should 
have  had  warning. 

"  So  Phillips  went  from  Antwerp  to  the  court  of  Brussels,  which  is  from  thence 
twenty-four  (rather  30)  English  miles,  the  King  having  tliere  no  Ambassador  ;- 
for  at  that  time  the  King  of  England  and  the  Emperor  were  at  a  controversy 
for  the  question  betwixt  the  King  and  Catherine,  who  was  aunt  to  the  Emperor  ; 
and  the  discord  grew  so  much,  that  it  was  doubted  lest  there  should  have  been 
war ;  so  that  Phillips,  as  a  traitor  both  against  God  and  the  Kiiif/,  was  there  the 
better  retained,  as  also  other  traitors  besides  him  ;  who  after  he  had  betrayed 
Master  Tyndale  into  their  hands,  showed  himself  likewise  against  the  King's 
own  person,  and  there  set  forth  things  against  the  KlngJi  To  make  short,  the 
said  Phillips  did  so  much  there,  that  he  procured  to  bring  from  thence  with  him 
to  Antwerp,  that  Procurer-general,  who  is  the  Emperor's  Attorney,  with  certain 
other  officers,  as  after  followeth ;  which  was  not  done  with  small  charges  and 
expenses,  from  whomsoever  it  came. 

"  Within  a  while  after,  Poyntz  sitting  at  his  door,  Phillips's  man  came  to  him, 
and  asked  whether  Master  Tyndale  were  there,  and  said  his  master  would  come 
to  him,  and  so  departed  ;  but  whether  his  master,  Phillips,  were  in  the  town 
or  not,  it  was  not  known ;  but  at  that  time  Poyntz  heard  no  more,  either  of  the 
master,  or  of  the  man.  Within  three  or  four  days  after,  Poyntz  went  forth  to 
the  town  of  Barrois,-*  being  eighteen  (rather  24)  English  miles  from  Antwerp, 
where  he  had  business  to  do  for  the  space  of  a  month  or  six  weeks  ;5  and  in  the 
time  of  his  absence  Henry  Phillips  came  again  to  Antwerp,  to  the  house  of 
Poyntz,  and  coming  in,  spake  with  his  wife,  asking  her  for  Master  Tyndale,  and 
whether  he  would  dine  there  with  him  ;  saying — '  what  good  meat  shall  we  have  ?' 
She  answered,  '  such  as  the  market  will  give.'  Then  went  he  forth  again,  as  it 
was  thought,  to  provide,  and  set  the  officers  whom  he  brought  with  him  from 
Brussels,  in  the  street,  and  about  the  door.  Then  about  noon  he  came  again, 
and  went  to  Master  Tyndale, and  desired  him  to  lend  him  forty  shillings  ;  'for,' 
said  he,  '  I  lost  my  purse  this  morning,  coming  over  at  the  passage,  between  this 
and  Mechlin.'     So  Tyndale  took  him  forty  shillings,  which  was  easy  to  be  had 


^  This  was  a  mistake,     yaiiphan,  of  whom  we  have  already  lieard,  was  still  there. 

3  The  reader  will  come  to  full  proof  of  this  jiresently. 

*  This  Barrois,  Barrow,  Barough,  Bergen,  we  repeat,  is  no  other  than  Bergen-op-Zoom,  now 
greatly  blocked  up  by  the  sands  of  Bevelaiid,  but  having  still  a  communication  with  the  Scheldt, 
by  canal.     Hence  the  title,  JIarquis  ol  Barough  or  llergen. 

5  In  the  marts  or  fairs  of  Brabant  the  English,  and  iirubably  otlier  foreigners,  were  obliged  to 
sell  their  cloths,  &c.  in  fourteen  days,  and  make  their  purchases  of  mercery,  haberdashery, 
and  groceries,  in  as  many  more,  on  pain  of  forfeiture.  Those  fairs  were  frcciuented  by  the  Eng- 
lish, French,  Germans,  and  other  nations. 


420  APPREHENSION   OF  TYNDALE.  [bOOK  T. 

of  him,  if  lie  liail  it ;  fur  in  the  wily  subtilties  of  tliis  workl,  he  was  simple  ami 
inexpoi't.*> 

"  Then  said  Phillii)s,  '  Master  Tyndale,  you  shall  be  my  guest  here  this  day.' 
No,  said  Tyndale, '  I  go  forth  this  day  to  dinner,  and  you  shall  go  with  me,  and 
be  my  guest,  where  you  shall  be  welcome.'  So  when  it  was  dinner  time.  Master 
Tyndale  went  forth  with  Phillips,  and  at  the  going  forth  of  Poyntz's  house  was 
a  long  narrow  entry,  so  that  two  could  not  go  in  a  front.  Tyndale  would  have 
put  Phillips  before  him,  but  Phillips  would  in  no  wise,  for  that  he  pretended  to 
show  great  humanity,  (courtesy.)  So  Master  Tyndale,  being  a  man  of  no  great 
stature,  went  before,  and  Phillips,  a  tall  comely  person,  followed  behind  him  ; 
who  had  .'ci  officers  on  either  side  of  the  door  on  two  seats,  who  being  there 
might  see  who  came  in  the  entry  ;  and  coming  through  the  same,  Phillips  pointed 
with  his  finger  over  Master  Tyndale's  head  down  to  him,  that  the  officers  who 
sat  at  the  door  might  see  that  it  was  he,  whom  they  should  take  ;  as  tlie  officers 
afterwards  told  Poyntz  ;  and  said,  when  they  had  laid  him  in  prison,  that  they 
pitied  to  see  his  simplicity,  when  they  took  him.  Then  they  brought  him  to  the 
Emperor's  attorney  where  he  dined.  Then  came  he,  the  attorney,  to  the  liouse 
of  Poyntz,  and  sent  away  all  that  was  tliere  of  Master  Tyndale's,  as.  well  liis 
books  as  other  things,  and  from  thence  Tyndale  was  had  to  the  castle  of 
ViLvoRDE,  eighteen  (rather  23^)  English  miles  from  Antwerp."  Thus  far  at 
present  the  narrative  of  Foxe. 

Tliougli  Mr.  Poyntz  was  from  home,  his  friends,  among 
the  merchant-adventurers  of  the  English  house,  were  imme- 
diately alive  to  what  had  happened,  and  application  was  made 
without  delay  to  the  court  of  Brussels,  but  without  effect. 
Many  of  these  merchants  Avere  much  in  favour  of  Tyndale, 
but  they  communicated  as  "  the  English  house"  officially, 
through  one  of  their  number,  elected  periodically,  called  their 
Governor.  This  was  at  present  one  Walter  3Iarshe,^  and  he, 
if  not  an  enemy  to  the  cause  for  which  'J'yndale  was  seized, 
was  at  least  indifferent.  England,  it  is  true,  had  no  influence 
with  the  Emperor,  who,  at  all  events,  Avas  then  engrossed  by 
his  famous  enterprise  against  the  piratical  states  in  Africa  ; 
and  though  Stephen  Vaughan,  of  whom  w^e  have  heard,  was 
still  at  J3russels,  he  seems  to  have  been  indisposed  to  say  or 
do  any  thing,  after  all  he  had  suffered  at  Antwerp,  through 
the  violence  of  Sir  Thomas  More,  now  himself  a  prisoner  in 
the  Tower.  Vaughan,  however,  had  received  no  instructions 
from  England,  and  without  these,  perhaps,  would  not  interfere. 
The  merchant-adventurers  were  a  powerful  body  of  men,  and 


6  The  betrayer,  in  this  instance,  first  took  from  his  kind  hearted  and  nnsuspicious  victim,  more 
than  "thirty  pieces  of  silver."  Two  pounds  tlien,  was  equal  in  value  to  lliirl;/  ])onnds  of  the 
present  day. 

7  Or  Marsch,  not  impvobahlv  related  to  .lohn  Marslie,  cousin  of  Sir  Thomas  (irr'^luini 


1535.J  CARDINAL   POLE   IN    CONTRAST.  421 

had  Marslie,  as  Governor,  only  taken  up  the  outrage  as  soon 
as  it  was  committed,  and  with  the  spirit  which  became  liim, 
Tjndale,  most  probably,  would  have  been  extricated.  His 
tardiness  Avas  prejudicial  to  the  case,  and,  as  we  shall  see, 
much  regretted  at  the  time.  ]Jut  by  no  other  man  was  the 
painful  event  so  deeply  felt  and  lamented,  as  by  the  kind  and 
generous  host  of  Tyndale.  This  gentleman  of  family,  Mr, 
Poyntz,  upon  returning  home  to  Antwerp,  resolved  at  least 
to  do  his  duty  ;  and  he  did  so  with  a  noble  zeal  and  fortitude 
for  which  he  ought,  long  ago,  to  have  been  better  known. 
This  will  appear  presently ;  but  intervening  events  first  de- 
mand our  special  notice.  They  are  ultimately  connected  with 
Tyndale's  apprehension. 

The  state  of  the  Continent,  at  this  period,  having  become 
exceedingly  critical,  with  regard  to  Henry's  personal  security 
as  King  of  England  ;  it  became  necessary  for  that  division  of 
his  Privy  Council  who  favoured  his  movements,  to  have  a 
watchful  eye  over  the  secret  intrigues  of  the  adverse  party, 
and  their  correspondents  in  foreign  parts.  For  ten  long  years, 
it  is  now  very  observable,  Tyndale  had  been  working  abroad, 
and  only  for  good ;  to  whom  the  Monarch  and  his  ministers 
had  been  ever  opposed  ;  but  now,  another  man  is  becoming 
active  and  formidable,  who,  for  more  than  tu'enUi  years,  and 
abroad  too,  shall  work  only  for  evil ;  his  baneful  influence 
extending  not  only  until  the  death  of  the  reigning  King,  but 
to  that  of  two  of  his  children.  This  was  Reginald  Pole,  the 
future  Cardinal,  whom  Henry  had  cherished,  and  educated 
with  a  princely  munificence,  and  even  kindness,  such  as  he 
had  never  shown  to  any  other  human  being.*^  The  cousin  of 
the  King,  and  now  abroad  ;  of  polished  manners,  possessed  of 
the  best  education,  having  easy  access  to  the  highest  circles, 
wherever  he  travelled  ;  the  vivacity  of  his  genius,  and  his 
playful  affability,  endeared  him  to  all.  His  Majesty,  having 
literally  made  him  the  man  he  was,  became  eager  to  have  his 
opinions  in  writing,  as  to  himself  and  his  movements  ;  expect- 
ing, of  course,  that  they  would  be  entirely  in  his  favour. 


"  "  Out  of  all  the  English  nobility,"  says  Pule  himself,  addressing  the  King,  "  you  selected 
me  to  have  a  careful  education.  You  had  me  instructed  in  virtues  and  letters  from  a  child. 
If  I  have  i)rofited  but  little,  it  has  been  my  own  fault,  but  your  kindness  was  certainly  verv 
great.  It  was  such  that  no  kingly  father  could  have  given  more  to  a  prince,  his  son.  No  man 
could  have  conferred  upon  another  an  ampler  benefit,  nor  one  more  pleasing  to  the  Deity  him- 
self."—Oo  Fa-cI.  Unit.,  p.  121). 


422  DISTINCT  INFORMATION  CONVEYED  [^BOOK  I. 

Pole  assented,  and  all  the  time  living  on  Henry's  bounty, 
carried  on  the  delusion.  His  opinions  grew  into  a  volume, 
which  he  began  in  January  of  this  year,  and  so  late  as  June, 
he  had  the  profound  hypocrisy  to  give  assurances,  in  writing, 
that  he  meant  to  serve  the  King  in  the  cause  desired."  His 
book,  however,  such  as  it  was,  had  been  completed  in  March, 
but  it  was  retained  for  more  than  twelve  months  after  that, 
and  shown  to  select  enemies,  just  as  if  intended  to  produce 
the  more  astounding  effect  on  the  day  of  its  presentation, 
next  year.^" 

Now,  comparing  the  last  ten  years  with  all  those  that  fol- 
lowed, it  is  not  difficult  to  perceive  the  finger  of  retributive 
justice  pointing  out  the  contrast.  But  it  is  rendered  far  more 
striking  from  a  singular  coincidence  at  the  present  period,  and 
never  before  observed.  It  was  this.  Henry's  mind  continued 
in  great  kindness  and  respect  for  Pole,  down  to  the  end  of  April, 
or  the  beginning  of  May,  this  year.  It  then  became  necessary 
to  watch  him.  But  the  same  man  who  was  now  engaged  to 
examine  and  report  as  to  the  state  of  the  Continent,  and  the 
movements  of  Pole  ;  in  his  very  first  despatches,  brings  the 
imprisonment  of  Tyndale  before  the  eye  of  both  Crumwell  and 
Cranmer.  He  writes,  however,  merely  as  though  he  would 
invite  their  sympathy  ;  for  it  is  evident,  from  his  style,  that 
he  had  received  no  instructions  to  enquire  with  kindness  after 
him.  The  writer,  Thomas  Tebold,"  (Theobald,)  was  a  man 
of  no  notoriety ;  but  being  well  qualified,  by  shrewdness  and 
address,  to  answer  CrumwelPs  purpose,  he  was  to  travel  from 
city  to  city,  and  report.  He  had  left  England  about  the 
end  of  June,  proceeding  first  to  Antwerp,  and  by  the  middle 
of  July  commenced  his  first  letters,  despatching  them  at  the 
end  of  the  month.  Both  are  full  of  information,  and  having 
never  before  been  printed,  we  give  them  entire.  The  first  is 
addressed  to  Crumwell. 

"  Pleaseth  it  your  Lordship  to  understand,  that  the  last  day  of  July  I  do  take 
my  journey  from  Antwerp  straight  to  Nurenherg,  from  whence  I  may  always 


n  Cotton  MS.,  Cleop.  E.  vi.,  fol.  334. 

'0  See  an  analysis  of  Cardinal  Pole's  cliaiactcr  and  writing?,  liis  virulent  and  trcnsonahlo 
langnage,  in  Turner's  Henry  VIII.,  chap  21). 

"  His  name  is  spelt  in  difTercnt  places,  Tcbald,  Tybbald,  Tliebold,  and  Theobald  ;  we  use  the 
last,  as  that  which  he  himself  finally  did.  This  man  had  been  a  student  at  Louvain  ;  he  could 
.".peak  Latin  fluently,  and  Cruniwcll's  wish  was,  that  ho  should  now  acquire  Cermau,  as  well  a.>. 
other  languages.  He  generally  subscribes  himself  his  fiod-son—pjwA  Cranmer,  in  writing  to  the 
Continent,  calls  him  !iis/ririi(l- 


Ij3j.3  TO   CKUMWELL   AND   CRAiNMER.  42;} 

send  letters  to  Antwerp  hy  post  ;  and  so  I  liave  spoken  in  Antwerp  to  an 
Englishman,  called  John  James,  both  to  convey  such  letters  as  I  send  nnto 
him,  to  England,  and,  likewise,  such  letters  as  shall  come  from  England,  to  he 
conveyed  up  to  mo,  so  soon  as  I  have  received  my  banks  in  Nurenberg,  and 
tliere  agreed  with  my  merchant  and  other  acquaintance,  to  convey  at  all  times 
my  letters  to  Antwerp.  Then  I  will  go  to  an  University  called  Tiibiugen,  or 
else  to  some  other  University  nearest  to  Antwerp,  for  the  intent  I  may  write 
often,  and  send  with  speed,  to  your  Lordship. 

"  News  here,  at  this  time,  be  none,  but  that  here  is  most  earnest  communication 
that  the  French  Queen,  and  her  sister  the  Queen  of  Hungai'y,  shall  meet  to- 
gether at  Cambray  now  afore  Michaelmas,  (29th  September.)  All  these  Low 
Countries  here,  be  most  earnest  with  the  Bishop  of  Rome  and  his  traditions, 
and  therefore  he  hath  now  sweetly  rewarded  them,  sending  them  his  deceitful 
blessing,  with  remission  of  all  their  sins,  so  that  they  fast  three  days  together, 
and  this  is  given  ijrath,  without  any  money.  Here  is  an  evil  market, — that 
whereas  he  was  wont  to  sell  his  pardons,  by  great  suit  and  money,  now  he  is 
glad  to  offer  them  for  nothing  !  And  yet  a  great  many  make  no  haste  to  re- 
ceive them,  where  they  be  offered.  I  do  hear  that  the  Bishop  of  Rome  is 
contented,  and  doth  desire  to  have  a  Genei'al  Council,  and  that  this  matter  is 
earnestly  euti'eated  of  divers.  I  am  sure,  if  this  be  truth,  your  Lordship  hatli 
heard  of  it  or  this  time,  more  at  large. 

"  He  that  did  take  Tyndale,  is  abidhxj  at  Louraln,  %nth  ichom  1  did  there  speak ; 
which  doth  not  only  there  rejoice  of  that  act,  hut  goeth  about  to  do  many  more 
Englishmen  like  displeasure ;  and  did  advance  this,  I  being  present,  with  most 
railing  words  against  our  King,  his  Highness,  calling  him — '  Tyrannum  ae  e.\- 
pilatorem  reip,' — tyrant  and  robber  of  the  Covnnonwealth. 

"  He  is  appointed  to  go  shortly  from  Louvaiu  to  Paris  in  France,  and  there  to 
tarry,  because  he  feareth  that  English  merchants  that  be  in  Antwerp,  will  hire 
some  men  privily  to  do  him  some  displeasure  unawares. 

"  Pleaseth  it  your  Lordship  to  understand,  that  I  have  determined  a  better  way 
to  send  my  letters  by^ — and  that  is,  by  one  Thomas  Leigh,  merchant  of  the 
staple  in  Calais,  which  is  of  great  acquaintance  with  my  Lord,  his  Grace  of 
Canterbury,  &c.  Written  in  haste,  at  Antwerp,  the  last  day  of  July,  by  your 
godson  and  daily  bedesman,  Thomas  Tebold."'- 

Tlie  reader  may  recollect  a  notable  man,  John  Tibald, 
examined  before  Tunstal  in  ]528,  who  suffered  much.  Tliis 
may  have  been  some  relation;  but,  at  all  events,  from  the 
close  of  the  letter,  the  writer  seems  to  have  been  long  known 
to  Crumwell,  who  was  now  at  once  promoting  his  education, 
and  employing  him  for  other  purposes.  But  his  second  letter, 
addressed  to  Craumer,  is  nmch  more  pointed. 

"  Pleaseth  it  your  Grace,  that  I  have  delivered  your  letters  unto  Mr.  Thomas 
Leigh,  which,  according  to  your  writing,  hath  delivered  unto  me  twenty  crowns 
of  the  same,  which  money,  God  willing,  1  will  deliver  where  your  Grace 
assigned.'3     Within  these  sixteen  days,  I  take  my  journey  from  Antwerp,  the 

>2  Galba,  B.  x..  81,  but  marked  in  the  Catalogue,  by  mistake,  as  addressed  to  Craumer. 

'3  This  may  have  been  money  for  his  uncle-in-law,  Osiandcr.  Theobald  was  going  to  Nurem- 
berg, and  Orannicr.  in  1.5.y,  having  married  the  niece  of  Osiander,  the  i>nstor  of  that  city,  kept 
\\\i  a  correspondence  with  liim  for  many  years. 


42-t  DISTINCT  INFORMATION   CONVEYED  |^BOOK  I. 

last  day  of  July .14  Aud  because  at  my  first  arrivance  at  Antwerp  I  found 
company  ready  to  go  withal  to  Cologne,  I  went  to  see  my  old  acquaintance  at 
Louvain.  Whei-eas  I  found  Doctor  (Bockenam)  Buckingham,  sometime  Prior 
in  the  Blackfriars  in  Cambridge,  and  another  of  his  brethren  with  him.  I  had 
no  leisure  to  commune  long  with  them  ;  but  he  shewed  me,  that  at  his  departing 
from  England,  he  went  straight  to  EcUnbiinjh  in  Scotland,  there  continuing  to 
Easter  last  past ;  and  then  came  over  to  Louvain,  where  he  and  his  companion 
doth  continue  in  the  house  of  the  Blackfriars  there  ;  having  little  acquaintance 
or  comfort  but  for  their  money ;  for  they  pay  for  their  meat  and  drink  a 
certain  sum  of  money  in  the  year.  Allsoever  that,  I  can  perceive  them  to 
have  it  onli/  by  him  that  hath  taken  Tyndale,  called  Harry  Phillips,  with  whom 
I  had  long  and  familiar  communication,  for  I  made  him  beltere  that  I  was 
minded  to  tarry  and  study  at  Louvaiu." 

It  will  be  observed  that  the  writer  of  this  letter  shows  no 
scruple  at  iuforming-  Cranmer  of  his  dissimulation !  It  was  one 
rei^nino;  vice  of  the  times  :  but  this  information  is  at  once 
curious  and  important.  Perhaps  the  reader  may  recollect, 
that  Buckingham  was  the  man,  whom  Latimer  so  successfully 
exposed,  at  Cambridge,  in  1526.  By  this  letter  it  appears  that 
he  must  have  lived  for  some  time  among  his  brethren,  in  the 
Blackfriars'  monastery  at  Edinburgh,  on  the  high  ground  op- 
posite the  wynd  of  that  name,  or  nearly  in  the  site  of  the  present 
Royal  Infirmary.  Having  received  intelligence  from  Louvain, 
Buckingham,  in  company  with  some  other  friar,  had  left  that 
city  about  the  28th  of  March.  There  was  evidently  a  bond 
of  union  between  the  parties,  and  Phillips  paid  all  charges, 
possessing,  as  we  have  learned,  money  at  command.  This,  by 
the  way,  is  one  token  of  Tyndale's  powerful  influence  in  both 
countries,  of  which  there  will  be  ample  proof,  when  we  come 
to  treat  of  North  Britain  ;  so  that  Scotland,  however  remotely, 
must  now  come  in  for  her  share,  as  well  as  England,  in  the 
guilt  and  shame  of  persecuting  to  the  death  their  common  and 
highest  benefactor.  But  these  men  were  generally  friars,  and 
all  the  friars  hated  Tyndale,  as  they  had  done  Wicliffe,  with 
a  perfect  hatred.  Theobald,  however,  went  on  to  inform  Cran- 
mer, of  all  the  other  circumstances. 

"  I  could  not  perceive  the  contrary  by  his  communication,  but  that  Tyndale 
shall  die ;  which  he  doth  follow,  and  procureth  with  all  diligent  endeavour,  re- 
joicing much  therein ;  saying  that  he  had  a  commission  out  also  for  to  have 
t.iken  Doctor  Barnes  and  George  Joije,  with  other.l^     Then  I  shewed  him  that 

14  Hence  he  had  hegun  to  write  both  lettei-s  on  the  15th  of  that  month. 

'S  These  two  names  certainly  point  us,  and  directly,  to  Gardiner  and  his  party;  for  he  was 
the  inveterate  enemy  of  both  men.  Jnt/ev/as  now  at  Embdcn,  wlierehehad  published  his  "Sub- 
version of  More's  false  foundation,"  against  the  fallen  Chancellor.  Barnes,  in  November  last, 
had  taken  a  bold  step,  which  must  have  greatly  incensed  Gardiner,  as  well  as  all  the  Bishops 


1535.3  '1'^  CRUMWELL  AND  CRANMER.  425 

it  was  conceived  both  in  Enylaiul  and  iu  Anttcerp  that  George  Jove  should  be 
of  counsel  with  him,  in  taking  of  Tyndale,  and  he  answered  that  he  never  saw 
George  Joye,  to  his  knowledge,  much  less,  he  should  him.  This  I  do  write,  be- 
cause Geoi'ge  Joye  is  greatly  blamed  and  abused  among  merchants,  and  many 
other  that  were  his  friends,  falsely  and  wrongfully. 

"  But  this  foresaid  Harry  Phillips  shewed  me,  that  there  was  no  man  of  his 
counsel,  but  a  monk  of  Stratford  Abbey  besides  London,  called  Gabriel  Donne, 
which  at  that  time  was  student  in  Louvain,  and  in  house  with  this  foresaid 
Harry  Phillips.  But  now,  within  these  five  or  six  weeks,  he  is  come  to  Eng- 
land, and,  by  the  help  of  Mr.  Secretary,  hath  obtained  an  Abbey  of  a  thousand 
marks  by  the  year  in  the  west  country. 

"  This  said  Phillips  is  greatly  afraid,  in  so  much  as  I  can  perceive  that  '  the 
English  merchants,'  that  be  in  Antwerp,  will  lay  watch  to  do  him  some  dis- 
pleasure privily.  Wherefore  of  truth  he  hath  sold  his  books  in  Louvain,  to  the 
value  of  twenty  marks  worth  sterling ;  intending  to  go  hence  to  Paris,  and  doth 
tarry  here  upon  nothing  but  the  return  of  his  servant,  which  he  has  long  since 
sent  to  England,  with  letters.  And  because  of  his  long  tarrying,  he  is  niarvel- 
ously  afraid  lest  he  be  taken  and  come  into  Master  Secretai'y's  handling,  with 
his  letters. 

"  Either  this  Phillips  hath  great  friends  in  England  to  maintain  him  here  ; 
or  else,  as  he  showed  me,  he  is  well  beneficed  in  the  bishopric  of  Exeter.17  He 
I'ailcth  at  Louvain,  and  in  the  Queen  of  Hungary's  Court,  most  shamefully  against 
our  King  his  grace  and  other.l**  I  being  present,  he  called  our  King  his  High- 
ness,— tyrannum,  expilatorem  reijmblica', — with  many  other  railing  words,  re- 
joicing that  he  trusteth  to  see  the  Emperor  scourge  his  Highness,  with  his  council 
and  friends.  Also  he  said,  that  Mr.  Secretary  hath  privily  gone  about  matters 
in  Flanders  and  Brabant,  which  are  secretly  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
Queen  of  Hungary,  the  governess  here,  which  she  reckoneth  one  day,  at  her 
pleasure  and  time,  to  declare  to  his  rebuke.  What  this  meaneth  I  cannot  tell, 
neither  could  I  hear  farther ;  but  if  I  had  tarried  there  any  time,  I  should 
have  heard  more. 

« 1  beseech  your  Grace  to  render  thanks  unto  Sir  Thomas  Leigh  for 

his  pains  that  he  took  for  me  in  making  my  bank  and  otherwise,  at  the  instance 
of  your  Grace's  letters.  I  am  minded  to  send  all  my  letters  from  Nuremberg  by 
post  to  Antwerp,  to  a  merchant  there  of  Thomas  Leigh's  acquaintance ;  which 
will  always  send  them  most  surely  with  speed  to  him.  Written  at  Antwerp  the 
last  day  of  July,  by  yom*  bedeman  and  servant,  ever  to  my  small  power,  Thomas 
Tebold.     '  To  4"f.  my  Lord  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  his  Grace.' "'9 


of  the  old  learning.  He  then  had  put  forth  his  "  Supplication  to  Henry  VIII ;"  explaining  his 
original  quarrel  with  these  men,  when  he  was  examined  before  them,  and  sadly  abjured;  saying 
that  he  was  now  ready  to  meet  them  in  argument ;  a  measure  on  which  Barnes  would  not  have 
ventured,  had  the  tide  not  been  turning  iu  favour  of  some  alliance  with  the  Lutherans.  The 
fact  is,  that  Barnes  had  already  arrived  on  the  Continent  when  Theobald  was  writing,  and  not  as 
a  private  character,  but  as  no  less  than  Etivvy  from  Henry  to  the  German  States!  It  was, 
therefore,  a  bold  step  indeed  to  propose  seizing  him  ;  but  such  was  the  rage  of  the  party  and  their 
willing  agents,  the  friars.  At  this  very  moment,  Barnes  was  in  Hamburgh,  on  his  way  to  Wit- 
tenberg, and  we  shall  hear  of  him  again,  before  the  year  is  ended. 

16  The  information  given  as  to  the  time  of  the  monk's  return,  and  his  resort  to  the  west  of 
England,  was  perfectly  correct,  as  will  appear  in  due  time. 

17  Vesey,  Bishop  of  Exeter,  was  a  decided  enemy  of  the  new  learning,  and  Cardinal  Pole  was 
Dean  of  Exeter.  We  shall  find  PhUlips,  ere  long,  in  great  distress,  earnestly  soliciting  an 
audience  of  the  Cardinal,  but  in  vain. 

18  He  refers  to  Mary,  sister  of  the  Empetor,  once  Queen  of  Hungary,  and  still  occasionally  so 
called,  though  now  she  was  Princess  Regent  of  the  Low  Countries. 

19  Galba,  B.  x.,  fol.  102.     31st  July  1535.     Marked  by  mistake  in  the  Catalogue  1.7.3i). 


420  POYNTZ,   THE   FRIEND  OF   TYNDALE,  [boOK  I. 

Thus  then,  whatever  is  to  become  of  our  immortal  Trans- 
lator, by  the  month  of  August  1535,  it  plainly  appears  that 
both  Cranmer  and  Orumwell  were  very  distinctly  informed  of 
the  circumstances  connected  with  his  apprehension.  The  for- 
mer, especially,  is  warned  of  Tyndale  being  in  imminent  dan- 
ger of  death,  as  well  as  of  a  certain  Monk  by  name,  deeply 
implicated.  Was  it  possible  that,  in  future  life,  he  could  ever 
forget  the  name  of  this  man?  But  whether  the  Archbishop 
or  Mr.  Secretary  then  moved  one  step  ;  or  whether  Tyndale, 
to  say  the  least,  was  ultimately  neglected  and  forgotten,  and 
this  very  monk  was  left  at  large  to  be  promoted ;  it  must  be  left 
for  the  sequel  to  explain.  At  all  events,  Tyndale  has  still 
fourteen  months  to  live.     Here  was  ample  time  to  interpose. 

Previously  to  these  letters,  however,  some  application  had 
been  made  to  England,  for  the  report  in  Antwerp  was,  that  his 
Majesty  had  interfered,  requesting  Tyndale  to  be  sent  back  to 
that  city.  It  was  but  a  groundless  rumour !  But  August 
had  now  come,  when  Mr.  Poyntz,  like  a  sound-hearted 
Englishman,  and  impatient  of  delay,  could  no  longer  refrain. 
At  such  a  crisis,  it  is  refreshing  to  find  that  there  was  one 
man  true  to  his  crest^  throughout;--'  whether  Crumwell  or 
Cranmer  move  or  not.  His  first  step  was  to  send  an  earnest 
letter  to  his  brother,  imploring  his  immediate  and  most  zealous 
exertion.     It  is  dated  "at  Antwerp,  25th  August  1535.'''' 

"  Right  well  beloved  brother, — I  recommend  me  unto  you,  and  to  [Ann,] 
your  wife,  trusting  in  God  that  j'ou  be  in  good  healtli.  Brother,  the  cause  of 
my  writing  to  you  at  this  time  is,  as  seems  to  me,  for  a  great  matter  concerning 
to  the  King's  Grace  ;  for  though  I  am  herein  abiding,  yet  of  very  natural  love 
to  the  country  that  I  was  born  in,  so  also  for  the  oath  and  obedience  the  which 
every  true  subject  is  bound  by  the  law  of  God  to  have  to  his  Prince,  compels 
me  to  write  that  thing  [which  I]  know  or  perceive  might  be  prejudicial  or 
hurtful  to  his  most  noble  Grace  ;— which  may  come  through  counsel  of  them 
that  seek  to  bring  their  own  appointments  to  pass,  under  colour  of  pretending 
the  King's  honour,  and  yet  be  as  the  thorns  under  a  goodly  7-ose, — I  might  say, 
very  traitors,  in  their  heart'?,  reckoning  at  length  to  bring  their  purpose  to  pass, 
as  they  have  always  done,  through  such  means.  "V\'ho  they  be,  I  name  no  man  ; 
but  it  is  good  to  perceive  it  umst  be  the  Papists,  which  have  always  been  the 
deceivers  of  the  world,  by  their  craft  and  juggling. 

"  For  whereas  it  ^\as  said  here,  the  King  had  granted  his  gracious  letters  in 
the  favour  of  one  William  Tyndale,  for  to  have  been  sent  hitlier  ;  the  which  is 
in  prison,  and  like  to  suffer  death,  c.vccj't  it  bo  through  his  gracious  help.  But 
it  is  thought  those  letters  be  stopped. 


2"  A  i-uliit  i\ini.  creel,  tlic  fist  rluticlicd.  pp.  vested  arg. 


1J3.3.]  WRITING   URGENTLY.  127 

"  Tliis  man  was  lodged  with  nie,  tlu'ee  quarters  of  a  year,  and  was  taken  out 
of  my  house,  by  a  Sergeant-of-arnis,  otherwise  called  a  dore-wardore,  and  the 
Procurer-general  of  Brabant  ;  the  which  was  done  by  procurement  out  of 
EiKjland,  and,  as  I  suppose,  unknown  to  the  King's  Grace,  till  it  was  done. 
For  I  know  well,  if  it  had  pleased  his  Grace  to  have  sent  him  a  commandment 
to  come  into  England,  he  would  not  have  disobeyed  it,  to  have  put  his  life  in 
jeopardy.  But  now  these  privy  (lorcarys)  lui-kers,  perceiving  that  his  Grace, 
of  his  entire  will  would  have  sent  for  him,  by  the  means  whereof,  it  is  to  be 
thought,  they  fear  that  if  his  Grace,  (as  no  doubt  but  his  abundant  goodness  is 
such  he  would)  charitably  hear  him, — then  it  might  be  the  froward's  fate  for 
their  purpose  they  went  about.  Wherefore  it  is  presupposed,  that  they  have 
solicited  this  to  his  Grace  or  to  his  Council, — that  the  putting  to  death  of  this 
man  here,  in  this  country,  might  be  to  the  King's  high  honour,  making  greatly 
for  liis  purpose  in  time  to  come,  when  a  (his)  matter  shall  be  disputed,  if  it 
come  thereto.  Wherefore,  if  it  be  their  persuading,  they  know  themselves  it  can 
stand  in  none  effect,  to  no  purpose,  but  might  be  greatly  against  his  Grace,  in 
that,  and  other  things.  Whether  this  be  their  device,  or  be  what  other  mis- 
chiefs mean,  I  cannot  tell ;  but  be,  whatsoever  it  be,  if  a  poor  man  might  and 
durst  boldly  reason  with  them,  I  think  if  they  had  either  fear  of  God,  their  Prince, 
or  shame  of  the  world,  they  should  (would)  beware  or  ever  the}-  did  go  about  to 
procure  such  a  thing.  For  they  would  that  the  King  should  highly  favour  them, 
because  they  can  prevent  such  things  for  liis  Grace,  and  be  the  mean  whereof 
they  may  come  to  high  promotions,  and  stand  fast  in  them  ;  and  so  as  they 
may  bring  that  to  pass,  they  care  not :  And  the  effect  of  their  [motions] 
is  nothing  else,  nor  is  it  possible  it  should  be,  of  them  that  seek  their  [all] 

in  worldly  pomp,  whatsoever  their  outward  pronouncing  be.     And to 

play  with  his  Grace,  as  some  men  do  that  be  put  in  trust,  and  with 

confederacy  with  othei's,  deceive  them  that  put  them  in  trust,  and  handle  it  so 
that  he  shall  make  the  party  think  he  has  done  more  for  him  than  his  reward 
is  worth.  And  so  play  '  Schoggyn  behynde  hys  boke.'  When  these  crafty 
fellows  meet,  they  jest  and  pout  at  lum  they  have  so  cleanly  deceived,  and 
though  afterward  it  be  known,  yet  they  care  not,  for  it  shall  be  reckoned  among 
such  as  they  be,  for  gi-eat  wisdom.  Wherefore  they  be  past  shame,  and  the 
.party  past  his  remedy. 

"  But  a  poor  man  that  has  no  promotion,  nor  looks  for  none,  having  no 
quality  whereby  he  might  obtain  honour,  but  of  a  very  natural  zeal,  and  fear  of 
God,  and  his  Prince,  had  (lever)  rather  live  a  beggar  all  days  of  his  life,  and 
put  himself  in  jeopardy  to  die,  rather  than  to  live  and  see  those  lyino- 
counsellors  to  have  their  purpose, — for  some  men  perceive  more  than  tliev  can 
express  by  words,  the  which  sorrow  it  inwardly,  till  they  see  remedy. 

"  And  by  the  means  that  this  poor  man,  William  Tyxdale,  has  lain  in  mv 
house  three  quarters  of  a  year,  I  know  that  the  King  has  never  a  truer-hearted 
subject  to  his  Grace  this  day  /ir'uhj,  and  for  that  he  does  know  that  he  is  bound 
by  the  law  of  God  to  obey  his  Prince.  I  wot  it  well,  he  would  not  do  the  con- 
trary, to  be  made  Lord  of  the  World,  howsoever  the  King's  Grace  be  infomied  ; 
but  what  care  these  Papists  for  that  I  For  their  pompous  and  high  authoritv 
have  all  things  been  liolden  up,  by  murder  and  shedding  the  blood  of  innocents  ; 
causing  Princes,  by  one  mean  or  other,  to  consent  with  them,  to  the  same. 

"  Brother,  about  eighteen  or  twenty  years  ago,  they  at  Rome,  to  magnifv  the 
King's  Grace  in  his  style,  gave  him  the  name  '  Defender  of  the  Faith,'  the 
which  may  be  likened  to  the  prophecy  of  Caiaphas,  when  he  said — '  It  is  expedi- 
ent for  us,  that  one  man  die  for  the  people,  that  all  do  not  perish."  That 
prophecy  was  true,  but  yet  contrary  to  his  meaning.     So  likew  ise,  they  thought, 


428  TO   HIS   BROTHER  IN  ENGLAND.  [booK  I. 

by  the  mean  thereof,  he  (our  Prince)  should  be  a  great  niaintahier  of  their 
abominations.  Ilowbeit,  God,  the  wliich  sees  all  things,  has  entered  his  Grace 
into  the  right  battle,  according  to  that  style,  as  never  Prince  has  done  so  nobly 
since  Christ  died,  in  the  which  I  beseech  God  give  him  victory. 

"  And  that  his  Grace  be  not  persuaded  to  let  be  undone,  what  might  greatly 
prevail  thereto,  by  the  death  of  this  man,  which  should  be  a  great  hindrance 
to  the  Gospel  ;  and,  to  the  enemies  of  it,  one  of  the  highest  pleasures :  But, 
and  if  it  would  please  the  King's  Highness  to  semi  for  this  man,  so  that  he 
might  dispute  his  articles  with  him  at  large,  which  they  lay  to  him,  it  might, 
by  the  mean  thereof,  be  so  opened  to  the  Court  and  the  Council  of  this  country, 
that  they  would  be  at  another  point  with  the  Bishop  of  Rome,  within  a  short 
space.  And  I  think  he  (Tyndale)  shall  be  shortly  at  a  point  to  be  condemned ; 
for  there  are  tico  Englishmen  at  Louvain,  that  do  and  have  applied  it  sore, 
taking  great  pains  to  translate  out  of  English  into  Latin  those  things  that  may 
make  against  him — so  that  the  Clergy  here  may  undei'staud  it  and  condemn 
him,  as  they  have  done  all  others,  for  keeping  opinions  contrary  to  their  busi- 
ness,— the  which  they  call,  '  the  order  of  holy  Church.' 

"  Brother,  the  knowledge  that  I  have  of  this  man,  causes  me  to  write  as  my 
conscience  binds  me  ;  for  the  King's  Grace  should  have  of  him,  at  this  day,  as 
high  a  treasure  as  of  honour;  one  man  Uring  [thtirc  is  iiof]  that  has  been  of 
GREATER  REPUTATiOiN.  Therefore,  I  desire  you  that  this  matter  may  be  solicited 
to  his  Grace  for  this  man,  with  as  good  effect  as  shall  be  in  you,  or  by  your 
means  to  be  done  ;  for,  on  my  conscience,  there  be  not  many  perfecter  in  this 
day  living,  as  knows  God,  who  have  you  iu  keeping. 

"  Your  Brother,  Thojias  Poy.ntz. 

"  Brother,  I  think  if  that  Walter  Marsch,  now  being  Governor,  had  done 
his  duty  effectually  here  at  this  time,  there  would  have  been  a  remedy  found 
for  this  man.  There  be  many  men  care  not  for  a  matter,  so  as  they  may  do 
ought  to  make  their  own  seem  fair,  in  avoiding  themselves  that  they  be  not  spied. 

"  To  his  irell-hctorcd  brother,  John  Poyntz,  Gentleman,  diceUivg 
in  North  Okendon,  in  Esse.i;  this  be  delirered."''^^ 

The  presumption,  if  not  the  certainty,  is,  that  it  was  thig 
letter  Avhich  at  last  took  effect ;  for  we  have  now  the  proof 
that  Tyndale's  situation  must  have  been  explained  to  his 
Majesty.  Mr.  John  Poyntz  had  been,  for  twenty  years,  in 
familiar  intercourse,  not  only  with  the  Court,  but  the  King ; 
he  had  been  lone/  about  the  King's  person,  and  in  the  house- 
hold, though  now  at  his  estate  in  Essex.  Hence  the  style  of 
his  brother's  letter.  It  was  to  be  a  dh'ect  appeal.  At  all 
events,  Crumwell  was  roused  at  last.  He  had  indeed  spoken 
with  great  bitterness  of  Tyndale,  when  writing  to  Vaughan ; 
and  we  have  seen  Cranmer,  too,  in  company  with  Sir  T. 
Elyot,  then  charged  to  seize  him  ;  but  the  times  had  now 
materially  changed,  and  they  alike  wavered  with  them.     J3e- 

21  Cotton  MS.,  Galba,  B.  x.,  fol.  fio. 


1635.]  ONE   MESSENGER   FROM   CRUMWELL.  -1.2^ 

fore,  tliere  was  no  such  Queen  upon  the  throne ;  and  Crum- 
well  could  not  have  forgotten  her  letter  to  himself,  last  year, 
respecting  Mr.  Harman.  He,  therefore,  now  acts  very  diffe- 
rently, at  least  for  a  little  moment.  Since  Marshe,  the 
Governor  of  the  Merchant-Adventurers,  had  been  complained 
of  as  so  remiss,  the  messenger  despatched  had  been  directed 
to  wait  upon  another  person,  Mr.  Robert  Flegge ;  and  he  re- 
plies, on  the  22d  of  September,  in  the  following  terms — 

" Plcaseth  it  your  mastership  to  understand,  that  the  tentli  day  of  tliis  pro- 
sent  month  of  September,  was  brought  to  me,  by  one  George  Collins,  two  letters 
sent  by  your  mastership,  as  he  reported,  the  one  directed  to  the  Marquis  of 
Barough,  (Bergen-op-Zoom,)  and  the  other  to  the  Bishop  (Archbishop)  of 
Palermo.  And  when  I  understood  that  the  said  letters  came  from  your 
mastership,  I  did  my  best  diligence  to  make  enquiry  whether  the  said  Lords 
were  in  the  Court  or  not ;  then  I  was  informed  that  the  Marquis  of  Barough 
was  departed  two  days  before,  towards  Dutchland,  (Germany,)  as  Governor 
and  ruler  of  the  Princess  of  Denmark,  to  conduct  her  to  her  husband,  the 
Palsgrave.  Supposing  the  said  letters  were  of  importance,  I  sent  one  of  our 
merchants  (Mr.  Poyntz)  after  him,  with  the  said  letters,  and  to  bring  the 
answer  thereof.  Also  I  had  written  to  the  said  Lord  Marquis,  desiring  him, 
right  humbly,  that  he  would  vouchsafe  to  write  to  such  of  his  friends  in  the 
Court,  -which  should  do  for  you,  as  much  in  his  absence,  as  if  he  were  present, 
in  all  such  causes  as  your  mastership  should  have  to  do  before  the  Queen  and 
the  Council.  Whereupon  1  have  received  a  letter  from  the  said  Lord  Marquis, 
wherein  he  writeth,  that  he  is  very  sorry  that  it  is  his  chance  to  be  absent  from 
the  Court  at  this  time,  so  that  he  cannot  do  the  King's  Highness  and  you  such 
service,  as  his  good  mind  and  will  is  to  do.  Also  he  wrote  me,  that,  according 
to  my  desire,  he  had  written  to  his  great  friend,  the  Bishop  of  Palermo,  con- 
cerning your  causes,  that,  in  everything,  he  should,  for  his  sake  in  his  absence, 
do  therein  as  if  the  matter  extended  to  his  own  person.  He  is  the  man  that 
may  do  most  in  these  matters,  of  any  other  resident  in  the  Court  at  this  time.-2 
"  And  so  is  come  from  my  Lord,  the  man  that  I  sent  the  letters  by,  the 
brhujer  hereof,  and  brought  with  him  both  your  letters,  and  the  Lord  Marquis's, 
and  delivered  them  to  the  Lord  of  Palermo.  Whereupon  the  Lord  of  Palermo 
spake  with  the  Queen  and  the  Coimcil,  and  hath  made  you  such  answer,  by 
writing,  as  this  bringer  hereof  shall  deliver  you,  the  which,  I  pray  God,  may 
be  to  the  King's  pleasure  and  yours,  &c. — At  Antwerp,  the  22d  day  of  Sep- 
tember, an.  1535. "23 

By  Foxe''s  narrative,  in  his  first  edition,  we  learn  that 
Flegge  had  consulted  with  the  chief  English  merchants — 
that  Mr.  Poyntz  had  to  proceed  sixty  miles  to  the  eastward. 
However,  he  overtook  the  Marquis  at  Achon,  (Alkhen,)  fif- 
teen miles  from  Maestricht.  On  reading  the  letter  addressed 
to  him,  the  Marquis,  at  first,  retorted,  that  "  tliere  were  of 
their  countrymen  burned  in  England  not  long  before"'' — allud- 

--  CarondeUt.  Lord  Archbishop  of  Palermo,  ntid  President  of  the  Council. 
?3  Cotton  MS.,  Galba,  B.  x.,  fol.  (!2. 


430  POYNTZ   EARNESTLY   ENGAGED.  [[booK  I. 

ing  to  the  Dutchmen  burnt  in  Smithfield.  Poyntz  acknow- 
ledged the  fact ;  "  howbeit,"  said  he,  "  whatsoever  the  crime 
was,  if  his  lordship,  or  any  other  nobleman,  had  written,  re- 
quiring him  to  have  had  them,  he  thought  they  should  not 
have  been  denied." — "  Well,"  said  he,  "  I  have  no  leisure  to 
write,  for  the  Princess  is  ready  to  ride."  Then  said  Poyntz, 
"  If  it  shall  please  your  lordship,  I  will  attend  upon  you  to 
the  next  baiting  place."  The  Marquis  assented,  adding,  "  if 
you  so  do,  I  will  advise  myself  by  the  way,  what  to  write." 
At  Maestricht,  accordingly,  Mr.  Poyntz  obtained  the  letters 
referred  to  by  Mr.  Flegge ;  one  to  the  Brabant  Council,  one 
to  the  Merchant- Adventurers,  and  a  third  to  Crumwell.  Mr. 
Poyntz  proceeded  direct  for  London,  but  there  he  had  to  wait 
during  the  greater  part  of  the  month  of  October.  "  At 
length,"  says  Foxe,  "  the  letters  (in  reply)  being  delivered 
him,  he  returned  and  delivered  them  to  the  Council  at  Brus- 
sels, and  there  tarried  for  answer  of  the  same."  This  was  on 
or  before  the  first  of  November. 

• 
"  When  the  said  Poyntz  had  tarried  three  or  four  days,  it  was  told  him,  by 
one  that  belonged  to  the  Chancery,  that  Master  Tyndale  would  have  been  de- 
livered to  him,  according  to  the  tenor  of  the  letters  ;  hut  Phillips  beimj  there, 
followed  the  suit  against  Master  Tyndale,  and  hearing  that  he  should  be  de- 
livered to  Poyntz,  and  doubting  lest  he  should  be  put  from  his  purpose,  he 
knew  no  other  remedy  but  to  accuse  Poyntz  ;  saying,  that  he  was  a  dweller  in 
the  town  of  Antwerp,  and  there  had  been  a  succourer  of  Tyndale,  and  was  one 
of  the  same  opinion  ;  and  that  all  this  was  only  his  own  labour  and  suit  to  have 
Master  Tyndale  at  liberty,  and  no  man's  else, 

"  Thus,  upon  his  information  aud  accusation,  Poyntz  was  attached  by  the 
Procurer-general,  the  Emperor's  Attorney,  and  delivered  to  the  keejiing  of  two 
Sergeants-at-arms.  The  same  evening  was  sent  to  him  one  of  the  Chancery 
with  the  Procurer-general,  who  ministered  imto  him  an  oath,  that  he  should 
truly  make  answer  to  all  such  things  as  should  be  enquired  of  him,  thinking 
they  would  have  had  no  other  examinations  of  him,  but  of  his  message.  The 
next  day  likewise,  they  came  again,  and  had  him  in  examination,  and  so  five  or 
six  days,  one  after  anotlu;r,  upon  not  so  few  as  a  hundred  articles,  as  well  of  the 
King's  affaii's,  as  of  the  message  concerning  Tyndale,  of  his  aiders,  and  of  his 
religion.  Out  of  these  examinations,  the  Procurer-general  drew  twenty-three 
or  twenty-four  articles,  and  declared  the  same  against  the  said  Poyntz." 

Eight  days  after,  he  was  ordered  to  have  his  answer  ready. 
Meanwhile,  he  must  send  no  message  to  Antwerp,  or  any 
other  place,  but  by  the  Brussels  post:  he  must  send  no  letters 
except  in  German,  and  these  to  be  examined  fii'st  by  the 
Procurer-general :   he  nuist  speak  only  in  that  language,  that 


]535.]  NARROW  KSCARK    KOR    II IS   Lll''E.  431 

liis  keepers  might  know  every  word  he  said.  To  this  last 
rule  there  was  hut  one  exception,  when  an  English  Noviciate 
of  the  White  Friars  was  allowed  by  their  Provincial  to  con- 
verse with  Mr,  Poyntz,  It  was  only  a  politic  step,  to  ascer- 
tain his  principles,  before  receiving  his  written  answer. 
Among  other  topics,  Sir  Thomas  More  and  the  Bishop  of 
Rochester,  and  their  executions  in  England  this  summer  were 
introduced,  as  one  key  to  their  purpose.  On  the  eighth  day, 
when  the  Commissioners  came  for  the  answer  in  writing,  Mr. 
Poyntz  had  not  his  excuse  ready,  when  they  gave  him  another 
week.  He  then  presented  a  general  reply,  but  they  insisted 
upon  a  specific  answer  to  each  of  the  articles,  separately. 
Thus  he  "  trifled  them  oft""  from  the  first  of  November  to  the 
twenty-fourth  of  December.  On  the  morning  of  that  day, 
they  informed  him,  that  if  his  reply  were  not  brought  in 
before  night,  he  should  be  condemned  without  it :  It  was 
eio'ht  in  the  eveniuo-  before  the  Procurer-general  received  the 
document.  This  led  to  a  tedious  altercation  in  writing, 
during  which  process,  Mr,  Poyntz  demanded  bail,  on  security 
being  oftered.  They  at  first  assented,  but  afterwards  declined 
to  take  any  security  whatever.  He  had  applied  to  the 
English  Merchants  in  Antwerp,  for  surety,  and  had  they 
come  forward,  it  would  have  altered  the  case  from  a  criminal 
to  a  civil  one ;  but,  strange  to  say,  if  they  actually  had  re- 
ceived the  application,  it  was  in  vain.  In  the  meantime,  the 
expenses  of  this  process  were  accumulating  to  a  considerable 
amount.  During  the  whole  time,  Poyntz  was  not  in  a  common 
prison,  but  in  the  keeping  of  the  two  Sergeants-at-arms  : 
besides  his  own  expenses,  he  had  to  maintain  them.,  so  that 
the  daily  charge  was  not  less  than  five  shillings  ;  an  enormous 
sum  in  those  times.  Altogether  he  had  now  been  detained 
about  thirteen  weeks,  from  the  first  of  November  to  Candle- 
mas, which,  at  five  shillings  daily,  had  cost  about  dP23,  or  equal 
to  above  ,£'300  of  the  present  time.  For  part  of  these  charges 
they  now  demanded  payment  or  surety,  and  gave  him  eight 
days  to  settle  the  matter.  Poyntz  sent  a  messenger  to  the  Eng- 
lish Merchants  who  wei'e  then  at  Barrow  (Bergen)  Market, 
resolving,  however,  not  to  Avait  his  return.  If  taken,  he  knew 
it  would  be  but  death,  and  so  during  the  night  he  contrived 
to  escape,  and  at  the  opening  of  the  city  gates,  in  the  morning, 
got  off.     As  soon  as  it  was  perceived  that  he  was  gone,  men 


432  TYNDALE'S  PROGRESS  IN   PRISON.  [boOK  I. 

Oil  horseback  were  sent  out  in  pursuit ;  but  he  knew  tlie 
country  well,  and  at  last  arrived  safely  in  England. 

Here  is  a  man,  hitherto  unknown,  though  certainly  he  now 
demands  our  most  grateful  remembrance.  For  his  friend  he 
could  not  possibly  do  more  than  he  had  done.  It  was  the 
most  memorable  exploit  in  his  whole  life ;  and  what  is  re- 
markable, we  shall,  by  and  bye,  find  it  to  have  been  engraven 
on  his  tomh-stone^  which,  we  are  gratified  to  add,  is  still  dis- 
tinctly visible,  and  not  far  from  London. 

With  respect  to  Tyndale  himself,  now  in  close  confinement 
at  Vilvorde,  we  are  not  altogether  without  information.  The 
fact  of  his  imprisonment  was  now  well  known  in  England, 
Scotland,  and  Grermany  ;  and  the  zeal  against  him  was  "  burn- 
ing hot,"  especially  at  Louvain,  a  place  long  celebrated  for  its 
ardent  attachment  to  the  old  learning.  This  may  easily  be 
conjectured  from  tbe  men  now  arrayed,  and  apparently 
(lathered  together  against  him.  Dunne,  having  fulfilled  his 
commission,  and  for  six  months  done  his  best,  had  left  for 
England  ;  but  Phillips  and  Buckenam,  with  others,  were  still 
at  Louvain,  only  twelve  miles  from  Vilvorde  ;  and  they,  in 
conjunction  with  the  doctors  there,  had  led  Tyndale  into  dis- 
cussion. He,  having  been  permitted  to  reply  in  writing,  was 
not  slow  to  answer.  "  There  was,""  says  Foxe,  "  much  writ- 
ing, and  great  disputation  to  and  fro,  between  him  and  them 
of  the  University  of  Louvain  ;  in  such  sort,  that  they  all  had 
enough  to  do,  and  more  than  they  could  well  wield,  to  answer 
the  authorities  and  testimonies  of  the  Scripture,  whereupon 
he,  most  pithily,  grounded  his  doctrine." 

They  had,  indeed,  now  laid  Tyndale  in  prison,  but  even 
this  could  by  no  means  prevent  the  progress  of  his  work.  It 
must  not  pass  unobserved,  that  there  came  out  this  year 
another,  or  the  third  edition,  of  his  "  Obedience  of  a  Christian 
Man,"  and  it  may  very  safely  be  presumed  not  without  his 
approbation,  if  not  concurrence  ;  as  it  was  printed  at  Marburg, 
where  he  and  Fryth  had  dwelt.^^  Wolsey  had  been  five  years 
in  his  grave,  whose  policy  it  so  effectually  exposed  ;  but  Tyn- 
dale had  there  said,  even  after  the  Parliament  of  November 
1529,  that  as  they  had  not  uprooted  the  tree,  it  would  grow 


s*  It  is  in  12mo.  black  lettor— '■  Marlbnrow  in  the  Land  of  Hcssp,  1535."— 7i/W.  Uarldance, 
vol.  i.,  no.  2I1<)2,  p.  i;«i. 


l.>.i.5.]  SIAI'K   Ol''    KNGI.ANl).  i-j-lj 

again.  Hy  the  reprint,  therefore,  he  seemed  to  repeat,  that, 
in  his  estimation,  mnch  still  remained  to  be  done  in  England  ; 
and  he  himself  was  now  suffering  under  the  very  system  he 
had  there  exposed.  The  republication  at  this  period,  how- 
ever, would  certainl}'  not  contribute  to  his  enlargement,  nor 
would  it  now  help  to  raise  him  in  the  estimation  of  Henry 
VIII.  Once  on  a  time,  it  is  true,  he  is  reported  to  have 
said — "  this  is  a  book  for  me  and  all  kings  to  read," — but 
then,  to  such  a  man,  there  were  "  hard  sayings'"'  in  it,  and 
that  emotion  had  died  away. 

Another  piece  also  now  appeared,  and  appropriate  to  the 
war  then  wao^infj  with  the  Doctors  of  Lou  vain.  This  was 
Wicliffe's  Wicket,  or  an  exposition  of  the  words  "  This  is 
my  hodtj^''  accompanied  by  Tyndale's  judgment  respecting  the 
Testament  of  William  Tracy .^^  But  the  most  memorable 
circumstance  was,  that  in  this,  though  the  year  of  Tyndale's 
imprisonment,  not  fewer  than  three  editions  of  his  New  Tes- 
tament came  from  the  press.  These,  however,  will  come  be- 
fore us,  with  much  more  effect,  after  we  have  observed  what 
was  doing  in  England,  or  that  country  for  which  they  were 
all  intended. 

Upon  returning  into  England,  the  altered  or  peculiar  character  of 
public  affiiirs  invites  our  special  notice.  For  the  gratification  of  his 
own  passions,  and  for  this  alone,  Henry  the  Eighth,  in  his  long  contest 
with  Clement,  had  now  wrought  his  kingdom  into  a  distinct  and  very 
marked  position  ;  not  only  as  it  regarded  Italy,  but  the  rest  of  Europe. 
Before  the  death  of  that  Pontiif,  in  September  last,  the  contest  was,  in 
many  respects,  ^personal  one,  and  there  had  been  not  a  little  of  mutual 
personal  provocation  ;  but  now  that  another  man,  Paul  III.,  has  suc- 
ceeded at  Rome,  and  circumstances  are  so  changed  at  home,  two 
questions  naturally  occur — What  was  the  actual  state  of  England  ?  and 
what  were  the  intentions  of  the  executive  government  \ 

In  addition  to  those  titles  which  his  ancestors  had  worn  for  ages,  his 
Majesty  might  assume  an  additional  one,  involving  vast  claims  ;  but  it 
by  no  means  followed  as  a  consequence,  either  that  the  nation  would 
bow  assent,  or  his  own  Council  see  eye  to  eye.  Henry,  therefore,  though 
the  resolute  monarch  still,  nay,  more  so  than  ever,  was,  after  all,  within 
his  own  kingdom,  in  fact,  only  the  head  of  a  party,  and  the  mind  of 


25  "  Wyckliffe's  Wycket,  whyche  he  made  in  Kyng  Rycarde's  Days  the  Second,  1399;  with 
the  Testament  of  Mr.  William  Tracy,  Esquier,  expounded  by  William  Tyndale,  wherein  thou 
shalt  see,  with  what  charitie  ^he  Chuncclhn-  of  IFnrceater  burned,  when  he  took  up  the  dead 
carcase,  and  niarle  aslics  of  it.  after  it  w.as  buried.     \'i^5."—llibl.  Hail.  No.  2899. 

vol..    1.  2  K 


4.34.  STATE   OF    ENGLAND.  [^BOOK  1. 

England  was  divided.  Not  merely  divided  between  him  and  the  Pontiff, 
which  it  certainly  was,  as  long  as  he  lived  ;  but  the  Volume  of  Inspira- 
tion had  been  introduced  from  time  to  time,  for  the  last  nine  years,  in 
spite  of  all  opposition,  and  it  was  now  working,  as  it  had  done,  with  an 
influence  irresistible.  Here,  although  hidden,  lay  the  future  stability 
of  England,  notwithstanding  a  divided  Cabinet,  and  a  monarch  so 
capricious. 

All  men  in  tiu-n,  it  is  true,  must  bow  to  the  Sovereign's  will  and 
pleasure,  yet  did  this  never  prevent  his  having  two  parties,  inveterately 
opposed  to  each  other,  and  continually  standing  in  his  presence.  They 
did  so  to  the  houi'  of  his  death  ;  and,  during  the  entire  period  of  his  future 
reign,  these  two  parties  continued  to  rise  and  fall,  like  the  corresponding 
scales  of  a  balance  ;  while  the  monarch  himself,  a  "  double-minded  man," 
and  therefore , "  unstable  in  all  his  ways,"  was  often  "  driven  as  by  the 
wind  and  tossed."  The  old  party  were  hostile  to  the  liberty  of  the 
subject,  or  the  enlargement  of  his  just  rights,  but,  above  all,  to  the 
liberty  of  the  press,  and  the  progress  of  the  human  mind  in  Divine 
knowledge :  the  new,  although  bloated  by  time-serving,  as  well  as 
notorious  compliance  with  the  passions  or  vices  of  the  monarch,  and 
occasionally  not  scrupulous  in  the  means  emjiloyed  to  gain  their  end, 
were,  however,  overruled  by  God,  for  bringing  the  kingdom  into  better 
times.  At  the  head  of  the  former  still  stood  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  the 
Prime-Ministcr,26  and  Gardiner,  the  Bishop  of  Winchester,  that  able, 
but  deceitful  man.  Crumwell,  Audley,  and  Cranmer,  conducted  the 
other  pai'ty  ;  while  under  both  there  were,  of  course,  active  subordinate 
agents.  The  influence  of  Anne  Boleyn,  in  her  character  as  Queen,  was 
decidedly  in  favour  of  the  advancement  of  truth ;  but  this  influence 
operating  at  once  as  a  restraint  or  correction  of  the  old  party,  and  a 
check  on  her  unbridled  husband,  her  career  soon  closed,  though  in  a 
manner  which  has  scarcely  even  yet  been  fully  explained. 

Meanwhile,  let  it  be  observed,  that,  dui'ing  the  whole  of  this  year, 
there  was  no  meeting  of  Parliament,  nor  any  Convocation  held  in  Eng- 
land.^ The  prospective  measures,  which  had  been  sjinctioned  in  the 
close  of  1534,  afforded  quite  enough  of  employment  till  February  1536, 
when  both  Houses  sat,  after  a  prorogation  of  fourteen  mouths. 

The  transactions  of  the  present  period  deserve  notice,  as  an  exhibition 
of  the  King  of  England  still  advancing  in  the  exercise  of  his  newly 
assumed  prerogatives.  The  last  Parliament  having,  for  the  augmenta- 
tion of  the  King's  royal  estate,  assigned  to  him  the  first-fruits  of  all 


26  The  only  man,  so  lonp;  near  his  person,  of  whom  Henry  was  at  once  jealous  and  afraid. 

27  There  is  some  confusion  in  Burnet,  and  otliers,  in  regard  to  this.  In  one  place  he  marks 
the  long  recess,  in  another  he  .appears  to  forget  it.  There  was  no  meeting  in  the  spring,  and 
in  the  fall  of  the  year  the  plague  j>rcvented  any  Session.  All  the  measures  of  LW.")  rose  out 
ipf  the  Parliament  and  Convncntion  of  \rM  :  or  from  Henry's  will  and  pleasure. 


1535.J  KHY   TO   ITS  COMMOTION.  4;J5 

spiritual  livings,  and  the  tentlm  thruughout  the  kingdom,  Henry  resolved 
not  to  be  deceived.  Some  step  must  be  taken  to  ascertain  what,  and 
how  much,  these  exactions  ought  to  be.  We  forget  not  that  the  Observant 
Friars  of  Greenwich  and  Richmond,  of  Canterbury,  Newark,  and  New- 
castle, had  already  been  put  down,  and  this  of  itself  must  have  produced 
not  a  little  excitement ;  but  they  were  not  possessed  of  wealth,  so  that 
a  far  more  important  key  to  the  commotions  ensuing,  may  be  found  in 
the  "  Instructions  and  Commission  of  Henry,"  on  the  30th  of  January, 
for  knowing  "  the  whole  and  just  yearly  value  of  all  possessions,  lands, 
tenements,  profits,  &c.,  as  well  spiritual  as  temporal,  pertaining  to  any 
manner  of  dignity,  monastery,  church,  parsonage,  vicarage,  or  other 
dignity,  throughout  England,  Wales,  Berwick  and  Calais."  The  Com- 
missioners, when  once  appointed,  were  to  survey  the  same  "  eiFectu- 
ally,  with  all  uprightness  and  dexterity,  as  they  were  to  answer  to  his 
Majesty  at  their  peril  V'^^  The  precise  yearly  income  of  every  Bishop, 
nay,  of  every  parsonage,  must  now  be  made  ajjparent  to  all ;  the  revenue 
of  every  minor  abbey,  priory,  or  monastery,  would  no  longer  be  a  secret. 
The  sweeping  decree  came  with  equal  pressure  on  every  priest,  and 
upon  all  the  friars,  whether  white,  black,  or  grey.  Such  a  step,  it  may 
easily  be  presumed,  would  not  only  rouse  up  the  kingdom,  but  it  ac- 
counts for  many  a  heart-burning,  as  well  as  many  a  plot  and  intrigue 
that  now  followed. 

His  Majesty  had  resolved  also  to  be  su^jported  in  his  assumed  Supre- 
macy, by  an  oath,  to  be  taken  by  all  parties  ;  and  the  reader  must  not 
forget,  that  it  was  now  become  treason  for  any  man,  either  to  deny  the 
King's  dignity,  or  to  call  him  heretic,  schismatic,  or  tyrant,  on  account 
of  any  thing  he  had  done,  nay,  or  was  yet  to  do  !  When  this  act  was 
passed  in  the  last  Parliament,  "  it  put  many,"  says  Strype,  "  who  were 
still  devoted  to  Rome,  into  very  terrible  concern." 

The  situation  of  Henry  was  critical  in  the  extreme  ;  perhaps  never 
more  so  than  at  this  moment.  Two  measures,  one  relating  to  the  minds 
of  his  subjects,  the  other  having  an  immediate  eye  on  their  property, 
had  been  determined.  Both  were  now  full  in  view,  having  been  made 
known  to  all,  and  the  oath  in  favour  of  the  King's  supremacy  was  to  be 
first  enforced.  Then  came  the  days  of  the  shedding  of  blood  ;  but  the 
word  of  terror  was  changed.  For  years  it  had  been  heresy,  but  as  far  as ' 
Englishmen  were  concerned,  it  was  now  treason.  On  the  part  of  the) 
Government,  a  certain  system  is  very  observable  in  the  order  of  proced- 
ure, Avhile  it  is  not  difiSicult  to  perceive  in  this  order,  the  tokens  of  retri- 
bution. Thus,  the  Clergy  had  been  the  main,  if  not  the  sole  persecutors, 
till  now,  and  from  them  obedience  was  now  to  he  first  exacted.  To  pre- 
pare the  way,  the  earliest  cruelties  wei-e  inflicted  on  men  of  an  inferior 


2"  See  the  orisinal  instructions,  on  vellum,  signed  hy  the  King,  and  the  Commission,  for  the 
:inic  inii-pose,  .Snth  .Tanuriry,  Cotton  MS.,  Cleop.  K.  iv..  fol.  167. 


4:3(i  HHXKVS   SUPRKMACY.  [unOK   1. 

grade.  Uu  the  4tli  of  May,  five  individuals  were  hanged,  drawn,  and 
quartered,  for  treason  ;  these  were  a  monk,  a  vicar,  and  three  priors, 
all  natives  of  England  ;^  but,  on  the  25th  of  the  same  month,  as  many 
as  nineteen  men,  and  six  women,  were  arraigned.  These  were  Holland- 
ers, and  not  fewer  than  fourteen  of  the  number  were  condemned  and 
burnt  for  heresy  ;  though  the  fear  felt  must  have  been  respecting  their 
political  influence.**^  Again,  on  the  19th  of  June,  three  monks,^^  of  the 
Charter-house,  in  London,  were  hanged  for  treason,  all  of  whom  were 
executed  in  their  habits ;  but  still,  these  revolting  cruelties  could  not 
shake  the  resolute  minds  of  two  far  more  eminent  men,  firmly  opposed 
to  the  title  on  which  the  King  now  doated.  These  were,  Fisher,  Bishop 
of  Rochester,  and  Sir  Thomas  More. 

The  Bishops,  in  general,  had  hitherto  bowed  to  the  times,  and  all 
escaped  with  their  lives  ;  but  here  was  Fisher,  a  formidable  case  for 
Henry,  not  merely  among  his  own  subjects,  but  especially  at  Rome  ;  yet, 
with  Crumwell  by  his  side,  there  was  to  be  no  favour  nor  exception. 
This  old  man,  now  in  the  seventy-seventh  year  of  his  age,  once  stood 
above  all  in  the  King's  estimation  ;  when  he  was  in  the  habit  of  boasting 
that  no  Prince  in  Europe  possessed  a  prelate  equal  to  him,  in  virtue 
and  learning.  He  it  was,  it  may  be  remembered,  who  had  been  ex- 
pressly selected  by  Henry,  to  preach  the  first  sermon  at  the  burning  of 
books,  and  the  recantation  of  Barnes  ;  but  not  long  after  this  he  began 
to  sink  in  the  royal  favour.  In  1527,  he  had  resolutely  refused  to  sign 
the  paper  declaring  the  King's  first  marriage  to  be  unlawful,  and  then 
he  became  counsel  for  Queen  Catherine.  In  1529,  he  had  loudly  ex- 
claimed against  the  bills  introduced  into  Parliament  by  the  Commons, 
affirming  that  they  all  had  but  one  object  and  intention,  and  that  was — 
"  Down  with  the  Church."  He  had  been  implicated  in  the  strange 
business  of  the  Maid  of  Kent,  and  being  judged  guilty  of  misprision  of 
treason,  had  been  left  in  prison  more  than  a  year,  and  treated  with 
great  neglect,  nay,  shocking  severity.  And  now  that  the  oath  of  suc- 
cession, under  the  Great  Seal,  was  tendered  to  him,  the  utmost  that  he 
would  promise  was,  that  he  would  swear  to  the  act  itself,  but  not  to  the 
preamble,  which  included  the  King's  beloved  title.  The  Pontiff  at  Rome, 
aware  of  his  situation,  (perhaps  by  a  foolish  bravado,  and  to  inspirit  the 
English  malecontents,)  sent  to  Fisher  the  red  hat  of  a  Cardinal.  Crumwell 
went  to  sound  him  as  to  whether  he  would  accept  of  it ;  but  it  is  of  little 
moment  what  he  said  in  reply,  as  the  event  seems  only  to  have  hastened 


29  These  were  Richard  Raynold,  for  whom  Cranmcr,  on  the  3(ith  of  April,  interceded  in  vain  : 
.Tohn  Haile,  vicar  of  Thistleworth ;  Prior  Houghton,  of  the  Charter-house;  Prior  Webster,  of 
Bcvall ;  Prior  Laurence,  of  Exham.    The  rumour  was,  that  they  had  combined  to  kill  the  King. 

30  As  it  appears  by  certain  expressions  of  Henry,  next  year,  wlien  writing  to  Germany.  These 
were  the  men  to  whom  the  Marquis  of  Bergen  alluded,  see  p.  429  last  line. 

3'  Middlemore,  Exmew,  and  Newdigate,  three  young  men  of  good  families,  the  last  of  whom 
had  been  brought  up  at  court. 


1535.]  FISIIER  OF   ROCHESTER.  437 

his  destruction.  That  self-yame  article,  which  Wolscy  had  imported 
with  such  mock  solemnity  and  pomp,  which  used  to  be  borne  on  high 
before  him  by  a  person  of  rank,  and  laid  on  the  altar  whenever  he  came 
into  the  Royal  Chapel,  was  now  to  be  treated  by  Henry,  the  Defender  of 
the  Faith,  with  truly  sovereign  contempt.^^^ 

The  aged  man  was  arraigned  before  Sir  Thomas  Audley,  the  judges, 
Crumwell,  and  three  peers  ;  and  that,  too,  as  the  late  Bishop  of  Rochester ; 
for  since  Cranmer's  appointment,  the  Legislature  had  made  and  unmade 
Bishops,  denying  all  right  to  any  other  authority.  Fisher  had  enter- 
tained no  objections  to  Henry's  strange  title  of  "  Defender  of  the  Faith," 
and  most  probably  had  assisted  him  to  attain  it  -p  but  the  present  claim 
to  be  "  Head  of  the  Church,"  was  out  of  the  c^uestiou  with  him,  and 
firmly  denied.  The  indictment  for  what  they  then  called  treason,  having 
been  found  against  him  on  the  11th  of  June,  he  was  tried  on  the  17th,  and 
beheaded  on  the  morning  of  the  22d  ;  his  head  afterwards,  with  shame- 
ful barbarity,  having  been  placed  in  terrorem  on  London  Bridge.^ 

A  more  notable  person  was  soon  to  follow  ;  for  this  oath  must  also  be 
tendered  to  the  laity.  At  the  very  top  of  the  list,  in  point  of  reputed 
talents,  eloquence,  and  character,  stood  Sir  Thomas  More,  and  to  him  the 
oath  was  now  administered.  Like  Fisher,  he  proposed  to  swear  to  the 
act,  and  not  to  the  preamble  ;  but  this  similarity  of  sentiment  only  the 
more  excited  the  King's  suspicion  and  fear,  that  there  was  lurking  trea- 
son, and  far  more  involved,  in  this  second  firm  refusal,  than  met  the  ear.-'^ 

To  uphold  that  system,  which,  in  England,  was  now  tottering  to  its 
base,  More  had  labom-ed  like  another  Hercules.  Many  a  tedious  sheet 
had  he  penned,  night  and  day,  and  many  a  thrust  had  he  aimed  at  our 
Translator  ;  and  yet  now  he  must  die  before  him,  and  soon  follow  that 
Bishoj)  to  the  grave,  who  had  so  early  preached  in  St.  Paul's  against  the 
books  of  the  new  learning.  But,  perhaps,  the  most  striking  point  of  all 
was,  that  in  the  net,  by  which  he  had  hoped  to  ensnare  others,  was  his 
own  foot  taken.  He  had  been  eager  to  prove  that  Tyndale  and  his  fol- 
lowers ought  to  be  held  guilty  of  treason,  as  well  as  heresy  ;  and  now, 
for  his  own  opinions,  he  is  held  to  be  guilty  of  that  very  crime  ;  while 


32  One  account  states,  that  Fisher  reiilied,  '"If  the  Cardinal's  hat  were  laid  at  my  feet,  I  would 
not  stoop  to  take  it  up,  I  set  so  little  by  it."— Another,  that  he  said,  "If  it  should  come,  I  would 
receive  it  on  my  knees."  But  if  the  reader  wish  to  have  farther  information  as  to  this  trial  and 
death,  he  may  consult  with  advantage,  an  article  by  John  Bruce,  Esq.,  in  the  Archaiologia,  vol. 
.\xv.,  pp.  ()l-9f). 

33  Seethe  Archseologia.  vol.  xxiii.,  p.  7t>,  note. 

34  Owing  to  a  mistake  in  the  Catalogue  of  the  Cotton  MS.,  Cleop.  E.  vi.,  fol.  2(14.  one  may  be 
misled  to  imagine  that  another  man  died,  or  was  tried,  along  with  him.  This  is  described  as  '•  a 
bill  found  against  Bishop  Fisher  and  James  W'halworth  for  denying  the  King's  supremacy.'' 
It  is  a  true  bill  found  by  a  grand  Jury  against  John  Rochester  aud  James  Whalworth,  two  Car- 
thusian Monks,  though  for  the  same  reputed  offence.  Though  "John  Rochester"  was  Fisher's 
official  signature,  the  manuscript,  of  course,  alludes  to  some  monk  of  no  note,  named  Rochester. 

35  Cranmer  had  advised  that  their  oaths  should  be  received,  with  the  limitation  they  had  pro- 
posed, as  this  might  deprive  the  Emperor  abroad  and  Catherine  at  home,  of  the  support  derived 
from  their  example  ;  but  Henry  was  bent  on  the  intin>idation  of  all  others.  He  might  bUmn 
Anne  Bolcjn,  but  he  justified  himself,  ni  the  most  violent  language,  ti>  the  Kiii^  of  I'rancc. 


•1-38  SIR  THOiMAS  MORE.  [book  I. 

the  monarch,  whose  honour  aud  dignity  he  had  been  professedly  so  eager 
to  uphold,  now  stands  in  his  way,  and  barbarously  exacts  his  life.  Nor 
do  the  tokens  of  return  for  past  offences  end  here.  Sir  Thomas,  when 
in  power,  had  been  severe  in  the  extreme,  towards  his  Majesty's  subjects, 
putting  them  to  death  for  what  they  called  heresy,  upon  old  if  not  obso- 
lete statute,  without  application  for  the  King's  writ  or  sanction  ;  and 
now  that  King,  although  Cranmer  and  others  were  alike  eager  to  save 
him,  had  made  a  new  law,  to  which  every  knee  must  bow,  and  he  will  on 
no  account  suffer  his  old  Chancellor  to  escape.  The  first  lay  Lord  Chan- 
cellor for  the  last  125  years,  must  therefore  be  the  first  layman  to  suffer 
death  at  this  crisis.  He  had  been  first  sentenced  to  be  hanged,  drawn, 
and  quartered  as  a  traitor,  but  this  decree  was  changed  into  that  of  de- 
capitation, and  he  suffered  accordingly  on  the  6th  of  July  in  the  fifty- 
sixth  year  of  his  age.  "  In  both  cases,"  says  Southey,  "  the  work  of  re- 
tribution may  be  acknowledged  ;  as  persecutors  both  sufferers  had  sinned, 
and  both  died  as  unjustly  Si^  they  had  brought  others  to  death.  The  con- 
sideration is  important  in  a  Christian's  view,  but  it  aftbrds  no  excuse,  no 
palliation,  for  the  crime."  Certainly  not,  nor  will  the  odium  of  the  death 
of  both  these  men  ever  cease  to  recoil  upon  the  royal  murderer .^^ 

Sir  Thomas  More  having  had  a  fortnight  to  reflect  on  the  death  of 
Fisher,  it  would  have  been  well  for  him,  if  he  had  taken  example  by  the 
last  end  of  his  friend.  In  his  behaviour  at  death  there  was  not  one  iota 
to  provoke  remark  ;  but,  to  say  the  least,  in  regard  to  More's  deportment 
at  that  moment,  the  opinion  has  never  been  unanimous.  He  had  resolved 
to  die  as  he  had  lived,  and  fond  to  excess  of  smartness  of  expression,  he 
carried  his  facetiousness  with  him  to  the  very  block  on  which  his  life 
was  extinguished.  This  has  been  represented  by  some  as  magnanimous, 
and  by  others  the  Avit,  if  it  deserve  the  name,  has  been  smoothed  down 
as  merely  characteristic  of  the  man.  But  in  connexion  with  this  playful- 
ness, displayed  on  the  very  borders  of  another  world,  is  it  fair  to  forget 
the  peculiarity  of  IMore's  professed  faith  1  Or  in  estimating  the  character 
of  the  man,  and  more  especially  of  his  mind,  is  there  any  discrimination 
shown  in  passing  over  this  ?  He  had  written  laboriously  in  favour  of 
purgatory,  and  consigned  his  fellow  creatures  to  destruction,  without 
mercy,  for  denying  it.  If,  then,  he  believed  in  it  hinuelf,  was  it  likely 
that  he  would  prefer  plunging  into  such  a  state  as  he  had  so  graphically 
described,  with  a  jest  upon  his  lips  ?  Was  such  a  manner  of  meeting- 
death,  at  all  consistent  with  that  faith  for  which  he  had  written  so 
much  '?  Or  rather,  are  we  not  now  given  to  understand,  that  he  had  been 
governed,  in  speculation,  by  a  theory,  Avhich,  in  practice,  he  denied  ? 


3«  In  a  very  confused  passaso  Foxe  ascribes  to  Fisher  the  dcatlis  of  Hitten  and  Bayfield, 
Tcwksbury  and  .John  Krytli.  Tlie  first  was  the  work  of  Warliam,  tlie  last  we  have  traced  to 
(iardiner.  Bayfiehl  and  Tcwksbury  were  martyred  by  Sir  Tliomas  More  and  .'^tokesly.  Fisher, 
no  doubt,  wa^  a  I'dsiciitnr,  and  presided  on  other  occasions.  )ni1  not  on  Uiosc. 


I53J.J  SIR  TIlOiMAS   MOKE'S   DEATH.  -i-Si) 

That  he  had  viewed  religion,  of  some  sort,  as  a  convenient  instrument 
for  governing  the  multitude,  while  he  himself  had  taken  the  liberty  of 
being  a  free-thinker  all  his  days  ?  "  It  is  true,  that  good  men  of  a  high 
order,  have  been  known  to  utter  pleasantries  in  their  last  hours.  But 
these  have  been  of  a  fine  ctherial  ([uality  ;  the  scintillations  of  animated 
hope,  the  high  pulsations  of  mental  health,  the  involuntary  movements 
of  a  spii'it  feeling  itself  free  even  in  the  grasp  of  death  ;  the  natural 
springs  and  boundings  of  faculties,  on  the  point  of  obtaining  a  far 
greater,  nay,  a  boundless  liberty."  ^7  But  the  pleasantries  of  the  de- 
ceased Chancellor  were  of  a  widely  different  character.  They  were  spent 
upon  Kingston,  the  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower,  and  in  rallying  the  execu- 
tioner, to  pluck  up  his  sjjirits,  and  beware  of  a  stroke  awry, — they  de- 
scended even  to  the  beard  he  wore,  or  the  manner  in  which  his  death  was 
to  ensue.  No,  death  is  an  event,  b//  itself,  and  certainly  ought  ever  to 
be  so  treated.  Should  any  man,  whoever  he  be,  mingle  merriment  with 
the  more  solemn  events  of  even  the  drama  of  life,  he  must  not  count  upon 
general  respect ;  but  if  he  chooses  to  do  this  with  the  last  moments  of 
his  own  earthly  existence,  he  labours  under  a  prodigious  mistake,  if  he 
expects  to  insure  the  unanimous  admiration  of  jjosterity. 

Such,  according  to  most  historians,  were  the  ostensible  effects  of  the 
King's  newly  assimied  title.  Mr,  Sharon  Turner  insists  that  in  all  these 
cases,  it  is  not  correct  to  suppose  that  death  ensued  in  consequence  of 
imreli/  declining  to  acknowledge  Henry's  supremacy  as  Head  of  the 
Church  of  England.  The  foreign  and  domestic  conspiracies  that  were 
afloat,  against  the  King  personally,  and  against  his  government,  he  sup- 
poses to  have  been  the  original  charge.  But  we  have  no  record  of  the 
trials  ;  though  still,  if  the  acknowledgement  of  Henry's  title  was  meant 
or  offered,  to  secure  his  clemency,  as  not  one  of  the  parties  would  accede 
to  it,  so  they  died.  Sir  Thomas  had  pronounced  the  oath  of  supremacy 
unlawful. 

The  deaths  of  Fisher  and  More  especially,  produced  a  deep  sensation, 
not  in  England  only,  but  throughout  Europe.  Two  pillars  of  the  old 
faith  had  fallen,  and  the  indignation  of  Henry's  political  enemies  rose  to 
its  height.  On  the  arrival  of  the  tidings  in  Spain,  the  Emperor  sent  for 
the  English  ambassador,  and  this  was  no  other  than  Sir  Thomas  Elyot, 
of  whom  we  have  heard  before.  "  We  understand,"  said  the  Emperor, 
"  that  the  King,  yovu-  master,  has  put  his  faithful  servant  and  wise 
counsellor.  Sir-  Thomas  INIore,  to  death."  Elyot  answered — "  I  under- 
stand nothing  thereof."  "  But,"  replied  Charles,  "  it  is  ti-ue  ;  and  had 
we  been  master  of  such  a  servant,  we  would  rather  have  lost  the  best  city 
in  our  dominions,  than  such  a  counsellor."  As  for  Paul,  the  Pontiff, 
Henry  had  put  a  new  made   Cardinal  to  death,  and  the  red  hat  had 


3'  John  Foster. 


110  TlIK    PONTIFF'S    WUATII.  [liUOK   I. 

never  before  been  treated  with  any  thing  but  reverential  awe.  Fisher's 
hat  had  come  as  far  as  Calais,  and  what  became  of  it  afterwards,  no  one 
knows.  But  the  contempt  shown  was  unprecedented,  and  the  Pontiff 
gave  out  his  loudest  thunder,  by  a  Bull,  dated  on  the  30th  of  August. 
It  decreed  that  Henry  should  be  deprived  of  his  dominions, — it  put  all 
places  under  an  interdict, — declared  his  offspring  by  Queen  Anne  to  be 
infamous, — absolved  his  subjects  from  their  allegiance, — forbade  all 
trading  with  him, — directed  all  ecclesiastical  persons  to  leave  his  king- 
dom,— ordered  the  nobility  to  take  up  arms  against  him, — made  void  all 
his  treaties, — urged  the  Kings  of  Europe  to  pursue  him, — doomed  all  his 
adherents  to  be  slaves,  and  ordered  the  prelates  to  excommunicate  him 
in  their  churches  !  !  This  document  was  posted  up  in  Flanders,  France, 
and  Scotland  !  But  there  could  not  have  been  a  more  foolish  step  :  the 
sack  of  Rome  had  dissolved  the  terror  once  occasioned  by  all  such  raving. 
The  Bull,  after  all,  was  suspended  in  its  operations  for  the  present,  and 
still  more  impotently  employed  three  years  after  this :  but  its  contents 
were,  of  course,  now  known  in  England,  where  they  were  disapproved  and 
opposed  by  even  Queen  Catherine  herself,  though  such  a  devoted  ad- 
herent of  the  Court  of  Rome. 

The  other  measure  on  which  his  Majesty  had  fully  resolved,  as  already 
noticed,  was  the  Visitation  of  the  lesser  Monasteries,  and  the  estimated  re- 
turn of  the  Clergy'' s  anniml  income.  The  fact  was,  he  anticipated  war 
with  the  Emperor,  if  not  invasion,  and  money  he  must  have  :  but  a 
deputy,  firm  and  resolute,  was  essential  to  such  a  mode  of  obtaining  it. 
Henry,  through  the  instrumentality  of  Wolsey,  had,  for  a  short  time, 
once  tasted  the  pleasure  of  ruling  these  men  called  Spiritvial,  but  then  he 
was,  what  they  all  acknowledged  him  to  be,  an  eminent  ecclesiastic.  There 
was  one  other  man,  fully  qualified,  now  at  the  King's  right  hand  ;  but 
he  was  a  layman,  and  this  might  have  seemed  to  others  an  insuperable 
objection.  He  was  merely  the  King's  Secretary,  Master  of  the  Rolls, 
and  in  rank,  as  yet,  no  higher  than  a  knight.  No  matter — he  was  fitted 
for  his  Majesty's  purpose,  and  he  must  be  clothed  with  power  sufficient 
to  rule  over  the  highest  Church  dignitary  in  the  land,  or  the  entire  body 
of  the  Clergy,  however  refractory  ;  and,  as  Head  of  their  Church,  Henry, 
of  course,  covild  do  whatever  seemed  to  be  best  in  his  own  eyes.  This  man, 
it  is  well  known,  was  Crumw^ell,  who,  before  visitors  were  appointed,  or 
the  visitation  began,  was  constituted — "  Vicegerent,  Vicar-General,  Com- 
missary, special  and  general.'''  ^^  By  virtue  of  this  office,  which  gave  him 
rank  next  to  the  King  himself,  all  the  monasteries  must  now  regard  him 


•"IS  Cotton  MS.,  Clcop.  F.  ii.,  fol.  131.  The  ihite  in  this  copy  is  wanting,  and,  indeed,  the  con- 
clusion ;  but  it  is  given  by  Collier,  and  dated,  An.  Dom.  15,3.5.  Stowe  says  it  was  18th  of  July, 
but  places  it,  by  mistake,  nndcr  l.i.Tfi.  Crumwell,  indeed,  must  have  been  clothed  with  the 
highest  offickil  authority  before  these  men  could  thus  go  out.  We  find  no  such  commission  for 
him  as  "  ns!tor-Oencra\,"  as  it  has  sometimes  been  stated.  Burnet  had  not  observed  the  com- 
mission to  wliich  ve  have  referred,  but  Ciillier  ))rinlrd  it  as  far  as  extant. 


I.)35.3  TlIK    VICKGKUENT  AND    VICAR-C.KNKUAL.  441 

as  their  superior  ;  and  no  Convocation  could  sit,  where  he,  in  absence  of 
the  King,  might  not  preside.  Crumwell,  therefore,  having  once  sent  out 
his  agents  or  commissioners,  the  principal  of  whom  were,  Richard  Lay- 
ton,  (once  a  fellow-servant  Avith  him  in  the  house  of  Wolsey  ;)  Thomas 
Legh,  William  Petre,  Doctors  of  Law  ;  John  London,  Dean  of  Walling- 
ford,  and  others  ;  we  shall  hear  the  result  next  year.  Meanwhile,  they 
were  furnished  with  power  to  visit  Archbishops,  and  all  below  them — 
to  confirm  or  null  the  election  of  prelates — to  deprive  or  suspend  them  ! 
and  as  for  monasteries,  their  powers  were  vmlimited.** 

If  from  the  Vicegerent,  Crumwell,  we  now  turn  to  Cranmer  among 
his  official  and  troublesome  companions,  the  Bishops,  another  vivid  pic- 
ture of  parties,  and  of  the  times,  is  presented.  After  the  Convocation 
at  the  close  of  last  year,  in  which  Cranmer  had  been  thwarted  by  Gar- 
diner and  his  party  ;  he  seems  to  have  determined  that  his  hands  should 
be  strengthened  before  another  was  assembled.  He  watched  every 
opening  ;  and  circumstances  proving  favourable  to  his  purpose,  sup- 
ported as  he  was  both  by  Crumwell  and  Queen  Anne,  we  shall  find  him 
occupy  a  different  position  before  the  close  of  this  year. 

There  were  two  Italians,  Cardinal  Campeggio,  (who  so  figured  away 
with  Wolsey  in  1529,)  and  Jerome  de  Ghinuccii,  who  occupied  the  Sees 
of  Salisbiuy  and  Worcester  ;  but  now,  as  no  foreigners  or  non-residents 
were  to  be  allowed,  here  were  two  vacancies  to  be  filled  up.  Cranmer, 
at  Queen  Anne's  instance,  had  begun  the  year  by  patronising  Latimer 
and  Shaxton,  thus  paving  the  way  for  their  advancement.  Latimer 
had  been  examined  once  and  again  before  the  Bishops  in  London  ;  and 
so  lately  as  the  2d  of  October  1533,  Stokesly  had  expressly  inhibited 
him  from  preaching  within  the  diocese  of  London.^*'  It  was,  therefore, 
no  slight  proof  of  the  change  of  the  times,  through  the  Queen's  in- 
fluence, that  while  Latimer  was  yet  only  resident  on  his  living  of  West 
Kington,  in  Wilts,  Cranmer  had  licensed  him  to  preach  throughout  his 
entire  province  ;  (as  Wolsey  had  once  done  throughout  England,)  and 
not  only  so,  but  appointed  him  his  Commissioner  to  license  other 
preachers.*^  But,  as  early  as  January  this  year,  he  went  farther  ;  and, 
however  galling  it  must  have  been  to  Stokesly  and  Gardiner,  summoned 
him  vip  to  London,  to  preach  before  the  King  and  Queen,  on  all  the 
Wednesdays  in  Lent,  or  from  the  10th  of  February  to  the  24th  of 
March.^^  The  reader  must  recollect  of  Latimer  preaching  before 
Henry,  several  years  ago  ;  and,  therefore,  this  was  not  a  new  thing  to 


39  The  derided  proof  of  Crumwell  having  been  appointed  to  these  high  offices,  is  to  be  found 
in  the  commissions  received  by  certain  Bishops  from  the  King,  to  act  in  their  several  spheres, 
and  execute  everything  belonging  to  their  office,  in  defect  of  Crumwelh  as  f-'ireiieroit,  nut  beini) 
at  leisure.  The  commissions  to  Cranmer  and  Lee,  Longland  and  Stokesly,  are  dated  in  Oetol/er, 
and  Tunstal's  10th  November  l.')35.  Gardiner's  was  just  before  his  going  to  France,  in  the  same 
year,  and  Bonner  received  a  similar  one  in  l.)39. 

•'"  \Vill<ins'  Concilia,  vol.  iii.,  p.  760.  n   Lansdownu  MS.,  No.  KM.",,  fol.  7:t,  h. 

•12  Mem,  fell.  74. 


442  CRANMER  AND  [booK  I. 

him  ;  but  Cranmcr's  eager  solicitude  tliat  he  should  make  a  favourable 
impression  now,  was  very  observable.  Through  his  secretary,  he  ad- 
vised him,  "  in  any  condition,  to  stand  no  longer  in  the  pulpit  than  an 
houi-j  or  an  hour  and  a  half,  at  the  most,  for  by  long  expense  of  time,  the 
King  and  Queen  shall,  peradventure,  wax  so  weary  at  the  beginning,  that 
they  shall  have  small  delight  to  continue  throughout  with  you  to  the 
end." — "  And  for  your  further  instruction  in  this  behalf,  I  would  ye 
should  the  sooner  come  up  to  London,  here  to  prepare  all  things  in  a 
readiness,  according  to  such  expectation  as  is  had  in  you.""'"* 

At  the  same  time,  Cranmer  ordered  Shaxton,  already  the  Queen's  al- 
moner, to  preach  before  the  Court,  on  Sunday  the  28th  of  February  ;■*•* 
who,  however,  on  the  Monday  preceding,  had  been  appointed  Bishop  of 
Salisbury,  in  place  of  Campeggio,  the  Italian.''^  As  for  Latimer,  Queen 
Anne,  it  is  well  known,  became  very  partial  to  him,  as  well  as  to  his 
preaching  ;  and,  on  the  4th  of  September,  he  was  made  Bishop  of  Woi'- 
cester,  instead  of  Ghinuccii.'*'^ 

Charles  Booth,  Bishop  of  Hereford,  having  died  on  the  5th  of  May 
this  year,  and  Fisher  of  Kochester  having  been  put  to  death,  two  very 
different  men  succeeded — Edward  Fox,  the  King's  almoner,  to  Here- 
ford, on  the  2d  of  September  ;  and  John  Hilsey,  or  Hildesley,  on  the  4th 
of  October,  to  Rochester.  The  former,  one  of  the  most  enlightened  men 
of  the  day,  had  been  frequently  employed  abroad  ;  and  after  proceeding 
to  the  German  States,  where  he  spent  the  winter,  he  will  make  a  con- 
spicuous appearance  at  the  next  Convocation  ;  the  latter,  a  Dominican 
friar,  was  once  of  very  different  sentiments,  having,  in  the  days  of  Wol- 
sey,  when  Prior  of  his  Order  at  Bristol,  objected  to  the  preaching  of 
Latimer  ;'*7  but  now,  and  to  the  day  of  his  death,  in  1538,  he  afforded 
valuable  assistance  to  Cranmer.  Thus  it  will  be  observed,  that,  during 
the  course  of  this  year,  not  fewer  than  four  votes  were  gained  to  the 
party  of  the  Archbishop. 

Were  this  all,  passing  events  might  seem  to  be  in  Cranmer's  favour, 
but  this  is  only  one  side  of  the  picture.  He  was  far  from  reposing  on  a 
bed  of  roses.  His  elevation  was  still  anything  but  welcome  to  all  the 
men  with  whom  he  was  associated.  Crumwell  at  present,  indeed,  could, 
and  did,  either  brave,  or  brow- beat  any  one  of  them  ;  but  Cranmer  was  a 
man  of  different  temperament. 


43  Hail.  MS.,  No.  014!!,  fol.  41. 

■»4  Idem,  fol.  41,  b.  "  The  tliird  Sunday  in  Lent,"  which,  in  this  year,  was  the  2(itli  February. 
The  correct  date  of  this  letter  is  the  i)th  of  Jaiiiian/,  though  it  has  been  copied  in  the  nianu- 
script  !)th  July.  In  this  letter  Cranmer  says,  that  be  had  already  "  suft'ered  great  oblo<iuy," 
for  having  licensed  Latimer,  and  that  Latimer  bad  not  only  so  suii'ered,  but  hath  "  lately  been 
endangered."  It  was  to  put  down  the  calumny  that  he  had  "  humbly  sued  unto  the  King's 
Highness"  to  grant  him  license  to  preach  before  him  ;  and  it  was  with  similar  views  be  had  now 
got  Shaxton,  the  Queen's  almoner,  to  do  the  same. 

'>■'  Nicolas'  Synopsis  of  the  Peerage  and  Bishops.  >'■  Idem. 

tr  Cotton  MS.,  (.'leop.  K.  iv..  fol.  liC. 


l.OoJ.J  THE   BlSHOl'S.  443 

It  may  be  remembered  that  Gardiner  of  Winchester,  then  the  King's 
Secretary,  and  Edward  Fox,  just  mentioned,  were  the  persons  who  first 
introduced  Cranmer  to  Henry  VIII. ;  but  certainly  nothing  could  then  be 
farther  from  their  thoughts,  than  that  Cranmer  should  so  soon  rise  above 
them  both,  and  become  Primate.  Fox  was  a  candid  and  generous  man, 
and,  probably,  had  no  objection ;  but  Gardiner,  as  ambitious  as  he  was 
crafty  and  cruel,  invariably  owed  Cranmer  a  grudge.  Ever  and  anon 
was  he  trying  to  undermine  him,  to  bring  him  into  discredit,  or  counter- 
work him  in  his  progress.'*" 

In  the  Convocation  of  November  last,  Cranmer  had  argued  for  a 
translation  of  the  Scriptures,  and  whether  it  rose  ovit  of  this  discussion 
or  not,  it  was  then  that  alarm  was  afresh  excited,  and  at  that  very  period 
that  the  plan  was  laid  for  seizing  Tyndale,  in  which  Gardiner,  no  doubt, 
was  interested  ;  but  his  movements  at  home  demand  notice  at  present. 
Perhaps  he  was  never  in  more  critical  circumstances,  at  least  dui-ing 
Henry's  reign,  nor  in  such  fear  of  his  neck.  The  times  demanded  all 
his  subtlety,  more  especially  during  the  months  preceding  and  follow- 
ing the  executions  of  Fisher  and  More  ;  Avhen  his  profound  obsequious- 
ness to  the  King,  and  even  to  Crumwell,  the  rising  sun,  at  whose 
progress  he  must  wink,  stands  in  curious  contrast  with  his  behaviour 
towards  Cranmer. 

In  the  course  of  the  spring,  Cranmer  had  resolved  officially  to  visit 
his  entu'e  province,  in  which,  of  covu-se,  Gardiner's  diocese  was  included ; 
but  the  latter,  by  Avay  of  bidding  higher  for  Henry's  supremacy  than 
any  other  man  alive,  pretended  that  Cranmer's  title  of  "  totius  Anglise 
Primus,"  Primate  of  all  England,  was  prejudicial,  as  detracting  from  the 
King's  supremacy,  a  point  on  which  he  well  knew  that  Henry  was 
extremely  sensitive  ;  and,  moreover,  he  grumbled  at  the  expense  to 
which  he  would  be  put  by  this  proposed  visitation,  recollecting,  no 
doubt,  that  his  Majesty  at  the  moment  was  athirst  for  money.  Stokesly, 
a  kindred  spirit,  at  the  same  time  resisted,  and  in  his  Register  entered 
not  fewer  than  three  protestations  against  the  proposal  f^  but  Gardiner, 
coming  up  to  the  Court  about  the  24th  of  April,  complained  directly  to 
the  King.^^'  Immediately  after  doing  this,  on  the  2d  of  May  he  took 
care  to  send  a  letter  to  Crumwell,  as  to  his  visitation  for  the  first-fruits 
and  tenths  to  the  croiun,  in  conformity  with  the  Act  which  had  been 
passed  in  Parliament.  But  here  most  artfully,  so  far  from  grudging  any 
expense,  with  consummate  hypocrisy,  he  took  care  to  express  himself  in 
the  following  terms  : — 

^8  After  their  first  casual  interview  with  Cranmer  in  August  1529,  already  mentioned,  "his 
advice  was  so  satisfactory  to  Gardiner  and  Fox,  that  the  former,  with  his  characteristic  cunninc, 
proposed  to  report  it  to  Henry  as  (heir  own,  while  the  latter  ingenuously  acknowledged  to  his 
Sovereign  the  author  of  it." — Tudii's  Life  ofCianmer,  i.,  p.  IG. 

49  Stokcsly's  Reg.  fol.  44.  By  these,  it  appears  that  Cranmer  had  styled  himself—"  JpusMkff 
srilis  Lepaliis,"  and  it  was  against  this  style  that  he  protested,  as  well  as  for  other  reasons. 

S"  Cotton  MP.,  Clcnp.  F.  i.,  fol   2(;(',  the  original  letter  of  Cranmer.  in  which  this  is  stated. 


441  CRANMER   AND  GARDINER.  [book  I. 

"  We  have  past  over  all  things  quietly,  without  luiscontentmtnt  shewed  by 
any  pai'ty,  and  without  any  other  suit,  than  as  shall  be  thought  agreeable  to  the 
statute  made  in  that  behalf.  Ye  shall  see  in  the  valuation  of  my  bishoprick  a 
good  portion  ;  but  whereof  1  shall  not  receive  now,  very  little  above  the  one- 
half  to  mine  own  use.  I  am,  in  some  men's  judgment,  too  strait  in  charging 
myself:  but  I  will  have  mine  own  will  therein  :  that  I  may  be  called  self-willed 
for  some  things,'''!  I  am  bold  to  trouble  }ou  with  my  long  letters,  in  which  I 
talk  with  you  as  I  were  present  familiarly.  My  servant  shall  shew  you  the 
book,  and  farther  do  as  ye  shall  command  us."^- 

Cranmer  being  theu  made  aware  by  Crumwell  of  the  complaints  which 
Gardiner  had  conveyed  to  the  King,  he  replies  in  a  long  letter,  dated  the 
12th  of  May.  As  for  titles,  he  professed  his  sovereign  contempt,  saying, 
"  I  pray  God  never  to  be  merciful  vmto  me,  if  I  set  more  by  any  title, 
name,  or  style  that  I  write,  than  I  do  by  the  imring  of  an  apple,  farther 
than  it  shall  be  to  the  setting  forth  of  God's  word  and  will  :"^^  and  as  for 
the  complaint  of  expense,  he  overwhelmed  Gardiner,  by  reference  to  his 
past  doings  in  his  own  diocese  ;  but  still,  in  the  end,  the  visitation  of  Cran- 
mer had  to  be  given  up.  Perhaps  the  visitation  of  Crumwell,  in  quest 
of  money  for  the  King,  rendered  it  inexpedient  ;  for  however  much  was 
said  respecting  the  immorality  of  monasteries,  and,  in  many  cases,  not 
without  reason,  still  the  sole  object  was  money  ;  and,  besides,  there  must 
not,  at  this  moment,  be  one  breath  of  suspicion  as  to  the  King's  supre- 
macy. When,  therefore,  September  came,  and  before  Crumwell  com- 
menced his  operations,  Henry  gave  out  his  letters  of  inhibition  addressed 
to  Cranmer,  charging  him  and  his  suffragans  not  to  visit  the  clergy  or 
religious,  till  the  Regal  visitation  was  completed.  Cranmer,  accordingly, 
had  to  address  his  mandate  to  Stokesly  himself,  as  Bishop  of  London, 
who  was  to  transmit  copies  of  the  inhibition  to  the  rest  of  the  provincial 
Bishops  ;  a  mandate,  which  no  doubt  he  obeyed  with  great  good  will.^'* 

To  return,  however,  to  Gardiner,  and  to  the  12th  of  May  ;  all  this  time 
the  eye  of  Henry  had  been  fixed  upon  him,  for  some  thing  else  than  these 
complaints  of  Cranmer  ;  and  but  a  few  days  after  this  Gardiner  found, 
and  was  made  to  feel,  that  he  had  sunk  under  the  suspicions  of  his  royal 
Master.  In  a  curious  letter  of  the  King's  still  extant,  and  formally 
dated  from  Greenwich  the  26th  day  of  the  27th  year  of  owx  reign,  that 
is,  the  18th  of  May  1535,  we  find  the  following  expressions,  addressed  to 
Crumwell : — 

"  Right  trusty  and  entirely  beloved,  we  greet  you  well,  advertising  you,  that  we 


*'  "  So,"  says  Stryi)e,  so,  it  seems,  he  was  usually  styled. 

52  Cleop.  E.  iv.,  fol.  307,  oiiginul.  53  Cleiip.  F.  i.,  fol.  2(;n. 

S4  See  Cranmer's  mandate,  dated  18th  September  1535,  in  Stokesly's  Register,  fol.  47.  These 
facts  seem  to  have  been  entirely  ovei-looked  by  Mr.  Todd  in  his  Life  of  Cranmer,  when  he  says 
— "  About  the  same  time  (with  Gardiner)  Stokesly,  Bishop  of  London,  in  vain  resisted  the 
visitation  of  the  Archbishop;  and  entered  in  his  Register  three  idle  protestations  against  it." 
Vol,  i..  p.  VJX 


ir,:]').]  (JARDINKR  OFFENDING.  445 

having  heard  what  the  Bishop  of  Winchester  hath  done,  in  tiie  house  of  Syon  ; 
although  he  would  so  set  the  same  fortli  unto  us,  as  we  might  have  occasion  to 
think  he  hath  done  truly,  as  beconieth  him,  toward  us  ;  yet  having  this  forenoon 
spoken  with  Morris  the  receiver  there,  we  may  well  pei'ceive  him  to  have 
"  ostentyd,"  and  boasted  him  to  have  done  more,  than  indeed  he  hath,  and  a 
coloured  doubleness  either  to  be  in  him,  or  in  Morris,  or  in  both, — Morris  not  an- 
swering directly  to  divers  "  introgates,"  by  us  to  him  ministered.  We,  having 
therefore  showed  him  that  intending  to  try  his  truth  to  us,  will  not  go  about  to 
grope  him,  but  will  see  if, according  to  Iiis  duty,  he  will  of  his  own  mind  confess 
the  mere  truth  ;  we  already  knowing  much  more  than  he  weeneth.  Wherefore 
we  require  you,  upon  his  repair  to  you,  studiously  to  examine  him,  by  whom 
ye  shall  perceive  doubleness  in  the  other,  in  him,  or  hath  ;  the  which  being  never 
so  craftily  handled,  T  would  not  were  hidden. "•'•■'' 

Whatever  it  was  that  Gardiner  had  done,  nothing  could  be  more  awk- 
ward for  him  at  this  moment,  nay  even  perilous,  than  that  it  was  in  the 
house  of  Syon, — a  house  of  such  evil  fame,  and  notorious  for  most  de- 
termined hostility  to  Henry's  supremacy.  Richard  Raynold,  an  eminent 
monk  belonging  to  it,  for  whom  even  Cranmer  interceded  in  vain,  had 
been  hung  in  his  habit,  only  a  fortnight  before  this  letter,  and  for  months 
afterward,  the  inmates  were  still  refractory.^''  But  this  was  not  all  ; 
Gardiner  had  mightily  oifended  the  King  in  revising  or  correcting  some 
manuscrijit  in  reference  to  his  beloved  supremacy.  Witness  his  artful 
and  wailing  apology  : — 

"  My  duty  remembered  to  your  Majesty,  with  all  lowly  humility  and  reve- 
rend honour.  Forasmuch  as,  letted  by  disease  of  body,  I  cannot  personally  re- 
pair to  your  Highness'  presence  ;  having  heard  of  your  Grace's  almoner  (Fo.x,) 
to  my  great  discomfort,  what  opinion  your  Highness  halh  conceived  of  me  ;57 
I  am  compelled,  by  these  letters,  to  represent  me  to  the  same,  Jamevting  and 
icailhuj  my  chance  and  fortune,  to  liave  lost  beside  my  deserts,  as  much  reputa- 
tion in  your  Grace's  heart,  as  your  Highness,  without  any  merit,  hath  conferred 
unto  me  in  the  estimation  of  the  world." 

He  then,  by  way  of  defence  or  apology,  most  slyly  touches  on  Henry's  author- 
ship, in  his  book  against  Luther,  (a  notable  argument  with  him  on  many  occa- 
sions,) on  Sampson's  defence  of  his  Grace's  cause,  and  the  condemnatory  articles 
against  Wicliffe  by  the  Council  of  Constance,  when  he  adds, — "  yet  I,  vot  learned 
in  divinity,  nor  knowing  any  part  of  your  Grace's  proofs,  am  I  trust  without 
cause  of  blame  in  that  behalf.  It  were  pity  we  lired  if,  so  little  expressing  our 
love  to  God  in  our  deeds,  we  should  abuse  his  name  and  authority,  to  your  high 
displeasure,  of  whom  we  have  received  so  many  benefits  !  Yoiu*  most  humble 
subject,  most  bounden  chaplain,  and  daily  bedeman,  Ste.  Winton."58 

To  those  who  were  not  acquainted  with  the  character  and  adroitness 
of  Gardiner,  it  must  have  seemed  impossible  for  him  to  have  weathered 
this  storm  ;  but  weather  it  he  did,  and  that  before  long,  for  he  was  no 

55  Cotton  MS.,  Vespasian  F.  xiii.,  fol.  "Jl.  b.  ;  but  dated,  by  mistake,  in  the  Catalogue,  15TC. 
The  letter,  though  not  marked,  must  have  been  addressed  to  Crumwell. 

56  Nine  or  ten  of  them  were  imprisoned,  and  died  there,— others  escaped  beyond  seas. 
*7  This  may  have  included  both  the  grounds  of  offence. 

58  Cotton  MS.,  Cleop,  E.  vi.,  fol.  2(M), 


446  GARDINER'S  ADDRESS.  [book  I. 

common  pilot.  He  knew  better  than  any  man  how  to  deal  with  the 
royal  indignation,  and  in  only  three  weeks  after  this,  his  wheedling  letter 
to  Crumwell,  dated  from  Waltham  on  the  10th  of  June,  is  highly  cha- 
racteristic, not  only  of  the  man,  but  of  his  manner,  when  warping  into 
favour. — 

"  Master  Secretary,  after  my  most  hearty  commendations.  Albeit  in  my  last 
letters  to  you,  sent  with  my  letters  of  answer  to  the  King's  Highness,  I  desired 
of  you  to  have  knowledge  thence,  how  my  Lord  of  London  proceeded  there,  in 
the  execution  of  the  King's  Highness'  commandment,  which  was,  as  I  think,  of 
one  tenor  to  us  both  ;  yet  now  doubting  lest  your  great  business,  might  defer 
the  answer  thereof,  longer  than  1  would  it  should,  I  have,  of  mine  own  head, 
made  out  commandments,  throughout  all  my  diocese,  of  such  tenor,  as  my  ser- 
vant, this  bearer,  .shall  shew  you  ;  in  which  I  think  I  have  satisfied  the  effect 
of  the  King's  Highness'  letters  to  me,  for  so  much  :  whei'eunto  if  ye  think  any 
thing  to  be  added,  in  tliat  matter,  it  may  soon  be  supplied. 

"  As  touching  children,  I  have  delivered  these  verses,  herein  inclosed,  to  be 
learned,  to  the  scholars  of  Winchester  ;  to  other  petty  teachers  I  gave  com- 
mandment in  general.  This  is  done  onward,  and  more  shall  be,  if  ye  think 
necessary  ;  whereof  I  pray  you  take  the  pain  to  advertise  me.  And  although 
as  I  have  devised  the  words  to  be  spoken,  T  preach  the  matter  upon  Sunday 
next,  in  every  man's  mouth,  yet  will  I  preach,  also  omitting  all  other  respect  of 
myself,  I'ather  than  I  should  be  otherwise  taken,  tlian  I  am  ;  that  is  to  say, 
openly  to  sware  one  thing,  and  privily  to  work — say — or  do  otherwise  ;  irhereof 
1  teas  NEVER  guUty !  ^'^  Nevertheless,  I  have  as  great  cause  as  any  man  to 
desire  rest  and  quiet  for  the  health  of  my  body  ;  whcreunto  I  thought  to  have 
'  entended,'  and  to  abstain  from  books  and  writing  ; — haviiu/  finished  the  transla- 
tion of  Saint  Luke  and  Saint  John,  wherein  I  hare  spent  a  great  labour !! 

"  And  now  resteth  the  levying  of  the  subsidy,  and  the  commissions  of  sewars 
in  two  places,and  the  commission  for  Musters  ;  wherein,  upon  your  advertisement, 
we  have  staj'ed  hitlierto  ;  abiding  now,  whether  ye  will  command  us  to  do  any 
thing  in  it  or  no.  I  seem  to  be  here  in  otio,  and  yet  I  was  never  more  busied ; 
what  with  the  matters,  and  jrhat  n-ith  care,  lest  I  do  not  irell.  Finally,  as  it 
shall  please  the  King's  Highness  to  order  expressly,  I  shall  gladly  do,  of  which 
mind  1  hare  ever  been — as  knoweth  God,  who  send  you  health  and  prosperity. 
From  Waltham,  (in  Hampshire,)  the  10th  day  of  June. — Your  assni'ed  friend, 
Ste.  Winton.go 

This  strange  production,  a  mere  fetch  of  the  moment,  every  line  of 
which  Crumwell  would  see  through,  as  he  read  it,  is  not  without 
symptoms  of  anxiety  and  fear,  for  the  times  were  critical,  and  Gardiner 
was  now  within  twelve  days  of  even  a  Bishop's  execution.^*  And  there- 
fore, 0  how  gentle  as  to  the  children  ! — how  zealous  towards  the  people  ! 
— how  devoted  to  the  King,  and  even  to  his  Secretary,  sweet  as  summer ! 
What  a  simple  hearted,  upright  man,  was  the  Bishop  of  Winchester,  by 
his  own  account  !     But  the  idea  that  Stephen  Gardiner — suspected,  and 


59  Gardiner  had  taken  the  oath  to  the  Kings  supremacy  on  the  lOth  of  February. 
fio  This  letter  is  holoiiraph— in  Crumwcll's  correspondence,  hundle  W.,  in  the  Charter-House, 
and  has  been  printed  in  the  Gov.  State  Papers,  vol.  i.,  p.  430. 
in  Fisher's,— who  sutTcred  on  the  22d  of  this  month. 


Ijo.O.]  (tAUDINER— OBSEUVANT    FRIARS— I'ULE.  447 

not  without  reason,  of  plotting  in  the  Monastery  of  Syon,  and  well 
known  to  be  in  opposition  to  Cranmer — who,  six  months  ago,  argued 
against  the  Scriptures  being  given  to  the  people,  and  was  now  in  the 
secret  of  a  i)lan  for  apprehending,  nay,  murdering  the  immortal  Tyndale, 
— that  he  should  have  been  all  the  time,  "spending  a  great  labour"  in 
translating  Luke  and  John  ! !  The  reader  may  be  apt  to  exclaim,  "  this 
is  beyond  every  thing  !"  But  this  was  not  all,  for  Gardiner  went  farther 
still.  Something  more  was  required  before  this  Bishop  could  be  fully 
reinstated  in  the  royal  favour  ;  and  as  he  stuck  at  nothing,  being  ready 
to  attempt  the  translation  of  Scriptiu'e,  or  curry  favour  with  Crumwell 
one  day,  and  justify  Henry's  bloody  footsteps  the  next,  at  last  he  suc- 
ceeded. Two  men  of  high  name  had  been  sent  into  the  other  world, — 
deeds,  the  most  hazardous  which  the  monarch  ever  perpetrated,  and 
demanding  as  much  sophistry  as  the  Bishop  could  muster,  by  way  of 
apology.  So,  says  Lord  Herbert,  "  Stephen  Gardiner,  as  I  find  in  our 
records,  wrote  a  justification  of  the  King  herein."  "  When  Fisher  and 
More  were  put  to  death,"  says  Jortin,  "Gardiner,  who  was  never 
wanting  in  the  most  servile  compliances,  wrote  a  vindication  of  the 
King's  proceedings  I " 

As  a  mattei'  of  course,  therefore,  we  shall  soon  find  Gardiner  in  a  sphere, 
widely  different  from  that  of  WTiggling  away  under  the  immediate  eye 
of  Cranmer  or  Crumwell,  both  of  whom  he  so  cordially  hated.  He  was, 
in  fact,  a  man  whom  it  was  dangerous  not  to  employ,  and  as  at  home  he 
stood  in  Crumwell's  way,  he  will  soon  be  the  artful  ambassador  abroad 
once  more  ;  where,  however,  he  will  continue  to  flatter  Henry,  and 
retain  his  ear  ; — to  thwart  the  progress  of  the  Archbishop,  or  the  King's 
Secretary ;  and  be  most  conveniently  ready  to  lend  his  counsel,  either  to 
the  party  now  leagued  against  Tyndale,  or  to  that  which  was  ruminating 
the  downfall  of  Queen  Anne. 

Such  was  the  perplexed  state  of  things  at  home  ;  but  the  apprehensions 
of  government  were  by  no  means  confined  to  subjects  within  the  realm. 
The  Observant  Friars,  recently  put  down,  had,  for  years  before,  been 
busy  in  promoting  agitation.  AVe  have  seen  how  they  burst  out  before 
Henry  himself,  in  his  own  chapel,  two  years  ago.  All  the  friars  now 
arrested,  and  punished  by  death  or  imprisonment,  were  of  this  order  ; 
and  it  is  a  fact,  pregnant  with  meaning,  that  the  agent  of  Charles  V. 
against  Henry  at  the  coiu-t  of  Rome,  for  some  years  past,  was  actually 
the  General  of  the  Observantines.  Cardinal  Pole,  too,  as  already  noticed, 
was  this  year  fully  employed,  in  various  ways,  against  the  King  his 
cousin  ;  and  there  can  now  be  no  doul>t,  that,  however  wild  the  idea,  he 
had  an  eye  to  the  throne.  It  had  been  therefore,  but  was  now  more 
than  ever,  necessary  to  watch  with  vigilance,  all  the  reigning  powers. 

If  Henry  will  assume  a  new  character  and  position  in  Europe,  he 
must  find  friends  where  he  can,  and  also  raise  supplies  in  money,  to 


448  SCOTLAND-  KRANC'K.  [hOOK  r. 

enable  him  to  cope  with  his  foes  ;  hut  the  state  of  things  abroad,  in  con- 
nexion with  those  at  home,  demanded  the  full  display  of  whatever  talents 
either  Crumwell  or  Henry  possessed.  The  policy  of  the  Emperor  at  this 
period,  was  to  stimulate  the  enmity  of  Scotland,  disturb  Ireland,  and 
preserve  alliance  with  France.  That  of  Henry,  was  to  watch  the  two 
fonner,  retain  his  amity  with  Francis,  and,  if  practicable,  form  an  alliance 
with  the  German  States. 

As  for  Scotland,  a  treaty  of  peace  had  been  ratified  by  James  V.,  on 
the  30th  of  June  last  year,  at  Holyrood  House,  in  presence  of  about 
two  thousand  persons,  with  great  joy.^^  Since  then,  Henry  had  two 
envoys,  Barlow  and  Holcroft,  at  that  covirt  ;  but  in  February  this  year, 
by  way  of  cementing  union,  he  sent  the  order  of  the  Garter  to  James 
his  nephew,  and  by  the  hands  of  Lord  William  Howard,  brother  to  the 
Duke  of  Norfolk,  the  Prime  Minister.''''  Lord  William,  though  not  in 
every  point  successful,  executed  his  commission  well  ;  and  next  month 
Bishoj)  Stewart  informs  Crumwell  that  no  help  or  supply  shall  be  given 
to  the  disaffected  in  Ireland.^  In  August,  the  Scotch  King  sent  Lord 
Erskine  as  his  proxy,  to  be  installed  at  Windsor  f^  and  although  an 
attempt,  on  Henry's  part,  to  excite  the  King,  his  nephew,  to  throw  off 
the  authority  of  Rome,  failed  of  any  effect  f^^  yet,  to  the  close  of  the 
year,  there  was  nothing  but  great  professions  ;  which,  however,  in  the 
end,  turned  out  to  be  those  only  of  hollow  friendship. 

With  regard  to  France,  the  game  was  more  diiEcult.  It  so  happened 
that  both  Francis  and  Henry  were  bent  on  alliance  with  the  German 
States,  but  with  widely  different  views.  A  circumstance  the  more  ex- 
traordinary on  the  part  of  the  former,  in  that  he  had  just  been  persecut- 
ing the  Lutherans  in  his  own  kingdom,  nay,  degrading  himself  to  such 
a  level,  as  to  have  walked  in  procession  through  his  own  capital,  before 
the  burning  of  heretics  !  Meditating,  however,  fresh  war  with  the 
Emperor,  in  order  to  recover  his  former  possessions  in  Italy,  he  had 
earnestly  solicited  the  aid  of  those  Gennan  Princes  who  were  associated 
by  the  League  of  Smalkald.  In  his  eagerness,  he  at  first  actually  softened 
down  his  professed  religious  views,  and  so  far  as  to  appear  but  little  re- 
moved from  the  terms  then  employed  by  these  parties,  to  express  their- 
sentiments.  He  even  had  invited  Melancthon  to  Paris,  in  order  to  per- 
fect, for  peace  sake,  their  reconciliation.  Margaret,  the  Queen  of  Navarre, 
the  King's  sister,  is  said  to  have  urged  this  course,  in  the  hope  that  her 
brother  might  be  induced  to  break  with  Rome. 

Henry  and  Crumwell  viewed  this  policy  with  alarm,  as  they  wished, 
by  means  of  these  German  Princes,  to  give  the  Emperor  a  powerful 
diversion,  if  he  should  go  about  to  invade  England,  and  follow  up  the 


«2  Gov.  State  Papers,  vo!.  iv.,  p.  67.1.  ^^  Idem,  vnl.  v.,  p,  1«.  64  Idem,  p.  24. 

«5  Idem.  p.  2!).  w  Cotton  AIS.,  Cloop.  E.  vi.,  Col.  im. 


i 


15;i5.]  THE  UKKMAN    STATES.  449 

censures  of  the  Pontiff.  Sir  John  Wallop  was  then  resident  ambassador 
at  the  court  of  France  ;  but  two  men,  Hains,  the  future  Dean  of  Exeter, 
and  Christopher  Mount,  a  German,  must  be  despatched,  merely  as  friends 
visiting  the  ambassador,  to  counterwork  these  movements  and  prevent 
the  approach  of  Melancthon  to  Paris.  The  Premier  of  France,  however, 
at  last  advised  his  sovereign  to  confine  the  treaty  to  temporal  affairs, 
when  the  Germans,  being  disgusted  with  the  French  cruelties,  broke  off 
all  further  negociation.  Soon  after  this  it  became  evident  that  a  still 
more  able  or  artful  man  than  the  English  ambassador  was  required  to  be 
at  Paris  ;  and  so  now,  at  last,  came  the  Bishop  of  Winchester's  opportu- 
nity. Stephen  Gardiner  was  not  only  the  best  French  scholar  among 
Henry's  counsellors,  but  there  was  no  other  so  fully  acquainted  with  the 
Continent  ;  so  that,  before  the  end  of  the  year,  he  found  employment  at 
the  French  court,  far  more  congenial  with  his  taste  and  talents,  than  that 
in  which  he  had  represented  himself  as  so  harassed  and  perplexed,  in  his 
letter  to  Crumwell.     Gardiner's  departure  was  on  the  1st  of  October. 

It  might  liave  been  supposed  that  Henry  the  Eighth  could 
never  have  brought  his  haughty  spirit  down  so  low,  as  to  bow 
to  Lutheranism,  after  having  so  written  against  Luther,  nay 
even  to  him  ;  for  once  on  a  time,  not  long  ago,  he  would  have 
disdained  the  very  idea.  But  the  "  Defender  of  the  Faith,"" 
and  now,  especially,  as  "  Head  of  the  Church  of  England," 
felt  constrained  to  look  after  his  own  personal  safety.  Dur- 
ing the  last  six  months  of  this  year,  therefore,  earnest  court 
was  paid  to  the  Lutheran  States  of  Germany  ;  though,  on 
the  part  of  the  King  of  England,  it  must  be  evident  that 
there  could  not  be  one  religious  motive,  or  any  sincere  regard  to 
Christianity  in  all  this.  It  was  simply  because  an  alliance 
with  these  States  might  prove  the  most  eSectual  and  vexatious 
check  to  Charles  V. ;  and  it  so  happened,  that  there  was  no 
man  in  England  so  likely  to  open  the  way  into  their  con- 
fidence, as  Robert  Barnes ! 

Barnes  was  a  violent  Lutheran,  the  personal  friend  and  acquaintance 
of  Luther,  as  well  as  Melancthon  and  others.  He  had  resided  for  years 
in  Germany,  and  knew  all  the  leading  parties  well.  And  so  now,  to 
serve  a  purpose,  he  must  be  the  envoy  of  Henry  VIII.  to  these  very 
men  ;  for  though  he  had  to  do  with  the  Elector  and  other  civil  rulers, 
great  court  must  be  paid  to  the  former,  and  that,  in  the  first  instance, 
by  the  instrumentality  of  Barnes.  How  remarkable  were  the  changes 
of  these  times  !  Nine  years  ago,  Wolsey,  in  great  pomp,  presided,  and 
Fisher,  who  is  just  beheaded,  preached  at  Barnes'  degradation  in  St. 
VOL.   I.  2  F 


4.")0  ROBERT  BARNES  [book  I. 

Paul's.  Nay,  only  three  years  since,  when  he  came  first  to  London, 
hut  under  a  safe  conduct,  Sir  Thomas  More  would,  without  scruple, 
have  violated  it,  and  consigned  him  to  the  tender  mercies  of  the  Bishops  ; 
but  now,  immediately  after  the  fallen  Chancellor's  execution,  Barnes, 
as  an  envoy,  is  off  to  those  very  Lutherans,  against  whom  both  Fisher 
and  More  had  written  with  such  vehemence.*"" 

In  August,  Barnes  had  left  Hamburgh  for  Wittemberg,  when  he  re- 
quests Crumwell  to  forward  a  commission  to  Duke  George,  that  he  might 
be  permitted  to  dispute  with  Cochlseus.*'^  But  so  eager  was  Henry  to 
succeed  in  Germany,  that  it  had  been  resolved  to  despatch  after  Barnes, 
two  abler  men,  viz.  Dr.  Edward  Fox  and  Nicholas  Heath.  Having 
heard  of  this,  in  September,  Barnes,  who  was  then  at  Gotha,  writes  to 
Cranmer, — 

"  Now  tliat  he  (Heath)  is  going  to  Wittenbei'g  to  entreat  of  those  matters 
there,  I  trust,  through  his  help,  and  my  Lord's  wisdom,  we  shall  make  a  good 
end.ro  This  thing  I  do  know,  that  the  Elector  would  gladly  that  his  learned 
men  and  we  might  agree.  I  have  so  informed  his  Grace,  that  he  is  not  against 
us;  but  he  liad  rather,  for  fear  of  the  Emperor,  that  his  learned  men  should 
handle  the  matter  than  he,  forasmuch  as  it  pertaineth  to  learning.  Farther- 
more,  Martin  (Luther)  is  more  fiery  in  the  cause  than  before  ;  (Justus)  Jonas 
does  not  fight;  Philip  (Melancthon)  appears  to  be  with  us  ;  Pomeramis  alone 
resists  tooth  and  nail ;  but  I  do  not  despair  of  happy  success. "70 

In  the  month  of  October,  Barnes,  being  then  at  Wittemberg,  writes  on 
the  6th  as  follows  : — 

"  Christopher  (Mount)  the  Dutchman,  (i.  e.  the  German,)  came  to  Jene  (in 
Saxe  Weimar)  out  of  France,  on  Friday  was  eight  days,  and  there  I  left  him." 
"  I  desire  your  liigh  Mastership  that  we  may  have  a  commission  to  dispute 
with  CoCHL.EUS,  both  to  clear  the  fame  of  our  Prince,  and  extinguish  the 
virulence  and  dissension  of  this  most  foolish  man.  For  all  men  liere,  that  be 
the  King's  friends,  think  it  greatly  for  the  King's  honour,  that  the  fool's  mouth 
should  be  stopped,  even  before  his  own  Prince.  I  am  not  afraid  to  dispute 
with  him  alone,  if  none  other  man  come.  Finally,  I  would  pray  your  liigh 
goodness  to  send  me  more  money,  for,  verily,  I  am,  and  must  be,  daily  a  great 
charge,  and  it  should  be  against  my  Prince's  honour,  if  I  should  pinch  or  spare; 
and  I  have  nothing  of  my  own  to  bear  out  the  charges  with.  Also,  I  must 
have  money  plenty,  to  pay  for  Philip's  (Melancthon)  costs,  and  all  their's  that 
he  shall  bring  with  him."7l 


"7  Seckendorf  says,  that  Barnes,  better  known  in  Germany  by  the  name  of  Antonius  Amarius, 
came  to  Wittemberg  in  the  sprinfi  of  this  year,  and  Strype  supposed  his  departure  to  have  been 
in  May  or  June.  But  tlie  letters  from  Henry  to  Prince  .Tohn  Frederic,  the  Elector,  are  dated 
from  Windsor  on  the  flth  of  .Tuly,  the  second  day  after  More's  death  ;  and  this  is  the  very  time 
when  Henry  Phillips  has  told  us  that  lie  had  a  commission  from  the  adverse  party  in  England, 
to  try  and  catch  Barnes.  The  extracts  from  Barnes  himself,  about  to  be  given,  aflbrd  additional 
proof  of  the  precise  time.  •>"  Cotton  MS.,  Vitell.  B.  xxi.,  fol.  116. 

"!'  Alluding  to  Fox,  who  h.id  been  elected  Bishop  of  Hereford,  as  already  noticed,  on  the  2d 
of  !:eptember.  70  Vitell.  B.  xxi..  fol.  113.  71   Vitell.  B.  xxi.,  fdl.  110. 


153.5.]  AS  AMBASSADOR.  451 

Whether  Barnes  ever  held  auy  public  disputation  w  ith  Cochlaeus  does  not 
appear,  nor  was  it  material.  He  seems,  however,  to  have  gained  access 
to  Duke  George,  of  Saxony,  and  expostulated  with  him,  respecting  the 
tirade  of  Cochlseus,  now  published,  against  the  King  of  England.  After 
this,  by  letters  from  Luther  and  Melancthon,  Jonas  and  Cruciger,  he 
was  introduced  to  Prince  John  Frederick  the  Elector.^^ 

While  Francis  and  Henry,  as  politicians,  about  the  same  time  were  thus 
dreaming,  each  after  his  own  fashion,  that  Lutheranism  might  possibly 
be  of  service  in  turning  the  scale  in  their  favour,  their  mutual  applica- 
tion to  Melancthon,  not  Luther,  is  worthy  of  notice.  When  the  adver- 
saries of  truth  employed  threats,  mild  and  gentle  though  Melancthon 
was,  no  man  showed  more  intrepidity  and  independence  ;  but  when 
soothed  and  approached  with  fair  words,  or  proposals  for  union,  he 
seemed  ready  to  comply.  He  would  have  gone  into  France,  and  the 
more  readily,  that  Luther  approved  of  his  doing  so  ;  but  the  Elector, 
who  probably  saw  farther  than  either  of  them,  would,  on  no  account, 
give  his  consent ;  and  to  Barnes  may  be  ascribed  some  share  in  turning 
the  balance  decidedly  in  favoui'  of  England,  at  least  for  the  moment. 
Some  communication  seems  to  have  passed  between  Melancthon  and 
Henry  VIII.  as  early  as  March,  and  by  the  month  of  August  Melancthon 
was  quite  disposed  to  have  come  into  this  country.  Even  Luther  was 
cherishing  hopes  of  some  good  effect  resulting  from  the  jom-ney.  "  Who 
knows,"  said  he  to  Camerarius,  "  what  God  will  effect  %  His  wisdom  is 
greater  than  ours,  and  his  will  better."  Adding,  "  that  care  be  taken 
of  Philip,  that  he  might  not  be  afflicted  with  too  much  sorrow,  for  the 
repulse  which,  a  little  before,  the  Elector  gave  him,  in  forbidding  his 
journey  into  France."73 

Before  this  period,  or  about  the  fall  of  last  year,  Melancthon  had 
become  acquainted  with  a  native  of  Edinburgh,  Alexander  Ales  {Alesius,) 
of  whom  we  shall  hear  next  year,  and  much  more  fully  when  we  come 
to  treat  of  Scotland,  and  the  introduction  of  the  Scriptures  into  North 
Britain.  Ales  himself  informs  us,  that  he  had  been  invited  into  Eng- 
land, by  Crumwell  and  Cranmer.^-*  Melancthon  availed  himself  of  this 
opportunity  to  make  some  farther  advance  to  his  Majesty,  and  intro- 
ducing the  exiled  stranger  by  a  letter  to  the  King,  he,  at  the  same  time, 
sent  him  a  copy  of  his  Commentary  on  the  Romans.  Henry  was  so 
pleased  with  the  bearer,  as  to  give  him  the  honorary  title  of  his  Scholar, 
and  he  took  up  his  abode  at  Lambeth.     In  return  for  the  volume,  his 


'i  Dated  from  Jene,  to  which  the  Professors  and  scholars  had  removed,  on  account  of  the 
plague  raging  at  Wittemberg. — See  Seckcndor/.    Strjipe. 

'3  Melancthon,  it  is  well  known,  was  subject  to  depression  of  spirit. 

"*  See  the  preface  to  his  tract,  "  Of  the  authority  of  the  Word  of  God."  The  precise  time 
when  Ales  arrived  in  England  is  rather  uncertain.  Todd,  in  his  Life  of  Cranmer,  would  make 
it  after  August ;  but  it  will  appear,  under  Scotland,  to  have  been  some  time  before  the  death 
of  Fisher,  who  was  Chancellor  of  Cambridge  only  to  the  22d  of  June. 


452  CRANMER'S    FRUITLESS   ATTEMPT  QboOK  I. 

Majesty  sent  the  avitlior  200  crowns,  and  a  letter  from  himself,  dated 
1st  October  1535.  In  September,  Melancthon  had  sent  to  the  King  of 
France,  politely  declining  his  invitation,  and,  on  the  1st  of  December, 
he  replied  to  Henry  ;  by  which  time  both  Fox  and  Heath  had  reached 
Barnes. 

From  the  beginning,  as  already  hinted,  Henry's  chief,  if  not  sole  ob- 
ject, in  seeking  alliance  with  these  parties,  was  to  strengthen  himself 
against  the  Emperor  ;  but  when  the  negociations  began,  the  question  of 
his  divorce,  which  Barnes,  no  doubt,  had  been  labouring  to  solve,  stood 
in  the  way  ;  and  of  this  the  Germans  could  not  approve.  In  short,  as 
the  cruelty  of  Francis  had  jjrevented  any  alliance,  so  we  shall  find  a 
worse  display  on  Henry's  part,  produce  the  same  effect,  in  a  few  months. 
Neither  the  one  nor  the  other  ever  saw  Melancthon. 

So  ended,  for  the  present,  all  the  movements  of  worldly  policy,  over- 
ruled by  Him  who  has  ever  been  "  the  Governor  among  the  nations  ;" 
but  before  the  year  is  dismissed,  we  have  the  fiir  higher  gTatification  of 
glancing  once  more  at  that  peculiar  cause,  which  had  existed,  not  only 
without  Royal  encouragement,  but  gone  on  in  spite  of  Royal  opposition, 
and  on  behalf  of  which,  not  oiie  man  of  any  power  or  influence  in  Eng- 
land, had,  as  yet,  lifted  up  his  voice. 

It  was  now  precisely  five  years  since  "  the  translation  of 
Scripture,"  said  to  be  '■'•corrupted  by  William  Tyndale,  as 
well  in  the  Old  Testament  as  in  the  New,"  had  been  de- 
nounced by  the  King  of  England  and  his  Bishops,  "as  utterly 
to  be  repelled,  rejected.,  and  put  away  out  of  the  hands  of  the 
people,  and  not  to  be  suffered  to  get  abroad  among  his  Majesty's 
subjects." ^^  But  the  cause  of  Tyndale,  was  that  of  a  higher 
power,  and  as  evidently  for  the  people.  Nothing,  however, 
had  been  done,  in  the  meanwhile,  to  furnish  any  other  transla- 
tion ;  nay,  at  that  time,  these  men  had  the  daring  impiety  to 
say  to  the  people  at  large — "  you  cannot  require  or  demand 
Scripture  to  be  divulged  in  the  English  tongue,  otherwise  than 
upon  the  discretion  of  your  supei'iors ;  so  as  whensoever  they 
think  in  their  conscience  it  may  do  you  good,  they  may  and 
do  well  to  give  it  unto  you  :  and  whensoever  it  shall  seem 
otherwise  unto  them,  they  do  amiss  in  suffering  you  to  have 
it!!"  They  then  said  also,  that  this  King  of  theirs  "did 
openly  say  and  protest,  that  he  would  cause  the  New  Testa- 
ment to  be,  by  learned  men,  faithfully  and  purely  translated 
into  the  English  tongue ;  to  the  intent  he  might  have  it  in 

'S  See  paste  2.57. 


1535.2  IN   HIS   APPLICATION   TO  THE   BISHOPS.  453 

his  hands  ready  to  be  given  to  his  people,  as  he  might  see  their 
manners  and  hehatiour  meet.,  apt.,  and  convenient  to  receive  the 
same!!''''  At  the  same  time,  they  took  care  to  inform  the 
people  that  the  King  "  thinketh  in  his  conscience,"  and  that 
by  their  "  deliberation  and  advice,  that  in  not  suffering  the 
Scripture  to  be  then  divulged  in  English,  he  did  well!!'''' 

By  the  good  providence  of  God,  however,  we  have  seen  that 
seven  years  before  1530,  Tyndale  had  resolved  that  his 
countrymen  should  actually  possess  tlie  Divine  Word;  and 
thus  come  to  know  more  of  tlie  Scripture  than  such  men  as 
these ;  and  as  both  husbandmen  and  artizans  had  been  brought 
before  Tunstal,  Bishop  of  London,  so  early  as  1528,  Tyn- 
dale, confessedly,  had  laboured  with  great  effect.  For  nine 
years  past  we  have  seen  one  edition  after  another  coming 
into  the  country. 

But  now,  at  the  last,  it  seemed  as  if  something  were  actually 
going  to  be  done,  and  by  Henry's  learned  men.  Even  the 
Bishop  of  Winchester  himself  has  told  us,  that  by  the  month 
of  June,  he  "had  been  spending  a  great  labour  in  translating 
Luke  and  John  !"  This  was  an  incident  by  far  too  remark- 
able to  pass  now  without  farther  notice ;  and  the  more  so,  as 
it  admits  of  an  explanation,  fully  as  curious  as  the  fact  itself. 
In  the  Convocation  last  December,  it  will  be  remembered  that 
the  necessity  for  a  translation  of  the  Scriptures  had  been 
urged,  while  all  other  books  of  suspected  heretical  doctrine 
were  to  be  called  in  within  three  months ;  and  though  nothing 
was  done  as  to  the  latter  design,  the  King  seems  to  have  been 
addressed  as  to  the  former.  This  was,  in  fact,  a  second  im- 
plication of  all  that  Tyndale  had  translated  or  written.  One 
is  curious,  therefore,  to  observe  the  first  attempt  of  these  men, 
standing  as  it  does,  in  contrast  with  the  hitherto  unaided, 
nay,  despised  exertions  of  the  persecuted  and  now  imprisoned 
Translator  and  patriot. 

In  proceeding  with  the  plan,  Craumer  took  an  existing 
translation, — Tyndale's,  of  course,  for  as  yet  there  was  no 
other, — and  having  divided  it  into  eight  or  ten  parts,  he  got 
them  transcribed.  These  he  transmitted  to  so  many  Bishops, 
the  best  learned,  accompanied  by  a  request,  that  each  part 
should  be  returned  to  him,  with  their  corrections,  by  a  certain 
day.  The  time  appointed  having  arrived,  every  portion,  in- 
cluding Crardiner's,  no  doubt,  is  said  to  have  been  returned  to 


454-  CRANMERS   FRUITLESS  ATTEMPT.  Qbook  I. 

Lambetli,  with  one  exception — the  Acts  of  the  Apostles^  which 
had  been  assigned  to  Stokeslv.  Cranmer  then  sent  to  Fulhani, 
for  the  corrected  manuscript ;  but  Stokesly,  far  less  compliant 
than  Gardiner,  not  being  then  in  such  fear  of  court  favour,  or 
of  his  neck,  only  made  the  following  reply.  "  /  marvel  what 
my  Lord  of  Canterbury  meaneth,  that  he  thus  abuseth  the  people^ 
in  giving  them  liberty  to  read  the  Scriptures ;  which  doth  nothing 
else  but  infect  them  icith  heresy.  I  have  bestoiced  never  an  hour 
upon  my  portion,  and  never  icill.  And,  therefore,  my  Lord  shall 
have  his  book  back  again  ;  for  I  never  will  be  guilty  of  bringing 
the  simple  people  into  error.""  When  the  Archbishop  was  in- 
formed of  this  uncourteous  speech,  he  merely  observed — "  I 
marvel  that  my  Lord  of  London  is  so  froward,  that  he  will  not 
do  as  other  men  do." — "  Why,  as  for  that,"  said  Lawney,  one 
of  the  Duke  of  Norfolk's  chaplains,  who  stood  by, — "  Your 
Grace  must  consider  that  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  are  a 
portion  of  the  New  Testament.  Peradventure,  my  Lord  of 
London  knows  that  Christ  has  left  him  no  legacy,  and  there- 
fore he  prudently  resolves  to  waste  no  time  upon  that  which 
will  bring  him  no  profit !  Or  it  may  be,  as  the  Apostles  were 
a  company  of  poor  illiterate  men.  My  Lord  of  London  dis- 
daineth  to  concern  himself  about  their  J.cfo .'"''' 

That  such  an  attempt  as  this  should  have  entirely  failed, 
can  excite  no  surprise ;  and  it  not  only  did  so,  but  Cranmer 
ever  afterwards,  from  this  moment,  despaired  of  obtaining  a 
translation  of  the  Scriptures  by  any  such  means  ;  and  of  this 
he  will  himself  inform  us,  two  years  hence.  These  men  of 
name  and  pretension  must  stand  aside,  for  never  shall  even  a 
single  book  of  the  Sacred  Volume  be  conveyed  to  their  country 
by  one  of  them. 

In  contrast,  therefore,  once  more,  to  these  prelates,  whether 
in  Convocation,  as  in  1534,  or  out  of  it,  as  in  1535,  in  the 
printing  press  of  Antwerp  we  can  discover  no  pause  or  hesita- 
tion ;   no  sympathy  whatever  with  tlie  scruples  of  the  blind  in 


"8  Stryve's  Ciaumer.  This  Thomas  Lawney,  who  was  so  facetious  at  Stokesly's  expense,  had 
been  one  of  Wolsey's  selected  Canons  in  15:?5,  and  one  of  the  earliest  readers  of  Tyndale's  New 
Testament ;  having,  above  nine  years  before  this,  snfiTered  for  his  attachment  to  the  new  learning. 
He  was,  in  truth,  the  fellow  prisoner  of  JoJin  Frytli,  in  the  noisome  cell  under  Cardinal  College 
in  1.52G.  With  regard  to  the  portions  actually  returned  to  Cranmer,  they  must  have  formed  a 
singular  medley,  and  had  they  remained  in  existence,  must  have  forcibly  illustrated  the  character 
of  Cranmcr's  associates.  But  not  one  fragment  suivives,  and  it  is  well.  They  have  been  con- 
signed to  oblivion,  with  the  vain  efforts,  in  ancient  time,  of  many  who  had  taken  in  hand  tliat 
for  which  they  were  not  competent,  and  that  of  which  Tiod  did  not  approve.     Luke,  i.,  1. 


153o.]  TYNDALE'S  EMPLOYMENT  IN   PRISON.  455 

England,  or  any  fear  of  the  enemy  in  Antwerp  itself.  During 
last  year  and  the  present,  not  fewer  than  seven  if  not  eight 
editions  of  Tyndale's  New  Testament  had  issued  from  the 
press  !  Nor  was  any  printer  ever  prosecuted,  save  the  first 
in  1526,  or  Christopher  of  Endhoven.  Thus,  if  the  Translator 
himself  throughout  the  whole  of  even  this  year  continued  to 
war  with  the  enemies  of  Divine  truth  on  the  Continent ;  it  was 
as  if  "  the  stars  in  their  courses"  were  fighting  with  England ; 
nor  was  there  to  be  any  truce  in  this  contest  till  the  enemy  was 
overcome,  nay  overruled,  and  constrained  to  accept  of  the  long- 
proffered  boon. 

The  editions  of  the  New  Testament  to  be  ascribed  to  1535  were  at  least  three. 
Of  the  first,  which  has  hitherto  been  ascribed  to  last  year,  Dr.  Cotton  has  said, — 
"  This  book  was  doubtless  printed  at  Antwerp,  but  from  the  great  variatious  ob- 
servable in  it,'  I  cannot  believe  the  date  1534  to  be  the  true  one  :  especially 
when  it  is  considered  that  Tyndale's  own  (corrected  copy,)  from  which  it  is 
princlpalhj  copied,  did  not  appear  till  November  in  that  year."  But  still  by 
their  computation,  as  the  year  continued  to  the  15i\\  of  March,  till  that  day  1 534 
would  be  their  date.  Owing  to  the  circumstances  now  stated,  however,  we  rank 
it  under  1535. 

Collation.  Title,  within  four  wood-cuts,  "  The  Newe  Testament,  Anno 
MDXXxiiii."  On  the  reverse  of  the  title,  "the  bokes  conteyned  in  the  Newe 
Testament."  The  cut  of  the  Apostle  Paul  prefixed  to  the  Romans,  Corinthians, 
Galatians,  Colossians,  Thessalonians  and  Hebrews,  in  Tyndale's  edition  of  1534, 
is  small ;  in  this  it  occupies  the  breadth  of  the  page.  Such  is  a  brief  notice  of 
the  book  described  by  Herbert,  p.  1543,  and  by  Dr.  Cotton,  now  in  the  Bodleian 
Library.     That  copy,  however,  is  but  very  imperfect. 

Of  the  second  edition,  distinguished  by  its  being  in  folio,  one  copy  is  men- 
tioned by  Dr.  Cotton  to  be  ascribed  to  this,  if  not  the  following  year. 

The  third  edition,  in  small  8vo,  or  12mo,  may  be  easily  distinguished  by  its 
orthography,  which  is  very  peculiar,  having  the  colophon  in  large  letters, — 
"fynesshed  1535."  There  is  one  copy  in  Exeter  College,  Oxford,  wanting  the 
first  title  and  preface  ;  and  in  which  the  prologue  to  the  Romans  seems  to  be 
transposed,  but  there  is  a  beautiful  one,  quite  perfect,  in  the  University  Library 
of  Cambridge.  Collation.  After  the  first  title  and  Tyndale's  preface,  tables 
for  the  Evangelists  and  the  Acts,  and  "  The  bokes  conteyned  in  the  Newe  Tes- 
tament," we  find  a  second  title,—"  The  newe  Testament,  dylgdently  corected  and 
compared  with  the  Greke  by  Will  yam  Tyndale :  and  fynesshed  in  the  yere  of  our 
Lorde  God  A.  md  and  xxxv."  There  are  small  wood-cuts  at  the  beginning  of 
each  gospel,  and  larger  ones  in  the  Revelations,  with  heads  of  Chapters,  sup- 
posed to  be  for  the  first  time.  A  full  page  contains  38  lines.  While  we  at 
present,  regret  our  inability  to  give  an  explanatory  account  of  this  book,  it  re- 
mains a  great  curiosity  of  its  kind.  Witness  its  orthography,  so  different  from 
all  the  other  editions. 

/aether,  muether,  broeOicr.  maesler,  stoene,  ouiies,  (hoese,  sayede,  irliorsse,  helioelde. 
father,  mother,  brother,   master,  stone,  once,  those,  said,      worse,      behold. 

But  is  it  possible  that  this  could  have  been  part  of  Tyn- 
dale's occupation  within  the  walls  of  the  castle  at  Vilvorde  ? 


45b'  COVERDALE'S  TRANSLAl'lUN.  [liuuK  I. 

While  warring  with  these  Doctors  of  Louvain,  on  the  one 
hand,  was  he,  on  the  other,  at  the  same  time  engaged  in 
earnest  pity  for  the  ploughboy  and  husbandmen  of  Gloucester- 
shire ?''''  This  orthography,  being  regarded  as  provincial,  so 
it  has  been  supposed.  If  the  conjecture  be  well  founded,  and 
Tyndale  himself  had  to  do  with  this  edition,  it  is  but  seldom 
that,  in  the  history  of  any  man,  such  an  instance  of  the  true 
sublime  can  be  produced.  The  book  has  never  been  assigned 
to  any  Antwerp  printer  ;  but  if  Tyndale  only  furnished  a 
list  of  words,  to  be  employed  whenever  they  occurred  in  the 
translation,  the  volume  could  have  been  printed  in  Holland 
or  any  other  place  in  Brabant. 

At  all  events,  the  book  comes  before  us  in  the  light  of  a 
step  in  advance,  or  additional  triumph.  The  Translator  was 
"  suftering  trouble  as  an  evil  doer,  even  unto  bonds ;  but  the 
Word  of  God  was  not  bound,"  nor  to  be  bound. 

To  those  who  have  not  before  been  acquainted  with  the 
history  of  the  English  Bible,  and  in  conclusion  of  the  year 
153.5,  one  fact  remains  to  be  stated,  which  must  occasion 
some  surprise.  For  some  time  past,  there  had  been  another 
translation  of  the  Scriptures  into  English  in  progress,  which 
was  now  completed.  From  the  degree  of  mystery  which  still 
hanos  over  it,  the  undertaking  must  have  been  conducted 
with  great  privacy  ;  but  it  is  a  curious  and  not  unimportant 
circumstance,  scarcely  before  observed,  if  indeed  at  all  known, 
in  connexion  with  the  late  Lord  Chancellor,  so  barbarously 
put  to  death  by  Henry,  in  July  ;  that,  though  not  a  party 
concerned  in  the  cost,  while  yet  alive,  nay,  long  before  his 
death,  and  at  the  very  time  he  was  writing  against  Tyndale, 
with  this  proceeding  he  may,  if  not  must,  have  been  acquainted 
all  along,  even  from  its  origin  I  From  a  single  line  through- 
out his  many  pages,  no  one  could  have  imagined  this  ;  but 
the  evidence  will  come  before  us  in  due  time. 

Meanwhile,  it  was  on  the  11th  of  October  that  the  last 
sheet  was  put  to  press,  under  the  eye  of  Miles  Coverdale. 
Printed,  as  it  had  been,  abroad,  copies  could  not  have  been 
ready  for  importation  to  England,  till  about  the  opening  of 
next  year,  at  the  soonest ;  but  if  any  had  reached  this  country, 
at  whatever  time,  the  book,   owing  to  very  peculiar  circum- 


Scc  licfoie.  page  3fi. 


l.VSr,.^  LAST   YEAH  OF  TYNDALE.  457 

stances,  to  be  explained,  could  not  have  been  shown  to  Henry 
the  Eighth,  before  the  month  of  June.  This,  indeed,  was 
the  earliest  moment ;  for,  most  probably,  it  was  not  presented 
to  the  King  till  much  later  in  that  year. 

But  the  origin  and  history  of  this  translation  we  must  re- 
serve for  the  year  following,  or  1 5.'37.  Then,  only,  can  we 
view  with  advantage  and  effect,  the  whole  case  at  once,  and 
in  comparison  with  that  translation,  on  which  our  eye  has 
been  fixed  from  the  beginning.  In  other  words,  Coverdale's 
will  then  be  compared  with  that  Bible  which  became  the 
prototype,  or  basis,  of  all  that  have  since  followed,  to  the 
present  day. 

No  such  digression  is  admissible  here,  as  the  reader  must 
be  impatient  to  follow  the  history  of  that  memorable  enterprise, 
which  has  engrossed  his  attention  throuohout  all  the  war, 
as  well  as  that  of  the  man  who  had  been  raised  up  to  carry  it 
on  to  victory. 


SECTION    XIII. 

LAST  YEAH  OF  TY>'1)ALE — STATE  OF  ENGLAXD — MONASTERIES — THE  QXIEEIfS 

— AXXE  BOLETN MOCK  TRIAL — QUEEN  EXECUTED SCENE  SUCCEEDING 

THE    NEW  OR  UNPRECEDENTED   PARLIAMENT QUEEN  ANNe's  TREATMENT 

REVIEWED HER  CHARACTER THE  NEW  OR  UNPRECEDENTED  CONVOCA- 
TION  LATIMER  PREACHING  BEFORE  IT STATE  OF  PARTIES  THERE OLD 

AND  NEW  LEARNING — PROCEEDINGS  IN  CONVOCATION — THE  FIRST  ARTICLES 
CRUMWELl's  FIRST  INJUNCTIONS NO  BIBLE    MENTIONED 

TYNDALE's    latter    DATS PHILLIPS    ONCE    MORE COLD  INDIFFERENCE  OF 

ENGLAND THE    COURT    OF    BRUSSELS HOME    AND   ABROAD   NOW   DEEPLY 

IMPLICATED THE  MARTYRDOM  OF  TYNDALE HIS  BENEVOLENT  CHAR- 
ACTER  HIS  REWARD POYNTZ,  THE  FRIEND  OF  TYNDALE FUTURE  HIS- 
TORY OF  THE  MISERABLE  BETRAYERS STATE  OF  THE  CONTINENT  AT  THE 

TIME    OF    TYNDALe's    DEATH STATE  OF  ENGLAND    AND    HER    KING THE 

ONLY  PROSPEROUS  CAUSE,  OR  THE  YEAR  WHICH  EXCELLED  ALL  THE 
PRECEDING. 

We  are  now  within  nine  months  only  of  the  martyrdom  of 
Tyndale  ;  but  as  it  is  necessary  that  the  reader  should  have 
before  him  all  that  previously  transpired  in  England,  we 
reverse  the  order  hitherto  pursued.  With  the  leading  events, 
Tyndale  himself  may  have  become  partially  acquainted,  but, 
whether  or  not,  it  is  due  to  his  memory  that  the}-  be  first 


458  DISSOLUTION  OF  MONASTERIES.  [book  I. 

reviewed ;  as  they  in  vol ve  a  dii'ect  bearing,  not  only  on  his 
character,  but  upon  the  obligations  of  his  country,  for  those 
noble  and  persevering  exertions,  which  terminated  only  with 
his  last  breath  at  the  stake,  and  have  far  too  long  been  per- 
mitted to  sleep  in  oblivion. 

Parliament,  after  being  prorogued  since  December  1534,  was  opened 
at  last  on  the  4th.  of  February.  The  long  recess  was  chiefly  owing  to 
the  plague,  which  had  appeared  in  different  parts  of  London  in  August 
and  September,  of  which  Audley,  the  Lord  Chancellor,  was  not  a  little 
afraid.'  But  the  Monarch  must  now  be  gratified  in  his  thirst  for  more 
money ;  and  to  prepare  the  country  for  the  bold  step,  already  determined, 
the  report  of  the  visitors  of  Monasteries  was  laid  before  Parliament.  The 
idleness  and  depravity  of  their  inmates  were  depicted,  their  waste  and 
misajjplication  of  funds,  their  frauds  and  follies  ;  and,  unquestionably, 
there  were  great  abuses  ;  but  it  was  not  on  account  of  these  that  the 
monastic  institutions  were  broken  up.  The  abuses  furnished  an  excel- 
lent handle  or  pretext ;  but  the  position  of  the  King  led  him  to  appre- 
hend war  with  the  Emperor,  if  not  invasion,  and  he  must  have  supplies. 
The  "  Court  of  Augmentation  of  the  King's  Revenue"  was  established, 
to  receive  the  surrenders  of  monasteries,  and  transfers  of  property  to  the 
crown,  and  all  monasteries  whose  annual  income  did  not  exceed  ^'200, 
were  suppressed.  Their  number  amounted  to  376,  which  brought 
,£100,000  into  the  royal  coffers,  and  £32,000  of  annual  revenue  ;  or  a 
sum  equal  to  a  million  and  a  half  in  our  day,  and  above  £400,000 
a-year.  At  the  same  time,  the  larger  monasteries  and  abbeys  were  art- 
fully commended,  and  many  of  those  monks  or  nvms  who  were  turned 
adrift,  had  it  in  their  option  to  repair  to  them.  This  was  done  in  order 
to  soothe  or  beguile  the  mitred  Abbots,  though  the  formidable  extent  of 
the  "  court"  established,  might  have  shown  that  matters  were  not  to 
stop  here.  Perhaps  it  was  this  that  suggested  the  often  quoted  remark, 
ascribed  to  Stokesly,  Bishop  of  London,  that  "  these  lesser  houses  were 
as  thorns,  soon  plucked  up,  but  the  great  Abbots  were  like  putrified  old 
oaks  ;  yet  they  must  needs  follow,  and  so  would  others  do  in  Christen- 
dom, before  many  years  were  past." 

Several  other  acts  of  inferior  moment  having  been  despatched,  this 
Parliament  was  dissolved  on  the  14th  of  April,  after  it  had  sat  for  a 
period  of  six  years,  by  repeated  and  unequal  prorogations.  It  had 
abundantly  answered  Henry's  varied  purposes,  but  now  its  pliancy  must 
have  been  somewhat  doubtful  ;  otherwise,  why  was  it  dissolved  1  This, 
liowever,  is  a  question  which  the  reader  will  resolve  for  himself,  after  he 
has  observed  the  dark  features  of  this  most  tragical  period  ;  since  all 


'    Govcrnniciit  State  Papers,  i.,  p.  4.'!!)'44fl. 


1530'.]         QUEEN  CATHERINE'S  DEATH.  459 

public  affairs  were  still  interwoven  with  those  which  were  personal  to  the 
Monarch  himself.  It  is  to  him,  therefore,  that  we  must  turn,  to  account 
for  one  Parliament  being  dissolved,  and  for  a  new  one  summoned  to 
attend,  in  such  breathless  haste.  During  the  entire  session  of  the  Par- 
liament just  dissolved,  one  of  the  darkest  plots  which  marked  the  reign 
of  this  licentious  Monarch,  had  been  proceeding  in  secresy  so  profound, 
as  to  be  unknown  to  any  of  its  future  victims,  Its  explosion  will  for  ever 
distinguish  Henry  as  a  man,  or,  more  properly  speaking,  a  monster, 
happily  of  but  rare  occurrence.  It  is  true,  that  official  documents  have 
been  very  carefully  destroyed  ;  but  if  calm  and  deliberate  attention  be 
paid  to  the  few  manuscripts  which  have  survived,  of  the  entire  conduct 
of  the  Monarch,  there  can  be  bvit  one  opinion,  though  words  may  fail  to 
express  it.  It  borders  on  the  incredible  ;  and,  therefore,  requires  to  be 
the  more  coolly  examined. 

At  two  o'clock  on  Tuesday  the  7th  of  January,  Queen  Catherine  died 
at  Kimbolton,  an  event  from  which,  perhaps,  Queen  Anne  might  augur 
a  little  more  security,  and  yet  even  this  is  doubtful,  for  before  this, 
she  had  perceived  that  the  affections  of  Henry  had  begun  to  waver.^  He 
had  tormented  all  Europe,  it  is  true,  and  waited  six  years  that  he  might 
gain  her  hand,  and  this,  in  other  cases,  would  have  been  good  security 
for  steadiness  of  attachment  ;  but  the  man  she  had  married  was  not  to 
be  judged  of  by  ordinary  rules.  The  Queen  was  near  the  period  of  her 
second  confinement,  and  on  the  29th  of  this  mouth,  she  was  delivered  of 
a  still-born  son.  Her  first  child,  Elizabeth,  could  now  lisp  her  father's 
name,  and  the  present  moment  would  have  melted  most  beings  in  human 
form  ;  but  as  it  was  then  that  he  chose  to  utter  certain  words  ominous 
of  some  dreadful  purpose,  we  have  sufficient  proof  of  evil  already  brooding 
in  his  mind.  He  intimated,  and  to  herself,  in  this  weak  and  sorrowful 
condition,  that  he  would  have  no  more  boys  by  her.  As  far  as  words 
could  reach,  this  was  an  attempt  to  crush  her  into  the  grave ;  but  as  it 
did  not  succeed,  we  are  left  to  watch  what  followed. 

Buj-net  has  said  that  "  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  at  court,  and  Gardiner 
beyond  sea,  (then  in  France,)  thought  there  might  easily  be  found  a 
mean  to  accommodate  the  King,  both  with  the  Emperor  and  even  Paul 
III.,  if  the  Queen  were  once  out  of  the  way  ;  for  then  he  might  freely 
marry  any  one  whom  he  pleased,  and  that  marriage,  with  the  male  issue 
of  it,  could  not  be  disputed  :  whereas,  as  long  as  the  Queen  lived,  her 
marriage,  as  being  judged  null  from  the  beginning,  could  never  be  al- 
lowed by  the  Court  of  Rome."  This,  if  it  be  taken  in  coujunction  with 
the  sentiments  of  the  Queen,  sufiiciently  accounts  for  their  brutal  zeal, 
and  that  of  their  party  ;  but  with  these  reasons  of  state,  another  con- 
curred, without  which  their  desire  had  never  been  gratified.     The  vile 

2  Anne,  however,  is  reported  by  several  historians  to  have  made  no  secret  of  her  satisfaction 
Ht  the  death  of  her  predecessor. 


460  QUEEN   ANNE   BOLEYN.  [bOOK  I. 

passious  of  the  Monarch  had  already  strayed  in  search  of  another  object ; 
and  though  the  Queen  used  every  mean  to  recover  his  aflfection,  all  was 
in  vain.  But  no  wonder  ;  for  before  the  sorrowful  mother  was  fully  re- 
covered from  her  languor  and  distress,  certain  steps  had  been  taken 
against  her,  and  deliberately  pursued,  with  dexterous  secresy,  as  the 
sequel  will  disclose. 

On  the  14th  of  April,  Parliament  had  been  dissolved,  and  presently, 
there  will  be  no  doubt,  with  an  immediate  view  to  a  new  one  being 
summoned  ;  though,  with  what  intentions,  only  a  few  select  individuals 
could  possibly  have  divined.  The  first  moment  that  Henry  wished  it, 
the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  who  behaved  with  savage  cruelty  throughout,  was 
ready  to  move  ;  and  it  was  well  for  Cranmer's  character,  that  he  was 
not  in  the  secret ;  though  both  Crumwell  and  Audley  were,  and  seem  to 
have  preserved  it  inviolate.  As  early  as  the  22d,  however,  there  were  a 
few  words  from  Cranmer,  in  a  letter  to  Crumwell,  which  though  curiously 
ambiguous,  certainly  refer  to  what  had  been  going  on.  After  an  earnest 
application  to  him  on  behalf  of  a  Mr.  Smith,  he  adds  : — 

"  I  have  sent  this  bearer  only  to  wait  upon  you,  until  you  liave  an  answer 
from  the  King,  and  to  put  you  in  continual  remembrance  ;  for  much  business 
causeth  you  to  forget  many  things  ;  and  yet  I  wonder  that  you  remember  so 
many  tilings  as  you  do. 

"  I  was  ever  hitherto  cold,  but  now  I  am  in  a  heat  with  the  cause  of  religion, 
if  it  be,  as  the  fame  goeth  ;  wherein  I  would  iconder  fain  break  my  mind  unto 
you  ;  and  if  you  please,  I  will  come  to  such,  place  as  you  shall  appoint  for  the 
same  purpose.  Thus,  He  that  made  you,  ever  keep  you.  From  Knol,  the  22d 
of  April,  your  own  assured  ever — T.  Cantuarien."3 

The  fame,  or  rather  fama,  perhaps  Cranmer  was  afraid  to  express  in 
writing,  but  only  one  short  week  will  elapse  before  he  shall  be  called  by 
Crumwell,  and  that  in  obedience  to  the  royal  mandate  ;  though  certainly 
not  to  the  place  he  had  supposed,  and  for  purposes  by  far  too  shocking 
for  him  to  have  anticipated.  Some  rumour,  it  seems,  had  already 
agitated  him,  but  of  the  awful  results  within  that  day  four  weeks,  he 
could  now  form  no  conception.  These  results  are  well  known  to  every 
reader  of  history.  By  that  time  Queen  Anne,  her  brother  Lord  Rochford, 
and  four  other  individuals,  Sir  Henry  Norris,  Sir  Francis  Weston, 
William  Brereton,  and  Mark  Smeton,  had  all  been  put  to  death  ;  nay, 
that  day  four  weeks  was  the  King's  marriage  day  to  another  Queen  ! 
But  we  are  nov/  only  tracing  the  dark  footsteps  of  the  royal  murderer, 
and  require  carefully  to  observe  ascertained  facts,  in  the  order  in  which 
they  transpired. 

Three  days  after  this  letter  from  Cranmer,  we  find  that  certain  parties, 
secretly  sanctioned  by  Henry,  had  been  engaged,  for  some  time,  in  col- 
lecting scandal ;  and,  by  the  authority  of  their  names,  twisting  it  into 

•■'  MS.  CnmiwcH's  C'nvrcsii.  Cli.-iptor-Houso.  AVcstniiiistcr.     Drkiinal  holofii-oph. 


1530.]  DARK   PLOT   AGAINST   ANNK    UOLEVrN.  4(jl 

shape,  or  making  it  as  feasible  as  they  coiild,  for  his  bloody  design.'*  A 
special  commission  which  had  been  made  out,  is  tested  on  the  25th  of 
April  in  the  28th  of  Henry,  at  Westminster,  that  is  on  Tuesday  the  25th 
of  April  1530.^  But  then  the  scandal  ])y  this  time  was  all  collected,  and 
various  consultations  on  its  effect  must  have  been  held,  before  the  formal 
completion  of  such  a  commission.  "  The  act  of  executing  the  commission 
was  a  deliberate  and  conclusive  measure.  Whatever  occurred  afterv/ards, 
could  have  no  more  than  a  faint  influence  on  the  succeeding  events. 
These  measures  must,  therefore,  have  begun,  when  the  Queen  was 
scarcely  recovered  from  the  birth  of  her  still-born  son  !"^  "The  con- 
tents of  this  document  of  the  25th  of  April,"  says  the  same  author, 
"would  offend  every  modest  eye,  even  seen  through  a  Latin  medium  ;" 
but  it  may  with  truth  be  added,  that  their  very  grossness,  and  the  manner 
in  which  every  case  is  put,  carries  its  oivn  refutation  along  with  it. 
Even  Turner,  who,  on  all  occasions,  is  so  sensitively  alive  to  Henry's 
character,  has  said — "  These  cii-cumstances  do  not  resemble  those  of  a 
true  case," — they  "are  very  like  the  inade-uf  facts,  of  a  fabricated 
accusation."  "  I  have  more  doubt  of  her  criminality,  since  I  met  with 
this  specifying  record,  than  I  had  before."  And  why  not  then  look  a 
little  farther  ?  We  are  only  on  the  threshold  of  enquu-y,  and  this  is 
more  than  sufficient  to  provoke  it,  though,  like  Ezekiel's  vision,  the 
farther  we  proceed,  we  should  see  greater  abominations. 

For  who  were  those  men,  twenty  in  number,  to  whom  the  King  thus 
committed  the  life  of  his  Queen  ?  the  men  to  whom  he  had  addressed 
this  secret  commission  1  Their  names  were  the  Dukes  of  Norfolk  and 
Suffolk  ;  the  Earls  of  Oxford  and  Westmoreland,  Wiltshire  and  Sussex  ; 
Lord  Sands  ;  Sirs  William  Fitzjames,  William  Paulet,  John  Fitzjames, 
John  Baldwin,  Richard  Lyster,  John  Porte,  John  Spelman,  Walter  Luke, 


■*  Lest  any  reader  should  imagine  that  we  are  already  bearing  too  hard  upon  these  men,  with 
Crvmwell  in  the  midst  of  them,  he  has  only  to  understand,  that  the  course  now  pursued  with  the 
Queen,  was  neither  new,  nor  seldom  pursued  by  Henry  with  his  subjects  after  this.  There  was 
a  book  of  Remembrances,  written  by  Crumwell  himself,  and  most  strangely  Irfl  in  existence 
behind  him,  into  wliicli  if  one  has  not  looked,  he  never  can  form  any  correct  estimate  of  his 
conduct  and  character.  This  sad  book  must  be  opened  again  before  he  dies ;  but  suppose  we 
open  it,  for  a  moment  thus  early,  since  it  alludes  to  what  is  past,  as  well  as  to  future  years  ;  and 
the  Keader  should  not  be  allowed  to  travel  on,  without  some  intimation  of  its  contents ;  as  it  is 
but  fair  that  he  should  be  apprised  with  whom  he  is  travelling.  The  reader  has  already  seen 
two  men  put  to  death  last  year,  viz.,  Fisher  and  More ;  and  what  says  Crumwell,  with  his  own 
bold  pen  in  his  Remembrances?  "Item.  To  advertise  the  King  of  the  ordering  of  Jlaster 
Fisher,  and  to  show  him  of  the  Indenture,  which  /  have  delivered  to  the  Solicitors."  "Item, 
when  Master  Fisher  shall  go  to  his  ejcecidion,  leilh  also  the  other."  This  other  was  not  Sir 
Thomas,  for  he  adds—"  Item,  to  know  his  pleasure  touching  Master  DTore."  "  Item,  what  shall 
be  done  farther  touching  Master  More."  But  the  daring  progress  of  this  shocking  subserviency 
will  be  expressed  in  still  viler  terms  after  this.  The  reader  will  find  many  other  proofs  taken 
from  this  manuscript  in  the  original  letters  published  by  Sir  Henry  Ellis,  the  second  series,  vol. 
ii.,  p.  121.  The  folds  and  creases  in  this  manuscript,  which  we  have  particularly  observed, 
"show,"  says  Sir  Henry,  "that  they  were  the  memoranda  which  Crumwell  doubled  up,  and 
carried  in  his  poeket,  when  he  went  to  the  Court,  the  Council,  or  the  Parliament;  and  it  is 
singular  that  he  should  have  suffered  such  to  remain."  They  speak  a  volume  as  to  Crumvell's 
character,  of  which  we  shall  yet  have  too  melancholy  proof. 

5  Birch  jMS..  Brit.  Mus.,  No.  429."!.  «  Sir  James  Mackintosh. 


4()2  DARK   PLOT   AGAINST   ANNE   BOLEYN.  [boOK  I. 

Anthony  Fitzherbert,  Thomas  Inglefield,  and  William  Shelley,  with 
Audley  as  Lord  Chancellor,  and  Secretary  Crumwell.7  Now,  of  what 
complexion  was  this  junto  ? 

Here  was  Howard  Duke  of  Norfolk,  who,  though  her  maternal  uncle, 
hated  the  Queen  as  cordially  as  he  did  "  the  new  learning," — Charles 
Brandon,  Duke  of  Suffolk,  Henry's  brother-in-law  and  special  favourite, 
so  ready  to  gratify  him  in  all  his  humours, — John  de  Vere,  Earl  of 
Oxford,  who  sujiported  all  the  measures  of  the  court — Robert  Radcliff, 
who  had  been  restored  to  honour  by  Henry,  as  Lord  Fitzwalter,  in  1525, 
and  since  then  created  Earl  of  Sussex — William  Sands,  the  Lord  Cham- 
berlain of  the  King's  household,  who  had  been  made  a  Baron,  and  got 
the  Buckingham  estates.  Here  we  have  eleven  Knights,  eight  of  whom 
were  compliant  Judges,  and  as  for  another,  William  Paidett,  the  Comp- 
troller of  the  King's  house,  he  was  a  man  of  the  most  convenient  politics  ; 
who,  when  asked,  at  the  end  of  a  long  life,  how  he  j^reserved  himself 
through  so  many  changes  ?  answered,  "  by  being  a  willow  and  not  an 
oak."^  Audley  was  always  obsequious  to  his  royal  Master,  and  as  to 
Crumwell,  the  share  he  took  in  this  business  must  speak  for  itself,  in 
connexion  with  his  future  career.  But  with  regard  to  the  Earl  of  Wilt- 
shire, the  Father  of  the  Queen  and  Lord  Rochford,  his  name  being  in- 
serted, was  a  stroke  of  hand  quite  worthy  of  Henry's  barbarity,  and 
must  have  been  done  to  save  appearances.  His  name  never  occurs  after- 
wards, and  it  is  certain  that  he  did  not  preside  at  the  mock  trial.^ 

Matters  being  now  arranged  for  the  Lady  and  her  accomplices,  who 
were  to  be  tried  and  executed  ;  what  was  done  only  two  days  afterwards, 
or  Thursday  the  27th  ?  Writs  were  issued  for  a  neiv  Parliament !  This, 
then,  was  the  first  measure  known  beyond  the  circle  already  named,  and 
the  reader  must  not  fail  to  mark  the  language  of  Lord  Chancellor  Audley 
afterwards,  at  its  opening  on  the  8th  of  June,  as  an  vinwitting  but  de- 
cided jiroof  of  premeditated  murder  !  In  connexion  with  this  very  day, 
the  27th  of  April,  it  has  never  been  sufficiently,  if  at  all,  observed,  that 
one  of  the  parties  marked  out  for  death,  Brereton,  was  arrested  ;  and  by 
two  o'clock  he  was  in  the  Tower.  "  Upon  Thursday  before  May-day, 
in  the  morning,"  says  George  Constantyne,  "  I  spake  with  him  about 
nine  of  the  clock,  and  he  told  me  that  there  was  no  way  but  one  with 
any  matter.^"     For  I  did  ask  him,  and  was  bold  upon  him,  because  we 


r  Birch  MS. 

8  This  man,  born  in  the  15th  year  of  Edward  IV.,  died  in  the  12th  of  Elizabeth,  had  lived 
nnder  eUild  sovereigns.  It  is  curious  enough  that  he  became  Karl  of  TViUshire  under  Edward 
VI.,  and  afterwards  Marquis  of  Winchester,  dying  at  the  age  of  97,  having  seen  one  hundred 
and  three  descendants.  He,  and  the  Earl  of  Pembroke,  were  ever  of  the  King's  religion,  and 
having  spent  what  was  left  them,  came  on  trust  to  the  Co-arX.—CoUin's  Peerage,  ii.,  p.  372. 

9  Burnet  at  first  inserted  his  name,  but  he  had  not  then  seen  a  record  of  the  trial,  now  lost. 
He  was  convinced  by  the  papers  he  saw  tliat  the  Earl  was  not  present,  and  expunged  the 
name  ;  which  is  therefore  not  to  be  found  in  certain  subsequent  editions  of  his  history. 

10  The  conversation  here  is  about  the  very  snare  that  had  been  laid,  without  knowing  how 
many  it  involved. 


1530.]  MAY-DAY   SCENK.  463 

were  born  within  four  miles  together  ;  and  also  we  went  to  grammar 
school  together.  And  the  same  day,  before  two  of  the  clock,  was  he  in 
the  Tower,  as  far  as  the  best.  What  was  laid  against  him  I  know  not, 
nor  ever  heard." '^  Only  two  days  more  elapsed,  when  on  Sunday  even- 
ing, the  last  day  of  April,  a  second  man,  Mark  Smeton,  was  apprehended, 
examined  at  Stepney,  and  it  was  affirmed  by  the  rack  ;  but,  at  all  events, 
next  morning  he  was  also  in  the  Tower.^ 

But  that  morning  was  May-day,  and  Henry  had  resolved  to  observe 
its  accustomed  festivities.  Such  was  the  extraordinary  moment  in  which 
he  first  chose  to  exhibit  himself  from  behind  the  cm-tain.  The  Court 
was  at  Greenwich,  and  a  splendid  joust,  or  mock  fight,  was  to  form  part 
of  the  amusements  of  the  day.  Two  victims  were  already  in  prison,  but 
three  if  not  four  others,  by  far  the  most  eminent,  were  now  to  be  present, 
and  without  thought  for  the  morrow,  came  to  enjoy  the  passing  hours 
amidst  splendour  and  pageantry.  "  The  May-day  perturbation,"  says 
Turner,  "  was  mere  public  scenery."  It  was,  indeed,  and  such  as  Herod 
or  Nero  never  furnished.  There  sat  the  King,  and  there,  the  most  con- 
spicuous object  of  attraction,  the  Queen,  by  his  side,  all  unconscious  of 
impending  danger  ;  to  witness  a  spectacle,  in  which  her  brother,  Lord 
Rochford,  and  Sir  Henry  Norris,  were  the  principal  actors,  one  being 
the  chief  challenger,  and  the  other  the  defendant.  Would  any  one  of 
these  have  been  present,  had  the  slightest  apprehension  been  enter- 
tained ?  Or,  would  they  all  have  been  here  to  entertain  the  Monarch 
with  a  spectacle,  had  they  known  that  their  lives  were  hanging  by  a 
thread,  nay,  their  deaths  determined  ?  There  is  no  occasion  for  repeat- 
ing the  popular  story  of  a  handkerchief  dropped  by  the  Queen,  having 
been  picked  up,  and  returned  to  her  by  Norris.  This  was  a  trifle  light 
as  air,  and  might,  or  might  not  have  happened.  Henry  may  have  found 
it  difficult  to  fix  on  the  best  moment  for  rising,  but  something  having 
occurred,  he  made  it  the  pretext  for  putting  on  his  look  of  wrath,  and 
retiring  from  the  balcony.  The  Queen,  in  great  uneasiness,  did  the 
same,  and  to  enquire  the  cause  :  but  he  took  care  that  she  should  not, 
or  should  ever,  see  him  again  !  Leaving  orders  that  she  was  not  to  quit 
her  apartments,  he  had  mounted  his  horse  for  Westminster,  with  only 
six  attendants.  One  of  these,  however,  according  to  Constantyne,  was 
his  master.  Sir  Henry  Norris.  "  The  King  rode  suddenly  to  West- 
minster, and  all  the  way,  as  I  heard  say,  had  Mr.  Norris  in  examination, 
and  promised  him  his  freedom  in  case  he  should  utter  the  truth.  But 
whatsoever  could  be  said  or  done,  Mr.  Norris  would  confess  nothing  to 


' '  See  the  curious  narrative  of  George  Constantyne,  (of  whom  \vc  have  frequently  heard  be- 
fore,) first  printcil  in  the  Archaeologia,  vol.  xxiii.,  p.  (!4. 

12  "  He  was  at  Stepney  in  examination  on  JMoy-evcn ;  I  cannot  tell  how  he  was  examined,  but 
upon  May-day,  in  the  mornivg,  he  was  in  the  Tower.  The  truth  is,  he  confessed  it ;  hiU  yel  (he sai/- 
■iii(/was,  that  he  was  first  ffi-iei'ou sly  racked,  which  I  could  never  know  of  a  tTn\h."—Coi>stantpiie. 


464  ANNE   IN   THE  TOWER.  [uoOK  I. 

the  King,  whereupon  he  was  committed  to  the  Tower  in  the  (Tuesday) 
morning."^''  The  same  day  Sir  F.  Weston,  and  Lord  Rochford  were 
there  also. 

It  is,  however,  to  the  Royal  victim,  the  Queen  herself,  that  the  mind 
now  turns  with  most  anxiety  for  information.  Having  passed  the  night 
and  following  morning  in  great  perplexity,  she  resolved  in  the  after- 
noon (Tuesday)  to  make  an  attempt  to  see  her  husband.  Once  on 
board  of  her  barge,  she  desired  the  rowers  to  make  speed  for  West- 
minster ;  but  she  had  proceeded  only  a  little  way,  when  she  was  met  by 
one  of  her  unnatural  enemies,  the  Duke  of  Norfolk.  He  and  other 
members  of  Council  came  on  board,  and  presented  an  order  for  her 
committal  to  the  Tower.  Another  account  states  that  she  was  arrested 
at  Greenwich,  when,  starting  with  horror,  she  demanded  the  reason  of 
their  coming.  Norfolk  answered — "  It  is  his  Majesty's  pleasure  that 
you  should  dej^art  to  the  Tov/er."  Regaining  her  self-possession,  Anne 
replied — "  If  it  be  his  Majesty's  pleasure,  I  am  ready  to  obey."  But 
be  this  as  it  may,  in  the  barge  Norfolk  had  the  brutality  to  enter  on  the 
subject.  She  protested  her  innocence,  demanding,  with  vehemence,  to 
be  permitted  to  see  the  King,  and  offer  her  personal  vindication.  But 
Norfolk  only  shook  his  head  contemptuously,  all  his  coadjutors  behav  - 
ing  as  badly,  except  Sir  Thomas  Audley,  who  acted  with  becoming 
delicacy,  and  endeavoured  to  soften  the  anguish  of  the  forsaken  and 
friendless  lady.  On  arriving,  it  was  about  five  in  the  afternoon,  at  the 
gate  of  the  Tower,  once  used  as  her  palace,  she  fell  down  upon  her 
knees,  with  this  expressive  supplication — "  0  Lord,  help  me,  as  I  am 
guiltless  of  this  whereof  I  am  accused  !"  She  enquired  of  Sir  William 
Kingston,  the  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower — "  Mr.  Kingston,  do  I  go  into  a 
dungeon  f  To  which  he,  jailor-like,  replied — "  No,  Madam,  you  shall 
go  into  your  lodging  that  you  lay  in  at  your  coronation."  The  recollec- 
tion overpowered  her,  and  she  cried  out — "  It  is  too  good  for  me  :  Jesus 
have  mercy  upon  me  !"  On  various  occasions,  the  first  sight  of  this 
man  seems  to  have  been  equivalent  to  that  of  a  death-warrant.  Wol- 
sey,  it  will  be  remembered,  sunk  the  moment  he  beheld  him.  The 
Queen  then  enquired — "  Mr.  Kingston,  do  you  know  wherefore  I  am 
here  V  And  he  said,  "  Nay."  She  then  asked  him  when  he  last  saw 
the  King,  and  when  her  brother  ?  At  this  moment,  she  had  no  idea  of 
his  being  implicated,  and  therefore  added — "  I  hear  say  that  I  should 
be  accused  with  three  men,  and  I  can  say  no  more  but  nay."  She  re- 
ferred then  to  her  mother  as  likely  to  die  for  sorrow — and  enquired — 
"  Mr.  Kingston,  shall  I  die  without  justice  ?"  To  which  he,  of  course, 
replied — "  The  poorest  subject  the  King  hath,  has  justice."  At  this  the 
Queen  laughed,  being,  it  is  evident,  in  a  state  of  great  nervous  agitation. 

13  Coiistantyiic. 


l.ySii.'J  CKANMEK   SENT    FUK.  4()j 

The  utter  lameness  of  the  scandal  already  so  collected,  and  that  the 
murderer  longed  for  more,  become  alike  apparent,  in  the  female  attend- 
ants now  placed  around  the  Queen  ;  as  "  they  reported,  with  atrocious 
accuracy,  all  the  incoherent  ravings  of  her  hysterical  agitation" — while 
she  declared  to  Kingston,  from  the  beginning,  and  repeatedly  affirmed 
in  other  words — "  I  am  as  clear  from  the  company  of  man,  as  for  sin,  as 
I  am  clear  from  you  :  I  am  the  King's  true  wedded  wife." 

But  here  we  must  leave,  for  a  few  moments,  this  scene  of  anguish  in 
the  Tower,  as  the  next  figure  in  this  unnatural  tragedy  pressing  upon 
our  notice,  is  Cranmer.  Neither  Henry  nor  his  accomplices  could  ad- 
vance in  their  career,  without  his  official  assistance.  He  had  certainly 
been  kept  in  the  dark,  but  the  King  had  already  proved  his  pliancy  ; 
and  though  the  humiliating  style  with  which  he  now  treated  him,  was 
a  greater  stretch  of  authority  than  any  which  had  preceded,  it  will  be 
manifest  that  there  had  not  been  the  shadow  of  a  doubt  as  to  Cranmer 
being  perfectly  obsequious,  whatever  he  might  say.  The  King,  there- 
fore, had  desired  Crumwell  to  order  him  uj)  from  the  country  to  Lam- 
beth. But  the  question  is,  u'hen  did  he  do  this  ?  For,  in  obedience  to 
Henry's  command,  Cranmer  had  arrived  at  Lambeth  on  Tuesday.  He 
does  not  appear  to  have  been  in  Surrey,  as  TTimer  has  supposed ;  at 
least,  only  a  week  before,  or  the  22d  of  April,  he  was  writing  to  Crum- 
well, from  Knole,  in  Kent,  about  twenty-four  miles  south-east  of  London. 
This  distance,  at  that  time,  was  a  day's  journey,  so  that  the  very  latest 
moment,  in  Avhich  Crumwell  could  obey  the  King's  order,  must  have 
been  on  May-day.  But  was  this  after  the  wretched  exhibition  at  Green- 
wich, or  before  it  ?  It  may  have  been  after  it ;  but,  in  this  case,  the 
messenger  must  have  travelled  in  post-haste  in  the  night,  and  Cranmer 
had  set  oiF  for  London  instantly  on  his  arrival.  The  royal  mandate, 
therefore,  looks  far  too  like  another  link  in  proof  of  pre- determined 
murder.  It  may  have  been  given  before  the  joust ;  but,  at  all  events, 
Cranmer  had  got  to  Lambeth  about  the  time  that  Queen  Anne  had 
reached  the  Tower,  if  not  before  ;  though  there,  in  durance,  he  must  wait. 
He  will  tell  us  himself,  that,  though  at  hand,  he  dared  not  come  into 
the  royal  presence,  until  he  received  farther  orders.  Next  day,  how- 
ever, impatient  of  restraint,  and,  perhaps,  imagining,  that  he  possessed, 
at  least,  some  influence,  he  must  write  a  letter  to  the  King  ;  and  as  it 
has  hitherto  bafiied  descrij^tion,  the  opinions  of  historians  being  so  very 
discordant,  we  are  under  the  necessity  of  giving  it  entire — '•* 


'■*  The  discordancy  is  so  singular,  that  it  is  not  unworthy  of  brief  notice.  Burnet  says—"  he 
wrote  with  all  the  softness  that  so  tender  a  point  required,  in  which  he  justified  her  as  far  as 
was  consistent  with  prudence  and  charity.  The  letter  shows  of  what  a  constitution  he  was  that 
wrote  if,  and  contains  many  things  that  tend  highly  to  her  honour."  "  Of  all  her  former  ad- 
herents," says  Todd,  "  Cranmer  now  alone  retained  his  grateful  regard  for  the  Queen.  He, 
therefore,  resolved  to  inform  Henry,  by  letter,  and  with  equal  tenderness  and  discretion,  while 
under  the  restriction  at  his  palace,  thus  lie  wrote."  Turner  considers  it  an  injudieinus  letter — 
VOL.    I.  2  (i 


4()(j  CRANMER'S   LETTER  [boOK  I. 

"  Pleaseth  it  your  most  noble  Grace  to  be  advertised,  that  your  Grace's  com- 
iiiandraent  by  Mr.  Secretary's  letters,  written  in  your  Grace's  name,  I  came  to 
Lambeth  yesterday,  and  do  there  remain  to  know  your  Grace's  farther  pleasure. 
And  forasmuch  as  without  your  Grace's  commandment,  I  dare  not,  contrary  to 
the  contents  of  the  said  letters,  presume  to  come  into  your  Grace's  presence  ; 
nevertheless  of  my  most  bounden  duty,  I  can  do  no  less  than  most  humbly  to 
desire  your  Grace  by  your  great  wisdom,  and  by  the  assistance  of  God's  help, 
.somewhat  to  suppress  the  deep  sorrows  of  your  Grace's  heart,  and  to  take  all 
the  adversities  of  God's  hand,  both  patiently  and  thankfully. 

"  I  cannot  deny  but  your  Grace  hath  great  causes,  many  ways,  of  lamentable 
heaviness  ;  and  also  that  in  the  wrongful  estimation  of  the  world,  your  Grace's 
honour  of  every  part  is  so  highly  touched,  whether  the  things  that  be  spoken  of 
be  true  or  not,  that  I  remember  not  that  ever  Almighty  God  sent  unto  your 
Grace  any  like  occasion  to  try  your  Grace's  constancy  throughout,  whether  you 
can  be  content  to  take  of  God's  hand  as  well  things  displeasant,  as  pleasant.  And 
if  he  find  in  your  most  noble  heart  sucli  an  obedience  to  his  will,  that  your 
Grace,  without  murmuration  and  over  much  heaviness,  do  accept  all  adversities, 
not  less  thanking  him  than  when  all  things  succeeded  after  your  Grace's  will 
and  pleasure,  nor  less  procui'ing,  His  glory  and  honour  ;  then,  I  suppose,  did 
never  thing  more  acceptable  unto  him,  since  your  first  government  of  this  realm. 
And,  moreover,  your  Grace  shall  give  unto  Him  occasion  to  multiply  and  in- 
crease his  graces  and  benefits  unto  your  Highness,  as  he  did  unto  his  servant 
Job  ;  unto  whom,  after  his  great  calamities  and  heaviness,  for  his  obedient 
heart,  and  willing  acceptation  of  God's  scourge  and  rod,  addldit  ei  Dominus 
cuncta  duplicia. 

"  And  if  it  be  true  that  is  openly  reported  of  the  Queen's  Grace,  if  men  had 
a  right  estimation  of  things,  they  should  not  esteem  any  part  of  your  Grace's 
honour  to  be  touched  thereby,  but  her  honour  only  to  be  clearly  disparaged. 
And  I  am  in  such  a  perplexity  that  my  mind  is  clean  amazed  :  for  I  never  had 
better  opinion  in  woman  than  I  had  in  her,  which  maketh  me  think  that  she 
should  n(A  be  culpable.  And  again  I  think  that  your  Highness  would  not  have 
gone  so  far,  except  she  had  been  surely  culpable.  Now  I  think  that  your  Grace 
best  knoweth,  that,  next  unto  your  Grace,  I  was  most  bound  unto  her  of  all 
creatures  living.  Wherefore  I  most  humbly  beseech  your  Grace  to  suff"er  me 
in  that  which  both  God's  law,  nature,  and  also  her  kindness  bindeth  me  unto  ; 
that  is,  that  I  may,  with  jour  Grace's  favour,  wish  and  pray  for  her,  that  she 
may  declai'e  herself  inculpable  and  innocent.  And  if  she  be  found  culpable,  con- 
sidering your  Grace's  goodness  towards  her,  and  from  what  condition  your  Grace, 
of  your  only  mere  goodness  took  her,  and  set  the  crown  upon  her  head  ;  I  re- 
pute him  not  your  Grace's  faithful  servant  and  subject,  nor  true  unto  the  realm, 
that  would  not  desire  the  offence  without  mercy  to  be  punished  to  the  example 
of  others.  And  as  I  loved  her  not  a  little  for  the  love  which  I  judged  her  to 
bear  towards  God  and  his  gospel  ;  so  if  she  bo  proved  culpable,  there  is  not  one 
that  loveth  God  and  His  Gospel  that  ever  will  favour  her,  but  must  hate  her 
above  all  other  ;  and  the  more  they  favour  the  Gospel,  the  more  they  will  hate 
her  ;  for  then  there  was  never  creature  in  our  time  that  so  much  slandered  the 


ill-timed,  and  probably  did  much  mischief!  "  Th.it  this  was  a  priulcnl  letter,  none  will  deny," 
says  Tjillcr,  "  but  that  it  merits  the  higli  encomium  bestowed  on  it,  by  Burnet,  may  be  ques- 
tioned." Mackintosli.  who.  however,  mis-dates  the  letter  on  the  fitti,  instead  of  the  3d  of  May, 
says, — "  Cranmer,  who  had  been  forliidden  to  aiiproach  tlie  Court,  wrote  a  skilful  and  per- 
suasive letter,  (if  any  skill  could  curb  furious  appetites— if  any  persuasion  could  allay  rajiing 
pasMons,)  imploring  the  King's  mercy  towards  her,  '  his  life  so  late  and  sole  delislit."  " 


1.536.]  TO  THE   KIN(J.  467 

gospel.  And  God  hath  sent  her  this  punishment,  for  that  she  feignedly  hath 
professed  his  Gospel  in  her  nioutli,  and  not  in  heart  and  deed.  And  though 
she  have  offended,  so  that  slie  hath  deserved  never  to  be  reconciled  unto  your 
(Jrace's  favour,  yet  Ahniglity  God  hatli  manifestly  declared  his  goodness  towards 
your  Grace,  and  never  offended  you.  But  your  Grace,  I  am  sure,  acknowledgeth 
that  you  have  offended  liim. 

"  Wherefore  I  trust  that  your  Grace  will  bear  ?iO  less  entire  favour  unto  the 
truth  of  the  Gospel,  than  you  did  before  ;  forsomuch  as  your  Grace's  favour  to 
the  Gospel  was  not  led  by  affection  unto  her,  but  by  zeal  unto  the  truth.  And 
thus  I  beseech  Almighty  God,  whose  Gospel  He  hath  ordained  your  Grace  to  be 
defender  of,  ever  to  preserve  your  Grace  from  all  evil,  and  give  you  at  the  end 
the  px'omise  of  his  Gospel.     From  Lambeth  the  3d  day  of  May." 

Certain  members  of  the  secret  commission,  however,  must  hurry  off 
Cranmer  across  the  Thames  to  the  Star  Chamber,  just  when  he  had 
written  thus  far.  It  was  in  order  that  he  might  receive  the  full  bias, 
which  might  render  him  an  easier  agent  in  whatsoever  the  King  would 
have  to  be  done  with  "the  Lady  in  the  Tower;"  and  the  simple  man 
then  subjoined  the  follov/ing  postscript — 

"  After  I  had  written  this  letter  unto  your  Gi'ace,  my  Lord  Chancellor,  my 
Lord  of  Oxford,  my  Lord  of  Sussex,  and  (Sands)  my  Lord  Chamberlain  of  your 
Grace's  house,  sent  for  me  to  come  unto  the  Star  Chamber  ;  and  there  declared 
unto  me  such  things  as  j/our  Grace^s  pleasure  was  they  should  make  me  privy  to  ; 
for  the  which  I  am  most  bounden  unto  your  Grace.  And  what  communication  we 
had  together,  I  doubt  not  but  they  will  make  the  true  report  thereof  unto  your 
Grace.  I  am  exceedingly  sorry,  that  such  faults  can  be  proved  by  the  Queen, 
as  I  heard  of  ?/ie'»- relation,  (and  upon  no  other  evidence  !)  But  I  am,  and  ever 
shall  be,  your  faithful  subject !" 

Thus,  after  commencing  his  letter  with  a  circuitous  not  to  say  flattering 
approach  to  the  King,  Cranmer  certainly  at  first  discovers  very  eager  desire 
for  Queen  Anne's  deliverance,  not  without  bearing  evidence  to  a  life 
which  was  presumed  to  give  the  lie  to  all  imputation, — but  then  the 
alteniative  is  introduced,  with  such  long  drawn  verbosity,  and  such 
violence  of  style,  that  it  could  scarcely  fail  to  gratify  a  heart  already 
bent  on  vengeance.  "  The  strong  reasons  which  he  inserted,"  says 
Turner,  "  for  the  unpitying  punishment  that  she  ought,  if  proved  guiltj^, 
to  receive,  must,  as  coming  from  the  King's  great  spiritual  adviser,  have 
tended  to  justify  in  his  mind,  the  fatal  severity  which  he  exerted  against 
her.  No  enemy  could  have  put  a  point  so  dangerous  at  that  moment, 
with  an  emphasis  more  likely  to  be  injurious." 

No  individual,  it  is  true,  nor  any  thing  he  might  say,  could  have  saved 
the  Queen  from  death  ;  but  above  all,  and  before  Cranmer  could  possibly 
judge  of  the  affair,  why  seize  that  opportunity  to  commence  and  conclude  a 
letter  by  so  complimenting  the  King  ?  why  take  occasion  in  this,  or  even 
any  other  letter,  to  speak  so  of  him,  and  to  him  1  It  was  one  misery  of  this 
Monarch  to  be  surrounded  by  those  who  either  pandered  to  his  vices,  or 
grossly  flattered  him,  for  qualities  he  never  possessed.     But  at  such  a 


M).s  QUKKN    ANNES   LEITER  [hoOK  I. 

moment  as  this,  how  could  Cranmer  talk  of  his  "  Grace's  favour  to  the 
Gospel,  and  zeal  unto  the  truth  ?"  One  can  scarcely  conceive  of  any 
man  being  farther  removed  from  both  ;  so  that  the  association  was  as 
preposterous  at  the  moment,  as  it  is  now  in  the  extreme  nauseous.  The 
reader  has  already  often  seen  how  independently  that  Sacred  cause  stood 
of  all  such  parties.  It  had  commenced  evidently  in  spite  of  them  all ;  and 
as  for  its  farther  advancement,  until  the  Bible  be  comj^leted,  though  Cran- 
mer and  Crumwell,  and  even  Henry  may  ajjpear,  it  will  be  only  as  instru- 
ments overruled  by  God.  The  translation  and  printing  of  the  Sacred 
Volume  was  not  only  accomplished  by  other  hands,  but  independently  of 
every  one  of  these  men  ;  while  it  was  merely  since  the  defamed  Queen 
came  to  the  throne,  that  the  King  and  his  advisers  had  ceased  to  per- 
secute those  who  received  or  read  any  part  of  it.  After  all,  Cranmer's 
language  betrays  just  as  much  anxiety  as  he  durst  express,  lest  the  King 
should  not  continue  to  act,  as  he  had  done,  in  the  days  of  Anne  Boleyn. 
Three  days  after  this,  or  on  the  6th  of  May,  came  the  Queen's  own 
memorable  letter  to  Henry,  "from  her  doleful  prison  in  the  Tower." '^ 

"  Sir, —  Your  Grace's  displeasure  and  my  imprisonment  are  things  so  strange 
unto  me,  as  what  to  write,  or  what  to  excuse,  I  am  altogether  ignorant. 
Whereas  you  send  unto  me,  (willing  me  to  confess  a  truth,  and  so  to  obtain 
your  favour)  by  such,  and  whom  you  know  to  be,  mine  ancient  professed  enemy, 
I  no  sooner  received  this  message  by  him,^f>  than  I  rightly  conceived  your 
meaning  ;  and  if,  as  you  say,  confessing  a  truth  indeed  may  procure  my  safety, 
I  shall  with  all  willingness  and  duty  perform  your  command. 

"  But  let  not  your  Grace  ever  imagine  that  your  poor  wife  will  ever  be  brought 
to  acknowledge  a  fault,  where  not  so  much  as  a  thought  ever  proceeded.  And, 
to  speak  a  truth,  never  a  prince  had  wife  more  loyal  in  all  duty,  and  in  all  true 
affection,  than  you  have  ever  found  in  Anne  Boleyn,  with  which  name  and 
place  I  could  willingly  have  contented  myself,  if  God  and  your  Grace's  pleasure 
had  so  been  pleased.  Neither  did  I,  at  any  time,  so  far  forget  myself  in  my 
exaltation  or  received  Queenship,  but  that  I  always  looked  for  such  an  altera- 
tion as  now  I  find  ;  for  the  ground  of  my  preferment  being  on  no  surer  founda- 
tion than  your  Grace's  fancy,  the  least  alteration  T  knew,  was  fit  and  sufficient 
to  draw  that  fancy  to  some  other  subject.  You  have  chosen  me,  from  a  low 
estate,  to  be  your  Queen  and  companion,  far  beyond  my  desert  or  desire.     If 


'S  "  It  is  universally  known,"  says  Sir  H.  Ellis,  'as  one  of  the  finest  compositions  in  the  Ene- 
lish  language,  and  is  only  mentioned  here,  to  obviate  a  notion  which  has  gone  abroad  against  it 
as  a  forgery.  The  original,  it  is  believed,  is  not  remaining  :  but  the  copy  of  it  (as  given  above,) 
preserved  among  Lord  Crumwell's  papers,  together  with  Sir  W.  Kingston's  letters,  is  certainly 
in  a  hand-writing  of  the  time  of  Henry  VIII. ;  and  Sir  W.  Kingston's  will  show  that  Anne  was 
too  closely  guarded  to  allow  of  any  one  concerting  such  a  letter  with  her.  That  it  rises  in  style 
above  Anne  Bokyn's  other  compositions  cannot  be  disputed  ;  but  her  situation  was  one  which 
was  sure  to  rouse  a  cultivated  mind  ;  and  there  is  a  character  of  nature  in  the  letter,  a  simplicity 
of  expression,  and  a  unity  of  feeling,  which  it  may  be  doubted  whether  genius  itself  could  have 
feigned  !"—A'W«'  Orig.  Letters,  first  series,  ii.  ;).  53.  "It  is  not  wonderful,"  says  Sir  James 
Mackintosh,  when  speaking  of  this  touching  and  beautiful  letter,  "  that  the  excitement  of  such 
a  moment,  if  it  left  her  calmness  enough  to  write,  .should  raise  her  language  to  an  energy  un- 
known to  her  other  writings."  Turner  sees  no  questionable  disparity  between  this  and  her 
other  compositions. 

">  If  this  dill  not  refer  to  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  it  was  most  probably  to  Sir  \V.  Filzwilliam,  to 
whom  Anneallude<i  significantly  after  this.     See  the  next  note. 


153G.]  TO  THK   KING.  4.()9 

then  you  found  me  worthy  of  sueh  honour,  good  your  Grace,  let  not  any  liglit 
fancy,  or  bad  counsel  of  mine  enemies,  withdraw  your  princely  favour  from  me  ; 
neither  let  that  stain,  that  unworthy  stain  of  a  disloyal  heart  towards  your  good 
Grace,  ever  cast  so  foul  a  blot  on  your  most  dutiful  wife,  and  the  infant  Princess 
your  daughter.  Try  me,  good  King,  but  let  me  have  a  laicful  trial,  and  let  not 
my  sworn  enemies  sit  as  my  accusers  and  judges  ;  yea,  let  me  receive  an  open 
trial,  for  my  ti-uth  shall  fear  no  open  shame.  Then  shall  you  sec,  either  mine 
innocency  cleared,  your  suspicion  and  conscience  satisfied,  the  ignominy  and 
slander  of  the  world  stopped,  or  my  guilt  openly  declared.  So  that  whatsoever 
God  or  you  may  determine  of,  your  Grace  may  be  freed  from  an  open  censure  ; 
and  mine  offence  being  so  wofully  proved,  your  Grace  is  at  liberty,  both  before 
God  and  man,  not  oidy  to  execute  worthy  punishment  on  me  as  an  unfaithful  wife, 
but  to  follow  yom-  affection,  already  settled,  on  that  party,  for  whose  sake  1  am 
now  as  I  am,  whose  name  I  could  some  good  while  since  have  pointed  unto, 
your  Grace  being  not  ignorant  of  my  suspicion  therein. 

"  But  if  you  have  already  determined  of  me,  and  that  not  only  my  death,  but 
an  infamous  slander  must  bring  you  the  enjoying  of  your  desired  happiness, 
then  I  desire  of  God  that  he  will  pardon  your  great  sin  herein,  and  Hkewise  my 
enemies,  the  instruments  thereof  ;  and  that  he  will  not  call  you  to  a  strait  ac- 
count for  your  unprincely  and  cruel  usage  of  me,  at  his  general  judgment-seat, 
where  both  you  and  myself  must  shortly  appear  ;  and  in  whose  just  judgment 
I  doubt  not,  whatsoever  the  world  may  think  of  me,  mine  innocency  shall  be 
openly  known,  and  sufficiently  cleared.  My  last  and  only  request  shall  be, 
that  myself  may  only  bear  the  burden  of  your  Grace's  displeasure  ;  and  that  it 
may  not  touch  the  "innocent  souls  of  these  poor  gentlemen,  whom,  as  I  under- 
stand, are  likewise  in  strait  imprisonment  for  my  sake.  If  I  ever  have  found 
favour  in  your  sight — if  ever  the  name  of  Anne  Boleyn  have  been  jjleasing  in 
your  ears, — then  let  me  obtain  this  request  ;  and  so  I  will  leave  to  trouble  your 
Grace  further.  With  mine  earnest  pi-ayer  to  the  Trinity,  to  have  your  Grace, 
in  his  good  keeping,  and  to  direct  you  in  all  your  actions,  from  my  doleful 
prison  in  the  Tower,  the  6th  of  May. — Your  most  loyal  and  faithful  wife 
Ann  Bulen." 

This  document  alone  would  have  ever  proved  fatal  to  the  reputation 
of  the  King  ;  but  in  connexion  with  the  other  proceedings,  both  before 
and  after,  it  covers  him  with  infamy.  The  writer,  having  little  or  no 
hope  of  escape,  had  made  up  her  mind  to  the  consequences  of  her  situa- 
tion, whatever  these  might  be  ;  and  a  mind  so  fully  conscious  of  its  own 
wrongs,  has  but  seldom,  if  ever,  expressed  itself  so  nobly,  and  so  well. 
Her  resignation  even  unto  death,  under  circumstances  so  cruel,  joined  to 
such  firm  assertion  of  her  integrity,  would  have  made  most  men  pause,  if 
not  tremble.  Her  faithfulness  to  the  King,  united  with  such  solemnity 
of  style,  and  the  amount  of  truth  which  we  now  know  the  letter  to  have 
contained,  were  sufficient  to  have  scared  any  man,  except  a  determined 
and  unprincipled  pi-ofligatc.  And  though  the  relentless  husband  paid 
no  regard,  it  was  well,  not  only  that  the  Queen  thus  wrote,  but  so  early, 
before  the  atrocious  course  to  be  pursued,  was  more  fully  developed. 

Two  parties  were  now  to  be  gi-atified,  at  any  cost — the  King,  in  getting 
rid  of  his  wife,  and  the  patrons  of  the  old  learning,  in  having  not  only 
the  Queen,  but  certain  other  obnoxious  men,  removed  out  of  the  way. 


470  TlIK    PLOT    PROCEEDS.  [book  I. 

This  will  sufficiently  iicoount  for  the  shameful  rapidity  of  all  the  subse- 
quent proceedings. 

Pour  days  after  this  letter,  or  Wednesday  the  10th  of  May,  the  grand 
jury  of  Westminster,  consisting  of  sixteen  men,  squires  and  gentlemen, 
were  assembled  before  the  judges  appointed  ;  but  who  were  these  1  No 
other  than  seven  already  named,  as  in  the  secret  inquisitorial  commis- 
sion !  The  verdict  of  the  jury  was,  of  course,  favourable  to  the  King's 
wishes,  as  they  found  a  true  bill  against  the  Queen,  and  all  the  other 
parties  marked  out. 

Only  two  days  after,  all  the  formalities  of  a  trial  were  gone  through 
at  Westminster,  ujjon  Norris  and  Weston,  Brereton  and  Smeton.  This 
last  alone  confessed  anything  ;  but  this,  even  at  the  moment,  an  enemy 
being  judge,  amounted  to  nothing.'?  Ifc  ^yas  a  confession  said  to  be  ob- 
tained by  means  of  the  rod;  and  by  a  promise  of  life,  which,  after  all, 
was  not  kept.'^  As  for  the  other  three  gentlemen,  they  all  felt  indig- 
nant at  the  charge,  and  not  only  solemnly  denied  their  own  criminality, 
but  pronounced  the  Queen  guiltless.  Sir  Henry  Norris,  in  particular, 
to  whom  Henry  had  promised  his  life,  if  he  would  confess  anything, 
spurned  at  the  proposal,  protesting  in  his  conscience  that  he  thought  Anne 
blameless,  and  that  he  would  die  a  thousand  deaths  rather  than  accuse 
an  innocent  person.^^  They  were  all,  of  course,  condemned  ;  the  three 
gentlemen  to  be  beheaded,  and  Smeton  to  be  hanged. 

Meanwhile,  and  previously  to  her  trial,  it  Avas  resolved  that  the  Queen 
should  be  carried  down  again  to  Greenwich,  and  examined  before  the 
Privy  Council  ;  where,  says  Mackintosh,  "  all  the  artifices  of  veteran 
pettyfogging  were  exhibited,"  Norfolk  making  himself  most  conspicuous  ; 
though  all  w^as  in  vain  as  to  any  evidence  of  evil.  "  I  was  cruelly  handled 
when  at  Greenwich,  with  the  King's  Council,"  said  Anne  afterw^ards — 
"  Me  to  be  a  Queen,  and  cruelly  handled  as  was  never  seen  ;  but  I 
think  the  King  does  it  to  prove  me." 


'7  Sir  William  Fitzwilliam,  Treasurer  of  the  Household,  had  made  himself  very  husy  in  op- 
position, and  Sir  Edward  Baynton  anxiously  informs  him,  "  no  man  will  confess  anything 
against  her,  but  only  Mark  (Smeton.)  'Wherefore,  in  my  foolish  conceit,  it  should  7in(ck  touch  the 
King's  honoitr,  if  it  should  wo  farther  ap]ieai%"— and  it  never  did  !  The  words  said  to  have  been 
uttered  by  a  woman,  then  deail.  Lady  Wingfield,  were  talked  of,  if  not  received  as  evidence  ;  but 
tliey  never  dared  to  confront  this  liiiiig  man,  Smeton,  with  the  Queen.  They  took  care,  how- 
ever, that  before  the  time,  he  should  be  hrjaUy  incapable. 

'!>  Carte  says,  "  he  was  worked  upon  by  a  promise  of  life  to  confess  ;  but  fearing  he  could  not 
ktand  it  out  if  confronted  witli  her,  no  use  was  made  of  his  evidence  at  her  trial,  and  he  was 
convicted  and  hanged,  to  procure  some  credit  to  his  defamation."  It  was  not  thought  "fit  to 
let  him  live  and  tell  tales,"  says  Burnet.  Of  this  man  it  is  curious  enough,  that  the  Queen 
should  happen  to  say,  when  in  the  Tower— that  he  never  was  in  her  apartment  but  once,  at 
Winchester,  to  perform  on  the  Virginal,  and  that  she  had  not  seen  him  since,  till  the  Saturday 
ie/ui-c  Matidai).  He  then  looked  sail,  which  the  Queen  observed,  and  though  he  evaded  en- 
((uiry,  was  there  not  a  cause?  Brereton  was  then  already  cnnimitted,  and  Smeton  was  seized, 
if  not  "  grievously  racked,"  next  day,  or  Sunday  before  the  May-day  scene.  Must  he  not,  then, 
on  Saturday,  already  have  had  some  fears,  of  what  Queen  Anne  had  then  no  foreljoding? 

19  Godwin  says,  on  this  being  rejiortcd  to  Henry,  he  brutally  exclaimed  twice—"  Hang  him 
up,  then  !"  Queen  Elizabeth,  in  approbation  of  his  conduct,  made  his  son  a  baron  :  and  his  four, 
if  not  six  grandchildren,  the  sons  of  Lord  Norris.  ancestors  of  the  present  Earl  of  Abingdon. 
were  eminent  as  military  men  under  that  reign. 


I53G.]  MOCK  TRIAL.  J  7 1 

Aud  HOW  on  the  15th,  the  Queen  and  her  bruther  were  to  he  tried,  pro- 
fessedly by  their  Peers.  And  were  they  impartially  all  summoned  ]  The 
Peers  were  fifty-three  in  number,  but  here  we  find  no  more  than  the  half, 
most  carefully  selected,  or  twenty-six,  with  Norfolk  at  their  head,  who, 
despising  all  sense  of  shame,  sat  as  Lord  High  Steward.-'^  Now  these  were 
notoriously,  men  whom,  on  various  occasions,  Hemy  had  employed  to  an- 
sAver  his  own  ends,  before  this  most  melancholy  occasion,  and  at  different 
times  honoured  with  various  titles,  to  mould  them  to  his  will.  We  might 
adduce  proofs  were  they  at  all  necessary.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that  twenty 
of  these  men  had  subscribed  his  letter  to  the  Pope,  in  1530,  and  at  least 
seven  of  them  had  been  at  work  in  the  secret  commission.  It  was  be- 
fore this  compliant  body  that  Lord  Rochford  was  summoned,  and  soon 
despatched. 

On  the  same  day,  the  Queen  appeared  before  these  '*  Lords  triers,"  as 
they  were  styled,  who,  in  some  degi-ee,  performed  the  functions  of  jurors, 
unanimity  not  being  essential  to  a  decision.  But  where  was  this  Court 
held  ]  In  a  temporary  wooden  hall,  erected  for  the  p\irpose,  vdtJdn  the 
Tower!  And  who  were  permitted  to  be  present  as  spectators?  Sir 
Ralph  Warren,  as  Lord-Mayor,  with  divers  aldermen  and  citizens  ! 

Upon  Anne  entei'ing  the  place,  with  mock  solemnity,  she  was  still 
treated  as  Queen,  and  a  seat  was  assigned  to  her,  which  she  took  with  a 
mixtui-e  of  dignity  and  composure,  cm-tseying  gracefully  to  the  Court. 
On  the  indictment  being  read,  she  held  up  her  hand,  and  pleaded  "  not 
guilty,"  as  her  brother  had  already  done.  She  had  no  counsel,  nor  was 
there  a  single  man  to  show  any  interest  in  her  favour.  In  her  defence, 
she  did  not  speak  much  ;  but  this  was  with  such  effect,  that  "  it  was 
everywhere  muttered  abroad,  that  the  Queen  had  cleared  herself  in  a 
most  noble  speech."  So  said  Wyatt ;  and  all  contemporary  writers  con- 
firm this  statement.  Even  the  device  of  having  merely  select  spectators, 
failed  of  its  desired  effect,  for  even  "  they  saw  no  evidence  against  her  ; 
only  it  appeared  to  them  that  these  Lords  were  resolved  to  get  rid  of 
her."  "  The  description  of  this  scene,  by  the  narrative  versifier,"  says 
Mackintosh,  "  bears  marks  of  accurate  intelligence,  and  minute  obser- 
vation. The  Queen,"  says  he,  "  defended  her  honour  calmly  against 
the  imputation  of  unutterable  turpitudes.     She  proved  that  she  was 


20  Of  these,  seven  were  Norfolk,  Suffolk,  Oxford,  Westmoreland,  Sussex,  Sands,  and  Audley. 
The  others  were,  Coii)fiit:i/,  Marquis  of  Exeter,  who  had  been  nominated  kcir-<ipjia rent.in  1532, 
and  who,  if  it  might  now  be,  liad  no  objections,  of  course,  to  be  heir  again.  The  Earls  of  Sur- 
rey, Arundel,  Northumberland,  Derby,  Worcester,  Rutland,  and  Huntingdon ;  Lords  De  la 
War,  Montague,  ilorley,  Dacres,  Cobham,  Maltravers,  Powis,  Mounteagle,  Clinton,  Windsor, 
Wentworlh,  Burgh,  and  Mordaunt.  Here,  then,  we  find  Surrey,  the  son,  and  Arundel,  the 
8on-in  law  of  Aor/olk;  and  Maltravers,  the  son  of  Arundel.  Mounteagle,  the  son-in-law  of 
Suffolk,  and  Worcester,  his  favourite.  Rutland  and  Sussex,  Windsor  and  Wentworth,  Burgh 
and  Mordaunt,  men  on  whom  Henry  had  heaped  honour,  and  Clinton,  a  ward  of  his  own, 
brought  up  at  Court.  The  entire  body  consisted  of  men  who  were  enemies  to  the  new  learning, 
and  therefore  at  enmity  with  the  ;)r!nc*;  Us  and  iirncedure  oi  Q,\\eer\  Anne.  Xoithnmberlani/  wns 
here,  hut  he  left  tlie  Court  before  the  verdict;  and  as  for  Morleti.  he  will  be  noticed  prescntlv. 


472  THE  QUEKN'S  ADDRESS.  [book  I. 

conscious  of  a  righteous  cause,  more  by  a  serene  countenance,  than  by 
the  power  of  language.  She  spoke  little  ;  but  no  man  who  looked  on 
her,  could  see  any  symptoms  of  criminality."  She  listened  with  an  un- 
changed face  to  the  sentence  of  death,  pronounced  by  her  unnatural 
uncle,  Norfolk — but  then  she  spoke,  and  in  language  sufficient  to  have 
made  every  one  of  her  Judges  tremble.  Raising  her  hands,  and  turn- 
ing her  eyes  towards  heaven,  she  first  exclaimed — "  0  Father  I  O 
Creator  !  Thou,  who  art  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life  !  Thou 
knowest  that  I  have  not  deserved  this  death."  Then,  turning  to  these 
Judges,  she  said — 

"  My  Lords,  I  will  not  say  that  your  sentence  is  unjust,  nor  presume  that 
my  opinion  ought  to  be  preferred  to  the  judgment  of  you  all.  I  believe  you 
have  reasons  and  occasions  of  suspicion  and  jealousy,  upon  which  you  have 
condemned  me  ;  but  they  must  be  other  than  have  been  produced  here  in  Court: 
for  I  am  entirely  innocent  of  all  these  accusations  ;  so  that  I  cannot  ask  par- 
don of  God  for  them.  /  hare  altcays  been  a  faithful  and  loyal  icife  to  the  Kin<j. 
I  have  not,  perhaps,  at  all  times,  shewn  him  that  humility  and  reverence  which 
his  goodness  to  me,  and  the  high  honour  bestowed  by  him  upon  me,  did  deserve. 
I  confess  that  I  have  had  fancies  and  suspicions  of  him,  which  I  had  not  strength 
nor  discretion  enough  to  manage  ;  but  God  knows,  and  is  my  witness,  that  I 
never  failed  otherwise  towards  him :  and  I  shall  never  confess  any  other  at 
the  hour  of  my  death.  Do  not  think  that  I  say  this  on  design  to  prolong  my 
life  :  God  has  taught  me  to  know  how  to  die,  and  He  will  fortify  my  faith.  Do 
not  think  that  I  am  so  carried  in  my  mind,  as  not  to  lay  the  honour  of  my 
chastity  to  heart.  Of  this  I  should  make  small  account  now,  in  my  extremity, 
if  I  had  not  maintained  it,  my  whole  life  long,  as  much  as  ever  Queen  did.  I 
know  that  these  my  last  words  will  signify  nothing,  but  to  justify  my  honour 
and  my  chastity.  As  for  my  brother,  and  those  others  wlio  are  unjustly  con- 
demned, I  would  willingly  suffer  many  deaths  to  deliver  them  ;  but  since  I  -see 
it  so  pleases  the  King,  I  must  bear  with  their  death  ;  and  shall  depart  with 
them  out  of  the  world,  under  an  assurance  of  leading  with  them  an  endless  life 
in  peace." 

With  these  words,  the  Queen  then  retired  from  the  presence  of  men 
•who  had  degraded  themselves  before  posterity  as  the  most  cruel  of  time- 
servers  ;  and  now,  to  crown  all,  it  only  remains  to  be  noticed,  that  a 
very  bad  woman,  to  whom,  unhappily.  Lord  Rochford  had  been  married, 
proved  to  have  been  one  leading  agent  in  the  foul  conspiracy  ;  even 
though  it  involved  six  lives,  and  one  of  these  her  own  husband  !  This 
profligate,  whose  name  should  never  be  forgotten,  was  Jane  Parker,  the 
daughter  of  Sir  Henry  Parker,  Lord  Morley.^'  The  father,  who  had 
been  restored  as  a  Baron  in  1530,  was  allied,  by  marriage,  to  the  King 
himself.22  The  daughter  was  a  being  capable  of  mischief  to  any  extent 
whatever,  and  she  fell,  unpitied,  on  the  scaff"old,  in  1.542,  in  company 


21  Not  Lord  Morley  and  Monteagle  as  it  is  sometimes  printed. 

^2  Alice,  Lady  Morley,  daughter  of  Sir  John  St.  John  of  Blctshoe,  was  a  grand  daughter  of 
Margaret  Beauchamp,  whose  daughter,  the  Countess  of  Richmond,  was  grandmother  of  Henry 
VIII. 


1.3;JG.]  KURTHKK  PltUCKEDINGS.  473 

with  Catharine  Howard,  the  fourth  wife  of  this  strange  mouarch.^-' 
The  father,  it  will  be  observed,  had  actually  sat  at  the  mock  trial  of 
his  son-in-law  and  Queen  Anne  !  It  was  but  just,  that  after  this,  not- 
withstanding, he  entirely  lost  the  favour  of  the  King,  whom  he  had  so 
basely  striven  to  accommodate.*"* 

It  was  now  Tuesday  the  16th,  or  fourteen  days  since  the  Queen  had  been 
kept  miserable  in  various  ways,  but  more  especially  so,  by  the  daring  false- 
hoods which  Norfolk  at  least,  if  not  others,  had  told  her — affirming  that 
the  parties  apprehended  had  actually  accused  her  !  At  the  same  time, 
it  deserves  notice,  that,  up  to  this  hour,  the  Queen  was  left  to  indulge  at 
least  the  hope  of  life.  Such  was  the  ingenuity  with  which  the  moral 
torture  had  been  pursued.  The  Governor  had  received  no  orders  for  her 
execution,  the  idea  of  her  banishment  was  cherished  ;  so  that  "  this  day 
at  dinner,"  says  Kingston  to  Crumwell,  "the  Queen  said  that  she  should 
go  to  AntweriJ,  and  is  in  hope  of  life."  Before  the  day  closed,  however, 
Cranmer  was  sent  to  her.  We  have  no  record  of  what  passed  ;  but  it 
must  have  been  for  no  other  purpose  than  to  prepare  her  for  a  second 
indignity,  and  before  him  ! 

"  On  the  morning  of  the  17th  of  May,"  says  Mackintosh,  "  she  was 
brought  to  Lambeth,  where  she  was  to  go  through  the  forms  of  trial 
once  more,  that  Cranmer  (who  must  then  have  been  either  the  most  un- 
happy or  the  most  abject  of  men,)  might  act  the  mockery  of  pronouncing 
the  nullity  of  her  marriage  with  the  King  !  The  object  in  view  by  the 
King  was,  that  he  might,  if  he  pleased,  be  rid  of  the  daughter, 
(Elizabeth)  as  well  as  the  mother  ;  and  if  she  could  be  brought  down 
to  the  level  of  an  illegitimate  child,  Heni-y  can  tell  his  subjects,  as  soon 
as  Parliament  opens,  what  was  then  his  sovereign  will  and  pleasure  ! 
That  a  full  understanding  had  once  existed  between  Anne  Boleyn  and 
Lord  Percy,  now  the  Earl  of  Northumberland,  previously  to  her  marriage 
with  the  King,  there  could  be  no  question,  as  it  had  required  the  in- 
fluence or  power  both  of  Percy's  father,  and  Wolsey,  to  put  an  end  to 
it  ;  but  the  wish  now  was,  to  prove  that  this  had  amounted  to  a  precon- 
tract of  marriage.  They  had  applied  to  Northumberland,  before  the 
trial,  but  he  resolutely  denied  that  there  Avas  any  contract,  and,  legally 
speaking,  thei'e  was  none.  And  now  after  it,  they  had  the  baseness  to 
try  and  extort  a  confession  from  Anne.  For  her  confession,  whatever 
was  the  amount,  it  is  not  difficult  to  account.  She  could  not  be  supposed 
to  understand  the  legal  nicety  between  "  verba  de  futuro,''  and  "verba  de 
prcesenti,"  but  as  far  as  words  could  go,  had  understood  Percy  to  be 


23  This  Jane  Parker,  Lady  Rochfortl,  was  a  rigid  disciple  of  Rome,  and  held  the  principles 
of  Queen  Anne  in  supersf  itious  abhorrence.  This  is  one  key  left,  as  to  the  part  she  acted  ;  but, 
besides,  she  has  been  represented  as  a  very  profligate  character. 

-■'  He  had,  about  this  time,  claimed  to  be  hereditary  Marshal  of  Ireland,  to  which  he  had 
an  indisputable  title,  but  Henry  would,  on  no  account,  consent.— Collins' Pccrnye,  vol.  vii.,  .387. 
.  dit.  1812. 


4-ri  LORD    RUCIIFOKD    PUT    TO    DEATH.  [bOOK  I. 

sincere,  as  he  certainly  was,  whatever  use  they  might  iiow  make  of  the 
affair.  The  result,  however,  was,  that  Craiimer  pronounced  the  marriage 
with  the  King  "  utterly  void,  in  consequence  of  certain  just  and  lawful 
impediments,  unknown  at  the  titne  of  her  pretended  marriage  !  now  con- 
fessed by  the  said  Lady  Anne,  before  the  most  reverend  father  in  God, 
sitting  judicially  ! "  But  mark  the  sequel — N^o  authentic  record  exists 
of  the  particulars,  nor  even  of  the  general  nature  of  the  alleged  "  im- 
pediments "  once  hinted  in  the  statute  :  nay  more,  "  I  observe,"  says 
Collier,  "  the  record  of  this  divorce  at  Lambeth,  though  passing  through 
all  the  forms  and  thus  attested,  is  not  entered  on  (Cranmer's)  Register. 
This  is  somewhat  remarkable,  especially  since  that  of  Anne  of  Cleves  is 
inserted  at  length."  As  soon,  however,  as  Cranmer  had  decreed  Anne's 
marriage  to  have  been  7udl  from  the  beginning,  Avhat  became  of  the 
unjust  sentence  pronounced  on  her,  only  two  days  before,  as  Queen  of 
England  1  But  such  was  law,  under  Henry  the  Eighth  !  And  the 
reader,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  will  search  in  vain  throughout  the  history  of 
his  country  for  a  course  of  more  malignant  wickedness  ;  even  though  it 
be  not  yet  at  an  end. 

It  will  scarcely  be  believed  that  it  seems  to  have  been  while  the 
Queen  was  thus  tormenting  at  Lambeth,  that  all  the  other  parties,  in- 
cluding her  brother,  were  put  to  death  !  The  mother  and  sister  of  Sir 
F.  Weston  had  implored  his  life,  offering  a  ransom  of  a  hundred  thousand 
crowns,  but  in  vain.  Lord  Rochford  behaved  with  inflexible  propriety. 
After  entreating  his  fellow  sufferers  to  meet  death  without  apprehension, 
he  turned  to  the  spectators.  "  I  am  come  here  to  die,  since  it  is  the 
King's  pleasure  that  it  should  be  so  ;  and  my  untimely  end  should  be  a 
warning  to  those  who  hear  me,  never  to  build  their  hopes  upon  Courts, 
States,  or  Kings,  but  vipon  God  alone.  I  do  not  complain  of  my  violent 
death.  My  sins  have  merited,  and  more  than  merited,  such  a  penalty  : 
but  I  steadily  deny  that,  by  any  fault  of  mine,  the  King  has  ever  been 
injured.  Ilini  I  never  offended.  Nevertheless,  he  has  my  best  wishes  ; 
and  I  earnestly  pray  God  to  grant  him  a  long  and  virtuous  life." 

By  the  evening  of  this  melancholy  day,  the  Queen  had  been  informed 
that  her  death  was  determined,  as  her  Almoner  was  with  her  by  two 
next  morning.  That  day,  after  reviewing  her  past  life,  she  desired  Lady 
Kingston  to  sit  down,  and  kneeling  before  her,  with  tears,  she  charged 
her,  as  she  should  answer  to  God,  that  she  should  go,  in  her  name,  and 
do  as  she  had  done,  before  the  Lady  Mary,  daughter  of  Queen  Catherine, 
asking  forgiveness  for  any  wrongs  she  had  done  her.  "  This  tenderness 
of  conscience  about  lesser  matters,"  says  Burnet,  "is  a  great  presumption, 
that  if  she  had  been  guilty  of  more  eminent  faults,  she  had  not  continued 
to  the  end  denying  them,  and  making  protestations  of  her  innocence. 
For  that  same  night  she  sent  her  last  message  to  the  King."  He  had 
strangely  asked  for  some  confession,  but  none  came.     She  acknowledged 


I.>;3(>.]  COWAItUlCK   UlSPLAVED.  47.5 

her  past  obligations.  "  From  a  private  gentlewoman,"  she  said,  "  he  had 
first  made  her  a  Marchioness,  and  then  a  Queen ;  and  now,  since  he 
could  raise  her  no  higher,  was  sending  her,  by  martyrdom,  to  be  a  saint 
in  heaven."  She  protested  her  innocence,  and  recommended  her  daughter 
to  his  care. 

This  day,  however,  had  not  passed,  it  must  be  observed,  without  be- 
traying some  cowardice  on  the  part  of  her  official  murderers  ;  some  fear 
of  the  people,  and  of  the  public  voice.  It  was  not  enough,  that  she 
had  been  tried  in  secrecy,  by  determined  enemies  ;  she  must,  as  quietly 
as  possible,  be  put  to  death.  Crumwell,  therefore,  had  written  to  King- 
ston, to  clear  the  Tower  from  all  strangers  !  And  he  replies  with  equal 
pusillanimity — "  Sir,  this  shall  be  to  advertise  you,  that  I  have  received 
your  letter,  wherein  ye  would  have  strangers  conveyed  out  of  the  Tower, 
and  so  they  be — but  the  number  of  strangers  passed  not  thirty,  and 
not  many  others — the  ambassador  of  the  Emperor  had  a  servant  there, 
and  honestly  put  out.  Sir,  if  we  have  not  an  hour  certain,  as  it  might 
be  known  in  London,  I  think  here  will  be  but  feiv,  and  I  think  a  reason- 
able number  were  best;  for  I  suppose  she  will  declare  herself  to  be  a  good 
woman  for  all  men  but  the  King,  at  the  hour  of  deatn.  i  have  secii 
many  men,  and  women  also,  executed,  and  that  they  have  been  in  great 
sorrow,  but,  to  my  knowledge,  this  Lady  hath  much  joy,  and  pleasiu'e 
in  death.  Her  Almoner  is  continually  with  her,  and  has  been  since 
two  of  the  clock  after  midnight."  ^-^ 

"  Is  there  any  example  in  history,"  it  has  been  asked,  "  of  so  much 
satisfaction,  and  so  much  calmness,  in  any  dying  person,  who  is  ascer- 
tained to  have  been  guilty  of  acts  owned  by  him  to  be  great  offences, 
and  perseveringly  denied  by  him,  to  be  perpetrated  by  himself  ?  ^^ 

The  fatal  hour  arrived  before  noon  next  day,  and  though  an  uncertain 
hour  to  many,  it  was  well  known,  as  we  shall  see  presently,  and  even 
watched  for,  by  the  King  himself !  The  Dukes  of  Suffolk  and  Richmond, 
Audley  and  Crumwell,  with  the  Lord  Mayor  and  Aldermen,  were  there 
officially.  On  the  scaftbld,  the  Queen,  the  only  person  present  who 
seemed  to  have  a  perfectly  composed  mind,  uttered  but  few  words — 
"  Good  Christian  people,  I  am  come  hither  to  die  according  to  law  ;  by 
the  law  I  am  judged  to  die,  and,  therefore,  I  will  speak  nothing  against 
it.  I  am  come  hither  to  accuse  no  man,  nor  to  speak  a7i//  thing  of  that 
whereof  /  atn  accused.  I  pray  God  save  the  King,  and  send  him  long 
to  reign  over  you  ;  for  a  gentler  (nobler  1)  or  more  merciful  prince  was 
there  never.  To  me  he  was  ever  a  good,  gentle,  and  sovereign  Lord. 
If  any  person  will  meddle  with  my  cause,  I  require  them  to  judge  the 
best :  thus  I  take  leave  of  the  world,  and  of  you,  and  I  heartily  desire 
you  all  to  pray  for  me." 


25  MS.  Cotton,  Otho,  c.  x.,  fol.  22;}.  2b  Mackintosh. 


47^>  TlIK  QUEK.V   EXECUTED.  [book  I. 

It  may  be  observed,  that,  throughout  the  whole  proceedings,  Aniie 
appears  to  have  traced  her  death  to  the  intrigues  of  her  bitter  enemies, 
not  to  the  malice  of  the  King  ;  but  this  very  guarded  language  at  the 
hour  of  death,  may  have  been  employed  for  the  sake  of  young  Elizabeth. 
The  phraseology  has  been  ascribed  to  Cranmer,  who  might  account  it  an 
advantage  that  the  Queen  should  not lyrovoke  Henry  against  their  child. 

Be  this  as  it  may,  with  the  exception  of  the  courtiers,  the  bystanders 
melted  into  tears.  She  herself  would  not  consent  to  have  her  eyes 
covered  with  a  bandage,  saying,  that  she  had  no  fear  of  death  ;  but 
with  her  own  hands  removing  her  hat  and  collar,  and  then  kneeling, 
she  repeated  several  times  before  the  blow — "  Christ,  I  pray  thee,  re- 
ceive my  spirit — Jesus  !  receive  my  soul." 

The  shriek  of  anguish  which  burst  from  the  spectators,  was  quickly 
drowned  in  the  discharge  of  artillery  !  a  savage  and  unwonted  accom- 
paniment, which  remains  to  be  explained.  Thus  teraiinated  this  slavish 
devotion  to  kingly  power  ;  when  the  remains  were  bax-barously  thrown 
into  a  chest,  used  for  holding  arrows,  and  interred  Avithout  ceremony 
within  the  Tower.^ 

Sut  what  could  the  sound  of  those  guns  intend  ?  Was  it  meant  for 
other  ears  than  those  of  the  people  whose  voices  it  drowned  1  So  it 
turned  out ;  and  it  is  certainly  a  remarkable  circumstance,  that,  without 
designing  it,  Henry  VIII.  should  select  the  moment  of  death,  for  begin- 
ning to  render  that  testimony  to  his  own  guilt,  and  Queen  Anne's  inno- 
cence, which  he  went  on  so  rapidly  to  confirm  by  other  proofs.  The 
oak  is  still  standing  in  Epping  forest,  named  "  Henry's  oak,"  under 
which  the  King  breakfasted  this  morning  ;  his  hounds  and  his  attendant 
train  waiting  around  him.  He  listened,  it  has  been  said,  from  time  to 
time,  with  intense  anxiety.  At  length  the  sound  of  this  artillery  boomed 
through  the  wood.  It  was  a  preconcerted  signal,  and  marked  the  mo- 
ment of  execution.  "  Ah  !  ah  !  it  is  done,"  said  he,  starting  up,  "  the 
business  is  done  !  uncouple  the  dogs,  and  let  us  follow  the  sport ! " 
Such,  at  least,  is  the  tradition  to  this  hour  ;  recorded  long  ago  in 
Tindal's  Rapin,  as  well  as  in  our  own  day,  by  Nott  and  Tytler  ;  while 
the  sequel  of  the  day  was  in  perfect  keeping  with  the  sport  of  the 
morning.  "  On  the  day  of  execution,  Henry  put  on  white  for  mourning, 
as  though  he  would  have  said,  '  I  am  innocent  of  this  deed.'  And — the 
next  day — married  Jane  Seymour,  eldest  daughter  of  Sir  John  Seymour, 
of  Wolf-hall,  Wilts."  "^  AVe  may  now  be  permitted  to  ask,  whether  the 
King  himself  could  have  given  more  powerful  testimony  to  the  inno- 


27  The  Queen  is  uinierstood  not  to  liave  been  beheaded  with  block  and  axe,  after  the  English 
fashion  ;  but  by  the  French  mode  of  decapitation,  with  a  sword,  and  by  a  Frenchman,  brought 
from  Calais.  The  axe  shown  in  the  Tower  is  a  popular  mistake ;  though  it  may  be  handled, 
perhaps,  as  the  axe  by  which  Crnmwell  afterwards  suffered. 

2R  Kllis"  Orig.  Letters,  A'c^?  .«f>/c.v,  vol.  ii.,  p.  Ofi. 


\:yS(i.j  THK  SCKNK   NKXT   SUCCKKDlNCi.  477 

cence  of  the  departed,  and  to  his  own  guilt  ?  The  evidence  of  both, 
however,  will  not  close  here. 

The  moment  of  exultation  for  the  votaries  of  "the  old  learning"  had 
now  arrived  ;  for,  in  their  feeble  apprehension,  the  greatest  obstacle  to 
its  revival,  had  been  the  influence  of  Queen  Anne  with  the  King,  and 
other  individuals.  She  was  now  removed,  and  the  leanings  of  her  suc- 
cessor, Jane  Seymour,  could  not  as  yet  be  divined  ;  though  her  having 
consented  to  nuptials  the  very  next  day  after  her  predecessor's  execution, 
was  certainly  well  calculated  to  deceive  them,  and  inspire  hope.  As  for 
the  King,  if  he  could  "  follow  the  sport"  on  the  day  of  his  Queen's  exe- 
cution, he  must  have  now  been  rejoicing  in  the  full  accomplishment  of 
his  wishes.     The  annoyance,  he  might  dream,  was  now  at  an  end. 

But  see  the  watchful  providence  of  God  !  It  was  on  the  following 
Tuesday,  or  only  the  fourth  day  after  Anne  Boleyn's  death,  that  the 
book  of  Cardinal  Pole  was  first  presented  to  Henry .^9  "  The  work,"  says 
Pole  himself,  "  is  divided  into  four  books.  In  the  first,  I  refute  the 
Supremacy  the  King  has  taken  on  himself  :  the  second  asserts  the  pre- 
rogatives of  the  See  of  Rome  :  in  the  third,  /  sound  in  the  King's  ear  the 
voice  which  the  guiltless  blood  he  has  shed,  and  the  horror  of  his  other 
actions,  raises  up  to  Heaven  against  him.  Having  thus  discharged  what 
I  owed  to  truth  and  my  country's  welfare,  in  the  last  part  I  cast  myself 
at  the  King's  feet  ;  I  conjure  him  to  take  in  good  part  what  I  have 
written,  as  it  proceeded  from  zeal  and  affection!'''  The  author  is  as 
bitter  against  Queen  Anne  as  he  is  against  Henry  ;  and  by  "  guiltless 
blood,"  he  referred,  of  course,  to  the  execution  of  others  ;  but  the  book 
having  been  reserved  till  now,  and  not  presented  till  immediately  after  such 
a  cruel  tragedy  as  that  which  we  have  recorded,  might  well  give  a  keener 
edge  to  the  charge  of  shedding  innocent  blood.  So  far  as  argument  is 
attempted,  the  work  is  not  distinguished,  or  even  for  its  sophistry ;  but 
in  point  of  acrimony  and  virulence,  of  all  that  was  ever  addressed  to  the 
ear  of  the  unprincipled  monarch,  it  stands  unrivalled.  The  rank  of  the 
author,  and  his  relation  to  the  King,  gave  the  work  a  degree  of  im- 
portance, which  made  it  the  more  formidable  and  dangerous  ;  while  the 
recollection,  by  Henry,  that  he  had  actually  reared  and  qualified  the 
writer  for  thus  attacking  him,  must  have  rendered  the  language  galling 
in  the  extreme.""^ 

His  Majesty  might  now  reflect,  or  not  reflect,  on  all  that  he  had  done ; 
but  the  end  being  gained,  for  which  so  much  blood  had  been  shed,  there 
was  still  time  sufficient  left,  for  all  the  other  perpetrators  to  repose 


29  Though  finished  fourteen  months  before,  or  24th  ilarch  153.5,  it  was  not  )>rcsentcd  to  the 
King  till  this  day,  S.'Jd  May  1536,  having  been  read  previously  by  some  of  his  greatest  political 
enemies!  See  before,  anno  1535,  p.  422.  Also  Herbert's  Henry  VIJI.,  p.  418,  edit.  1672;  and 
Turner's  Henry  VIII.,  c.  28. 

•''O  The  King  has  been  somewhere  represented  as  prrservin"  his  self-command  ;  but  the  evi- 
dence of  facts  shows  the  reverse. 


47H  NEW    PARLIAMENT.  [book  I. 

themselves.  This  they  were  permitted  to  do  for  a  fortnight  ;  as  it  was 
not  till  Whitsunday  that  Queen  Jane  was  openly  shown  in  her  royal 
habiliments.''" 

And  now,  on  Thursday  the  8th  of  Jvine,  the  forty  days  having  once 
expired  since  the  writs  were  issued,  Parliament  was  opened,  and  Sir 
Thomas  Audley  will  explain  the  reasons  ;  for  never  has  it  fallen  to  the 
lot  of  any  subservient  Lord  Chancellor  to  pronounce  such  an  address.  It 
was,  of  course,  his  Majesty's  own  version  of  the  gloomy  past.  Audley 
actually  informed  the  House,  "  that  when  the  former  Parliament  was 
dissolved,  (14th  April,)  the  King  had  no  thoughts  of  summoning  a  new 
one  so  soon  !  But  that  his  Majest3^'s  objects  in  assembling  them  so 
early  after  the  dissolution,  were  these  two — "  That  he,  finding  himself  so 
subject  to  many  infirmities,  and  considering  that  he  was  mortal,  he 
desired  to  settle  an  heir-apparent  to  the  crown,  in  case  he  should  die 
without  children  lawfully  begotten  !  And  the  other  was,  to  repeal  an 
Act  of  the  former  Parliament,  as  to  the  succession  of  the  crown,  to  the 
issue  of  the  King  by  Queen  Anne  Boleyn  !  That  Anne  and  her  con- 
spirators being  put  to  death,  as  they  well  deserved,  the  King,  at  the 
humble  request  of  the  nobility^  was  pleased  to  marry  a  Queen,  by  whom 
there  were  very  probable  hopes  of  his  having  children  !"  And  all  this, 
of  course,  he,  and  these  "  humble  requesters,"  had  quietly  and  coolly  in 
view,  on  the  27th  of  April,  when  the  writs  were  issued,  nay,  and  of  ne- 
cessity, as  it  has  been  clearly  proved,  for  some  time  before  then  !  Per- 
haps there  has  seldom  been  a  more  striking  instance  of  that  "  inattention 
to  particulars,"  which  Providence  has  appointed  as  the  safeguard  of 
innocence,  for  the  vindication  of  chai'acter.  Such  a  story,  however,  was 
by  far  too  gross,  to  be  received  at  once.  New  Parliament  though  it  was, 
and  packed  as  far  as  it  might  be,  fortunately  for  the  memory  of  the 
murdered  Queen  of  England,  there  was  some  slender  virtue  to  be  found 
in  it.  A  bill  could  not  be  agreed  upon  for  three  weeks  to  come,  as  it 
was  not  brought  before  the  Lords  till  the  30th  of  June.  The  Lords 
were  now  more  generally,  if  not  all  assembled,  and  could  not  exactly 
agree  in  a  day  or  an  hour,  as  the  "  humble  requesters"  had  done,  upon 
the  mock  trial  in  the  Tower.  The  other  House,  too,  had  to  be  consulted  ; 
but  at  last  the  King's  party  triumphed,  and  the  bill  was  passed,  con- 
firming all  that  had  been  done,  and,  moreover,  recommending  that  the 
King  should  provide  an  heir,  at  his  discretion,  in  the  event  of  his  death 
without  issue.     So  absolutely  did  the  tyrant  reign  ! 

Before  leaving  this  melancholy  exhibition  of  human  depravity,  it  has 
been  but  an  act  of  justice  due  to  the  character  and  memory  of  Queen 
Anne  Boleyn,  to  expose  the  wickedness  of  that  conspiracy,  which  had 
been  formed  against  her  life.     The  profound  secrecy  of  the  proceedings. 


31  Halle.— Tills  was  four  days  before  Parliament  sat  down;  Whitsunday  falling  this  year  on 
tlie  4tli  of  June. 


|,>;j«i.]  (jUEKN    ANNKS   TKKATMKNT   EXAMINED.  479 

till  the  moment  when  all  things  were  ready  for  explosion — Cranmer 
carefully  kept  in  the  dark,  till  there  could  be  no  retrograde  step — and 
then  the  movements  as  rapid  as  they  were  terrible — the  complexion 
of  the  men  who  had  been  selected  for  the  first  secret  commission — the 
character  of  the  judges  appointed — of  the  Peers  so  carefully  selected, 
and  amounting  to  only  the  half  of  the  entire  peerage — the  trial  within 
the  Tower — the  exclusion  of  sjiectators,  first  from  the  trial,  and  then 
from  the  execution — the  caution,  if  not  cowardice,  both  of  Crumwell  and 
even  Kingston  himself, — in  short,  there  is  not  one  solitary  step  in  the 
entire  course,  from  first  to  last,  which  is  not  pregnant  with  suspicion  or 
wrong.  The  evil  intent  was  never  more  glaring,  nor  a  case  of  pre- 
meditated murder  more  fully  established.  At  the  time,  therefore,  the 
transactions  were  viewed  with  indignation  in  other  countries.  They  at 
once  made  the  Germans  pause  with  horror.  Melancthon  and  Bucer 
abandoned  all  idea  of  setting  their  foot  on  English  ground.  The  former 
regarded  Queen  Anne  as  innocent  ;'^  and  when  the  profusion  of  blood- 
shed was  obseived,  Erasmus,  now  within  a  few  weeks  of  his  death,  had 
already  described  the  country  as  one  where  the  most  intimate  friends 
were  fearful  of  conversing  with  each  other. 

As  yet,  however,  the  death  of  Anne  remains  to  be  accounted  for  ; 
and  the  mystery  to  be  dispelled.  That  the  scheme  was  fully  ar- 
ranged, that  it  was  deeply  laid,  has,  we  presume,  been  made  perfectly 
evident ;  as  well  as  that  "the  May-duy  scene,"  with  which  most  histo- 
rians have  commenced  this  tragedy,  was  merely  a  link  in  the  chain,  and 
one  worthy  of  any  Roman  Emperor  in  the  height  of  his  cruelty.  But 
still  the  question  retui'ns, — what  was  the  cause  of  this  cruel  outrage  ? 
The  King  himself  was,  of  course,  the  chief  delinquent ;  but  he  could  not 
proceed  without  assistance,  and  if,  before  referring  to  the  Queen  herself, 
Ave  turn  to  the  parties  concerned  in  her  death,  they,  together,  may  assist 
us  to  some  correct  understanding.  Henry  intended  one  thing,  and  the 
men  around  him,  another  ;  but  the  purposes  of  both,  involved  the  re- 
moval of  the  Queen.  Her  death  once  accomplished,  the  former  went  on 
his  way  carousing  ;  the  latter  party  were  foiled  in  their  ultimate  design. 
As  for  the  King,  Queen  Anne's  "  greatest  guilt,"  says  Fuller,  "  consisted 
in  his  better  fancying  another  ;"  and  though  he  and  Crumwell  will  pre- 
sently outwit  the  gentlemen  of  the  old  learning,  meanwhile  no  scruple 
had  been  felt  at  employing  them  throughout  this  bloody  scene. 

The  sentiments  and  feelings  of  this  party  need  not  now  be  explained, 
but  its  position  at  the  moment,  demands  notice.  The  fact  was  that  they 
were  then  opposed  to  both  King  and  Queen.  The  former,  in  his  royal 
progi-ess  was  still  shaking  to  its  foundations  what  they  regarded  as  the 
good  old  cause.     For  five  years  past,  the  clergy  had  been  paying  his 


S2  See  his  letter  to  Camerarius,  dated  fifth  of  the  ides,  or  the  9th  of  June  15.%. 


480  THE   TRKATMKNT   OK  [booK  I. 

Majesty  above  £20,000  annually,  as  the  price  of  their  pardon,  and  they 
were  still  smarting  under  their  last  instalment ;  when  behold,  here  comes 
Crumwell  in  this  last  Parliament,  and  having  opened,  on  a  large  scale, 
his  "  Court  of  Augmentation  of  the  King's  revenue,"  he  had  already  laid 
low  376  monasteries,  or,  as  they  styled  them,  "  religious  houses."  Be- 
tween these  men  and  their  friends  in  foreign  parts,  there  was  a  kindred 
sympathy  as  to  the  importance  of  this  royal  progress  being  stayed. 
Here  however,  and  full  in  their  way,  stood  the  Queen,  whose  principles 
and  procedure  had  been  alike  obnoxious.  These  will  be  explained  pre- 
sently, but  she  had  gone  much  too  far  to  be  viewed  by  the  zealots  for 
"  the  old  learning"  without  the  keenest  envy  and  malice.  The  moment 
for  working  on  the  wavering  passions  of  the  King  had  at  last  come,  and 
the  two  parties  conspiring  together.  Queen  Anne's  downfall  was  inevitable. 

Whatever  may  be  said  when  summing  up  her  character,  it  was  cer- 
tainly no  slight  testimony  to  the  weight  of  her  influence  now,  that  it 
was  so  felt  at  a  distance,  as  well  as  at  home.  She  had  enjoyed  the  hon- 
our of  being  hated,  from  the  Pontiff  downwards  ;  and  if  the  malice 
cherished  at  home,  can  be  shown  to  have  been  in  league  with  a  kindred 
feeling  abroad,  it  is  difiicult  to  say  what  farther  proof  the  most  fastidious 
can  desire,  as  to  the  solution  of  this  catastrophe. 

Manuscript  letters,  still  happily  j^reserved,  here  come  to  our  aid,  and 
at  once  suggest  a  few  pointed  questions,  in  explanation,  from  this  party. 
Gardiner,  Queen  Anne's  arch-enemy,  however  eager  for  the  divorce,  it 
is  granted,  was  not  at  home ;  but  what  was  more  to  his  purpose,  he  was 
in  France,  or  on  the  way  between  England  and  Italy ;  and  thus  could  not 
fail  to  have  his  share  in  what  had  been  going  on  for  some  time,  since 
Rome  itself  was  so  fully  informed.  While,  then,  Queen  Anne  was  still 
only  lying  pale  and  languid,  in  confinement,  what  was  involved  in  Sir 
Gregory  Cassali  conferring  with  the  Pontiff  about  Henry's  marriage, 
and  then  writing  to  his  Majesty  himself,  so  early  as  the  20th  of  Feb- 
ruary ?33  How  was  it  that  Richard  Pate,  the  English  ambassador  with 
the  Emperor,  was  writing  to  the  King  in  cgpher,  and  so  early  as  the  12th 
of  April  about  legitimating  the  Princess  Mary,  and  what  meant  the  am- 
bassador, in  pressing  the  subject  with  vehemence  ?^*  But  above  all,  on 
the  17th  of  May,  or  the  day  on  which  they  were  putting  Lord  Rochford 
and  others  to  death,  and  harassing  the  Queen  at  Lambeth,  by  whose  in- 
structions or  instigation  was  it,  that  Cassali  was  earnestly  reporting 
progress  to  the  Pontiff  ?  That  very  day,  as  far  distant  as  Rome,  he  was 
narrating  to  him  the  acceptable  tidings  of  the  Queen,  with  her  brother 
and  others,  having  been  thrown  into  prison.  And  what  was  the  rejjly 
of  Paul  the  Third,  the  same  man  who  within  the  last  nine  months  had 


33  Cotton  MS.,  Vitelline  n.  xiv.,foI.  Ifii,  dated  Rome,  FelM-u.iry  20,  1.5.3.'; 
31  Idem,  fol.  177. 


1.5.3(>.]  QUKEN  ANNE   EXPLAINED.  481 

framed  such  a  Bull  against  Henry,  and  which  was  still  hanging  over 
him  ?3-^  Let  Cassali  himself,  writing  to  the  King,  inform  us.  The  tid- 
ings from  England  once  told, — "  he  (Paul)  then  said,  that  he  had  been 
imploring  heaven  to  enlighten  youi*  mind  on  this  affair ;  that  he  had 
always  had  soinething  of  this  sort  in  his  eye,  because  he  thought  the  mind 
of  your  Majesty  was  adorned  with  such  virtues,  &c. ! — That  your  Majesty 
now  might  perform  an  excellent  work  for  Christendom,  being  now  re- 
leased from  a  marriage  that  was  indeed  too  unequal  for  you."  Such  was 
the  language  uttering  in  Rome,  at  the  very  moment  when  Cranmer  was 
professedly  sitting  in  judgment  at  Lambeth  !  But  this  was  not  all ; 
Cassali  goes  on — "  It  was  most  manifest,  that  if  your  Majesty  had  the 
Roman  Pontiff  with  you,  you  might  command  the  other  princes,  (?'.  e.  the 
Emperor  and  Francis)  as  you  pleased, — he,  the  Pontiff,  promised  to  obey 
you  in  this  business, — desired  only  peace, — was  not  disposed  to  faction, 
nor  covetously  to  increase  his  fortune  in  immense  sums  !"  He  said, 
"  your  Majesty  ought  not  to  be  in  an  angry  mind  towards  him,  but  to  be 
friendly."  The  Pontiff  went  on  so  far  as  to  apologize  for  having  made 
Fisher  a  Cardinal,  and  confessed  he  had  eiTed  in  that  step  !  With 
many  more  words  in  tbe  same  strain  ;  after  which  Cassali  again  earnestly 
urges  the  King  to  compliance.  All  this  was  uttered  by  the  17th  of  May, 
as  far  distant  as  Italy,  so  that  the  sovereign  Pontiff  was  rejoicing  over 
the  plot  entire,  and  without  the  slightest  hesitation  as  to  its  complete 
success,  two  days  before  the  Queen  was  put  to  death  !  !  The  whole  des- 
patch is  curious,  and  worthy  of  perusal.-^  "  No  advances,"  says  Turner, 
"  could  be  more  eager,  submissive,  flattering  and  tempting  to  a  King  of 
Henry's  temper,  than  this  ingenious  conference  ;"  and  certainly  instead 
of  "  entire  favour  and  zeal  unto  the  truth,"  proceeding  from  his  Majesty's 
own  motion,  for  which  Cranmer,  at  the  moment,  was  so  grossly  flattering 
him  ;  nothing  was  more  likely  than  Henry's  compliance, — only  it  so 
happened,  that  Queen  Jane  turned  out  to  be  not  unfavourable  to  the 
new  learning.  Again,  therefore,  was  the  monarch  overruled,  partly  by 
the  very  marriage  into  which  he  had  plunged  so  barbarously,  and  partly 
by  the  policy  of  Crumwell,  now  rising  to  the  height  of  his  transient  glory. 
Union  with  the  Pontiff,  or  influence  in  foreign  politics,  were,  at  this  mo- 
ment, of  no  account  in  his  Majesty's  esteem,  when  compared  with  the  grati- 
fication of  his  own  will,  and  the  pleasing  prospect  of  augmented  revenue. 
That  a  perfect  vxnderstanding  had  existed,  however,  between  certain 
men,  and  as  far  as  Rome,  there  is  now  no  reason  to  doubt.  They  intended 
at  once  to  destroy  the  Queen,  and  disgrace  her  husband,  and  thus  far 
they  succeeded  ;  but  as  the  sole  cause  of  this  mighty  change  of  mind 

35  The  reader  cannot  have  forgotten  that  furious  document  noticed  last  year ;  but  he  may 
contrast  it  now  with  the  suddenly  altered  tone  of  the  the  Man  at  Rome.     See  p.  440. 

36  Vitell.,  B.  xiv.,  fol.  215,  dated  Rome,  27th  May,  l.'iSe.  Observe  his  commencement.  "  Ten 
dnys  have  elapsed  since  I  went  to  the  Pope,  and  narrated  to  him  the  tidings  that  the  Queen  had 
been  thrown  into  prison,  &c.     He  llien  said  that  he  hail  been,  &c."  as  above. 

VOL   I.  2   H 


482  HER   EAltLY    LIFE  [BOOK  I. 

and  conduct  in  Paul  III.,  was  the  simple  announcement  of  Queen  Anne's 
downfall,  the  fact  itself  speaks  a  volume.  The  language  employed  by 
the  cringing  PontiflF,  lately  so  furious,  and  to  be  so  again,  becomes  the 
highest  testimony  in  the  world  ;  which,  if  not  granted  to  the  nature  of 
her  principles,  must  be  acceded  to  the  power  and  general  current  of  her 
influence,  and  that  from  the  day  that  Cranmer  said,  so  exultingly,  "  I 
did  put  the  crown  upon  her  head." 

Henry's  brutal  treatment  of  Anne  Boleyn  cannot  be  said  to  have  ter- 
minated with  her  death.  His  procedure  towards  his  own  father-in-law, 
the  father  of  the  lady,  once  so  caressed,  crowned  the  whole.  He  is  to  be 
removed  out  of  his  sight.  He  was  then  Lord  Privy  Seal  ;  but  he  must 
now,  on  the  2d  of  July,  give  way  to  Thomas  Crumwell,  since,  among 
others,  he  had  bowed  so  servilely  to  the  royal  passion.  And  yet,  by  the 
month  of  October,  Henry,  in  terror  for  the  security  of  his  throne,  had 
the  meanness,  throvigh  Crumwell,  to  borrow  money  from  the  man  whose 
daughter  he  had  mui-dered.^''  Nor  was  this  all.  Uj^on  the  Earl's  death, 
in  February  1538,  with  matchless  rapacity,  Henry  laid  claim  to  the 
favourite  residence  of  Hever  Castle  in  Kent,  and  that  in  right  of  a  wife, 
from  whom,  previously  to  being  beheaded,  he  had  been,  by  a  cruelty  all 
his  own,  divorced  !  The  manor  is  said  to  have  been  afterwards  settled 
on  Lady  Anne  of  Cleves  ;  who,  however,  had  Richmond  Palace  as  her 
residence.  And  yet  of  a  scene,  in  every  point  of  view,  so  revolting,  the 
reader  even  still  cannot  form  an  adequate  conception,  except  he  revert 
for  a  few  moments,  finally,  to  its  victim. 

The  violence  of  parties  at  the  moment,  combined  with  the  strong 
language  employed  ever  since,  respecting  Anne  Boleyn,  whether  adverse 
or  friendly  to  her  character,  render  it  no  easy  task  to  present  any  direct 
or  straight-forward  narrative,  with  regard  to  her.  Nor,  so  far  as  the 
object  oi  this  history  is  concerned,  is  it  either  essential,  or  of  vital  conse- 
quence. The  reader  has  already  witnessed  that  the  great  cause  of 
Divine  truth  had  taken  effectual  root  in  our  native  land,  independently 
of  the  forecast  of  a  single  hirnian  being,  high  or  low.  He  has  seen  it  gi-ow 
and  flourish,  not  only  above  the  power  of  official  influence,  but  in  spite 
of  it,  whether  in  man  or  woman,  and  he  will  see  this  frequently  to  the 
end.  At  the  same  time,  it  may  still  be  enquired — "  Why  all  this  mighty 
stir  about  the  death  of  only  one  female  1 "  The  discordancy  of  historians, 
indeed,  proves,  at  least,  this  much  ;  that  there  must  have  been  no  want 


37  The  language  of  Wriothesley  to  Crumwell,  announcing  this,  ought  not  to  be  omitted.  "  For 
my  Lord  of  Wiltshire,  he  (the  King)  is  very  glad  you  remembered  him,  and  also  that  you  wrote 
for  so  good  a  sum  ;  for  his  Grace  being  very  merry,  said— there  was  a  servant  of  King  Edward's, 
his  grandfather,  which  once  made  a  suit  for  a  thousand  oaks,  that  he  might  only  obtain  twenty  : 
and  so  he  trusted  your  request  to  my  Lord  of  Wiltshire  should  purchase  £500,  or  such  a  matter, 
by  the  reason  it  was  so  great ;  which  being  less,  would  else  jiercase  have  wrought  nothing  with 
him.  23  Oct.  \5X." — Got:  State  Papers,  i.,  p.  40(1.  If  any  man  ever  had  a  talent  for  asking 
stijijilies  it  was  Crumwell,  and  as  long  as  he  could  yet  them,  he  stood  high  in  Henry's  favour,  but 
when  these  once  fail,  we  shall  witness  the  sequel. 


I/530'.]  AND   EDUCATION.  483 

of  what  is  styled  "  force  of  character  "  in  Henry's  second  Queen,  even 
though  the  period  of  her  ascendency  was  so  transient ;  but  her  intiuence 
over  him  alone,  can  never  account  for  this  uproar.  For  this  reason,  and 
with  the  statements  of  both  foes  and  friends  before  us,  a  few  particulars 
may  be  hazarded  ;  some  of  which  have  hitherto  escaped  notice. 

Anne  Boleyn,  the  eldest  daughter  of  Sir  Thomas  Boleyn  of  Blickling, 
in  Norfolk,  was  born  at  the  family  seat,  about  the  year  1501.  Of  her 
mother,  the  daughter  of  Thomas  Howard,  Karl  of  Surrey,  and  afterwards 
Duke  of  Norfolk,  she  was  bereaved  by  a  fever  in  1-512.  In  August  1514, 
when  Louis  XII.  of  France  was  betrothed  to  Mary  the  youngest  sister  of 
Henry  VIII.,  Lady  Anne,  then  about  fourteen  years  of  age,  was  ap- 
pointed her  fourth  maid  of  honour.  There  is  a  letter  extant  to  her 
father,  in  French,  and  in  prospect  of  this  appointment,  promising  to  do 
her  utmost  in  the  service  of  her  royal  Mistress.  ^^  Proceeding  to  France 
in  the  autumn  of  1514,  she  remained  till  the  death  of  Louis  soon  after, 
on  the  1st  of  January  1515.  Instead,  however,  of  returning  with  her 
mistress,  then  married  to  Charles  Brandon,  Duke  of  Suffolk,  she  was  re- 
tained in  the  com-t  and  service  of  Claude,  the  daughter  of  Louis,  and 
consort  of  Francis  I.,  an  amiable  woman,  who  revived  and  promoted 
the  moral  restraints  of  the  court,  following  the  example  of  her  mother, 
Anne  of  Brittany.  Her  maids  of  honour  were  diligently  occupied  in 
embroidery,  or  similar  pursuits,  and  the  society  of  gentlemen  was  not 
admitted.  Here,  however,  Anne  had  the  advantage  of  being  associated 
with  a  lady  far  better  known  —  Margaret  of  Valois,  the  Duchess  of 
Alen^on,  afterwards  Queen  of  Navarre.  Hence  Lord  Herbert,  generally 
so  correct  as  an  historian,  informs  us  that  "  Anne  had  been  received  into 
a  place  of  much  honour,  first  with  Queen  Claude,  and  then  with  the 
Duchess  of  Alen^on,  where  she  staid  till  some  dift'erence  grew  between 
our  King  and  Francis,"  or  till  the  spring  of  1522.  To  any  one  at  all 
acquainted  with  what  had  taken  place  in  Paris  by  this  moment,  or  from 
the  year  1518  to  1522,  it  must  be  evident  that  Anne  could  not  have 
existed  in  such  interesting  and  profitable  society,  without  seeing  and 
hearing  far  more  than  she  could  have  done  in  England,  whether  she  had 
been  influenced  by  it  at  that  time  or  not.  Paris,  especially  in  1520,  was 
far  a-head  of  London.  In  1521,  indeed,  the  writings  of  Luther  were 
condemned  alike  in  both  cities,  but  London  had  no  such  men  to  show 
as  Lefevre,  Bri^onnet,  and  Farel,  nor  England  any  such  woman  as 
Margaret  of  Valois. 


38  Turner,  who,  with  other  historians,  has  supposed  the  birth  of  Anne  to  be  in  1507,  perplexed 
by  the  style  of  this  letter,  as  not  that  of  a  child,  ascribes  it  to  the  year  1527,  when  Anne  was 
about  to  enter  tlie  household  of  Queen  Catherine  of  EnjjUind.  But,  independently  of  its  being  a 
letter  bearing  on  a  French  court,  it  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  a  young  lady  in  her  teens,  going 
from  under  her  father's  eye.  Turner  agrees  in  sending  Anne  to  France  in  1514  ;  but  would  a 
child  of  six  or  seven  years  have  been  sent  as  maid  of  Iionour,  and  actually  named,  as  she  was, 
in  Mary's  retinue  ? 


iH-i  HER  PROCEEDINGS  AND  [boOK  I. 

After  l)eing  introduced  into  the  x'oyal  household  of  Henry,  as  maid 
of  honour  to  Queen  Catherine,  an  attachment  which  had  been  formed 
between  Anne  and  Percy,  the  future  Earl  of  Northumberland,  was  im- 
peratively and  with  great  cruelty  broken  up,  at  the  instigation  of  the 
King ;  at  least,  it  has  always  been  taken  for  granted  that  it  was  at  his 
instigation.  But  be  this  as  it  may,  Wolsey  was  the  agent,  and  the 
natural  consequence,  on  the  part  of  both,  was  an  unbroken  jealousy  of 
the  Cardinal  ever  after.  Percy  was  dismissed  the  court,  and  Anne 
also  withdrew  to  Hever  Castle,  a  favourite  residence  of  her  father,  thirty 
miles  distant  in  Kent.®  As  the  daughter  of  Sir  Thomas  certainly  did 
not  appear  in  public,  or  at  court,  till  May  1527,  there  remain  four  years 
to  be  filled  up.  Injuriously  dismissed,  she  not  only  discovered  a  perse- 
vering sense  of  the  affront,  but,  according  to  the  shrewd  supposition  of 
Burnet,  again  returned  to  France.  One  of  Anne's  latest  biographers'^'^' 
has  no  doubt  that  farther  research  will  verify  Burnet's  statement,  while 
both  agree  with  Turner  in  assigning  to  her  a  residence  with  Margaret,  till 
her  marriage  with  Henry  D'  Albret,  King  of  Navarre.  This  took  place  on 
the  24th  of  January  1527,  when  Anne  returned  with  her  father  to  Eng- 
land, early  in  that  year.  That  her  father,  who  had  been  created  Viscount 
Rochford  in  1525,  was  abundantly  ambitiovxs  of  his  daughter's  advance- 
ment, as  well  as  his  own,  has  been  made  very  evident  ;  and  he  it  was  who 
first  led  her  into  such  critical  cii'cumstances,  by  promoting  her  return 
to  court  once  more,  where  she  attended  on  Queen  Catherine.  The 
question  of  Henry's  divorce  from  his  unimpeachable  wife,  with  whom  he 
had  lived  so  long,  being  once  moved  ;  this  young  woman  was  then  ex- 
posed to  all  the  sophistry  of  Gardiner  and  Fox,  but  above  all,  to  that 
of  Cranmer,  who  wrote  his  book  in  her  father's  house,  and  had  free 
access  to  her  day  by  day.  Lending  an  ear  to  the  doctrine  of  the  day, 
could  not  save  Anne  from  personal  responsibility,  any  more  than  it  could 
those  men  who  laboured  to  promote  it.  At  the  same  time  all  the  ad- 
vances of  the  King,  previously  to  a  certain  period,  ought  to  have  been 
regarded  as  deeply  insulting.  That  he  met  with  a  decided  and  notable 
repulse  on  his  first  approach,  has  been  recorded  by  Anne's  bitterest 
enemies  ;'*^  but  for  her  yielding  to  any  alliance  by  marriage,  at  least 
before  the  day  that  Cranmer  took  it  upon  him,  not  to  pronounce  a  di- 
vorce, which  he  never  did,  but  to  declare  the  union  itself  null  and  void, 
or  at  an  end  ;  for  her  subsequent  can-iage  towards  the  Queen  Dowager  and 
her  daughter  Mary,  she  was  personally  responsible — and  let  her  be 
blamed.  Nothing  of  all  this,  however,  and  though  it  had  been  ten  times 
greater,  would  ever  have  been  so  severely  censured,  had  Anne  Boleyn, 

39  Percy  was  married  to  a  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Shrewsbury,  al)OUt  1524,  in  consequence 
of  a  previous  contract  between  that  nobleman,  and  the  Earl  his  father.  The  father  dying  in 
1.527,  it  was  the  same  man  whom  Wolsey  had  once  so  IMvarled,  who,  with  Sir  W.  Walshe,  was 
sent  by  Henry  to  apprehcnii  him  in  153(t. 

■lO  Agnes  Strickland.  i>  Sloane  MS.,  no.  2-105. 


1530.]  CHARACTER  AS  QUEEN.  485 

after  she  came  to  the  throne,  only  lent  her  influence  in  favour  of  "  the 
old  learning."  Here  it  was  that,  in  the  estimation  of  leading  men  in 
power,  she  had  erred  so  grievously.  Here  lay  her  sin  unpardonable. 
There  were  certain  palpable  steps  never  to  be  forgiven,  and  which,  in 
the  eye  of  the  timid  and  time-serving,  had  shown  more  of  generous  zeal, 
than  worldly  prudence.  These  have  been  too  slightly  explained  hitherto, 
though  a  brief  digression  might  have  explained  them. 

Let  any  one  peruse  the  account  recently  given  of  Margaret  of  Valois, 
by  Merle  D'Aubigne,  from  manuscripts  of  the  time,  and  he  can  scarcely 
fail  to  conclude,  that  the  early  and  intimate  acquaintance  of  Anne 
Boleyn  with  such  a  character,  must  have  had  some  beneficial  eflfect 
upon  her."*-     But  be  this  as  it  might,  at  all  events,  we  have  already  seen 


**  It  was  creditable  to  the  Earl  of  Wiltshire,  while  yet  Lord  Rochford,  as  well  as  his  daughter, 
that  society  with  such  a  princess  was  preferred  and  prized  ;  for  many  historians  agree  in  allow- 
ing to  her  this  privilege,  and  Anne  could  not  fail  to  have  enjoyed  benefit  from  it,  itUimately. 
Margaret  of  Valois  was  an  ardent  reader  of  the  Scriptures,  and  every  day  perused  a  portion  of 
them,  or  rather  twice  a  day.  She  has  described  this  habit  so  beautifully  herself,  in  the  preface 
to  her  tales,  that  we  must  present  it  in  her  own  words,  since  they  are  so  very  appropriate 
to  these  pages. 

"  You  ask  me,  my  children,  to  do  a  very  difficult  thing— to  invent  a  diversion  that  will  drive 
away  your  ennuis.  I  have  been  seeking  all  my  life  to  effect  this,  but  I  have  found  only  one 
remedy,  which  is,  reading  the  Holy  Scriptures.  In  perusing  them,  my  mind  experiences  its 
true  and  perfect  joy ;  and  from  this  pleasure  of  the  mind,  proceed  the  repose  and  health  of 
the  body.  If  you  desire  me  to  tell  you  what  I  do,  to  be  so  gay  and  so  well,  at  my  advanced 
age  ;  it  is  because  as  soon  as  1  get  up,  I  read  these  sacred  books.  There  I  see  and  contemplate 
the  will  of  God,  who  sent  his  Son  to  us  on  earth,  to  preach  that  Holy  Word  ;  and  to  announce 
the  sweet  tidings,  that  he  promises  to  pardou  our  sins  and  extinguish  our  debts,  by  giving  us 
his  Son,  who  loved  us,  and  who  suffered  and  died  for  our  sakes.  This  idea  so  delights  me,  that 
I  take  up  the  Psalms,  and  sing  them  with  my  heart ;  and  pronounce  with  my  tongue,  as  humbly 
as  possible,  the  fine  hymns  with  which  the  Holy  Spirit  inspired  David,  and  the  sacred  authors. 
The  pleasure  I  receive  from  this  exercise,  so  transports  me,  that  I  consider  all  the  evils  that 
may  happen  to  me  in  the  day,  to  be  real  blessings ;  for  I  place  Him  in  my  heart,  by  faith,  who 
endured  more  misery  for  me.  Before  I  sup,  I  retire  in  the  same  manner,  to  give  my  soul  a  con- 
genial lesson.  At  night,  I  review  all  that  I  have  done  in  the  day ;  I  implore  pardon  for  my 
faults ;  I  thank  my  God  for  his  favours ;  and  I  lie  down  in  his  love,  in  his  fear,  and  in  his  peace, 
my  soul  being  free  from  every  worldly  anxiety.  Lo !  my  dear  children,  what  has,  for  a  long 
while,  made  me  so  happy.  I  have  sought  every  where  else,  but  have  found  nothing  but  this,  so 
solid  and  so  satisfying — and  if  you  will  give  an  hour  every  morning  to  such  reading,  and  say 
your  prayers  devoutly  during  the  mass,  you  will  perceive  in  this  solitude  those  charms  which 
will  attend  you  in  every  city.  Indeed,  whoever  knows  God,  will  find  the  most  beautiful  things 
in  Him ;  but  without  Him  what  is  there  that  will  not  become  otfensive  and  disagreeable  ? 
You  must  believe  what  I  say,  if  you  wish  to  have  a  safe  and  pleasant  life." 

Between  the  Courts  of  France  and  England  there  were  several  points  of  resemblance  at  this 
period,  so  far  as  these  two  females  were  concerned,  and  in  consequence  of  which,  the  Queen  of 
Navarre  must  have  felt  deeply  the  death  of  one,  whom  she  had  known  so  well.  Ever  since  the 
infatuated  alliance  of  Francis  I.,  in  15.33,  with  Rome,  Queen  Margaret  had  well  known  what 
it  was  to  be  suspected,  opposed,  and  hated,  for  her  opinions.  Montmorency,  the  Premier,  had 
told  the  King  that  if  he  wished  to  exterminate  heresy,  he  must  begin  with  his  own  Court,  and, 
especially,  with  his  sister,  the  Queen  of  Navarre.  Her  table,  however,  was  still  the'resort  of 
those  who  loved  the  Scriptures,  and  there,  in  1536,  sat  Lefevre,  their  translator  into  French,  at 
the  advanced  age  of  one  hundred,  who  died  next  year.  There,  the  last  end  of  the  murdered 
Queen  of  England  must  have  been  canvassed,  and  duly  appreciated.  Indeed,  it  is  rather  a 
singular  coincidence,  that  for  the  earliest  account,  as  well  as  many  of  the  most  important  par- 
ticulars, we  are  indebted  not  to  any  English,  but  to  two  French  authorities,  who  were  in  London 
at  the  moment,  and  saw  or  heard  what  they  described.  The  first  of  these,  "  Histoire  de  Anne 
Boleyn,  par  un  Contemporain,"  a  metrical  narrative,  too,  is  dated  at  London  so  early  as  the 
2d  of  June,  or  only  fourteen  days  after  her  death,  and  a  week  before  Latimer  preached  to  the 
Bishops.  The  other,  by  Crispin,  Lord  of  Milherve,  was  preserved  by  Meterin,  the  Dutch  Consul- 
Gencral,  in  his  "  Histoire  de  Pays  Bass,  1(518."    Burnet,  and  all  subsequent  historians,  have 


486  HER   PROCEEDINGS  AND  [book  i. 

that,  as  early  as  1529,  Anne  had  possessed  at  least  one  publication  of 
Tyndale — "  The  Obedience  of  a  Christian  man."  It  was  a  species  of 
writing  for  which  her  previous  acquaintance  with  Margaret  had  fully 
prepared  her ;  and  had  she  proceeded  no  farther,  the  offence  would  have 
been  passed  over.  This,  however,  happened  before  she  was  Queen  of 
England.  AfterAvards  she  went  much  farther,  and  to  such  extent  that 
all  she  had  said  or  done  before  was  as  nothing. 

There  were  two  men  especially,  who,  through  her  influence,  at  last 
became  Bishops,  and  the  unprecedented  circumstances  of  their  acces- 
sion, constituted  mortal  offence.  Their  appointments  were  already 
noticed  last  year  ;  but,  in  justice  to  the  Queen,  they  come  before  us 
again.  No  other  than  two  Italians,  nay  Roman  Cardinals,  were  de- 
prived of  both  oflice  and  revenue,  before  these  men  could  be  so  ad- 
vanced. At  such  a  time,  so  far  as  money  was  concerned,  it  might  have 
been  said,  "  Let  them  go,  but  woe  to  the  men  who  shall  be  put  in  their 
places.""*^  This,  however,  was  not  all.  These  two  successors  had  been  long 
peculiarly  obnoxious  to  the  gentlemen  of  "  the  old  learning."  The  first 
had  been  marked  as  a  transgressor  from  the  days  of  Wolsey  ;  and  the 
second,  as  early  as  1530,  had  incurred  the  wrath  of  Nix,  the  old  Bishop 
of  Norwich,  to  such  a  degree,  that  he  said,  in  slaying  Bilney,  he  was 
"  afraid  that  he  had  slain  Abel  and  saved  Cain  alive."  But  far  worse 
than  this,  the  first  of  these  men  had  incurred  the  wrath  of  no  less  than 
Stokesly,  the  reigning  Bishop  of  London,  and  lay  under  his  censure. 
He  had  not  only  examined  and  molested  him  in  1532,  but,  by  the  3d  of 
October  1533,  inhibited  him  from  preaching  within  the  diocese  of  Lon- 
don. This,  however,  with  all  his  quaintness,  it  will  be  now  acknow- 
ledged, was  the  noblest  character  then  living  in  all  England, — the  only 
man  who  ever  boldly,  and  without  evasion,  spoke  the  truth  to  Henry 
VIII.,  and  was  afterwards  no  less  faithful  to  Anne  Boleyn.  We  need 
not  name  Hugh  Latimer.  But  who  could  be  expected  now  to  inter- 
pose in  his  favoiu'  ?  It  was  no  other  than  the  Queen  ;  and  if  her 
achievement  in  rescuing  him  from  the  fangs  of  Stokesly  and  his  fellows, 
was  to  be  followed  by  any  farther  mark  of  her  personal  regard,  she  could 
not  fail  to  incur  most  virulent  hatred.  Even  thus  far,  however,  she  had 
already  made  way  for  the  cautious  and  timid  Primate  ;  and  this  becomes 
the  more  observable,  as  it  is  about  the  first  time  that  we  hear  of  Cran- 
mer  doinff  any  thing  in  advance.     He  followed  in  the  wake  of  Latimer 

been  Indebted  to  it ;  and  it  is  from  this  sonrce  that  we  derive  the  final  address  of  Anne  to 
Henry's  "  Lords  triers."  It  is,  finally,  to  a  third  native  of  France,  and  he  a  disciple  of  "the  old 
learning"  still,  we  owe  the  following  information.  "  Many  English  gentlemen  have  assured 
mc,  that  Henry  VIII.,  on  his  deathbed,  greatly  repented  of  the  oftences  he  had  committed, 
and,  among  other  things,  of  the  injury  and  crime  committed  against  Anne  de  Boleyn,  falsely 
overcome  and  accused  by  the  charges  against  her."— T/«'ir/.  Though  too  credulous  as  a  bio- 
grapher, "  the  simplest  mhid,"  says  Turner,  "must  have  known,  whether  its  cars  did  or  did 
not  hear,  what  via»>/  had  mcntiimcd  to  them  :"  and.  certainly,  if  Henry  did  repent  of  any  thing 
at  all,  such  conduct  could  not  fail  tn  meet  him  on  his  death-bed. 

•'•■'  fardinal  (ihinucci.  Bishop  of  Worcester,  and  Cardinal  Cam)>eggin.  Bishop  of  Salisbury. 


153G.]  CHARACTER   AS  QUEEN.  487 

and  the  Queen.  Accordingly,  by  the  autumn  of  1534,  Cranmer  had  not 
only  befriended  Latimer,  but,  in  the  face  of  Stokesly's  ire,  he  had  actu- 
ally "  licensed  divers  to  preach  within  the  province  of  Canterbury,  at 
his  instance  and  request"  and  this,  of  course,  embraced  London.'*'*  Next 
year,  however,  Anne  proceeded  much  farther.  By  the  10th  of  Feb- 
ruary, the  same  man  was  preaching  before  the  King  and  Queen,  and 
upon  all  the  following  Wednesdays  in  Lent  ;^^  till  at  last,  through  the 
same  influence,  by  September,  Latimer,  as  Bishop  of  Worcester,  occu- 
pied the  place  from  which  Cardinal  Ghinucci  had  been  expelled.  Thus, 
the  last  Italian  non-resident  Bishop  over  Tyndale's  native  soil,  from 
whence  so  many  thousand  pounds  had  been  drained  for  half  a  century, 
being  gone  ;  it  was  altogether  a  deed  so  notable,  that  it  must  have  been 
resented  not  only  in  England,  but  especially  at  Rome  ;  and  much  more 
so,  if  the  second  man  to  whom  we  have  referred,  was  also  to  be  so  ad- 
vanced. This  was  Nicholas  Shaxton,  a  most  miserable  contrast,  indeed, 
to  Latimer,  though  not  at  present,  nor  for  years  after.  Nix  of  Norwich, 
his  sworn  enemy,  was  yet  alive  ;  and  yet  this  man,  by  May  1534,  was 
the  Queen's  almoner  ;  and  in  February  following,  he  succeeded  in  the 
See  of  Salisbury  to  Cardinal  Campeggio.'*" 

The  Queen's  decided  encouragement  of  Latimer,  was,  of  itself,  sufli- 
cient  to  have  sealed  her  doom,  with  the  opposite  party.  She  had  en- 
treated him  to  point  out  whatever  was  amiss  in  her  conduct ;  and  not- 
withstanding all  the  calumny  which  has  been  heaped  upon  her,  let  that 
conduct  now  be  farther  observed  ;  for  there  were  other  offences,  so  called, 
of  not  less  magnitude.  By  her  letter  to  Crumwell,  in  May  1534,  she  had 
openly  and  officially  avowed  her  approbation  of  the  Scriptures  having 
been  imjwrted  into  England  ;  which  no  official  man  had  yet  dared  to  do, 
and  against  which  Wolsey  and  the  Bishops  had  been  fighting  all  along. 
In  short,  her  approbation  of  the  Scriptures  having  been  circulated  in 
the  vulgar  tongue — her  recent  vindication  of  Mr.  Ilarman,  their  zeal- 
ous importer — her  pointed  request  that  he  should  be  restored  to  all  his 
forfeited  privileges,  as  a  merchant  in  Antwerp — her  growing  estimation 
in  the  eyes  of  the  people  ;  "  for  her  ordinary,"  says  one  of  the  oldest 


■<■»  Harleian  Manuscript,  No.  G148,  fol.  41. 

■15  Cranmer.  quite  in  character,  cautioned  him,  to  "  be  I'ery  circumspect,  to  overpass  and 
omit  all  manner  of  speech,  either  .-ipertly  or  suspiciously  sounding  against  any  special  man's 
facts,  acts,  manners,  or  sayings"— and  to  "  stand  no  longer  in  the  pulpit  than  an  hour,  or  an 
hour  and  a  half,  at  the  most— lest  the  King  and  the  Queen  wax  weary  at  the  beginning,"  or  have 
"  small  delight  to  the  end."  It  is  not  likely  that  Latimer  could  ever  adjust  himself  so  nicely 
before  any  .ludience,  or  that  he  ever  would.  These  sermons  must  have  been  great  literary 
curiosities,  at  such  a  time  ;  but  though  we  know  nothing  of  them,  we  shall  sec  whether  Latimer 
remembered  this  trimming,  when  he  came  to  preach  before  Cranmer  himself,  and  his  brethren 
on  the  bench,  in  the  memorable  Convocation  of  this  year,  1536. 

48  In  the  preamble  to  the  bill  of  deprivation,  it  is  stated,  that  i;3(T<iO  annually  had  gone 
direct  to  Rome,  from  these  two  Sees.  Worcester,  however,  as  it  included  the  whole  of  Glou- 
cestershire, must  have  been  of  most  value,  though  we  shall  still  rate  it  at  only  i'1500.  Since 
the  year  1484,  as  already  explained,  the  district  had  been  given  up  to  Ilat!a»  absentee  Prelates  ; 
so  that,  in  the  fifty  preceding  years,  here  was  i'/o.fi'iO,  which  had  gene  to  Italy.  It  may  be  re- 
membered, that  this  was  equal  to  more  than  a  million  sterling  of  the  present  day.  and  yet  the 
falcnlatinn.  nm^t  pvnbablv.  is  fiir  loo  mndcrale. 


488  THE   NEW,  OR   FIRST  CONVOCATION.  QboOK  I. 

biographers,  "  amounted  to  fifteen  hundred  pounds,  at  the  least,  yearly, 
(equal  to  .£22,500  now,)  to  be  bestowed  on  the  poor — her  provisions  of 
stock  for  them,  in  sundry  needy  parishes,  were  very  great.  Out  of  her 
privy  purse  went  not  a  little  to  like  purposes  ;  to  scholars  in  exhibition, 
very  much  ;  so  as,  in  three  quarters  of  a  year,  her  alms  and  bounty  were 
summed  to  fourteen  or  fifteen  thousands."  And  now  at  last,  in  the 
Tower,  after  a  review  of  her  past  life,  we  have  seen  this  same  person,  on 
her  bended  knees  before  Lady  Kingston,  imploring  her,  in  the  sanie 
manner,  to  ask  forgiveness  of  Princess  Mary,  for  any  wrongs  she  had 
done  her ;  for  to  the  King,  her  husband,  it  may  now  be  granted,  she 
had  done  no  wrong.     Lady  Kingston  punctually  fulfilled  the  commission. 

All  these  were  deeds  which  cannot  be  disputed  ;  and,  when  taken  to- 
gether, they  not  only  show  that  the  Queen  had  been  by  far  too  good  a 
woman  for  such  a  being  as  Henry  had  discovered  himself  to  be ;  but 
they  prove,  that  she  had  proceeded  much  too  far,  in  a  certain  course, 
ever  to  escape  the  bitterest  defamation  from  her  enemies  ;  perhaps  it 
was  thought  too  fast ;  and  hence  the  pusillanimity,  if  not  the  base  deser- 
tion of  her  professed  friends.  As  for  death  from  her  husband,  it  was 
nothing  more  than  one  awful  result,  though  probably  the  worst,  of  his 
vile  and  variable  passions.  It  is  of  him,  and  after  a  masterly  review  of 
the  entire  proceedings,  that  Sir  James  Mackintosh  has  said — "  Henry, 
perhaps,  approached  as  nearly  to  the  ideal  standard  of  perfect  wicked- 
ness, as  the  infirmities  of  human  nature  would  allow  !" 

But  we  now  turn  to  a  widely  different  scene ;  and  as  Latimer  had 
now  been  Bishop  of  Worcester  for  nine  months,  in  despite  of  the  Bishop 
of  London  or  his  party,  the  reader  may  be  curious  to  hear  what  he  had 
got  to  say  to  the  ofiicial  leaders  of  "  the  old  learning,"  only  that  day 
three  weeks  after  Anne  Boleyn  had  been  removed  from  the  present  life. 

Henry  having  called  a  new  Parliament,  had  resolved  also 
to  have  a  neio  Convocation,  and  one  differing  in  its  character 
from  all  that  had  preceded  it  on  English  ground,  or,  indeed, 
atiy  where  else.  Of  the  Parliament  we  can  already  judge. 
"  Henry's  two  divorces  having  created  an  uncertainty  as  to 
the  line  of  succession,  Parliament  had  endeavoured  to  remove 
this,  not  by  such  constitutional  provisions  in  concurrence 
with  the  crown,  as  might  define  the  course  of  inheritance,  but 
by  enabling  the  King,  on  failure  of  issue  by  Jane  Seymour, 
or  any  other  lawful  wife,  to  make  over  and  bequeath  the 
kingdom  to  any  person  at  his  pleasure,  not  even  reserving  a 
preference  to  the  descendants  of  former  sovereigns  !'"'*''  But 
we  have  now  to  look  into  the  Convocation. 


■t?  Hallam's  Cniistitii(imial  History. 


1.536'.]  THE   NEW,  OR   FIRST  CONVOCATION.  489 

The  confusion  and  misrepresentation  which  reigns  through- 
out almost  all  our  general  histories,  respecting  this  Convoca- 
tion and  its  results,  more  especially  with  regard  to  the  Eng- 
lish Bible,  render  it  imperatively  necessary  for  the  reader  to 
observe  what  actually  took  place.  Having  already  witnessed 
the  failure  of  these  Prelates  in  1534  and  1535,  their  procedure 
in  1536  only  invites  the  more  careful  inspection,  if  not  the 
deeper  interest.  A  universal  mistake  has  consisted  in  the 
supposition  that  Gardiner,  Bishop  of  Winchester,  then  am- 
bassador at  Paris,  was  here  present ;  but  there  are  many 
others,  especially  in  relation  to  the  Scriptures  in  English. 

Thus,  for  example,  Hume,  in  his  History  of  England,  informs  us,  that  "  a 
vote  was  passed  for  publishing  a  new  translation  of  the  Scriptures ;  and  in  three 
years'  time  the  work  was  finished,  and  published  at  Paris!"  Burnet  re- 
presents certain  "  arguments"  as  so  prevailing  with  both  houses  of  Convocation, 
that  "  they  petitioned  the  King,  that  he  would  give  order  to  some  to  set  about 
it." — "  These  arguments,  joined  with  the  power  that  the  Queen  had  in  his 
affections,  were  so  much  considered  by  the  King,  that  he  gave  order  for  setting 
about  it  immediately  I  To  whom  that  work  was  committed,  or  how  they  pro- 
ceeded in  it,  1  know  not.  For  the  account  of  these  things  has  not  been  pre- 
served, nor  conveyed  to  us,  with  that  care  that  the  importance  of  the  thing  re- 
quired. Yet  it  appears  that  the  work  was  carried  on  at  a  good  rate  :  for  three 
years  after  this,  it  was  pruited  at  Paris,  which  shews  they  made  all  convenient 
haste,  in  a  thing  that  required  so  much  deliberation  !!" 

Other  historians  being  equally  loose,  and  as  far  astray,  one  is  the  less  sur- 
prised at  egregious  mistakes  committed  by  the  painter.  Only  the  other  day  a 
cartoon  was  exhibited  in  Westminster  Hall,  entitled,  "  A  Convocation  held 
in  1536,  for  a  deliberation  on  a  new  translation  of  the  Scriptures."  Instead  of 
all  the  Prelates  being  seated  before  and  below  Crumwell,  the  Vicegerent  and 
Vicar-General, — "  Cranmer,"  according  to  the  description  given,"  is  represented 
as  presiding  over  the  Assembly.  On  his  right  hand  are  Crnmxcell !  Tunstal, 
Gardiner,  (though  in  France,)  and  others  ;  on  liis  left  are  Latimer,  Fox,  Good- 
rich, and  others."  But  we  forbear.  It  will  be  seen,  however,  that  there 
actually  were  two  or  three  scenes  at  this  Convocation,  inviting  the  pencil  of  our 
highest  artists  :  especially  "  Latimer  preaching  before  the  Convocation,"  or 
even  "  Stokesly  of  London,  at  the  height  of  his  wrath ;"  but  they  yet  remain  to 
be  laid  on  the  canvass. 

The  friends  of  the  "  old  learning"  round  the  King,  in- 
cluded two  distinct  parties — the  nobility  and  the  clergy. 
The  present  prospects  of  these  two,  were  direct  contrasts  to 
each  other.  The  former  were  looking  forward,  with  eager- 
ness, to  the  acquisition  of  property;  the  latter  were  trembling 
in  the  apprehension  of  losing  it.  The  nobility  were  happy  to 
aid  the  King  in  his  late  affair,  and  had  borne  him  through  it ; 
but  certainly  not  without  full  expectation  of  his  recollecting 


490  LATLMER   PREACHIiNG   BEFORE  [boOK  I. 

their  services,  for  they  had  laid  the  King  under  a  debt  of 
gratitude  ;^''  the  clergy  had  also  rejoiced  in  the  death  of  the 
Queen,  and  will  immediately  give  their  official  sanction.  But 
then,  it  was  not  to  follow  as  a  matter  of  course,  that  because 
this  latter  party  had  gone  along  with  Henry  in  his  bloody  pro- 
gress, that  he  was  to  aid  them,  or  even  spare  them,  as  a  body, 
in  theirs.  By  no  means.  On  the  contrary,  the  clergy,  at  all 
events,  must  prepare  for  farther  inroads  and  fresh  humiliation. 
It  will  be  remembered  that  Crumwell  had,  last  year,  been,  very 
conveniently,  made  "  Vicegerent,  Vicar-General,  and  Oom- 
missar}'  Special  and  Principal,"  involving  vast  powers ; 
placing  him,  in  fact,  next  to  the  royal  family,  for  specific  and 
prospective  purposes  ;  and  Ave  have  now  to  see  the  height  to 
which  he  thought  himself  entitled  to  act. 

The  Convocation  had  met  on  the  day  after  Parliament,  or 
the  9th  of  June.  Cranmer  had  resolved  to  try  what  a  sermon 
could  effect  at  the  opening.  We  have  seen  how  eager  he  was 
respecting  Latimer  preaching  before  the  Court,  and  he  ap- 
pointed him  now  to  preach  before  the  Convocation.  His  text 
was  appropriate  enough.  "  The  children  of  this  icorld  are  tciser 
in  their  generation,  than  the  children  of  light,'''' — and  he  did  not 
fail  to  speak  as  he  thought.  He  delivered  two  sermons,  on 
the  same  day,  from  this  text,  and  in  the  afternoon,  especially, 
came  to  the  point.     Perhaps  nothing  of  the  kind  ever  equalled 

Latimer  preaching  before  the  Convocation. 

"  They  that  be  secular  and  laymen,  are  not  by  and  bye  children  of  the  world  ; 
nor  they  children  of  light,  that  are  called  spiritual  and  of  the  clergy.  No,  no  ; 
as  ye  may  find  among  the  laity  many  children  of  light,^^  so  among  the  clergy, 
(how  much  soever  we  arrogate  these  holy  titles  to  us,  and  think  them  only  at- 


■*8  "  The  reproach  of  servility  and  patient  acquiescence  under  usurped  power,  falls  not  on  the 
Enslish  pi'opli;  hut  on  its  leaders.  Henry's  compliant  nobility  yielded  to  every  mandate  of  his 
imperious  will  ;  they  bent  with  every  breath  of  his  capricious  humour;  they  are  responsible  for 
the  illegal  trial— for  the  iniquitous  attainder— for  the  sanguinary  statute— for  the  tyranny  which 
they  sanctioned  by  law— and  for  that  which  they  permitted  to  subsist  without  law.  Nor  was 
this  selfish  and  pusillanimous  subserviency  more  characteristic  of  the  minions  of  Henry's  favour, 
the  Crum  wells,  the  Riches,  the  Pagets,  the  Russels,  and  the  Powletts,  than  of  the  representatives 
of  ancient  and  honourable  houses,  theNorfolks,  the  Arundels,  and  the  Shrewsburies."— //a?/ani. 
All  this  is  correct,  as  far  as  it  goes,  and  some  other  names  might  have  been  specified  ;  but  still 
the  "  Lords  servile"  could  never  have  succeeded,  without  the  "  Lord  Bishops."  They  were  not 
only  in  the  secret  of  every  intrigue,  but,  as  it  has  oft(!n  appeared,  were  at  the  bottom  of  all  mis- 
chief and  cruelty.  In  the  recent  tragedy,  indeed,  the  "  Lords  triers"  stand  conspicuous  ;  but 
before  the  plot  exploded,  Gardiner  had  been  whispering  in  the  ear  of  his  dear  friend,  the 
Jluke  of  Norfolk.     See  before,  p.  4.'J!). 

•<o  A  most  significant  public  testimony !  And,  under  Providence,  may  we  not  be  permitted 
now  to  say,—"  Thanks  to  Tyndale,  and  the  )ierusal  of  his  translations  of  the  Divine  Word  ?"  for 
what  else  had  brought  out  these  children  of  light  ?  There  was  no  preaching  of  the  truth.  In  the 
almost  solitary  person  of  Latimer,  this  had  been  denounced. 


l.j^f).]  THE    FIRST  CONVOCATION.  4.'H 

tributcil  to  us — '  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  wovkl — the  chosen  people  of  Christ — 
a  kingly  priesthood — an  holy  nation,'  and  such  other,)  ye  shall  find  many 
children  of  the  world,  because  in  all  places  the  world  getteth  many  children. 
For  I  foar,  lest  in  all  orders  of  men,  the  better,  I  must  say  the  greater  part  of 
them,  be  out  of  order,  and  children  of  the  world." — "  But  because  I  cannot 
speak  of  all,  when  I  say  Prelates,  I  understand  Bishops,  Abbots,  Priors,  Arch- 
deacons, Deans,  and  other  of  such  sort,  as  are  now  called  to  this  Convocation, 
as  I  see,  to  entreat  here  of  nothing  but  of  such  matters,  as  both  appertain  to 
the  glory  of  Christ,  and  to  the  wealth  of  the  people  of  England.  Which  thing 
I  px'ay  God  they  may  do,  as  earnestly  as  they  ought  to  do.  But  it  is  to  be 
feared,  lest  as  light  hath  many  of  her  children  here,  so  the  world  hath  sent 
some  of  his  whelps  hither;  amongst  the  which  I  know  there  can  be  no  concord 
nor  unity,  albeit  they  be  in  one  place,  in  one  congregation." — "  But  if  the 
children  of  this  world  be  either  more  in  number,  or  more  prudent,  than  the 
children  of  light,  what  then  availeth  this  Convocation  ?  Had  it  not  been  better 
we  had  not  been  called  together. 

"  The  end  of  your  Convocation  shall  shew  what  ye  have  done  ;  the  fruit  that 
shall  come  of  your  consultation,  shall  shew  what  generation  ye  be  of.  For  what 
liave  ye  done  hitherto,  I  pray  you,  these  seven  years  and  more  ?  What  have 
ye  ingendered  ?  What  have  ye  brought  forth  ?  What  fruit  is  come  of  your 
long  and  great  assembly  po  What  one  thing  that  the  people  of  England  hath 
been  better  of,  a  hair  1  Are  you  yourselves  either  more  accepted  before 
God,  or  better  discharged  toward  the  people  committed  to  your  care  ?  For  that 
the  people  is  better  learned  and  taught  now,  than  they  were  in  time  past,  to 
whether  of  these  ought  we  to  attribute  it — to  your  industry,  or  to  the  providence 
of  God  and  the  foreseeing  of  the  King's  Grace  ?  Is  it  unknown,  think  you, 
liow  both  ye,  and  your  curates  were  in  a  manner  by  violence  enforced,  to  let 
(hinder)  books  to  be  made,  not  by  you,  but  by  profane  and  lay  persons,  to  let 
(hinder)  them,  I  say  to  be  sold  abroad  and  read,  for  the  instruction  of  the  people  ? 
I  am  bold  with  you,  but  I  speak  Latin  and  not  English,  to  the  clergy,  not  to 
the  laity. 5\  I  speak  to  you  being  present,  and  not  behind  your  backs.  God  is 
my  witness,  I  speak  whatsoever  is  spoken,  of  the  good-will  that  T  bear  you. 
God  is  my  witness,  which  knoweth  my  heart,  and  compelleth  me  to  say  what 
I  say. 

"  Now,  I  pray  you,  in  God's  name,  what  did  you,  so  great  Fathers,  so  many, 
so  long  a  season,  so  oft  assembled  together  ?  What  went  you  about  ?  What 
would  you  have  brought  to  pass,  two  things  taken  away  ?  The  one,  that  ye, 
(which  I  heard)  burned  a  dead  man  :  The  other,  that  ye,  (which  J  felt,)  went 
about  to  burn  one  being  alive.  Him,  because  he  did,  I  cannot  tell  how,  in  his 
testament  withstand  your  iirofit ;  in  other  points,  as  I  have  heard,  a  very  good 
man  :  reported  to  be  of  an  honest  life,  while  he  lived,  full  of  good  works,  good 
both  to  the  clergy,  and  also  to  the  laity .5:2  This  other,  which  truly  never  hurt 
any  of  you,  ye  would  have  roasted  in  the  coals,  because  he  would  not  subscribe 
to  certain  articles  that  took  away  the  supremacy  of  the  King.53  Take  away 
these  two  noble  acts,  and  there  is  nothing  else  left,  that  ye  went  about,  that  I 
know  ;  saving  that  I  now  remember,  that  something  ye  attempted  against  Eras- 


50  With  reference  to  which  Latimer  had  written  liis  noble  letter  to  Henry  VIII.  of  Dec.  1.53it. 

51  Both  these  sermons  were  in  Latin  ;  but  the  above  is  the  faithful  translation  published  next 
year,  "  to  the  intent  that  things  well  said  to  a /tic,  may  be  understood  of  many,  and  do  good  to 
all  them  that  desire  to  understand  the  truth." 

52  Alluding  to  the  body  of  Sir  William  Tracy,  to  which  we  have  before  referred.  See:  nnol5.'i2. 

53  Referring  to  his  own  appearance  before  the  Convocation,  in  l.WZ,  for  which  see  page  .135. 


402  LATJMER  PREACHING  BEFORE  [book  i. 

mus,  albeit  as  yet  nothing  is  come  to  light.54  Ye  have  oft  sat  in  consultation, 
but  what  have  ye  done  ?  Ye  have  had  many  things  in  deliberation,  but  what 
one  is  put  forth,  whereby  either  Christ  is  more  glorified,  or  else  Christ's  people 
made  more  holy  ?  I  appeal  to  your  own  consciences  ;  how  chanced  this  ?  How 
came  it  thus  ?  Because  there  was  no  children  of  light,  no  children  of  God 
amongst  you,  which,  setting  the  world  at  nought,  would  study  to  illustrate  the 
glory  of  God,  and  thereby  show  themselves  children  of  light  I  I  think  not  so ; 
certainly  I  think  not  so.  God  forbid,  that  all  you,  which  were  gathered  together 
under  the  pretence  of  light,  should  be  children  of  the  world  ?  Then  why  hap- 
pened this  ?  Why,  I  pray  you  ?  Perchance,  either  because  the  children  of  the 
world  were  more  in  number,  in  this  your  congregation,  as  it  oft  happeneth,  or  at 
the  least  of  more  policy  than  the  children  of  light  in  their  generation  :  whereby 
it  might  very  soon  be  brought  to  pass,  that  those  were  much  more  strong  in 
gendering  the  evil,  than  these  in  producing  the  good." 

Then,  after  detailing,  at  length,  the  evils  to  be  removed, 
and  urging  them  all  to  "  do  something  whereby  they  might  be 
known  to  be  the  children  of  light," — as  "  all  men  know  that 
we  be  here  gathered,  and,  with  most  fervent  desire,  breath 
and  gape  for  the  fruit  of  our  Convocation  ;"  and  "as  our  acts 
shall  be,  so  shall  they  name  us."  After  warning  them  by 
that  wicked  professor  who  "  beat  his  fellow  servants,  and  did 
eat  and  drink  with  the  drunken," — he  closes  all  by  saying: — 

"  Come,  go  to,  my  brothers  ;  go  to,  I  say  again,  and  once  again  go  to,  leave 
the  love  of  your  profit ;  study  for  the  glory  and  profit  of  Christ ;  seek  in  your 
consultations  such  things  as  pertain  to  Christ,  and  bring  forth,  at  the  last,  some- 
thing that  may  please  Christ. — Preach  truly  the  Word  of  God.  Love  the  light, 
walk  in  the  light,  and  so  be  ye  the  children  of  light,  while  ye  are  in  this  world, 
that  ye  may  shine  in  the  world  that  is  to  come,  bright  as  the  sun,  with  the 
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  whom  be  all  honour,  praise,  and 
glory — Amen." 

This  stringent  and  intrepid  discourse  must  have  been  as 
gall  and  worm-wood  to  many  who  were  present ;  but  it 
certainly  was  meet,  that  some  such  address  should  salute  their 
ears,  and  at  such  a  time  as  this.  It  was  fit  that  they  should 
be  told,  when  thus  all  assembled  to  hear,  that  already  there  were 
among  the  People  '•'•many  children  of  light;"  while  they  had 
not  yet  done  one  thing,  whereby  the  inhabitants  of  England 
had  profited  "  one  hair."  It  was  fit  that  Tunstal  should  be 
reminded,  thus  publicly,  of  his  miserable  injunction  in  ]  526, 


5''  "  Henry  Standish,"  says  Bale,  "  a  Minorite,  and  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph,  in  a  daily  Convocation, 
uttered  many  idle  invectives  against  Cold  and  Erasmus  ;  and  once  fell  on  his  knees  befoi'e  the 
King  and  Queen  (Catharine  ;)  when  he  exhorted  and  even  conjured  them,  by  every  thing  sacred, 
to  go  on  resembling  their  ancestors,  otherwise  the  religion  of  Christ  would  be  in  deplorable  state  I 
Standish  had  died  on  the  9th  of  July  last  year ;  but  Latimer,  most  probably,  had  some  other 
men  now  present,  in  his  eye." 


1536.]  THE   FIRST    CONVOCATION.  493 

and  his  torturing  examinations  in  1528,  and  his  burning  of 
the  Sacred  Vohime  in  1530:  nay,  that  in  that  very  St.  Paul's, 
where,  after  his  return  from  Spain,  he  had  denounced  the  New 
Testament,  of  which  now  so  many  editions  had  been  sold  and 
circulated,  he  should  have  to  sit  still  and  listen  to  such  har- 
rowing interrogations  as  these.  And  although  some  may 
question  the  delicacy  of  Latimer  introducing  himself,  more 
especially  as  he  was  reverting  to  the  most  humiliating  scene 
in  his  past  life,  perhaps  the  solitary  speck  in  his  public 
character;^'  still  it  was  fit  that  the  ears  of  Stokesly  and  his 
fellows  should  be  made  to  tingle,  in  remembrance  of  their 
past  cruelties.  Stokesly  had  actually  officiated,  before  the 
sermons  began  ! 

In  short,  taking  the  discourse  all  in  all,  a  more  perfect  dis- 
claimer of  any  thing  having,  as  yet,  been  done,  by  these  men  in 
England,  could  not  have  been  given  ;  nor  a  higher  attestation 
to  the  powerful,  though  denounced,  exertions  of  Tyndale,  as 
well  as  to  their  positive  and  extensive  effects.  It  was  only 
in  perfect  keeping  with  all  that  has  been  recorded,  that  such 
an  eminent  and  distinct  testimony  should  have  been  delivered 
before  an  assembly  of  foes  and  friends,  at  St.  Paul's  in  London, 
three  months  before  Tyndale  received  the  crown  of  martyrdom, 
— and  that  by  Latimer,  the  man,  among  all  present,  best 
qualified  to  judge. 

It  becomes  of  no  little  curious  importance  to  observe  who 
were  actually  assembled  to  hear  all  this  ;  and  the  more  so,  that 
the  statements  frequently  given  have  been  both  defective  and 
erroneous.  Of  the  twenty-one  Bishops,  sixteen  were  present  at 
the  Convocation,  and  two  voted  by  proxy.  As  for  the  other 
three,  not  present ;  Gardiner  of  Winchester  was  still  in 
France,  where  indeed  he  remained  for  above  two  years. 
Athaqua  or  Attien,  Bishop  of  Llandaff,  if  yet  alive,  being 
a  Spaniard,  could  not  now  vote ;  and  Kite  of  Carlisle,  once 
Archbishop  of  Armagh,  an  appointment  which  he  had  received 
from  Leo  X.  in  1513,  and  resigned  for  Carlisle  in  1521,  was 
now  in  extreme  old  age,  and  died  next  vear.^^ 


■'•5  See,  anno  1532,  page  335.  In  his  address,  however,  he  gives  a  turn  to  the  close  of  his  ex- 
amination, which,  as  he  does  not  explain,  so  of  course  it  does  not  appear  on  the  record. 

5"  Fuller,  professing  to  give  an  account  of  this  Convocation,  has,  here  at  least,  led  Burnet 
and  several  other  historians  astray.  Lord  Herbert  had  given  only  the  titles  of  fourteen  of  the 
Sees,  and  Fuller  would  supply  the  names  ;  but  for  Norwich  he  inserted  Nix,  who  died  in  January 
preceding ;  and  for  Chichester  he  names  Sherburne,  now  aged  9fi,  who  had  resigned.     He  put 


4.JJ4  STATE   OF    PARTIES   IN    THE   CONVOCATION.       [hOOK   i. 

But  besides  the  sixteen  Bisliops  present,  tliere  were  forty 
mitred  Abbots  and  Priors,  or  fifty-six  in  all.  In  the  lower 
liouse  fifty  members  attended,  namely,  twenty-five  Archdea- 
cons, seven  Deans,  seventeen  Proctors,  and  one  Master  of  a 
College.  Of  the  eighteen  who  voted  from  the  Bench,  those 
who  were  with  and  against  Cranmer,  will  show  how  equally 
they  were  divided  when  discussion  began.  We  give  tlieiu 
with  the  dates  of  their  appointment. — 


1531. 

Lee  of  York. 

1533. 

Cranmer  of  Canterbury. 

1530. 

Stokesly  of  London. 

1534. 

Goodrich  of  Ely. 

1530. 

2'undal  of  Durham. 

1535. 

Shcuton  of  Salisbury. 

1520. 

Longland  of  Lincoln. 

1535. 

Fux  of  Hereford. 

1519. 

Vesey  of  Exeter.57 

1535. 

Latimer  of  Worcester. 

1533. 

Clerk  of  Bath. 

1535. 

Hilsey  of  Rochester. 

1534. 

Lee  of  Litchfield  .5" 

1536. 

Barlow  of  St.  Davids. 

15,34. 

t^alcot  of  Bangor. 

1536. 

Warton  of  St.  Asaph. 

153G. 

liugje  of  Norwich. 

1536. 

SaiKiJsou  of  Chichester. 

Thus,  although  the  reader  will  still  recognise  well  known 
enemies  to  the  progress  of  Divine  Truth,  and  to  Tyndale 
personally,  he  will  observe  that  the  coast  is  clear  of  the  aged 
and  literally  blind  Nix  of  Norwich — of  West  of  Ely,  the 
crafty  foe  of  Latimer — of  Standish,  the  slanderer  of  Colet 
and  Erasnms — of  Fisher,  the  ablest  opponent  of  the  7ieii' 
learning — and  of  Cardinal  Campeggio  of  Salisbury,  as  well 
as  Ghinucci  of  Worcester,  two  Italians,  ever  ready  to  sup- 
port the  old — besides  five  others.  If  death  had  not  thinned 
the  ranks  of  these  men,  it  is  evident  that  Cranmer  had  been 
left  in  a  small  minority  ;  but  it  now  appears,  that,  since  his 
appointment,  only  three  years  ago,  as  many  as  eleven  vacan- 
cies had  occurred,  and  of  these  not  fewer  than  eight  voted 
with  him.  So  late  as  the  31st  of  May,  the  other  party  had 
been  strengthened  by  Rugge  alias  Repps,  being  elected  for 
Norwich;^  but  it  shows  the  keenness  of  Crumwell  and  Cran- 
mer, that  on  the  very  dat/  before  the  Convocation,  they  got 


in  Gardiner  of  Winchester,  not  observing  that  he  was  abroad  ;  and  Kite  of  Carlisle,  who  w.xs 
not  present.    Herbert,  too,  had  added,  "  ami  the  rest,"  but  Fuller  did  not  supply  the  deficiency. 

5"  Voted  by  proxy. 

.w  Nicholas"  Synopsis.  This  may  seem  strange ;  but  the  mystery  is  solved,  by  observing  that 
Hbnry  was  a  party  concerned.  Norwich  being  vacant,  he  had  taken  into  his  own  hands  all 
the  lands  and  manors  of  the  See,  the  old  Bishop  having  at  last  fallen  under  a  prnmiiiire  ;  and 
giving  several  priories  in  exchange,  the  King  recommended  William  Rugge  or  Rejjps,  Abbot  of 
.St.  Benedicts,  in  Hiilmc,  who,  of  course,  nrust  be  received.  Tlie  old  man.  Richard  Nix,  upon 
his  submission,  was  pardoned  and  discharged  from  prison,  but  not  without  a  fine;  with  part  of 
which,  it  h.^s  been  said,  the  gl.-iss  windows  of  Khip's  Cdl/i'tic,  Cainhridfje.  were  purcliased. 


153().]  CKUMWKLL   AS    VlCAU-GliNKRAL.  495 

Wartou  into  St.  Asaph,  nay,  on  the  day  of  opening^  having 
procnred  Sherburne'' s>  resignation,  they  put  Richard  Sampson, 
the  King's  great  champion,  in  his  place/''  Even  then,  how- 
ever, they  divided,  it  appears,  nine  to  nine.  Fortunately  for 
Cranmer\s  peace,  Gardiner  was  not  there,  and  two  disciples  of 
the  old  learning  voted  only  by  proxy,  viz.  Exeter  and  Litch- 
field, for  whom  Longland  of  Lincoln,  acted. 

Preliminaries  being  adjusted  by  Friday  the  IGth  of  June, 
the  old  party  in  the  lower  house,  had  prevailed  in  securing 
one  of  their  number  to  be  Prolocutor  in  the  Convocation. 
This  was  Richard  Gwent,  an  Archdeacon  of  Stokesly's,  now 
presented  and  confirmed  by  the  upper  house.  But,  by  way  of 
keeping  the  balance  even,  or  rather  of  discovering  how  strong 
was  the  rod  of  royal  authority  over  them,  there  entered,  on 
the  same  day,  not  even  Cruniwell  himself,  for  he  was  as  yet  too 
busy  with  Parliamentary  affairs,  but  Dr,  William  Petre,  as 
his  deputy  !  He  claimed  the  precedency  due  to  his  immedi- 
ate master,  and  the  commission  he  brought  with  him  beino- 
read,  Cranmer  assigned  him  his  place,  next  to  himself.  Some 
might  well  question,  and  probably  did,  as  Fuller  supposes, 
whether  "  a  deputy's  deputy"  might  properly  claim  his  place 
who  was  principally  represented.  It  has  been  said  that  it 
was  with  difficulty  that  the  clergy  suppressed  their  murmurs 
at  CrumwelFs  appointment  to  his  office — a  man  who  had 
never  taken  orders,  nor  graduated  in  any  University  ;  but 
their  indignation  increased,  when  they  found  that  the  same 
pre-eminence  was  claimed  by  any  of  his  clerks^  whom  he  might 
commission  cis  his  deputy  at  their  meetings.*** 

On  Wednesday  next,  however,  the  21st,  Crumwell  entered, 
and  as  Vicegerent  and  Vicar-General  seated  himself  judici- 
ally above  all.^'  He  then  presented  them  an  instrument, 
annulling  the  King's  marriage  with  the  late  Queen.  They 
all  signed   it,  and  one  party  most  willingly,  though,  as  al- 


59  Nicholas'  Synopsis,  where  the  day  of  his  consecration  is  stated  Ihc  i)(h  ofjuiie. 

60  Godwin,  Collier,  Lingard.  As  if  to  make  the  humiliation  more  perfect,  who  was  this  Dr. 
Pbtre?  No  other  than  one  of  the  visitors  of  Monasteries,  appointed  in  October  last!  The 
Doctor,  however,  afterwards  Sir  William  Petre,  who  had  been  tutor  to  Lord  Roehford,  and 
Latin  Secretarj-  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  office,  finally  became  Principal  Secretary  of  State. 
But  what  was  more  remarkable,  he  contrived  sn  to  remain,  not  only  under  Henry  VIH.,  but 
under  Edward  VL,  Queen  Mari/,  and  Elizabeth.  After  his  visitations,  be  had  obtained  very 
large  grants  of  Abbey  lands,  and  died,  leaving  estates  in  seven  counties,  to  his  son,  the  first 
Lord  Petre. 

61  It  must  be  remembered,  that  this  Vicegerent  and  Ficar-General,  was  still  nothing  more 
than  a  Knight,  or  member  of  the  Commons  House,  and  not  even  Lord  Privy  Seal  til!  next  month. 


496  INTERMINABLE  STRIFE.  [bOOK  I. 

ready  noticed,  the  measure  did  not  pass  the  House  of  Lords 
till  the  80th. 

On  Friday,  the  23d  of  June,  Gwent  brought  up  from  the 
lower  house,  a  long  list  of  what  they  styled  mala  dogmata^ 
or  erroneous  doctrines.  The  number  amounted  to  not  fewer 
than  sixty-seven ;  and  it  now  remained  for  Cranmer,  Latimer, 
and  others,  to  say,  what  was  to  be  done  with  them  ;  for  this 
was  no  other  than  "  The  protestation  of  the  Clergy  of  the 
lower  house,  within  the  province  of  Canterbury.''''  As  a 
picture  of  the  men  within  these  doors,  and  of  the  opinions 
that  were  now  travelling  the  country,  the  document  is  of 
value.  The  puerility,  it  is  granted,  and  the  absurdity  of 
most  of  the  items,  strikingly  evince  the  degraded  state  of  the 
human  mind,  in  those  who  sanctioned  the  list ;  while,  on  the 
other  hand,  some  of  those  very  items  prove,  that,  in  the  face 
of  their  most  furious  opposition,  Divine  Truth  had  already 
found  its  way  into  a  thousand  channels.  A  few  only  will 
serve  to  show  whether  there  were  aiiy  of  "  the  children  of 
this  world"  in  this  assembly,  as  Latimer  had  more  than 
suspected,  and  whether  there  were  many  of  "  the  children  of 
light"  elsewhere,  as  he  had  affirmed. 

"  We  think,"  say  they,  "  in  our  consciences  and  opinions,  these  errors  and 
abuses  following,  to  have  been,  and  now  to  be,  within  this  realm,  causes  of  dis- 
sension, worthy  special  reformation.     It  is,  to  wit, 

1.  "  That  it  is  commonly  preached,  taught,  and  spoken,  to  the  slander  of 
this  noble  realm,  disquietness  of  the  people,  damage  of  Christian  souls,  not 
without  fear  of  many  other  inconveniences  and  perils — that  the  sacrament  of 
the  altar  is  not  to  be  esteemed. 

.5.  "  Item. — That  all  ceremonies  accustomed  in  the  Church,  which  are  not 
clearly  expressed  in  Scripture,  must  be  taken  away,  because  they  are  meii's  in- 
ventions. 

8.  "  Item. — That  it  is  preached  and  taught,  that  the  Church  that  is  commonly 
taken  for  the  Church,  is  the  old  synagogue ;  and  that  the  Church  is  '  the  congrega- 
tion of  good  men  only.' 

15.  "  Item. — That  images  of  saints  are  not  in  any  wise  to  be  reverenced. 

26.  "  Item. — That  confession  auricular,  absolution,  and  penance,  ai'e  neither 
necessary  nor  profitable  in  the  Church  of  God. 

27.  "  Item. — That  auricular  confession  is  only  invented  and  ordained  to  have 
the  secret  knowledge  of  men's  hearts,  and  to  pull  money  out  of  their  purse. 

44.  "  Item. — That  there  is  no  mean  place  between  Heaven  and  Hell,  wherein 
souls  departed  may  be  afflicted. 

56.  "  Item. — That  by  preaching,  the  people  have  been  brought  in  opinion 
and  belief,  that  nothing  is  to  be  believed,  except  it  can  be  proved  expressly  from 
Scripture. 

65.  "  Item. — That  besides  preaching,  there  ai-e  many  slanderous  and  er- 
roneous books  that  ha^e  been  made  and  suffered  to  go  abroad  indifferently, 


153G.3  INTERMINABLE  STRIFE.  497 

wliich  books  were  the  more  gladly  bouglit,  because  of  these  words,  '  cum  privi- 
legiu;'  which  the  ignorant  people  took  to  have  been  an  express  approbation  of 
the  King,  where  it  was  not  so  indeed. 

66.  "  Item. — That  where,  heretofore,  divers  books  hare  been  examined  by 
persons  appointed  in  the  Convocation,  and  the  said  books  found  full  of  heresy  and 
erroneous  opinions,  and  so  declared;  the  said  books  are  not  yet  by  the  Bishops 
expressly  condemned,  but  suffered  to  remain  in  the  hands  of  unlearned  people, 
which  ministereth  to  them  matter  of  argument,  and  much  unq^uietness  within 
the  realm."62 

Independently  of  Latimer's  testimony,  here  was  a  second, 
and  from  many  individuals.  If  it  be  said  that  their  alarm 
may  have  led  them  to  exaggerate  the  good  that  had  been  done, 
it  must  be  remembered  that  God  had  been  carrying  forward 
his  work  with  secret  energy,  and  that  they  were  not  the  men  to 
know  all:  but  still  they  come  forward  in  proof  that  the  Sacred 
Volume^  so  far  from  having  been  read  in  vain,  had  already 
produced  some  of  its  finest  efiects,  and,  it  may  safely  be  pre- 
sumed, to  a  considerable  extent,  since  they  afiirmed  that  these 
truths  were  "  commonly  taught  and  spoken.''''  It  is  true,  that 
all  this  had  been  accomplished  in  the  face  of  opposition,  and 
certainly  without  the  bold  and  public  sanction  of  any  pre- 
sent ;  but,  though  it  has  been  too  little  observed,  the  moment 
was  a  crisis  in  the  history  of  England,  more  important  than 
any  one  that  has  since  occurred  in  her  eventful  history.  As 
far  as  the  vital  interests  of  Christianity  itself  are  concerned, 
who  is  there  now,  understanding  these  interests,  who  can  for- 
bear to  exclaim — "  Oh!  had  they  but  let  '  welF  alone!  and 
left  those  cardinal  principles,  which  the  majority  of  these 
men  now  branded  as  evil,  to  have  found  their  way  into  every 
city  and  hamlet,  till  they  had  leavened  the  community  !"" 
But  no ;  the  perfection,  the  all-sufficiency  of  the  Sacred 
Volume  to  accomplish  all  the  purposes  of  the  Divine  will,  was 
a  tenet  held  by  no  one  there. 

And  now  the  war  grew  warm,  the  strife  interminate,  for 
what  else  could  be  expected  from  an  assemblage  such  as  this  ? 
Cranmer  alone,  as  yet  possessed  of  no  fixed  principles,  nor 
any  distinct  conception  of  where  he  was  going,  though  even 
backed  by  Latimer,  with  all  his  wit  and  shrewdness,  could 
have  done  nothing.  Even  in  the  absence  of  Gardiner,  they 
would   have   been  crushed  or  overruled.     Queen  Anne  was 


"3  See  the  list  entire  in  Collier, 
VOL.   I.  2  I 


498  ALES  OF   EDINBURGH.  [book  I. 

gone,  and  the  old  party  had  determined  to  try  their  strength. 
Oh  !  exclaims  old  Fuller,  "  what  tugging  was  here,  betwixt 
those  opposite  sides,  (for  I  dare  not  take  Bishop  Latimer\'3 
phrase,  as  he  took  it  out  of  his  text — betwixt  the  children  of 
this  generation,  and  the  children  of  lights)  whilst,  with  all 
earnestness,  they  thought  to  advance  their  several  designs^ 
The  truth  is,  that  the  House  of  Lords  itself  was  often  inter- 
rupted in  their  business  by  these  men;  and  in  their  "  Journal,"'' 
the  reason  recorded  for  many  adjournments  was  this,  that  the 
Lord  Bishops  "  were  busy  in  the  Convocation." 

It  was  while  these  discussions  were  proceeding,  or  rather 
about  their  commencement,  that  a  notable  scene  occurred,  in 
which  Alexander  Ales,  the  native  of  Edinburgh,  already  men- 
tioned, made  a  conspicuous  appearance.  One  day,  as  Lord 
Crumwell  was  proceeding  to  the  house,  he  met  Ales  "by 
chance  on  the  street,"  and,  as  if  determined  on  still  farther 
humiliation  of  the  Bench,  "  he  called  him,  and  took  him  with 
him  to  the  Parliament  house,  to  Westminster."  Upon 
entering,  all  the  Bishops  "  rose  and  did  obeisance  to  their 
Vicar-General,  and  after  he  had  saluted  them,  he  sat  him 
down  in  the  highest  place,"  "  Right  against  him  sat  Cranmer 
and  Lee  as  Archbishops ;  and  then  Stokesly  and  Longland, 
Shaxton  and  Clerk,  Goodrich  and  Fox,  Sampson  and  Rugge, 
Latimer  and  certain  others,"  adds  Ales,  "whose  names  I  have 
forgotten."  "  All  these  did  sit  at  a  table  covered  with  a 
carpet,  with  certain  Priests  standing  about  them." 


63 


The  "  Vicar-General  of  the  realm "  commenced — "  The  King's  Majesty 
giveth  you  high  thanks  that  ye  have  so  diligently,  without  any  excuse,  assemhled 
hither  according  to  his  commandment ;  and  ye  be  not  ignorant  that  ye  be  called 
hither  to  determine  certain  controversies,  which  at  this  time  be  moved,  con- 
cerning the  Christian  religion  and  faith,  not  only  in  this  realm,  but  also  in  all 
nations  throughout  the  world.  For  the  King  studieth  day  and  night  to  set  a 
quietness  in  the  Church  !  And  he  cannot  rest  until  all  such  controversies  be 
fully  debated  and  ended  through  the  determination  of  you,  and  his  whole 
Parliament  !  For  although  his  special  desire  is  to  set  a  stey  (fix  according  to 
rule)  for  the  unlearned  people,  whose  consciences  are  in  doubt  what  they  may 
believe,  and  he,  himself,  by  his  excellent  learning,  knoweth  these  controversies 
well  enough  ;   yet  he  will  suffer  no  common  alteration,  but  by  the  consent  of 


fl3  The  Convocation  here  seated  buforo  and  below  Crumwell,  as  far  as  here  named,  presents 
an  equal  division  of  opinion,  as  before  stated.  There  were  Cranmer,  Shaxton,  Goodrich,  Fox, 
and  Sampson,  on  one  side ;  Lee,  Stokesly,  Longland,  Clerk,  and  Rugge,  on  the  other.  The 
names  that  Ales  had  forgotten  were  six  in  number,  or,  in  all,  nine  on  one  side,  and  nine  on  the 
other,  including  the  two  votes  bv  proxy. 


153(j.]  CHANMER  SPEAKS  TO  ORDER.  490 

you  and  his  whole  Parliament.  And  he  desireth  now,  for  Christ's  sake,  that, 
all  manner  of  obstinacy  and  cai'nal  respect  set  apart,  ye  will,  friendly  and  lov- 
ingly, dispute  among  yourselves,  of  the  controversies  moved  in  the  Chui*ch,  and 
that  ye  will  conclude  all  things  by  the  Word  of  God  ;  without  all  brawling  or 
scolding.  Neither  will  his  Majesty  suffer  the  Scripture  to  be  wrested  or  defaced 
by  any  glosses,  or  by  any  authority  of  doctors  or  CouncUs ;  and  much  less  will 
he  admit  any  articles  or  doctrine  not  contained  in  the  Scripture  ;  but  approved 
only  by  continuance  of  time  and  old  custom,  and  by  tinwritten  verities,  as  ye 
were  wont  to  do.  Ye  know  well  enough,  that  ye  be  bound  to  show  this  service 
to  Clirist  and  to  his  Church  ;  and  yet,  notwithstanding,  his  Majesty  will  give 
you  high  thanks,  if  ye  will  set  and  conclude  a  godly  and  a  perfect  imity — 
wliereunto  this  is  the  only  way  and  mean,  if  ye  will  determine  all  things  by 
the  Scripture,  as  God  commandeth  you  in  Deuteronomy — which  thing  his 
Majesty  exhorteth  and  desireth  you." 

However  strange  the  former  part  of  this  address  must  ap- 
pear to  every  enlightened  Christian  now,  toward  the  close 
the  trumpet  gave  a  certain  sound ;  and,  so  far  as  words  could 
convey  meaning,  no  man  present  could  misunderstand  the 
message.  But  what  followed  ?  "  After  this,"  says  Ales, 
"  they  began  to  dispute  of  the  sacraments.''''  First  of  all,  the 
Bishop  of  London,  Stokesly,  (whom,  a  little  before,  Orum- 
well  had  rebuked  by  name,  for  defending  of  unwritten  veri- 
ties,) went  about  to  defend  that  there  were  seven  sacraments 
of  our  Christian  religion,  which  he  would  prove  by  certain 
glosses  and  w'riters ;  and  he  had  upon  his  side  the  Arch- 
bishop of  York,  the  Bishops  of  Lincoln,  Bath,  Chichester, 
and  Norwich.  The  Bishops  of  Salisbury,  Ely,  Hereford, 
and  Worcester,  and  certain  others,  with  the  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  were  against  him.  After  they  had  made  much 
strife  and  contention  about  the  sayings  of  the  doctors,  Cran- 
mer  rose  and  said — 

"It  beseemeth  not  men  of  learning  and  gravity  to  make  much  babbling  and 
brawling  about  bare  words,  so  that  we  agree  in  the  very  substance  and  effect 
of  the  matter.  For  to  brawl  about  words,  is  the  property  of  sophisters,  and 
such  as  mean  deceit  and  subtilty,  which  delight  in  the  debate  and  dissension  of 
the  world,  and  in  the  miserable  state  of  the  Church  ;  and  not  of  them  which 
should  seek  the  glory  of  Christ,  and  should  study  for  the  unity  and  quietness 
of  the  Church. 

"  There  be  weighty  controversies  now  moved  and  put  forth,  not  of  cere- 
monies and  light  things,  but  of  the  true  imderstanding,  and  of  the  right  diffe- 
rence of  the  Law  and  the  Gospel — of  the  manner  and  way  how  sins  be  for- 
given— of  comforting  doubtful  and  wavering  consciences,  by  what  means  they 
may  be  certified  that  they  please  God,  seeing  they  feel  the  strength  of  the  law- 
accusing  them  of  sin — of  the  true  use  of  the  sacraments,  whether  the  outward 
work  of  them  doth  justify  man,  or  whether  we  receive  our  justification 
through  faith. 


500  CRANMER  SPEAKS  TO  ORDER.  [BOOK  I. 

"  Item. — Which  be  the  good  works,  and  the  true  service  aud  honour  which 
pleaseth  God  ;  and  whether  the  choice  of  meats,  the  difference  of  garments,  the 
vows  of  monks  and  priests,  and  other  traditions,  which  have  no  Word  of  God 
to  confirm  them  ;  whether  tliese,  I  say,  be  riglit  good  works,  and  such  as  make 
a  perfect  Christian  man,  or  no. 

"  Item. — Whether  vain  science  and  false  honouring  of  God  and  man's  tra- 
ditions, do  bind  men's  consciences,  or  no.  Finally,  whether  the  ceremonies  of 
confirmation — of  orders — and  of  anointing,  and  such  other,  (which  cannot  be 
proved  to  be  instituted  of  Christ,  nor  have  any  worth  in  them  to  certify  us  of 
remission  of  sins,)  ought  to  be  called  Sacraments,  and  to  be  compared  with 
Baptism  and  the  Supper  of  the  Lord,  or  no. 

"  These  be  no  light  matters,  but  even  the  principal  points  of  our  Christian 
religion ;  wherefore  we  contend  not  about  words  and  trifles,  but  of  high  and  ear- 
nest matters.  Christ  saith — '  blessed  be  the  peace-makers,  for  they  shall  be 
called  the  sous  of  God.'  And  Paul  commandeth  Bishops  to  avoid  brawling  and 
contention  about  words,  which  be  profitable  to  nothing,  but  unto  the  subversion 
aud  destruction  of  the  hearers  :  and  he  admonisheth  especially  that  he  should 
resist  with  the  Scriptures  when  any  man  disputeth  with  him  of  the  faith,  and 
he  addeth  a  cause, — '  doing  this,  thou  shalt  preserve  both  thyself  aud  also  them 
which  hear  thee.'  Now,  if  ye  will  follow  these  counsellors,  Christ  and  Paul,  all 
contention  and  brawling  about  words  must  be  set  apart,  and  ye  must  stablish  a 
godly  and  a  perfect  unity  and  concord,  out  of  the  Scripture." 

This  assembly,  to  a  man,  had  already  acknowledged  Henry 
to  be  the  Supreme  Head  of  their  Church,  and  now  also  had 
made  obeisance  to  his  Vicegerent,  their  Vicar-General ;  but 
such  was  the  catalogue  of  affairs  brought  forward,  and  as  ex- 
plained by  Oranmer  himself.  He  did  not  stop  to  enquire 
whether  the  men  whom  he  urged  to  engage  in  discussion  were 
peace-makers,  were  the  sons  of  God,  icere  Bishops  indeed, — 
but,  waving  this,  here  was  a  field  for  strife  and  debate,  confess- 
edly wide  enough,  if  not  boundless,  and  as  now  spread  out, 
it  certainly  exhibited  a  strange  mixture  of  truth  and  error ; 
where  the  mere  acts  of  outward  conformity  were  mingled  with 
the  inward  feelings  of  mental  obedience ;  and  comparative 
trifles  were  enumerated  in  company  with  matter  of  divine 
authority.  But  still,  should  Oranmer  commence  With  faith  and 
not  with  obedience,  or  with  what  he  styled  "the  principal  points 
of  our  Christian  religion,"  or  "high  and  earnest  matters,"  and 
NOT  with  ceremonies,  an  eflectual  turn  may  yet  be  given  to  dis- 
cussion. Two  steps  were  before  him,  the  right  and  the  wrong; 
and  as  he  had  precedence,  and  was  about  to  state  the  order  of 
debate,  and  now  had  this  in  his  own  hands,  one  naturally 
waits  with  anxiety  to  hear  his  decision, — and  here  it  was. 

"Wherefore,  in  this  disputation  we  must  first  agree  uf  the  number  of  tlie 


1530.3  ALES  SPEAKS  BY   REQUEST.  501 

Sacraments,  and  vvliat  a  Sacrament  doth  signify  in  the  lioly  Scripture ;  and 
when  we  call  Baptism  and  the  Supper  of  the  Lord  sacraments  of  the  Gospel, 
what  we  mean  thereby  !" 

How  much  of  mental  misery,  nay  of  bloodshed,  has  some- 
times depended  upon  only  a  few  words,  uttered  by  one  man, 
when  in  possession  of  what  is  called  power — oiSicial  power  ! 
To  such  a  momentous  instant,  Cranmer  had  now  come.  By 
his  ingenuous  confession  afterwards,  he  came  to  the  knowledge 
of  divine  things  "  but  by  slow  degrees,  or  by  little  and  little;" 
but  had  he  only  known  how  much  of  his  own  future  misery,  as 
well  as  that  of  many  others,  now  hung  as  on  a  hair,  depending 
on  his  course  of  debate,  or  his  decision  as  to  the  order  to  be 
pursued,  he  must  have  paused,  if  not  shrunk  back.  That  the 
example  which  he  now  first  set  and  sanctioned,  both  as  to 
"  Articles"  and  the  order  of  discussion,  was  to  form  a  precedent 
down  to  the  Act  of  Uniformity,  and  farther  still,  was  far  beyond 
his  foresight :  though  had  he  taken  only  one  leaf  out  of  the 
masterly  writings  of  the  man,  so  denounced  both  by  his  royal 
Master  and  his  singular  Vicar-General,  he  had  never  so  decided. 
For  twelve  long  years  Tyndale  had  been  warring  with  the 
darkness  which  brooded  over  his  native  country ;  and  although 
perambulating  the  very  field  of  battle  on  the  Continent,  with  a 
judgment  and  prudence  peculiar  to  himself,  he  would  on  no  ac- 
count first  engage  in  the  Bellum  Sacramentarium  ;  but  Cranmer 
here  plunges  into  it  at  once,  and  that  too  in  discussion  with  men 
who  discerned  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God ;  but  who,  to 
this  hour,  had  been  the  notorious  persecutors  of  the  truth,  as 
well  as  of  every  man  who  had  imbibed  the  love  of  it.  Cran- 
mer, however,  was  emphatically  now,  a  man  under  authority. 
But  to  proceed, — Lord  Crumwell  observing,  by  his  counte- 
nance, that  Ales  was  pleased  with  Cranmer"'s  address,  thought 
it  the  proper  moment  to  call  upon  him ;  and  having  intro- 
duced him  to  all  present,  under  the  high  appellation  of  "  the 
King's  Scholar,"  he  desired  him  now  to  say,  what  he  thought 
of  this  disputation.''^  The  exiled  Scotsman  complied,  main- 
taining throughout,  and  for  the  first  time  upon  English  ground, 
for  many  centuries,  before  any  such  audience,  that  there  were 

64  Inadvertently,  Mr.  Todd,  in  his  life  of  Cranmer,  has  rejiresented  him  as  rising  aflcr  Ales, 
to  defend  the  tnith  which  he  had  spoken.  The  sentiments  of  Cranmer  respecting  the  Lord's  Sup- 
per have  divided  historians  from  his  own  time  to  the  present ;  but,  at  all  events,  they  were  not, 
at  this  moment,  equal  to  those  of  Ales.  Cranmer  was  by  no  means  prcjiared  for  his  decisive 
counsel,  as  the  event  will  show. 


502  MEMORABLE  ADDRESS  OF   FOX.  QuooK  l. 

only  two  Sacraments, — easy  to  be  kept,  and  very  excellent  in 
signification, — and  that  these  were  "  Baptism  and  the  Supper  of 
the  Lord."  Stokesly  sat  with  impatience,  and  at  last  fired, — 
saying  of  what  Ales  had  affirmed — "  It  is  all  false.''''  To  this 
he  answered,  "  I  will  prove  all  that  I  have  said  to  be  true,  not 
only  by  the  Scripture,  but  by  the  old  doctors,  and  by  the 
School  writers  also." 

Upon  this  Edward  Fox,  Bishop  of  Hereford,  interposed, 
and  in  a  noble  address,  Avell  worthy  of  being  recorded,  spoke 
as  follows  : — 

"  Brother  Alexander,  conteiul  not  much  with  liim,  about  the  minds  aud  say- 
ings of  the  doctors  and  school  writers  ;  for  ye  know  that  they,  in  many  places, 
do  differ  among  themselves,  and  that  they  are  contrary  to  themselves,  also,  al- 
most in  every  article.  And  there  is  no  hope  of  any  concord  to  be  made,  if  we 
must  lean  to  their  judgments,  in  these  matters  of  controversy.  And  we  be 
commanded  by  the  King's  Grace  to  dispute  by  the  Holy  tScripture.^^  Then 
turning  himself  to  the  Bishops,  he  thus  proceeded — 

"  Think  ye  not,  that  we  can,  by  any  sophistical  subtilties,  steal  out  of  the 
world  again,  the  light  which  every  man  doth  see.  Christ  hath  so  lightened  the 
world  at  this  time,  that  the  light  of  the  Gospel  hath  put  to  flight  all  misty 
darkness  ;  and  it  will,  shortly,  have  the  higher  hand  of  all  clouds,  though  we 
resist  in  vain  never  so  much.  The  lay  people  do  now  know  the  Holy  Scrip- 
ture, BETTER  THAN  MANY  OF  US.  And  the  Germans  have  made  the  text  of  the 
Bible  so  plain  and  easy,  by  the  Hebrew  and  the  Greek  tongue,  that  now  many 
things  may  be  better  understood,  iclthout  any  glosses  at  all,  than  by  all  the  com- 
mentaries of  the  doctors.  And,  moreovei",  they  have  so  opened  these  contro- 
versies by  their  wi-itings,  that  women  and  children  may  wonder  at  the  blind- 
ness and  falsehood  that  hath  been  hitherto.65  Wherefore,  ye  must  consider 
earnestly,  what  ye  will  determine  of  these  controversies,  that  ye  make  not  your- 
selves to  be  mocked,  and  laughed  to  scorn  of  all  the  world  ;  and  that  ye  bring 
them  not  to  have  this  opinion  of  you,  to  think  evermore  hereafter,  that  ye  hate 
not  one  spark  of  learning  nor  yet  of  godliness  in  you.  And  thus  shall  ye  lose  all 
your  estimation  and  authority  with  them  which  before  took  you  for  learned 
men,  and  profitable  members  unto  the  commonwealth  of  Christendom.  For 
that  which  you  do  hope  upon,  that  there  was  never  heresy  in  the  Church  so 
great,  but  that  process  of  time,  with  the  power  and  authority  of  the  Pope,  hath 
quenched  it — it  is  nothing  to  the  purpose.  But  ye  must  turn  (change)  your 
opinion,  and  think  this  surely,  that  there  is  nothing  so  feeble  and  weak,  so  that 
it  be  true,  but  it  shall  find  place,  and  be  able  to  stand  against  all  falsehood. 

"  Truth  is  the  daughter  of  time,  and  time  is  the  mother  of  truth.  And  what- 
soever is  besieged  of  truth,  cannot  long  continue  ;  and  upon  whose  side  truth 
doth  stand,  that  ought  not  to  be  thought  transitory,  or  that  it  will  ever  fall. 
All  things  consist  not  in  painted  eloquence,  and  strength,  or  authority.     For 


65  Of  course,  the  lap  people,  to  whom  Fox^>'*<  referred,  could  not  read  German,  and  but  very 
few  of  them  Hebrew  or  Greek  ;  but  he  must  touch  but  gently  on  the  English  Scriptures ;  and 
as  for  Tyndale's  name,  it  must  not  here  be  whispered.  It  would  have  broken  up  the  sitting ; 
though  we  shall  see,  presently,  that  his  translation,  and  in  a  variety  of  editions,  was  pouring 
into  the  country  at  this  very  moment. 


1536.]  ALES  AND   STUKESLY.  .OOo 

the  truth  is  of  so  great  power,  strengtli,  and  efficacity,  that  it  can  neitlior  be  de- 
fended with  words,  nor  be  overcome  with  any  strength  :  but  after  she  hatli  hid- 
den herself  long,  at  length  she  putteth  up  her  head,  and  appearetli." 

Encouraged  by  this  oration,  and  confining  himself  to  the 
Sacred  Volume,  Ales  proceeded  to  ply  the  Bishop  of  London 
with  this  argument — "  Sacraments  be  signs  or  ceremonies, 
which  make  us  certain  and  sure  of  the  will  of  God — but  no 
man's  heart  can  be  certain  and  sure  of  the  will  of  God,  with- 
out the  Word  of  God.  Wherefore,  it  followeth,  that  there  be 
no  sacraments  without  the  Word  of  God.  And  such  as  can- 
not be  proved  out  of  the  Holy  Scripture,  ought  not  to  he  called 
sacraments." 

"  And  so  after  this  manner  doth  Paul  speak  unto  the  Ephesians,  that  Christ 
doth  sanctify  his  Church,  through  the  bath  of  water  in  the  word  of  life.  And 
for  as  much  as  he  joineth  the  Word  unto  the  ceremony,  and  declareth  the 
virtue  and  power  of  the  Word  of  God,  that  it  bringeth  with  him  (it)  life  ;  he 
doth  manifestly  teach,  that  the  Word  of  God  is  the  principal  thing,  and  even, 
as  it  were,  the  very  substance  and  body  of  the  sacrament ;  and  the  outwai'd 
ceremony  nothing  else  than  a  token  of  that  lively  inflammation  which  we  re- 
ceive, through  faith  in  the  Word  and  promise. 

"  St.  Paul,  also,  in  ministering  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  doth 
manifestly  add  the  words  of  Christ.  '  He  took  bread,'  saith  he, '  aud  when  he 
had  given  thanks,  he  brake  it  and  said,  take  ye  this,  and  eat  }e  this,  for  it  is 
my  body.'     Item, '  do  ye  this  in  my  remembrance.' 

"  Beside  this,  he  teacheth  evidently,  that  only  Christ,  and  none  but  He,  had 
power  to  institute  a  sacrament :  and  that  neither  the  Apostles,  nor  the  Church, 
hath  any  authority,  to  alter,  or  to  add  anything  unto  his  ordinance.  Whereas 
he  saith — '  For  1  received  of  the  Lord,  that  which  I  delivered  unto  you,'  &c. — 
to  what  purpose  should  he  go  about  to  move  the  people  to  believe  him,  and  to 
win  their  hearts  with  his  protestation,  if  it  had  been  lawful  for  him  to  have 
made  any  sacraments,  or  to  have  altered  the  form  and  manner  of  ministering 
this  sacrament  ?  As  some  men,  both  wickedly  and  shamelessly  do  affirm,  that 
the  Apostles  did  alter  the  form  of  baptism." 

Stokesly,  however,  here  again  interrupted  him  and  said — 
"  Let  us  grant  that  the  sacraments  may  be  gathered  out  of  the 
Word  of  God,  yet  are  ye  far  deceived,  if  ye  think  that  there 
is  none  other  Word  of  God,  but  that  ichich  every  souter  and 
cobbler  doth  read  in  this  mother  tongueT^  The  Vicar-General 
and  others  smiled  when  he  had  done ;  but  it  was  now  twelve 
o'clock,  and  time  to  disperse.  Crumwell,  therefore,  desired 
Ales  to  be  "  content  for  the  time,"  on  which  he  closed,  by 
saying  to  Stokesly, — 

(■6  Another  significant  testimony,  tlioughin  wiatli,  aud  from  the  lips  of  this  Bishop  of  London, 
to  the  wide  extension  of  Tvndale's  translation. 


.504  THE   DAY   FOLLOWING.  [liOOK  I. 

"  Right  Reverend  Master  Bishop — ye  deny  that  our  Christian  faith  and  re- 
ligion doth  lean  only  upon  the  Word  of  God  which  is  written  in  the  Bible : 
which  thing  if  I  can  prove  and  declare,  then  ye  will  grant  me,  that  there  be  no 
sacraments  but  those  that  have  the  manifest  Word  of  God  to  confirm  them." 
To  this  he  consented,  and  the  assembly  for  that  day  was  dissolved. 

The  next  day,  however,  when  the  Bishops  were  again  met, 
this  dangerous  man  of  Edinburgh  must  not  be  admitted.  He 
was  punctually  present  with  Lord  Crumwell,  and  ready  to 
accompany  him  ;  but  poor  Cranmer,  ever  in  character,  timid 
and  time-serving,  became  alarmed  as  to  consequences,  and 
must  try  and  prevent  the  appearance  of  Ales. 

«  The  next  day,"  says  he,  "  when  the  Bishops  were  assembled  again,  and  I 
was  present  with  the  Lord  Crumwell,  there  came  unto  me  a  certain  Arch- 
deacon, in  the  name  of  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  which  told  me  that  the 
other  Bishops  were  grievously  offended  with  me — that  I,  being  a  sti-anger, 
should  be  admitted  imto  their  disputation .67  Which  thing,  when  I  had  shewed 
it  to  the  Lord  Crumwell,  he  thought  it  best  to  give  place  unto  the  Bishops, 
specially  because  he  would  not  procure  me  their  hatred  ;  for  he  knew  well, 
that  if  they  had  once  conceived  in  their  hearts  any  malice  against  any  man, 
they  would  never  cease  till  they  had  gotten  him  out  of  the  way.  They  had 
before  brought  to  death  diverse  whom  the  King  did  highly  favour,  before  the 
King  himself  could  perceive  and  spy  out  their  craft  and  subtilty.  But  he  bade 
me  give  him  the  paper  wherein  I  had  written  my  disputation,  that  he  might 
shew  it  to  the  Bishop  of  Loudon,  and  to  the  other  Bishops  in  the  Couucil." 

The  obvious  purport  of  this  dispute  respecting  the  ordinances 
of  Christ,  here  styled  sacraments,  was,  whether  there  were 
seven,  or  only  two;  and  Ales  firmly  maintained  his  ground, 
but  his  arouments  had  no  efiect  whatever  in  swaying  such  men. 

In  these  circumstances,  what  was  to  be  done  ?  To  one  of 
the  parties  it  seemed  at  last,  that  some  expedient  must  be 
devised,  to  enforce  obedience  or  conformity,  silent  or  quiet 
submission.  But  where  did  the  power  reside  ?  Only  in  the 
breast  of  a  man,  who  had  been  washing  his  hands  in  blood, 
and  "  following  the  sport"  on  the  day  of  his  Queen's  execu- 
tion !  In  the  language  of  sacred  writ,  that  he  was  also 
"  proud,  knowing  nothing,  but  doting  about  questions  and 
strifes  of  words," — "  vainly  puffed  up  by  his  fleshly  mind," 
we  have  already  had  but  too  much  evidence  ;  only  he  was  now 
about  to  proceed  one  step  farther,  and  should  ke  only  fix 
on  more  sacraments  than  two,  all  must  yield,  and  at  least 
bow  assent. 

•i?  This  must  have  been  Cranmer's  own  brother,  Edmund,  who  was  present  at  this  Convoca- 
tion. He  had  become  Archdeacon  of  Canterbury  in  1.534,  in  place  of  Wm.  Warham,  a  nephew 
nf  Cranmer's  predecessor,  who,  having  retired  on  a  pension,  was  now  on  the  Continent. 


1536.3  THE  ROYAL  COMMANDS.  505 

Of  course,  neither  Henry,  nor  any  of  his  advisers,  under- 
stood that  Christianity,  as  revealed  in  the  New  Testament, 
repudiated  all  constraint  of  receiving  and  holding  opinions  by 
human  authority ;  or,  to  use  a  word  often  employed  since, 
all  "  imposition ;"  that  the  nature  of  faith  did  not  admit  of 
this — that  God  himself  had  appointed  no  such  means  to  en- 
force belief,  nor  nominated  any  Vicegerent  to  attempt  this — 
that  dominion  over  conscience  is  God's  exclusive  province, 
within  which,  especially,  his  name  is  "  Jealous" — that  any 
man,  therefore,  presuming  to  enter  here,  must  needs  be  an 
usurper,  demanding  blind  submission, — so  that  whatever 
means  be  adopted,  they  must  be  nefarious.  But,  apart  from 
all  these  vital  considerations,  so  far  as  the  present  uproar  was 
concerned,  both  Crumwell  and  Cranmer  well  knew,  that  they 
had  only  to  repair  to  the  royal  presence,  and  describe  this 
scene  of  strife, — "  the  perverse  disputings  of  men  of  corrupt 
minds,  and  destitute  of  the  truth,  who  supposed  that  gain 
was  godliness."  They  did  so  at  last,  when  a  message  arrived 
from  Henry.  He  soon  stilled  the  tumult,  very  much  in  the 
manner  of  Sardanapalus  of  old — "  Sicvolo,  sicjubeo,  and  let  m^ 
will  for  reason  stand.''''  These  men  had  been  convoked,  in  fact, 
not  to  discuss,  but  to  "  do  the  King's  business." 

The  form  in  which  this  settler  came,  was  in  that  of  certain 
"  Articles,"  which  all  must  subscribe.  They  were  strangely 
enough  entitled — "  Articles  devised  by  the  King's  Highness' 
Majesty,  to  stablish  Christian  quietness  and  unity  among  us, 
and  to  avoid  contentious  opinions  !" 

These,  the  first  articles  propounded  in  England,  though 
not  originally  composed  by  Henry,  were  carefully  revised  by 
him  ;  at  least,  in  the  preface,  he  speaks  of  having,  in  his  own 
person,  many  times,  bestowed  on  them  "  great  pain,  study, 
labour  and  travail !"  No  doubt,  Cranmer  and  his  coadjutors 
had  done  their  best  before  then ;  and  if,  after  passing  through 
such  an  ordeal,  these  articles  are  to  be  regarded  as  the  amount 
of  their  united  wisdom,  they  only  discover  what  darkness  and 
confusion  still  reigned  in  the  minds  of  all  men  in  power.  It 
is  not  only  the  substance,  but  the  order  in  which  they  are 
stated,  which,  at  once,  betrays  this  confusion.  At  the  same 
time,  we  now  discover  that  Cranmer  must  have  had  his  secret 
reason  for  passing  over  every  Christian  doctrine,  or  mat- 
ter of  belief,  and  giving  it  out  as  imperative,  that  they  must 


500  THE   MUST  ARTICLES.  [^BOOK  I. 

heqin  with  the  sacraments  !  So  it  was  with  the  Articles  : 
for  after  simply  allowing  the  particulars  of  the  Christian  faith 
to  be  contained  in  the  Scriptures,  but  joining  with  them  the 
Nicene  and  Athanasian  creeds  ;  we  have  1.  Baptism.  2.  Pen- 
ance. 3.  Tlie  Sacrament  of  the  Altar,  or  the  Mass.  4.  Jus- 
tijication.  5.  Images.  6.  Honouring  of  Saints.  7.  Praying  to 
Saints.  8.  Rites  and  Ceremonies.  9.  Purgatory.  They,  in 
fact,  allowed  the  use  of  images,  sanctioned  prayers  to  the 
Saints,  defended  purgatory,  and  recommended  prayers  for  the 
dead.  Far  from  following  the  sentiments  of  Ales,  not  only 
spoken,  but  more  fully  delivered  in  writing  to  Crumwell,  and 
meant  to  have  been  read  before  them —  they  assert  three 
sacraments;  1.  Penance,  2.  Baptism,  3.  the  Lord's  Supper — 
maintaining  that  infants,  dying  before  the  second,  perish  ever- 
lastingly !  and  that  the  real  body  and  blood  of  Christ  are 
present  in  the  third  !  No  wonder  than  Cranmer  trembled  for 
his  Articles,  or  was  afraid  of  the  set  speech  of  Ales,  next  day  ; 
for  if  it  had  been  listened  to  by  any,  not  to  say  all,  it  might 
have  at  least  retarded  the  attempt  to  "  stablish  Christian 
quietness,"  after  this  fashion. 

Nor  had  these  miserable  articles  any  such  effect.  On  the 
contrary,  when  once  published,  they  occasioned,  says  Burnet, 
"  great  variety  of  censures."  Beyond  the  walls  of  their  as- 
sembly, "  quietness,"  of  any  kind,  was  not  to  be  the  order  of 
the  day ;  although,  at  this  moment,  all  the  men  within  must 
acquiesce  in  the  unbending  will  of  their  acknowledged  Head. 
At  least  one  hundred  and  nine  individuals  subscribed  ;  in- 
cluding Crumwell  and  the  two  Archbishops,  sixteen  Bishops, 
forty  Abbots  and  Priors,  and  fifty  Archdeacons  and  Proctors.*^^ 

Nothing  can  more  forcibly  illustrate  the  absurdity  of  this 
blind  consent  to  certain  propositions,  professedly  religious, 
than  that  this  assembly  had  never  yet  been  able  to  agree 
upon  any  translation  of  the  Sacred  Volume  itself ;  nor,  upon 
this  subject,  according  to  Cranmer's  strongly  expressed  opinion 
next  year,  if  left  to  themselves,  would  they  ever  have  agreed, 
to  the  end  of  their  days.  But  after  thus  subscribing,  it  would 
have  been  more  inconsistent  still,   had  they  now  departed, 


68  Among  these  signatures,  those  of  fFiiichester,  Carlisle  and  Llandatt',  of  course,  do  not  appear, 
for  the  reasons  already  specified.  The  vantage  ground,  however,  thus  given  to  Gardinbr,  by 
meddling  with  articles,  was  immense,  and  this  will  appear  in  due  season.  Neither  C'rannicr  nor 
Crumwell  foresaw  this ;  but  wc  have  only  to  wait  for  Gardiner's  return. 


l.ioG.]  THE  FliUlTLESS  PETITION.  507 

without  any  reference  to  the  subject.  They  had,  to  a  man, 
professedly  recognised  the  Scriptures  as  containing  the  essen- 
tials of  the  Christian  faith,  but  could  not  agree  on  a  transla- 
tion into  their  own  language  ;  neither  could  they,  as  a  body, 
approve  of  that  translation,  through  which  many  of  the  people 
were  already  so  far  before  them  in  acquaintance  with  Divine 
Truth.  They  agreed,  however,  upon  the  form  of  a  petition, 
to  be  presented  to  the  King,  that  he  would  graciously  indulge 
unto  his  subjects  of  the  laity,  the  reading  of  the  Bible  in  the 
English  tongue,  (which  so  many  had  already  read  without 
his  indulgence,)  and  that  a  neic  translation  of  it  might  be 
forthicith  made  for  that  end  and  purpose.*^  This  was  a  con- 
venient method  for  postponing  the  subject;  but,  providentially, 
their  dissension  or  agreement  was  of  no  earthly  moment,  since 
neither  the  petitioners,  nor  the  King  they  addressed,  were  to 
be  allowed  to  furnish  that  translation  of  the  Bible  for  England, 
which  was,  ultimately,  to  become  her  own. 

With  regard  to  the  other  doings  of  this  Convocation,  his 
Majesty  had  determined  to  reduce  the  prodigious  number  of 
holidays.  All  feasts  or  holidays  during  harvest  time,  or  from 
the  1st  of  July  to  the  29th  of  September,  were  therefore  at 
once  abolished,  as  well  as  those  which  fell  during  term  time  at 
Westminster ;  the  number  throughout  the  year  being  greatly 
curtailed.  And  as  a  General  Council  had  been  summoned  by 
the  Pontiff,  to  assemble  at  Mantua,  Fox  of  Hereford  submit- 
ted to  both  houses  the  King's  reasons  for  declining  to  take 
any  part  in  its  proceedings,  he  being  resolved  to  hold  no  in- 
tercourse with  that  man  ;  for  such  was  the  phrase.  To  this 
document  all  present  subscribed.  This  was  on  the  20th  of 
July,  or  the  last  day  of  that  Convocation,  to  which  Latimer, 
at  the  beginning,  had  preached  in  vain.^° 

Thus,  Parliament  having  risen,  and  the  Convocation  being- 
dissolved,  after  having  shewn  nothing  save  profound  subser- 
viency to  the  wishes  and  the  vices  of  the  Sovereign,  both 

69  Heylin.  Lewis.  Whether  copies  of  Coverdalu's  Bible  had  come  to  England  by  this  time 
or  not,  signified  nothing  to  them  ;  but  the  bearing  of  this  petition  on  thai  version  will  come  be- 
fore us  next  year. 

70  Had  Gardiner  been  at  home,  and  Tunstal  not  been  furnished  with  other  business  by  the 
King,  this  Convocation,  even  such  as  it  was,  had  been  still  more  disturbed,  and  certainly  less 
compliant.  But  while  the  former  remained  in  France,  the  latter  had,  by  his  Majesty's  com- 
mand, been  reading  the  vexatious  book  of  Cardinal  Pole,  and  framing  an  answer.  Tunstal,  who 
professedly  had  renounced  the  PontiflF,  but  ever  hugged  the  popedom,  read  the  wliole  with 
amazement,  and  his  full  reply  was  written  while  this  Convocation  was  sitting.  It  is  dated  on 
the  13th  of  July.— See  Cotton  MS.  CIcoii.,  E.  vi.,  fol.  37u. 


508  CRUMWELL'S  FIRST   INJUNCTIONS.  [UOOK  I. 

Crumwell  and  Cranmer  will  contrive  to  save  themselves  the 
trouble  of  consulting  either  of  these  bodies,  for  some  time  to 
come ;  for  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  there  was  neither 
Parliament  nor  Convocation  held  till  the  year  1539. 

Immediatel}'  after  this,  the  first  act  of  Crumwell,  as  Viceger- 
ent, was  to  issue  certain  injunctions,  and,  upon  one  account  at 
least,  they  demand  notice.  Since  the  days  of  John  Foxe  to 
the  present,  they  have  been  generally  misunderstood,  and  with 
respect  to  the  Scriptures  especially,  have  led  all  subsequent 
historians  wrong.  These  injunctions  of  1536,  diflFer  materially 
from  those  to  be  issued  in  1538.  The  latter,  in  1538,  were 
addressed  to  the  Bishops,  but  not  the  former ;  the  latter  em- 
braced the  Scriptures,  which  these  now  issued,  did  not,  and 
could  not. 

With  regard  to  these  now  put  forth,  they  were  merely  fol- 
lowing up  the  doings  of  the  Convocation  just  dissolved.  The 
act,  abolishing  the  holidays  in  harvest,  though  intended  to  help 
it  forward,  rather  inflamed  than  satisfied  many ;  and  Crum- 
welVs  present  injunctions,  therefore,  embraced  the  holidays, 
and  the  articles  recently  subscribed,  but  nothing  more.  The 
remarks  of  Burnet  and  Collier  are,  on  this  account,  equally 
inapplicable.  The  former  describes  these  injunctions  as 
"  the  first  act  of  pure  supremacy  done  by  the  King ;  for  in 
all  that  went  before,  he  had  the  concurrence  of  the  two  Con- 
vocations." But  in  these,  the  King  and  Vicegerent  had  such 
concurrence.  The  holidays,  it  is  expressly  stated,  were  abo- 
lished "  with  the  common  assent  and  consent  of  the  prelates 
and  clergy,  in  Convocation  lawfully  assembled  :"  and  as  for 
the  articles,  all  present  had  subscribed  them,  in  conjunction 
with  Crumwell  himself.  "  These  injunctions,"'*'  says  Collier, 
"  we  may  observe,  were  only  directed  to  the  Deans  and  down- 
wards. Thus  the  Lord  Crumwell  had  something  of  modesty 
in  his  wonderful  office,  and  forbore  the  brandishing  his  vice- 
gerency  over  the  Bishops."  But  the  fact  was,  that  the 
"  brandishing,"  as  we  have  seen  already,  had  taken  place  be- 
fore many  witnesses,  anterior  to  this,  in  the  Convocation  ; 
when  the  King,  through  Crumwell,  had  awed  them  into  silence 
and  unanimous  acquiescence.  Hence  his  injunctions  were  ad- 
dressed only  to  the  Deans,  and  all  below  them. 

Among  these  injunctions,  however,  by  whatever  means,  there 
has  crept  into  the  pages  of  several  historians,  the  following : 


1536.]  NO   BIBLE  MENTIONED.  50U 

"  Item. — That  erery  parson  or  proprietary  of  any  Cliurch  within  this  reahii, 
shall,  on  this  side  of  the  feast  of  St.  Peter  ad  rincula,  next  coming,  provide  a 
book  of  the  n-hole  Bible,  both  in  Latin,  and  aho  in  English,  and  lay  the  same 
in  the  choir,  for  every  man  that  will,  to  look  and  read  thereon,  and  shall  dis- 
courage no  man  fi-om  the  reading  of  any  part  of  the  Bible,  either  in  Latin 
or  English."!^ 

There  is  no  necessity  for  estimating  whether  there  were  in  existence, 
any  where  in  England,  as  many  Bibles  in  Latin,  much  less  in  English,  as 
is  here  supposed  ;  nor  for  reminding  the  reader  that  the  Convocation  had 
advanced  only  so  far  as  to  2)etltion  for  a  translation  to  be  forthwith  made  ; 
as  a  little  reflection  might  long  ago  have  led  to  the  suspicion,  that  there 
must  be  some  palpable  interpolation,  or  blunder  here. 

In  these  injunctions,  let  it  be  observed  that  the  harvest  holidays  were 
pointedly  embraced,  as  having  already,  during  the  Convocation,  been 
abrogated  by  the  King.  In  his  injunctions  he  had  branded  them  as 
"  prejudicial  to  the  common  weal,"  as  "  the  very  nui'se  of  thieves  and 
vagabonds,  and  pernicious  to  the  souls  of  men  as  leading  to  excess  and 
riot."  These,  as  well  as  the  additional  injunctions,  Crumwell  now 
ordered  to  be  universally  observed.  They  were  to  be  read  by  all  parsons 
and  curates  to  the  people,  under  the  penalties  of  suspension  and  seques- 
tration. Now,  was  it  at  all  likely  that  the  Vicegerent,  in  the  very  same 
document,  should  fix  on  one  of  these  denounced  holidays,  by  name,  and  in 
the  middle  of  harvest,  for  enforcing  obedience  to  any  of  these  items  1 
But,  moreover,  the  thing  enjoined  was  impossible,  as  the  feast  referred 
to,  "  St.  Peter  ad  vincula,"  was  just  at  hand.  The  Convocation  rose  on 
the  20th  of  July,  the  day  referred  to  was  the  first  of  August !  7^ 

These  considerations  might  suffice  for  rejecting  the  clause  now  quoted ; 
but  the  fact  is,  that,  though  so  often  taken  for  correct,  by  former  writers, 
and  moralised  over  by  Lewis,  who  has  led  others  astray  ;  the  paragraph 
is  not  to  be  found  in  the  official  copy  in  Cranmer's  Register,  7iot  in  Wil- 
kins'  Concilia,  not  in  the  folio  editions  of  Burnet,  nor,  it  might  be  added, 
in  the  text  of  any  subsequent  edition.  It  is  only  in  the  appendix  of 
later  editions,  that  the  erroneous  statement  of  Foxe  has  been  substituted 
for  what  was  before  the  correct  one,  though  transcribed  by  Biirnet  himself 
from  the  Register.  It  is  curious  enough  that  such  a  mistake  shoiild 
never  have  been  distinctly  pointed  out  till  the  year  1835,  by  Mr.  Jenkyns 


71  This,  by  the  way,  had  the  thing  been  practicable,  would  have  conveyed  a  very  high  eulo- 
gium  indeed,  on  the  people  of  England,  at  this  early  period  ;  as  it  took  for  granted,  that  if  the 
book  were  only  open  to  inspection,  whether  in  English  or  even  Latin,  there  would  be  no  lack 
of  people  able  to  read  either,  and  thus  compare  them,  if  so  disposed.  Two  years  hence  we  shall 
find  such  a  privilege  actually  proposed,  (a  mere  proposal)  within  the  diocese  of  Hereford,  though 
not  by  Crumwell  as  to  the  kingdom  at  large.     He  then  alludes  only  to  the  English  Bible. 

72  These  absurd  feast-days  were  absolutely  appointed  with  the  view  of  superseding  the  Papan 
revelries.  Thus,  tlic  feast  of  St.  Peter  ad  vincula  was  instituted,  to  supersede  a  splendid  pagan 
festival,  celebrated  annually  on  the  1st  of  August,  to  commemorate  the  victory  of  Augustus 
over  Antony  at  Actium  I 


.510  BETRAYERS   OF   TYNDALE.  [bOOK  I. 

in  his  Remains  of  Cranmer.  "  It  would  appear  then,"  says  he,  "that  no 
order  was  issued  for  placing  the  English  Bible  in  Churches  before  Crum- 
well's  second  set  of  injunctions,  which  were  issued  in  September  1538."  73 
Not  one,  certainly,  in  reference  to  the  kingdom  at  large  ;  though  Cran- 
mer, indirectly  through  the  Chancellor  in  the  summer  of  that  year,  issued 
such  injunctions  within  the  diocese  of  Hereford.  That  there  were  no 
other  svich,  till  then,  will  become  increasingly  evident,  as  we  proceed. 
Meanwhile,  neitlter  the  King,  Crunmoell,  nor  Cranmer  had  yet  spoken  oiu 
word  o'fficially  respecting  any  Bible,  or  Nev)  Testament  separately. 

Turning  away,  therefore,  from  the  Convocation  of  1536, 
which,  with  reference  to  the  Sacred  Volume,  was  equally 
fruitless  of  any  benefit  to  the  kingdom  with  that  of  1534, 
no  sooner  do  we  come  to  the  actual  history  of  the  English 
Bible,  than  it  turns  out  to  have  been  by  far  the  most  remark- 
able year  of  all  that  had  preceded  it !  Nay,  to  those  who 
have  never  looked  narrowly  into  the  subject,  it  may  seem 
next  to  incredible,  that  there  should  have  been  of  Tyndale''s 
New  Testament,  as  many  editions  as  in  most  of  the  preceding- 
years  when  put  together  !  Such,  however,  will  turn  out  to 
have  been  the  fact,  and  of  this  state  of  things  let  us  hope  that 
our  Translator  could  not  have  been  kept  altogether  in  igno- 
rance, more  especially  as  the  jailor  and  his  family  will  appear 
to  have  been  Avon  to  his  principles.  So  far  as  he  did  know, 
after  such  a  passage  through  life,  this  must  have  cheered  him 
in  his  entrance  to  the  haven  of  eternal  rest,  as  a  finer  sun, 
which  was  to  shine  for  ages  upon  his  native  land.  He  had 
corrected  his  New  Testament  in  1534,  and  these  were  re- 
prints of  that  edition  ;  but  we  must  refrain  from  any  farther 
account  at  this  moment,  reserving  this  for  the  close,  as  the 
appropriate  and  the  only  refreshing  intelligence  throughout 
the  whole  year.  Besides,  the  absorbing  question,  at  present, 
must  be — "  What  has  become  of  those  guilty  men  who  had 
ensnared  our  Translator?  and,  above  all,  of  Tyndale  himself?" 

Upon  once  more  looking  abroad,  and  before  we  approach 
the  castle  of  Vilvorde,  or  the  martyr's  stake,  it  is  of  im- 
portance to  record  whatever  can  be  certainly  ascertained, 
not  onl}^  respecting  the  betrayers  of  Tyndale,  after  that  Mr. 
Poyntz  had  so  providentially  escaped ;  but  the  agitation  of 


73  See  vol.  i.,  p.  2fl0,  note.   "  Wilkins,  it  may  be  observed,  has  placed  Cnimwell's  second  sot  of 
injunctions  in  l.'i.TS,  tinder  tbe  same  ye.ir  as  the  first,  namely  'irt:V}."—Coiieil.  iii.,  p.  Hl5. 


^r>8G.2  cold  indifference.  511 

Henry  VIII.  himself  in  connexion  with  one  of  them,  in  his 
assumed  character  of  t/ie  gentleman.  Since  not  only  Halle 
and  Foxe,  but  all  other  historians  fail  us  here,  these  particulars, 
now  read  for  the  first  time,  will,  it  is  presumed,  prove  the 
more  interesting. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  Theobald,  the  man  whom  Crum- 
well  and  Cranmcr  had  sent  to  the  Continent  last  year,  felt  no 
scruple  whatever  in  imposing  upon  Phillips,  in  order  to 
extract  from  him  the  precise  circumstances  respecting  Tyn- 
dale''s  apprehension ;  and  these  he  had  duly  communicated 
both  to  the  Primate,  and  the  Vicegerent.  He  told  Phillips 
that  he  had  come  to  remain,  and  had  seemed  to  comply  with  the 
entreaty,  that  he  would  abide  in  the  same  house.  The 
natural  consequence  of  this  dissimulation  soon  followed. 
Theobald  departed,  and  Phillips  then  saw  that  he  had  been 
deceived.  He  soon  learnt  that  he  belonged  to  the  Archbishop 
of  Cantei'bury,  and  immediately  reported  him  to  be,  what  he 
really  was,  a  spy ;  though  evidently  not  commissioned  by 
either  of  his  employers  to  resort  to  Louvain,  or  there  interest 
himself  on  behalf  of  the  illustrious  exile  and  prisoner  at  Vil- 
vorde.  Theobald  himself  repeats  all  this,  and  more,  two  years 
later,  in  1538. 

"  After,"  says  he,  "  when  I  was  gone  into  High  Almaine,  and  Phillips  learn- 
ing that  I  was  belonging  unto  my  Lord  of  Canterbury,  he  accused  me  to  be 
a  spy,  and  a  messenger  sent  into  Germany  about  some  practices  ;  causing 
watch  to  be  laid  for  me,  betwixt  Antwerp  and  Cologne,  by  the  space  of  three 
or  four  months,  thinking  that  I  would  have  returned  upon  some  message." 74 

Phillips  himself,  however,  as  we  have  seen,  remained  about 
Brussels  and  Louvain,  all  the  time  that  Mr.  Poyntz  was  held 
in  prison;  but  after  his  escape  into  England,  the  abandoned 
youth  fled,  leaving  Tyndale  to  the  tender  mercies  of  the 
wicked.  The  probability  is,  that  Mr.  Poyntz,  immediately 
after  his  arrival  in  London,  had  succeeded  so  far  as  to  excite 
alarm  respecting  this  man  ;  and  this  he  could  easily  do,  by 
communicating,  through  his  brother,  with  the  King  direct. 
But  probability  approaches  to  certainty,  when  it  is  observed, 
that  by  the  month  of  March,  soon  after  Mr.  Poyntz  had  got 
to  England,  the  conduct  of  Phillips  had  eftectually  roused  the 
indignation  of  the  English  Monarch.     This  young  man  had 


74  Cotton  MS.,  Nero,  B.  vi.,  fol.  132,  dated  Padua,  1st  October  [KWfi.]    This  letter  will  pre- 
sent itself  to  our  notice  once  more. 


512  TYNDALE'S   LATTER  DAYS.  [boOK  I. 

not  only  been  pursuing  Mr.  Poyntz  and  Tyndale  himself,  unto 
death,  but  "  raging  against  Henry,"  as  Theobald  had  stated 
long  ago  ;  though  no  notice  had  been  taken  of  the  warning. 
For  eight  months,  from  July  last  year,  to  March  in  this, 
there  is  no  evidence  to  be  found  that  either  Orumwell  or 
Cranmer  had  moved  one  step,  and  even  now  the  apparent 
apathy  of  both  seems  to  force  itself  on  our  notice.  The 
Vicar-General  was  busy  in  chiming  in  with  the  King"'s  odious 
purposes  and  plan  against  his  Queen  :  the  Primate  was  look- 
ing after  the  worldly  interests  of  a  brother-in-law.^^  But  it 
will  be  abundantly  more  awkward,  or  rather  humiliating,  for 
both,  if,  after  the  letters  from  Theobald,  one  of  the  betrayers 
of  Tyndale  had  actually  been  permitted  to  sit  down  in  the 
Convocation  in  June,  and  there  listen  to  Latimer,  when  he 
lectured  so  roundly  the  whole  fraternity  !      We  shall  see. 

Already  we  have  had  sufficient  evidence  that  the  mind 
of  Henry,  at  this  juncture,  was  like  "  the  troubled  sea,"  as 
it  continued  to  be,  throughout  the  whole  of  this  year.  His 
"  secret  commission"  upon  Anne  Boleyn  was  already  at  work, 
and  it  was  while  they  were  so  engaged,  that  we  find  two 
letters  of  the  incensed  monarch,  dated  from  his  palace  near 
London.  Both  manuscripts  (in  Latin,  and  bearing  the  same 
date)  are  very  imperfect ;  but  there  is  enough  remaining  to 
answer  our  enquiry.  The  King,  it  will  be  evident,  was  en- 
raged at  least,  if  not  alarmed;  but  it  was  only  because  of  the 
language  and  conduct  of  Phillips,  with  reference  to  his  own 
beloved  self.  For  Tyndale,  or  in  regard  to  his  seizure  and 
imprisonment,  we  look  in  vain  for  one  word  of  sympathy ; 
though  his  condition  by  this  time,  could  not  fail  to  have  been 
fully  known  to  his  Majesty.''^ 

75  He  is  writing  to  Crumwell — "  And  as  one  that  is  bold  many  times  to  trouble  you  with 
suits,  both  for  myself  and  my  friends,  which  naturally,  yea,  and  by  the  law  of  God,  I  am  bound  to 
do— in  my  right  heartiest  wise,  desire  you  to  be  good  master  unto  this  bearer,  my  brother-in-law; 
(who  is  clerk  of  my  kitchen,  and  for  whom  I  spoke  to  you  yesterday  at  the  Court ;)  as  to  get  him 
the  farm  or  lease  of  the  Priory  of  Shelforde,  or  of  '  some  other  house  of  religion'  in  Nottingham- 
shire, where  his  native  country  is  ;  which  now  are,  by  the  Act  of  Parliament,  suppressed.  At 
Lambeth,  the  25th  day  of  March  I53f>."—3IS.  ChapUr-Uouse,  fVestminster,  or  Cranmer's  Rem. 
by  Jenkyns,  i.,  p.  ICl.  The  bearer  may  have  been  Harold  Boselle  of  Radcliife,  married  to 
Cranmer's  sister. 

'fi  This  becomes  much  more  observable,  from  there  being  close  by,  in  the  same  vol.  of 
manuscript,  a  letter  written  only/o»)'  days  before  those  about  to  be  quoted,  and  from  Jlcnry  to 
the  Archbishop  and  Lords  of  Bremen,  on  behalf  of  "  our  servant  George  Wollwever  ;" — "  inter- 
cepted by  guileful  arts,  and  most  unjustly  detained  a  prisoner,  and  every  day  more  harshly  and 
cruelly  treated."  This  letter  is  at  once  peremptory  and  indignant,  though  it  related  merely  to 
commerce.  It  is  dated  from  our  palace  near  London,  17th  March  1535,  ?.  e.  1536. — Vitellius,  B.  xxi., 
fol.  1(12.  Now,  tlie  situation  of  Tyndale  was  precisely  similar,  or  rather  far  worse,  but  no  such 
remonstrance  followed,  as  to  the  translator  of  the  Sacred  Volume! 


1536.]  PHILLIPS   ONCE   MORE.  513 

Tlie  first  letter  is  addressed  by  the  King,  as  "  Defender  of 
the  Faith,  Lord  of  Ireland,  and  Supreme  Head,  immediately 
under  Christ  !  in  the  territories  of  the  Church  of  England, 
to  the  Consuls  and  Senators  of  the  city  of  Nuremberg." 

"  Out  of  this  our  kingdom  there  have  escaped  two  of  our  subjects ;  of  whom 
the  one  is  James  Grjffeth  Apwell,  (ap-Howell,)  but  the  otlier  is  Henry  Phillips 

most  perfidious  men,  and  some  time  since  guilty  of  the  most  heinous 

crime  of  [hvsoi  Ma/jestatis)  treason — polluted  also  with  detestable  sacrilege,  and 
every  kind  of  base  action,  by  guile  and  evil-speaking  covei'ing  such  impious 
crimes.  Seeking  a  place  in  your  territory,  we  have  heard  that  they  will  take 
their  journey So,  for  our  authority  over  them,  we  pursue  them,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  exacting  the  punishment  long  ago  due  to  their  wickedness ;  and  we  shall 
not  be  at  rest  in  our  zeal,  except  they  are  brought  again  into  our  power.  There- 
fore, you,  whom  we  know  to  be  upright  and  just,  we  earnestly  entreat,  that 
upon  our  high  favour,  if  at  any  time,  with  your  knowledge,  they  take  their 
jom'ney  through  your  territory,  or  that  of  your  allies,  ye  will  by  all  means  take 
care  that  they  be  apprehended  and  safely  sent  over  to  us,  who  shall  most  liber- 
ally repay  the  expenses  and  trouble  for  this  business.  And  in  a  like  matter, 
or  more  important,  if  at  any  time  [we  can  be  of  service,]  we  shall  always  be 
greatly  mindful  of  your  benevolence  towards  us.  So  farewell.  From  our 
Palace  near  Loudon,  23d  March,  1535,  i.  e.  1536."" 

The  second  letter  is  addressed  to  a  man  of  considerable 
influence,  an  old  correspondent  of  Henry's,  Laurence  Stayber, 
residing  in  Nuremberg.  Commencing  with  all  his  titles,  and 
on  the  same  day,  he  proceeds — 

"  As  we  have  now,  by  long  experience,  proved  your  fidelity,  diligence,  and 
perseverance,  we  always  confidently  employ  your  assistance.  It  happened,  in 
a  former  year,  that  because  [James  Gryffith]  had  committed  against  us  the 
crime  of  treason,  and  to  whom,  of  our  clemency,  we  forgave  what  deserved  any 

kind  of  punishment,  hoping  he  would  change  for  the  better Having  abused 

this  our  clemency,  and  turning  his  mind  to  the  most  wicked  and  impious  crimes, 
restraining  no  wickedness,  but  committing  such,  publicly  and  privately  ;  at 
length,  terrified  by  the  consciousness  of  such  grievous  offences,  and  fearing 
what  was  long  ago  due  to  his  treasons  and  guilt,  after  he  had  privately  tra- 
versed different  countries,  in  conclusion  conveyed  himself  to  Flanders,  some  great 
rebels  and  traitors  being  disguised  along  with  him.  There,  for  some  time  carry- 
ing on  the  most  grievous  course,  they  proved  the  most  wretched  and  unworthy 
men  that  any  land  could  endure,  and  whom,  above  all  things,  we  desire  should 
come  into  our  will  and  power,  him  especially.  Whom  noio  we  hear,  have  de- 
parted to  Italy  through  Germany  ;  (together  with  one  Henry  Phillips,  descended 
from  obscure  parents,  om'  most  perfidious  rebel,)  that  from  change  of  place  in 
unknown  countries,  they  may  escape  the  justice  of  the  laws.  Therefore  we 
earnestly  entreat  that  you  will  use  such  care,  by  spies,  both  of  the  public  and 
private  roads,"  SlcJ^ 

These  letters  furnish  one  proof,  among  others,  of  that  wide- 

77  Vitellius,  B.  xxi.,  No.  39.  78  idem,  I'ol.  103. 

VOL.   I.  2   K 


514  PHILLIPS   AND  GRIFFITH    DENOUNCED.  [book  I. 

spread  discontent  whicli  now  prevailed  against  the  King. 
Gryffith  and  Pliillips  were  not  precisely  of  the  same  party 
before  this  ;  but  there  was  an  evident  sympathy  between  all 
these  malecontents,  wherever  they  dwelt,  and  whenever  they 
met ;  and  they  were  all,  more  or  less,  acting  in  concert, 
either  against  his  Majesty's  proceedings,  or  "the  new  learning." 
As  for  this  man,  with  whom  Phillips  is  now  classed,  James 
Gryffith  or  James  Greffeth  ap-Howcll,  as  he  is  sometimes 
called,  he  was  not  a  common  individual,  or,  like  Phillips,  of 
low  parentage,  but  the  son  of  a  gentleman  in  Wales,  and  a 
nephew  of  Sir  Rice  ap-Thomas,  the  well-known  military  com- 
mander, under  both  Henry  YIII.  and  his  father.  Gryffith 
had  been  imprisoned  in  London ;  but,  according  to  this  letter, 
pardoned.  This  was  in  1533,  on  whicli  he  fled,  in  June  of 
that  year,  into  Scotland ;  where  Lord  Dacre  and  T.  Wharton, 
the  ambassadors,  were  ordered  to  watch  him.  He  went  not 
alone  ;  on  the  2d  of  July,  Dacre  informs  Henry  direct,  that 
he  had  come  to  St.  Ninian's,  near  Stirling,  having  his  wife 
and  eight  persons  with  him,''^  and  that  he  named  himself  uncle 
to  (Sir  Griffith)  Rice  of  Wales,  the  son  of  Sir  Rice  already 
mentioned.^*^  From  thence  he  soon  proceeded  to  Edinburgh, 
with  his  train,  "  well  favoured  and  appointed  ;"  where,  though 
not  received  by  the  King,  he  frequently  "  resorted  to  the 
Lords  of  the  Council."  So  long  as  Scotland  was  at  war  with 
England,  he  wished  to  remain,  and  was  permitted  to  do  so  for 
some  time ;  but  by  the  month  of  December  we  find  him  in 
Antwerp,  where  he  had  been  evidently  desirous  of  stirring 
up  war  with  England,  and  proffering  aid  from  Wales,  if 
Queen  Mary  and  the  Emperor's  Council  would  only  send 
ships  across  the  sea.  Carondelet,  the  Archbishop  of  Palermo, 
declined,  saying,  that  the  King  of  England,  the  Emperor,  and 
that  country  were  friends.  Li  May  1534,  Gryffith  was  at 
Lubeck,  and  had  gone  from  place  to  place,  as  he  was  doing 
still,^^  The  truth  is,  that  both  of  these  men,  whether  separ- 
ately or  in  company,  were  now  on  their  way  towards  Cardinal 


79  More  correctly,  his  wife  and  daughter,  with  seven  servants,  one  of  wliora  was  named 
Henry  Ellington. 

8U  The  mother  of  Sir  Rice,  was  also  named  Griffith,  a  lineal  descendant  from  Howell  ap-Grif- 
fith.  By  inter-marriage,  the  two  families  were  interwoven  for  ages.  Sir  Rice  may.be  ranked 
among  the  progenitors  of  the  present  Lord  Dynevor. 

"I  See  Government  State  Papers,  vol.  iv.,  pp.  647,  G'''!)  652,  compared  with  a  letter  from  John 
Coke,  to  Cnimwcll,  dated  Antwerp  Decemher  0.— Cotton  MS.,  Galba,  B.  x. ,  fol.  72. 


].33().]  INDIFFERENCE  OF   ENGLAND.  515 

Pole.  He  became  the  nucleus  of  all  the  disaffected.  Every 
one  that  was  discontented,  in  distress,  or  in  debt,  gathered 
round  hira,  or  at  least  applied  to  him  ;  and  although  neither 
Phillips  nor  Gryffith  received  encouragement,  in  two  years 
after  this,  we  shall  find  the  former^  unwittingly,  excite  in 
Pole  the  utmost  fear  and  apprehension. 

It  cannot  be  forgotten,  that  Phillips  had,  within  the  court 
of  Queen  Mary,  denounced  Henry  as  "  a  tyrant  and  a  robber 
of  the  commonwealth."  The  "  first-fruits,"  no  doubt,  had 
already  been  consigned  to  the  King,  and  he  was,  at  the 
moment,  in  the  act  of  receiving  the  spoils  of  the  monasteries  ; 
but  this  man  had  been  permitted  to  remain  unreproved  by 
the  court  of  Brussels  ;  while  Gryffith,  for  a  longer  period,  had 
been  allowed  to  harbour  in  Flanders.  This,  for  political 
reasons,  had  been  hitherto  endured ;  but,  as  the  Emperor  and 
Francis  were,  though  known  to  few,  actually  preparing  for 
war,  and  Henry  had  resolved  to  remain  neutral,  hence  we 
account  for  the  English  envoy,  Mr.  Vaughan,  being  now 
withdrawn.  There  is  a  letter  from  him,  dated  in  May,  or 
only  two  months  after  those  just  quoted. 

"  The  27th  day  of  this  month,"  says  he, "  came  a  post  from  the  Emperor  to  the 
Court,  who  brought  such  uneasy  news  from  his  army,  as  hath  made  them  some- 
what sad  in  the  Court.  These  news  are  kept  so  secret  yet,  that  they  come  to 
the  knowledge  of  few  or  none.  If  they  had  been  good,  they  had  been  out  or 
their  letters  had  been  half  read. 

"  As  I  was  writing  that  goeth  before,  came  my  servant  out  of  England  with 
your  letter,  by  the  which  ye  write  me,  that  the  Khn/s  pleasure  is,  that  I  shall 
take  my  leave  of  the  Queen,  and  other  the  King's  friends  here,  and  so  make 
my  return  into  England,  which  I  shall  gladly  do,  with  mine  humble  thanks  for 
the  same. — From  Brussels,  the  29th  day  of  May  153G — Your  old  servant — 
S.  Vaughax."82 

Here,  then,  was  the  same  man  who,  in  other  daj'^s,  had 
spoken  so  boldly  respecting  Tyndale ;  but  in  favour  of  his 
very  life,  to  the  everlasting  disgrace  of  the  King  of  England, 
as  well  as  some  others,  Vaughan  is  not  commissioned,  before 
he  leaves,  to  say  one  word  ! 

Nine  months  ago,  or  in  August  last  year,  both  Crumwell 
and  Cranmer  had  been  very  pointedly  informed,  by  their  com- 


82  Cotton  MS.,  Galba,  B.  x.,  fol.  G8.  This  letter  must  have  been  in  reply  to  Crumwdl. 
Vaughan  was  sent  again,  as  King's  ambassador,  to  Flanders,  in  1538,  and  he  remained  abroad, 
much  employed  in  pecuniary  and  mercantile  negociations,  down  to  1546,  or  the  close  of  Henry's 
reign,  and  longer  still.     He  was  twice  married,  and  died  in  London  early  in  \T)f>ii. 


516  COURT   OF   BRUSSELS.  QboOK  I. 

mon  agent,  of  Tyiidale''s  situation,  as  well  as  of  the  myrmi- 
dons who  had  betrayed  him  ;  the  first  generous  visit  of  Mr. 
Poyntz,  post  haste,  after  this,  had  confirmed  the  whole ; 
when  at  last,  in  October,  Crumwell  sent  one  solitary  letter. 
Since  then,  here  was  Mr.  Poyntz,  escaped  to  England  only 
with  his  life,  and  now  comes  Stephen  Vaughan,  who  once 
pled  so  powerfully  against  persecution  for  opinions.  But  no ; 
nothing  was  done ! 

It  has  now,  therefore,  become  but  too  apparent,  that  neither 
Henry,  nor  his  Ministers,  were  free  from  the  blood  of  William 
Tyndale.  Had  he,  or  they,  exerted  their  ofiicial  power  to  the 
last,  the  guilt  might  have  fallen  not  so  heavy  upon  them  ;  but 
instead  of  this,  they  had  all,  as  we  have  seen,  oul}-  ten  days 
before  Vaughan''s  letter,  stepped  into  blood  at  home;  and  what 
sympathy  or  generous  feeling  could  be  expected  from  them  ?^ 

His  own  country  having  thus  left  him  to  perish,  the  only 
remaining  quarter  to  which  we  can  turn,  is  to  the  Govern- 
ment of  Flanders  itself.  Curiosity  must  be  awake  to  know 
the  character  of  the  parties  into  whose  hands  Tyndale  had 
fallen.  The  reigning  Princess,  Mary,  was  merely  a  vassal  of 
the  priests.  With  the  chief  man,  still  in  power,  Carondelet^ 
the  Archbishop  of  Palermo,  we  have  been  long  familiar,  and 
to  him  the  character  of  Tyndale  must  have  been  well  known 
for  nine  years  past,  at  least ;  but  he  was  a  mere  courtier, 
without  heart ;  and  from  the  days  in  which  Cornelius  Graph- 
eus,  the  learned  Secretary  of  Antwerp,  had,  under  his  eye, 
suffered  so  severely,  for  publishing  a  book  on  "  the  liberty  of 
the  Christian  Religion,"  he  had  been  familiar  with  cruelty. 
No  mercy  was  therefore  to  be  expected  from  him.^^  Erardus 
a  Marchia,  the  Cardinal  and  Bishop  of  Liege,  the  man  to 
whom  Reginald  Pole  fled  next  year  for  protection,  was,  of 
course,  a  determined  opponent  of  the  Scriptures ;  and  Mon- 
tigni  lived  under  the  sovereign  power  of  the  monks.  Such 
were  the  men  of  influence  and  authority.  It  was  only  three 
years  since  Erasmus  himself,  tliat  eminent  reviver  of  litera- 

83  The  17tli  and  lyth  of  May  were  indeed  days  of  blood  in  London.     See  pages  474-476. 

"4  It  was  Hulst,  the  Inquisitor,  who,  as  early  as  1522,  first  threw  Grapheus,  alias  Schryver, 
into  a  dungeon,  and  then  sought  out  matter  of  accusation  against  him  ;  when  he  appealed  to 
the  Archbishop  of  Palermo,  describing  the  deplorable  condition  to  which  he  was  reduced,  but 
in  \ain.  The  book  published  was  by  John  Van  Gooch,  and  Grapheus  had  written  a  preface, 
"  blaming  those  who  laid  a  needless  yoke  upon  Christians."  After  great  and  tedious  sufi'ering, 
this  learned  man  at  last  escaped,  and  lived  till  1558,  aged  7G.  See  hrandl's  History;  and  his 
fine  countenance  in  Foppcn'i  Bibl.  lielg.,  i.,  p.  201. 


1536.3  HOME   AND   ABROAD   IMPLICATED.  517 

ture,  was  invited  to  this  Court.  But  he  was  then,  and  ever 
afterwards,  afraid  to  venture  near  it,  even  though  the  Em- 
peror himself  had  invited  him,  and  money  had  been  remitted 
to  defray  his  travelling  charges."^  Sometime  after  this  invita- 
tion, his  picture  of  the  Government  was  sufficiently  graphical, 
and  it  serves  our  present  purpose.  Having  referred  to  the 
monks,  in  a  letter  to  Cholerus,  in  1534,  he  says — "  These 
animals  are  omnipotent  at  the  Emperor''s  Court,"  in  the  Low 
Countries.  "  Mary  is  a  mere  puppet,  maintained  by  our 
nation ;  Montigni,  a  man  of  authority,  is  a  tool  of  the  Fran- 
ciscans ;  the  Cardinal  of  Liege  is  an  ambitious  friend,  and 
when  he  takes  offence,  a  violent  enemy ;  the  Archbishop  of 
Palermo  is  a  giver  of  good  words,  and  nothing  else."**^ 

And  thus  it  is  at  last,  that  the  history  of  the  times,  and 
of  the  men  of  the  times,  whether  in  England  or  Brabant, 
but  too  well  prepare  us  for  anticipating  the  martyrdom  at 
Vilvorde. 

After  the  escape  of  Mr.  Poyntz,  "  Tyndale,"  we  are  in- 
formed by  Foxe,  "  was  proffered  an  advocate  and  a  procurer; 
for  in  any  crime  there,  it  shall  be  permitted  to  counsel  to 
make  answer  in  the  law  ;  but  he  refused  to  have  any,  say- 
ing, that  he  would  make  anstcer  for  himself;  and  so  he  did." 
But  at  last,  after  much  reasoning,  when  no  reason  would 
serve,  although  he  deserved  no  death,  he  was  condemned,  by 
virtue  of  the  Emperor''s  decree  at  Augsburg.  Such  had  been 
"  the  power  of  his  doctrine,  and  the  sincerity  of  his  life,  that 
during  the  time  of  his  imprisonment,  which  endured  about 
one  whole  year  and  a- half,  (or  rather  a  year  and  three- 
quarters,)  it  is  said  he  converted  his  keeper,  the  keeper's 
daughter,  and  others  of  his  household.  The  rest  that  were 
in  the  Castle,  and  conversant  with  Tyndale,  reported  of  him, 
that  if  he  were  not  a  good  Christian  man,  they  could  not  tell 
whom  to  trust :  and  the  Procurator-General,  the  Emperor''8 
attorney,   being    there,  left    this  testimony  of  him,  that  he 


85  He  was  now  on  his  death-bed,  at  Fribourg.  He  expired  on  the  12th  of  July,  in  the  6yth 
year  of  his  age,  and  was  buried  at  Basil. 

86  Jortin's  Life,  8vo,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  44,  51.  Jean  de  Charon,  now  in  his  68th  year,  was  the  son 
of  a  Chancellor  of  Burgundy,  who,  on  account  of  his  diminutive  stature,  was  named  Carondele- 
tus.  Since  1520,  he  had  been  Chancellor  of  Flanders ;  on  the  resignation  of  Cardinal  T.  Cajetan, 
he  was,  in  1523,  apjiointed  Archbishop  of  Palermo,  and  Primate  of  Sicily ;  and  since  15.31,  he 
had  been  President  in  the  Privy  Council  of  the  Low  Countries.  He  died  at  Mechlin,  8th  Feb. 
1545,  aged  75,  and  lies  intened  at  Bruges,  in  the  church  of  St.  Donatian.  Morcri.  Foppcn,  ii., 
p.  605,  where,  if  the  impression  be  good,  there  is  an  excellent  likeness  of  the  little  man. 


518  MARTYRDOM   OF  TYNDALE.  [boOK  I. 

was  '  Homo   docius,  pius,    et   bonus — a   learned,    pious,  and 
good  man." 

The  decree  issued  at  Augsburg,  on  the  19  th  of  November 
1530,  was  still  in  full  force,  after  which,  no  man  was  admit- 
ted into  the  judicature  of  the  Imperial  Chamber,  unless  he 
approved  of  it  ;  and  the  Privj  Council  of  Brussels,  of  which 
Oarondelet  was  President,  enjoyed  ample  authority  in  all 
matters,  religious  as  well  as  political.  The  persecutors  of 
Tyndale,  therefore,  knew  full  well,  since  his  own  King  and 
Council  had  left  him  to  perish,  how  they  could,  at  any  time, 
close  the  controversy,  and  slay  him.  That  detestable  decree 
had  not  only  enjoined  the  continuance  of  all  the  former  cere- 
monies, rites,  and  superstitions, — but  particularly  rejected  the 
doctrine  oi  justification  by  faith  alone.  The  doctors  of  Louvain 
must  have  discussed  many  subjects  with  their  prisoner :  His 
translation  of  the  Scriptures,  of  course,  he  would  defend  to 
the  last ;  but  here  was  one  point,  on  which  Tyndale  would 
remain  firm  as  a  rock.  There  was  no  man  in  Germany,  to 
say  nothing  of  England,  who  had  written  with  greater  dis- 
tinctness on  the  subject  of  justification ;  no  man  who  had 
discovered  a  more  profound  esteem  for  this  sacred  and  precious 
truth.  This  was  one  of  those  "  high  matters,""  on  which  he 
had  so  warmly  pressed  his  dearest  earthly  friend,  Fryth,  to 
remain  immovable  in  London  ;  and  it  is  not  a  little  remark- 
able, that,  at  this  moment,  besides  his  New  Testament  in 
folio.,  Tyndale's  first  publication  was  either  printing  or  finished, 
and  in  London,  too,  under  this  ver}^  title — "  A  treatise  of 
justification  by  faith  only^^^ 

From  the  past  history  frequently  showing  how  early,  and 
with  what  accuracy,  Tyndale  was  in  possession  of  intelligence 
from  England,  we  have  already  supposed  it  to  be  quite 
possible,  that,  though  in  prison,  he  may  have  heard  of  many 
things  that  had  occurred  there,  during  the  last  nine  months  ; 
and,  more  especially,  that  his  New  Testament,  as  corrected  in 
1 534,  was  so  pouring  into  his  native  land,  by  repeated 
editions,  from  Antwerp.  This  is  the  more  probable,  from  his 
having  been  made  useful  to  the  keeper  of  the  Castle  and  his 


87  Herbert's  Ames,  iii.,  pp.  1546.  1832.— The  full  title—"  A  Treatyse  of  Justificacyon  by  faith 
only,  otherwise  called.  The  Parable  of  the  Wicked  Mammon,  by  William  Tindale.  Imprinted 
in  Southwark  for  J.  Nychol.son."  This  boldness  in  printing  cannot  be  accounted  for,  without 
referiinfi  to  tlic  intiucncc  of  Queen  Anne. 


1536.]  MARTYRDOM  OF  TYNDALE.  5\i) 

family,  having  thus  gained  their  favour.  But,  besides  this, 
all  that  he  had  translated,  was  now  actually  proceeding  to 
the  press,  in  folio,  and  under  the  eye  of  a  competent  friend  and 
great  admirer,  John  Rogers.  This  was  more  than  Crumwell, 
or  Cranmer,  or  the  King,  yet  knew  ;  although  the  volume 
was  to  prove  absolutely  the  first  Bible,  the  reading  of  which 
throughout  England,  the^  were  to  enjoin  !  But  now,  and 
after  such  years  of  persecution,  the  end  was  come  ! ! 

It  appears  to  have  been  at  some  hour  on  Friday,  the  6th  of 
October  1.536,  that  Tyndale  was  led  forth  to  be  put  to  death. 
Before  leaving  the  Castle,  he  delivered  a  letter  to  the  keeper, 
addressed  either  to  Mr.  or  Mrs.  Poyntz  of  Antwerp ;  but  no 
copy  of  it  remains. ^^  Having  reached  the  fatal  spot,  the 
noble  martyr  was  fastened  to  the  stake — upon  which,  "crying 
with  a  fervent  zeal,  and  a  loud  voice — "Lord  !  open  the  eyes 
OF  THE  King  of  England" — he  was  first  strangled,  and  then 
liis  body  was  consumed  to  ashes !  Though,  strange  to  say,  even 
up  to  this  hour,  "  no  marble  tells  us  where  !"  For,  surely, 
if  ever  the  lines  of  England's  choicest  Christian  poet  were 
strictly  applicable  to  any  single  man,  every  word,  by  way  of 
eminence,  belongs  to  the  Memory  of  William  Tyndale, — 

"  His  l>lood  was  shed 

In  confirmation  of  the  noblest  claim, 

Our  claim  to  feed  upon  immortal  truth, 

To  walk  with  God,  to  be  divinely  free, 

To  soar,  and  to  anticipate  the  skies. 

Yet  few  remember  him.     He  lived  unknown 

Till  persecution  dragg'd  him  into  fame, 

And  chased  him  up  to  Heaven.     His  ashes  flew — 

No  marble  tells  us  whither.     With  his  name 

No  bard  embalms  and  sanctifies  his  song  ; 

And  history,  so  warm  on  meaner  themes, 

Is  cold  on  this."^ 


88  Shortly  after  the  martyrdom,  the  keeper  himself  carried  this  letter  to  the  house  from 
whence  Phillips  had  betrayed  him.  Mrs.  Poyntz.  a  German  lady,  had  probably  not  as  yet 
followed  her  husband  to  England,  if  she  did  at  all  now ;  for  Mr.  Poyntz  afterwards  returned  to 
the  Continent. 

89  Cowpcr.  Will  the  censure  here  conveyed,  be  suffered  to  continue  much  longer?  It  would 
be  strange  if  some  British  emigrant  or  American,  now  carried  off  the  palm,  before  any  English- 
man proper  ;  but  certainly  there  arc  but  few  histories,  in  which  so  many  points  occur,  fitted  to 
kindle  the  poet's  fire,  or  excite  the  jiainter's  genius.  Had  Milton,  or  Cowper  himself,  only  been 
aware  of  the  heart-stirring  incidents,  probably  we  should  not  have  had  it  in  our  option  so  to 
quote  these  lines.  As  for  3f0)niments,  among  all  that  have  ever  been  erected,  to  evince  the 
gratitude  and  veneration  of  posterity,  one  at  least  is  still  wanting— but  no  common  one— to  the 
memory  of  Willi.am  Tvnpai.e.  Let  the  proposal  commence' where  it  will,  it  may  go  round 
THE  KINGDOM,  and  provc  what  it  ought  to  be— a  National  Monument. 


520  HIS   WONTED  BENEVOLENCE.  [^BOOK  I. 

Tyudale's  dying  invocation,  most  emphatically  expressed  his 
opinion  of  Henry  VIII. ;  and  uttered,  as  it  was,  with  a  loud 
voice,  though  in  a  foreign  land,  was  meant  to  be  heard,  if  not 
also  carried  to  England.  The  precise  meaning  of  the  speaker, 
in  those  dying  words,  it  may  be  difficult  to  divine  ;  but  if 
Oranmer  could  go  so  far  as  to  grossly  flatter  his  Majesty,  even 
on  the  third  of  May ;  Tyndale  told  him  the  truth  with  his 
last  breath,  from  the  stake,  on  the  sixth  of  October.  He  re- 
garded all  that  Henry  had  yet  done,  as  the  work  of  a  blind 
man,  and  certainly  this  was  the  most  charitable  of  all  construc- 
tions. Though  to  us  now,  who  view  the  royal  progress  entire, 
and  such  as  it  was,  that  blindness,  even  by  this  time,  was  no 
longer  a  mere  misfortune,  but  his  crime.  The  King  had 
already,  and  but  too  manifestly,  closed  his  eyes,  and  hardened 
his  heart,  of  which  his  future  life  will  aflford  the  saddest 
evidence. 

As  for  the  Martyr  himself,  since  no  good  man  was  ever 
cut  off  in  the  midst  of  his  usefulness,  so  neither  was  Tyndale. 
His  work  was  done,  and  by  an  invincible  providence,  he  had 
been  singularly  preserved  to  the  last.  In  the  councils  of 
heaven,  he  had  accomplished,  as  a  faithful  servant,  his  day, 
and  evening''s  welcome  hour  had  come.  Occupying  a  place  in 
the  history  of  his  country,  which  no  other  man  could  ever 
occupy  after  him,  he  was  now  called  off  from  his  labour,  and 
with  a  character  unspotted.  That  character  has  been  drawn 
long  ago,  and  with  so  much  of  simple  beauty,  that  we  must 
give  it  entire.  Oh,  what  a  contrast  does  it  exhibit  to  almost 
all  those  men  around  him,  whether  at  home  or  abroad,  to  whom 
his  life  and  labours  have  constrained  us  to  allude  ! 

"  First,  he  was  a  man  very  frugal,  and  spare  of  body,  a  great  student,  and 
earnest  labourer  in  the  setting  forth  of  the  Scriptures  of  God.  He  reserved  or 
hallowed  to  himself  two  days  in  the  week,  which  he  named  his  pastime,  Mon- 
day and  Saturday.  On  Monday  he  visited  all  such  poor  men  and  women  as 
were  fled  out  of  England,  by  reason  of  persecution,  into  Antwerp,  and  these, 
once  well  understanding  their  good  exercises  and  qualities,  he  did  very  liberally 
comfort  and  relieve ;  and  in  like  manner  provided  for  the  sick  and  diseased 
persons.  On  the  Saturday,  he  walked  round  about  the  town,  seeking  every 
corner  and  hole,  where  he  suspected  any  poor  pei'son  to  dwell  ;  and  where  he 
found  any  to  be  well  occupied,  and  yet  over-burdened  with  children,  or  else 
were  aged  and  weak,  those  also  he  plentifully  relieved.  And  thus  he  spent  his 
two  days  of  pastime,  as  ho  called  them.  And  truly  his  alms  were  very  large, 
and  so  they  might  well  be  ;  for  his  exhibition  that  he  had  yearly,  of  the  English 
merchants  at  Antwerp,  when  living  there,  was  considerable,  and  that  for  the 
most  part  he  bestowed  upon  the  poor.     The  rest  of  the  days  of  the  week,  he 


1536'.]  HIS   AMPLE    REWARD.  521 

gave  wholly  to  his  bovk,  wherein  he  most  diligently  travailed.  When  the  Sunday 
came,  then  went  he  to  some  one  merchant's  chamber,  or  other,  whither  came 
many  other  merchants,  and  unto  them  Avould  he  read  some  one  parcel  of  Scrip- 
ture ;  the  which  proceeded  so  fruitfully,  sweetly  and  gently  from  him,  much  like 
to  the  writing  of  John  the  Evangelist,  that  it  was  a  heavenly  comfort  and  joy 
to  the  audience,  to  hear  him  read  the  Scriptures :  likewise,  after  dinner,  he 
spent  an  hour  in  the  same  manner.  He  was  a  man  without  any  spot  or  blemish 
of  rancour  or  malice,  full  of  mercy  and  compassion,  so  that  no  man  living  was 
able  to  reprove  him  of  any  sin  or  crime  ;  although  his  righteousness  and  justi- 
fication depended  not  thereupon  before  God  ;  but  only  upon  the  blood  of  Christ 
and  his  faith  upon  the  same.  In  this  faith  he  died,  with  constancy,  at  Vilvorde, 
and  now  resteth  with  the  glorious  company  of  Christ's  martyrs,  blessedly  in  the 
Lord. — And  thus  much  of  the  life  and  story  of  the  true  servant  and  martyr 
of  God,  William  Tvndale,  who  for  his  notable  pains  and  travail,  may  well  bo 
called  the  Apostle  of  England,  in  this  our  latter  age." 

Such  was  the  estimate  of  old  John  Foxe  in  his  day ;  and 
though,  in  various  instances,  he  stands  chargeable  with  indis- 
criminate praise,  in  the  present,  he  has  not  exceeded ;  nay, 
living  so  early,  he  could  not  be  expected  to  distinguish  the 
relative  greatness,  and  peculiar  distinction  of  Tyndale''s  cha- 
racter. Standing  above  all  his  contemporaries,  with  only  one 
man  by  his  side,  his  companion  Fryth,  he  had  never  temporised, 
never  courted  human  favour,  never  compromised  or  sacrificed 
one  iota  of  Divine  truth  ;  but  with  his  face  to  the  foe,  and 
dying  on  the  shield  of  faith,  he  was  called  to  quit  the  well- 
fought  field,  for  his  mansion  near  the  tlirone  ;  to  refresh  him- 
self, after  the  dust  and  turmoil  and  heat  of  the  day,  in  the 
paradise  of  God.  Having  once  exchanged  contention  with 
the  votaries  of  darkness  and  superstition,  for  the  harmony  and 
the  light  of  heaven ;  the  solitude  of  his  dungeon,  for  the  pre- 
sence of  his  Redeemer,  in  the  city  of  the  living  God ;  his 
faithful  and  intrepid  spirit,  as  Milton  would  have  said  of  him, 
"  had  entered  that  region,  where  they,  undoubtedly,  that  by 
their  labours,  counsels,  and  prayers,  have  been  earnest  for  the 
common  good  of  religion  and  their  country,  shall  receive  above 
the  inferior  orders  of  the  blessed ;  and  in  super-eminence  of 
beatific  vision  shall  clasp  inseparable  hands  with  joy  and  bliss 
in  over  measure  for  ever." 

But  the  influence  and  usefulness  of  such  a  man,  could  not 
possibly  die  with  him.  If  he  had  now  rested  from  all  his  la- 
bour, we  shall  find  his  works  following  him.  The  light  he  had 
kindled,  was  to  prove  "  the  joy  of  many  generations."  Hence 
the  force  of  individual  consistent  Christian  character — the  im- 
portance of  individual  exertion. 


522  THE   FRIEND   OF   TYNDALE.  [bOOK  I. 

At  the  place  of  lionour,  or  as  it  were  close  by  the  martyr's 
stake,  we  must  not  omit  to  notice  his  kind  and  generous  friend, 
Thomas  Poyntz  ;  and  the  more  so,  since  it  has  never  been 
before  observed  who  he  was.  It  is  well  that  we  have  one 
Englishman,  who  boldly  stood  by  our  illustrious  countryman 
to  the  last,  and  only  left  him  at  the  risk  of  his  own  life,  when 
he  could  do  no  more.  He  is  entitled  to  the  grateful  remem- 
brance of  posterity. 

The  Poyntz  family,  descended  from  Drago  FitzPons,  who 
accompanied  William  the  Conqueror  into  England,  is  well 
known  to  have  been  one  of  the  most  ancient  in  England. 
One  branch  settling  in  Gloucestershire,  and  another  in  Essex ; 
it  is  singular  enough,  that  Tyndale  commenced  his  career  with 
the  one,  and  closed  it  with  the  other.  The  Lady  of  Sir  John 
Walsh,  where  he  had  been  tutor,  was  the  daughter  of  Sir 
Robert  Poyntz  of  Iron  Acton,  Gloucestershire ;  and  Mr. 
Poyntz,  with  whom  he  last  lived  at  Antwerp,  was  the  second 
son,  and  finally  the  heir  of  the  Essex  family. 

When  Tyndale  was  seized,  it  lends  additional  interest  to 
the  zeal  of  this  gentleman  at  the  moment,  when  it  is  observed 
that  he  had  been  but  recently  married,  and  to  a  German 
Lady,  Ann,  the  daughter  of  John  Oalva,  Esq.  To  her,  after 
the  confusion  had  subsided,  and  notwithstanding  the  state  of 
the  Continent,  or  the  risk  he  had  run,  he  returned  ;  and  be- 
came the  father  of  three  sons,  Gabriel,  Ferdinand,  and  Robert, 
and  of  one  daughter,  Susanna. 

The  Manor-house  of  North  Okendon,  in  Essex,  eighteen 
miles  from  London,  to  which  he  addressed  his  letters,  and  to 
which,  of  course,  he  fled  from  Brussels,  had  been  in  possession 
of  his  ancestors  from  the  days  of  Edward  III.  ;  and  his  elder 
brother,  John,  to  whom  he  wrote  with  such  generous  warmth 
and  so  earnestly,  having,  by  the  death  of  his  father,  come  to 
the  estate  in  the  year  L500,  died  in  the  first  of  King  Edward's 
reign,   without  issue.**"      Thomas,  who  survived  him  fifteen 


no  The  admirer  of  ancient  English  poetry  may  be  pleased  to  know  that  this  was  no  other 
than  the  friend  of  Sir  Thomas  Wyatt,  whom  he  addresses  as  "  Mi/nc  own  John  Poi/iis,"  when 
celebrating  the  happiness  of  a  country  life,  recounting  the  miseries  of  public  service,  and  lashing 
the  vices  of  a  Court,  if  not  the  Covrl.  Mr.  Poyntz  had  been  in  the  service  of  Queen  Catherine, 
and,  as  mentioned  by  Halle,  had  accompanied  Henry  and  his  Queen  to  the  Camp  of  the  cloth  of 
polit  in  152(1,  but  had  afterwards  retired.  His  remarkably  intelligent  and  expressive  counte- 
nance may  be  seen  among  his  Majesty's  collection  of  Holbein's  Heads,  by  Chamberlain  ;  and  it 
is  one  of  the  finest  heads  in  that  splendid  volume.  Mr.  C.  adds,  "  .Tohn  Poyntz  probably  _^r*< 
employed  HoLnEiN.  and  afterwards  recommended  the  artist  to  his  rclaticms,  for  we  shall  find 


1536.]  THE   FRIEND  OK  TYNDALE.  523 

years,  but  remained  some  time  abroad,  of  course  succeeded ; 
and  dying  also  at  North  Okendon,  in  1562,  lies  there  interred.^' 

His  eldest  son,  born  about  two  years  after  Tyndale's  death, 
in  1538,  Sir  Gabriel  Poyntz,  High  SheriflF  of  Essex,  was  in- 
terred by  his  father's  side  in  1 607  ;  and  the  only  daughter, 
Susanna,  married  to  the  Mayor  of  London,  Sir  Richard 
Saltonstall,  lies  by  a  mural  monument  in  the  adjoining  parish 
of  South  Okendon. 

Although  acquainted  with  the  history  of  this  ancient  and 
retired  parish  church,  the  writer  could  not  be  satisfied  with- 
out visiting  the  burial-place  of  Mr.  Poyntz,  and  examining 
for  himself  the  memorials  of  his  family.  He  was  chiefly  de- 
sirous of  ascertaining,  not  only  what  vestiges  remained,  but 
whether  there  was  any  expression  still  legible,  in  regard  to  by 
far  the  most  memorable  event  in  the  life  of  Tyndale's  friend  ; 
and  more  especially  because  the  interpretation  intended  to  be 
conveyed  by  the  lines  on  his  tomb,  had  never  been  adverted 
to  by  any  author.  Most  probably  they  have  never  before  been 
understood,  except  by  relatives  at  the  time  of  his  decease. 

It  was  in  the  month  of  September  1837,  or  precisely  three 
hundred  years  after  the  English  Bible  at  which  Tyndale 
laboured,  the  basis  of  all  following  editions,  had  reached  this 
country.  He  found  the  little  church,  with  its  flint  stone 
embattled  tower  covered  with  ivy,  in  a  condition  distinguished 
for  its  cleanliness  ;  and  the  monuments  of  difierent  families, 
some  of  them  in  elegant  marble,  in  perfect  preservation  ;  but 
the  humbler  tablets  excited  the  deepest  interest. 

In  a  horizontal  line,  in  the  wall  of  the  Chancel,  are  the 
monuments  of  the  Poyntz  family,  in  regular  succession  from 
about  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century ;  while  that  of 
Tyndale's  devoted  friend  remains,  easily  to  be  distinguished 

no  less  than  three  portraits  of  gentlemen  of  this  family."  Be  this  as  it  may,  with  regard  to  his 
recommending  Holbein,  but  the  other  two  seem  to  be  portraits  of  Sir  Nicholas,  of  Iron  Acton, 
the  Sheriff  of  Gloucestershire,  the  nephew  of  Lady  Walsh  of  Little  Sodbury,  where  Tyndale 
once  lived  as  tutor.  From  the  letter  of  Thomas  Poyntz,  already  given,  it  is  evident  that  he 
addressed  his  brother  as  a  man  who  might  have  influence  at  Court.  He  had  known  it  well,  and 
many  years  before  Crumwell  himself  did. 

9'  At  his  decease  he  held  this  Manor,  with  above  130f)  acres  of  land  in  North  and  South  Oken- 
don, Alveley,  Upminstcr,  South  Wield,  Brendwood,  Warley,  Childerdich,  Dunton,  East  Horn- 
dean,  GraysThurrock,  and  Bulvan  :  with  the  presentation  to  the  Church  of  North  Okendon,  of 
the  Queen,  in  free  soccage,  by  fealty.  Iiiquis.  4  KHz.  Pipe-roll  in  the  Tower.  The  occasion 
of  this  inquisition  must  have  been  Mr.  Poyntz'  absence  on  the  Continent,  where  he  remained 
till  1556;  at  least  that  is  the  date  of  his  first  presentation  to  the  Church,  the  widow  of  his 
brother  having  done  this  in  15.54  ;  but  the  presentations  for  above  three  hundred  years,  by  this 
family,  may  be  seen  in  Ncwcourfs  Rcpcrtorium,  the  last  of  which  was  by  Lord  Thomas  Poyntz 
Littleton,  in  169",  the  incumbent  living  in  1700. — See  the  fullowing  note  93. 


524  THE  FRIEND  OF  TYNDALE.  QbOOK  I. 

from  the  others,  by  its  still  conveying  to  the  reader,  what 
had  been  his  own  impressions,  in  reference  to  the  scene 
through  which  he  had  passed  at  Brussels. 

"  This  gentleman,  for  his  most  faithful  service  to  his  Prince, 
and  his  most  ardent  profession  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  was 
in  bonds,  and  suffered  imprisonment  in  countries  beyond  seas, 
so  that  he  was,  at  this  time,  emdently  destined  to  death ;  but 
forecasting  with  himself,  relying  on  Divine  providence,  he 
wonderfully  escaped  out  of  prison.  Tn  this  little  chapel,  he 
now  peacefully  sleeps  in  the  Lord.  Anno  1562,  or  the  5th  of 
Queen  Elizabeth."  The  following  is  the  epitaph,  as  copied 
from  the  tablet  in  the  wall. 

"  Thomas  Poyntz  Armiger  [filius  Gulieliui]  Pointz,  ad  quem  post  mortem 
fratris,  Joannis,  Dominu[m  hujus  villae]  et  patronatus  Ecclesire  pervenit  ;  qui 
duxit  in  matrimonium  Annam  van  Calva,  Filiam  et  unam  coliEeredam  Joannis 
Calvse  Armigeri  nationeq.  Germani,  ex  qva  genvit  Gabrielem,  Ferdinandum  ac 
Robertum  filios,  filianq.  unam  Susanara. 

"  Hie  pro  fidelissimo  Principis  svi  servitio,  ac  ardentissimo  euangelicse 
veritatis  professione  uincvla,  et  incarcerationes  in  transmarinis  regionibvs 
passus  est,  adeo  ut  Caedi  jam  plane  destinatus  esset,  nisi  divina  fretus  provi- 
dentia  euasione  €  carcere  mirifice  sibi  prospexisset  :  in  hoc  sacello  jam  placide 
obdormit  in  Domino,  anno  1562.     R.  Reg.  Eliz.  quinto."92 

At  that  early  period,  there  may  have  been  some  prudential 
reason  for  the  immortal  name  of  Tyndale  not  being  mentioned. 
But  now,  after  the  lapse  of  three  centuries,  without  this  ex- 
pressive key  to  the  inscription  being  known  to  many  genera- 
tions, to  the  audience  assembling  there  every  week,  or,  per- 
haps, to  any  other  persons  ;  till  this  be  hinted,  the  lines  them- 
selves convey  but  feeble  meaning.  To  this  name  alone,  the 
epitaph  owes  all  its  emphasis,  and  to  it,  the  humble  tablet 
may,  perhaps,  now  owe  a  more  frequent  inspection.  Passed 
over  hitherto,  without  marked  observation,  if  we  once  except 
the  Manor-house  of  Little  Sodbury,  it  is  the  solitary  relict 
left  upon  English  ground,  pointing  to  perhaps  the  greatest 
benefactor  that  our  native  country  ever  enjoyed. 

As  for  the  excellent  man  himself,  this  unpretending  me- 
morial has,  all  along,  conveyed  his  ov:?i  testimony  to  sur- 
vivors ;  but  a  far  more  conspicuous  token  of  respect  for  his 


^■^  The  decease  of  Mr.  Poyntz,  has  been  ascribed  to  the  5th  of  May  1S()2 ;  but  this  must  be  a 
mistake.  The^fi/th  of  Elizabeth  began  on  the  17th  of  November,  which  fixes  his  death  to  the 
close  of  the  year  15(i2. 


153G.]  THE  FRIEND  OF  TYNDALE.  525 

memory,  may  now  well  be  erected ;  and  the  people  should 
know  how  much  they  stand  indebted  to  a  man  "  sleeping 
peacefully  in  the  Lord,""  in  the  vault  below. 

Long  before  this  late  period,  the  deeply  interesting  history 
of  our  Translator  ought  to  have  been  familiar  to  every  one, 
and  then  a  marble  tablet  might,  at  least,  have  told  that — 

POYNTZ,  THE  FHIEND— THE  LA3T  AND  AHDENT  FEIEND  OF  TYNDALE 
LIES  HERB— THE  EEST  ALL  ENGLAND  KNOWS.»» 

Vilvorde,  (Vilvorden,  or  Villefort,)  is  situate  at  the  confluence  of  the 
Senne  and  Woluwe,  half  way  between  Mechlin  and  Brussels,  or  about 
eight  miles  from  the  former,  and  seven  from  the  latter.  The  large  and 
strong  castle,  to  which  they  had  conveyed  Tyndale  from  Antwerp,  and 


93  The  genealogy  of  this  family  has  been  often  given,  we  presume,  inaccurately.  To  say  no- 
thing of  Atkyns,  Morant,  or  Nott,  in  his  Life  of  Sir  T.  Wyatt ;  even  in  Burke's  History  of  the 
Commoners,  recently  published,  v.  3,  p.  538,  the  ancestor  is  stated  to  have  been  Henry,  second 
son  of  Sir  Nicholas  Poyntz  of  Iron  Acton,  who  died  in  1449;  and  after  the  death  of  Henry,  we 
have  then  four  generations  in  succession  before  the  century  expires,  in  the  brief  space  of  fifty 
years  !  This  is  thrown  into  a  note  attached  to  the  Gloucestershire  family  ;  but  there  is  some 
good  reason  to  believe  that  the  Essex  branch  must  have  been  the  more  ancient  of  the  two.  The 
two  families,  indeed,  appear  to  have  sprung  from  the  same  parent  stem— Lord  Nicholas  Poyntz 
of  Gary  Mallet,  and  Tockington,  the  second  Baron,  who  was  twice  married — Poyntz  of  Oken- 
don,  from  a  second  son  of  the  first  marriage,  and  Poyntz  of  Iron  Acton,  from  a  son  by  the 
second,  or  Sir  John  Poyntz  of  Iron  Acton,  in  right  of  his  mother ;  he  was  Sheriff  of  Gloucestershire 
in  1363.  But  besides  Hugh,  the  eldest  son  of  Nicholas,  and  the  third  Baron,  there  were  other 
children,  at  least  one  son,  Poyntz,  and  one  daughter,  Alice;  "  and  Lord  Nicholas  dying,"  says 
Rudder,  "  seized  of  Tockington  in  the  5th  of  Edward  II.,  or  1311,  this  estate  was  carried,  by  the 
marriage  of  Alice,  into  the  Berkeley  family.  Now,  before  this  marriage,  it  will  be  evident,  that 
the  Essex  family  had  its  rise.  The  Latin  inscriptions  in  North  Okendon  Church,  are  distinctly 
legible,  and  from  the  monuments  themselves,  we  now  take  the  pedigree,  adding  a  few  other 
particulars. 

I.  Poyntz  Fitzpointz,  son  of  Lord  Nicholas  Poyntz  of  Tockington,  in  the  county  of  Gloucester. 
He  became  patron  of  North  Okendon,  and  Lord  of  this  manor,  by  marriage  with  Eleanor,  heiress 
of  William  Bawden  ;  and  dying  in  the  time  of  Edward  III.,  the  estate  came  to  his  son  and 
successor,  II.  John  Poyntz,  married  to  Eleanor,  daughter  of  Sir  John  Dancote.  He  died  under 
Henry  IV.,  or  before  1413,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son.  III.  John  Poyntz.  He  married  Ma- 
tilda, daughter  of  William  Perte,  Esq.,  and  dying  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VI.,  or  before  1461,  left 
the  estate  to  his  son,  IV.  IVilliam,  who  married  Elizabeth,  sister  of  Sir  John  Shaa,  Lord  Mayor 
of  London,  by  whom  he  had  three  sons,  John,  Thomas,  Henry,  and  at  least  one  daughter, 
Juliana.  William  died  under  Henry  VII.,  in  the  year  1500,  when  the  property  came  to  his 
eldest  son,  V.  John  Poyntz,  who  married  Anne,  daughter  and  heir  of  Isaac  Sibley,  Esq.  of 
Bucks,  and  died  in  the  first  of  Edward  VI.  His  death,  said  to  be  at  the  end  of  Queen  Mary's 
reign,  16th  July  1558,  is  an  unaccountable,  though  frequent  mistake.  His  tombstone  restricts 
his  life  to  Edward's  reign  ;  and  as  if  there  had  been  something  of  eminence  about  fVyatVs  friend, 
there  is  a  second  stone  on  the  floor  of  the  chancel—"  Here  licth  the  bodie  of  John  Poyntz,  late 
son  and  heir  of  W"  Poyntz,  «S:c.,  which  deceased  the  13th  day  of  June,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord 
God  1547."  Dying  without  issue,  VI.  Thomas,  his  brother,  and  the  friend  of  Tyndale,  suc- 
ceeded ;  and  dying  in  the  5th  of  Elizabeth,  VII.  Sir  Gabriel,  his  son,  left  an  only  daughter,  who 
by  her  marriage,  conveyed  the  estate  to  Sir  John  Morrice  of  Chipping  Ongar.  The  name  of 
Poyntz  was,  however,  adopted,  and  the  property  remained  with  their  male  descendants  till  the 
death  of  Richard  Poyntz,  alias  Morrice,  in  1643,  when  it  passed  into  the  Lyttleton  family.  AH 
these  monumental  inscriptions  are  printed  literally  in  Salmon's  Histoi-y  of  Essex,  pp.  276,  277, 
taken  from  the  collections  of  Thomas  Jekyll,  Esq.  The  Essex  estate  belongs  at  present  to  Sir 
Charles  Hulse,  Bart.  The  male  representative  of  the  Gloucestershire  family  was  William 
Stephen  Poyntz,  Esq.  of  Cowdray  Park  and  Midgham  House,  lately  deceased,  his  two  sons 
having  died  before  him.  His  three  daughters,  as  already  stated,  are  married  into  the  Clinton, 
Spencer,  and  Exeter  families. 


526  VISIT   TO   VILVORDE.  [bOOK  I. 

where  he  remained  to  the  hour  of  his  death,  was  originally  built  by  Duke 
Wenceslaus,  in  the  year  1375.  It  was  afterwards  employed  as  a  place 
of  safe  keeping  for  the  archives  and  charters  of  Brabant,  as  well  as  of 
state  prisoners.  But  the  castle  has  now  given  place  to  a  prison  and 
house  of  correction  upon  a  very  large  scale. 

And  here,  if  the  present  writer  may  be  permitted  to  mention  his  own 
approach  to  Vilvorde,  and  to  the  site  of  its  ancient  castle — for  though 
at  a  moment  when  he  had  no  idea  of  ever  being  engaged  in  tracing  the 
footsteps  of  our  Translator,  it  was  a  visit  which  he  can  never  forget ; — 
not  merely  from  its  being  in  the  year  1826,  or  exactly  three  hundred 
years  from  the  first  introduction  of  the  English  New  Testament  into 
Britain,  but  because  of  the  long  endeared  friend  whom  he  accom- 
panied, now  gone  to  his  reward.  Another  Englishman,  and  born  within 
thirty  miles  of  Tyndale's  own  birth-place,  he  was  also  another  Transla- 
tor of  the  Sacred  Volume,  and  that  into  the  language  of  a  country  which 
he  in  like  manner  was  never  destined  or  pennitted  to  enter.  The  lan- 
guage, too,  being  that  of  the  largest  associated  population  in  the  world, 
I  need  scarcely  add  the  Chinese,  or  the  name  of  Joshua  Marshman. 
Standing,  with  such  a  man,  on  the  spot  where  Tyndale  had  fought  his 
final  battle  with  the  votaries  of  "  the  old  learning,"  defending  his  trans- 
lation unto  the  death — on  the  very  ground  of  his  imprisonment  and 
martyrdom  ;  this  had  become  more  deeply  interesting  from  immediately 
preceding  events  :  having  only  returned,  by  way  of  Antwerp,  from  present- 
ing to  the  late  King  of  Denmark,  a  copy  of  that  Bible  which  had  been 
translated  and  printed  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  within  the  Danish 
settlement  of  Serampore  ;  and  our  happening,  but  a  few  days  before,  to  be 
the  last  persons  engaged  in  commending  to  the  Divine  protection,  before 
his  embarking  from  Europe,  a  native  of  Prussia,  so  well  known  since — 
Charles  Giitzlaff,  now  of  Pou-tcheou,  in  the  province  of  Fo-kien,  China.-''^ 

"  Tyndale,"  said  the  Belgian  traveller's  guide  to  us  then,  ''  Tyndale, 
who  first  translated  the  New  Testament  into  English,  suflfered  martyr- 
dom here  in  1536  ;"  but  the  reader  is  now  better  able  to  estimate  what 
had  been  the  amount  of  his  exertions  and  example  ;  and  next  year,  we 
shall  witness  how  much  more  of  the  Sacred  Volume  was  conveyed  to 
England,  as  the  richest  legacy  she  had  ever  received.  Meanwhile,  we 
are  obliged  to  turn  to  a  very  different  subject,  and  present  a  melancholy, 
though  instructive  view,  in  the  dark  side  of  this  entire  picture. 

These  two  unhappy  men,  the  agents  of  their  party,  Henry 
Phillips,  the  reputed  gentleman,  and  Gabriel  Donne,  the  ser- 


9*  "  If  spared  in  life,"  said  the  Doctor,  "  that  young  man  will  be  a  second  Carey;"  thouRh 
little  did  he  imagine,  at  the  moment,  that  he  would  prove  the  instrument  of  conveying  his  own 
translation  so  far  and  so  effectually  into  China  itself 


153G.3  I'HE  iVIISERAULE   BETRAYERS.  527 

vant  in  disguise,  who  had  been  hired  to  apprehend  our  Trans- 
lator, and  M'ho  entered  so  lieartily  into  the  design,  now  pre- 
sent a  contrast  of  the  blackest  hue.  No  particulars  respect- 
ing them  have  ever  before  been  recorded ;  but  they  must  not 
now  be  so  consigned  to  oblivion.  The  former  will  lead  us  in- 
to some  curious,  if  not  unknown  particulars,  respecting  Car- 
dinal Pole  abroad,  whose  motions  it  seems  as  if  he  had  been 
eager  to  observe ;  and  the  latter,  into  certain  appointments, 
unaccountable  or  passing  strange,  respecting  himself,  at  home. 
Both  together  will  involve  a  few  anticipations  of  our  narra- 
tive, but  it  is  better  to  dismiss  these  men  at  once.  It  is  only 
because  of  their  sad  connexion  with  Tyndale,  that  they  are 
here  noticed  at  all. 

As  to  Phillips,  we  still  stand  mainly  indebted  to  Theobald,  in  his 
oiEcial  correspondence,  as  a  spy,  employed  alike  by  Crumwell  and  Cran- 
mcr.  In  the  year  1535,  Phillips,  as  we  have  seen,  had  been  watching 
Theobald  for  months  after  his  departure  from  Louvain  ;  but  the  latter 
had  proceeded  on  his  way,  stopping  only  for  a  short  time  at  Cologne, 
Frankfort,  and  Heidelberg.  He  then  visited  Nuremberg,  Wittenberg, 
Augsburg,  Ulm,  and  Tubingen.  He  had  been  supplied  with  money  on 
his  journey  ;  and  now,  in  the  spring  of  153G,  or  before  war  had  broken 
out  between  the  Emperor  and  Francis,  we  quote  one  of  his  replies  to 
Crumwell,  reporting  progress  : — 

"  This  money  came  to  me  very  happily  for  two  causes.  One  is,  because  I 
fear  tear ;  the  second  is,  I  have  been  at  great  cost  riding  to  Nuremberg,  Wit- 
tenberg, Augsburg,  Ulm.  From  all  these  places  I  sent  j'ou  letters  at  large, 
for  I  had  to  all  these  places  letters  of  commendations  to  the  learned  men. 
Also  in  Tubingen,  it  is  costly  unto  me  ;  for  your  Lordship  inlled  me  to  resort 
and  haunt  the  acquaintance  of  the  best,  as  I  do :  for  I  am  in  familiar  acquaint- 
ance with  the  Bishop  of  the  town,  and  likewise  with  the  Bishop  and  reformator 
of  the  whole  country  ;  with  the  Governor  of  the  town,  and  most  part  of  the 
professors — being  a  great  deal  better  esteemed  of  them,  than,  peradventure,  I 
am  worthy,  and  of  more  credit  than  it  beconieth  me  to  rehearse  ! 

"  Here  (in  Germany)  is  a  mad  foolish  fellow,  and  unlearned,  called  Coch- 
L^us,  which  hath  madly  and  railingly  written  aijaUist  our  King's  Highness, /o/- 
Mr.  3Iore's  death,  and  my  Lord  of  liochet'ter's,  and  of  other  matters  ;  which 
book  your  Lordship  shall  receive  of  Reynard  Wolfe.  His  book  doth,  and  will 
do,  hurt.  I  marvel  that  no  answer  is  made  to  Erasmus'  epistle  (carmen)  for 
Mr.  More  and  my  Lord  of  Rochester.  I  send  your  Lordship  herewith  an 
epistle  of  Clement  Marot,  an  excellent  poet,  in  the  French  tongue,  who  is  fled 
France,  and  in  exilement  for  the  Gospel."  9-^ 


95  Cotton  MS.,  Vitell.,  B.  xxi.,  fol.  141.  The  Carmen  Erasmi  was  spurious.  "  No  such 
poem,  I  dare  say,  was  ever  composed  by  him.  He  was  not  in  a  versifying  humour  at  this  time." 
Jorlin,  anno  1535.     Marot  had  fled  in  1534.     Sec  M'Crie's  Italy,  p.  69. 


528  PHILLIPS  AND  GRYPFITH  [book  I. 

In  explanation  it  is  now  necessary  to  state,  that  on  the  22d  December 
1536,  Pole  was  made  a  Cardinal,  the  red  hat,  contrary  to  custom,  being 
forced  upon  him,  says  Turner,  "  as  the  helmet  of  rebellious  battle  ;"  and 
early  in  1537,  he  was  sent  into  France  as  a  legate,  though  in  reality  to 
fan  the  flame  of  rebellion  in  England.  His  King  proclaimed  him  a  traitor, 
offering  a  reward  of  fifty  thousand  scudi  for  his  head  ;  having  also  re- 
monstrated Avith  the  Courts  of  France  and  Flanders  against  receiving 
him.  To  the  Emperor,  it  has  been  said,  Henry  offered  for  the  person  of 
his  cousin,  an  auxiliary  force  of  4000  men,  during  his  campaign  against 
Francis.  On  his  arrival  in  Paris,  when  referring  to  Francis,  the  King, 
he  says  himself, — "  When  I  came  to  the  door  of  his  hall,  before  I  could 
knock,  I  was  excluded  ;"  and  thus  mortified,  the  legate  bent  his  way 
towards  Cambray.  Influenced  by  political  motives,  the  Princess  or 
Queen-Regent  of  Flanders  was  not  less  inflexible  ;  but  the  Cardinal  of 
Liege,  of  whom  we  have  heard,  invited  him  to  his  palace,  where  he 
remained  three  months.  His  host  went  so  far  as  to  advise  him  to 
proceed  to  England  in  disguise  ;  (dissimulato  vestitu  ;)  but  this  was  too 
hazardous  a  project,  for  a  man  so  well  known  in  England.  While  he 
lay  here,  persons,  in  the  pay  of  Henry,  were  watching  his  motions ;  and, 
in  particular,  John  Huttou  was  despatched  with  fresh  remonstrances  to 
the  Queen-Regent  in  May  1537.^  Hutton  there  insinuated  himself 
into  acquaintance  with  Michael  Throgmorton,  a  confidential  agent  of 
Pole's,  and,  as  he  siifjiosed,  gained  him  over  to  Crumwell's  side  and  ser- 
vice. Though,  therefore,  his  master  would  not  venture  into  England, 
Throgmorton  actually  did ;  and  used  to  boast  of  it,  as  one  of  the  most 
dexterous  exploits  of  his  life,  that  he  had  deceived  even  Crumwell,  and 
returned  to  the  Continent  with  his  head  on  his  shoulders  !  This  fact 
Theobald  will  confirm  to  us  presently  ;  but,  in  the  meanwhile,  he  had 
returned  to  London  about  the  month  of  June.  By  the  next  month, 
being  ready  to  embark  again  for  the  Continent,  there  is  a  curious  letter 
from  Cranmer  to  Lord  Crumwell,  respecting  his  joui'ney. 

"  After  hearty  commendations  unto  your  Lordship,  this  is  to  advertise  the 
same,  that  the  beai-er  hereof,  Mr.  Tybald,  one  that  hath  exercised  his  study 
in  Ahuayue  these  two  or  three  years  past,  brought  from  Caj)ito  (Wolfgang 
Fabrieius)  and  Monsterus,  (Sebastian  Munster,)  both  letters  and  books  to  the 
King's  Highness  ;  and  if  his  Grace's  pleasure  be  to  i-eward  them  for  their  pains, 
and  good  hearts,  which  they  bear  unto  his  said  Grace  ;  this  man  that  brought 
the  said  letters,  shall  very  conveniently  do  the  King  good  service  in  that  be- 
half :  for  he  is  going  thitherward  now  again,  and  is  a  tery  honest  man,  and  both 
loved  and  trusted  of  the  learned  men  in  these  parts  ;  with  whom,  if  it  please 
your  Lordship  to  commune,  he  ean  well  inform  you  of  the  state  of  that  country. 
Wherefore,  not  only  iu  this,  but  also  for  his  passport,  I  beseech  you  to  be  his 
good  lord,  so  that  he  may  have  your  favourable  letters  unto  the  ports,  for  his  pas- 
se Galba,  B.  x.,  fol.  333.    Herbert's  Henry  VIII. 


1.33(>.]  ONCE   iMOUK.  529 

sage  and  safe  conduct.     Thus  our  Lord  Iiave  your  Lordshijj  in  liis  tuition.     At 
Lambeth,  the  22d  day  of  July  1537."i>7 

Cranmer  here  assumes  to  himself  all  the  credit,  or  the  discredit,  of 
employing  this  man,  whereas  Crumwell  knew  Theobald  as  well  as  he  did. 
The  letter  at  first  sight,  must  therefore  seem  strauge  ;  but  the  mystery 
is  solved,  as  soon  as  it  is  observed,  that  this  was  simply  a  formal  com- 
munication, addressed  to  Crumwell  as  Lord  Privy  Seal,  and  intended  for 
the  royal  eye,  to  meet  more  purposes  than  one.  It  would  bring  Theo- 
bald to  the  notice  of  his  Majesty  ;  it  might  secure  some  i)resent  for  the 
Continent  ;  and  it  would  insure  suitable  passports. 

After  this,  Theobald  took  his  departure,  carrying  with  him  a  letter, 
from  Cranmer  to  Capito,  in  which  he  informs  him,  that  he  now  sends  a 
present  of  one  hundi-ed  crowns  from  the  King  for  his  book — On  Divorce, 
Matrimony,  and  the  power  of  the  Civil  Magistrate  in  religion.  There 
may  have  been  a  similar  communication  to  Sebastian  Munster,  though 
we  have  no  evidence ;  but  there  was  another  letter  of  Cranmer's, 
addressed  to  Joachim  Vadian.  He  acknowledges  the  receipt  of  his 
work  on  the  Lord's  Supper,  but  remains  in  favour  of  the  old  doctrine, 
and  deprecates  the  revival  of  so  bloody  a  controversy.^^ 

When  this  agent,  alike  of  Crumwell  and  Cranmer,  was  at  home, 
among  other  things,  he  had  been  fully  informed  of  the  chase  after  both 
Phillips  and  Gryffilh  ;  and,  therefore,  upon  a  Sunday,  24th  March  1538, 
he  writes  to  Cranmer  from  Augsburg,  particularly  respecting  the  latter. 
Had  the  Lord  Privy  Seal  only  given  him  a  commission,  he  says  that  he 
could  have  apprehended  him  ;  and  he  blames  Laurence  Stayber  of  Nurem- 
berg, to  whom  Henry  had  written,  who  might  have  done  so,  "  if  he  had 
would."  He  informs  the  Archbishop  of  his  honourable  treatment  by  the 
chief  citizens  of  Tubingen  and  Augsburg — that  he  intended  to  proceed 
through  Innspruck  and  Trent  to  Venice  ;  and  then  this  "  very  honest 
man,"  tells  liim  that  he  has  found  out  "  a  way  to  go  to  Home,  and  not  to  be 
known  for  an  Englishman  !'''' — "  I  beseech  youi*  Grace  to  move  my  friends 
to  send  my  bank  to  Venice  with  all  speed.  I  would  God  it  would  please 
your  Grace  to  receive  (some)  money  of  my  father,  and  to  cause  it  to  be 
sent  by  your  hands."  ^ 

The  war  which  Theobald  dreaded  in  1536,  between  Francis  and  the 
Emperor,  it  is  well  known,  bm-st  out  ;  but  while  he  was  writing  his  last 
letter,  there  had  been  a  suspension  of  arms,  which  was  succeeded  by  a 
truce  in  July.  By  this  time,  and  before  it,  both  these  monarchs  had 
shewn  great  courtesy  to  Cardinal  Pole,  who  was  now  at  Venice.  His 
steward,  Throgmorton,  pretending  to  serve  tico  masters,  had  written  a 
long  and  artful  letter  to  Crumwell  last  year.'^     Theobald  was  not  yet 

S7  MS.  Chapterhouse. — Jenkyii's  Remains  of  Cranmer,  i.,  p.  1!)1. 

'M  Zurich  MS.  in  Cranmer's  Remains,  i.,  jip.  19-2-193.  9»  Vitell.  B.  xxi.,  f<.I.  i;if). 

luo  Cleop.  E.  vi.,  fol.  ,372.     Dated  from  Liege,  2(itli  Aug.  1537.— Its  design,  "o  doulit,  was  U> 

VOL  I.  2  L 


530  MISERY    OK    PHILLIPS  [bOOK  I. 

aware  of  his  character  ;  but  having  reached  Caldiero,  nine  miles  from 
Verona,  where  he  had  stopt  to  drink  the  mineral  waters,  he  addresses 
Cranmer  from  thence  on  the  16th  of  August. 

He  mentions  that  Thi-ogmorton,  within  the  last  week,  had  been  at 
Padua,  procuring  certain  necessaries  for  his  Master's  household,  and 
that  he  would  remain  at  Venice  most  of  the  winter, 

"  Also  he  related  how  greatly  and  lovingly  the  French  King  did  entertain  his 
master," — "  And  of  truth  I  hear  of  divers  and  many,  that  he  alone  was  more 
conversant  with  them,  and  better  entertained,  than  all  the  rest,"  i.  e.  than  the 
Pontiff  and  his  Cardinals.  "  Also,  he  was  with  the  French  Queen,  (when  at 
Nice,)  and  communed  long  with  her,  and  after  with  the  Queen  of  Navarre, 
whom  he  (Cardinal  Pole)  liked  not  so  exceedingly." 

A  few  days  before  writing  this  letter,  Theobald  had  passed  through 
Vicenza  itself,  where  a  Council  had  been  attempted,  as  yet  in  vain,  being 
deferred  till  Easter,  or  April  1.539, — he  had  dined  with  the  physician 
and  secretary  of  Cardinal  Brundusium,  (Alexander,)  on  whose  character 
he  dilates.  He  tells  Cranmer  that  Friar  Peyto,  by  the  influence  of 
Pole,  was  living  among  the  Observant  Friars  at  Venice  ;'^^  and  then  begs 
the  Archbishop  to  obtain,  before-hand,  half-a-year's  rent  of  Chedingstone 
farm  from  the  Earl  of  Wiltshire,  that  he  may  be  able  to  perform  his  jour- 
ney in  disguise  "  to  Rome  this  winter  season. "^"^ 

Next  month  oui'  spy  had  reached  Padua  itself,  and  from  that  city  he 
sends  two  long  and  curious  letters,  dated  the  first  and  second  of  October, 
one  addressed  to  Lord  Crumwell,  the  other  to  Cranmer.^*^^  He  repeats 
the  same  story  to  both  ;  but  as  the  letter  to  Crumwell  is  most  minute, 
at  once  exposing  the  true  character  of  Throgmorton,  and  the  miserable 
condition  of  PhilU'ps,  the  betrayer  of  Tyndale,  we  prefer  it. 

"  Since  the  writing  of  ray  last  letter,  pleaseth  it  your  Lordshij)  to  understand, 
that  I  have  twice  spoken  with  Michael  Throgmorton. 

"  The  first  time,  he  was  merrily  disposed,  and  all  in  rehearsing  his  policy 
and  wisdom,  how  he  decelred,  in  his  opinion,  your  Lordship  and  Master  Moryn- 
son,  (Sir  Richai-d  Moryson,)  when  he  was  in  Enyland,  in  message  from  his 
master ;  thinking  that  but  for  his  ci'afty  and  subtle  conveyance,  ye  would  have 
beheaded  him :  not  considering  that  he  is  a  person  whose  Hfe  can  neither  hinder 
nor  farther  the  King  his  most  gracious  Highness,  or  your  Lordship  ;  or  that 

deceive  and  intimidate.  Most  of  the  letter  is  given  by  Strype,  who  also  supposed  tliat  Throg- 
morton "  being  now  (laiiied,  was  to  be  employed  by  the  Lord  Privy  Seal,  to  learn  as  much  of 
Pole's  designs  and  affairs  as  might  be."  Turner  merely  says  that  he  became  a  correspondent  of 
the  Lord  Privy  Seal ;  but  we  shall  see  what  Theobald  says,  and  it  will  remain  for  the  reader  to 
judge,  whether  it  be  not  the  same  Throgmorton  who  will  come  before  him  at  the  downfall  of 
Crumwell  himself  in  1.540. 

i<"  Friar  Peyto  or  Peto  was  the  preacher  at  Greenwich.     See  anno  153.3,  p.  367. 

'02  Nero,  B.  vi.,  fol.  148.— The  contents  of  this  letter  prove  it  to  have  been  written  in  1538. 
It  is  marked  by  mistake  in  the  catalogue  1536.  Mr.  Turner,  therefore,  generally  so  accurate, 
probably  thus  misled,  has  quoted  this  letter  as  a  proof  of  "  the  interest  which  Henry  took  in 
Pole's  concerns,  thaiqih  aln-oad."  But  long  before  this  epistle,  Henry  had  put  a  price  upon 
his  head,  and  Theobald,  now  at  Chaldere,  as  it  is  si)elt,  was  there  with  no  friendly  intentions  to 
the  Cardinal,  or  any  of  his  party.     The  concourse  at  Nick  will  be  specially  noticed  under  15.38. 

103  Nero,  B.  vi..  fol.  1.32,  to  Crumwell,  1st  Oct.     Idem,  to  Cranmer,  fol.  120.  2d  Oct. 


/.O.'jfi.]  THE    BETRAVER   OK   TYNDALE.  531 

liis  Grace  or  your  Lordship  would  violate  the  security  of  a  messenger  fur  any- 
thing. But  herein,  and  in  passing  the  limits  of  modesty,  he  doth  so  much, 
so  often,  and  continually  rehearse  this,  as  with  his  own  high  commendations 
always  ;  thinking  no  act  ever  to  have  passed  this  his  fantasy.  I  find  him  much 
simpler,  and  of  less  discretion,  than  he  supposcth  himself  to  bo  ;  and,  as  I  can 
perceive,  he  is  in  more  credence  and  trust,  than  in  authority  about  his  master. "^4 

"  The  second  time  was  the  18th  day  of  August,  rather  in  a  morning,  clothed  in  a 
coat  of  wolf  skins,  and  a  cap  of  mail,  as  pale  as  ashes  ;  blowing  and  puffing  like 
unto  a  raging  lion.  Wherefore,  I  asked  him  what  the  matter  was,  that  he  was 
thus  moved  and  disguised.  At  last  he  answered — matters  of  great  importance, 
for  all  that  night  past  he  had  not  slept,  with  many  circumstances. 

"  The  matter  vas,  that  one  Harry  Phillips,  which  sometime  was  student  in 
Louvaiji,  at  what  time  he  betrai/ed  good  Tyndale,  came,  at  this  present,  out  of 
Flanders  unto  Master  Pole,  as  I  can  find  by  all  circumstances  and  conjectures, 
for  succour ;  compelled,  by  poverty  or  some  evil  behaviour,  to  forsake  these 
parts.  But  by  reason  that  he  was  arrayed  like  a  Switzer,  or  a  inifHing  man  of 
war,  having  on  a  pair  of  Ahnayn  boots  ;  sajing  that  he  came  on  foot,  and  three 
weeks  afore,  he  was  in  Flanders, — and  to  this  they  imagined  that  they  did  per- 
ceive that  he  had  worn  spurs,  and  of  such  other  suspicions  gathered  incontinent, 
that  he  came  for  some  treasoii,  sent  by  your  Lordship,  giving  him  piardon  for 
his  trespasses,  passed  by  on  condition  that  lie  would  destroy  Master  Pole;  or 
else  to  be  a  spy,  to  see  what  he  doth,  or  goeth  about. 

"  Then  I  reasoned  with  him,  how  Uiat  were  likely,  that  one  could  or  durst  ad- 
venture alone,  on  such  an  act,  in  a  strange  comitry.  He  answered,  when  his 
Master,  as  he  custoraeth  daily,  rode  abroad  of  pleasure,  with  five  or  six  horses, 
imarmed. — He  (Phillips)  then  to  have  three  or  four  hardy  fellows,  set  in  a 
privy  place,  with  whose  help,  at  opportune  time  to  have  destroyed  him  ;  and  in- 
continently, within  tlie  space  of  four  hours,  with  post  horses  provided  afore,  they 
might  have  fled  to  the  momitaius,  where  they  were  in  safeguard, — for  this  is 
the  Italian  practice,  or  poison,  with  their  enemies.  And  inasmuch  as  I  could 
perceive,  a  certain  gentleman  of  Venice,  which  at  that  present  was  with  his 
master,  was  chief  author  of  this  suspicion,  judging  after  the  custom  and  manner 
that  is  in  use  among  them. 

"  The  cause  why  he  should  be  a  Spy,  he  said  was  this  ;  whereas  they  were 
satisfied  that  his  Master's  younger  brother  was  in  the  Tower,  (which  I  fehjned 
not  to  have  known  ffl/bj-e,)l"5  tjie  King  his  Highness  should  think  his  master 
therewith  to  be  so  moved,  that  incontinent  he  would,  with  writing  and  publish- 
ing books,  revenge  himself  against  his  Grace  ;  which  his  Highness  (they  reckon) 
hath  and  Aoih  fear,  more  than  all  the  world  besides  :  Saying  also  that  his  mas- 
ter hath  both  old  and  newly  written  books  lying  by  him,  which,  if  they  come 
forth,  they  will  cause  heaven  and  earth  to  quake !  He  shewed  me  also  that 
here/ore  they  avoided  this  Phillipis  incontinent  ;  and  Master  Pole  himself,  in  a 
great  fury,  defended  (forbade)  him  the  whole  dominions  of  the  Venetians. 

"  After  he  (Phillips)  was  departed,  being  in  desperation  of  all  succour  in 


104  Here  was  the  exposure;  and  sentence  soon  followed.  On  the  4th  of  December  1538, 
Throgmorton  and  Peyto,  with  Hilyard  and  Goldwell,  two  friars,  were  attainted  in  absence,  for 
writing  treasonable  letters,  and  sending  them  into  England,  &c. 

105  This  shows  that  Pole  had  anticipated  what  was  coming  on  his  family  ;  and  if  Theobald  did 
know  any  thing  by  this  time,  1st  October,  it  could  only  be  the  intentions  of  Crumwell.  The 
Marquis  of  Exeter,  Henry  Pole  or  Lord  Montacute,  and  Sir  Edward  Nevil,  were  arrested  on  the 
3d  of  November.  But  Sir  Geoffrey  Pole,  the  elder,  not  younger,  brother  of  the  Cardinal,  had  been 
in  Ike  Tower  before  this.   See  Ellis'  Letters,  ii.,  Ofi,  97.     Titus,  B.  i.,  fol.  140. 


532  CKUMWELL  AND   C'UANMEK  [uoOK   I. 

these  parts,  lie  wrote  ii  letter  to  Mr.  Pole,  to  require  him,  to  give  him  somewhat 
toward  his  costs  to  return  ;  and  that  lie  would  write  a  letter  of  commendation 
for  him  unto  the  Bishop  of  Leuke  ?  requiring  also,  in  a  letter  to  Thi-ogmorton, 
to  make  him  hereof  at  least  an  answer.  For  this  policy,  Throgmorton  said, 
they  suspected  him,  to  have  by  craft  gone  about  to  have  gotten  a  letter  of  their 
hands,  whereby  he  might  have  had  testimony  at  his  return  to  England,  that  he 
had  been  here. 

"  At  his  departure  from  thence,  (Venice)  they  counselled  him  to  come  hither, 
(Padua)  advertising  him  of  an  English  student  to  be  here,  which  was  liis  coun- 
tryman, and  it  was  truth,  of  whom  peradveuture  he  might  have  some  comfort  ; 
and  so  indeed  he  came  hither.  Throgmorton  however,  was  I  reckon,  within 
little,  as  soon  here  as  he,  riding  the  most  part  of  the  night  to  dog  him ;  and  he 
had,  before  his  meeting  with  me,  found  out  where  he  was  lodged,  and  had  beset 
all  the  gates  in  Padua  to  know  wliich  way,  or  with  wliat  company,  he  did  depart ; 
for  all  their  suspicion  was,  that  his  adlierents  would  either  be  here  in  Padua  or 
in  Venice, — desiring  me  to  be  a  mean,  to  know  of  this  his  countryman  here, — 
whether  he  (Phillips)  came  to  him  or  no,  and  whether  he  told  him  where  he 
would  go  to  ;  thinking  verily  that  if  he  went  thither,  (to  Venice,)  that  there  he 
would  have,  privily,  his  helpers,  and  means  to  accomplish  this,  their  foresaid 
imaginations  and  dreams. 

"  Now,  indeed,  a  little  before  I  met  with  Throgmorton,  this  Englishman  had 
been  with  me,  and  shewed  me  how  this  Harry  Phillips  had  been  with  him,  and 
required  help  and  friendship  of  him.  But  he  rejected  him,  saying,  that  although 
for  love  of  the  country  and  his  friends,  he  would  gladly  do  for  him,  yet  by  reason 
he  had  misordered  himself,  that  he  neither  durst,  nor  would,  in  any  cause, 
meddle  with  him,  or  help  him.  Then  he  desired  of  him  to  know  what  other 
Englishmen  were  here.  Then  he  named  me,  which  wlien  he  heard,  he  desired 
liim,  that,  in  no  wise,  he  should  let  me  knoic  that  he  was  here. 

"  I  reckon  he  suspected  I  would  have  procured  him  some  displeasure,  the 
cause  whereof  riseth  hereof.  Above  three  years  before,  I,  passing  through  Lou- 
vain  toward  high  Almayne,  did  there  visit  my  old  friends  and  acquaintance, 
and  so  by  occasion  did  insinuate  myself  to  familiar  acquaintance  with  him,  to 
know  what  practice  he  went  about  with  Tyndale,"  &c. 

Here  reminding  Crumwell  of  intelligence  to  which  he  had  fcdd  no 
regard.  Theobald  then  states  that  Phillips,  after  all,  went  to  Venice — 
wished,  but  in  vain,  to  speak  with  Mr.  Harvel,  the  resident  there — ^"^ 
returned  to  Padua,  and  having  also  applied,  without  success,  to  Mr. 
Bokeler,  the  student  already  mentioned,  at  last  he  ventured  to  come  to 
Theobald  himself.  Hence  the  two  men  had  met  once  more,  after  three 
years  and  three  months'  separation. 

"  He  came  to  me,  pretending  great  repentance  of  his  behaviour  in  times  past, 
desiring  me  to  pardon  him,  if  he  had  offended  me  heretofore,  &c.  I  shewed 
him,  all  private  matters  I  could  be  content,  and  were  already  remitted  from  my 
remembrance  ;  but  his  public  offences  to  God,  to  his  most  gracious  Prince,  and 
natural  country,  I  could  not  dissemble  shewing  myself  to  be  sorry  that  lie  had 
so  misordered  himself :     Counselling  him  to  return,  and  sue  for  pardon,  and 


106  Edmund  Harvel,  the  concspondent  of  Starkey  in  1536.— Ellis,  ii.,  p.  70.    And  since  then 
with  Crumwell.— Nero,  B.  vii.,  II7,  &c. 


I.08(;.]  REMIJSDED   OF   TYNUALE.  533 

sliew  himself,  by  repentance  and  amendment,  woi'thy  thereof;  which  he  said  he 
he  would  do,  imputing  all  that  is  past  to  the  H(/htness  of  his  youth,  and  Evii, 
COUNSEL.  In  conclusion,  he  said  he  would  return  towards  Flanders,  to  make 
means  to  your  Lordship  for  remission." 

In  writing  to  Cranmer  next  day,  or  "  the  Tuesday  after  St.  Michael's," 
lie  reminds  him  also,  of  what  he  had  written  respecting  Tyndale  in  1535. 

"  As  soon  as  Mr.  Bokeler  made  mention  of  my  being  in  Padua,  and  that  he 
might  speak  with  me,  he  desired  him,  for  God's  sake,  that  he  would  not  let  mc 
know  of  his  being  here,  for  he  feareth  lest  I  would  do  him  displeasure  :  for 
he  had  a  belief  before  three  years,  when  I  passed  through  Louvain  toward 
Almayne,  that  I  had  then  gone  about  to  have  taken  him,  as  I  then  wrote  to  your 
Grace,  and  of  his  enterprises  for  Tyndale  at  large  ;  of  the  which  Mr.  Bokeler  in- 
continent came  and  shewed  me,  afore  Mr.  IMichael  Throgmorton  came." — "  Now, 
this  Hari'y  Phillips,  after  he  came  to  me,  desiring  me  to  be  good  unto  him,  pre- 
tending great  repentance  of  his  faults," — that  is,  merely  against  Henry, "  I  coun- 
selled, and  to  sue  for  pardon  and  grace  ;  and  so,  he  shewed  me,  he  would  return 
to  Flanders  and  submit  himself ;  hit,  I  reckon,  being  in  this  necessity,  he  is  rather 
tjone  to  the  icars.     Or  ever  he  departed,  he  had  sold  his  doublet  and  his  cloak." 

Thus  sunk  into  oblivion  one  of  the  betrayers  of  our  Translator.  He 
might  descend  into  battle  and  perish,  or  die  in  misery  before  long  ;  but 
not  so  the  other  man,  the  Monk,  the  eldest  of  the  two,  and,  therefore, 
not  improbably,  by  far  the  most  guilty.  At  that  time,  said  Phillips, 
"  there  was  no  man  of  my  counsel,  but  a  Monk  of  Stratford  Abbey,  be- 
sides London,  called  Gabriel  Doune.'**7 

Gabriel  Donne  or  Dunne,  the  Monk  of  Stratford  Abbey, 

'"7  As  for  Theobald,  he  was  disappointed  in  accomplishing  his  journey  to  Rome  in  disguisL'. 
In  about  two  months  after  these  letters,  he  was  recalled;  and  though  he  had  got  sadly  entangled 
by  his  equivocations,  he  went  on  with  them  to  the  end.  On  the  12th  of  November,  he  informs 
Lord  Crumwell,  from  Padua,  that  he  had  been  dining  with  "  an  eari.est  enemy,"  Carolus 
Capellius,  a  Venetian,  who  had  been  ambassador  in  England,  France,  and  Hungary.  A  "  fa- 
miliar" of  this  nobleman,  an  opponent,  ad  Ituaniam,  had  invited  hira  ;  which,  says  Theobald, 
"  doth  judge  me  also  to  be  oiliis  error,  or  else  he  would  not  have  brought  me  there,  for  in  this 
doing  he  thought  to  gratify  him  :  as,  indeed,  he  did  entertain  me  with  all  gentleness,  requiring 
me,  in  any  wise,  when  I  come  to  Venice,  to  resort  to  his  palace,  familiarly  to  him.  He  is  great- 
ly, and  out  of  measure,  superstitious." 

His  next,  and  last  letter  to  Crumwell,  is  dated  also  from  Padua,  on  the  12th  of  December. 
"  Pleaseth  it  your  Lordship  to  understand  that  I  being  at  this  present  advertised  by  my  brother- 
in-law's  letters,  that  it  is  your  Lordship's  pleasure  and  commandment,  that,  with  all  haste,  I 
do  repair  myself  to  England  ;  shall  herein,  as  in  all  other  matters,  most  gladly  satisfy  your 
Lordship's  mind.  If  it  might  have  been  with  your  Lordship's  favourable  license,  and  security 
here,  I  would  gladly  have  tarried  a  year  longer  in  these  part.s,  at  least  to  have  seen  more  of 
Italy.  And  in  hope  that  I  may,  with  your  leave,  return  again,  so  that  I  may  be  here  in  safe- 
guard, I  intend  so  to  depart  hence,  that  no  man  doth  or  shall  know,  by  me,  that  I  come  to 
England ;  but  do  persuade  unto  all  my  familiars  here,  that  I  ride  to  Cologne,  to  commune  and 
agree  with  Mr.  fVill'tam  IFarham,  sometime  Archdeacon  of  Canterbury,  for  the  permutation  of 
a  prebend! !"  and  this  was  chiefly  to  escape  the  suspicions  of  Friar  Petjlo.  "  which  hath  shewed 
me  much  of  his  secrets.  "—Co«0)t  MS.,  Nero,  B.  vi.,  fol.  54  .ind  128. 

On  the  part  of  the  letter  writer,  all  this  is  sufficiently  melancholy ;  but  what  can  be  said  for 
those  to  whom  hcnddressed  his  letters?  The  truth  of  history  must  not  be  sacrificed,  in  deference 
to  any  individual ;  but  the  crooked  policy  of  this  man,  reaching  down  to  the  end  of  1.W8,  bears 
but  too  evidently  on  the  characters  of  those  who  supported  him.  To  posterity,  he  has  been  of 
service,  as  to  facts  reported,  when  there  was  clearly  no  temptation  to  deceive  ;.  but  if  Cranmcv 
thought  hira  "  a  very  honest  man,"  he  can  only  be  left  alone  in  his  opinion. 


534  DONNE,  THE  ACCOMPLICE  WITH  PHILLIPS.  [uoOK  I. 

has  hitherto  remained  unobserved  or  unknown,  at  least  as  the 
crafty  assistant  of  Phillips ;  and  for  three  hundred  years  his 
name  has  escaped  that  disgrace,  which,  it  is  to  be  feared,  must 
now  ever  rest  upon  it.  In  extenuation  of  himself,  Phillips  not 
only  pled  his  youth,  but  complained  of  his  having  been  the 
victim  of  "■  evil  counsel ;''"'  and  a  shrewd  Cistertian  monk,  so 
much  older  than  himself,  would  not  be  slow  to  tender  it,  on 
such  an  occasion  ;  while  the  inoney^  with  which  Phillips  was 
so  plentifully  furnished,  and  of  which  he  boasted,  proves  that 
there  were  other  powerful  prompters  to  the  heinous  deed. 

The  history  of  Donne  is  far  more  remarkable  than  that  of  his  pre- 
tended Master  at  Antwerp,  as  well  as,  in  every  sense,  more  melancholy  : 
and  when  it  is  once  known  that  this  very  man  afterwards,  for  a  season, 
exercised  all  manner  of  episcopal  jurisdiction,  even  in  the  diocese  of  Lon- 
don ;  or,  in  other  words,  that,  by  Cranmer's  appointment,  he  filled  up  the 
space  between  the  deprivation  of  Bonner,  and  the  appointment  of  Rid- 
ley, and  was  at  last  buried  honourably  in  St.  Paul's  ;  it  must  appear 
passing  strange  that  he  should  have  escaped  the  searching  inquiries  not 
only  of  Foxe  and  Strype,  but  of  all  later  historians  ;  as  the  most  notable 
person  engaged  in  seizing,  though  no  doubt  hired  to  seize,  the  long-per- 
secuted Translator  of  the  Scriptures.  It  is  only  in  this  degraded  charac- 
ter, and  as  the  tool  of  a  well-known  party,  that  he  demands  any  atten- 
tion ;  but  as  such,  the  following  particulars  ought  not  to  be  withheld. 

Presently,  the  reader  will  presume  that  Donne  must  have  been  a  stu- 
dent of  Trinity  Hall,  Cambridge  ;  but  the  earliest  distinct  notice  which 
we  have  found  of  him,  is  in  connexion  with  his  Convent.  The  transac- 
tion occurred  under  Fitzjames,  Bishop  of  London,  though  it  be  recorded 
in  the  register  of  Tunstal,  his  successor.  The  Abbey  of  Stratford,  to 
which  Phillips  so  distinctly  referred,  within  the  parish  of  Westham,  in 
the  vicinity  of  London,  and  of  which  Donne  was  a  conspicuous  inmate, 
had  been  founded  in  the  year  1135,  for  Benedictine  or  Cistertian  Monks. 
The  Abbot  and  Convent  being  proprietors  of  the  Rectory,  and  patrons  of 
the  Vicarage  of  Westham,  a  tedious  suit  arose,  in  1.514,  between  them 
and  William  Shragger,  then  Vicar  ;  which,  after  discussion  in  the  Arch- 
bishop's Court,  had  been  removed  by  appeal  to  Rome."'^  At  last,  on  the 
7th  of  February  1517,  a  "composition  real"  between  the  said  Abbot  and 
Vicar  was  executed  ;  and  on  this  occasion  "  the  provident  and  religious 
man,  Gabriel  Donne,  Monk  of  the  blessed  Mary  of  Stratford,  of  the  order 
of  Cistcrtians,"  .appeared  and  stood  proctor  for  his  brethren  in  the  con- 


ies And  to  Home  it.self,  ShniRRer  repaired  ;  for  from  tlicncc  he  corresponded  with  Wolsev. 
Vitell.  B.  ii„  fol.  112,  MX  dated  2d  Pccembcr  l.';14.  In  y);Y(/.TC  uf  1  he  Hisliop  of 'Worcester !  Sec 
before  p.  13. 


153G.J  DONNE,   BECOME   AN   ABBOT.  535 

vent.'**'  Something  must  have  occurreJ,  which  occasioned  Tunstal  to 
revise  this  proceeding,  just  before  he  retired  from  the  diocese  of  London 
to  that  of  Durham,  in  1530,  and  hence  its  insertion  in  his  register.''*^ 

From  this  period  we  hear  nothing  more  of  the  monk  till  he  appears 
as  the  companion  of  Phillips.  After  their  success  at  Antwerp,  Donne 
resided  for  six  months  longer  with  his  pretended  master  at  Louvain,  and 
lent  his  aid  in  the  persecution  of  Tyudale  ;  being,  no  doubt,  by  far  the 
most  able  of  those  two  Englishmen,  to  whom  Mr.  Poyntz  referred ;  as 
"  applying  it  sore,  taking  great  pains  to  translate  out  of  English  into 
Latin,  those  things  which  might  make  against  him,  so  that  the  clergy 
there  might  understand  and  condemn  him."'''  The  monk,  in  short, 
had  fulfilled  his  commission,  when,  we  have  been  told  by  Phillips  him- 
self, through  Theobald,  he  returned  to  England  in  June  1535,  and  to 
an  Abbey  in  the  west  of  England.  The  information  was  perfectly  cor- 
rect, both  as  to  place  and  time.  The  Abbey  to  which  Donne  returned 
was  that  of  Buclcfaster,  or  Buckfastleigh  in  Devonshire."^  The  Abbot, 
John  Rede,  was  then  within  a  few  months  of  his  death  ;  and  who  should 
step  into  his  place,  but  this  very  monk  1  That  a  man  who  was  abroad, 
should  at  this  time  return  from  Louvain,  and  almost  immediately  suc- 
ceed to  such  an  appointment,  certainly  carries  all  the  appearance  of  a 
reward  for  service  done.  His  friends  at  home  must  have  interested 
themselves  on  his  behalf,  and  Secretary  Crumwell,  if  he  was  consulted, 
may  have  acceded  to  the  appointment  ;  but,  at  all  events,  Donne  be- 
came the  Abbot  of  Buckfaster,  with  ten  Cistertian  monks  vmder  him,  and 
at  this  very  period  ;  so  that  when  the  Convocation  came  to  be  summoned 
to  meet  in  June,  1536,  or  about  four  months  before  Tyndale's  martyr- 
dom, there  he  was  actually  present  in  St.  Paul's  I  But,  what  of  necessity, 
must  have  been  the  feelings  of  this  man,  if  he  had  any  feeling,  when 


'09  See  Tunstal's  Register,  p.  145.  The  substance  of  this  composition,  which  was  confirmed 
by  Leo  X.,  12th  June  1519,  just  before  Shragger's  death,  is  correctly  given  in  Newcourt's  Reper- 
torium,  ii.,  3(13-4. 

11"  This  is  an  insertion  analogous  to  that  of  Leo's  Bull  of  152(»,  under  1531).  See  the  explana- 
tion already  given  in  note  26,  page  2(53.  The  probable  reason  for  Tunstal  examining  the  transac- 
tion was  tliis.  The  former  appointments  to  the  Vicarage  of  Westham  h.ad  been  generally  en- 
tered in  tlie  London  Register ;  but  that  of  Robert  Paynter,  the  Vicar  of  1530,  had  not ;  as  he  had 
been  inducted  during  a  vacancy  by  Warham,  five  days  before  Tunstal's  own  appointment.  But 
be  this  as  it  may,  by  this  "  composition"  the  Abbot  and  Monks  had  set  aside  the  endowment  of 
tlie  Vicarage,  and  in  lieu  of  it  settled  £3!l,  13s.  8d.  on  the  Vicar  and  his  successors,  which,  after 
the  surrender  of  the  Abbey,  was  paid  by  tlie  Crown  till  1G38.  "Abbots,"  said  old  Fuller,  "robbed 
Parish  Vicars,  by  appropriations,  by  decrying  their  performances,  and  magnifying  their  own 
merits."  "What  was  the  devotion  of  a  silly  priest,  in  comparison  of  a  corjioratiun  of  prayers 
from  a  whole  monastery  ?"  But  if  thus  they  acted,  Henry  will  before  long  make  a  clean  sweep 
of  them  all.  The  annual  rental  of  the  Abbey  of  Stratford,  when  surrendered  in  March  1538,  by 
William  Huddlcstone  the  last  Abbot,  was  iC(;52,  or  A'900O  of  the  present  day.  Next  year  tlie 
Convent  Church  and  site  of  the  Monastery  were  given  by  Henry  to  Sir  Peter  Mewtas,  who  had 
been  Ambassador  in  France  ! — Lyson's  Environs  of  London,  iv.,  p.  264. 

1 1 1  It  is,  however,  extremely  probable  that  the  other  Englishman,  was  not  Phillips,  but  Friar 
Bnckenhawfrimi  Kdinburgh,  Latimer's  old  acquaintance,  whom  he  had  ousted  from  Cambridge. 
Wc  know  now  for  certain,  that  Buckcnham  was  there,  and  the  conviction  of  Theobald  was  that 
Friar  Buckenham  was  maintjtined  at  the  expense  of  rhillii>s.     See  I'age  424  and  428. 

112  See  Dugdale's  .Moiiast..  vol.  v..  pji.  .■f84-3a'). 


536  PRESENT   IN   THE  CONVOCATION.  [book  I. 

listeuiug  to  the  bold  and  noble  discourse  of  Latimer  I  For  that  he  sat 
there,  and  heard  it  all,  there  can  now  be  no  doubt ;  since  his  name  ap- 
pears subscribed  to  the  articles  then  issued — Gabriel,  Abbas  de  Buck- 
fastria}^^  He  was  the  last  Abbot,  and  surrendered  his  monastery  to 
the  King  on  the  25th  of  February  1539,  when  he  received  a  pension  of 
^120  annually.""*  Upon  this  sum,  as  it  was  equal  to  £1800  in  our  day, 
he  might  have  lived  comfortably  enough ;  but  farther  promotion  soon 
awaited  him.  A  congenial  spirit,  Edmund  Bonner,  had  come  to  the 
diocese  of  London,  and  on  the  16th  of  March  1541,  Donne  became  no  less 
than  a  Prebendary  of  St.  Paul's  ;''^  and,  again,  in  1544,  on  the  25th 
of  October,  he  obtained,  very  near  to  his  old  abode,  the  Rectory  of  Step- 
ney "  sine  ciira"  by  the  death  of  Richard  Layton,  one  of  the  men  who 
had  visited  the  monasteries.''** 

Five  years  after  this,  or  in  Sejjtember  1549,  Bonner  was  deprived  of 
his  place  as  Bishop  of  London,  upon  which  Cranmer  officially  interposed. 
"  The  Archbishop^''  says  Strype,  "  constituted  Gabriel  Donne,  Residentiary 
of  St.  PauVs,  to  be  his  official,  and  keeper  of  the  spiritualities,  to  exercise 
all  manner  of  Epjiscop)al  jurisdiction  in  the  said  city  and  diocese!" — so 
that  all  this  he  continued  to  do,  till  the  appointment  of  Nicholas  Ridley 
in  April  1550."? 

The  Prebendary  then  remained  in  his  stall,  of  course  ;  and  now,  for 
nearly  three  years,  he  came  under  the  influence  of  one  of  the  finest 
characters  of  the  age ;  but  there  was  no  change  upon  him  !  On  the 
contrary,  Donne  was  one  of  those  very  men,  so  pointedly  referred  to  by 
Ridley,  amongst  his  expressive  and  touching  farewells,  written  before 
his  martyrdom  in  1555.  These  were  his  words, — "Oh  !  London,  London, 
to  whom  now  may  I  speak  in  thee,  or  whom  shall  I  bid  farewell  1  Shall 
I  speak  to  the  Prebendaries  of  PauVs  ?  Alas  I  all  that  loved  God's 
Word,  and  were  the  true  setters  forth  thereof,  are  now,  as  I  hear  say, 
some  burnt  and  slain,  some  exiled  and  banished,  and  some  holden  in 
hard  prison,  and  appointed  daily  to  be  put  to  most  cruel  death,  for 
Christ's  Gospel's  sake.  As  for  the  rest  of  them,  I  know  they  could  never 
brook  vie  ii'ell,  nor  could  I  erer  delight  in  them." 

"3  A  facsimile  of  his  signature  may  be  seen  in  the  first  volume  of  DodJ's  Church  History, 
now  republishing.  It  is  the  44th  name,  and,  curiously  enough,  stands  next  to  that  of  Huddle- 
ston,  the  last  Abbot  of  Slrnlfoni,  of  which  Donne  had  been  a  conspicuous  inmate. 

114  Dugdale. — These  pensions  granted  for  life,  were  very  unequal;  and  as  the  revenue  of 
Buckfaster  was  surrendered  at  £Hiti,  lis.  2d.,  (or  £7000  of  the  present  day,)  the  sum  granted  to 
Donne  was  very  large.  He  must  have  had  friends  in  the  Augmentation  Court,  where  Rich,  the 
Chancellor,  was  a  notorious  enemy  of  the  new  learning.  The  ruins  of  this  abbey,  supplied 
materials  for  many  of  the  houses  in  the  existing  village  of  Bltck/asdvif/h,  three  miles  from 
Ashburton. 

i'5  Occupying  Mapesbury,  parish  of  Wilsdon,  Middlesex,  or  the  twelfth  stall  on  the  rigljt  of 
the  choir. — Newcourt's  Repert.,  vol.  i.,  p.  ly.'i. 

116  Newcourt,  p.  739;  Wood's  Fasti  by  Bliss,  i>.  18.— The  patron  was  Richard  Williams,  ali<i.<: 
Crumwell,  pro  hac  vice- 

"7  Strypc's  .\nnals.— The  letter  of  Theobald  to  the  Archbishop  himself  in  July  15,'ir>,  )i.  i-2n. 
reads  very  awkwardly  afterthis  appointment.  For  whatever  may  be  said  of  Cranmer  himself,  he 
certainly  was  associated  with  a  miserable  class  of  men,  wliethcr  relating  to  character  or  conduct. 


1536.]  FINALLY    UUIUED    IN    ST.    PAUL'S.  537 

Such,  then,  was  the  judgment  of  Ridley,  little  more  than  three  years 
before  Donne  expired,  on  the  5th  of  December  1558.  His  executors 
laid  his  body  close  by  the  high  altar  of  St.  Paul's  ;  and  told  posterity 
that  his  spirit  was  gone  to  the  regions  of  happiness  and  peace,  by  en- 
graving on  his  tombstone  that  posthumous  righteousness,  so  often,  and 
so  falsely  imputed  by  the  living  to  the  dead.^^^  Strype  has  said  that  he 
was  "  buried  honourably  in  St.  Paul's,  on  the  9th  of  December  1558." 
It  was  only  the  day  before  Reginald  Pole,  the  last  English  Cardinal,  was 
carried  to  Canterbury  for  interment,  and  only  four  days  before  Queen 
Maiy  was  laid  in  her  grave  at  Westminster.  They  were  all  three 
noted  opponents,  and  went  to  render  their  several  accounts  about  the 
same  time. 

We  now  suppose  that  this  monk  had  been  partly  educated  at  Trinity 
Hall,  Cambridge.  The  presumption  is  founded  upon  his  will;  for,  after 
the  payment  of  his  debts  and  other  legacies,  the  surplusage  of  his 
estate  was  mainly  devoted  to  that  College.  The  Master  and  Fellows 
of  Trinity  Hall  receiving  £120,  (equal  to  £1800  now  ;)  with  this  sum  a 
scholarship  was  founded,  well  known  ever  since,  the  student  being 
distinguished  as  "  Mr.  Gabriel  Donne's  scholar."  If  any  one,  therefore, 
when  visiting  the  beautiful  little  chapel  of  Trinity  Hall,  will  look  up  to 
the  roof,  there  among  fifteen  coats  of  arms,  he  will  find  "  the  fourth  on 
the  north  side  is  B,  for  the  residentiary  prebend  of  St.  Paul's,  a  bene- 
factor ;"  and  on  the  shield  itself  he  Avill  see  an  emblem,  the  significancy 
of  which  has  never  before  been  kno-wn  ;  for  it  is  no  other  than  that  of 
a  ^Volf  rampant.  "  Azure,  a  wolf  rampant,  and  a  chief  Argent,  for 
Gabriel  Donne  !  "119 

Now,  it  is  not  unworthy  of  notice,  that  Trinity  Hall  was  quite  a  pet 
of  Stephen  Gardiner's.  His  appointment  as  the  Warden  or  Master  of  it, 
he  held,  excepting  only  a  few  years,  from  the  year  1525,  throughout  his 
varied  life  ;  and  so  for  ten  years  before  Donne's  appearance  at  Antwerp. 
Is  it  now,  therefore,  likely,  that  our  Cistertian  monk  was  unknown  to 
Tunstal  in  1530,  or  to  Gardiner,  both  before  and  after  ?  Certainly  not. 
And  since  Gardiner  by  his  will  left  £100  to  Trinity  Hall,  and  Richard 
Nix,  the  old  Bishop  of  Norwich,  of  whom  we  have  heard  so  much,  founded 
three  fellowships  and  two  scholarships  in  the  same  ;  as  we  have  already 
fixed  on  the  accomplice,  so  there  can  be  little  doubt,  that  we  have  here 
also  two,  if  not  three,  of  that  guilty  band  or  faction,  who  were  deeply 
implicated  in  the  seizure  of  Tyndale. 

Such,  at  all  events,  was  the  end  of  the  companion  of  Phillips  ;  and 


"8  This  cvitaph,  with  all  others,  was  destroyed  in  the  great  fire  of  IGfiC;  but  such  as  it  was, 
it  may  he  found  in  Dufidale's  St.  Paul's.     Sec  ed.  of  1821,  p.  4'i. 

"!>  Or  see  Coles'  MS.  in  the  British  Museum,  under  Trinity  Hall,  where  the  shield  is  copied. 
As  prebendary,  Donne  was  succeeded  by  the  well-known  .Tolin  Harpsfield,  on  the  lutli  Decem- 
ber.    Wood's  .\thcna-  by  Bliss,  i...  441. 


538  DIED  THE   SAME  MAN.  [BOOK  I, 

since  he  did  return  to  England,  it  is  perfectly  consistent  with  the  whole 
story,  that  he  should  have  been  advanced  into  notice  and  power,  by  such 
a  monster  of  cruelty  as  Edmund  Bonner.  Permitted  by  the  long-suffer- 
ing of  God,  to  exist  for  twenty-three  years  after  his  sad  exploit  at  Ant- 
werp, he  seems  to  have  died  without  any  remorse.  Living  as  he  did, 
and  for  some  time  in  such  favourable  cu'cumstances,  under  Ridley,  nay, 
till  above  thirty  editions  of  the  entire  Scriptures,  and  about  seventy  of 
the  New  Testament,  had  issued  from  the  press  ;  all  was  in  vain  ! 

Such  were  the  two  men  who  had  been  richly  hired  to  en- 
snare and  seize  Tyndale.  In  the  one  accomplice,  there  is 
to  be  seen  nothing  but  a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond  to  his  dying 
day  ;  in  the  other,  a  man  who  had  time  given  him  for  reflec- 
tion, and  space  for  repentance ;  but  we  search  in  vain  for 
either  the  one  or  the  other.  So  true  it  is,  in  many  instances, 
that  though  "  favour  be  shown  to  the  wicked,  yet  will  he  not 
learn  righteousness ;  he  will  not  behold  the  majesty  of  the 
Lord."  It  is  not  for  us  to  draw  rash  conclusions  as  to  the 
state  of  the  dead,  and  far  from  our  province,  to  pronounce 
judgment ;  while  no  man  can  say,  with  impunity,  that  the 
M'ays  of  Jehovah  are  not  equal.  The  awful  consequences  of 
cruelty  and  sin  are  cei'tain,  though  not  immediate;  and 
"  though  a  sinner  do  evil  an  hundred  times,"  said  the  wisest 
of  men,  "  and  his  days  be  prolonged  ;  yet  surely  I  know  that 
it  shall  be  well  with  them  that  fear  God,"  with  them  only 
"  who  fear  before  him." 


Having  thus  attended  Tyndale  to  the  stake,  and  followed 
his  devoted  friend  Poyntz  to  an  honourable  tomb ;  as  well  as 
seen  the  grave  close  on  the  hirelings  who  apprehended  our 
Translator ;  it  is  time  to  enquire  into  other  events  at  the 
moment  of  his  martyrdom,  and  immediately  succeeding  it, 
both  on  the  Continent  and  at  home. 

To  those  who  have  never  before  been  aware  of  the  fact,  it 
nmst  appear  extraordinary,  that  the  Martyrdom  of  Tyndale, 
the  first  translator  of  our  Bible  into  English,  should  stand  so 
emphatically  by  itself.  There  was  no  other,  with  which  the 
Councils  of  England,  and  of  a  Continental  kingdom,  were  both 
concerned;  no  other,  in  the  guilt  of  which,  both  our  own  country, 
and  a  foreign  power,  were  alike  involved.  The  eyes  of  Henry 
the  Eighth,  and  those  of  his  Ministers,  were  wide  open,  when 
the  martyr  fell   under  a  decree  of  the  Emperor  Charles  V. 


1536.3  STATE   OF   THE   COiNTlNENT.  539 

Considered  as  an  event,  amidst  all  the  wide-spread  and  long- 
continued  violence  of  the  times,  his  martyrdom  rises  up  to 
view,  and  appears  like  a  conspicuous  solitary  column.  If 
there  be  any  memento  inscribed,  it  is  a  double  one — German 
on  one  side,  but  English  on  the  other.  In  the  history  of 
such  a  martyrdom,  we  should  be  liable  to  the  charge  of  omis- 
sion, or  injustice,  were  we  to  pass  on  without  observing  con- 
temporary events,  whether  relating  to  the  Emperor  abroad, 
or  to  the  King  at  home. 

The  time  of  Tjndale's  death,  and  the  months  following  it,  will  now 
reward  notice.  He  had  been  slain  on  the  6th  of  October,  and  the  events 
in  England  have,  in  part,  been  traced  up  nearly  to  that  month  ;  but 
those  of  the  Continent  as  well  as  England,  afterwards,  now  require  to  be 
glanced  at :  in  other  words,  the  situation  of  the  Emperor,  under  whose 
authority  he  was  sacrificed,  and  that  of  Henry  and  his  Council,  who,  to 
say  the  least,  had  so  heartlessly  left  him  to  perish.  In  the  scale  of 
creation,  the  death  of  Tyndale  was  nothing  more  than  that  of  any  other 
human  being,  and,  therefore,  in  itself,  an  every-day  occurrence  ;  though 
after  all  that  we  have  read,  it  will  be  conceded  that  he  was  no  common 
character.  He  had  engaged  attention  not  only  abroad,  but  especially  at 
home,  and  that  of  public  men,  both  dead  and  still  alive.  But  then,  be- 
sides, he  was  not  merely  the  only  conspicuous  Englishman  thus  slain,  with 
the  full  cognition  of  this  country  and  the  Continent  ;  but  the  only 
translator  of  the  Sacred  Yohime  in  Europe,  so  put  to  death.  The  moral 
crime  attached  itself,  at  once,  to  home  and  foreign  authorities. 

It  is  true,  that  although  the  hand  of  God  ought  to  be  acknowledged  in 
all  human  aiFairs,  hasty  conclusions  respecting  cause  and  efi'ect,  or  sin 
and  punishment,  during  the  present  life,  are  ever  to  be  avoided  :  but 
still,  coincidences  in  point  of  time,  ought  never  to  pass  unheeded.  If 
there  be  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth,  let  Him  be  acknowledged  as 
mvich  as  may  be  ;  and  if  there  be  storms  in  Providence,  Avhen  they  arc 
once  fully  exhausted,  or  have  drifted  to  leeward,  it  is  no  more  than 
what  is  due,  to  mark  simultaneous  effects.  In  the  natural  world,  this 
is  never  omitted  ;  and  why  should  it  ever  be  in  the  moral  ? 

To  Charles  V.  it  so  happened,  that  this  was  the  season  of  his  greatest 
personal  mortification.  Last  year,  he  could  express  himself,  with 
marked  severity,  on  the  death  of  Sir  Thomas  More  by  Henry  VIII. — a 
piece  of  cruelty  for  which  he  has  been  justly  reprobated,  from  that  day 
to  the  present  ;  but  of  Tyndale's  martyrdom,  we  hear  not  a  single  word, 
either  from  the  Emperor,  or  any  of  his  Council,  though  it  was  such 
a  conspicuous  consequence  of  Jus  own  cruel  and  blasjihemous  decree. 

Composed,  it  has  1)ccn  said,  and  regular  in  his  deportment,  strictly 
attentive  to  decorum,  and  therefore  conspicuous  for  concealing  his  pas- 


.'540  CONDITION   OF  THE   EMPEROR.  [book  I. 

sions,  Charles  was  at  last  intoxicated  by  success  ;  so  in  April,  at  Rome, 
this  year,  he  let  himself  down,  by  proposing  to  settle  all  quarrels  with 
Francis  in  single  combat,  on  an  island  or  a  bridge,  or  on  board  a  galley. 
And  though  apparently  soon  sensible  of  the  impropriety  of  his  bravado,  in 
a  haughty  spirit  he  immediately  prepared  for  war.  He  put  himself  at 
the  head  of  his  forces  on  the  6th  of  May,  and  in  July  he  was  reviewing 
his  army  on  the  plain  of  Coni,  in  Piedmont.  His  officers  warned  him  of 
the  dangers  connected  with  thus  invading  France,  and  entreated  him  to 
pause  and  consider  ;  but  he  adhered  obstinately  to  his  plan,  and  ad- 
vanced. Before  firing  a  shot,  he  began  to  divide  his  future  conquests, 
promising  to  his  generals,  lands,  honours,  and  offices  in  France.  "  San- 
guine in  extreme  belief  of  great  success,"  he  led  his  army  forward.  He 
had  with  him,  as  on  other  occasions,  the  active  and  celebrated  Antony 
de  Leyva,  who  had  been  his  main  stay  for  many  years — who  had  raised 
himself  from  the  ranks,  to  be  General  of  the  imperial  forces  in  Italy, 
Austria,  and  Africa — who  had  so  defended  Pavia  against  the  King  of 
France  himself,  and  who  had  now  even  urged  the  present  expedition. 

The  Emperor  attempted  to  surprise  Marseilles,  and  laid  siege  to 
Aries,  but  failed  in  both.  The  Imperial  army  in  the  Low  Countries, 
also  engaged  under  Henry  of  Nassau,  was  attacking  the  north  of 
France,  and  had  sat  down  before  Peronne,  the  vii'gin  fortress,  only 
about  120  miles  distant  from  Vilvorde.  "  While  the  Emperor  remained 
in  France,"  says  Turner,  "  a  great  scandal  fastened  upon  his  name,  by 
the  Dauphin  dying  when  coming  to  act  against  him.  The  unjust 
charge,  that  he  had  poisoned  the  French  prince,  grievously  wounded 
his  feelings,  by  its  defaming  imputation." 

But  now  the  month  of  September  came.  On  the  10th,  the  troops  of 
Flanders  were  compelled  to  raise  the  siege  of  Peronne.'^"  Sickness  had 
seized  the  Imperial  army  in  France,  of  which  about  30,000  died  ;  but, 
above  all,  de  Leyva  himself,  and,  according  to  Herbert,  on  the  1.5th  of 
September.  The  Emperor,  "  ordering  his  soldiers  to  provide  themselves 
with  food  for  several  days,  suddenly  decamped  from  Aix  to  Frejus,  and 
so  precipitately,  that  the  line  of  his  retreat  was  strewed  with  dead,  sick, 
arms,  and  horses,  while  he  marched  painfully  to  Nice."  Bellay,  an  eye- 
witness, compares  their  miseries  to  those  which  the  Jews  suffered  from 
the  victorious  and  destructive  arms  of  the  Romans.  Having  got  to 
Genoa,  as  Charles  could  not  bear  to  expose  himself  to  the  scorn  of  the 
Italians,  he  embarked  for  Spain  in  November. 

"  As  this  humbled  the  Emperor's  arrogance,  no  less  than  it  checked 
his  power,  he  was  mortified  more  sensibly,  on  this  occasion,  than  on  any 
other,  during  the   course   of  the  long  contests  between   him  and  the 


120  Often  styled  Pucelle,  because  it  had  never  been  taken  ;  and  never  was,  till  a  few  days  alter 
tlie  battle  of  Waterloo,  in  IHl."..  bv  the  Britl,'ih, 


153(J.]  STATK  OK   ENGLAND.  541 

French  monarch."  ^^^  No  man,  ever  afterwards,  requu-ed  to  remind  him 
of  the  autumn,  or  of  the  months  of  Septeinher  and  October  1536. 

Upon  returning  into  England,  from  Vilvorde  ;  whether  Henry  VIII. 
was  ever  before  in  such  pertiu'bation  as  to  his  own  personal  safety,  or 
the  security  of  his  croAvn,  may  be  left  to  the  reader's  judgment.  The 
King  shall,  presently,  speak  for  himself,  and  through  the  medium  of  his 
Secretary,  to  whom  he  dictated  the  expressions.^^^ 

The  dissolution  of  the  lesser  Monasteries  had  begun  to  be  severely  felt 
long  before  the  present  moment,  and  had  been  operating  powerfully  for 
months,  throughout  the  kingdom,  in  fomenting  discontent ;  while  the 
attention  of  the  government  and  of  the  metropolis  had  been  suddenly 
absorpt  by  the  King's  inexorable  haste  to  get  rid  of  his  Queen,  as  well 
as  to  call  a  new  Parliament,  and  an  unprecedented  Convocation,  with 
Crumwell  for  its  presiding  Head. 

By  the  first  measure,  thousands  of  persons  were  sent  abroad  to  seek 
their  living  as  they  might,  with  little  more  than  forty  shillings  to  meet 
the  change  in  their  cii'cumstances.  Rents  to  the  amount  of  thirty-two 
thousand  pounds  were  coming  in  to  the  Crown,  besides  one  hundred 
thousand  pounds  in  moveables  ;  and  the  Commissioners  were,  of  coui'se, 
not  forgetful  of  themselves,  at  the  moment  they  were  also  filling  the 
coffers  of  his  Majesty.  By  way  of  a  peace-offering,  on  the  17th  of 
August,  Henry,  by  his  letters  patent,  had  given  back,  w  perfetuam 
eleemosynam,  first  five  Abbeys,  and  then  ten,  besides  sixteen  Nunneries, 
or  thirty-one  houses  in  all :  but  this  was  merely  a  blind  for  the  moment, 
as  they  were  swept  away,  with  all  others,  in  two  years  afterwards. 

Still  the  people  were  discontented — and  then  came  "  the  Articles 
devised  to  stablish  Christian  quietness,  and  to  banish  all  contentious 
opinions."  But  though  the  friends  of  "  the  old  learning"  and  the  olden 
time,  might  be  reduced  to  silence,  nay,  by  their  signatures  individually, 
to  apparent  acquiescence  within  the  Convocation,  it  by  no  means  followed 
that  they  and  their  coadjutors  were  to  be  "  quiet"  afterwards. 

Then  came  the  "injunctions"  of  the  New  Vicar-General  and  Vice- 
gerent. These  affected  the  pockets  of  many,  by  bereaving  them  of 
profits  derived  from  images,  and  relics,  and  pilgrimages.  Thus  the  se- 
cular and  regular  clergy  were  cemented  into  one,  while  the  mitred  Ab- 
bots, the  magnates  of  the  kingdom,  in  alarm  at  coming  events,  which 
already  cast  their  shadows  before,  were  secretly  cherishing  the  spirit  of 
resistance. 

The  time  for  its  display  seemed  to  be  suspended  for  a  little  season  ;  but 
this  may  be  accounted  for.      There  was  a  harvest  on  the  ground,  and 


121  Robertson.     Turner. 

122  By  far  the  most  graphical  aocount  of  Henry's  agitation  was  never  puhlishcd  till  witliin 
these  few  years,  in  tlie  Government  State  Pa)icrs ;  and  as  they  have  yet  been  seen  only  by  a  few 
persons,  we  may  be  excused  for  introducing  the  reader  so  fully  to  his  Majesty. 


542  PERTURBATION  [^BOOK  I. 

the  people  were  engaged  till  they  had  reaped  it ;  Init  no  sooner  was  this 
accomplished,  than  they  were  ready  for  action. 

If  we  now  return  to  the  King ;  in  the  month  of  July  he  had  met  with 
a  severe  hlow  by  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Richmond  in  his  eighteenth 
year,  a  natural  child  of  his  own,  on  whom  he  doated,  and  on  whom  it 
is  thought,  in  the  defect  of  male  issue,  he  had  fixed  his  eye  as  successor 
to  the  throne.  After  this,  consoling  himself  in  the  company  of  his  new 
Queen,  he  was  looking  forward  to  her  coronation.  But  September  came, 
and  the  prospect  was  never  realised.  Queen  Anne  was  the  last  of  his 
Queens  ever  crowned. 

During  this  month,  disease  in  London  had  been  g-athering  strength. 
It  was  the  plague  !  And  at  Westminster  seems  to  have  been  specially 
virulent.  Sir*  Ralph  Sadler  is  writing  to  Crumwell  from  Windsor,  on 
Thursday  the  27th  of  September.  "After  supper,"  says  he,  "  his  Grace  re- 
turned into  his  chamber,  and  immediately  called  me  to  him,  saying,  that 
he  had  digested  and  resolved  the  contents  of  yoiu"  letters,  and  perceiving 
how  the  iTlagiie  had  reigned  in  Westminster,  and  in  the  Abbey  itself, 
his  Grace  said  that  he  stood  in  a  suspense,  whether  it  were  best  to  put 
off  the  time  of  the  coronation,  for  a  season.  Wherefore  it  were  good 
that  all  my  counsel  were  assembled  here,  that  we  might  consult  and  de- 
termine upon  every  thing  touching  the  same  accordingly.  And  so,  quod 
he,  write  to  my  Lord  Privy  Seal,  and  send  him  word  that  my  Lord  Ad- 
miral (Fitzwilliam)  is  here,  Mr.  Controller  (Poulet)  and  the  Bishop  of 
Hereford  (Fox)  be  here,  and  pray  him  also  to  come  hither  undelay- 
edly,  and  then  we  shall  soon  be  at  a  point.''^^^ 

Crumwell,  however,  had  other  business  to  engross  him,  and  in  four  days 
after  this,  Henry  also  will  have  other  points  to  settle  ;  widely  different 
from  any  connected  with  the  pomp  or  paraphernalia  of  a  Queen's  corona- 
tion. Next  Monday  morning,  the  2d  of  October,  an  insurrection  broke 
out  at  Louth  in  Lincolnshire.  The  fiuy  of  the  populace  was  directed 
against  the  proceedings  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Commissioners,  about  to  hold 
their  visitation  that  day.  The  King,  it  must  be  remembered,  had  no 
standing  army,  so  that  the  consternation  at  Court  was  extreme.  The 
exciter  of  the  people,  was  the  Prior  of  Barlings,  one  of  the  suppressed 
monasteries,  Dr.  Matthew  Makerel  ;  and  their  leader,  not  the  Doctor  in 
disguise,  as  different  historians  have  affirmed,  but  one  Melton,  under  the 
appellation  of  Captain  Cobler.  The  insurgents  stowed  some  tact  in  send- 
ing up  an  address,  respectful  in  language,  explaining  the  reasons  for 
their  resistance,  and  their  fears,  that  the  system  of  spoliation  now  going 
on,  would  extend  even  to  the  parish  Churches.  The  reply  of  his  Ma- 
jesty was  accompanied  with  substantial  proof,  that  he  was  determined  to 
crush  the  parties  ;  as  the  Duke  of  Suffolk,  the  Earls  of  Shrewsbury,  Rut- 

123  Gov.  State  Papers,  vol.  i.,  p.  4fiO. 


1536.]  OK  THK   KING.  543 

land,  and  Huntingdon  were  at  the  same  moment  despatched,  with  all 
the  force  they  could  collect.  The  style  in  which  Henry  addressed  his 
subjects  was  sufficiently  flain,  quite  characteristic  of  the  man,  though 
not  over-wise. 

"  How  presumptuous  are  ye,  the  rude  commons  of  one  shire,  and  that 
one  of  the  most  hriite  and  bemtly  of  the  whole  realm,  and  of  least  experi- 
ence, to  find  fault  with  your  Prince  for  the  electing  of  his  Counsellors 
and  Prelates  !"  Nor  were  any  of  the  demands  or  complaints  treated 
with  less  haughtiness ;  but  after  ordering  instant  submission,  one  hun- 
dred victims,  including  theu*  leaders,  Avere  demanded  for  punishment  I'^"* 

Such  language,  as  might  have  been  anticipated,  only  produced  greater 
irritation,  of  which  the  Duke  of  Suffolk  having  informed  the  Court,  on 
the  12th  of  October,  a  very  different  style  was  adopted  ;  and  having  at 
last  succeeded  in  persuading  the  people  to  disperse,  they  generally  re- 
turned home  the  next  day. 

This  good  news  arrived  at  Windsor  on  Sunday  the  15th ;  but  that 
very  day,  tidings  far  more  formidable  than  those  of  the  last  fortnight, 
also  reached  the  castle.  The  more  daring  of  the  Lincolnshire  men  had 
shaped  their  course  northward  towards  Yorkshire,  and  there  "  the  heath 
was  on  fire."  This  was  called  "  the  Pilgrimage  of  Grace,"  under  a  man 
of  some  property  in  that  county,  Robert  Aske.  Lord  Shrewsbury,  and 
after  him  the  Dvike  of  Norfolk  himself,  the  Marquis  of  Exeter,  Sir 
Anthony  Brown,  and  Sir  Anthony  Kingstone,  were  sent  with  a  strong 
military  force. '^^ 

But  from  this  day,  and  so  forward,  the  agitation  of  the  King  became 
evident  to  all.  That  same  Sunday,  Wriothsley,  his  secretary,  must  write 
twice  to  Crumwell — 

"  Since  tlie  writing  of  my  last  letters,"  says  he,  "  arrived  here  a  post  from 
my  Lord  Darcy,  declaring  a  great  part  of  Yorkshire  to  be  up,  and  the  whole 
country  to  favour  their  opinions  ;  being  the  very  same  that  were  reported  in 
Lincolnshire,  by  tlie  rebels  tliere." — "  The  letter  containeth  no  certainty  in 
number,  nor  any  thing  else,  but  such  general  words,  as  though  all  tlie  world 
went  upon  wheels  !  The  matter  hangeth  yet  like  a  fever — one  da}'  good, 
another  bad.  The  King's  Highness  will,  in  all  haste  possible,  send  forth  the 
letters  to  my  Lord  Steward  ;  for  so  it  is  thought  necessary,  '  in  omnem 
erevtuiii.'  "12G 

Criunwell,  aware  of  the  state  of  the  country,  had  been  preparing  the 
sinews  of  vv'ar  ;  and  this  day  also  Henry  had  been  informed,  so  that  im- 
mediately Wriothsley  must  write  once  more — 

"  His  Grace,"  said  he,  "  took  the  towardness  of  your  preparation  very  well, 
and  heartily  tlianketh  you  for  yoiu-  pain  and  diligence  ;  but  his  Grace  said  sun- 
dry times — '  I  would  I  knew  how  much  he  hath  done,  that  I  might  be  satisfied 

124  Gov.  St.itc  Paiicrs.  i.,  p.  4<!3.  l«s  Idem,  \t.  462.  126  Idem,  p.  4G8. 


544-  REBELLION   IN   YORKSHIRE.  [book  I. 

with  the  speciality.'  And  when  I  had  taken  my  leave,  called  me  again,  and 
willed  me  to  require  you  to  taste  the  fat  priests  thereabouts  ;  naming  Doctor 
Wolman,  Doctor  Bell,  Doctor  Knight,  and  others  about  Paul's,  or  elsewhere.l^ 
His  Grace  told  me  that  Doctor  Chambre  had,  of  his  own  motion,  without  de- 
sire, presented  unto  him  200  merks,  and  Doctor  Lupton  one  hundred;  12!) 
which  his  Highness  also  requireth  you  to  lay  to  them  for  a  precedent ;  and 
further  to  declare,  that  being  of  such  sort,  as  they  cannot  help  in  persons, 
they  must  shew  their  good  wills,  if  they  have  any,  otherwise ;  and  so,  of  that 
sort,  to  get  all  that  you  ca«."l2y 

Next  day,  particular  instructions  for  the  officers  of  the  army  going  to 
the  north,  had  to  be  drawn  out ;  and  on  Tuesday,  we  have  two  other 
letters  to  Crvimwell,  in  reply  to  his  of  Monday — 

«  His  Highness'  pleasure  is,  tliat,  with  all  possible  diligence,  you  shall  send 
all  the  money  you  have  gotten  into  your  hands,  by  John  Freeman,  to  Master 
Gostyk,  being  appointed  treasurer,  ^\•ith  my  Lord  Steward  ;  who,  as  the  King's 
Highness  is  advertised,  doth  this  day  march  with  all  his  force  against  those 
traitors  in  Yorkshire.  His  Grace  t<Ad  me,  to  be  written  unto  you,  that  he 
would  sell  all  the  plate  he  hath  ;  but  he  will  subdue  these  traitors,  in  such  sort, 
that  all  others  shall  beware  by  their  example.  And  therefore  his  Highness 
requireth  you  to  do  all  that  ever  your  Lordship  can,  to  borrow  yet  as  much 
more  money  as  you  can  devise  to  get  into  your  hands,  to  the  intent  that  he 
may  be,  for  this  matter,  thoroughly  furnished."  130 

For  one  day,  this  might  seem  sufficient  ;  but  no,  the  secretary  must 
again  take  up  his  pen. 

"  The  King's  Highness  taketh  this  rebellion  of  Yorkshire  so  much  to  heart, 
that  though  it  should  fortune  to  be  appeased,  before  my  Lord  Steward  should 
in  manner  set  forth  ;  yet  his  Highness  hath  resolved,  that  he  shall  resort  to  the 
very  places  where  the  said  insurrection  began,  and  as  well  punish  the  begin- 
ners, as  those  that  gave  any  aid,  counsel,  or  special  favour  to  the  rebels,  though 
they  never  stirred." — "  When  I  had  written  this  letter  hitherto,  arrived  here 
a  new  post  ;  upon  the  knowledge  whereof,  I  went  up  to  the  King's  chamber  to 
learn  the  news.  And  there  the  King's  Highness  told  me,  that  the  letters  ar- 
rived by  the  said  post,  contained  matter  much  variable  from  the  other.  The 
particularity  he  declared  not,  but  said,  in  general  words,  they  wrote,  now,  of 
viarvellous  numbers  of  men  ;  and  thereupon  willed  me,  in  any  wise,  to  despatch 
a  post  unto  you,  and  to  desire  your  Lordship,  on  his  behalf,  to  be  here  with  his 
Grace  to-morrow,  as  soon  as  you  could  ;  so  that  I  perceived  he  would  have 
you  here,  at  the  farthest,  by  8  or  9  of  the  clock.  His  Grace  requireth  yon, 
also,  to  bring  with  you  the  letters,  sent  unto  your  Lordship  last,  from  Maister 
Gostyk,  which  I  sent  unto  you  this  day,  writing  upon  them,  <  in  haste,  haste, 
post.'  I  doubt  not  but  they  be  come  to  your  Lordship's  hands. — From  Wind- 
sor, this  Tuesday  night  at  ten  of  the  clock."  131 

Next  day,  Wednesday  the  ISth,  Wriothsley  began  to  think,  as  well 


127  fFulman,  the  Dean  of  Wells ;  Bell,  one  of  the  King's  Chaplains,  and  Bishop  of  Worccstci- 
11  1.539;  and  Knight,  afterwards  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells. 
IL>8  The  Dean  of  St.  Stephen's,  and  Lnpton,  Provost  of  Eton  and  Canon  of  Windsor. 
V2i>  Gov.  State  Papira,  i.,  p.  47^.  '2"  Idini,  p.  47».  '3'  Idem,  ]>.  Am>. 


153G.3  HKN'RV'H   AGITATION.  545 

he  might,  that  all  this  turmoil  was  bordering  upon  the  ludicrous — but 
there  was  to  be  uo  smile  on  Henry's  countenance  for  some  time  to  come, 
nor  any  ease  for  my  Lord  Privy  Seal.  This  was  a  holiday — that  of  Luke 
the  Evangelist — and  Crumwcll  was  bent  on  keeping  it  in  his  own  way. 
He  therefore  sent  Gostyk's  letters,  and  one  from  himself,  to  be  at  Wind- 
sor by  the  hour  he  was  expected.  The  King  was  not  disappointed,  but 
it  was  because  of  the  way  the  holiday  was  to  be  employed  ;  for  it  cer- 
tainly was  a  busy  day  to  his  Majesty,  as  well  as  his  Minister ;  and 
Wriothslcy  must  send  off  three  different  letters  into  town. 

"  Having  this  morning  received  your  letters,  immediately  I  went  to  the 
King's  cliamber,  and  because  his  Grace  was  not  ready,  sent  in  the  very  letters 
unto  him.  His  Grace  giveth  unto  you  most  hearty  thanks,  but  also  that  your 
considerations,  for  your  '  demore'  at  home,  this  holy  day,  be  so  necessary,  that 
his  Highness  is  well  contented,  and  thinketh  it  very  necessary  you  should  so 
do,  specially  for  the  getting  in  as  much  vioney  as  could  be  gotten,  and  the  sending 
forth  of  the  same — requiring  you,  nevertheless,  to  be  here  with  his  Grace  to- 
morrow, in  the  morning.  And,  I  assure  you,  I  see  not  here  any  such  cause,  as 
should  make  this  great  hobleshof."  So  at  least  he  thought  at  the  moment,  but 
after  another  half  page,  he  changes  his  tone. — "  After  the  writing  hereof, 
arrived  letters  from  my  Lord  of  Suffolk,  &c.,  declaring  this  matter  of  York- 
shire to  be  marvellous ;  all  the  shire  in  manner  up,  as  they  write,  and  messages 
from  them  of  Lincolnshire  to  the  other,  so  that  the  sequel  is  much  feared. 
Whereupon  his  Majesty  called  me  alone  to  him,  and  commanded  me,  with  all 
possible  speed,  to  advertise  your  Lordship,  that  he  doth  most  instantly  desire 
you,  with  all  speed  possible,  to  despatch,  at  the  least,  to  Master  Gostyk,  20,000 
merks;  which  for  my  Lord  Steward,  &c.,  will  serve  but  for  one  month's  wages;  and 
his  Grace  also  desireth  you  to  despatch  a  convenient  sum  to  my  Lord  of  Suffolk. 

"  His  Highness  desireth  you  now,  to  assay  what  may  be  borrowed  in  his 
name,  and  with  all  men  to  shift  to  all  your  possible  power  ;  so  that  he  might, 
besides  these  sums,  have  a  convenient  furniture,  whatsoever  shall  happen. 
And  rather  than  to  tcant,  his  Grace^s pleasure  is,  you  shall  go  to  the  jeicel-house 
in  the  Tower,  and  there  take  as  much  plate,  as  you  shall  think  his  Grace  shall  not 
necessarily  occupy,  and  put  it  straight  to  coining.  His  Majesty  appeareth  to 
fear  much  this  matter,  specially  if  he  should  want  money ;  for  in  the  Lord 
Darcy,  his  Grace  told  me,  he  had  no  great  trust,— and  his  Grace  would  have 
this  matter  for  money  well  followed,  for  there  resteth,  with  you,  all  our  hope."^^i 

To  this  letter  of  the  morning,  Crumwell  replies  immediately,  that  he 
had  got  together  .£10,000 ;  and  Wriothsley  answers  that  <£3000  must  be 
sent  to  Suffolk,  and  i^TOOO  to  the  Lord  Steward  Shrewsbury  ;  but  such 
was  now  the  emotion  of  Henry,  that  he  must  pen  and  despatch  another 
letter,  ordering  the  money  to  be  sent  off  that  night.  These  letters,  too, 
were  superscribed  by  the  Secretary — "in  haste,  haste,  post,  for  thy  life  !" 

Next  day,  the  Lord  Privy  Seal  got  out  to  Windsor,  but  he  could 
remain  with  the  King  only  a  very  short  time ;  for  Wrio.thsley,  the  Secre- 
tary, is  writing  to  him  in  the  same  strain,  on  Sunday  and  Monday  fol- 


132  Gov.  State  Papers,  pp.  481,  4!^2. 
VOL.   I.  2  M 


.54G  THE  ONLY    PROSPEROUS  CAUSE.  [book  I. 

lowing  ;  and  money  still  continues  to  be  the  b\irden  of  the  song.    Crum- 
well  had  written  on  Monday,  and  Wriothsley  says  that  same  day,  in  reply — 

"  And,  first,  for  your  proceedings,  his  Grace  took  them  in  most  thankful 
part,  and  willed  me  to  signify,  that  he  liketh  both  the  order  thereof,  and  the 
thing's  self  exceeding  well.  Second,  his  Grace,  hkewise,  thanketh  you  for 
your  remembrance  touching  the  Priests  :  (ior  money)  I  perceive  well  he  would 
not  have  them  forgotten.  Thirdly,  for  mi/  Lord  of  Wiltshire,  he  is  very  glad 
you  remembered  him,  and  also  that  you  wrote  for  so  good  a  sum  !"133 

Henry  had  now,  in  some  degree,  recovered  from  his  severe  panic, 
though  he  continued  but  ill  at  ease  till  the  rebellion  was  crushed.  The 
rising  in  Lincolnshire  had  amounted  to  about  twenty  thousand  ;  but 
this,  in  the  north,  extended  to  more  than  double  that  number  in  the  field, 
besides  many  others  equally  disaffected,  while  the  Lord  Steward  had  only 
about  five  thousand  troops.  But  by  the  intrepidity  of  Shrewsbury,  the 
vigilance  of  Norfolk,  and  sagacity  of  Suffolk,  the  King's  forces  stood  their 
ground.  They  avoided  any  general  engagement,  and,  by  skilful  delays, 
bringing  the  enemy  into  distress  for  supplies,  they  at  last  prevailed. 
The  country  was  quieted  by  the  month  of  January.  Lords  Darcy  and 
Hussey,  Robert  Aske,  and  a  number  of  others,  were  executed  ;  and  this 
commotion  will  not  fail  to  be  improved  for  the  farther  demolition  of  Ab- 
beys. After  a  year  which  had  commenced  and  concluded  without  leaving 
one  subject  for  pleasing  reflection  ;  if  there  be  another  department  of  Eng- 
lish history  worthy  of  recollection,  how  much  more  so,  when  now  reviewed. 


The  confusion  and  the  cruelty  which  had  prevailed  through- 
out the  King''s  own  affairs,  followed  by  the  dissensions  in  his 
kingdom  to  the  end  of  the  year,  have  now  passed  before  us. 
And  when  it  is  remembered  that,  as  yet,  not  even  one  official 
man  had  openly  pronounced  the  name  of  Tyndale,  but  with 
disapprobation,  if  not  contempt;  nay,  that  in  the  hatred  so  long 
cherished  and  expressed  by  these  officials  we  discover  no  abate- 
ment ;  it  must  now  certainly  appear  the  more  striking,  that 
the  cause  for  which  he  lived,  and  had  now  been  put  to  death, 
had  never  before  exhibited  a  year  so  prosperous.  Our  Trans- 
lator, whom  we  have  followed  from  his  cradle  to  the  fiery 
stake,  has  been  taken  to  a  better  world ;  and  it  was  only  in 
appropriate  harmony  with  all  the  past,  that  the  year  in  which 


133  We  have  already  alluded  to  this  mean  transaction,  (see  page  482,)  in  Crumwell,  bor- 
rowing money  from  his  predecessor,  the  Earl  of  Wiltshire,  and  Henry's  repartee,  on  being 
informed;  the  man  who  had,  only  five  months  before,  put  his  son  and  dmif/hler  to  death.  By 
his  reply,  Wiltshire  might  have  struck  the  King  dumb,  as  the  Earl  of  Bedford  once  did  .Tames 
II.—"  Please  your  Majesty,  I  am  an  old  man,  and  can  do  but  little  ;  I  had  o?«-c  o  son,  that 
could  now  have  been  very  serviceable  to  your  Majesty."  But  neither  the  King  nor  Crumwell 
would  have  so  excused  him.     His  money  now,  was  but  the  prelude  to  his  castle  afterwards! 


Ij3f>.]  THE  ONLY    PROSPEROUS  CAUSE.  547 

lie  sealed  his  testimony  with  his  blood,  should  stand  distin- 
guished above  all  that  had  preceded.  Events  of  but  inferior 
importance  to  us  now,  though  all-engrossing  at  the  moment, 
have  first  been  glanced  at ;  but  mainly  for  the  sake  of  placing 
them  in  contrast  with  the  only  department  worthy  of  special 
remembrance.  While  men  of  name  and  office,  or  authority, 
in  England,  and  throughout  the  whole  twelve  months,  were 
only  groping  their  way  out  of  darkness ;  one  division  driven 
to  desperation,  and  the  other  bound  by  the  miserable  doctrine 
of  expediency,  or  abject  submission  to  their  Royal  master''s 
will ;  no  sooner  do  we  turn  to  that  separate  or  providential 
undertaking,  which  has  been  ever  on  the  advance,  than  it 
seems  as  if  there  had  been  actually  no  turmoil,  no  interrup- 
tion of  tranquillity  whatever.  The  storm  has  changed  into 
a  calm  ;  and  we  are  now  left  as  calmly  to  survey  what  had 
been  accomplished. 

It  was  the  year  of  the  Translator's  martyrdom,  but  was 
there  to  be  no  demand  for  the  work  of  his  hands  ?  Was  truth 
to  be  silent  or  suppressed,  because  folly  frowned  ?  So  far 
from  this,  though  the  two  last  years  had  been  more  highly 
distinguished  than  ever,  for  the  number  of  editions,  the  pre- 
sent year  exceeded  them  both  put  together.  Or,  to  speak 
more  generally  and  from  the  beginning:  from  the  year  1525 
to  ]  530  there  had  been  at  least  six  impressions,  which,  on  an 
average,  was  more  than  one  edition  annually  ;  since  then  there 
had  been  seven  if  not  eight  editions,  which  was  equal  to  two 
every  year ;  but  in  this  one  year,  or  the  last  of  the  Transla- 
tor\s  life,  there  were  nine  if  not  ten  editions  from  the  press. 
One  gentleman,  deeply  conversant  with  the  subject,  does  not 
despair  of  his  being  able  to  make  out  the  round  dozen. 

Once  more,  therefore,  and  for  the  third  time,  these  volumes 
come  before  us  in  contrast  to  all  the  mere  confabulations  of 
the  Convocation  men.  They  had  met  again,  as  if  resolved  to 
force  themselves  upon  the  notice  of  every  future  historian, 
and  we  have  already  seen  them  striving  to  settle  matters  of 
high  behest ;  but  to  the  highest  of  all,  or  the  Sacred  Volume 
itself,  we  are  here  confined  ;  and,  now  that  Tyndale  is  gone,  it 
seems  to  be  due  to  his  proceedings,  to  glance  at  what  these 
men  had  as  yet  said  ;  for  there  had  been  nothing  done^  as 
Latimer,  with  such  pungent  or  galling  frequency,  had  thun- 
dered in  their  ear. 


548  THE   IMBECILITY   OF  OPPOSITION.  [book  1. 

In  the  close  of  1534,  or  eighteen  months  ago,  these  men  had  petitioned 
in  the  following  temis, — "  That  his  Majesty  would  vouchsafe  to  decree! 
that  the  Scriptures  should  be  translated  into  the  vulgar  tongue  by  some 
honest  and  learned  men  to  be  nominated  by  the  King ;"  and  now,  once 
more,  after  having  completely  failed  among  themselves,  nay  fighting 
with  each  other  over  the  Sacred  Record,  here  they  are,  professedly,  a 
second  time  petitioning  the  King.  And  what  is  the  language  they  now 
employ  1  They  petition,  "  That  the  King  would  graciously  indulge  unto 
his  subjects  of  the  laity  the  reading  of  the  Bible  in  the  English  tongue  ;" 
though,  as  yet,  according  to  their  own  showing,  there  was  no  Bible  to 
read  ;  and  the  Bishop  of  London  has  not  only  returned  the  portion  of 
Scripture,  with  contempt,  which  has  been  assigned  to  him  for  revision, 
but  he  has  declared  that  he  will  be  no  party  in  leading  the  people  into 
error  by  giving  them  the  Scriptures  !  Still,  however,  and  as  a  Convoca- 
tion, they  go  on,  and  now  petition,  "  That  a  neiv  translation  might  be 
forthwith  made  for  that  end  and  purpose  ;"  that  is,  that  the  laity,  under 
ih.Q  gracioiis  indulgence  of  Henry  the  Eighth,  might  read  the  Bible  !  But 
a  neio  translation  of  it !  Had  these  terms  escaped  from  them  unwittingly  ? 
Were  they  a  tacit  admission,  or  confession,  that  one  had  been  made  al- 
ready ?  Were  they  now  saying  that  the  New  Testament,  which  was  to 
be  England's  and  Scotland's  own  book,  long  after  they  were  in  their 
graves,  was  of  no  esteem  in  their  eyes  ?  Or  that  the  volume,  they  had 
openly  denounced  and  burnt  so  long,  was  now  to  be  consigned  to  oblivion  ? 
Was  this  a  frown  upon  Coverdale's  new-born  attempt,  of  which  they  may 
have  only  just  heard  ?  But  especially,  and  certainly,  upon  Tyndale's  nu- 
merous editions,  which  had  now  driven  them  to  such  perplexity  %  So  it 
seemed  to  Lewis,  above  a  century  ago.  "  By  this,"  said  he,  ''  it  appears 
that  the  clergy  did  not  ajiprove  of  the  translation  already  made  by  Tyn- 
dale  and  (or)  Coverdale,  and  that  their  attempt  which  they  made  two 
years  (eighteen  months)  ago,  to  have  the  royal  permission  to  make  a 
new  one,  did  not  succeed."  True,  and  we  have  read  the  history  of  its 
failure  ;  but  certainly  if  Cranmer  had  been  a  tool  as  deep  and  dexterous 
as  any  one  man  within  the  Convocation,  he  could  not  have  contrived  to 
pliice  himself  and  his  brethren  before  posterity,  in  a  light  or  posture  so 
little  to  be  envied. 

All  this,  however,  only  lends  additional  interest  to  the  vo- 
lumes, which,  throughout  the  whole  year,  had  been  issuing 
from  the  press,  and  coming  into  England,  "  thick  and  three- 
fold," without  the  "  gracious  indulgence"  of  his  Majesty 
being  either  asked  or  granted.  Of  these  New  Testaments 
three  separate  and  entirely  distinct  editions  were  in  quarto. 
Of  the  duodecimo  or  small  octavo  size  we  know  of  five  editions; 
and  though  in  these  pages  we  adhere  to  those  books  only  which 


153G.2  FOLIO  NEW  TESTAMENT.  549 

have  been  verified,  we  may  add  tliat  another  edition,  if  not  two, 
may  yet  be  ascertained  to  exist.  All  these  editions,  with  the 
exception  of  one,  had  been  printed  abroad  in  Antwerp;  but  that 
one,  in  several  respects,  may  be  considered  as  equal  in  import- 
ance to  all  the  otliers.  The  size  of  the  book,  in  folio ;  the 
season  of  its  publication,  the  present  year ;  but  above  all,  the 
printer  and  the  place,  his  Majesty's  own  patent  printer,  in  Lon- 
don ,•  all  conspire  to  render  the  volume  even  still  a  mystery. 
It  comes  before  us,  unaccountably,  as  the  top-stone  of  this 
hazardous  but  successful  enterprise ;  brought  into  view,  also, 
about  the  ver}'^  time  when  our  Translator  was  breathing  his 
last,  or  consuming  to  ashes  at  Vilvorde.  Some  account  of  it, 
in  particular,  must  not  be  withheld. 

"  The  Newc  testament  yet  ones  agayne  corrected  by  W.  Tyndale  :  And  in 
many  places  ameded,  where  it  scaped  before  by  neglygence  of  the  printer. 
Also  a  Kalender,  and  a  necessary  table,  wherin  easely  and  lightly  may  be 
founde  any  story  coteyned  in  ye  foure  Euangelystes,  and  in  the  Actes  of  y^ 
apostels.  Also  before  every  pystel  of  S.  Paul,  is  a  prologue,  very  frutefull  to 
ye  reder.  And  after  ye  newe  testament,  foloweth  the  Epistels  of  yc  olde 
testament.  Newly  printed  (by  Tho.  Berthelet)  in  the  yere  of  our  lorde 
MDXxxvi." — in  the  compartment  of  the  boi/s  in  triumph,  and  with  a  small 
medallion  of  a  head  laureated,  supported  by  sphynxes  ;  peculiar  to  this  print- 
ing press. 

Collation.  Prefixes,  viz.  Almanake  for  23  years — Kalender — W.  T.  to  the 
Christen  Reder — a  prologue  into  the  four  Euangelystes — the  Offyce  of  all 
Estates,  and  the  Bokes  conteyned  in  the  Newe  Testament :  14  leaves.  The 
Newe  Testament  contains  folio  cxcvii.,  but  the  folios  run  on  to  ccv. ;  then  the 
table  of  the  Epistles  and  the  Gospels,  in  double  columns,  &c.  But  at  the  end 
we  have  the  following  distinguishing  mark — "  God  saue  the  Kynge,  and  all  his 
WELL-WYLLERS."  Words  wliicli  may  have  been  actually  printing,  and  in  Lon- 
don too,  not  far  from  the  hour  when  the  Translator  himself,  the  most  eminent 
ivell-willer  the  King  ever  had,  was  prajing  for  him,  and  passing  into  heaven. 

Of  this  rare  volume,  a  copy  now  lies  before  the  writer. 
Very  correctly  printed,  it  is,  perhaps,  the  first  to  be  distin- 
guished throughout  for  one  peculiarity  in  its  orthography, 
viz.  the  Anglo-saxon  particle  of  negation,  nat  for  not,  and 
wrtAvithstanding  ;  which  was  occasionally  adopted  after  this, 
as  in  the  Latin  and  English  edition  of  Redman,  1538,  and  of 
Powell,  in  1547  and  1549.  In  all  other  respects,  the  book 
is  an  exact  reprint  of  Tyndale''s  corrected  edition  in  1534, 
having  his  name  on  the  title  page,  and  his  long  prologue  to 
the  Romans,  which,  by  itself,  had  been  so  often  and  so  long 
condemned  ! 

The  name  of  Thomas  Berthelet  as  printer,  it  is  true,  is  not 


ri.W  FIKST  TESTAMENT   PRINTED   IN    ENGLAND.       [liuoK  I. 

mentioned,  whether  out  of  delicacy  to  the  Bishops  and  their 
adherents,  we  cannot  tell ;  but  Ames,  Herbert,  and  Dibdin, 
agree  in  ascribing  the  book  to  his  press.  It  is  known,  indeed, 
by  the  type,  and  the  ornamental  title  of  the  boys  in  tri- 
umph.'^ In  the  Harleian  Library  there  were  two  copies  of 
this  edition,  one  of  them  bound  in  red  morocco,  finely  orna- 
mented with  gold.^^  It  is  probably  one  of  these  which  is 
now  in  the  Bodleian  at  Oxford.  But  at  such  a  season  as  this, 
in  this  style,  and  by  the  King's  printer,  the  book,  we  repeat, 
is  a  mystery  still.  Must  it  not  have  been  got  up  under  favour 
of  the  late  Queen  ?  Such  a  supposition  is  only  in  harmony 
with  her  letter  to  Crumwell,  on  behalf  of  Mr.  Harman,  and  with 
Henry's  printer  being  the  man  employed.  But,  at  all  events, 
such  was  the  first  Sacred  Volume  printed  on  English  ground}^ 
We,  of  course,  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  attached  any 

134  In  Herbert's  Ames,  this  notable  book,  by  Berthelet,  stands  in  strange  juxta-position  with 
two  previous  articles,  printed  by  the  same  man.  "  A  proclamation  to  avoid  and  abvlish  such 
English  books  as  contain  pernicious  and  detestable  errors  and  hercnies  ;  made  the  8th  day  of 
July,  28  of  Henry  VHI.,"  or  153().  And  a  Proclamation  for  calling  in  diverse  books,  and 
especially  one,  comprising  a  Sermon  made  by  John  Fisher,  late  Bishoj)  of  Rochester,  &:c.  T. 
Berthelet  excvdehat. 

By  some  writers  this  Berthelet  has  been  mentioned  as  having  been  Crannier's  Secretary  ;  but 
this  is  certainly  a  mistake.  Berthelet  was  Ww  first  who  sustained  the  office  of  King's  printer, 
as  appointed  by  Henry  VIII.,  and  the  second  man  in  England  having  this  title.  His  predeces- 
sor, Richard  Pynson,  appointed  by  Henry  VII.,  seems  not  to  have  had  any  patent ;  but 
Berthelet's,  the  first  in  existence,  is  dated  22d  Feb.  15.10,  and  the  Statutes,  his  first  publication 
with  a  date,  being  finished  before  the  25th  of  March,  bears  the  year  1529,  He  had  been  printing 
before  this,  and  continued  to  do  so  till  his  death  in  1555.  It  was  not  that  he  cared  for  the 
Scriptures  ;  so  that  he  must  have  printed  the  New  Testament  at  the  instigation  of  others,  who 
had  employed  him  ;  and  his  daring  to  do  so,  we  can  ascribe  to  no  other  or  inferior  influence 
than  that  of  the  Queen.  In  15,30  he  had  printed,  officially,  the  proclamation  iirohibitinff  the 
having  of  Holy  Scripture  translated  into  the  vulgar  tongues  of  English,  French  and  Dutch," 
that  is  the  German.  And  in  154G,  ten  years  after  this,  he  printed  the  proclamation  which 
denounced  "  the  Testament  of  Tyndale,  and  all  his  writings !"  Proclamations,  however,  which 
were  all  in  vain ;  though  these  circumstances  only  render  this  folio  New  Testament  the 
more  remarkable. 

Thomas  Berthelet,  who,  from  15.33  to  1535,  was  Secretary  to  Cranmer,  might  be  a  son  or  rela- 
tive, but  not  the  ))rinter,  as  appears  from  Cranmer's  letter  to  Crumwell,  1st  March  l.')35. — "  For 
the  honesty  and  service  of  my  servant,  Thomas  Barthelet,  I  do  tender  his  preferment,  and  can- 
not as  I  would  gladly  do  for  him,  unless  he  were  disposed  to  be  a  secular,  which,  as  1  perceive, 
he  intcndeth  not.  I  therefore  commend  and  present  him  unto  you,  with  no  less  good  heart 
and  mind  than  ye  presented  him  to  me,  and  for  my  sake  to  set  him  to  such  beneficial  exercise, 
as  ye  shall  think  meet  for  him." — Harl.  MS-,  6148,  fol.  49.  Accordingly,  as  a  public  notary, 
he  was  emijloyed  by  Crumwell  in  1536,  with  Layton,  Bedel,  and  others,  in  visiting  monasteries. 
There  was  a  John  Barthlet  also  so  engaged. 

'35  Harl.  Cat.,  vol.  i.,  Nos.  156,  15?. 

isa  A  Manuel  of  Devotions  is  said  to  have  been  presented  by  Anne  Bolejn  to  her  maids  of 
honour.  If  so,  then  this  folio  New  Testament  gives  the  surest  ground  for  the  notable  expressions 
contained  in  it.  "  Grant  us,  most  merciful  Father,  this  one  of  the  greatest  gifts  that  ever  thou 
gavest  to  mankind,  the  knowledge  of  thy  holy  will  and  glad  tidings  of  our  salvation  ;  this  great 
while  oppressed  with  the  tyranny  of  thy  adversary  of  Rome,  and  his  fautors,  and  kept  close 
under  his  Latin  letters;  and  now  at  length  promulgate,  piMislwd,  and  set  at  liberty,  by  the 
grace  poured  into  the  heart  of  thy  supreme  jiower,  our  Prince,  as  all  King's  hearts  be  in  thy 
hand."  Lewis  has  quoted  this  in  connexion  with  Coverdale's  Bible ;  but  that  book  could  not 
have  been  presented  to  Henry  before  the  infiuence  of  Queen  Anne  was  entirely  gone.  The 
Testament,  on  the  other  hand,  as  i)rinted  in  London,  may  have  commenced  at  press  in  the  close 
nf  ir>3r>,  while  all  the  wliilp,  in  LIIKi,  Berlhclcl  went  on .' 


1.537.]  THE  YEAR  OF  TRIUMPH.  AS  1 

essential  influence  to  tlie  late  Queen.  But,  in  conclusion  of 
this  year,  it  ought  to  be  remembered,  that  as  she  was  now 
gone,  and  her  influence  at  Court,  whatever  was  its  amount, 
had  died  with  her ;  this  will  now  render  the  futui'e  overrul- 
ing of  the  King  and  his  adherents,  or  of  all  surviving  parties, 
only  the  more  obvious  and  distinct. 

In  Bunyan\s  immortal  story  of  "  the  Holy  War  "  when 
ear-gate  was  once  broken  up,  and  its  bolts  and  bars  shivered 
into  a  thousand  pieces,  Emmanuel  himself  came  forward,  and 
set  his  throne  in  it ;  the  weapons  of  war  were  then  carried 
within  the  walls,  to  be  employed  on  the  citadel  of  the  heart. 
So,  in  this  long  and  arduous  contest,  Wolsey  and  Warham, 
Fisher  and  More,  with  many  other  opponents,  were  now  gone; 
but  if  printers  within  the  shores  of  England,  and  near  to 
Henry's  own  person,  have  begun  thus  to  act,  what  will  sig- 
nify all  his  proclamations,  or  the  wrath  of  all  his  official  men  ? 
In  truth,  the  day  was  nearly  won.  The  printing  press  abroad 
was  now  busy,  in  a  style  quite  unprecedented ;  and  next  year, 
though  quite  unforeseen  by  the  King,  or  Crumwell,  or  Cran- 
mer,  the  victory  will  be  complete  !  They  had  no  idea  what- 
ever, of  what  was  awaiting  them,  only  eight  months  hence. 


SECTION    XIV. 

MEMORABLE    IKTRODUCTION     OF     THE     ENTIRE     SACRED     VOLUME MYLES 

COVERDALE — HIS    CIRCUMSTANCES    COMPARED  WITH    TYNDALe's — COVER- 

DALE's  TEMPORARY  SUCCESS — THE  REMARKABLY  SUDDEN  CHANGE TYN- 

DALE'S    bible STATE    OF    ENGLAND    BEFORE    ITS    INTRODUCTION CRAN- 

MER'S    PREVIOUS    ENGAGEMENTS TYNDALE's    BIBLE    ARRIVED IMMEDI- 
ATELY RECEIVED MUST  BE  BOUGHT  AND  READ THE  KING  AGREES THIS 

AT    FIRST    SEEMS  TO   BE    INCREDIBLE — GRAFTON    THE    PROPRIETOR ALL 

PARTIES  OVERRULED — DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  THE  BIBLE  REJECTED  AND 
THE  BIBLE  RECEIVED — CONCLUSION  OF  THE  FIRST  YEAR  OF  TRIUMPH. 

With  regard  to  the  highest  favour  ever  bestowed  upon  this 
kingdom,  there  are  no  years  so  marked  and  memorable  as 
those  of  1526  and  1537.  The  former,  distinguished  by  the 
arrival  and  introduction  of  the  New  Testament  Scriptures, 
printed  in  the  native  tongue ;   the  latter,  by  that  of  the  entire 


552  ENTIRE  SACRED   VOLUME.  [book  I. 

Sacred  Volume.  The  former,  in  defiance  of  all  the  authori- 
ties ;  the  latter,  with  the  immediate  concurrence  of  the  King 
and  his  best  advisers.  The  former  came  as  Tyndale's  first 
effort ;  the  latter  arrived  as  the  distinct  and  appropriate  tri- 
bute to  his  memory  ;  both  alike  being  foreign  printed  books. 

It  was  now  above  fourteen  3^ears  since  the  design  had  been 
first  formed.  Up  to  this  period,  there  had  been  more  than 
ten  years  of  hard  fighting,  in  single  combat,  with  the  nation 
entire,  from  its  monarch  downwards  ;  but  more  than  twenty 
editions  of  Tyndale's  translation  of  the  New  Testament  had 
passed  through  the  press.  They  had  gone  into  a  thousand 
unknown  channels  ;  deep,  nay,  indelible  was  the  impression 
already  made  upon  many  minds.  Latimer  has  informed  the 
Convocation  of  his  brethren,  that  among  the  people  there  were 
"  many  cliildren  of  light ;"  and  Fox  has  told  them,  that  "  the 
lay  people  knew  the  Holy  Scriptures  better  than  many  of 
themselves ;""  but  it  was  time  that  the  King  and  all  around 
him  should  be  overruled.  The  day  drew  near,  though  they 
knew  not  of  it.  The  Translator  was  gone,  it  is  true,  but  his 
translations  were  safe ;  and  not  only  in  safe  keeping,  but  in 
the  press.  The  volume  must  have  been  preparing  before  he 
was  consumed  to  ashes.  But,  at  all  events,  the  Scriptures 
entire,  from  Grenesis  to  Revelation,  will  now  be  introduced ; 
and  his  Majesty,  however  incensed  before,  or  armed  with 
power  and  pride  still,  must  at  once  bow  in  assent,  and  all 
other  men  proceed,  as  it  had  been  appointed  they  should. 
The  opposition  hitherto  had  been  both  loud  and  long ;  but 
when  once  the  day  for  the  arrival  of  the  Scriptures  comes,  not 
a  man  must  move  his  tongue  against  them. 

We  have  heard  already  of  one  translation  of  the  Bible  by 
Coverdale  ;  but  the  death  of  Queen  Anne  had  retarded  its  ap- 
pearance in  England.  Henry  had  married  Jane  Seymour, 
after  wliich  the  name  of  her  predecessor  here  inserted,  was  no 
passport  to  royal  favour.  Some  time,  however,  having  once 
elapsed,  although  there  be  no  positive  proof  of  this  book  hav- 
ing ever  been  laid  before  the  King,  what  is  curious  enough, 
a  reprint  of  it  had  obtained  favour  in  his  eye  ;  so  that  we  are 
now  prepared  for  a  comparison  of  Coverdale''s  Bible,  with  that 
of  Tyndale,  edited  by  his  surviving  devoted  friend  John 
Rogers,  under  the  name  of  Tliomas  Matthew,  and  imported 
this  year. 


1537.]  MYLES  COVERDALE.  553 

It  is  remarkable  that  such  obscurity  should  have  rested 
on  the  origin  of  our  two  first  Translators  of  the  Scriptures  ; 
though  that  which  still  prevails  over  the  very  name  and 
parentage  of  Ooverdale,  be  b;^  far  the  greatest.  No  such  sur- 
name being  certainly  known  to  exist,  in  the  person  of  any 
other  man,  it  has  been  supposed  to  have  been  taken  or  given, 
as  in  foreign  countries,  from  the  district  in  Yorkshire  where 
he  was  born.  The  parish  or  township  of  Coverham,  near 
Middleham,  in  the  North  Riding  of  that  county,  claims  him 
for  a  native.  Burnet  strangely  imagined  him  to  be  a  foreigner, 
and  native  of  Denmark.  Into  this  mistake  he  may  have  been 
led,  from  Ooverdale  having  afterwards  married  abroad,  though 
this  was  to  a  lady  of  Scotch  extraction,  Elizabeth  Macheson ; 
a  circumstance  which  we  shall  find  proved  of  great  value  to 
him,  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Mary.  The  surname  itself  being 
so  unknown,  if  Lewis  be  correct  in  saying  that  one  of  this 
name  took  the  degree  of  Bachelor  of  Canon  Law  at  Cam- 
bridge, A.D.  1531,  it  could  scarcely  apply  to  any  other  than 
the  future  Translator ;  and  it  seems  no  unsuitable  introduc- 
tion to  his  engagements  from  that  very  time.  According  to 
Godwin,  he  received  a  doctor's  degree  from  Tubingen,  and, 
though  late  in  life,  was  admitted  ad  eundem  at  Cambridge, 
but  no  dates  are  mentioned. 

The  origin  and  progress  of  Coverdale's  translation  have  re- 
mained in  equal  obscurity  ;  and  hence  the  extremely  differ- 
ent opinions  which  have  been  hazarded  as  to  the  length  of 
time  he  occupied  in  preparing  for  the  press,  or  in  printing  it 
after  it  was  ready. 

Upon  a  marble  tablet  erected  to  his  memory  in  1537,  by  the  parishioners  of 
St.  Magnus  in  London,  where,  in  the  close  of  his  long  career,  he  used  to  preach, 
they  have  engraved,  that  he  "  spent  many  years  of  his  life  in  preparing  a 
translation  of  the  Scriptures  ;"  and  they  add — "  On  the  4th  of  October  mdxxxv. 
the  first  complete  English  printed  vei'sion  of  the  Bible  was  published  under  his 
direction."  With  regard  to  its  appearance  in  England,  howevei',  the  reader  is 
already  able  to  judge  more  correctly  ;  for  it  does  not  follow,  because  the  last 
sheet  was  committed  to  the  press,  in  a  foreign  land,  on  the  day  mentioned, 
that  the  book  was  then  published. 

On  the  other  hand,  more  recently,  in  "  a  historical  account  of  the  English  ver- 
sions of  the  Scriptures,"  we  have  been  told  that  instead  of  "  many  years,"  this 
translation  of  the  entire  Bible  "  could  not  have  commenced  before  November 
1 534,  and,  probably,  it  was  not  until  the  following  month  !  Thus,  the  longest 
time  that  Covcrdale  could  have  had  for  the  completion,  both  of  the  translation 
and  of  the  printing,  was  deren  months ;  and  if  this  work  did,  in  any  way,  i-esult 
from  the  resolutions   of   the   Convocation,    19th    December    1534,  then   the 


554  MYLES  COVERDALE.  Qbook  i. 

whole  was  executed  iu  the  short  space  of  nine  mouths  and  a  half!     Tlie  time 
when  he  began  was  certamly  not  previous  to  November  1534."' 

If  Coverdale  had  overtaken  a  translation  of  the  entire 
Sacred  Volume  in  the  space  of  two  years,  or  even  three,  and 
employed  nearly  another  in  printing  it,  when  the  time  in 
which  he  lived  is  considered,  it  will  be  allowed  by  all  who  are 
competent  to  judge,  that  he  must  have  been  very  busily 
occupied.  And  if  it  shall  turn  out  that  he  was  not  only  un- 
molested, but  fostered  in  his  undertaking,  this  he  may  have 
accomplished.  Extreme  opinions,  so  wild  or  wide  of  the 
truth,  whether  on  marble  or  in  print,  need  not  be  refuted ; 
though  they  show  the  necessity  for  some  more  feasible  and 
distinct  account,  if  any  evidence  can  be  found. 

We  have  heard  of  Coverdale  before,  again  and  again ; 
though  to  those  who  have  ever  paid  any  attention  to  the 
subject,  by  this  time  it  may  have  appeared  extraordinary, 
that  we  should  seem  to  have  either  forgotten  him,  or  omitted 
frequent  mention  of  his  name.  But  the  truth  is,  that  we 
have  searched  for  him  all  along,  and  yet,  upon  the  broad  sur- 
face of  all  these  manuscripts,  with  the  exception  of  one  signi- 
ficant letter,  we  have  not  found  a  single  intelligible  allusion, 
since  after  meeting  with  him  in  Hamburgh,  according  to 
Foxe.^  We  supposed  that  he  had  then  returned  again  into 
England.  This  he  certainly  did,  granting  our  old  historian 
to  be  correct  in  thus  sending  him  abroad ;  for  the  whole  story 
rests  upon  his  sole  authority.  But  this  was  above  six  years 
ago.  Amidst  this  unbroken  silence,  however,  we  have  this 
epistle  from  Coverdale  himself,  and  but  one,  which  has  effec- 
tually prevented  him  from  being  forgotten.  It  would  scarcely 
have  been  intelligible  much  before  the  present  year,  when, 
wherever  he  had  been,  we  find  him,  for  the  first  time,  and 
then  certainly  upon  English  ground. 

Before  giving  this  letter,  however,  there  is  one  notable  cir- 
cumstance, coimected  with  Coverdale''s  name,  which  has  never 
been  pointed  out,  not  the  least  curious  in  the  history  of  these 
stormy  times.  The  reader  need  not  here  be  told,  that  a 
searching  controversial  war  had  been  going  on  in  England  for 
years,  or  that  the  man  who  enjoyed  the  melancholy  eminence 
of  being  the  grand  opponent  to  the  new  learning,  was  Sir 


'   The  italics  are  not  ours.  J  In  llic  end  of  ir>i!),  and  bcKinninf;  of  15.30.     See  page  2411. 


1537-3  MYLES  COVERDALE.  555 

Thomas  More.  But  it  so  happened,  that  in  opposing  the 
translation  of  the  Scriptures,  and  their  introduction  into  his 
native  hind,  it  was  a  main  point  with  the  Lord  Chancellor  to 
report  names ;  and  this  he  did,  not  only  with  accuracy,  but 
emphasis.  Hence,  not  only  is  Tyndale  named,  times  out  of 
number,  and  Fryth  very  frequently ;  but  we  have  "  Friar 
Barnes^  sometime  doctor  in  Cambridge ;"  "  Friar  Roye^  the 
apostate  ;"  "  George  Constantyne  ,•"  "  George  Joye^  otherwise 
called  Clarke ;"  "  Richard  Bayfield^  both  a  priest  and  a 
monk  ;"  "  Thomas  Bilney  ,•"  "  John  Tewksbury  ,•"  "  Thomas 
Hytton  r  "  John  Byrte,  otherwise  calling  himself  Adrian, 
otherwise  John  Bookbinder,  and  yet  otherwise  I  cannot  tell 
what."  In  short,  names  were,  in  the  Chancellor's  esteem,  of 
first-rate  importance  in  the  controversy ;  and,  therefore,  not 
only  the  Translator  himself,  by  way  of  eminence,  but  all  the 
subordinate  agents,  who,  in  the  humblest  manner,  aided  in 
the  importation  of  his  translation,  or  even  read  it,  were  held 
up  to  reprobation,  or  to  the  terror  of  all  England.  What, 
then,  had  become  of  Coverdale  \  Why  was  he  not  treated 
with  derision  as  well  as  Tyndale  ?  How  is  it,  that  in  the 
wide  compass  of  More's  voluminous  controversy,  the  name  of 
Coverdale  is  not  exposed  as  that  of  a  delinquent,  nay,  never 
once  mentioned  ?  Was  he  not  engaged ;  must  he  not  have 
been  busily  at  work  somewhere,  at  the  same  time  that  Sir 
Thomas  More  was  so  busy  in  ferreting  out,  and  naming, 
every  suspected  individual  \  We  have  seen  Coverdale  make 
one  narrow  escape.  His  name,  in  1528,  when  so  many  men 
were  punished,  had  been  very  distinctly  held  up  before  Tun- 
stal,  as  a  noted  delinquent.  He  had  been  preaching ;  he,  as 
well  as  Barnes,  had  approved  of  Tyndale's  New  Testament,  and 
of  its  dispersion  ;  but  we  then  quoted  his  own  letter  to  Crum- 
well,  in  August  1527,  as  accounting  fully  for  his  safety,  and 
his  being  then  passed  over  in  silence.  But  if  since  that  period, 
and  more  especially  at  the  very  season  when  Sir  Thomas  was 
continuing  to  write  so  furiously  against  Tyndale''s  version, 
and  all  who  dared  to  read  it,  Coverdale  has  been  engaged  in 
translating;  and  if  by  the  close  of  1535,  he  has  finished  at 
press  an  impression  of  the  English  Bible,  he  must  have  been 
employed  upon  it  for  a  considerable  time.  There  can  be  now 
no  doubt  that  he  was,  and  as  little,  that  Sir  Thomas  More 
had  been  perfectly  aware  of  his  occupation  ;   though  his  sin- 


556  MYLES  COVERDALE.  |^BOOK  I. 

gular  silence,  maintained  throughout,  must  have  always  re- 
mained a  riddle,  not  to  be  solved,  but  for  this  one  solitary 
letter  from  Coverdale's  own  pen,  which  has  never  been  printed 
till  within  these  few  years.     It  is  addressed  to  Orumwell — 

"  Most  singular  good  Master — With  due  humility,  I  beseecli  unto  your 
Mastership  all  godly  comfort,  grace,  and  prosperous  health.  For  so  much  as 
your  goodness  is  so  great  toward  me,  your  poor  child,3  only  through  the  plen- 
teousncss  of  your  favour  and  benevolence,  I  am  the  bolder  of  your  goodness,  in 
this  my  rude  style,  if  it  like  your  favour,  to  revoeate  to  your  memory  the  godly 
communication  which  your  Mastership  had  with  me,  your  orator,  in  Master 
Maoris  house  in  Easter  Eve,  amongst  many  and  divers  fruitful  exhortations, 
specially  of  your  singular  favour,  and  by  your  most  comfortable  words,  I  per- 
ceive your  gracious  mind  towards  me. 

"  Wherefore,  most  honourable  Master,  for  the  tender  love  of  God,  and  for  the 
fervent  zeal  that  you  have  to  virtue  and  godly  study,  cordis  genibus  prorobitus, 
T  humbly  desire  and  beseech  your  goodness,  of  your  gracious  help.  Now  I  be- 
qin  to  taste  of  Holy  Scriptures  ;  now,  honour  be  to  God,  I  am  set  to  the  most 
sweet  smell  of  holy  letters,  with  the  godly  savour  of  holy  and  ancient  doctors, 
unto  whoso  knowledge  I  cannot  attain,  without  diversity  of  books,  as  is  not  un- 
known  to  your  most  excellent  wisdom.  Nothing  in  the  world  I  desire,  but 
books  as  concerning  my  learning.  They  once  had,  I  do  not  doubt  but  Almighty 
God  shall  perform  that  in  me,  which  He,  of  his  most  plentiful  favom*  and  grace, 
hath  begun.  Moreover,  as  touching  my  behaviour,  your  llastership's  mind 
once  known,  with  all  lowliness  I  offer  myself,  not  only  to  be  ordered  in  all  things, 
as  shall  please  your  icisdom,  but  also  as  concerning  the  education  and  instruction 
of  others,  alonly  to  ensue  your  prudent  counsel  ;  '  nam,'  &c.  ;4  for  whatever  of 
counsel  is  in  thee,  there  is  nothing  which  is  not  2^olitic,  nothing  not  divine  ; 
verily,  whatever  you  do,  you  do  nothing  unadvisedly,  never  vaunting  yourself 
the  first  philosopher  :  but  of  the  dew  of  heaven,  (in  the  mauner  of  Jacob,)  j'ou 
have  stolen  away  the  chief  blessing.  Out  of  that  mighty  stream  of  yours,  I 
greatly  desire  to  drink,  because,  in  your  presence,  I  wish  to  speak  not  after 
an  ordinary  manner.  Farewell,  thou  ornament  of  learning,  of  councils,  and,  in 
fine,  of  every  virtue  ! — From  the  Augustine's,  this  May-day — Your  child  and 
beedman  in  Jesu  Christ,  Frere  Myles  Cov'dale. 

"  Unto  the  right  worshipful,  and  his  most  singular  good'  Master,  Master  Crum- 
well,  this  be  delivered  tcith  due  manner."^ 

This  document  is  important  in  several  respects  ;  and  though 
the  year  in  which  it  was  written  be  not  marked,  the  style 
proves  that  Crumwell  had  already  much  in  his  power,  and 


3  The  term  chilil,  as  here  and  again  employed,  is,  of  course,  not  intended  to  mark  any  inferio- 
rity in  point  of  age — but  to  denote  humble  courtesy.     Coverdale  was  born  in  tlie  year  148K. 

4  This  he  must  give  in  Latin — "  Nam  quicquid  est  in  te  concilii,  nihil  non  politicum,  nihil  non 
divinum  est;  quicquid  enim  agis,  nihil  inconsultc  agis,  nusquam  te  primum  philosophuni 
prcdes.  Dc  rore  autem  cell  summam  (more  Jacob)  surrepuisti  benedictioncm.  De  tuo  ipso 
torrente  niaximo  potari  cxopto,  te  quia  coram  alloqui  nom  mcdiocriter  cupio.  Vale,  decus 
literarum,  conciliorum,  omnium  denique  probitatum."  He  subscribes  himself  still  a  Friar, 
and  is  mindful  of  Wolscy's  rule.     Sec  the  note  under  Coverdale's  letter  of  August  1527,  P-  KVi. 

■■>  MP.  CnimwcU's  Correspondence  in  the  State  Paper  Office ;  and  see  Gov.  State  Papers,  i.,  p. 


1537.]  MYLES  COVERDALE.  557 

that,  therefore,  he  must  have  been  engaged  officially  near  the 
King.  His  Majesty's  Commissioners  in  our  day,  who  first 
printed  the  letter,  in  1880,  have  said — "  From  the  superscrip- 
tion it  was  clearly  before  Crumwell  became  Secretary  of  State, 
probably  before  he  was  of  the  Privy  Council,"  and  they  have 
dated  it  1st  May  1532.  But  the  "  superscription"  is  liter- 
ally the  same  which  Yaughan  and  others  employed,  when 
addressing  Crumwell  in  1531  ;*•  and  as  time  must  be  allowed 
for  Coverdale  to  complete  his  translation,  we  are  inclined  to 
think  that  the  letter  may  have  been  written  on  May-day 
1531.  In  May  1530,  the  Bishops  and  Sir  Thomas  More 
were  mad  to  fury  against  Tyndale,  but  by  the  next  year,  his 
influence  being  more  powerful  than  ever,  Crumwell  may  have 
felt  that  something  must  be  attempted.^ 

As  for  the  gentleman,  in  whose  house  Crumwell  and  Cover- 
dale  had  conversed.  Master  Moor,  there  can  be  little  hesita- 
tion. The  name  of  Sir  Thomas  was  then  often  so  spelt,  and 
it  is  well  known,  that,  at  that  period,  in  familiar  correspond- 
ence, titles  were  frequently  dropt.  Master  Moor'^s  name  occurs 
in  the  letter  of  1527,  as  well  as  in  the  present .** 

The  style  of  this  epistle,  may  have  amused  the  reader,  since 
adulation  could  scarcely  farther  go.  This  was  the  foible  of 
the  age  ;  though,  at  the  same  time,  it  forcibly  explains  to  us, 
the  only  course  which  Coverdale  imagined  he  could  pursue. 
He  felt  that  he  must  have  a  Patron,  and  posterity  has  now 
the  advantage  of  seeing,  in  the  two  cases  of  Tyndale  and 


<f  Crumwell  was  certainly  a  Privy  Counsellor  in  1531,  if  not  earlier,  see  p.  225 ;  though  not 
Secretary  of  State  till  1534. 

7  Among  too  many  other  mistakes,  a  most  unceremonious  freedom  is  used  with  this  date  of 
the  Government  Commissioners,  in  a  recent  anonymous  publication,  entitled,  "  Memorials  of 
Myles  Coverdale,"  8vo,  London,  1838.  "  The  date  there,"  says  the  author,  "  is  wrongly  assigned 
to  1531 ;"  misquoting  the  Commissioners,  who  say  1532.  But  then  he  tells  us,  that  this  letter 
"  it  is  mofl  probable  was  written  before  1514!  Because,  in  that  year.  Tanner  says  that  Cover- 
dale  took  orders  at  Norwich  before  John  Bishop  of  Chalcedon."  What  help  or  hope  he  could 
have  by  applying  to  Crumwell  thc».  it  is  indeed  hard  to  say ;  for  where  was  Crumwell  to  be 
found  before  1514?  Four  years  before,  according  to  the  popular  story,  he  had  been  trying  to 
soothe  the  sweet  tooth  of  Julius  II.  at  Rome,  by  some  dainty  Jd//«.  made  after  the  English 
fashion  ;  and  after  that,  he  is  understood  to  have  been  a  soldier-adventurer,  when,  of  course, 
he  had  but  little  to  spare.  But  the  first  historical  notice  of  Crumwell  on  English  ground,  then 
in  a  humble  capacity  as  confidential  servant  to  the  Marchioness  of  Dorset,  is  placed  by  Sir  H. 
Ellis,  in  1523.— /,(■»<■»•.«,  i.,  p.  219.  At  last  he  got  into  Wolsey's  good  graces;  but  assuredly  he 
was  never  there  addressed  as  "  the  ornament  of  councils."  In  1526,  we  have  already  seen 
Coverdale  in  the  Monastery  at  Cambridge  with  Banies,  then  coming  up  to  London  with  him ; 
and  two  years  afterwards,  in  no  small  danger  of  apprehension.  See  p.  186.  But  now,  the  books 
he  wanted  were  evidently  for  a  sjiecific  design,  in  which  he  was  eager  to  engage,  after  the  godli/ 
communication  held  with  him,  in  Master  Moor's  house. 

8  John  Foxe,  Tyndale,  and  others,  meant  nothing  discourteous  when  referring  to  him  as 
Maister  More. 


oTiS  COVERDALES   SITUATION  [booic  I. 

Coverdale,  whether,  in  translating  the  Sacred  Volume,  a  man 
succeeds  best,  iritk  or  without  one.  Coverdale  was  afterwards 
of  great  value  ;  but  as  soon  as  he  appears,  when  compared 
with  Tyndale,  we  have  no  choice,  but  are  obliged  to  discrimi- 
nate. They  were  men  evidently  cast  in  two  different  moulds. 
The  former  never  could  have  adopted  such  a  style  of  address 
to  any  man,  whether  in  or  out  of  power.  Once  in  his  life, 
indeed,  we  have  seen  Tyndale  approach  Sir  Henry  Guilford, 
with  the  translation  of  a  Greek  Ode,  as  a  specimen  of  his 
scholarship,  and  he  advised  him  to  apply  to  Tunstal ;  but 
being  civilly  enough  refused,  this  at  once  opened  his  eyes,  so 
that,  from  that  moment  he  looked  up  to  God  alone,  and 
went  on  his  way.  "  God,"  said  he,  seven  years  afterwards, 
"  who  knoweth  what  is  within  hypocrites,  saw  that  I  was 
beguiled,  and  that  that  counsel  was  not  the  next  way  to 
my  purpose,  and,  therefore,  He  gat  me  no  favour  in  my 
lord's  sight." 

After  such  a  letter,  and  "  books  once  had,"  it  is  natural  to 
suppose  that  Coverdale  lost  no  time.  He  had  been  set  to  "the 
smell  of  holy  letters"  by  no  common  Patron — a  man  rising 
into  great  power ;  though  the  spot  to  which  this  second  transla- 
tor retired,  has  never  yet  been  asceHained.  But  wherever  it 
was,  there  he  sat  down,  and  amidst  all  the  war\s  tumultuous 
noise,  as  well  as  shielded  from  the  keen  arrows  of  the  Lord 
Chancellor  of  England,  he  was  left,  like  Luther  on  his  moun- 
tain ground  at  Wartburg,  to  pursue  the  even  tenor  of  his 
way.  How  striking  is  the  contrast,  when  we  turn  for  a  mo- 
ment to  the  situation  of  Tyndale,  whether  in  1531  or  1532? 
Having  had  no  fixed  abode,  no  certain  dwelling  place,  but 
under  the  pelting  of  a  pitiless  storm,  by  May  1531,  for  more 
than  seven  long  years,  he  had  already  been  doing  his  best  for 
England.  As  far  as  reproach,  denunciation,  and  persecution, 
could  go,  it  might  be  said,  "  with  many  an  arrow,  deep  infixed, 
his  panting  side  was  charged." — "  As  I  now  am,"  said  he  to 
Vaughan,  in  April  of  that  year,  "  very  death  were  more 
pleasant  to  me  than  life  ;"  and  if  the  reader  will  only  glance 
over  that  stern  and  strange  letter  of  this  same  man,  Crum- 
well,  he  will  be  better  able  to  judge  of  the  contrast.**  Or  let 
the  date  given  in  the  Government  State  Papers  turn  out  to 


"  111  May  l.'i:!!.     See  page  275. 


1537.3  COMPARED   WITH    TVNDAI.K'S.  5r)0 

be  the  correct  one  ;  then,  at  that  moment,  Sir  Thomas  Elyot 
liad  been  charojed  by  Henry  VIII.  to  seize  Tyndale,  if  he 
could  ;  at  home,  the  Bishops  were  tormenting  Latimer,  and 
burning  Mr.  Bainham  ;  and  as  Coverdale  dates  his  letter 
from  St.  Atipistine's,  he  could  scarcely  miss  hearing  that 
gentleman,  with  Tyndale's  Testament  in  his  hand,  address 
the  Congregation  there,  as  he  did,  with  tears  !  At  all  events, 
if  that  letter  was  written  on  May-day  1532,  Bainham  had 
been  consumed  to  ashes  in  Smithfield,  that  very  morning.^'' 

If,  however,  we  now  assume  the  latest  date,  or  that  of  the 
Government  Commissioners,  to  be  the  true  time,  it  is  evident 
Coverdale  had  quite  enough  to  do  for  fully  two  years  to  come, 
in  bringing  his  manuscript  of  the  entire  Scriptures  into  such 
a  state,  as  that  he  could  please  his  employers,  with  regard  to 
any  word  or  any  rendering  contained  in  it. 

According  to  his  own  expression,  he  was  then  ready  to  set 
forth  this  special  translation.  In  other  words,  he  was  then 
ready  for  the  press. '^  Nor  is  the  time  unworthy  of  notice. 
It  will  be  remembered  that  by  May  in  that  year,  Crumwell 
had  been  appointed  Secretary  of  State,  and  that  his  influ- 
ence was  rising  rapidly  to  its  great  height.  He  had,  there- 
fore, much  more  in  his  power,  while  Coverdale,  as  we  have 
seen  for  years  past,  was  at  his  disposal,  or  entirely  subservi- 
ent to  his  will.  Now,  it  was  the  I^ew  Testament,  all  along, 
of  which  the  authorities  had  been  most  afraid  ;  the  systematic 
alteration  of  certain  words  in  it,  might  be  regarded  as  likely 
to  allay  their  apprehensions,  and  could  be  very  easily  done, 
before  the  manuscript  was  committed  to  the  press. '^  At  all 
events,  Coverdale  was  then  ready  to  "  set  forth"  his  transla- 
tion, "  according  as  he  was  desired;'"''  and  the  letter  just  quoted, 
indeed,  is  chiefly  valuable  as  a  key  to  certain  expressions  to 
be  found  in  the  preliminary  matter  aflixed  to  the  Bible  of 


")  See  page  333. 

"  To  set  forth,  was  Coverdale's  phrase  for  priidhiij,  as  in  his  next  letter;  and  thus  much 
seems  to  be  implied  in  what  he  afterwards  said  in  his  Apology  to  the  Reader,  before  his 
own  second  edition  of  his  Bible  in  15."i0.  "  For  the  which  cause  (accordyng  as  I  was  dcsi/red,) 
anno  1534,  I  toke  the  more  upon  me  to  set  forth  this  special!  translacyon,"  i&c.  The  same 
words  he  had  printed  before,  in  his  first  edition  ;  but  here  he  inserts  the  year  in  which  he 
was  "  desired  to  set  if  furtti."  To  suppose  that  he  then  only  began  to  translate  from  Genesis 
to  Revelation,  as  already  noticed,  p.  55,3,  would  be  to  impose  a  task  which  neither  Coverdale, 
nor  any  other  man,  was  able  to  accomplish,  not  only  in  his  early  day,  but  even  in  our  own. 

12  One  of  those  terms  was  Penanee ;  a  word  for  which  all  the  Ic.iding  adherents  of  the  old 
learning  entertained  a  decided  preference.  Fuller,  the  historian,  was  so  uncourtcous.  or  un- 
charitable, as  to  insinuate  somewhere,  that  this  was  owing  to  one  circumstance— that  Penance 
ki'iit  their  Kiteheii. 


500  OOVERDALE'S   -SITUATION  [boOK  l. 

1535.  No  fault  can  ever  be  found  with  Coverdale's  amiable 
temper  as  a  man,  wliile  his  expressed  humility  as  a  scholar 
shines  pre-eminent.  Among  his  contemporaries  he  must  ever 
be  ranked  very  high.  As  a  translator  he  did  well ;  and  had 
he  not  been  encumbered  with  patronage,  he  would  have  done 
far  better.  We  must,  however,  take  the  work  as  it  came 
from  his  hands,  and  can  now  judge  of  it  only  by  its  merits. 

But  if  the  situation  of  the  two  men  has  furnished  one  con- 
trast, the  origin  of  the  two  translations  presents  another,  not 
less  worthy  of  remembrance.  The  origin  of  Tyndale's,  must 
ever  be  traced  to  his  own  bosom  and  conscience  alone.  Before 
leaving  England,  we  have  supposed  that  he  might  have  said, — 
"  The  word  of  the  Lord  was  in  mine  heart,  as  a  burning  fire 
shut  up  in  my  bones,  and  I  was  weary  with  forbearing,  and  I 
could  not  stay ;"  nay,  and  with  the  prophet  of  old,  he  might 
have  added — "All  my  familiars  watched  for  my  halting  ;  say- 
ing, perad venture  he  will  be  enticed,  and  we  shall  prevail  against 
him,  and  we  shall  take  revenge  upon  him."  With  Ooverdale, 
it  was  far  otherwise.  It  was  an  undertaking,  no  doubt,  con- 
genial with  his  taste ;  but,  left  to  himself,  if  we  are  to  believe 
his  own  words,  he  never  would  have  attempted  it.  In  his  pro- 
logue "to  the  Christian  reader,"  he  styles  his  work  a  "  special 
translation,"  because  he  proceeded  as  he  was  desired  under  au- 
thorit3^  "  But,  to  say  the  truth  before  God,  it  was  neither 
77iy  labour,  nor  my  desire  to  have  this  work  put  into  my  hands; 
nevertheless,  when  I  was  instantly  required,  though  I  could 
not  do  so  well  as  I  would,  I  thought  it  yet  my  duty  to  do  my 
best,  and  that  with  a  good  will." 

Then,  again,  as  to  the  expense  of  this  undertaking,  Ooverdale 
,was  patronised.  In  Tyndale"'s  case,  under  the  influence  of  the 
power  of  Christianity  and  the  noblest  patriotism,  the  whole 
commenced  at  his  own  risk ;  and  purely  for  his  country's 
benefit,  we  have  seen  him,  again  and  again,  embarrassed  in 
more  ways  than  one.  But  Coverdale  had  no  risk  whatever  to 
run.  He  was  employed,  and,  whether  he  was  to  succeed  or 
not,  the  work  was  to  involve  him  in  no  expense  whatever. 
He  spake  as  he  felt  at  the  moment,  and  it  was  intended,  no 
doubt,  as  a  hint  to  the  King ;  but  certainly  it  was  by  far  too 
bold  to  say,  that  "he  trusted,  that  God  would  bring  his  simple 
and  rude  labour  to  good  effect,  seeing  that  others  had  been 
mated  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  undertake  the  cost  of  it."     The 


1537.]  tlOMFAKKU    VViril    TYNIMl.KS.  -jQl 

gUiriiit^  trutli  was,  that  the  community  at  large  had  been  even 
by  t/iat  time  happily  brought  into  such  a  state,  by  manifold 
editions  of  Tyndale's  translation,  that  the  patrons  of  Coverdale 
were  moved  by  no  higher  feeling  than  that  of  imperative  ex- 
pediency ;  and  this  feeling  forms  decidedly  one  of  the  strongest 
testimonies  to  the  eftect  and  power  of  Tyndale's  exertions. 

Having  proceeded  however  to  the  close,  Coverdale  had  now 
to  approach  his  Majesty,  no  doubt  under  direction,  that  nothing 
might  be  wanting  to  secure  acceptance  ;  and  therefore  he  came 
with  thejirst  of  those  dedications,  which,  to  say  the  least,  ought 
never  to  have  been  bound  up  with  the  word  of  the  living  God. 

In  the  course  of  his  dedication,  he  compares  Henry  VIII,  to 
Moses,  to  David,  to  Jehosaphat,  to  Hezekiah,  "  yea  a  very 
Josias;"  and  as  if  all  this  had  not  been  too  much,  he  says — 
"  I  thought  it  my  duty,  and  to  belong  unto  my  allegiance, 
when  I  had  translated  this  Bible,  not  only  to  dedicate  this 
translation  unto  your  Highness,  but  wholly  to  commit  it  unto 
the  same  :  to  the  intent  that  if  any  thing  therein  be  translated 
amiss,  it  may  stand  in  your  Grace's  hands,  to  correct  it,  to 
amend  it,  to  improve,  yea,  and  clean  to  reject  it,  if  your  godly 
umdom  shall  think  it  necessary  f'' 

In  the  volume  which  Coverdale  thus  presented,  were  these 
words,  of  his  own  translating, — "  He  that  rebuketh  a  man, 
shall  find  more  favour  at  the  last,  than  he  that  flattereth  him  ;" 
though  certainly,  at  the  moment,  it  might  seem,  that  under 
such  high  patronage,  and  after  incense  so  dense  and  abundant 
as  had  been  offered  to  his  Majesty,  he  must  succeed.  And  not 
only  succeed,  but  overshadow  the  man  who  had  been  so  sig- 
nally raised  up  by  God,  and  who,  for  twelve  j^ears,  had  been 
God's  own  sanctioned  instrument,  for  conveying  into  Britain 
His  blessed  Word.  Often  have  we  marked  his  labours,  as  form- 
ing a  distinct  and  independent  undertaking,  with  which  Divine 
providence  would  not  permit  mere  time-serving  men,  whoever 
they  were,  or  worldly  politicians,  to  interfere  ;  but  how  will  it 
be  possible  to  draw  this  distinction  now  ?  And,  more  especially, 
as  this  is  only  the  first  of  several  distinct  attempts,  to  bestow 
on  this  country,  a  translation  difterent  from  that  of  the  first — 
the  unpatronised  Tyndale's  I 

Yet  in  serving  man  only,  and  in  seeking  to  please  him, 
there  are  many  critical  moments,  while  in  serving  God,  there 
is  not  one :  and,  therefore,  with  regard  to  this  attempt,  it  so 

VOL.  I.  2  N 


.•3(j2  COVEkDALK'S   DEDICATION.  QhoOK  I. 

happened  that  Coverdale  had  oversliot  the  mark  at  a  most  criti- 
cal period.  This  might  have  well  warned  any  future  individual, 
of  the  danger  connected  with  such  dedications.  The  last  sheet 
of  this  Bible  having  been  put  to  press  on  the  4th  of  October 
1535,  Coverdale  had  closed  the  heading,  or  title,  of  his  dedica- 
tion to  Henry,  by  imploring  the  Divine  blessing  on  himself, 
and  his  "  dearest  just  wife  and  most  virtuous  Princess,  Queen 
Anne.''''  Any  copy  of  this  book,  bound,  could  not  have  reached 
this  country  before  the  beginning  of  1536,  at  the  soonest. 
But  by  February,  if  not  earlier,  the  very  name  of  Queen  Anne, 
so  far  from  being  a  passport  to  royal  favour,  was  fatal  to  any- 
thing, to  which  it  was  affixed  !  Crumwell,  too,  as  we  have 
already  seen,  had  fallen  in  with  the  King's  barbarous  inten- 
tions, so  that  till  another  Queen  arose,  in  the  person  of  Jane 
Seymour,  the  book  must  have  remained  unpresented.  After 
that,  it  is  true,  the  Convocation  assembled  in  June ;  but,  as  a 
body,  they  appear  to  have  entertained  no  favour  for  the  transla- 
tion, no  nor  even  sympathy  for  those  who,  as  Coverdale  has  told 
us,  had  been  "  moved  to  pay  the  cost!''''  So  far  from  this,  "  the 
Convocation  agreed  upon  the  form  of  a  petition  to  be  presented 
to  the  King,"  as  already  noticed,  "  That  he  would  graciously 
indulge  unto  his  subjects  of  the  laity,  the  reading  of  the 
Bible  in  the  English  tongue,  and  that  a  7iew  translation  of  it 
might  be  forthwith  made,  for  that  end  and  purpose."  And, 
therefore,  said  Lewis,  it  appears  that  the  Clergy  did  not  ap- 
prove of  the  translations  already  made  by  Tyndale  and  Cover- 
dale,  and  their  own  attempt  to  have  the  royal  permission  to 
make  a  new  one  had  not  succeeded. 

Here,  however,  was  a  Bible,  completely  finished  by  Coverdale,  dated 
in  1535,  and  before  any  remarks  respecting  it,  we  give  the  Title  and 
Collation. 

"  BiBi  lA.  The  Bible,  tliat  is  the  holy  Scripture  of  the  Oldo  and  New  Tes- 
tament, faithfully  and  truly  translated  out  of  Douche  and  Latyn  in  to  Englishe, 
.MDXXXV."  The  book  is  in  black  letter,  printed  in  double  colunin.s,  in  a  foreign 
secretary -gothic  type,  with  wood-cuts ;  but  the  dedication,  prologue,  and  con- 
tents of  Genesis,  are  in  a  different  letter.  Collation.  Wood-cut  title ;  dedica- 
tion to  K.  Henry  VIII.  including  his  "dearest  just  wife,  and  most  vertuous 
pryncessc,  Quee.n  Anne," — indicating  the  powerful  influence  she  possessed  in 
that  year,  5  pages.  "  A  prologue  to  the  reader,"  6  pages.  "  The  Bokes  of  the 
hole  Byble,"  2  pages.  «  The  contentes  of  the  boke  of  Genesis,"  1  page.  "  The 
first  book  of  Moses,"  fol.  i.— xc. ;  then  a  map  of  the  Holy  Land.  "  The  second 
parte  of  the  Olde  Testament,"  Josua  to  Hester,  fol.  ii. — cxx.    "  Job  to  Solomon's 


1.5.37.]  COVERDALE'S    BIBLli;.  563 

Ualettes,"  fol.  i. — lii.  "  All  the  Pro))hetes  in  Eiiglislie,"  fol.  ii. — cii.  "  Apo- 
cripha,"  fol.  ii. — Ixxxiii.,  falsely  numbered  Ixxxi.,  a  blank  leaf.  "  The  Newe 
Te.stamente,"  fol.  ii. — cxiii.  and  on  the  reverse  of  the  last  is,  "  Prynted  in  the 
yeare  of  oure  Lorde,  mdxxxv.  and  fynished  the  fourth  daye  of  October." 

The  death  of  Queen  Anne  in  May  1.').36,  having  jjroved  fatal  to  the 
appearance  of  this  book  till  after  the  event,  various  expedients  were 
then  tried  to  ensure  success.  "  The  interval,"  says  Professor  Walter, 
"  between  the  date  on  the  title-page  and  the  actual  publication,  is  clearly 
marked  by  a  curious  alteration  in  the  dedicatory  letter  to  Henry  VIII. 
which  contains  these  words, — '  yoiu'  dearest  just  wife  and  most  vertuous 
pryncesse  Qu.  JAne.'  This  is  not  as  it  was  printed  ;  for  Anne  has  been 
altered  into  JAne  by  the  pen."  Thus  indeed  it  stands  in  the  British 
Museum  copy,  but  there  is  great  variety  as  to  this  appellation.  Lam- 
beth Library  has  one  copy  with  Anne,  another  with  Jane.  The  Bodleian 
has  Anne.  Sion  College  has  Jane,  and  in  some  copies  the  'jiame  of  the 
Queen  had  been  expunged.  None  of  these  expedients,  it  must  be  obvious, 
could  possibly  meet  the  case.  The  preceding  phrase  was  now  as  in- 
auspicious as  that  of  the  Queen's  name.  The  epithet  jiist,  as  intended 
to  mark  both  Coverdale's  and  Crumwell's  ai>probation  of  Henry's  second 
Queen,  had  come  too  late  ;  and  it  was  more  than  awkward  when  applied  to 
the  third  marriage,  as  it  seemed  to  say  that  the  question  of  legitimacy 
would  never  be  laid  to  rest.  Only  one  other  device  remained  to  be  tried, 
which  was  that  of  a  new  title,  as  if  it  were  a  different  book  ;  changing 
the  year  to  the  next,  or  1536,  and  leaving  out  the  words  "  translated  out 
of  Doiich  and  Latyn,'"  as  follow,  "  Biblia.  The  Byble  :  that  is,  the 
Holy  Scrypture  of  the  Olde  and  New  Testament,  faythfully  translated  in 
Englyshe,  mdxxxvi."  But  all  was  yet  in  vain,  and  that  year  expired 
without  leaving  one  shadow  of  proof  that  the  book  had  obtained  the 
royal  approbation.  In  June,  the  Prelates  virtually  expressed  theu-  dis- 
satisfaction, with  all  that  had  yet  been  done  ;  and  we  have  already  seen 
that  there  were  no  injunctions  on  the  subject  in  1.5-36. 

From  all  this,  it  becomes  evident,  that  wherever  Cover- 
dale  had  superintended  the  press,  whether  at  Zurich,  Frank- 
fort, or  Cologne,  for  they  have  all  been  mentioned,  in  1536 
he  must  have  been  in  London;  and  in  1537  we  have  evi- 
dence not  only  of  his  occupation  and  place  of  abode,  but  of 
his  long-continued  confidential  communication  with  Crum- 
well.  We  have  never  seen  him  but  as  his  obedient  servant 
for  ten  years  past,  or  since  August  1527.  His  return  to 
England  therefore,  and  his  continued  residence  in  it  till 
next  year,  being  thus  ascertained,  all  such  assertions  as 
that    "  CovERDALE,    assisted    by   Eogers  who   corrected    the 


561  coverdalp:  as  a  translator.  [book  i. 

press,  revised  the  wliole  of  Tyndule's  work  before  they  re- 
printed it,  not  only  the  published  but  the  unpublished  part 
of  it,"  as  Mr.  Whittaker  had  imagined,  are  now  at  an  end, 
Coverdale  was  at  home  in  England,  all  the  time  that  Rogers 
was  so  busy  abroad ;  and  from  the  superior  manner  in  which 
he  executed  his  task,  it  is  evident  that  he  required  no  such 
assistant.  The  alliance  of  Coverdale  with  Tyndale,  at  any 
time,  is  a  historical  fiction,  which  must  now  be  discarded. 
No  two  undertakings  could  well  be  more  distinct ;  though 
Rogers,  it  will  be  evident,  had  sat  in  judgment  on  whatever 
Coverdale  had  translated. 

With  reference,  however,  to  the  Bible  brought  into  England 
in  ]  536,  of  Coverdale's  qualifications  as  a  Translator  from  the 
original,  there  can  be  little  or  rather  no  question,  after  what 
Mr.  Whittaker  has  so  ably  written  respecting  his  acquaint- 
ance with  Hebrew  ;  though,  at  the  same  time,  his  leaning  to 
the  Vulgate  and  German  versions,  has  been  made  equally 
apparent  by  Professor  Walter  ;  who  goes  so  far  as  to  insist 
that  the  version  cannot  be  ranked  so  high  as  that  of  a  primary 
one.^^  The  truth  seems  to  be,  that  between  Coverdale  and 
Crumwell,  expediency  had  been  far  too  much  consulted  in  the 
undertaking  throughout.  Hence  even  the  first  title-page, 
bearing  these  words  "  translated  out  of  Douche  and  Latynr 
These  terms,  as  Whittaker  had  not  seen  them,  he  could 
scarcely  believe ;  adding,  "  if  this  be  the  case,  the  title-page 
contains  a  very  great  misrepresentation."  Hence  the  with- 
drawment  of  the  words  in  1536  by  Coverdale,  and  this  year 
by  Nycolson ;  to  say  nothing  of  the  awkward  substitute, 
"  translated  in  Englyshe."  At  the  same  time,  Coverdale 
himself  informs  us  that  he  had  five  different  translations, 
both  Latin  and  Dutch,  that  is  German,  before  him,  and  "  to 
help  him  herein  ;"  and  though  he  certainly  does  not  appear 
to  have  venerated  these  "  interpreters"  as  authority^  he  regard- 
ed their  translations  with  "  gladness,"  and  therefore  could 
not  upon  all  occasions  be  free  from  some  degree  of  bias.'^ 


1  See  "  An  historical  and  critical  enquiry  into  the  interpretation  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures, 
by  John  W.  Whittaker,  M.A.,  1819;"  and  Letter  to  Marsli,  Bishop  of  Peterborough,  by  Henry 
Walter,  B.D.,  IIL'3. 

14  Thel.NTEnpRiiTERStliemsehes,  cannot  now  be  positively  fixed  ;  but  considering  the  tim  ,  the 
following  may  have  been  the. /ifc  referred  to.— 1.  The  VvJgale,  of  course.  2.  The  Biblia  Sacra, 
of  Riidelius,  already  mentioned,  7tute,  p.  1C7,  printed  at  Cologne  in  1527,  and  again  in  152.0  ;  for, 
though  unknown  to  our  bibliographers,  and  though  LeLong,  who  had  never  seen  the  first  edition, 
and  speaks  of  the  second  as  so  scarce  that  he  could  not  find  it  in  the  Lil)raries  at  Paris,  it 


1537. J  lilS  TRANSIEiNT  SUCCESS.  565 

But  we  arc  now  advancing  into  the  year  1537,  and  yet,  if 
there  has  been  any  application  to  the  King  respecting  this 
Jiible,  there  is  no  reply.  Not  a  single  petition  from  Crumwell 
in  its  favour  is  to  be  found.  A  printer  however,  and  in 
London  itself,  now  appeared  in  furtherance  of  Coverdale's 
design — James  Nycolson  in  St.  Thomas'  Hospital,  South- 
wark.  By  this  time  he  bad  reprinted  Coverdale's  Bible,  with 
his  dedication  to  the  King  ;  and  it  deserves  notice  that  there 
Avere  other  copies  with  a  different  title,  without  the  dedica- 
tion. From  the  spelling,  we  presume  the  latter  to  have  been 
the  first  expedient  for  royal  favour ;  but  this  is  immaterial, 
for  the  fact  is,  that  they  both  succeeded.  Both  titles  bear  at 
the  foot  of  the  page  these  words,  "  Set  forth  with  the  Kyng^s 
most  gracious  license.'''' 

But  when,  or  in  what  month  of  1537,  could  this  have  been 
obtained  1  There  was,  as  already  hinted,  no  Convocation ; 
but  were  the  Bishops  not  consulted  ?  It  should  seem  not. 
Their  Vicar-General  had  thought  it  unnecessary ;  for  he  it 
was  who  had  applied  to  Henry  and  obtained  his  license. 
Coverdale  himself  was  now  in  London  ;  and  though  there  be 
not  a  word  yet  found  in  favour  of  the  first  Bible  printed  in 
1535,  he  now  applied  earnestly  to  his  old  patron,  iox  farther 
favour  to  Nycolson,  whom  he  was  employing  as  a  printer  of 
several  smaller  things. 

"  After  due  consideration  to  your  good  Lordship,  I  heartily  and  in  most 
humhle  wise  heseech  the  same,  that  inasmuch  as  the  King's  most  excellent 
Majesty,  of  his  singular  grace,  (by  the  means  of  your  good  Lordship  as  God's 
instrument  in  that  behalf,)  UatU  granted  unto  this  bearer,  James  Nicholson,  his 
gracious  license  and  privilege,  for  the  sale  of  his  Bibles  and  New  Testaments  al- 
ready printed  ;  and  forasmuch  as  his  Grace  is  also  informed,  and  halh  seen  a  part 
of  our  postil,  or  ordinary  sermons,  which  the  Lord  Archbishop  of  Canterbury 
hath  corrected  ;  your  Lordship  (according  to  your  most  loving  and  favourable 
manner  of  old,)  will  help  and  further  the  said  James  Nicholson,  to  the  King's 
most  gracious  privilege  for  certain  years  to  print  the  same ;  considering  the 
cost  and  charge  he  hath  had,  not  only  for  drawing  of  the  said  sermons  out  of 
Scripture,  but  also  in  preparing  now  of  his  letters  and  prints  for  the  settinij 
forth  of  the  same.is     This  I  most  humbly  require  of  your  Lordship,  whom 


must  have  been  of  easy  access  in  the  days  of  Coverdale ;  and  if  it  should  turn  out  that  he  printed 
at  Cologne,  the  hook  was  quite  at  hand.  3.  The  version  by  Pa(i)u>tus,  15-28,  4.  The  German- 
Swiss  or  Helvetian  version,  by  Leo  Juda,  1525-1529,  which,  if  Coverdale  printed  at  Zurich,  was 
sure  to  be  consulted.  5.  Luther's  German  version  of  1532.  Besides  these,  indeed,  there  were 
the  Belgic  or  Dutch  Bible,  152(;,  and  following  editions,  printed  by  Leisveldt  of  Antwerp,  and 
the  Lower  Saxon,  in  1,533,  at  Lubeck,  by  Pomeranus.  The  Bible  by  Sebastian  Munstcr,  was 
too  late  for  Coverdale's  consultation. 
IS  Coverdale's  phrase  for  printhifi,  as  fomcrly  noticed  in  the  prologue  before  his  Bible. 


5(}6  REMARKABLY    SUDDEN  CHANGE.  [book  1. 

God    px'eserve  now  and  ever.      Aniun.     Your  Lordship's  humble  and   daily 
orator — Miles  Coverdale."'*' 

To  this  letter  there  is  iiu  mouth  affixed,  but  he  writes 
to  Crumwell  uow,  evideutly  more  at  ease,  aud  as  full  of  hope. 
Here,  therefore,  and  at  last,  it  will  be  presumed  by  all  that  the 
business  is  finished.  Coverdale  is  alive,  and  in  high  favour. 
The  King's  gracious  license  speaks  for  itself ;  and  if  Crum- 
well and  Oranmer,  nay,  and  his  Majesty  be  gained  over,  what 
hope  remained  of  the  smallest  notice  being  ever  taken  of 
Tyudale's  labours  ?  What  hope  of  any  just  estimate  being 
now  formed  of  his  merits  as  a  Translator,  however  superior  ? 
He  had  not  only  left  the  world,  but  left  not  one  solitary  friend 
at  that  court,  where  his  name  had  been  branded  with  infamy, 
from  the  days  of  Wolsey  until  now  ;  and,  therefore,  long  be- 
fore Coverdale  had  even  sat  down  to  his  work.  Besides  this, 
the  King  and  Crumwell,  and  Cranmer,  had,  for  years,  fully 
committed  themselves  agaitist  Tyndale ;  the  two  former  by 
the  most  violent  language,  and  Cranmer,  all  these  years,  by 
at  least  bowing  to  the  storm,  and  winking  hard  at  his  mar- 
tyrdom. Nor  must  it  be  forgotten,  that  the  Primate,  in  his 
official  capacity,  in  company  with  his  brethren,  had  been 
striving  hard  after  some  translation  by  their  own  authority. 

Such  was  the  actual  state  of  matters,  down  to  the  beginning 
of  August  this  year;  when,  as  far  as  it  is  yet  known,  not  one  man 
in  all  England,  from  the  King  downwards,  said,  or  even  ima- 
gined, that  any  change  was  at  hand  !  But  such  are  the  ways 
of  Him,  who  is  the  Governor  among  the  nations.  That  which 
He  most  highly  favours — that  which,  by  way  of  eminence,  is 
his  own  cause,  He  may  allow  for  a  moment  to  sink*  into  for- 
getfulness,  or  in  oblivion  die,  only  that  his  own  hand  may  be 
the  more  conspicuous. 

Waiving  therefore  all  implication  of  Coverdale,  in  any  sense 
whatever,  whether  as  an  individual,  a  translator,  or  a  Christian, 
the  favour  noic  bestowed  upon  him  by  man,  becomes  a  part  of 
English  history,  by  no  means  the  least  observable.  It  was 
permitted  to  take  its  course.  It  was  permitted  to  do  so,  till 
it  had  reached  its  utmost  height.  But  what  if  all  this  were 
only  to  render  the  interposition  of  Divine  providence  more  ap- 


"■  C'runiwcU's  Correspondence,  State  Puper  Office. 


153?.]  REMARKABLY   SUDDEN   CHANGE.  567 

parent  aiul  striking  i  Capricious  the  King  of  England  might 
be,  to  a  proverb;  but  Henry  the  Eightli  was  God's  servant,  as 
entirely  as  Nebuchadnezzar  was  of  old  ;  and  though  all  things, 
at  present,  seem  to  run  one  way,  in  a  few  days  only,  we  shall 
see  them  all  at  once  take  another  direction. 

We  shall  see  the  translation  set  aside,  which  the  Kinp  had 
licensed,  and  of  which  even  Cnimwell,  and  perhaps  some  others, 
had  paid  the  cost !  No  other  man  than  Crannier  shall  be  the 
moving  cause.  Nycolson  the  printer  shall,  next  year,  be  out 
of  favour  with  Coverdale  ;  nay,  Coverdale  himself  be  engaged 
in  correcting  the  press  of  another  translation,  under  the  sanc- 
tion of  both  Henry  and  Crumwell ;  while  the  Bihle^  which  we 
have  just  reported,  shall  be  not  only  passed  by,  but  ere  long 
interdicted  by  authority  ! 

But  why,  it  may  be  enquired,  why  make  such  distinction 
between  the  two  translations  ?  To  this,  at  present,  we  only, 
reply,  that  supposing  they  had  been  precisely  of  equal  merit ; 
surely  something  was  due  to  the  memory  of  him  who  had 
ploughed,  and  sowed,  and  toiled  so  long ;  who  had  first  cast 
up  the  high  way,  and  lifted  up  a  standard  for  the  people; 
without  one  word  of  encouragement,  or  one  smile  of  Court  fa- 
vour, from  any  of  these  men.  The  important  distinction,  how- 
ever, between  the  two  translations,  will  be  pointed  out,  when 
once  we  have  recorded  the  historical  facts. 

We  must,  therefore,  as  we  have  often  done  before,  look 
abroad,  but  only  for  a  few  moments,  as  we  shall  soon  have  occa- 
sion to  return  to  England  again. 

In  England  itself,  by  this  time,  there  were  many  admirers 
of  Tyndale,  who  now  revered  his  memory  ;  many  who  had 
read  and  believed  the  truths  of  Scripture,  which  he  had  been 
importing  into  his  native  land  since  the  year  1526;  but  they 
were  like  the  seven  thousand  in  Israel,  in  the  days  of  Elijah. 
The  printing  press  at  home  was  fettered  in  the  hands  of  but 
a  very  few  individuals,  and  there  was  no  man  of  sufficient 
nerve  in  this  country  to  take  up  the  cause.  Tyndale  himself 
too,  has  been  also  withdrawn  ;  but  all  this  will  only  render  that 
Providence,  with  whom  the  work  had  begun,  still  more  con- 
spicuous, when  lending  the  finishing  stroke  to  all  that  his 
chosen  servant  had  translated.  This  then  appears  to  have 
been,  and  not  till  then,  the  proper  moment  for  overrulinrf  the 
men  in  England :  that  is,  after  all  the  three  influential  in- 
dividuals, the  King,  Crumwell,  and  Cranmer,  had  fully  com- 


.jGS  TYNDALK'S    BIBLH.  j^BOOK  I. 

liiitted  tliemselves,  again  and  again  ;  and  before  any  "  injunc- 
tions" were  issued,  which  might  have  misled  the  people. 

As  there  was  one  man  to  whom  Tyndale  had  been  useful, 
John  Fryth,  who  had  first  stood  by  him  as  an  assistant,  and 
then  preceded  him  to  a  better  world ;  so  now,  there  had  been 
a  second  raised  up,  to  do  justice  to  his  memory,  as  a  transla- 
tor. This  was  John  Rogers,  alias  Matthew,  a  native  of  War- 
wickshire, born,  it  is  most  probable,  about  the  year  1500.''' 
He  had  been  educated  at  Cambridge,  and  having  come  to  Ant- 
werp while  Tyndale  resided  there,  he  became  a  Chaplain  to 
the  English  merchant-adventurers.  By  his  intimate  conver- 
sation with  our  Translator,  he  was  induced  to  examine  the 
Scriptures  for  himself,  and  the  result  was  that  he  embraced, 
in  a  great  degree,  the  same  views  with  this  eminent  man.  We 
have  spoken  with  some  limitation,  as,  according  to  Foxe,  in 
future  years  he  had  not  even  then  understood,  so  clearly  as 
Tyndale,  the  subject  of  liberty  of  conscience,  which  indeed 
scarcely  any  man  then  did.'^ 

Where  Rogers  sat  down  to  superintend  the  press,  remains 
still  only  a  matter  of  conjecture  :'^  but  it  must  have  been  soon, 
if  not  immediately  after  Tyndale  was  imprisoned  at  Vilvorde, 
that  his  friend  set  about  his  edition  of  the  Bible,  in  large 
folio ;  as  the  work  was  finished,  and  ready  for  importation  to 
England  by  the  month  of  July  1.537. 

That  this  tribute  to  Tyndale's  memory  originated  in  the  in- 
dividual zeal  of  his  friends,  there  can  be  little  or  rather  no 
doubt ;  as  Rogers  had  pinnted  more  than  the  half  of  the  en- 
tire volume,  before  we  have  any  evidence  of  the  men  coming 
forward,  who  then  took  up  the  work,  as  a  matter  of  business 
or  trade.  These  were  Richard  Grafton,  and  Edward  Whit- 
church, so  well  known  afterwards,  as  printers  in  London. 
The  former  enjoyed  the  high  honour  of  embarking  almost  his 
all  in  the  undertakino-  :  for  neither  Cranmer  nor  Crum- 
well,  nor  the  King,  ever  contributed  one  farthing  of  the  ex- 
pense.-^*    By  the  time,  therefore,  that  Rogers  had  got  to  the 


■T  Seo  a  more  particular  account  of  hiin,  when  lie  comes  to  die,  as  the  first  martyr  under 
Queen  Mary. 

18  This  is  only  to  be  found  in  Foxe's  Latin  Edition,  15.59.     j).  202. 

ir*  Fdxe  and  Slrype,  supposed  Hamburijh.  Lewis,  Atarhitrp  in  Hesse.  Wanly,  thought 
Paris.  Antwerp  itself  has  been  mentioned,  and  more  recently  Luhcck.  But  were  the  many 
wooden  blocks  and  flourishing  capitals  more  carefully  examined,  the  press  may  yet  be  fi.xed. 

20  Lewis,  in  his  history  of  translations,  loosely  speaks  of — "  Cranmer  favouring  this  edition." 
True,  but  not  till  he  was  astonished  by  the  first  sight  of  it.     And  he  afterwards  goes  on  to  men- 


l.).37.]  TYNDALE'S   BIBLE.  569 

beginning  of  Isaiah,  these  two  individuals  having  embraced 
the  design,  on  that  page  the  numbers  begin  again,  with  a 
title,  "  The  prophetes  in  Englishe^''  in  black  and  red  letters, 
surrounded  by  sixteen  wood-cuts  ;  and  on  the  next  page  there 
is  printed  in  flourished  text  capitals  R.G.  at  the  top,  and  E.  W. 
at  the  bottom,  with  a  large  wood-cut  between.  The  name  of 
Tyndale  affixed,  would  have  been  fatal  to  its  acceptance  with 
Henry.  That  of  Thomas  Matthew,  at  whose  instance />^r/<aj»s 
the  undertaking  may  have  commenced,  was  therefore  printed,  in 
the  title-page,  and  T.  M.  at  the  end  of  the  dedication ;  but  to 
mark  Rogers""  connexion  with  the  book,  we  have  at  the  beginnino- 
"An  exhortation  to  the  study  of  the  Holy  Scripture  gathered  out 
of  the  Bible,"  which  is  subscribed  J.  R. :  and  what  is  singular, 
at  the  end  of  the  Old  Testament,  we  find  W.  T.  in  very  large 
flourished  text  capitals,  evidently  intended  for  William  Tyn- 
dale.  Not  that  he  had  finished  the  whole,  the  remainder  be- 
ing completed  as  we  shall  presently  describe.  The  object 
that  Rogers  had  in  view  was  to  forward  tlie  work,  and  do  jus- 
tice to  the  labours,  of  the  man  he  admired.  Accordingly,  the 
whole  of  the  New  Testament,  and  of  the  Old,  as  far  as  the 
end  of  2d  Chronicles,  or  exactly  two-thirds  of  the  entire 
Scriptures,  are  Tyndale''s  verbally,  with  an  occasional  variation 
only  in  the  orthography ;  and  as  for  the  other  third,  while 
Rogers  may  have  taken  advantage  of  Coverdale's  printed 
sheets,  he  evidently  had  sat  in  judgment  on  every  page,  and 
his  method  is  not  implicitly  followed.^^ 

When  referring  to  this  book.  Bale  has  said  that  "  Rogers 
translated  the  Bible  into  English,  from  Genesis  to  the  end  of 
Revelation,  making  use  of  the  Hebrew,  Greek,  Latin,  German, 
and  English  (that  is  Tyndale's)  copies,"  But  this  is  merely 
a  specimen  of  those  loose  and  inaccurate  statements  which 
have  been  made  by  him,  and  Johnson,  and  various  other 
writers.  There  is  now  no  question  that  Tyndale  translated 
his  New  Testament  from  the  Greek ;  and  the  Old,  as  far  as  he 


tion  Cranmer  as  the  curator  of  a  reprint !    Though  pretty  accurate  for  his  time,  it  is  years  since 
the  whole  work  of  Lewis  has  been  pronounced  to  be  "grievously  in  want  of  correction." 

21  The  contents  of  the  chapters  and  prefaces  are  better  disposed.  In  the  14th  Psalm,  Cover- 
dale,  following  the  Vulgate,  has  three  verses  not  in  the  Hebrew,  which  Rogers  rejected.  In  the 
Song  of  Solomon,  the  speakers  are  distinguished,  and  in  red  ink.  The  book  of  Jonah  is  the  same 
in  both,  but  then  Rogers  inserts  Tyndak's  famous  and  solemn  prologue,  which  had  been  so  de- 
nounced. And  will  Hoirij  receive  it,  and  even  sanction  it  now  ?  Besides  these,  there  are  other 
variations.  It  is  only  to  be  regretted  that  Rogers  should  have  inserted  the  Apocrypha,  which,  in 
obedience  to  his  patrons,  C'overdale  had  translated. 


570  STATE   OF   LONDON    AT  [booK  I. 

had  gone,  from  that  Hebrew,  which  he  so  admired.  What 
Rogers  did  therefore,  was,  that  he  adopted  Tyndale  as  far  as 
he  had  proceeded  in  translating ;  and  as  a  variety  of  passages 
from  the  Okl  Testament  had  been  not  only  translated,  hnt  pub- 
lished before  Ooverdale's  Bible  saw  the  light;  so  it  must  be  pre- 
sumed that  there  were  other  chapters  in  manuscript.-^  In  short, 
Rogers  had  the  whole  of  Tyndale,  whether  in  print  or  manu- 
script, as  well  as  Coverdale^s  sheets,  for  the  remainder,  before 
him  :  and  having  now  arrived  at  the  close  we  find  these  words : 
"  To  the  honoure  and  prayse  of  Gob  was  this  Byhle  prynted,  and 
fynesshed  in  the  yere  of  oure  Lorde  God,  a.  mdxxxvii.'"  No 
month  is  mentioned,  but  it  must  have  left  the  press  by  the 
middle  of  July,  if  not  in  the  end  of  June. 

Richard  Grafton,  therefore,  was  now  ready;  but  before  any 
application  is  made  to  England,  in  favour  of  that  Bible  which 
was  providentially  to  form  the  prototype  of  so  many  millions, 
it  becomes  of  importance,  first  to  ascertain  the  precise  circum- 
stances under  which  it  came  into  our  native  land. 

The  occupation  of  Oranmer  and  his  coadjutors — the  position 
of  other  men — the  actual  state  of  the  country,  and  especially 
of  the  capital,  will  explain  these.  Of  the  month  or  day  when 
Coverdale's  Bible  arrived,  we  have  no  account  whatever,  but 
it  happens  to  be  very  different  in  the  present  case  ;  and,  there- 
fore, every  item  of  intelligence  becomes  doubly  interesting. 

Prom  the  end  of  May  Cranmer  had  been  at  Lambeth  ;  Fox  of  Here- 
ford was  living  at  Poplar,  and  Latimer  at  hand,  elsewhere  ;  but  they, 
with  "  other  Bishops,  and  certain  learned  men,"  met  frefjuently,  by  ap- 
pointment, at  Stepney.  They  were  engaged  in  long  and  harassing  dis- 
cussion over  the  terms  of  a  book,  which  was  to  follow  up  their  "  articles" 
of  last  year  ;  well  known  afterwards  as  "  the  institution  of  a  Christian 
man,"  frequently  styled  "  the  Bishops'  Book."  For  a  season,  it  seemed 
altogether  impossible  for  them  ever  to  agree  ;  and  we  need  only  refer  to 
the  months  of  July  and  August  in  illustration  ;  the  one  preceding,  and 
the  other  following,  the  reception  of  the  Bible.  Upon  a  Friday  in  the 
month  of  July,  Fox  of  Hereford  is  writing  to  Lord  Crumwell — 

"  Surely  if  it  might  so  have  stood  with  the  King's  pleasure  and  yours,  I  would 
to  God  you  had  been  hei-e  with  us,  for  we  wanted  much  your  presence.  Albeit, 
sir,  we  have  done,  in  your  absence,  the  best  we  could,  and  have  subscribed  all 


■ti    111  whole  or   in   part,  Esther  viii.      I'rov.   xxxi.      Isiiiah  i.  ii.  vi.  vii.  xliv.   li.  liii.  Ivii.  Iviii. 
,Icr.  xxviii.    Ezek.  i.  viii.  xxxvi.    .loci  ii.  iii.    Hosch  xi.     Amos  iv.,  ami  Zcch.  ii.  viii. 


1537.]  THE    MOMENT    OF    ITS    INTRODUCTION.  571 

our  books,  (their  opinions  us  to  the  *  Institution,')  and  shall  send  them  to  your 
Lordship  to-morrow.  And  now,  if  it  shall  be  the  King's  pleasure  to  put  the 
same  to  printing,  I  beseech  your  Lordship  to  know  his  pleasure  for  the  pirfaces 
which  shall  be  put  unto  the  said  book  ;  and  irhether  his  Hhjkness  will,  that,  the 
book  shall  ^o  forth  in  His  name,  according  to  such  device  as  I  once  moved  unto 
your  Lordship  ;  or  in  the  name  of  the  Bisho2^s.  And  thereupon,  if  it  shall 
please  your  Lordship  to  cause  Mr.  VVriothsloy  to  devise  the  said  prefaces  and 
send  them  hither,  I  shall  be  glad  to  employ  my  diligence  to  the  speedy  setting 
forth  thereof  to  the  uttermost  of  my  power."  23 

This  book,  accordingly,  was  sent  to  Berthelet's  press,  and  on  Monday 
the  27th  of  August,  it  was  expected  to  be  finished.  In  prospect  of  this, 
on  the  Saturday  before,  Latimer  is  writing  to  Crumwell — 

"  Upon  Monday,  I  think,  it  will  be  done  altogether.  As  for  myself,  I  can 
nothing  else  but  pray  God,  that,  when  it  is  done,  it  be  well  and  sufficiently  done, 
so  that  we  shall  not  need  to  have  any  more  such  doings  ;  for  verily,  for  my  part, 
1  had  lever  (rather)  be  poor  parson  of  poor  Kingston  again,  than  to  continue 
thus,  Bishop  of  Worcester.  Not  for  any  thing  that  I  have  had  to  do  therein, 
or  can  do  ;  but  yet,  forsooth,  it  is  a  troublesome  thing  to  agree  upon  a  doctrine, 
in  things  of  such  conirorersy,  with  judgments  of  such  diversity,  every  man,  I  trust, 
meaning  well,  and  yet  not  all  meaning  one  way." 24 

The  device  to  which  Fox  alludes  in  July,  is  now  worthy  of  notice,  as 
not  unintelligible — 

"  It  may  have  been,"  says  Mr.  Jenkyns,  "  that  the  commissioners  should 
send  a  letter  to  the  King,  respecting  their  proceedings,  and  pi-aying  for  his 
Majesty's  sanction  ;  that  the  King  should  return  a  gracious  answer,  complying 
with  their  request  ;  and  that  both  these  documents  should  be  printed  by  way 
of  introduction  to  the  book.  Such  a  letter  from  the  commissioners  was  actually 
prefixed  to  the  Institution,  and  a  minute  of  an  answer  from  the  King  is  pre- 
served in  the  Chapter-house,  Westminster,  though  it  does  not  seem  to  have 
been  noticed  by  the  historians.  In  this,  he  informs  the  Prelates^  that  he  had 
not  had  time  to  overlook  their  work  ;  he  trusted  to  them  for  its  being  accord- 
ing to  Scripture ;  that  he  permitted  it  to  be  printed,  and  commanded  all  who 
had  care  of  souls  to  read  a  portion  of  it  every  Sunday  and  holiday  for  three 
years.  But  it  would  appear,  that,  cautiously  as  this  reply  was  worded,  Henry 
VIII.  did  not  choose  to  commit  himself  by  its  publication  ;  for  the  Institution 
came  out  with  no  other  preface  than  the  above-mentioned  letter  of  tlie  Prelates, 
and  with  no  farther  claiiii  to  royal  atithority  than  was  implied  in  its  issuing  from 
the  press  of  the  King's  printer."  25 


23  CruraweU's  Corn,  bundle  F.  Chap.-House,  or  Gov.  State  Papers,  vol.  i.,  p.  556. 

24  Idem,  holograph,  in  bundle  W.,  or  State  Papers,  i.,  p.  5(i.'5. 

25  Remains  of  C'ranmer,  vol.  i.,  p.  18H.  "  It  rested,  therefore,  on  very  dift'erent  grounds  from 
the  '  Articles  of  Religion '  which  prcct'ded,  and  the  '  Necessary  Doctrine,'  whWh /oUvticil  it.  For 
both  of  those  formularies  were  lirst  approved  in  Convocation,  and  were  then  provided  with 
a  preface  by  the  King,  and  declared  in  the  title-page  to  be  set  forth  by  his  authority.  Thus  it 
was  not  a  distinction  without  a  difference,  that  the  Iiistitiitivii  was  called  the  Bishops',  and  the 
Xccessari/  Doctrine  the  Ki.ng's  book.  This  statement  has  been  given  at  some  length  ;  because, 
if  correct,  it  will  solve  some  dithculties  in  the  subsequent,  ('.  c.  Cranmer's  letters,  and  because 
there  are  several  conflicting  accounts  of  the  matter  in  our  ecclesiastical  writers."  Thus  far  the 
valuable  note  of  Mr.  Jenkyns.     Let  the  reader,  therefore,  only  the  more  carefully  mark  the  mo- 


572  STATE   OF   LONDON   AT  [bOOK  I. 

Heuiy  was  a  being,  to  whom  no  man,  or  set  of  men,  must  dictate  at 
any  moment ;  nay,  they  might  fail,  any  day,  even  when  they  approached 
him  with  the  utmost  courtesy  ;  and  it  must  be  obvious,  that  at  this  very 
period,  a  company  of  "  Bishops  and  learned  men  in  union,"  had  failed 
in  gaining  all  they  wished,  if  not  also  craved.^^  At  such  a  time  as  this, 
therefore,  beyond  all  others,  if  Grafton  has  arrived  with  his  Bible,  is  it 
at  all  probable  that  he  can  have  succeeded  1  If  a  selected  body  of  com- 
missioners, with  Cranmer,  and  even  Crimawell  at  their  head,  have  been 
treated  with  caution,  is  it  possible  that  Henry  has  been  overruled  with 
regard  to  all  that  T>jndale  had  translated  %  Will  he  now  sanction  the 
work  of  that  same  man,  against  whom,  he  and  his  Council  have  been 
fighting  for  more  than  ten  years  %     We  shall  see  presently. 

But  the  state  of  London  and  Westminster  mxist  not  pass  unnoticed  ; 
more  especially  as  it  was  so  expressly  marked  by  these  Bishoj^s,  and  had 
already  excited  general  apprehension.  Thus,  on  the  10th  of  August,  we 
find  that  Tunstal  is  down  at  Laleham  on  the  Thames ;  and  though  sent 
for  by  Crumwell,  he  is  afraid  to  approach  the  capital.  It  was  the  flag^ie, 
which  had  again  appeared,  as  it  had  done  last  year,  and  the  hand  of  God 
lay  heavy  on  the  metropolis  and  its  vicinity.^ 

"  Ou  Saturday  the  SSth  of  August,"  says  Bishop  Fox  to  Crumwell,  "  I  have 
lain  out  of  London  myself  (at  Poplar)  more  than  these  three  weeks  ;  and  the 
most  part  of  all  my  servants  have  lain  at  Ruyslip  (north-east  of  Uxbridge) 
more  than  these  ten  weeks.  Wherefore,  if  it  shall  please  your  Lordship  to 
send  me  word  of  the  King's  pleasure  concerning  my  return  to  the  Court,  I 
would  gladl}'  come  thither  ou  Monday  or  Tuesday  next,  and  then  I  shall  bring 
with  me  ilie  book,  I  trust,  pei'fectly  printed." — "  Sir,"  says  Latimer,  on  the  same 
day,  "  we  be  here  not  without  all  peril,  for  two  have  died  of  my  keeper's  folks, 
out  of  my  gate  house  ;  and  even  now  Mr.  Nevell  (Cranmer's  confidential  ser- 
vant) comcth  and  telletli  me  that  my  under-cook  is  fallen  sick,  and  like  to  be  of 
the  plague.  Set  duodecim  sunt  liore  diei,  et  termini  vite  sunt  ab  eo  constituti, 
qui  nou  potest  falh  ;  neque  verius  est  tamen,  quod  nascimur,  quam  quod  sumus 
moritm'i."  28 

But  what,  then,  has  become  of  Cranmer  I  The  fact  was,  that  Fox 
and  Latimer  had  remained  where  they  were,  for  no  other  purpose  than 
to  superintend  the  printing  of  this  foresaid  book  ;  otherwise  neither  of 


tnent  in  wJcich  the  Sacred  Volume  tras  so  singularly  introduced  into  Knpland,  hy  the  overrulin 
hand  of  Him  tvho  first  gave  it  to  mankind — and  then  let  him  as  carefully  observe,  whether  it 
did  not  vitally  overthrow  the  "  Articles,'"  which  had  preceded,  and  render  "  the  necessary  doc- 
trine," which  followed,  aUogeiher  tmnecessary ;  nay,  as  the  people  at  large  afterwards  under- 
stood Christianity,  superstitious  and  profane. 

-6  Even  although  they  had  been  not  less  obsequious  than  Coverdale  himself!  "  We  do,"  said 
they,  "  most  humbly  submit  it  to  the  most  excellent  wisdom  and  exact  judgment  of  your  Ma- 
jesty to  be  recognised,  overseen,  and  corrected,  if  your  Grace  sliall  find  any  u'ord  or  sentence  in 
it  meet  to  be  changed,  rjualitied,  or  further  expounded,  for  the  plain  setting  fortli  of  your  High- 
ness' most  virtuous  desire  and  purpose  in  that  behalf.  Wherefore,  we  shall,  in  that  case,  con- 
form ourselves  ! .'" — Preface  to  the  Institution,  1537. 

27  See  Gov.  Slate  Papers,  vol.  v.,  p.  102,  note.  28  Idem,  vol.  i..  p.  56.1. 


15;37.3  lill'^    MOMhJNT   UK    ITS    INTHUDUGTION.  5T6 

them  would  have  hceu  there  ;  since  Cranmer  and  the  rest  had  taken 
alarm  more  than  a  month  before.  Thus  he  had  addressed  Crumwell  as 
early  as  the  21st  of  July — 

"  I,  with  other  Bishops  and  learned  men,  here  assembled  by  the  King's  com- 
mandment, have  almost  made  an  end  of  our  determinations  ;  for  we  have  al- 
ready subscribed  unto  the  declarations  of  the  Paternoster,  and  the  Ave  Maria, 
the  creed,  and  tlic  ten  commandments  ;  and  there  remaineth  no  more  but  cer- 
tain notes  of  the  creed,  unto  which  we  bo  agreed  to  subscribe  on  Monday  next  ; 
wliich  all,  whou  they  shall  be  subscribed,  I  pray  you  that  I  may  know  your 
mind  and  pleasure,  whether  I  shall  send  them  incontinently  to  you,  or  leave 
them  in  the  Lord  of  Hereford's  (Fox's)  hands,  to  be  delivered  by  him  when  he 
Cometh  next  unto  the  Court :  Beseeching  you,  my  Lord,  to  be  intercessor  un- 
to the  King's  Highness  for  its  all,  that  we  may  have  his  Grace's  license  to  de- 
part for  this  time,  until  his  Grace's  farther  pleasure  be  known  :  for  they  die  al- 
most everywhere,  in  London  and  Westminster ;  and  in  Lambeth  they  die  at  vty 
gate,  even  at  the  next  house  to  me.  I  would  fain  see  the  King^s  Highness  at  my 
departing  ;  but  I  fear  me  that  I  shall  not,  because  that  I  shall  come  from  this 
smoky  air  ;  yet  I  would  gladly  know  the  King's  pleasure  herein."  29 

The  next  day,  22d  July,  the  last  letter  which  Cranmer  wrote  from 
Lambeth  before  departing  for  Croydon,  was  one  already  quoted,  on 
behalf  of  that  "  very  honest  man,"  as  he  styled  him,  Mr.  Theobald  !  On 
Monday  the  28th,  and  Tuesday  the  29th  of  July,  he  had  been  examin- 
ing Rowland  Phillips,  the  Vicar  of  Croydon,  that  steady  defender  of  the 
old  learning,  and  an  enemy  to  all  changes.  "  I  beseech  your  Lordship," 
Cranmer  had  said  to  Crumwell  on  the  21st,  and  who,  as  Vicar-General, 
it  seems,  must  now  be  obsequiously  consulted  on  every  step,  "  to  send 
me  word  whether  I  shall  examine  the  Vicar  of  Croydon  in  this  presence 
of  the  Bishops,  and  other  learned  men  of  our  Assembly,  or  otherwise 
how  I  shall  order  him  ;"  and  so  the  examination  was  held  before  the 
Archbishop  himself,  on  these  two  days.  Some  years  before,  this  Vicar 
had  preached  at  Paul's  Cross  a  noted  sermon,  one  saying  in  which  has 
been  often  repeated,  without  knowing  precisely  from  whom  it  came. 
But  this  is  the  man — that  very  Vicar  of  Croydon  who  had  declared,  with 
no  inferior  sagacity — "  We  must  root  out  printing,  or  printing  will  root 
out  us."  It  is  a  coincidence,  therefore,  not  a  little  remarkable,  that  this 
examination  should  happen  to  have  been  Cranmer's  very  last  occupation 
before  proceeding  into  the  country .^'^ 


29  Cotton  MS.,  Cleop.,  E.  v.,  fol.  52,  holograph.  In  the  Gov.  St.ite  Papers,  i.,  .559,  another 
letter  of  this  date  has  been  assigned  to  Cranmer;  but,  with  far  greater  probability,  Mr.  Jenkyns 
has  placed  it  in  1539. — Cramiier's  Ri-mains,  i.,  \t.  28G,  note. 

30  Certain  readers  will  be  curious  to  see  a  little  farther  into  this  examination.  On  some  loose 
papers  in  the  Chapter-house  at  Westminster,  but  now,  probably,  in  the  State  Paper  Office,  frag- 
ments of  this  still  remain  ;  and  as  part  of  the  business  in  which  Cranmer  had  been  engaged,  im- 
mediately before  Gr.ifton's  visit  to  Forde,  a  few  of  the  items  are  worth  quoting.  IiiterrogaUir. 
— "  Whom  he  knoweth  fallen  into  this  error— that  they  trust  to  be  saved  by  faith  and  baptism, 
and  have  left  all  good  works— and  how  long  it  is  since  the  people  full  into  that  error?"  Re 
sponrlet. — "  That  he  knoweth  no  special  person  that  is  in  that  error  :  but  it  is  iibout  eh-veti  years 


574  EVEN    ITS   APPROACH    ALIKE    UNKNOWN  [^BOOK  I. 

Immediately  after  this,  Cranmer  hastened  farther  from  the  plague, 
into  Kent,  to  his  house  at  Forde ;  so  that  if  Richard  Grafton  has  arrived 
in  London  from  the  Continent,  and  intends  to  apply  to  the  Archbishop, 
he  must  go  down  there  with  his  Bible  for  inspection  ;  and,  for  a  moment, 
we  leave  Cranmer  looking  over  it. 

Already  we  have  done  full  justice  to  Coverdale.  He  had 
stepped  in,  and  occupied  the  field  of  favour,  from  all  the  higher 
powers — the  King,  Crumwell,  and  Cranmer.  But  by  the  end 
of  July  this  favour  had  extended  a  little  farther,  and,  more 
especially,  since  Gardiner  was  not  in  England.  We  have 
seen,  by  the  Archbishop's  own  letter,  as  well  as  those  of 
Latimer  and  Fox,  that  he  and  his  fellow  commissioners,  after 
a  tedious  war, of  words,  had  agreed  about  their  book,  by  Mon- 
day the  23d  of  July.  Their  preface  having  been  also  prepared, 
in  it,  as  a  body,  the  parties  thus  express  themselves,  with 
their  accustomed  flattery  : — 

"  We,  considering  tlie  godly  effect  and  intent  of  your  Highness'  most  virtuous 
and  gracious  commaudnient,  do  not  only  rejoice  and  give  thanks  to  Almighty 
God  with  all  our  hearts,  that  it  hath  pleased  hira  to  send  such  a  king  to  reign 
over  us,  which  so  earnestly  mindeth  to  set  forth  among  his  subjects  the  light  of  Holy 
Scripture,  which  alone  sheweth  the  right  path  to  come  to  God,  to  see  Him,  to 
know  Him,  to  love  Him,  and  so  to  serve  Him,  as  He  most  desireth." 

Coverdale,  as  well  as  Crumwell  his  patron,  could,  at  this 
moment,  desire  little  more.  Henry,  observe,  had  treated  the 
Bishops"'  book  with  caution  ;  he  would  not  commit  himself  by 
any  formal  gracious  reply  ;  yet  has  he  permitted  these  words 
to  pass,  wliich  could  refer  to  no  other  than  Coverdale's  Bible, 
if  to  any  Bible  already  printed  at  all;  but  they  will  acquire 
double  emphasis,  when  the  course  that  Cranmer  and  Crum- 


ago  (1520)  since  the  people  came  into  that  error."  Now,  whatever  Phillips  meant,  he  counts 
from  the  precise  period  when  the  New  Testament  had  been  introduced.  Item. — "  What  good 
works  the  people  have  left?"  Resp.—"  That  they  have  left  prayer,  fasting,  and  alms."  By 
these,  of  course,  he  meant  the  mass,  peitanee,  and  jjayment  of  money.  Uem.—"Whoia  he 
knoweth  to  be  of  this  opinion,  that  faith  which  justitieth,  of  necessity  bringeth  forth  good  works  ; 
and  whether  he  be  of  the  same  opinion,  or  no  ?"  Resp. — "  That  Barnes,  Crome,  Champion,  and 
many  other,  so  have  preached,  and  he  is  not  of  that  opinion  himself"  Item. — "  Whom  he 
knoweth  that  doth  exclude  all  bodily  observances  as  frivol  and  vain,  all  ceremonies  of  religion, 
and  all  vocal  jirayer,  calling  it  lip  labour  ?"  Resp. — "  The  Bishop  of  Worcester,  (Latimer, )  and 
r)r.  Crome,  have  so  done  ;  for  ilfolloweth  of  their  -words— Adorabiinl  Patrem  in  spiritii.'"  See 
Cranmer's  Remains  by  Jenkyns,  i.,  p.  190.  Phillips  had  been  warmly  patronised  by  Warham, 
and  signalised  himself  by  his  opi)Osition  to  the  subsidy  proposed  by  Wolsey  in  1523.  His  silence, 
says  Lingard,  was  "  at  length  ])urchased  by  the  policy  of  the  Court."  He  was  not  merely  Vicar 
of  Croydon,  but  a  prehejidary  of  St.  Paul's  ;  but  certainly  not  the  greater  friend  of  Latimer  now, 
any  more  than  Gabriel  Donne,  after  hearing  his  memorable  sermon  before  the  Convocation 
last  year. 


I.}a7]  TO   CRANAlblR,  CRUMWKLL,   OR   THE    KlN(i.  575 

well,  and  even  Henry  pursued  in  a  few  days  hence,  comes  to 
be  observed. 

There  is,  in  short,  another  translation  of  the  English  Bible 
coming  from  abroad ;  and,  it  is  true,  that  as  far  as  any  con- 
nexion with  the  Continent  was  concerned,  the  reader  may  be 
still  haunted  by  the  recollection,  that  he  has  found  both 
Cranmcr  and  Crumwell  in  busy  confidential  communication 
with  such  an  unprincipled  spy  as  Theobald;  and  not  only  this 
year,  but  throughout  the  next.  This,  however,  we  can  neither 
help  nor  soften.  Gross  inconsistencies  of  character  must  stand 
as  matter  of  history  ;  but,  in  the  present  instance,  they  will 
only  render  it  the  more  apparent,  who  it  was  that  gave  the 
Bible  to  Britain.  To  the  people  of  this  Country,  it  is  of 
infinite  moment  now,  that  they  should  see  more  fully  into  the 
Divine  character,  with  regard  to  an  event  never  to  be  forgotten. 

The  laborious  exertions  of  Tyndale,  for  twelve  long  years, 
which  the  King  and  his  Councillors,  nay,  and  the  generality 
of  these  Bishops,  had  so  violently  opposed,  are  already  before 
the  reader  ;  as  well  as  the  editions  of  his  New  Testament  and 
Pentateuch,  which  had  been  introduced  into  England,  under 
so  many  proofs  of  their  hot  displeasure  ;  but  the  reader  may, 
without  reserve,  admit  the  full  force  of  that  transient  favour 
which  had  been  now  shown  towards  Coverdale's  translation. 
Henry,  without  consulting  either  Convocation  or  Parliament, 
had  certainly  so  far  sanctioned  it,  sometime  before  August,  at 
least  in  the  instance  of  Nycolson's  reprint. 

We  repeat,  however,  there  is  at  this  hour  another  Bible, 
in  folio,  coming  over  the  sea  to  old  England,  one  page  of 
which  neither  Cranmer  the  Primate,  Crumwell  the  Vicar- 
General,  or  Henry  the  King,  had  ever  beheld,  and  respecting 
which  not  one  of  them  had  ever  been  consulted.  Such  appears 
to  have  been  the  exact  state  of  matters,  immediately  before  all 
that  Tyndale  had  accomplished  in  translating  the  Sacred  Volume 
teas  laid  before  his  Majesty. 

Grafton  therefore  having  arrived  in  England,  from  what 
has  now  been  narrated,  we  can  scarcely  make  any  mistake 
with  regard  to  Cranmer's  state  of  mind.  He  had,  in  truth, 
been  made  as  sick  of  discussion,  as  he  had  been  afraid  of  the 
plague,  and  had  only  made  his  escape  from  both ;  though  had 
his  fellow  commissioners  but  once  suspected  at  the  moment, 
what  effect  this  sickness  would  have  upon  him,  certainly  they 


576  TYNDALE'S    BIBLK    ARRIVED.  [bOOK  I. 

had  argued  less.  Like  the  Jews  at  Rome,  of  okl,  they  must 
have  had  "  great  reasoning  among  themselves"  over  this 
"  Bishops'  Book ;"  and,  in  the  next  letter  from  the  Primate 
to  Crumwell,  we  shall  see  whether  he  does  not  hint,  that,  in 
his  apprehension,  there  would  be  no  end  to  it.^^ 

It  may  be  regretted  that  there  had  not  been  some  solitary 
expression  of  sympathy  or  admiration  in  the  Translator"'s  life 
time  ;  but  such  was  the  preparation  of  Thomas  Cranmer  for  the 
sight  of  Tyndale's  labours — such  the  moment  when  his  trans- 
lation was  brought  before  him  !  Grafton  had  resolved  to  apply 
first  to  the  Archbishop,  perhaps  as  not  having  been  the  patron 
of  (Joverdale ;  but  whatever  was  the  motive,  he  must  have 
immediately  followed  him  into  Kent.  We  need  not  describe 
how  he  sped,  as  the  following  letters  from  Forde  speak  more 
forcibly  than  any  description ;  but  before  quoting  them,  we 
give  the  title  and  collation  of  the  Book  which  Grafton  had 
brouffht  home  with  him. 

Title. — "  The  Byble,  which  is  the  Holy  Scripture  :  in  which  are  contayned 
the  Olde  and  Newe  Testament,  truely  and  purely  translated  into  Englysh — by 
Thomas  Matthew. — mdxxxvii." 

Collation. — This  title  is  in  red  and  black  letters,  within  a  wood  engi'aving, 
filling  the  page  ;  and,  at  the  bottom,  in  large  letters,  "  Set  forth  with  the 
Kinge's  most  gracyous  licence."  a  Callender  and  Almanac  for  18  years,  be- 
ginning 1538,  4  pages.  An  Exhortation  to  the  study  of  the  Holy  Scriptures, 
1  page  ;  having,  in  large  flourished  capitals  at  the  bottom,  the  initials  of  the 
editor,  I.  R.  The  Summe  and  content  of  all  the  Holy  Scripture,  2  pages. 
Dedication  to  Henry  VIII.,  .3  pages,  with  flourished  capitals  at  the  beginning 
and  end.  "  To  the  Christen  Readers,"  and  a  table  of  principal  matters  in  the 
Bible,  26  pages.  "  The  names  of  all  the  bokes  of  the  Bible,  and  a  brief  re- 
hearsal of  the  years  passed  since  the  begynnynge  of  the  worlde,  unto  this  yearc 
of  our  Lord,  mdxxxvii,"  1  page.  "Genesis  to  Salomon's  Ballet,"  fol.  i. — ccxlvii. 
"  The  Prophetes  in  English."  On  the  reverse  of  this  title  is  a  large  woodcut, 
between  R.  G.  and  E.  W.,  in  flourishing  capitals — "  Esay  to  Malachi,"  fol.  i. — 
xciiii.  ;  and,  at  the  end  of  Malachi,  W.  T.  for  William  Tyndale,  in  large 
flourished  te.xt  capitals.  The  Apocripha,  put  in  from  Coverdale's  Bible.  "  The 
Newe  Testament,  &c.,  printed  in  the  yere  of  our  Lordc  God,  mdxxxvii.,"  in 
red  and  black,  as  in  the  first  title.  "  Matthew  to  Revelation,"  fol.  ii. — cix. 
Tables,  &c.,  fol.  cx.-cxi.  On  the  last  leaf,  is  "  The  ende  of  the  Newe  Testa- 
ment, and  of  the  Avhole  Byble." — "  To  the  honoure  and  prai/se  of  God,  was  this 
Bi/ble  pi-pited  and  fynesshed,  in  the  yere  of  our  Lorde  God,  a.  mdxxxvii."  A 
full  page  contains  60  lines. 


3'  Latimer,  too,  had  been  no  less  annoyed.  To  go  on  thus  wrangling  with  such  men,  he 
would  rather  be  "  the  poor  parson  of  poor  Kingstone  once  more,  than  continue  to  be  Bishop  of 
Worcester,"  with  all  its  revenue :  and  as  for  Fox,  he  had  been  longing  for  tlie  iron  hand,  or 
imperative  presence,  of  the  Vicar-General,  to  make  them  now,  as  Henry  bad  done  in  153(5,  ull 

agree,  nr  rather/t'/iy*!  consent  once  more. 


1537.]  TYNDALE'S   BliiLE   RECEIVED.  577 

The  following  letters  are  all  addressed  to  Crumwell ;  and 
they  are  the  very  next  that  Cranmer  wrote  and  sent,  after 
those  we  have  quoted. 

"  My  especial  good  Lord,  after  most  hearty  commendations  unto  your  Lord- 
ship ;  these  shall  be  to  signify  unto  the  same,  that  you  shall  receive  by  the 
bringer  thereof  a  Bible,  both  of  a  new  translation,  and  of  a  new  p7-int,  dedicated 
unto  the  King's  Majesty,  as  farther  appcareth  by  a  pistle  unto  his  Grace,  in 
the  beginning  of  the  book,  which,  in  mine  opinion,  is  very  well  done ;  and 
therefore  I  pray  your  Lordship  to  read  the  same.  And,  as  for  the  translatioit, 
so  far  as  I  have  read  thereof,  I  like  it  better  than  any  other  translation  here- 
tofore made ;  yet  not  doubting  that  there  may  and  will  be  found  some  fault 
therein,  as  you  know  no  man  ever  did  or  can  do  so  well,  but  it  may  from  time 
to  time  be  amended. 

"  And  forasmuch  as  the  book  is  dedicated  unto  the  King's  Grace,  and  also 
great  pains  and  labour  taken  in  setting  forth  of  the  same,  I  pray  you,  my  Lord, 
that  you  will  exhibit  the  book  unto  the  King's  Highness,  and  obtain  of  his 
Grace,  if  you  can,  a  license  that  the  same  may  be  sold  and  read  of  every 
person,  without  danger  of  any  act,  jjroclamation,  or  ordinance  heretofore  granted 
to  the  contrary,  until  such  time  that  we,  the  Bishops,  shall  set  forth  a  better 
translation,  which  I  think  will  not  be  till  a  day  after  doomsday !  And  if  you 
continue  to  take  such  pains  for  the  setting  forth  of  God's  Word,  as  you  do,  al- 
though in  the  mean  season  you  suffer  some  snubs  and  many  slanders,  lies,  and 
reproaches  for  the  same,  yet  one  day  He  will  requite  altogether.  And  the 
same  word,  as  St.  John  saith,  which  shall  judge  every  man  at  the  last  day, 
must  needs  show  favour  to  them  that  now  do  favour  it.  Thus,  my  Lord,  right 
heartily  fare  you  well.  At  Forde,  the  4th  day  of  August,  [1537.]  Your 
assured  ever — T.  Cantuarien."32 

So  far  then,  from  Cranmer  having  the  slightest  connexion 
with  this  undertaking,  or  "  exerting  himself"  for  this  book, 
as  Mr.  Todd  has  imagined,  this  letter,  in  its  proper  connexion, 
clearly  shows  that  it  came  upon  the  writer  in  the  way  of  de- 
lightful surprised  No  doubt  he  had  wished  for  a  Bible  ;  but, 
after  vainly  toiling  with  his  coadjutors  as  to  the  New  Testa- 
ment only,  he  now,  very  candidly  acknowledges  that  the  present 
production  Avas  literally  beyond  their  power,  as  a  body  of  men. 

Here  then,  and  at  last,  is  that  one  transaction  in  Cranmer's 
life,  which  those  who  must  ever  disapprove  of  many  other 
things  in  his  conduct,  should  therefore  never  forget.  Con- 
sidered in  itself  and  in  its  consequences,  every  other  good 
thing  he  ever  did  shrinks  into  comparative  insignificance. 
For  this,  all  who  have  prized  the  Word  of  God,  or  now  do 

32  Crumwell's  Corr.,  Chapter-House.     Original.    Gov.  State  Papers,  vol.  i.,  p.  561. 

33  Life  of  Cranmer,  vol.  i.,  p.  210.  Another  author  actually  represents  it  as  printed  under 
his  patronage.  From  inattention  to  his  own  language,  the  position  of  Cranmer  has  very  fre- 
Huently  been  misstated,  by  our  ablest  authors. 

VOL  1.  2  o 


578  Tt)    BE   BOLUiHT   ANO    READ.  [uOOK  I. 

SO,  stand  indebted  to  him  as  an  instrument.  It  would  have 
been  gratifying  could  we  have  fallen  upon  some  distinct  testi- 
mony from  his  pen,  at  an  earlier  season  ;  for  it  is  passing 
strange,  if  he  had  never,  till  this  late  period,  expressed  his 
admiration  of  Tyndale's  translation  ;  but  such,  alas  !  may 
have  been  one  effect  of  that  timidity  which  annoyed  him  all 
his  days.  The  conjunction  of  circumstances,  already  de- 
scribed, seems  to  have  emboldened  him,  and  better  late  than 
never.  But  be  this  as  it  may,  and  after  allowing  to  this 
first  agent  at  home  all  the  good  he  did,  the  reader,  as  he 
goes  on,  will  lose  sight  of  man  ;  and,  it  is  presumed,  will  not 
be  slow  to  recognise,  above  all,  that  unseen  hand,  so  con- 
spicuously displayed  throughout  the  whole  affair,  of  which 
this  is  nothing;  more  than  the  first  movement, 

Grafton,  let  it  be  observed,  was  not  kept  long  in  suspense ; 
the  entire  request  of  Cranmer  was  immediately  granted  ; 
for,  though  all  who  could  avoid  London  were  gone,  Crumwell 
had  remained  at  his  post — went  to  the  King,  and  succeeded. 
Cranmer  had  heard  of  this  in  less  than  eight  days  ;  for  thus 
he  writes  again,  on  Monday  week  after  his  last — 

"  My  very  singular  good  Lord,  iu  my  most  hearty  wise  I  commend  me  unto 
your  Lordship.  And  whereas  I  understand  that  your  Lordship,  at  my  request, 
hath  not  only  exhibited  the  Bible  which  I  sent  unto  you,  unto  the  King's  Ma- 
jesty, but  also  hath  obtained  of  his  Grace,  that  the  same  shall  be  allowed  by 
his  authority  to  be  bought  and  read  within  this  realm  :  My  Lord,  for  this  your 
pain  taken  in  this  behalf,  I  give  unto  you  my  most  hearty  thanks ;  assuring 
your  Lordship,  for  the  contentation  of  my  mind,  you  have  shewed  me  more 
pleasure  herein,  than  if  you  had  given  me  a  thousand  pounds.  And  I  doubt 
not  but  that  hereby  such  fruit  of  good  knowledge  shall  ensue,  that  it  shall  well 
appear  hereafter,  what  high  and  acceptable  service  you  have  done  unto  God 
and  the  King ;  which  shall  so  much  redound  to  your  honour,  that,  besides  God's 
reward,  you  shall  obtain  perpetual  memory  for  the  same  within  this  realm. 
And  as  for  me,  you  may  reckon  me  your  bondman  for  the  same :  And  I  dare 
be  bold  to  say,  so  may  ye  do  my  Lord  of  Worcester.  Thus,  my  Lord,  right 
heartily  fare  ye  well.     At  Forde,  the  13th  day  of  August"  [1537.]  3-t 

The  gratitude  of  Cranmer  is  expressed  in  the  strongest  man- 
ner :  "In  terms,"  says  Mr.  Jenkyns,  most  correctly,  "  far  too 
warm  to  admit  of  the  belief  that  the  general  use  of  the  English 
Scriptures  was  already  allowed.^  There  was,  no  doubt,  some- 
thing in  the  translation  itself,  that  at  once  caught  the  eye 


s*  Cotton  MS.,  Cleop.  E.  v.,  fol.  329,  original;  or  Cranmer's  Remains,  i.,  p.  199. 
35  Cranmer's  Remains,  Pref.,  p.  xxvii. 


153?.]  TUK   KINU   AUREUS  TO   THIS.  579 

and  the  approbation  of  Craniiier  ;  but  it  was  this  step  in  ad- 
vance, tliis  "  general  use,"  over  which  he  also  exulted.  His 
Majesty  had,  it  is  true,  acceded,  and  at  Crumweirs  request, 
to  Coverdale's  Bible,  of  Nycolson's  printing,  having  these 
words  upon  it — "  Set  forth  by  the  King's  gracious  license  ;" 
and  Coverdale  had  i-equested,  that  this  printer  might  have  the 
monopoly  for  "  certain  years," — but  there  was  no  reply  to  that 
application.  Whereas  now,  the  tide  has  not  only  changed, 
but  it  has  begun  to  flow  in  another  direction  :  for  this  Bible 
is  not  only  to  be  stamped — Set  forth.,  »fec.,  but  it  is  to  be  sold 
and  read  of  every  person  without  danger  of  any  Act,  Proclama- 
tion or  Ordinance  heretofore  granted  to  the  contrary !  All  this 
Cranmer  asked,  and  to  all  this  Henry  at  once  agreed  !  Oran- 
mer,  in  short,  felt  like  a  man  when  every  hindrance  has  been 
removed  :  and  escaped,  for  the  present,  out  of  the  paw  of  his 
brethren  on  the  Bench,  in  a  way  that  seemed  quite  marvellous 
to  himself ;  so  moved  was  he,  that  fifteen  days  after  this,  in 
his  very  next  letter  to  Orumwell,  he  writes  absolutely  as  if  he 
had  not  yet  written  at  all.  Other  subjects,  indeed,  demanded 
his  attention,  but,  in  the  fulness  of  his  heart,  with  this  he 
must  begin. 

"  My  very  singular  and  especial  good  Lord,  in  my  most  hearty  wise  I  com- 
mend me  to  your  Lordship.  These  shall  be  to  give  you  most  hearty  thanks 
that  any  heart  can  think,  and  that  in  the  name  of  them  all  which  favoureth 
God's  Word,  for  your  diligence  at  this  time  in  procuring  the  King's  Highness 
to  set  forth  the  said  God's  Word,  and  his  Gospel,  by  his  Grace's  authority. 
For  the  which  act,  not  only  the  King's  Majesty,  but  also  you  shall  have  a  per- 
petual laud  and  memory  of  all  them  that  be  now,  or  hereafter  shall  be,  God's 
faithful  people,  and  the  favourers  of  his  Word.  And  this  deed  you  shall  hear 
of  at  the  great  day,  when  all  things  shall  be -opened  and  made  manifest.  For 
our  Saviour  Christ  saith  in  the  said  Gospel, '  that  whosoever  shrinketh  from  Him 
and  His  Word,  and  is  abashed  to  profess  and  set  it  forth  before  men  in  this 
world.  He  will  refuse  him  at  that  day :  and  contrary,  whosoever  constantly 
doth  profess  Him  and  His  Word,  and  studicth  to  set  that  forward  in  this  world, 
Christ  will  declare  the  same  at  the  last  day,  before  His  Father  and  all  His 
angels,  and  take  upon  Him  the  defence  of  those  men.'  Thus,  my  Lord,  right 
heartily  fiire  you  well.     At  Ford,  the  28th  day  of  August,"  [1537.]36 

Grafton  seems  to  have  brought  only  one  Bible  with  him,  as 
a  specimen,  and  had  left  his  servant  to  follow  him  with  other 
copies.  The  first  he  had  presented  to  Cranmer,  who  sent  him 
with  it  to  Orumwell,  and  he  requested  six  copies  to  be  brought 


36  Cleop.  E.  v.,  fol.  292.    Original. 


580  THIS  SEEMS  TO   BE   INCREDIBLE.  [boOK  I. 

to  him,  on  their  arrival.  The  very  clay  on  which  Cranmer 
wshs  writing  his  last  letter,  the  servant  had  arrived ;  and  in 
the  midst  of  the  plague,  still  raging,  Grafton  sent  the  volumes 
to  Crumwell,  with  the  following  letter, — 

"  Most  humbly  beseeching  your  Lordship  to  understand,  that,  according  to 
your  request,  I  have  sent  your  Lordship  six  Bibles  ;  which  gladly  I  would  have 
brought  myself,  but  because  of  the  sickness  that  remaineth  in  the  City ;  and, 
therefore,  I  have  sent  them  by  my  servant,  which  this  day  came  out  of 
Flanders.  Requiring  your  Lordship,  if  T  may  be  so  bold  as  to  desire  you,  to 
accept  them  as  my  simple  gift,  given  to  you  for  those  most  godly  pains,  for 
which  the  Heavenly  Father  is  bound,  even  of  his  justice,  to  reward  you  with 
the  everlasting  kingdom  of  God.  For  your  Lordship's  moving  our  most 
gracious  Prince  to  the  allowance  and  licensing  of  such  a  work,  hath  wrought 
such  an  act  worthy  of  praise,  as  never  was  mentioned  in  any  chronicle  in  this 
realm  ;  and  as  my  Lord  of  Canterbury  said,  the  tidings  thereof  did  him  more 
good  than  the  gift  of  £1000." 

In  grossness  of  flattery,  the  printer  exceeds  Coverdale,  to 
say  nothing  of  the  profanity  of  his  compliment,  betraying  his 
ignorance  of  the  truth,  and  the  value  of  the  truth  contained 
in  his  Bible ;  but  then  his  language  shows,  that  some  great 
and  unprecedented  i\\\ng  had  taken  place;  and  thus  it  appeared 
in  general  estimation.  So  much  so,  indeed,  that  it  seemed 
incredible.  With  some  it  was  "  too  good  news  to  be  true." 
Others  demurred,  because  they  wished  not  to  believe  it :  and 
Grafton  therefore  proceeds  : — 

"  Yet  certain  there  are  which  believe  not  that  it  pleased  the  King's  Grace  to 
license  it  to  go  forth.  Wherefore,  if  your  Lordship's  pleasiu-e  were  such  that 
we  might  have  it  licensed  under  your  Privy  Seal,  it  Avould  be  a  defence  at  this 
present,  and  in  time  to  come,  for  all  enemies  and  adversaries  of  the  same.  And 
foi-asmuch  as  this  request  is  for  the  maintenance  of  the  Lord's  Word,  which  is 
to  maintain  the  Lord  himself,  I  fear  not,  but  that  your  Lordship  will  be  earnest 
therein.  And  I  am  assured,  that  my  Lords  of  Canterbui'y,  Worcester,  and 
Salisbury,  will  give  your  Lordship  such  thanks,  as  in  them  lieth.'''7  And  sure 
you  may  be,  that  the  Heavenly  Lord  will  reward  you,  for  the  establishment  of 
his  gloi'ious  truth.  And  what  your  Lordship's  pleasure  is  in  this  request,  if  it 
may  please  your  Lordship  to  inform  ray  servant,  I,  and  all  that  love  God 
heartily,  are  bound  to  pray  for  your  preservation  all  the  days  of  our  life.  At 
London,  the  28th  day  of  this  present  month  of  August,  1537.  Your  orator 
while  he  liveth,  Richard  Grafton,  Grocer."^ 

The  message  in  reply  was,  that  Crumwell  thought  the 
"  Privy  Seal"  would  be  unnecessary ;  but  Grafton's  anxiety 
was  perfectly  natural ;  for,  let  it  be  observed,  that  his  all  was 

37  By  this  time,  therefore,  he  had  seen  Latimer  and  Shaxton,  since  he  returned  from  Forde. 
3n  Cleop.  E.  v.,  fol.  330.     Grafton  was  a  member  of  the  Grocer's  Company  in  London. 


1537.]  GRAFTON    THE  CHIEF   PROPRIETOR.  581 

embarked  in  the  undertaking,  amounting  to  above  <£*500  ster- 
ling. This  was  a  sum,  equal  in  value  of  the  present  day,  to 
more  than  as  many  thousands ;  and  some  would  say,  seven 
thousand  five  hundred  at  the  least !  No  wonder,  then,  that 
he  should  very  soon  write  a  long  letter  to  Crumwell,  under 
the  apprehension  of  being  undersold  by  an  inferior  article 
from  the  German  press,  just  as  Tyndale  had  so  often  been, 
lonof  before  him. 


"  Most  humbly  beseeching  your  Lordship  to  understand,  that  according  as 
your  commission  was,  by  my  servant  to  send  you  certain  Bibles,  so  have  I  now 
done,  desiring  your  Lordshii)  to  accept  them,  as  though  they  were  well  done. 
And  whereas  I  writ  unto  your  Lordship  for  a  Privy  Seal  to  be  a  defence  unto 
the  enemies  of  this  Bible,  I  understand  that  your  Lordship's  mind  is,  that  I 
shall  not  need  it.  But  now,  most  gracious  Lord,  forasmuch  as  this  work  hath 
been  brought  forth  to  our  most  great  and  costly  labours  and  charges ;  which 
charges  amount  above  the  sum  of  five  hundred  pounds ;  and  I  have  caused  of 
these  same  to  be  printed  to  the  sum  of  fifteen  hundred  books  complete,  which 
now,  by  reason  that  of  many  this  work  is  highly  commended,  there  are  that 
will,  and  doth,  go  about  the  printing  of  the  same  work  again,  in  a  lesser  letter; 
to  the  intent  that  they  may  sell  their  little  books  better  cheap  than  I  can  sell 
these  great ;  and  so  to  make,  that  I  shall  sell  none  at  all,  or  else  very  few,  to  the 
utter  undoing  of  me,  your  orator,  and  of  all  those  my  creditors,  that  hath  been 
my  comforters  and  helpers  therein.  And  now  this  work,  thus  set  forth  with 
great  study  and  labours,  shall  such  persons,  moved  with  a  little  covetousness,  to 
the  undoing  of  others  for  their  own  f)rivate  wealth,  take  as  a  thing  done  to  their 
hands.  In  which  behalf  the  charges  shall  not  come  to  them,  that  hath  done  to 
your  poor  orator.  And  yet  will  not  they  do  it,  as  they  find  it,  but  falsify  the 
text ;  that  I  dare  say,  look,  how  many  sentences  are  in  the  Bible,  even  so  many 
faults  and  ei-rors  shall  be  made  therein.  For  their  seeking,  is  not  to  set  it  out 
to  God's  gloi'v,  and  to  the  edifying  of  Christ's  congregation,  but  for  covetous- 
ness. And  that  may  appear  by  the  former  Bibles,  (i.  e.  the  New  Testaments,) 
that  they  have  set  forth ;  which  hath  neither  good  paper,  letters,  ink  nor  cor- 
rection.39  And  even  so  shall  they  corrupt  this  work,  and  wrap  it  up  after  their 
fashions,  and  then  they  may  sell  it  for  nought  at  their  pleasures.  Yea,  and  to 
make  it  more  truer  than  it  is,  therefore  Dutchmen,  dwelling  within  this  realm, 
go  about  the  printing  of  it ;  which  can  neither  speak  good  English,  nor  yet 
write  none !  And  they  will  be  both  the  printers  and  correctors  thereof ;  be- 
cause of  a  little  covetousness,  they  will  not  bestow  twenty  or  forty  poxmds  to  a 
learned  man  to  take  pains  in  it,  to  have  it  well  done. 

"  It  were,  therefore,  as  your  Lordship  doth  evidently  perceive,  a  thing  un- 
reasonable to  permit,  or  sufl'er,  them  which  now  hath  no  such  business,  to  enter 
into  the  labours  of  them  that  had  both  sore  trouble  and  unreasonable  charges. 
And  the  trtitk  is  this,  that  if  it  be  printed  by  any  other,  before  these  be  sold,  which 
I  think  shall  not  be  these  three  years  at  the  least,  then  am  I,  your  poor  orator, 
utterly  undone."     (Even  Grafton  had  no  idea  of  the  prospect  now  openuig.) 

"  Therefore,  by  your  most  godly  favour,  if  I  may  obtain  the  King's  most 


38  Beferring  to  the  pirated  editions  of  Tyndak's  Testament. 


582  GRAFTON  THE   CHIEF   PROPRIETOR.  [BOOK  I. 

gracious  privilege,  that  none  shall  print  them  until  these  be  sold,  your  Lordship 
shall  not  find  me  unthankful,  but  that  to  the  uttermost  of  my  power  I  will  con- 
sider it :  and  I  dare  say,  that  so  will  my  Lord  of  Canterbury,  with  other,  my 
most  special  friends ;  and  at  the  last,  God  will  look  upon  your  merciful  heart, 
that  considereth  the  undoing  of  a  poor  young  man ;  for  truly  my  whole  Iking  lieth 
hereupon.  If  I  may  have  sale  of  them  not  being  hindered  by  any  other  men, 
it  shall  be  my  making  and  wealth  ;  and  the  contrary  is  my  undoing.  Therefore, 
most  humbly  I  beseech  your  Lordship  to  be  my  helper  herein,  that  I  may  ob- 
tain this  my  request. 

"  Or  else,  if  by  no  means  this  privilege  may  be  had, — forasmuch  as  it  hath 
pleased  the  King's  Highness  to  license  this  work  to  go  abroad  ;  and  that  it  is 
the  most  pure  Word  of  God  which  teacheth  all  true  obedience,  and  reproveth  all 
schisms  and  contentious. — It  may  therefore  be  commanded  by  your  Lordship, 
iu  the  name  of  our  most  gracious  prince,  that  every  curate  have  one  of  them, 
that  they  may  learn  to  knoui  God,  and  instruct  their  Parishioners;  yea,  and  that 
every  Abbey  should  have  six,  to  be  laid  in  six  several  places,  that  the  whole 
Convent,  and  the  resorters  thereunto,  may  have  occasion  to  look  on  the  Lord's 
Law. — And  then  I  know  there  would  be  enough  found  in  my  Lord  of  London's 
diocese  to  spend  away  a  great  part  of  them. — And  I  know  that  a  small  com- 
mission will  cause  my  Lord  of  Canterbury,  Salisbury,  and  Worcester,  to  cause 
it  to  be  done  through  their  diocese  ;  yea,  and  this  should  cease  the  whole  schism 
and  contention  that  is  in  the  realm;  which  is,  some  calling  them  of  the  old 
learning,  and  some  of  the  wew.  Now,  should  we  all  follow  one  God,  one  book,  and 
one  learning:  and  this  is  hurtful  to  no  man,  but  profitable  to  all. 

"  I  will  trouble  your  Lordship  no  longer,  for  I  am  sorry  I  have  troubled  you 
so  much :  but,  to  make  an  end,  I  desire  your  most  gracious  answer  by  my  ser- 
vant. For  the  sickness  is  brime  (furious)  about  us,  or  else  I  would  wait  upon  your 
Lordship:  and  because  of  coming  to  your  Lordship,  1  hare  not  suffered  my  ser- 
rant  with  me  since  he  came  over. — Your  orator,  Richard  Grafton."*" 

From  this  letter  it  is  evident,  that  as  the  volume  had  come 
upon  Cranmer  by  surprise,  so  he  had  no  concern  whatever 
with  the  cost  incurred  ;  nay,  that  no  man  in  England  shared  in 
the  expense.  It  was  a  gift  from  abroad,  and  tlie  burden  lay 
chiefly  on  the  shoulders  of  this  individual,  as  a  man  in  business. 

We  have  no  written  reply  to  this  letter,  which,  however, 
does  not  signify,  as  it  is  well  known  that  Grafton  succeeded  : 
but  as  to  the  present  sudden  and  most  memorable  interposi- 
tion in  favour  of  Tyndale's  exertions,  it  was  an  occurrence,  the 
effects  of  which  reach  down  to  the  present  hour.  The  event 
itself,  is  only  more  extraordinary  than  the  fact,  that  it  should 
never  have  been  even  marked  as  it  ought  to  have  been,  and 
much  less  dwelt  upon,  by  any  previous  writer.  But  though 
hitherto  buried  among  other  casual  incidents,  it  would  be  un- 
pardonable now  to  pass  on  without  contemplating  an  occurrence, 
in  which,  without  either  presumption  or  enthusiasm,  the  over- 

■i"  Olcop.  E.  v.,  (bl.  325  ;  or  Todd's  Craniiu  r.  i.,  p]).  Slfi,  220. 


1 537.]  RETKOSPECT.  583 

ruling  hand  of  God  may  be  so  distinctly  traced.  There  is 
here  no  interference  with  the  free  agency  of  man,  but  one  of 
the  most  complete  specimens  of  the  mode  in  which  an  all- 
wise  Providence  governs  the  world.  Grafton,  indeed,  and 
liis  co-partner  Whitchurch,  may  be  easily  disposed  of,  or  re- 
garded throughout  the  whole  affair  as  resembling  only  the 
hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water,  in  ancient  time ;  but 
in  looking  back  to  the  spring  of  1 526,  when  Tyndale's  first 
efforts  were  so  very  keenly  felt,  as  to  awaken  the  wrath  of  all  in 
power ;  and  following  the  track,  as  we  have  done,  down  to  the 
month  of  August  1587,  what  a  varied  scene  has  passed  before 
us  !  The  hand  of  the  Most  High  has  been  visible  all  along; 
but  it  was  most  of  all  conspicuous  now^  for  the  day  was  won  ! 
In  the  course  of  the  long  conflict,  not  a  few  of  the  enemy  have 
perished.  Two  Lords  Chancellor,  an  Archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury, besides,  at  least,  four  noted  Bishops,  have  fallen  ;  to  say 
nothing  of  other  two,  sent  adrift  into  Italy.  Wolsey  and 
Warham,  West  of  Ely  and  Nix  of  Norwich,  Standish  of  St. 
Asaph  and  Fisher  of  Rochester,  as  well  as  Dr.  Robert  Rid- 
ley and  Sir  Thomas  More,  are  gone. 

But  what,  it  may  still  be  said,  does  all  this  signify  ?  There 
are,  at  least,  eight  or  ten  men  yet  alive  ;  and,  except  it  be  the 
King  himself  transiently,  when  in  some  unwonted  mood,  not 
one  of  them  has  spoken  a  word  in  favour  of  Tyndale  or  his 
exertions,  up  to  this  month  of  August ;  nay,  with  two  or 
three  exceptions,  all  the  rest  have  even  raged  against  him. 
These  men  too,  occupy  the  Privy  Council,  the  Senate,  and  the 
Bench ;  so  that  before  such  an  event  as  the  present  could 
possibly  have  taken  place,  every  one  of  them  must  have  been 
overruled.  And  accordingly  now,  within  the  compass  of 
ten  days,  each  day  for  a  year,  and  whether  pacified  or  not, 
they  hate  all  been  overruled. 

Yes,  the  King  himself,  and  his  Prime  Minister  the  Duke 
of  Norfolk ;  Crumwell  his  Vicegerent,  and  Cranmer  his 
Archbishop ;  Tunstal  of  Durham  and  Stokesly  of  London ; 
Longland  of  Lincoln  and  Gardiner  of  Winchester ;  nay, 
Coverdale  and  his  friend  Nycolson,  have  all  alike,  or  every 
one  of  them,  been  disposed  of. 

For  where  is  the  individual  who  can  now  look  so  low,  as  to 
trace  this  change  to  Cranmer,  and  simply  say,  that  he  was  the 
cause?     Already  we  have  given  him  full  credit,  as  well  as 


584  ALL   PARTIES   OVERRULED.  [boOK  I. 

done  liim  ample  justice,  by  giving  his  own  letters  entire. 
He  was  the  superintended  agent,  and  let  it  only  be  the  more 
observed,  the  willing  instrument,  for  certainly  he  did  all,  at 
this  moment,  not  by  constraint,  but  of  hearty  good  will ;  and 
yet  it  must  be  clear  as  day,  that  of  all  others,  he  was  most 
under  the  influence  of  predominant  power.  The  step  he  took 
was  a  bold  and  decided  one,  and  had  Crumwell  been  the  man, 
it  would  have  been  in  perfect  character  :  but  Cranmer,  though 
withal  an  amiable  character,  was  by  constitution  timid,  and 
according  to  his  oicn  repeated  confession,  had  lost  beyond  re- 
covery, in  his  youth,  every  spice  of  audacity  or  daring.*' 
Yes,  and  he  was  therefore  only  the  more  fit  to  be  employed 
as  an  instrument,  to  overrule  or  take  by  surprise,  all  the  rest. 
After  a  long  and  tedious  war,  the  bitter  though  fruitless  op- 
position of  eleven  years,  the  opportunity  for  dealing  with 
crafty  opponents,  with  stiff-necked  and  rebellious  enemies  to 
the  truth,  had  arrived  ;  the  time  for  showing  "  the  weakness 
of  God  to  be  stronger  than  men."  It  was  a  select  hour  for 
choosing  a  cautious  and  a  timid  man  to  sway  the  mighty  and 
the  wayward.  He  himself,  indeed,  might  be  doubtful  of  suc- 
cess ;  for  he  said  to  Crumwell,  obtain  all  I  ask — if  you  can  ; 
but  what  was  the  result?  Take  up  the  men  individually, 
and  see. 

In  so  sanctioning  this  prototype,  which  contained  the  trans- 
lations of  Tyndale,  the  King  himself  was  overruled.  Witness 
his  violent  language  for  years,  employed  in  public  documents 
— his  interdict  of  Tyndale's  version,  and  all  his  other  writ- 
ings— his  commissioning  men  to  apprehend  him,  though  in 
vain — and  his  cold  indiflerence  at  the  end,  only  last  year,  re- 
specting his  very  life.  On  the  same  ground  stands  Crumwell ; 
after  having  vilified  our  Translator,  and  warned  the  English 
Envoy,  Vaughan,  if  he  dared  to  speak  favourably  of  hira ; 
after  having  long  patronised  Coverdale,  contributed  to  his 
support,  nay,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt,  to  the  cost  of  his 
translation,  as  well  as  obtained  the  temporary  assent  of 
Henry  to  the  reprint  of  that  book.  As  for  the  others,  who 
had  been  sworn  enemies  all  along :  Timstal,  notwithstanding 
his  raving  in  1526,  about  the  "  pestiferous  poison"  that  had 


•"  This  he  himself  used  to  ascribe  to  the  "  cruel ti/ of  his  earliest  teacher;"  as  he  dift'erent 
times  reported  to  his  Secretary.  Ralph  Moricc,— See  Torld's  Cranmer,  ii.,  p.  540. 


1537.3  ^^^  PARTIES  OVERRULED.  585 

infected  his  diocese  of  London,  he  is  now  in  alarm  as  to  other 
infectioii.  He  is  now  absolutely  terrified  to  approach  the 
capital,  for  fear  of  the  plague ;  and  besides,  he  is  under 
marching  orders  for  Newcastle,  as  President  of  the  Council 
of  the  North.  Stokesly  of  London,  after  all  his  bloody  deeds, 
must  now  be  quiet,  although  Grafton  be  proposing,  for  his 
diocese,  such  a  plentiful  supply  of  that  very  translation,  for 
the  reading  of  which,  he  was  wont  to  doom  the  party  to  the 
flames.  Old  Longland  of  Lincoln,  who  so  exulted  over  Wol- 
sey''s  "  secret  search,  and  at  one  time"  in  London,  Oxford,  and 
Cambridge,  for  books  to  be  burnt,  must,  for  the  present,  also 
ponder  over  the  change,  but  remain  neutral !  Gardiner^  when 
at  home,  of  all  other  men,  wonderfully  contrived  to  retain  the 
King's  ear ;  but  that  shrewd  and  far-seeing  man,  the  ablest 
foe  of  all,  had  been  removed  to  a  distance.  As  Tunstal  was 
out  of  the  way,  in  Spain,  when  the  New  Testament  first  came, 
so  was  Gardiner,  in  France,  when  the  Bible  arrived.  After 
displeasing  the  King  in  1585,  it  had  been  convenient  to  send 
him  into  honourable  exile,  as  Ambassador  to  Paris,  out  of 
Crumweirs  way,  and  he  was  not  to  be  recalled  for  a  year  to 
come.  The  Duke  of  Norfolk  too,  Gardiner"'s  dear  friend,  is 
down  in  the  North ;  and  though  panting  to  return,  and  pes- 
tering Crumwell  with  letters  for  this  end,  he  cannot  wend  his 
way  to  London  till  relieved  by  Tunstal,  who,  however,  is  slow 
to  move.  But,  above  all  the  rest,  no  one  was  more  signally  over- 
ruled than  Cranmer,  the  agent  first  employed.  No  individual 
in  England  had  striven  so  hard  for  some  certain  translation, 
to  be  sanctioned  by  his  fellows.  He  had  got  them  to  petition 
his  Majesty,  in  1534,  for  such  a  one.  In  1535,  he  had  at- 
tempted the  New  Testament  only,  but  failed  ;  and  last  year, 
in  Convocation  again,  he  had  not  only  petitioned  once  more 
for  the  same  thing,  but  acquiesced,  with  all  the  rest,  in  the 
King's  sacrament  of  penance ;  which  the  Bible  of  this  year, 
over  which  he  now  so  rejoiced,  will  not  sanction  !  And, 
finally,  as  for  Myles  Coverdale  himself,  he  is  shortly  to  be 
employed  in  correcting  the  press  of  a  second  edition  of  this 
very  i3ible,  which  Grafton  had  thus  brought  into  England. 

In  short,  as  this  year  no  Parliament  was  assembled — no 
Convocation  held,  so  neither  the  one,  nor  the  other  was,  or 
could  be,  consulted  on  the  subject  !  The  Bishops,  as  a  body, 
were  now  scattered  by  the  plague,  "  every  one  to  his  own  ;"" 


586  ALL   PARTIES  OVERRULED.  [booK  I. 

while  Cranmer,  who  has  just  fled  from  it,  and  in  total  despair 
of  all  deliverance  arising  from  that  quarter,  boldly  affirms, 
that  a  better  translation  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  they  either 
could  not,  or  would  not,  "  set  forth,  till  a  day  after  dooms- 
day !"  To  this,  no  doubt,  the  best  men  in  all  England  then 
fully  responded  ;  and,  in  concert,  they  might  all  have  said 
or  sung,  in  the  language  of  their  own  Bible — 

O !  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song, 

For  he  hath  done  marvellous  things  ! 
With  his  own  right  hand,  and  with  his  holy  arm. 
Hath  He  gotten  the  victory  ! 
The  Lord  is  King,  be  the  people  never  so  unpatient : 
He  sitteth  upon  the  Cherubims,  be  the  earth  never  so  unquiet. 

At  such  a  crisis,  when  the  country  was  in  danger  of  being 
deluged  with  corrupt  versions  of  His  own  blessed  Word,  it 
was  thus  shown,  in  the  most  striking  manner,  to  every  de- 
vout and  careful  observer,  that  the  God  of  Providence  is  the 
God  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  ;  and  as  He  intended  the  version 
now  given,  to  remain  in  this  highly-favoured  land  for  genera- 
tions then  unborn,  it  was  fit  that  this  interference  should 
take  place  at  the  heginning.  In  the  wide  compass  of  English 
history,  a  more  signal  interposition  of  Divine  providence  on 
behalf  of  His  own  Word  never  occurred  since,  and  that  simply 
for  this  reason,  it  was  never  demanded  ;  the  present  sufficed 
for  all  time  to  come.  This  same  Monarch,  indeed,  and  some 
of  his  wilfully  blind  Prelates,  may  yet  rage  and  strive,  but 
the  version  shall  never  be  banished  from  the  land.  It  may 
be  corrected  and  improved,  nay,  and  be  burnt  again ;  and 
seventy  years  after  this,  upwards  of  fifty  learned  men  may 
be  engaged  for  three  years,  in  order  to  make  it,  as  they  said, 
"  more  smooth  and  easy,  and  agreeable  to  the  text ;"  but 
the  translation  now  received,  shall  be  the  basis  of  all  future 
editions.  And  well  it  might ;  for  after  all  this  labour,  and 
after  all  due  praise  to  our  present  version,  to  say  nothing 
of  particular  words,  there  are  still  happy  turns  of  expression, 
which  had  better  have  been  retained.  "  In  point  of  per- 
spicuity, and  noble  simplicity,  propriety  of  idiom,  and  purity 
of  style,"  it  has  been  said,  "  no  English  version  has  yet  sur- 
passed it  ;"^^  and  if  any  one  suspect  that  this  is  saying  too 


i-i  Tliesc  words  arc  applied  by  Ocddes,  by  way  of  distinction,  to  Tyndalc  ;  and  not  to  Cover- 
dale,  as  sometimes  quoted. 


1.037.]  DISTINCTION    TO   HE  OBSERVED.  .OS? 

much,  let  him  first  peruse  Tyndale  for  himself,  and  then 
observe  the  innumerable  passages,  which,  after  so  many  re- 
visions, are  verbally  the  same  as  in  our  present  version. 

In  the  detail  thus  presented  to  the  reader,  he  cannot  fail 
to  have  observed  more  reasons  than  one  for  the  distinction 
drawn  between  the  translation  of  Tyndale  and  that  of  Cover- 
dale.  He  has  seen  that  the  powerful  ejects  of  the  former 
had  roused  Crumwell,  and  led  him  to  employ  Coverdale 
"  instantly,"  or  in  all  haste,  to  sit  down  to  his  task  ;  and  the 
task  performed,  before  it  could  have  made  any  impression  on 
England,  he  has  heard  Fox  of  Hereford,  in  Convocation  last 
year,  allow  or  rather  describe  the  glorious  result  of  Tyn- 
dale's  primary  version — "  The  lay  people,"  said  he,  "  do  now 
know  the  Holy  Scripture,  better  than  many  of  us."  In  one 
word,  the  times  themselves,  were  the  effect  of  Tyndale' s  transla- 
tion ;  Co'eerdaW s  translation  was  only  one  effect  of  the  times. 

But,  independently  of  these  material  circumstances,  or  of  Tyndale's 
version  being  preferable,  for  his  choice  of  terms,  and  greatly  superior  in 
point  of  euphony,  there  is  a  far  more  important  distinction  between  these 
two  Bibles,  than  that  of  style  or  idiom  ;  and  it  is  one  which  renders  it 
still  more  extraordinary,  that  the  unpatronised,  nay,  obnoxious  trans- 
lator, and  his  hitherto  obnoxious  ti'anslation,  should  have  gained  the 
ascendancy.  Instead  of  describing  this,  the  better  way  will  be  to 
exhibit  it. 

Tyndale.  Coverdale. 

Printed  in  1525,  imported  1526.  Printed  1535,  imported  1536. 

Repent,  the  Kyiigdome  of  heven  is  Amende  yotir  selves,  the  Kyngdome 

at  hande.  of  heven  is  at  hande. 

Brynge  forth  therefore  the  frutes  Beuarre,  bringe  forth  due  frutes  of 

belonging  to  repentance.  ^)C?i?irtMWce. 

And  they  went  forth  and  preached  And  they  went  forth  and  preached 

that  they  should  repent.  that  men  should  amende  them  selfes. 

Repent  and  beleve  the  gospell.  Amende  your  selves,  and  beleve  the 

gospell. 

But  except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  But  excepte  ye  amende  your  selves, 

in  likewyse  perish.  ye  shall  perish  likewise. 

I  say  unto  you  that  likewyse  joy  I  saye  unto  you  :   Even  so  shall 

shall  be  heven  over  one  synner  that  there  be  joy  in  heven  over  one  synner 

repenteth,  more  than  over  ninety  and  that  doth  pennaunce,  more  than  over 

nine  juste  persons,  which  uede  no  re-  nyne   and  nyentye  righteous,  wliicli 

pentaunce.  nede  not  repentaunce. 

Lykewise  I  say  unto  you,  joy  shall  Even  so  (I  tell  you)  shall  there  be 

be  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  joye  before  the  Auffels  of  God,  over  one 

God,  over  one  synner  that  repenteth.  synner  that  doth  pennaunce. 


588         DISTINCTION   BETWEEN  THE   BIBLE   REJECTED,    [BOOK  I. 


Rebuke  him,  and  if  he  repent,  for- 
give him. 

Peter  sayde  unto  them  ;  Repent 
and  be  ye  baptyiied  every  one  of 
you. 

Repent  ye,  therefore,  and  turne, 
that  your  synnes  may  be  done 
away. 


Rebuke  hyni,  and  if  ho  amende,  for  • 
give  him. 

Peter  said  unto  them ;  Amende 
your  se/fes,  and  let  every  one  of  you 
be  baptysed. 

Do  jjeuaunce  now,  therefore,  and 
turn  you,  that  your  synnes  may  be 
done  awai. 


One  passage  may  be  quoted  in  full,  Acts  xxvi.,  19-24,  not  only  in- 
volving the  same  distinction,  but  as  a  specimen  of  their  different  styles. 


Wherefore,  King  Agi'ippa,  I  was 
not  disobedient  to  the  heavenly 
vision :  but  shewed  fyrst  unto  them 
of  Damasco,  and  at  Jerusalem,  and 
throughout  all  the  coastes  of  Jewry, 
and  to  the  gentyls,  that  they  should 
repent,  and  turne  to  Gou,  and  do  the 
ryght  workes  of  repentance.  For 
this  cause  the  Jewes  caught  me  in  the 
temple,  and  went  about  to  kyll  me. 
Nevertheless  I  obtained  help  of  God, 
and  continue  unto  this  day,  witness- 
inge  both  to  small  and  to  greate,  say- 
ing none  other  thinges,  than  those 
which  the  prophetes  and  Moses  dyd 
say  shuld  come,  that  Christ  sliuld 
suffre,  and  that  he  shuld  be  the  fyrst 
that  shuld  ryse  from  death,  and  shuld 
sliewe  lyght  unto  the  people,  and  the 
gentyls. 


Wherefore  (O  Kynge  Agrippa)  I 
was  not  faithlesse  unto  the  heavenly 
vysion,  but  shewed  it  fyrste  unto  them 
at  Damascon,  and  at  Jerusalem,  and 
in  all  the  coastes  of  Jewrye,  and  to 
the  Heithen,  that  they  should  do  pen- 
aunce,  and  turn  to  God,  and  to  do 
right  vorkes  of  penaunce.  For  this 
the  Jewes  toke  me  in  the  temple  and 
went  about  to  kyll  me.  But  thoroughe 
the  help  of  God  lente  unto  me,  I 
stonde  unto  this  daye,  and  testifye 
both  unto  small  and  greate,  and  say 
none  other  thynge,  then  that  the  pro- 
phetes have  sayde,  (that  it  shoulde 
come  to  passe)  and  Moses  :  that 
Chryste  should  suffre,  and  be  the 
fyrst  of  the  resurrection  from  the 
dead,  and  shew  lyght  unto  the  people 
and  to  the  Heythen. 


We  need  not  therefore  now  affirm,  that  the  two  productions  were  very 
distinct.  No  man  was  more  conscious  of  this  than  Coverdale  himself ; 
and  the  modesty  with  which  he  speaks  of  his  own  performance,  would 
be  more  than  sufficient  to  have  dissuaded  from  any  comparison,  if  the 
interests  and  purity  of  Divine  Truth  were  not  concerned  :  but  Lewis,  in 
his  "  History  of  Translations,"  has  so  heedlessly  confounded  the  one 
with  the  other,  and,  in  our  own  day,  others  have  been  so  misled,  that  no 
choice  is  left  to  any  impartial  writer.  After  comparing  Tyndale's  trans- 
lation of  one  passage  in  the  Pentateuch  with  that  of  Coverdale,  in  which 
the  former  is  best,  Lewis  then  adds, — "  So  Matt.  iii.  is,  '  sayinge.  Amende 
your  selves,'  as  it  is  in  Tyndales  first  editions.''''  But  where  is  there  any 
such  expression  to  be  found  in  Tyndale  1  Had  Lewis  not  examined 
the  first  editions  ?  Was  he  not  aware  that  they  were  the  first 
editions  that  Sir  Thomas  More  attacked,  and  that  upon  this  very  point, 
among  others  1  Or  had  he  not  read  Tyndale's  able  and  animated 
reply  in  l.'iSO,  when  he  answered,  7vhy  he  had  translated  love  and  not 
charity — congregation  and  not  church — repentance  and  not  penance  ? 


1537.]  AND  THE  BIBLE  RECEIVED.  589 

Yes,  all  this  he  had  doue,  and  of  all  this  he  seems  to  have  been  aware, 
and  yet,  strange  to  say,  forgot  his  own  previous  history  !  No,  there 
existed  in  Tyndale's  mind  a  very  different  feeling  from  that  which  would 
have  led  him  to  have  regarded  penance  and  repentance  as  synonymoim 
terms  ;  and,  more  especially,  since  the  sense  of  the  previous  term  was  so 
fully  known  and  felt  throughout  Europe,  when  "  the  scourge  inexorable, 
and  the  torturing  hour,  called  them  to  penance."  Coverdale,  on  the 
other  hand,  in  obedience  to  the  dominant  power  of  the  day,  falling  under 
the  influence  of  expediency,  mixed  up  those  terms  with  others  of  far 
inferior  moment,  and  here  is  his  explanation. 

"  Sure  I  am,"  he  says  in  his  epistle  to  the  reader,  "  that  there  cometh  more 
understanding  and  knowledge  of  the  Scripture,  by  tliese  sundry  translations, 
than  by  all  the  glosses  of  our  sophistical  doctoi's.  Be  not  thou  offended,  there- 
fore, good  reader,  though  one  call  a  scribe,  that  another  calleth  lawyer;  or 
elders,  that  another  calleth  father  and  mother ;  or  repentance,  that  another 
calleth  penance  or  amendment.  For  if  we  were  not  deceived  l»j  men's  tradi- 
tions, we  should  find  no  more  diversity  between  these  terms,  than  between 
four-pence  and  a  groat  !  And  this  manner  liave  I  used  in  my  transla- 
tion, calling  in  some  places  penance,  that  in  another  I  call  repentance  ;44  and 
that  not  only  because  the  interpreters  have  done  so  before  nie,45  but  that  the 
adversaries  of  the  truth  might  see  that  we  abhor  not  this  word  penance,  no 
more  than  the  interpreters  of  Latin  abhor  pcenitere,  when  they  read  resipiscere." 

Now,  above  five  years  before  his  translation  was  printed,  Coverdale 
must  have  been  perfectly  familiar  with  Tyndale's  strong  impression,  as 

to  the  vital  importance  of  this  word  Metanoia  being  correctly  rendered 

he  had  heard  him  saying  to  his  opponent,  the  Lord  Chancellor — 

"  He  cannot  prove  that  I  gave  not  the  right  English  unto  the  Greek  word  ;" 
and  after  explaining  his  views,  had  heard  him  add — "  these  things  to  be  even 
so,  Mr.  More  knoweth  well  enough,  for  he  understandeth  the  Greek,  and  he 
knew  them  long  ere  I.  So  now  the  cause  why  our  prelates  thus  rage,  and  what 
moveth  them  to  call  Mr.  More  to  help,  is,  not  that  they  find  just  causes  in  the 
translation,  but  because  they  hare  lost  their  feigned  terms,  wherewith  Peter 
prophesied  they  should  make  merchandise  of  the  people." 

If,  therefore,  Coverdale  had  been  for  once  with  Tyndale,  at  Ham- 
burgh, in  1529,  we  need  not  suppose  that  the  former  dissembled  ever 
after,  or  kept  in  secret  from  Tyndale  the  com-se  he  was  pursuing.  No 
the  conclusion  to  be  drawn  is  this,  that  there  could  have  been  7io  fami- 
liar intercourse  between  the  parties  ever  since  that  period  ;  while  there  can 
be  no  doubt,  that  had  Tyndale  known  of  this  proceeding,  or  read  Cover- 
dale's  lame  apology  for  it,  the  voice  of  remonstrance,  nay,  and  of  strong 
reprobation,  would  have  been  heard  from  the  castle  of  Vilvorde. 

At  the  same  time,  a  distinction  so  systematic,  in  opposition  to  all  the 
editions  of  Tyndale's  New  Testament,  which  had  been  imported  into 


**  But  penance  most  frequently,  as  already  shown. 

■•5  The  only  English  interpreter  before  him  had  never  done  so— they  must  have  been  his 
Latin  or  Douch  (German)  interpreters  to  whom  he  referred. 


5.00  DISTINCTION  TO   BE   REMEMBEIIED.  []b00K  I. 

England  for  above  ten  years  past,  could  not  now  have  been  adopted,  but 
under  the  sanction  of  Crumioell^  though  he  must  by  no  means  be  allowed 
to  bear  all  the  blame.  Long  after  his  death,  this  particular  word  was 
one  to  which  Coverdale,  when  acting  for  himself,  pertinaciously  ad- 
hered.*^ Indeed,  of  all  the  men  now  so  signally  overruled,  it  is  natural 
to  suppose  that  he  must  have  felt  the  greatest  mortification  ;  but  there 
was  no  help  for  him.  He  had  been  so  profoundly  obsequious  to  his  Ma- 
jesty as  to  give  him  his  choice  of  putting  his  version  aside  altogether, 
and  so  it  has  come  to  pass.  He  must  of  course  therefore  now  submit, 
and  very  soon,  or  almost  immediately,  he  will  be  engaged  to  superintend 
the  press  of  a  second  edition  of  the  successful  translation. 

On  reading  thus  far,  however,  it  is  by  no  means  improbable  that, 
owing  to  recent  circumstances,  a  few  questions  will  naturally  occur  to 
many.  Was  there  not  held  in  the  year  1835  a  commemoration  of  the 
4th  of  October  1.535,  styled  "  the  third  Centenanj  of  the  English  Bible.'" 
There  was.  And  was  it  with  reference  to  Coverdale's  Bible  just  de- 
scribed ?  Of  course  it  was.  But  were  the  parties  aware  that  his  version 
was  thus  laid  aside  1  Were  they  aware  that  it  was  not  only  superseded, 
but  never  enjoined  to  be  read  in  England,  or  that  it  stood  at  the  top  of 
the  list  of  interdicted  books  in  1546  ?  Above  all,  were  they  aware  that 
this  was  the  book,  which  contained  these  passages,  thtis  rendered  ? 
Surely  they  were  not  ;  for  if  they  had,  the  centenary  must  have  been 
postponed  ;  except  they  had  been  resolved  to  celebrate  the  wrong  book, 
and  rejoice  before  the  proper  time.  But,  again,  did  the  year  1825  and 
1826  pass  by,  without  any  notice  of  Tyndale,  three  hundred  years  be- 

46  In  the  days  of  Edward  VI.,  Coverdale  felt  himself  more  at  liberty,  when  we  find  him, 
however  strange  it  may  seem,  repeatedly  attempting  to  push  the  same  translation  into  notice, 
by  dedicating  it  afresh  to  that  Prince.  It  was  reprinted  abroad,  and  even  not  so  correctly  as  at 
first,  in  1550,  and  again  reissued  in  1553.  In  both  instances  he  printed  his  dedications  in  London, 
and  repeats  the  same  language  which  he  had  employed  in  1535,  but,  happily,  with  as  little  effect. 
These  impressions  of  his  Bible,  in  quarto,  embrace  the  solitary  two  years,  out  of  ei(fhly-one,  in 
which  he  was  Bishop  of  Kxetcr  ;  and  what  is  curious  enough,  as  if  the  Church,  of  which  he  was 
then  a  Bishop,  had  been  all  along  of  his  sentiments,  in  reference  to  penance  and  repentance, 
in  one  of  the  sentences  already  quoted,  he  changes  "  the  adversaries  of  the  tnilh,"  into,  "  the 
adversaries  of  the  Church," — "  that  the  adversaries  of  the  Church  might  see,  that  tee  abhor  not 
this  word  penance." 

Variety  of  translations  was  a  favourite  subject  of  Coverdale's,  and  in  his  prologue  he  had  ex- 
pressed himself  in  terms  which  have  puzzled  more  authors  than  one  ;  even  so  late  as  1838,  the 
anonymous  Memorialist  of  Coverdale  confesses  himself  to  be  quite  in  the  dark.  "  Among  the 
Greeks,"  says  Coverdale,  "  had  not  Origen  a  special  translation?  Had  not  Vulgarius  one  pe- 
culiar, and  likewise  Chrysfistom?"  But  who  was  Vulg.\rius?  For  it  is  singular  enough,  that 
fifteen  and  eighteen  years  after,  or  in  1550  and  15.53,  he  repeats  the  same  word.  "  Miles  Cover- 
dale,"  says  Jortin,  "  published  an  English  translation  of  the  Bible  in  1550,  and  dedicated  it  to 
Edward  VI.  In  his  preface  he  reckons  l-^ulftarius  among  the  fathers  of  the  Church.  Maittairc 
(iii.,  585,)  makes  mention  of  this  edition,  and  declares  himself  quite  at  a  loss,  and  unable  to 
guess  who  this  Vulparius  should  be.  He  knew  nothing,  it  seems,  of  the  history  of  this  blunder. 
Erasmus,  by  a  strange  mistake,  gave  the  name  of  Vulgarius  to  Theophi/lact.  Being  censured 
for  this,  he  made  a  shuffling  excuse;  but  was  sensible  of  his  error,  and  afterwards  called  him 
by  his  true  name  Theophylact,  in  the  second  and  the  following  editions  of  the  New  Testament. 
Coverdale  then  was  misled  by  Erasmus,  which  is  somewhat  strange,  since  Erasmus  had  cor- 
rected the  mistake  in  hisx\otcs."—Jo)-tin's  Erasmus,  ii.,  3/6.  Had  Coverdale  then  only  consulted 
the  first  edition  of  1516  ?  So  it  should  seem.  Tyndale  had  kept  his  eye  on  them  all,  up  to  the 
fourth,  in  1527. 


1 


1537.]  CONCLUSION.  5yi 

fore  1  They  did.  And  was  not  the  month  of  August  1537,  far  more 
worthy  of  joyful  commemoration  than  that  of  October  1535,  when,  in 
fact,  nothing  whatever  immediately  followed  ?  Of  this,  we  i^rcsume, 
there  can  be  no  question  now  ;  but  it  also  passed  away  without  the 
slightest  reference  to  Tyndale.  The  first  introducer  of  penmice,  as 
printed  in  the  English  tongue,  and  forty-seven  years  before  the  Rhemish 
version,  was  held  up  to  view  by  many,  though  even  then,  not  by  all ;  on 
the  other  hand,  his  predecessor  by  ten  years,  and  the  first  able  advo- 
cate of  "  Repentance  towards  God,"  has  been  allowed  to  sleep  in  oblivion. 

These,  however,  it  is  acknowledged,  are  matters  of  but  small  account, 
compared  with  the  fact,  that  up  to  this  hour  the  hand  of  the  Almighty 
has  never  been  distinctly,  and  therefore  duly  recognised.  The  very 
marked,  and  ever-to-be-remembered,  period,  when  God,  by  his  overruling 
providence  and  grace,  was  introducing  that  inestimable  boon,  which,  as 
an  instrument  in  his  hand,  has  made  our  Country  what  it  is,  has  never 
been  clearly  distinguished  ;  never  held  up  to  public  view  as  the  fit 
season  for  grateful  and  adoring  commemoration  !  It  is  one  proof,  among 
too  many  others,  that  due  regard  has  not  yet  been  paid  to  the  history  of 
our  Saci-ed  Record. 

It  was  only  two  months  after  the  arrival  of  this  Bible,  when  Henry 
met,  most  unexpectedly,  with  what  was  calculated  to  produce  some  per- 
manent impression  upon  him.  It  was  not  yet  seventeen  months  since 
he  had  so  barbarously  put  his  Queen  to  death,  and  married  a  third  wife 
the  next  day  !  On  the  12th  of  October  Queen  Jane  Seymour  gave  birth 
to  a  son,  but  in  twelve  days  afterwards  sunk  and  died.  Whether  his 
Majesty  was  long  or  deeply  afflicted  by  his  loss,  as  historians  have  but 
too  often  represented,  will  appear  very  soon.  But  the  birth  of  this 
amiable  child,  following  so  immediately  after  the  introduction  of  the 
Scriptures,  it  may  now  be  said, — "  ahout  which  time  Edwakd  was 
horn!'''  Throughout  his  brief  reign,  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and  in  this 
translation  of  it,  will  be  treated  as  it  ought  ever  to  have  been,  whether 
by  the  prince  or  the  peasant. 

But  in  conclusion  of  this  present  year,  all  other  events  sink 
into  insignificance  when  compared  with  that  extraordinary  oc- 
currence in  the  month  of  August.  Such  was  the  introduction 
of  Tyndale's  Bible  to  his  countrymen  ;  so  peacefully,  easily,  and 
effectually  accomplished,  after  all  the  blood  and  turmoil  of  the 
past.  The  plague  was  raging  furiously  all  the  time ;  yet  the 
prototype,  the  first  edition  of  our  English  Bible  must  be  then 
and  so  introduced.  Come  it  did,  at  a  season  so  rousing,  and 
fraught  with  solemn  warning.  Not  to  increase  alarm,  even  Graf- 
ton who  brought  it,  was  cautious  of  approach.  Official  men  had 
fled  for  safety  from  the  Metropolis.     Not  so  Crumwell.     He 


r)b2  CONCLUSION.  [book  I. 

stood  firm  in  the  niid.st  of  the  dying  and  the  dead.  It  was 
chiefly  to  do,  what  he  did  in  this  matter ;  while  all  other  men 
of  power  and  pretension  have  appeared  before  us,  only  as  "  clay 
in  the  hand  of  the  potter,"  To  exempt  any  individual,  would 
be  historically  incorrect :  they  have  been  overruled  to  a  man. 

If,  therefore,  there  be  any  importance  in  setting  an  ex- 
ample ;  in  exhibiting  a  pattern  after  which  others  may  work, 
or  in  laying  the  foundation-stone  of  a  great  enterprise  ;  if  it 
be  easy  to  follow,  where  one  has  broken  up  the  way,  and 
smoothed  it ;  and  if  the  first  individual  who  strikes  out  a 
new  and  untried  path,  in  which  his  country,  after  having 
shewed  great  resistance,  at  last  follows,  be  allowed  to  discover 
a  mind  above  the  common  order ;  then,  so  far  as  human 
agency  was  concerned,  all  this  must  be  traced  to  one  man ; 
and  one  whom  now  we  need  not  name. 

But  above  all,  the  mode  of  the  Divine  procedure,  in  this  in- 
stance, deserves  special  regard.  In  studying  this,  whether  to- 
wards the  Christian  individually,  or  towards  a  people  as  such, 
it  has  been  said  that,  in  certain  cases,  something  may  be  dis- 
covered, bearing  no  slight  analogy  to  the  principal  sound, — 
the  key-note  in  music  ;  to  which  the  whole  piece  is  accommo- 
dated, with  which  it  usually  begins,  but  always  ends.  Now 
if  the  Sovereign  disposer  of  all  events  had  begun  to  discourse 
with  the  higher  powers  in  this  country  after  this  fashion ; 
had  begun  by  an  instance  of  his  overruling  providence,  so  sig- 
nal as  the  present ;  it  remains  to  be  cautiously  observed, 
whether  He  does  not  so  interpose,  again  and  again,  in  favour 
of  his  own  blessed  word.  Nay,  whether  He  has  not  once  done 
so,  even  in  our  own  times,  and  may  yet  do  so,  once  more. 
At  all  events,  ancient  though  this  triumph  be,  hitherto  al- 
most unobserved,  and  therefore  generally  disregarded,  it 
may  yet  be  seen  to  carry  a  firm  and  determined  aspect, 
quite  beyond  our  own  eventful  day.  The  series  of  events  to 
be  recorded  in  our  Second  Volume  should  resolve  this  point. 
But  they  will  at  least  prove  that  we  have  far  more  to  do,  and 
to  do  now,  with  the  history  of  the  English  Bible,  than  the 
great  body  of  those  who  at  present  profess  Christianity 
throughout  this  kingdom  have  imagined. 


END  OF  VOLUME  I. 


n 


BS455.A54V.1 

The  annals  of  the  English  Bible. 

Princeton  Theological  Seminary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  00081    1879 


