BS\Z35 
.A38S 

COPM     I 


THE  BOOK  OF  GENESIS, 


PART  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  EXODUS 


g^  <Ecbiscb  0crsioit,  tviitlj  gliirginiil  |tcfercnxcs, 


EXPLANATORY  COMMENTARY. 


HENRY    AFFORD,    D.  D., 

LATE    DEAN    OF   CANTERBURY. 


STRAHAN   &   CO., 

56,  LUDGATE  HILL,  LONDON. 

1872. 


[A/i  Rights  resen'ed.] 


JOHN    CHILD3   AND   SON,    PRINTERS. 


PREFACE. 


In  Februarj',  1870,  Dean  Alford  undertook  to  write  an  explana- 
tory Commentary  on  the  Old  Testament.  The  first  volume  was 
intended  to  include  the  Pentateuch.  In  the  course  of  the  year  he 
completed  the  Book  of  Genesis,  revised  it  for  the  press,  and  placed 
the  first  sheet  in  the  printers'  hands :  he  also  wrote  the  Com- 
mentary as  far  as  the  twenty-fifth  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Exodus ; 
when  his  work  on  earth  ended,  on  Jan.  12th,  1871. 

It  is  due  both  to  his  memory  and  to  those  for  whose  instruction 
he  laboured,  that  the  unfinished  volume  should  be  published  exactly 
as  he  left  it. 

Pains  have  been  taken  to  make  the  publication  as  accurate  as 
possible.  But  if  errors  are  observed,  it  will  be  borne  in  mind 
that  the  difficulty  of  printing  from  the  manuscript  was  not  slight, 
and  the  difiiculty  of  correcting  the  press  was  increased  by  an  un- 
foreseen occurrence  to  the  manuscript. 

It  was  the  Dean's  intention  to  prefix  to  the  Book  of  Genesis,  a 
general  Introduction :  but  no  part  of  it  was  actually  written. 
Many  important  questions,  at  which  he  only  glances  in  the  Com- 
mentary, were  to  be  discussed  in  the  Introduction.  Among 
them  were  "  all  general  matters  respecting  the  Creation  of  the 
AVorld  and  Man  " — "  science  and  revelation  " — "  the  use  of  the  name 
Elohim  in  the  first  chapter  " — ^'  the  distinctness  of  the  accounts  of 


iv  PREFACE. 

tlie  Creation  in  the  first  two  chapters  " — "  Paradise  and  the  Fall  " 
— "  the  trees  of  Life  and  Knowledge  "— "  the  Sons  of  God  "— "  the 
Flood  and  its  extent" — "the  Confusion  of  Tongues  and  Disper- 
sion " — also  "  the  Anthropomorphism  of  the  early  part  of  Genesis," 
and  "  the  hypothesis  of  the  composition  of  the  book  by  two  writers, 
distinguished  as  the  Elohist  and  the  Jehovist,  or  even  by  more 
than  two." 

A  book  which  he  valued  highly — Theophylact's  Commentaries 
on  St.  Paul — was  first  published  in  England  under  circumstances 
so  similar  to  those  in  which  this  Commentary  is  submitted  to  the 
Header,  that  I  venture  to  introduce  it  Avith  the  words  of  the  preface 
of  that  book  : — 

"Virum  omni  literarum  genere  excultum,  inter  media  optima) 
frugis  molimina  abreptum,  etiam  ignoti  flebunt.  At  vero  mei 
muneris  esse  duxi  (qui  in  istiusmodi  studiis  illi  inservierim)  non 
tarn  dcfunctum  ignavo  questu  prosequi,  quam  qua?  voluerit,  memi- 
nisse ;  qua)  mandaverit  exequi.  Ilinc  animus  mihi  accendebatur 
hosce  Commentaries  quos  ille  bono  publico  destinaverat  pro  medio- 
critate  mea  potius  excolere  qiiam  una  cum  ipso  sepelire.  Priores 
ipsius  curas,  atque  etiam  secundas  experti  erant ;  manus  tantum 
deerat  suprema,  Unde  licet  fortassis  baud  usque  adeo  absolutes, 
non  tamen  omnino  neglectos,  prodire  comperies." 

W.  T.  B. 

Kenshiglon,  J/iiip,  1872. 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  MOSES, 


GENESIS. 


I.  1  ^  In  the  beginning  God  ^  created  the  *=  heavens  and  the  ='^x 
•=  earth,      2  J^^id.  the  earth  was  "^  waste,  and  "^ernpty  ;   and  bver'al.^; 


Jxt 


Isa.  xl.  26 ;  ilv.  18.    See  note.        c  ch.  xiv.  19,  22. 

Title]  Tlic  book  is  called  in  the  Hebrew 
BEiiEsniTii,  In  the  beginning-,  from  its 
first  word.  It  was  also  known  by  the  Eab- 
bis  as  "  The  Book  of  Creation."  The  pre- 
sent name  is  derived  from  the  Septuagint 
version,  which  inscribes  it  Genesis  Kosmou, 
the  genesis  of  the  world. 

I.  1 — II.  2.]  First,  or  Ititroductorij  por- 
tioii.     The  creation  of  the  wokld  and 

OF  MAN. 

I.  1,  2.]  Hi.sfori/  previous  to  the  six  clays' 
works.  The  assignment  of  tliis  portion  of 
the  narrative  has  been  curious.  Many  have 
regarded  ver.  1  as  an  announcement  of  the 
original  creation  of  matter,  and  ver.  2  as 
opening  with  the  first  day.  Others  have 
included  ver.  1  in  the  first  day's  works,  and 
have  regarded  the  opening  words  as  meaning 
Tirst  of  all.  But,  inasmuch  as  every  one  of 
the  six  days'  works  opens  with  And  God 
said,  it  is  required  by  the  symmetry  of  the 
narrative  that  the  first  day's  work  should 
begin  at  ver.  3,  and  that  vv.  1,  2,  should  be 
regarded  as  introductory  matter.  It  is  no 
objection  to  this  that  in  Exod.  xx.  11,  xxxi. 
17,  God  is  said  in  six  days  to  have  "  made  " 
heaven  and  earth.  See  on  the  former  of 
these  places.  This  being  so,  we  have  in  it 
three  propositions.  First,  {a)  originally  God 
created  the  heaven  and  the  earth.  Secondly, 
(b)  at  a  certain  time  formlessness  and  dark- 
ness prevailed.  Thirdly,  {r)  the  Divine 
Spirit  wrought  upon  this  chaotic  state.  And 
thus  the  way  is  prepared  for  tlic  six-days' 
work.  («)  1.  In  the  beginning]  i.  e.  as 


21.        dJer.  iv.  23.    Isa.ixxiv.il. 

in  reff.,  absolute,  at  the  first  beginning  of 
things.  God]  Elohim,  the  Divine  Name 

used  throughout  the  Mhole  of  this  first  por- 
tion, I.  1 — II.  3.  created]  The  Hebrew 
verb  does  not  of  necessity  signify  creation  out 
of  nothing.  It  is  the  same  word  which  is  used, 
I's.  li.  r2,"Create  innieacleanheart,OGod;" 
Jer.  xxxi.  22, "  Jehovah  hatli  created  (brought 
about)  a  new  thing  in  the  earth  ;  "  Isa.  Ixv. 
]  8,  "  I  create  (make)  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing." 
But  in  tlie  sense  of  creating  at  all,  it  is  used 
of  God  only  :  and  Geseuius  thinks  that  in 
passages  like  this,  the  sense  of  creation  out 
of  nothing  must  be  taken  as  intended  by  it. 
If  not  so  here,  what  distinction  would  there 
be  between  this  proposition  and  the  narrative 
wliich  follows,  specifying  as  it  does  the  ar- 
rangement and  furnishing  of  that  matter 
which  is  here  said  to  have  been  created  .^ 
the  heavens  and  the  earth]  = ,  see 
reff.,  the  whole  world,  tlic  universe.  The 
Hebraists  tell  us  that  there  is  in  Hebrew  no 
one  word  expressing  tliis  meaning.  And 
therefore  the  expressions  "heaven"  and 
"earth,"  occurring  here  in  an  idiomatic 
formula,  are  not  to  be  taken  singly  out  and 
argued  on  as  when  they  afterwards  occur 
singly  in  the  following  narrative.  Heavens 
is  properly  plural,  and  is  so  rendered  in  tlie 
A.  V.  in  ch.  ii.  1,  and  frequently  elsewhere. 
It  is  not  possible  to  preserve  absolute  uni- 
formity in  such  renderings;  but  in  solemn 
formula)  like  the  present,  it  is  well  to  be  pre- 
cise, {b)  2.]  At  a  certain  time,  or,  as 
fii-st  created,  the  earth— that  whicli  we  uow 

B 


^ 


GENESIS. 


ech.  viii.  2. 
Job  xxviii.  14. 
Jonah  ii.  5. 
ch.  xli.  38. 
Num.  xxiv.  2. 
£xod.  xxxi.3. 
Judfj.  iii.  10. 


darkness  iras  upon  the  face  of  tlie  ^  deep.  And  the 
^  Spirit  of  God  ^  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  waters. 
3  ^  And  God  ^  said,  Let  there  be  lio^ht :  and  ^  there  was 

Ps.  civ.  30.     gDeut.xxxii.il.      h  Ts.  xxiiii.  9  ;  cxxvii.  15  ;  cxlviii.  S.   John  i.  1.    Heb.  xi.  3.   2  Pet.  iii.  5. 


knowand  inhabit,  but  then  in  embryo,  in  chaos 
—was  waste  and  empty  (literally.wasteness 
and  emptiness).  This  is  tlie  true  rendering. 
The  expression  icithout  form  seems  to  have 
been  borrowed  from  the  apocryplial  Book  of 
"Wisdom  (xi.  17).  The  Septuagint  version  has 
invisible  and  unarranged.  In  the  Hebrew, 
the  -words  have  not  only  much  the  same 
meaning,  but  also  a  kindred  sound  ;  tohu  va 
boltu.  Besides  this,  darkness  was  upon  the 
face  of-  rested  upon  and  covered,  the  deep— 
(see  ref.),  the  abyss  of  waters  which  en- 
veloped the  -waste  earth.  The  -word  thus 
rendered  is  derived  from  a  root  signifying 
2Jcrtijrbntion,  commotion — a  raging  deep  of 
wild  -waters  and  storm.  (c)  2.]    T/ie 

Jirst  action  of  God  to  bring  order  and  light 
out  of  cJiaotic  darkness.  And  the  Spirit  of 
God— so,  beyond  question,  the  words  are  here 
to  be  rendered.  The  English  reader  need 
hardly  be  told  that  sjn'rit  is  originally  and 
literally  breath,  or  tcind  ;  but  that  it  has  in 
usage  and  in  Scripture  acquired  the  meaning 
-which  we  now  commonly  assign  to  it,  of  an 
immaterial,  sentient,  and  active  being  ;  and 
when  joined  with  of  God,  as  here,  the  term 
becomes  a  theological  one,  variously  indeed 
revealed  and  understood  in  the  various  ages  of 
revelation,  but  always  importing  a  personal 
agency  of  God.  (See  the  retf.,  in  which  this 
meaning  hasitsexamplcs.)  moved  upon 

(lit.  Jluttered  over,  as  a  bird  over  her  young, 
see  ref.  Deut.,  which  is  the  only  recurrence 
of  the  same  form  of  this  verb.  The  meaning 
evidently  is,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  exerted 
an  incubating  or  vivifying  influence,  prepara- 
tory to  the  great  calling  forth  of  organism 
alid  life  -which  was  to  follow).  This  primeval 
chaotic  form  of  matter,  and  evocation  of  life 
Dy  a  Divine  influence,  are  common  to  the 
ancient  Gentile  cosmogonies.  The  Divine 
influence  is  personified  as  Eros  (love),  and  is 
called  the  eldest  of  the  gods.  3—31.] 

Thk  six  days'  -wokk.  And,  herein,  3 — 5.] 
The  fivit  dag's  worJ: :  the  creation  of 
LIGHT.  and  God  said]  It  is  well  to 

mark  the  significance  of  these  words,  which 
form  the  introduction  to  each  creative  act. 
They  are  altogether  anthropomorphic : 
trausUtiiig  a  Divine  method  of  proceeding, 


-which  is  naturally  removed  out  of  our  realm 
of  cognizance  into  language  expressing  an 
analogy  with  human   acts.     Human   com- 
mands are  given  to  intelligent  agents  by  the 
material  organ  of  the  voice  :  here  God,  who 
is  a  Spirit,  is  represented  as  exerting  His 
power  over  non-intelligent   matter  by  the 
utterance  of  words.     This  example,  obvious 
as  it  is,  of  the    anthropomorphism   of  the 
whole   narrative,  has,  from  our  familiarity 
-with  the  phrase,  been  overlooked.     [Kalisch 
remarks,  in  his  able  commentary,  "In  the 
history  of  creation,  God  is  said  to  hover  (ver. 
2)  ;  to  speak   (ver.  3,  6,  &c.)  ;  to  see  and 
examine  (ver.   4,  18,  &c.) ;  to  give  names 
(ver.   6,  8,  &c.) ;  to  approve  of  His  works 
(ver.  4,  12,  &c.)  ;  to  deliberate  with  Him- 
self (ver.  26)  ;  to  rest,  and  to  repose  Him- 
self (ii.  2,  3) ;  and  even  to  make  garments 
for  the  first  pair  (iii.  21).     By  these  anthro- 
ptmiorphistic  phrases,  the  biblical  text  loses 
nothing  of  its  grandeur,  and  gains  immea- 
surably in  distinctness   and  perspicuity ;  it 
describes   Divine  manifestation  for  human 
beings  and  in  a  human  medium."]    Observe, 
that  there  is  a  material  difference  between 
this  absolute  proposition  "God  said,"  and 
that  other,  "  God  said  unto  Moses,"  or  the 
like.    God  may  have  communicated  His  will 
to  His  intelligent  creatures  by  the  vehicle  of 
sound,  if  it  so  pleased  Him.     But  here  we 
are  on  totally  different   ground.     Observe, 
also,  that  this  form  of  conveying  to  us  the 
Divine    procedure    entirely    precludes    the 
idea  of  the  creatures  being  emanation  from 
God   Himself.      It   implies  a  freely-acting 
Personality  on  the  part  of  the  Creator.     In 
this  employment  of  the  Divine  word  as  fho 
agent  in  creation  we  see  the  first  germs  of 
the   mysterious   doctrine    of    the   Personal 
Word  as  now  known  to  us  in  the  X.  T.  reve- 
lation.    Compare  the  refF.  Let  there 
be  light]    The  simplicity  and  sublimity  of 
this  record  of  the  first  act  of  the  six-days' 
work  has  been  observed  even  by  those  out- 
side the  faith  of  the  Bible.     AYith  regard  to 
the   act   itself,    we    may  remark   that    the 
sacred  writer  first   relates   the   creation  of 
a  world  of  matter,  and  then  out  of  it,  in 
a  waste  and  dark   condition,  the    separut- 


5—5. 


GENESIS. 


light 


^  And  God  saw  tlie  light,  that  ii  iras  good  :  and 

God  divided  betvreenthe  light  and  the  darkness.     ^  And  /C  4^/^-^ /">-"»- 

God  called  the  light  Day,  and  the  darkness  he_called  A: 

Night.     And  it  was  evening,  and  ij;  was  morning;  one  7ki*cfCU) 


ing  of  lif>lit  and  darkness,  of  waters 
above  and  waters  below,  of  earth  and  seas, 
of  day  and  night.  Then  we  have  the 
general  before  the  elementarj"  creation,  the 
elementary  before  the  special.  It  is  in  vain 
to  inquire  scientifically,  as  some  have  done, 
of  what  kind  this  tirst-created  light  was. 
We  ai'c  not  here  in  the  realm  of  science,  nor 
is  the  anthropomorphic  arrangement  of  this 
Divine  revelation  of  the  facts  of  creation  to 
be  set  parallel  with  our  upward  feelings 
after  the  ways  and  works  of  the  God  of 
Nature.  4.]    Tlie   oversight   and  ap- 

proval by  God  of  each  of  the  works  of  cre- 
ation, as  made,  is  recorded  again  and  again, 
in  the  spirit  of  the  whole  narrative,  ac- 
cording to  the  analogy  of  human  workman- 
ship. But  not  only  so.  The  sacred  writer 
has'  it,  from  the  first,  in  his  purpose  to 
affirm  the  absolute  goodness  of  the  Divine 
works  :  and  this  formula  is  only  another  and 
a  more  detailed  method  of  saying  that  all 
creation  followed  the  behest  and  the  cha- 
racter of  its  maker.  Himself  all  good. 
and  God  divided]  As  above  noticed,  this 
divimon,  this  specific  arrangement  out  of 
confusion,  is  the  general  character  of  these 
former  days  of  creation.  The  scientific  in- 
quiry how  this  division  wore  possible  without 
the  heavenly  bodies,  whose  creation  follows 
on  the  fourth  day,  is  both  a  misuse  of  science 
and  a  misunderstanding  of  the  narrative. 
No  such  matter-of-fact  priority  is  here  in 
question  ;  light  and  darkness,  as  here  spoken 
of,  are  not  merely  dependent  on  the  presence 
or  absence  of  the  sun,  but  are  phenomena  of 
human  sense  and  objects  of  human  thought, 
distinct  from  each  other.  That  they  are  so, 
is  the  effect  of  the  creative  act  of  God.  By 
what  arrangements  lie  made  provision  for 
their  alt-crnution,  does  not  enter  here. 
Between  the  light  and  the  darkness  is 
literally,  between  the  light  and  between 
the  darkness.  6.1  Here,  again,  we  sec 

the  spirit  of  the  narrative.  We  are  still  on 
the  ground  of  purely  elementary  and  general 
distinction,  and  the  words  will  not  bear 
pressing  into  literal  accuracy.  It  is  not 
always  day  where  tliere  is  light,  nor  always 
night  where  there  is  darkness.      But  God 


made  light  to  be  the  distinguisliing  mark  of 
day,  and  darkness  of  niglit.  Tlie  olijcction 
tliat  the  eflicient  causes  of  the  succession  of 
day  and  niglit  have  not  yet  been  mentioned 
as  created  —as  it  does  not  stand  in  the  way  of 
the  sacred  M'riter,  so  neitlier  should  it  in 
oni-s.  This,  again,  is  not  enough  remembered. 
The  sacred  writer  could  speak  of  this 
division :  he  could  imply  this  succession 
through  three  days  and  a  half ;  and  yet  he 
had  no  scruple  to  record  after  all  this  (ver. 
14),  that  God  said,  Let  there  be  lights  .  ,  .  to 
diridc  the  day  from  the  niyht.  Surely  we 
are  not  called  upon  to  be  wiser  than  he  was, 
nor  to  reconcile  that  as  a  dilference  which 
was  none  to  him.  He  had  reason  for  writing 
as  he  did;  and  the  question  for  us  is,  What 
was  that  reason  ?  By  God  calling  tlie  light 
Day,  &c.,  is  implied  that  God  made  the  light 
(as  above)  to  be  the  distinguishing  mark  of 
that  which  we  call  Day,  &c.  and  it 

was  evening  .  .  .]  This,  which  is,  as  it  were, 
the  burden  or  refraii),  of  the  six  strophes  in 
the  narrative,  is  especially  instructive,  as  it 
here  occurs  for  the  first  time.  For  how 
shall  we  seek,  if  _we  are  to  seek,  to  press 
it  in  this  case  to  a  literal  interpretation  ? 
There  can  be  none,  unless  indeed  the  pri.n- 
eval  darkness  is  to  be  taken  as  the  evening) 
and  the  creation  of  light  as  the  morning. 
And  if  that  be  so,  then  surely  all  attempt  at 
literal  interpretation  is  at  an  end.  For 
neither  was  that  darkness  an  evening,  nor 
that  light  a  morning,  except  in  a  sense  al- 
together figurative  and  non-literal ;  and 
hardly  even  then,  for  evening  darkens  on- 
ward into  night ;  which  could  in  no  sense  be 
said  of  that  primeval  darkness ;  for  it 
brightened  into  morning.  From  tliis  con- 
sideration alone  it  would  follow  that  the 
idea  of  a  common  day  of  24  hours  being 
intended,  is  quite  foreign  to  the  purpose. 
But  this  consideration  does  not  stand  alone. 
Such  an  hypotliesis  would  be  involved  in 
the  absurdity  of  limiting  God's  rest  on  the 
seventh  day  to  a  day  of  the  same  length, 
whereas  we  know  that  that  rest  is  enduring. 
Again,  let  it  bo  observed  that  tno  whole 
notion  of  equality  of  endurance,  or  of  close 
succession,  of  these  "  days  "  of  creation,  is 


GENESIS. 


i<t.^4^t'^-*^  day.     ^  ^  And  God  said,  Let  there  be  anjexpanse  in  the 

diAcU  midst  of  the  waters,  and  let  it  be  a  division  between  the 

/r^t^'.J  jC-u^,n.  /    waters  and  the  waters.     7  And  God  made  the  expanse, 

^«x;^^"frvc/  jir«^4^^  and  divided  between  the  waters^imder  the  expanse  and 

«*'•  '        the  waters  above  the  expanse  :  and  it  was  so.     ^  And  God 

^//^..,  called  the  expanse  Heaven.     And  it  was  evening,  and 


imaginary,  and  imported  into  the  narra- 
tive. The  story  of  creation  is  arranjjed 
in  these  periods,  familiar  to  us ;  the  great 
personal  cause  of  every  step  in  it  is^God, 
and  God's  will.  But  it  is  as  irrelevant  and 
as  foolish  to  inquire  minutely  into  the 
lower  details  following  on  a  literal  accept- 
ance of  the  terms  used  in  conveying  this 
great  truth  to  our  minds,  as  it  would  be  to 
take  the  same  course  with  the  words  "  God 
said," — to  inquire  in  wliat  language  He 
spoke,  and  to  whom.  It  never  can  be  too 
much  impressed  on  the  reader  that  we  are, 
■while  perusing  this  account,  in  a  realm 
separated  by  a  gulf,  impassable  for  human 
thought,  from  the  matter-of-fact  revelations 
which  our  senses  make  to  us.  We  are 
listening  to  Him  who  made  the  world,  as 
He  explains  to  us  in  words,  the  imperfect 
instruments  of  our  limited  thoughts.  His,  to 
us,    inscrutable    procedure.  it    was 

evening,  and  it  was  morning]  Many  com- 
mentators have  illustrated  this  order  of 
making  up  the  day  by  a  similar  way  of 
speaking  among  many  nations.  But,  as 
Kalisch  well  observes,  such  illustrations  are 
not  to  be  trusted:  for  if  many  used  tliis 
arrangement,  quite  as  many  used  the  con- 
verse order.  The  choice  would  be  ruled  by 
considerations  which  may  or  may  not  be 
traceable.  It  may  seem  natural  to  end  the 
day  with  the  disappearance  of  the  sun  :  it 
may  seem  natural  also  to  begin  the  day  at 
the  moment  when  the  darkness  begins  to 
wane  iuto  light.  Some  have  reckoned  their 
days  from  sunrise  to  sunrise,  some  from  nf)on 
to  noon.  It  is  euougli  for  the  illustration 
of  our  text,  that  the  Hebrews  reckon  them 
from  sunset  to  sunset  ;  and  for  Hebrews  our 
text  was   written.  one   day]    I   have 

preferred  giving  througliout  the  literal 
rendering  of  these  Hebrew  formuLp.  That 
adopted  by  the  A.  V,,  though  passable  in  a 
version,  does  not  tell  us  exactly  what  the 
text  tells  us.  The  definite  article,  "the," 
does  not  appear  at  all  in  it  till  ver.  31  ;  and 
the  use   of  that   article    throughout  tends 


to  give  more  idea  of  a  definite  pre-ar- 
ranged week  than  is  furnished  by  the 
text.  6 — 8.]  The  second  dai/s  u-orl: :  the 

creation  of  heaven.  6.  An  expanse] 

The  Hebrew  word  is  derived  from  a  verb  which 
signifies  to  heat,  or  to  spread  out  hij  heating. 
And  this,  which  our  version,  after  the  Septu- 
agint  and  tlie  Vulgate,  calls  a  frmamoit, 
implies  a  solid  vault.  "  The  Hebrew  idea  of 
heaven  was  as  of  a  substance  (Exod.  xxiv. 
10),  a  firm  vault  fixed  on  the  water-flood 
which  surrounds  the  earth  (Prov.  viii.  27), 
firm  as  a  molten  looking-glass  (Job  xxxvii. 
18),  borne  by  the  liigliest  mountains,  which 
are  therefore  called  pillars  and  foundations 
of  heaven  (2  Sam.  xxii.  8  ;  Job  xxvi.  11)  ; 
doors  and  windows  arc  attributed  to  it  (ch. 
vii.  11.  xxviii.  17;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  23)."  Kno- 
bel.  Some  have  thought  that  by  the  word 
which  the  LXX.  used  they  intended  merely  a 
solid  of  three  dimensions,  as  distinguished 
from  a  mere  surface  ;  and  so  the  Jew  Philo 
interprets  the  word.  But  this  hardly  agrees 
with  the  passages  quoted  above,  nor  would 
there  he  in  this  case  any  contrast  between 
the  firmament  and  the  waters,  seeing  that 
they  are,  in  this  sense,  solid  also.  As  the 
word  firmament  novF  stands  in  our  A.  V.  it 
conveys  no  idea,  having  become  in  our 
usage  synonymous   with  hraren.  and 

let  it  be  a  division]  The  Hebrew  expresses 
that  the  expanse  is  to  be  ajMnncni///  separa- 
tion, between  the  waters  and  the 
waters,  &c.l  The  region  above  the  expanse 
was  regarded  as  the  storehouse  of  rain, 
Avhieh  from  thence  descends  to  swell  the 
waters  below.  The  expanse  of  heaven 
separates  these  two,  and  thus  the  clear  blue 
sky  becomes  visible.  Beware  of  applying 
to  such  a  record  speculation  about  the 
watery  material  of  the  planets,  or  the  like. 
The  description  is  given  by  God  according 
to  the  thoughts  of  them  to  whom  it  was 
given  ;  and  is  altogether  out  of  the  realm  of 
physical  science.  The  LXX.  insert  here, 
And  God  saiv  that  it  was  r/ood.  But  these 
words  are  not  found  in  the  Hebrew  ;  proba- 


6—14. 


GENESIS. 


it  was  morning ;  a  second  clay.  ^  ^  And  God  said,  Let 
the  waters  under  the  heaven  be  gathered  together  unto 
one  place,  and  let  the  dry  land  appear  :  and  it  was  so. 
10  And  God  called  the  dry  laud  Earth  ;  and  the  gathering 
together  of  the  waters  called  he  Seas  :  and  God  saw  that 
it  was  good.  ^^  And  God  said.  Let  the  earth  bring  forth 
grass,  the  herb  yielding  seed,  the  fruit  tree  yielding  fruit 


^4 


after  his  kind,  whose^seecL^'s  Jn_itself,  above  the  earth  :  w^ 


*y^r 


/ 


and  it  was   so.     i-  And   the  earth  brought   forth  grass, 
herb  yielding  seed  after  his  kind,  and  the  tree  yielding^  -9^  A^'-^-j/ 
fruit,  whose  seed  is  in  itself,  after  his  kind  :  and  God  saw  u/^^^^  «  >••/{»#<.  f^ 
that  it   teas  good.     ^'^  And   ij;  was  evening,   and   it  was  J^^(^'^ 

morning  ;  a  third  day.     i'^  %  And  God  said.  Let  there  be 


bly,  because  we  arc  not  at  a  point  of  com- 
pletion ;  the  upper  and  lower  waters  are 
separated,  but  on  earth  it  was  not  yet  good, 
for  the  dry  land  had  not  appeared. 
9 — 13.]  The  third  day's  work :  the  r-EY 
LAND  and  THE  SEAS :  and  vegetatiox. 
Observe  the  symmetry  of  the  whole.  This 
third  day,  on  which  plants  were  made, 
answers  to  the  sfxth,  on  which  animals  and 
man  were  created.  9.]  The  earth  was  as 

yet  a  mere  watery  desert.  It  was  necessary 
that  the  land  and  water  should  be  separated, 
before  the  products  of  the  earth  could  ap- 
pear. Kalisch  well  remarks,  "  "NVe  have  no 
right  to  ask  how  vegetation  could  exist  and 
thrive  before  the  creation  of  the  sun  ;  ac- 
cording to  the  biblical  statement,  the  world 
and  its  contents  were  miraculously  formed 
by  the  will  of  God ;  they  are  not  the 
result  of  mere  natural  laws  :.and  that  order 
of  the  days  seems  just  designed  and  intend- 
ed to  teach  that  tlie  vegetation  was  called 
forth  by  the  Omnipotence  of  God,  and  not 
by  the  influence  of  the  solar  rays." 
10.]  In  the  poetical  expansion  of  this  brief 
account,  Ps.  civ.  5 — 9,  the  method  of  this 
division  between  water  and  dry  land  is  de- 
scribed to  be  the  ascending  of  the  moun- 
tains and  subsidence  of  the  valleys,  and  the 
consequent  "  parting"  of  the  waters  to  the 
latter.  See  also  Prov.  viii.  24—29.  But, 
as  Kalisch  again  observes,  we  are  not  by 
either  of  these  descriptions  set  at  unity 
with  the  conclusions  of  science.  The  con- 
tinents and  seas  have  not  always  been  rela- 
tively fixed  ;  and  the  rock  formations,  even 
beneatb    the    ocean,    are    not     only    full 


of  animal  and  vegetable  fossil  remain!?, 
but  are  themselves  evidences  of  long  ages  , 
of  deposit  wlien  they  formed  part  of  conti- 
nents. "  We  have  willingly  renounced," 
he  continues,  "  the  attempt  to  discover  that 
harmony  [between  Scripture  and  Science]  ; 
and  both  science  and  biblical  exposition  will 
gain  by  this  candid  understanding." 
11.]  Let  the  eartb  bring  fortb  represents 
the  endowing  of  the  earth  with  power 
so  to  do.  It  is  disputed,  whether  here  two 
or  three  kinds  of  vegetable  productions  are 
specified.  Some  believe  the  first,  here  ren- 
dered grass,  to  represent  vegetation  in  gen- 
eral, and  to  include  the  two  subordinate 
kinds,  the  herb  and  the  fruit-tree.  Others, 
and  it  seems  to  me  with  more  probability, 
regard  the  first  as  pointing  to  the  universal 
covering  of  the  earth,  which,  as  was  ancient- 
ly believed,  was  of  spontaneous  growth 
without  seed,  while  the  second  and  third 
specify  the  herbs  or  "vegetables"  which  are 
propagated  by  seed,  and  the  race  of  trees 
which  bear  both  seed  and  fruit.  above 

(upon,  A.  Y.)  the  earth.]  It  is  doubtful, 
again,  whether  these  words  represent  the 
stature  of  the  tree  rising  above  the  earth,  as 
distinguished  from  that  of  the  herb  and  the 
grass, — or  belong  to  all  the  varieties  of 
vegetation  mentioned.  The  former  view  is 
supported  by  the  use  of  the  same  He- 
brew expression  in  ver.  20,  "that  may  fly 
above  the  earth ;"  I  have  therefore  kept 
the  same  rendering  here  as  there. 
14 — 19,]  The  fourth  daijs  work :  the 
heavenly  bodies.  From  this  point,  the 
second  half  of  Creation's  week  begins  :  the 


GENESIS. 


y  ^ 


J  Job  iii.  3. 

J.T.    X.    2. 

Mjtt.  %\\' 


k  So  I.. 
2.  i. 


XV.  3 ;  xxix. 
39.  Ps.  civ. 
19.    Jer.  »iii. 


IJoh  xxiviil. 
33. 


•-y 


m  So  ch.  ix.  7. 
r^    /  Tf       Kxod.  i.  7. 
•7    '»*'SnSoLev.v.2; 
'       xi.  29,  &c. 


Uglits  in  tlie  expanse  of  the  heaven  to  divide' between  the 
day  and  the  night ;  and  let  them  bo  for  J  signs,  and  for 
^  seasons,  and  for  days,  and  years :  ^'^  and  let  them  be  for 
lights  in  the  expanse  of  the  heaven  to  give  light  upon  the 
earth :  and  it  was  so.  ^^  And  God  made  the  two  great 
lights  ;  the  greater  light  to  ^  rule  the  day,  and  the  lesser 
light  to  ^  rule  the  night :  he  made  the  stars  also.  ^"  And 
God  set  them  in  the  expanse  of  the  heaven  to  give  light 
upon  the  earth,  '^^  and  to  rule  over  the  day  and  over  the 
night,  and  to  divide  between  the  light  and  the  darkness  : 
and  God  saw  that  it  was  good.  ^^  And  it  was  evening,  and 
it  was  morning  ;  a  fourth  day.  -^  And  God  said.  Let  the 
waters  ™  swarm  with  "moving  crcaturcg  that  "have  life, 
and  let  fowl  fly  above  the  earth  (-towards  the  expanse  of 

times  of  the  ntiljation  of  birds  (Jer.  viii.  7, 


divisions  of  it  answering  to  those  of  the 
first  half.  On  the  first  day  light  was  made: 
on  the  fourth,  it  is  divided  into  its  various 
vessels  for  the  use  of  the  world.  On  the 
second,  the  expanse  of  heaven  was  arranged, 
dividing  the  waters  :  on  the  fifth,  the  waters 
and  the  air  are  peopled  with  the  winged 
tribes.  On  the  tliird,  the  land  and  its 
vegetation  is  called  into  being :  on  the  sixth, 
animals  to  people  that  land,  and  feed  on  its 
products  ;  and,  lastly,  man,  for  whom  all  is 
made. 

Observe,  again,  that  in  this  section  all  is 
geocentric,  related  from  the  position  also  of 
man,  with  reference  to  this  earth  only,  and  as 
judged  of  by  man's  eye  and  measurement. 
Of  astronomy  or  its  facts  there  is  here  not  a 
word,  14.  lights]  Ixmiiwrks,  reposi- 

tories of  light.  for  signs,  &c.]   Tluse 

terms  have  been  variously  interpreted.  Ka- 
lisch  thinks  the  most  likely  understanding  of 
them,  "  for  signs  of  the  seasons,  days,  and 
years ; "  but  Knobel  and  Keil,  as  it  seems,  more 
probably  take  "  signs  "  as  importing  the  to- 
kens given  by  the  heavenly  bodies,  which  are 
so^  often  mentioned  in  Scripture  (see  rcff.). 
seasons]  not  merely  times  naturally 
marked,  or  days  and  years  would  not  be  also 
specified,  but  festal  times  ;  the  word  is  de- 
rived fi"om  a  verb  signifying  to  constitute, 
to  appoint:  seerctf.,  in  all  which  places  the 
same  Hebrew  noun  occurs,  and  is  thus  ren- 
dered in  A.  v.,  except  in  Ps.  civ.  19,  where 
it  is  *'  He  appointed  the  moon  for  seasons." 
Other  appointed  times,  having  reference  to 
man  or  beast,  may  also  be  included,  as  the 


where  A.  V.  thus  renders  the  word),  the  rut- 
ting-time  of  beasts,  the  periods  of  women, 
&c.  days  and  years  need  no  explan- 

ation. 15.]  Ob-erve,  all  these  services 

of  the  heavenly  bodies  are  for  the  earth  and 
for  man.  Of  aught  else  there  is  no  account 
taken.  16—18.]    The    final  words   of 

this  verse  in  the  Hebrew  arc  simply, — "and 
the  stars."  Notice,  again,  how  the  myriads 
of  fixed  stars,  and  firmaments,  are  spoken  of 
merely  with  reference  to  ffii'iny  light  upon 
the  earth,  and  to  serve  man's  purposes. 
"  Biblical  astronomy  is  derived  from  mere 
optical  appearance ;  the  eye  alone  is  the 
judge  ;  the  moon  is  represented  as  the  se- 
cond of  the  great  heavenly  orbs,  and  as 
a  luminous  body ;  the  stars  are  nothing 
else  but  her  companions ;  and  their  only 
end  is  to  shed  their  chaste  lustre  on 
our  small  planet."  Kalisch. 
20—23]  The  fifth  dag's  u-orl: :  FISHES  AND 
Binus.  20.   Let  the  waters]    As   on 

the  second  day  of  the  first  triad,  tlie  waters 
below  were  separated  from  the  waters  above, 
and  the  expanse  of  air  was  constituted  be- 
tween the  two ;  so  on  this,  the  second  day 
of  the  second  triad,  those  waters  and  air 
were  peopled  with  living  creatures.  Observe, 
this  is  the  first  introduction  of  animal  life  : 
creation  rising  in  a  climax  from  the  lowest 
to  the  highest.  teem  with]  It  is  im- 

possible to  represent  exactly  the  force  of  the 
Hebrew.  The  verb  and  the  following  sub- 
stantive have  the  same  sound,  which  feature 
cannot  be  preserved  in  English.     The  verb 


15—26. 


GENESIS. 


heayen.  21  ^^(J  Qgd  p  created  the  ffreat  i  wliales,  and 
every  living  creature  that  moveth,  with  which  the  waters 
teem  abundantly,  after  their  kind,  and  every  winged 
fowl  after  his  kind :  and  God  saw  that  it  was  good. 
22  And  God  blessed  them,  saying,  Be  fruitful,  and  mul- 
tiply, and  fill  the  waters  in  the  seas,  and  let ^  fowl  multiply 
in  the  earth.  23  And  it  was  evening,  and  it  was  morning  ; 
a  fifth  day.  24  ^  And  God  said,  Let  the  earth  britig  forth 
living  creatures  after  their  kind,  cattle,  and  creeping 
things',  and  beast^  of  the  earth  after  their  kind :  and  it 
was  so.  2o  And  God  made  the  beasts  of  the  earth  after 
their  kind,  and  cattle  after  their  kind,  and  all  the  creeping 
things'  that  creep^upon  the  '^'ground  after  their  kind:  and 
God  saw  that  it  icas  good.     26  ^  And  God  said,  Let  us 


t&jjit^ 


p"vrr.  1,'rpfr. 

q  Exod.  vii.  9. 
I^;..  xxMl.  1.  , 

See  Ezek.  A/X«vi  ( 

xxxii.2.  J«r 


/  •';-  ^ 

rSoch.  ii.  19-   efT   eTt/ 

Exod.  XX.  21.       I      K       I 


is  probably  not  to  bring  forth  abundantly, 
but  to  creep,  or  creep  \_w{th\  i.  e.  to  sivarm 
[with] :  it  is  used  of  the  frogs  in  Ex.  viii.  3, 
the  river  shall  swarm  [with]  frogs ;  and  of 
men  in  reff.  The  substantive  derived  fi-oni 
the  verb  usually  denotes  creeping  things 
(rcif.).  "Plainly,"  says  Quarry,  "it  is  the 
similarity  in  the  manner  of  moving,  ■with  a 
wavy  or  serpentine  action  of  the  body,  that 
gives  rise  to  the  double  use  of  the  word, 
■while  the  signification  ■5\'hich  the  verb  has, 
to  swarm,  or  produce  abundantly,  is  plainly 
derived  from  the  abundant  offspring  of  such 
creatures,  the  numerous  fry  of  fishes  or 
young  of  worms  being  perhaps  the  chief 
ground  for  this  use  of  the  word.  It  is  em- 
ployed here  for  the  sake  of  the  alliteration, 
which  cannot  be  preserved  in  a  translation 
without  departing  from  the  .sense  of  eitlier 
the  verb  or  the  noun."  that  have  life] 

literally,  a  living-  soul,  where  soul  repre- 
sents the  animal  principle,  the  vital  element: 
see  in  ch.  ii.  7.  There  is  no  trace  in  the 
original  of  the  fowl  being  created  out  of 
the  water,  as  the  A.  V.,  by  inserting  that, 
'•'■fowl  that  may  fg,"  gives.  towards 

the  expanse]  Literally,  to  the  face  of  the  ex- 
panse, i.  e.  to  the  under  face,  which  is  turn- 
ed towards  us.  There  may  be,  as  some  have 
thought  in  classing  both  fishes  and  birds 
under  one,  as  moving  creatures,  reference  to 
the  similarity  of  their  motion  ;  birds  swim- 
ming in  the  air  with  their  wings  as  fishes 
■with  their  fins  in  the  water.  21.  Great 

whales]  The  word  thus  rendered  is  derived 
from  a  verb  signifying  extension,  and  is  used 


to  denote  any  great  monsters  ;  as,  e.  g.  ser- 
pefits,  ref.  Exod. :  crocodiles,  ref.  Isa.  :  dra- 
gons, ref.  Jer.  No  scientific  clas.sification 
must  be  thought  of;  "  the  Hebrew  term  de- 
notes both  mammifer  and  non-mamraifer." 
Kalisch.  22.]  Here  we  first  hear  of  a 

blessing,  and  a  command  to  multiply ;  for 
here  we  first  have  the  power  of  spontaneous 
propagation.  The  words  in  the  earth  are 
a  testimony  against  the  connection  of  the 
creaticm  of  the  fowls  with  the  xcaters. 
24 — 34.]  The  sixth  claysicork:  the  ani- 
mals   OF   THE   EARTH,    AND   MAN.       Ou   this 

third  day's  work  of  the  second  triad  of  the 
week,  see  above,  on  ver.  14.  living 

creatures]  The  same  expression  as  before, 
living  soul :  expressing  the  complex  idea  of 
all  creatures  thus  brought  into  being,  that 
they  had  animal  life.  They  are  sub- 
divided into  three  classes:  cattle — the  non- 
predaceous,  graminivorous  animals :  beasts 
of  the  earth, — the  beasts  of  prey,  and 
creeping  things,  worms  and  reptiles. 
25.]  The  word  rendered  ground  is  not  that 
which  has  been  rendered  earth  throughout 
the  liistory,  but  is  Adamah,  soil,  the  term 
cognate  to  Adam  (see  ou  both,  ch.  ii.  19). 

26—28.]  This  is  the  first  instance  of 
more  than  one  '  saying  '  of  God  duriug  the 
creative  day.  Let  us  make]  This  plural 

form  of  deliberation  has  been  variously  inter- 
preted : — (1)  The  idea  of  a  Trinitarian  ex- 
planation lay  too  close  to  the  inclination  and 
the  practice  of  the  Christian  Fathers,  and 
those  who  in  modern  times  have  followed 
them,  not  to  draw  them  aside.  But  any  such 


.V 


GENESIS. 


t/T/ 


make  man  in  our  **  image,  after  our  *  likeness  :    and   let 


sch.  T.  3;  ii.  6. 
1  Sam.  vi.  5, 

\yi.\"  '      them  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  over  the 

t  2  Chron.  iv.  3. 

J     i,a.xi.ib.      j^Q^^Y  of  the  heaven,  and  over  the  cattle,  and  over  all  the 


earth,  and  over  the  creeping  things  that  creep^upon  the 


intimation  here  would  be  in  the  hig^hest  decree 
unnatural  and  incongruous.  The  doctrine 
of  the  Holy  Trinity,  which  lies  at  tlie  very 
root  of  the  New  Covenant,  was  gradually 
and  insensibly  opened  even  in  the  Old  Test- 
ament. But  to  discover,  in  such  expressions 
as  this,  inlets  into  the  secrets  of  the  Godhead, 
is  to  violate  the  proportion  and  analogy 
of  faith.  (2)  Some  have  thought  it  the 
plural  of  majesty  :  against  which  it  is  urged 
as  an  objection,  that  the  repetition  of  the 
plural  again  "/«  our  imaije,  in  ovirli/icness," 
seems  to  rcciuire  a  deeper  reason  than  one  of 
mere  form  ;  or  (3)  of  agreement  with  the 
plural  form  of  Elohim,— which  cannot 
stand,  seeing  that  in  ch.  xi.  7,  we  have 
the  same  deliberative  plural  connected,  not 
with  the  plural  form  Elohim,  but  with  the 
singular  Jehovah;  or  (4)  of  commtniica- 
tion,  understanding  that  God  took  counsel 
with  the  heavenly  powers.  But  tliis,  though 
adopted  by  the  Jewish  Targums  and  I'liilo, 
and  by  the  Christian  Delitxsch,  would  both 
be  unbetitting,  and  is  contradicted  by  what 
follows :  for  man  was  not  created  in  the 
image  of  the  angels  as  well  as  in  that  of  God, 
but  in  that  of  God  only  ;  or  (o)  of  mere 
superfluity,  having  no  meaning  at  all,— 
which  hardly  needs  refuting ;  or  (0)  as  an 
address  to  that  personified  Wisdom  of  God 
which;  is  said  (i'rov.  viii.  22,  tf.)  to  have 
been  present  with  God  at  the  creation  :  but 
this  in  its  bare  form  would  be  liable  to  the 
same  objections  as  lie  against  the  Trinita- 
rian'.explanation  ;  or  (7)  of  pure  deliberation, 
one  who  deliberates  being  both  speaker  and 
spoken  to,  and  thus  having  a  kind  of  double 
personality.  This  last  view  is  that  of  Ka- 
lisch,  who  refers  to  ch.  xi.  7,  above  noticed, 
and  to  Ezra  iv.  18,  vii.  24  (which  two  seem 
rather  the  regal  jjlural  of  majesty). 

I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  habit, 
testified  by  the  name  Elohim,  and  cor- 
rected by  its  usage  with  singular  verbs  and 
adjectives,  of  connecting  plurality,  perhaps 
for  the  sake  of  majesty,  with  the  idea  of 
God,  would  in  some  measure  account  for 
this  plural.  And  it  would  be  no  objection, 
that  the  same  plural  occurs  with  the  singu- 
lar Jehovau  in  ch.  xi.  7 :  because  the  idea 


would  there  rule  the  deliberative  expression, 
as  here.  Then,  again,  do  the  phrases  "  in 
our  iiniffe,  m  our  likeness,"  necessarily  re- 
quire any  more  profound  account  than  this  ; 
they  must  necessarily  follow  the  form  of  the 
preceding,  'i'his  shadowed  ideal  plurality 
might,  as  Laugc  well  reminds  us,  not 
be  altogether  unconnected  witli  the  fact 
that  besides  God,  the  spirit  of  God  has 
been  already  mentioned.  The  fact  of 

Divine  deliberation  here,  and  here  only,  in- 
terrupting the  continuous  flow  of  God's 
creative  acts,  sufficiently  indicates  the -solemn- 
ity of  that  which  is  to  follow.  Earth  and 
earth's  tribes  were  prepared  ;  but  now  there 
is  a  king  to  be  set  over  them,  —one  like  them, 
but  also  unlike  them :  a  complex  being, 
made  up  of  the  dust  of  the  earth  and  of  the 
image  of  God.  We  may  observe,  once  for 
all,  that  the  word  here  rendered  man  is 
Adam,  as  throughout  the  whole  history  of 
the  fall,  I  have  followed  Kalisch's  example, 
and  have  not  changed  it  into  a  proper  name, 
till  we  arc  beyond  this  portion  of  Genesis, 
and  he  is  distinguished  in  the  gcneal>i;its 
from  other  men.  in  our  image,  after 

our  likeness]  The  former  substantive  means 
priniarilv,  a  shadow;  hence  a  sketch,  or 
effigy,  or  image  (see  reff.) :  the  latter  is  lit- 
erally rendered  (reff.). 

The  distinction  between  these  two  phrases, 
much  maintained  of  old,  viz.  that  the  former 
applies  to  the  physical,  the  latter  to  the  eth- 
ical side  of  man's  likeness  to  God,  appears 
to  be  groundless.  They  are  far  more  proba- 
bly synonymous.  Luther  has  rendered  them 
"an  image  which  may  be  like  us."  That 
the  two  words  do  not  difier  in  meaning,  is 
shown  by  their  indiscriminate  use,  the  for- 
mer in  ver.  27  and  in  ch.  ix.  6,  and  the 
latter  in  eh.  v.  1,  where  the  same  thing  is 
evidently  meant.  This  likeness  consists  not 
in  his  nobler  external  form, — for  God  has 
none ;  not  in  his  imperial  rule  over  earth 
and  her  inhabitants,  —  for  this  would  be 
only  a  consequence  of  his  likeness  to  God ; — 
but  in  his  superior  spiritual  nature,  which  he 
has  by  direct  communication  from  God,  as 
the  parallel  account,  ch.  ii.  7,  gives  it.  This 
spiritual  nature,  when  free  from  sin,  reflect- 


26—11.  2. 


GENESIS. 


u  vcr.  1,  refF. 


rUL^' 


earth.    ^7  go  God  "  created  man  in  Lis^ image,  in  tlie  image 
of  God  ^  created  he  him  ;  male  and  female  ^^  created  he 
them.    28  And  God  blessed  them,  and  God  said  unto  them, 
Be    fruitful,    and    multiply,   and    replenish    the    earth, 
and  subdue  it :  and  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the 
sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of  the  heaven,  and  over  every  living 
thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth.     29  ^  And  God  said. 
Behold,  I  have  gi^en  you  every  herb  bearing  seed,  which    yiUUt^jf 
is  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth,  and  every  tree,  in  the 
which  is  the  fruit  of  a  tree  yielding  seed  ;  to  you  it  shall 
be  for  foody     ^^  ^nd  to  every  beast  of  the  earth,  and  to   »^»^'/  ^j 
every  fowl  of  the  heaven,  and  to  every  thing  that  creep- 
eth upon  the  earth,  wherein  tltej'e  is  life,  I  have  rjircn  every    ^ 
'^ green  herb  for  meat:  and  it  was  so.     ^i  And  God  saw  '' ^"^^vii: ^^l'''"'- 
ever3[_thing  that  he  had  made,  and,  behold,  it  was  very  '* - 
good.    And  it  was  evening,  and  it  was  morning  ;  the  sixth 
day.     II.   1  And  the  heavens'  and  the  earth  were  finished, 
and  all  the  '^  host  of  them.    ^  And  on  the  seventh  day  God 


..      i 


ed  in  small  the  spiritual  nature  of  God  him- 
self. When  sin  intervened,  it  lost  its  purity 
and  dignity,  its  holiness  and  blessedness,  but 
not  its  basis  and  form.  Christ  is  the  restorer 
again  to  it  of  the  Divine  image,  Col.  iii.  10 ; 
Eph.  iv.  24.  The  words  all  the  earth  are 
rendered  by  the  Syriac  version,  and  are  by 
some  commentators  understood  to  imply, 
the  beasts  of  the  earth  or  of  the  forests. 
Otherwise,  they  are  not  specified  in  this 
catalogue.  27.]    The  repetition   gives 

solemnity  and  importance — the  fact  was  as 
God  in  His  deliberation  had  proposed  it. 
male  and  female  created  he  them] 
There  is  no  absolute  assertion  here  that  one 
pair  alone  were  first  created  :  but  it  follows 
in  the  Jchovistic  narrative,  ch.  ii.  7,  22 ; 
and  is  implied  in  the  Elohistic  of  ch.  v.  3. 
There  is  no  reason  to  infer  from  these  words 
that  both  sexes  were  at  first  united  in  the 
man,  as  some  have  supposed.  This  account 
is  independent  of  the  details  which  follow 
in  ch.  ii.,  and  speaks  generally.  But  evident- 
ly in  the  form  of  this  narrative,  both  sexes 
were  created  on  the  sixth  day,  so  that  the 
Jehovistic  account,  ch.  ii.  4,  must  be  re- 
garded not  as  consecutive  on  this,  but  as 
complete  in  itself,  and  beginning  from  the 
first. — It  has  been  observed  that  the  paral- 
lelism of  style  begins  at  this  verse,  and  gives 


to  it  a  kind  of  jubilant  character.  28.] 

The  blessing  of  man  and  the  declaration  of 
his  prerogative  of  dominion  next  follow. 
The  blessing  is  double  :  that  of  fruitfulness 
they  share  with  the  fishes,  fowls ;  that  of 
dominion  is  peculiarly  their  own. 
29,  30.]  The  assignment  of  food  to  man, 
and  the  animals.  It  appears  from  this,  that 
vegetable  diet  alone  was  originally  assigned 
to  man,  the  vegetable  world  being  shared 
between  him  and  the  inferior  animals ;  man 
taking  the  seed-bearing  trees  and  plants,  and 
the  animals  the  "green  herbs,"  literally,  the 
green  of  the  herb.  Traditions  of  the  same 
fact  are  found  in  various  Gentile  writers  of 
Greece  and  Rome,  and  the  ancient  practice 
of  Egypt,  India,  and  Syria  agrees  thereto. 
life  is  literally  "  a  living  soul."  31.] 

The  approval,  given  separately  to  each  day's 
work  before,  is  now  not  repeated  for  that  of 
the  sixth  day,  but  is  spread  over  the  whole, 
and  the  approval  is  intensified  by  the  addi- 
tion of  very.  The  latter  clause  stands  liter- 
ally a  day,  the  sixth. 

II.  1.]  Gtnicral  summary.  The  word 
rendered  host  is  generally  used  of  the 
heavens  alone.  In  ref.  Xeh.,  we  have  the 
expression  more  conformed  to  ordinary 
usage.  In  ref.  Isa.,  the  word  rendered 
armies  in  A.  V.  is  the  same  :  see  note  there 


10 


GENESIS. 


II. 


y  Exod.  xxiii. 
25.   Job  i.  10. 
Ps.  Ixv.  10  i 


ended  his  work  wliicli  he^made ;  and  lie  ^  rested  on  the 
seventh  day  from  all  his  ■work  which  he^made.  ^  And 
God  y  blessed  the  seventh  day,  and  ^  sanctified  it :  because 
that  on  it  he  rested  from  all  his  work  which  he  *  created 
and  made. 


^*^  '    Prov.  ill.  33. 
'       /  I  Lev.  xii.  ». 
Jucl  i.  U. 
ach.  i.  l,nff, 

"inilij'ix'v.'        ■*  IT  ^  These  are  the  venerations  of  the  heaven^  and  of 

12,  IS  i  xxxvi.  ° 

;   1,  ».    Num.    Ui.  1.    Buth  iv.  18.    1  Chron.  i.  29.    Sec  ch.  v.  1. 


2,  3.]  God's  rest  on,  and  blessing  of, 
the  seventli  day.  Tlare  is  no  ditliculty  in 
the  asstrtiou  that  God  ended  His  work  on 
the  seventh  day.  As  Keil  well  remarks, 
this  ending  liad  two  aspects, — negative,  in 
leaving  oil'  creating,  and  positive,  in  blessing 
the  seventh  day.  The  Samaritan  I'cntateuch, 
as  also  the  LXX.,  reads  sixth  for  seventh, 
doubtless  on  account  of  the  apparent  dilii- 
ciilty.  Otlicrs,  as  Kaliseh,  understand 
ended  as  a  pluperfect,  had  ended:  but  tliis 
hardly  seems  necessary.  rested]  Ceased 

to  work,  sec  Lam.  v.  14,  15,  where  the  A.  V. 
renders  the  vtrb  by  cease.  In  none  of  those 
places  is  there  any  implication  of  rest  owing 
to  weariness,  but  merely  of  abstaining  from 
doing  what  was  done  before.  Still,  although 
•we  know  that  the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the 
earth  is  not  weary,  Isa,  xl.  23,  it  would  be 
vain  to  deny  that  by  the  very  terms  here  the 
human  idea  of  rest  after  work  is  suggested, 
and  was  meant  to  be  suggested.  Tlie  record 
of  creation,  which  throughout  suits  the 
Divine  acts  to  man's  ways  of  thought,  here 
gives  the  most  notable  example  of  tliis  pro- 
cedure, in  the  Almiglity  worker  resting  from 
His  work.  It  was  to  guard  against  the 
literal  acceptation  of  this,  that  our  Lord 
asserted  against  the  Jews,  "  My  Father 
worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work,"  John  v. 
17.  3.]  blessed  is   the  same  word  as 

before  in  cb.  i.  22,  28.  Here  it  is  left  to  be 
explained  by  wliat  follows.  Its  usage  with 
regard  to  inanimate  things  will  be  found  in 
relf.  sanctified]    Set   apart  as   holy, 

"separated  it  from  tlie  other  days,  and  gave 
it  a  higher  signiticancc,"  as  Knobel.  This 
higher  signiticance  was  not  fully  brought 
out  till  the  giving  of  the  Mosaic  law: 
though  there  are  traces  of  the  recurrence 
of  the  day  being  observed  in  pre-Mosaic 
times:  see  on  ch.  iv.  3;  viii.  10,  12. 
It  is  useless  to  deny  that  the  intent  of  this 
ordinance,  solemnly  completing  as  it  did  the 
work  of  creation,  was  to  be  coeval  with 
mankind,  the  appoiuted  lords  of  the  world 


thus  finished.  But  it  is,  by  this  very  con- 
sideration, and  the  reason  on  which  it  rests, 
equally  futile  to  suppose  that  any  subsequent 
circumstances  could  change  the  day  thus  to 
be  observed.  "We  cannot  first  say  that  this- 
sanctification  of  the  seventh  day  isbindiiiij  >  u 
all  men  in  all  time,  because  its  ground  >  -  ii- 
cerns  God's  rest  after  creation,  and  then 
transfer  that  obligation  to  another  daj%  to 
which  no  such  reason  applies.  With  the 
stricter  Mosaic  sanctions  of  the  day,  we 
Christians  have  no  concern  :  but  its  signifi- 
cance as  commemorative  of  God's  rest  has  no 
more  passed  away  for  us  than  the  signilieancc 
of  the  rainbow  or  any  other  fact  naturally  re- 
curring which  has  been  by  God  clothed  with 
sacred  meaning.  That  the  Christian  Church 
has  seen  tit  to  observe  as  a  sacred  day  the 
Jirst  which  witnessed  the  resurrection  of  our 
Lord,  is  a  matter  resting  on  wholly  dilferent 
grounds,  and  not  to  be  referred  to  this  or- 
dinance for  its  sanction :  a  practice  which 
in  the  purer  times  of  the  Church,  and  by  bcr 
best  authors,  was  consistently  repudiated. 
To  confound  the  two  is  to  destroy  the  land- 
marks of  the  symbolism  of  creation  and  of 
the  kingdom  of  grace.  "  The  Church,"  says 
Delitzsch  well,  "  keeps  the  Sunday  ;  but 
the  Sabbath  remains  the  blessed  and  hal- 
lowed Day  of  Days."  created  and 
made]  Literally,  created  to  produce,  or 
created  producing :  a  frequent  Hebrew 
mode  of  speech,  used  constantly  in  such 
phrases  as  "spoke  saying"  (lit.  spoke  to 
speak),  Exod.  vi.  10,  al.,— "laboured  to  do," 
Eccl.  ii.  11,  &.C. 

II.  4— III.  24.]  Second  account  of  the 
creation  of  tlie  ivorld  and  of  man  :  Pakadi.-<E 
AND  Tin;   Fall.  4.   These  are  the 

generations]  This  is  an  opening  formula, 
and  has  reference  to  what  follows  :  see  retf. 
It  is  not  to  be  taken  as  closing  the  former 
account  and  referring  back.  It  is  plain  that 
the  meaning  of  the  generations  must  be  ex- 
tended beyond  mere  oriijin  ;  as  it  is  indeed 
in  many  places,  e.  g.  ch.  ri.  9 ;  xxv.  19 ; 


GENESIS. 


11 


the  earth  wlien  they  ^yere  created^  In  the  "^day  that^God 
Jehovah  made  the  earth  and  the  heavens^  ^  iLo  plant 
of  the  field  was  yet  on  the  earth,  and  no  herb  of  the  field 
did  yet  sprout^forth  :  because  God_ Jehovah  had  not  caused 
it  to  rain  upon  the  earth,  and  t/iere  was  not  a  man  to  till 
the  ground.  ^  And  there  went  up  a  ^  mist  from  the  earth, 
and  watered  the  whole  face  of  the  orround.  7  And  God 
Jehovah  ®  formed  the  man  of  the  ^  dust  of  the  around,  and 
breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life  ;  and  the  man 
became  a  living  creature.  ^  ^  And  God_Jehovah  planted 
a  garden  in^^Eden,  ^eastward;  and  there  he  put  the  man 


c  Num.  iii.  1.  t       // 

Exod.  vi.  28.  ,'     '** 

Isa.  xi.  16,         '  y^ 


/^'V 


d  Job  xxxTi.27.  /3L<Jr/ 

e  Isa.xliT.9,12:  /i~ /j,^^ 

liv.  17;  Ixiv.  ^**  *-<'-»^ 

8.    ch.  i.  aci,  A-^  i^ 

21.  J       , 
f  ch.  xxvi,  1.5.  i 

Josh.  Vii.  6.      ■         |y 

gch.  iv,  l(i.  Isa.  OT 

h.  3.    Ezck.  •             .      , 

X.'iviii.  U  ;  J^^l        It 

xxxi.  9,  IB,  / 

IS.    Joel  ii.  3.  -—    , 

hch.  iii.  24  ;  iv.  />• 
16;  xi.  2,  retr. 


sxxvii.  2.  wlien  they  were  created] 

Lit.,  in  their  creation.  litre  the  first  mem- 
ber of  the  sentence  apjicars  to  end  :  not  as  in 
A.  V.  So  Kalisch.  But  see  Num.  iii.  1, 
■ffhich  seems  to  favour  the  other  construction. 
In  the  day  that]  It  is  not  necessary, 
as  some  have  done,  to  suppose  that  we  must 
take  the  word  day  literally  (see  reff.),  so  as 
to  create  a  discrepancy  between  this  and  the 
former    account.  5.]    Literall}-,    and 

every  plant  of  the  field  was  not  yet  in  the 
earth,  and  every  herb  of  the  field  sprouted 
not  yet :  i.  e.  the  earth  was  as  yet  void  of 
.vegetable  life.  This  might  be  taken  as  de- 
noting a  point  in  ch.  i.,  corresponding  to 
the  middle  of  the  third  day,  were  it  not  for 
the  reason  which  follows :  viz.  that  the 
earth  was  as  yet  dry.  In  ch.  i.  the  waters 
at  first  covered  the  whole,  then  (ver.  9) 
were  gathered  into  one  place  and  the  dry 
land  appeared.  In  that  case  the  "dry  land," 
having  but  newly  emerged  from  the  water, 
would  not  be  in  want  of  rain.  '  It  is  lament- 
able to  see  commentators  attempting,  by 
quibbling  on  mere  words,  to  deny  a  substan- 
tial difference  like  tliis.  Thus  it  is  said 
that  because  the  land  is  called  '\dry  "  there, 
the  account  is  in  accord  with  this  which 
affirms  dryness  of  it.  But  who  does  not  see 
that  the  term  "dry  (land)  "  there  is  merely 
one  of  distinction  from  "  water,"  and  has 
absolutely  nothing  to  do  with  the  intrinsic 
quality  of  the  earth  composing  such  land  ? 
On  the  difference  between  the  earth  "dry" 
and  "dried,"  see  note  on  ch.  viii.  14. 
6,  a  mist]  The  word  is  rendered  by  the 
LXX.  and  the  ancient  Syriac  version,  a 
fountain :  but  this  appears  to  be  incorrect. 
The  moisture  rose  in  vapour,  and  fell  in  rain, 
for  so  it  is  implied.  7.  The  creation  of 


the  man]  Thus  one  of  the  hindrances  to  vege- 
tation was  removed  ;  and  now  the  other  is  to 
be  taken  away.  One  is  to  be  supplied  to  till 
the  ground.  formed]  fashioned,  shaped  : 

the  word  is  used  in  reff".  Isa.,  of  workmen 
forming  an  image,  of  weapons  formed,  of  the 
work  of  a  potter.  a  living  creature] 

see  reff.,  where  the  Hebrew  words  are  pre- 
cisely the  same.  The  description  is  not  one 
bringing  out  any  distinctive  attribute  of  man, 
but  simply  one  describing  tlie  animation  of 
the  form  shaped  out  of  the  dust  of  the  earth, 
whereby  he  became,  what  in  ch.  i.  the  various 
tribes  of  created  things  are  described  as  be- 
coming, a  living  being.  The  difference, 
whatever  it  may  be,  between  him  and  other 
living  creatures,  is  not  declared  in  this  term, 
but  would  be  deduced  from  the  agency 
whereby  he  was  endued  with  life.  Into  no 
other  creature  do  we  read  that  God  breathed 
the  breath  of  life.  This  verse  seems  plainly 
referred  to  in  Job  xxxiii.  4.  See  also  Isa. 
xlii.  5.  8 — 15.  The  garden  of  Eden,    a 

garden]  This  word  is  rendered  in  the  LXX. 
and  Vulgate  a  paradise, — that  name  being 
one  common  to  the  Semitic  languages  (occur- 
ring in  Neb.  ii.  8 ;  Eccl.  ii.  5 ;  Cant.  iv.  13) 
to  signify  the  gardens  which  surrouuded  the 
palaces  of  kings  and  the  wealthy :  see  2 
Kings  XXV.  4  ;  Jer.  xxxix.  4.  in  Eden] 

The  word  signifies  pleasure  or  delight ;  and 
is  thus  used  in  Ps.  xxxvi.  8  ;  2  Sam.  i.  24. 
Hence  the  Vulgate  here  renders  "  a  garden  of 
2)leasure,"  and  so  the  LXX.  in  ver.  15.  But 
by  comparing  ch.  iv.  16,  there  can  be  little 
doubt  that  it  is  here  used  as  a  proper  name, 
and  denotes  a  particular  spot.  "Where  situated, 
has  been  a  vexed  question,  which  never  can 
be  determined.  The  various  opinions  would 
require  pages  even  to  enumerate  ;  they  may 


12 


GEXESIS. 


II. 


whom  lie  had  formed.  ^  And  out  of  the  ground  made 
God_Jehovah  to  grow  every  tree  that  is  pleasant  to  the 
sight,  and  good  for  food  ;  the  tree  of  life  also  in  the  midst 
of  the  garden,  and  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil. 

10  And  a  river  went  out  of  Eden  to  water  the  garden  ;  and 
from  thence  it  was  parted,  and  became  into  four  heads. 

11  The  name  of  the  first^  Pison  :  that  is  it  which  compass- 
eth  the  whole  land  of  '  Ilavilah,  where  f/icre  is  the  gold  ; 
1-  and  the  gold  of  that  land  is  good :  there  is  J  bdclliuiu 
and  the  ^  onyx  stone.      i-^  x\.nd  the  name  of  the  second 

be  found  tabulated  in  Kalisch.     Observe,  tbc    ■which  is  before  Egypt,  as  thou  goest  toward 


ich.Txv.  18. 
1  Sam.  XV.  7. 

j  Num.  xi  7 

only. 
k  V.xoil.  xxix. 


name  in  Hebrew  is  distinct  from  that  of 
Dden  in  Assyria,  mentioned  2  Kings  xix. 
12;  Isa.  xxxvii.  12;  Kzck.  xxvii.  23; 
Amos   i.   5.  eastward]  Tliis  word  is 

rendered  in  the  Vulgate,  //'/;«  t/if  begiimiiig^ 
but  scliolars  seem  agreed  that  this  is  a  mis- 
take :  see  rcff.,  especially  the  two  first :  and 
that  it  signifies  in,  or  at,  or  towards  the 
east.  9]  Consistency   of   interpreta- 

tion requires  tliat  we  understand  tlie  tree 
of  life  here  and  in  Rev.  xxii.  2  (ii.  7)  by 
the  same  rule.  In  this  history,  it  is  a  tree, 
tlie  fruit  whereof  conferred  immortality ;  see 
ch.  iii.  22 ;  as  that  of  the  other  tree  con- 
ferred knowledge  of  the  difference  between 
right  and  wrong.  10^14.]  Compare, 

throngliout,  the  description  of  the  heavenly 
paradise    in    Rev.    xxii.    1,    2.      It    seems 


.\ssyria: "  in  ref.  1  Sam.  it  is  also  con- 
nected with  "  Shur,  that  is  over  against 
Egypt."  There  is  a  Ilavilah,  a  son  of  Cush 
the  son  of  Ham,  in  ch.  x.  7  ;  and  another, 
the  son  of  Joktan  the  son  of  Eber,  ib.  29. 
On  the  peoples  supposed  to  be  descended 
from  these,  see  Ilarilnh,  in  Smith's  Biblical 
Dictionary.  12.]  From  tlie  description 

of  the  gold  as  good,  it  is  plain  that  the 
countries  and  rivers  here  spoken  of  are  to 
be  regarded  as  subsisting  when  tlic  account 
was  written,  not  as  belonging  to  a  state  of 
things  gone  by.  bdellium]  In  tlie  He- 

brew, Bdolach.  Ilere,  again,  we  have  a  dis- 
pute as  to  what  is  intended.  Bdellium  is 
explained  by  Pliny  to  be  a  ;ium,  found  in 
Bactriana,  Arabia,  India,  ^Icdia,  and  Baby- 
lon.    But  Gesenius  tliinks  this  could  not  be 


futile  to  seek  geographically  for  four  rivers  precious  enough  to  be  ranked  witli  the  onyx 

which  rise  iirar  one  anotlier,  thus  rational-  which  follows  :  and  therefore  inclines  to  tiie 

izing  the  description.     Tliere  was  one  rirer  opinion  of  the  Jewish  writers,  who  believed 

(not  mere  contiguous  origin)  :  and  it,  after  pearls  to  be  intended.     In  ref.  Num.,   the 

it  had  watered  the  r/anfni,  was  parted  into  manna  is  said  to  have  been  of  the  eohnir  of 

four  streams,  whose  names  indicate  the  most  bdellium,  which  would  suit  the  pearl,  but 

important  rivers  of  the  world.  heads  not  so  well  the  gum.     But  Pliny  describes 

does     not     signify    source.%    but    principal  it   as   translucid,  like   wax ;  so   that   there 

streams,  i.  e.  as  we  should  say,  arms.  seems  no  force  in  this  argument.  the 

11,  12.]  It  is  quite  uncertain  what  river  is  onyx  stone]  Ileb.   Shoham,  generally  thus 

here  indicated, — opinions  are  very  various,  interpreted  :  this  intei-pretation  at  least  suits 

The  most  notable  are  those  which  identify  the   colour, — the   name  meaning  /^fl^/*-,  and 

Pison  with  1.  the  G.vxces.     Tliis  was  held  the  oiii/x  being  so  named  as  signifying  in 

by  Josephus,  Eusebius,  Ambrose,   Epipha-  Greek    a  fiiigernail.      See   reflP.  13.] 


nius,  Jerome,  Augustine,  and  others.  Ka- 
lisch prefers  the  Indus.  Some  have  thought 
of  the  Fhasis^  but  only,  it  would  appear, 
from  similarity  of  sound.  Havilah] 

"What  this  is,  is  equally  uncertain.  Opinions 
have  been  mostly  ruled   by  previous   con- 


About  GiHOX  there  is  less  dispute,  almost 
all  agreeing  that  it  is  the  Xile.  In  Jer.  ii. 
IS,  the  LXX.  render  Sihon,  which  is  the 
Xile,  by  Geoti.  The  land  of  Cush  (eldest 
son  of  Ilam,  ch.  x.  6),  which  it  is  said  to 
encompass,  is  the  country  of  the  South,  com- 


jecture  about  the  river  Pison.  The  land  of  prising  Ethiopia  and  all  that  was  known  to 
Ilavilah  in  ref  Gen.  forms  one  boundary  of  the  Hebrews  in  their  direction.  See  reff. 
the  people  of  Ishmael,  the  other  being  "  Shur,    Kalisch  mentions  and  illustrates  the  ancient 


9—19. 


GENESIS. 


13 


0: 


al 


river^  Glhon  :  the  same  is  it  that  compassetli  the  whole 
land  of  ^  Gush.  ^^  And  the  name  of  the  third  river^ 
Iliddekel :  that  is  it  which  floweth  in  front  of  Assyria. 
And  the  fourth  river^  that  is  Euphrates.  ^^  And  God  ^  /t^rr^p^rvL 
Jehovah  took  the  man,  and  -^wi  him  into  the  garden  of 
Eden  to  till  it  and  to  guard  it.  i'^  xind  God  Jehovah  ^t'C^L  ^^/  /t^^ 
commanded  the  man,  saying.  Of  every  tree  of  the  garden 
thou  maj^est  freely  eat :  17  but  of  the  tree  of  the  know- 
ledge of  good  and  evil,  thou  shalt  not  eat  of  it :  for  in  the 
day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die. 
1^  ^  And  God_Jehovah  said.  It  is  not  good  that  the  man  ^t  ^'-^cyrtL/ 
sliould  be  alone  ;  I  will  make  him  an  ™  help  "  likeunto  him. 
1'^  And  out  of  the  ground  God__Jehovah  formed  every 
beast  of  the  field,  and  every  fowl  of  the  air^  and  brought  ^^■'-■<-:' 
it  unto  the  man  to  see  what  he  would  call  it :  and  Avhat-  ^^•--/  /2l* 


V 


J 


y 


popular  belief  that  the  Ganges  and  Xile,  or 
Indus  and  Xile,  were  part  of  the  same  great 
river.  14.]  Hiddekel  is  generally  be- 

lieved to  be  the  Tigris.  The  name  is 
formed  by  prefixing  the  epithet  "swift" 
(Chad)  to  the  name  of  the  river,  Digla,  or 
Dekel,  the  universally-received  name  of  the 
Tigris,  which  already  signified  "  siciftness." 
There  is  a  difficulty  in  the  rendering  of  the 
A.  v.,  totcard  the  east  of  Assyria,  seeing  that 
the  Tigris  bounded  Assyria  on  the  west.  The 
marginal  rendering,  eastward  to  Assyria, 
devised  to  escape  the  difficulty,  seems  hardly 
allowable.  The  word  rendered  toward  the 
east  also  means  "  iu  front."  It  is  used  in 
Ps.  exxxix.  5,  in  this  sense,  and  Isa.  ix.  12  ; 
and  Kalisch  maintains  that  it  has  this  mean- 
ing here.  So  also  Knobel,  and  others.  The 
fourth  river  has  no  local  notice  attached  to 
it,  as  being  thorouglily  known  to  the  He- 
brews. 15.]  The  second  object  is  now 
accomplished,  a  man  to  till  the  ground.  The 
other  part  of  the  duty  of  the  man  is  stated 
with  reference  to  present  circumstances, 
under  which  a  garden  requires  watching  and 
protecting.  Knobel  understands  it  to  have 
been  the  guarding  his  charge  against  the 
tribes  of  beasts  which  were  about  to  be 
created.  16,  17.]  The  primal  com- 
mand to  the  man.  Tlie  only  difficulty  in  these 
verses  is  presented  by  the  concluding  words. 
Man  did  not  die  in  the  day  when  he  ate 
thereof.  The  simplest  solution  of  the  diffi- 
culty is  found  ill  remembering  that  death  is 


not  only  the  actual  separation  of  soul  and 
body,  but  includes  all  that  culminates  in 
that  separation.  A  man  may,  as  we  say, 
"  die  by  inches  : "  and  may  be  said,  espe- 
cially if  passing  from  a  state  where  deatli 
was  not  the  necessary  end  of  his  days,  to  die, 
when  the  seeds  of  death  begin  to  work  in 
him.  It  is  not  sufficiently  borne  in  mind, 
that  man's  exclusion  from  the  tree  of  life 
which  could  have  conferred  immortality  on 
him,  was  the  carrying  out  of  this  sentence. 
18 — 24.]  The  creation  of  u-oman. 
18.]  like  unto  him,  literally,  as  in  front 
of,  or,  over  against  him ;  i.  e.  corre- 
sponding to  himself.  The  likeness  is  both 
physical  and  mental.  The  same  word  is 
used  in  ref.  Isa.,  of  one  tiling  set  over 
ayainst  another  by  way  of  comparison  :  in 
ref.  Neb.,  of  one  set  of  men  eorrcspondiny 
to  another.  The  Vulgate  renders  as  our 
text.  19.]  In  pursuance  of  the  purpose 

just  announced,  Jehovah  forms  out  of  the 
ground  the  beasts  and  birds.  Eut  for  the 
difficulty  of  uniting  this  second  narrative 
with  the  former  one,  no  one  Avould  have 
dreamt  of  other  than  the  prima  facie  under- 
standing of  this,  that  at  this  time,  and  sub- 
sequently to  man,  the  beasts  and  birds  were 
created.  As  to  the  reconciliation  of  the  two, 
it  need  not  trouble  those  wlio,  like  tlie  sacred 
writer  who  originally  set  together  these  two 
accounts,  are  not  slaves  of  the  letter  but  free- 
men of  tlie  spirit.  Those  who  insist  on 
strict  historical  consecutiveness  in  the  days 


14 


GENESIS. 


II. 


och.  XT.  1 


pLiterally,buiU 
Sew  1  Kings 
xviii.  ;>2. 


soever  tlie  man  called  every  living  creature,  tliat  ?ra.9  the 
name  thereof.  20  ^j^fj  the  man  gave  names  to  all  cattle, 
and  to  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  to  every  beast  of  the  field  ; 
tA.  but  for  the  man  he  found  not  an  help  like  unto  him. 
21  And  God_Jehovah  caused  a  °  deep  sleep  to  fall  upon  the 
man,  and  he  slept :  and  he  took  one  of  his  ribs,  and 
closed  up  the  flesh  in  the_i3lace  thereof;  22  and  the  rib, 
which  GodJehovah  had  taken  from  the  man,  p  formed  he 
into  a  woman,  and  brought  her  unto  the  man.  23  ^^^  w^q 
man  said,  This  time  it  is  bone  of  my  bones,  and  flesh  of  my 
flesh  :  this  shall  be  called  "Woman,  because  this  was  taken 
''u;''i^u.'32:  o^*  ^^  Man.  24  q  Therefore  shall  a  man  leave  his  father 
and  his  mother,  and  shall  cleave  unto  his  wife  :  and  they 
shall  be  one  flesh. 

of  creation  are  obliged  here  to   have   re-  not    helps    corresponding    to    him. 

course  to  various  devices  which  for  us  are  woman]  In  the  Hebrew,  Ishah,  as  being 

uunceded.     The  man  was  endowed  by  his  taken  out  of  Ish.  24.]  These  words 

Creator  with  the  gift  of  speech — and  that  may  be  intended  as  spoken  by  the  man  :  or 

endowment  presupposed  the  perception  of  they  may  be   the  words   of  the   writer  of 

the   congruity   of  sounds  with   the   things  Genesis.     The  latter  is  maintained  by  De- 


which  to  the  thoughts  of  men  they  represent. 
Exejcising  this  faculty  and  perception,  the 
man  gives  names  to  the  various  animals. 
20.]  he,  that  is,  the  man,  found  no 
help  like  unto  him  (self).     Tiie  process  of 


litzsch,  both  as  suiting  best  the  citation  by 
our  Lord,  Jfatt.  xix.  5,  and  because  this 
particle  *'  Wherefore  "  or  "  Therefore  " 
commonly!  introduces  parenthetical  remarks 
by   the   writer :    see  reflf.      But   Delitzsch 


giving  names  was,  in  fact,  that  of  declaring    Beems    subsequently  to   have    changed   his 


attributes  and  qualities :  and  among  all 
these,  none  occurred  bearing  with  it  that 
correspondence  to  himself  which  was  sought 
for.     See  below  on  vcr.   23.  21,  22.] 

Notice  again,  as  characteristic  of  this  second 
narrative,  the  formative  and  tentative  pro- 
cesses used.  Compare  the  short  and  majestic 
words  of  the  former  narrative,  "  male  and 
female  created  He  them."  Jehovah  built 
up  the  lib  into  a  woman.  the  rib,  as 

taken  from  the  side,  where  is  the  heart : 
typifying  the  close  and  inseparable  con- 
nection. "Woman  is  made,  not  out  of  the 
dust  of  the  earth,  but  out  of  man.  Woman 
did  not  receive  the  command  to  obedience, 
but  through  and  as  part  of  man.  T\'oman 
did  not  take  any  part  in  those  first  utter- 
ances which  fixed  the  names  of  creation,  but 
inherited  them  from  man.  There  is  no  part 
of  the  sacred  narrative  warning  us  more 
forcibly  against  bondage  to  the  letter.  The 
whole  is  parabolic  and  symbolic.  23.] 

this  time  it  is, — in  contrast  with  the 
previous  exhibition  to  him  of  those  who  were 


view ;  and  the  coherence  of  the  narrative  as 
well  as  the  solemnity  of  the  saying  appears 
to  require  that  it  should  be  represented  as  a 
prophetic  saying  for  all  mankind,  spoken 
by  their  first  father.  That  our  Lord  quotes 
it  as  a  word  of  "  Him  that  made  them  fiom 
thfi  beginning,"  is  in  no  way  against  this 
view ;  not  because,  as  some,  Adam  may  have 
spoken  by  Divine  inspiration  (of  which  there 
is  no  hint,  and  which  would  not,  after  all, 
fulfil  tlie  saying  of  our  'Lord),  but  because 
the  whole  ^account  is  one  given  by  God's 
inspiration  as  a  Divine  narrative  of  the 
origin  of  mankind.  The  mention  of  father 
and  mother  in  the  mouth  of  Adam  is,  of 
coarse,  not  to  be  judged  servilely  according 
to  'the  letter,  but  to  be  regarded  as  of  a 
piece  with  the  whole  spiritual  character  of  the 
narrative.  Their  state  was  one  of  innocence 
void  of  shame — as  that  even  now  of  cliildren, 
— of  whom  these  same  words  may  still  be 
said,  25— in.  24.]    The  Fcill.     \ox. 

25  is  not,  as  commonly  taken,  the  conclusion 
of  what  has  gone  before,  but,  as  Quairy  has 


20— III.  4. 


GENESIS. 


15 


25  And  they  were  botli  naked,  the  man  and  his  wife, 
and  were  not  ashamed.  III.  ^  And  the  serpent  was  more 
'subtil  than  any  beast  of  tlie  field  which  God  Jehovah  had 
made.  And  he  said  unto  the  woman,  Yea,  hath  God  said, 
Ye  shall  not  eat  of  any  tree  of  the  garden  ?  ^  And  the 
woman  said  unto  the  serpent.  Of  the  fruit  of  the  trees 
of  the  garden  we  may  eat :  ^  but  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree 
which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  garden,  God  hath  said,  Ye 
shall  not  eat  of  it,  neither  shall  ye  touch  it,  lest  ye  die. 
*  And  the  serpent  said  unto  the  woman,  Ye  shall  not  die  : 

■well  pointed  out,  the  opening  of  the  follow- 
ing iiarvative.  However  solemn  the  purport 
of  that  narrative,  the  coherence  of  it  is 
found  in,  (1)  the  fact  of  their  nakedness 
(ii.  25) ;  (2)  the  discovery  of  that  nakedness 
(iii.  7)  ;  (3)  the  remedy  of  that  nakedness 
(ili.  21).  25.]    Of  the  whole   of  the 

account,  it  is  hardly  to  be  doubted  that  the 
solemn  fact  of  man's  temptation  is  conveyed 
to  us  in  terms  of  parable  and  allegory. 
Reverence  requires  this  conclusion,  no  less 
than  reason.  To  suppose  the  narrative 
realistic  and  matter  of  fact  is  to  degrade 
it  from  tlie  higher  spiritual  reality.  Tliis 
view  has  been  held  without  blame,  both  iu 
ancient  and  modern  times.  Eusebius  says, 
"  There  is  present  to  each  of  us  a  wicked 
demon,  lying  in  wait  for  us,  a  seducer,  and 
a  hater  of  good,  and  the  same  that  from  tlie 
beginning  plotted  against  the  salvation  of 
man.  He  (Moses)  calls  this  demon  a  di-agon 
and  a  serpent,  because  he  is  black  and 
allied  to  darkness,  full  of  poison  and  malice. 
....  by  his  fraud  our  first  parents  also 
fell  from  their  Divine  estate ; "  hereby 
plainly  showing  that  in  his  view  the  spirit- 
ual and  not  the  literal  interpretation 
was  to  be  taken.  And  Cardinal  Cajetan 
Bays,  "  It  is  plain,  both  by  the  method  of 
speech  of  all  Scripture,  and  by  that  of  this 
narrative,  that  under  the  name  of  the  serpent 
we  must  not  understand  the  reptile  thus 
called,  but  the  devil  "  With  this  interpret- 
ation we  are  content  :  not  inquiring  fur- 
ther whether  the  tempter  of  man  is  to  be 
supposed  to  have  assumed  the  form  of  a  ser- 
pent, and  in  that  form  to  have  spoken  with 
Eve,  any  more  than  whether  the  serpent  is 
to  be  conceived  as  changing  its  physical 
character  after  the  curse,  llegarding  the 
whole  as  a  Divine  parable  setting  forth  to 
us  the  spiritual  facts  of  the  fall  of  man,  we 


ic,  W,  al. 


S/,r-t  /y  I 


are  not  careful  about  such  matters.  See 
below  on  ver.  14.  It  is  remarkable,  in  con- 
nection with  our  Lord's  saying  in  John  viii. 
44,  that  t]ie  Samaritan  Pentateuch  has  liere 
liar  instead  of  serpent :  the  two  words  iu 
Hebrew  differing  only  by  one  letter.  Ob- 
serve, that  the  name  Jehovah  is  not  used  by 
the  serpent,  nor  by  the  woman,  but  only  by 
the  sacred  writer  in  the  course  of  his  nai*- 
rative.  Some  commentators  have  found 
deep  meaning  in  the  non-use  of  "  Jehovah  " 
by  the  serpent :  but  they  have  omitted  to 
observe  that  it  is  wanting  in  the  woman's 
speech  likewise.  Those  who  have  observed 
on  this,  have  thought  that  it  was  to  preserve 
the  Holy  name  from  the  desecration  of 
being  uttered  to  the  serpent.  Observe  that 
doubt  is  the  beginning  of  temptation.  Stress 
bus  also  been  laid  on  the  fact  that  the 
woman's  answer  goes  further  than  the 
Divine  prohibition.  Kalisch  regards  this  as 
an  exaggeration,  showing  "  the  fanaticism  of 
passion  and  its  self-deception ; "  but  he 
thinks,  as  she  did  not  receive  the  command, 
this  may  have  arisen  from  its  being  niisre- 
ported  to  her.  Lange  sees  in  this  ovejdone 
obedience  the  first  wavering  of  allegiance. 
But  surely  we  may  turn  round  suoh 
subjectivities  as  easily  the  other  way,  and 
suppose  this  additional  particular  to  have 
been  inserted  in  the  ardent  desire  to  obey. 
Not  that  I  really  take  it  so— but  such  a 
consideration  serves  to  show  the  insecurity  of 
such  fine  tracking  of  words  to  their  supposed 
sources.  The  same  may  be  said  of  almost  all 
the  minute  inferences  which  have  been  druwl* 
from  this  reply.  The  best  exposure  of  their 
unsafeness  is  that  some  hold  Eve's  reply  to 
be  a  sign  of  her  unswerving  loyalty,  others 
of  her  incipient  disloyalty  to  God.  4.] 

It  is  not  easy  to  give  iu  this  verse  the  force 
of  the  origiual,  which  brings  out  iuto  promi- 


16 


GENESIS. 


III. 


."li/Neh.  viii.  13, 
m:ii!j.;  ix.  20. 
Piov.  xxi.  11. 


'/ 


t  Job  xvi.  15. 
Kccl.  iii.  7. 
.        Eiiek,  xiii.  8. 


^  for  God  doth  know  that  in  the  day  ye  eat  thereof,  then 
your  e^-es  shall  be  oj^ened,  and  j'-e  shall  be  as  God,  know- 
ing good  and  evil.  ^  And  wh^en  the  woman  saw  that  the 
tree  teas  good  for  food,  and  that  it  wm  pleasant  to  the 
eyes,  and  a  tree  to  be  desired  to  ^rnake  one  wise,  she  took 
of  the  fruit  thereof,  and  did  eat^  and  gave  also  unto  her 
husband  with  her/  and  he  did  eat.  7  And  the  eyes  of  them 
both  were  opened,  and  they  knew  that  they  icere  naked ;  and 
they  *  sewed  fig  leaves  together,  and  made  themselves 
girdles.  ^  And  they  heard  the  voice  of  God_Jehovah 
walking  in  the  garden  in  the  cool  of  the  day  :  and  the 
man  and  his  wife  hid  themselves  from  the  presence  of  God 
Jehovah  amongst  the  trees  of  the  garden.  ^  And  God 
Jehovah  called  unto  the  man,  and  said  unto  him.  Where 
art  thou?  ^^  And  he  said,  I  heard  thy  voice  in  the 
garden,  and  I  was  afraid,  because  I  nan  naked  ;  and  I  hid 
mj'self.  ^1  And  he  said.  Who  told  thee  that  thou  art 
naked  ?  Ilast  thou  eaten  of  the  tree,  -whereof  I  com- 
manded thee  that  thou  shouldest  not  eat?  i- And  the 
man  said.  The  woman  whom  thou  gavest  to  he  with  me, 
she  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and   I  did  cat.       ^^  And   God 


nencc  the  threatened  punishment  as  somctliinj: 
utterly  incongruous  to  the  known  eftoct  of 
the  fruit.  It  may  best  be  done  perliaps  by 
laying  strong  emphasis  on  the  word  die. 
Our  insertion  in  the  A.  V.  of  '' surcli/"  does 
not  answer  the  purpose,  because  that  adverb 
is  apt  to  be  taken  with  the  whole,  as  if  it 
■were,  "Surely  ye  shall  not  die:"  which, 
tliough  Kalisch  thus  renders,  can  hardly 
represent   the   meaning.  6.]  to  make 

one  wise]  There  is  considerable  doubt  about 
the  meaning  of  this  word.  The  LXX.,  Vul- 
gate, tlie  Targum  of  Onkelos,  and  some  of 
the  ancient  versions,  render  it  to  look  upon. 
But  seeing  that  the  word  will  certainly  bear 
the  other  meaning  (see  rcff.),  and  that  the 
proposed  one  introduces  almost  a  repetition 
of  the  preceding  clause,  I  have  kept  the  A.  Y. 
7,]  It  seems  better,  with  Kalisch  and 
Gcscnius,  to  take  this  as  the  ordinary  fig, 
whose  leaves  would  require  uniting  for  this 
purpose,  than,  with  Knobel,  and  others,  as  the 
Ij.inana  or  niusa,  one  of  whose  leaves  would 
be  too  large  for  the  purpose.  The  ordinary 
fig  is  indigenous  over  the  whole  East. 
8.]  The  anthropomorpliism  of  the  narrative 


may  be  said  here  to  reach  its  highest  ex- 
ample. Eden  is  the  garden  of  God,  and  He 
is  represented  as  gone  forth  to  walk  in  the 
cool,  literally,  the  wind,  of  the  day,  i.  e.  in 
the  breeze  which  springs  up  in  the  evening, 
and  invites  into  the  open  air.  Who  can 
doubt  that  we  are  as  much  in  the  region  of 
parable  here,  as  when  we  read  of  the  House- 
holder who  ])lanted  a  vineyard  and  let  it  out, 
or  the  certain  man  who  came  seeking  fruit 
on  bis  fig-tree  .=  11.]  Literally,  Of  the 

tree,  whereof  I  commanded  thee  that  thou 
shouldest  not  eat,  of  that  hast  thou  eaten  1 
12,  13.]  Kalisch's  remarks  here  are 
well  worth  extracting  :  "  God  was  in  familiar 
intercourse  with  man  in  the  happy  days  of  his 
innocence.  He  was  loved  as  a  father  ;  fear 
Avas  unknown  :  the  severe  rule, '  nobody  be- 
holds .  God  and  lives,'  did  not  yet  exist. 
As  man  was  scarcely  aware  of  his  superiority 
over  the  animal  creation,  so  he  was  hardly 
impressed  with  that  awe  of  God  which  the 
consciousness  of  His  grandeur  inspires.  His 
eyes  were  not  yet  opened.  He  knew  neither 
pride  nor  humility.  He  Avalkcd  in  .sim- 
plicity, careless,  but  sure  of  the  right  path. 


0—15. 


GENESIS. 


17 


Jcliovali  said  unto  the  woman,  AVhat  is  tliis  t//at  thou 
hast  done  ?  And  the  woman  said,  The  serpent  beguiled 
mc,  and  I  did  eat.  ^'^  And  God_Jehovah  said  unto  the 
serpent,  Because  thou  hast  done  this,  thou  ar^  cursed  above 
all  cattle,  and  above  every  beast  of  the  field  ;  upon  thy 
belly  shalt  thou  go,  and  '^dust  shalt  thou  eat  all  the  days  of  vNum.xxxv. 

''   _  .  O      '  -^  21,22.    Ezek. 

thy  life  :  ^^  and  I  will  put  "■  enmity  between  thee  and  the     xxxvlsVoniy. 


ulsn.  IxT.  25.  , 

Micali  vii.  17.  3  1  '/ 
SeePs.lxxii.  ' 

9.  Isa.  xlix. 
23 ;  aUo  Ps. 
cii.  9. 


Tint  now  he  was  awalvencd  to  a  sense 
(if  duty.  He  cannot  beat-  the  presence  of  God: 
it  I'verwlichnshis  spirit.  lie  hears  His  step  ; 
lir  hides  himself;  lie  answers  timidly  to  the 
il'i' stion  of  God;  he  fears  His  anger;  ho 
triis  to  avert  it,  by  laying  the  fault  partly 
i!|inu  his  wife  and  partly  upon  God  himself ; 
'  the  woman  whom  thou  gavest  to  be  ivith 
III  ,  she  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and  I  did 
I  :it '  ;  and  Eve,  not  less  terrified,  accuses  the 
.'^I'lpent  as  the  cause  of  the  transgression. 
'i'lic  voice  of  conscience  troubled  for  the  first 
time  the  internal  peace.  The  harmony  of 
till'  mind  was  disturbed.  We  abstain  from 
(L\oloping  the  many  and  important  practi- 
c;il  trutlis  contained  in  this  narrative  ;  we 
ciiniiot  wonder  that  many  have  here  abandon- 
ed themselves  to  the  strains  of  the  preacher ; 
it  is  indeed  tempting  to  pursue  the  inimit- 
able and  unparalleled  description  of  the 
consequences  of  sin,  the  uneasiness  and 
timidity,  the  cowardice,  the  internal  wretch- 
edness which,  as  a  last  resource,  impeaches 
even  God  as  the  primai-y  cause  of  the  offence. 
It  is  sufficient  for  us  to  have  indicated  the 
general  course  of  ideas  which  our  section 
suggests,  and  to  have  pointed  out  the  suc- 
cessive stages  of  innocence,  temptation  and 
conflict,  sin,  remorse,  and  banishment,  which 
are  represented  by  the  Paradise,  the  serpent, 
the  forbidden  fruit,  the  concealment,  and 
the  curse."  I  may  add  to  these  admir- 
able remarks,  that  if,  in  the  majestic  sim- 
plicity of  the  former  cosmogony  in  ch. 
i.,  one  felt  that  we  were  listening  to  Him 
who  in  the  beginning  made  the  heavens 
and  the  earth,  we  here  feel  that  every 
word  of  the  mysterious  parable  is  in- 
spired by  Him  who  "  needed  not  that  any 
should  testify  of  man;  tor  lie  knew  what 
was  in  man."  14,  15.]  As,  long  after, 

the  rainbow,  a  phenomenon  which  must 
have  always  subsisted  since  the  creation  of 
liglit  and  water,  was  consecrated  to  a  sym- 
bol of  the  covenaat  between  God  and  man, 


so  here  the  serpent,  which  must  always  since 
its  creation  have  maintained  its  present  form 
and  habits,  was  in  that  form  and  thoso 
habits  appointed  a  symbol  of  the  deceiver's 
punisliment;  and  so  was  that  enmity  between 
it  and  mankind,  which  issues  in  the  wounds 
of  man's  lowest  part,  followed  by  the  crush- 
ing out  of  the  serpent's  life,  consecrated  as  a 
pledge  of  the  ultimate  triumph  of  man  in 
the  person  of  the  great  seed  of  the  woman, 
over  the  tempter  of  souls.  Cleave  to  the 
letter  as  historical  fact,  and  all  this  is  lost. 
Admit  the  divine  parable,  and  the  reference 
is  indisputable.  The  LXX.  have  here  "upon 
thy  breast  and  upon  thy  belly  shalt  thou  go," 
combining  the  reading  "  upon  thy  breast," 
which  the  Vulgate  also  follows,  with  the  re- 
ceived one.  dust  shalt  thou  eat]  As 
crawling  in  the  dust,  deeper  and  more  abun- 
dant in  the  dry  East  than  with  us  (see 
reff.) ;  and  thus  necessarily  mingling  all  it 
eats  with  dust.  15.]  The  Messianic 
import  of  this  curse  is  recognized  in  the 
Targums.  The  Targum  of  Jonathan  says:  "it 
will  be,  when  the  children  of  the  woman 
observe  the  commandments  of  the  Law, 
that  they  will  tread  thee  on  thy  head,  and 
when  they  forsake  the  commandments  of 
the  Law,  thou  Avilt  be  able  to  bite  them 
on  their  heels  ;  but  they  will  be  healed, 
and  thou  wilt  not  be  healed  :  and  they 
will,  in  the  days  of  the  Messiah,  be  able 
to  make  a  bruise  with  the  heel."  Kaliscli. 
Observe,  it  is  it,  or  he,  viz.  the  wo- 
man's seed,  that  shall  bruise  the  serpent's 
head,  not  she,  as  the  Vulgate  and  the 
Church  of  Home  have  it  here.  Even  were 
it  she,  no  such  application  of  the  words 
could  be  made  as  that  Church  makes  to  the 
Virgin  Mary,  for  it  would  mean  she,  tlie 
M'Oman  then  present,  by  means  of  her  seed 
which  is  to  come.  The  deeper  or  parabolic 
sense  of  the  words  is  veiled  under  that  which 
is  ordinary  and  physical  as  regards  the 
common  relation  of  the  serpent  to  man. 
c 


18 


GENESIS. 


III. 


w  Job  ix.  17. 
Ps.  cxxxix. 

11  (coverj 
only. 

X  ch.  V.  29. 


y  ch.  iv. 
Cant. 
only. 


•woman,  and  between  tliy  seed  and  her  seed;  it  shall  ^bruise 
tliy  bead,  and  thou  sbalt  "^bruise  its  heel,  i^  Unto  the 
woman  he  said,  I  will  greatly  multiply  thy  ^jDain  and  thy 
conception;  in  ^pain  thou  shalt  bring- forth  children  ;  and 
thy  5' desire  shall  be  to  thy  husband,  and  he  shall  rule  over 
thee.  17  And  unto  the_man  he  said,  Because  thou  hast 
hearkened  unto  the  voice  of  thy  wife,  and  hast  eaten 
of  the  tree,  of  which  I  commanded  thee,  saying.  Thou 
shalt  not  eat  of  it :  cursed  is  the  ground  for  thy  sake ;  in 
-''pain  shalt  thou  eat  of  it  all  the  days  of  thy  life  ;  ^^  thorns 
also  and  thistles  shall  it  bring  forth  to  thee ;  and  thou 
shalt  eat  the  herb  of  the  field ;  ^^  in  the  sweat  of  thy 
face  shalt  thou  eat  bread,  till  thou  return  unto  the  ground ; 
for  out  of  it  wast  thou  taken  :  for  dust  thou  art,  and  unto 
dust  shalt  thou  return,     ^o  ^^j  ^lic  man  called  his  wife's 


16.]  thy  pain  and  thy  conception, 

i.  e.  the  pain  which  accompanies  thy  preg- 
nancy. Some,  as  Knobel,  take  the  "and" 
as  meaning  especialli/ :  thy  pain  (throngh- 
out  life,  in  the  physical  troubles  inci- 
dent to  the  sex),  and  especially  thy  preg- 
nancy. And  yet,  though  this  shall  be  so, 
the  woman,  as  a  second  curse,  shall  desire 
again  the'occasion  of  this  pain ;  and,  tliirdly, 
though  thus  the  subject  of  all  the  suffering 
which  accompanies  the  propagation  of  the 
race,  she  shall  be  the  subordinate,  and  ruled 
over  by  the   man.  17 — 19.]   To   the 

man  is  appointed  penal  labour,  and  death 
for  his  sin.  Before,  he  was  put  into  the 
garden,  to  till  it  and  keep  it;  but  now  the 
soU  is  to  be  stubborn,  and  to  defy  his  labour, 
and  cause  him  pain  and  disappointment. 
Before,  he  had  access  to  the  tree  of  life, 
which  was  to  make  him  immortal  (and  this 
was  not  forbidden  him,  see  on  ver.  22) :  now 
he  is  to  be  driven  out  from  access  to  it,  and 
to  return  to  the  earth  again.  The  word 
which  we  render  for  thy  sake  is,  by  the 
differing  apprehension  of  a  single  turn  in  a 
Hebrew  letter,  translated  "m  t/ii/  tcorks" 
by  the  LXX.,  and  "  in  tluj  work "  by  the 
Vulgate.  18.]  And  this  labour  will  be 

hindered  by  the  curse  of  the  soil,  over- 
powering his  tillage  with  noxious  growths. 
He  will  eat,  not  the  rich  spontaneous  fruits 
of  Eden,  but  the  herb  of  the  field — the  lesser 
growths   sown  by  his  own  toil.  19.] 

the  sweat  of  thy  face,  because  it  is  on  the 


face  that  that  effect  of  labour  is  first  and 
prominently  shewn.  On  the  latter  part  of 
the  verse,  see  on  ver.  22.  It  is  commented 
on  by  St.  Paul  in  1  Cor.  xv.  47,  "  the  first 
man  was  of  the  earth,  earthy."  20 — 

24.]  The  man  and  his  icife  are  clothed  by 
Jehovah,  and  are  driven  out  of  the  garden 
of  Eden.  20.]  The  connexion  of  this 

verse  here  has  been  thought  somewhat  dif- 
ficult to  assign.  Its  place  has  to  some 
appeared  to  be  after  ch.  iv.  1.  Perhaps 
it  is  inserted  here,  because  here  the  man  and 
his  wife  are  first  reunited  in  the  narrative 
after  the  separate  account  of  their  parts  in 
the  act  of  disobedience  and  its  consequences, 
and  in  connection  with  the  words  of  God  to 
the  woman,  relative  to  her  conception  of 
children.  Murphy  remarks,  "  The  man 
here  refers  to  two  expressions  in  the  sen- 
tences he  had  heard  pronounced  on  the  ser- 
pent and  the  woman.  .  .  It  is  the  woman 
who  is  to  bear  the  seed,  and  this  seed  is  , 
to  undo  what  had  been  done  for  the  death  of 
man,  and  so  re-invest  him  with  life.  This 
life  was  to  come  by  the  woman.  Again, 
in  the  address  of  the  Judge  to  the  wpman, 
he  had  heard  the  words,  '  thou  shalt  bear 
children.'  These  children  are  the  seed, 
among  whom  is  to  be  the  bruiser  of  the 
serpent's  head,  and  the  author  of  life.  .  .  He 
gives  permanent  expression  to  his  hope  in 
the  name  which  he  gives  to  his  wife."  Simi- 
larly Delitzsch  :  rendering  "  for  she  is  be- 
come the  mother  of  all  living,"  viz.  by  the 


1(3—24. 


GENESIS. 


19 


zch.  xxvii.  16. 

Job  xli.  7,  ul. 


Cet^ 


name  Eve  ;  because  slie  was  the  mother  of  all  living.  21 
Unto  the  man  also  and  to  his  Avife  did  God  Jehovah  niake,^'';'^'"^-^'"^/'''**^/ 
•garments  of ''skin,  and  clothed  them.  -^  ^  And  God_Jehovah 
^aid,  Behold,  the  man  is  become  as  one  of  us,  to  know 
fjood  and  evil :  and  now,  lest  he  put  forth  his  hand,  and 
take  also  of  the  tree  of  lifc^  and  eat,  and  live  for  ever/ 
-  *  therefore  God  Jehovah  sent  him  forth  from  the  garden 
if  Eden,  to  till  the  ground  from  whence  he  was  taken. 
- '  So  he  drove  out  the  man ;  and  he  placed  at  the  east  of 
,  the  garden  of  Eden  the  ''Cherubim,  and  a  flaming  sword 
which  ^  turned  every  way,  to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of 
life. 


aExocl.xxv.18, 
«Vi".     Num.    ■^/     ^/ 
vii.  8'J.     1       '    /  / 

S:im.  iv.  4.  , 

2  Sam.  XX.  U*''-/ 
(1'!,.  xviii.lll;.  ' 
1  Kings  vi. 
23,  &c.  (2 
Clirou.  iii.  7,  / 
&c.)  1  Cliion.  ffK/ 
xxviii.  IM.  ' 

x.  1,  &c.;       '**/    - 
xi.22  ;  xxviii. 
H,  16. 
b  Job  xxxvii. 
1'.';  xxxviii. 
14. 


words  concerning  child-bearing  just  pro- 
nounced by  God :  and  regarding  the  name 
as  given  in  faith  and  hope.  Knobel  thinks 
the  connection  is  by  way  of  contrast  to 
the  preceding  verse,  which  seemed  to  im- 
ply the  extinction  of  the  species ;  but  still 
thinks  that  after  iv.  1  would  be  its  more 
appropriate  place.  Eve]  Chauah,  i.  e. 
living  ;  rendered  by  the  LXX.  Zu'c,  i.  e.  life  ; 
but  in  chap.  iv.  1  by  Eua.  21.]  The 

first  act  of  Divine  mercy,  in  answer  to  man's 
first  word  of  faith — healing  tlie  first  wound 
which  the  consciousness  of  good  and  evil  bad 
inflicted.  It  is  hardly  allowable  to  assume, 
as  some  have  done,  that  these  "  coats  of 
skins"  were  the  skins  of  animals  slain  in 
sacrifice.  But  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  the 
Targum  of  Onkelos  paraphrases  the  words 
as  "garments  of  honour  upon  tlie  skin  of 
their  flcsb  "  (see  1  Cor.  xii.  23),  thus  un- 
derstanding the  skin  as  their  s/cm,  which 
the    garment    covered.  22.]     God   is 

again  (see  i.  26)  introduced  a^  taking  coun- 
sel, speaking  to  Himself:  here,  perhaps, 
more  evidently  than  there  in  a  communica- 
tive sense,  seeing  that  one  of  us  widens 
those  addressed  by  Ilim,  at  least  to  the 
higher  order  of  spirits,  who  minister  round 
Ilis  throne.  To  see  here,  with  some  of  the 
Fathers,  an  argument  for  the  Trinity  of 
Persons  in  the  Godhead,  is  surely  far-fetched, 


use  was  not  forbidden  him,  nor  would  it  have 
been  precluded  even  after  tiic  fall,  had  he 
remained  in  the  garden.  Some  comment- 
ators (e.  g.  Keil  and  Delitzsch)  suggest 
that  in  that  case,  the  "living  for  ever" 
would  have  been  to  him  not  eternal  life,  but 
eternal  persistence  in  the  present  sinful 
state  :  but  surely  we  cannot  gather  so  much 
from  the  mysterious  narrative.  23, 24.] 

Heaven  and  earth  are  now  disjoined  by  the 
sin  of  man.  Paradise  was  tlie  symbolic 
setting  forth  of  God's  unity  with,  and  dwell- 
ing among,  man.  And  now  this  presence  of 
God  on  earth  is  not  altogether  withdrawn, 
but  is  set  up  to  the  exclusion  of  men  from 
its  most  holy  place.  As  in  the  temple  after- 
wards, so  here,  the  Holy  Place  is  westward : 
it  is  at  the  cast  of  Paradise  that  the  barrier 
to  God's  presence  is  setup.  For  the  Cherub- 
im, here  mentioned,  are  in  Scripture  ever- 
more the  attendants,  and  bearers  up,  of  the 
throne  of  God  (see  relf.).  The  cherubic 
forms  (Ezek.  x.  l4)  arc  the  same  as  those 
borne  by  the  four  living  beings,  who  sur- 
rounded the  throne  in  Rev.  iv.  6— 8.  I 
have  dealt  ^yith  this  matter  in  my  Ilulscan 
Lectures  for  1841,  and  am  still  of  the  same 
opinion,  that  the  placing  of  these  Cherubim 
at  the  east  of  Eden  was  indicative  of  ordin- 
ances of  worship,  and  a  form  of  access  to  the 
Divine  presence  still  open  to  man,  though 


and  but  ill  calculated  to  serve  the  cause  of    he  was  debarred  from  entrance  into  paradise. 


Christian  orthodoxy.  Thiseven  Delitzsch  con- 
fesses, and  "Wordsworth  merely  states  the  fact 
timidly.  lest  lie  put  fortlihis  hand.  .  .] 

Then  our  narrative  implies,  as  St.  Paul 
asserts,  1  Cor.  xv.  47,  that  man  was  created 
subject  to  death,  but  would  by  the  use  of  the 
tree  of  life  have  gained  immortality.     This 


See  further  on  chap.  iv.  3,  and  Smith's 
Biblical  Diet.,  \uv\iix   "Cherub."  the 

flaming  sword]  lit.  the  flame  of  the  sword, 
not  borne  in  the  hands  of  the  Cherubim,  but 
separate  from  them,  which  turned  -every 
way — i.  e.  continually  flashing,  or  corns- 
cant,  in  all  directions.     Evidently,  from  the 


20 


GENESIS. 


IV 


I  /  t>^~j,'  fr-j 


lY.  1  And  tlie  man  knew  Eve  liis  wife ;  and  she  con- 
ceived, and  bare  Cain,  andsaid,  I  liave  gotten  a  man  by 
tbe  help_of  Jehovah.  ^  ^^-^^  gj^e  again  bare  his  brother 
Abel.  And  Abel  was  a  keeper  of  sheep,  but  Cain  was 
a  tiller  of  the  ground,  ^  And  in  process  of  timelt^came 
to  pass,  that  Cain  brought  of  the  fruit  of  the  ground  an 
offering  unto  Jehovah.  ^  And  Abel,  he  also  brought  of 
the  '^  firstling-s  of  his  flock  and  of  the  fat  thereof.     And 


context,  the  purpose  of  the  guard  was  to  bar 
the  way  to  the  tree  of  life  against  man's 
entering  and  partaking  of  it.  But  it  had  at 
the  same  time  a  symbolical  and  teaching 
significance  as  regarded  man.  It  was  a  pro- 
vision of  access  as  well  as  an  ordinance  of  ex- 
clusion. 

IV.  1 — 26.]  The  jMsteritij  of  Adam. 
In  the  whole  of  this  section,  with  the  single 
exception  of  Eve's  speech,  ver.  25  (where 
Elohim  only  is  used),  the  name  Jehovah 
is  used  simply,  without  the  addition  of 
Elohim.  It  is  to  he  regarded  as  another 
separate  document,  distinct  alike  in  its  pro- 
saic narrative  style  (see  on  vv.  23,  24)  from 
the  majesty  of  the  first  portion  (eh.  i. — ii.  3) 
and  the  poetic  symbolism  of  the  second 
(ch.  ii.  4— iii.  2i).  1.]  The  knoicledge 

of  Eve  his  wife  involves  the  recognition 
and  use  of  her  for  that  purpose  to  which 
God  had  ordained  and  especially  devoted 
her.  Cain]   i.  e.    possession,    or    ac- 

quisition," gain,"  to  answer  to  lier  saying. 

by  the  help  of  Jehovah]  In  the  He- 
brew the  phrase  might  mean  even  Jehovah, 
the  particle  eth  which  precedes  the  sacred 
name  being  the  usual  sign  of  apposition  in 
the  accusative  case.  And  this  possibility  has 
been  used  to  introduce  the  idea  that  Eve  be- 
lieved she  had  borne  the  Incarnate  God,  the 
seed  of  the  woman.  But  such  an  idea  is  by 
almost  all  confessed  to  be  alien  from  the  con- 
text. No  such  promise  is  even  latent  in 
ch.  iii.  15.  So  that  we  have  no  way  but  to 
take  the  less  usual  sense  of  the  particle,  and 
to  render  it  with,  i.  e.  by  the  help  of.  Ka- 
lisch  has  with  ;  Wright,   by  the  help   of. 

2.]  again  bare,  literally,  "  added  to 
bear.'"  Some  liave  thought,  because  there  is 
no  mention  of  a  second  conception,  that 
Cain  and  Abel  were  twins.  But  this  does 
not  seem  necessary.  After  what  went  before, 
the  fact  only  needs  stating.  Observe,  it  is 
not  said  that  she  called  his  name  Abel  ( Hevel, 


nothingness,  vaniti/).  That  name  was  in  all 
probability  given  afterwards,  owing  to  his 
premature  end.  Notice  the  difference  in 
ver.   25.  3.]  The  words  in  process  of 

time  seem  best  to  render  the  Hebrew  at  the 
end  of  days.  Kalisch  says,  ' '  at  tlie  end  of 
a  certain  indefinite  time,  when  both  the  ease 
and  the  atHuence  of  a  pastoral  life  were  seen 
in  suHicient  contrast  to  the  toils  and  cares  of 
the  husbandman."  See  his  views  below,  on 
ver.  4.  Cain  brought  simply  some  of  the 
fruits  of  his  labour :  we  arc  not  told  that 
they  were  the  first  or  the  best.  This  seems, 
from  the  beginning  of  the  nai-rative,  to  make 
a  difference  between  the  brothers.  For  4.] 
Abel  brought  some  from  anKuig  the  firstlings 
of  his  flock,  and  from  their  fat.  Kalisch  re- 
gards the  and  as  meaning  especially.  Abel's 
offering  consisted  of  these  first-born  them- 
selves, and  of  their  fat.  That  they  were 
first  slain  would  hence  appear ;  but  it  lies  in 
the  background  :  a  valuable  truth,  but  not 
belonging  to  the  present  comparison  between 
the  sacrifices.  Abel's  was  the  "  better  sacri- 
fice" (Ileb.  xi.  4),  as  being  the  best  of  what 
he  had,  which  does  not  appear  of  Cain's. 
We  must  not  travel  beyond  the  sacred  nar- 
rative when  we  have  these  indications 
■within  it.  Cain  being  an  agriculturist, 
could  but  do  as  he  did  in  the  /natter  of  his 
offering.  The  fact  of  the  brothers  each 
bringing"of  his  own  as  an  offering  would  be 
disturbed  by  one  having  recourse  to  the 
other  for  the  material  of  his  offering,  as 
must  have  been  on  the  hypothesis  of  Cain's 
fault  having  consisted  in  not  bringing  a  slain 
sacrifice. 

How  the  acceptance  of  the  one  offering 
and  the  rejection  of  the  other  were  shewn 
we  are  not  told.  Some  have  imagined  in  tlie 
consumption  of  the  one  by  fire  from  above, 
and  not  of  the  other  ;  and  Theodotion  in  his 
version  actually  has  given  ^'consumed  bij 
fire  "  as  the  rendering  of  the  verb,  whereas 


1—8. 


GENESIS. 


21 


Jclipvali  had  respect  unto  Abel  and  to  liis  offering :  ^  but  ^^(*^/ 
unto  Cain  and  to  bis  offering-  he  had  not  respect.     And 
Cain  was  very  wroth,  and  his  *^  countenance  fell.     ^  And  "^seeKIIv'^d. 
Jtliovah  said  unto  Cain,  Why  art  thou  wroth  ?  and  why  is  /^W 
tliy  countenance  fallen?     "  If  thou  doest  well,  shalt  thou  skU'  ,-^  » 
not  be  accepted  ?  and  if  thou  doest  not  well,  sin  licth  at  a^^^Uri/ 
1(10  door.  And  unto  thee  is  his  desire,  and  thou  shalt  rule  yrl^ii-^  ' 
u^-er  hiui.    ^  And  Cain  talked  with  Abel  his  brother ^^  and  trU,/  di  -A, 


its  meaning  is   simply  regarded,   "looked 
"w  itli  favour  on."    Tiiore  is  no  mention  of  an 
alttr,  as  in  ch.  viii.  20,  in  the  case  of  Xoah, 
>  '  that  it  seems  we  must  rather  think  of 
s  iiie   appearance  or  word   of  Jehovah   by 
■     iih  the  preference  was  shewn.     As  to  the 
creuce  itself,  it  is,  I  think,  unavoidable  to 
iiose  that  there  was  ground  for  it  in  the 
\  ions  character  and  the  present  state  of 
.    ii  J  of  Cain,  and  that  we  have  a  hint  of  this 
ill  wr.  3.  Whether,  as  Kalisch  insists  at  some 
L  iijj,th,    we  are  to  suppose  previous  hatred 
and  envy  of  his  brother,  lam  not  so  sure. 
There  is  enough  in  the  narrative  to  beget 
tluit   in   an   unthankful   and   selfish  mind. 
Cain  was  very  wroth]  Literally,  it 
burned  in  (or  with)  Cain  exceedingly,  i.  e. 
his  anger  was  much  iutlamcd.  his  coun- 

tenance fell]  He  scowled  and  hung  his  head, 
as  men  do  in  displeasure.  6.]  It  seems  to 
be  implied  here  and  in  the  following  verses 
that  Jehovah  was  in  some  way  manifested  as 
present.  7.]  There  are  few  verses  in 

the  Bible  about  which  there  is  more  uncer- 
tainty. It  seems  dillicult  to  extract  sense 
from  any  of  the  various  renderings.  I  can 
only  lay  before  the  reader  those  of  the  prin- 
cipal commentators  and  versions,  (a)  The 
LXX.  give  it, — "  If  thou  hast  offered  rightlij, 
but  hast  not  divided  riglUhj,  hast  thou  not 
sinned?  Rest  quiet  :  toward  thee  is  his  {or 
its)  resort,  and  thou  shalt  rule  over  him 
(or  it)."  (b)  The  Vulgate :  "  If  thou  hast  done 
u-ell,  shalt  thou  not  receive?  but  if  badly, 
ivill  not  sin  be  forthwith  present  at  the 
doors  ?  but  in  thy  power  tcill  be  his  (or  its) 
desire,  and  thou  shalt  rule  over  him  (or  it)." 
(c)  Kalisch  :  "  If  thou  doest  well,  wilt  thou 
not  find  acceptance  ?  and  if  thou  doest  not 
well,  sin  lieth  at  the  door,  and  to  thee  is  its 
desire;  but  thou  shalt  ride  over  it,"  inter- 
preting that  sin,  as  a  wild  beast  in  ambush, 
lies  at  the  door,  desiring  to  have  thee.  {d) 
Kuobel :  "  Is  there  not,  if  thou  doest  well, 


lifting  up  [of  countenance)  ?  but  if  thou  doest 
not  icvll  {falling  of  countoiance)  ?  This 
latter  an  ellipsis,  filled  up  out  of  vv.  5,  6. 
Sin  is  lying  in  trait  before  the  door,  a7id  to 
thee  is  its  desire,  but  thou  shalt  rule  over  it.'' 
And  so  very  nearly  Keil,  except  that  he  does 
not  fill  in  the  ellipsis,  but  makes  the  last 
clause  depend  upon  "  If  thou  doest  not  tcell" 
....  and  similarly  also  Delitzsch.  (e)  The 
idea  pressed  by  Abp.  Magee  on  the  atone- 
ment, that  *'  sin  lieth  at  the  door,"  ought  to 
be  rendered  "a<  the  door  a  sin-offering  is 
crouching,"  and  that  the  words  point  to  the 
opportunity  of  atonement  by  sacrifice  seems 
to  be  universally  repudiated  by  Hebraists. 
{f)  In  the  uncertainty  I  have  left  the  A. Y. 
of  the  former  2)art  unaltered.  It  expresses 
very  nearly  the  sense  as  given  by  the  Tar- 
gxmi  of  Onkelos,  and  seems  in  no  respect  to 
violate  the  requirements  of  the  original.  In 
the  latter  portion  I  have  abstained  from 
changing  his  and  him  with  its  and  it,  al- 
though the  consensus  of  nearly  all  comment- 
ators is  that  way,  feeling  that  the  words 
may  apply  to  Abel,  who,  as  the  younger 
brother,  is  described  by  God  as  still  ready 
to  submit  himself  to  his  elder  brother.  This 
certainly  suits  better  ch.  iii.  16,  where 
nearly  the  same  words  occur.  I  have  only 
supplied  is,  instead  of  shall  be.  8.]  Here, 
again,  is  a  difficulty.  The  Ilebrew  word  ren- 
dered talked,  or  spoke,  has  not  properly  this 
meaning.  The  literal  rendering  is:  And  Cain 

said  unto  Abel  his  brother in  which 

case  there  is  an  ellipsis,  nothing  which  was 
said  being  mentioned.  And  in  consequence 
we  have  in  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch,  in  the 
LXX.,  the  Vulgate,  the  Syrian  Version,  and 
the  Targum  of  Pseudo-Jonathan,  these  words 
inserted,  "  Let  us  go  into  the  field,"  and  some 
are  in  favour  of  inserting  them  in  the  text. 
But  they  are  not  found  in  a  single  Ilebrew 
MS.,  nor  in  the  Targum  of  Onkelos,  nor 
were  they  in  the  Ilebrew  text  used  by  Origeu. 


22 


GENESIS. 


IV 


ech. 

xviii 

.  20, 

ai; 

xix. 

l;i. 

Ex 

od.  ii 

li.  ii. 

J;il 

Ties  V 

.  4. 

Ha 

b.  ii. 

11. 

See  Job 

xvi. 

IS; 

;  UVL. 

xxvi 

21, 

also 

Hel). 

xii 

.24. 

./^■ft/ 


+  or,  Mine  iiii- 

quit!/. 
II  ur,  Joigiven. 


it  came  to  pass,  when  tliey  were  in  tlie  field,  that  Cain 
rose  up  against  Abel  his  brother,  and  slew  him.  ^  And 
Jehovah  said  unto  Cain,  AYhere  is  Abel  th}"-  brother  Y 
And  he  said,  I  know  not :  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  ? 
10  And  he  said.  What  hast  thou  done  ?  *^the  voice  of  thy 
brother's  blood  crieth  imto  me  from  the  ground.  ^^  And 
now  art  thou  cursed  from  the  ground,  which  hath  opened 
her  mouth  to  receive  thy  brother's  blood  from  thy  hand  ; 
12  when  thou  tillest  the  ground,  she  shall  no_  more  yield 
unto  thee  her  strength  ;  a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond  shalt 
thou  be  in  the  earth.  ^^  And  Cain  said  unto  Jehovah,  ^  ^ly 
f  punishment  is  greater  than  can  be  |1  borne.  ^^  Behold,  thou 


Some  have  supposed  that  "  ?T'  shouhl  be 
supplied  after  "  said,"  viz.  that  ■which  God 
had  said  to  Cain, — *'  Cain  tokl  it  to  Abel ;  " 
but  this  -would  not  seem  likely  to  have  been, 
nor  if  it  had  happened,  would  it  come  na- 
turally into  the  narrative.  Others  have  sup- 
posed that  another  verb,  composed  of  nearly 
the  same  letters,  should  be  read,  signifying 
that  Cain  watched  Abel  his  brother  (so  Kno- 
bel) ;  hut  thus  we  should  be  entering  the 
realm  of  conjecture,  which  must  in  the  criti- 
cism of  the  sacred  text  be  strictly  forbidden. 
Gesenius,  in  his  Lexicon,  taking  the  meaning 
that  Cain  told  to  Abel  the  words  of  God, 
thinks  it  implied  that  a  temporary  reconcili- 
ation took  place,  but  that  afterwards  in  the 
field  Cain's  suppressed  indignation  broke  out 
again,  and  led  to  the  murder.  I  have  again, 
in  the  uncertainty,  left  the  A.  V.,  which, 
whether  it  exactly  render  the  Hebrew  verb 
or  not,  expresses  what  happened.  slew 

him]  In  what  manner  and  with  what  weapon 
is  uot  intimated,  and  it  is  vain  to  speculate. 
9.]  Knobel  remarks  that  the  evil  in 
man  has  made  a  step  onward :  Adam  and 
Eve,  when  challenged,  confessed  their  fault ; 
Cain   denies    his.  10.]    This    way    of 

speech,  representing  murder,  or  other  crime, 
crying  for  vengeance,  is  common  in  the  sacred 
text  (see  reff.).  It  is  in  allusion  to  this 
voice  of  Abel's  blood  that  in  ref.  Ilcb.  the 
writer  describes  Christ's  blood  as  speaking 
better  things :  reconciliation,  and  not  ven- 
gence.  11.]  cursed  from,  i.e.  driven 

out,  as  an  accursed  exile  from.  But  more 
than  this.  Not  only  does  the  ground  eject 
thee  from  a  particular  fovoured  spot  (com- 
pare "from  thy  face"  below,  vcr.  14),  but 
she  has  a  quarrel  against   thee  everywhere ; 


that  blood  (in  the  Hebrew  plural,  those 
streams,  drops  of  blood)  which  thou  hast 
poured  upon  her  shall  curse  her  for  thee,  so 
that  she  shall  no  longer  yicdd  her  strength 
under  thy  tillage, — a  double  curse  of  the 
ground  for  man's  sake.  Kalisch  disputes  this, 
the  usually  received  interpretation,  and  insists 
that  it  was  only  that  particular  portion  of 
ground  which  had  received  his  brotlier's 
blood  that  .should  be  cursed  with  barrenness 
for  Cain  :  viz.  the  land  of  Eden.  But  what 
follows  is  against  this  :  his  vagabcmd  life  is 
connected  with  the  ground  not  yielding  her 
strength  to  him.  And  what  additional  par- 
ticular would  it  be  in  his  punishment,  that 
the  district  from  which  he  was  to  be  ex- 
pelled should  not  yield  her  strength  to  him.' 
This  detail  would  act  pei-  contra  :  he  would 
be  driven  from  earth  which  would  be  bar- 
ren to  him,  to  that  which  would  be  fertile. 

The  LXX.  render  the  latter  clause  of  the 
verse,  '■^groaning  and  trembling  nhnlt  thou 
be  on  the  earth : "  probably  they  mistook  one 
of  the  Hebrew  verbs.  13.]  The  word 

rendered  punishment  is  the  common  terra 
for  sin,  and  so  may  indeed  be  rendered  here, 
provided  we  understand  si?i,  or  iniquity,  to 
imply  the  apprehended  magnitude  of  his  sin, 
now  first  revealed  to  him  by  its  punishment. 
And  the  words  rendered  than  I  can  bear 
may  also  have  the  meaning  given  in  the  mar- 
gin. Gesenius  prefers  both  these ;  and  they 
are  adopted  by  the  LXX.,  Vulgate,  Syriac 
Version,  the  Targum  of  Onkelos,  and  many 
ancient  expositors.  But  the  A.  V.  seems  to 
fit  the  context  better,  seeing  that  he  goes  on 
to  complain  of  the  heaviness  of  the  sentence 
against  him.  14.]    from   thy  face   I 

shall  be  hid  seems  certainly  to  point  to  some 


0-17. 


GENESIS. 


23 


^t  driven  mo  out  this  day  from  tlie  face  of  tlio  ground  ; 
and  from  tliy  face  shall  I  be  hid  ;  and  I  shall  be  a  fugitive 
I  and  a  vagabond  in  the  earth;  and  it  shall  come  to  pass,  *^-<^..^<- 
that  every  one  that  findcth  me  shall  slay  me.     i^  And  »*^i^«^'^'-/ 
Jehovah  said  unto  him,  Therefore  whosoever  slayeth  Cain,  r  ^i»-»^y' 
vengeance  shall  be  taken  on  him  sevenfold.     And  Jehovah  /  ^U^d/ 
appointed  a  s^sign  imto  Cain,  thatjno  one  finding  him  should  ^  l^xod"iiL  12./^/ '^^^' 
kill  him.     1*^  *[[  And  Cain  went  out  from  the  presence  of     1  »"'^^"''Mij'//.-.Vt/ 
Jehovah,  and  dwelt  in  the  land  of  JYod,   on  the  east  of  f-'!r.tC/ 
Eden.     17  ^jitl  Cain  knew  his  Avife  ;  and  she  conceived, 
and  bare  Enoch :  and  he  builded  a  city,  and  called  the 


especial  location  of  God's  manifested  presence 
in  Eden  (see  on  eh.  iii.  24).  Kalisch  is  very 
indignant  at  tliis  intei'prctation,  desij^nating 
it  as  "  an  almost  heathen  idea,  that  the  pre- 
sence of  God  is  bound  to  a  certain  spot,  which 
lie  has  chosen  for  His  residence,  or  the 
sphere  of  His  activity."  But  surely  lie  forgets 
the  "place  Avhere  I  have  put  my  name,''  and 
the  prevalence  of  this  idea  throughout  the 
IMosaic  dispensation  (see  Jonah  i.  3,  10). 
Cain's  fear  that  every  one  that  should  find 
him  should  slay  him,  seems  to  belong  to  a 
later  period  when  the  earth  should  be 
peopled,  for  as  yet  he  was  the  only  man  on 
earth  besides  Adam  and  Eve.  Perhaps  the 
history  ifee//"  belongs  to  this  later  period.  If 
so,  we  have  repeated  goings  back  to  the  ear- 
lier time  again,  e.g.  vv.  17,  2o.  15.]  AYe 
may  ask,  with  some  degree  of  surprise,  why 
God  granted  this  uncommon  indulgence  to  a 
murderer,  who  had  insidiously  killed  his  own 
brother  }  Did  not  God  Himself  give  the  dis- 
tinct precept,  "  He  who  sheddeth  man's  blood 
by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed"  ?  Why  was 
it  necessary  to  take  such  anxious  precautions 
to  save  a  life  forfeited  according  to  human 
and  Divine  right  ?  There  is  a  peculiar  point 
in  the  words :  "  He  who  killcth  the  murderer 
(Cain),  vengeance  shall  be  taken  on  him 
seven-fold."  "  We  hesitate  to  speak  with  de- 
cision where  the  text  is  silent."  Kalisch. 
Equally  mysterious  is  the  sign  which  God 
gave  to  Cain.  It  appears  to  have  been  some 
pledge  on  God's  part  which  reassured  him. 
The  A.  V.  appears  not  to  be  justified  in 
"■  set  a  7nark   upon."  16 — 24.]   Caiu^s 

dwelling  and  posterifij.  He  is  described  as 
going  eastward  further  still,  as  our  first 
parents  were  driven  eastward,  and  the  pre- 
sence of  God  was  set  up  on  the  east  of  Eden. 


The  name  Nod  signifies ^2(7^<  or  exile.  The 
Vulgate  does  not  give  any  proper  name,  but 
renders,  "  dwelt  as  a  fugitive  in  the  earth  on 
the  east  side  of  Eden.'^  But  from  the  ex- 
press naming  of  a  city  in  the  next  verse,  it  is 
probable  that  some  thus  named  territory  is 
intended.  Knobel  connects  the  whole  with 
China,  "  the  oldest  and  best  known  Cainitish 
people."  But  all  is  in  uncertainty.  We  have 
evidently  here  only  fragments,  too  brief  to  be 
intelligible,  of  ancient  prehistoric  documents. 

17.]  Of  the  wife  of  Cain  we  know 
nothing  :  no  daughters  of  Adam  and  Eve 
have  been  as  yet  mentioned ;  but  we  read  of 
such  at  ch.  v.  4.  The  narrative  proceeds, 
as  with  regard  to  Cain's  fear  expressed  in 
ver.  14,  as  if  the  world  were  already  peopled. 

Enoch]  i.  e.  dedication,  or  initiation. 
"  The  resemblance  of  names  in  the  two  fami- 
lies of  Cain  and  Seth  are  remarkable.  In  the 
family  of  Cain  we  have  Enoch  and  Lamech, 
Irad,  IMehujael,  Jlcthusael ;  and  in  the  fam- 
ily of  Seth  we  have  Enos,  Cainan,  Mahala- 
leel,  Jared,  Enoch,  Methuselah,  Lamech. 
Two  names  ai-e  here  identical,  Enoch  and 
Lamech  ;  in  a  third  there  is  a  likeness  of 
two  syllables."  Bp.  Wordsworth.  There  is 
not  the  least  ground  for  the  idea  started  by 
Ewald,  and  supported  by  others,  that  the  two 
families  were  really  one  and  that  we  have 
here  two  accounts  in  error.  The  names  do 
not  occur  in  like  places  in  the  genealogies; 
and  examples  of  similar  names  in  diflerent 
lives  are  common  enough  in  Scripture. 
"  There  is  a  Judith  among  the  daughters  of 
Hcth  (ch.  xxvi.  34);  a  Korah  among  the 
sons  of  Levi  (Exod.  vi.  31)  and  among  those 
of  Esau  (ch.  xxxvi.  5);  a  Kenaz  in  the 
family  of  Esau  (ch.  xxxvi.  11)  and  in  that 
of  Judah  (Xum.xxxu.  12)."  Keil.   And  on 


24 


GENESIS. 


lY. 


name  of  the  city,  after  the  name  of  his  son,  Enoch. 
1^  xVnd  unto  Enoch  was  born  Irad  :  and  Irad  begat  Mchu- 
jael:  and  Mehujael  begat  Methusael :  and  Mcthusael  be- 
gat Lamech.  ^^  ^  And  Lamech  took  unto  him  two  wives : 
the  name  of  the  one  uxm  Adah,  and  the  name  of  the 
other  Zillah.  ^o  And  Adah  bare  Jabal :  he  was  the  father 
of  such  as  dwell  in  tents,  and  of_such  as  have  ^'cattle. 
21  And  his  brother's  name  icas  Jubal :  he  was  the  father  of 
all  such  as  handle  the  ^  harp  and  J  pijje.  22  ^^d  Zillah,  she 
also  bare  Tubal-cain,  a  '^  forger  of  every  kind  of  '  instru- 
ment in  brass  and  iron :  and  the  sister  of  Tubal-cain  was 
Naamah.     23  And  Lamech  said  unto  his  wives, 

carried  during  dancing  or  processional 
motion, — more  what  we  understand  by  the 
lyre.  pipej  I'erbaps  a  combination  of 

pipes,  like  our  "  Pan's  pipe."  In  all  the  reff. 
the  A.  V.  has  "  organ."  But  that  instru- 
ment in  the  modern  acceptation  is  an  inven- 
tion of  later  ages.  The  word  (wjoogahv)  is 
connected  by  Kalisch  and  others  with  a  root 
meaning  to  blow,  and  must  be  taken  as  re- 
presenting icind  instruments,  as  the  other 
does  stringed  instruments.  22.]    The 

derivation  of  Tubal-cain  is  acknowledged  on 
all  hands  to  be  entirely  obscure,  and  it  would 
exceed  the  limit  of  the  present  work  to  give 
the  discussion  on  it.  The  syllable  cain  is 
omitted  by  the  LXX.  The  sense  may  be  as  in 
A. v.,  but  the  revised  text  is  preferred  by  the 
Hebraists,  tlie  sharpener  being  taken  not 
figuratively,  as  instructor,  but  literallj',  as  a 
forger  or  polisher;  and  the  latter  noun, 
whicli  is  literally  only  "cutting,"  that  which 
cutteth,  being  understood  of  the  tool,  not  of 
its  maker.  brass]  This  word,  which 

occurs  very  commonly,  is  always  rendered 
brass  in  the  A.V.  In  strict  accuracy  it  ought 
to  be  copper,  as  the  mixture  of  copper  and 
zinc,  now  known  as  brass,  was  not  known  to 
the  ancients.  But  the  word  brass  is  so  fami- 
liarized to  us,  that  I  have  not  thought  it 
well  to  make  the  change.  the  sister] 

Why  tliis  sister  is  named  does  not  appear, 
nor  need  we  be  anxious  to  inquire,  among 
these  primaeval  fragments.  The  name  Naa- 
mah  signilies  pleasatit,  or  lovely.  The  scope 
of  this  notice  of  the  Cainite  race  seems  to  be 
to  represent  them  as  advancing  in  all  worldly 
arts  and  arms,  and  becoming  exceedingly 
prosperous  on  earth  :  but  unconnected  with 
the  worship  of  Jehovah.   The  race  are  never 


h  ch.  xxvi.  U  ; 

xlvii.  17. 

Exod.  x.xxiv. 

19. 
i  ch.  xxxi.  27. 

1  Sam.  X.  5. 

Ps.cxxxvii.2. 

Isa.  xxiii.  Ifi, 

al  fr. 
j  Job  xxi.  12; 

XXX.  31.  Vs.. 

cl.  4,  only. 
k  a   sharpener. 

1  Sam  xiii. 

20.    Jobx»i. 

9.  Ps.  vii.  12; 

lii.  2,  only. 
1  here  only.*  See 

uote. 


any  hypothesis  concerning  our  Lord's  bre- 
thren there  must  have  been  repetitions  of  the 
names  Judah,  Joses,  Simon  in  the  Holy 
family.  "  The  similarity  of  names  shows 
nothing  more  than  that  the  two  branches  of 
the  human  race  maintained  intercourse 
with  one  another."  Keil.  Builded  is  literally 
"was  building,"  and  does  not  seem  to  im- 
ply that  ho  linished  the  building.  Here, 
again,  it  would  seem  as  if  the  world  were 
more  populous  than  by  the  place  of  the  nar- 
rative wc  should  suppose.  19.]  Poly- 
gamy originates  in  the  race  of  Cain,  and  in 
the  same  line  various  occupations  and  arts 
take  their  beginning.  Keil  notices  that  the 
names  of  Laiuech's  wives  indicate  already  a 
state  of  luxury  and  enjoyment.  Adah  signi- 
fies adornment  or  beauty  (it  was  also  the 
name  of  the  Hethite  wife  of  Esau,  ch.  xxxvi. 
2,  4),  and  Zillah,  tinkling  sound  (but  accord- 
ing to  Geseiiius,  shadow).  20.]  Jabal, 
probably  meaning  projit :  the  word  used  for 
"the  increase  of  the  earth"  (Deut.  xxxii.  22). 
He  introduced  the  nomad  pastoral  life  of  the 
eastern  tribes.  Keil  suggests  that  the  eating 
of  lUsh  may  be  well  implied  as  introduced, 
which  seems  not  to  have  been  from  the  first. 
The  word  rendered  cattle  simply  signilies  in 
the  primitive  meaning  possessions,  but  as 
the  sole  possessions  of  nomads  are  Hocks  and 
herds,  became  the  usual  word  for  cattle  (see 
reff.).  21.]  Jubal,  signifying  wi«s/ca^ 
sound :  the  word  is  represented  in  our  jubi- 
lant, Jubilee.  the  harp]  This  Hebrew 
word  i^Kinnohr)  occurs  41  times  in  the  Bible, 
and  is  always  rendered  harp  by  our  trans- 
lators. It  follows  from  the  context  of  several 
of  tlie  places  (see  in  reff.)  that  it  was  a  smaller 
instrument  than  the  harp  at  present,  being 


18—26. 


GENESIS. 


25 


Adali  and  Zillah,  Hear  my  voice  ; 

Ye  wives  of  Lamecli,  hearken  unto  my  speech  : 
For  I  have  skiin  a  man  for  my_ wound, 
And  a  young  man  for  mybruise, 
2-*  For  Cain  shall  be  avenged  sevenfold, 
And  Lamech  seventy  and  sevenfold. 
-^  ^  And  Adam  knew  his  wife  again ;  and  she  bare  a  son, 
and  called  his   name  Seth  :  For   God,  said^  site,  hath  ap- 
pointed me  another  seed  instead  of  Abel^  whom  Cain  slew. 
26  And  to  Seth,  to  him  also  there  was  born  a  son  ;  and  he 
called  his  name  Euos :  then  began  men  to  ™  call  upon  the 


y 


m  ch.  xii 
xiii.  4;  xxi. 
33;  xxvi.  25. 
Ps.  Ixxix.  6. 

Isu.  xii.  4. 


named  aj^ain  after  this  chapter.  23,  24.] 
Here,  again,  we  have  a  mysterious  particular 
iutrocUiced,  which  has  never  received  even  a 
probable  interpretation.  The  conjecture 
which  seems  at  any  rate  not  to  contradict 
any  probability  is  that  Lamech  had  slain 
some  man  in  self-defence ;  and  here  in  a 
poetical  form  he  represents  to  his  wives  his 
innocence,  and  his  conviction  that  if  Cain's 
slaughter  by  an  avenger  of  blood  were  for- 
bidden, much  more  must  his  own  be.  The 
renderings  "  to  my  woimdiiiff,"  "  fo  my 
hurt,"  in  the  A.  V.,  are  generally  regarded 
as  erroneous.  "  As  Drechsler  remarks,  the 
history  of  the  Cainite  race  begins  with  a  deed 
of  murder,  and  ends  with  a  song  of  murder," 
Wright :  who  with  many  modern  scholars, 
Ewald  included,  understands  the  words  as  a 
song  of  blasphemous  triumph  on  the  inven- 
tion of  the  sword,  and  renders  the  verb  in  the 
future,  I  icill  slay.  This  alone  may  serve 
to  show  how  entirely  the  interpretation  and 
reference  are  wrapped  in  uncertainty,  and 
also  to  read  a  lesson  to  all  positive  and  rash 
interpreters  of  other  parts  of  this  prima;val 
history,  which,  perhaps  only]  fi-om  our  own 
ignorance,  appear  to  us  more  clear  in  mean- 
ing and  reference.  This  saying  of  Lamech's 
presents  strikingly  the  characteristic  parallel- 
ism of  Hebrew  poetry,  and  has  consequently 
been  generally  arranged  as  a  lyrical  frag- 
ment. 25,  26.]  The  narrative  returns  to  the 
first  progenitors  of  mankind,  and  their  further 
posterity,  in  the  line  of  which  the  future 
history  is  to  be  continued.  It  seems  as  if 
the  writer  of  Genesis  had  retained  this  por- 
tion of  the  document  prior  to  the  new  narra- 
tive in  ch.  v.,  in  order  to  bind  the  por- 
tions together.  (See  on  ch.  v.  1  ff.)  "We  may 
notice  that  here  first  is  the  first  man  called 


by  the  proper  name  Adam,  without  the 
article  :  Ila-Adara,  the  man,  having  in  every 
case  where  he  is  directly  introduced  been 
heretofore   used.  Seth]  Appointed  or 

substituted.  The  words  are  put  into  the 
mouth  of  Eve,  without  any  notice  to  indicate 
that  they  are  hers.  Observe,  that  she  uses 
the  name  Elohim,  whereas  at  the  birth  of 
Cain  she  used  Jehovah  ;  can  any  reason  be 
assigned  for  this  ?  that  given  by  Knobel,  be- 
cause the  Sethites  were  Elohists,  would  be  a 
reason  for  the  name  appearing  in  any  inser- 
tion in  ch.  v.,  but  not  here,  where  we  are 
still  apparently  in  the  portion  belonging  to 
the  history  of  Cain  aiul  Abel.  Keil's  reason 
that  Elohim,  God,  who  had  made  up  the  loss, 
is  the  contrast  to  Cain,  man,  who  had  occa- 
sioned it  (so  also  Delitzsch),  has  perhaps  more 
likelihood,  but  hardly  seems  to  reach  the 
root  of  the  matter.  Least  of  all  will  the  fair- 
judging  reader  agree  with  Bp.  Wordsworth, 
who  tries  to  convince  him  that  because  the 
one  name  occms  in  a  passage  otherwise  de- 
voted to  the  other,  therefore  no  distinction  is 
to  be  traced  between  the  Elohistic  and  Jeho- 
vistic  documents.  I  would  rather  seek  the 
reason  in  supposing  that  this  joining  link 
between  the  history  in  ch.  iv.  and  that  in 
ch.  V.  itself  belongs  to  some  independent 
document.  26.]  Another  link  with  the 

next  independent  account  in  ch.  v.  Enosh 
signifies  7nan,  but  usually  on  the  side  of  our 
weakness  and  nothingness.  See  Ps.  viii.  5, 
where  the  word  is  used.  So  that,  as  Delitzsch 
observes,  the  meaning  is  not  far  removed 
from  that  of  Abel.  The  words  that  follow 
to  the  end  have  seemed  to  the  conmicntators 
full  of  mystery.  The  expression  "  to  call  on 
the  name  of  Jehovah  "  is  found  in  the  Pen- 
tateuch only  in  the  Jchovistic  parts  (see  reff.), 


26 


GEI^ESIS. 


Y. 


name  of  Jehovali.'  Y.  ^  This  is  tlie  "book  of  tlie  genera- 
tions of  Adam.  In  the  day  that  God  created  Adam,  in  the 
likeness  of  God  made  he  him  ;  ^  Male  and  female  created 
he  them  ;  and  blessed  them,  and  called  their  name  Adam,  in 
the  day  when  they  were  created.    ^  %  And  Adam  lived  an, 


and  in  tbe  sense  of  making  prayer  to  Him. 
The  notice,  here  inserted  by  the  Jehovist 
writer,  seems  merely  to  indicate  tliat  at  this 
time,  coincidently  with  the  apostasy  of  the 
Cainite  race,  there  began  to  be  a  distinct  and 
formal  worship  of  Jehovah,  that  God-fear- 
ing line  being  founded,  in  and  down  which 
the  true  worsliip  of  the  Lord  descended.  It 
is  not  that  then  first  the  name  of  Jehovah 
was  known  ;  for  we  have  Eve  using  it  at  the 
birth  of  her  first-born  ;  but  that  it  then  first 
became  a  formal  and  di;tinctive  name  in 
men's  worship.  There  is  notliing  correspond- 
ing to"  »ic?i"  in  tlie  Hebrew  ;  it  is  literally, 
then  began  to  call,  &c.,  no  subject  to  the  verb 
being  specified.  So  widely  differing  have  been 
the  interpretations,  that  the  Targum  of  On- 
kelos  paraphrases,  "  Then  the  children  of 
men  ceased  to  call  on  the  7iame  of  Jehovah." 
V.  1 — 32,]  The  generations  from  Adam  to 
Noah  (Eloliistic).  See  on  ver.  29.  From 
tliis  point  the  sacred  narrative  follows  only 
the  line  of  the  descendants  of  Seth,  the  call- 
ers upon  the  name  of  Jehovah ;    this  line 


alone  is  important  for  the  purpose  of  the 
tracing  down  of  God's  covenant  with  man, 
and  the  bringing  in  of  tlie  father  of  the 
fiiithful.  Of  such  patriarchs  there  are  ten 
from  Adam  to  Xoah,  and  again  (ch.  xi.  10, 
ff.)  ten  from  Noah  to  Abraham. 
1.  The  book  of  the  generations]  Simi- 
larly the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew  begins : 
meaning  the  register,  a  genealogy.  The 
recapitulation  shows  that  we  have  here  a 
complete  document,  not  a  continuation  mere- 
ly of  that  which  has  gone  before.  2.] 
This  is  a  recitation  of  ch.  i.  27,  28,  as  far  as 
"blessed  them."  The  word  Adam  is  the 
same  throughout  these  two  verses,  without 
the  article.  God  called  man  Adam  when  he 
was  created,  he  being  so  named  in  the  nar- 
rative of  tlie  act  of  his  creation,  ch.  i.  27. 
3,  ff.]  The  chronology  of  these  ten  pa- 
triarchs is  ranch  disturbed  by  the  varieties 
which  we  find  in  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch 
and  in  the  LXX.  The  accompanying  table 
will  show  the  differences. 


.•^  p  y . 


Present  Hebrew 

Samaritan 

text 

Pentateuch. 

L.i-v. 

Kamcs. 

Asp  at 
birth  of 

Rest  of 
life. 

Whola 
Ufc. 

Age  at 

birth  of 

son. 

Rest  of  Whole 
life.         lite. 

Aac  at 
binli  of 

Rest  of 
life. 

Whole 

life. 

Adam 

130 

800 

930 

130 

800 

930 

230 

700 

930 

Seth    ... 

10.5 

807 

912 

105 

807 

912 

205 

707 

912 

Enos  . 

90 

815 

905 

90 

815 

905 

190 

715 

905 

Cainan 

70 

840 

910 

70 

840 

910 

170 

740 

910 

Mahalalccl . 

G.5 

830 

895 

65 

830 

895 

165 

730 

895 

Jared 

162 

800 

962 

62 

785 

847 

162 

800 

962 

Enoch 

6.5 

300 

365 

65 

300 

365 

165 

200 

365 

Methuselah 

187 

782 

969 

67 

653 

720 

167 

(or  187 

802 
782) 

969 

Lamech 

182 

595 

777 

53 

600 

653 

188 

565 

753 

Noah 

500 

450 

950 

500 

450 

950 

500 

450 

950 

Age  of,  at  Flood 

100 

100 

100 

Total  from  Crea- 

, 

tion  to  Flood 

1656 

1307 

2242 

It  will  be  seen,  by  the  notes  on  ch.  xi.  10,  to   enter   on    disquisition    on    matters    of 

that  there  are  difterences  of  etpal  import-  this    kind,   as   to    di-aw  inference  from  the 

ance  in  the  genealogy  of  ten  post-diluvian  phenomeua    which    may   be   useful    to   an 

patriarchs.     Now,  the  object  of  the  present  English  reader  for  the  practical  benefit  of 

edition  of  the  Old  Testament  is  not  so  much  his  faith.      And  such  an   inference  in  the 


1—13. 


GE.XESIS. 


27 


Lundrccl  and  thirty  years,  and  begat  a  son  in  his  likeness, 
after  his  imago ;  and  called  his  name  Seth :  ^.And  the 
days  of  Adam  after  he  had  begotten  Seth  M^erc  eight  hun- 
dred years  :  and  he  begat  sons  and  daughters  :  ^  And  all 
;  the  days  that  Adam  lived  were  nine  hundred  and  thirty 
years  :  and  he  died.  ^  And  Seth  lived  an  hundred  and 
five  years,  and  begat  Enos  :  ^  And  Seth  lived  after  he  be- 
gat Enos  eight  hundred  and  seven  years,  and  begat  sons 
and  daughters  :  ^  And  all  the  daj's  of  Seth  were  nine 
hundred  and  twelve  years :  and  he  died.  ^  %  And  Enos 
lived  ninety  3-ears,  and  begat  Cainan  :  ^^  ^\.nd  Enos  lived 
after  he  begat  Cainan  eight  hundred  and  fifteen  years,  and 
begat  sons  and  daughters  :  ^^  ^ndi  all  the  days  of  Enos 
were  nine  hundred  and  five  years :  and  he  died.  ^^ 
^  xVnd  Cainan  lived  seventy  years,  and  begat  Mahalaleel : 
,^nd  Cainan    lived  after 


13 


he   begat   Mahalaleel   eight 


present  case  seems  to  be  this :  that  we  have, 
in  the  presence  of  such  uncertainty  as  tliis, 
absohitely  no  right  to  assert  the  numerical 
accuracy  of  these  dates.  Quarry  has  well 
pointed  out  that  as  we  do  not  undervahie 
tlic  Divine  authority  of  the  Gospels  of  St. 
]\[atthcw  and  St.  Luke,  because  of  the  de- 
monstrable inaccuracy,  as  to  matter  of  fact, 
of  tlie  genealogies  of  our  Lord  given' by 
those  two  Evangelists ;  so  neither  need  the 
Divine  authority  of  the  Book  of  Genesis  be 
undervalued,  because  of  tlic  manifest  uncer- 
tainty of  all  these  technical  chronological 
enumerations.  We  happen  to  know  that  in 
St.  Matthew's  genealogy  three  whole  gener- 
ations are  omitted  to  make  the  three  four- 
teens  square  with  one  another.  How  can 
■we  tell  what  similar  process,  or  what  other 
process,  may  not  have  been  employed,  to 
square  the  ten  antediluvian  and  the  ten 
postdiluvian  patriarchs  ?  How  can  we  tell 
what  difference  in  conventional  Avays  of 
reckoning,  at  present  untraceable  by  us,  may 
have  assigned  to  Noah  and  Abraliara,  who 
■were  contemporaries  during  oSjyears,  to  the 
former  a  life  of  950  years,  to  the  latter  a  life  of 
175  years?  On  such  matters,  and  where 
we  are  involved  in  such  uncertainties,  it 
surely  becomes  Christians  to  suspend  their 
judgment, — "not  to  be  unwise,  but  under- 
standing what  the  Avill  of  the  Lord  is," — 
and  above  all,  to  abstain  from  harsh  and  un- 
favourable expressions  towards  those  who 
dill'er  from  them  in  method  or  iu  result  of 


their  search  after  truth.  See,  on  the  whole 
details,  Mr.  Stuart  Poole's  able  article  on 
"  Chronology,"  in  Smith's  Biblical  Diction- 
ary. 3.  in  his  likeness,  after  his 
image]  Do  these  words  imply  a  continua- 
tion of  the  Divine  likeness  and  image,  or  a 
discontinuation?  The  word  '^own"  of 
coui-se  implied,  but  not  expressed  in  the  He- 
brew, and  inserted  in  the  A.  V.  for  per- 
spicuity, tends  to  throw  the  bias  somewhat 
too  strongly  in  the  latter  direction,  and  to 
bring  out  a  contrast  where  it  may  not  neces- 
sarily be  implied.  On  tlie  one  side  we  have 
Kalisch,  "  The  Divine  image  impressed  by 
God  as  the  first  man  was  inherited  by  his 
descendants ;  for  Adam  begat  Seth  in  his 
image  and  his  likeness  ;  "  and  Knobel,  even 
more  decidedly,  holding  that  to  insist  on 
the  identity  was  the  object  of  the  insertion 
of  these  words.  On  the  other  side,  we 
have  several  of  the  older  commentators, 
and  recently  Keil,  Bp.  Wordswortli,  and 
Prof.  Murphy.  Keil  gives  a  slightly 
moderated  view  —  that  it  is  meant  tliat 
Adam  transmitted  the  Divine  image  through 
his  own  condition — which  includes  the  de- 
terioration introduced  tlirough  sin.  But 
perhaps  it  is  more  natural,  seeing  that 
the  Divine  image  is  expressly  predicated  of 
man  again,  ch.  ix.  6,  and  as  a  reason  for  a 
permanent  institution,  to  understand  tlie 
words  simply  of  the  transmission  of  the 
image  of  God,  in  which  Adam  was  himself 
created.  12.  Mahalaleel]    praise    of 


28 


GENESIS. 


Y. 


.  vi  9,  only, 
e  Mic.  vi. 


hundred  and  forty  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daugliters  : 
1^  And  all  the  days  of  Cainan  were  nine  hundred  and  ten 
years  :  and  he  died.  ^^  ^  And  Mahalaleel  lived  sixty  and 
five  years,  and  begat  Jared  :  ^^  And  Mahalaleel  lived 
after  he  begat  Jared  eight  hundred  and  thirty  years,  and 
begat  sons  and  daughters  :  i'  And  all  the  days  of  Maha- 
laleel were  eight  hundred  ninety  and  five  years  :  and  he 
died.  ^S  51  And  Jared  lived  an  hundred  sixty  and  two 
years,  and  he  begat  Enoch  :  l^  And  Jared  lived  after  he 
begat  Enoch  eight  hundred  years,  and  begat  sons  and 
daughters :  20  ^-^^^  qH  |]^g  days  of  Jared  were  nine 
hundred  sixty  and  two  years  :  and  he  died.  21  ^  jt^^id 
Enoch  lived  sixty  and  five  years,  and  begat  Methuselah : 

22  And  Enoch  °  walked  with  God  after  he  begat  Methuse- 
lah three  hundred  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters  : 

23  And  all  the  days  of  Enoch  were  three  hundred  sixty 
and  five  years  :     24  J^j^d  Enoch  °  walked  with  God  :  and 


El  (God).  22  —  24.]  A  special  notice  is 

given  of  Enoch,  "  seventh  Irora  Adam."  The 
dread  monotony  of  "  and  he  died  "  is  now 
first  broken  through,  as  Delitzsch  well  ob- 
serves. His  further  commentary  is  worth 
extracting:  "Enoch's  life  had  another  issue. 
He  walked  with  God ;  this  expression,  only 
found  in  the  antediluvian  history  (see  reff.), 
is  more  than  to  tccd/c  before  God  (ch. 
xvii.  1 ;  xxiv.  40)  or  to  walk  after  .  . .  (Deut. 
viii  19).  It  betokens  the  most  intimate  com- 
munion of  life  witli  God,  as  it  were  a  walk- 
ing beside  God  who  still  walked  among  men 
(ch.  iii.  3).  [NVc  may  notice  that  the  LXX. 
render  walked  with  "^j/ertser/,"  and  that 
this  is  adopted  in  Ileb.  xi.  5,  6.]  The  name 
IIA-ELOniM  evermore  recalls  the  contrast 
of  the  created  and  worldly  to  God ;  in  the 
N.  T.  it  would  be  said  that  his  walk  was  in 
heaven.  To  this  walk  corresponded  his  end 
of  life  :  he  suddenly  disappeared  (on  this  ex- 
pression, was  not,  compare  retf.),  God  had 
taken  him  away.  AVith  the  other  patriarchs 
long  life  is  a  blessing  from  God  ;  Enoch's 
early  end  (his  36oth  year  corresponds  about 
to  our  33rd)  was  no  premature  death  :  he 
was  in  some  manner,  surprising  and  inex- 
plicable to  his  contemporaries,  taken  hence, 
and  taken  into  nearer  proximity  to  God,  with 
whom  he  had  here  walked.  It  is  not  said 
that  he  was  taken  up  to  heaven :  heaven 
Avas  at  that  time  not  yet  in  the  later  sense 


the  place  of  blessedness,  the  essential  par- 
ticipation of  God's  revelation  of  Himself  in 
glory.  Heaven  and  earth  were  not  yet,  in 
respect  of  their  personal  self-witness  of  God, 
separated  as  they  afterwards  were.  God 
snatched  away  Enoch  from  this  nether  world 
of  sin  and  evil,  to  which  he,  as  we  know 
from  Jude  14,  f.  (compare  Sirach,  xliv.  16), 
had  proclaimed  the  future  coming  of  God  to 
judgment,  and  set  hira  in  His  own  imme- 
diate presence,  where  is  no  sin  or  evil,  and 
that  without  his  becoming  a  prey  to  death, 
Heb.  xi.  5.  He  excepted  him,  therefore, 
from  the  law  of  death,  shewing  that  though 
He  had  subjected  man  to  this  law.  He 
bound  not  Himself  to  it, — that  personal  im- 
mortality was  an  attainable  gift  of  grace, 
that  for  them  who  Avalked  with  Him  in  the 
life  of  the  body,  a  higher  existence  was  re- 
served." And  Kalisch  well  observes,  "  "We 
are  convinced,  that  the '  taking  away '  of  Enoch 
is  one  of  the  strongest  proofs  of  the  belief  in 
a  future  state,  prevailing  among  the  He- 
brews ;  without  this  belief  the  history  of 
Enoch  is  a  perfect  mystery,  a  hieroglyph 
without  a  clue,  a  commencement  without 
an  end."  On  all  matters  regarding  the 
Tery  curious  apocryphal  Book  of  Enoch,  see 
Dr.  "Westcott's  article  in  Smith's  Biblical 
Dictionary,  and  the  Introduction  to  the 
Epistle  of  Jude  in  my  Xew  Testament  for 
Englishreaders.  25.]  Some  have  traced 


14— TI.  2. 


GENESIS. 


29 


Phe   was   not;    for  God   took  him.      25  ^Vnd   Methuselah   p,f^ , '''"•..'''• 

'  31!.  Jub  vu.  tt, 

lived   an  hundred   eighty   and    seven    years,    and   begat 

Lamech  :  -^  And    Methuselah    lived  after  he  begat   La- 

meeh  seven  hundred  eighty  and  two  years,  and  begat  sons 

and  daughters  :     27  ^nd  qH  the  days  of  Methuselah  were       a 

nine    hundred  sixty  and   nine   years :    and  he  died.     28 

51  And  Lamech  lived  an  hundred  eighty  and  two  years, 

and  begat  a  son  :    29  Xi^^  he  called  his  name  Noah,  saying,        «-         /•  ^^      "*• 

This  same  shall  relieve  us  frojn  our  work  and  the  toil  of  c^-f*^/  ^"^1  iTri 

our  hands,    because   of  the  ground  which  Jehovah  hath  fiz^r^/ 

cursed.     ^^  And  Lamech  lived  after  he  begat  Noah  five 

hundred   ninety    and   five    years,    and   begat   sons   and 

daughters  :    "^^  And  all  the   da^'s  of   Lamech  were  seven       «- 

liundred  seventy  and  seven  years :  and  he  died.     -^2  And 

Noah  was  five  hundred  years  old :  and  Noah  begat  Shem, 

Ham,  and  Japheth.     YI.  i  And  it  came  to  pass,  when 

men  began  to  multiply  on  the  face  of  the   ground,  and  ^'^*^ 

daughters  were  born  unto  them,    2  That  the  'i  sons  of  God  ^  xxxvm'v'"' 

saw  the  daughters  of  men  that  they  Kcre  fair;  and  they     ri'ii'xx^x."6;  :>'.'• 


in  the  name  Methuselah — man  of  sending 
forth  [Bp.  Wordsworth  adds  (0/  u-ater), 
but  this  seems  pure  fancy] — a  prophetic 
intimation  of  tlie  Hood,  secinsj  that  he 
died  tlie  same  year  as  the  flood  began. 
But  all  this  is  untrustworthy.  Gcscnius 
intei-prets  the  name,  the  man  of  the  wea- 
pon (missile).  Such  ground  needs  tlie 
utmost  caution  in  treading.  29.]  Noah, 

i.  e.  rest.  The  sacred  writer  connects  the 
name  with  another  root  signifying  to  com- 
fort (see  below),  "caring,"-  as  Simonis 
(quoted  in  Gesenius)  observes,  "  more  for  the 
reality  of  things  than  of  words."  The  con- 
struction is, — shall  comfort  us  from,  i.  e.  shall 
comfort  tis  by  relieving  us  from.  This  is 
nearest  expressed  in  English  by  "  relieve  us 
from,"  as  Kalisch.  This  last  comment- 
ator understands  the  name,  as  given,  to  be 
prophetic  of  a  relief  of  the  human  race  from 
the  necessity  of  living  on  vegetable  food,  re- 
quiring the  hard  labour  of  incessant  tillage, 
and  tlie  coming  permission  to  eat  the  llcsh 
of  animals.  Surely  this  is  most  fanciful. 
Even  if  we  are  to  understand  ch.  i.x.  3,  tf. 
as  the  first  JJivine  sanction  for  the  practice 
of  eating  flesh,  who  shall  say  that  the  prac- 
tice did  not  prevail  long  before  ?  Ob- 
serve, that  the  name  Jehovau  is  here  found. 


It  was  Jehovah  Elohim  -who  had  cursed  the 
ground,  ch.  iii.  17.  And  thus  the  occurrence 
of  the  name  is  a  sign  of  minute  accuracy, 
■which  should  not  be  overlooked.  It  may  point 
to  a  "  Jehovistic"  insertion  or  correction  of 
the  "  Elohistic  "  narrative.  32.]    The 

mention  of  the  t]iree  sons,  unprecedented  as 
yet,  serves  to  preface  us  for  their  playing  some 
notable  part  in  the  history  whicli  is  to  fol- 
low :  also  for  the  continuation  of  the  "  book 
of  generations,"  no  longer  in  one  main  line, 
but  in  three  branches.  See  ch.  x.  1,  fl'.  Of 
these  sons,  Ilam  was  the  youngest  (see  ch.  ix. 
24) ;  Shem  the  eldest  (see  ch.  x.  21,  in  our 
text).- 

VI.    1— IX.  29.]    The    life-time    of 
No.\H.     TiiK   cwusES  OF   THE  Flooh,  its 

HISTORY      AND      ITS      CONSEQUEN-CES.        On 

the  mixed  Jehovistic  and  Elohistic  charac- 
ter, see  Introduction.  1  —  7.]  Tlie 
causes  of  the  Flood.  Andlierein  (1—  4)  the 
unnatural  union  of  sons  of  God  with  daugh- 
ters of  men,  by  which  giants  and  men  of  re- 
nown came  upon  earth.  AVitli  regard  to 
these  sons  of  God,  I  liavc  maintained  in  the 
Introduction  to  the  Epistle  of  Jude,  N.  T. 
for  English  readers,  vol.  ii.  part  2,  tliat  they 
are  most  probably  to  be  understood  as  being 
angels.     In  no  other  way,  in  spite  of  the 


30 


GENESIS. 


VI. 


-^/ 


■X7 


took  tliem  wives  of  all  wliicli  they  cliose.  ^  And  JeliOYali 
said,  My  spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man,  for  that 
he  also  is  flesh :  yet  his  daySj^sEall'  be  an  hundred  and 


arj^nmciits  to  the  contrary  by  Hengstenberg, 
Quarry,  aud  others,  can  we  understand  the 
contrast  between  the  sons  of  God  and  the 
daughters  of  Man:  for  however  the  dis- 
tinction may  have  been  drawn  between  the 
godfearing  race  of  the  Sethites  and  the  un- 
godly race  of  the  Cainites,  nothing  ap- 
proaching any  justitication  of  such  names  for 
thetwohasbeuuadduced.  Andagain,  only  thus 
can  St.  Jude's  expression  respecting  Sodom 
and  Goniorrha,  that  they  committed  foniica- 
tion  in  like  manner  to  these  angels,  be  ex- 
plained. The  great  objection  to  this,  which 
was  the  opinion  of  the  early  fathers,  and  of 
I'hilo  and  Josephus,  seems  to  be  that  it 
opens  the  way  to  the  idea  that  the  narration 
is  mythical  and  not  historical.  But  is  this 
really  so .'  And  if  it  were  so,  is  it  to  over- 
bear the  plain  sense  of  words,  and  the  com- 
mon sense  of  interpretation  ?  What  wonder 
would  it  be, — what  Avould  it  be  worthy  of 
narration,— that  these  took  place,  mixed 
marriages  between  the  godly  and  ungodly  } 
Has  not  this  been  already  testified  by  the 
community  of  names  in  the  Sethite  and 
Cainite  lines .'  And  what  issue  such  as  is 
here  stated,  could  have  been  the  result  of 
those  mixed  marriages  .>'  Again,  in  order  to 
carry  through  what  I  cannot  help  calling 
this  makeshift  interpretation,  the  word 
"men,"  in  ver.  1,  must  be  limited  to  the 
Cainite  line,  whereas  it  is  plainly  and  un- 
raistakeably  used  of  the  whole  human  race, 
and  as  about  to  distinguish  the  human  race 
from  some  other  order  of  beings  to  be  pre- 
sently mentioned.  "We  conclude,  therefore, 
moved  by  these  considerations,  and  by  the 
others  adduced  by  Dr.  Kurtz,  that  these 
sons  of  God  were  beings  of  a  higher 
order  than  man.  We  are  here  in  the 
region,  as  Bp.  Wordsworth  has  well  argued 
in  his  long  note  on  the  flood,  of  the 
miraculous,  and  our  simple  understanding 
of  the  same  text  is  not  to  be  overthrown 
by  considei-ations  deduced  from  our  present 
ordinary  conception  of  things,  To  what 
ultimate  inference  this  leads  us  is  no  con- 
cern of  the  interpreter.  On  the  phrase  sons 
of  God,  see  rcfl\  3.]  Here   is  another 

verse  over  which  much  controversy  has  been 
spent.  The  two  streams  of  interpretation 
may  be  thus  described:  1.  (corresponding  to 


the  translation,  My  spirit  shall  iiot  alwai/s 
rule  in  man  while  he  is  also  flesh)  The 
Spirit  of  God,  the  Lord  who  giveth  life,  was 
not  any  longer  to  preside  in  man  in  the  flesh 
for  so  long  a  period  as  it  had  hitherto  done, 
approaching  a  thousand  years  ;  but  his  life 
shall  henceforth  be  reduced  to  a  hundred 
and  twenty  years.  So,  in  the  main,  the 
LXX.,  the  Vulgate,  Kalisch,  Knobel,  and 
many  others ;  and  so  Delitzsch,  but  he  un- 
derstands the  former  clause  to  mean  that 
God  would  withdraw  His  Spirit  of  life  from 
the  whole  race  of  man,  i.  e.  destroy  the  race, 
—  and  the  latter  clauses  as  below.  2. 
(corresponding  to  the  translation,  Mtj  spirit 
shall  not  always  strive  xcith  man,  for  that 
[because]  he  also  is  flesh)  The  Spirit  of  God, 
the  author  and  suggester  of  all  that  is  good 
in  man,  was  not  any  longer  to  strive  with  a 
race  who  had  by  their  carnal  corruption 
shewn  themselves  to  be  flesh.  also]  i.  e. 

as  well  as  the  lower  tribes  (so  Knobel) ;  but 
in  this  prospect  of  the  withdrawal  of  God's 
striving  Spirit  in  man,  his  days  (of  gracious 
respite)  should  be  120  years.  Thus  this 
latter  view  regards  the  words  as  spoken 
120  years  before  the  flood,  i.  e.  in  the  480th 
of  Xoah's  life.  So  Kinichi,  and  most 
modern  interpreters.  The  whole  verse 

is  a  battle-field  •  of  commentators,  and  it 
seems  impossible  to  decide.  It  is,  as  so  often 
in  the  interpretation  of  difficult  0.  T.  texts, 
Hebraist  against  Hebraist,  one  great  scholar 
insisting  on  a  meaning  for  a  word  which 
another  great  scholar  entirely  denies  that  it 
can  ever  have.  We  may  say  here,  by 

way  of  laying  down  some  landmarks  for  the 
interpretation,  1.  That  the  spiritual  meaning, 
of  God's  (warning)  Spirit  striving  with  man, 
is  something  quite  alien  as  yet  from  the 
primaival  narrative.  2.  That  the  interpreta- 
tion of  "  his  days,"  as  meaning  his  time  of 
grace  intervening  before  judgment  is  in- 
flicted, is  not  after  the  analogy  of  ch.  v., 
where  "the  days  of"  is  used  ten  times  in 
the  sense  of  "  the  life  of."  3.  That  this  last 
interpretation  cannot  be  said  to  square  with 
the  following  history,  in  which  the  lives  of 
the  patriarchs  far  exceed  the  limit  of  120 
years.  4.]  The  context  shews  (so  Kno- 

bel and  others.  Lange,  &c.,  maintain  the 
contrary,  that  the  giants  were  on  the  earth 


3—11. 


GENESIS. 


31 


^    The  •■  giaiits  were  in  tlic  cartli  in  those 


twenty  years 

daj's,  and  also  after  that  the  sons  of  God  came  in  unto  the 
daughters  of  men,  and  they  bare  chihlren  to  them,  these  were 
the  mighty  men  which  xccvc  of  old,  men  of  renown.  ^  ^  And 
Jehovah  saw  that  the  wickedness  of  man  was  great  in  the 
earth,  and  ihat  OA'cry  ®  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his 
heart  iccm  only  evil  continuall}'.  ^  And  it  repented  Jehovah 
that  he  had  made  man  on  the  earth,  and  it  grieved  him  at 
his  heart.     7  And  Jehovah  said,  I  will  destroy  man  whom 

I  have  created  from  the  face  of  the  ground ;  both  man, 
and  beast,  and  the  creeping  thing,  and  the  fowl^  of  the 
air;  for  it  rcpenteth  me  that  I  have  made  them.     ^  But  Jut^-^-i/ 
Noah  found  grace  in  the  eyes  of  Jehovah.      ^  ^  These  are  ^  t'^-^/ 
the  generations  of  Noah  :    Noah  was  a  righteous  man, 
perfect    in    his    generations:    Noah  walked    with   God.  ^'u... , 

10  And  Noah  begat  three  sons,  Shem,  Ilam,  and  Japheth. 

II  I'he  earth  also  was  corrupt  before  God,  and  the  earth  i.«^//  'ij  oj 


k</J^ 


J  t*ri.t 

8  ch.  Tlii.  21.    • 
Duut.   xxxi.  ' 
21 ;    ouly    in 
I'lnlal.     1 
Chron  xx<iii. 
U;    XXIX.    w. 
I'll.  ciii.  4 
(frami-).  Isa. 
xxvi.  3;       / 
xxxi.  16      ' 
(Ihiiii; 
Iraiiied). 
Mull.  ii.  18 


/  t^^ 


Lt.  ^       f^ri' 


^"-''^•^*;'#jr 


previously  to  those  marriages)  that  these 
giants  (see  ref. :  the  word  appears  to  be  con- 
nected with  a  root  signifying  to  fall,  and  so 
is  variously  interpreted, — violent  men,  who 
fall  upon  otliei's, — or  apostates,  men  who 
have  fallen),  men  of  great  stature  and  power, 
are  spoken  of  as  the  oifspring  of  the  unhal- 
lowed unions  indicated  above.  Knobel  takes 
this  verse  to  mean  that  these  giants  who  were 
the  first  offspring  of  the  unions,  propagated 
their  race  upon  earth,  and  became  parents 
of  the  mighty  men  of  old,  men  of  renown. 
Delitzsch,  who  participates  the  above  view 
concerning  these  unions,  understands  the 
description  in  the  latter  part  of  the  verse  to 
be  that  of  the  giants  themselves.  "NVe  may 
remark,  in  the  midst  of  all  this  whirl  of  in- 
terpretations, that  it  is  impossible  not  to 
connect  such  notices  as  this  with  the  subse- 
quent frequent  intimations  of  giant  races  in 
and  among  the  nations  bordering  on  Pales- 
tine. See  Xum.  xiii.  33;  Deut.  ii.  11;  iii. 
11,  13;  Josh.  xii.  4  ;  xiii.  12;  xv.  8;  xvii. 
1-5;  xviii.  16;  2  Sam.  xxi.  10  (end);  1 
Chron.  xx.  4  (end).  It  may  be  said  that 
such  a  connexion  is  at  once  precluded  by 
the  intervention  of  the  Deluge  ;  but  it  must 
not  be  forgotten  that  even  among  the  pos- 
terity of  Xaah  there  was  an  accursed  race. 
5.]  imagination  seems  exactly  the 
word  :  it  is  literally/orma^/t)??.,  product  of  the 
thought ;  see  reff.  continually]  literal- 


ly, every  day.  6.]  The  anthropopathisra 

of  this  verse  is  striking.  See  Exod.  xxxii. 
14  ;  1  Sam.  xv.  29,  and  the  true  account 
of  the  matter  in  Xum.  xxiii.  19.  7.] 

The  whole  living  world  is  involved  in  the 
punishment    of    man's    wickedness :     with 

8.]  One  exception — Xoah,  and,  as  in- 
volved in  his  rescue,  his  family.  9—22.] 
The  generations  of  Noah  ;  the  beginning  of 
the  history  of  the  Flood.  (Elohistic :  assigned 
to  the  writer  of  ch.  i. — ii.  3  ;  ii.  1,  and  of 
ch.  v.).  On  the  opening,  sec  on  ch.  v.  1. 

perfect  in  his  generations]  Tho 
word  rendered  generations  is  not  the  same 
as  that  thus  rendered  before  in  this  verse. 
It  is  the  word  commonly  found  in  the  sense 
of  a  generation  of  men,  not  of  a  series  of 
genealogical  successions.  Tiic  clause  is 
here  usually  interpreted  of  Noah's  blame- 
less chai-acter  among  the  generations  of 
men  Avith   whom   be   lived.  walked 

with  God]   See   on    ch.   v.   22.  10.] 

The  three  sons  of  Noah  are  here  mention- 
ed again  because  of  their  position  as  tiie 
forefatliers  of  the  new  earth,  in  connex- 
ion with  Noah,  whose  rightcou.sncss  was  to 
rescue  himself  and  family  from  the  coming 
catastrophe.  11.]  A  more  detailed  ac- 

count of  that  which  ver.  5  has  already  by 
implication  revealed.  The  ten  generations 
which  had  passed  had  been  a  downward  pro- 
gress into    universal    depravity.    Delitzsch 


32 


GENESIS. 


TI. 


t  F.zek.  xxii. 

2fi.  Zeph.  iii. 

4.   Jer.   xxii. 

3. 
11  Exod.  xxxii. 

7.  Deut. 

xxxii.o,  al.fr. 


V  here(ch.  vi. — 

ix.):indExod. 

ii.  3,  5,  only, 
w  ^  here    only. 

See  Exod. 

XXX.  10,  reff. 
X  (see  note) 

Exod.  IXV.2; 

xxxvii.  2. 

y  see  ch.  xUii. 
16.    Deut. 
xviii.  -id,  &c. 


was  filled  witli  *  violence.  ^2  And  God  looked^npon  the 
earth,  and,  behold,  it  was  ^  corrupted ;  for  all  flesh  had 
corrupted  its  way  upon  the  earth.  ^^  And  God  said  unto 
Noah,  The  end  of  all  flesh  is  come  before  me ;  for  the 
earth  is  filled  with  violence  through  them  ;  and,  behold, 
I  will  destroy  them  with  the  earth,  i'^  %  Make  thee  an 
"^ark  of  gopher  wood  ;  cells  shalt  thou  make  in  the  ark,  and 
shalt  ^  pitch  it  ^  within  and  without  with  "^  pitch.  ^^  And 
this  is  the  fasli  ion  which  thou  shalt  make  it  of:  The  length  of 
the  ark  s/iall_bc  three  hundred  cubits,  the  breadth  of  it  fifty 
cubits,  and  the  height  of  it  thirty  cubits.  ^^  ^'  light  shalt 
thou  make  for  the  ark,  and  in  a  cubit  shalt  thou  finish  it 
above  ;  and  the  door  of  the  ark  shalt  thou  set  in  the  side 
thereof;  with  lower,  second,  and  third  sfor.ies  shalt  thou 


points  out  the  fearful  contrast  in  ver.  12  to 
cli.  i.  31.  The  reluctance  which  our  trans- 
lators shewed  to  writing  "  its  "  lias  here 
given  rise  to  an  amhiguit)' ;  " /as  way  " 
is  often  understood  as  God's  way.  13. 

through  them]  is  literally  in  their  presence, 
i.  e.  by  their  conscious  agency.  with] 

i.e.  together  with.  the  earth]  Meaning 

here,  by  the  earth,  not  the  very  substance  of 
the  earthitself,  but  the  superficial  contents  of 
it— fields,  building,  trees,  &c.  14—22.] 

Command  to  Noah  to  build  the  ark,  and 
specification  of  the  same.  The  word  for 
ark,  iehvah,  is  found  only  in  the  history  of 
Xoah  and  in  that  of  Moses.  See  reff.  It  ap- 
pears to  have  been  originally  not  a  Hebrew 
but  an  Egyptian  word.  gopher  wood] 

"  The  word  gopher  occurs  in  this  passage 
only ;  its  root  seems  to  signify  to  cover :  it 
is  evidently  a  tree  which  yields  a  resinous, 
pitch-like  substance,  as  the  lime,  fir,  and 
cedar.  ...  it  signifies  here  most  likely  the 
cypress,  which  was  in  some  parts  of  Asia 
exclusively  used  as  the  material  of  ships; 
in  Athens  for  coffins  ;  and  in  Egypt  for  the 
mummy-cases,  for  which  purpose  it  was 
peculiarly  adapted,  on  account  of  its  great 
durability  and  hardness."  Kalisch. 
cells]  literally,  nests,  i.  e.  compartments, 
within  and  without]  is  expressed  by 
a  Ilebrcw  idiomatic  expression  signifying 
from  the  house  and  from  the  street,  as 
also  in  reff.  The  word  rendered  pitch,  as 
both  verb  and  substantive,  is  nearly  rela- 
tive to  gopher  above.  It  gets  its  meaning 
from  covering :  a   substance   smeared   over 


the  surfoce.  15.]  Assuming  the  cubit  at 

21  inches,  which  seems  the  most  approved 
account  of  it,  the  ark  would  be  525  ft. 
long,  87  ft.  6  in.  broad,  and  52  ft.  6  in. 
high,  not  far  from  the  size  of  Canterbury 
Cathedral,  except  that  it  would  be  many 
feet  less  in  height.  It  would  be  considerably 
larger  than  the  largest  British  man  of  war. 
"  The  Great  Eastern,  however,  is  both 
larger  and  deeper  than  the  ark,  being  680 
feet  in  length  (691  on  deck),  83  in  breadth, 
and  58  in  depth.  Solomon's  temple,  the 
proportions  of  which  are  given  in  1  Kings 
vi.  2,  Avas  the  same  height  as  the  ark,  but 
only  one-fifth  of  the  length,  and  less  than 
half  the  width."  — Prof.  Pcrownc,  in  Smith's 
Biblical  Dictionary,  axt.  "  Xoah,"  which  see 
for  much  interesting  matter  on  this  part  of  the 
history.  16.  light]    Not    a    window, 

which  gives  the  absurd  idea  of  there  being 
but  one  window  in  the  ark.  The  word  used 
in  ch.  viii.  6  is  a  different  one.  See  there. 
This  terra,  here  in  the  singular,  is  used  in 
the  dual  number  23  times  in  the  0.  T., 
and  every  time  in  the  sense  of  noon  day, 
i.  e.  the  doubling  of  light.  See  reff.  Noah 
was  to  make,  i.  e.  to  provide  for  giving,  light 
to  the  ark.  This  might  be  done  either  by  a 
series  of  windows  (see  on  ch.  viii.  6)  or  by 
leaving  a  vertical  space  on  each  side,  on  the 
ridge  of  the  roof,  and  covering  this  on  the 
top.  When  the  commentators  say  that  some 
translucent  material  must  have  been  em- 
ployed, or  the  rain  would  have  come  in,  they 
forget  that  such  a  raised  lantern  along 
the  ridge,  especially  if  protected  by  eaves , 


2— YII.  1. 


GENESIS. 


33 


make  it.     ^"  And,  beliold,  I  will  bring  the  flood  of  waters    ^       <^-\ 

ii|)()u  the  earth,  to  destroy  all  flesh,  wherein  h  the  breath 

ul  life,  from  under  the  heaven;  every  tiling  that  is  in  the   ^^   t 

earth  shall  die.     ^^  But    with    thee    will    I    establish   my   v^ri;/!. 

covenant ;  and  thou  shalt  come  into  the  ark,  thou,  and 

thy  sons,   and  thy  wife,   and  thy   sons'  wives  with  thee. 

^^  And  of  every  living  thing  of  all  flesh,  two  of  every  sort 

shalt  thou  bring  into  the    ark,  to  keep  t/teiii  alive  with 

thee;  they  shall  be  male  and  female.     20  Qf^fowls  after^^'<^ 

their  kind,  and  of  cattle  after  their  kind,  of  every  creeping  ^^ 

thing  of  the  earth  after  his  kind,  two  of  every  sort  shall  come  ;••««— '^/ 

unto  thee,  to  keep  f/iem  alive,     ^i  And  take  thou  unto  thee 

of  all  food  that  is  eaten,  and  thou  shalt  gather  it  to  thee ; 

and  it  shall  be  for  food  for  thee,  and  for  them.     22  Thus 

did  Xoah ;  according  to  all  that  God  commanded  him,  so 

did  he.     YII.  ^  And  Jehovah  said  unto  Noah,  Come  thou  '^  -Tr.  /<,  ' 

and  all   thy  house  into   the   ark  ;  for    thee  have  I   seen 


sliijlitly  ovcrliunj^injr,  -would  admit  very 
little  water.  This  idea  would  also  explain 
the  following  words,  "in  a  cubit  shalt  tliou 
liiiish  it  above  ;  "  viz.  that  the  height  of  the 
lantern,  the  vertical  dimension  of  the 
"  light,"  was  to  be  a  cubit,  running  the 
whole   length  of  the  ai-k.  shalt  thou 

make  it]  That  is,  the  ark,  not  the  door. 
18.]  This  is  the  first  ttieiUion  of  a  covenant 
between  God  and  man,  although  one  was 
implied  in  the  narrative  of  tlic  events  imme- 
diately following  the  fall.  To  Christians,  who 
see  in  the  rescue  from  the  flood  a  type  of 
baptism,  this  word  is  of  interest.  19.] 

This  command  is  differently  .given  in  the 
Jehovist  account,  cli.  vii.  2,  3,  but  referred 
to  again  in  t/nse  same  terms,  not  in  those, 
in  the  resumption  of  the  Elohistic  narrative, 
ch.  vii.  8,  9.  Let  the  reader  beware  of  the 
well-meant  desires  by  which  it  has  been 
attempted  to  show  that  there  is  no  such 
variety  in  the  accounts.  When  we  once  con- 
sent to  break  down  tiie  barriers  of  simple- 
minded  truth  and  to  commit  pious  frauds  to 
save  the  literal  accuracy  of  Scripture,  we 
let  go  all  evidence,  and  all  fair  judgment 
thereupon.  If  two  may  mean  seven,  and 
seven  two,  what  need  is  there  for  us  to 
mark,  learn,  and  inwardly  digest  Scripture 
at  all  ?  The  discrepancy  is  recognized  by 
the  best  of  the  orthodox  commentators,  e.  g. 
Delitzscli  says,  on  ch.  vii.  1 — 9,  "I  hold  it 


undeniable  that  ch.  vii.  1 — 9  belongs  to  the 
Supplementa,  and  that  it,  in  respect  of  the 
contradiction  between  vii.  1 — 9  and  vi. 
9,  ff.,  vii.  10  — 13,  as  to  the  number 
of  the  beasts  to  be  included,  is  similarly 
situated  to  ch.  ii.  5,  ff,  and  i.  1,  ff.  in  re- 
spect of  the  contradiction  as  to  the  Creation. 
These  contradictions  point  to  different 
sources,  but  admit  of  harmonizing  in  the 
spirit  of  the  narrative.  The  original  docu- 
ment spoke  of  only  two  of  each  kind  taken 
in  by  Xoah,  the  Supplementa  specifies  this 
more  clearly  fi'om  sources  which  gave  more 
particulars,  &c." — Genesis,  p.  190.  That 
some  solution  of  the  discrepancy  was  possible 
and  was  accepted,  is  evident  by  the  fact  of 
the  insertion  of  the  two  accounts  in  immedi- 
ate contiguity  by  the  sacred  writer.  20.] 
Here  we  have  again  the  phraseology  of  ch.  i. 
21.]  All  food  that  is  eaten  would  at 
this  time  probably  comprehend  only  vege- 
table food,— herbs  and  fruits.  22.]  Refers 
mainly  to  the  building  of  the  ark ;  but  also 
includes  prospectively  what  the  same  writer 
by-aud-by  relates  in  detail,  ch.  vii.  7 — 9. 

VII.  1—10.]  Eiitri/  of  Xoah  into  the  Ark  ; 
command  of  God  to  brinrj  in  the  clean  beasts 
bij  sevens,  and  the  unclean  hi/  two ;  and 
fowls  by  sevens.  The  foundation  of  the 
passage  is  Elohistic  (compare  ver.  9),  but  the 
subsequent  hand  of  the  Jehovist  is  evident 
in  the  passage  1 — 6. 

D 


34  GENESIS.  VII. 

rigliteous  before  me  in  this  generation.  ^  Qf  every  clean 
^^^^  /  beast  tliou  shalt  take  to  tbee  by^  sevens,  the  male  and  his 

female :  and  of,  beasts  that  are  not  clean,  two,  the  male 
>^  /       ,'  ^  i  '  v-and  his  female.     ^,0f  fowU,  also- of  the  air  by  sevens,  the 

male  and  the  female ;  to  keep  seed  alive  upon  the  face  of 
'  '.^-  "•  .5  ,      all  the  earth.     ^  ^  For  yet  seven  days,  and  I  will  cause  it 

Amos  IV.  7.  J  J     ' 

to  rain  upon  the  earth  forty  days  and  forty  nights ;  and 
every  living  substance  that  I  have  made  will  I  destroy 
from  off  the  face  of  the  ground.  ^  And  Noah  did  accord- 
ing unto  all  that  Jehovah  commanded  him.  ^  And  Noah 
icas  six  hundred  years  old  when  the  flood  of  waters  was 
upon  the  earth.  '^  ^  And  Noah  Avent  in,  and  his  sons, 
and  his  wife,  and  his  sons'  wives  with  him,  into  the  ark, 
^  because  of  the  waters  of  the  flood.     ^  Of  clean  beasts,  and 

'  of  beasts  that  are  not  clean,  and  of  fowls,  and  of  every 

thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth,  9  there  went  in  two 
and  two  unto  Noah  into  the  ark,  the  male  and  the  female, 
as  God  had  commanded  Noah.     ^^  And  it  came  to  pass 
*  Lev.^'xi.' 3R.      after  seven  days,  that  the  waters  of  the  flood  were  upon 
ptixxxvii.7.  the  earth.     ^^  ^  In  the  six  hundredth  year  of  Noah's  life, 

b  ch.  viii.  2.  ** 

iD^^Eccrxii.'^'  in  the  second  month,^the  seventeenth  day  of  the  month, 
Hos'xm'3  \the  same  day  were  all  the  *  fountains  of  the  great  deep 
0,1    broken  up,  and   the  ^windows   of  heaven  were  opened. 


.  Xlll. 

(chimney^ 
Wal.  ill.  10, 
only. 


2.]  The  distinction  between  clean  and  im-  two  and  two,  though  it  looks  like  the  fulfil- 
clean  cannot  for  one  moment  be  treated  as  ment  of  tlie  command  in  vi.  19,  20,  need  not 
an  anachronism,  introduced  here  out  of  the  be  inconsistent  with  the  taking  in  of  sevc7i 
Mosaic  law.  Those  who  are  prepared  to  pair  of  clean  animals  in  ver.  2. 
think  so  humbly  of  the  writer  of  the  Penta-  11—24.]  Principally  Elohistic.  "  The  flood 
tench  surely  forget  that  he  and  those  who  began  on  the  17th  day  of  the  2Dd  month, 
came  after  him  must  have  been  aware  of  which  was  later  called  Jar  :  it  corresponds 
such  an  absurdit}-.  Eathcr  is  the  distinction  Avith  April  or  May  ;  it  is  not  the  Marliesh- 
a  testimony  to  the  subsistence  at  that  time  van,  or  October,  which  is  never  designated 
of  sacrificial  arrangements,  which  would  as  the  second,  but  the  eighth  month  ;  for  the 
necessitate  such  a  distinction.  That  sacrifice  year  is,  throughout  the  Bible,  counted  from 
was  in  view  is  clear  from  ch.  viii.  20.  Nisan,  not  from  Tishri."  Kalisch.  See  on 
We  must  imagine  of  these  sevens  as  seven  Exod.  xii.  2.  11.  fountain]  The  great 
pair,  otherwise  they  could  not  have  come  deep,  i.  e.  the  ocean,  was  conceived  as  having 
"male  and  his  female."  And  the  Hebrew  its  springs  in  the  earth  ;  see  Job  xsxviii.  IC; 
expression  is  "  seven  and  seven,"  whereas  in  Prov.  viii.  28  ;  and  the  meaning  is,  that 
the  subsequent  clause  it  is  not  "  tico  and  these  fountains  were  (lit.)  rent  open,  and 
two,"  but  simply  "two."  (It  is  to  be  noted  caused  the  sea  to  flood  the  earth  from  be- 
that  the  LXX.,  Yulgate,  and  Syriac  versions  neath,  as  the  rain  from  above.  win- 
read  "  iico  and  two.")  6.]  literally,  dows]  Xot  the  same  word  as  so  rendered  ch. 
son  of  six  hundred  years.  7 — 10.]  We  viii.  6.  This  word,  aruhboth,  is  derived 
have  here  again  the  resumption  of  the  ori-  from  a  root  signifying  wearing  or  plaiting, 
siual  Elohistic  account.  See  ch.  vi.  20.     This  and  comes_ to  mean  a  window  from  the  lat- 


2—23. 


GENESIS. 


35 


^-  And  the  rain  was  upon  tlio  cartli  fort}-  daj-s  and  forty 
nights.     13  In  the  selfsame  day  entered  Noah,  and  Shcni, 
and  Ham,  and  Japheth,  the  sons  of  Noah,  and  Noah's 
wife,  and  the  three  wives  of  his  sons  with  them,  into  the 
ark ;  ^"^  they,  and  every  beast  after  his  kind,  and  all  the     c-^' 
cattle   after   their   kind,  and  every  creeping  thing  that 
creepcth  npon  the  earth  after  his  kind,  and  every  fowl    '^ 
after  hjs  kind,  every  bird    of  every  sort.     ^^  And  they  ^^T^/      '^ 
went  in  unto  Noah  into  the  ark,  two  and  two  of  all  flesh, 
wherein  is  the  breath  of  life.     ^^  And  they  that  went  in, 
went  in  male  and  female  of  all    flesh,  as  God  had  com-  •■ 
manded  him:    and  Jehovah,  shut   him   in.     i'' And   the  /■  — 
flood  was  forty  da3's  upon  the  earth  ;  and  the  waters  in- 
creased, and  bare  up  the  ark,  and  it  rose  above  the  earth.  "^"  ^/^  *^/ 
1^  And  the  waters  prevailed,  and  increased  greatlj^  upon 
the  earth  ;  and  the  ark  went  upon  the  face  of  the  waters. 
1^  And  the  waters  prevailed  *^  exceedingly  iij)on  the  earth ; 
and  all  the  high  mountains,  that  n-ere  under  the  whole 
heaven,  were  covered.     ^0  Fifteen  cubits  upward  did  the 
waters  prevail ;  and  the  mountains  were  covered.     21  And 
all  flesh  died  that  moved  upon  the  earth,  both  of  fowl,  and  «^ 
of  cattle,  and  of  beast,  and  o_f  ever}'-  creeping  thing  that  ''/  'Z  '/ 
creepcth  upon  the  earth,  and  every  man:  22  qI\  {^^  whose  ^'•''■' 
nostrils  icas  the  breath  of  the  spirit  of  life,  of  all  that  nris 
in  the  dry  laiir/,  died.     23  And  he  destroyed  every  living  i(,~Jhu^  c^^c 
substance  which  was  upon  the  face  of  the  ground,  both 


c  lit.  much 
fnuch.i>cc  ch. 
xvii.  2,6,20; 
XXX.  4a. 
Exod.  i.7. 
Kum.  XIV.  7. 


.7K./ 


ticodorrctioulatocl  matorinl  with  which  win- 
dows were  formerly  closed.  The  waters  heing 
divided  (ch.  i.  6)  into  those  ahove  and  be- 
low the  expanse  of  heaven,  both  contributed 
to  the  flood  of  the  delun^e.  12.  was] 

i.  e.  fell.  It  endured,  on  the  earth,  more 
than  three  times  as  long,  vcr.  24.  13.] 

i.  e.  in  the  seventeenth  day  of  the  second 
month,  as  above  in  vcr.    11.  By  the 

three  wives  we  see  that  monogamy  was  pre- 
served in  the  God-fearing  family.  Yer.  14  is 
a  complete  enumeration  of  the  animals  which 
■went  in.  X^c  last  words  may  be  also  ren- 
dered, as  by  Kalisch,  everi/  bird,  every 
winged  creature.  The  close  of  ver.  16  is 
remarkable,  as  introducing  into  this  Elohis- 
tic  portion  the  name  Jkhovah.  Knobel  re- 
marks that  the  clause  also  betrays  the  strong 


anthropomorphism  of  the  Jchovist  writer. 
One  would  rather  say  perhaps  that  he  has 
in  mind  the  covenant  which  God  had  estab- 
lished with  Noah,  and  of  which  this  shutting 
him  in  was  a  pledge  :  Jehovah  being  especi- 
ally the  covenant  name  of  God.  The  phrase 
is  literally,  Jehovah  shut  behind  him.  It 
should  be  remarked  that  in  the  progress  of 
the  narrative  Noah  possesses  the  power  of 
opening  and  closing  the  ark.  See  ch.  viii. 
6,  13.  So  that  this  act  can  only  be  regarded 
as  an  assurance  of  security  to  Noah  and  his 
family.  17.  was]  See  above,  vcr.  12. 

AVent  on  increasing.  No  expressions  could 
well  be  stronger  than  those  hei'C  used  to 
assert  the  universality  of  the  flood.  20.  ] 

Fifteen  cubits,  i.e.  upwards  of  26  feet,  above 
the  tops  of  the  highest  mountains. 


36 


GENESIS. 


VII. 


i  -.  ch.  xi 
XXX.  23 

Exod.  li 
1  Sum.  i 


man,  and  cattle,  and  the  creeping  things,  and  tlie  fowl  of 
tlie  heaven ;  and  they  were  destroyed  from  the  earth  :  and 
Noah  only  reiiaamed_alire,  and  they  that  were  with  him  in 
the  ark.  ^4  ^^d  the  waters  prevailed  upon  the  earth  an 
•  29;  hundred  and  fifty  days.  VIII.  ^  And  God  'h'emembered 
IS.  Noah,  and  every^living  thing,  and  all  the  cattle  that  nrjs 
with  him  in  the  ark  :  and  God  made  a  wind  to  pass  over 
the  earth,  and  the  waters  asswaged  ;  ^  the  fountains  also 
of  the  deep  and  the  windows  of  heaven  were  closed,  and 
the  rain  from  heaven  was  stopped  ;  ^  and  the  waters  re- 
tired from  off  the  earth  continually  :  and  after  the  end  of 
the  hundi'ed  and  fifty  days  the  waters  were  abated.  ^  And 
the  ark  rested  in  the  seventh  month,  on  the  seventeenth 
day  of  the  month,  upon  the  mountains  of  Ararat.  ^  And 
the  waters  decreased  continually  until  the  tenth  month : 
in  the  tenth  montJi,  on  the  first  day  of  the  month,  were  the 
tops  of  the  mountains  seen.  ^  1[  And  it  came  to  pass  at 
the  end  of  forty  days,  that  Noah  opened  the  window  of  the 


YIII.  1—19.]  Subsidence  of  the  Flood, 
and  of  the  Ark:  the  going  forth  of  Noah. 
(The  whole  section  is  Eloliistic.)  1. 

a  wind]  The  ordinary  means  of  clearing  away 
the  rain-cloud  and  producing  dry  weatlier. 
2.]  See  on  ch.  vii.  11.  3.  con- 

tinually] Literally,  in  going  and  returning. 
The  hundred  and  fifty  days  included  'ihe 
forty  days  of  the  rain's  falling.  For,  seeing 
that  Xouh  entered  the  ark  and  the  flood 
began  on  the  17th  day  of  the  2nd  month, 
Ave  have  (counting  the  mouth  at  30  days) 
13  days  of  the  2ud  month  +  120  for  the 
3rd,  4th,  5th,  and  6th  months,  +  17  for  the 
7th  +  150  days.  4,  5.]  It  seems  to  be 

implied  that  at  the  time  indicated,  the  ark 
first  took  the  groxmd — obviously  on  the 
highest  peak  of  Ararat  ;  then  the  waters 
continuing  to  decrease,  on  the  first  day  of 
the  10th  month  tlie  tops  of  the  mountains 
(generally)  were  seen.  Ararat]  "The 

name  in  its  Biblical  sense  may  be  most 
correctly  considered  as  descriptive  generally 
of  the  Armenian  higlilaiuls,  the  lofty  plateau 
which  overlooks  the  plain  of  the  Araxes  on 
the  N.,  and  of  Mesopotamia  on  the  S."  Mr. 
Uevan's  article,  in  Smithes  Biblical  Diction- 
ary, which  see.  The  Ararat  consists  of  two 
unequal  peaks,  the  higher  16,254  French 
feet  high,  and  covered  with  perpetual  snow, 


—the  lesser  12,284  feet  high.  Delitzsch 
observes  :  "  There  is  no  point  in  the  old 
world  which  lies  in  tlie  interior  and  yet  so 
truly  island-like,  surrounded  by  great  waters, 
■which  seem  to  have  fallen  on  all  sides  from 
its  height.  And  there  is  no  point  in  the 
old  world  which  has  a  central  position  in 
reference  to  so  many  great  features  of  land 
and  sea.  It  is  the  higliest  mountain-top, 
with  the  exception  of  the  Himalayas,  in 
the  old  world "  See  also  Kalisch's  long 
and  graphic  note.  5.]  In  seventy-two 

days  after  the  grounding  of  the  ark,  on  the 
highest  peak  the  tops  of  the  surrounding 
lower  mountains  became  generally  visible. 
Then  6.]  forty  days  after  that  Noah 
makes  the  first  trial  of  the  state  of  the  earth. 
As  before  observed  on  ch.  vi.  16,  the  word 
here  rendered  window  is  diflferent  from  that 
which  we  have  there  translated  light.  This 
may  have  been  one  division  or  portion  of 
that  larger  aperture  perhaps  extending  the 
length  of  the  ark.  There  is  no  reason  what- 
ever to  infer  that  there  was  but  one  such 
aperture  of  the  limited  size  which  one  man 
might  open.  "V\''e  may  be  allowed  to  remind 
the  reader  that  our  own  common  usage  is 
to  speak  of  opening  "  the  window,"  though 
there  may  be  many  windows  in  the  room. 
This  "  window  "  might  even  be  a  mere  open- 


24— Till.  13. 


GENESIS. 


37 


ark  which  he  had  made :  "  and  he  scut  forth  the  raven, 

Avliich  wont  forth  to  and  fro,  until  the  water*  were  dried   <u^r^; 

np  from  off  the  earth.     ^  Also  he  sent  forth  the  dove  from  i.A^/ 

him,  to  sec  if  the  waters  were  abated  from  off  the  face  of 

the  ground ;  ^  but  the  dove  found  no  rest  for  the  sole  of 

her  foot,  and  she  returned  unto  him  into  the  ark,  for  the 

waters  iccrc  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth  :  then  he  put   i^--"^/ 

forth  his  hand,  and  took  her,  and  pulled  her  in  unto  him    i^W^/^/ 

into  the  ark.     i*^  And  he  stayed  yet  other  seven  days  ;  and 

again  he  sent  forth  the  dove  out  of  the  ark  ;   ^^  and  tlie 

dove  came  in  to  him  in  the  evening  ;  and,  lo,  in  her  mouth  a^«w.-^v«^v 

H-as  ajfresh^olive  leaf:  so  JN^oah  knew  that  the  M-aters  were  ^  »>*./  Ut^cA^  <rf^ 

abated  from  off  the  earth.     ^-  And   he  stayed  yet  other 

seven  days  ;  and  sent  forth  the  dove  ;  which  returned  not  A'-**^  '^^-  ' 

again  imto  him  any  more.     ^^  ^  And  it  came  to  pass  in 

the  six  hundredth  and  first  year,  in  the  first  month,  the 

first  dai/  of  the  mouth,  the  waters  Avere  dried  up  from  off 


ing  closed  by  a  shutter,  a  kind  of  door ;  the 
LXX.  seems  to  liave  regarded  it  as  such. 
7-  the  raven,  a  bird  of  prey,  perliaps 
"  xcent  going  and  returning ,"  or  went  to  and 
fro  on  the  earth  feeding  on  the  carcases. 
Kalisch  understands  the  words  to  mean  that 
she  came  back  from  time  to  time,  to  the  ark, 
for  her  food.  But  this  is  hardly  probable, 
or  we  should  have  read  of  her  returning,  as 
in  the  case  of  the  dove.  The  carcases  would 
naturally  be  found  on  the  tops  of  the  moun- 
tains, which  we  know  were  by  this  time 
visible  above  the  waters.  8,  fF.]  Though 

it  is  not  here  mentioned,  it  must  be  inferred 
from  ver.  10  that  the  sending  forth  of  the 
dove  was  7  days  after  that  of  the  raven. 
The  dove  forms  in  its  habits  a  strong  con- 
trast to  the  raven,  being  domestic,  and  a 
frequenter  of  woods  and  plains,  whereas  the 
other  is  wild  and  solitary.  He  sent  her  to 
sec  whether  the  plains  were  yet  dry.  The 
olive  is  i-eputed  by  Theophrastus  and  Pliny 
to  grow  under  water.  "  It  does  not  appear," 
says  Kalisch,  "  that  the  ancient  Hebrews  re- 
gai'ded  olive  branches  as  a  svmbol  of  peace 
and  joy,  though  it  is  generally  known  that 
the  classical  nations  connected  with  them 
those  ideas,  and  though  it  appears  that  the 
later  .Jews  adopted  from  the  Greeks  tliis 
notion,  among  many  others  (2  Mace.  xiv.  4)." 
He  quotes  from  Wilkinson,  Ancient  Egypt- 
ians, that  the  olive  probably  became  an  em- 


blem of  peace  because  of  the  great  amount 
of  time  and  care  which  the  restoration  of 
olive  plantations  require  after  a  frontier 
invasion,  or  agricultural  neglect.  "  "What 
messenger  of  returning  happiness  could  he 
more  appropriate  than  a  dove,  the  lovely 
type  of  purity  and  atonement,  through  the 
Spirit  of  God,  offering  an  olive-leaf,  the 
symbol  of  the  renewed  fruitfulness  of  the 
earth  ?  "  Kalisch.  The  olive-tree  grows  in 
Armenia :  not  on  the  heights  of  Ararat, 
nor  so  high  as  the  walnut,  mulberry,  and 
apricot,  but  on  the  lowest  hills  and  in  the 
plains.  So  that  the  dove  had  a  long  day's 
tiight  to  find  her  olive  leaf.  Tlie  leaf  was 
fresh,  so  that  there  had  been  time  for  a 
tender  shoot  to  be  put  forth.  This,  and 
the  mere  fact  of  the  top  of  an  olive  tree 
being  above  the  water,  showed  him  that  the 
waters  were  indeed  decreased.  12.  yet 

other  seven  days]  So  that  since  the  end  of 
the  forty  days  in  ver.  6  three  weeks  had 
passed.  Tliese  intervals  uiu|ucstionably  give 
support  to  the  idea  that  the  sabbatical  rest 
was   observed    by   Xoah.  13.]    Bp. 

Wordsworth  remarks,  "Probably  tlicre  was 
so  much  evaporation  from  the  action  of  the 
sun  on  the  water,  that  he  could  not  see  to 
any  great  distance  from  his  lofty  position, 
and  on  account  of  the  mist  could  not  dis- 
cover whetlier  the  plains  beneath  him  were 
dry  :  it  was  not  till  the  waters  were  asswagcd 


38 


GENESIS. 


Till. 


e  Exod.  xxvi. 
14;  XXXV.  11 J 
xxxvi.  19  ; 
xxxix.  34 ; 

xl.  IS.  Num. 
ill.  25;  iv.  5, 
1(1,  11,  la,  25, 
only, 
f  Isa.  xix.  5. 
Jer.  xxiii.  10; 
1.  38.  Joeli. 
20,  al. 


•^  ,h  t-tt-M  / 


g  See  Lev.  i.  9, 
reff. 
/  «v/  «  '    h  ch.  xxiv.  45; 

'         /  xxvii.  41.     1 

Sam.  xxvii.  1 
Hos.  vii.  2,  al; 


tlie  earth :  and  Noali  removed  tlie  ^  covering  of  the  ark, 
and  looked,  and,  beliokl,  the  face  of  the  ground  was  dry. 
14  And  in  the  second  month,  on  the  seven  and  twentieth 
day  of  the  month,  was  the  earth  ^  dried^up.  i^  And  God 
spake  imto  Noah  saying,  ^^  Go  forth  of  the  ark,  thou,  and 
thy  wife,  and  thy  sons,  and  thy  sons'  wives  with  thee. 
17  Bring  forth  with  thee  every  living  thing  that  is  with 
thee,  of  all  flesh,  both  of  fowl,  and  of  cattle,  and  of  every 
creeping  thing  that  creepeth  xipon  the  earth  ;  that  they 
may  increase  abundantly  in  the  earth,  and  be  fruitful,  and 
multiply  upon  the  earth,  i^  And  Noah  went  forth,  and 
his  sons,  and  his  wife,  and  his  sons'  wives  with  him :  i^ 
every  beast,  every  creeping  thing,  and  every  fowl,  and 
whatsoever  creej^eth  upon  the  earth,  after  their  kinds, 
went  forth  out  of  the  ark.  20  ^  J^-^^  Noah  builded  an 
altar  unto  Jehovah  ;  and  took  of  every  clean  beast,  and  of 
every  clean  fowl,  and  offered  burnt  offerings  on  the  altar. 
21  And  Jehovah  ^  smelled  a  sweet  savour ;  and  Jehovah 
^  said  in  his  heart,  1  will  not  again  curse  the  ground  any 


from  the  earth  that  he  could  see  tliat  the 
face  of  the  ground  was  dry."  the  cover- 

ing] This  word  (see  reff.)  is  elsewhere  used 
only  of  coverings  of  leather  and  skin,  as  in 
the  case  of  the  tabernacle.  And  perliaps  we 
are  to  think  of  the  covering  of  the  ark  as  of 
like  material.  14.]  The  difference  be- 

tween the  state  of  tlie  earth  in  ver.  13  and 
here  was  that  when  Noah  first  looked  the 
"  dry  land  "  appeared  :  but  at  this  latter 
date  it  had  become  quite  dry,  i.  e.  had  ac- 
quired its  usual  state  of  dryness.  This  dif- 
ference may  serve  to  illustrate  tlie  interpret- 
ation of  ch.  ii.  5,  as  compared  with  ch.  i.  9. 
See  there.  By  this  date  we  have  the  whole 
duration  of  the  ilood  from  the  17th  day  of 
the  2nd  month  of  the  600th  year  of  Noah's 
life,  to  the  27th  day  of  the  2nd  month  of 
the  601st,  i.  e.  one  year  and  ten  days. 
15 — 19.]  The  going  forth  from  the  ark. 
20 — 22.]  Xoah's  sacrifice  to  Jehovah, 
ii'ho  is  appeasied  therehg,  and  covenatits  no 
more  to  destroy  the  earth.  This  portion  is  Je- 
hovistic,  introducing  the  first  mention  of  altar 
and  sacrifice.  It  appears  to  be  inserted  be- 
tween two  consecutive  verses  (viii.  lOandix.l) 
of  the  Elohistic  record,  for  it  is  not  true,  as 
Delitzscli  maintains,  that  the  blessing  and 
covenant  of  ch.  ix.  necessarily  presuppose  the 


thank-offering  of  Noah,  and  its  favourable 
reception.  All  in  the  Elohistic  narrative 
pi'oceeds  consecutively  without  the  supple- 
ment. But  this  docs  not  take  at  all  from 
the  authority  of  that  supplement.  The  sacri- 
ficial notices  inserted  afterwards  are  of  equal 
weight  and  authenticity  with  tlie  original  and 
simpler  account.  20.]    The  notice   of 

every  clean  beast  and  every  clean  fowl  i» 
in  strict  accordance  with  that  in  ch.  vii.  2,  3. 
21.]  The  expression  is  anthropomor- 
phic in  its  first  usage,  but  became  figura- 
tive afterwards  (see  reff.).  Nor  did  the  New 
Testament  reject  that  phrase,  even  in 
reference  to  its  most  sacred  idea,  for  it 
says  :  "  Christ  has  given  Himself  for  us  as  an 
offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet- 
smelling  savour  (Eph.  v.  2)."  Kalisch.  It 
of  course  indicates  the  gracious  acceptance  of 
the  thank-offering  of  the  patriarch.  "  God 
saw  with  delight  the  piety  of  the  only  fiimily 
which  had  escaped  the  universal^alamity : 
and  He  determined  never  again  to  expose 
the  earth  to  so  fearful  a  destruction,  but  to 
be  mindfid  of  the  weakness  of  the  human 
heart.  .  .  .  He  received  the  sin-offering  of 
Noah  as  an  atonement  for  the  wickedness  of 
the  former  generations  :  the  sin  of  man  was 
no  more  to  be  measured  after  the  test  of 


14— IX.  5. 


GENESIS. 


39 


more  foi'  man's  sake  ;  for,  the  iniagiuatlon  of  man's  heart  /  ■■ 

is  evil  from  his  youth  ;  neither  will  I  again  smite  any 

more  every  thing  living,  as  I  have  done.     ^2  "\Yhile  the 

earth  rcmaineth,  seedtime  and  harvest,  and  cold  and  heat, 

and  sunnncr   and  winter,   and  day  and  night  shall  not 

cease.     IX.  ^  And  God  blessed  Noah  and  his  sons,  and 

said  unto  them,  Be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  and  replenish  //'- 

the  earth.     2    And  the  fear  of  you  and  the  dread  of  you 

shall  he  upon  every  beast  of  the  earth,  and  upon  every 

fowl  of  the  ah',  upon  all  thatjQioveth_j{/)0/i_.the..earth,  and  /Sta  '^'''^jy^^c  ^..n  7J< 

»poft  all  the  fishes  of  the  sea ;  into  your  hand  are  they/r'  * 

delivered.     3  Every  moving  thing  that  liveth  shall  be  t©  ^'z 

you  for  food  ;    even  as  the    '  green  herb  I   give^  3^ou  all  '  Ei,^j'"j  f^  ^"^^/T-/ 

4-hiii^ft-.     "^  Only   flesh   with   the   life  thereof,    the   blood     p^'^xxvi'i'l'vr 

thereof,   shall  ye  not  eat.     ^  And  surely  your  blood   of     ""''■• 


justice,  but  after  that  of  mercy.  God  had, 
during  several  centuries,  judged  him  after 
his  innate  Divine  attributes  ;  He  now  in- 
tended to  view  him  with  regard  to  his 
huma)i  imperfections  :  He  was  aware  that 
though  the  spirit  is  willing,  the  flesh  is 
weak.  God  proclaimed,  tliat  man  cannot 
gain  salvation  by  his  own  righteousness,  but 
by  the  Divine  mercy."  Kalisch.  To  this 
striking  Jewish  commentary  the  Christian 
can  supply  tlie  only  foundation,  the  Great 
Sacrifice,  which  was  being  already  gradually 
figured  out  before  the  eyes  of  men,  and 
would  in  due  time  be  revealed  on  the  cross. 

On  said  in  his  hsart,  see  res'.  It  is 
equivalent  to  thowjht,  determined.  22.] 

The  LXX.  version,  literally  following  the 
Ilebrew,  translates  "  All  the  days  of  the 
earth,"  to  which  exactly  correspond  the  last 
words  of  our  Lord  to  His  disciples,  "  Eehold, 
I  am  with  you  all  the  days,"  Matt,  xxviii. 
20.  The  Hebrews  distinguished  two  seasons 
only  (see  Zech.  xiv.  8  ;  Amos  iii.  15 ;  Isa. 
xviii.  6),  summer  and  winter,  with  the  heat 
and  cold,  the  seed-time  and  liarvest,  respect- 
ively belonging  to  tlieni.  These  had  been 
thrown  out  of  their  regidar  succession  by  tlie 
flood.  Not  so  day  and  night,  which,  how- 
ever, are  added  to  complete  the  series  of  re- 
gularly ordained  changes. 

IX.  1 — 17.]  The  blessing  of  Noah  and 
his  family  —  ordinances  concerning  eating 
flesh  and  abstaining  from  the  blood ;  and  (S — 
17)  the  covenant  of  the  rainboic.  The  whole  of 
this  is  Elohistic,  and  continues  naturally  from 


ch.  viii.  19.  2.  all  that'moveth  upon  the 
earth]  literally,  all  with  which  the  earth 
moveth.    See  on  ch.i.  21.  3.]  This  sub- 

sequent enlargement  of  the  original  provision 
of  man's  food  (ch.  i.  29)  assumes,  not  that 
flesh  had  not  been  eaten  by  man  before  the 
Flood,  but  that  such  eating  now  first  received 
Divine  sanction.  See  Bp.  Wordsworth's 
note   here.  4.]    Among  the  principal 

places  where  this  command  is  iterated,  and 
its  reason  assigned,  see  Levit.  xvii.  10,  11, 
14;  Deut.  xii.  23  —  25.  The  prohibition 
was  afterwards  extended  to  fat  also  (see 
Levit.  iii.  17;  vii.  22 — 27);  but  this  exten- 
sion seems  never  to  have  been  regarded. 
See  on  these  places.  The  law  against 
eating  blood  was  among  those  reserved  as 
binding  on  the  primitive  Christian  Church 
(see  Acts  xv.  20,  29  ;  xxi.  15),  and  is  ri- 
gorously observed  by  all  Jews  at  the  present 
day.  Besides  that  the  forbidding  of  the 
blood  bears  testimony,  as  Kalisch  well  says, 
to  the  original  inviolability  of  every  animal 
life,  the  sacred  reference  of  blood  as  the 
means  of  Atonement  doubtless  underlay 
this  commandment.  This  is  not  the  place 
to  enlarge  upon  the  matter,  but  every  Chris- 
tian will  be  able  to  fill  in  the  outline. 
5.]  The  principle  just  laid  down  that  the 
blood  is  the  life,  is  enlarged  to  the  declara- 
tion of  vengeance  being  exacted  for  the 
shedding  of  man's  blood.  "  The  blood  of  a 
human  being  cries  for  revenge  to  heaven 
(iv.  10;  Ileb.  xii.  24),  the  soul  of  the  slain 
raises  its  voice   (Job  xxiv.^12;  Ecv.  vi.  9), 


40 


W 


GENESIS. 


IX. 


■  x  J-  v/*.^/' 


,sUac^ 


your  lives  will  I  require  ;  at  the  hand  of  every  beast  will 
I  require  it,  and  at  the  hand  of  man/  at  the  hand  of  his 
brother  nian/  will  I  require  the  life  of  man.  ^  AVhoso  shcd- 
deth  man's  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed  :  for  in  the 
image  of  God  made  he  man.  7  And  you,  be  ye  fruitful,  and 
multiply ;  bring  forth  abundantly  in  the  earth,  and  multi- 
ply therein.  ^  H  And  God  spake  unto  Noah,  and  to  his  sons 
with  him,  saying,  ^  And  I,  behold,  I  establish  my  covenant 
with  you,  and  with  your  seed  after  you  ;  ^^  and  with  every 
living  creature  that  k  with  you,  of  the  fowl,  of  the  cattle, 
and  of  every  beast  of  the  earth  with  you  ;  from  all  that  go 
out  of  the  ark,  to  every  beast  of  the  earth.  ^^  And  I  will 
establish  my  covenant  with  you;  neither  shall  all  flesh  be 
cut  ofi"  any  more  by  the  waters  of  a  flood  ;  neither  shall 
there  any  more  be  a  flood  to  destroy  the  earth.  ^^  And 
God  said,  This  is  the  token  of  the  covenant  which  I  give 
between  me  and  you  and  every  living  creature  that  is  with 
you,  for  perpetual  generations  :  ^'^  I  have  given  my  bow^ 
in  the  cloud,  and  it  shall  be  for  a  token  of  a  covenant  be- 
tween me  and  the  earth.  ^^  And  it  shall  come  to  pass, 
when  I  bring  a  cloud  over  the  earth,,  and  the  bow  is  seen 


the  blood  of  the  innocent  victim  hangs  at 
the  skirt  of  the  nnirderer's  garments  (Jer.  ii. 
24),  the  blood  is  identical  with  the  life  of 
the  individual  itself  (Ps.  xciv.  21  ;  Matt, 
sxiii.  35)."    Kalisch.  at  the  hand  of 

every  beast]  This  agrees  with  the  enact- 
ment of  the  Mosaic  law.  See  E.xod.  xxi. 
28—32.  The  last  clause  of  this  verse  has 
been  very  variously  rendered  ;  the  A.  V.  is 
approved  by  Kalisch  ;  but  the  text  is  the 
better  rendering  of  the  Hebrew ;  and  so 
Knobel.  6.]    In    the  words   by  man 

shall  his  blood  be  shed,  we  can  hardl)-,  as 
Bp.  Wordsworth  sugn'csts,  trace  the  in- 
stitution of  magistrates  who  would  take 
cognizance  of  murder,  though  such  an  insti- 
tution must  ere  long  spring  out  of  the  obliga- 
tion ;  but  rather  is  this  the  institution  of  the 
duty  of  the  avenger  of  blood,  who  was  the 
next  of  kin  to  the  murdered.  See  Num. 
xxiv.  19;  Deut.  xix.  6,  11—13;  Josh.  xx. 
1—9. 

The  reason  assigned  in  the  latter  half  of 
the  verse  has  been  already  adduced  in  the 
note  on  ch.  v.  3,  as  shewing  that  man  is  still 
in  the  image  of  God.     If  that  image  were 


lost,  this  reason  would  not  apply  to  the  mat- 
ter in  hand.  7.]  In  contrast  to  the 
last  and  foregoing  verses  :  men  were  placed 
on  the  earth  not  to  fight  and  destroy  one 
another,  but  to  fill  the  earth.  10.]  The 
meaning  of  the  latter  clause  is  tliat  the  cove- 
nant, beginning  by  being  made  with  all  that 
go  out  of  the  ark,  is  to  extend  to  all  the 
animal  world  that  should  hereafter  be  upon 
earth.  12 — 17.]  The  rainbow  set  as 
the  sign  of  the  covenant.  13.]  Kalisch 
remarks  that  the  past  tense,  I  have  given  (or 
set)  my  bow  in  the  cloud,  seems  to  imply 
that  it  is  recognized  as  having  been  there 
before  the  Flood,  though  now  first  made 
into  a  sign.  But  Keil  takes  another  view. 
"  The  setting  of  the  rainbow  for  a  token  of 
the  covenant  of  promise  that  there  should  no 
more  be  an  universal  flood,  assumes  that  it 
then  for  the  first  time  appeared  on  the  vault 
and  the  clouds  of  heaven.  From  this  fol- 
lows, not  that  it  never  rained  before  the 
Deluge,  which  would  be  scarcely  reconcile- 
able  with  ch.  ii.  5,  but  that  the  atmosphere 
before  the  flood  was  differently  constructed 
from   that  after  it :  with  which   idea  the 


G— 20. 


GENESIS. 


41 


in  tlie  cloud i  ^^^I  will  remember  my  covenant,  which  is  ^  a."^ 
between  me  and  you  and  every  living  creature  of  all 
flesh ;  and  the  waters  shall  no  more  become  a  flood  to  de- 
stroy all  flesh.  ^6  And  the  bow  shall  be  in  the  cloud; 
and  I  will  look  upon  it,  that  I  may  remember  the  ever- 
lasting- covenant  between  God  and  every  living  creature 
of  all  flesli  that  is  upon  the  oartli.  ^^  And  God  said  unto 
Noah,  This  is  the  token  of  the  covenant,  which  I  have 
established  between  me  and  all  flesh  tliat  is  upon  the 
earth.  '^^  ^  And  the  sons  of  Noah,  that  went  fortli  of  the 
ark,  were  Shorn,  and  Ilam,  and  Japheth  :  and  Ilam  ?.s-  the 
father  of  Canaan.  ^^  These  are  the  three  sons  of  Noah  : 
and  of^  them  was  the  whole  earth   overspread,     ^o  And  p-t-"-  •^-'' 

stances.  It  seems  to  me  that  we  are  bound 
to  suppose  some  participation  on  the  part  of 
Canaan  himstlt',  in  tlie  act  of  dislionoiiring; 
Noah.  Dclitzsch  inclines  to  the  view  that 
the  curse  of  Ilani,  Noah's  youngest  sou  (ver. 
24),  is  rctributively  pronounced  on  his 
yuuiigest  son,  Canaan  (20  ff.).  The  same 
commentator  has  well  remarked  that  this 
season  after  the  Flood,  like  tliat  immediately 
following  tlie  Creation,  is  the  time  of  decisive 
events  pregnant  with  weighty  consequences ; 
in  the  one  the  fate  of  mankind,  in  the  other 
that  of  nations,  is  decided  upon  apparently 
trivial  and  every- day  antecedents.  It  is 
peculiar  to  the  prim;eval  times,  that  the 
weightiest  and  widest-spread  consequences 
depend  on  common  and  accidental  incidents, 
which  yet  involve,  on  their  small  scale,  the 
same  conflicts  between  spiritual  powers,  as 
in  our  more  extended,  more  numerically  im- 
portant combinations. 

It  is  not  apparent,  from  our  nan-ative, 
whether  Noah  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  Jirst 
planter  of  the  vine,  and  discoverer  of  the 
power  of  wine.  The  supposition  has  been 
widely  made,  but  in  great  part  as  an  excuse 
for  what  happened.  We  may  observe  thus 
nuich;  that  if  the  filling  of  the  earth  with  vio- 
lence and  wickcilness  before  the  Flood  is  to  be 
regarded  as  having  taken  place  without  the 
influence  of  wine,  the  share  of  the  alcoholic 
element  in  human  depravity  is  very  consider- 
ably lightened  ;  indeed  it  maybe  said  that 
mankind  has  been  worse  without  wine  than 
with  it.  I  should  rather  regard  our  narra- 
tive as  indicating  that  Noah,  in  the  prosper- 
ity which  followed  the  Flood,  had  allowed 
himself  to  fall  into  some  of  the  sinful  habits 


parts  of  natural  history  harmonize  which 
point  to  a  difference  in  the  earth's  superficial 
climate  before  and  after  the  Flood."  And 
so  likewise  Delitzsch.  But  this  would  cer- 
tainly imply  that  there  had  been  no  rain,  as 
oue  understand  rain,  before  the  Flood.  If 
we  arc  to  maintain  that  the  rainbow  now 
first  appeared,  the  earth  must  have  been 
watered  by  mere  mists  for  nearly  1 7  cen- 
turies. 18 — 27.]  Noah's  sons.  His 
drunkenness  :  the  sin  of  Flam  :  he  is  cursed 
by  his  father.  This  portion  is  plainly  due 
to  the  Jehovist.  This  is  testified  both  by 
the  sacred  name,  ver.  2G  (see  there),  and  by 
the  especial  notices  in  vv.  18,  22,  which 
have  been  supposed  to  be  due  to  the  relation 
of  the  children  of  Israel  to  the  Canaanites  in 
after  time.  The  allusion  to  the  meaning  of 
the  name  Japhet  in  ver.  27  is  also  character- 
istic. "  This  portion  of  the  chapter  pro- 
ceeds evidently  from  the  pen  of  the  Jehovist: 
it  is  inserted  by  hiui  to  prepare  the  reader 
here  already  for  the  future  glory  of  Israel ; 
he  approaches  nearer  to  one  of  the  chief  ends 
of  the  Pentateuch  ;  and  he  proves  that  the 
origin  of  Israel's  ascendancy  and  of  Canaan's 
degradation  dates  so  far  back  as  the  family 
of  the  second  founder  of  the  human  race." 
Kalisch.  18-]  On  the  sons  of  Noah, 
sec  on  ch.  v.  32.  The  prominence  given  to 
Canaan,  the  younger  son  of  Ilam  (ch.  x.  6), 
is  remarkable.  These  notices  inserted  by 
the  sacred  writer,  "  Ilam  is  the  father  of 
Canaan,"  "Ilam,  the  father  of  Canaan," 
■would  perhaps  be  accountable  as  above  ;  but 
the  terms  of  Noah's  prophecy  would  neces- 
sarily belong  to  the  original  account,  and 
can  hardly  be  due  to  any  subsequent  circum- 


42 


GENESIS. 


IX. 


j  See  Zech.  xiii. 


I  ch.  xxvii.  15 


Noali  began  to  he  an  J  liusbandman,  and  he  planted  a  vine- 
yard :  21  and  he  drank  of  the  wine,  and  was  drunken ; 
and  he  was  uncovered  within  his  tent.  22  ^ncl  Ham,  the 
father  of  Canaan,  saw  the  nakedness  of  his  father,  and  told 
his  two  brethren  without,  23  And  Shem  and  Japheth 
took  the  garment,  and  laid  it  upon  both  their  shoulders, 
and  went  backward,  and  covered  the  nakedness  of  their 
father  ;  and  their  faces  were  backward,  and  they  saw  not 
their  father's  nakedness.  24  And  Noah  awoke  from  his 
^  wine,  and  knew  what  his  ^  younger  son  had  done  unto 
him.     25  And  he  said, 

Cursed  he  Canaan  ; 

^  Servant  of  servants  shall  he  be  unto  his  brethren. 

26  And  he  said. 


of  those  against  wliom  he  had  formerly 
testified.  an.  husbandman  is  literally 

"a  man  of  the  r/round,"  or  "  i/ic  field," 
see  reff.  Armenia  always  was,  and  still  is, 
productive  of  wine,  even  in  parts  as  much  as 
4000  feet  above  the  sea.  21.]   It  has 

very  generally  been  alleged  as  ail  excuse  for 
Noah,  that  he  was  unacquainted  with  the 
iutoxicating  power  of  wine.     But  see  above. 

22.  j  Luther  says  here,  "  The  son 
would  never  have  derided  his  father  in  his 
shame,  had  he  not  first  banished  from  his 
mind  that  reverence  and  deference  wliich  by 
God's  command  should  be  iu  cliildren  to- 
wards their  parents."  What  he  did  was 
only  an  index  to  his  character ;  open  acts 
give  occasion  for  punishment,  but  the  pun- 
ishment is  earned  by,  and  is  administered  for, 
the  depravity  out  of  which  open  acts  spring. 

told  his  two  brethren]  clearly  not 
that  they  might  do  what  tliey  did,  nor  in 
any  such  spirit;  but  jestingly  and  unduti- 
fully.  23.]    the  garment,  viz.  which 

Noah  had  thrown  olf.  24.]  his  wine, 

the  effects  of  his  wine,  see  retf.  his 

younger  son]  literally,  his  little  son,  or  his 
son  the  little  [one].  The  same  expression 
with  the  same  meaning  is  found  iu  reff.  He 
knew  this  perhaps  (for  so  seems  the  spirit 
of  the  narrative)  prophetically,  and  not  by 
ordinary  information ;  and  he  pronouuces 
the  curse  on  Ilaui  (see  above)  not  so  as  to 
affect  all  his  posterity,  but  his  youngest  son, 
Canaan.  And  the  form  of  the  curse  is  that 
he  shall  be  the  lowest  of  servants  to  both  his 
brethren.     The  prophetic  speech  of  Noah  is 


poetical,  or  rather   rhythmical,  as  that   of 
Lamech  was,  ch.  iv.  23,  tf.  25.]  "  The 

Cauaanites  alone,  of  all  the  Hamites,  were 
considered  impious  and  wicked ;  their  de- 
struction was  decreed  as  soon  as  the  cup  of 
their  iniquity  was  full  (ch.  xv.  16  ;  compare 
Lev.  xviii.  24 — 30)  ;  they  suffered  both  for 
their  own  sin  and  that  of  the  founder  of 
their  race.  The  long-suffering  of  God  did 
not  hasten  their  perdition.  lie  allowed 
them  to  grow  and  prosper  during  the  ten 
generations  from  Noah  to  Abraham, and  the. 
five  following  centuries  from  Abraham  to 
Joshua  ;  their  fields  and  vineyards  yielded 
abundant  harvests,  and  their  laud  was  full 
of  strong  and  populous  cities  ;  but  their  evil 
deeds  accumulated,  and  they  forfeited  the 
land  which  their  vices  had  contaminated." 
Kalisch.  The  curse,  as  matter  of  world- 
history,  has  more  or  less  followed  all  the 
Hamite  races.  "  The  Canaauites  were  under 
Joshua,  and  under  the  Shemite  race  of  Israel, 
partly  destroyed,  partly  reduced  to  the  most 
abject  state  of  slavery  (Josh.  ix.  21  ft'.; 
compare  Judges  i.  28,  30,  33,  3-5);  and  their 
remnants  were  subjected  to  the  same  lot  by 
Solomon  (1  Kings  xi.  20  f.).  The  Phoeni- 
cians, who  belonged  to  Canaan,  with  the 
Carthaginians  and  Egyptians,  were  subdued 
by  the  Japlietic  Persians,  Macedonians,  and 
Eomans,  and  the  rest  of  the  Hamite  races 
shared  the  same  lot,  and  do  so  even  now,  as 
e.  g.  the  negroes  and  other  African  races  under 
the  yoke  of  the  hardest  slavery."  Keil. 
26.]  The  blessings,  in  their  turn,  are 
introduced  by  the  formal,  "And  lie  said." 


21— X.  1. 


GENESIS. 


43 


Blessed  be  Jehovah  ^od  of  Shcin  ; 
And  let  Canaan  be  servant  unto  him. 

-"  Let  God  enlarge  Japheth, 
And  let  him'' dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem  ; 

And  let  Canaan  be^scrvant  unto  him.  l^^  ej 

28  ^  And  Noah  lived  after  the  flood  three  hundred  and 
fifty  years.  29  }^^^^  .^  \\-^q  days  of  Noah  were  nine 
hundred  and  fifty  years :  and  he  died.     X.  ^  Now  these 


"/ 


In  the  first  blessing  of  Shem,  through  whom 
should  come  the  line  of  the  covenant, 
he  blesses,  not  Shem,  but  Jehovah,  the 
covenant  God,  in  whom,  so  to  speak,  Shem 
and  his  race  are  included ;  "  instead  of 
making  prominent  the  blessedness  of  Shem, 
ho  makes  ])r()minent  the  source  of  that  bless- 
edness. "  Kuobel.  The  words,  And  Canaan 
shall  be  servant  unto  him,  follow  both 
blessings  as  a  sort  of  refrain  or  burden  ; 
keeping  up  the  tone  of  malediction  which 
the   occasion  had  sot.  27.]    There    is 

here  an  allusion  to  the  meaning  of  the  name 
Japhet,  which  signifies  enlargement  or  ex- 
pansion. This  is  characteristic  of  the  Jeho- 
vistic  narrative.  See  ch.  iv.  1,  2o  ;  v.  29. 
Oljserve  it  is  here  Elohim,  not  Jehovah  ;  for 
,Jehovah  Elohim  is  the  covenant  God  of  the 
Sliemite  race  of  Israel,  Elohim  became  to 
them  Jehovah ;  not  so  with  the  race  of 
Jai)het,  till  the  time  when  the  Covenant 
should  be  with  all  flesh.  On  the  next  clause 
there  has  been  some  doubt  as  to  the  interpret- 
ation. AViio  is  the  subject  of  the  proposi- 
tion, "  he  shall  dwell  "  %  Is  it  God  {Elo- 
him) ?  or  is  it  Japheth  f  Many  have  taken 
the  former  ;  God  shall  pitch  His  tabernacle 
in  the  tents  of  Shem  ;  which  was  so  in  early 
times,  patriarchal  and  mosaic,  and  then 
notably  when  "  the  "Word  was  made  flesh  and 
dwelt  (tabernacled)  among  us."  But  to  this 
there  are  serious  objections.  The  greatest  is, 
that  the  name  Elohim  has  been  deliberately 
substituted  for  Jehovah  since  the  last  verse  ; 
and  if  any  such  meaning  as  that  in  question 
had  been  intended,  Jehovah  would  certainly 
have  been  used.  Again,  such  a  meaning 
would  really  make  this,  Japhet's  portion  of 
tile  paternal  blessing,  only  an  addition  to  that 
of  Shem.  So  that  we  must  suppose  Japhct 
to  be  the  subject  of  the  verb  "shall  dicell." 
And  then  the  propliecy  may  portend  either  a 
multiplying  of  the  race  of  Japhet  by  the  pro- 
mised enlargement,  so  as  to   overflow  into 


the  settlement  of  Shem  (which  however 
would  look  like  an  abridgment  of  the  bless- 
ing of  Shem),  or  a  fusion  and  fraternizatioQ 
of  the  two  races  by  simultaneity  of  dwelling 
or  religion.  That  this  latter,  the  intercourse  . 
of  Europe  and  Asia,  has  been  the  great  text 
of  ages  of  history,  and  is  to  this  day  taking 
the  form  indicated  in  the  prophecy,  is  no 
mean  argument  for  the  secular  part  of  the 
interpretation,  while  ^e  grafting  in  of  the 
Japhetic  races  into  the  blessing  of  Jehovah, 
God  of  Shem,  by  Him  in  whom  all  are  bless- 
ed, seems  fully  to  satisfy  the  spiritual  mean^ 
ing. 

Ver.  28,  29  are  assigned,  on  accoimt  of 
their  similarity,  to  ch.  v.,  and  the  mention  of 
"  the  Flood  "  to  the  original  or  Elohistic 
narrative. 

X.  The  table  of  the  nations^  as  descended 
from  the  soi  of  Noah :  extending  over 
"West  Asia,  North  Africa,  and  Europe. 
Elohistic,  with  the  exception  of  an  insertion 
ver.  8  —  12.  See  also  on  ver.  25.  This  is 
shewn  by  the  superscription,  and  closing 
formida;,  ver.  5,  20,  31,  32  ;  by  the  ex- 
pression, "  the  Flood,"  ver.  1,  32.  Also  we 
may  notice  that  the  genealogy  lies  insulated 
here  ;  for  evidently  tlie  incident  involving 
Canaan,  in  ch.  ix.  19 — 27,  is  an  anticipation 
of  our  ver.  6;  while  on  the  other  hand  the 
divisions  of  the  world  here  narrated  are  an- 
ticipations of  the  narrated  cause  of  the  dis- 
persion in  ch.  xi.  1 — 9. 

The  order  of  the  generations  of  the  sons 
of  Noah  here  followed-  is  Japhet,  Ham, 
Shem.  The  reason  of  this  arrangement  be- 
ginning with  Japhet,  is  that  he  was  the 
eldest  of  the  three.  Ilam  follows  next,  in 
order  that  the  main  subject,  the  line  of 
Shem,  may  be  free  for  treatment,  the  obje(Jt 
of  secondary  interest  having  been  first  dis- 
posed of,  according  to  the  practice  of  tlie 
sacred  writer, — sec  an  example  in  the  treat- 
ment of  the  Cainites  before  Seth,  ch.  iv.  y. 


44 


GENESIS. 


X. 


jn  1  Chron.  i.  5. 
^Jsa.  Ixvi.    19. 


are  tlie  generations  of  tlie  sons  of  Noali,  Sliem,  Ham,  and 
Japlietli :  and  unto  tliem  wen©  sons  born  after  the  flood, 
'^  The  sons  of  Japlieth ;  Gomer,  and  Magog,  and  Madai, 
and  Javan,  and  "^  Tubal,  and  ™  Meshecli,  and  Tiras.  ^  And 


It  is,  of  course,  and  ever  must  be, 
doubtful  whetber  many  of  tbe  names  bare 
given  are  to  be  regarded  as  tbose  of  persons 
or  of  nations.  As  Dclitzscb  remarks,  tbe 
line  between  ideal  and  bistorical  points  of 
unity  of  nations  is  never  in  antiquity 
strongly  drawn.  Tbe  two  are  curiously  in- 
termingled in  the  Canaanitish  portion  of  the 
list,  vv.  15—18.  And  in  vv.  13,  14,  the 
apparently  personal  names  at  last  blend  into 
Philistim  and  Capbtorim.  In  the  following 
commentary  I  shall  simply  mention  tbe 
principal  similarities  between  the  recorded 
names  and  those  of  tbe  ancient  nations  as 
they  have  been  given  us  by  the  best  author- 
ities. 

2 — 5.]  The  sons  of  Japheth.  The  simi- 
larity of  the  name  Japheth  and  the  la- 
2>etus  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  (the 
progenitor  of  the  human  race),  is  too  strong 
to  be  overlooked.  The  name  Gomer  has 
been  traced  iu  the  Klmmerians  of  Homer 
and  the  classics,  also  iu  the  Cymrij  or  Cym- 
rian,  even  now  used  by  tbe  Welsh,  as  tlieir 
national  name.  IMagog  is  supposed  to  indi- 
cate the  Scythians,  and  the  second  syllable 
to  have  affinity  with  C«!<casus,  which  is 
even  now  called  Gogh,  in  the  vernacular  of 
the  Caucasian  tribes.  ]\L4.dai  is  traced  in  the 
Medes,  who  in  old  Persian  were  called  Mada. 
Javan  is  one  of  the  most  easily  identified 
as  the  Ionian  race,  called  by  the  old  poets 
laones :  this  name  in  tlie  Eastern  tongues, 
e.  g.  the  Kebrew  and  other  Semitic  dialects, 
as  in  Sanskrit,  old  Persian,  and  Egyptian, 
designated  the  whole  of  the  Grecian  people. 
Tubal  and  Mesech,  which  names  fre- 
quently come  together  in  the  0.  T.  (see 
reff.),  have  not  been  satisfactorily  traced,  but 
as  tbe  list  seems  to  run  from  North  to 
South,  would  naturally  belong  to  tbe  South  of 
Europe.  But  the  names  neirest  allied  to  these 
are  the  Moschi  and  Tibareni,  two  Colcbian 
tribes  mentioned  by  Herodotus  as  constituting 
a  satrapy  in  the  Persian  empire,  and  as  serv- 
ing in  the  army  of  Xerxes.  Sir  H.  Eawlin- 
son,  in  bis  edition  of  Herodotus,  says  that 
they  are  constantly  associated,  under  the 
names  of  Muskai  and  Tvplai,  in  the  Assyrian 
inscriptions   (see  art.  "  Tubal "  in  Smith's 


Biblical  Dictiotiary).  But  Knobel  is  dis- 
posed to  look  for  them  as  above  among  the 
S.  European  nations,  and  to  find  them  in  the 
Iberians  and  Ligurians.  So  that  we  are  in 
uncertainty.  Tiras]    Various   guesses 

have  been  made  as  to  what  nation  is  repre- 
sented by  this  name  of  a  son  of  Japhet. 
Josephus  gives  the  Thracians,  Knobel 
thinks  the  Agathyrsi.  The  range  of  the 
Taurus,  tlie  river  Tyras  (Dniester),  tbe 
Tyrite,  and  even  tbe  Tyrseni  or  Tyrrheni, 
have  been  thought  of.  See  in  Smith's 
Biblical  Dictionary.  3.]  Now  we  come 

to  tlie  descendants  of  Japhet  in  the  second 
generation,  but  in  two  branches  only ;  be- 
yond which  the  genealogy  is  not  carried. 
Ashkenaz]  There  seems  strong 
reason  to  believe  that  the  Germanic  races  are 
designated  by  this  term.  Tbe  original  place 
of  Ashkenaz  was  in  Armenia,  see  ref., 
where  it  is  classed  with  Ararat.  Some 
think  it  to  be  a  compound  word,  and  as  to 
be  tbe  first  portion  carrying  the  distinctive 
name,  and  Kenaz,  {gcnos  in  Greek,  kin  or 
kind  in  Englisli),  signifying  race  ov  people  ; 
and  connect  tbe  As  with  Asia.  In  North 
Asia  Minor  there  was  a  lake  Ascanius, 
wliicb  name  again  occurs  in  the  story  of 
Troy  as  that  of  tbe  son  of  ^Eueas.  Tbe  cen- 
tral part  of  Asia  ]\Iinor,  where  dwelt  the 
Mysians  and  Phrygians,  was  called  Ascania 
according  to  Prankish  traditions,  says  Kno- 
bel ;  after  the  fall  of  Troy,  a  portion  of  tbe 
Franks  came  thence  to  Pannonia,  and  subse- 
quently to  the  Rhine.  Tbe  ancient  Saxon 
legends  make,  it  is  true,  the  Saxons  indigen- 
ous, but  name  the  first  king  Ascban  or  As- 
chanes,  and  the  name  is  traceable  also  in  old 
northern  traditions,  of  a  people  tbe  Asians, 
who  came  fi-om  the  other  side  of  tbe  Don, 
and  were  the  first  German  inhabitants  of 
5crt«dinavia.  It  is  somewhat  remarkable 
that  the  Jews  to  tliis  day  call  Germany  As- 
kenaz.  Riphath]  By  this  name,  accord- 

ing to  Knobel,  the  Celtic  race  seem  to  be 
designated.  They  dwelt  originally  on  the 
Riphcpan,  Eipcean,  or  Carjmthian  mountains, 
and,  according  to  an  account  given  by  Plu- 
tarch, spread  thence  westward,  one  branch 
over    North    and    N.-"NVest    Europe,    and 


2— G. 


GENESIS. 


45 


I  the  sons  of  Gomer ;  "  xVshkcnaz,  and  "  Ripliatli,  and  p  Tog- 

armali.     •*  And  the  sons  of  Javan  ;  'i  Elishah,  and  '"  Tar- 

sliish,  ^Kittim,  and  '  Dodanini.     ^  l|y  these  were  the  isles 

!  of  tlie  Gentiles  divided  in  their  lands  j  every  one  after  his 

i  tong'uc/  after  their  families,  in  their  nations.     ^  If  And  the 

sons   of  Ham ;    "  Cush,    and  Mizraiim    Jiwd  ^  Phnt,    and 


n  Jer.  li.  27. 
o  ^ce  1   C'liron. 


7,  only.  '  ' 

I  Kings  X.  22;  _,/ 

xxii.     4H.     1  7 

Cthmn.   i.  7.  .  / 

xlviii.  8  ;  j  / 


Ixxii.  lU.  I 

ii.   16  ;  xxiii. 

1,  C,   10,  14  ; 

Ix.    9;    Ixvi. 

19.  Jer.  X.  9.    Ezck.  xxvii.  12, 15  ;  xxxviii.  13.    Jonah  i.  3;  ir.  2,  only.  8  Num.  xxiv.  24.    1  Chron.  i.  7.    Isa.  xxiii.  1,  12. 

Jer.  ii.  10.     Eiek.  xxvii.  6.     Uan.  xi.  311.     1  Mace.  i.  1  ;  viii.  5.  t  I  Chron.  i.  7.    Eick.  xxii.  15.  (Dedan.)  u  cli.  ii.  13. 

1  Chron.  i.  8,9.  2  Chron.  xii.  3;  xiv.  9,  12,13;  xvi.  8.  Esth.  i.  1 ;  viii.  9.  Job  xxviii.  19.  Ps.  Ixviii.  31  ;  Ixxxvii.  4. 
ls:i.  xi.  11 .  xviii.  I  ;  XX.  3— 3;  xxxiii.9;  xliii.3;xlv.  14.  Jer.  xiii.St;  xlvi.  9.  Eiik.  xxix.  10;  xxx.  4,  5,  9;  xxxMii.  5. 
Nail.  iii.  9.     Zeph.  iii.  10.  t  1  ChroH.  i.  &    Jer.  xlvi.  9.     Ezek.  xxvii.  10;  xxx.  5  ;  xxxviii.  5.    N';^h.  iii.  9,  oul}' (ls<t. 

Ixvi.  19  ;  sfe  then;). 


another  into  France.  Much  doubt  is  cast 
on  this  view  by  some  of  the  other  comment- 
ators, who  however  have  nothing  so  prob- 
able to  substitute  for  it.  Togarmah] 
Almost  beyond  doubt  the  Armenians,  who 
themselves  make  their  founder  the  son  of 
Tliorgom.  To  this  view  the  mention  of  To- 
garmah in  retf.  Ezek.  corresponds;  for  in 
the  former  they  are  represented  as  trading 
in  the  fairs  at  Tyre  with  horses  and  horse- 
men and  mules,  which  have  always  been  the 
staple  of  Armenia,  and  in  the  latter  they  are 
spoken  of  as  "  of  the  north  quarters,"  and 
ranked  with  Gomer.  4.]  The  first 
mentioned  name  of  a  son  of  Javan,  Elishah, 
has  been  variously  connected  with  the  Greek 
race  ;  Josephus  supposed  it  to  represent  the 
j^oUans :  and  to  this  Knobel  also  agrees. 
Others  have  traced  the  name  in  Elis,  or 
even  in  Hellas.  In  ref.  Tyre  is  said  to  have 
been  covered  with  "  blue  and  purple  from 
the  isles  (or  sea-coasts)  of  Elishah."  The 
Julians  in  ancient  times  were  much  more 
widely  spread  than  afterwards  over  Greece 
and  Asia  Elinor,  the  N.W.  corner  of  which 
was  from  them  called  ^-Eolis.  Tarshish] 
Wc  may  notice  that  this  name  is  coupled  by 
and  to  Eli.shah,  but  is  not  so  coupled  to  what 
follows.  Knobel  hence  infers  some  affinity 
with  the  preceding.  He  interprets  this  with 
Tarshish  of  the  Tyrrhenians  or  Tyrsenians 
(see  above  on  Tiras),  who  as  well  as  the 
iEolians  were  a  Pelasgic  race.  Elsewhere 
in  the  0.  T.  he  seems  to  regard  Tarshish  as 
others  do,  as  being  Tartessus  in  Spain.  See 
note  on  Jonah  i.  3.  I  have  given  in  the 
reff.  all  the  places  where  the  word  occurs  in 
the  0.  T.  Kittim]  is  taken  as  repre- 
senting primarily  the  Phcenician  settlers  in 
the  isles  of  the  Levant,  traceable  (so  Jose- 
phus) iu  Citium  the  capital  of  Cyprus,  but 
mainly  the  Carians,  the  people  who  suc- 
ceeded them  in  the  occupation  of  these  is- 
lands.    The  LXX.  and  Vulgate  render  the 


word  variously  in  various  places  ;  e.  g.  in 
ref.  Num.  the  Vulgate  has,  "  they  shall  come 
in  ships  out  of  Italy  ;  "  and  in  ruf.  Dun. 
the  LXX.  has,  "  and  Romans  shall  come," 
and  the  Vulg.ate,  "ships  and  Romans."  In 
1st  ref.  1  Mace.  Alexander  the  Great  is  said 
to  have  come  out  of  the  land  of  Chittim  ; 
and  in  2nd,  Perseus  is  called  king  of  the 
Chittians.  Josephus  says  that  in  his  time  the 
islands  of  the  Archipelago  were  called  by 
the  Jews  Chettim.  The  name  has  been  sup- 
posed originally  connected  with  that  of  the 
Ilittites  (Heb.  C>^(ttites),  a  branch  of  the 
Canaanitish  race.  Dodanim]  as  coupled 

to  Kittim,  seems  to  represent  sdme  people  in 
Greece.  The  name  is  also  written  Rodanim, 
and  is  here  rendered  in  the  LXX.  Rhodians, 
by  which  name  they  have  also  rendered 
Dedan  in  ref.  Ezek.  Dodanim  is  now  gen- 
erally'assumed  to  answer  to  the  Dardnni,  the 
ar  and  o  being  interchangeable,  as  in  Bar- 
milcar  and  Bomilcar,  Hamilcar  and  Ham- 
ilco.  The  Dardani  were  anciently  found  in 
Illyrium  and  Troy.  The  Dodona  in  Epirus 
reminds  one  of  this  name,  and  Kalisch 
thinks  the  Dawiians  in  Italy  may  be  repre- 
sented by  it.  On  all  these  names  see  the 
articles  in  Smith's  Biblical  Dictionary. 
5.  the  isles  of  the  Gentiles]  would 
appear  to  include  the  coast  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean. The  word  signifies  not  only  island 
but  also  any  maritime  tracts.  The  notice 
in  this  verse  must  evidently  be  regarded  as 
anticipatory  of  ch.  xi.  1.  6  —  20]    The 

sons  of  Ham.  Ciish'\  The  well-known 

designation  of  the  Ethiopians,  the  farthest 
South  of  the  children  of  Ham.  "They  dwelt," 
says  Knobel,  "  partly  in  A.sia,  e.  g.  in  India, 
Gedro.sia,  Carmania,  and  Southern  Arabia, 
and  farther  north  in  Susiana  and  Babylonia. 
In  these  lands  the  ancients  speak  of  dark- 
skinned  tribes  known  by  thrm  as  Ethiopians, 
who  partly  vanished  in  old  time,  partly  re- 
main  in  fragments   even   now.      But   the 


46 


GENESIS. 


X. 


rs'^'ix™i'i.'i»:   Canaan.    7  And  the  sons  of  Cusli ;  "^  Seba,  and  '^  Havilali, 
ve'V.Mich  ii    andySabtah,   and  ''Raamali,   and  =^  Sabtecliali :   and   tlie 

11;  XXV.  18.  1  '  ' 

sons  of  Raamab ;    ^  Sbeba,   and    *=  Dedan.       ^  And  Cusli 


.  XV.  7 
Chron.  i.9,2:i 
y  1  Chron.  i.  9, 

onlv.        z  1  Chron.  i.  9.      Ezek.  xxvij. 
23  (ch.  XXV.  SJ.        c  ch.  xxv.  3.     1  tin 


™lv.         a  1  Chron.  i.  9.        b  1  riiron.  i.  9.     See  ver. 
.  9,  32.    Jer.  xxv.  23  ;  xlix.  8.    Ezck.  x.xvii.  15, 2n 


r.    Ezck,  xxvii.  22, 
13,  only. 


main  body  of  this  race  dwelt  in  Africa,  in 
the  present  Xuhia  and  Abyssinia.  To  these 
African  Ethiopians  the  name  Cush  in  the  0. 
T.  usually  applies ;  but  in  these  national 
tables,  the  name  indicates  the  Ethiopian 
race  jrencrally,  and  has  a  wider  meaning.  In 
the  division  of  lands  here  the  sons  of  Cush 
are  also  mentioned,  whom  the  writer  enum- 
erates from  West  to  East.  "  In  all  the  reff. 
except  in  the  genealogical  table  in  Chron., 
Cush  is  rendered  Ethiojiia  in  the  A.  V. 
Mizraim]  Thij  is  the  name  through- 
out the  0.  T.  for  Egypt  or  the  Egyptians. 
Mr  Stuart  Poole,  in  his  art.  in  Smith's 
Biblical  Dictionary/,  maintains  that  the  form 
IMizraim  can  in  no  case  be  a  man's  name,  as 
neither  can  any  of  those  (ending  in  im)  in  vv. 
13, 14,  but  must  indicate  nations,  and  that  the 
order  here  may  furnish  a  clue  to  the  positions. 
Cush  would  stand  first  as  the  most  widely 
spread  of  these  peoples,  extending  from  Baby- 
lon to  the  Upper  Nile ;  the  territory  of  IMizraim 
would  be  the  next  to  the  north,  embracing 
E"-vpt  and  its  colonies  on  the  N.  W.  and 
N.  E.  Phut  as  dependent  on  Egypt  might 
follow  Mizraim,  and  Canaan  as  the  north- 
ernmost would  end  the  list.  The  occurrence 
of  the  name  Mizraim  in  the  0.  T.  is  far  too 
frequent  to  admit  of  a  list  of  reff.  It  is 
ever V where  rendered  Egypt  in  the  A.  V. 
except  in  Genesis  1.  11,  where  the  name  is 
given  as  it  stands  in  a  compound  word. 
Phut]  has  been  ordinarily  under- 
stood to  indicate  the  Libyans.  See  Mr. 
Stuart  Poole's  art.  in  Smith's  Biblical  Diet., 
who  inclines  to  interpret  it  rather  of  Nubi- 
ans. However  this  may  be,  "the  few  men- 
tions of  Phut  clearly  indicate  a  country  or 
people  of  Africa,  and  probably  not  far  from 
Et^ypt.  They  occur  only  in  the  list  of 
Noah's  descendants  and  in  the  prophetic 
Scriptures  ;  "  see  the  reff.,  which  seem  quite 
to  bear  out  this  assertion,  and  on  Isa.  Ixvi. 
19.  Canaan]    The    well-known   pro- 

genitor, or  natural  name  of  the  Phoenician 
tribes,  occupying  the  territory  from  the 
Mediterranean  to  the  Persian  Gulf.  See  on 
bis  descendants  below.  7.  Saba]    To 

this  name  is  allotted  the  north  of  Ethi- 
opia, including  Meroe,  which  is  sometimes 


called  Saba  by  Josephus.  See  Mr.  Stuart 
Poole's  art.  in  Smith's  Biblical  Diet. 
Havilah]  See  on  ch.  ii.  11.  Thei-e  is  an- 
other Ilavilah  mentioned  in  tliis  chapter,  ver. 
29,  as  a  son  of  Joktan,  see  tliere.  This  one 
is  taken  as  representing  the  district  Khaiclan 
(which  is  similar  in  name)  iu  Yemen  ;  it  is 
"  a  fertile  territory  embracing  a  large  part  of 
myrrhiferous  Arabia."  Mr.  Stanley  Poole  in 
Smith's  Biblical  Bid.  Sabtah]    This 

name  has  been  traced  in  Sabbatic  or  Sa- 
bota,  an  important  inland  city  in  South 
Arabia.  See  Mr  Stanley  Poole's  art.  as 
above.  Kaamah]  This  name  has  been 

identified,  by  means  of  the  LXX.  and  Vul- 
gate renderings,  Ttegma,  as  a  city  so  called, 
and  mentioned  by  tlie  ancient  geograpliers, 
on  the  shore  of  the  Persian  Gulf.  See  Mr. 
Stanley  Poole's  art.  as  above.  Sabte- 

chah]  iMr.  Poole  thinks  this  name  has  not 
been  satisfactorily  or  even  proximately  traced. 
From  its  position  here,  we  should  expect  a 
people  on  the  Per.sian  Gulf ;  and  Knolii^l 
connects  with  the  name  a  maritime  town  and 
river  Sa??(?/f/rtA-e  mentioned  by  Ptolemy.  Put 
this  seems  far-fetched.  Sheba]    This 

Cushite  Sheba  is  not  to  be  confounded  with 
the  better  known  Sheba  of  ver.  28,  on  wliieh 
see  ;  it  seems  to  represent  a  people  on  the 
Persian  Gulf,  wliere  we  are  told  are  the  ruins 
of  an  ancient  city  called  Seba.  In  ref.  Ezek. 
Sheba  is  mentioned  as  here,  in  connexion 
with  Raamah,  as  bringing  to  Tyre  spices, 
precious  stones,  and  gold.  On  the  r^'appear- 
ance  of  some  of  these  names  in  ch.  xxv.  3, 
as  children  of  Keturah,  see  there. 
Dedan]  IMuch  obscurity  rests  over  this  name. 
Mr.  Stanley  Poole  (art.  as  above)  thinks  tliat 
the  view  best  supported  by  the  facts  of  tlie 
case  is,  "that  Dedan  son  of  Raamah  settled 
on  the  shores  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  his 
descendants  (see  ref.  Ezek.)  became  caravan- 
merchants  between  that  coast  and  Palestine." 
Mr.  Poole  thinks  the  name  is  to  be  traced  in 
the  island  of  Dadan  on  the  border  of  the 
Gulf.  In  Jer.  xxv.  23,  Ezek.  xxiii.  15,  the 
name  is  connected  with  islands. 
8  — 12.]  Parenthetical  notice  concerning 
Nimrod.  Its  diversity  of  material  from, 
and  disconnexion  with,  what  went  before  and 


7—11. 


GENESIS. 


47 


d  1  riiron.  i  10. 
Mi.-.ih  ».  6. 
only. 


vii.  1. 
xxvi. 


begat   ^Nimrod:  he  began    to  be  a  mighty  one  in  the 

earth.     ^   lie  was  a  mighty  hunter  '^  before  the  Loud  : 

wherefore  it  is  said,  Eveii_as  Nimrod  the  miglity  liunter 

before  the  Lord.     10  ji^i^f[  ^he  beginning  of  his  kingdom 

was  f  Babel,  and  ^Erech,  and  ^' Accad,  and  Calnch,  in  the  fS'ech.xi.a 

land  of  Shinar.     H  Out  of  that  hmd  he  went  forth  to  As-   i.i.:Jr„„w.   o^, 


12.  I'. 

Jonul _. 

(AcU  vU.  20.) 


^C 


V 


shur,  and  builded  Nineveh,  and  the„j;ity  'Rchoboth,  and  ".^'x^wa'??  (^ -S^j 

what   follows,    and   the   occurrence   of  the  lasar),  while  the  name  of  Accad  is  preserved 

name  JcJiovah,  mark  the  insertion  as  due  to  in   tlie   title    Kin:i-aLkad,    by    which    the 

the  Jchovist    supplcmcntcr.             Nimrod]  founder  or  cmhcllislu'r  of  their  towns  was 

See  Mr.  Bevan's  article  in  Smith's  Bihiical  distingui.-hcd  (Rawlinson,  i.  43.5).      Bevan. 

JJict.     The  e.\pres,>;ion  he   began  to   be    a  See  JMr.  Grove's  art.  in  .B/i//m//J«W.  Knobel 

mighty  one  in  the  earth,  is  explained  that  finds  the  name  Calneh  in  Chalonitis:  the 

he  was  the  first  wlio  established  an  empire,  name  of  a  district  north  of  Babylon    on  the 

becoming  a  conqueror,  and  joining  more  cities  east  bank  of  the  Tigris.     On  the  land  of 

than  one  under  his  rule.             9.]  This  no-  Shinar,  see  note,  cli.  .\i.  2.             11.1  Tliis 

tice  is  generally  taken  in  its  simiile  primary  yerse,  as  it  seems  now  generally  agreed  nar- 

sensc,  tliat  this  great  conqueror  was  also  a  rates  a  further  progress  towards  greatness  on 

great  follower  of  tlie  chase,  a  pursuit  which,  tlie  part  of  Nimrod,  in  going  further  north- 


as  Dclitzsch  remarks,  "  has  remained  to  this 
day,  true  to  its  origin,  the  favourite  pleasure 
of  tyrants."  The  expression  before  the 
Lord  is  more  than  a  mere  intensitive  ;  it 
signifies  that  in  the  sight  of  Ilim  wlio  over- 
looks all  the  world,  such  greatness  was  emi- 
nent— that  the  reputation  was  world-wide. 
The  citation  of  popular  proverbs  is  found 
also  in  ch.  xxii.  11  ;  K'uni.  xxi.  27  ;  1  Sam. 
X.  12;  xix.  24.  Ilis  first  establishment  of 
his  kingdom  began  with  these  four — Babel 
(universally  known  as  Babylon.  The  an- 
cient tradition  made  the  Ethiopians  found- 
ers   of    Babylon — an  Ethiopian   King   Ce- 


ward  into  and  conquering  Asshur.  The  ren- 
dering in  the  A.  V.  seems  to  be  possible,  but 
mistaken.  Four  more  cities  are  mentioned 
as  built  by  Nimrod  in  Assyria.  First, 
Nineveh.  It  would  be  beyond  the  limits 
of  a  note  to  give  any  full  account  of  the 
early  history  of  and  conjectures  respecting 
Xineveh.  IMr.  Layard,  who  lias  most  rigli't 
to  do  so,  has  related  botli  these  in  his  article 
in  Smith's  Biblical  Did.  Nimrod  is  con- 
nected with  Nineveh  more  by  tlic  modern 
name  Niraroud,  given  by  the  Arabs  to  tlie 
principal  mound  of  ruins,  than  by  any 
ancient     tradition.  Rehoboth]     Tliis 


pheus :  and  recognized  a  migration  of  word  properly  signifies  streets,  and  is  taken 
the  people  of  Cepheus  northwards,  Knobel).  by  Jerome  to  mean,  in  connexion  with  the 
Belus  also,  the  mythical  founder  of  Baby-  following  word  in  tlie  Hebrew,  the  streets 
Ion,  was  said  to  be  of  Egyptian  origin,  of  the  city,  viz.  of  Nineveh :  and  it  is  so 
being  the  son  of  Poseidon  and  Libya,  rendered  by  the  Vulgate.  But  it  is  "-ener- 
"  The  name  Cush  itself  was  preserved  in  ally  supposed  to  represent  a  distinct  place ; 
Babylon  and  the  adjacent  countries  under     and  its  locality  is  very  variously  assigned. 

Kalisch  says  the  name  was  very  common, 
and  ;jye  have  in  ref.  another  instance  of  its 
occurrence.  This  Eehoboth  is  now  gener- 
ally supposed  to  represent  a  portion  of  the 
existing  ruins  of  Nineveh.     Tiie  Samaritan 


and 


the  form  of  Cosswi,  Cissia,  Cuthah, 
Susiana,  or  Chuzistan."  Bevan. 
Erech]  The  earliest  seat  of  empire  was  in 
the  south  part  of  the  Babylonian  plain.  The 
large  mounds,  which  for  a  vast  number  of 
centuries  have  covered  tlie  ruins  of  ancient  version  reads  here,  for  Rehobotlu  Sutcaii  : 
cities,  have  already  yiehied  some  evidence  of  which  name  is  found  united  with  Calab  on 
the  dates  and  names  of  their  founders,  and  the  breast  of  a  statue  of  the  god  Nebo,  dis- 
■we  can  assign  the  highest  antiquity  to  tlie  interred  at  Nimroud  by  Sir  II.  Bawlinson. 
towns  represented  by  the  mounds  of  Kiffer  Sutcan  is  supposed  to  represent  Sittacene,  a 
(pc  rhaps  the  early  Babel,  though  also  idon-     district   in   southern   Assyria.  Calah] 

tified  with    Calneh),  Warka    (the    biblical     Kalisch  identifies  this  witli  tlie  large  mound, 
Erecli),    Mugheir  (Ur),  and  Senkcrch  (El-     Kalah  Hherghat,  about   05  miles  south  of 


48 


GENESIS. 


X. 


2Tin"s-!i"    Calah,  i^  ^nd   Eesen  between  Nineveli  and  J  Calali :  tlie 

kicijronj^u,  samee'stlie  great  city.     ^^  And  Mizraim  begat  '^  Ludim, 

fES.'xxvif.  and  ^ Anaiuim,  and  "^ Lebabim,  and  ^ Naijbtubim,  i^  and 

10;  XXX.  5). 

tfv/i  fchron'Tii;  "  Patbrusim,  and   °  Caslubim,   (outj)f  wbom  came  Pbilis- 

'        onlv. 

m  1  Chron.  i.  11,  only     Lubims,  2  Clirnn.  xii.  3  ;  xvi.  f>.    Nah.  iii.  9.    Dan.  xi.  43.      a  1  Chron.  i.  12,  only.     Puthros,  Is» 
xi  11.    Jer.  xliv.  1,  15.     tzek.  xxix.  U  ;  xxx.  14,  only.        o  1  Chion.  i.  la,  only.  . 


Mosul,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Tigris. 
Calah,  he  says,  possessed  one  of  the  most 
extensive  palaces,  and  is  several  times  men- 
tioned on  the  black  obelisk  of  tlie  central 
palace  of  Niniroud  as  the  residence  of  the 
king.  But  Layard  {Biblical  Diet.,  as  above) 
regards  Calali  as  the  same  with  Nimroud. 
Resen]  This  has  been  identified  by 
some  with  the  ruins  of  Nimroud,  regarding 
Nineveh  itself  as  being  Kouyuiijik.  But 
these  sites  seem  at  the  best  very  uncertain. 
the  same  is  the  great  city]  Knobel 
refers  this  to  the  whole  four  just  mentioned, 
Nineveh,  Eehoboth,  Calah,  and  Resen : 
these  four  places  are  the  site  tchich  is  named 
the  great  city,  viz.  Nineveh  in  the  wider 
eense.     See  Jonah  iv.  11 ;  iii.  3. 

13 — 20.  ]  Continxtation  of  the  sons  of 
Bam.  Resumption  of  the  Elohistic  gene- 
alogy. In  what  follows  respecting  the 
sons  of  Ham  individual  and  national  names 
are  mixed.  All  these  in  vv.  13,  14  are 
plural  in  form;  and  in  vv.  16,  17,  the 
names  are  unmistakably  national.  13, 

14.]  Sons  of  Mizraim,  on  whom  see  note, 
ver.  6.  Lubim]  Tlicre   is   some   diffi- 

culty in  assigning  the  Scripture  mention  of 
Lud  and  Ludim  between  this  ]\Iizraite 
people  and  the  Shcmite  of  ver.  22.  Vly.  Stuart 
Poole  discu.sses  the  matter  in  Smith's  Biblical 
Diet.,  and  thinks  it  probable  that  this  ap- 
parently Egyptian  tribe  are  intended  in  Jer. 
xlvi.  9,  "  Cush  and  Phut  that  handle  the 
buckler,"  and'^the  Ludimthaf  bend  the  bow," 
in  Pharaoh -Nccho's  army.  In  Ezek.  xxvii. 
10,  again,  Lud  is  associated  with  Phut  as  in 
Jer.,  and,  probably  again,  the  African  Ludim. 
In  Ezek.  xxx.  5  we  have  a  similar  associa- 
tion.  But  (see  the  article)  there  are  reasons 
why  this  must  remain  uncertain.  Ana- 

mim]  Probably  a  people  of  North  Egypt ; 
but  nothing  probable  has  been  discovered 
about    their     site.  Lehabim]     Now 

generally  identified  with  the  Lxihim  of 
refli'.,  and  supposed  to  be  the  Libyans,  the 
inhabitants  of  N.W.  Africa.  See  art.  in 
Biblical  Diet.  Naphtuhim]  Kalisch  con- 

nects   this    name    with    the    Libyan    city 


Nassata,  in  the  north  of  the  province  of 
]\lcroe,  which  was  the  capital  of  an  Ethi- 
opian kingdom.  Pathrusim]  The  con- 
clusion of  Mr.  Stuart  Poole  in  the  Biblical 
Diet.  (Pathros)  is,  "  On  the  evidence  here 
brought  forward,  it  is  reasonable  to  consider 
Pathros  to  be  part  of  Upper  Egypt,  and  to 
trace  its  name  in  that  of  the  Pathyrite 
Nome  (district  in  which  Thebes  was  situ- 
ate). But  this  is  only  a  very  conjectural 
identification,  which  future  discoveries  may 
overthrow."  He  thinks  that  the  etymology 
which  connects  the  name  with  "  that  which 
is  southern"  must  be  abandoned. 
CasluMm]  There  is  nothing  to  lead  to  the 
identification  of  this  race.  They  were  long 
supposed  to  be  the  Colchians,  who  are  related 
to  have  been  an  Egyptian  colony  ;  but  this 
is  very  doubtful,  especially  as  the  Philistines 
are  said  to  have  sprung  from  these  Caslu- 
hims,  and  they  certainly  never  carae  from 
Colchis.  "  The  only  clue  to  their  position 
is  their  place  in  the  list  between  the  Pathru- 
sim and  the  Caphtorim,  whence  it  is  pro- 
bable that  they  were  seated  in  Upper  Egypt." 
Stuart  Poole.  Knobel  connects  the  name 
with  Mount  Casius  and  the  town  Cassitmi, 
the  territory  of  which  was  afterwards  called 
Cnssioti-t.  out  of  whom  (or  whence) 
came  Philistim]  The  name  of  the  Philis- 
tines is  derived  from  a  verb  signifying  to 
migrate,  and  so  this  notice  is,  as  Mr.  Bevan 
remarks  [Biblical  Diet.)  "an  etymological 
as  well  as  an  historical  memorandum."  An 
attempt  has  been  made  to  set  up  a  transposi- 
tion here,  and  to  make  out  that  the  notice 
refers  to  the  Caphtorim  who  follow,  because 
it  is  said  (see  ref.  on  that  word)  that  the 
Philistines  came  from  them.  But  we  evi- 
dently must  take  this  place  as  we  find  it. 
There  is  no  reason  why,  the  settlements 
being  near,  the  Philistines  may  not  have 
come  from  both.  Caphtorim]  have 
been  in  former  times  identified  with  tiie  Cap- 
padocians,  Cyprians,  and  Cretans :  others 
have  supposed  the  name  to  be  traceable  in 
Coptos.  But  all  appears  uncertain.  On  the 
derivation  of  the  Philistines  from  them,  see 


(12—19. 


GENESIS. 


49 


itim,)  anrl  p  Caplitorim.  15  ^  ^Ynd  Canaan  boo-at  Sidon  bis  ppr"'-  "•'^'" 
.firstborn,  and  Iletb,  i^  and  tbe  Jebusite,  and  tbe  Amor- 
it  o,  and  Girgasito,  i"  and  tbe  Hivite,  and  tbe  i  Arkite,  and 
'tbe  Sinite,  ^^  ^jid  tbe  *' Arvadito,  and  tbe  ''Zeniarite,  and 
tbe  Ilamatbite :  and  afterward  were  tbe  families  of  tbe 
iCanaanites   spread   abroad,      i^  j^^^^   tjje   border  of  tbe 


Xlvil.   11. 

AmoB  ix.  7. 
q  1  Cliron.  1.15, 

onlv. 
r  1  Cliron.  i.  16, 

only.^^el•Ez(■k. 

xxvii.  8,  11. 
B  IChr.i.ie.onlT 
t  1  Chion.  i.  10, 

only.  Humiith 

Num.    xiii. 

Zl.iin.l  fre- 

quuntly. 


phovo.  15,  f.]  The  sons  of  Canaan  and 

\tlie  7-ares  dcrired  from   him.  Sidon] 

,Tlu'  Can;i;initisli  peoples  of  Phoenician  race, 
ithouirh  they  spoke  a  Semitic  lan^jtiage,  were 
bdtli  liistorically  and  mytlioloj^ically  origin- 
ially  from  the  south.  Sidon  and  Tyre  were 
tluir  most  ancient  cities.  Sidon  was  the 
loiily  Phoenician  city  known  to  Homer.  From 
Heth  came  tlic  Hittites,  who  dwelt  about 
tin;  mountains  of  Jndah,  and  especially  near 
Hebron.  But  from  Josh.  i.  4  their  settle- 
ments must  have  been  originally  much 
wider ;  and  from  1  Kings  x.  29,  2  Kings 
vii.  6,  there  were  kings  of  the  Hittites  in 
the  days  of  Solomon  and  of  Jorara.  The 
four  next-mentioned  sons  of  Canaan  dwelt 
iu  Palestine  :  the  Jebusites,  in  and  around 
Jerusalem ;  though  defeated  by  Joshua, 
they  maintained  their  ground  in  their  city 
Jcbus,  were  unsuccessfully  attacked  by  the 
tribes  of  Judah  (Judg.  i.  8)  and  Benjamin 
(Judg.  i.  21;  xix.  11),  driven  out  by  David, 
but  never  entirely  extirpated.  They  are 
mentioned  after  the  return  from  Babylon, 
Ezra  ix.  1.  The  Amorites,  Kiiobel  thinks, 
are  not  the  great  people  of  that  name  E. 
and  W.  of  the  Jordan,  but  a  portion  of 
them  only  who  were  mingled  with  the 
Ciinaanites  on  the  mountains  of  Judah. 
The  name  implies,  dwellers  on  the  summits. 
See  Mr.  Grove's  interesting  artrele  {Biblical 
DictioiMri/),  w^ho.  however,  does  not  maintain 
the  above  distinction.  The  Girgasites 
may  possibly  be  connected  with  the  Gerge- 
senes  mentioned  JIark  v.  1,  on  the  E.  of  the 
Sea  of  Galilee.  The  Hivites  inhabited 
Shechem  and  Gibeon,  and  had  a  settlement 
in  the  N.  near  the  foot  of  Hermon  and 
Lebanon.  They  were  not  a  large  people,  and 
are  frequently  included  under  the  Amorites. 
The  Arkites  are  supposed  to  be  the  in- 
habitants of  a  town  Arka  or  Arke,  at  the  X. 
Western  foot  of  Lebanon,  whose  ruins  are 
still  called  Tel  Arka.  The  Sinites  were  in 
the  same  neighbourhood,  at  a  town  which 
still  preserved  the  name  of  Sini  in  Jerome's 
time,  and  which  existed  as  a  village  called 


Sin  near  the  river  Arka,  as  late  as  the  15th 
century.  The  Arvadites  dwelt  in  the  island 
of  Aradus,  olf  the  Pho-nician  coast.  It  is  a 
mere  rock,  only  7  furlongs  in  circumference, 
but  grew  to  be  a  settlement  almost  rivalling 
Sidon,  by  exiles  from  which  it  was  founded, 
— and  even  sent  out  colonies,  of  which  Tar- 
sus was  one.  It  was  ruled  by  its  own  kings 
for  many  centuries,  but  yielded,  first  to  the 
Persians,  then  to  Alexander  and  to  Ptolemy 
Soter.  But,  instead  of  declining,  it  ro.se  to 
greater  prosperity  ;  it  was  declared  a  city  of 
refuge,  and  probably  regained  its  independ- 
ence, for  it  oticred  alliance  and  supi)ort  to 
Antiochus  Epiphanes ;  but  after  his  time  it 
declined,  becoming  subject  to  Syria,  Arme- 
nia, and  Rome,  and  was  finally  destroyed 
under  Constans.  A  village  ( Riiad)  still  re- 
calls the  name,  and  there  are  remains  of  mas- 
sive I'hocuician  walls.  The  Zemarites  are 
certainly  not  Samaritaiis,  as  the  LXX.  and 
Vulgate  here  render ;  for  it  does  not  corre- 
spond with  the  Hebrew  word.  They  are  sup- 
posed by  Kalisch  to  have  been  the  inhabit- 
ants of  Simyra,  near  Antaradns  (a  town 
opposite  the  island  of  Aradus)  or  Tortosa, 
The  ruins  now  bear  the  name  of  Sumrah. 
It  was  once  thought  that  the  Zemarites 
were  the  tribes  round  Edessa,  near  the  river 
Zamyrus.  The  Hamathites  were  iuhabit- 
auts  of  Hamath,  the  principal  city  of  Upper 
Syria.  It  was  on  the  Orontes,  and  coni- 
nianded  the  whole  of  the  valley.  For  an 
account  of  its  history  see  Smith's  Biblical 
Dictionary  and  Kalisch.  It  was  called  by 
the  Greeks  Epiphania.  It  still  exists  ;  and 
when  Burckhardt  visited  it  in  1812,  had 
30,000  inhabitants.  The  concluding  notice 
imports  that  the  Canaanites,  who  at  first 
dwelt  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Zidon,  spread 
further  over  Palestine,  viz.  as  specified  in 
the  next  verse.  19.]   The  borders  south- 

ward of  the  Canaanite  extensions.  Gerar 
was  a  large  city  to  the  south  of  Palestine, 
the  capital  of  Abimelech,  and  probably  birth- 
place of  Isaac.  Its  situation  is  very  uncertain. 
See  Dr.  Hayman's  art.  iu  Smith's  Biblical 


50 


GENESIS. 


X. 


u  ch.  XX.  1,2; 
xxvi.  1,  G,  17, 
20,26. 

2  Chron.  xiY. 
13, 11. 


r/    Mk 


Canaanite^  was  from  Sidon,  as  thou  comest  to  "  Gerar, 
unto  Gaza  ;  as  tliou  goesty  unto  Sodom,  and  Gomorrah, 
and  Admati,  and  Zeboim,  even  unto  Laslia.  20  These  are 
the  sons  of  Ham,  after  their  families,  after  their  tongues, 
in  their  countries,  ami  in  their  nations,  ^l  ^  JJnto  Shem 
algo,  the  father  of  all  the  children  of  ^  Eber,  the  Jbrother 
of  Jaj)heth  the_elder,  even  to  him  were  cldldren  born.  22 
i^chron.  i.  18,  Thc  childrcn  of  Shem ;  ^  Elam,  and  Asshur,  and  ^  Arphaxad 


T   ver.  25  ;  ch. 

xi.     15,    16. 

1  Chron.  i.l9. 
w  ch.  xiv.  1,9. 

1  Chron.  i.  17, 

al.  fr. 
X  ch.xi.  10,&c. 


Dictionary.  But  see  also  note  on  ch.  xx.  1. 
The  four  names  Sodom,  Gomorrah,  Admah, 
and  Zehoim,  will  be  found  discussed  under 
ch.  xix.  ;  the  fifth,  Lasha,  is  involved  in  un- 
certainty. From  the  expression  even  unto, 
it  would  appear  to  be  beyond  the  "  cities  of 
the  plain "  first  mentioned,  and  from  the 
meaning  of  the  name,  a  fissure  or  break,  we 
might  expect  to  find  it  in  a  ravine.  Such 
conditions  would  be  fulfilled  in  Callirhoe, 
which  was  Jerome's  conjecture  for  it.  But 
there  are  no  traces  of  a  town  in  this  neigh- 
bourhood. See  Mr.  Bevan,  Biblical  Dic- 
tionary. This  verse  in  the  Samaritan  Pen- 
tateuch stands  thus  :  The  boundary  of  Ca- 
naan teas  from  the  river  of  Egypt  to  the  great 
river,  the  ricer  Euphrates.  Kalisch  sets 
this  down  to  a  corruption  originating  in  the 
mistaken  idea  that  the  boundaries  of  the 
kingdoms  of  Israel  were  intended.  Yer.  20 
is  a  formal  conclusion,  as  ver.  o. 
21 — 31.]  The  children  of  Shem :  placed 
last,  as  has  been  before  noticed,  to  clear  away 
the  collateral  matter  and  leave  the  main 
subject  to  be  treated.  The  notice,  the 
father  of  all  the  children  of  Eber,  mani- 
fests the  object  of  the  sacred  writer,  to  give 
the  people  of  the  Hebrews,  who  are  included 
(compare  ver.  25  and  ch.  xi.  16,  ff.)  among 
Eber's  descendants.  But  tliis  is  doubted  by 
some  (see  Mr.  Brown's  art.  "Plebrew"  in  Bib- 
lical Dictionary),  who  think  that  this  notice 
only  means  that  Shem  was  father  of  all  that 
dwelt  east  of  the  Euphrates  (see  on  ch. 
xiv.  13).  But  on  this  supposition  it  would 
he  difficult  to  account  for  the  insertion  of 
the  Avords  in  this  prominent  place.  The 
words,  the  brother  of  Japheth  the  elder, 
are  taken  in  three  ways:  1.  That  Shem  was 
Japhet's  elder  brother,  i.  e.  older  than  Ja- 
phet.  So  Knobel  and  others.  2.  That  Shem 
was  brother  of  Japhet  the  elder,  i.  e.  young- 
er than  Japhet.  So  the  LXX.  and  many 
commentators.  3.  That  Shem  was  brother 
of  Japhet  the  elder,  i.  e.  younger  than  Japhet, 


but  older  than  Ham, — the  elder  of  the  two 
brothers  of  Japhet.  It  must,  we  think,  re- 
main uncertain  whether  Shem  or  Japliet 
was  the  eldest  brother.  No  real  difficulty, 
as  Quarry  has  well  shewn  (Genesis,  &c.,  p. 
192,  f.),  is  occasioned  on  either  h)-pothesis. 
Dr.  Colenso's  assertion  that  in  Abraham's 
ancestry  every  person  mentioned  is  the 
eldest  son  of  his  father,  is  a  pure  assumption 
of  his  own.  22.]  Elam  "  appears  to  be 

the  province  lying  S.  of  Assyria  and  E.  of 
Persia,  which  is  termed  Susis  or  Susiana  by 
the  geographers.  It  includes  a  portion  of 
the  mountainous  country  separating  the 
Mesopotamian  plain  from  the  high  table-  J 
land  of  Iran,  together  with  a  fertile  and 
valuable  low  tract  at  the  foot  of  the  range, 
between  it  and  the  Tigris.  The  passage  of 
Daniel  (viii.  2)  which  places  Shushan  (Susa) " 
in  the  province  of  Elam,  "  may  be  regarded 
as  decisive  of  this  identification,  which  is 
further  confirmed  by  the  frequent  mention 
of  Elymiieans  in  this  district,  as  well  as  by 
the  combinations  in  which  Elam  is  found  in 
Scripture,  Gen.  xiv.  1  ;  Isa.  xxi.  2 ;  Ezck, 
xxxii.  24."  ]Mr.  Rawlinson,  Biblical  Diet.. 
Asshur]  As  we  learn  from  ver.  11, 
the  Assyrians  were  afterwards  conquered  by 
the  Hamites.  They  inhabited  the  plain 
E.  of  the  Tigris  and  N.  W.  of  Susiana. 
The  name  imports  a  plain  or  level.  They 
afterwards  spread  N.  and  N.  W.  into  Syria' 
(see  on  Amos  ix.  7),  Cappadocia,  and  Pontus 
Enobel  says,  "  From  many  names  of  places,! 
persons,  and  deities,  the  Assyrians  were 
Semitic,  at  all  events  originally ;  but  some 
of  their  elements  of  language  are  Aryan,  and 
from  Isa.  xxviii.  11,  xxxiii.  19  (see  alsoi 
xxxvi.  10),  their  tongue  was  not  understood' 
by    the    Hebrews."  Arphaxad]  Tliis 

name  is  supposed  to  point  to  the  nortln  m 
district  of  Assyria,  called  Arrhaphachi/is, 
adjoining  Media,  and  lying  chiefly  S.  of 
the  Gordiaean  Mountains.  Some  suppose 
the  name  to  mean  the  highland  of  the  Chid- 


\ 


dl 


10—2: 


GENESIS. 


51 


andyLud,   and  Aram.     23  ^mj  f]^Q  cliildrcn  of  Aram;  >" ',,^''[™i 'iJ^ vr»-,  ' 

^  TJz,  and  Kul,  and  Gethcr,  and  ]\Iasli.    24  j^^^^  Arpliaxad 

begat  Salah  ;  and  Salah  begat  Eber.     25  j^^^^  unto  Eber 

were  born  two  sons :  the  name  of  one  iras  Pcleg ;  for  in 

bis  days  was  tbe  earth   divided ;  and  his  brother's  name 

u-as  "■  Joktan.  -^  And  Joktan  begat  Ahnodad,  and  Sheleph, 

and  Hazarmaveth,  and  Jerah,  27  ^^d  Iladoram,  and  Uzal, 


Kzek.  xxvli. 
Ill;  XXX.  5. 
:  ch.  xxii.  '.'1 ; 
xxxvi.  28. 
Job  i.l  which 
Rt'c.  l.Chron. 
i.  17. 


a  I  Chrnn.i.  19, 


daans.  Lud]  See  on  ver.   13.     Jose- 

pluis  supposed  Lud  to  be  the  ancestor  of  tlie 
Li/dians,  and  there  are  certain  indications 
which  favour  the  idea  ;  but  the  existence  of 
ja  powerful  people  named  Ludeii  near  Meso- 
potamia, easts  doubt  on  it,  unless  by  chance 
the  two  may  be  the  same,  and  may  have 
migrated  westward.  See  Jlr.  Stuart  Poole 
in  Biblicdl  Bid. 

Aram  represents  the  Aramooans,  the  in- 
habitants of  the  country  about  Lebanon. 
There  were  Aramaeans  also  E.  of  the  Eu- 
phrates in  Mesopotamia.  See  Mr.  Grove's 
art.    in   Biblical  Diet.  23.]    Uz    was 

probably  between  the  Idumaans  and  the 
Euphrates.  On  all  points  respecting  it,  see 
on  Job  i.  1.  Hul]  The  strongest  evi- 

dence as  to  the  site  is  in  favour  of  the  dis- 
trict about  the  roots  of  Mt.  Lebanon,  where 
the  names  Ard-el-IIuleh,  a  district  to  the 
N.  of  Lake  Merom  ;  Ulatha,  a  town  noticed 
by  Josephus,  between  Galilee  and  Tracho- 
nitis ;  Golan,  and  its  modern  form  Djaulun  ; 
bear  some  affinity  to  the  original  name  Hul, 
or,  as  it  should  rather  be  written,  Chul. 
Mr.  Bevan,  in  the  Biblical  Diet. 
Gather]  jS'othing  is  known.  Absalom  was 
the  son  of  JIaacah,  daughter  of  Talmai,  king 
of  Ge.shur,  which  was  on  the  Orontcs.  But 
all    is    conjecture.  Mash]    Josephus 

connected  the  name  with  Mesene  in  Lower 
Babylonia,  far  away  from  the  rest  of  the 
Arama)an  race.  But  others  more  probably 
have  traced  it  in  Mt.  Masitis  'of  classical 
writers,  a  range  forming  the  N.  bound- 
ary of  Mesopotamia.  The  name  is  given  as 
Meshsch  in  1  Cliron.  i.  17.  21]  This 

mention  of  Arpbaxad's  sons  comes  in  appar- 
ently in  order  to  introduce  the  geographical 
notice  of  Joktan  and  his  posterity,  vv.  2G — 
30.  The  words,  for  in  Ms  days  was  the 
earth  (or  land)  divided  {niphlcgah),  have 
given  rise  to  much  speculation.  It  is  utterly 
improbable  that  they  have  any  refei'ence  to 
the  division  of  the  earth  between  the  sons  of 
Noah,  seeing  that  Pcleg  is  in  the  fifth  gener- 


ation from  Noah,  and,  according  to  the 
genealogy  in  the  next  chapter,  at  least  130 
or  140  years  after  the  Flood.  The  most  pro- 
bable interpretation  is  tliat  the  name  was 
owing  to  a  partition  of  the  earth  (or,  land) 
between  Peleg  and  his  brother  Joktan,  whose 
numerous  family  split  off,  leaving  Pcleg  in 
JNIesopotamia.      See    below.  Joktan] 

The  name  signifies  the  small,  or  younger. 
He  is  the  reputed  ancestor  of  Arabian  tribes 
occupying  the  southern  part  of  the  peninsula. 
A  province  and  town  of  Kaclitan  (which  is 
his  Arabic  name)  still  exist.  On  tlie  Joktan- 
ite  settlements,  see  below.  Of  the  thirteen 
sons  of  Joktan,  Almodad  is  thought  to  be 
traceable  in  El-mudad,  a  fiimous  person- 
age in  Arabic  history,  the  reputed  father 
of  Ishmael's  Arab  wife  and  chief  of  the  Jok- 
tanite  tribe  Jurhum.  The  name  was  com- 
mon among  its  chiefs,  but  not  among  other 
tribes.  Sheleph]   "  The   tribe   which 

sprung  from  him  has  been  satisfactorily 
identified,  both  in  modern  and  classical 
times,  as  well  as  the  district  of  the  Yemen 
named  after  him."  Mr.  Stanley  Poole  in 
Biblical  Dictionary.  The  latter  appears  to 
have  been  the  district  of  Sidnf,  and  the 
former  the  tribe  of  Shelif  or  S/ndaf. 
Hazarmaveth]  This  name  also  is  satisfac- 
torily ideiitified  with  the  Arabic  province 
Hadramdut  in  Southern  Arabia ;  it  is  sit- 
uated East  of  the  modern  Yemen  ;  its  chief 
ports  are  Mirbat,  Zafari,  and  Kishcem. 
The  Greeks  and  Eonians  called  the  people 
ChatramotitiB  or  Chatiarnmitie.  See  Mr. 
Stanley  Poole,  as  above.  Jerah]  The 

identification  is  doubtful.  A  fortress  named 
Ycralch  has  been  mentioned ;  bnt  others 
have  fancied,  because  Jerah  signifies  the 
moon,  that  the  Jerahites  were  the  Alilaei,  a 
people  dwelling  near  the  Red  Sea,  for 
llerodotus  says  of  the  Arabs  tliat  they 
call  the  moon  Alilat.  Hadoram  has  not 
been  satisfactorily  traced.  Kalisch  finds 
them  in  tiie  Adramita,  but  others  think  this 
name  belony-s  rather  to  Iladramaut  above. 


52 


GENESIS. 


X.  28—32. 


b  1  Chron.  i.22. 
Isa. Ix.  6. 

Jer.  vi.  20. 
Ps.  Ixxii.  10. 


^s-^l 


and  Diklah,  28  ^nd  Obal,  and  Ablniael,  and  ^  Sheba, 
29  and  Ophir,  and  Havilali,  and  Jobab  :  all  tbese  were 
tbe  sons  of  Joktan.  "^^  And  their  dwelling  was  from 
Mesba,  as  thou  goest  unto  Sephar  a  mount  of  the  east. 
31  These  are  the  sons  of  Shem,  after  their  families,  after 
their  tongues,  in  their  lands,  after  their  nations.  ^2  These 
are  the  families  of  the  sons  of  Noah,  after  their  genera- 
tions, in  their  nations  :  and  by  these  were  the  nations 
divided  in  the  earth  after  the  j&ood.  XI.  ^  And  the  whole 


TIzal]  The  name  of  Sana,  the  capi- 
tal city  of  Yemen,  was  anciently  Awzal.  It 
was  called  Auzara  by  the  classics.  Diklah 
signifies  a  palm-tree,  and  is  perhaps  traced 
in  a  place  named  Dakalah  in  Arabia,  or  in 
several  named  Nakhleh,  another  name  for  a 
palm-tree.  All,  however,  seems  uncertain. 
Obal  has  not  been  identified.  Bocliart  thought 
he  had  traced  him  in  the  Avalita?,  a  tribe  on 
the  E.  African  coast  opposite  to  Arabia.  Abi- 
mael  is  totally  uncertain ;  not  even  a  proba- 
ble guess  has  been  made.  Sheba]  The 
kingdom  of  this  name  embraced  the  greater 
pai't  of  Yemen,  or  Arabia  Felix.  The 
people  were  the  Sab;f  ans.  It  was  from  this 
and  not  from  the  Cushite  Sheba  (see  on  ver. 
1)  that  the  Queen  of  Sheba  came  to  visit 
Sohmion.  See  Mr.  Stanley  Poole'.s  art.  in 
the  Biblical  Dictionary.  Ophir]  Very 
great  disputes  have  arisen  about  the  site  of 
this  place ;  but  here,  from  the  accurate 
specification  of  the  land  of  the  Joktanites 
which  follows,  it  seems  evident  that  Ophir 
must  be  sought  in  Arabia,  not  in  India,  as 
many  have  supposed.  On  the  whole  matter 
see  Mr.  Twisleton's  art.  in  the  Biblical 
Dictionary.  Havilah]  See  on  ver.  11. 
There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  a  different 
Havilah  meant  from  that  one  ;  probably,  as 
in  several  other  cases,  the  Cushites  and 
Shemites  were  mixed  there.  Jobab  has  as  yet 
escaped  research.  But  Mr.  Stanley  Poole 
reminds  us  that  Ptolemy  has  mentioned  a 
tribe  the  Jobarite  (or  Jobabitii??)  in  South- 
ern Arabia.  30.]  Mesha  seems  yet  to 
want  satisfactory  identification.  Mr.  Stanley 
Poole  (Biblical  Dictionary)  thinks  the  near- 
est approach  to  it  has  been  the  seaport 
3Iusa  or  Miiza  mentioned  by  old  geogra- 
phers, and  lying  near  a  mountain  now 
called  Jebel  Moosa,  in  lat.  13°  40'  N.,  long. 
43°  20'  E.  Kalisch  thinks  it  is  the  Island 
Mesene  at  the   N.  W.  point  of  the  Persian 


Gulf.  Sephar  has  been  better  made  out. 
"  There  appears  to  be  little  doubt  that  the 
ancient  sea-port  town  called  Dhafdri  or 
Zafdri,  and  Dhafur  or  Zafur,  represents 
the  Biblical  site  or  district."  Mr.  Stanley 
Poole,  as  above,  whose  article  see  for  col- 
lateral matter.  "  It  is  situated  on  the  coast, 
in  the  province  of  Hadraraaut  (see  above  on 
ver.  26),  and  near  to  the  district  which  ad- 
joins that  province  on  the  East,  called  Esh- 
Shihr,  under  a  lofty  mountain  (as  here  de- 
scribed). There  are  still  ruins  attesting  its 
ancient  importance  (Ibid.).  31.]  The 

formal  close,  as  at  ver.  5,  20  :  followed,  32, 
by  a  general  conclusion  of  a  similar  kind : 
completing  the  Elohistic  account  of  the 
peopling  of  the  earth  by  the  three  sons 
of  Noah  :  and  naturally  followed  by  the 
taking  up  again  of  the  generations  of  Shem, 
the  line  of  the  sacred  history,  at  ch.  xi.  10. 

XI.  1 — 9.]  The  confusio7i  of  tongues,  and 
dispersion  of  vmnkitid.  Respecting  the 
general  understanding  of  this  narrative,  it  may 
be  sufficient  here  to  observe  that  almost  all  the' 
difficulties  supposed  inherent  in  it  have  been 
imported  into  it  by  making  it  say  more  than 
is  contained  in  it.  And  we  may  further  ob- 
serve, that  whatever  be  its  meaning  it  is  mani- 
festlv  to  be  taken — 1.  As  explanatory  of 
much  which  has  already  taken  place  in  ch. 
X.,  where,  after  the  account  of  the  dispersion 
of  the  descendants  of  each  of  the  sons  of 
Noah,  we  have  it  specified  that  it  was  after 
their  tongues ;  and  2.  As  not  asserting  any- 
thing inconsistent  with  the  substantial  unity 
of  tongue  among  the  tribes  descended  from 
each  son  of  Noah.  In  the  object  that  they 
might  not  undertake  one  another's  speech, 
these  at  least  were  not  included.  The  in- 
sertion, as  remarked  upon  ch.  x.  32,  is 
Jehovistic. 

1.]  The  words  here  are  important  as  furn- 
ishing some  clue  to  what  has  gone  before. 


XI.  1—5. 


GENESIS. 


63 


;  earth  was  of  one  •=  language,  and  of  one  speech.  2  ^n(j  n 
'came  to  pass,  as  they  journeyed  eastWrd;  that  they  found 
a  plain  in  the  land  of  Shinar ;  and  they  dwelt  there. 
3  And  they  said  one  to  another,  '^  Go  to,  let  us  make  brick, 
and  burn  them  throughly.  And  they  had  brick  for  stone, 
and  ^  slime  had  they  for  morter.  ^  And  they  said,  ^Go  to, 
let  us  build  us  a  city^  and  a  tower/  whose  ^  top  mai/^  reach 
unto  heaven  (  and  let  us  make  us  a  name/  lest  we  be  scat- 
tered abroad  upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth.  ^  And  the 
p  Lord  came  down  to  see  the  city  and  the  tower,  which 


=Job  xil.  20. 

1*8.  IXXXi.    S. 

Prov.  xvii.  7. 
Ua.  xlx.  lb.     cY 


V 


d  vT.  4,  7. 

ch.  xxxviil. 

IG,     Kxod.  I. 

10  {tome  on).      ,   yy       -r^ 
edi.  xiT.  10.     Vv*'*^ 

Kxod.  ii.  3,  .        /   • 

only.  ^w  Tint/ 4  '      ' . 

f  Dout.  i.  2».  '  fc      ■*    w 

Uan.  iv.  22. 
g  Kioii.  xbl. 

211 ,  x^uUv.  S. 

Num.  xi.  25  ; 


Tliere  was  a  time  when  the  whole  earth 

was  of  one  language;  when  'they" — all 
mankind  that  then  were— journeyed,  and 
came  to  a  certain  place,  and  combined  in  a 
certain  purpose.  No  words  are  needed  to 
shew  that  this  must  have  been  before  the 
dispersion  of  the  descendants  of  the  sons  of 
Noah.  What,  then,  was  the  whole  earth  .' 
Have  we  any  right  to  give  it  one  meaning 
here  and  another  in  the  history  of  tlie  Flood.' 
The  Hebrew  has  literally  of  one  life  and  one 
(plural,  as  also  in  the  Jeliovist  portions,  ch. 
xxvii.  44  ;  xxix.  20)  words.  2.]  The 

word  rendered  by  the  A.  V.  from  the  east  is 
interpreted  by  Kalisch  in  the  east.  The  very 
same  expression  is  tran.slated  "  East,"  i.e. 
eastward,  inch.  xiii.  II,  and  "eastward" 
in  ch.  ii.  8.  the  land  of  Shinar]  This 

word  probably  means  two  rivers.  It  seems 
to  have  been  the  Jewish  name  for  Babylonia, 
as  no  trace  of  it  is  found  in  the  ancient 
inscriptions.  See  Prof,  llawlinson's  art.  in 
the  Biblical  Diet.  The  neighbourhood  of 
Babylon  is  described  by  Herodotus  as  a  great 
plain.  3.     bum   them   throughly] 

The  more  usual  way  of  hardening  the  bricks 
seems  to  have  been  sun-drying  :  but  these 
are  to  be  thorouglily  burnt,  for  endurance. 
Both  kinds  are  found  in  the  ruins  of  Baby- 
lon, slime]  Herodotus  speaks  of  a 
tower  and  a  river,  both  named  Is,  the  latter 
flowing  into  the  Euphrates,  and  bringing 
down  bitumen  in  abundance.  And  other 
writers  testify  to  the  quantity  of  asphalt 
found  in  Mesopotamia.  Modern  travellers 
desci'ibe  the  tower  and  river,  and  the  use  of 
and  traffic  in  the  bitumen.  Layard  observes, 
that  the  cement  in  the  ruins  is  so  tenacious 
that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  detach  an 
entire  brick  from  the  mass.  See  Kalisch. 
4.  ]  Their  purpose  seems  to  have  been 


to  gain  a  centre  of  permanent  habitation,  and 
also  a  distinguishing  memorial  or  mark  by 
which  their  repute  might  be  handed  down. 
There  doubtless  is  something  of  rebellion 
against  God's  purposes  implied  in  their  de- 
termination. He  would  have  them  spread 
over  the  whole  earth,  while  they  resolved  to 
be  gathered  in  one  spot.  The  idea  of  a 
tower  whose  top  might  reach  heaven  is 
related  here  as  entertained  by  them  bona 
fide:  in  other  places  the  expression  is  used 
hyperbolically :  see  refi". 

There  is  no  trace  in  Scripture  of  the  popu- 
lar idea  that  their  design  was  to  provide  an 
effectual  escape  from  a  future  deluge.  With 
this  description  the  accounts  of  Babylon 
given  by  classical  writers  entirely  agree. 
The  gigantic  walls  were  of  burnt  brick, 
cemented  with  asphalt,  as  were  also  the 
magnificent  temple  of  Belus,  and  the  hang- 
ing gardens.  The  circumference  of  the  city 
was  according  to  some  480  furlongs,  or 
60,000  paces  ;  according  to  otliers,  385  or 
360  furlongs.  The  most  important  edifice 
was  the  quadrangular  temple  of  Belus,  of 
which  each  side  was  two  furlongs  in  length  ; 
out  of  it  rose  an  enormous  massive  tower 
of  eight  stories,  according  to  Herodotus,  of 
one  furlong  in  diameter,  and  according  to 
Strabo  a  furlong  (600  feet)  high.  The 
ruins  of  this  vast  tower  are  generally  sup- 
posed to  be  the  enormous  mound  called  the 
Birs  Ximroud.  The  building  of  Bab)  Ion  is 
generally  ascribed  by  the  ancients  to  t^emi- 
ramis;  but  this  must  mean  only  its  fortifying 
and  strengthening,  for  the  city  was  con- 
fessedly older.  It  is  described  ch.  x.  10  as 
built  by  Nimrod  ;  but  in  that  narrative  it 
has  no  such  importance  as  here,  and  is 
classed  with  other  cities  as  liaving  been  built 
at  the  same  time.  6.]  The  anthropo- 


54 


GENESIS. 


XI. 


the  children  of  men  buikled.     ^  j^^^^  the  Loed  said,  Be- 
V  <h^^y{i-.^^CA./^^r//hold,  the  people  /-s  one,  and  the}^  have  all  one  language; 


h  ch.  il.  4  ; 
V.  1 ;  X.  1. 


and  this^ they  begin  to  do:  and  now  nothing  will  be  re- 
strained from  them,  which  they  have_  imagined  to  do. 
7  ^  Go  to,  let  us  go  down,  and  there  confound  their  lan- 
guage, that  they  may  not  understand  one  another's  speech. 
^  So  the  Lord  scattered  them  abroad  from  thence  upon  the 
face  of  all  the  earth :  and  they  left  off  to  build  the  city. 
9  Therefore  is  the  name  of  it  called  Babel ;  because  the 
Lord  did  there  confound  the  language  of  all  the  earth  : 
and  from  thence  did  the  Lord  scatter  them  abroad  upon 
the  face  of  all  the  earth.  ^^  ^  These  are  the  generations 
of  Shem :  Shem  was  an  hundred  years  old,  and  begat  Ar- 
phaxad  two  years  after  the  flood  :  ^^  And  Shem  lived  after 


morpbism  of  tbe  narrative  is  here  apparent 
to  all.  Even  Bp.  AVordsworth  says,  "  We 
are  not  to  suppose  locomotion  in  Him  who 
is  Omnipresent :  but  by  such  sentences  as 
these,  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  condescends 
to  man's  weakness,  He  teaches  us  that  God 
does  not  punish  without  examination. "  No 
doubt  :  but  where  are  we  to  draw  the  line 
for  such  a  method  of  interpretation  to  stop  ? 
How  about  the  next  verse,  where  there  is 
put  into  the  mouth  of  Omnipotence  language 
of  caution,  requiring  a  human  device  to  curb 
men's  becoming  too  strong  for  God?  May 
we,  must  we,  not  say  here  also,  we  are  not 
to  suppose  precaution  in  Him  who  is  Om- 
nipotent :  but  by  such  sentences  as  these,  in 
which  the  Holy  Spirit  condescends  to  man's 
weakness,  He  teaches  us  that  God  must  be 
understood  by  men  as  having  done  that 
which  men  under  the  circumstances  would 
do  ?  And  when  we  have  taken  this  further 
step,  can  we  avoid  taking  more  ?  On  these 
words  we  may  observe,  that  as  concerns  the 
narrative  itself  we  have  no  right  at  all  to 
spiritualize  them  alone.  If  the  rest  of  the 
narrative  is  to  be  taken  in  simplicity  and 
aupied  de  la  lettre,  so  also  must  they.  See 
further  on  ch.  iii.  8.  The  children  of  men 
is,  as  usual,  the  sons  of  Ada7n.  6 — 8.] 

See  above,  and  on  God's  taking  counsel. 
9.]  This  statement,  of  the  reason  of 
calling  the  city  Babel,  has  given  rise  to 
some  discussion,  seeing  that  the  derivation 
of  Babel  from  the  name  of  Bel  or  Belus  is 
hardly  to  be  doubted.     But  perhaps  those 


are  on  mistaken  ground  who  find  difficulties 
in  such  matters.  It  is  not  unfrequcntly 
the  custom  of  Scripture  to  trace  allusion  in 
names  which  certainly  had  no  part  in  their 
original  bestowal.  In  the  phrase,  therefore, 
"  is  the  name  of  it  called  Babel,"  may  be  meant 
no  more  than  that  to  Hebrew  ears  this 
signification  is  carried  by  the  name. 
10—26.]  The  descendants  of  Shem.  Here 
again  we  have  a  divergence  of  the  same 
kind  as  in  ch.  v.,  between  the  Hebrew  text, 
the  Samaritan  Pentateuch,  and  the  LXX. 
I  subjoin,  as  I  have  done  there,  a  table  of 
the  difi"erences  in  the  10  generations  (see 
next  page). 

This  genealogy,  it  is  agi'eed  by  Hebraists, 
belongs  to  the  original  or  Elohistic  docu- 
ment. This  is  shewn  by  the  title  :  see  reff. 
Also  by  other  traces,  e.  g.  '■'■  the  flood,''  &c. 
10.]  The  first  four  of  the  descendants 
of  Shem  are  mentioned  ch.  x.  22  if.  There  is 
some  little  consideration  necessary  in  order 
to  fit  in  the  chronological  notices  of  ch.  v. 
32  and  vii.  11.  In  the  former  it  is  said  that 
Noah  was  500  years  old,  and  begat  Shem, 
Ham,  and  Japheth.  But  clearly  this  is 
merely  a  notice  in  round  numbers,  as  he 
could  not  beget  them  all  three  in  one  year. 
In  vii.  11,  the  flood  begun  in  the  GOOth 
year  of  Noah's  life,  the  second  month.  If 
Shem  were  the  second  son,  he  might  be  99 
years  old  or  thereabouts.  The  flood  lasted 
one  year  and  ten  days,  so  that  probably 
by  the  words  after  the  flood  here  we 
must  understand  after  the  beginning  of  the 


G— 19. 


GENESIS. 


00 


lie  begat  Arphaxad  five  hundred  years,  and  begat  sons  and 
daughters.  ^^  And  Arphaxad  lived  five  and  thirty  years, 
and  begat  Salah  :  ^^  And  Arphaxad  lived  after  he  begat 
Salah  four  hundred  and  three  years,  and  begat  sons  and 
daughters,  i^  And  Salah  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat 
Eber  :  ^'^  And  Salah  lived  after  he  begat  Eber  four  hun- 
dred and  three  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters. 
1^  And  Eber  lived  four  and  thirty  years,  and  begat  Peleg : 
17  And  Eber  lived  after  he  begat  Peleg  four  hundred  and 
thirty  j'cars,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.  ^^  And  Peleg 
lived  thirty  years,  and  begat  Peu  :  ^^  And  Pclcg  lived 


Present  Hebrew 

Samarit 

m 

text 

Puntatevicli. 

LXX. 

Xan.cs. 

Aseat 
birtli  of 

Rest  of 

life. 

Whole 
life. 

Ace  at 

birth  of 

son. 

Rest  of 
life. 

Whole 
Ufe. 

son           '"®- 

Whole 
life. 

Shorn 

100 

500 

600 

100 

500 

600 

100     500 

600 

Arpliaxad    . 

35 

403 

438 

135 

303 

438 

135     400 
(or  430 
(or  330 

535 
565) 
465) 

Cainan   ,    . 

not  mentioned 

not  mentioned 

130     330 

460 

(or  430 

560) 

Salah 

30 

403 

433 

130 

303 

433 

130     330 
(or  450 

460 
580) 

Eber  . 

34 

403 

434 

134 

270 

404 

134     270 
(or  370 

404 
504) 

Peleg 

30 

200 

239 

130 

109 

239 

130     209 

339 

Eeu    . 

32 

207 

239 

132 

107 

239 

132     207 

339 

Senig 

30 

200 

230 

130 

100 

230 

130     200 

330 

Nalior 

29 

119 

148 

79 

69 

148 

179     125 
(or  79     129 

304 
208) 

Terah 

70 

205 

70 

75 

145 

70     135 

205 

Call  of  Abram 

75 

75 

75 

Total   from  birth 

of  Sliem  to  Call 

- 

of  Abram 

465 

1115 

1345,  or,  accord- 
inp:  to  the  Alexan- 

drine reading 

1245 

flood.  12.   Arphaxad]  See   on  ch.  x. 

22.  This  name,  which  as  there  has  received 
a  territorial  identification,  is  clearly  here 
that  of  an  individual.  Some  of  the  sons 
are  mentioned  ch.  x.  22.  It  will  be  ob- 
served by  the  Table  that  between  Arphaxad 
and  Salah  the  LXX.  introduce  another  name, 
Cainan,  and  are  herein  followed  by  St. 
Luke  in  the  genealogy  of  our  Lord,  iii.  35. 
Respecting  the  account  to  be  given  of  this, 
see   note  there  in  my  New  Testament  for 


English  Readers.  12.  Salah]  Signifies 

extension.  Knobel  adduces  a  place  of  this 
name  in  N.E.  Mesopotamia.  14.  Eber] 

See  on  ch.  x.  31.  This  name  is  distinct 
(see  Mr.  Brown,  Biblical  Diet.  "  Ilehcr") 
from  Heber,  ch.  xlvi.  17  reff.,  except  in 
Luke  iii.  35,  where  Heber  represents  this 
name.  16.  Peleg]  See   on  ch.  x.  25. 

18.  Reu]  This  patriarchal  name  is  supposed 
to  be  traceable  in  Roha,  the  Arabic  appel- 
lation  of  Edessa  in  N.^W.  Mesopotamia. 


56 


GENESIS. 


XI.  1 


iii.  4. 

.xxi.ie. 


after  he  begat  E,eu  two  hundred  and  nine  years,  and  begat 
sons  and  daughters.  20  And  Reu  lived  two  and  thirty 
years,  and  begat  Serug :  2i  And  Reu  lived  after  he  begat 
Serug  two  hundred  and  seven  years,  and  begat  sons  and 
daughters.  22  And  Serug  lived  thirty  years,  and  begat 
JSTahor :  23  And  Serug  lived  after  he  begat  Nahor  two 
hundred  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.  24  And 
Nahor  lived  nine  and  twenty  years,  and  begat  Terah  : 
25  And  Nahor  lived  after  he  begat  Terah  an  hundred  and 
nineteen  years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.  26  And 
Terah  lived  seventy  years,  and  begat  Abram,  Nahor,  and 
Ilaran.  27  ^  JSTow  these  are  the  generations  of  Terah  : 
Terah  begat  Abram,  Nahor,  and  Haran ;  and  Ilaran  begat 
Lot.  28  And  Ilaran  died  ^  before  his  father  Terah  in  the 
land  of  his  nativity,  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees.  29  And  Abram 
and  Nahor  took  them  wives  :  the  name  of  Abram's  wife 
was  Sarai ;  and  the  name  of  Nahor's  wife,  Milcah,  the 
daughter  of  Ilaran,  the  father  of  Milcah,  and  the  father  of 
Iscah.    20  ]3ut  Sarai  was  barren  ;  she  had  no  child,    ^i  And 


The  LXX.  (see  also  Luke  iii.  35)  give  this 
name  by  Ragau,  which  is  not  far  from 
Rages,  said  also  to  have  been  a  name  of 
Edessa.     But    see    on    ver.    28.  20. 

Serug]  There  is  a  district  and  town  men- 
tioned by  the  Arabian  geographers  Sariig,  a 
day's  journey  north  of  Ilaran.  On  tlie  le- 
gendary statements  connected  with  his  having 
taught  men  hero-woi'ship,  see  Bishop  Lord 
A.  Hervey's  art.  in  the  Biblical  Diet. 
22.  Nahor]  Not  to  be  confounded  with  his 
grandson  of  the  same  name,  Abram's  brother, 
ver.  27.  27.]  The  narrative  now  passes 

to  the  descendants  of  Terah,  Abram's  father. 
They  are  particularly  specified,  because  they 
are  to  be  further  dealt  with  in  the  subsequent 
history :  Rcbekah,  Leah,  and  Eachel  being 
of  Nahor's  family,  and  Lot  and  Milcah  of 
that  of  Harans.  28.  before]  Is  literally 

■  in  the  presence  of,"  aud  therefore  of 
vOursc  before  in  time.  The  same  expression 
is  used  in  reff.  Ur  of  the  Chaldees] 

^rof.  Rawlinson  in  Biblical  Diet,  discusses 
the  various  opinions  about  this  place,  and 
thinks  the  evidence  in  favour  of  Mugheir, 
which  bore  the  ancient  name  of  Ur  or  Hur, 
to  preponderate.  It  is  in  the  low  country 
near  the  Persian  Gulf;  is  now  more  than 
100  miles  inland,  but  was  once  on  the  sea  : 


there  is  a  mound  with  ruins,  some  of  the 
most  ancient  yet  discovered.  The  bricks 
bear  the  name  of  a  certain  Urukh,  the 
earliest  of  the  Chaldiican  monumental  kings, 
— and  Ur  was  his  capital.  "  Ur  retained 
its  metropolitan  character  for  200  years, 
and  even  after  it  became  second  to  Babylon, 
M'as  a  great  and  sacred  city.  It  remained 
a  place  of  burial  for  many  ages,  and  the 
ruins  are  mainly  now  those  of  tombs."  See 
the  art.  above  mentioned.  Some  hold  that 
the  name  refers  to  the  Roaji  or  Arrhooci ;  if 
so,  what  has  already  been  said  on  Ragau 
will    require    modifying.  29.]   Sarai 

was,  according  to  eh.  xx.  12,  the  daughter 
of  Terah  by  another  wife  than  Abraham's 
mother,  and  was  ten  years  younger  than 
her  husband  (ch.  xvii.  17).  Iscah  is 
nowhere  else  mentioned.  Joseph  us  and 
the  Targnms  hold  her  to  have  been  identi- 
cal with  Sarai,  but  that  cannot  have  been 
by  what  has  been  noticed  above.  Marriage 
with  near  i-elativcs  was  the  practice  of 
Terah's  family.  See  ch.  xxiv.  3,  4  ;  xxviii. 
1,  2.  30.]  This  remark  is  inserted  as 

important  to  the  following  history. 
31.]  Terah  was  an  idolater  (Josh.  xxiv.  2), 
so  that    this  his    journey    can  hardly    be 
supposed  to  have  been  an  obedience  on  his 


20— XII.  1. 


ge:!^esis. 


57 


Terah  took  Abram  his  son,  and  Lot  the  son  of  Ilaran  his 
son's  son,  and  Sarai  his  daughter  in  law,  his  son  Abram's 
wife ;  and  they  went  forth  with  them  from  Ur  of  the 
Chaldees,  to  go  into  the  hind  of  Canaan ;  and  they  came 
unto  Haran,  and  dwelt  there.  2-  And  the  days  of  Terah 
were  two  hundred  and  five  years :  and  Terah  died  in  Ila- 
ran. XII.  1  And  J?;ii()VAH  said  unto  Abrani,  Get  thee 
out  of  thy  country,  and  from  the  fplace_  of  thy  birth,  and 


j  =cl 


xi.  28; 

'•,■'  ; 
xxxi.  '■>,  li; 
xxxil.  1". 
^um.  X.30. 
Kutliii.U.       .    /        . 
Jer.  xxii.  10;  /•^r.-*C 
xlvi.  IB. 


part  to  that  Divine  intimation  which  we 
learn,  from  the  subsequent  Jehovist  account, 
was  made  to  his  son.  It  may  have  been 
that  the  two  designs  coincided,  as  Kalisch 
supposes,  or  it  may  have  been  that  Abram 
persuaded  his  aged  father  to  accompany 
him.  It  appears  that  Nahor  also  went  to 
Haran.  Compare  eh.  xxiv.  10  ;  xxvii.  43  ; 
xxix.  4,  5.  That  the  call  of  Abram  took 
place  in  Ur  and  not  in  Ilaran,  as  Keil 
and  others  maintain,  is  clear  from  ch.  xv.  7 
(see  also  Neh.  ix.  7  ;  Acts  vii.  2),  which 
expression  it  is  impossible  to  explain  away, 
as  Keil  and  Dclitzsch  endeavour  to  do. 
Haran  (in  Greek  Charran,  see  Acts  vii.  2) 
was  in  Mesopotamia  (ch.  xxiv.  10),  or  more 
strictly  in  Padan-aram  (ch.  xxv.  20),  in 
the  beautiful  country  between  Mount 
Masius  and  the  Euphrates.  The  name 
has  never  changed,  the  town  being  still 
called  Ilarran  ;  and  the  Chalda^an  language 
and  worship  prevailed  there  to  a  late  time. 
It  was  famous  for  the  defeat  of  the  Roman 
army  under  Crassus  by  the  Parthians.  See 
Prof.  Kawlinson's  art.  in  Biblical  Diet. 
32.]  Why  they  stopped  in  Ilaran  docs  not 
appear.  It  is  possible  that  the  death  of 
Terah  there  may  suggest  the  reason.  Or 
the  halt  may  have  been  made  owing  to 
local  political  circumstances.  From  ch.  xii. 
5  it  appears  that  Abram  spent  a  consider- 
able time  there  before  his  onward  journey, 
they  went  together]  These  words, 
rendered  tJiexj  went  forth  with  tliem  in  the 
A.  v.,  have  occasioned  some  dispute  as  to 
their  precise  meaning.  The  text  gives  that 
preferred  by  Knobel  and  Kaliscli — they  ii-ent 
tcith  each  other,  i.  e.  together.  Some 
suppose  icith  them  to  mean  with  the  un- 
named members  of  Terah's  family,  viz. 
Nahor  and  his  :  but  it  is  well  replied  that 
had  they  been  intended  they  would  have 
been  specified.  Keil  preferred  to  understand 
"  they  (Lot  and   Sarai)   went    forth   with 


them  "  (Terah  and  Abram),  and  so  doubtless 
the  A.  V.  intended. 

XII.  1 — XIII.  18.]  Abuaji's  call  and 
Mir.HATioN.  From  this  time  the  name 
Jehovah  prevails,  and  it  becomes  evident 
that  the  tracing  down  of  the  covenant  of 
God  with  the  chosen  people  is  that  which 
forms  the  thread  of  the  narrative.  There 
are  apparent  from  time  to  time  fragments 
of  another  narrative,  worked  in  by  the 
sacred  writer ;  but  much  caprice  and  doubt- 
ful assertion  has  been  indulged  in  by  able 
writers,  such  as  Ewald  and  Knobel,  in  as- 
signing the  various  portions  of  the  narrative 
to  different  writers.  And  on  the  other  hand, 
orthodox  commentators,  such  as  Keil, 
strangely  deny,  in  the  face  of  all  evidence, 
the  incorporation  by  the  Jehovist  of  elder 
documents.  Dclitzsch,  equally  orthodox, 
acknowledges,  and  carefully  traces  out,  the 
different  elements  of  the  narrative.  This 
we  shall  also  endeavour  to  do  as  we  proceed. 

XII.  1.]  This  command  was  given  to 
Abram  not  in  Ilaran,  but  in  Ur  :  see  above, 
and  add  to  what  was  there  said,  that  the 
terms  of  the  command  itself  involve  this. 
For  we  read  (eh.  xi.  31)  that  the  whole 
family  reached  Ilaran  on  their  tcay  to 
Canaatk  But  this  command  must  apply  by 
the  words,  "  a  land  tliat  I  will  shew  thee," 
to  a  time  when  the  direction  of  the  journey 
■was  unknown.  The  force  of  it  was  still  abid- 
ing and  working  upon  Abram,  and  when  the 
cause  of  his  detention  in  Ilaran  was  over 
he  went  forth  thence,  leaving  his  fath' 
there.  On  the  statement  of  Stephen,  Acfl 
vii.  4,  that  this  was  so,  and  the  subterfuges 
of  commentators  to  justify  it,  see  my  not»-T 
there  in  NewTestanient  for  English  Readers. 
The  figures  are  as  follows :  Terah  lived  70 
years,  and  begat  Abram,  Nahor,  and  Ilaran 
(ch.  xi.  26)  ;  lived  205  years,  and  died  in 
Haran  (xi.  32)  :  Abram  was  7-5  when  ho 
left  Haran  (ver.  4).    So  that  Abram  having 


58 


GENESIS. 


XII. 


;ii. 


^  yf<.uti 


^tt..»  > 


k  Fieli.  txvii. 
13    (Rev. 
xviii.  13  ; 
Mace.  X.  33). 


1  ch.  xviii.  21  j 
xix.  12  ; 
xxix.  22. 


from  tliy  father's  house,  unto  a  land  that  I  will  shew  thee  : 
2  and  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation,  and  I  will  bless 
thee,  and  make  thy  name  great ;  and  thou  shalt  he  a  bless- 
ing :  3  and  I  will  bless  them  that  bless  thee,  and^ursejliim 
that  curseth  thee:  and  in  thee  shall  all  families  of  the 
earth  be  blessed.  ^  gQ  Abram  departed,  as  Jehovah  had 
spoken  unto  him ;  and  Lot  went  with  him :  and  Abram 
ica8  seventy  and  five  years  old  when  he  departed  out  of 
Haran.  ^  And  Abram  took  Sarai  his  wife,  and  Lot  his 
brother's  son,  and  all  their  substance  that  they  had  ga- 
thered, and  the  ^  souls  that  they  had  gotten  in  Haran  ; 
and  they  went  forth  to  go  into  the  land  of  Canaan ;  and 
into  the  land  of  Canaan  they  came.  ^  ^  And  Abram 
passed  through  the  land  imto  the  ^  place  of  Shechem,  imto 


been  born  about  Terah's  70th  year,  about 
70+ 75  =z  about  145,  Terah's  age  when 
Abram  left  Haran.  Bp.  "Wordsworth  and 
others  attempt  to  get  over  the  difficulty  by 
supposing  Abram  to  have  been  the  youngest 
of  the  three  sons  of  Terah,  and  to  have  been 
begotten  when  his  father  was  130.  And  yet 
this  very  son  regards  it  as  impossible  that 
he  himself  should  beget  a  son  at  99.  (See 
ch.  xvii.  1,  17.)  Not  to  say  further,  that  by 
this  argument  all  the  deductions  drawn  in 
Scripture  from  the  miraculous  birth  of  Isaac 
would  entirely  disappear  (see  Rom.  iv.  17 — 
21  ;  Ilcb.  xi.  11,  12).  For  us  plain  people, 
who  believe  our  Bibles,  it  is  enough  to  fol- 
low their  data,  and  to  assume  that  Terah 
lived  60  years  after  Abram's  departure  from 
Haran.  the  place  of  thy  birth]  8uch 

is  the  general  meaning  of  this  word :  see 
reff.  In  some  places  it  seems  to  signify  kind- 
red as  Gen.  xliii.  7  ;  Esther  viii.  6. 
2,  3.]  The  promise  to  Abram  ranges  itself 
in  six  particulars,  forming  three  pairs  of 
parallels.  I.  (1)  Making  into  a  great  nation, 
(2)  personal  blessing;  II.  (3)  greatness  of 
name,  (4)  being  a  source  of  blessing  ;  III. 
(5)  blessing  of  his  well-wishers  and  dis- 
comfiture of  his  enemies,  (6)  being  a  general 
blessing  to  all  men.  The  unfolding  of  the 
fulfilment  of  this  promise,  afterwards  made 
special  in  its  last  member  to  the  seed  of 
Abraham  (ch.  xxii.  18,  xxvi.  4),  is  the  great 
subject  of  all  Scripture.  On  the  prophetic 
meaning  of  the  concluding  words,  see 
below  and  on  ch.  xxii.  18.  The  words  in 
thee  shall  all  families  of  the  earth  be 


blessed  have  given  occasion,  as  was  to  be 
expected,  for  much  contention  on  the  part  of 
the  rationalist  interpreters.  Knobel,  Avho  is 
the  best  example  of  them,  would  understand 
them,  that  all  families  of  the  earth  should 
hless  with  (or,  ««)  tliee^  i.e.  wish  themselves 
blessed  in,  by  the  example  of,  Abraham  ; 
wish  for  themselves  blessedness  like  his.  This 
rendering  he  defends  by  ch.  xlviii.  20,  "  In 
thee  shall  Israel  bless,  saying,  God  make 
thee  as  Ephraim  and  as  Manasseh."  The 
objection  to  this  is  that  the  verb  is  in  the 
passive  voice,  not  bless,  but  be  blessed.  And 
although  in  the  repetition  of  the  promise, 
ch.  xxii.  18,  xxvi.  4,  the  passive  voice  is  not 
used,  but  the  reflexive,  that  does  not  by  any 
means  exclude  from  those  places  the  sense 
which  this  requires,  much  less  does  it  require 
force  to  be  put  on  the  plain  words  here  by 
doing  away  with  the  passive  sense.  On  those 
places,  see  notes  there.  On  such  a  matter  we 
may  further  remark,  that  we  may  well  leave 
the  New  Testament  writers,  to  M'hom  He- 
brew was  familiar,  to  decide  for  us  which  of 
the  senses  should  prevail.  And  this  has 
been  plainly  and  emphatically  done.  See 
Acts  iii.  25  ;  Gal.  iii.  8,  14.  Notice  that 
literally  the  expression  is,  "  all  the  families 
of  the  ground,"  so  that  the  blessing  is  an 
echo  of  the  primal  curse,  ch.  iii.  17. 
5.  the  souls  that  they  had  gotten]  "Were 
slaves  :  see  reff.  Abvani's  stay  in  Haran 
must,  from  this  verse,  have  been  consider- 
able. 6.  the  place  of  Sichem]  Geseuius 
interprets  this  expression,  which  appears  to 
be  found  only  here,  as  the  neighbourhood  of 


2—8. 


GENESIS. 


-oo 


^  the  ""oak  of  Moreli.     And  the  Canaanite  uris  then  in  the  ""^tMi"'*' 

land.     7  And  Jetiovah  appeared  unto  Abrara,  and  said,  c.m.xi.so. 

Unto  thy  seed  will  I  give  this  land  :  and  there  builded  he  h^m^x-s. 
an  altar  unto  Jehovah,  who  appeared  unto  him.     ^  And 


Sicheni ;  Ktil,  as  the  site  where  afterwards 
stood  Sichcm  ;  most  others,  as  if  "  the  place 
of"  were  redundant,  the  jjface,  Sirhem,  and 
this  seems  favoured  by  the  occurrence  of 
tlie  word  in  this  sense  in  refF.  See  also  eh. 
xxxiii.  18.  SiiECiiEJi  was  one  of  the  oldest 
towns  in  Palestine,  in  a  narrow  valley  be- 
tween the  mounts  Gerizini  and  Ebul,  about 
seven  miles  south  of  Samaria.  It  was  in  early 
times  inliabited  by  the  Ilivites  (ch.  xxxiv. 
2) :  there  Jacob  bought  a  parcel  of  a  field 
and  built  an  altar  (xxxiii.  19).  In  the 
division  of  the  land,  Shcchem  was  in 
tlie  lot  of  Epliraim,  but  was  assigned  to 
the  Levites,  and  became  a  city  of  refuge 
(Josh.  xxi.  20,  21).  The  mountains  of 
Ebal  and  Gerizim  were  of  great  interest  as 
being  the  appointed  spots  fur  the  declara- 
tions of  blessings  and  curses  on  the  ob- 
servers and  breakers  of  the  law  (Dent,  xxvii. 
11  ;  Josh.  viii.  33 — 35).  Here  Joshua  as- 
sembled the  people  before  his  death  and 
pledged  them  to  serve  the  Lord  (Josh.  xxiv. 
1,  ff.).  Ilere  Jotham  delivered  his  parable 
against  the  rule  of  Abimelech  (Judg.  ix. 
7,  ft'.  22,  ff. ;  see  Stanley,  Sinai  and  Palestine, 
p.  236).  The  city  was  destroyed  by  Abime- 
lech (cf.  ver.  45).  But  we  find  all  Israel 
meeting  at  Shechem  (1  Kings  xii.  1,  ff.)  to 
make  liebohoam  king.  After  the  captivity 
the  place  was  occupied  by  Samaritans.  The 
"  men  from  Shechem,"  Jer.  xli.  5,  who 
were  coming  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord 
and  were  slain  all  but  ten  by  Ishmael, 
■were  pi'obably  Samaritans  of  the  mixed 
race,  the  result  of  the  Babylonians  sent  by 
Shalmaneser  (2  Kings  xvii.  24)  dwelling 
among  the  people  of  the  land.  On  the  N'ew 
Testament  interest  attached  to  the  place 
see  notes  on  John  iv.  2,  and  on  its  modern 
history  as  Nablous,  the  art.  by  Prof.  Hackett 
in  Smith's  Biblical   Diet.  the  oak] 

Thus  the  best  Hebrew  authorities  seem 
agreed  in  rendering  the  word,  and  not 
plain.  The  same  is  the  case  in  all  the 
places  mentioned  in  reff.  The  only  question 
is  whether  the  tree  should  not  rather  be 
named  the  terebinth  than  the  oak.  The 
matter  seems  very  doubtful,  and  cannot  be 
discussed  in  a  note.  See  Mr.  Houghton's  art. 


"  Oak"  in  the  Biblical  Diet.,  and  Kalisch's 
long  and  interesting  note  on  sacred  trees. 

Tliere  is  also  a  difference  respecting 
Moreli.  Knobel  thinks  it  is  not  a  proper 
name,  and  renders,  "  the  oak  of  the  teacher,'' 
comparing  ^'■Ihe  oak  of  the  witches,"  Judg. 
ix.  37,  which  he  regards  as  identical 
with  this.  But  the  view  that  ]\Ioreh  is  a 
proper  name  has  generally  prevailed.  Afr. 
Grove,  in  the  Biblical  Diet.,  thinks  that  the 
name  may  not  be  unconnected  with  "  the 
land  of  Moriah,"  in  ch.  xxii.  2.  He  also 
remarks,  that  perhaps  a  trace  of  this  ancient 
name  is  discernible  in  the  word  Morthia, 
which  appears  on  some  ancient  coins  as  a 
title  of  Xeapolis.  There  seems  to  be  no 
connexion  with  the  hill  of  Jloveh  in  Judg. 
vii.  1 :  see  there.  the  Canaanite  was 

then  in  the  land]  See  ch.  xiii.  7  ;  xxxiv. 
30.  This  notice  was  most  probably  added 
to  shew  that  the  land  was  not  empty  at  that 
time,  but  that  the  subsequent  promise  im- 
plied a  displacement  of  inhabitants  then  in 
possession.  This,  of  course,  enhanced 
Abram's  faith,  and  made  his  obedience  more 
admirable.  Notliing  can  be  more  natural 
than  such  a  notice  :  and  there  is  not  the 
slightest  reason  for  supposing  it  to  be  an 
interpolation  of  later  date  than  the  narrative 
itself.  The  promise  of  ver.  7  was  an  ex- 
pansion of  that  in  ver.  1  into  concrete  par- 
ticulars. It  was  repeated  to  Abraham,  ch. 
xiii.  15,  17  ;  xv.  18  ;  xvii.  8  ;  to  Isaac,  xxvi. 
.3  ;  to  Jacob,  xxviii.  13  ;  xxxv.  12. 
7.  Abraham  builded  an  altar  to  Jehovah 
in  Shechem,  as  did  Jacob  afterwards,  ch. 
xxxiii.  20.  There  was  afterwards  a  sanctu- 
ary of  Jehovah  in  Shechem  (see  Josh.  xxiv. 
1,  26),  the  beginning  of  which  was  doubtless 
this  first  act  of  the  Patriarch's  worship. 
Bethel  [Jerusalem],  Hebron,  and  Beersheba 
were  similarly  places  known  as  hallowed  to 
the  worship  of  Jehovah.  See  ver.  8 ;  ch. 
xiii.  18;  xiv.  18  [ch.  xxii.  1,  ff.,  but  see 
on  Moreh  above] ;  xxi.  33 ;  xxvi.  25. 
■who  appeared  unto  him]  See  ch. 
xxxv.   1.  8,  9.J     His  journey  south- 

uards.  No  motive  is  assigned  for  the 
journey  further  south.  Possibly  the  famino 
had  already  beguu  which  drove  him  (ver.  10) 


60 


GENESIS. 


XII. 


-^t-fi^/C^^ 


^/       lie  removed  from  tlience  unto  g,  mountain  on  the  east  of 

iv^xi/     Beth-el,  and  pitched  his  tent,  having  Beth-el  on  the  west, 

7v.        and  Hai  on  the  east :  and  there  hejbuilded  an  altar  unto 

Jehovah,  and  called  upon  the  name  of  Jehovah.    ^  And 

Abram    journeyed,    going    on    still    toward    the    south. 

10  ^  And  there  was  a  famine  in  the  land :    and  Abram 

went  down  into  Egypt  to  sojourn  there  ;  for  the  famine 

was  grievous  in  the  land,     ii  And  it  came  to  pass,  when 

he  was  come  near  to  enter  into  Egypt,  that  he  said  unto 

Sarai  his  wife,  Behold  now,  I  know  that  thou  art  a  fair 

„.J7::*-.^^oman  to  look  upon :   ^^  therejbre  it  shall  come  to  pass, 

when  the  Egyptians  shall   see  thee,  that  they  shall  say. 

This  is  his  wife :  and  they  will  kill  me,  but  they  will  save 

thee  alive.     ^^  Saj^,  I  pray  thee,  thou  art  my  sister  :   that 

^Ai^     it  may  be  well  with  me  for  thy  sake;  and  my  soul  shall 


into  E^ypt.  Beth-el,  so  named  here  by  an- 
ticipation, for  it  was  at  this  time  called  Luz, 
and  did  not  become  Beth-el  till  after  Jacob's 
vision  (see  ch.  xxviii.  19),  was  in  the  direct 
thoroughfare  of  Palestine  (see  Judges  xxi. 
19).  On  the  situation  of  Abram's  tent,  see 
notes,  ch.  xiii.  10.  on  the  west]  liter- 

ally, from  the  sea,  which  is  the  universal 
■westward  boundary  of  Palestine.  Would 
Moses,  who  was  born  and  bred  in  Egypt, 
have  used  this  expression  ?  The  exact  site 
of  Hai  (or  Ai)  is  unknown.  The  various 
conjectures  will  be  given  on  Joshua  vii.  2. 
The  same  notice  that  it  is  on  the  east  side  of 
Beth-el  is  there  given.  9.  the  south] 

literally,  the  dry  country,  the  desert. 

10 — 20.]  Abrain's  sojourn  in  Egypt. 
The  deliverance  of  Sarai.  The  account  of 
the  pressure  of  famine  on  the  nomad  patri- 
arch and  the  seeking  of  plenty  in  the  more 
permanently  settled  Egypt  is  in  singular  ac- 
cord with  two  subsequent  parts  of  the 
history — (1.)  When  Isaac  (ch.  xxvi.  1),  on 
the  occurrence  of  another  famine,  is  for- 
bidden to  go  down  to  Egypt ;  (2.)  When 
Joseph's  brethren  during  time  of  famine  go 
to  buy  corn  in  Egypt.  Keil  remarks  that  the 
custom  of  flying  to  Egypt  for  food  is  even 
now  exemplified  by  the  Bedouin  tribes  when 
dearth  arises.  The  history  respecting  Sarai 
reappears  in  another  form  in  ch.  xx.  1,  ff.,  at 
the  court  of  Abimelech,  king  of  Gerar : 
and,  in  substance,  again  in  ch.  xxvi.  1,  ff., 
also  at  the  court  of  an  Abimelech,  king  of 
Gerar,  but  i«appening  to  Isaac  and  Rebekah. 


Abraham  himself  explains  in  ch.  xx.  13  that 
the  giving  out  of  Sarah  as  his  sister  had  been 
a  mattersettlcdbctweenthemat  the  beginning 
of  his  wanderings.  It  is  vain,  as  some  of 
the  orthodox  commentators  (e.  g.  Keil)  have 
done,  to  try  to  soften  down  Abram's  un- 
truthfulness. Bp.  Wordsworth  well  remarks, 
Abram  came  forth  from  a  land  of  idolaters. 
He  was  surrounded  by  idolaters  in  Canaan, 
and  by  idolaters  in  Egypt,  and,  we  may 
add,  was  himself  born  of  idolatrous  parents. 
And  wherever  idolatry  abounds  falsehood 
abounds.  Sarai  was  at  this  time  upwards 
of  65  years  old,  for  (ch.  xvii.  17)  she  was 
ten  years  younger  than  Abram,  who  was  75 
when  he  left  Haran  (ver.  4).  It  seems  the 
worthiest  and  most  reverent  way  of  regard- 
ing considerations  of  this  kind,  to  remember, 
with  Kalisch,  that  we  are  in  a  region  of 
primaeval  history  not  to  be  measured  out 
by  our  present  rules  of  verisimilitude,  w'ith- 
out  using  that  recollection,  as  he  does,  to 
impugn  the  credibility  of  the  narrative  as 
one  of  facts.  If,  as  Knobel  has  observed, 
the  writer  "perhaps  conceived  a  certain 
divine  grace  to  have  dwelt  about  the 
progenitress  of  the  people  of  God,"  why 
might  not  his  conception  have  just  as  w'ell 
represented  the  fact  as  not ."  What  right 
have  we  to  assume  that  all  heroic  ideas 
about  primaeval  men  and  ages  are  ideas  only  .' 
That  such  ideas  are  found  in  works  of 
mere  human  fiction  is  surely  no  proof 
that  they  never  corresponded  to  fact  at 
all.     We  may  hesitate  to  believe  that  the 


9— XIII.  1. 


GENESIS. 


CI 


live  because  of  thee.     ^*  ^  And  it  came  to   pass,  that, 
when  Abram  was  come  into  Egypt,  the  Egj'ptians  bchekl 
the  woman  that  she  rras  very  fair.     ^^  The  princes  also  of  •^f -^Z  ^  ^ 
Pharaoh  saw  her,  and  commended  her  before  Pharaoh  :  />*«*vvy  -ziy 
and  the  woman  was  taken  into  Pharaoh's  house.     ^^  And 
he  entreated  Abram  well  for  her  sake :  and  he  had  sheep, 
and  oxen,  and  he  asses,  and  manservants,  and  maidserv- 
ants, and  she  asses,  and  camels.    ^7  And  Jetiovah  plagued 
Pharaoh  and  his  house  with  great  plagues  because  of  Sarai 
Abram's  wife.     ^^  And  Pharaoh  called  Abram,  and  said, 
^^'^lat  is  this  thfft  thou  hast  done  unto  me  ?  why  didst  thou  ^ 
not  tell  me^she  icas  thy  wife  ?  ^^  Why  saidst  thou,  She  is  my  y-^'-  ^/ 
sister  ?  so  I  might  have  taken  her  to  me  to  wife  :  now  there-  7ir..t  X7^^, 
fore  behold  thy  wife,  take  her,  and  go  thy  way.    ^^  And  Pha- 
raoh commanded  ///«  men  concerning  him  :   and  they  sent  jv^  *•'-  c^*^^/  ^W. 
him  away,  and  his  wife,  and  all  that  he  had.     XIII.  i  And»x72l  *.-*^  / 
Abram  went  up  out  of  Egypt,  he,  and  his  wife,  and  all 


r/ 


old  men  of  Troy  declared  Helen's  beauty, 
at  100,  worth  the  world's  battle,  but  this 
Bcepticism  need  not  aifcct  our  reception  of  the 
Scripture  prinneval  history.  We  may  ob- 
serve, and  ought  not  to  conceal,  the  entirely 
selfish  nature  of  the  arrangement.  It  is 
not  made  to  save  Sarai  but  to  save  Abram 
by  the  more  easily  sacrificing  her.  If  she 
were  known  as  his  wife,  she  could  be  had 
only  by  destroying  him  ;  if  as  his  sister,  the 
end  might  be  accomplished  without  affecting 
his  safety,  nay,  with  probable  good  results 
for  his  worklly  prosperity.  The  slight 
semblance  of  truth  by  which  the  falsehood 
was  upheld  (see  ch.  xx.  12)  oiTly  testified  that 
it  was  known  to  be  a  falsehood  in  the 
conscience.  "  Pharaoh  is  the  common  title 
of  the  native  kings  of  Egypt  in  the  Bible, 
corresponding  to  P-RA  or  PII-RA  of  the 
hicrogljiibics."  Mr.  Stuart  Poole,  Biblical 
Diet.,  who  further  remarks  on  this  Pharaoh, 
that  while  there  arc  no  clear  indications  in 
the  Scripture  narrative  for  the  identification 
of  this  Pharaoh,  there  are  strong  chrono- 
logical presumptions  that  he  was  one  of  the 
Shepherd  kings,  probably  Salatis,  the  head 
of  their  first  and  most  powerful  line. 
These  are  confirmed  by  the  notice  which 
follows,  ver.  16,  that  he  gave  Abraham 
camels,  for  that  animal  was  hateful  to  the 
subsequent    Egyptians    on   account   of   its 


great  value  to  their  enemies,  the  Sheplicrds, 
and  nowhere  appears  on  any  of  their  monu- 
ments. The  most  probable  date  of  Abram's 
visit  is  about  2080,  which  would  accord  with 
the  time  of  Salatis.  16.]  The  presents 

are  much  the  same  as  the  items  of  the 
patriarchal  wealth  given  elsewhere,  e.  g. 
ch.  xxiv.  35 ;  xxxii.  15  ;  Job  i.  3 ;  xlii. 
12.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  in  these 
enumerations  we  nowhere  find  horses  men- 
tioned, though  they  were  the  pride  of 
Egypt.  This  result  fully  bears  out  what  we 
said  above  of  the  selfish  nature  of  Abram's 
compact.  17.]    We    may    perliaps 

venture  to  guess  at  the  nature  of  these 
plagues  by  the  fuller  account  in  ch.  xx.  18. 
According  to  Josephus,  the  cause  of  them 
was  revealed  to  Pharaoh  by  the  priests. 
The  words  so  might  I,  &c.,  might  also 
be  rendered,  owrf  /  took  her  to  me  to 
wife.  This  Pharaoh  did,  altliougli,  as 
we  may  fiiirly  supply  from  the  subsequent 
account  (compare  ver.  17  with  ch.  xx.  C), 
that  he  was  providentially  withheld  from 
consummating  his  marriage  with  her. 
20.]  The  concluding  words  seem  to  imply 
in  the  Hebrew  that  Pharaoh's  men  escorted 
him  and  his  out  of  the  land. 

XIII.  1 — 13.]  The  return  of  Abram  to 
Canaan :  his  severance  from  Lot.  He 
returned  to   the   "  dry  couutrj-,"  the  desert 


Josh.  xvii. 

—1.8.  Judg. 


ix.20. 
Chron.  viii. 
7,  al. 

>  oh.  XX.  15  ; 
x,\xiv.  10; 

xlvll.  6. 


62  GENESIS.  XIII. 

^,M/  tliat  lie  had,  and  Lot  witli  him,  to  tlie  south.    ^  ^nd  Abram 

was  very  rich  in  cattle,  in  silver,  and  in  gold.  ^  j^^^  j^e 
went  on  his  journeys  from  the  south  even  to  Beth- el,  unto 
the  place  where  his  tent  had  been  at  the  beginning,  be- 
tween Beth-el  and  Hai ;  ^  unto  the  place  of  the  altar,  which 
he  had  made  there  at  the  first :  and  there  Abram  called  on 
the  name  of  Jehovah.  ^  ^  And  Lot  also,  which  went  with 
Abram,  had  flocks,  and  herds,  and  tents.  ^  And  the  land 
was  not  able  to  bear  them,  that  they  might  dwell  together  : 
for  their  substance  was  great,  so  that  they  could  not  dwell 
together.  7  And  there  was  a  strife  between  the  herdmen 
of  A'bram's  cattle  and  the  herdmen  of  Lot's  cattle  :  and 
the  Canaanite  and  the  ^  Perizzite  dwelled  then  in  the  land. 
■/kIuss'  ^  And  Abram  said  unto  Lot,  Let  there  be  no  strife,  I  pray 
thee,  between  me  and  thee,  and  between  my  herdmen  and 
thy  herdmen  ;  for  we  he  brethren.^  Is  not  °  the  whole  land 
before  thee  ?  separate  thyself,  I  pray  thee,  from  me  :  if 
pch.xxiv.«.    thou  wilt  take  p  the  left  hand,  then  I  will  ffo  to  the  p  riffht : 

Num.  XX.  17 ;  ^"         -  -«-  '  O  O  ' 

^'xiiM.        ^j.  {^ijf^Q  11^(^2)  art  to  the  right  hand,  then  I  will  go  to  the  left. 
1^  And  Lot  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  beheld  all  the  region 

South  of  Palestine  (see  cli.xii.  9).             2.]  indicated    is    left    in    oliscurity.     On    the 

The    woi'd    rendered    rich    is     the    same  various  places  in  rcff.  the  scattered  notices 

as    that  rendered    "grievous"   in  eh.  xii.  of  them  will  be  commented  on.     From  this 

10  :  heavy  in  material,  to  move  and  to  feed,  and  other  places   they  seem   to  have  been 

3.     his  journeys]  After  the  manner  inhabitants  of  the  southern  part  of  Palestine. 

of  a   nomad,    not   in   one  journey,  but  in  9.]  On  the  modes  of  expression,  see 

many  marches — by  stations.     On  the  place  reff.              10.]  "  Immediately  east  of  the 

spoken  of,  see  eh.  xii.  8,  and  note  below  on  low  grey  hills   on  which    the  Canaanitish 

ver.   10.     Kalisch  remarks,   "  It  is  evident  Luz    and    the    Jewish    Beth-el  afterwards 

from   the  tenor  of  the  text   that   Abram's  stood,  rises, — as  the  higlicst  of  a  succession 

premeditated  aim   was   the   service    which  of  eminences,  each  now  marked  by   some 

he   intended  to  solemnize ;  and  the  words  vestige  of  ancient   edifices, — a  con.'^picuous 

'  he  invoked   the  name   of  the  Lord '  imply  hill ;  its  topmost  summit  resting,  as  it  were, 

a  more  profound  devotion  than  an  ordinary  on  the  rocky  slopes  below,  and  distinguished 

prayer  :  they  are  hence  used  only  on  cer-  from  them  by  the  olive-grove  which  clusters 

tain  predominant  occasions,  and  tend  here  over  its  broad  surface    above.     From   this 

to   prove   that   Abram   returned    from   the  height,  thus  offering  a  natural  base  for  the 

land  of  multifarious  idolatry,  in  which  his  patriarchal   altar,   and   a   fitting  shade  for 

progeny  lost  and  forgot  the  true  faith,  as  the    patriarchal    tent,    Abraham    and    Lot 

a  pure  and  believing  servant  of  tlie  Creator."  must  be  considered  as  taking  the  wide  sur- 

5.]  Lot  had  become   prosperous   in  vcy  of  the   counti-y  '  on  the  right  hand  and 

the    prosperity    of    Abram.              7.]  The  on  the  left,'  such  as  can  be  enjoyed  from  no 

land    (i.    e.    about  those    parts)    was    not  other  point  in  the  neighbourhood.     To  the 

empty  :    the    Canaanite  (ch.   xii.   6)   dwelt  east  there  rises  in  the  foreground  the  jagged 

there,  and  also  the  Perizzite.     This  latter  range  of  the  hills  above    Jericho ;    in  the 

is  here  first  mentioned  — not  in  the  catalogue  distance  the  dark  wall  of  Moab;    between 

in  ch.  X.  ;  so  that  the  origin  of  the  people  them  lies  the  wide  valley  of  the  Jordan,  its 


2—18.  GEJ^ESIS.  G3 

round  about  Jordan,  that  it  icas  well  watered  every  where,   9fC.yL.J 

before  Jehoa'AH  destroyed  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  efcn  as  t^^'u/ 

the  ^  garden  of  JEIIO^•AH,  like  the  hind  of  Egypt,  as  thou  'secEzek""'"" 

comest  unto  Zoar,     ^^  Then  Lot  chose  him  all  the  region     xxlu'-'b,'*.' Jo^ '  ^*-'-v^ 

round  about  Jordan;  and  Lot  journeyed  east:  and  they  of-TL,/ 

separated  themselves  the  one  from  the  other.     ^^  Abram 

dwelled  in  the  laud  of  Canaan,  and  Lot  dwelled  in  the 

cities  of  the  plain,  and  pitched  hk  tents  as  far  as  Sodom. 

l"^  But  the  men  of  Sodom  iccre  wicked  and  sinners  before  Je-  «-^a2>«.// aj"**"— -'^Z 

HOVAH  exceedingly.    ^^  ^  And  Jehovah  said  unto  Abram, 

after  that  Lot  was  sej)arated  from  him,  Lift  up  now  thine 

eyes,  and  look  from  the  place  where  thou  art^northward^  ^ 

and  southward/  and  eastward^  and  westward :  ^^  for  all  the 

land  which  thou  seest,  to  thee  will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy 

seed  for  ever.     ^^  And  I  will  make  thy  seed  as  the  dust  of 

the  earth :  so  that  if  a  man  can  number  the  dust  of  the 

earth,  then  shall  thy  seed  also  be  numbered.     ^7  Arise, 

walk  through  the  land  in  the  length  of  it  and  in  the  breadth  ^^^  ^^  j,  ^ . 

of  it :  for ^1  will  ffive  it  unto  theei     ^^  xVnd  Abram  pitched     xxulit,  ^A^y^i 

•  '  -^^  °  _  ■'^  -  I'.i;  XXV.  9; 

Im  tent^,  and  came  and  dwelt  in  the  oak- grove  of  ^  Mamre,     fa'oniy.'  '"/>  6^/  *  jj 

course   marked  by  the   tract   of  forest  in  its  fame,  as  of  the  garden  of  Eden,  as  of  the 

which  its  rushing  stream  is  enveloped :  and  valley  of  the  Nile  ;  no  crust  of  salt,  no  vol- 

down  to  this  valley  a  long  and  deep  ravine,  canic   convulsions    had   as    yet    blasted   its 

now,  as  always,  the  main  line  of  communica-  verdure,   or  touched  the  secure  civilization 

tion  by  which  it   is   approached  from  the  of  the  early    Phoenician  settlements  which 

central  hills  of  Palestine — a  ravine  rich  with  had  struck   root    within   its    deep    abyss." 

vine,  olive,  and  fig,  winding  its  way  through  Stanley,  as  before.  well-watered]    A 

ancient  reservoirs  and  sepulchres,  remains  6f  number  of  streams  descend  from  the  moun- 

a  civilization  now  extinct,  but  in  the  times  tains  of  Moab  and  fertilize  it.     The  garden 

of  the  patriarchs  not  yet  begun.    In  the  south  of  Jehovah  (reft'.)  is  of  course  Eden.     On 

and  west  the  view  commanded  the  bleak  hills  Zoar,  see  note,  eh.  xix.   22.  13.]  Lot 

of  Judoja,  varied  by  the  heights   crowned  pitched  his  tent  as  far  as  Sodom,  advanced 

with    what   were    afterwards   the    cities   of  in  his  nomadic  journeys  to  Sodom  :  there  wc 

Benjamin,    and    overhanging    what    in    a  find  him,  ch.  xiv.  12  and  xix.  1.     The  word 

later  day  was  to  be  Jerusalem,  and  in  the  plain  here  is  the  same  as  before,  the  region 

far  distance  the  southern  range,  on  whose  round  about, — the  district,  as  Kalisch..    It 

slope  is  Hebron.     Northward  arc  the  hills  came  to  be  used  without  the  adjunct  "  of 

which  divide  Judasa  from  the  ricli  plains  of  the  Jordan^  14,  ft'.]  Reneical  of  the 

Samaria."       Stanley,  Sinai   and  Palestine,  promise   to  Abram.      "  That  dreary  view, 

p.  218.  the  region  round  about  Jor-  unfolded  then  in  its  primaeval  desolation  bc- 

dan]    Literally,   the  circle  of  Jordan  — the  fore  tlie  eyes  of  the  now  solitary  patriarch, 

environs  of  Jordan.     The  LXX.  expression  would  be   indeed   peopled   with    a   mighty 

(perichorus)  is  that  occurring  in  Matt.  iii.  5,  nation     througli     many    generations,    with 

and  rendered  there  as  in  our  text.     Kalisch  mighty   recollections,  like   the   dust  of  the 

compares  the  French  arrondissement,  and  the  earth  in  number,  for   ever."      Stanley,    as 

German  Kreis   or  Bezirk.      "  He  saw  not  above.  18,  the  oak  grove]  See  on  ch. 

indeed    the    tropical    fertility    and   copious  x.   6.  Mamre,   as  we  learn  from  ch. 

streams  along  its  coui-se.     But  he  knew  of  xiv.  13,  24,  wus  a  person,  brother  of  Eshcol 


64 


GENESIS. 


XIY. 


wliicli  is  in  Hebron,  and  built  there  an  altar  unto  Jehovah. 
XIV.  1  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  days  of  Amrapbel  king 
of  Shiuar,  ^  Ariocb  king  of  Ellasar,  Chedorlaomer  king  of 


and  Aner,  and  all  three  brothers  were  con- 
federates of  Abraham  (see  also  ch.  xviii.  1). 
But  in  the  other  reff.  the  name  appears 
simply  as  that  of  a  place.  See  on  ch.  xxiii. 
20.  Hebron]  This  is  the  first  mention 

of  this  famous  city.  It  is  situated  among 
the  mountains,  20  Roman  miles  S.  of  Jeru- 
salem, and  the  same  distance  N.  of  Beer- 
sheba.  It  is  one  of  the  most  ancient  cities 
in  the  world.  See  Num.  xiii.  22,  where  it 
is  said  to  have  been  built  seven  years  before 
Zoan,  in  Egypt  (see  there).  Its  former 
name  was  Kirjath-Arba,  the  city  of  Arba, 
the  father  of  Anak,  and  pi'ogenitor  of  the 
Anakim  (see  Josh.  xv.  13,  14;  xxi.  11). 
At  Hebron  Sarah  died,  on  which  occasion 
Abraham  bought  of  Ephron  the  Hittite  the 
field  and  cave  of  Machpelah,  for  a  burial- 
place.  The  cave  is  still  there,  enclosed  with- 
in the  walls  of  a  mosque.  On  the  entry 
of  the  Israelites  Hebron  was  taken  by 
Joshua  (Josh.  x.  36),  and  given  by  him  to 
Caleb  (Josh.  xiv.  13,  f. ;  xv.  13,  14).  It  was 
assigned  to  the  Levitcs,  and  made  a  city  of 
refuge  (Josh.  xxi.  11 — 13).  Here  David 
established  his  seat  of  government,  and 
reigned  seven  &nd  a  half  years  over  Judah 
(2  Sam.  v.  5).  For  other  and  later  particu- 
lars, see  Mr.  Porter's  article,  Biblical  Diet. 
He  says,  "  About  a  mile  from  the  town,  up 
the  valley,  is  one  of  the  largest  oak  trees  in 
Palestine.  It  stands  quite  alone  in  the  midst 
of  the  vineyards.  It  is  23  ft.  in  girth,  and 
its  branches  cover  a  space  90  ft.  in  diameter. 
This,  say  some,  is  the  very  tree  beneath 
which  Abraham  pitched  his  tent ;  but  how- 
ever this  may  be,  it  still  bears  the  name  of 
the  patriarch." 

XIV.  Invasion  of  Palestine  hy  four  East- 
tern  kings  (1 — 7).  Their  triumph,  and  cap- 
ture of  Lot  (8 — 12).  Rescue  of  Lot  by 
Abram  (13 — 1^5).  Bis  meeting  with  the 
king  of  Sodom  and  with  Melchizedek  (17 — 
24).  This  chapter  shews  us  Abram  not 
only  as  a  sojourner  in  the  land  which  after- 
wards his  seed  was  to  possess,  but  as  a 
political  power  and  conqueror  :  and  this, 
doubtless,  not  so  much  for  the  interest  in 
this  world's  history,  which  such  an  ex- 
hibition of  him  may  have,  but  for  the  in- 
terest thereto  attaching  in  reference  to  the 


future  kingdom  of  God.  It  shews  us 
Abram  in  conflict  with  this  world's  powers 
and  victorious,  foreshadowing  in  the  long 
perspective  of  prophecy  that  which  the 
kingdom  of  Abram's  son,  Solomon,  more 
nearly  represented,  the  prevalence  of  Abram's 
seed  and  its  redemptive  work  in  the  world. 
This  portion  of  the  history  belongs  to  the 
Jehovist  in  its  present  form  ;  but  evidently 
he  has  wrought  up  a  much  older  document. 
This  will  be  illustrated  in  detail  as  we  pass 
on.  Ewald  is  disposed  to  think  this  vener- 
able fragment  of  history  one  of  the  oldest 
portions  of  Genesis.  In  it  first  we  are  in- 
troduced to  this  world's  matters  in  the  form 
of  action  such  as  our  histories  deal  with. 
1.]  Of  Amraphel  nothing  is  known. 
He  was  king  or  chief  of  Babylonia  (see  on 
ch.  xi.  2).  The  name  Arioch  (see  ref.)  pro- 
bably means  lion-like:  he  was  chief  of 
Ellasar,  probably  Larsa,  called  Larissa  by 
the  Greeks,  an  old  Chaldean  town,  about 
half-way  between  Ur  and  Erek.  "  Tlie  in- 
scriptions (says  Prof.  Rawlinson,  Biblical 
Diet. )  shew  it  to  have  been  one  of  the  primi- 
tive capitals,  of  earlier  date,  probably,  than 
Babylon  itself."  It  must  not  be  confounded 
with  Thelassar,  2  Kings  xix.  2.  Our  know-  . 
ledge  of  Chedorlaomer  is  only  conjectural. 
Traces  have  been  found  on  the  inscribed 
bricks  in  Chaldea  of  a  king  Kudur  maptda, 
who  bears  also  the  title  of  "  ravager  of  the 
West."  Even  nearer  to  the  name  is  that  of 
Kedar-el- Ahmar,  or  the  red,  a  great  hero  in 
Arabian  tradition.  He  was  king  of  Elara 
(see  on  ch.  x.  22,  and  art.  "  Chedorlaomer  " 
in  the  Biblical  Diet.)  He  appears  as  a 
settled  king  of  great  power,  able  to  make 
war  2000  miles  from  his  country,  and  hold- 
ing other  kings,  among  whom  is  the  king 
of  Babylon,  under  his  supremacy.  This 
pre-eminence  was  of  short  duration  :  Elam 
fell  under  Babylon  and  Assyria,  and 
afterwards  (?)  under  Persia,  when  Susa 
(Shushau)  the  Elamite  capital  became  the 
scat  of  empire.  Tidal  is  otherwise  un- 
known. His  title,  king  of  nations  (Go- 
zim),  seems  to  imply  that  he  was  chief  of  a 
number  of  nomadic  tribes.  Some  have 
called  to  mind  "  Galilee  of  the  nations  " 
(Matt.  iv.  15) ;  but  this  must  be  only  for 


1—5. 


GENESIS. 


65 


Elara,  and  Tidal  king  of  nations ;  2  that  these  made  war    ^ 
with  Bera  king  of  Sodom,  and  with  Birsha  king  of  Go- 
morrah, Shinab  king  of  Aduiah,  and   Shcracbor  king  of 
Zcboiim,  and  the  king  of  Belay  which  is  Zoar.     '^  All  these    ; 
were  joined  together  in  the  vale  of  Siddim^  which  is  the  ^y 
salt  sea.     ^  Twelve  years  they  served  Chedorlaomer,  and 
in  the  thirteenth  year  they  rebelled.     ^  And  in  the  four- 
teenth year  came  Chedorlaomer,  and  the  kings  that  iccve 
with  him,  and  smote  the  *  Rephaim  in  Ashteroth  Karnaim, 
and  the  Zu25imin  Ham,  and  the  Emim  in  Shaveh  Kiriathaim, 


V  ^/ 


tch.«v.  20.    Oj 
Dput.  ii.  10,  ' 
21);  iii.  11. 
J"-li.  xii.  1  ; 
TiVn.  12  ; 
xui.  1.5. 


illustration,  not  for  identification,  as  wo 
have  obviously  in  this  history  nothing  to  do 
with  Galilee.  2.  ]  On  all  these  towns, 

sec  notes,  ch.  xix.  Of  these  kings,  whose 
names  are  not  elsewhere  found,  nothing  is 
known.  The  last  city,  Bela  or  Zoar  (see 
on  cli.  xix.  22),  has  no  king  named,  probably 
on  account  of  its  insignificance. 
3.]  The  vale  of  Siddim  is  named  only  here. 
The  meaning  of  the  name  is  doubtful. 
The  Hebraists,  Gesenius  and  Kalisch,  sup- 
pose it  to  mean  "a  plain  cut  up  by  stony 
channels,  which  render  it  ditlicult  of  transit." 
The  word  translated  vale  {Emek)  is  also 
applied  to  the  plain  of  Jezreel,  and  hence  is 
explained  to  be  "  a  broad,  flattish  tract, 
sometimes  of  considerable  width,  enclosed  on 
each  side  by  a  definite  range  of  hill."  This 
vale  of  Siddim,  at  all  events,  by  the  very 
terms  of  our  text,  formed  a  portion  of  the 
low  land  afterwards  submerged  by  the  Salt 
Sea.  Sec  on  the  whole,  Mr.  Grove's  art.  in 
the  Biblical  Diet.  The  notice,  which 

is  the  salt  sea,  is  one  of  those  added  by  the 
writer  of  Genesis  to  the  ancient  document. 
See  vv.  2,  6,  7,  and  notes.  5.]    The 

Eephaims  (sec  reff.),  or  giants,  appear  first 
hero  in  the  E.  of  Palestine,  but  are  after- 
wards found  in  connexion  with  the  Phi- 
listines in  the  "W.  as  enemies  of  Israel. 
There  is  no  mention  of  them  in  ch.  x.,  so 
that  they  were  not  Canaauites.  Their  last 
remaining  king  was  Og,  whose  sway  was 
very  extensive  (Josh.  xii.  4,  5).  The 
Zuzim  and  Emim  were  giant  tribes  of  the 
Ecphaim,  dwelling,  the  former  in  the  coun- 
try afterwards  held  by  the  i\Ioabites  (Dcut. 
ii.  10),  the  latter,  called  Zamzummims  by 
the  Ammonites  (Deut.  ii.  20),  between 
the  Arnon  and  the  Jabbok.  Ashteroth 
Karnaim,  or  Ashteroth  of  the  two  horns, 


is  quite  unknown  as  to  situation.  Knobcl 
says  it  has  been  recognized  in  Tell  Ash- 
teroth, in  the  neighbourhood  of  Damas- 
cus. But  Mr.  Grove,  writing  at  the  same 
date  {Biblical  Diet.,  18G0),  makes  no  men- 
tion of  this  recognition.  It  is  elsewhere 
called  Astaroth  in  Edrei  (Dcut.  i.  4),  or 
simply  Ashtaroth  (Josh.  ix.  10):  in  Josh, 
xii.  4,  xiii.  12,  31,  we  have  "Ashtaroth  and 
Edrei,"  as  separate  cities,  pertaining  to  Og 
in  Bashan.  Ashtaroth  was  his  residence 
(Deut.  as  above).  In  later  times  it  was 
known  as  Carnaim,  1  Mace.  v.  43,  44,  or 
Camion,  2  Mace.  xii.  2G.  The  adjunct 
Karnaim  probably  alludes  to  the  worship  of 
the  horned  goddess  Ashtoreth,  or  the  moon 
(Astartc) :  but  some  refer  it  to  a  mountain 
with  two  peaks  or  horns,  in  the  neighbour- 
hood. It  is  somewhat  doubtful  whether 
Ham  is  a  proper  name  at  all.  The  LXX.  and 
Vulgate  render  the  word  (Be-ham)  '•'■together 
^ciththem."  But  the  general  opinion  is, 
that  a  place  is  represented,  possibly  the 
Ammonitish  capital  Rabbath  Ammon,  the 
ruins  of  which  arc  now  called  Amman.  The 
Samaritan  Pentateuch  has  here  the  totally 
difl'erent  name  Lishah,  meaning  thereby 
perhaps  the  Lasha  of  ch.  x.  19.  Sha- 
veh Kiriathaim,  or  the  plain  Kiriathaim  : 
a  city  so  called  is  mentioned  Num.  xxxii. 
37  as  having  been  bnilt  by  the  Reubenites, 
and  as  pertaining  to  them.  Josh.  xiii.  19, — 
as  a  Moabitish  city,  Jer.  xlviii.  23  ;  Ezek. 
XXV.  9 ;  by  Eusebius  and  Jerome  as  Kari- 
atha,  10  miles  west  of  Mcdeba  (which,  how- 
ever, does  not  appear  to  lie  in  a  plain). 
The  identification  thus  seems  to  be  quite 
uncertain,  as  it  may  well  be,  considering 
that  Kiriathaim  simply  means  two  cities. 
6.]  The  Horites  mean  dwellers  in 
caves,  as  the  inhabitants  of  Mount  Seir  (the 


66 


GENESIS. 


XIY. 


'vUt^/ 


u  Exod.  xvii. 

3,  14.     Num. 

xxiv.  20.    1 

Sam.  XT.  3,  8. 
V  2  Chron.  [xx. 

2,  only. 


6  and  tlie  Horites  in  tlieir  mount  Seir,  unto  El-paran,  whicli 
in  by  tlie  wilderness.  7  And  they  returned,  and  came  to  En- 
mislipat^wliich.  h  Kadesl^,  and  smote  all  the  countrj^  of  the 
^Amalekites,  and  also  the  Amorites,  that  dwelt  in  ^Ha- 
zezon-tamar.  ^  And  there  went  out  the  king  of  Sodom 
and  the  king  of  Gomorrah,  and  the  king  of  Admah,  and  the 
king  of  Zeboiim^  and  the  king  of  Bela  (the  same  is  Zoar;) 
and  they  joined  battle  with  them  in  the  A^ale  of  Siddim ; 
9  with  Chedorlaomer  the  king  of  Elam,  and  with  Tidal 
king  of  nations,  and  Amraphel  king  of  Shinar,  and 
Arioch  king  of  EUasar ;  four  kings  with  five.     ^^  And  the 


rugged,  full  of  clefts  and  caverns)  or  Petra 
might  ■well  be  called.  Their  expulsion  and 
destruction  by  the  Edomites  are  recorded 
in  Deut.  ii.  12.  El-paran,  the  oak-  (or 
terebinth)  of  Paran,  the  E.  limit  of  the 
■wilderness  of  Paran.  On  this  latter  see 
note,  Deut.  i.  1.  Here  we  have  another 
of 'the  explanatory  notices  which  abound 
in  this  history.  7.]  If  they  marched 

northward,  they  arrived  in  the  desert  of 
Zin,  which  formed  a  part  of  the  great 
wilderness^of  Paran.  Here  lay,  on  the  fron- 
tier of  the  Iduma>an  land,  the  old  province 
and  town  of  Kadesh  or  Kadcsh-barnca 
(Num.  xiii.  26 ;  xx.  16).  It  was  not 
distant  from  the  town  Gerar  (ch.  xx.  1), 
extended  from  here  to  the  S.  districts  of 
Canaan,  and  formed  its  southern  boundary 
(Num.  sxxiv.  4  ;  Josh.  xv.  3).  Therefore 
Moses  could  from  here  send  the  scouts  for 
the  exploration  of  the  promised  land,  and 
treat  with  the  King  of  Edom  regarding 
the  transit  of  the  Hebrew  array  (Num. 
xiii.  20  ;  xx.  14).  "  The  town  contained 
a  celebrated  well  which,  from  an  unknown 
but  no  doubt  important  cause,  was  called 
En-mishpat,  Well  of  Judgment,  which  more 
ancient  name  later  gave  way  to  tliat  of 
Kadesh  {Jwhj),  likewise  pointing  to  the  holy 
character  of  the  place."  Kalisch.  In  con- 
nexion with  both  names,  it  may  be  remem- 
bered that  it  was  here  Moses,  in  striking  the 
rock,  spake  unadvisedly  with  his  lips  (Num. 
XX.  10,  11),  and  -kas  judged  for  his  offence; 
and  here  also  "  the  children  of  Israel  strove 
■with  the  Lord,  and  He  was  sanctifed  in 
them  "  (Num.  v.  13).  The  objection  to  con- 
necting these  incidents  with  the  name  seems 
to  be  that  because  of  that  strife  the  water 
did  receive  a  name,  viz.  that  of  Meribah 


(ib.).  The  explanatory  words,  which  is 
Kadesh,  have  apparently  been  inserted  by 
the  Supplementer.  There  is  some  difficulty 
in  the  mention  of  the  Amalekiteshere,  seeing 
that  "duke  Amalek,"  who  is  ordinarily 
taken  as  the  progenitor  of  that  people,  was 
the  grandson  of  Esau  (ch.  xxxiv.  12, 
16).  If  that  -were  so,  then  this  mention 
of  the  country  of  the  Amalekites  must 
be  understood  as  meaning,  ichich  was 
afterwards  that  of  the  AmaleJdtes.  But 
some  (see  Mr.  Bevan,  Biblical  Diet.)  suppose 
that  the  assumption  with  regard  to  Esau's 
grandson  is  unfounded,  and  that  the  Ama- 
lekites were  the  ancient  inliabitants  of  the 
peninsula  of  Sinai  and  the  wilderness  inter- 
vening between  the  southern  hill-ranges  of 
Palestine  and  the  border  of  Egypt.  For  their 
subsequent  history  see  retf.,  and  notes 
thereon.  the  Amorites]  See  on  eh. 

X.  16,  and  note  on  the  report  of  the  spies. 
Num.  xiii.  29.  Mr.  Grove  in  Biblical  Diet. 
regards  the  name  not  as  indicating  a  distinct 
tribe,  but  as  being  a  local  term  only,  sup- 
porting the  opinion  by  the  curious  blending 
of  the  designation  Amorite  with  the  various 
Canaanitish  Gentile  appellations — Hittite, 
Canaanite,  Hivitc,  Jebusite.  Hazezon- 

tamar]  In  the  only  other  place  where  this 
name  occurs  (ref )  it  is  explained  to  be  En- 
gedi.  The  word  is  said  to  mean  "  the  fell- 
ing of  palm-trees^'  and  the  place  may  be 
the  "city  of  palm-trees"  of  Judg.  i.  16. 
See  Stanley,  Sinai  and  Palestine,  p.  297, 
note.  8.]  Here  we  have  another  pa- 

renthetical notice  of  the  identity  of  Lela 
with  Zoar.  10.]  There  is,  perhaps,  an 

imi^lication  that  the  bitumen  pits  were  con- 
nected with  the  overthrow  of  the  kings  : 
theyfell  there,  i.  e.  in  the  pits,  probably  by 


6—15. 


GE^^ESIS. 


67 


vale  of  Siddim  icas  full  of  sliinepits  ;  aiid  the  Icings  of 

Sodom  and  Goniorrali  fled,  and  fell  there  ;  and  they  that 

remained  fled  to  the  mountain.     ^^  And  they  took  all  the 

goods  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  all  their  victuals,  and 

went  their  way.     ^2  ^^d  they  took  Lot,  Abram's  brother's 

son,  who  dwelt  in  Sodom,  and  his  goods,  and  dejDarted. 

1"^  %  And  there  came  one  that  had  escaped,  and  told  Abram 

the  Hebrew  ;  for  he  dwelt  in  the  oak- grove  of  Mamre  the  ^/  ^/  ♦V 

Amorite,  brother  of  Eshcol,  and  brother  of  Aner :  and 

these  toere  confederate  with  Abram.    i"*  And  when  Abram 

heard  that  his  brother  was  taken  captive,  he  armed  his  (u.jCt^tt- 

tried  scrra)ifs,  born  in  his  own  house,  three  hundred  and  >w^~-/*'^' 

eighteen,  and  pursued  t/toti  unto  Dan.     ^'^  And  he  divided  -i,  'C^  a-' 


being  entangled  in  them,  and  unable  to 
escape.  From  the  bitumen  found  on  its  sur- 
face and  shores  the  sea  received  the  name  of 
Laciis  Asphaltites.  The  sentence  is  literally, 
"  The  vale  of  Siddim  was  pits  pits  of  bitu- 
men," i.  e.  was  all  pits.  The  remainder, 
the  three  kings  of  Admah,  Zeboiim,  and 
Lcla,  fled,  as  Lot  afterwards,  to  the  heights 
of  Moab.  13.]  There  has  been  much 

discussion  over  the  words  Abram  the  He- 
brew. The  simplest  explanation  of  all  is  that 
of  Knobel,  that  the  term  is  to  be  understood 
in  its  obvi(ms  later  sense,  as  distinguishing 
Abram  from  the  Gentile  races  and  people 
who  occur  in  the  narrative.  Thus  we  have, 
"Let  the  Ilebrews  hear,"  1  Sam.  xiii.  3. 
See  also  ib.  ver.  7,  and  xiv.  21.  The  chief 
objection  to  this  view  is  that  there  does  not 
appear  here  any  sufficient  reason  for  such 
contrast  being  made.  Another  explanation 
is,  that  Abram  is  thus  called  here  owing  to 
his  descent  from  Eber,  ch.  x.  21.  It  is  true 
that  Eber's  descendants  there  seem  to  be 
specially  mentioned  as  constituting  a  race  by 
themselves  ;  but  again  there  would  be  against 
this  tlie  former  objection  that  no  reason  exists 
here  for  thus  distinguishing  the  patriarch. 
There  remains  the  solution  afforded  by  the 
Septuagint  rendering,  which  the  Hebrew 
word  will  bear,  Abram  the  crosser-orer,  or 
the  immifjrant,  viz.  from  the  other  side  of  the 

t Euphrates.  If  this  were  a  name  by  which 
Abram  was  known  among  his  Canaanitish 
'  contemporaries,  and  if  this  remarkable  docu- 
ment were,  as  has  been  by  some  supposed,  a 
fragment  of  Canaanitish  history  incorporated 
by  the  Jehovist,  then  a  reason  would  be 


furnished  for  this  title  being  given.  But  the 
question  why  Abram  is  here  thus  called, 
cannot  be  considered  as  satisfactorily  solved. 
On  the  oak-grove  of  Mamre,  sec  note,  ch. 
xiii.  18.  Eshcol,  the  cluster  of  grapes,  was 
in  after  times  the  name  given  by  the  children 
of  Israel  to  a  valley  near  Hebron,  because 
of  the  bunch  which  the  spies  brouglit  from 
thence.  But  there  can  hardly  be  any  con- 
nexion between  the  two  names.  Of  Aner 
nothing  is  known.  confedei'ates  with 

Abram]     Literally,    lords   of   the    oath  of 
Abram,  possessors  of  a  treaty  with  A. 
14.  his  brother]  i.  c.  his  near  relative.    See 
ch.  xiii.   8.  armed]  Literally,  poured 

out  or  emptied  out.  tried]  Or  proved — 

faithful  and  skilled.  The  root  of  the  word 
signifies  to  narrow,  hence  to  initiate  or  im- 
bue with.  unto  Dan]  If  this  is  the 
same  place  as  that  afterwards  named  Dan  by 
the  Danites,  the  word  must  have  been  sub- 
stituted here  for  its  older  appellation  Laish 
(see  Josh.  xix.  47).  But  this  (though  held 
by  Ewald)  seems  very  improbable,  as  other 
ancient  names  have  not  been  thus  changed, 
but  have  been  parenthetically  explained. 
See  vv.  2,  7,  8.  And  yet  we  can  hardly  fix 
on  any  other  place,  as  Dan  lies  almost  in  the 
line  of  the  way  from  Sichem  to  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Damascus,  along  which  Abram 
pursued  the  kings.  Another  place,  if  it  be 
anotlier,  Dan-jaan,  is  by  Keil  supposed  to 
be  this  Dan.  It  is  mentioned  2  Sam.  xxiv. 
6,  but  corresponds  there  again  very  well  with 
the  Daiiite  city,  formerly  Laish.  15.] 
He  divided  himself  against  them,  i.  e.  split 
his  forces  into  two  portions.     Hobah  has  not 


68 


GENESIS. 


XIY. 


o- 


lU^^^Ji^-^-''-/ 


himself  against  them,  he  and  his  servants,  hy  night,  and 
smote  them,  and  pursued  them  unto  Hobah,  which  is  on 
the  left  hand  of  Damascus.  ^^  And  he  brought  back  all 
the  goods,  and  also  brought  again  his  brother  Lot,  and  his 
goods,  and  the  women  also,  and  the  people.  ^^  ^  And  the 
king  of  Sodom  went  out  to  meet  him  after  his  return  from 
the  slaughter  of  Chedorlaomer^  and  of  the  kings  that  were 
with  him,  at  the  valley  of  Shaveh,  which  is  the  valley  of 
the  king.  ^^  And  Melchizedek  king  of  Salem  brought 
forth  bread  and  wine :  and  he  was  the  priest  of  the  high 
God.  1^  And  he  blessed  him,  and  said,  Blessed  be  Abram 
of  the  most  high   God,  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth  : 


been  satisfactorily  made  out.  It  was  to  the 
lett  hand,  i.  e.  the  north,  of  Damascus.  The 
Hebrews  regarded  themselves  as  facing  the 
East,  and  named  the  quarters  of  the  compass 
accordingly.  The  Jews  regard  the  village  of 
Jobar,  a  few  miles  N.  E.  of  Damascus,  as 
answering  to  Hobah.  At  Burzeh,  very  near, 
is  a  spot  held  in  veneration  by  the  people  as 
having  been  the  "  praying-place  "  of  Abra- 
ham, where  he  returned  thanks  to  God  after 
the  discomfiture  of  the  kings.  See  Mr.  Por- 
ter's art.  Biblical  Diet.  17.]  Nothing 
is  knoT\ni  of  the  name  or  the  site  of  the 
valley  of  Shaveh.  It  is  probable  that  the 
word  itself  (see  on  ver.  5)  means  a  valley,  in 
which  case  the  valley  of  Shaveh  is  a  redupli- 
cation. In  2  Sam.  xviii.  18  we  read  that 
Abraham  erected  for  himself  a  monument  in 
the  "valley  of  the  king,"  but  we  are  not 
told  where  it  was :  see  there. 

18 — 24.]  Abram'' s  meeting  with  Melchize- 
dek. His  renunciation  of  the  spoil.  It 
would  exceed  the  limits  of  a  note  to  give  the 
many  different  opinions  about  this  mysterious 
personage,  Melchizedek.  "Bearing  a  title 
which  Jews  in  after-ages  would  recognize  as 
designating  their  own  sovereign,  bearing 
gifts  which  recall  to  Christians  the  Lord's 
Supper,  this  Canaanite  crosses  for  a  moment 
the  path  of  Abram,  and  is  unhesitatingly 
recognized  as  a  pei'son  of  higher  spiritual 
rank  than  the  friend  of  God.  Disappearing 
as  suddenly  as  he  came  in,  he  is  lost  to  the 
sacred  writings  for  a  thousand  years ;  and 
then  a  few  emphatic  words  for  another  mo- 
ment bring  him  into  sight  as  a  type  of  the 
coming  Lord  of  David.  Once  more,  after 
another  thousand  years,  the  Hebrew  Chris- 
tians are  taught  to  see  in  him  a  proof  that  it 


was  the  consistent  purpose  of  God  to  abolish 
the  Levitical  priesthood.  His  person,  his 
office,  his  relation  to  Christ,  and  the  seat  of 
his  sovereignty,  have  given  rise  to  innumer- 
able discussions,  which  even  now  can  scarcely 
be  considered  as  settled."  Mr.  Bullock, 
Biblical  Diet. 

It  may  be  stated  briefly,  that  he  has  been 
variously  supposed  to  have  been  Shcm,  au- 
thorized by  the  dignity  of  age  and  by  para- 
mount lordship  of  Canaan,  to  bless  Abram 
and  convey  to  him  his  right  over  the  land, 
(so  the  Jewish  opinion  in  Jerome's  time, — 
the  Samaritan,  as  reported  hy  Epiphauius, 
— the  later  Targums,  or  Jewish  comment- 
aries,— and  in  modern  times,  Luther  and 
Melanchthon,  Lightfoot,  and  others), — a>» 
angel  (ascribed  to  Origen  by  Jerome),  a 
Power  or  Virtue  of  God,  or  even  the  Holy 
Ghost  (various  heretics  blamed  by  the  Chris- 
tian Fathei's),  the  Son  of  God,  in  human  form 
(some  of  the  ancients,  to  whose  opinion 
Ambrose  inclines,  as  well  as  some  modern 
critics),  the  Messiah  (a  Jewish  opinion), 
Ham,  or  Enoch,  or  Job.  But  we  may  safely 
treat  all  these  as  fanciful  and  imneeded.  The 
typology  connected  with  Melchizedek  does 
not  require  that  he  himself  should  be  re- 
garded as  any  superhuman  person,  but  merely 
exalts  the  human  circumstances  under  which 
he  appears  into  symbols  of  superhuman 
things.  Everything  combines  to  shew  that 
Melchizedek  was  a  Canaanitish  king  who 
had  retained  the  worship  of  the  true  God, 
and  combined  in  his  own  person  the  offices 
of  king  and  priest.  It  is  to  be  observed  that 
there  is  not  used  regarding  him,  nor  does  he 
nse,  the  title  of  Jehovah,  but  that  of  the  High 
God,  a  title  found  also  in  the  question  ad- 


16—23. 


GEXESIS. 


G9 


20  And  blessed  be  tlie  bigb  God,  which  liath  delivered 
thine  enemies  into  thy  hand.  And  he  gave  him  tithes 
of  all.  -^  And  the  king  of  Sodom  said  unto  Abram,  Give 
mo  the  persons,  and  take  the  goods  to  thyself.  22  And 
Abram  said  to  the  king  of  Sodom,  I  ^  lift  up  mine  hand 
unto  Jehovah  the  high  God,  the  possessor  of  heaven  and 
earth,  23  ^That  I  will  not  talic  from, a  thread  even  to  a 
shoclatchet,  and  that  I  will  not  take  any  thing  that  is  thine, 


w  Exod.  »i.  fl. 

Num.  xiv.HO. 

Drut.  xxxii. 

40.    Dan. 

xii.  7. 
X  So  ch.  xxi. 

23  ;  XX  vi.  29; 

xlii.  15.    Ps. 

xcv.  11  (Heb. 

iv.  S). 


dressed  (Micali  vi.  6)  by  the  IMoabitisli  king 
Balak,  to  his  prophet  Balaam:  but  tliat  Abram 
in  answering  the  King  of  Sodom  probably  in 
bis  presence,  atbrins  the  identity  of  his 
covenant-God,  Jehovah,  with  the  High  God, 
possessor  of  heaven  and  earth,  of  whom 
Mflehizedek  had  spoken. 

llcspecting  Salein,  the  city  of  Melehizedek, 
there  is  much  discussion.  Mr.  Grove  {Bibli- 
cal Diet.)  thinks  that  no  satisl'actory  identi- 
fication is  possible.  He  quotes  Dr.  Wolff, 
•who  maintains  that  Salem  is  not  a  place,  but 
part  of  the  title,  "King  oi jjeace."  This  is 
also  held  by  Bleek  and  others.  The  general 
idea  has  been  in  ancient  and  modern  times 
that  Salem  is  Jerusalem,  because  it  is  so 
called  in  Ps.  Ixxvi.  2.  Certainly  it  is  :  but 
this  is  no  argument  whatever  for  this  Salem 
being  also  Jerusalem.  Jerome  identifies  it 
with  the  Salem  (Saleira  in  the  Greek)  near 
where  John  the  Baptist  was  baptizing,  John 
iii.  23.  He  reports  that  in  his  time  the 
ruins  of  JMelchizedek's  palace  were  shewn 
there.  But  this  Salem  would  be  at  a  great 
distance  from  any  point  where  Abram  might 
be  met :  and  if  we  are  to  take  the  account 
strictly,  this  incident  happened  (ver.  17) 
after  Abram' s  return,  and  consequently  in 
Hebron,  which  makes  it  likely  that  after 
all  Salem  may  be  Jerusalem.  On  all  other 
points  connected  with  this  history,  see  notes 
on  Heb.  vii.  1 — 4.  There  the  sacred  writer 
adduces  this  incident  as  manifesting  the 
supcri(n-ity  of  the  priesthood  of  Christ,  who 
(Ps.  ex.  4)  was  to  be  a  priest  after  the  order 
of  Melehizedek,  to  the  Levitical  priesthood 
hererepreseutedby  Levi's  ancestor,  Abraham. 
Melehizedek  is  greater  than  Abraham,  be- 
cause Abraham  receives  blessing  at  his  hand, 
and  pays  tithes  to  him  of  all  his  spoil.  It 
'  is  interesting  to  sec  the  view  taken  of  this 
incident  by  Kalisch,  a  Jew  :  "  Everything 
is  here  significant,  everything  typical:  it 
is  obvious  that  the  dim  background  is 
designed  to  veil  a  grand  religious  and  po- 


litical future i\rclchizedek  brought 

forth  to  Abraham  bread  and  wine,  not  to  re- 
fresh him  or  his  men,  for  Abraham  had, 
among  the  booty  of  the  enemies,  seized  their 
large  stores  of  provisions  also  (vv.  11,  24), 
but  to  perform  a  symbolical  ceremony,  in 
which  bread  and  wine  had  a  typical  mean- 
ing. For  bread  represents  the  ordinary  daily 
food,  the  necessities  of  ph3'sical  subsistence, 
whilst  the  wine  points  to  the  cheering  de- 
lights of  life  and  to  the  spiritual  cravings  of 
religion,  in  the  rites  of  which  it  formed  an 
important  object."  He  also  notices  that 
whereas  the  Canaanitish  king  served  only 
the  most  High  God,  but  Abram  the  same 
God  by  the  sublimcr  name  of  Jehovah,  the 
religious  enlightenment  of  the  king  of  Salcra 
was  but  a  ray  of  the  sun  of  Abraham's  faith. 
"  This  is  another  instance  of  the  extreme 
carefulness  of  the  Scriptures  in  the  applica- 
tion of  the  names  of  the  Deity  :  the  serpent 
was  not  allowed  to  profane  the  holy  name 
(iii.  1 — 5)  ;  Japheth,  though  blessed,  stood 
not  under  the  direct  protection  of  Jehovah 
(ix.  27) ;  and  Melehizedek,  tiiough  a  believer 
in  God,  had  not  entirely  understood  the  God 
of  the  Hebrews. 

On  the  blessing,  and  the  paying  of  tithes,  in 
their  deeper  significance,  sec  on  Hebrews,  as 
above.  21.]  Certainly  the  impression 

is  that  the  offer  of  the  spoils  by  the  king  of 
Sodom  takes  place  at  the  same  time  and  in 
the  presence  of  Melehizedek.  And  this  is 
confirmed  by  the  repetition  in  Abram's  mouth 
of  the  name  and  designation  of  God  used 
already  by  Melehizedek.  On  the  prefacing 
this  by  the  special  Divine  name,  see  above. 
The  king  of  Sodom  appears  moved  by  the 
liberality  of  Abram  to  a  like  generous  return. 
But  there  is  no  league  between  Abram  and 
Sodom,  nor  will  he  give  his  riches  to  the 
idohiters  about  him.  This  is  at  least  a  dif- 
ferent spirit  from  that  in  which  he  acquired 
his  riches  in  Egypt,  ch.  xii.  16.  I  lift 

up  my  hand,  i.  c.  I  swear :  sec  reff.     The 


70 


GENESIS. 


XV. 


^ 


y  2  Chron. 

xxi.  20.    Ps. 

xxxix.  13. 
z  Lev.  XX.  20. 

Jer,  TTTn-  30. 


lest  thou  slioiildest  say,  I  have  made  Abram  ricli :  -'^  Save 
only  tliat  wliicli  tlie  young  men  have  eaten,  and  the  por- 
tion of  the  men  which  went  with  me,  Aner,  Eshcol,  and 
Mamre ;  let  them  take  their  portion.  XY.  ^  After  these 
;^  ^, ,..  things  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  unto  Abram  in  a  vision, . 
saying,  Fear  not,  Abram :  I  am  thy  shield,  cnid  thy  ex- 
ceeding great  reward.  ^  And  Abram  said.  Lord  Jehovah, 
what  wilt  thou  give  me,  seeing  I  ^  go  ^  childless,  and  the 
steward  of  my  house  is  this  Eliezer  of  Damascus  ?  ^  And 
Abram  said.  Behold,  to  me  thou  hast  given  no  seed :  and, 
/^,w/-v/  lo>  one  belonging  to  my  house  is  mine  heir.     4  And,  be- 

^ir<-^  'aia.,  hold,  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  unto  him,  saying,  This^ 
azsam  vii.i2;  gball  uot  bc  thiuc  hcir ;   but  he  that  shall  ^  come  forth  out 

XVI.  11.  ' 

of  thine  own  bowels  shall  be  thine  heir.    ^  And  he  brought 

him  forth  abroad,  and  said.  Look  now  toward  heaven,  and 

tULj  tut  I      number  the  stars,  if  thou  be  able  to  number  them  :  and  he 

said  unto  him.  So  shall  thy  seed  be.     ^  And  he  believed  in 


words  do  not  appear  to  record  a  past  action, 
but  to  describe  a  present  one.  Abram  tbcn 
and  tbere  makes  oath  to  God.  That  I 

will  not  take  is  literally  If  I  take  :  tbe 
act  of  lifting  np  tbe  band  in  abjuration  im- 
plying the  calling  down  God's  anger  on  him- 
self if  he  did  that  which  he  abjured.  See 
reff.,  and  compare  1  Kings  six.  2,  and  like 
passages.  from  a  thread  to  a  shoe- 

latchet  (or  lace)]  Meaning,  any  of  even  the 
most  vile  and  trivial  things,  over  which,  and 
which  only,  the  expression  extends. 
24.]  Save  only  is  literally  Not  for  me:  only. 
.  .  .  Abram  claims,  for  himself,  nothing ; 
for  his  own  servants,  only  that  which  they 
had  eaten ;  for  his  allies,  their  fair  portion 
of  the  spoil. 

XV.  Promise  of  an  heir  to  Abram,  and 
solemn  covenant  of  Jehovah  tvith  him. 
1.]  Literally,  there  was  a  word  of  Jehovah 
to  Abram.  The  vision  was  not  one  in  sleep, 
as  is  evident  from  what  follows.  Apparently 
the  first  portion,  to  verse  9,  happens  during 
the  night  (ver.  5).  Then  the  obedience  to 
the  command  (ver.  9)  takes  place  during  the 
day,  and  the  night  again  supervenes  in  vv. 
12 — 17.  God  had  shewn  Himself  to  be 
Abram's  shield  in  Egypt  and  in  his  late  en- 
counter :  the  reward  of  which  He  speaks  is 
to  come,  and  to  it  Abram's  question  applies. 
It  is  not  quite  certain  whether  we  should 
keep   the  idea  that   God  was  his  reward : 


Kalisch  renders,  "  I  am  thy  shield  :  thy  re- 
heard will  be  very  great."  But  Keil  and 
Knobel  retain  the  text.  2.]  This  is  the 

first  time  that  Lord  Jehovah  occurs. 
I  die  (literally,  go,  depart :  see  reff.)  child- 
less (literally,  naked).  the  heir  is  lit. 
the  son  of  possession.  There  is  in  the 
original  a  play  upon  words :  the  heir  is  ben- 
meshek,  and  the  appellation  of  Eliezer  is 
Dam-mesek :  such  alliteration,  as  frequently, 
expressing  a  certain  degree  of  despondent 
feeling.  In  Isa.  xvii.  1,  Damascus  is  again 
introduced  in  an  alliteration ;  Masah  Dam- 
masek,  "the  bm-den  of  Damascus."  There 
is  some  dispute  over  the  name  and  designa- 
tion of  this  steward.  As  they  stand  in  the 
Hebrew  the  words  would  be  Damascus 
Eliezer.  Kalisch  is  inclined  to  think  that 
the  two  words  together  makes  his  name,  as 
Hadad-czer  (2  Sam.  viii.  3),  Chushan- 
risliatbaim  (Judg.  iii.  10),  &c. ;  and  so  the 
LXX.  and  Vulgate  render.  But  almost  all 
the  commentators,  however  they  get  at  the 
meaning  as  a  question  of  Hebrew,  believe 
tliat  Eliezer  of  Damascus  expresses  the 
sense.  Probably  he  was  a  servant  acquired 
at  that  city  during  Abram's  journeying. 
3.]  one  belonging  to  my  house  is  literally 
a  son  of  my  house,  that  expression  being 
evidently  equivalent  not  to  one  horn  in  my 
house  (that  his  own  son  would  be),  but  to 
one  attached  to,  a  defendant  of,  my  house. 


1—11. 


GENESIS. 


71 


Jehovah  ;  and  lie  counted  it  to  him  for  righteousness. 
7  And  he  said  unto  him,  I  am  Jkhovaii  that  brought  thee 
out  of  Ur  of  the  Chaldces,  to  give  thee  thi.s  hind  to  inherit 
it.  ^  And  he  said,^Lord  Jehovah,  whereby  shall  I  know 
that  I  shall  inherit  it  ?  ^  And  he  said  unto  him.  Take  for 
me  an  heifer  of  three  years  old,  and  a  she-goat  of  three 
years  old,  and  a  ram  of  three  years  old,  and  a  turtle- 
dove, and  a  young  pigeon.  ^^  And  he  took  for  IIim 
all  these,  and  divided  them  in  the  midst,  and  laid  each 
piece  one  against  another :  but  the  birds  divided  he  not. 
^1  And  the  birds  of  prey  came  down  upon  the  carcases,  but 


/L/r^/ 


^/ 


o1 


6.]  Keil  remarks,  ".In  the  strictly 
maintained  objective  character  of  the  narra- 
tives of  Genesis,  in  accordance  with  which 
simple  facts  without  insertion  of  any  subjective 
judgment  are  told,  this  remark  seems  so 
surprising  that  the  question  presses  itself  on 
us,  whence  Moses  has  derived  it.  How 
did  Abram  manifest  his  belief  in  Jehovah  ? 
And  how  did  Jehovah  reckon  it  to  him  as 
righteousness  ?  The  answer  to  both  questions 
must  not  be  sought  from  the  N.  T.,  but  miist 
be  given  or  implied  in  the  context.  What 
return,  then,  did  Abram  make  to  the  promise, 
or  what  did  he  do  on  its  reception .'  When 
God  for  the  confirmation  of  the  same  in  ver. 
7  pledged  Himself  to  him  as  Jeiiovaii,  who 
brought  him  out  of  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  to 
give  him  this  land  in  possession,  Abram  re- 
plied, '  Lord,  how  shall  I  know  that  I  shall 
iuherit  it .' '  And  then  God  commanded  him, 
'Take  one,'  &c.  And  Abram  took  the 
animals  as  prescribed  and  did  as  God  com- 
manded him.  By  this  prompt  fulfilment  of 
that  which  God  ordered  him  to  do,  Abram 
shewed,  as  matter  of  fact,  that  he  believed 
Jehovah  :  and  that  which  God  did  with  the 
animals  which  Abram  sacrificed  was  the 
practical  declaration  on  Jehovah's  side  that 
He  reckoned  Abram's  faith  as  righteousness. 
The  signification  of  the  divine  act  is  finally 
given  in  ver.  18  :  'In  the  same  day  Jehovah 
made  a  covenant  with  Abram.'  Accordingly, 
He  shewed  that  he  reckoned  Abram's  faith 
for  righteousness,  in  that  He  made  a  covenant 
with  him,  and  took  Abram  as  a  party  into 
covenant  witli  Himself."  On  the  N.T.  sig- 
nificance of  this  verse,  see  notes,  Eom.  iv.  3. 
7.]  We  have  before  referred  to  this 
verse  to  shew  that  the  command  of  God  to 
Abram  first  came  when  he  was  at  Ur,  not 


afterwards  at  Haran.  8.]  The  same 

request  may  be  made  with  two  different 
minds.  Zacharias  (Luke  i.  18)  asked  this 
in  unbelief;  the  Blessed  Virgin  (Luke  i.  34), 
as  Abram  here,  in  faith,  humbly  yearning 
for  further  assurance.  God,  who  sees  the 
heart,    answers  iiccordingly.  9.]  The 

animals  prescribed  are  of  the  three  kinds 
afterwards  by  the  law  allowed  for  sacrifice  : 
and  the  birds  are  those  repeatedly  mentioned 
in  the  law  as  to  be  brought  for  offerings. 
The  animals  were  to  be  each  three  years  old, 
denoting,  says  Kalisch,  the  perfection  of 
their  species.  But  we  Christians  cannot 
shut  our  eyes  to  a  deeper  symbolism  in  this 
sacred  number,  especially  when  we  remember 
that  this  part  of  the  covenant  symbolism  was 
to  be  "  for  ME,"  i.  c.  to  signify  God's  part 
of  it  (see  also  ver.  10).  The  universal 
Eastern  custom  was  to  divide  the  sacrifices, 
as  Abram  did,  and  both  the  contracting 
parties  passed  between  the  halves.  Here  one 
alone  of  the  parties,  Jehovah,  thus  passed. 
Abram's  part  of  the  covenant  was  the  obedi- 
ence of  faith  :  and  God  on  account  of  this  en- 
tered, He,  the  righteous  God,  into  bond  with 
Abram,  thus  made  a  contracting  party  with 
God,  and  therefore  accounted  righteous. 
See  above.  10.]    Abram  appears  to 

have  done  this  not  by  special  command,  but 
as  being  aware  what  purpose  the  killing  of 
these  animals  was  to  serve,  viz.  that  of 
ratifying  a  covenant.  Abram  took  these,  as 
commanded,  for  Gon.  So  Kalisch.  On  the 
practice  of  cutting  the  sacrificed  animals  in 
two  and  passing  between  the  parts,  see  Jer. 
xxxiv.  18,  19  ;  Ps.  1.  5.  11.]  Abram 

drove  them  away  in  the  expectation  that  the 
sacrifice  was  about  to  serve  God's  purpose  ; 
another  act  of  faith.  12.]     The  great 


72 


GENESIS. 


XY. 


Abram  drove  them  away.    ^^  And  when  the  sun  was  going 

<i  eU^^  down,  sleep  fell  upon  Abram ;  and,  lo,  an  horror  of  great 

darkness  fell  upon  him.     ^^  And  he  said  unto   Abram, 

Know  of  a  surety  that  thy  seed  shall  be  a  stranger  in  a 

fii^c  Ul  land  not  their's ;  and  shall  serve  them,  and  they  shall 

afflict  them,  four  hundred  years  ;  i*  ^j^fj^  q[^q  ^]^a^  nation, 

whom  they  shall  serve,  will  I  judge :    and  afterward  shall 

/itJ^/  they  come  out  with  great  substance.     ^^  And  thou  shalt  go 

to  thy  fathers  in  peace  ;  thou  shalt  be  buried  in  a  good  old 

CU^I  age.     16  But  in  the  fourth  generation  they  shall  come 

<jV  hither  again :  for  the  iniquity  of  the  Amorite?  is  not  yet 

full.     17  And  it  came  to  pass,  .thaj,  when  the  sun  went 

Ti^^LJ  down,  and  it  was  thick  darkness,']behold  a  smoking  furnace, 

^fi^^l,!    tic^^l     ^^^  ^  burning  lamp  that  passed  between  those  pieces. 

1^  In  that  day  Jehovah  made  a  covenant  with  Abram, 

saying,  Unto  thy  seed  have  I  given  this  land,  from  the 

river  of  Egypt  unto  the  great  river,  the  river  Euphrates  : 


darkness  was,  as  Knobel  -well  explains,  to 
hide  the  working  of  the  Godhead  from 
mortal  eyes — and  the  horror  accompanied  it, 
because  of  the  presence  of  the  terrible  God. 
During  the  sleep  Abram  receives  the  pro- 
mise. 13.]  Literally,  Knowing  know : 
see  ch.  ii.  17.  400  years  is  the  manner  of 
speech  of  prophecy,  taking  the  greater  and 
round  numbers.  It  really  was  430 :  see  Exod. 
xii.  40.  The  devices  resorted  to  in  order 
to  produce  exact  agreement  are  beneath 
notice.  15.J  See  the  fulfilment  of  this 
in  ch.  XXV.  8.  "  The  death  of  Abraham  is 
predicted  in  one  of  those  remarkable  phrases 
which  seem  to  prove  that  the  Hebrews  were 
not  unacquainted  with  the  doctrine  of  im- 
mortality. Here  the  return  of  the  soul  to 
the  eternal  abode  of  the  fathers  is,  with  some 
distinctness,  separated  from  the  interment  of 
the  body  :  that  both  cannot  be  identical  is 
evident ;  for  whilst  Abraham  was  entombed 
in  Canaan,  all  his  forefathers  died  and  were 
buried  in  Mesopotamia ;  and  the  reunion  of 
the  spirits  is  in  some  passages  expressed 
still  more  clearly  by  the  term  being  '  gathered 
to  the  fathers  '  after  the  fact  of  the  death  it- 
self had  been  stated,  and  with  a  separate 
allusion  to  the  act  of  sepulture  (ch.  xxv.  8, 
9  ;  xlix.  29,  33  ;  Num.  xx.  24,  26 ;  xxxi. 
2 ;  Luke  xx.  3)."  Kalisch.  16.  the 
fourth  generation]  "Was  really  the  end  of  the 


fifth  century  (about  480  years).  So  that  the 
length  of  a  generation  as  here  reckoned 
must  be  understood  as  being  120  years,  the 
age  (according  to  one  interpretation  of  ch. 
vi.  3)  allotted  to  man  after  the  Flood.  Ou 
the  Amorites  as  a  general  name  for  the 
Canaanitish  tribes,  see  above,  ch.  xiv.  13. 
The  whole  of  their  tribes  are  frequently  de- 
scribed as  being  sunk  in  grossest  immoralities. 
See  Levit.  xviii.  24 ;  xx.  23 ;  Deut.  ix.  4 ; 
xviii.    12,    al.  17.]    This   fire   was  a 

symbol  of  the  presence  of  Jehovah.  See 
Exod.  iii.  2  ;  xiii.  21.  18,  the  river  of 

Egypt]  Is  variously  supposed  to  mean  the  'Nile 
(Keil,  Delitzseh,  Kalisch,  Mr.  Stuart  Poole 
in  Biblical  Diet,  and  many  others,  the  ob- 
jection being  that  the  borders  of  the  Land  of 
Promise  was  never  even  supposed  to  extend 
thus  far),  or  the  present  Wady  al  Arish, 
south  of  Philistia  (the  objection  being  that 
the  name  given  to  this  small  river,  if  indeed 
even  that  can  be  assumed  as  certain,  is  the 
Naha^  Mizraim,  the  brook  of  Egypt,  not  as 
here  the  Nahar  Jlizraim,  the  river  of  Egypt). 
If  the  A'ile  be  meant,  then  Abraham's  seed 
have  never  permanently  reached  either  of 
the  divinely-appointed  boundaries  of  their 
inheritance:  even  ifat  one  time  in  Solomon's 
day,  2  Chron.  ix.  26,  it  could  be  said. 
19—21.  The  Kenites]  Were  a  people 
curiously    connected    with    Israel  in  after 


12— XYI.  4. 


GENESIS. 


19  The  ^  Kenites,  ajad  the  Kenizzitejs,  and  the  Kadmonites, 

20  and  the  HittiteS,  and  the  PerizziteA,  and  the  Rcphaims, 

21  and  the  Amoritcs,  and  the  Canaanitc^,  and  tha-  Girgas- 
hites,  and  the  Jebusite^.  XVI.  i  Now  Sarai  Ahram's 
wife  bare  him  no  children :  and  she  had  an  handmaid,  an 
Egj'ptian,  whose  name  icas  Ilagar,  2  ^Ynd  Sarai  said  unto 
Abram,  Behold  now,  Jehovah  hath  restrained  mc  from 
bearing  :  I  pray  thee,  go  in  unto  my  maid ;  it  may  be  that 
I  may  obtain  children  by  her.  And  Abram  hearkened  to 
the  voice  of  Sarai.    ^  And  Sarai  Abram's  wife  took  Ilagar 

'^^^maid  the  Egj^ptian,  after  Abram  had  dwelt  ten  years 
in  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  gave  her  to  her  husbnnd  Abram 
to  be  his  wife.  *  ^  And  he  went  in  unto  Hagar,  and  she 
conceived :  and  when  she  saw  that  she  had  conceived,  her 


b  Num.  xxiv. 
21,22.    Judg. 
i.  IB;  iv.  11. 
1  Sam.  XV.  6; 
xxvii.  10  ; 
XXX.  29.     1 
Cbron.  ii.  55. 


rJ  rj  <ff 

fj  a  "y 


'/  V 


Or^U. 


ji^^M/  y 


times:  sec  rcff.  and  notes  there.    Their  origin 
is  entirely  obscure.  The  Kenizzites, 

or  Kenezites,  are  mentioned  again  Kum. 
xxxii.  12  ;  Josh.  xiv.  6,  14,  where  we 
read  that  Jephunneh,  the  father  of  Caleb, 
■was  a  Kenezite.  Tiiere  is  this  difficulty  re- 
specting them.  If  these  Kenizzites  are  the 
descendants  of  Kenaz  (ch.  xxxvi.  11),  the 
mention  of  them  here  must  be  an  after  in- 
sertion ;  if  they  are  distinct  from  that  tribe, 
then  we  must  regard  them  as  a  people  who 
are  otherwise  utterly  unknown  to  us,  and  who 
had  became  extinct  in  the  time  of  Moses  and 
Jo.shua.  The  Kadmonites  are  otherwise 
unknown,  and  mentioned  here  only.  The 
name  indicates  an  Eastern  location.  The 
enumeration  here  is  remarkable  both  for 
what  it  inserts  and  for  what  it  omits.  "We 
have  no  mention  of  the  Hiviies,  who  are  in 
no  other  place  absent  from  the  complete 
enumeration  of  the  Canaanitish  nations.  The 
number  of  10  may  be  hei-e  used  to  signify 
the  completeness  of  the  gift.  The  number 
specified  is  generally  5,  6,  or  7.  See  Exod. 
iii.  8,  17  ;  xiii.  5 ;  xxiii.  23,  28  ;  xxxiii.  2  ; 
xxxiv.  11;  Deut.  vii.  1  ;  xx.  17;  Josh.  iii. 
10  ;  ix.  1  ;  xxiv.  11,  (tc.  On  the  Hittites, 
see  on  ch.  x.  15  ;  Perizzites,  xiii.  7  ;  Ee- 
phaims,  xiv.  5  ;  Amorites,  x.  IG,  and  on 
ver.  IG;  Girgashites,  x.  16;  Jebusites,  ib. 
XVI.  1—16.]  The  birth  of  Ishmael.  It  is 
natural  that  Sarai  should  iiave  had  a  female 
slave  from  Egypt.  By  ch.  xii.  16  we  learn 
that  Abram  was  enriched  with  "  maid  serv- 
ants." The  name  Hagar  (flight)  belongs 
to  a  tribe  mentioned  1  Clu-on.  v.  10,  19,  20  ; 


xxvii.  31  ;  Ps.  [Ixxxiii.  68  ;  but  (see  there) 
their  connexion  with  Ilagar  is  doubtful. 
2.]  This  practice  is  stated  to  he  not 
uncommon  in  the  East.  It  is  the  less  to  be 
wondered  at  in  this  case,  seeing  that  Sarai 
had  nowhere  as  yet  been  mentioned  as  the 
future  mother  of  the  seed  of  promise,  and 
she  might  imagine  that  she  was  the  obbtacle 
in  the  way  of  its  fultilment.  That  the  pro- 
posal comes  from  her  and  not  from  Abram, 
must  be  regarded  as  a  token  of  the  simplicity 
of  his  faith.  He  was  willing  to  leave  to  God 
the  method  of  fulfilling  Ilis  promise ;  where- 
as Sarai,  not  seeing  a  way  to  it,  becomes 
impatient,  and  has  recourse  to  a  doubtful 
expedient.  obtain  children  is  literally, 

be  built ;  the  pillars  of  the  house  being  the 
offspring.  See  this  figure  used  ch.  xxx.  3 ; 
Exod.  i.  21 ;  Deut.  xxv.  9  ;  2  Sam.  vii.  11, 
27 ;  1  KingSjXi.  38.  Sarai  regards  Hagar's 
possible  ollspring  as  hers,  not  foreseeing  how 
the  matter  would  turn  out.  3.]  his  wife 

must  of  course  be  understood  in  the  inferior 
sense  of  that  relation.  There  is  in  the  very 
terms  of  this  verse,  Sarai  Abram's  wife,  and 
gave  her  to  her  husband  Abram  to  be  his 
wife,  an  implied  disapprobation  of  the  course 
taken.  Knobel  regards  this  whole  narrative 
as  containing  portions  of  the  original  record 
worked  in  by  the  Jchovist,  and  sees  in  the 
careful  specification  of  date  here,  and  in  the 
expression  the  land  of  Canaan,  the  original 
hand  of  the  Elohist.  4.]    The  many 

touches  of  genuine  nature  in  this  narrative 
have  compelled  even  modern  unbelief  to 
admit  that  it  is  no  myth,  but  a  record  of 


74 


GENESIS. 


XVI. 


A^t.'^ct 


■/ 


7i^ 


i 


j/  /tv- 


mistress  was  despised  in  her  eyes.  ^  And  Sarai  said  unto 
Abram,  My  wrong  he  upon  thee :  I  liave  given  my  maid 
into  thy  bosom ;  and  when  she  saw  that  she  had  conceived, 
I  was  despised  in  her  eyes  :  Jehovah  judge  between  me 
and  thee.  ^  But  Abram  said  unto  Sarai,  Behold,  thy  maid 
«.s  in  thy  hand ;  do  to  her  that  which  is  good  in  thine  eyes. 
And  when  Sarai  dealt  hardly  with  her,^she  fled  from  her 
face.  7  ^  And  an  angel  of  Jehovah  found  her  by  a  foun- 
tain of  water  in  the  wilderness,  by  the  fountain  in  the  way 
to  Shur.  ^  And  he  said,  Hagar,  Sarai's  niaid,  whence 
camest  thou  ?  and  whither  wilt  thou  go  ?  And  she  said,  I 
flee  from  the  face  of  my  mistress  Sarai.  ^  And  the  angel 
of  Jehovah  said  unto  her,  Beturn  to  thy  mistress,  and 
submit  thyself  under  her  hands.  ^^  And  the  angel  of  Je- 
hovah said  unto  her,  I  will  multiply  thy  seed  exceedingly, 
that  it  shall  not  be  numbered  for  multitude.  ^^  And  the 
angel  of  Jehovah  said  unto  her,  Behold,  thou  art  with 
child,  and  shalt  bear  a  son,  and  shalt  call  his  name  Ish- 


real  life.     See  a  parallel  in  Hannah's  case, 
1  Sam.  i.  6.  5.]  In  saying,  My  wrong 

be  (or,  is)  upon  thee,  Sarai,  now  perceiving 
the  consequence  that  she  is  despised,  reminds 
her  husband  that  he  too  is  involved  in  this 
contumely,  and  in  fact  in  the  latter  part  of 
the  verse  passionately  attempts  to  cast  th^ 
chief  blame  on  him  :  "  I  made  the  offer  to 
thee,  but  the  deed  vras  thine ;  let  God  ap- 
portion the  blame  between  us."  6.] 
Abram  assures  her  that  Hagar  has  entered 
into  no  new  and  rival  relation,  but  is  still  in 
her  own  power,  still  thy  maid.  On  this 
Sarai  maltreated  her  (it  is  the  same  word 
as  ^'■afflict,"  ch.  xv.  13,  xxxi.  50  ;  and  per- 
haps implies  hard  bondage,  as  in  those  places), 
and  she  fled.  7.]  This  is  the  first  men- 
tion of  an  angel  of  Jehovah.  The  Hebrew 
word  [Malcach)  signifies  one  sent,  an  am- 
bassador or  emissary.  In  several  places  it 
appears  that  this  emissary  of  Jehovah  is 
none  other  than  an  appearance,  carrying  the 
power  of  the  Divine  presence.  As  none  can 
see  Jehovah  Himself,  every  such  appearance 
to  the  eye,  or  manifestation  to  the  ear,  is  in 
fact  a  mission  fi-om  Himself.  As  Christians, 
we  have  a  further  inference  from  such  a  cir- 
cumstance. "We  know  Who  it  is  that  is  the 
shining  out  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the 
expressed  stamp  of  His  Deity  (Heb.  i.  3), 


even  the  Divine  Word,  who  is  the  Declaration 
of  the  Father  to  man  (John  i.  18;  xiv.  9). 
But  the  more  we  feel  this  in  our  hearts,  the 
more  lightly  and  reverently  should  such 
thoughts  be  touched.  It  has  not  pleased  God 
positively  to  declare  to  us  that  it  was  the  Divine 
Son  who  was  present  in  these  Divine  appear- 
ances, and  therefore  we  should  not  on  our  parts 
positively  declare,  nor  build  systems  upon  it. 
Shur  is  a  place,  not  now  known,  on  the 
eastern  boundaries  of  Egypt  (ch.  xxv.  18 ; 
Esod.  XV.  22;  1  Sam.  xv.  7;  xxvii.  8). 
See  further  on  ver.  14  and  ch.  xx.  1. 
8.]  The  address  Sarai's  maid  both  serves  to 
remind  her  of  her  position  and  duty,  and  is 
in  consonance  with  the  formal  character  of 
the  narrative  in  which  such  relations  are 
again  and  again  expressed  (ver.  3). 
9.]  There  is  no  difference  between  the  He- 
brew expression  for  the  angel  here  and  an 
angel  above  :  in  both  places  the  noun  is 
without  the  definite  article.  I  have  in- 
serted it  at  this  second  mention  in  con- 
formity with  our  English  usage.  10.  J 
lit.  multiplying  I  will  multiply.  On  the 
angel  using  the  first  person,  as  Jehovah,  see 
above,  and  compare  Exod.  iii.  2,  and  notes. 
11.]  Ishmael,  or  God  heareth,  or  shall 
hear,  in  the  sense  of  taking  note  of,  so  as  to 
act  thereupon.     Compare  the  similar  use  of 


A.. 


5— XYII.  1. 


GENESIS. 


75 


mael ;  because  Jehovah  hatli  heard  tty  affliction.     ^^  ^j^^ 

he  will  be  a  wild  ass  of  a  man;  his  hand  mil  he  against       w'^'aV^  a^^v^/** 

every  man,  and  every  man's  hand  against  him ;  and  he 

shall  dwell  in  the  presence  of  all  his  brethren.     ^-^  And 

she  called  the  name  of  Jehovah  that  spake  unto  her,  Thou 

art  the  God  of  my  seeing  :  for  she  said,  Do  I  here  also  see,>/-r>-»^i.    ^*v^^  /  »y 

after  my  seeing  ?     ^^  Wherefore  the  well  was  called  Beer-  »^<.*'v/ 

lahai-roi ;    behold,    it   is   between     Kadesh    and    Bered. 

^^  51  And  Hagar  bare  Abram  a  son :  and  Abram  called  his 

son's  name,  Avhich  Ilagar  bare,  Ishmael.    ^*^  And  Abram  icas 

fourscore  and  six  years  old,  when  Hagar  bare  Ishmael  to 

Abram.     XVII.  ^  And  when  Abram  was  ninety  years  old 

and  nine,  Jehovah  appeared  to  Abram,  and  said  unto 


hear  in  Isa.  xxxvii.  4,  17.  12.]  The  rov- 

ing fierceness  of  the  wild  ass  of  the  desert  is 
described  Job  vi.  5 ;  xxiv.  5  ;  xxxix.  5,  8. 
See  also  Ps.  civ.  11  ;  Isa.  xxxii.  14.  The 
rendering  in  the  text  is  that  of  Kalisch. 
The  A.  v.,  by  omitting  the  central  word  in 
the  sentence,  loses  altogether  the  point  of 
the  prophecy.  "The  character  of  the  Ishraael- 
ites,  or  the  Bedonins,  covdd  not  be  described 
more  aptly  or  more  powerfully.  They  have 
preserved  it  almost  unaltered  during  three 
or  four  thousand  years.  .  .  .  They  have 
defied  the  softening  influence  of  civiliza- 
tion, and  mocked  the  attacks  of  the  invader. 
Ungovernable  and  roaming,  obeying  no  law 
but  their  spirit  of  adventure,  regarding  all 
mankind  as  their  enemies,  whom  they  must 
either  attack  with  their  spears  or  elude  with 
their  faithful  steeds,  .  .  .  the  Bedouins  are 
the  outlaws  among  the  nations.  ...  'In 
the  desert,  everybody  is  everybody's  enemy,' 
is  their  proverbial  saying."  Kalisch. 
in  the  presence  of]  Is  interpreted  by  Dc- 
litzsch  as  rather  meaning  to  the  east  of,  but 
Kalisch,  and  the  majority  of  commentators, 
render  as  in  text,  and  understand  it  as  de- 
scribing "the  wide  and  almost  indefinite 
extent  of  territories  through  which  the 
Bedouins  roam,  so  that  they  seem  to  be 
everyAvhere  before  the  eyes  of  their  brethren." 
Certainly,  as  Kalisch  observes,  their  limit 
being  said,  in  ch.  xxv.  18,  "unto  Shur,  that 
is  before  Egypt,"  they  did  not  dwell  only  to 
the  east  of  their  brethren.  13.]  "  She 

exclaimed,  with  mingled  feelings  of  exulta- 
tion and  submission,  '  Thou  art  the  God  of 
seeing ; '  for  she  said,  '  Do  I  even  still  see 


after  seeing  ? '  that  is,  Thou  art  to  me  a 
God  whom  I  saw  unpunished  :  for  although 
I  saw  Thee  I  still  live  and  see  the  light  of 
day."  Kalisch.  Compare  ch.  xxxii.  30 ; 
Exod.  xxxiii.  20  ;  Deut.  v.  24  ;  Judg.  vi.  22, 
23;  xiii.  22;  Isa.  vi.  5.  Do  I  still  see, 
i.  e.  live,  as  explained  in  the  next  verse, 
14.  Beer-lahai-roi]  Literally,  '^  the  fountain 
for  the  life  of  beholding."  Kalisch.  He 
renders  it,  the  wi'll  of  seeing  God  and  living. 
It  is  stated  to  be  between  Kadesh,  i.  e.  Ka- 
deshbarnea  (see  ch.  xiv.  7 ;  also  xxiv.  C2 ; 
xxv.  11),  and  Bered.  This  latter  has  not 
been  satisfactorily  made  out.  Mr.  Grove 
{Biblical  Diet.)  thinks  it  to  be  El-Chalasah 
the  ancient  Elusa,  12  m.  S.  of  Beershcba. 
Mr.  Rowlands  claims  to  have  discovered  this 
well  about  12  m.  from  Kadesh,  on  the  road 
to  Jebcl-es-Serr  (Shiu-  .') — at  a  place  still 
called  by  the  Arabs  Moilahi  Hadjar,  Moi 
(water)  being  equivalent  to  Beer  (well). 
See  Eev.  G.  Williams,  Hohj  City,  i.  p.  4Go. 
15,  16.]  The  fulfilment  of  the  jjromise 
to  Ilagar.  15-]  AVe  can  surely  find  no 

ground  here  for  asserting  a  discrepancy  from 
vcr.  1 1 .  Abram  obeys  the  order  there  given 
to  Hagar. 

XVII.  1 — 25.]  The  covenant  sealed  by  a 
7iew  name  given  to  Abram,  and  by  circum- 
cision. The  narrative  is  considered  by 
Knobel  to  belong  throughout,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  the  opening  words,  to  the  original 
Elohistic  document,  and  to  be  unchanged. 
Abram  had  waited  fourteen  years  at  least  for 
the  performance  of  the  promise,  and  no  sign 
of  it  had  appeared.  This  appearance  of  God 
denoted  the    fulness   of  the   time  for  the 


76 


GENESIS. 


XVII. 


, Shaddai ; 

!   Ch.  XXXV. 


him,  I  am  "  God  Almiglity  ;  walk  before  me,  and  be  thou 
perfect.  2  XxiA.  I  will  make  my  covenant  between  me  and 
tbee,  and  will  multiply  thee  exceedingly.  ^  And  Abram 
fell  on  his  face :  and  God  talked  with  him,  saying,  ^  As 
for  me,  behold,  my  covenant  is  with  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
be  a  father  of  many  nations.  ^  Neither  shall  thy  name 
any  more  be  called  Abram,  but  thy  name  shall  be  Abra- 
ham ;  for  a  father   of  many  nations  have  I  made  thee. 

6  And  I  will  make  thee  exceeding  fruitful,  and  I  will 
make  nations  of  thee,  and  kings  shall  come  out  of  thee. 

7  And  I  will  establish  my  covenant  between  me  and  thee 
and  thy  seed  after  thee  in  their  generations  for  an  ever- 
lasting covenant,  to  be  a  God  imto  thee,  and  to  thy  seed 
after  thee.  ^  And  I  will  give  unto  thee,  and  to  th}^  seed 
after  thee,  the  land  wherein  thou  art  a  stranger,  all 
the  land  of  Canaan,  for  an  everlasting  possession  ;  and 
I  will  be  their  God.     ^  51  And  God  said  unto  Abraham, 


covenant  promise  to  be  put  in  fulfilment. 
God  here  calls  Himself  El  Shaddai,  God 
All-mighty,  able  to  perform  that  which  He 
had  promised.  I  reserve  the  full  explanation 
of  this  name  for  the  remarkable  place,  Exod. 
vi.  2,  3.  There  is  an  appropriateness  in  its 
special  revelation  here,  seeing  that  in  order 
for  God's  promise  to  be  performed  the  coiu-sc 
of  nature  itself  would  have  to  be  changed. 
"  Is  anything  too  hard  for  Jehovah  ?  "  was 
an  appeal  made  by  God  Himself  during 
the  course  of  the  narrative  (ch.  xviii.  14). 
Abram's  part  of  the  covenant  was  to 
walk  before,  in  the  presence  of,  God  in 
the  obedience  of  faith.  See  ch.  vi.  9 ; 
Micah  vi.  8 ;  IMatt.  v.  48 ;  James  iii.  2. 
2.]  Knobel  thinks  that  this  was  the 
only  narrative  of  the  making  the  covenant 
contained  in  the  primeval  document,  the 
others  having  been  afterwards  added  by  the 
Jehovist.  That  would  account  for  the  ap- 
parently first  introduction  here  of  the  pro- 
mise of  multiplying  Abram  exceedingly, 
which  had  been  already  given  both  generally, 
ch.  xii.  2,  and  specially,  ch.  xv.  5,  in  the 
Jehovist  supplement.  Abram,  overcome 
with  the  Divine  majesty  and  grace,  prostrated 
Jiimself.     See  Levit.  ix.  24  ;  Ruth  ii.  10. 

5.]  Abraham  Ta.eans  father  of  a  multi- 
tude, the  latter  part  of  the  name  signifying 
"  the  noise  and  tumult  characteristic  of  agi- 


tated crowds."  Kalisch.  Henceforth  both 
narrators  use  no  other  name  for  him  than 
Abraham.  8.]    The    land    wherein 

thou  art  a  stranger  is  literally,  the  land  of 
thi/  sojournings  or  icanderings.  9 — 14.] 

The  ordinance  of  circumcision.  In  apply- 
ing what  we  know  from  history  to  this 
narrative,  we  must  bear  in  mind  what  was 
before  said  (ch.  ix.)  on  the  covenant  character 
there  given  to  the  rainbow.  It  is  as  futile 
to  attempt  in  the  face  of  historical  and  eth- 
nical facts  to  deny  that  circumcision  existed 
before  Abraham  received  it  as  the  sign  of 
God's  covenant,  as  it  is  to  deny  in  the  face 
of  physical  facts  that  the  rainbow  existed 
before  Noah  received  it  as  the  sign  of  God's 
covenant.  Keither  our  Lord's  saying  that 
it  was  of  the  Fathers  as  distinguished  from 
Moses  (John  vii.  22),  nor  Stephen's,  that 
God  gave  Abraham  the  covenant  of  circum- 
cision, is  the  least  to  the  purpose.  "When- 
ever and  among  whomsoever  the  practice 
first  originated,  Jewish  circumcision  was  "of 
the  Fathers,"  and  the  coreHo«<o/circumcision 
was  given  by  God  to  Abraham.  The  prac- 
tice appears  to  have  been  at  first  begun  from 
sanitary  inotives  among  the  African  tribes. 
The  Egyptians  and  ^Ethiopians,  according 
to  Herodotus,  maintained  it :  "  it  is  in  use 
among  the  Kafir  nations  of  South  Africa, 
forming  a  considerable  portion  of  the  native 


2—14. 


GENESIS. 


77 


As  for  tliec,  thou  shalt  keep  my  covenant,  thou,  and 
thy  seed  after  thee  in  their  generations.  ^^  This  is  my 
covenant,  which  ye  shall  keep,  between  me  and  you 
and  thy  seed  after  thee ;  Every  man  child  among  you 
shall  bo  circumcised.  ^^  And  ye  shall  circumcise  the 
flesh  of  your  foreskin  ;  and  it  shall  be  a  token  of  the  cove- 
nant betwixt  me  and  you.  ^^  And  he  that  is  eight  days 
old  shall  be  circumcised  among  you,  every  man  child  in 
your  generations,  he  that  is  born  in  the  house,  or  bought 
with  money  of  any  stranger,  which  is  not  of  thy  seed. 
^^  He  that  is  born  in  thy  house,  and  he  that  is  bought 
with  thy  money,  must  needs  be  circumcised :  and  my 
covenant  shall  be  in  j^our  flesh  for  an  everlasting  covenant. 
1*  And  the  uncircumcised  man  child  whose  flesh  of  his 
foreskin  is  not  circmncised,  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from 


population  of  Africa  :  and  it  has  been  dis- 
covered in  many  southern  islands  of  the 
Indian  seas  and  the  Pacific  Ocean."  Kalisch, 
who  also  adds,  "  There  is  scarcely  a  doubt 
that  in  these  southern  countries  the  rite  of 
circumcision  was  introduced  from  a  physical 
cause.  It  was  not  only  a  matter  of  expedi- 
ency, but  in  some  cases  of  necessity.  ...  It 
prevents  painful  and  often  miserable  disease 
....  the  Christian  missionaries  who  ex- 
erted themselves  for  its  abolition  in  Abys- 
sinia were,  by  the  dangerous  physical  con- 
sequences, obliged  to  desist  from  their  plans." 
Abundant  testimony  of  the  same  kind  may  be 
found  in  Winer,  Reahcorterbuch,  art.  "Be- 
schneidung."  See  also  Mr.  T.  T.  Pei'ownc, 
Biblical  Diet.  I  may  remark  that  the  very 
manner  of  introduction  of  the  ordinance  here 
confirms  the  idea  that  it  is  not  now  heard  of 
for  the  first  time.  It  is  spoken  of  as  a 
practice  recognizable  on  a  slight  mention  ; 
to  be  adopted,  rather  than  instituted.  The 
idea,  upheld  by  Bp.  Wordsworth,  that  the 
Egyptians  learnt  it  from  Joseph,  in  the 
face  of  such  a  testimony  as  ch.  xliii.  32  to 
the  entire  distinctness  of  the  national  prac- 
tices, surely  needs  no  refutation.  By  the 
words  my  covenant  must,  of  course,  be  un- 
derstood the  sign  of  my  covenant  (ver.  11). 
Circumcision  was  not  the  covenant  itself,  but 
the  seal  of  the  covenant.  See  the  similar 
expression.  Acts  vii.  8.  On  the  nature  of  the 
sign,  see  some  admirable  remarks  of  Delitzsch 
in  loc.  12.]  The  Arab  descendants  of 


Abraham  observed  another  rule  :  see  on  ver. 
25.  Compare  Levit.  xii.  3  ;  Gen.  xxi.  4 ; 
Luke  i.  5,  9 ;  ii.  21 ;  Phil.  iii.  5.  14.] 

This  has  been  sometimes  mistaken  to  mean 
that  by  some  special  intervention  God  would 
punish  such  a  person.  But  most  commenta- 
tors hold,  as  Kalisch — "  We  believe  the  true 
sense  of  the  phrase  to  be  that  the  individual 
who  transgresses  the  condition  or  sign  of  the 
covenant  thereby  resigns  his  connexion  with 
the  Hebrew  community  and  ceases  to  belong 
to  it."  So,  of  modern  commentators,  Knobel, 
Murphy,  &c.  On  the  other  side  are  Kcil, 
Bp.  Wordsworth,  &c.  If  wc  examine  usage, 
wo  shall  find  it  .slightly  in  favour  of  the 
former  view.  In  Exod.  xxxi.  14,  15,  death 
is  prescribed  as  the  manner  of  cutting  off 
from  among  the  people  the  Sabbath-breaker  : 
see  also  xxxv.  2.  In  Levit.  xvii.  4,  cuttitig 
ojf  from  among  the  people  is  the  penalty  of 
killing  a  clean  beast  and  not  bringing  it  as 
an  offering  ;  but  in  xxiv.  17,  "lie  that 
killeth  any  man  shall  surely  be  /;?<<  to 
death."  (See  also  Exod.  xxi.  12;  Num. 
xxxv.  31.)  In  Levit.  xviii.  29  cutting 
off  is  the  punishment  for  unnatural  crime  ; 
in  Exod.  xxii.  19,  death.  So  that  it  would 
appear  as  if  cutting  off  generally,  but 
not  always,  implied  death  at  man's  hand. 
But  no  inference  is  justified  that  judg- 
ment at  God's  hand  should  follow  in 
cases  where  it  is  threatened.  The  case  in 
Exod.  iv.  24  (see  there)  seems  to  be  ex- 
ceptional, and  anyhow  cannot  apply  here, 


78 


GENESIS. 


XVII. 


his  people ;  lie  hatli  broken  my  covenant.  ^^  ^  And 
Elohim  said  unto  Abraham,  As  for  Sarai  tliy  wife,  thou 
sbalt  not  call  her  name  Sarai,  but  Sarah  ahaU  her  name  he. 
1^  And  I  will  bless  her,  and  give  thee  a  son  also  of  her  : 
yea,  I  will  bless  her,  and  she  shall  be  a  mother  of  nations  ; 
kings  of  people  shall  be  of  her.  ^^  Then  Abraham  fell  upon 
his  face,  and  laughed,  and  said  in  his  heart.  Shall  a  child 
be  born  unto  him  that  is  an  hundred  years  old  ?  and  shall 
Sarah,  that  is  ninety  years  old,  bear  ?  ^^  And  Abraham 
said  unto  Elohim,  0  that  Ishmael  might  live  before 
thee  !  ^^  And  Elohim  said,  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  bear  thee 
a  son  indeed ;  and  thou  shalt  call  his  name  Isaac :  and  I 
will  establish  my  covenant  with  him  for  an  everlasting 
covenant,  and  with  his  seed  after  him.  20  ^^l^  ^s  for 
Ishmael,  I  have  heard  thee  :  Behold,  I  have  blessed  him. 


■where  it  is  the  circumcised  person  and  not 
the  parent  who  is  to  be  "  cut  off."  15.] 

Sarai's  name  also  is  changed,  to  testify  to 
her  part  in  the  covenant.  It  is  acknow- 
ledged on  all  hands  that  Sarah  means  a 
princess  :  but  as  to  Sakai,  Hebraists  are 
far  from  being  agreed.  Gesenius  and 
Ewald  interpret  it  "  conte7itious,"  which 
seems  imlikely  in  itself;  Kalisch,  com- 
bating or  contending,  which  is  not  far 
off  the  other,  though  differently  under- 
stood, viz.  as  "  contending  with  diffi- 
culties :  "  and  Delitzsch  remarks  well  on 
this,  that  the  name  of  conflict,  Sarai,  is 
changed  into  the  name  of  triumph,  Sarah. 
Others  again  (as  Kcil)  suppose  Sarai  to  sig- 
nify princelike  (Fiirstliche),  and  Sarah, 
princess  (Fiirstinn) ;  others,  that  Sarai 
means  my  princess,  Sarah,  princess,  abso- 
lutely. 17.]  Abraham's  feeling  is  one 
mingled  of  reverence  and  incrcdulousness. 
On  this  occasion  he  hardly  justified  the  high 
praise  of  Eom.  iv.  19  ;  on  that  other  occa- 
sion, "the  deadness  of  Sarah's  womb"  was 
hardly  in  his  view.  So  that  the  praise 
must  be  taken  as  applied  to  his  whole  con- 
duct, and  especially  his  obedience  in  this 
case,  when  assured  by  God,  to  the  order  im- 
posed on  him  of  adopting  the  sign  of  the 
covenant.  The  laugh  was  not  one  of  "joy- 
ful astonishment,"  as  the  words,  of  the 
question,  and  the  subsequent  wish  regard- 
ing Ishmael,  plainly  shew.  Nor  can  such 
an  interpretation  derive  support  from  our 


Lord's  words  in  John  viii.  56 :  see  note 
there.  I  may  repeat  the  observation  that 
the  words  of  this  verse  are  a  decisive  censure 
to  that  lame  chronological  compi'omise  (see 
on  ch.  xi.)  which  makes  Abraham  him- 
self born  when  his  father  Terah  was  130. 
18.]  This  wish  has  been  explained 
away  by  some  commentators,  as  if  Abraham 
had  meant,  0  that  Ishmael,  in  addition  to 
the  promised  seed,  might  live  and  prosper 
before  Thee  !  It  really  is  astonishing  how 
such  a  departure  from  the  obvious  spirit  of 
the  words  both  of  Abraham  and  of  God  can 
approve  itself  to  any  mind.  But  the  desire 
to  find  no  flaw  in  Abraham's  failh,  has 
fairly  blinded  our  expositors.  It  is  hardly 
necessary  to  state  that  Abraham's  wish  is 
uttered  in  the  half-inci'edulous  spirit  of  his 
inward  questioning.  He  yearns  for  the  ac- 
ceptance of  his  existing  son  as  the  heir  of 
the  promise  :  and  to  this  (see  below)  is  the 
Divine  answer  directed.  19.]  God  responds 
first  to  his  inward  questioning.  That  which 
thou  hast  doubted  shall  indeed  come  to 
pass  :  and  the  son  which  shall  be  born  shall 
be  named  after  this  thy  laughter,  which  was 
the  expression  of  thy  doubt.  For  the  name 
Isaac  signifies  "  laughter."  Human  weak- 
ness should,  by  God's  abounding  grace,  be 
turned  into  exultation  at  His  mercy.  This, 
and  no  other,  should  be  the  son  of  the 
covenant.  20.]  Thy  wish  for  Ishmael 

has   been  heard.     Not  indeed  in  the  full 
sense,  but  in  the  sense  of  his  being  blessed 


1  J— XVIII.  2.  GENESIS.  79 

and  will  make  him  fruitful,  and  will  multiply  him  exceed- 
ingly ;  twelve  princes  shall  he  hegct,  and  I  will  make 
him  a  great  nation.  21  j^^^,  my  covenant  will  I  establish 
with  Isaac,  which  Sarah  shall  bear  unto  thee  at  this  set 
time  in  the  next  year.  22  jt^^^^i  ]^q  jgfj;  ^^ff  talking  with 
him,  and  Elohim  went  up  from  Abraham.  23  ^[^  ^Ynd  Abra- 
ham took  Ishmael  his  son,  and  all  that  were  born  in  his 
house,  and  all  that  were  bought  with  his  monc}',  every  male 
among  the  men  of  Abraham's  house  ;  and  circumcised  the 
flesh  of  their  foreskin  in  the  selfsame  day,  as  Elohim  had 
said  unto  him.  24  j^^^^  Abraham  icas  ninety  years  old 
and  nine,  when  he  was  circumcised  in  the  flesh  of  his  fore- 
skin. 25  And  Ishmael  his  son  was  thirteen  years  old, 
when  he  was  circumcised  in  the  flesh  of  his  foreskin. 
2G  In  the  selfsame  day  was  Abraham  circumcised,  and  Ish- 
mael his  son.  27  And  all  the  men  of  his  house,  born  in 
the  house,  and  bought  with  money  of  the  stranger,  were 
circumcised  with  him.  XVIII.  ^  And  Jehovah  appeared 
unto  him  in  the  oak- grove  of  Mamre :  and  he  sat  in  the 
tent  door  in  the  heat  of  the  day ;  2  and  he  lift  up  his  eyes 
and  looked,  and,  lo,  three  men  stood  by  him :  and  when 

abundantly,  and  becoming  a  great  nation.  But  surely  the  former  alternative  is  far  the 
On  his  12  sons,  see  eh.  xxv.  12 — 16.  more  probable.  The  two  following  verses 
21.]  But  he  shall  not  be  the  promised  seed,  bear  it  out,  re-stating  as  they  do  with  care- 
That  shall  be  the  privilege  of  Isaac,  whose  ful  and  formal  accuracy  what  has  been 
birth  is  now  announced  at  the  set  time  of  already  narrated. 

one  year  from  the  date  of  the  establishment        XVIII.,  XIX.     Sodom  and  Gomoreha. 

of  the  covenant.  22.]   God  went  up,  The  section  begins  by  the  visit  of  Jehovah, 

viz.   to   heaven.    Sec  ch.  sxxv.   13.  accompanied  by  two  angels,  to  Abraham  at 

23—27.]  Abraham  fulfils  the  JDiiine  com-  Mamre.     The  object  of  this  visit  is  twofold: 

maud  in  the  obedience  of  faitfi.     Here  was  first,  to  announce  to  Sarah  her  part  in  the 

the  sign  of  his  unwavering  faith  in  God's  covenant ;  secondly,  to  impart  to  Abraham 

promise  and  covenant.    Ilowever  momentary  the  Divine  purpose  of  destroying  Sodom  and 

doubt  may  have  dimmed  his  spiritual  sight,  Gomorrha.     The  whole  section  is  Jehovistic, 

the  direct  assurance  from  God  clears  it  again,  with  the  remarkable  exception  of  ch.  six.  29, 

He   hesitates   not   to  perform   the   painful  which  is  apparently  an  insertion  from  the 

operation  on  himself  and  all  in  his  house,  original  Elohistic  narrative  (see  there). 
Nor  is  there  the  slightest  delay.     It  is  done        1.]  On  the  oak-grove  of  Mamre,  see  on 

"the   selfsame   day."  25.]  The  men-  ch.  xiii.  18.     The  commentators  quote  from 

tion  of  this  circumstance   may    have   been  Volney,  that  it  is  the  custom  of  the  Arabs, 

made  merely   to    give    completion    to   the  when    the  time  for  their  midday  meal  ap- 

formal  details  of  so  important  a  transaction,  proachcs,  to  sit  in  the  entry  of  their  tent  in 

or  as  (Kalisch  supposes)  the  sacred  historian  order  to  sec  the  passers-by,  and  invite  them 

may  have  inserted  it  "  to  explain  the  usage  to  share  the  meal.  2.]  The  process  of 

of  the  Arabians,  who  circumcise  their  males  recognition   on   the    part    of    Abraham   is 

in  the  thirteenth  year,  by  the  circumstance  minutely    described.       The    three   men  on 

that  Ishmael  had  then  attained  that  age."  being  seen  are  perceived  to  be  ;the  appear- 


80 


GENESIS. 


XYIII. 


d  ch.  xix.  2  ; 
xxiv.  32  ; 
xliii.  24. 
Jud?.  xix.  21. 
2  Sam.  xi.  8. 


c  1  Sam.  XXV. 

18.     2  Kings 

vii.  1,  16. 

See  Isa.  xl. 

12.  Ps.  Ixxx. 

5.  Matt.  xiii. 

33.    Luke 

xiii.  21. 
f  Exod.  xii.  39. 
,    Num.  xi.  8. 

1  Kings  xvii. 

13  ;  XIX.  6. 

Ezek.  iv.  12. 

Hos.  vii.  8, 

only, 
p  1  Kings  X.  8. 
'Jer.  lii.  12. 

Heb.  xiii.  2. 


h  2  Kings  iv. 


he  saw  them,  lie  ran  to  meet  tliein  from  the  tent  door,  and 
bowed  himself  toward  the  ground,  ^  and  said,  Lord,  if  now 
I  have  found  favour  in  thy  sight,  pass  not  away,  1  pray 
thee,  from  thy  servant :  *  let  a  little  water,  I  pray  you, 
be  fetched,  and  ^  wash  your  feet,  and  rest  yourselves  under 
the  tree  :  ^  and  I  will  fetch  a  morsel  of  breads  and  refresh 
ye  your  hearts  ;  after  that  ye  shall  pass  on  :  for  therefore 
are  ye  come  to  your  servant.  And  they  said,  So  do,  as  thou 
hast  said.  ^  And  Abraham  hastened  into  the  tent  unto 
Sarah,  and  said,  Make  ready  quickly  three  ®  measures  of 
fine  meal,  knead  it,  and  make  ^  cakes.  ^  And  Abraham 
ran  unto  the  herd,  and  fetcht  a  calf  tender  and  good,  and 
gave  it  unto  the  young  man  ;  and  he  hasted  to  dress  it. 
S  And  he  took  butter,  and  milk,  and  the  calf  which  he  had 
dressed,  and  set  it  before  them ;  and  he  ^  stood  by  them 
under  the  tree,  and  they  did  eat.  ^  ^  And  they  said  unto 
him.  Where  is  Sarah  thy  wife  ?  And  he  said,  Behold,  in 
the  tent,  i^  And  he  said,  I  will  certainly  return  unto 
thee  ^  next  year  ;  and  behold  a   son  to   Sarah  thy  wife. 


ance  of  the  Divine  Presence,  and  hence 
Abraham  does  not  merely  invite  them  to  his 
meal,  hut  performs  the  act  of  reverence 
mentioned.  The  three  men,  as  declared  in 
ver.  22,  were  the  human  appearance  of 
Jehovah  accompanied  by  two  angels.  But  it 
is  not  in  vain  that  the  Church  reads  this 
chapter  as  the  Lesson  on  Trinity  Sunday ; 
for  though  it  would  be  presumption  to  say 
that  we  have  related  here  the  appearance  of 
the  Blessed  Trinity,  yet  she  finds  ample  justi- 
fication in  the  employment  of  the  sacred  and 
mysterious  number  as  connected  with  the 
Divine   Presence.  3.]    The  word  by 

which  Abraham  addresses  the  principal  per- 
sonage among  the  Three  is  uniformly  used 
in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  as  the  appellation 
of  Deity,    Adonai.  4.]    The   address 

which  begun  in  the  singular  now  passes  to 
the  plural.  As  the  Easterns  walk  in  sandals 
merely,  or  with  the  feet  bare,  the  washing 
of  the  feet  from  the  dust  of  travel  is  always 
the  first  care,  and  especially  before  meals  : 
see   refi".  rest  yourselves]    Literally, 

lean  [upon  your  elbows],  recline,  as  the 
manner  mostly  was  in  the  East,  at  meat. 
6.  three  measures]  Literally,  three 
scahs, —  sata — the  measure  being  that  in 
most  ordinary  household   use,  and  r=  the 


third  part  of  an  ephah,  or  slightly  over  a 
peck.     See  reff.  fine  meal]  Literally, 

meal,  fine  meal,  i.e.  meal,  the  best  we  have. 
The  cakes  here  spoken  of  are  explained 
to  be  round  and  flat,  baked  upon  the  hot 
stones   of  the   hearth.  7.   the  young 

man]  viz.  who  was  in  attendance.  8.] 

The  word  rendered  butter  is  indurated  milk, 
it  may  be  in  the  way  of  butter  or  of  curd : 
here  probably  the  former.  Kalisch  under- 
stands sour  milk  in  which  the  calf  was  boiled, 
but  in  the  text  the  dressing  seems  to  have 
taken  place  first,  and  this  was  a  garnish. 
Abraham  stood  by  them,  waiting  upon 
them,  as  is  the  custom  of  the  sheikhs  in  Arabia 
even  now,  when  they  have  distinguished 
guests.  9.]  The  visit  had  especial  re- 

ference to  Sarah,  therefore  she  is  asked  for. 
10.]  The  expression  rendered  by  the 
A.  V.  '■^according  to  the  time  of  life"  is  lite- 
rally at  the  living  time  (or  season),  and 
is  explained  by  the  Hebraists  to  mean  when 
the  year  now-passing  away  again  revives,  i.  e. 
during  the  next  year.  Kalisch  renders, 
"  a7id  she  was  behind  it,"  viz.  the  tent  door. 
But  as  that  door  Avas  [only  an  opening  made 
by  drawing  back  the  material  of  the  tent, 
this  serves  to  give  a  wrong  idea.  The  notice 
is  apparently  inserted  to   signify  that  the 


o— 18. 


GENESIS. 


81 


Au(\  Sarah  heard  it  in  the  tent  door,  which  iras  behind 
'in.  11  Now  Abraham  and  Sarah  ircre  old  and  advanced 
ago  ;  and  it  ceased  to  be  with  Sarah  after  the  manner 
of  women.  ^^  Therefore  Sarah  laughed  within  herself, 
saying,  After  I  am  ^  worn  out  shall  I  have  pleasure,  my 
lord  being  old  also  ?  ^"^  And  Jehovah  said  inito  Abra- 
ham, Wherefore  did  Sarah  laugh,  saying.  Shall  I  of  a 
surety  bear  a  child  which  am  old  ?  ^^  Is  any  thing  J  too 
hard  for  Jehovah  ?  At  the  time  appointed  I  will  return 
•unto  thee  next  year,  and  Sarah  shall  have  a  son.  i^  Then 
Sarah  denied,  saying,  I  laughed  not ;  for  she  was  afraid. 
And  he  said,  'Nay ;  but  thou  didst  laugh.  ^^  %  And  the 
men  rose  up  from  thence,  and  looked  toward  Sodom  :  and 
Abraham  went  with  them  to  bring  them  on  the  way. 
1''  And  Jehovah  said.  Shall  I  hide  from  Abraham  that 
thing  which  I  do ;  ^^  seeing  that  Abraham  shall  surely 
become  a  great  and  mighty  nation,  and  all  the  nations 


j  Dcut.  xvi.  8; 
x\r.  11. 


opening  of  the  tent  ■was  behind  the  speaker, 
and  conseqnently  unseen  by  him.  So  far 
from  this  involving  (as  Kalisch  urges)  "  a 
notion  incompatible  with  tlic  omnipresence 
of  God,"  it  is  mentioned  for  the  very  pur- 
pose of  introducing  a  proof  of  that  om- 
nipresence. Thoujh  she  was  behind  Ilim, 
He  was  fully  conscious  of  her  presence 
there,    and   of  that  wliich  she  was  doing. 

11.]  That  natural  recurrence,  which 
indicates,  and  at  its  cessation  terminates, 
the  power  of  conceiving  children,  had 
ceased   to   be  with  Sarah.  12.]    She 

lauglied,  not  from  a  different  reason  from 
that  which  caused  Abraham's  liTughter  in  ch. 
xvii.  17,  but  from  the  same  reason.  The 
very  same  enquiry  accompanies  the  laughter 
in  both  cases ;  and  it  is  utterly  futile  to 
attempt,  in  order  to  save  the  consistency  of 
Abraham's  faith,  to  represent  the  one  laugh- 
ter as  owing  to  "  amazement  and  joy,"  and 
the  other  to  unbelief.  It  is  not  thus  that 
the  intelligent  understanding  of  Scripture 
is  promoted.  my  lord]    St.   Peter  (1 

Pet.  iii.  6)  adduces  this  expression  of  Sarah's 
as  an  example  of  reverence  for  her  husband. 

13.]  Here  first  is  one  of  the  three 
designated  as  being  Jehovah.  which 

am  old]  Literally,  and  I  have  grown  old. 

14.]  Bp.  Wordsworth  well  remarks 
on  the  adoption  of  the  very  words  used  iu  the 


LXX.  here,  by  St.  Luke,  ch.  i.  37,  in  the 
speech  of  the  angel  Gabriel  to  the  Blessed 
Virgin.  15.]  Her  laughter  had  been 

inward  only  (ver,  12),  but  it  had  taken 
place.  She  must  be  conceived  as  having 
been  by  the  solemn  question  of  ,ver.  13 
brought  out  from  her  hiding-place.  Her 
untrue  self-excusing  is  'gently  dealt  with  by 
Him  who  knows  what  is  in  man,  and  "  up- 
braideth  not." 

16 — 33.]  The  doom  of  Sodom  ;  Abra- 
ham's intercession.  16.J  It  would 
appear  at  first  sight  as  if  no  departure  had 
taken  place  at  this  moment.  The  Three 
rose  up  from  meat,  aud  as  intending  to  leave 
the  spot,  and  turned  their  faces  towards 
Sodom,  Abraham  being  prepared  to  go  with 
them  to  accompany  them  on  their  way.  Then 
Jehovah  imparted  His  counsel  to  the  two, 
which  resulted  in  the  announcement  of  vv. 
20,  21;  and  at  ver.  22  the  two  depart  to- 
ward Sodom.  Kalisch  supposes  that  the 
two  angels  went  on,  and  Abraham  with  them, 
and  that  Jehovah  remained,  and  is  repre- 
sented as  deliberating  with  Himself:  Knobel, 
that  the  Three  went  on,  aud  the  deliberation 
took  place  by  the  way.  And  this  last  is 
certainly  right,  from  ch.  xix.  27,  from 
which  tlie  place  where  Abraham  stood  be- 
fore tiie  Lord  appears  to  have  been  at  some 
distance  from  his  tout.  17.  which 
G 


82  GENESIS.  XVIII. 

of  tlie  eartli  shall  be  blessed  in  him  ?  ^^  For  I  have 
chosen  him,  that  he  may  command  his  children  and  his 
household  after  him^  that  they  keep  the  way  of  Je- 
hovah, to  do  justice  and  judgment  ;  that  Jehovah 
may  bring  upon  Abraham  that  which  he  hath  spoken 
of  him.  20  Ji^xid  Jehovah  said,  Verily  the  cry  of 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  is  great,  yea,  their  sin  is  very 
grievous.  21  j  ^y{\\  go  down  now,  and  see  whether  the}'- 
have  done  altogether  according  to  the  cry  of  it,  which 
is  come  imto  me ;  and  if  not,  I  will  know.  22  j^^^^  ^]^g 
men  turned  their  faces  from  thence,  and  went  toward  So- 
dom :  but  Abraham  stood  yet  before  Jehovah.  23  ^  And 
Abraham  drew  near,  and  said,  Wilt  thou  also  destroy  the 
righteous  with  the  wicked  ?  24  Perhaps  there  shall  be 
fifty  righteous  within  the  city :  wilt  thou  also  destroy, 
and  not  spare  the  place  for  the  fifty  righteous  that  are 
therein  ?  25  -That  be  far  from  thee  to  do  after  this  manner, 
to  slay  the  righteous  with  the  wicked  :  and  that  the  right- 
eous should  be  as  the  wicked,  that  be  far  from  thee  :  Shall 
not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  justice  ?  26  And  Je- 
hovah said.  If  I  find  in  Sodom  fift}-  righteous  within  the 
city,  then  I  will  spare  all  the  place  for  their  sakes.  -'  And 
Abraham  answered  and  said,  Behold  now,  I  have  taken 
upon  me  to  speak  unto  the  Lord,  which  am  but  dust  and 

I  do]  i.  e.  have  determined  to  do,  am  about  At  this    point    there  was  a  view  over  the 

doin"-.           19.]  The  Hebraists  seem  mostly  cities  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  and  all  the 

agreed  that  the  rendering  of  this  verse  should  land  of  the  circle  of  Jordan.  Knobel,  follow- 

be  as  in  the  text.     It  is  God's  ^Jtoyjose  with  ing  Robinson,  thinks  it  might  have  been  the 

regard  to  Abraham,  not  His  knowledge  of  the  present  Beni  Nairn,  al)out  three  miles  East 

character  of  Abraham,  that   is   spoken   of.  of  Hebron.            23 — 33.]    Abraham's  in- 

This  purpose  being  such  as  is  here  affirmed,  tercession.     He  is  moved  to  this,  not  by  his 

the  being  taken  into   God's  counsel  with  re-  special  interest  in  Lot,  not  by  the  memory 

gard  to  the  reason  of  that  which  was  about  of  his  own  exertions  in  saving  this  land  from 

to  happen  to  Sodom  would  tend  to  further  the  invading  kings,  but  by  a  noble  sense  of 

it,  by  testifying  to  the  Divine  hatred  of  sin.  right,  and  love  of  men.     There  is  nothing 

21.]  The  word  rendered  altogether  derogatory  to  the  majesty  of  God  in  the 

is   given   by  the  Arabic  version  the  whole  Divine  answers  to  him  here;  no  difficulty  in 

multitude  of  them.     It  is  a  noun,  signifying  them,  which  does  not  meet  us,  every  time  we 

perfection    or    consummation.      From    the  attempt  to  describe  an  answer  to  prayer.     If 

tone   of    Abraham's   intercession  it   would  the  mere  outward  propriety  of  the  narrative 

appear  as  if  there  were  something  to  be  said  need  vindication,  we  may  bear  in  mind  that 

for  this  rendering.     In  Exod.  xi.   1,  where  God  is  represented  as  being  as  yet  of  uncer- 

the  word  is  also  rendered  "  altogether,"  the  tain  counsel,  and  awaiting  the  issue  of  facts. 

same  ambiguity  exists.             22.    the  men]  25. J  There  is  no  grander  testimony 

i.  e.  the  angels,  at  a  certain  point  in  the  on  record  to  the  majesty  of  the  moral  sense 

way,  left  Abraham  standing  before  Jehovah,  in  man.               27.  the  Lord  here  and  in 


19— XIX.  2. 


GENESIS. 


83 


ashes  :  28  perhaps  there  shall  lack  five  of  the  fifty  right- 
eous :  wilt  thou  destroy  all  the  city  for  five  ?  And  he 
said,  If  I  find  there  forty  and  five,  I  will  not  destroy  it. 
23  And  he  spake  unto  him  yet  again,  and  said,  Perhaps 
iforty  shall  be  found  there.  And  he  said,  I  will  not  do  it 
for  the  sake  of  the  forty.  30  2\j^^  lie  said,  Let  not  the 
Lord  be  angry,  and  I  will  speak  :  Perhaps  thirty  shall  be 
found  there.  And  he  said,  I  will  not  do  it,  if  I  find  thirty 
there.  ^^  And  he  said.  Behold  now,  I  have  taken  upon  me 
to  speak  unto  the  Lord :  Perhaps  twenty  shall  be  found 
there.  And  he  said,  I  will  not  destroy  it  for  the  sake  of 
the  twenty.  ^2  And  he  said.  Let  not  the  Lord  be  angry, 
and  I  will  sj)eak  yet  but  this  once  :  Perhaps  ten  shall  be 
found  there.  And  he  said,  I  will  not  destroy  it  for  the  sake 
of  the  ten.  ^3  And  Jehovah  departed  when  he  had  finished 
communing  with  Abraham  :  and  Abraham  returned  unto 
his  jjlace.  XIX.  i  And  the  two  angels  came  to  Sodom  at 
even ;  and  Lot  sat  in  the  gate  of  Sodom :  and  Lot  seeing 
t]icm  rose  up  to  meet  them ;  and  he  bowed  himself  with 
his  face  toward  the  ground ;  ^  and  he  said.  Behold  now, 
my  lords,  turn  in,  I  pray  j'ou,  into  your  servant's  house, 
and  tarry  all  night,  and  wash  your  feet,  and  ye  shall 
rise  up  early,    and   go  on  yo\iv  ways.     And  they  said, 

vv.  31,  32  is  the  rendering,  not  of  Jehovah, 
but  of  Adonai,  as  in  ver.  3.  dust  and 

ashes  is  in  the  Ilebrew,  which  loves  alliter- 
atiun,  gaphar  va-aipher  :  dust  in  my  origin, 
and  u.-hts  in  my  end.  33.]  Jehovah 

departed,  as  ch.  xix.  2i  shews,  to  heaven. 
Tile  expression  of  the  A.  V.,  "  went  his  icay," 
is  calcuUited  to  mislead,  besides  having,  at 
liast  in  our  days,  a  somewhat  colloquial 
a>pcct.  Kalisch  well  remarks  that  God  pro- 
cn  ded  with  far  greater  leniency  than  even 
Abraham's  anxiety  had  the  courage  to  advo- 
cate :  for  He  delivered  the  house  of  Lot,  the 
only  virtuous  family  which  was  found  in 
Sodom,  lie  furtherremarksthatthcpatriarch, 
su  fur  from,  as  some  have  said,  shewing  the 
"impudence"  of  importunity,  had  asked 
simply  for  justice,  and  not  fur  mercy  :  "he 
might  at  once  have  insisted  on  the  principle, 
t  the  sinners  only  should  die,  whatever 


tl 

their  number  might  be:  though  he  had  con- 
fidence in  the  Divine  attribute  of  justice,  he 
had  not  fathomed  its  whole  depth.  Comp. 
Kum.  xvi.  22  ;  Ezek.  xviii.  20." 


XIX.   The  destruction  of  Sodom.     The 
incest   of  Lot.  1.]    Kalisch  renders, 

"  And  two  of  the  angels  came"  «fcc.  lu 
his  character  for  hospitality,  Lot  is  the 
counterpart  of  Abraham.  lie  sits  at  the 
gate,  where  he  might  best  see  approaching 
strangers.  He  has  no  idea  who  they  are  : 
see  vv.  2  and  8.  Eut  they  probably  had 
something  beautiful  and  majestic  in  their 
appearance  :   see  on  ver.  5.  2.  ]  He 

addresses  them  as  my  lords.  The  word  is 
the  same  as  that  by  which  Abraham  addressed 
God,  ch.  xviii.  3,  in  the  singular,  but  it  is 
differently  pointed  in  the  Ilebrew,  and  evi- 
dently must  be  diiferently  understood,  as  the 
sentence  is  in  the  second  person  plural,  not 
singular,  as  there.  And  accordingly,  while 
the  Masoretic  editors  have  a  note  against 
Adonai  there,  ^'sacred,"  meaning  that  it  is 
the  name  of  God,  here  they  note  the  '"pro- 
fane," meaning  that  it  is  the  name  of  man 
only.  wash  your  feet]    See  on  ch. 

xviii.  4.  They  decline  his  otter  of  hospitality, 
as  not  wishing  to  become  guests  of  any  among 


84  GENESIS.  XIX. 

Nay ;  but  we  will  abide  in  tbe  street  all  nigbt.  ^  And 
be  pressed  upon  tbem  greatly ;  and  tbey  turned  in 
mito  bini,  and    entered  into  bis   bouse  ;    and  be   made 

k  ch.  xxr  8 ;      tbem   a   ^  feast,    and    did   bake    unleavened    cakes,    and 

judg."xw.i2.  tbey  did  eat.      ^  ^  But  before  tbey  lay  down,  tbe  men 

of  tbe   city,    tbe  men  of  Sodom,    compassed   tbe   bouse 

'  jer'uii"'  I'o^^iiclj  botb  old  and  young,  all  tbe  people  ^from  every 
quarter :  ^  and  tbey  called  unto  Lot,  and  said  unto  bim, 
Wbere  are  tbe  men  wbicb  came  in  to  tbee  tbis  nigbt  ? 
bring  tbem  out  unto  us,  tbat  we  may  know  tbem.  ^  And 
Lot  went  out  at  tbe  door  unto  tbem,  and  sbut  tbe  door 
after  bim,  ^  and  said,  I  praj'  you,  bretbren,  do  not  wickedly. 
8  Bebold  now,  I  bave  two  daugbters  wbicb  bave  not  known 
man ;  let  me,  I  pray  you,  bring  tbem  out  unto  you,  and 
do  ye  to  tbem  as  is  good  in  your  eyes :  onl}^  unto  tbese  men 
do  notbing,  because  tbey  came  under  tbe  sbadow  of  my 
roof.  9  And  tbey  said,  Stand  back.  And  tbey  said,  Tbis 
one  came  in  to  sojourn,  and  be  continually  judgetb  ns : 
now  will  we  deal  worse  witb  tbee,  tban  witb  tbem. 
And  tbey  pressed  sore  upon  tbe  man,  even  Lot,  and  came 
near  to  break  tbe  door,  i^  ]3^t  tbe  men  put  fortb  tbeir 
band,  and  pulled  Lot  into  tbe  bouse  to  tbem,  and  sbut  to 
tbe  door.     ^^  And  tbey  smote  tbe  men  tbat  were  at  tbe 

the  Sodomites  :    but      3]   at  longtli  yield,  done,  suppose  that  Lot  had  any  end  in  view 

and  are  entertained.     Tliis  apparently  was  beyond  that  which  the  proposal  declares,  or 

to  try  the  sincerity  of  his  invitation,  and  to  that  it  was  due  to  his  perturbation  of  mind, 

bring  about    that  sifting  of   his    character  as  Augustine  suggests.     It  seems  simply  to 

which  the  following  shameful  incident  af-  have  had  in  view  the  averting  of  a  fearful 

forded.  a  feast]    Literally,  a  drink,  crime  (enhanced  in  this  case  by  its  violating 

but  used  in  this  wider  sense  in  reff.     Proba-  the  sacred  rights  of  hospitality)  by  the  per- 

bly  the  cause  of  the  absence  of  leaven  was  mission  of  another  crime,  the  very  thought 

the  suddenness  of  the  occasion  :    see  also  of  which  we  happily  in  these  Christian  days 

Exod.  xii.  33,  34.  4 — 7.]  From  Levit.  cannot  find  place  for  in  a  father's  heart. 

22—25  we  learn  that  the  practice  of  the  sin  9.   Stand  back]  i.   e.  make  way  for 

here  contemplated  was  among  the  principal  us   to   enter   the   house.      So   Knobel  and 

causes  why  God  exterminated  the  Canaan-  Gesenius.      Others,    as    Kaliscb,    interpret 

itish  nations.        from  every  quarter]  Liter-  the  expression,  "  Cone  Jiither  (to  us)." 

ally,  from  the  end,  viz.  of  the  city.     See  he  continually  judgeth  us]  i.  e.  is  con- 

reff.  8.]    It   is  ditficult   to  give  an  stantly  protesting  against  our  customs  and 

account   of  this  offer  consistently  with  any  practices.     The  threat  which  follows  is  in- 

estimate   of  Lot  as   a   "righteous"    man.  terprcted  by  Knobel,  that  they  would  smite 

But  in  our  estimating  we  must  remember  and  kill  him,  whereas  they  would  only  mis- 

that  the  same  offer  was  made,  and  the  thing  handle   his   guests.      But   Lange    remarks 

actually  done,  in  the  parallel  case  at  Gibeah  that  the    following   words   point   to    quite 

of  Benjamin,  Judges  xix.  24,  ff.     Guided  by  another  (and  a  darker)  meaning.  10, 

that  other  case,   we  cannot,  as  some  have  H.]  The  blindness  does  not  appear  to  have 


3— i: 


GENESIS. 


85 


cl(.)or  of  the  liouso  with  blindness,  both  small  and  great : 
so  that  they  wearied  themselves  to  find  the  door.  '2  ^  And 
the  men  said  unto  Lot,  Ilast  thou  here  any  one  besides  ? 
son  in  law,  and  thy  sons,  and  thy  daughters,  and  what- 
soever thou  hast  in  the  city,  bring  them  out  of  this 
place  :  ^^  for  we  will  destro}^  this  place,  because  the  cry  of 
them  is  waxen  great  before  the  face  of  Jehovah  ;  and 
Jehovah  hath  sent  us  to  destroy  it.  ^^  And  Lot  went 
out,  and  spake  unto  his  sons  in  law,  which  married  his 
daughters,  and  said.  Up,  get  you  out  of  this  place  ;  for 
Jehovati  will  destroy  this  city.  And  he  was  as  one  that 
mocked  in  the  eyes  of  his  sons  in  law.  ^'^  ^  And  when 
the  ™  morning  ™  arose,  then  the  angels  hastened  Lot,  say- 
ing. Arise,  take  thy  wife,  and  thy  two  daughters,  which 
are  here  ;  lest  thou  be  consumed  in  the  iniquity  of  the 
city.  16  And  while  he  lingered,  the  men  laid  hold  upon 
his  hand,  and  upon  the  hand  of  his  wife,  and  upon 
the  hand  of  his  two  daughters ;  Jehovah  being  merci- 
ful unto  him :  and  they  brought  him  forth,  and  set 
him  without  the  city.    i"^And  it  came  to  pass,   when 


m  ch.  xxxii. 
24, 26.     Josh, 
vi.  15.     Judg. 
xix.  2o,  al. 


been  literal  and  final,  but  to  have  consisted 
in  a  bewilcicring  of  their  vision,  so  that  they 
could  not  find  the  door.  Augustine  well 
says,  Had  they  been  struck  blind,  they 
■would  not  have  wearied  themselves  to  find 
the  door,  but  would  have  ceased  to  seek  for 
it.  12.]  The   mention   of  the  son  in 

law  before  the  sons  and  daughters  is  some- 
what surprising.  Lange  has  proposed  to 
read  thus :  "  Hast  thou  here  any  besides  as 
son  in  l<no?"  (i.  e.  connected  with  thee  by 
marriage),  and  then  follows  the  mention  of 
the  members  of  Lot's  own  family.  And 
this  would  certainly  be  a  more  probable 
arrangement.  13.]    Observe  that   the 

angels  speak  of  themselves  at  the  same  time 
as  free  agents,  and  as  being  sent  by  Jehovah 
with  a  purpose.  This  is  in  strict  accord 
with  similar  utterances  of  Divine  messengers  : 
see  ch.  xxxii.  24,  if. ;  Exod.  iii.  1 — 6. 
14.]  Lot  goes  out  into  the  city  and  addresses 
the  husbands  of  his  (married)  daughters, 
but  without  effect.  There  is  considerable 
variety  of  opinion  about  these  sons  in  law. 
Some  hold  them  to  have  been  only  be- 
trothed to  his  two  daughters  before  men- 
tioned:  and  so  the  Vulgate  renders,   "/us 


sons  in  laic,  who  were  about  to  receive 
his  daughters."  So  also  Josephus,  and 
of  the  moderns,  Kalisch,  Keil,  Lange, 
Ewald,  &c.  On  the  other  hand  the  LXX. 
keeps  the  past  tense,  and  is  followed  by 
Rosenmuller,  Knobel,  and  Dclitzsch.  Cer- 
tainly, in  vcr.  15,  the  "  tico  daughters  which 
are  here''  seem  to  be  distinguished  from 
other  daughters  who  were  absent.  On  the 
whole  the  more  probable  view  seems  that 
there  were  husbands  of  married  daughters 
living  in  the  cities,  whereas  his  two  virgin 
daughters  lived  with  their  father  at  home. 
The  appearance  of  mockery  seems  to  have 
been  not  altogether  due  to  the  unbelief  of 
the  sons  in  law,  but  partly  to  some  want  of 
earnestness  in  Lot's  manner.  lie  required 
hastening,  vv.  15, 16.  15-]  The  morn- 

ing is  the  dawn ;  the  Ilebrew  root  signifies 
splitting  or  breaking,  the  streaks  of  light 
breaking  up  the  eastern  clouds;  and  it 
arose,  because  the  dawn  advances  from  the 
horizon  upwai'ds.  which  are  here  is 

literally  which  are  found,  in  contradistinc- 
tion to  others  of  his  family  who  were  absent. 
See  above  on  ver.  14.  thou]  Under- 

stand, and  thine  :  his  family  arc  summed  up 


86 


GENESIS. 


XIX. 


Jer.  xlv 
only. 


.34, 


they  had  brought  them  forth  outside,  that  he  said, 
Escape  for  thy  life ;  look  not  behind  thee,  neither  stay 
thou  in  all  the  plain ;  escape  to  the  mountain,  lest  thou 
be  consumed.  ^^  And  Lot  said  unto  them.  Not  so.  Lord  : 
19  Behold  now,  thy  servant  hath  found  grace  in  thy  sight, 
and  thou  hast  magnified  thy  mercy,  which  thou  hast 
shewed  unto  me  in  saving  my  life ;  and  I  cannot  escape  to 
the  mountain,  lest  the  evil  overtake  me,  and  I  die  :  ^0  j^e- 
hold  now,  this  city  is  near  to  flee  unto,  and  it  is  a  little 
one :  Oh,  let  me  escape  thither,  (is  it  not  a  little  one  ?) 
and  my  soul  shall  live.  -^  And  he  said  unto  him.  See,  I 
have  accepted  thee  concerning  this  thing  also,  that  I  will 
not  overthrow  this  city,  for  the  which  thou  hast  spoken. 
22  Haste  thee,  escape  thither  ;  for  I  cannot  do  any  thing 
till  thou  be  come  thither.  Therefore  the  name  of  the  city 
was  called  °  Zoar.  -3  ^  The  sun  was  risen  upon  the  earth 
when  Lot  entered  into  Zoar.  2i  Then  Jehovah  rained  upon 


in  him.  So  cli.  xxxiv.  30,  "  I  being  few  in 
number."  17.]    The    Avord    rendered 

plain  is  the  same  as  that  used  in  eh.  xiii.  10, 
the  country  round  Jordan,  the  circle  or 
environs  of  Jordan.  "  Lot  had  once  seen 
the  plain  of  Jordan  beautiful  like  the  garden 
of  Eden,  and  had  been  tempted  to  go  and 
dwell  there.  Now  he  may  not  remain  in  it 
lest  he  be  destroyed  :  he  must  leave  his 
paradise,  for  it  is  polluted  by  sin,  and  will 
be  overwhelmed  by  tire."  Bp.  Wordsworth, 
the  mountain]  Of  Moab,  eastward 
of  the  "circuit."  18,  19.]  Lot  has  by 

this  time  recognized  his  guests  as  divine,  .and 
has  also  (possibly  by  reason  of  some  physical 
appearance  preceding  the  catastrophe)  risen 
to  the  apprehension  of  the  fearful  destruction 
which  was  impending.  Hence  both  the 
reverence  and  the  urgency  of  his  request. 
He  fears  that  there  will  not  be  time  to  reach 
the  somewhat  distant  mountains  before  the 
catastrophe.  20,    fl'.]    The   plea  that 

Zoar  should  be  spared  rested  on  the  part  of 
its  smallness.  It  would  not  be  a  passing  by 
of  any  great  amount  of  wickedness.  Its 
former  name  was  Beta,  ch.  xiv.  2,  and  was 
after  this  event  changed  to  Zoar,  i.  e.  little- 
ness. About  the  situation  of  Zoar  there  is 
considerable  and,  as  appears  to  ]\lr.  Grove 
[Biblical  Did.),  irremoveable  doubt.  It  was 
near  enough   to   Sodom   for  Lot  and    his 


daughters  to  reach  it  in  less  time  than  that 
between  the  dawn  and  the  sunrising :  but 
then,  where  was  Sodom  ?  The  plain  or 
circuit  of  the  Jordan  seems  to  have  been  X. 
of  the  Dead  Sea  (see  Mr.  Grove's  article,  ns 
above),  but  Zoar  is  usually  placed  to  the  S. 
of  it.  It  is  one  of  the  points  mentioned  as 
bounding  Moses'  view  from  Pisgah,  Dcut. 
xxxiv.  3  (see  other  refF.),  and  is  there  con- 
.nected  with  "  the  plain  of  Jericho."  Knobel 
thinks  it  is  to  be  sought  at  the  S.E.  end  of  the 
sea  at  the  mouth  of  the  Wady  el  Asal.  "  This 
spot,"  he  says,  "  is  to  this  day  well  watered 
and  full  of  trees  and  bushes,  but  unhealthy  : 
it  is  inhabited  and  built  over  by  Arabs  who 
have  here  a  fixed  village ;  in  winter  it  is  a 
gathering-place  for  more  than  10  tribes." 
See  much  more  in  Knobel  and  Biblical  Diet. 
24.]  It  has  been  suggested  that  the 
conditions  of  this  terrible  description  would 
be  fulfilled  by  lightning  from  heaven  ignit- 
ing the  bituminous  material  of  the  soil,  and  it 
has  been  intimated  that  the  buildings  them- 
selves of  the  cities  may  have  been  con- 
structed of  solid  asphalt,  and  thus  have  fallen 
a  prey  to  the  fire.  But  the  language  of  the 
text  seems  to  imply  more  than  this  :  at  the 
very  least,  an  eruption  of  bituminous  liquid 
which  fell  on  the  cities.  The  whole  is  in 
such  immediate  connexion  with  Divine 
agency,  that  it  is  vain  to  seek  an  explanation 


18—29. 


GENESIS. 


87 


Sodom  and  upon  Goraorrali  brimstone  and  fire  from  Je- 
1  iiovAii  out  of  heaven ;  25  ^nd  he  overthrew  those  cities, 
;  and  all  the  plain,  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  cities, 
and  tliat  which  grew  upon  the  ground,  26  ^  J3nt  his  wife 
looked  back  from  behind  hira,  and  she  became  a  pillar  of 
salt.  27  ^  J^i^([  Abraham  gat  up  early  in  the  morning  to 
the  place  where  he  stood  before  Jehovah  :  28  and  he 
looked  toward  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  toward  all  the 
land  of  the  plain,  and  beheld,  and,  lo,  the  smoke  of  the 
country  went  up  as  the  smoke  of  a  °  furnace.  29  ^  And  °  fif^xiifi  */ 
it  came  to  pass,  when  Elohim  destroyed  the  cities  of  the 
plain,  that  Elohim  remembered  Abraham,  and  sent  Lot 


only. 


in  physical  causes  only.  There  is  no  occa- 
sion and  no  justification  for  supposing 
tliat  the  double  nicntiou  of  Jehovah  in  this 
verse  points  to  a  variety  of  Divine  persons. 
The  second,  from  Jehovah,  can  hardly  be 
otherwise  than  equivalent  to  "from  Him- 
self." The  overthrow  of  these  cities  has 
naturally  been  matter  of  long  and  laborious 
research,  which  is  by  no  means  as  yet  re- 
warded with  a  definite  result.  This  is  not 
the  place  even  to  report  the  dili'erent  opinions. 
Ample  information  will  be  found  in  Mr. 
Grove's  article  "Sodom  "  in  Smith's  Biblical 
Diet.,  and  in  Kalisch's  commentary.  Two 
remarks  may  be  made  for  the  reader's  guid- 
ance: 1.  That  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
the  cities  to  have  been  sunk  beneath  or 
overflowed  by  the  Dead  Sea ;  2.  That  all 
evidence  tends  to  shew  them  to  have  been 
N.  of  the  lake,  not  S.,  as  commonly  supposed. 
Besides  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  Admah  and 
Zeboim  were  destroyed.  See  Dent.  xxix.  23. 
25.]  the  plain  again  is  the  circle  or 
environs  of  Jordan.  26.]    Lot's   wife 

looked  longingly  back  (the  word  is  said  to 
imply  a  steady  earnest  look).  The  pillar  of 
salt  is  spoken  of  in  the  Apocryphal  Book  of 
"Wisdom,  X.  7,  "  Of  whose  (the  cities')  wicked- 
ness even  to  this  day  the  waste  land  that 
smoketb  is  a  testimony,  and  plants  bearing 
fruit  that  never  come  to  ripeness  :  and  a 
standing  pillar  of  salt  is  a  monument  of  an 
unbelieving  soal."  Joscphus  relates  that  it 
was  standing  in  his  time.  The  same  is 
asserted  by  Fathers  of  the  Church,  and 
even  modern  travellers  have  not  been  want- 
ing who  liave  deposed  to  the  same.  We 
may  observe,  in  the  spirit  of  Mr.  Grove's 
article  "  Lot "  in  the  Biblical  Diet.,  that  no 


details  are  given  us  here  at  all  furnishing  a 
foundation  for  the  legends,  and  tales  of 
travellers,  which  have  been  built  upon  the 
history.  "  There  is  no  attempt  in  the 
narrative  to  invest  the  circumstance  with 
permanence  ;  no  statement,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  pillar  erected  over  Rachel's  grave  (xxxv. 
20),  that  it  was  to  be  seen  at  the  time  of  the 
compilation  of  the  history.  And  in  this  we 
surely  have  an  example  of  that  sobriety 
whicii  characterizes  the  statements  of  Scrip- 
ture, even  where  the  events  narrated  are  most 
out  of  the  ordinary  course."  And  these  re- 
marks are  confirmed  by  the  fact,  that  the 
salt  rock  which  splits  into  upright  pillars, 
and  which  seems  to  have  furnished  material 
for  the  tales  of  travellers,  lies  at  the  S.  end 
of  the  Dead  Sea,  whereas  it  has  been  observed 
above  that  the  "cities  of  the  plain"  must 
have  been  at  the  N.  end.  27.]  See  on 

ch.  xviii.  22.  The  simple  and  graphic  ac- 
count shews  the  entireness  of  Abraham's 
faith.  He  fully  expects  that  the  Divine 
purpose  had  been  accomplished.  That  which 
we  saw  as  a  proof  of  this  sliews  that  not 
submersion  by  water,  but  combustion  by  fire, 
was  the  method  of  destruction  used.  No 
words  could  more  aptly  describe  the  effect 
of  the  igniting  of  the  bituminous  matter  in 
the  plain  than  these.  This  description  was 
manifestly  before  the  prophet  Isaiah  when 
he  wrote  the  terrible  tlireat  against  Edom, 
xxxiv.   9.  29.]  Eluhistic  summary  of 

this  history.  This  verse  is  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  instances  of  an  independent  and 
summary  account  worked  into  the  midst  of 
another  and  detailed  one.  It  may  almost  be 
described  as  the  crucial  experiment  of  the 
view  which  I  cannot  help  adopting,  viz.  that 


88 


GENESIS. 


XIX. 


out  of  the  midst  of  tlie  overtlirow,  wTien  lie  overthrew  the 
cities  in  the  which  Lot  dwelt.  ^^  ^  And  Lot  went  up  out  of 
Zoar,  and  dwelt  in  the  mountain,  and  his  two  daughters 
with  him  ;  for  he  feared  to  dwell  in  Zoar :  and  he  dwelt 
in  a  cave,  he  and  his  two  daughters.  ^^  And  the  firstborn 
said  unto  the  younger.  Our  father  is  old,  and  tlici-e  is  not  a 
man  in  the  earth  to  come  in  unto  us  after  the  manner  of 
all  the  earth  :  2-  come,  let  us  make  our  father  drink  wine, 
and  we  will  lie  with  him,  that  we  may  preserve  seed  of 
our  father.  ^3  And  they  made  their  father  drink  wine 
that  night :  and  the  firstborn  went  in,  and  lay  with  her 
father ;  and  he  joerceived  not  when  she  lay  down,  nor 
when  she  arose.  ^^  And  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow, 
that  the  firstborn  said  unto  the  younger.  Behold,  I  lay 
yesternight  with  my  father  :  let  us  make  him  drink  wine 
this  night  also ;  and  go  thou  in,  and  lie  with  him,  that  we 
may  preserve  seed  of  our  father.  ^^  And  they  made  their 
father  drink  wine  that  night  also :  and  the  younger 
arose,  and  lay  with  him ;  and  he  perceived  not  when  she 
lay  down,  nor  when  she  arose.  ^^  Thus  were  both  the 
daughters  of  Lot  with  child  by  their  father.  ^^  And  the 
firstborn  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Moab  :  the 
same  is  the  father  of  the  Moabites  imto  this  day.     38  And 


tliis  ancient  sacred  book  is  made  up  of 
Eloliistic  and  Jeliovistic  materials  inwrought 
and  alternated  one  ■with  the  other.  Those 
■who  question  this  have  to  account  for  the 
remarkable  phenomenon,  that  on  the  oc- 
currence of  an}'  such  summary  recapitulation 
as  this  ■we  have  simultaneously  occurring 
the  change  of  the  Divine  name  from  Jehovah 
to  Elohim.  There  is,  in  this  summary, 
nothing  inconsistent  with  the  detailed  ac- 
count in  the  midst  of  ■which  it  appears. 
30 — 38.]  T/ie  incestuous  origiii  of 
Moab  and  Amnion.  30.]  Lot  seems  to 

have  been  afraid  lest  Zoar,  itself  in  tlie  burn- 
ing plain,  might,  though  temporarily  spared 
for  his  sake,  eventually  fall  a  prey  to  tlie 
destruction.  He  therefore  accomplishes  the 
journey  which  at  first  he  deprecated,  and 
flees  to  the  mountain.  This  neighbourhood 
is  to  this  day  full  of  holes  and  caves.  See 
the  interesting  article  on  Caves  by  Mr. 
Phillott,  in  Smith's  Biblical  Diet. 
31.]  On  the  vain  attempt  which  has  been 


made  by  some  out  of  these  ■words,  our 
father  is  old,  to  construct  an  argument 
justifying  Stephen's  assertion,  Acts  vii.  4 
see  note,  eh.    xii.   1.  37,    38.]    Th( 

mother  names  the  cliild  as  in  ch.  xvi.  11 
The  names,  Moab,  "from  the  father,"  o\ 
"  seed  of  the  father"  (the  LXX.  add,  '■^  say 
ing,  He  is  by  my  father "),  and  Ben 
ammi,  "  soji  of  my  people  "  (the  LXX.  add. 
"saying,  He  is  the  son  of  my  family") 
contain  in  themselves  traces  of  the  incestu- 
ous origin. 

On  the  subsequent  history  of  the  Moabites 
and  Ammonites  and  their  hostile  encounters 
■«ith  the  Isi'aelites,  see  Mr.  Grove's  admir- 
able articles  in  the  Biblical  Diet.  It  may 
suffice  here  to  remind  the  reader  that  by  the 
Mosaic  law,  Deut.  xxiii.  3 — 6,  inexorable 
hatred  to  these  two  races  ■was  enjoined  on  the 
children  of  Israel,  not  in  any  reference  to 
their  incestuous  origin,  but  because  of  their 
hostile  conduct  to  Israel  on  the  way  from 
Egypt.      As  Ivalisch    well   remarks,    "  Xo 


30— XX.  4. 


GENESIS. 


89 


tlic  younger,  she  also  bare  a  son,  and  called  liis  name 
Ben-ammi :  tlie  same  is  the  father  of  the  children  of  Am- 
mon  P  imto  this  day.  XX.  ^  And  Abraham  journeyed 
from  thence  toward  the  south  country,  and  dwelled  be- 
tween Kadesh  and  Shur,  and  sojourned  in  Gerar.  '^  And 
Abraham  said  of  Sarah  his  wife,  She  is  my  sister  :  and 
Abimelcch  king-  of  Gerar  sent,  and  took  Sarah.  ^  But 
Elohim  came  to  Abimelech  in  a  dream  by  night,  and  said 
to  him.  Behold,  thou  art  hut  a  dead  man,  for  the  woman 
which  thou  hast  taken  ;  for  she  is  a  man's  wife.     ^  But 


p  rh.  xxvi.3»; 
xxxil.  :i2; 
xlvii.  -iG,  III. 


■word  is  cmployt'd,  no  allusion  nuulo,  in  the 
wliolc  of  this  tale  to  express  disgust,  aver- 
sion, or  hatred  :  the  laws  concerning  the 
allowed  and  forbidden  degrees  were  not  yet 
fixed  :  Abraham  himself  lived  in  a  matri- 
mony cursed  as  an  abomination  in  the 
]\Iosaic  code  (Lev.  xviii.  9)  :  the  event  is 
related  with  all  the  calmness  of  historical 
composition."  And  it  must  also  not  be  for- 
gotten that  in  Deut.  ii.  9 — 19,  the  posses- 
sions of  the  "  children  of  Lot  "  in  Ar  and  in 
the  land  of  Amnion  arc  recognized  by  God, 
and  the  Israelites  are  forbidden  to  distress  or 
meddle  with  them.  But  at  the  same  time 
the  very  necessity  which  there  was  for 
bereaving  Lot  of  his  self-command  shew  us 
beneath  the  surface  that  his  "  righteous 
soul,"  even  though  it  could  brook  much 
which  nature  now  abhors  (see  on  ver.  8), 
could  not  have  been  brought  to  consent  to 
that  into  which  he  was  unconsciously  be- 
trayed. The  words  "unto  this  day"  are 
noticed  as  occurring  in  the  portions  of  the 
book  due  to  the  later  supplementary  docu- 
ments :  see  refF. 

XX.,  XXL  Abraham  at  Gerar.  And 
herein  (xx.  1 — 18)  his  second  deceit  con- 
cerninr/  Sarah.  Elohistic.  The  former  ac- 
count of  his  deceit  in  Egypt  was,  it  is  to  be 
noticed,  Jehovistic.  1.]    On  Kadesh 

see  note,  ch.  xiv.  7,  and  on  Shur,  note,  ch. 
xvi.  7.  The  site  of  Gerar  appears  to  have 
been  found  "  in  a  shallow  wady  (valley)  three 
hours  S.S.E.  of  Gaza  :  it  is  now  called  Khir- 
bet-cl-Gerar,  the  ruins  of  Gerar.  At  the 
spot  are  traces  of  an  ancient  city.  This  is 
all  the  information  given  by  the  Eev.  J. 
Eowlands,  who,  so  far  as  I  know,  is  the 
only  person  who  has  as  yet  visited  it." 
Porter,  Handbook  of  Palestine.  The  peo- 
ple were  Philistines  (ch.  xxi.  32,  34 ; 
xxvi.  1,  14,  15,  18),  pastoral  (ch.  xsvi.  20) 


but  warlike  (ver.  22 ;  ch.  xxvi.  2G).  It 
is  to  be  noticed,  however,  that  in  this  earlier 
portion  of  the  Elohistic  narrative  the  name 
Philistine  does  not  occur,  only  tirst  at  ch. 
xxi.  32 — 34.  The  removal  of  Abraham 
from  Hebron  is  traced  by  some  to  the  prox- 
imity of  the  accursed  territory  of  the  cities 
of  the  plain.  Kalisch  remarks,  that  he  was 
"  reminded  by  their  catastrophe  that  he 
ought  not  to  bind  up  his  fate  too  closely 
with  that  of  any  heathen  town,  and  that  he 
should  never  cease  to  regard  himself  as  a 
stranger  in  a  strange  land."  The  south 
country  is  the  district  called  the  Negeb  (ch, 
xii.  9 ;  xiii.  1,  al.)  or  dry  country.  His 
general  abode  was  limited  between  Kadesh 
and  Shur,  and,  at  a  particular  time,  he 
pitched  his  tent  in  Gerar.  2.]  Sarah 

was  at  this  time  upwards  of  90  years  old,  ch. 
xvii.  17.  But  it  must  not  be  I'urgotteu  that 
she  had  "  received  strength  to  conceive 
seed,"  and  after  this  bare  and  nursed  Isaac. 
As  usual,  some  of  the  commentators,  more 
anxious  to  shield  the  Father  of  the  faithful 
than  to  deal  as  Scripture  has  dealt  with  him, 
see  in  this  his  second  act  of  deceit  an  act  of 
faith  in  God  (I)  If  this  were  so,  it  is  strange 
that  his  faith  did  not  advance  a  step  further 
and  believe  that  Gud  could  preserve  Sarah 
without  his  lie.  Abimelech,  the  father 

king,  appears  to  have  been  the  standing 
title  of  the  kings  of  Gerar.  He  took  Sarah, 
i.  e.  into  his  harem,  anxious,  say  some,  to 
be  connected  in  marriage  with  so  powerful  a 
chief  as  Abraham.     But  this  is  mere  fancy. 

3.  thou  art  a  dead  man]  i.  e.  thy 
sickness    (vv.    C,  17)   shall   issue   in   death. 

the  woman]    Or,  the  wife.  a 

man's  wife]  lit.  ruled  over  by  a  lord : 
but  the  word  is  used  ordinarily  of  marriage, 
e.  g.  in  Deut.  xxi.  13;  xxiv.  1;  Isa.  Ixii. 
5;    Mai.  ii.   11.  4.]   Abimelcch's  re- 


90  GENESIS.  XX. 

Ablmelech.  Lad  not  come  near  lier  :  and  lie  said,  Lord, 
wilt  thou  slay  also  a  righteous  nation  ?  ^  Said  lie  not 
unto  me.  She  is  my  sister  ?  and  she,  even  she  herself  said, 
He  is  my  brother :  in  the  integrity  of  my  heart  and  in- 
nocency  of  my  hands  have  I  done  this.  ^  ^nd  the  Elohim 
said  unto  him  in  a  dream.  Yea,  I  know  that  thou  didst  this 
in  the  integrity  of  thy  heart ;  for  I  also  withheld  thee  from 
sinning  against  me  :  therefore  suffered  I  thee  not  to  touch 
her.  7  JNfow  therefore  restore  the  man's  wife  ;  for  he  is  a 
prophet,  and  he  shall  pray  for  thee,  and  thou  shalt  live : 
and  if  thou  restore  lier  not,  know  thou  that  thou  shalt 
surely  die,  thou,  and  all  that  are  thine.  ^  Therefore 
Abimelech  rose  early  in  the  morning,  and  called  all  his 
servants,  and  told  all  these  things  in  their  ears  :  and  the 
men  were  sore  afraid.  ^  Then  Abimelech  called  Abra- 
ham, and  said  unto  him,  What  hast  thou  done  unto  us  ? 
and  what  have  I  offended  thee,  that  thou  hast  brought  on 
me  and  on  my  kingdom  a  great  sin?  thou  hast  done 
deeds  unto  me  that  ought  not  to  be  done.  ^^  And  Abime- 
lech said  unto  Abraham,  What  sawest  thou,  that  thou 
hast  done  this  thing  ?  ^  And  Abraham  said,  Because  I 
said.  Surely  the  fear  of  Elohim  is  not  in  this  place ;  and 
they  will  slay  me  for  my  wife's  sake.  ^^  And  yet  indeed 
she  is  my  sister  ;  she  is  the  daughter  of  my  father,  but  not 
the  daughter  of  my  mother  ;    and  she  became  my  wife. 

monstrance  shews,  teneath  tlie  surface  of  said  to  be  a  prophet,  occupying  a  place  of 
the  narrative,  that  the  terrible  example  of  especial  favour,  so  that  his  intercession  would 
the  Sodomites  had  wrought  its  effect  on  the  avail  with  God.  And  no  less  remarkable 
neighbouring  tribes.  He  prides  himself  on  are  those  that  follow,  in  which  the  heathen 
his  people  being  free  from  the  sins  which  king  reproves  the  prophet,  the  Friend  of 
had  drawn  down  vengeance  on  the  cities  of  God,  by  an  appeal  to  those  first  principles 
the  plain,  and  uses  much  the  same  argument  of  moral  right  which  bind  prophets  and 
as  Abraham  in  ch.  xviii.  23.  He  uses  the  heathens  alike  :  "thou  hast  done  deeds 
name  Adonai,  Lord :  see  on  ch.  xviii.  3.  with  me  that  ought  not  to  be  done."  Abim- 
5.]  As  morality  was  then  understood,  Abime-  elech  shines  throughout  this  narrative.  His 
lech  had  committed  no  crime  in  taking  Sarah,  public  announcement  of  the  facts  to  his  ser- 
believing  her  to  be  Abraham's  sister.  Nay,  vants  is  the  act  of  an  injured  man  conscious 
he  stood  justified  in  comparison  with  the  of  his  own  rectitude  and  desirous  thoroughly 
other  parties  ;  there  is  doubtless  a  hint  of  to  clear  himself.  10.  what  sawest 
moral  guilt  in  his  reference  to  their  part  in  thou]  i.  e.  what  object  hadst  thou  in  view .' 
the  transaction.  6.]  See  on  vv.  17,  18  11,  ff.]  Abimelech's  questions  were 
below.  7.]  This  verse  is  in  every  way  more  detailed  and  required  more  accoimt  to 
remarkable.  It  lets  us  into  the  wonderful  be  given  than  those  of  Pharaoh  in  ch.  xii., 
I'elation  of  Abraham,  the  called,  and  the  which  amounted  to  little  more  than  a  re- 
depositary  of  the  promise,  to  God.     He  is  monstrance.             12.]    Regarding  this  re- 


5— XXI.  1. 


GENESIS. 


91 


^^  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Eloliim  caused  me  to  wander 
from  my  father's  house,  that  I  said  unto  her,  This  is  thy 
kindness  which  thou  shalt  shew  unto  me ;  at  every  place 
whither  we  shall  come,  say  of  me,  He  is  my  brother. 
1^  And  Abimelech  took  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  menservants, 
and  woraenservants,  and  gave  f/icin  imto  Abraham,  and 
restored  him  Sarah  his  wife.  ^'^  And  Abimelech  said, 
Behold,  my  land  is  before  thee  :  dwell  where  it  plcasclh 
thee.  1^  And  unto  Sarah  he  said.  Behold,  I  have  given 
thy  brother  a  thousand  pieces  of  silver  :  behold,  it  is  to 
thee  a  covering  of  the  eyes,  unto  all  that  are  with  thee, 
and  with  all  ot/icr :  thus  thou  art  righted.  ^^  ^  go 
Abraham  prayed  unto  the  Elohim  :  and  Elohim  healed 
Abimelech,  and  his  wife,  and  his  maidservants  ;  and  they 
bare  children.  ^^  For  Jehovah  had  fast  closed  up  all  the 
wombs  of  the  house  of  Abimelech,  because  of  Sarah  Abra- 
ham's wife,     XXI.  1  And  Jehovah  i  visited  Sarah  as  he 


1  ch.  1.  24. 
Kxod.  lii.  Ifi  ; 
iv.l3  ;  xiii.  19. 


lationship,  see  on  ch.  xi,  29,  and  on  its 
moral  significance  in  our  estimate  of  Abra- 
ham's sin,  see  on  ch.  xii.  10—20.  13.] 
We  have  in  this  verse  the  rare  occurrence  of 
a  plural  verb  with  the  name  of  God, 
Elohim,  itself  a  plural  form.  Those  who 
distinguish  different  writers  in  the  Pen- 
tateuch profess  to  find  this  construction  only 
in  the  portions  due  to  this  writer,  e.  g.  ch. 
XXXV.  7  ;  Exod.  xxii.  8  ;  xxxii.  4,  8 ;  and 
in  Josh.  xxiv.  19.  14.]  Abimelech  is 
anxious  to  make  restitution  for  the  wrong 
done  to  both  Abraham  and  Sarah. 
16.]  The  meaning  of  the  latter  part  of  the 
Terse  is  much  disputed.  Kalisch  renders, 
"  Behold,  he  is  to  thee  a  protection  to  all  who 
are  with  thee,  and  with  all,  and  thou  wilt  be 
recognized ;"  and  explains,  "he  gave  to 
Abraham  for  her  a  thousand  shekels  of 
silver  (for  the  property  of  the  wife  belonged 
to  the  husband),  and  addressed  to  her  a  re- 
mark embodying  the  experience  he  had  just 
made,  and  the  respect  with  which  it  in- 
spired him  (vcr.  18)  ;  he  said  that  though 
she  might  profess  Abraham  was  her  brother, 
he  was  her  protection  against  every  man ; 
she  might  be -taken  by  others  as  his  sister, 
but  she  would  be  soon  known  and  convicted 
of  being  his  wife  by  the  supernatural  inter- 
ference of  God."  On  the  other  hand, 
Knobel  renders,  "  It  (the  gift  of  1000 
shekels)  is  to  thee  a  covering  of  eyes  (i.  e. 


shall  shut  thine  eyes  that  they  see  not,  i.  e. 
shall  blind  thee  that  thou  care  not  for  what 
has  happened,  i.  e.  shall  recoucile  and 
make  amends  to  thee)  in  reference  to  all 
which  is  with  thee  and  with  all  (i.  c.  Avhich 
has  happened  to  thee  and  thy  companions) ; 
thus  thou  art  righted  (thine  injury  atoned 
for).  Similarly  Keil,  Delitzsch,  and  Lange. 
I  have  therefore  preferred  this  rendering. 
The  LXX.  gives  it,  "  These  shall  be  to  thee 
for  an  honour  of  thy  countenance,  and  to 
all  the  women  that  are  with  thee ;  and 
speak  the  truth  in  all  things."  Tlie  Vulgate, 
"  This  shall  be  to  thee  for  a  veil  of  the  eyes 
to  all  that  are  ivith  thee,  and  wheresoever 
thou  shalt  go  ;  and  remember  that  thou  hast 
been  detected."  17,  18.]  These  verses 

are  to  be  taken  with  reference  to  both 
sexes.  God  had  visited  all  with  incapacity, 
wkich  visitation  was  now  removed.  The 
last  verse  is  treated  as  an  addition  by  way  of 
explanation,  on  account  of  the  name  Jehovah 
occurring  in  it  only  of  the  wliole  narrative. 
However  this  may  be,  let  the  reader  be- 
ware of  the  supposed  significance  in  the 
use  of  the  names  of  God,  so  ingeniously 
found  out  by  some  commentators.  Any 
such  fancies  can  be  justified  by  any  moder- 
ately ingenious  person  ;  and  in  one  of  the 
latest  commentaries  it  has  been  done  here  by 
passing  entirely  over  verses  1 1  and  1 3,  which 
stood  iu  its  way. 


92 


GENESIS. 


XXI. 


had  said_,  and  Jehovah  did  unto  Sarah  as  he  had  spoken. 

2  For  Sarah  conceived,  and  bare  Abraham  a  son  in  his  old 
age,  at  the  set  time  of  which  Elohim  had  spoken  to  him. 

3  And  Abraham  called  the  name  of  his  son  that  was  bom 
unto  him,  whom  Sarah  bare  to  him,  Isaac.  *  And  Abra- 
ham circumcised  his  son  Isaac  being  eight  days  old,  as 
Elohim  had  commanded  him.  ^  And  Abraham  was  an 
hundred  years  old,  when  his  son  Isaac  was  born  unto  him. 
6  %  And  Sarah  said.  Laughter  hath  Elohim  prepared  for 
me :  all  that  hear  will  laugh  with  me.  7  And  she  said, 
Who  would  have  said  unto  Abraham,  that  Sarah  should 
have  given  children  suck  ?  for  I  have  born  him  a  son  in 
his  old  age.  ^  And  the  child  grew,  and  was  weaned  :  and 
Abraham  made  a  great  feast  the  sa/iie  day  that  Isaac  was 
weaned.  ^  ^  And  Sarah  saw  the  son  of  Ha  gar  the 
Egyptian,  which  she  had  born  unto  Abraham,  mocking. 
^0  Wherefore  she  said  unto  Abraham,  Cast  out  this  bond- 


XXI.  1 — 7.]  Birth  and  circumcision  of 
Isaac.  The  whole  of  this  chapter,  with  the 
exception  of  ver.  1  and  vv.  33,  3i,  belongs 
to  the  Elohistic  narrative.  Those  verses 
have  apparently  been  inserted  to  fill  in  and 
complete  the  history  from  Jehovistic  sonrces. 
1.]  It  is  said  (Knobcl)  that  this  sense 
of  the  word  visit,  as  used  of  God,  is  found 
in  the  Jehovistic  portions  only  :  see  reff. 
In  the  Elohistic  portions  (but  not  in  them 
exclusively)  we  have  the  word  ^^ remember" 
used  for  tlie  same  idea :  see  ch.  viii.  1,  and 
reff.  2.]    On   this    set   time,  see  ch. 

xvii.    21.  3.]  This   had   been  pre-or- 

dained, ch.  xvii.  19,  and  the  name  given, 
signifying  "  laughter,"  on  account  of  Abra- 
ham's laughing,  as  there  related.  See  be- 
low. 6.]  The  laughter  after  which 
Isaac  had  been  named  (ch.  xvii.  17,  and 
we  may  add  ch.  xviii.  12)  had  been  that  of 
incredulity ;  but  God's  abounding  mercy 
had  turned  weakness  into  strength,  and 
made  his  name  an  accompaniment  of  the 
laughter  of  joy.  To  relating  this  glad  re- 
sult both  the  narratives  contribute :  the 
Elohistic  record  in  ch.  xvii.  and  here,  and 
the  Jehovistic  in  ch.  xviii.  There  is  in  this 
little  song  of  thanksgiving  (Sarah's  Magni- 
fcat,  as  Bp.  "Wordsworth  calls  it)  a  poetical 
character,  both  in  the  form  of  the  Hebrew 
words  used  and  in  its  arrangement  by 
parallels.     To  suppose  that  it  was  uttered  at 


the  moment  of  Isaac's  birth,  and  that  ver. 
7  should  be  "Who  will  tell  Abraham?"  &c., 
is  inappi-opriate.  "Women  do  not  give  their 
children  suck  at  the  time  of  birth,  nor  in- 
deed are  certain  that  they  shall  do  so. 
8 — 21.]  Expulsion  of  Hag ar  and  Ishmael. 
8.]  The  weaning  was  often  as  much 
as  three  years  (see  2  Mace.  vii.  27),  or  even 
more,  after  birth.  From  1  Sam.  i.  22,  com- 
pared with  ii.  11,  it  would  appear  that 
Samuel  was  not  weaned  till  he  was  old 
enough  to  be  left  with  Eli,  which  hardly 
could  be  so  early  as  at  three.  This  would 
make  Ishmael  sixteen  years  old  or  more  at 
the  time.  The  occasion  is  still  kept  in  the 
East  as  a  family  feast.  The  word  so  ren- 
dered is  the  same  as  in  ch.  xix.  3,  where  see 
note.  9.]  One  can  hardly  believe,  with 

the  LXX.,  "S'ulgate,  Knobcl,  and  Gesenius, 
that  the  word  rendered  mocking  merely 
means  playing,  as  is  the  wont  of  children. 
It  comes  from  the  same  root  as  the  name 
Isaac  itself,  and  might  in  another  context 
bear  such  a  meaning  (as  e.g.  in  Exod.  xxxii. 
6 ;  Judg.  xvi.  25 ;  ch.  xxvi.  8)  ;  but  here 
there  is  certainly  that  beneath  the  surface  of 
the  narrative  which  should  give  it  the  mean- 
ing of  laughing  offensively,  mocking,  as  in 
ch.  xix.  14;  xxxix.  14,  17.  Certainly  St. 
Paul  so  understood  it.  Gal.  iv.  29,  where 
he  says  that  "  he  that  was  born  after  the 
flesh  persecuted  him  that    was   after    the 


2—17. 


GENESIS. 


93 


woman  and  her  son  :  for  the  son  of  this  bondwoman  shall 
not  bo  heir  with  my  son,  with  Isaac.  ^^  And  the  thing 
was  very  grievous  in  Abraham's  sight  because  of  his  son, 
^-  ^  And  Elohim  said  unto  Abraham,  Let  it  not  be  griev- 
ous in  thy  sight  because  of  the  lad,  and  because  of  thy 
bondwoman ;  in  all  that  Sarah  hath  said  unto  thee, 
hearken  unto  her  voice ;  for  in  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be 
called.  1"^  And  also  of  the  son  of  the  bondwoman  will  I 
make  a  nation,  because  he  is  thy  seed.  ^'^  And  Abraham 
rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  took  bread,  and  a  skin 
of  water,  and  gave  if-  unto  Hagar,  putting  //  on  her 
shoulder,  and  the  boy,  and  sent  her  away  :  and  she  de- 
parted, and  wandered  in  the  wilderness  of  Becr-sheba. 
15  And  the  water  was  spent  in  the  bottle,  and  she  cast 
the  boy  under  one  of  the  shrubs.  ^^  And  she  went,  and 
sat  her  down  over  against  Iiiiii  at  the  distance  as  it  were  oi 
a  bowshot :  for  she  said,  Let  me  not  see  the  death  of  the 
boy.  And  she  sat  over  against  //im,  and  lifted  up  her 
voice,  and  wept.     ^^  And  Elohim  heard  the  voice  of  the 


Spirit."  The  narrative  does  not  say,  but  it 
may  easily  be  supplied,  that  Hagar  -was 
abetting  her  son's  insolence.  The  Christian 
reader  will  remember  the  allegorization  of 
this  whole  history  in  the  passage  of  St. 
Paul  just  referred  to.  On  this  matter,  see 
notes  there.  11.]     This  notice   is   in 

exact  and  characteristic  accordance  with 
Abraham's  yearning  expressed  ch.  xvii.  18, 
"  Oh  that  Ishmael  might  live  before  thee  !  " 
12.]  in  Isaac  (i.  e.  in  the  line  of 
Isaac, — not  in  the  line  of  Ishmael)  shall 
thy  seed  (those  who  arc  truly  thy  descend- 
ants, and  above  all  the  seed  of  promise)  be 
called  (tliis  shall  be  the  line  where  all  that 
are  so  named    shall   be    found).  13.] 

The  same  had  been  promised  even  more  in 
detail,  eh.  xvii.  20.  It  seemed  to  be  a 
specialty  of  Abraham's  descendants  to  multi- 
ply into  nations;  the  very  fact  of  descent  from 
him  is  alleged  as  a  reason  why  Ishmael 
should  become  one.  14.]  The  divine  in- 

junction had  taken  place  in  the  night,  as 
in  ch.  XV.  1  ;  XX.  3,  6 ;  xxii.  1 ;  xxvi. 
24;  xxxi.  11,  24;  xlvi.  2.  This  imme- 
diate and  energetic  obedience  is  charac- 
teristic of  Abraham  :  sec  ch.  xxii.  3,  and 
compare  Matt.  ii.  14,  21.  Some  misunder- 
standing has   arisen    in    interpreting    this 


verse.  The  LXX.  render,  "  a7id  he  placed 
the  child  on  her  shoulder : "  so  also  the 
Targum  of  Onkelos,  the  Samaritan  Penta- 
teuch, and  the  ancient  Syriac  version : 
so  also  many  commentators.  But  such 
a  rendering  is  not  necessary,  nor  is  it 
adopted  by  the  Vulgate  nor  by  most  of  the 
principal  Hebraists.  The  lad  was  led  by 
the  hand:  sec  ver.  18.  The  leathern  bottle, 
as  may  be  seen  to  this  day  in  the  East,  and 
indeed  in  the  S.  of  Europe,  is  made  of  the 
whole  skin  of  an  animal  (in  this  case  of 
course  of  a  small  one,  such  as  a  goat  or  kid), 
the  fore  leg  serving  as  the  tap,  and  the  nick 
as  the  mouth  of  the  bottle.  Beer-sheba  is 
here  named  by  anticipation :  see  below,  ver. 
31.  Perhaps  she  wandered  hopelessly  forth 
into  the  wilderness.  But  the  direction  was 
towards  her  native  Egypt,  and  thither  she 
may  have  intended  to  direct  her  course.  Ver. 
21  shews  that  her  connexion  with  it  was 
afterwards    re-established.  15.]     she 

cast  the  boy  need  not  imply  that  he  was  a 
mere  child,  but  only  tliat  he  was  as  such  at 
this  time,  exhausted  with  tliirst  and  power- 
less. The  whole  description  is  most  vivid 
in  life  and  patlios.  She  would  not  see  his 
death,  and  yet  she  would  not  let  him  be  al- 
together out  of  her  presence.  17.]  The 


94  GENESIS.  XXI. 

lad ;  and  an  angel  of  EloTiIm  called  to  Hagar  from 
heaven,  and  said  unto  her,  What  aileth  thee,  Hagar  ? 
fear  not ;  for  Elohim  hath  heard  the  voice  of  the  lad 
where  he  is.  ^^  Arise,  lift  up  the  lad,  and  hold  him  by 
thine  hand  ;  for  I  will  make  him  a  great  nation.  ^^  And 
Elohim  opened  her  eyes,  and  she  saw  a  well  of  water ; 
and  she  went,  and  filled  the  skin  with  water,  and  gave  the 
lad  drink.  20  ^^d  Elohim  was  with  the  lad  ;  and  he 
grew,  and  dwelt  in  the  wilderness,  and  became  a  great 
archer.  21  J^^id  he  dwelt  in  the  wilderness  of  Paran  :  and 
his  mother  took  him  a  wife  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt. 
22  ^  And  it  came  to  pass  at  that  time,  that  Abimelech 
and  Phichol  the  chief  captain  of  his  host  spake  unto 
Abraham,  saying,  Elohim  is  with  thee  in  all  that  thou 
doest :  23  now  therefore  swear  unto  me  here  by  Elohim 
that  thou  wilt  not  deal  falsely  with  me,  nor  with  my  son, 
nor  with  my  son's  son :  according  to  the  kindness  that  I 
have  done  unto  thee,  thou  shalt  do  unto  me,  and  to  the 
land  wherein  thou  hast  sojourned.  24  And  Abraham  said, 
I  will  swear.  2o  And  Abraham  reproved  Abimelech  be- 
cause of  a  well  of  water,  which  Abimelcch's  servants  had 
violently  taken  away.     26  And  Abimelech  said,  I  wot  not 

weeping  of  the  lad  has  not  been  mentioned,  Job  xviii.  19  and  Isa.  xiv.  22,  in  both 
but  is  naturally  understood.  where  lie  which  they  are  rendered  by  "so«"  and 
is]  lit.  there,  where  he  is.  This  would  seem  "9iep/iew."  25.]  A  covenant  has  two 
as  if  the  distance  was  considerable.  sides,  and  Abraham  proceeds  to  enforce  the 
18.]  She  was  to  help  him  up,  in  token  that  part  due  to  him  also.  Kalisch  observes  on 
he  was  not  to  die,  but  to  be  reserved  the  passage :  "  One  may  hence  infer  (from 
for  great  ends.  19.]  The  impression  Abraham's  oath  to  Abimelech)  that  for  some 
conveyed  is  that  God  created  a  spring  time  at  least  the  southern  part  of  Philistia 
of  water  near  her,  but  this  is  not  neces-  was  not  attacked  by  the  Hebrews.  Eut, 
sarily  conveyed  in  the  words.  It  may  be  though  the  Philistines  wei'e  never  subjugated 
that  there  was  a  spring  near,  which  she  by  them,  it  is  certain  that  almost  incessant 
had  not  seen  before  in  her  weariness  hostilities  were  carried  on  between  both  na- 
and  despair.  21.]  On  the  wilder-  tions.  Thus,  immediately  after  the  couclu- 
ness  of  Paran,  see  on  Num.  x.  12.  sion  of  the  alliance,  a  contention  arose  which 
22 — 34.]  T/ie  covenant  beticeen  Abraham  threatened  to  result  in  serious  enmity. 
a7id  Abimelech.  Abinaelech,  see  ch.  xx.  14,  Abimelech's  servants  had  violently  seized  a 
15,  had  learned  that  Abraham  was  favoured  well  dug  by  Abraham.  A  more  serious  in- 
of  God,  and  no  doubt  knew  the  promise  of  jury  can  scaixely  be  inflicted  on  a  nomad 
future  greatness  that  awaited  his  seed  :  he  chief,  rich  in  flocks  and  herds.  The  posses- 
is  therefore  anxious  to  make  a  lasting  cove-  sion  of  a  well  in  arid  regions  not  uufre- 
nant  with  him.  23.]  son,  and  son's  quently  causes  strife  and  warfare  between 
son  are  literally  offspring  and  progeny :  whole  tribes,  and  the  protection  of  his  wells 
Prof.  Murphy  renders,  kin  and  kith.  The  is  a  prominent  object  of  solicitude  to  an  Arab 
two  Hebrew  words  mean  the  same  thing,  sheikh.  Abimelech,  therefore,  perceived 
and  are  found  together  in  two  other  places,  fully  the  force  of  Abraham's  complaint :  he 


18— XXII.  1. 


GENESIS. 


95 


v.']\o  liatli  done  this  thing  :  neither  didst  thou  tell  me, 
IK  illier  yet  heard  I  of  if,  but  to  day.  27  _/Vnd  Abraham 
liMik  sheep  and  oxen,  and  gave  them  unto  Abimclech  ; 
;ni(l  both  of  them  made  a  covenant.  28  ^j^j  Abraham  set 
M\en  ewe  lambs  of  the  flock  by  themselves.  29  j^nd 
Aliimclcch  said  unto  Abraham^  AVhat  »iean  these  seven 
c\\o  lambs  which  thou  hast  set  by  themselves?  30  ^^^ 
lie  said,  Because  thou  slialt  take  f/iesc  seven  ewe  lambs  of 
my  hand,  that  they  may  be  a  witness  unto  me,  that  I  have 
digged  this  well,  ^i  "Wherefore  ho  called  that  place 
jBeor-sheba ;    because    there    they   sware   both    of  them. 

32  Thus    they   made    a    covenant   at    Beer-sheba :    then 
[Abimelech  rose  up,  and  Phichol  the  chief  captain  of  his 

host,  and  they  returned  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines. 

33  ^  And  Abraham  planted  a  *"  grove  in  Bcer-shcba,  and 
called  there  on  the  name  of  Jehovah,  the  everlasting  God. 
3^  And  Abraham  sojourned  in  the  Philistines'  land  many 
days.     XXII.  i  And  it  came  to  pass  after  these  things. 


•  I  Sam.  xsii. 
6  ;  xxxi.  13. 


■was  indignant  at  the  injustice  of  bis  slaves, 
of  which  he  had  never  before  been  informed. 
But  the  patriarch,  desirous  of  obtaining  a 
guarantee  which  might  in  future  shield  his 
property  against  Abimelech's  subjects  also, 
conducted  him  to  the  well  (vv.  31,  32),  and 
here  concluded  with  him  a  treaty,  by  dividing 
animals,  and  passing  between  the  dissected 
parts ;  but  in  order  to  impart  still  greater 
solemnity  to  the  ceremony,  he  gave  besides 
seven  lambs  to  Abimclech,  to  serve  as  a  proof 
and  a  witness  that  the  well  belonged  to  him- 
self." 31.]  Beer-sheba  (Hab.  in  this 
and  the  other  early  notices  of  the  place, 
Beer  shahah)  may  mean  either  the  icell  of 
the  oath,  as  here  interpreted,  or  the  well  of 
seven  (from  the  seven  lambs  of  vv.  29,  30), 
which  is  in  fact  the  same  thing  (seven  being 
the  sacred  number  of  completion) :  see  on  oh. 
xxvi.  33.  The  spot  is  one  of  the  most  inter- 
esting in  Palestine.  It  meets  the  traveller  as 
he  enters  from  the  south,  and  retains  its 
ancient  name  "  as  nearly  as  an  Arabic  signifi- 
cation will  permit,  Bir-es-sebu — '  the  well  of 
the  lion,'  or,  '  of  seven.'  There  are  at 
present  on  the  spot  two  principal  wells,  and 
five  smaller  ones."  Mr.  Grove,  Biblical  Diet., 
where  is  a  full  description.  The  history  of  this 
spot  will  be  dealt  with  at  the  various  mentions 
of  it :   sec  especially  ch.  xxvi.  33 ;   1  Sam. 


viii.  2;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  7;  1  Kings  xix.  3;  Amos 
V.  5 ;  viii.  14 ;  Neh.  xi.  30.  32.]  From 

tlie  presence  of  the  captain  of  the  host,  we 
may  infer  that  tlie  covenant  was  accompanied 
with  official  solemnity.  It  is  inferred  by 
Knobel  that  the  mention  of  the  land  of  the 
Philistines  betrays  the  commencement  of  the 
Jehovistic  supplement  at  this  verse,  which 
beyoud  question  includes  the  two  following. 
33.]  a  grove  best  represents  the  sense 
of  the  word  aishel,  which  in  its  simple  sense 
means  a  tamarisk  tree.  It  occurs  only  in  reff. 
besides.  The  title  of  God  here  used,  the 
everlasting  God,  the  God  of  the  age,  i.  e. 
eternity,  is  found  only  in  Isa.  xl.  28  besides 
this  place.  St.  Paul  uses  the  equivalent 
Greek  epithet  in  Kom.  xvi.  26.  34.] 

During  tliese  many  days  Isaac  grew  up  from 
a  child  to  sucli  au  age  that  he  was  able  to 
bear  tiie  wood  for  the  ofl'ering,  ch.  xxii.  6. 

XXII.  1 — 19.]  Abraham's  obedience  to 
God.  The  general  remarks  of  Kalisch  are 
worth  quoting  :  "The  readiness  of  Abraliam 
to  sacrifice  his  son  has  always  been  con- 
sidered as  the  greatest  deed  of  faith  on  re- 
cord, and  as  an  act  of  self-control  at  which 
the  mind  stands  amazed.  It  became  the 
basis  on  whicii  the  Israelites  founded  their 
claims  of  election  among  tlie  nations,  and 
the  later  Jews  their  hopes  of  atonement ;  it 


96 


GENESIS. 


XXII. 


sTIxod.  XV.  25  ; 
xvi.  i ;  XX. 
20.   Ps.  xxvi. 


that  the  Elolilm  did  ^  try  Abraham,  and  said  unto  liira, 
Abraham  :  and  he  said,  Behold,  here  I  am.  2  ^^^l  he 
said,  Take  now  thy  son,  thine  only  one,  whom  thou  lovest, 
Isaac,  and  get  thee  into  the  land  of  Moriah  ;  and  offer 


served  the  Christians  as  a  type  of  redemp- 
tion, and  salvation  through  faith ;  and  it  is 
in  the  religion  of  Mohammed  ghirified  as  the 
highest  example  and  model  of  piety.  It  has 
indeed  exercised  a  powerful  and  ennobling 
influence  upon  almost  all  nations  and  all 
times." 

This  section  at  first  sight  seems  due  to  the 
Elohistic  portion  of  this  book,  but  on  ex- 
amination this  impression  is  changed.  As 
Knobel  well  remarks,  nothing  but  the  sacred 
name  Elohim  favours  such  an  idea.  Every- 
thing is  full  of  the  Jehovistic  character. 
The  strong  anthropomorphism,  exemplified 
in  God  trying  Abraham  (ver.  1),  satisfying 
Himself  by  the  trial  (ver.  12),  swearing  (ver. 
16),  and  numerous  other  details  dependent 
on  the  use  of  Hebrew  words  and  expressions, 
plainly  declare  which  portion  of  the  sacred 
book  is  before  us.  The  use  of  the  divine 
names,  as  in  several  other  eases,  is  matter 
of  accurate  and  careful  discrimination,  as  will 
be  seen  in  the  course  of  the  notes. 
1.]  after  these  things  casts  the  thought 
back  upon  the  events  recently  narrated — the 
long  course  of  indefinite  promise — the  short- 
er period  during  which  the  promise  had  be- 
come definite  and  specified — the  birth  of  the 
son  of  promise,  and  his  waxing  onward 
amidst  the  joy  and  hope  of  his  parents. 
When  all  this  was  at  its  climax,  and  trial 
seemed  over,  then  ....  God  tried  Abraham, 
....  with  a  trial  of  such  magnitude  that  it 
seemed  as  if  he  had  never  been  tried  before. 
God]  Elohim.  This  name  is  used 
throughout  the  former  portion  of  the  narra- 
tive, in  which  the  general  God-fearing  of 
Abraham  is  in  question,  and  in  which  God 
appears  as  the  instigator  of  a  practice  foreign 
to  the  Covenant  in  virtue  of  which  His 
sacred  name  was  Jehovah, — a  practice  com- 
mon to  the  nations  outside  tlie  Covenant. 
See  further  on  ver.  11.  did  try  Abra- 

ham] See  reff.  The  vision  was  by  night : 
see  ver.  3.  The  command  came, — there  is  no 
escape  from  the  plain  fact, — not  from  any 
thought  of  Abraham's  mind,  but  from  God, 
the  true  God,  Himself.  It  was  one  of  those 
mysterious,  but  surely  not  to  be  doubted, 
communications  from  the  Father  of   man's 


spirit,  in  which  he  tries  and  proves  His 
creatures,  and  none  so  much  as  those  nearest 
to  Himself.  Everything  was  against  the 
probability  of  this  command  being  from  God. 
Abi'aham  knew,  quite  as  well  as  modern 
rationalists,  the  cogent  a  priori  reasons  why 
such  a  command  should  not,  could  not  (he 
might  be  disposed  by  his  own  reason  to  say) 
proceed  from  God.  But  the  fact  that  it  did 
so  proceed  overbore  all  a  priori  considera- 
tions, and  herein  consisted  the  nobility  of 
Abraham's  faith.  And  is  there  not  abund- 
ant analogy  for  such  a  proceeding  on  the 
part  of  God .'  "What  seems  so  cruel  and 
uncalled-for  as  the  removal  of  many  a  be- 
loved desire  of  man's  eyes  with  a  stroke, 
and  for  the  same  purpose  as  the  command 
here  was   given  ?  •  2.]    Each  designa- 

tion mounts  upward  iu  climax  after  the 
other :  thy  son,  thine  only  one, — whom 
thou  lovest,  Isaac,  the  personal  designa- 
tion coming  last,  and  clenching  as  it  were 
the  identification  of  the  very  heir  of  the 
promise  himself.  There  was  in  the  com- 
mand no  softening,  but  rather  all  aggrava- 
tion, of  the  trial.  the  land  of  Moriah] 
About  the  situation  of  this  country  there  is 
considerable  controversy.  The  landmarks  to 
guide  us  through  it  seem  to  be  these :  1. 
We  must  search,  not  for  a  hill,  but  for  a  dis- 
trict. 2.  One  condition  of  its  genuineness  is 
tliat  it  should  contain  a  mountain  {'■'■  the 23lace 
of  ichich  God  told  him"),  visible  afar  off 
(ver.  4).  And  3.  This  at  three  days' journey 
(at  most)  from  the  Philistines'  land  (not  from 
Beersheba  necessarily,  for  we  have  no  right 
to  assume  that  Abraham  continued  to  dwell 
there;  indeed,  by  one  ver.,  19,  it  seems  im- 
probable that  he  did).  4.  The  place  was 
solitary.  Abraham  left  the  servants  and  ad- 
vanced to  it  Avith  Isaac  alone,  to  avoid 
human  eyes  witnessing  what  should  then 
take  place.  Now  when  with  these  guides 
we  come  to  the  controversy,  we  find  two 
rival  spots  with  claims  to  be  adjudged.  («) 
Mount  jMoriah,  where  in  aftei'-ages  Solomon's 
temple  was  built:  2  Chron.  iii.  1,  "Then 
Solomon  began  to  build  tlic  house  of  Jehovah 
at  Jerusalem  in  Mount  Moriah,  where  Je- 
hovah appeared  unto  David  his  father,  iu  the 


2—5. 


GENESIS. 


97 


liim  there  for  a  burnt  offering  upon  one  of  the  mountains 
wliicli  I  will  tell  thee  of.  ^  ^j^  ^y^^  Abraham  rose  up 
early  in  the  morning,  and  saddled  his  ass,  and  took  two 
of  his  young  men  with  him,  and  Isaac  his  son,  and  clave 
the  wood  for  the  burnt  offering,  and  rose  up,  and  went 
unto  the  place  of  which  the  Elohim  had  told  him.  ^  Then 
on  the  tliird  day  Abraham  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw  the 
place  afar  off.  ^  And  Abraliam  said  unlo  his  young  men, 
Abide  ye  here  with  the  ass  ;  and  I  and  the  lad  will  go 


place  that  David  had  prepared  in  the  thresh- 
ing-floor of  Oman  the  Jehusite.  And  such 
has  hocn  in  the  main  the  Jewish,  and  also 
the  Christian,  tradition.  The  temptation  to 
adopt  and  defend  it  has  been  great  both  to 
Jews  and  to  Christians:  to  the  former  he- 
canse  it  adds  anotlier  glory  to  the  city  of  their 
solemnities,  to  the  latter  because  of  typical 
associations  connecting  this  sacrifice  with  that 
greater  one  offered  in  the  fidness  of  time  at 
Jerusalem.  But  there  are  weis^hty  considera- 
tions against  this  view  :  the  first  and  greatest 
being  tliat  in  no  one  place  of  Scripture,  and 
rot,  as  is  plain  from  the  quotation  above,  in 
that  place  where  of  all  others  we  should  look 
for  it,  is  there  the  slightest  intimation  of  this 
sacred  association  having  been  conne.  ted 
with  the  spot.  Commentators  of  strong 
fancy,  e.  g.  the  excellent  Rp.  "Wordsworth, 
speak  of  this  opinion  as  "grounded  on"  2 
Chron  iii.  1,  but,  as  has  been  seen,  without 
a  shadow  of  a  reason.  If  we  apply  to  this 
view  tiie  tests  above  enumerated,  the  case 
will  stand  thus :  The  district  in  which  the 
temple  elevation  is  found  is  certainly  moun- 
tainous, but  the  particular  spot  is  so  far  from 
being  seen  afar  off,  that  it  is  surrounded  by 
higher  eminences  preventing  its  being  seen 
till  one  is  very  near  upon  it.  The  third  test, 
that  it  should  be  three  days'  journey,  at  most, 
from  the  Philistines'  land,  may  be  said  to  be 
satisfied.  The  distance  of  Jeru;-aleni  from 
Beer-slieba  and  its  neighbourhood  is  about 
40  miles,  which  miglit  he  dividid  into  15, 
15,  and  10.  The  fourth  test,  that  of  soli- 
tude, tries  this  hypothesis  severely.  If  the 
temple  elevation  were  the  place  it  would 
be  certainly  close  to,  if  not  part  of,  tiie 
Jehusite  city.  It  is  a  remarkable  feature  of 
the  liistory  of  this  idea,  that  Christian  tradi- 
tion, for  the  purposes  of  its  typology,  shifted 
the  place  from  Moriali  in  Jerusalem  to  Cal- 
vary, and  still  shows  it,  even  to  the  thicket 


in  which  the  ram  was  caught,  close  to  the 
church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre.  (6)  The 
second  candidate  for  identity  with  the  spot  of 
Abraham's  sacrifice  is  Mount  Gerizim,  over 
Sliechem,  or  Nahlous.  Tliere  Abraham  had 
dwelt  on  his  first  entrance  into  Canaan ; 
there  Jr/wvnh  had  appeared  to  him,  and  he 
had  built  an  altar  to  him  (eh.  xii.  5)  under 
the  oak  of  Moreh  (see  note  there).  The 
spot  well  satisfies  the  test  of  being  conspicu- 
ous from  afar  off,  and  is  perhaps  within  the 
required  distance  from  some  parts  of  the 
Philistines'  land,  tliongh  not  from  Beer- 
sheba  (being  nearly  80  miles  of).  The  re- 
quirement of  solitude  would  also  be  abund- 
antly satisfied.  The  strongest  point  against 
it,  in  my  mind,  is  that  it  is  the  spot  fixed  on 
by  Samaritan  tradition,  which  held  tliat  "  in 
this  mountain  men  ought  to  worship,  and 
not  in  Jerusalem."  But  this  is  by  no  means 
decisive.  And  it  is  curious  that  the  same 
expression  (Maehom)  which  designated 
Sichem  inch.  xii.  6,  "  the  place  of  Sicheni," 
is  twice  used  here  in  the  narrative,  "  the 
place  of  which  God  had  told  him,"  "saw  the 
2)lace  afar  off."  On  the  whole,  we  may  ven- 
ture to  say  that  the  matter  must  be  still  re- 
garded as  a  dimhtful  one.  The  discussion 
maybe  seen  well  given  in  Mr.  Grove's  art. 
" Moriah  "  and  Mr.  Ffoulkes's  "Gerizim"  in 
the  Biblical  Diet.  3.]  See  on  eh.  xxi. 

14.  4.]  At  what  time  on  the  third  day 

is  not  said,  but  Mr.  Grove's  remark  on  ver.  5, 
that  we  are  not  told  how  many  more  days 
were  required  to  roach  the  spot,  is  hardly 
justified  by  the  context,  which  seems  to  im- 
ply that  the  place  was  at  all  events  so  near 
as  to  make  the  presence  of  the  young  men 
from  tiiat  point  undesirable  ;  besides  that 
the  details,  the  laying  the  wood  on  Isaac, 
and  the  taking  xXxoJire,  are  against  the  idea 
of  a  considerable  distance  intervening.  It 
is  doubtless  in  the  interest  of  the  Gerizim 


98 


GENESIS. 


XXII. 


yonder  and  worship,  and  come  again  to  you.  ^  And 
Abraham  took  the  wood  of  the  bvirnt  offering,  and  laid  it 
upon  Isaac  his  son  ;  and  he  took  the  fire  in  his  hand,  and 
the  knife  ;  and  they  went  both  of  them  together.  7  And 
Isaac  spake  unto  Abraham  his  father,  and  said,  My 
father  :  and  he  said.  Here  am  I,  my  son.  And  he  said, 
Behold  the  fire  and  the  wood  :  but  where  is  the  lamb  for 
a  burnt  offering  ?  ^  And  Abraham  said.  My  son,  Elohim 
will  provide  himself  a  lamb  for  a  burnt  offering  :  and 
they  went  both  of  them  together.  ^  And  they  came  to 
the  place  which  the  Elohim  had  told  him  of ;  and  Abra- 
ham built  an  altar  there,  and  laid  the  wood  in  order,  and 
bound  Isaac  his  son,  and  laid  him  on  the  altar  upon  the 


hypothesis  to  lengthen  the  time  of  the 
journey;  but  the  text  will  hardly  bear  it. 
It  would  seem  that  Abraham  had  some  pre- 
sentiment that  the  lad's  life  would  be  spared. 
Some  fancy  that  his  words  were  a  mere 
excuse  without  truth,  and  refer  to  his  deal- 
ing in  Egypt  and  at  Gerar.  Nor  would  the 
inconsistency  even  at  such  a  time  be  past 
example.  One  part  of  the  moral  being  may 
be  intensely  alive,  while  another  is  dead  and 
without    sensation.  the    fire,    wbich 

Abraham  took  in  his  hand,  was  a  brand,  or 
torch,  kindled  at  the  spot  where  he  left 
the  servants.  This  is  entirely  against  the 
idea  that  the  distance  from  that  spot  to  the 
place  of  sacrifice  might  have  been  a  day's 
journey  or  more.  7,  8.]  All  comment- 

ators have  remarked  on  the  pathos  and 
grandeur  of  these  verses.  The  repetition  of 
his  father,  my  father,  my  son;— the  art- 
lessness  of  Isaac's  question,  —  the  high 
resignation  of  Abraham's  answer,  and  then 
the  result,  repeated  from  before,  and  (not- 
withstanding,—still)  they  went  both  of 
them  together,  the  father  in  his  noble 
resolve,  the  son  in  his  trusting  simplicity, 
these  mark  the  sacred  narrative  as  stand- 
ing in  the  very  first  place  for  truth  and 
for  power.  This  wliole  incident  is  to  the 
Christian  mind  full  of  type  and  suggestion 
of  the  most  sacred  kind.  All  the  more 
should  our  fancy  be  kept  in  check  in  in- 
terpreting details.  The  minnte  parallel- 
izing of  these  with  the  majestic  facts  of  our 
redemption,  as  carried  out  by  some  comment- 
ators, tends  only  to  cast  dishonour  on  the 
joy  of  the  Christian  heart,  with  which  the 


stranger  intermeddlcth  not.  I  refrain  from 
giving  instances  throughout,  as  they  might 
be  culled  from  modern  commentaries.  I 
would  simply  warn  the  reader  by  way  of  ex- 
ample against  such  fancies  as  that  when 
Abraham  said,  "  God  will  provide  Himself 
a  lamb  for  a  burnt  offering,"  he  "with  the 
eye  of  faith,  quickened  by  God's  Spirit,  saw 
Christ."  This,  which  is  Mp.  Wordsworth's 
view,  is  a  violation  of  the  far  more  revei'ent 
tact  of  St.  Ambrose,  whom  he  quotes  to 
justify  it,  but  who  says,  "  Abraham  pro- 
phesied in  substance,  not  in  consciousness." 
This  we  are  all  ready  to  allow,  while  we  in- 
stinctively shrink  from  that  other.  It  is  a 
more  intei'esting  and  safer  question  for  us, 
whether  Abraham  in  tliese  words  contem- 
plated any  such  deliverance  as  that  which 
really  took  place.  From  his  subsequent 
ready  compliance  in  act,  it  would  seem  that 
we  must  answer  this  in  the  negative,  and 
must  take  refuge  in  the  assurance  of  the 
writer  to  the  Hebrews  that  Abraham  "ac- 
counted that  God  was  able  to  raise  Isaac  up, 
even  from  the  dead."  It  is  refreshing,  after 
reading  long  pages  of  notes  full  of  forced 
analogies  and  unreal  parallelisms,  to  go  back 
to  the  manly  simplicity  of  the  apostolic 
writer,  and  to  feel  that  here  we  are  on 
ground  common  to  all  who  have  the  faith  of 
Abraham  and  of  Christ.  9.]  God  then 

had  revealed  to  him  not  only  the  locality, 
but  the  very  spot.  And  it  would  hardly  be 
the  same  as  that  where  he  had  built  an  altar 
before  (ch.  xii.  6,  7),  or  we  should  rather 
read  that  h&repaired  the  altar  which  he  liad 
built.     He  built  an  altar,  viz.  by  gathering 


G—irj. 


GENESIS. 


99 


wood.  10  And  Abraham  stretched  forth  his  hand,  and 
took  the  knife  to  shiy  his  son.  ^^  And  an  angel  of 
Jehovah  called  unto  him  out  of  heaven,  and  said,  Abra- 
ham, Abraham :  and  ho  said.  Here  run  I.  ^^  ^^^jj  ]^q 
said,  Lay  not  thine  hand  ujDon  the  lad,  neither  do  thou 
any  thing  unto  him  :  for  now  I  know  that  thou  fearcst 
Eh)him,  seeing  thou  hast  not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  only 
one,  from  me.  ^^  ^\^ji(j  Abraham  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and 
looked,  and  behold  behind  //iin  a  ram  caught  in  a  thicket 
by  his  horns  :  and  Abraham  went  and  took  the  rain,  and 
offered  him  up  for  a  burnt  offering  in  the  stead  of  his  son. 
^^  And  Abraham  called  the  name  of  that  place  Jchovah- 
jireh  (i.  e.  Jehovah  seeth)  :  as  it  is  said  to  this  day.  In  the 
mount  of  Jehovah  it  shall  be  seen,     i^  ^  And  an  angel  of 


and  builiHiiij  up  the  stones  lying  on  the 
mount;iiii-tup,  :i  work  of  a  very  short  time. 

10.]  The  pictures  are  perhaps  hardly 
riglit  wliich  represent  liim  with  tlie  knife 
elevated  to  strike  his  son.  Rather  may 
•we  imngiue  that  the  moment  was  just 
he    ffrasped    the    knife    where    it    lay. 

11.]  We  now  first  have  the  coven- 
ant God,  Jehovah,  by  special  interference 
arresting  the  course  of  that  obedience  with 
which  lie  was  fully  satisfied.  The  angel 
of  Jehovah  speaks  with  the  power  and  in 
t!ie  person  of  Jehovah  Himself:  see  esp. 
Exod.  iii.  2,  6,  and  notes.  We  have  no 
right  to  say,  in  tliis  or  any  similar  instances, 
that  this  angel  was  Christ  Himself.  The 
double  appellation,  Abraham,  Abraham, 
served  to  arrest  immediate  attention  to  the 
urgency    of    the    call.  -12.]     "The 

original  '  I  have  known'  denotes  an  eventual 
:nowing,  a  discovering  by  actual  experi- 
ment." ilurpby.  thou  fearest  God 
(Elcihim)]  This  was  the  great  subject  of  the 
trial,  Abraham's  God-fearing  character.  The 
Divine  name  is  tbei'efore  the  general  one, 
and  not  that  of  the  especial  Covenant  God. 

13.]  There  is  some  dispute  among 
Hebraists  about  the  expression  behind  /lim, 
seeing  it  is  said  merely  that  Abraham 
"  lifted  xtp  his  eyes,"  not  that  he  turned 
himself.  Kalisch  insists  on  the  sense  '•  in  the 
backijround,"  behind  the  things  immediately 
present.  But  in  this  he  seems  to  stand 
alone.  Prof.  Murphy  thinks  that  the  voice 
was  heard  behind  Abraham,  causing  him  to 
turu  round,  and  then  he  "lifted  up  his  eyes." 


The  word  rendered  ^^ behind"  nowhere  else 
occurs  as  an  adverh  of  place  (Knobel).  But 
it  seems  beyond  doubt  that  it  must  he  so 
taken.  14.]  The  name,  Jehovah  seeth 

or  provideth,  recalled  to  mind  not  only 
God's  mercy  to  him,  but  the  fulfilment  of  his 
own  saying,  whether  that  saying  were  con- 
scious or  unconscious  of  such  meaning, 
"God  will  provide  himself  a  lamb,"  &c., 
the  Hebrew  verb  in  both  sentences  being 
the  same.  In  the  popular  saying  there  is 
an  allusion  to  the  name  Jloriah,  tlie  moun- 
tain of  vision.  It  imports  proverbially  that 
difficulties  and  trials  will  receive  their  solu- 
tion on  the  mountain  of  Jehovali,  or  at  the 
place  which  God  has  appointed  for  action. 
'This  seems  the  most  probable  meaning. 
Many  others  have  been  given,  as,  e.  g.  the 
saying  by  Kalisch,  that  it  alluded  to  the 
worship  herealtcr  to  be  paid  on  that  mount, 
"On  the  mount  of  the  Lord  His  people 
shall  be  seen,  or  appear  ;  "  by  Keil,  "  On  the 
mount  where  Jehovah  appears,"  denying,  as 
is  the  usual  way  of  one  llebraist  against  an- 
other, the  possibility  of  the  rendering  "  it 
will  be  seen."  Again,  others  propose,  "in 
the  mount  of  the  Lord  He  will  be  seen," 
i.  e.  will  appear  for  His  people's  deliverance. 
The  result  of  these  varying  opinions,  as  in 
so  many  other  eases,  must  be  to  cause  us  to 
repeat,  while  of  necessity  giving  a  provisional 
preference  to  one  among  them,  that  as  yet 
no  satisfactory  solution  of  the  meaning  of 
the  phrase  has  been  arrived  at.  15  —  19.] 

The  reneical  of  the  covenant  promised  to 
Abraham  on  the  ground  of  his  obedience  in 


100 


GENESIS. 


XXII. 


xxiii.  1,  &c. 


r  Matt.  xvi.  18. 
See  Ps. 
lxxxvii.2. 
Isa.  xiv.31 ; 
xsiv.  12. 


Jehovah  called  xmto  Abraham  out  of  heaven  the  second 
tNum.xxiv.3,  time.  16  and  said,  Bv  myself  have  I  sworn,  *  saith  Jehovah, 

2K.     'Z  Sain.  '  ■'..«/  •' 

for  because  thou  hast  done  this  thing,  and  hast  not  with-  . 
held  th}^  son,  thine  only  one  :  ^7  that  in  blessing-  I  will 
bless  thee,  and  in  multijolying  I  will  multiply  thy  seed  as 
the  stars  of  the  heaven,  and  as  the  "  sand  which  is  upon 
the  sea  shore ;  and  thy  seed  shall  possess  the  ^  gate  of  his 
enemies  ;  ^^  and  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth  be  blessed ;  because  thou  hast  obeyed  my  voice. 
19  So  Abraham  returned  unto  his  young  men,  and  they 
rose  vip  and  went  together  to  Beer-sheba  ;  and  Abraham 
dwelt  at  Beer-sheba.  20  ^  ^Vnd  it  came  to  pass  after 
these  things,  that  it  was  told  Abraham,  saying,  Behold, 
Milcah,  she  hath  also  born  children  unto  thy  brother  Na- 
hor  ;  21  Uz  his  firstborn,  and  Buz  his  brother,  and  Kemuel 
the  father  of  Aram,  22  and  Chesed,  and  Hazo,  and  Pil- 
dash,  and  Jidlaph,  and  Bethuel.  23  And.  Bethuel  begat 
Eebekah  :  these  eight  Milcah  did  bear  to  Nahor,  Abra- 
ham's brother.     24  j^^y^^  \^[g  concubine,  whose  name  was 


this  trial.  16.]  "  God  swears  either  by 

Himself  (compare  ,Ter.  xxii.  5;  xlix.  13),  or 
by  His  eternal  attributes,  and  His  wonderful 
works  (Deut.  xxxii  40,  &c.),  whereas  man 
solemnly  pledges  his  faith  either  by  invoking 
God  or  the  impi'rishable  soul  which  He 
has  imparted  to  him  (compare  cli.  xiv.  22  ; 
2  Kings  ii.  2  ;  Jer.  xxxviii.  16,  &c.).  These 
ideas  arc  so  natural,  that  the  oath,  '  I  swear 
by  myself,'  may  date  from  the  earliest  times 
of  a  conscious  knowledge  of  God,  and  in 
itself  in  no  manner  presupposes  a  later 
origin."  Kaliseh,  The  Christian  reader  may, 
for  the  rationale  of  such  an  oath  on  the  part 
of  God,  refer  to  Heb.  vi.  13,  14,  which  com- 
ments on  this  very  passage.  See  also  Exod. 
xxxii.  13,  where  Moses  adduces  this  oath  in 
prayer  for  Israel's  rescue  from  destruction. 
The  expression  rendered  saith  Jehovah  is 
not  the  common  phrase  in  narrative,  but  one 
betokening  poetic  or  prophetic  utterance : 
see  reff.  It  is  the  usual  phrase  in  the  pro- 
phets, "  saith  Jehovah."  17,]  On 
the  promise  see  ch.  xv.  5.  The  additional 
comparison  of  the  sand  is  f(mnd  here  (see 
reff.),  carrying  the  thought  of  multitude  still 
further.  Possessing  the  gate  is  being  master 
of  the  access,  and  so  of  the  city.  The  gate 
was  the  place  of  public  resort,  and  of  council, 


and  so  came,  as  in  the  expression,  the  Otto- 
man Porte,  to  signify  the  power  of  a  nation 
or  city.     See  reff.  18.]  See  above,  ch. 

xii.  3.  19  ]  It  does  not  appear   whe- 

ther they  had  sot  out  from  Beer-sheba:  see 
onver.  2.  20-24.]   Nolire  of  offspring 

in  the  line  of  Ahtahnnis  brother  iS'fihor. 
The  intent  of  inserting  this  appears  to  be  in 
order  to  keep  up  connexion  with  the  branch 
of  the  family,  from  which  Isaac's  wife  was 
to  be  taken.  Milcah  was  daughter  of 
Haran,  and  sister  to  Lot  (ch.  xi.  27,  29). 
The  remarkable  thing  about  the  genealogy 
is  its  strict  analogy  with  the  family  of  Jacob. 
Like  that,  the  house  of  Nahor  has  twelve 
sons  :  like  that,  eight  by  the  wife,  and  four 
by  the  concubine.  The  same  number  of 
sons  are  also  reckoned  to  Ishmael  (ch.  xvii. 
20;  XXV.  13—15).  Another  thing  to  be 
noticed  is  that  the  same  names  (in  part)  are 
found  here  which  have  already  occurred 
either  in  the  pedigree  of  the  race  of  Shem  in 
ch.  X.,  or  in  the  course  of  the  history. 
Uz  (or  Huz),  e.  g.  is  nam(>d  in  ch.  x. 
23  as  one  of  the  children  of  Aram,  and  it 
was  from  Ur  of  the  Chassidim  (Cliald;rans) 
that  Abram  was  called.  "Whereas  here 
Chesed  is  a  son  of  Nahor.  But  there  is  no 
reason  against  the  repetition  of  names  in  the 


16— XXIII.  G. 


GENESIS. 


101 


Hcuinali,  she  bare  also  Tebah,  and  Galiani,  and  Tliahash, 
and  Maachah.  XXIII.  ^  And  Sarah  was  an  hundred  and 
seven  and  twenty  years  old :  these  u-erc  tlie  years  of  the 
life  of  Sarah.  ^  Ji^^^i  (Sarah  died  in  Kirjath-arba  ;  the 
same  is  Hebron  in  the  Luul  of  Canaan  :  and  Abraham 
canio  to  mourn  for  Sarah,  and  to  weep  for  her.  ^  if  And 
Abraham  stood  up  from  before  his  dead,  and  spake  unto 
the  sons  of  Ileth,  saying,  "^  I  am  a  stranger  and  a  so- 
journer with  you  :  give  me  a  possession  of  a  buryingpkico 
with  you,  that  I  may  bury  my  dead  out  of  my  sight. 
^  And  the  children  of  Ileth  answered  Abraham,  saying 
unto    him,  ^  Hear    us,    my    lord :     thou    art  a  prince   of 


line  of  Slieni :  wc  have  already  two  in 
Abiain's  fainily  bciiring  tlic  name  of  Xalior, 
Abraham's  grandfather  and  brother:  and 
Ur  of  the  Chassidim  may  be  thus  called  by 
anticipation.  See  Job  xxxii.  2.  Elihu  is 
saiil  to  be  a  Biizite,  of  the  kindred  of  Ram 
(=  Aram).  Of  Kemuel,  I'ildash,  Jidlaph, 
nothing  more  is  known.  Knobel  traces 
Ilazo  in  a  district-name,  Cliazene,  of  whicli 
there  was  one  in  Mesopotamia,  and  one  in 
Assyria.  Betliuel  appears  afterwards  in  the 
narrative  of  eh.  xxiv.:  see  there.  Tebah 
(Thibatli),  near  the  city  of  the  Syrian  king 
Hadadezer,  1  Chron.  xviii.  8  (called  Bu'tali 
in  2  Sam.  viii.  8).  Tiiahasli  is  traced  in  a 
town  Atachas,  N.W.  of  Ki^ibis.  We  have 
an  Aram-Maacluih  in  1  Chron.  xix.  6 
(Syria-iMaacliah  in  A.  V.);  the  border  of 
Og,  king  of  Bashan,  reached  as  far  as  to  the 
^Maacbathites  (Josh.  xii.  5) ;  the  tribe  of 
Manasseh  took  the  country  of  Argob  to  tlie 
coasts  of  Gesliuri  and  MaachaMii  (Dent.  iii. 
14):  see  also  Josli.  xiii.  II,  13,  where  it  is 
stated  that  the  Gesluirites  and  JIaacliathites 
still  dwelt  among  the  Manassites.  "We  have 
the  city  Abel  of  Beth-maacliali  mentioned 
2  Sam.  XX.  15;  1  Kings  xv.  20;  2  Kings 
XV.  29.  It  is  worth  notice  tliat  Absalom's 
motlier  was  Maacah,  daughter  of  'I'almai, 
king  of  Geshnr  (2  Sam.  iii.  3),  and  that  .Ab- 
salom's daughter  bore  the  same  name,  1 
Kings  XV.  2  ;  2  Chron.  xi.  20. 

XXII 1.  Death  of  Sarah.  Purchase  by 
Abraham  of  the  cave  of  Mac/ipc/ah  as  a  bury- 
ing place  for  her.  Sarah  is  the  only  woman 
■whose  age  is  mentioned  in  the  Scripture. 
Slie  occupies  an  important  place,  as  the 
mother  of  the  cliosen  people  (see  1  Pet.  iii. 
6  ;  Isa.  li.  2).  2.]     On  Hebron,  sec 


note,  ch.  xiii.  18.  Tlic  words  in  the  land  of 
Canaan  are  added  for  fulness  of  desi-ri[)tion, 
but  not  without  reference  to  tlie  fiict  that 
thus  the  mother  of  the  faithful  rested  in  the 
land  promised  to  her  descendants.  Abra- 

ham came]  Probably  from  some  nomad  ex- 
cursion in  the  iieiglibourhood,  or  perhaps 
(but  this  is  not  so  likely)  from  Becr-sheba, 
where  he  is  last  heard  of  aa  dwelling,  ch. 
xxii.    19.  3.]     Abraham    must    be 

thought  of  as  "  weeping  over  the  face  "  of 
Sarah  (2  Kings  xiii.  U),  and  he  rises  up 
from  the  face  (so  refP.)  of  his  dead.  In 
this  rising  u])  is  implied  tlie  act  of  going  to 
the  gate  of  the  city  where  the  sons  of  Ileth 
(or  Ilittites)  were  assembled.  These  sons  of 
ileth  were  Canaanites  (ch.  x.  lo) ;  from 
them  afterwards  Esau  took  wives,  ch.  xxvi. 
34,  35.  4.]    Abraham  knew  that  the 

land  of  Canaan  was  to  be  the  inheritance  of 
his  seed ;  and  the  securing  a  grave  in  it  for 
his  and  for  himself  was  an  act  of  faith  on  his 
part.  The  possession  of  a  buryingplace 
clearly  had  reference  to  future  burials  as 
well  as  to  that  now  urgent.  5.]  The 

reply  of  the  eliiUlien  of  Ileth  is  deeply  re- 
spectlul  to  Abraham,  and  confers  on  him  an 
unusual  favour — admission  for  his  dead  into 
the  family  sepulchres  of  the  inhabitants: 
but  it  does  not  meet  the  point  at  which  his 
request  had  aimed.  There  is  some  dilhcnlty 
in  the  word  rendered  "unto  him  ;"  it  is 
unusual  in  such  a  connexion.  But  there 
seems  no  reason  for  departing  from  the  A.  V. 
Tiie  LXX.  have  rendered  it  as  if  it  were  an- 
other word  of  similar  sound,  and  signified 
"  No  ;  "  "  Not  so,  my  lord."  But  there  can 
be  little  doubt  that  this  is  an  instance  of  the 
carelessness  of  which  that  celebrated  version 


102  GENESIS.  XXIII. 


wExod.xv. 4.    God  amonjT:  lis:  in   tlie  "^clioice  of  our  sepulch.res  bury 

Deut.  xii.  11.  "  ■■■  _•' 

Ez'l;k'?xiiv'.5.  thy  dead ;  none  of  ns  sliall  withliold  from  thee  his 
sepulchre,  but  that  thou  mayest  bury  thy  dead.  7  And 
Abraham  stood  up,  and  bowed  himself  to  the  people 
of  the  land,  even  to  the  children  of  Ileth.  ^  And 
he  communed  with  them,  saying,  If  it  be  your  mind 
that  I  should  bury  my  dead  out  of  my  sight ;  hear 
me,  and  intrcat  for  me  to  Ephron  the  son  of  Zohar, 
^  that  he  may  give  me  the  cave  of  Machpelah,  which  he 
hath,  which  is  in  the  end  of  his  field  ;  for  as  much  money 
as  it  is  w^orth  he  shall  give  it  me  for  a  possession  of  a 
buryingplace  amongst  you.  ^^  And  Ephron  sat  among 
the  children  of  Heth :  and  EjDhron  the  Hittite  answered 
Abraham  in  the  audience  of  the  children  of  Ileth,  of  all 
that  went  in  at  the  gate  of  his  city,  saying,  ^^  Naj^  my 
lord,  hear  me  :  the  field  give  I  thee,  and  the  cave  that  is 
therein,  I  give  it  thee ;  in  the  presence  of  the  sons  of  my 
people  give  I  it  thee :  bury  thy  dead.  ^'^  And  Abraham, 
bowed  down  himself  before  the  people  of  the  land.  ^^  And 
he  spake  unto  Ephron  in  the  audience  of  the  people  of  the 
land,  saying,  But  if  thou  wUt  give  it,  I  pray  thee,  hear  me: 
I  will  give  thee  money  for  the  field ;  take  it  of  me,  and  I 
will  bury  my  dead  there,     i^  And  Ephron  answered  Abra- 

preseiits  so  many  examples.         a  prince  of  inconvenience,  and  it  was  "  before  Mamre'' 

God  seems  to  signify  more  than  merely  "  a  i.  e.  close  to  the  patriarch's  own  residence. 

mighty  prince,''  as  A.\.     They  viewed  him  The  LXX.  and    Vulgate   render    the  word 

as  enjoying  in  a  special  manner  the  Divine  Machpelah,  " f?ow6/e  .•  "  butit  would  appear, 

favour,   and  possibly,  as    Kalisch    suggests,  in  error.  10.]   It  would  seem  that  tlie 

regarded  his  residing  amongst  them    as    a  notice,  with  which  this  verse  begins,  alludes 

protection  and  a  safeguard   again -.t  Divine  not   to   Ephron   having   dwelt    among   the 

inflictions :    compare    Abimelech's     confes-  children  of  Heth,  but  to  his  having  been 

sion,  ch.  xxi,  22.     They  therefore  repudiate  present,  sitting  at  the  gate.     The  Hebrew 

his  description  of  himself  as  a  stranger  and  word  is  the  same  as  that  rendered  "sat," 

a  sojourner,  and  manifest  a  wish  to  incorpor-  ch.  xviii.  1 ;  xix.  1.  all  that  went  in  at 

ate  him  among  themselves.     He  therefore,  the  gate  are  the  inhabitants  who  assembled 

while    courteously  acknowledging   their   fa-  there  for  the  purpose  of  converse  and  busi- 

vourable    proposal,  now   makes    known    to  ness.     See  on  ch.  xxii.  17.     It  has  been  re- 

them  his  full  mind  on  the  matter.     His  de-  marked  that  the  procedure  here  is  even  now 

scription   of    himself  as  a  stranger  and   a  acted  continually  over  by  the  crafty  Oriental 

sojourner  had  not  been  given  at  random  :  bargainer.      He  offers  to  give    the   object 

it  had  its  deep  foundations  in  truth,  and  was  sought,  for  nothing ;  he  depreciates  its  price 

not   to  be  coraplimeTited    away,  but   to  be  as  a  trifle  not  worth  having;  and  thus  ob- 

adhered  to  and  acted    on.  9]    There  tains    at    last    more     than     it    is     worth, 

were  two  reasons  why  Abraham  chose  Mach-  "Ephron,  unable  longer  to    withstand   the 

pelah  :  it  was  "at    the  end"  of  Ephron's  temptation,  but  reluctant  openly  to  exhibit 

field,  and  so  could  be  parted  with  at  small  bis  avarice,  with   adroit  cunning  preserved 


7— XXIV.  1. 


GENESIS. 


103 


ham,  sii^'ing  unto  him,  ^'^  ^ly  lord,  hearken  unto  me  :  the 
hind  is  icorf//  four  hundred  shekels  of  silver ;  what  is  that 
betwixt  me  and  thee  ?  bury  therefore  thy  dead.  ^^  And 
Abraham  hearkened  unto  Ephron  ;  and  Abraham  weighed 
to  Ephron  the  silver,  whieh  he  had  named  in  the  audienee 
of  the  sons  of  Ileth,  four  hundred  shekels  of  silver,  cur- 
rent with  the  merchant,  i'  %  And  the  field  of  Ephron, 
which  WY/s  in  Machpelah,  -which  was  before  Mamre,  the 
field,  and  the  cave  which  mis  therein,  and  all  the  trees 
that  were  in  the  field,  that  n-cre  in  all  the  borders  round 
about,  were  made  sure  ^^  unto  Abraham  for  a  possession 
in  the  presence  of  the  children  of  Ileth,  before  all  that 
went  in  at  the  gate  of  his  cit}'.  ^^  And  after  this,  Abra- 
ham buried  Sarah  his  wife  in  the  cave  of  the  field  of 
Machpelah  before  Mamre  :  the  same  is  Hebron  in  tlie  land 
of  Canaan,  ^o  And  the  field,  and  the  cave  that  is  therein, 
were  made  sure  unto  Abraham  for  a  possession  of  a  bury- 
in  gplace  by  the  sons  of  Heth.  XXIV.  ^  And  Abraham 
was  old,  coul  well  stricken  in  age :    and  Jehovah   had 


the  appearance  of  disinterestedness,  while  lie 
was  exacting  a  considerable  sum  from  the 
rich  emir  ;  he  seemed  even  impatiently  to 
solicit  the  honour  of  furnishing  the  desired 
ground.  But  Abraham  understood  well  liis 
stratagem  and  its  motives,  and  he  at  once 
paid  the  amount  hinted  at  in  current  silver, 
such  as  merchants  give  and  receive."  Kalisch. 
See  the  same  remark,  and  the  whole  trans- 
action thus  commented  on,  in  "  The  Land 
and  the   Book,"  p.    578.  16.]   There 

was  then  no  coined  money,  sp  that  ingots  of 
silver  were  weighed  for  the  price;  the  phrase 
"  current  with  the  merchant "  implying  jier- 
haps  that  the  ingots  were  certified  genuine 
and  of  proper  weight  by  some  mark.  But 
all  respecting  the  primaeval  habits  of  pay- 
ment in  commerce  is  very  doubtful.  See 
Mr.  Stuart  Poole's  art.  "  Money,"  in 
S/nith's  Biblical  Diet.  17.]  This  mi- 

nute specification  seems  like  a  recital  of 
the  very  formula  of  sale,  and  shews  the 
solemn  significance  of  the  whole  pro- 
ceeding. By  the  expression  which  was 
iu  (the)  Machpelah,  it  would  seem  as  if 
the  name  belonged  not  to  tlie  cave  only,  but 
also  to  the  district  or  property.  See  Dean 
Stanley,  "Localities  visited  in  the  East  in 
18G2."  before  Mamre,  in  the  face  of 


Mamre,  probably  implies,  eastward  of 
Mamre.  Tradition  is  certainly  at  fault  con- 
cerning the  saered  sites  at  Hebron.  For 
while  Machpelah  is  universally  believed  to 
be  within  tlie  walls  of  the  great  mosque  or 
Ilaram,  in  the  city ;  a  spot  15  furlongs  off, 
on  tlie  road  to  Jerusalem,  is  pointed  out,  the 
Eamet  el  Chalil,  the  traditional  dwelling- 
place  of  Abraham,  where  Josephus  mentions 
the  terebinth  tree  as  standing  in  his  time. 
It  is  probable  that  this  part  is  an  error,  and 
the  other  authentic.  Vv.  19,  20  relate  the 
burial  in  like  formal  terms,  the  place,  city, 
and  country  being  again  specified,  and  the 
fact  also  of  the  field  and  cave  being  secured 
to  Abraham,  and  by  whom.  The  best  and 
most  recent  account  of  the  Mosque  at  He- 
bron is  found  iu  Dean  Stanley's  "  Localities 
in  the  East  visited  in  1862,"  published  as  an 
appendix  to  his  "  Sermons  in  the  East." 

XXIV.  1  —  G7.]  Abraham's  servant  is 
sent  to  Haran  to  find  a  iiife  of  the  house  of 
I\\ihor  for  Isaac.  lie  brings  liebekah. 
Tiiis  beautiful  narrative  belongs  totlie  Jeho- 
vistic  portion,  as  is  abundantly  shewn  in  its 
progress.  1.]  Abraham  was   140  years 

old  :  see  ch.  xxv.  20.  2.]  This  might, 

or  might  not,  be  tlic  steward,  Eliezer  of  Da- 
mascus,  mentioned  ch.  iv.  2.     That   was 


104 


GENESIS. 


xxiy. 


:  Exod.  xxiii. 
20,  2:i ; 
xxxii.  34; 
xxxiii.  2. 
Num.  XX.  16. 


T  See  ch.  xii. 
16. 


blessed  Abraham  in  all  things.  2  ^^^  Abraham  said  unto 
his  eldest  servant  of  his  house,  that  ruled  over  all  that  he 
had,  Put,  I  pray  thee,  thy  hand  under  my  thigh  :  ^  and  I 
will  make  thee  swear  by  Jehovah,  the  Elohim  of  heaven, 
and  the  Elohim  of  the  earth,  that  thou  shalt  not  take 
a  wife  unto  my  son  of  the  daughters  of  the  Canaanites, 
among  whom  I  dwell  :  ^  |jut  thou  shalt  go  imto  my  coun- 
try, and  to  my  kindred,  and  take  a  wife  unto  ni}'  son  Isaac. 
5  And  the  servant  said  unto  him,  Peradventure  the  woman 
will  not  be  willing  to  follow  me  unto  this  land  :  must  I 
needs  bring  thy  son  again  unto  the  land  from  whence 
thou  earnest  ?  ^  And  xlbraham  said  unto  him,  Beware 
thou  that  thou  bring  not  my  son  thither  again.  ^  ^  jp_ 
HOVAH,  the  Elohim  of  heaven,  which  took  me  from  my 
father's  house,  and  from  the  land  of  my  kindred,  and 
which  spake  unto  me,  and  that  sware  unto  me,  saying, 
Unto  thy  seed  will  I  give  this  land;  he  shall  ^send  his 
angel  befoi'e  thee,  and  thou  shalt  take  a  wife  unto  my  son 
from  thence.  ^  And  if  the  Avoman  will  not  be  willing  to 
follow  thee,  then  thovi  shalt  be  clear  from  this  my  oath  : 
only  bring  not  my  son  thither  again.  ^  And  the  servant 
put  his  hand  under  the  thigh  of  Abraham  his  master,  and 
sware  to  him  concerning  that  matter.  ^^  %  And  the  serv- 
ant took  ten  camels  of  the  ^  camels  of  his  master,  and  de- 
parted ;  for  all  the  goods  of  his  master  /cere  in  his  hand  : 
and  he  arose,  and  went  to  Mesopotamia,  unto  the  city  of 


nearly  60  years  ago.  "Whoever  this  was, 
he  was  in  the  fullest  confidence  of  his 
master,  and  amply  justified  it :  comp.  ver. 
10.  The  whole  narrative  gives  us  an  emi- 
nent example  of  domestic  faitlifulness  in  a 
God-fearing  family,  but  such  an  one  as  we 
may  be  thankful  that  many  families  among 
ourselves  can  parallel.  The  effect  of  tlie 
fear  of  God  is  the  same  in  all  lands  and 
ages.  Put  thy  hand  under  my  thigh] 

In  these  words  is  euphemistically  described  a 
practice  of  making  an  oath  binding  by 
touching  that  part  of  the  body  which  symbol- 
izes power  and  continuance.  For  the  Jew, 
a  further  sanctity  was  imparted  to  this  con- 
firmation of  an  oath  by  that  member  being 
the  recipient  of  God's  covenant  of  circum- 
cision. The  practice  is  found  besides  in  ch. 
ilvii.  29,   only.  4.]    See   similar    ex- 


pressions in  the  Jehovistic,  ch.  xii.  1. 
5,  6.]  The  servant  understands  the  mission 
of  obtaining  a  wife  for  Isaac  to  be  so  en- 
tirely committed  to  him,  that  in  case  tiie 
endeavour  to  bring  one  back  failed,  it  was  a 
question  whether  Isaac  should  not  be  taken 
there  to  choose  for  himself.  Tliis  proposal 
Abraham,  in  the  firmness  of  his  faith  in  Gud's 
promise,  strongly  repudiates  ;  and  in  the 
case  supposed  (which  however  [ver.  7]  he 
is  confident  in  God  will  not  arise),  absolves 
the   servant  from  tlie    obligation    (ver.    8). 

10.]  Mesopotamia  is  in  the  lleb., 
Aram  Naliaraim,  Aram  of  the  two  rivers, 
lying  between  the  Euphrates  and  the  'I  igiis. 

the  city  of  Nahor  is  Ilaran,  whither 
Kahor  must  liave  (though  this  is  not 
related)  followed  his  father  Terah  :  see  ch. 
xi.  31.  11.]  The  servant,  having  been 


2—15. 


GENESIS. 


105 


Nahor,  1^  And  he  made  his  cornels  to  kneel  down  -u-ith- 
out  the  city  by  a  well  of  water  at  the  time  of  the  evening, 
even  the  time  that  women  go  out  to  draw  tcafcr.  ^^  And 
he  said,  0  Jehovah,  the  Elohim  of  ray  master  Abraham, 
I  pray  thee,  send  me  good  speed  this  day,  and  shew  kind- 
ness unto  my  master  Abraham.  ^^  Behold,  I  stand  by  the 
well  of  water  ;  and  tlic  daugliters  of  the  men  of  the  city 
come  out  to  draw  water :  ^ '  and  let  it  come  to  pass,  that 
the  damsel  to  whom  I  shall  sa}'.  Let  down  thy  pitcher,  I 
pray  tliee,  that  I  may  drink  ;  and  she  shall  say.  Drink, 
and  I  will  give  th}'  camels  drink  also :  her  thou  hast  ap- 
pointed for  thy  servant  Isaac ;  and  thereby  shall  I  know 
that   thou   hast    shewed    kindness    unto   my   master.     ^^ 


bred  in  a  school  of  piety  (;is  Kaliscli),  com- 
mits liis  way  unto  God's  iirovidence  to 
prosper  it.  But  at  tlio  same  time  he  takes 
the  course  pointed  out  by  human  providence. 
He  goes  to  the  place  wliere  and  at  tlie  time 
when  he  was  most  likely  to  see  the  young 
women  of  the  town.  "  The  principal  well 
was  a  place  (compare  Exod.  ii.  15;  also  ch. 
xxix.  2,  If.)  whither  the  duties  of  the  daugh- 
ters of  tlie  inliabitants  called  them  at  certain 
times  of  the  day.  Even  the  daughters  of 
the  chief  seldom  fail  to  appear  there  with 
their  vessels.  The  well  or  cistern  is  for  the 
females  what  the  gate  is  for  the  men  :  here 
they  indulge  in  friendly  conversation  and 
exclian<je  their  news ;  liere  they  are  for  a 
short  interval  released  from  much  of  thtir 
oriental  restraint :  and  since  slieplierds  also 
repair  hitlier  to  water  their  flocks  and  lierds, 
it  serves  in  many  eases  as  a  convenient  place 
for  meetings  and  appointments,  and  may  in 
others  be  the  scene  of  strife,  where  old  leuds 
and  enmities  arc  brought  to  an  issue  (Exod. 
ii.  16,  17).  Cisterns  were  generally  closed 
by  a  large  heavy  stone,  which  was  removed 
by  the  united  strength  of  the  shepherds 
(xxix.  8),  while  excavated  wells  were  made 
more  easily  accessible,  by  steps  leading  down 
to  them.  The  place  where  the  following 
event  happened  seems  to  have  belonged  to 
the  latter  description  :  see  ver.  16."  Kaliscb. 
14.]  The  sign  proposed  by  the  serv- 
ant was  not  chosen  at  hazard.  A  maiden 
who  should  shew  such  spontaneous  kindness 
as  that  here  described  would  be  worthy  of 
being  Isaac's  wife.  Notice  too  the  exquisite 
trust  in  the  gentleness  of  the  favoured  family 


in  the  assumjition  that  none  but  one  of  its 
members  would  act  as  here  pointed  out.  It 
is  unwelcome,  but  necessary,  to  have  to  re- 
mind the  reader  how  entirely  the  beautiful 
simplicity  of  the  narrative  is  marred  by 
commentators  who  tell  us  that  we  are 
not  to  believe  what  we  are  here  told, 
that  the  servant  of  himself  suggested  this 
sign,  but  rather  that  it  was  intimated  by 
God  ;  because,  forsooth,  "  God  is  not  to  be 
tempted  by  the  presumptuous  dictation  of 
modes  in  which  His  Providence  is  to  act :  " 
see  Judith  viii.  10—16,  who  says,  "  Do  not 
bind  the  counsels  of  the  Lord  our  God  ;  for 
God  is  not  as  man,  tliat  He  may  be  tlueat- 
ened."  (Bp.  Wordsworth.)  It  is  strange 
that  those  who  would  be  wise  beyond  what 
is  written  do  not  see  how  their  uncalled-for 
hyi)otheses  mar  that  which  is  written.  If 
God  had  previously  given  Abraham's  serv- 
ant the  sign,  how  is  it  that  he  wondered 
(ver.  29)  when  tlie  sign  whicli  he  had  prayed 
for  appeared  to  be  fulfilled  }  and  how  could 
he  describe  himself,  ver.  45,  as  speaking  in 
his  heart  when  he  uttered  these  words  ?  It 
is  not  witli  any  view  of  controverting  tlie 
opinion  of  one  whom  I  deeply  revere  and 
esteem  that  I  quote  his  words  with  disap- 
proval, but  because  a  sacred  principle  of 
truth  in  interpretation  is  involved.  We  of 
this  generation  h;ive  to  learn  to  f(dlow,  not 
to  lead,  Holy  Scripture  ;  fearlessly  to  ascer- 
tain what  it.  does  say,  and  tlu-n  fearlessly  to 
adopt  its  simple  words  ;  to  leave  off  laying 
down  a  priori  what  must,  out>ide  the  text, 
have  been,  and  thus  making  void  God's 
word  with  our  inventions.  15.]    The 


106  GENESIS.  XXIY. 

^  And  it  came  to  pass,  before  lie  liad  done  si^ealdng,  tliat, 
behold,  Rebekah  came  out,  wbo  was  born  to  Bethuel,  son 
of  Milcab,  the  wife  of  Nahor,  Abraham's  brother,  with 
her  pitcher  upon  her  shoulder.  16  j^y^^  ^i^g  damsel  icas 
very  fair  to  look  upon,  a  virgin,  neither  had  any  man 
known  her :  and  she  went  down  to  the  well,  and  filled  her 
pitcher,  and  came  up.  17  And  the  servant  ran  to  meet 
her,  and  said.  Let  me,  I  pray  thee,  drink  a  little  water  of 
thy  pitcher,  i^  And  she  said,  Drink,  my  lord :  and  she 
hasted,  and  let  down  her  pitcher  upon  her  hand,  and  gave 
him  drink.  ^^  And  when  she  had  done  giving  him 
drink,  she  said,  I  will  draw  uriter  for  thy  camels  also, 
until  they  have  done  drinking.  20  And  she  hasted,  and 
emptied  her  pitcher  into  the  trough,  and  ran  again  unto 
the  well  to  draw  wafer,  and  drew  for  all  his  camels.  2i 
And  the  man  beheld  her  in  silence,  to  know  whether  Je- 
hovah had  made  his  journe}^  prosperous  or  not.  22  And 
it  came  to  pass,  as  the  camels  had  done  drinking,  that  the 
man  took  a  golden  ring  of  half  a  shekel  weight,  and  two 
bracelets  for  her  hands  of  ten  shekels  Aveight  of  gold ; 
23  and  said.  Whose  daughter  art  thou  ?  tell  me,  I  joray 
thee :  is  there  room  in  thy  father's  house  for  us  to  lodge 
in  ?  24  And  she  said  unto  him,  I  am  the  daughter  of 
Bethuel  the  son  of  Milcah,  which  she  bare  unto  Nahor. 
25  She  said  moreover  unto  him,  We  have  both  straw  and 
provender  enough,  and  room  to  lodge  in.  26  And  the 
man  bowed  down,  and  prostrated  himself  to  Jehovah.  27 
And  he  said.  Blessed  he  Jehovah,  the  Elohim  of  ni}^  mas- 
ter xibraham,  who  hath  not  left  destitute  my  master  of  his 
mercy  and  his  truth  :  I  being  in  the  way,  Jehovah  led  me 
to  the  house  of  my  master's  brethren.  28  And  the  damsel 
ran,  and  told  her  mother's  house  according  to  these  words. 

hearing  on  the  shoulder  seems  to  have  heen  of  enduring  thirst,  drink,  when  an  opportu- 

the  practice  with  the  Hebrews  :  see  ch.  xxi.  nity  oflers,  an  enormous  quantity  of  water, 

14  ;   Exod.  xii.  34  ;  Josh.  iv.  .5.     We  have  it  will  be  acknowledged  that  the  trouble  to 

also  bearing  on  the  head  mentioned,  ch.  xl.  which  the  maiden  cheerfully  submitted  re- 

16.  16.]  On  "  going  down  to  the  well,"  quired  more  than  ordinary  patience." 

see  above.  19.]  The  words  until  they  22.]  The  ring  was  a  nose-ring  :  see  on  ver. 

have  done  drinking  are  by  no  means  with-  47.     The  weight  specified  is  a  bekah,  which 

out  significance.     Kalisch  remarks,  "  If  it  is  :=  j  a  skekel.     The  presents  were  not  as  yet 

remembered  that  camels,  though  endowed  in  bridal  presents  :  those  first  come  in  ver.  53, 

an  almost  marvellous  degree  with  the  power  and  could  not  be  given  till  the  consent  of 


16—43.  GENESIS.  107 

29  ^  And  Rcbekah  had  a  brother,  and  his  name  teas  Laban  : 
and  Laban  ran  out  unto  the  man,  unto  the  well.  ^^  And 
it  came  to  pass,  when  he  saw  the  ring,  and  tlie  bracelets 
upon  his  sister's  hands,  and  when  he  heard  the  words  of 
Hebekah  his  sister,  sa^'ing,  Thus  spake  the  man  unto  me  ; 
that  he  came  unto  the  man  ;  and,  bcliold,  he  stood  by  the 
camels  at  the  well,  ^i  ji^nd  he  said.  Come,  thou  blessed 
of  Jehovah  ;  wherefore  standest  thou  without  ?  for  I  have 
prej^ared  the  house,  and  room  for  the  camels.  ^2  ^f  ^^mj 
the  man  came  into  the  house :  and  Laban  un girded  his 
camels,  and  gave  straw  and  provender  for  the  camels,  and 
water  to  wash  his  feet,  and  the  men's  feet  that  ucre  with 
him.  23  And  there  was  set  before  him  to  eat :  but  he 
said,  I  will  not  cat,  until  I  have  told  mine  errand.  And 
he  said,  Sj^eak  on.  ^'^  And  he  said,  I  am  Abraham's 
servant.  ^'^  And  Jehovah  hath  blessed  my  master 
greatly  ;  and  he  is  become  great :  and  he  hath  given  him 
flocks,  and  herds,  and  silver,  and  gold,  and  menservants, 
and  maidservants,  and  camels,  and  asses.  ^^  And  Sarah 
my  master's  wife  bare  a  son  to  my  master  when  she  was 
old :  and  unto  him  hath  he  given  all  that  he  hath.  37 
And  my  master  made  me  swear,  saying.  Thou  shalt  not 
take  a  wife  to  my  son  of  the  daughters  of  the  Canaanites, 
in  whose  land  I  dwell :  ^^  but  thou  shalt  go  unto  my 
father's  house,  and  to  my  kindred,  and  take  a  wife  unto 
my  son.  ^^  And  I  said  unto  my  master,  Peradvcnture 
the  woman  will  not  follow  me.  '^^  And  he  said  unto  me, 
Jehovah,  before  whqm  I  walk,  will  send  his  angel  with 
thee,  and  prosper  thy  way  ;  and  thou  shalt  take  a  wife  for 
my  son  of  my  kindred,  and  of  my  father's  house :  *^  then 
shalt  thou  be  clear  from  my  oath,  when  thou  comest  to  my 
kindred  ;  and  if  they  give  not  thee  one,  thou  shalt  be  clear 
from  my  oath.  '^'^  And  I  came  this  day  unto  the  well,  and 
said,  O  Jehovah,  Elohim  of  my  master  Abraham,  if  now 
thou  do  prosper  my  way  which  I  go  :  ^3  behold,  I  stand 
by  the  well  of  water  ;  and  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  the 
virgin  which  coraeth  forth  to  draw  irafcr,  and  I  say  to  her. 
Give   me,  I  pray  thee,  a  little  water  of  thy  pitcher  to 

Laban  and  Betliuel  had   been  ascertained.  31.]  i.  c.  he  hud  given  orders  to  that 


108  GENESIS.  XXIY. 

drink  ;  ^4  q^i-^^  s|ie  say  to  me,  Botli  drink  tliou,  and  I  will 
also  draw  for  thy  camels  :  let  the  same  be  the  woman  whom 
Jehovah  hath  appointed  for  my  master's  son.  *'5  And 
before  I  had  done  sj^eaking  in  mine  heart,  behold,  Ke- 
bekah  came  forth  with  her  pitcher  on  her  shoulder ;  and 
she  went  down  unto  the  well,  and  drew  wafer :  and  I  said 
unto  her.  Let  me  drink,  I  pray  thee.  ^*^  And  she  made 
haste,  and  let  down  her  pitcher  from  her  shoulder,  and 
said,  Drink,  and  I  will  give  th}^  camels  drink  also  :  so  I 
drank^  and  she  made  the  camels  drink  also.  '^^  And  I 
asked  her,  and  said.  Whose  daughter  art  thou  ?  And  she 
said,  The  daughter  of  Bethuel,  Nahor's  son,  whom  Milcah 
bare  unto  him :  and  I  put  the  ring  upon  her  nose,  and  the 
bracelets  upon  her  hands.  ^^  And  I  bowed  down,  and 
prostrated  myself  to  Jehovah,  and  blessed  Jehovah,  the 
Eloliim  of  my  master  Abraham,  which  had  led  me  in  the 
right  way  to  take  my  master's  brother's  daughter  unto  his 
son.  4^  And  now  if  ye  will  shew  mercy  and  truth  to  iny 
master,  tell  me :  and  if  not,  tell  me ;  that  I  may  turn  to 
the  right  hand,  or  to  the  left.  ^'^  Then  Laban  and  Bethuel 
answered  and  said.  The  thing  proceedeth  from  Jehovah  : 
we  cannot  speak  unto  thee  bad  or  good.  ^^  Behold,  Re- 
bekah  is  before  thee,  take  I/cr,  and  go,  and  let  her  be  th}^  mas- 
ter's son's  wife,  as  Jehovah  hath  spoken.  ^-  And  it  came  to 
pass,  that,  when  Abraham's  servant  heard  their  words,  he 
prostrated  himself  before  Jehovah  to  the  earth.  ^'■^  And 
the  servant  brought  forth  vessels  of  silver,  and  vessels  of 
gold,  and  raiment,  and  gave  the/n  to  Bebekah  :  lie  gave 
also  to  her  brother  and  to  her  mother  precious  things. 
^*  And  they  did  eat  and  drink,  he  and  the  men  that  icere 
with  him,  and  tarried  all  night ;  and  they  rose  up  in  the 
morning,  and  he  said,  Send  me  away  luito  my  master. 
^^  And  her  brother  and  her  mother  said.  Let  the  damsel 

effect,  on  lieaiinar  bis  sister's  story.  cility  of  Bethuel,  being  the  ground  of  it. 
50.]  Prof.  Blunt,  in  bis  interesting  little  But  Knobel  justifies  it  on  the  ground  of  the 
volume  on  "  Coincidences  in  Scripture,"  ad-  brother  exercising  guardianship  over  bis 
duces  the  consistent  manner  in  which  sister,  as  in  eh.  xxiv.  5,  11,  2.5  ;  Judg.  xxi. 
throughout  this  narrative  a  secmidary  place  22;  2  Sam.  xiii.  22.  53.]  Tiiese  wire 
is  allotted  to  Bethuel,  the  master  of  the  the  bridal  presents  destined  to  ratify  the 
bouse,  as  characteristic  of  a  trutliful  history,  espousal.  55.]  about  ten  days  is  liter- 
some  untold  fact,  such  as  possibly  the  imbe-  ally  days,  or  ten,— i.  e.  some  days,  say  ten. 


44—65. 


GENESIS. 


109 


abide  with  us  aLout  ten  clays  ;  after  tliat  she  shall  2:0.  ^6 
And  he  said  unto  them,  Hinder  me  not,  seeing  Jkhovaii 
hatli  2)rospered  my  way  ;  send  me  away  tliat  I  ma}'  go  to 
my  master.  ^7  And  they  said,  AVe  will  call  the  damsel, 
and  enquire  at  her  mouth.  58  And  they  called  Ilebekah, 
and  said  unto  her,  Wilt  thou  go  with  this  man  ?  And  she 
said,  I  will  go.  -59  And  they  sent  away  Rcbekah  their 
sister,  and  her  nurse,  and  Abraham's  servant,  and  his 
men.  <50  And  they  blessed  Rebekah,  and  said  unto  her, 
Thou  art  our  sister,  raayest  thou  become  thousands  of 
myriads,  and  let  thy  seed  possess  the  gate  of  those  which 
hate  them.  ^^  %  And  Rebekah  arose,  and  her  damsels, 
and  they  rode  upon  the  camels,  and  followed  the  man  : 
and  the  sei-vant  took  Rebekah,  and  went  his  way.  ^'-  And 
Isaac  came  from  the  way  of  the  well  Lahai-roi ;  for  he 
dwelt  in  the  south  country.  ^3  And  Isaac  went  out  to 
meditate  in  the  field  towards  the  evening  :  and  he  lifted 
up  his  eyes,  and  saw,  and,  behold,  there  were  camels 
coming.  ^^  And  Rebekah  lifted  up  her  eyes,  and  when 
she  saw  Isaac,  she  lighted  off  the  camel.  ^^  And  she  said 
unto  the  servant,  What  man  is  this  that  walkcth  in  the 
field  to  meet  us  ?     And  the  servant  said,  It  is  my  master : 


58.  Wilt  thou  go  with  this  man  T] 
There  is  110  iieeil  to  supply  unytliiiij;-  such  as 
'^  now,  or  stay  here  a  while  f'^  'J"hc  man 
was  on  the  point  of  departure  ;  would  she 
go  with  him  ?  59.]  The  nurse's  name 

was  Deborah.  "We  read  of  her  deatii  many 
years   after,    cli.    xxxv.    8.  60.]    Tiie 

wisli  for  prolific  abundance  is  character- 
istic in  the  family  to  whom  this  was  tlie 
Special  promise.  The  latter  portion  of  the 
wish  is  singularly  coincident  with  the  bless- 
ing tf  God  on  Abraliam  in  ch.  xxii.   17. 

61-]  Kuobel  thinks  the  two  portions 
of  this  verse  parts  of  two  separate  narratives, 
incorporated  together.  Certainly  they  look 
like  independent  accounts  of  the  same  tians- 
actioii.  62.]  Isaac  had  been  on  an  ex- 

cursion which  took  him  to  the  well  wiiere 
Hagar  had  been  found  by  the  angel  (ch.  xvi. 
14),  between  Kadesh  and  liered,  and  he  was 
now  returning.  lie  dwelt  in  the  Negeh,  or 
south  country  (see  oil.  xii.  9),  i.  e.  not  at 
Ileliron,  but  in  tlie  neighbourhood  of  Beer- 
sheba.  63  ]  The  interpretation  of  the 


word  rendered  to  meditate  is  very  various, 
and  quite  uuceitain.  It  is  given  as  here  iu 
the  LXX.  (by  the  same  word  which  they 
use  in  I's.  Ixxxvii.  3,  6,  12),  the  Vulgate, 
the  Samaritan  Pentateuch,  and  the  general- 
ity of  ccmmentators ;  but  Onkelos  and  the 
Arabic  version  i>ive  it  "  to  pray;"  the  Syriac, 
to  take  a  walk  ;  while  Knobel  contends  for 
the  sense  "  to  mourn  "  (for  his  mother),  and 
Gesenius  thinks  there  has  been  some  error  in 
transcription,  and  that  the  word  ought  to  be 
another,  signifying  "?o  moke  his  roitnch," 
to  overlook  his  Jlucks  and  herds.  The  word 
occurs  but  this  once  in  the  Bible.  As  the 
rendering  of  the  A.  V.  seems  to  be  more 
generally  adopted  than  any  of  the  others,  I 
have  left  it  in  the  text.  64]  "  It  is  an 

Kastern  custom,  prevalent  in  many  parts  to 
this  day,  that  women,  when  riding  on  the 
road,  and  meeting  strani;e  men,  descend  from 
their  animals,  as  a  mark  of  respect  offered 
to  the  str(mger  sex."  Kalisch.  But  it 
seems  to  be  more  general  and  to  be  uniform- 
ly done  by  travellers  of  both  sexes  on  meet- 


no 


GENESIS. 


xxiy. 


therefore  sTie  took  lier  veil,  and  covered  lierself.  ^^  And 
the  servant  told  Isaac  all  tilings  that  he  had  done.  ^7 
And  Isaac  brought  her  into  his  mother  Sarah's  tent,  and 
took  Rebekah,  and  she  became  his  wife  ;  and  he  loved  her  : 
and  Isaac  was  comforted  after  his  mother's  death.  XXY. 
1  And  Abraham  took  another  wife,  and  her  name  was 
Keturah.  ^  And  she  bare  him  Zimran,  and  Jokshan,  and 
Medan,   and  Midian,   and  Ishbak,  and  ^Shuah.      ^  And 


ing    any    distinguished    person.  67.] 

The  wives  of  Jacob  had  separate  tents,  eh. 
xxxi.  33.  This  tent  would  naturally  be  at 
Hebron  where  Sarah  died,  and  there  is  no- 
thing in  the  narrative  to  forbid  tliis,  as 
Knobel  thinks  ;  Isaac  brought  his  wife  from 
where  he  dwelt  at  the  time  of  her  arrival  to 
Hebron.  It  was  now  three  years  since 
Sarah's  death  ;  and  some  have  supposed  that 
the  "  Jehovist,"  in  thus  writing,  must  have 
set  Sarah's  death  later,  seeing  that  30  or  70 
days  were  tlie  usual  period  of  mourning. 
But  our  narrative  obviously  is  not  treating 
of  a  mere  formal  period  of  mourning,  but  of 
filial  sorrow,  which  is  not  bounded  by  time. 
XXV.  The  descendants  of  Abkaham. 
Herein  (vv.  1 — 4)  Abraham's  marriage  icith 
Keturah,  and  their  progeny  ;  (vv.  5 — 10)  his 
death  and  burial;  (  vv.  11 — 18)  the  descend- 
ants and  death  of  Ishmael ;  (vv.  19 — 34) 
the  two  S071S  of  Isaac.  Tlie  portion  1—18 
is  Elohistic,  belonging,  as  Knobel  gathers 
from  various  indications,  to  the  original 
document.  1.]    Keturah  is    called    a 

concubine  in  1  Chron.  i.  32.  It  is  usually 
assumed,  but  merely  on  the  assumption  of 
the  history  following  in  chronological 
sequences,  that  Abraham  espoused  Keturah 
after  Sarah's  death.  And  the  words,  "  Then 
again  "  of  the  A.  V.  leave  this  impression  on 
the  English  reader.  But  there  is  nothing 
in  the  original  to  bear  this  out.  The  literal 
sense  is,  "And  Abraham  added  and  took  a 
wife,"  i.  c.  took  annther  wife  besides  Sarali : 
but  ichen  is  not  said.  Indeed,  from  ver.  6, 
which  says  that  he  sent  away  the  sons  of  his 
concubines  during  his  lifetime,  it  would  be 
most  improbable  that  they  should  all  have 
been   born  after  Sarah's  death.  2,  ff.] 

This  list  is  not  without  its  difficulties.  Of  the 
names  mentioned,  Sheba  and  Dedan  have 
before  been  mentioned,  ch.  x.  7,  as  sons  of 
Eaamah,  the  son  of  Cush,  the  son  of  Ham. 
Such  occurrences  can  only  be  accounted  for 


by  observing  that  the  names  here  given  are 
those  of  tribes  quite  as  frequently  as  those  of 
individuals,  and  supposing  that  the  S.ibeans 
and  Dedanites  were  of  mixed  descent  from 
Cush  and  from  Abraham.  And  this  appears 
to  have  been  actually  the  case  according  to 
the  national  traditions  of  Arabia,  given  by 
Kalisch,  p.  477.  These  traditions  recognize 
three  elements  of  Arab  descent :  1.  A  prim- 
aeval race  answering  to  the  Cushites  of  ch.  x. 
7.  2.  The  pure  Arabs,  answering  to  the 
Semitic  descendants  of  Joktan,  ch.  x.  25, 
ff.  And  3.  An  influx  of  12  tribes,  sprung 
from  Ishmael,  and  called  the  mixed  Arabs. 
These  last  Kalisch  holds  to  have  compre- 
hended also  the  descendants  of  Abraham  by 
Keturah.  Several  of  the  names  here 

given  are  untraceable,  while  others  have  been 
recognized  in  history.  The  name  Zimran 
is  supposed  to  be  discovered  in  the  Znbram 
of  Ptolemy,  a  town  between  Mecca  and  Me- 
dina. Of  Jokshan  notliing  certain  is 
known.  Some  have  regarded  the  name  as 
identical  with  Joktan  of  ch.  x.  25,  if.,  but  this 
is  hardly  probable,  and  would  ratlier  create 
than  remove  difficulties.  Medan  appears 
not  to  be  immediately  related  to  Midian,  which 
next  follows.  Ptolemy  mentions  a  Madiana 
and  Madtama  on  the  East  coast  nf  tlie  gulf 
of  Akabeh.  A  branch  of  the  Midianites  is 
found  also  in  these  parts,  and  a  town  Madia7i 
(or  Madiene,  as  Josephus),  supposed  to  be 
the  residence  of  Moses'  father-in-law.  The 
better  known  portion  of  the  Midianites, 
dwelling  further  X.,  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  i\Ioabites  and  Ammonites,  as  well  as  the 
Sinaitic  ilidianites,  will  be  treated  further 
on  in  the  history.  See  on  Exod.  ii.  15. 
Ishbak  is  supposed  to  be  traced  in  the  valley 
called  Sabak,  or  Sibak,  and  other  places  of  a 
similar  name,  Shebek,  and  Esh-Shobak.  See 
Mr.  Stanley  Poole's  article  in  the  Biblical  Diet. 
Shuah  was  the  tribe  to  which  Job's 
friend,  Bildad,  belonged,  see  rcff. ;  and  bene  e 


6G— XXY.  9. 


GENESIS. 


Ill 


Jokshan  begat  Slieba,  and  -''Dcdan.  And  the  sons  of  De- 
dan  were  ^Assliurim,  and  Letusliim,  and  Lcummim.  '^ 
And  the  sons  of  Midian  ;  '^Ephah,  and  E^jhcr,  and  Ilanoch, 
and  Abidah,  and  Eldaah.  All  these  n-cre  the  children  of 
Keturah.  ^  ^  And  Abraham  '^gave  all  that  he  had  unto 
Isaac.  ^  But  unto  the  sons  of  the  concubines,  which 
Abraham  had,  Abraham  gave  gifts,  and  sent  them  away 
from  Isaac  his  son,  while  he  yet  lived,  eastward,  unto  the 
east  country.  7  And  these  arc  the  daj's  of  the  years  of 
Abraham's  life  which  he  lived,  an  hundred  threescore  and 
fifteen  years.  ^  Then  Abraham  gave  up  the  ghost,  and 
died  in  a  good  old  age,  an  old  man,  and  full  of  //ears ;  and 
was  gathered  to  his  people.  ^  And  his  sons  Isaac  and 
Ishmacl  buried  him  in  the  cave  of  Machpelah,  in  the  field 


Isa.  xJti.  13. 
JcT.  xlix.7,8. 


Ich.  x\i.  10. 
Judtt.  xi.  2. 
Gal.  ir.  30. 


must  be  looked  for  near  Uz,  see  ch.  x.  23 ; 
xxii.  21  ;  and  note  on  Job  i.  1.  Slieba 

(see  above)  is  connected  with  those  Sabians, 
■who  in  Job  vi.  19  are  mentioned  togetiier 
with  tlie  companies  of  Tenia,  and  in  Job  i.  15 
plundered  the  herds  of  tiie  Edoniite  Job. 
The  "travelling  companies  of  Dedanim" 
are  mentioned  in  rcf.  Isa.,  and  in  connexion 
■with  the  "inhabitants  of  the  land  of  Tenia: " 
in  ref.  Jer.  both  people  are  included  in 
Edom,  as  also  in  ref.  Ezek.  The  sons  of 
Dcdan  (see  also  above)  bear  the  names  of 
tribes  with  the  plural  termination -iin  ;  of 
these  the  Asshurim  are  incutioned  in  reff. 
Ezek.  in  connexion  with  Arabia;  the  Letu- 
shim  are  traced  by  Knobel  as  the  Ileleiiu 
Arabs,  dwellers  iu  the  neighbourhood  of  Leits, 
four  days'  journey  S.  of  Mecca,  and  spreading 
into  otaer  parts  of  Arabia  :  aud  the  Leum- 
miin  as  the  beni  Lam,  a  far- spreading  tribe, 
centralized  in  the  same  parts,  but  extending 
even    into     Babylonia    and    Mesopotamia. 

4.]  Ephah  is  mentioned  in  connexion 
•witb  Midian  and  Sheba  in  reff.  Isa.  as  bring- 
ing dromedaries  in  the  day  of  Israel's  ])ros- 
perity.  Epher]  Knobel  finds  tlie  sons  of 

Ghiphar  mentioned  by  the  Arab  geographers ; 
but  of  two  tribes  bearing  this  name,  Mr. 
Stanley  Poole  objects  {Biblical  Diet.)  that 
the  first  is  a  branch  of  Amalek,  the  second 
is  IsbuKU'lite,    but   neither  is    Midianitisli. 

Hanoch]  Or  Henoch,  1  Chron.  i.  33. 

Knobel    mentions    a     town     Hanakye     or 

Chanuka,  3  days'  journey  N.  from  jNIedina. 

Abidah]  This  name,  as  well  as  Eldaah, 

have  not  been  traced,  though  again  Knobel 


thinks  be  has  found  two  tribes  corrcspondin'" 
to  them.  It  will  be  seen  from  these  notices 
that  the  descendants  of  Keturah  are  to  be 
sought,  and  that  many  of  their  names  have 
been  found  among  the  Southern  tribes  of 
Arabia.  5—10.]  Abraham's  death  and 

burial.  5,  6.]  i.  e.  He  made  Isaac  his 

chief  heir — transmitted  to  him  all  that  be 
was  possessed  of  at  his  death.  See  reff. 
the  concubines  may  be  only  Ilagar 
and  Keturah,  but  we  cannot  say  that  there 
may  not  have  been  others.  Their  sons  were 
dowered  and  sent  away  before  Abraham's 
death,  to  be  out  of  the  way  of  Isaac.  It  does 
not  follow  (as  Knobel)  from  the  fact  of  Isli- 
niael's  presence  at  his  father's  funeral,  that 
he  was  not  sent  away  before :  it  would  be 
natural  that  he,  as  chief  of  the  sons  in  the 
second  rank,  and  besides  signalized  by  au 
especial  covenant  of  blessing  from  God,  ch. 
xvi.  10 ;  xxi.  18,  should  return  to  Hebron 
on  the  solemn  occasion.  Abraham  sent 
them  into  the  East  country,  i.  e.  to  Arabia. 
A  similar  departure  of  Esau  from  Jacob  is 
related  ch.  xxxvi.  6.  7.]    So  that  it 

w-as  just  a  century  since  Abram's  call  out  of 
Ilaran,  ch.  xii.  4.  8.]  The  two  verbs, 

gave  up  the  ghost,  and  died,  are  identical 
iu  meaning :  the  repetition  belongs  to  tiie 
solemnity  of  the  narrative.  The  English 
reader  may  be  reminded  liiat  "gave  up  the 
ghost "  is  equivalent  to  "  breathed  his 
last,"  "  expired,"  and  has  no  reference  to 
the  spirit.  full  of  years  is  merely  full, 

satiated,  in  the  11  (brew.  The  expression 
was  gathered  to  his  people  does  not  relate 


112 


GENESIS. 


XXV. 


29. 


ech.  xvi.  H. 
fch.xxviii.  9; 

xxxvi.  ;i 

1  Chion. 

Isa.  Ix.  7. 
gPs.  oxx.  5. 

Cant.  i.  5. 

Ifa.  xxi.  16, 

17  ;  xlii.  11 ; 

Ix.  7. 

Jer.  ii.  10,49; 

xxviii.  2**. 

Ezek.  x.wii. 

21. 
h(Josh.  XV..W). 

isa.  xxi.  U. 
iJob  vi.  19. 

Isa.  xxi.  U. 

Jer.  XXV.  ■U. 


of  Epliron  the  son  of  Zoliar  the  Hittite,  wLicli  is  before 
Mainre  ;  ^^  the  field  which  Abraham  purchased  of  the 
sons  of  Heth  :  there  was  Abraham  buried,  and  Sarah  his 
wife.  1^  T[  And  it  came  to  pass  after  the  death  of  Abra- 
ham, that  Elohim  blessed  his  son  Isaac  ;  and  Isaac  dwelt 
by  the  well  <^Lahai-roi.  ^'■^  ^  Now  these  are  the  genera- 
tions of  Ishmael,  Abraham's  son,  whom  Ha  gar  the  Egypt- 
ian, Sarah's  handmaid,  bare  unto  Abraham :  ^^  and  these 
are  the  names  of  the  sons  of  Ishmael,  by  their  names,  ac- 
cording to  their  generations :  the  firstborn  of  Ishmael, 
^Nebiijoth;  and  ^Kedar,  and  Adbeel,  and  Mibsam,  ^^  and 
Mishma,  and  ^Dumah,  and  Massa,  ^^  Hadar,  and  ^Tema, 


to  burial,  for  this  was  not  so :  Abraham's 
"  people"  dwelt  at  this  time  in  Ilaran,  and 
he  was  buried  at  Hebron.  Besides  which, 
the  fact  of  burial  is  here,  and  in  many  other 
places,  specified  over  atid  above  (see  ch.  xv. 
15  ;  XXXV.  29  ;  1  Kings  ii.  10  ;  xi.  43,  &c.). 
Nor  is  it  a  mere  synonym  for  dying  :  for  in 
many  places,  as  here,  it  is  specified  over  and 
above  the  fact,  here  repsatedly  expressed,  of 
death  (see  ver.  17;  ch.  xxxv.  29;  xlix. 
33;  Num.  XX.  26;  Deut.  xxxii.  50).  The 
only  assignable  sense,  therefore,  is  that  of  re- 
ference to  a  state  of  further  personal  exist- 
ence beyond  death  :  and  the  expression  thus 
forms  a  remarkable  testimony  to  the  O.  T. 
belief  in  a  future  state.  11.]  The  Divine 

blessing  which  had  accompanied  Abraham 
descended  to  him  who  is  now  the  possessor 
of  the  promises.  Isaac's  dwelling  at  the 
well  Lahai-roi  (rcff.)  was  apparently  only 
temporary,  for  in  ch.  xxxv.  27  we  find 
that  bis  habitual  dwelling-place  was  at 
Hebron. 

12 — 18.]  The  descendants^  and  death,  of 
Ishmael.  On  the  number,  12,  of  the  sons  of 
Ishmael,  see  on  ch.  xxii.  20.  The  eldest, 
Nebaiotli,  has  of  late  become  the  subject  of 
controver.sy.  It  had  been  universal  since 
Jerome  to  identify  the  descendants  of  Ne- 
baiotli with  the  Nabatheans  of  Arabia 
Petroea.  But  a  doubt  has  been  now  cast  on 
this.  It  would  be  quite  beyond  our  limits 
to  enter  on  the  discussion,  which  will  be 
found  well  summarized  in  Mr.  Stanley  Poole's 
art.  "  Nebaiotli,"  in  the  Biblical  Diet.  He 
inclines,  till  more  decisive  evidence  shall  be 
found  against  it,  to  maintain  the  generally 
believed  identification.  From  ref.  Isa.  the 
Nabatheans  were  a  pastoral  people.     They 


are  mentioned  as  allies  of  the  Jews  in  the 
JIaccabtjean  period,  1  Mace.  v.  24,  25  ;  ix. 
35.  Kedar]  The  classical  geographers 

class  together  the  Nabatheans  and  Kcdncans, 
as  is  also  done  in  rcff.  Isa.,  and  both  ap- 
pear to  have  inhat)ited  Arabia  I'etraja,  and 
had  their  capital  Petra,  the  Ivedra;ans  being 
to  the  N.W.  and  next  Palestine.  Tiiis  being 
so,  the  mention  of  them  is  naturally  fre- 
quent. See  reff.,  where  their  principal  cha- 
racteristics may  be  found.  Tlie  name  sig- 
nifies black,  dark-skinned  :  see  especially  ref. 
Cant.  The  name  passed  into  the  Rabbinical 
appellation  for  all  the  Arabs.  Of  Adbeel 
(=1  a  miracle)  and  Mibsam  (:=  sircet  odour) 
nothing  at  all  satisfactory  is  known.  Mish- 
ma may  be  connected  with  the  Masaniani  of 
I'tolemy,  N.E.  of  Medina ;  and  there  is  a 
tribe  in  Arabic  writers  named  the  Beni-Mis- 
mah  ;  but  nothing  more  is  known  of  them. 
Dumah  in  ref.  Isa.  is  coupled  with  Seir,  the 
forest  of  Arabia,  and  Kedar  ;  it  is  Duinaitha 
or  -metha  in  I'tolemy,  and  is  uncertainly 
situated,  in  Arabia  Felix  or  Deserta.  See 
]\Ir.  Stanley  Poole's  art  in  Biblical  Diet. 
Massa  is  thought  to  appear  in  the  Masani, 
a  tribe  N.E.  of  Dumah,  mentioned  by 
Ptolemy.  Hadar  (written  Iladad  iu  1 
Chron.  i.  30)  seems  to  be  traced  in  a  moun- 
tain Iladad,  N.  of  Medina,  on  the  borders 
of  the  Syrian  desert.  To  this  last  is  coupled 
Tema  in  a  way  peculiar  to  these  two,  and 
perhaps  indicating  that  they  dwelt  together, 
separate  from  others  to  whom  they  are  not 
so  coupled.  In  ref.  Job  Tema  is  connected 
with  Sheba,  and  in  ref.  Jer.  with  Dedau 
and  Buz.  The  name  is  said  (Mr.  Stanley 
Poole,  Biblical  Diet.)  to  be  satisfactorily 
identified  with  Teyma,  a  small  town  ou  the 


10-21. 


GE]^ESIS. 


113 


•T<  tur,  Naphisli,  and  Kedomah :  ^^' these  arc  the  sons  of 
1  Innacl,  and  these  are  their  names,  by  their  towns,  and 
1 » \  their  castles  ;  J  twelve  princes  according  to  tlieir  nations.  J  <='••  ''*•''•  '^■ 
''  ^Vnd  these  arc  the  years  of  the  life  of  Ishniael,  an  hun- 
dred   and    thii'ty   and  seven  years:  and  he  gave  up  the 
U^iost  and  died  ;  and  was  gathered  unto  his  people.     ^^ 
And  they  dwelt  "^from  Ilavdah  unto  Shur,  that  is  before  kisam.xr.i 
I'uypt,  as  thou  goest  toward  Assyria :  and  his  Uot  was  cast  '•'^^s;/'j" 
ill  the  presence  of  all  his  brethren.     ^^  ^  And  these  are 
the  generations  of  Isaac,  Abraham's  son  :  Abraham  begat 
Isaac :    ^0  ^nd    Isaac  was  forty  years  old  when  he  took 
Eebekah  to  wife,  the  daughter  of  Bethuel  the  Aramaean 
of  "'Padan-aram,  the  sister  to  Laban  the  Aramaean.     21 
And  Isaac  "intreated  Jehovah  for  his  wife,  because  she 


mch.  xxxi.  18 ; 
xxxiii.  18; 
XXXV.  9; 
\W\.  15. 
See  niso 
xxviii.2,  5, 6, 
■ ,  :ind  note  ; 
also  ell.  xlviii. 


n  Exod.  viii.  30; 
X.  18.    Judg. 
xiii.  e.    Job 
xxxviii.  26. 


confines  of  Syria,  in  the  nciglibourliood  of 
Duinah.  There,  as  at  Dumah  also,  are  the 
ruins  of  a  stronghold  or  castle  (ver.  16). 
There  seems  to  be  no  doubt  that  Jetur  re- 
presents the  Ituncaus,  between  Bashan  and 
Damascus,  spreading  however  N.  of  that  city 
into  Lebanon,  progenitors  of  tlie  modern 
Druses  (Luke  iii.  1).  Of  Naphish  nothing 
seems  to  be  known.  Kedemah  (tlie  East) 
may  be  connected  with  the  Beni  Kedem  or 
children  of  the  East,  mentioned  as  a  special 
tribe  of  Arabs  in  Judg.  vi.  3,  33 ;  vii.  12. 
Compare  also  "  they  of  the  East,"  Isa.  xi. 
14  ;  "  the  men  of  the  East,"  Ezek.  xxv.  4, 
10.  18.]  See  on  ch.  xvi.  7;    xx.  1 ; 

also  on  ch.  ii.  11.  The  exact  boundaries 
indicated  are  somew'hat  uncertain.  Shur, 
as  above,  seems  to  be  the  eastern  limit 
of  Egypt.  Havilali  is  altogether  un- 
decided :  see  art.  in  Biblical  Diet.  as 
thou  goest  towards  Assyria  seems  to  mean, 
it  thou  wert  to  leave  Egypt  for  As- 
syria, Shur  would  be  before  it,  i.  e.  east  of 
it,  facing  thee.  There  is  some  diihculty  in 
the  last  clause  of  the  verse.  The  verb  ren- 
dered in  the  A.  V.  "■died"  is  "fell."  Ge- 
senius,  as  well  as  the  greater  part  of  modei'ii 
Hebraists,  believes  the  woi'd  to  mean  hero 
dwelt,  and  the  clause  to  be  a  taking  up 
again  of  the  prophecy  in  ch.  xvi.  12,  where  a 
ditferent  verb  is  used.  The  same  verb  as  this 
occurs  in  ret!',  1  Sam.,  where  it  is  rendered 
"  lay  along,"  namely,  camping  in  their  tents. 
Perhaps  the  best  rendering  is  that  of  Kalisch, 
his  lot  was  cast. 

19— 34.J     The    history    of   Isaac.     The 


birth  and  fortunes  of  Esau  and  Jacob. 
The  well-known  formula,  "  These  are  the 
generations,"  introduces  a  new  portion  of 
the  history,  which  now  resumes  the  main 
line  of  the  patriarchal  descent.  The  repeti- 
tion of  the  fact  of  Isaac's  birth  is  in  the  man- 
ner of  these  resumptions :  see  ch.  v.  2.  Of 
a  like  kind  is  the  recapitulation  in  ver.  20 
of  Isaac's  marriage.  It  would  seem  as  if 
these  portions  were  intended  to  be  used 
separately,  and  each  to  carry  completeness  in 
itself.  Xalisch  remarks,  "These reiterations, 
natural  in  themselves,  far  from  causing  dif- 
ficulty, are  in  harmony  not  only  with  the 
style  of  the  Bible,  but  of  ancient  historio- 
graphy in  general,  and  are  in  this  instance 
not  without  a  positive  gain,  for  they  add  the 
valuable  chronological  fact,  that  Isaac  was 
40  years  old  when  he  married  Rebekah,  a 
statement  of  decided  importance  for  the 
exact  understanding  of  several  circumstances 
connected  with  Isaac's  history."  Pa- 

dan-aram,  the  plain  of  Aram,  designates  the 
champaign  country  of  Syria,  i.  e.  Mesopo- 
tamia, '■^  Aram  Naharaim,"  Aram  of  the  two 
rivers,  together  with  the  desert  at  the  W.  of 
the  Euphrates,  as  contrasted  with  the  moun- 
tain region  of  Syria  reaching  westward  to  the 
Mediterranean:  see  relf.  In  IIos.  xii.  12  the 
same  country  is  designated  by  Sedeh-Aram, 
{z=cotcntrij  of  Syria,  A.  V.)  from  which 
Gesenius  infers  that  Padan  is  equivalent  in 
meaning  to  Sedeh,  Held,  or  champaign. 
21.]  This  barrenness  lasted  20  years, 
as  we  gather  from  ver.  26.  It  was  the  lot  of 
Sarah,  and  of  llachcl  also  :  see  ch.  xi.  30  ; 


114  GENESIS.  XX  Y. 

u-as  barren  :  and  Jehovah  was  intreated  of  him,  and  Re- 
bekah  his  wife  conceived.  22  j^^^^  ^j^g  children  struggled 
together  within  her ;  and  she  said,  If  it  be  so,  why  am  I 
thus  ?  And  she  went  to  enquire  of  Jehovah.  23  ^^id 
Jehovah  said  unto  her, 
Two  nations  are  in  thy  womb, 

And  two  people  shall  be  separated  from  thy  bowels ; 
And  people  shall  be  stronger  than  people  ; 

o  Rom.  ix.  12.  And  °  the  elder  shall  serve  the  younger. 

2^  ^  And  when  her  days  to  be  delivered  were  fulfilled,  be- 
hold, there  icere  twins  in  her  womb.  25  ^mj  ^j^g  £j.g^ 
came  out  red,  all  over  like  an  hairy  garment ;  and  they 
called    his    name    Esau.      26  ^^(j    after   that   came    his 

p  Hos.  xii.  3.  brother  out,  and  his  hand  p  took  hold  on  Esau's  heel ;  and 
his  name  was  called  Jacob  :  and  Isaac  teas  threescore  years 
old  when  he  begat  them.  27  And  the  boys  grew :  and 
Esau  was  a  man  skilled  in  hunting,  a  man  of  the  field ; 

q  Job i.  1,8;      and  Jacob  icas  a  i  harmless  man,  abiding  in   (the)  tents. 

viii.  2(1.  '  O  \  / 

prol^xii.  ^^  And  Isaac  loved  Esau,  because  he  did  eat  of  his  venison: 
but  Hebekah  loved  Jacob.  29  ^  ^j^i  Jacob  cooked  pot- 
tage :  and  Esau  came  from  the  field,  and  he  nris  weary : 


xxix.    31.     The  -word  rendered  intreated,  responses  in  His  name.     The  response  is  in 

and  elsewhere  (reff.)  used  for  praying,  is  in  the   form  of  poetical  parallelism.             25, 

its  primary  meaning  '■'■burnt  incense."     But  26.]  The  whole  narrative  is  symbolical  and 

the     literal    sense    need    not    be    pressed,  has  reference  to  the  subsequent  fortunes  of 

for  his  wife]  literally,  before  his  wife ;  the   two   peoples.       Esau    signifies   hairy; 

it  is  the  same  term  as  occurs  in  cli.  xxx.  38,  Jacob  imports   heel,  but  has   also   another 

where  Jacob  laid  the  rods  before,  i.  c.  iu  meaning,  that  of  a  cheat  or  deceiver.     The; 

front  of,  the  flocks.     Eut  there  can  be  no  boys  were  born  15  years  before  Abraham's 

doubt  that  the  word  here  has  the  force  of  for  death  :  see  above.            27.]  Esau's  life  and 

or  in  behalf  of :    acquiring  this   meaning  habits  were  wild  and  lawless ;  Jacob's  were 

through  that  of  '■' having  reference  to,"  '■'■in  harmless  and  stay-at-home.     The  adjective 

regard  of .'^            22.]  This  antenatal  strug-  rendered  "^ilain"  in  A.  V.  is  literally  per- 

gle  was  prophetical  of  the  future  enmity  of  feet,  blameless :    it  is   ordinarily   used  (see 

the  twiu  brothers.     And  Eebekah  is  rcpre-  reff.)  of  a  righteous.  God-fearing  character, 

sented  doubtless  as  recognizing  this  presage  but  appears  here  to  designate  Jacob's  gentle- 

of  misfortune,  and  making  it  matter  of  en-  ness  and  innocence,  as  set  against  Esau's  fierce 

quiry   from   Jehovah.      Kalisch    interprets  and  lawless  disposition.     This  difference  was 

her   "  going   to   enquire  of  the  Lord  "    as  shewn  also  by  their  habits :  Esau  hunted  in 

having  recourse  to  God's  prophet  Abraham  the  field,  while  Jacob  abode  in  [the]  tents. 

(Luther  thought,  to  Shetn  ;  some,  to  Mel-  28-]   literally,  because  venison  was 

chizcdek),  who  still  survived  (compare   ch.  in  his  mouth.             29.]  We  have  here  a 

xxi.  5  with  ch.  xxv.  7,  26;  see  ch.  sx.  17,  striking  picture  of  the  habits  of  the  two. 

and  compare  1  Sam.  ix.  9).     Knobel,  on  the  Jacob  is  performing  the  menial  duties  of  the 

other  hand,  and  Kcil,  understand  that  she  tent,  and  has  newly  prepared  a  savoury  mess 

went   to   some    place    where   Jehovah  was  of  the  red  Icntile  or  vetch.     Esau  comes  in 

adored  and  where  priests  were  ready  to  give  tired,  and  longs  for  the  appetizing  food.     Dr. 


I 


m 


22— XXYI.  1. 


GENESIS. 


115 


^^  and  Esau  said  to  Jacob,  Let  mc  cat,  I  pray  tliec,  of  that 
red,  that  red  pottage ;  for  I  am  weary :  therefore  was  his 
name  called  Edom  (red),  31  ^^nd  Jacob  said.  Sell  me  this 
day  thy  birthright.  32  ^^j  Esau  said,  Behold,  I  am  on 
the  way  to  die :  and  what  profit  shall  this  birthright  do 
to  me  ?  33  ^\^u(l  Jacob  said.  Swear  to  me  this  day ;  and 
he  sware  unto  him  :  and  he  sold  his  birthright  unto  Jacob. 
3^  Then  Jacob  gave  Esau  bread  and  pottage  of  lentiles ; 
and  he  did  eat  and  drink,  and  rose  up,  and  went  his  way : 
thus  Esau  despised ///•>?  birthright.  XXVI.  l  And  there  was 
a  famine  in  the  laud,  beside  the  first  famine  that  was  in 


Tristram  says  :  "  There  are  several  varieties 
recognized,  and  the  Red  Lentil  is  considered 
the  best.  .  .  It  is  generally  used  as  a  pottage, 
or  cooked  as  the  Spaniards  cook  haricot 
teans,  stewed  with  oil,  and  flavoured  Avith 
red  pepper.  It  is  by  no  means  an  unsavoury 
dish."  Nat.  Hist,  of  the  Bible,  p.  462.  The 
words  here  are  literally,  cooked  a  cooked 
(dish)  :  brewed  a  broo.  30.]  The  words 

run  in  the  Hebrew,  Let  me  eat  now  of  that 
edom  (red),  that  edom  (red) ;  for  I  am  weary: 
therefore  his  name  was  called  edom  (red). 
In  the  heat  of  hunger  he  omits  the  name, 
and  merely  asks  for  the  mess  by  its  outward 
appearance,  as   that  red    (stuff).  31.] 

Jacob,  tlie  quiet  but  sly  man,  on  the  watch 
for  his  advantage,  seizes  the  opportunity. 
We  may  supply  in  the  background,  from  the 
intimation  of  his  mother's  favouritism,  that 
the  promises  attaching  to  the  birthright, 
unheeded  by  the  free-rover  Esau,  were 
thoroughly  understood  and  valued  by  Re- 
bekah  and  her  son.  That  such  a  considera- 
tion has  two  sides  to  it,  one  looking  towards 
good,  the  other  towards  evil,  is  an  inconsist- 
ency found  in  liistory  because  it  is  found  in 
man.  32.]  This  saying  of  Esau,  "Be- 

hold, I  am  on  the  way  to  die,"  may  be 
understood  in  three  ways :  they  may  have 
(1)  a  general  meaning, — I  care  only  for  the 
present :  I  shall  die,  and  the  bii'tliright  will 
pass  on  and  be  of  no  use  to  me  ;  (2)  a  par- 
ticular one,  referring  to  his  way  of  life, — I 
am  meeting  death  every  day  in  the  field,  and 
am  not  the  man  to  benefit  by  the  birthright, 
constantly  exposed  as  I  am  to  the  risk  of 
life ;  or  (3)  one  belonging  to  the  occasion 
then  present, — "  I  am  ready  to  die  of  faint- 
ness  and  fatigue,  and  so  hold  a  present  meal 
of  more  value  than  a  distant  contingency." 


Of  these  the  A.  V.,  by  rendering,  "  I  am  at 
the  point  to  die,"  chooses  the  third.  Kalisch 
and  Keil  prefer  the  first,  Kuobel  the  second. 
33,  34.]  Jacob  is  not  slow  to  follow 
up  his  advantage,  and  to  shew  his  value  for 
that  which  Esau  despised.  The  narrative 
accumulates  terms  of  contempt  to  shew  the 
lightness  and  profanity  of  Esau.  lie  be- 
haved as  if  it  were  an  ordinary  meal  and 
nothing  especial  had  happened.  But  he  had 
by  his  conduct  thrown  himself  out  of  the  line 
of  that  world's  blessing,  to  record  which  the 
sacred  writer  held  his  pen. 

XXVI.  1 — 33.]  Further  history  of  Isaac, 
The  whole  portion  is  Jehovistic  in  cliaracter. 
This  is  shewn  both  by  the  Divine  name,  vv. 
2,  12,  24,  25,  28,  29,  and  by  the  reference 
to  previous  Jehovistic  matters,  as  God's  oath 
to  Abraham,  ver.  3,  Abraham's  sojourn  in 
Gei-ar,  ver.  15,  &c.  Various  other  tokens  of 
the  same  are  enumerated  by  Knobel  and 
others. 

1 — 6.]  Renewal  of  the  p)-omise  to  Isaac 
in   Gerar.  1.    in   the   land]    viz.    of 

Canaan,  where  Isaac  appears  to  have  been 
dwelling  since  ch.  xxv.  11.  There  is  great 
similarity  in  tliis  part  of  Isaac's  life  to  that  of 
Abraham.  In  fact,  the  son  seems  to  be  a  faint 
copy  of  the  father.  Like  him,  he  is  tlic  in- 
heritor of  the  Divine  promises,  and  the  father 
of  the  chosen  seed  ;  but  there  is  not  in  Isaac, 
as  there  was  in  Abraham,  any  great  personal 
character,  and  he  falls  into  the  track  of  his 
father's  life  and  habits,  as  we  so  often  find 
in  corresponding  cases  among  ourselves. 
Even  his  very  standing  in  the  blessing  of  the 
promise  is  dependent  on  the  past  righteous- 
ness of  Abraham,  ver.  5.  It  would  appear 
that  the  design  of  Isaac  in  going  to  Gerar 
had  been  to  proceed  further  into  Egypt;,  as 


116 


GENESIS. 


XXVI. 


r  ch.  xxii.  16. 


u  ch.  xxii.  18. 


tlie  days  of  Abraham.  And  Isaac  went  imto  Abimelecli 
king  of  the  Philistines  unto  Gerar.  2  ^nd  Jehovah  ap- 
peared imto  him,  and  said,  Go  not  down  into  Egyj^t ; 
dwell  in  the  land  which  I  shall  tell  thee  of:  ^  sojourn  in 
this  land,  and  I  will  be  with  thee,  and  will  bless  thee ;  for 
unto  thee,  and  mito  thy  seed,  I  will  give  all  these  coun- 
tries, and  I  will  perform  the  ^"  oath  which  I  sware  unto 
Abraham  thy  father ;  ^  and  I  will  make  thy  seed  to  mul- 
tiply ^  as  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  will  give  unto  thy  seed 
all  these  countries ;  and  *  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations 
of  the  earth  be  blessed  ;  ^  because  that  Abraham  '^  obeyed 
my  voice,  and  kept  my  charge,  my  commandments,  my 
statutes,  and  my  laws.  ^  And  Isaac  dwelt  in  Gerar. 
7  ^  And  the  men  of  the  place  asked  him  of  his  wife ;  and 
he  said,  She  is  my  sister  :  for  he  feared  to  say.  She  is  my 
wife  ;  lest,  said  he,  the  men  of  the  place  should  kill  me  for 
Eebekah ;  because  she  was  fair  to  look  upon.  ^  And  it 
came  to  pass,  when  he  had  been  there  a  long  time,  that 
Abimelech  king  of  the  Philistines  looked  out  at  a  window, 
and  saw,  and,  behold,  Isaac  was  sporting  with  Rebekah 


had  been  done  by  Abraham  under  similar 
distress.  It  must  be  remembered  that  there 
■was  an  oath  of  friendliness  between  Abra- 
ham and  Abimelech  (ch.  xxi.  22  —  24). 
This  can  hardly  be  the  same  Abimelech :  at 
the  time  of  Abraham's  sojourn  in  Gerar  he 
■was  aa  hundred  years  old,  and  Isaac  was 
born  ;  sixty  years  then  elapsed  before  Esau 
and  Jacob  -were  born,  and  the  boys  were 
now  grown  up.  So  that  it  must  have  been 
at  least  eighty  years  since  that  former  visit, 
even  considering  that  it  lasted  many  days. 
But  Abimelech  seems  to  have  been  the  royal 
title  among  the  Philistines,  rather  than  a 
personal  name.  In  I  Sam.  xxi.  10 — 15  the 
name  of  the  king  of  Gath  with  whom  David 
took  refuge  is  Achish ;  but  in  the  title  of 
Ps.  xxxiv.  the  same  king  is  called  Abime- 
lech. On  Phichol,  see  below,  ver.  26. 
2.]  The  command  with  which  the  verse  ends 
is  o-eneral— choose  not  thine  own  habitation, 
but  be  guided  by  My  Divine  intimations. 
3.  this  land]  viz.  Philistia,  Gerar. 
all  these  countries]  viz.  Canaan  and  its 
surroundings  :  this  is  the  only  place  Avhere 
the  promise  to  the  chosen  seed  is  thus  ex- 
pressed.    The  reff.  will  shew  how  entirely 


these  promises  are  a  recapitulation  of  those 
made  to  Abraham.  The  accumulation  of 
words  in  ver.  5,  by  which  Abram's  obedience 
is  described,  is  one  oftener  occurring  when 
the  law  was  fully  revealed.  This  was 
natural,  supposing  Moses  to  have  been  the 
writer.  He  would  express  the  Divine  say- 
ings in  terms  familiar  to  himself. 

7 — 11.]    Be   gives  out  his    icife   as    his\ 
sister ;  it  i.t  detected,  and  she  is  saved.    Seel 
on  this  incident  notes  on  ch.  xii.  10,  ff.      It! 
is  at  all  events    characteristic  of  Isaac  toj 
tread  almost  servilely  in  the  steps  of  Abra- 
ham his  father ;  and  it  is  to  be  noted,  that! 
the  fraud  has  not  the  same  result  here  as  it . 
had   on   the  latter  occasion   in   Abraham's 
time ;    for   Rebekah   was    not    taken    into 
Abimelech's  harem.     We  rnayalso  note  two 
other  things  :   1.  It  is  against  this  being  the 
same  Abimelech,  that  no  suspicion  arises  at 
the  repetition  of  the  allegation  of  sisterhood. 
2.  It  IS,  for  the  identity  that  Abimelech  ex- 
presses no  chance  of  his  own  having  takeu 
Eebekah,    but    only   of*  one   of  the  people 
having  outraged  her.  8,  if.]  There  is 

here  no  Divine  interference  :  all  is  human 
detection  and  human  foresight.     There  is  no 


—18.  GENESIS.  117 

I  his  wife,  ^  And  Abimelecli  called  Isaac,  and  said,  Bc- 
!  hold,  of  a  surety  she  is  thy  wife  :  and  how  saidst  thou, 
She  /s'  my  sister  ?  And  Isaac  said  unto  him.  Because  I  said, 
Lest  I  die  for  her.  ^^  And  Abimelech  said.  What  is  this 
thou  hast  done  unto  us  ?  one  of  the  people  might  lightly 
have  lien  with  thy  wife,  and  thou  shouldcst  have  brought 
guiltiness  upon  us.  ^^  And  Abiuielech  charged  all  //is 
people,  saying,  He  that  toucheth  this  man  or  his  wife 
shall  surely  be  put  to  death.  ^^  Then  Isaac  sowed  in  that 
land,  and  received  in  the  same  year  an  hundredfold  :  and 
Jehovah  blessed  him.  ^^  And  the  man  waxed  great,  and 
went  forward,  and  grew  until  he  became  very  great: 
l"*  and  he  had  possession  of  flocks,  and  possession  of  herds, 
and  great  store  of  servants  :  and  the  Philistines  envied 
him.  1^  And  all  the  wells  which  his  father's  servants  had 
digged  in  the  days  of  Abraham  his  father,  the  Philistines 
stopped  them,  and  filled  them  with  earth.  ^^  And  Abime- 
lech said  unto  Isaac,  Go  from  us ;  for  thou  art  much 
mightier  than  we.  ^^  ^  And  Isaac  departed  thence,  and 
pitched  his  tent  in  the  valley  of  Gerar,  and  dwelt  there. 
18  And  Isaac  digged  again  the  wells  of  water,  which  they 

further  meaning  in  ver.  8  than  appears  in  6,  note.  It  is  said  to  he  practised  hy  the 
the  words.  What  passed  was  no  more  than  Arabs  of  modern  times  along  the  lines  of 
is  related,  but  was  enough  to  justify  the  passage  of  the  pilgrims  when  their  demands 
king's  inference.  of  black  mail  are  not  paid.  17 — 33.] 
^  12 — 16.]  Isaac's  prosperiti/  in  Gerar.  Isaac  moves  to  the  valley  of  Gerar,  and 
12.]  Knobel  remarks  that  we  do  not  thence  to  Beer-sheba — disputes  about  icells  ; 
read  of  Abraham  that  he  sowed  the  land ;  final  reconciliation,  and  treaty  with  Abime- 
he  appears  only  as  a  nomad  with  flocks  and  lech.  It  is  evident  from  our  naiTativo  that 
herds.  But  wo  do  read  it  of  J.acob  and  his  the  valley  of  Gerar  was  at  some  distance 
sons  (eh.  xxxvii.  7).  "The  fact,"  Kalisch  from  Gerar  itself,  a  circumstance  which  has 
observes,  "  marks  a  progress  in  the  history  not  been  taken  into  account  in  Dr.  Ilay- 
of  the  patriarchs  :  it  is  the  transition  from  man's  art.  in  Biblical  Diet.  Stanley  men- 
uncertain  migrations  to  a  more  settled  mode  tions  the  Witdy  Kibab  as  being  probably 
of  life  ;  it  implies  a  more  permanent  interest  that  which  was  known  in  ancient  times  as 
in  the  land  itself ;  during  one  season  at  least  the  valley,  i.  e.  the  torrent-bed  or  Wady  of 
the  Hebrew  could  call  his  own,  not  only  the  Gerar  {Sinai  and  Pal.  p.  159).  18.] 
grave  of  his  parents,  but  the  soil  which  gives  These  wells  are  not  mentioned  in  ch.  xxi., 
life  and  wealth."  The  neighbourhood  of  but  only  one,  which  Abinielech's  servants 
Gaza  is  to  this  day  exceedingly  fertile,  and  had  taken  away.  Tlicre  were  other  occasions 
Kuohel  quotes  from  Burckliardt  cases  of  as  of  strife  of  which  the  history  takes  no  ac- 
rich  a  return.  Yer.  15  appears  to  relate,  count.  Knobel  maintains,  witli  his  confi- 
not  what  the  Pliilistiues  had  done,  but  what  dent  "  evidently,"  that  the  wells  mentioned 
they  did,  in  consequence  of  their  envy  of  in  this  verse  and  those  in  vv.  19,  21  arc 
Isaac.  On  the  wells,  see  ch.  xxi.  25,  if. ;  identical,  and  that  we  have  here  a  mixture  of 
and  on  the  practice  of  filling  up  wells  as  an  two  accounts.  But  never  was  an  assumption 
act  of  hostility,  2  Kings  iii.  25,  and  Isa.  xv.  more  groundless.     It  has  no  support  what- 


118  GENESIS.  XXVI. 

had  digged  in  tlie  days  of  Abraham  his  father ;  for  the 
Philistines  had  stopped  them  after  the  death  of  Abraham : 
and  he  called  their  names  after  the  names  by  M'hich  his 
father  had  called  them.  ^^  And  Isaac's  servants  digged  in 
'^  cfrnt'^iv:  fs.  ^-^^  valley,  and  found  there  a  well  of  "^  springing  water. 
z7ch!xiv.  8.    20  _^nd  the  herdmen  of  Gerar  did  strive  with  Isaac's  herd- 

John  iv.10,11. 

men,  saying,  The  water  is  our's :  and  he  called  the  name 
of  the  well  Esek  [Contention]  ;  because  they  strove  with 
him.  21  And  they  digged  another  well,  and  strove  for 
that  also :  and  he  called  the  name  of  it  Sitnah  [Strife]. 
22  And  he  removed  from  thence,  and  digged  another  well ; 
and  for  that  they  strove  not :  and  he  called  the  name  of  it 
Rehoboth  [Enlargement]  ;  and  he  said.  For  now  Jehovah 
hath  made  room  for  us,  and  we  shall  be  fruitful  in  the 
land.  23  And  he  went  up  from  thence  to  Beer-sheba. 
2*  And  Jehovah  appeared  unto  him  the  same  night,  and 
said,  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham  thy  father :  fear  not,  for 
I  am  with  thee,  and  will  bless  thee,  and  multiply  thy  seed 
for  my  servant  Abraham's  sake.  25  And  he  builded  an 
altar  there^  and  called  upon  the  name  of  Jehovah,  and 
pitched  his  tent  there  :  and  there  Isaac's  servants  digged 
a  well.  26  ^  Then  Abiraelech  went  to  him  from  Gerar, 
and  Ahuzzath  his  fiiend,  and  Phichol  the  chief  captain  of 

ever  in  the  context.      The  two  wells  of  vv.  also  ch.  xxxv.  6,  the  building  of  an  altar 

19,  20  are  manifestly  new  wells.  19.]  and  setting  up  a  place  of  worship.  Here 
springing,  literally  living  :  see  reff.  also  Isaac  seems  to  have  fixed  his  home  for 

20,  21.]  The  Gerar  herdsmen  may  have  laid  most  of  the  remainder  of  his  life :  see  ch. 
claim  to  these  wells  as  being  in  their  valh-y ;  xxviii.  10.  He  died,  however,  at  Hebron, 
but  when  22.]  Isaac  left  the  valley,  ch.  xxxv.  27.  The  well  dug  at  Beer-sheba 
there  was  no  longer  any  such  claim  possible,  by  Isaac's  servants  would  seem  to  have  been 
Robinson  found  at  the  junction  of  the  roads  one  of  the  two  larger  at  present  remaining 
to  Gaza  and  Hebron  ruins  of  a  city,  now  there:  see  on  ch.  xxi.  25.  It  may  have 
called  in  Arabic  Euhaibeh,  and  naturally  been  a  characteristic  act,  by  way  of  repeat- 
suggesting  Rehoboth  ;  but  he  says  thei-e  are  ing  what  had  been  done  by  his  father. 

no  traces  of  a  well,  the  water  supply  having  26.]  The  motive  of  this  visit  seems  to  have 

been  by  means  of  cisterns.         23 — 25.]  Isaac  been,  that  Isaac  had  now  grown  sufficiently 

leaves  the  neighboiirhood  of  Gerar  for  the  important,  having  established  himself  near 

neighbouring  district  of  Beer-sheba,  appar-  their  frontiers,  for  definite  relations  to   be 

ently  fi-om  the  desire  of  peaceful  habitation  cultivated  with  him.     And  the  memory  of 

and  enjoyment  of  water  for  his  flocks.    Here  their  somewhat  churlish  dismissal  of  him, 

the  promise  is  renewed  to  him,  but  again  and  the  quarrels  which  had  happened  since, 

for  Abraham's  sake.     The   very  place  was  may  have  made  them  the  more  anxious  to 

full  of  the  memories  of  the  great  patriarch,  remove   cause    of    offence   from   his   mind, 

who  had  dwelt  and  worshipped  there,  ch.  xxi.  Ahuzzath    Ms    friend]    Thus    we 

33.     The  occurrence  of  the  Divine  intima-  have    in    1    Kings    iv.    5,   Zabud    son    of 

tion  induces,  as  in  ch.  xii.  8;  xiii.  IS;  see  Nathan  "principal  ofiicer,   and  ike  ki?>ff's 


19— XXVII.  1.  GENESIS.  119 

his  army.  27  And  Isaac  said  unto  them,  "Wlierefore  come 
j  ye  to  me,  seeing  ye  hate  mo,  and  have  sent  me  away  from 
you  ?  28  And  they  said,  We  saw  certainly  that  Jkiiovah 
was  with  thee  :  and  we  said,  Let  there  be  now  an  oath  be- 
twixt us,  eirii  betwixt  us  and  thee,  and  let  us  make  a 
covenant  with  thee  ;  -^  that  thou  wilt  do  us  no  hurt,  as 
we  have  not  touched  thee,  and  as  we  have  done  unto  thee 
nothing'  but  good,  and  have  sent  thee  away  in  peace  :  thou 
art  now  the  blessed  of  Jehovah,  ^o  And  he  made  them  a 
feast,  and  they  did  eat  and  di-ink.  ^i  And  they  rose  up 
betimes  in  the  morning,  and  sware  one  to  another :  and 
Isaac  sent  them  away,  and  they  departed  from  him  in 
peace.  ^^  And  it  came  to  pass  the  same  day,  that  Isaac's 
servants  came,  and  told  him  concerning  the  well  which 
they  had  digged,  and  said  unto  him,  We  have  found 
water.  ^^  And  he  called  it  Shebah  :  therefore  the  name 
of  the  city  is  Beer-sheba  unto  this  day.  ^^  ^  And  Esau 
was  forty  j'ears  old  when  he  took  to  wife  Judith  the 
daughter  of  Beeri  the  Hittite,  and  Bashemath  the  daugh- 
ter of  Elon  the  Hittite :  ^^  which  were  a  grief  of  mind 
unto  Isaac  and  to  Rebekah.     XXVII.  ^  And  it  came  to 

f riend  ;"  and  1  Chron.   xxvii.  33,  Husliai  It  is  useless  to  attempt  to  evade  the  difficulty, 

the  Aichite,  "  the  king's  companion."     The  as  some  have  done  by  a  suggestion  which 

visit  was  one  of  official  state.     On  the  name  we  forbear  to  characterize,  that  the  former 

Phichol  appearing  as  that  of  the  commander  narrative  gives  the  origin  only  of  the  name 

of  Abimelech's  army  both  here  and  iu  the  of  the  well,  whereas  this  speaks  of  the  citi/. 

history  of  xlbrahani  also,  various  conjectures  Far  rather  would  we  seek  a  solution  in  the 

have  been  made.     The  safest  conclusion  is  fact,  so   apparent    throughout    the   life   of 

that  of  Mr.  Grove  {Biblical  Diet.),  that  it  is  Isaac,  that  his  whole  bent  and  plan  seems  to 

a  Philistine  name  of  the  meaning  of  which  have  been  to  copy  Abraham  his  father,  and 

we  are  ignorant.     We  have  no   means   of  as  it  were  to  retrace  the  lines  which  he  had 

saying  whether  it  may  or  may  not  have  been  previously  traced. 

an  official  name.     See  note  on  ver.  1  :  and         34,  35.]   77/e  double  marriage   of  Esati. 

on  Abimelech's  speech  to  Isaac,  see  above.  Esau,   like  his  father,  marries  at  40.     lie 

There  is  evidently,  from  ver.  29,  a  desire  to  takes  two  wives,  which  is  not,  as  some  have 

have  a  difTei'cnt  interpretation  put  on  the  said,  attributed  to  him  as  a  sin :  Abraham 

former,  sending  him  away  fiom  the  true  one.  had  done  the  same,  and  so  did  Jacob.     The 

In  this  characteristic  trait  Knobel  sees  incon-  sin,  and  that   which  brought   grief  to   his 

sistency  between  this  account  and  that  in  parents,  was  that  ho  took  those  wives,  being 

ver.   16  !  31.]  So  in  ch.   xx.xi.  46  a  himself  ungodly,  out  of  the  heathen  race  of 

meal  was  the  accompaniment  of  a  solemn  the    Canaauites.     On   the   names   of  these 

contract.  33.]  He  called  it,  i.  e.  the  wives  see  note,  ch.   xxxvi.  2.     Tliey  were 

Avell,  Shibgah,  oath:  see  on  the  whole  ch.  both  Ilittites,  of  the  children  of  Ileth:  see 

xxi.  31,  note.     The  account  of  this  second  ch.  x.  15.     They  introduced  misery  into  the 

origin  of  the  name  Beer-sheba  must  be  re-  family  tents.     We  see  its  depth  and  power 

garded  as  rather  au  intimation  of  a  coinci-  in  ch.  xxvii.  46. 
dence  than  as  to  be  pressed  in  its  literal  sense.        XXVII.     Jacob's  fraud  vjwn  his  father 


120 


GENESIS. 


XXVII. 


-f  or,  sword. 


pass,  that  when  Isaac  was  old,  and  his  eyes  were  dim,  so  that 
he  could  not  see,  he  called  Esau  his  eldest  son,  and  said  unto 
him.  My  son :  and  he  said  unto  him,  Behold,  here  am  1. 
2  And  he  said,  Behold  now,  I  am  old,  I  know  not  the  day 
of  my  death :  3  now  therefore  take,  I  pray  thee,  thy 
weapons,  thy  f  quiver  and  thy  bow,  and  go  out  to  the 
field,  and  take  me  some  venison  ;  *  and  make  me  savoury 
meat,  such  as  I  love,  and  bring  if  to  me,  that  I  may  eat ; 
that  my  soul  may  bless  thee  before  I  die.  ^  And  Rebekah 
heard  when  Isaac  spake  to  Esau  his  son.  And  Esau  went 
to  the  field  to  hunt  for  venison,  that  he  might  bring  it. 
6  ^  And  Rebekah  sj)ake  unto  Jacob  her  son,  saying.  Be- 
hold, I  heard  thy  father  speak  unto  Esau  thy  brother, 
saying,  7  Bring  me  venison,  and  make  me  savoury  meat, 
that  I  may  eat,  and  bless  thee  before  Jehovah  before  my 


and  brother,  1.]  Isaac   was   at   this 

time  137  years  old,  as  appears  thus:  Joseph 
was  30  years  old  when  he  stood  befoi'e 
Pharaoh  (oh.  xli.  46)  ;  there  had  passed  the 
seven  years  of  plenty,  and  two  years  of 
famine  when  Jacob  came  into  Egypt  and  de- 
clared himself  130  years  old  ;  so  that,  Joseph 
being  39  when  his  father  was  130,  he  was 
born  when  his  father  was  91.  But  Joseph 
was  born  when  his  father  had  been  14  years 
in  Mesopotamia  (compare  ch.  xxx.  25  with 
xxix.  18,  21,  27),  so  that  Jacob  was  77 
when  he  fled  to  Mesopotamia;  and  as  he 
was  born  when  his  father  was  60  (ch.  xxv. 
26), — Isaac  must  have  been  at  this  time  137. 
At  this  age  his  half-brother  Ishmacl  had  died 
(ch.  xxv.  17) ;  but  Isaac  survived  yet  43 
years  (see  ch.  xxxv.  28).  It  is  literally,  his 
eyes  had  grown  dim  from  seeing,  i.  e.  so  that 
he  could  not  see.  He  had  not  given  up 
Esau  as  his  first-born,  notwithstanding  the 
prophecy  and  the  transaction  about  the 
birthright.  Isaac's  character  is  usually 
treated  as  that  of  the  good  and  weak  old 
man,  led  captive  by  his  mere  sensual  predi- 
lections. But  those  who  thus  estimate  for- 
get that  the  father,  as  a  lover  of  justice,  had 
every  right  on  his  side  in  maintaining  that 
of  which  Esau  had  been  unjustly  defrauded. 
The  type  of  his  predilections  and  desires  may 
have  been  low,  as  undoubtedly  was  that  of 
his  favourite  son's ;  but  while  we  accept  the 
sacred  narrative  in  this  chapter  as  a  record  of 
God's  inscrutable  ways  of  bringing  about 


His  purposes,  we  must  not  for  a  moment  let 
our  plain  sense  of  His  justice  and  truth  be 
warped  by  any  theological  considerations ; 
we  must  not  withdraw  our  sympathies  from 
Esau  the  victim,  nor  suffer  our  indignation 
against  the  instigator  and  the  perpetrator  of 
the  wrong  to  be  blunted.  "We  shall  find  in 
the  course  of  the  history  that  whatever  great 
results  followed  the  crime,  it  did  not  remain 
unvisited  on  the  heads  of  both  those  guilty 
persons.  3.]  The  word  rendered  quiver 

is  found  only  here  :  it  specifies  that  which  is 
kuuff  on,  and  has  by  some  been  rendered 
sword.  But  Knobel  remarks  that  the  sword 
is  girded  on,  while  the  quiver  is  suspended. 
Still,  one  name  for  a  sword  was  a  hanger, 
and  perhaps  the  bow  would  of  itself  imply 
the  quiver,  without  its  being  mentioned. 
venison  is  rather  a  translation  by  de- 
rivation than  by  sense,  which  is  '■^venare 
mihi  venationem,"  "  hunt  me  the  produce  of 
hunting,"  i.  e.  game.  Such  is  exactly  re- 
presented in  the  derivation  of  the  word  by 
venison,  which  is  venatio ;  but  not  in  the 
ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  which  is  the 
flesh  of  deer.  In  the  concluding  words  of 
the  verse  Isaac  shews  a  consciousness  of  his 
patriarchal  dignity  as  the  holder  and  trans- 
mitter of  the  Divine  covenant-promise,  and 
as  the  vehicle  of  fate  and  blessing  in  vii-tue 
of  this  office.  5,  6.]  Notice  Esau  his 

son,  .  .  .  Jacob  her   son.  7.]    The 

words  Jjefore  Jehovah,  if  not  actually  uttered 
by    Isaac,   shew    Eebekah's    sense   of   the 


2—15. 


GENESIS. 


121 


death.  ^  Now  therefore,  my  son,  obey  my  voice  according 
to  that  which  I  command  thee.  ^  Go  now  to  the  flock, 
and  fetch  me  from  thence  two  good  kids  of  the  goats  ;  and 

I  will  make  them  savoury  meat  for  thy  father,  such  as  ho 
loveth :  ^^  and  thou  shalt  bring  it  to  thy  father,  that  he 
may  eat,  and  that  he  may  bless  thee  before  his  death. 

II  And  Jacob  said  to  licbekah  his  mother.  Behold,  Esau 
my  brother  is  a  hairy  man,  and  I  am  a  smooth  man : 
1'^  my  father  pcradventurc  will  feel  me,  and  I  shall  seem 
to  him  as  a  deceiver ;  and  I  shall  bring  a  curse  upon  me, 
and  not  a  blessing.  ^^  ^Ynd  his  mother  said  unto  him,  Upon 
me  be  thy  curse,  my  son :  only  obey  my  voice,  and  go 
fetch  me  them.  ^^  And  he  went,  and  fetched,  and  brought 
them  to  his  mother :  and  his  mother  made  savoury  meat, 
such  as  his  father  loved.  ^'^  And  E-ebekah  took  goodly 
raiment  of  her  eldest  son  Esau,  which  were  with  her  in 
the  house,  and  put  them  ujjon  Jacob  her  younger  son  : 


solemnity  of  tlic  intended  blessing,  gathered 
from  the  tone  of  him  whom  slie  had  over- 
heard speaking.  The  blessing  of  a  father, 
as  before  God,  would  be  ratified  by,  as  it 
would  be  inspired  by,  Him  in  the  full  con- 
sciousness of  whose  Presence  it  would  be 
pronounced.  11.]  Jacob  urges  no  such 

scruple  against  the  voice  of  his  temptress  as 
his  son  afterwards  uttered  (ch.  xxsix.  9), 
but  is  afraid  only  of  the  consequences  of  de- 
tection. (The  Syriac  version  and  some 
MSS.  of  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch  have, 
"■Thou  wilt  bring  a  curse  upon  me. ")  But 
his  wicked  mother  had  provided  for  all  this 
by  a  scheme  heartless  in  proportion  as  it  was 
monstrous  and  unnatural.  She  will  take  ad- 
vantage of  the  failing  sight  and  impaired 
perception  of  her  aged  husband  for  her  per- 
fidious purposes.  At  the  same  time  we  can- 
not help  regarding  with  a  sort  of  admiration 
her  lofty  appreciation  of  that  result  which 
she  sought,  and  her  self-forgetful  devotion 
(vcr.  7)  to  her  beloved  son  ;  but  it  is  as  we 
feel  the  same  sort  of  admiration  for  Lady 
Macbeth — with  full  consciousness  of,  and 
never  forgetting,    her   crime.  15.]    It 

has  been  a  dream  of  the  more  fancilul  of 
ancient  and  modern  commentators,  that  this 
goodly  raiment  of  Esau  consisted  of  the 
sacerdotal  robes  belonging  to  him  as  the 
firstborn    in    the    patriarchal    family,   and 


that  "  the  transfer  of  the  sacerdotal  robes 
from  Esau  to  Jacob  seems  to  be  typical  of 
the  transfer  of  the  priesthood  from  the  Jew- 
ish hierarchy  to  Christ  and  the  Church." 
Bp.  Wordsworth.  But  to  say  nothing 
of  the  sort  of  typology  which  sees  in 
a  transfer  to  Israel  a  type  of  a  transfer /ro»i 
Israel,  we  may  fervently  exclaim,  ahsit 
omen  !  at  the  same  time  that  wc  remind  the 
reader  of  the  improbability  of  such  an  inter- 
pretation of  the  garments,  in  the  absence  of 
any  intimation  in  the  text.  Besides,  would 
such  vestments,  supposing  them  to  have  ex- 
isted at  all,  have  been  described  as  "raiment 
of  the  eldest  son  "  during  his  father's  life- 
time ?  And  even  if  they  .could  have  been 
so  described,  is  it  likely  that  the  ambitious 
Eebekali  would  have  allowed  them  to  remain 
Esau's,  when  the  birthright  to  which  they 
Avere  attached  bad  been,  in  her  view  and 
his  own,  transferred  to  Jacob  ?  They  were 
probably  best,  or  state  garments  of  ".my 
lord"  Esau,  in  which  he  sought  the  com- 
panies of  his  brother  hunters,  and  redolent 
(ver.  27)  of  the  aromatic  shrubs  of  the  wild- 
erness which  they  had  brushed  through. 
The  objection  that  if  so  they  would  be  in  the 
keeping  of  his  wives  is  of  no  weight.  Esau 
seems  still  a  member  of  his  fatlicr's  house- 
hold, of  the  treasures  of  which  Picbckah  was 
naturally  the  keeper.  in  the  house] 


122  GENESIS.  XXYII. 

1^  and  slie  put  the  skins  of  the  kids  of  tke  goats  upon  his 
hands,  and  upon  the  smooth  of  his  neck :  ^^  and  she  gave 
the  savoury  meat  and  the  bread,  which  she  had  prepared, 
into  the  hand  of  her  son  Jacob.  ^^  If  And  he  came  unto  his 
father,  and  said.  My  father  :  and  he  said,  Here  am  I ;  who 
art  thou,  my  son  ?  ^^  And  Jacob  said  unto  his  father,  I  am 
Esau  thy  firstborn ;  I  have  done  according  as  thou  badest 
me  :  arise,  I  pray  thee,  sit  and  eat  of  my  venison,  that  thy 
soul  may  bless  me.  20  ji^j^^  Isaac  said  unto  his  son,  How 
is  it  that  thou  hast  found  it  so  quickly,  my  son  ?  And  he 
said.  Because  Jehovah  thy  Elohim  brought  it  to  me.  ^i 
And  Isaac  said  unto  Jacob,  Come  near,  I  pray  thee,  that 
I  may  feel  thee,  my  son,  whether  thou  be  my  very  son 
Esau  or  not.  ^2  ^^j  Jacob  went  near  unto  Isaac  his 
father;  and  he  felt  him,  and  said,  The  voice  is  Jacob's 
voice,  but  the  hands  are  the  hands  of  Esau.  ^3  ^j^^  -j^q 
discerned  him  not,  because  his  hands  were  hairy,  as  his 
brother  Esau's  hands  :  so  he  blessed  him.  24  And  he  said, 
Art  thou  my  very  son  Esau  ?  And  he  said,  I  am.  25  ^^^ 
he  said.  Bring  it  near  to  me,  and  I  will  eat  of  my  son's 
venison,  that  my  soul  may  bless  thee.  And  he  brought  it 
*  near  to  him,  and  he  did  eat :  and  he  brought  him  wine, 

and  he  drank.     26  ji^j^^  j^ig  father  Isaac  said  unto  him, 

This  word  house  has  surprised  Knobel,  as  the   comment   on   this  wicked  fraud.     Nor 

inconsistent  with  the  usual  term  tetit.     He  was  this  aloue.     His  subsequent  life  presents 

says  ch.  xxxviii.  11  is   not  parallel,  as  that  many  times  the  cheater  cheated:    compare 

has   reference   to    Canaanitish    connexions,  ch.  xxix.  25 ;  xxxiv.  30  ;  xlii.  36 — 38,  and 

But  may  not  the   expression   be   merely  a  the  suspicion  of  fraud,  ch.  xlv.  26.     Observe 

general    one  .'             16.]    "  The    skins    of  how  the  blasphemy  is  enhanced  by  the  most 

goats  are  well  adapted  to  the  purpose  for  solemn  name  of  God  being  used,  and  His 

which  Jacob   (?)  employs   them.     For  the  covenant  relation  to  Isaac  introduced  :  Je- 

hair  of  the  Syrian  long-eared  goat,  though  hovah   thy   God.             21.]   The  arousing 

often  black,  is  long  and  soft,  and  looks  and  and  the  lulling  of  the  old  man's  suspicions, 

feels   not   unlike    human  hair,  whence   the  are  alike  characteristic.    He  suspected  Jacob 

Romans   employed   it   for  wigs   and   other  from  habit ;  but  his  distrust  was  lightly  ap- 

artificial  coverings  of  the  head  "  (see  Cant,  peased  by  an  expedient  which  would  hardly 

iv.  1).     Kalisch.             20.]  The  baseness  of  have   taken   in   an  intelligent   child.     Yet 

Jacob  is  here  coped  by  his  blasphemy.     It  is  though  appeased,  it  is  not  set  at  rest.     It 

no  mean  sign  of  the  sublimity  of  Scripture  arises  again  ver.  24,  and  even  then  is  with 

that  no  word  of  disapproval  is  inserted  in  difficulty  overcome.     The  concluding  words 

cases  like  this.     The  condemnation  is  left  to  of  this  verse,  so  he  blessed  him,  must  ap- 

the  "  discernment  of  good  and  evil"  which  parently  not  be  understood  as  importing  that 

we  have   "even  of  ourselves;"  and  when  the  blessing  was  now  given,  for  eV  evidently 

passed,  it  is  in  the  history's  sequel,  amply  follows  in  vv.  27 — 29  (compare  the  reference 

justified.     Jacob's  own  infinite  anguish  as  to  it,  ver.  37)  ;  nor  again  as  being  a  mere 

the  victim  of  deceit,  ch.  xxxvii.  34,  35,  is  preliminary  or  summary  blessing,  afterwards 


xDi'iit.  xxxiii. 
13.  H"».  xiv. 
jS.  Zech,  viii. 
12. 


IG— 33.  GENESIS.  123 

Come  near  now,  and  kiss  me,  my  son.     ^7  And  he  came 

near,  and  kissed  him :    and  he  smelled  the  smell  of  his 

raiment,  and  blessed  him,  and  said, 

See,  the  "^smcllof  my  son  wcam.  iv.  n. 

As  the  smell  of  a  field 

Which  Jehovati  hath  blessed  : 

28  And  fGod  give  thee  +ThcEiohim. 

Of  the  ^  dew  of  heaven, 
And  of  the  fatness  of  the  earth, 
And  plenty  of  corn  and  wine : 

29  Let  people  serve  thee, 

And  nations  bow  down  to  thee  : 
Be  lord  over  thy  brethren. 
And  let  thy  mother's  sons  bow  down  to  thee : 
Cursed  are  they  that  curse  thee. 

And  blessed  are  they  that  bless  thee. 

30  ^  And  it  came  to  pass,  as  soon  as  Isaac  had  made  an 
end  of  blessing  Jacob,  and  Jacob  was  yet  scarce  gone  out 
from  the  presence  of  Isaac  his  father,  that  Esau  his  brother 
came  in  from  his  hunting.  ^^  And  he  also  had  made 
savoury  meat,  and  brought  it  mito  his  father,  and  said 
unto  his  father,  Let  my  father  arise,  and  eat  of  his  son's 
venison,  that  thy  soul  may  bless  me.  ^^  And  Isaac  his 
father  said  unto  him,  Who  art  thou  ?  And  he  said,  I  am 
thy  son,  thy  firstborn  Esau.  ^3  And  Isaac  trembled  very 
exceedingly,  and  said.  Who  ?  where  is  he  that  hath  taken 
venison,  and  brought  it  me,  and  I  have  eaten  of  all  before 
thou  camest,  and  have  blessed  him  ?  yea,  and  he  shall  be 

to  be  expanded ;  but  as  anticipatory,  and  reflf.            29.]  From  physical  the  blessing 

summarizing   vv.  27 — 29  ;  q.  d.    the    main  goes  on  to  political  prosperity.     The  Edom- 

instrumcnt  in  deceiving  Isaac  and  extracting  itcs,  descendants  of  Jacob's  brother,  were  sub- 

the  blessing  from  him,  was  the  fact  that  his  jugated  by  David  (2  Sam.  viii.  14 ;  1  Kings 

hands  were,  &c.             27.]  On  the  smell  of  xi.  13  ;  Ps.  Ix.,  title).     Sec  below   on  ver. 

his  raiment   see  note,  ver.  15.     The  word  40.     The  concluding  words  were  remarkably 

raiment  may  perhaps  include  the  skins  of  the  reproduced  by  Balaam,  Num.  xxiv.  9. 

goats.     As  Knobel  remarks,  all  contributed  30—40.]  EsaiC s  return ;  his  despair  at  the 

to  confirm  the  old  man  and  obtain  the  bless-  trencher //  and atthc  irrevocable  blessing.  The 

ing, — the  meal,  the  wine,  the  kiss,  the  wild  words  of  the  patriarch,  spoken  in  the  fulness 

odour.             28.]  The  blessing  is  conveyed,  of  Divine  inspiration,  are  irrevocable,  how- 

as  usual  with  such  sayings,  in  a  form   of  ever  obtained.     This  is  one  of  the  mysterious 

poetic  parallelism.     The  dew  and  the  fat-  parts  of  the  narrative  ;  but  it  only  represents 

ness  of  the  earth  are  in   Palestine  closely  to  us  the  constant  issue  of  similar  successes  in 

connected.     The  dews  there  are  like  rain  (see  life  itself.     The  wrong  is  done,  the  prize  is 

The  Land  and  the  Book,  p.  491):  compare  thereby  won;    there  is  no  reversal  of  the 


124  GENESIS.  XXVII. 

blessed.  ^^  And  when  Esau  heard  the  words  of  his  father, 
he  cried  with  a  great  and  exceeding  bitter  cry,  and  said 
unto  his  father.  Bless  me,  even  me  also,  0  my  father.  ^^ 
And  he  said,  Thy -brother  came  with  subtil ty,  and  hath 
taken  away  thy  blessing,  ^^  And  he  said.  Is  not  he 
rightly  named  Jacob  [Defrauder]  ?  for  he  hath  defrauded 
me  these  two  times  :  he  took  away  my  birthright ;  and, 
behold,  now  he  hath  taken  away  my  blessing.  And  he 
said,  Hast  thou  not  reserved  a  blessing  for  me  ?  ^^  And 
Isaac  answered  and  said  unto  Esau,  Behold,  I  have  made 
him  thy  lord,  and  all  his  brethren  have  I  given  to  him  for 
servants ;  and  with  corn  and  wine  have  I  sustained  him  : 
and  what  shall  I  do  now  unto  thee,  my  son  ?  ^^  And  Esau 
said  unto  his  father.  Hast  thou  but  one  blessing,  my 
father  ?  bless  me,  even  me  also,  0  my  father.  And  Esau 
ych.  xxi.  ifi.  ylifted  up  his  voice,  and  wept.  ^^  And  Isaac  his  father 
answered  and  said  unto  him. 

Behold,  apart  from  the  fatness  of  the  earth  shall  be  thy 
dwelling. 

And  apart  from  the  dew  of  heaven  from  above  ; 
40  And  by  thy  sword  shalt  thou  live. 

And  shalt  serve  thy  brother  ; 
And  it  shall  come  to  pass  when  thou  shalt  revolt. 

That  thou  shalt  break  his  yoke  from  off  thy  neck. 

issue ;  the   enjoyment  of  the  prize  may  be  withstanding    some    fertile  valleys  in  the 

poisoned  by  the  wrong,  but  the  prize  itself  is  eastern  parts,  Edom  is  probably  "  the  most 

of  no  less  value.     On  all  this  compare  the  desolate  and  barren  uj^land  in  the  world" 

N.  T.  comment,  Heb.  xii.    17.              35.]  (Seetzen,    cited   by  Keil).     So   also    Shaw 

Isaac  has  now  his  eyes  opened  to  the  double  describes  it,  "  a  solitary,  empty  waste,"  and 

fact, — Jacob's  unpiincipledfiaud  and  Jacob's  Burckhardt,   "a  stony  desert."     No  words 

destination  to  inlierit  the  blessing  and  birth-  could  more  accvu-ately  describe  the  habits  of 

right.             36.]  "  Supjjlanter  "  is  pei'haps  its  inhabitants  than  those  of  living  by  their 

nearer  to  the  meaning,  but  is  not  so  well  sword,  existing  as  robbers  and  freebooters, 

understood.             39  ]  This  is  put  a  poor  Witness  the  perils,  to  this  day,  of  a  visit  to 

remnant  of  blessing  after  that  bestowed  upon  Petra.              On    thou    shalt    serve    thy 

Jacob.     But  it  has  been  well  observed  by  brother,  see  above,  ver.  29.     The  renderings 

Delitzsch  that  it  contains  in  it  the  elements  of  the  following  words  have  been  very  di- 

of  trouble  for  Jacob's  blessing,  and  thereby  verse.     Tlie  Targum  of  Onkelos  give  them, 

bco-ins  to  visit  on  the  latter  the  unjust  means  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  his  sons 

whereby  he  obtained  it.     The  arrangement  shall  transgress  the  words  of  the  law,  thou 

is  poetical:  see  above,  vv.   27  —  29.     The  shalt,"  &c.     The  ancient  Syriac,  "  If  thou 

opening  words  most  likely  signify  the  very  shalt  repent,  thou  shalt,"  &c.     The  Hebrew 

contrary  of  that  by  which  the  A.  V.  renders  verb  signifies  to  roam  at   Ubertij,  to  rush 

them.      Esau  was  to  dwell  in  the  barren  wildly  about,  as  cattle  free  from  the  yoke, 

land  of  Idumrea,  far  off  from  the  fertility  of  It  is  thus  used  in  Jer.  ii.  31.      See  note 

his  brother's  lot.     Travellers  say  that  not-  there.     It  seems  that  our  nearest  English 


34— XXVIII.  1. 


GENESIS. 


125 


4^  H  And  Esau  hated  Jacob  because  of  the  blessing  where- 
with his  father  blessed  him :  and  Esau  said  in  his  heart, 
The  days  of  mourning-  for  my  father  are  at  hand ;  then 
will  I  slay  my  brother  Jacob.  ^'^  And  these  words  of 
Esau  her  elder  son  were  told  to  Rebekah :  and  she  sent 
and  called  Jacob  her  younger  son,  and  said  unto  him,  Be- 
hold, th}^  brother  Esau,  as  touching  thee,  doth  comfort 
himself,  ])iirj)osi)/(j  to  kill  thee.  ^^  Now  therefore,  my  son, 
obey  my  voice  ;  and  arise,  flee  thou  to  Laban  ni}-  brotlier 
to  Ilaran ;  '^^  and  tarry  with  him  a  few  days,  until  thy 
brother^s  finy  turn  away ;  "^^  until  thy  brother's  anger 
turn  away  from  thee,  and  he  forget  t/iat  which  thou  hast 
done  to  him  :  then  I  will  send,  and  fetch  thee  from  thence : 
vrhy  should  I  be  deprived  also  of  you  both  in  one  day  ? 
^^  And  Rebekah  said  to  Isaac,  I  am  weary  of  my  life  be- 
cause of  the  daughters  of  Heth :  if  Jacob  take  a  wife  of 
the  daughters  of  Ileth,  such  as  these  ichich  are  of  the 
daughters  of  the  land,  what  good  shall  my  life  do  me  ? 
XXVIII.    1  And  Isaac  called  Jacob,  and  blessed  him,  and 


term  in  this  connexion  is  "  to  revolt."  The 
Edoraites  were  to  be  subjugated  by  Israel, 
but  would  in  time  assert  their  liberty  and 
succeed  in  shaking  off  the  yoke.  This  they 
did  in  the  reign  of  Jorani,  2  Kings  viii.  20, 
ff.  They  were  brought  under  again  by 
Amaziah  (2  Kings  xiv.  7  ;  2  Chron.  xxv. 
11).  In  the  latter  days  of  the  kingdom  of 
Judah  the  Edomites  were  a  cause  of  annoy- 
ance (see  2  Chron.  xxviii.  17).  41 — 45.] 
Esau  holes  and  threatens  Jacob ;  his  mother 
sends  him  awaxj  to  Haran,  It  is  again 
characteristic,  that  Esau  will  not  afflict  his 
father  by  taking  revenge  on  Jacob,  but  will 
wait  till  his  death.  He  makes  no  account  of 
his  mother,  who  was  indifferent  to  him. 
Kalisch  calls  in  question  this  rendering,  and 
prefers,  "  Days  of  grief  arc  at  hand  for  my 
father,  for  I  will  slay,"  &c.,  without  any 
reference  to  Isaac's  death.  But  the  common 
interpretation  seems  universally  accepted, 
and  certainly  suits  better.  It  does  not,  as 
Kalisch  objects,  "  presuppose  a  deliberate 
calmness  and  self-control  on  the  part  of 
Esau  totally  at  variance  with  his  character," 
but  only  an  interference  of  his  passion  for 
revenge  on  his  brother  with  that  of  tender- 
ness for  his  father,  a  very  common  incident 
with  impetuous  persons.     It  surely  woiild 


be  far  more  inconsistent  with  his  character 
to  suppose  a  side-look  at  his  father's  pro- 
bable distress  to  be  a  bitter  accompani- 
ment of  his  feeling  of  revenge.  The 
historical  comment  on  this  tlireat  is  found 
at  ch.   XXXV.   29.  44.]  by  the  words 

a  few  days  Rebekah  persuades  her  son  to 
tear  himself  from  home.  The  punishment 
of  the  fraud  is  beginning.  She  never  saw 
him  again.  45.]  If  Esau  killed  Jacob, 

she  would  lose  them  both,  because  the  cus- 
tom of  the  avenging  of  blood  would  have 
compelled  Jacob's  nearest  of  kin  to  kill 
Esau.  46.]  It  is  curious  to  see  such 

commentators  as  Knobel,  maintaining  that 
this  speech  of  Rebekah's  is  inconsistent  with 
what  has  gone  before.  It  is  simply  another 
fraud  upon  the  feeble  Isaac,  who  was  un- 
conscious of  the  threat  of  Esau.  Rebekah 
sets  up  the  pretext  of  Jacob  going  in  search 
of  a  wife,  which  had  enough  of  reality  to 
commend  it,  to  induce  his  father  to  send 
him  away  without  being  informed  of  the 
more  cogent  reason.  Isaac  falls  into  the 
trap,  and  hence  his  speech  to  Jacob,  ch. 
xxviii.  1,  ff.  On  Esau's  wives,  see  ch.  xxvi. 
34  and  xxxvi.  2,  ff. 

XXVIII.— XXXV.       The     history     of 
Jacob;  his  icanderings  ;  his  wives  and  chil- 


126  GENESIS.  XXVIII. 

charged  him,  and  said  unto  him,  Thou  shalt  not  take  a 
wife  of  the  daughters  of  Canaan.  2  Arise,  go  to  Padan- 
aram,  to  the  house  of  Bethuel  thy  mother's  father ;  and 
take  thee  a  wife  from  thence  of  the  daughters  of  Laban 
tELSHiBBii.  thy  mother's  brother.  ^  And  fGod  Almighty  bless  thee, 
and  make  thee  fruitful,  and  multiply  thee,  that  thou  may- 
est  be  a  multitude  of  people ;  "^  and  give  thee  the  blessing 
of  Abraham,  to  thee,  and  to  thy  seed  with  thee  ;  that  thou 
maj'-est  inherit  the  land  wherein  thou  art  a  stranger, 
which  God  gave  unto  Abraham.  ^  And  Isaac  sent  away 
Jacob :  and  he  went  to  Padan-aram  unto  Laban,  son  of 
Bethuel  the  Aramaean,  the  brother  of  Rebekah,  Jacob's 
and  Esau's  mother.  ^  51  When  Esau  saw  that  Isaac  had 
blessed  Jacob,  and  sent  him  away  to  Padan-aram,  to  take 
him  a  wife  from  thence ;  and  that  as  he  blessed  him  he 
gave  him  a  charge,  saying,  Thou  shalt  not  take  a  wife  of 
the  daughters  of  Canaan ;  7  an(l  that  Jacob  obeyed  his 
father  and  his  mother,  and  was  gone  to  Padan-aram ; 
8  and  Esau  seeing  that  the  daughters  of  Canaan  pleased 
not  Isaac  his  father ;  ^  then  went  Esau  unto  Ishmael, 
and  took  imto  the  wives  which  he  had  Mahalath  the 
daughter  of  Ishmael  Abraham's  son,  the  sister  of  J^eba- 
joth,  to  be  his  wife.      ^^  ^  And  Jacob  went  out  from 

dren  ;  his  return  to  Canaan  ;  his  sojourn  at  or  more  briefly  in  Kaliscli.         2.]  On  Padan- 

Shechem,  at  Bethel,  at  Mamre,  ivhere  Isaac  aram.seeoncb.  xxv.  20.         3.]  OnElShad- 

dies  and  is  buried.     And  herein,  XXYIII.  dai,  see  note,  cli.  xvii.  1.             5.]  Bethuel 

1—5]  Isaac  blesses  Jacob  and  sends  him  to  take  the  AraniEean,  see  eh.  sxv.  20,  where  Laban 

a  icife  among  Laban' s  daughters  at  Baran.  is  called  by  this  name ;    and  note  there,  as 

There  is  no  inconsistency  -n-hatever  in  this  above.             6—9.]  Esau's  third  marriage. 

incident  as  here  related,  with  what  has  just  This  proceeding  of  Esau   shews  the   same 

passed  in  ch.  sxvii.     Eebekah  had  kept  the  characteristic  misapprehension  of  the  posi- 

aged  Isaac  uninformed  of  the  true  reason  why  tion,  and  of  his  father's  mind,  as  we  have 

she  sent   Jacob  away,   and  had  substituted  seen  in  him  before.     It  fulfils  that  mind  to 

for  it  her  anxious  desire  that  he  should  not  the    letter,    but   violates   it   in   the    spirit, 

take  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  the  land.  There  is,  again,  no  inconsistency  with  what 

Isaac  acts  on  this,  and  in  dismissing  Jacob,  has   gone   before,    as  some  have    thought, 

gives  him  his  special  blessing,  at  the  same  Esau  need  not  have  known  that  his  mother 

time  reiterating   the   general   terms  of  the  had  heard  of  his  threat  against  his  brother : 

patriarchal  promise  in  the  form  of  a  solemn  he  sees  his  brother's  dismissal  to  Haran,  and 

wish   for  him.     In  this   whole  portion  the  its  ostensible   reason.     He   knows  that  his 

Elohistic  and  Jehovistic  elements  are  gener-  wives  were  displeasing  to  his  father  ;  and  he 

ally  intermingled.     It  is  not  the  purpose  of  endeavours  in  his  clumsy  way  to  repair  the 

this  commentary  to  follow  out  such  consider-  mischief.         On  Mahalath,  see  ch.  xxxvi.  3. 

ations  in  detail.    Those  who  wish  for  a  com-  10 — 22.]  Jacob' s  journey ,  and  dream 

plete  account  may  find  it  (allowing  for  the  at  Luz.     On  Haran,  see  ch.  xi.  31  ;  xxiv. 

rationalistic  bias)  in  Knobel's  commentary,  10.            11.]  This  was  not  at  the  end  of 


2—18.  GENESIS.  127 

Beer-slicba,  and  went  toward  Haran.  ^^  And  lie  lighted 
'  ujion  a  certain  place,  and  tarried  there  all  night,  because 
the  sun  was  set ;  and  he  took  one  of  the  stones  of  that 
place,  and  put  it  under  his  head,  and  lay  down  in  that 
place  to  sleep.  ^^  XwA.  he  dreamed,  and  behold  a  ladder 
set  up  on  the  earth,  and  the  tojD  of  it  reached  to  heaven : 
and  behold  the  angels  of  God  ascending  and  descending 
on  it.  1-^  And,  behold,  Jehovah  stood  above  it,  and  said, 
I  am  Jehovah  God  of  Abraham  thy  father,  and  the  God 
of  Isaac :  the  land  whereon  thou  liest,  to  thee  will  I  give 
it,  and  to  thy  seed ;  ^*  and  thy  seed  shall  be  as  the  dust 
of  the  earth,  and  thou  shalt  spread  abroad  to  the  west, 
and  to  the  east,  and  to  the  north,  and  to  the  south :  and 
in  thee  and  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth 
be  blessed.  ^^  And,  behold,  I  am  with  thee,  and  will 
keep  thee  in  all  places  whither  thou  goest,  and  will  bring 
thee  again  into  this  land ;  for  I  will  not  leave  thee,  until 
I  have  done  tliat  which  I  have  spoken  to  thee  of.  ^^ 
51  And  Jacob  awaked  out  of  his  sleep,  and  he  said,  Surely 
Jehovah  is  in  this  place ;  and  I  knew  it  not.  ^^  And  he 
was  afraid,  and  said,  IIow  dreadful  in  this  place !  this  ts 
none  other  but  the  house  of  God,  and  this  is  the  gate  of 
heaven.     ^^  And   Jacob    rose  up  early  in  the    morning, 

the  first  day's  journey;  for,  as  Xnobcl  ob-  an  enlargement  of  tbcm,  both  in  that  the 
serves,  Jerusalem  was  several  days'  journey  blessing  to  all  races  on  earth  (literally,  of  the 
from  Beer-sheba,  and  Bethel  was  further  on  earth's  surface,  on  the  ground  :  so  also  ch. 
still.  12.]  This  symbolical  dream  of  xii.  3;  notch,  xviii.  18;  xxii.  18;  xxvi.  4) 
Jacob's  has  deep  meaning,  and  serves  as  a  is  not  only  said  of  the  seed,  but  is  made 
revelation  to  him  of  God's  promises  and  pur-  personal,  in  thee  and  in  thy  seed  ;  doubt- 
poses.  This  is  necessarily  implied  in  the  nar-  less  because  this  was  he  whose  personal 
rative.  On  the  one  side  is  Jacob,  a  lone  name  was  to  designate,  as  he  personally 
man,  not  sheltered  by  the  walls  of  a  city  or  was  to  multiply  into,  the  whole  race  of 
of  a  house,  but  lying  down  to  rest  under  the  Israel ;  and  also  in  that  there  is  here  con- 
canopy  of  heaven ;  on  the  other  is  He  who  tained  a  guarantee  that  God  would  guard 
never  slumbers  nor  sleeps,  keeping  watch  Jacob  in  all  his  paths,  and  would  bi-ing  him 
over  Israel,  imparting  to  man  grace  and  back  to  the  land  of  liis  birth,  and  would  not 
help  by  His  heavenly  messengers,  and  re-  forsake  him  till  all  His  promises  should  be 
ceiving  men's  wants  through  the  same.  The  accomplished.  16.  Jkhovah  is  in  this 
whole  represents  the  future  fortunes  of  Israel  place  is  the  predication  of  an  especial  and 
and  the  connexion  of  the  chosen  people  with  solemn  presence,  such  as  all  men  associate 
God.  The  sjTubol  is  alluded  to  by  the  with  a  spot  which  is  called  the  house  of  God. 
Psalmist  in  Ps.  cxxi.,  and  by  the  prophet  In  saying  that  it  was  the  gate  of  heaven, 
Hosea,  ch.  ii.  4,  o,  and  in  its  deeper  and  fullest  he  does  no  more  than  revive  the  vision  of 
meaning  by  our  blessed  Lord,  in  John  i.  51.  the  night :  here  heaven  had  been  opened  to 
14.]  This  was  not  only  a  renewal  of  him.  18.]  The  putting  the  stone  pil- 
the  promises  to  Abraham  and  to  Isaac,  but  low  for  a  monument  derives  further  signifi- 


128 


GENESIS. 


XXYIII. 


'I  ch.  xxxi.  45; 
XXXV.  14. 

Jos.  iv.  9,20; 
xxiv.26,  27. 
1  Sam.  vii.  12. 


and  took  tlie  stone  tliat  lie  had  put  under  liis  liead,  and 
^set  it  up /or  a  monument,  and  poured  oil  upon  tlie  top  of 
it.  1^  And  lie  called  the  name  of  that  place  Beth-el :  but 
the  name  of  that  city  u-as  called  Luz  at  the  first,  ^o  ^^d 
Jacob  vowed  a  vow,  saying,  If  God  will  be  with  me,  and 
will  keep  me  in  this  way  that  I  go,  and  will  give  me 
bread  to  eat,  and  raiment  to  put  on,  ^i  so  that  I  come 
again  to  my  father's  house  in  peace ;  then  shall  Jehovah 
be  my  God :  22  and  this  stone,  which  I  have  set  for  a 
monument,  shall  be  God's  house  :  and  of  all  that  thou 
shalt  give  me  I  will  surely  give  the  tenth  unto  thee. 
XXIX.  1  Then  Jacob  lifted  up  his  feet  and  came  into  the 


cance  and  endurance  by  bis  anointing  it,  as 
Moses  did  tbe  tabernacle  and  its  furniture 
afterwards,  Exod.  xxx.  26.  "We  read  else- 
■wbere  of  the  custom  of  setting  up  stones  as 
memorials :  see  reff.  There  is  a  curious 
fact  in  connexion  with  this  narrative,  that 
of  the  mention  by  various  ancient  writers  of 
anointed  stones  as  objects  of  veneration, 
which  anointed  stones  were  called  Boetulia 
in  Greek,  and  Bcetyli  in  Latin,  apparently 
from  their  usually  being  aerolites,  and  thus 
Avere  regarded  as  having  come  from  God's 
dwelling.  Accounts  are  given  of  such  stones 
in  Phrygia,  Phoenicia,  S3Tia,  Arabia,  Egypt ; 
and  the  celebrated  Caaba  at  Mecca  is  an 
excellent  example.  The  setting  up  of  such 
pillars  has  been  stated  to  have  been  for- 
bidden by  tlie  law  in  after  times,  on  the 
strength  of  Levit.  xxvi.  1  ;  Deut.  xvi.  22 ; 
but    see    at    those   places.  19.]    The 

giving  of  the  name  Beth-el,  the  house  of 
God,  is  again  narrated  ch.  xxxv.  15,  and 
said  to  have  taken  place  on  Jacob's  return. 
That  account  is  purely  Elohistic  ;  but  there 
is  no  reason  for  regarding  it  as  inconsistent 
with  this.  This  may  be  well  related  in 
anticipation,  as  Jacob  may  have  given  the 
name  lightly  and  cursorily  now,  and  more 
formally  and  finally  then,  or  both  narratives 
may  relate  but  one  incident,— the  naming 
of  the  place  Beth-el, — without  saying  when 
it  happened.  20.]  This  vow  of  Jacob 

is  the  first  formally  recorded  in  Scripture, 
and  consists  of  a  promise  that  if  he  should 
return  safely,  Jehovah  should  be  his  God, 
and  he  would  dedicate  the  tenth  of  his 
property  to  Him.  It  is  of  the  essence  of 
the   vow,   that  this  dedication  should    be 


voluntary,  contingent  on  a  certain  event ; 
and  it  follows  that  no  deduction  can  be 
hence  made  as  to  the  obligatory  nature  of 
payment  of  tithes.  It  would  have  been 
mockery  to  dedicate  to  God  what  already 
belonged  to  Him.  The  stone  was  to  be  the 
house  of  God  (Beth-Elohim),  i.  e.  a  place 
where  God  should  be  worshipped.  The  sub- 
sequent fortunes  of  Beth-el,  thus  named  and 
consecrated,  were  remarkable.  It  was  further 
hallowed  by  the  erection  of  an  altar  on  a 
Divine  command  to  Jacob  himself  on  his  re- 
turn, ch.  xxxv.  1,  flf.  ;  afterwards  it  became 
the  resort  of  those  wdio  wished  to  enquire  of 
God,  Judg.  XX.  18,  26  (where  "  the  house  of 
God "  in  both  verses  ought  rather  to  be 
Bethel):  next  we  meet  with  it  as  the  (idol- 
atrous) Holy  place  of  the  kingdom  of  the  ten 
tribes,  1  Kings  xiii.  32,  33 ;  Amos  v.  13 
(where  see  note).  The  incidents  which 
happened  there  in  the  course  of  that  king- 
dom, and  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies 
of  Hosea  (iv.  15  ;  v.  8  ;  x.  5,  8)  and  Amos 
(v.  5  ;  vii.  10 — 13),  are  admirably  com- 
mented on  in  Stanley,  Sinai  and  Palestine, 
pp.  220—223. 

XXIX.  1— XXX.  24.]  Jacob's  arrival 
at  Haran,  and  sojournitig  icith  Lahan.  His 
service  for  his  wives,  Leah  and  Bachel.  The 
births  of  his  children.  1.  lifted  up  Ms 

feet]  Such  expressions  are  used  at  the  com- 
mencement of  long  or  important  undertak- 
ings, e.  g.  in  Matt.  v.  2  Jesus  opened  his 
mouth  and  taught  them.  The  children 

(sons)  of  the  east  here  are  the  inhabitants 
of  Mesopotamia.    The  expression  is  generally 
used  of  the  Arabs  E.  of  Palestine  :  see  reflT. 
2.]  This  well  is  apparently  not  the 


19— XXIX.  10.  GENESIS.  129 

land  of  tlio  ^children  of  the  cast.     2  \y\(\.  ho  looked,  and  aJudg.vi.3,33; 

vii.   12;    vili. 

beliold  a  ^yell  in  the  field,  and,  lo,  there  iccre  three  flocks     iv.:io.\?/,"1! 
of  sheep  lying  by  it ;  for  out  of  that  well  they  watered  the     j^'i'fta, 


uf 

Uic  E.J 


flocks :  and  the  stone  upon  the  well's  mouth  was  great. 
2  And  thither  were  all  the  flocks  gathered  from  time  to 
time :  and  they  rolled  the  stone  from  the  well's  mouth, 
and  watered  the  sheep,  and  put  the  stone  again  upon  the 
well's  mouth  in  his  place.  *  And  Jacob  said  unto  them, 
My  brethren,  whence  he  ye  ?  And  they  said.  Of  Ilaran 
are  we.  ^  And  he  said  unto  them.  Know  ye  Laban  the 
son  of  Nahor  ?  And  they  said.  We  know  //im.  ^  And  he 
said  unto  them,  Is  he  well  ?  And  they  said,  He  is  m'cU  : 
and,  behold,  Rachel  his  daughter  cometh  with  the  sheep. 
7  And  he  said,  Lo,  it  is  yet  high  day,  neither  is  it  time 
that  the  cattle  should  be  gathered  together :  water  ye  the 
sheep,  and  go  and  feed  thcDi.  ^  And  they  said,  We  can- 
not, until  all  the  flocks  be  gathered  together :  then  they 
roll  the  stone  from  the  well's  mouth :  and  we  water  the 
sheep.  ^  %  And  while  he  j^et  spake  with  them,  Eachel 
came  with  her  father's  sheep  :  for  she  kept  them.     ^^  And 

same  as  tbat  in  ch.  xxiv.  11,  fF.  It  seems  that  -wbicli  was  the  custom  day  by  day.  I 
to  be  furtlier  from  the  city,  and  different  in  have  attempted  to  make  this  plain  by  in- 
its  maungemcnt.  This  well  is  dosed  by  a  serting  the  words  from  time  to  time  in 
large  stone  which  is  only  removed  at  the  italics.  4.]  The  antecedent  of  them  is 
assemblage  of  the  flocks  and  shepherds  in  the  left  to  be  gathered  out  of  the  preceding  ; 
evening.  This  usage  is  illustrated  in  the  viz.  the  herdmen  who  were  with  the  three 
Land  and  the  Book,  p.  589  :  "  Cisterns  are  flocks.  5.]  Laban  was  actually  the 
very  generally  covered  over  with  a  large  grandson  of  Nahor.  The  insignificance  of 
slab,  having  a  round  hole  in  it  large  enough  Bethuel,  Laban's  father,  is  here  also  kept  up 
to  let  down  the  leather  bucket^  or  earthen  as  in  ch.  xxiv.  7.]  On  the  intelligence 
jar.  Into  this  hole  a  heavy  stone  is  thrust,  of  Rachel's  coming,  Jacob,  wishing  his  in- 
often  such  as  to  require  the  imited  strength  terview  with  her  to  be  private,  exhorts  the 
of  two  or  three  shejiherds  to  remove.  The  shepherds  to  water  their  flocks  and  depart 
same  is  seen  occasionally  over  icells  of  '  liv-  with  them,  as  it  is  not  yet  evening.  This 
ing  water ; '  but  where  they  are  large  and  they  reply  they  cannot  do,  because  the  stone 
the  supply  abundant  no  such  precaution  is  must  be  rolled  away,  which  is  not  done  till 
needed.  It  was  cither  at  one  of  these  cis-  all  the  flocks  were  gathered.  This  their  re- 
terns,  or  less  abundant  and  more  precious  ply  seems  much  more  probably  grounded  on 
■wells,  that  Jacob  met  Rachel ;  and  being  a  their  iinwillingness  to  break  the  custom  (no 
stout  man,  nearly  (?)  seventy  years  of  age,  he  small  consideration  with  Orientals)  than  on 
was  able  to  remove  the  stone  and  water  the  their  lacking  strength  to  move  the  stone. 
flock."  The  whole  scene  is  most  graplii-  Nor  is  there  any  improbability  in  Jacob 
cally  described.  We  have  a  similar  one  in  venturing,  on  the  strength  of  his  relation- 
Exod.  ii.  16,  ff.  Ver.  3  describes,  not  as  the  ship  to  Laban  and  his  love  for  Rachel,  to  do 
impression  is  from  the  A.V.,  that  which  took  that  from  which  the  shephcrils  had  shrunk, 
place  on  this  occasion,  which  would  be  in-  9.]  for  she  kept  them  is  literally, 
consistent  Avith  what  follows,  ver.  7,  8,  but  for    she    was    a    shepherdess.     The  un- 

E 


1 

130  GENESIS.  XXIX. 

it  came  to  pass,  wlien  Jacob  saw  Rachel  the  dai;gliter  of 
Laban  bis  motber's  brotber,  and  tbe  sbeep  of  Laban  bis 
motber's  brotber,  tbat  Jacob  went  near,  and  rolled  tbe 
stone  from  tbe  well's  moutb,  and  watered  tbe  flock  of 
Laban  bis  motber's  brotber.  ^^  And  Jacob  kissed  Racbel, 
and  lifted  up  bis  voice,  and  wept,     i^  ^^d  Jacob  told 

'"l^'J-is!'^^'  Racbel  tbat  be  icas  ber  father's  ^brother,  and  tbat  be  icas 
Eebekab's  son  :  and  she  ran  and  told  ber  father.  ^"^  And 
it  came  to  pass,  when  Laban  beard  the  tidings  of  Jacob 
his  sister's  son,  that  be  ran  to  meet  him,  and  embraced 
him,  and  kissed  him,  and  brought  him  to  his  house.  And 
he  told  Laban  all  these  things,     i*  And  Laban  said  to 

"i'sfJxil  him.  Surely  thou  art  my  ''bone  and  my  flesh.  And  he 
is.^seech.  g^]3Q(jg  with,  him  the  space  of  a  month.  ^^  ^  And  Laban 
said  unto  Jacob,  Art  thou  my  brotber,  and  sbouldest  thou 
serve  me  for  nought  ?  tell  me,  what  shall  thy  wages  he  ? 
1^  And  Laban  bad  two  daughters :  the  name  of  tbe  elder 
was  Leah,  and  the  name  of  tbe  younger  ivas  Rachel. 
17  Leah's  ej^es  were  dull :  but  Rachel  was  beautifid  and 
well  favoured.  ^^  And  Jacob  loved  Rachel;  and  said,  I  will 
serve  thee  seven  years  for  Rachel  thy  younger  daughter. 
19  And  Laban  said,  It  is  better  that  I  give  her  to  thee,  than 
that  I  should  give  ber  to  another  man  :  abide  with  me. 

married  daughters  of  the  nomad  Arahs  to  in  the  wider  sense :    see  next  verse  and  rcff. 

this  day  keep  the  fiocks.     The  meeting  is  in  14.]  the  space  of  a  month  is  literally  a 

the  highest   degree  touching   and  natural,  month  of  days.     Kalisch  denies  this,  and 

The  forlorn  man,  driven  from  his  father's  renders,    "a   month   as  regards   days,"   or 

house  by  peril  of  his  life,  was  at  once  met,  "time."     The   difference  is  trivial, 

not  only  with  his  own  flesh  and  blood,  but  15.]  The  sense   seems  somewhat   disturbed 

with  her  who  in  a  moment  becomes  to  him  the  by  the  A.  V.     The  fact  of  being  a  relative 

centre  of  his  new  and  recovered  life.     The  would   rather   enhance   than   diminish    the 

history  is  drawn  from  the  very  deepest  wells  of  wages,  and  on  this  consideration  the  ques- 

human  emotion.     His  service  done,  and  his  tion  of  Laban  depends,  and  the  answer  of 

impassioned  manner,  justify  his  taking  the  Jacob   also.             17.]    Leah's    eyes    were 

privilege  of  a  near  relative,  and  all  doubt  on  feeble,  i.  e.    dull,   without  brilliancy   and 

this  is  removed  by  his  own  avowal.     Ob-  freshness.     In  the  East  the  clear  expressive 

serve  the  continual  and  studied  repetition,  lustrous  eye  is  accounted  the  chief  feature 

"  the    daughter     of    Laban    his    mother's  in  female  beauty.     It  was  compared  to  the 

brother," — "  the  flock  of  Laban  his  mother's  eyes  of  the  gazelle  :   see  1    Sam.  xvi.   12. 

brother," — "her    father's    brother," — Re-  On  the  contrary,  Rachel's  beauty  was  com- 

bekah's   son," — "Jacob  his    sister's   son."  plete :    she    was    beautiful     in    form    and 

The  joy  of  meeting  is  imparted  to  her  whom  beautiful  in  look,  both  in  figure  and  in  face, 

he   met  :  she   rwis   and    tells    her   father.  18,   19.]  All  this   is  represented  in 

And  he  attain,  in  his  turn,  welcomes  the  way-  Eastern  customs  even  now.     It  is  still  the 

farer   with   the   same    affectionate   ardour,  custom  to  serve  for  a  wife.    Eurl<hardt  found 

12.]  Her  father's  brother  is  of  course  a  young  man  in  Hauran  who  had  served  eight 


11—30.  GENESIS.  131 

20  And  Jacob  served  seven  years  for  Rachel ;  and  they 
seemed  unto  him  hnt  a  few  days,  for  the  love  he  had  to 
her.  21  ^  A.\i(\.  Jacob  said  unto  Laban,  Give  me  my  wife, 
for  my  days  are  fulfilled,  that  I  may  go  in  unto  her. 
22  And  Laban  gathered  together  all  the  men  of  the  place, 
and  made  a  feast.  23  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  evening, 
that  he  took  Leah  his  daughter,  and  brouglit  her  to  him; 
and  he  went  in  unto  her.  24  ^j^^  Laban  gave  unto  his 
daughter  Leah  Zilpah  his  maid_/by  an  handmaid.  25  And 
it  came  to  pass,  that  in  the  moniing,  behold,  it  was  Leah: 
and  he  said  to  Laban,  What  is  this  thou  hast  done  unto 
me  ?  did  not  I  serve  with  thee  for  Rachel  ?  wherefore 
then  hast  thou  beguiled  me  ?  26  ^^^1  Laban  said.  It  must 
not  be  so  done  in  our  country,  to  give  the  younger  before 
the  firstborn.  27  Fulfil  her  week,  and  we  will  give  thee 
this  also  for  the  service  which  thou  shalt  serve  with  me 
yet  seven  other  years.  28  ^^^  Jacob  did  so,  and  fulfilled 
her  week  :  and  he  gave  him  Rachel  his  daughter  to  wife 
also.  29  And  Laban  gave  to  Rachel  his  daughter  Bilhah 
his  handmaid  to  be  her  maid.  20  ^^^^  j^e  went  in  also 
unto  Rachel,  and  he  loved  also  Rachel  more  than 
Leah,    and    served    with    him    yet    seven    other    years. 

years  for  liis  board,  and  had  then  married  sequently    formed    no    excuse   for   Laban's 

his  master's  daughter,  but   had  yet   more  treachery.          27.]  Fulfil  her  week,  .  .  . 

years  to  serve  for  her.     And  Laban's  speech  i.  e.    attach   thyself  to  her  during  the  ac- 

yet  indicates  the  rule  of  Eastern  betrothals,  customed  days   of  the   wedding-feast :    see 

The  general  rule  is  that  first  cousins  marry  ;  Judg.  xiv.  12  ;  Tobit  xi.  19.           we]  i.  e.  I 

without  the  consent  of  those  who  have  this  and  mine.             28.]  So  that  Jacob  in  eight 

right  women  are  not  betrothed  to  those  who  days  married  two  wives.     Keil  well  remarks 

are  not  tlieir  kindred.     Even  atier  marriage  that  although  we  have  no  right,  as  Calvin 

they  call  one   another   cousins.              20.]  does,  to  pass  severe  judgment  on  this  bigamy 

This  verse   beautifully   represents    Jacob's  of  Jacob's   after  the   requirements  of    the 

lightheartedness  in  tlie  presence  of  his  be-  Mosaic  law,  and  to  designate  it  incest  (see 

loved.     It  is  wonderful  to  our  minds  to  re-  Levit.  xviii.  18),  yet  we  must  not  justify  it 

member  that  these  seven  years  were  from  by  the   consideration   that   God's    blessing 

the  78th  to  the  85th  year  of  Jacob's  age.  turned  it  into  a  means  of  multiplying  the 

23.]  "So,"  remarks   Keil,    "is   the  patriarchal    family.      It    arose    owing     to 

deceiver  of  Esau  deceived,  and  sin  punished  treachery   on   Laban's  part,  and  owing  to 

by  sin."     The  fraud  was  rendered. possible  abandonment  to  the  love  of  beauty  on  the 

by  the  eastern  custom  of  the  bride  being  part  of  Jacob  (for  Eachel  seems  to  have  been 

veiled,  aided  by  the  darkness  of  the  night,  far  less  worthy  of  his  love  than  Leah)  :  and 

24.]    Kebekah    (ch.    xxiv.    61)    bad  it   turned,  in  its   results,   into   a  veritable 

"  her  damsels  ;  "  Leah  and  Rachel  have  but  "  school   of    crosses,"    as  Keil   calls  it,  to 

one   maid   each.              26.]    This   custom,  Jacob.            30.]  After  his  second  marriage 

even  now  prevalent  among  the  Egyptians,  he  served  seven  years  more  for  Rachel,  hav- 

was  not  announced  to  Jacob  when  the  con-  ing  for  that  service  received  her  in  prepay- 

ditions  of  his  servitude  were  fixed,  and  con-  nient.            31—35.]  The  birth  of  Leah's 


132  GENESIS.  XXIX. 

31  ^  And  wlien  Jehovah  saw  that  Leah,  icas  hated,  he 
opened  her  Avomb :  but  Rachel  was  barren.  ^^  And 
Leah  conceived,  and  bare  a  son,  and  she  called  his 
name  Heuben  [Behold  a  Son]  :  for  she  said,  Surely  Je- 
hovah hath  looked  upon  my  affliction  ;  now  therefore 
my  husband  will  love  me.  ^^  And  she  conceived  again, 
and  bare  a  son  ;  and  said,  Because  Jehovah  hath  heard 
that  I  am  hated,  he  hath  therefore  given  me  this 
son  also  :  and  she  called  his  name  Simeon  [Hearing]. 
2*  And  she  conceived  again,  and  bare  a  son;  and  said, 
Now  this  time  will  my  husband  be  joined  unto  me,  be- 
cause I  have  born  him  three  sons :  therefore  was  his  name 
called  Levi  [Joining].  ^^  And  she  conceived  again,  and 
bare  a  son :  and  she  said,  Now  will  I  praise  Jehovah  : 
therefore  she  called  his  name  Judah  [Praised]  ;  and  ceased  j, 
bearino-.  XXX.  ^  And  when  Hachel  saw  that  she  bare 
Jacob  no  children,  Bacliel  envied  her  sister  ;  and  said 
unto  Jacob,  Give  me  children,  or  else  I  die.  ^  And 
Jacob's  anger  was  kindled  against  Eachel :  and  he  said, 
Am  I  in  God's  stead,  who  hath  withheld  from  thee  the 
fruit  of  the  womb  ?  ^  And  she  said.  Behold  my  maid 
Bilhah,  go  in  unto  her  ;  and  she  shall  bear  upon  my 
knees^  that  I  may  also  have  children  by  her.  *  And  she 
gave  him  Bilhah  her  handmaid  to  wife :  and  Jacob  went 
in  unto  her.     ^  And  Bilhah  conceived,  and  bare  Jacob  a 

four  sons.     The  whole  narrative  is  full  of  pear,  in  success  at  the  third  hirth ;  and  now, 

God's  justice  and  of  man's  weakness   and  at  the  fourth,  she  hreaks  out  into  praise.    It 

unworthiness.     The  plain  and  hated  wife-  must  be  owned  that  Leah  appears   by  no 

sister  is  blessed  with  children  ;    the   hns-  means  to  disadvantage  in   this  part  of  the 

band's    heart    is    won    towards    her ;    the  narrative. 

beautiful  and  beloved  one  is  led,  through  XXX.  1.]  It  is  remarkable,  tliat  as  soon 

crosses    and    failings,   and    her    husband's  as  Rachel  had  children   (literally,  sons)  she 

anger,  to  a  humbler  mind  (ch.  xxx.  23,  24),  did  die.     It  is  impossible  to  read  this  and 

God  in  time  compensating  her  for  her  afflic-  not  to  form  an    unfavourable   estimate   of 

tion.             32]  There  is  much  behind  these  Eachel.     There  is  at  the  same  time  an  im- 

words  of  Leah's :  doubtless  the  penalty  of  petuosity  and  an  ungodliness  in  her  speech 

her  share  in  the  deceit  had  been  severe,  in  to  her  husband.              2.  in  God's  stead] 

the  entire  alienation,  after  the  first,  of  her  i.  e.  having  the  place  and  power  of  God. 

husband.             33.]  The  sight  of  his  first-  3—8.]     The  sons  of  Bilhah.      No 

born   son   draws   Jacob   again  to   the  dis-  blame   is   attached   in    the    sacred  text  to 

favoured  Leah,  but  does  not  attach  him  to  this  procedure,  which  was  but  a  following 

her.              34.]    But   on   the   birth  of  the  of  what  Sarah  had  done  previously.     Nay, 

third  son  she  believes  this  will  take  place,  from  Leah's  speech  in  ver.  18  it  would  ap- 

34.]  All  hitherto  had  been  a  struggle  pear  to   have   been   regarded   rather   as   a 

for  the  poor  wife,  issuing,  so  it  would  ap-  meritorious   act.     But  it  would  necessarily 


31— XXX.  14. 


GENESIS. 


133 


son.  '^  And  Rachel  said,  God  liath  judged  mc,  and  Lalli 
[also  heard  my  voice,  and  hath  given  me  a  son  :  therefore 
'called  she  his  name  Dan  [Jiidg-c].  7  And  Bilhali  Xlachcl's 
maid  conceived  again,  and  bare  Jacob  a  second  son.  ^  And 
Rachel  said,  AVith  wrestlings  of  God  have  I  wrestled  with 
my  sister,  and  I  have  prevailed :  and  she  called  his  name 
Naphtali  [Wrestling].  9  When  Leah  saw  tliat  she  had 
left  bearing,  she  took  Zilpah  her  maid,  and  gave  her 
Jacob  to  wife.  ^^  And  Zilpah  Leah's  maid  bare  Jacob  a 
son.  1^  And  Leah  said.  In  luck  !  and  she  called  his  name 
Gad  [Luck].  ^'^  And  Zilpah  Leah's  maid  bare  Jacob  a 
second  son.  ^^  And  Leah  said.  For  my  happiness,  for  the 
daughters  will  call  me  happj' :  and  she  called  his  name 
Asher  [Hai^py].  ^^  H  And  Reuben  went  in  the  days  of 
wheat  harvest,  and  found  mandrakes  in  the  field,  and 
brought  them  unto  his  mother  Leah.  Then  Rachel  said 
to  Leah,  Give  me,  I  pray  thee,  of  th}'-  son's  mandrakes. 


carry  with  it  disastrous  results  in  a  family, 
even  under  polygamy.  And  such  results 
seem  pointed  at  in  eh.  xxxvii.  2  :  see  there. 
upon  my  knees]  Onkelos  interprets, 
"  that  she  may  bear,  and  I  will  be  the  nurse; " 
i.  e.  I  will  take  her  child  on  my  lap  as  my 
own.  have  children  by  her  is  literally, 

as  in  ell.  xvi.  2,  be  built  up  by  her. 
8.]  wrestlings  of  God  are  more  than  great 
wrestlings,  as  A.  V.  They  signil'y  wrestlings 
in  a  matter  of  God  ;  in  this  case,  as  to  the 
maternity  of  God's  people.  The  LXX. 
render,  "  Godhnth  helped  me  ;"  The  Vulgate, 
"  God  hath  compared  me  icith  my  sister ;" 
but  both  ap])ear  to  be  wrong.  -  It  is  to  be 
noticed,  says  Kcil,  that  Raeliel  merely  speaks 
of  Elohim  (God),  while  her  sister  regards  her 
four-  sons  as  the  gift  of  Jeuovah.  See  below 
on  ch.  xxxi.  34.  9—13.]   The  sons  of 

Zilpah.  11.]  The  A.  V.  has  followed, 

the  Samaritan  Pentateuch,  which  here  reads 
a  dilferent  word  from  the  Hebrew.  The 
familiar  rendering  of  the  latter  seems  the 
only  expressive  way  of  giving  the  sense. 
Where  this  is  the  case  I  have  not  shrunk 
from  using  the  words.  "\Vc  need  not  dilute 
the  meaning  of  the  text  because  the  words 
happen  to  be  in  trivial  use  among  us. 
14 — 21.]  The  transaction  resjiecting  the 
mandrakes^  introducing  the  birth  of  tioo 
more  sons  and  a  daucjhler  hy  Leah.  Ka- 
lisch  has  the  following  remarks  ;  "  Eeubcu, 


the  eldest  son  of  Leah,  finding  in  the  fields 
certain  fruits  {Dudaim,  or  mandrakes)  be- 
lieved to  possess  tlie  power  of  promoting 
conception,  brought  them  to  his  mother, 
■who  had  for  some  time  been  afflicted  with 
barrenness.  Ilcr  first  impulse  was  to  em- 
ploy them  for  its  removal.  She  therefore  re- 
plied to  Rachel,  wlio  begged  them  of  her, 
with  a  certain  indignation,  mingled  how- 
ever with  faithful  love  for  her  husband. 
But  she  was  far  from  attacliing  a  decisive  or 
essential  value  to  the  fruit ;  and  when 
therefore  her  sister,  with  her  usual  tenacity, 
insisted  upon  obtaining  them,  she  readily 
ceded  them  to  her,  relying  for  fruitfulness 
upon  the  mercy  of  God  rather  than  the 
powers  of  nature,  a  sentiment  which  she 
distinctly  expressed  when  she  gave  birth  to 
her  fifth  son.  llachel,  still  enslaved  by 
pagan  superstitions,  as  she  later  stealthily 
carried  away  the  idols  of  her  father  (xxxi. 
19),  and  purchasing  the  mandrakes  with  a 
certain  sacrifice,  expected  from  them  a  de- 
liverance from  her  sterility ;  but  she  had 
still  to  learn  that  ofi'spring  are  granted  by 
the  beneficence  of  God  alone,  and  that  the 
products  of  nature  are  unavailing  without 
His  aid."  mandrakes]     "This  plant 

{inandragora  officinalis)  is  of  the  family 
Solanacece  (to  which  the  potato  belongs), 
and  is  of  very  peculiar  appearance.  It  sends 
up  in  early  spring  a  broad  disk  of  leaves, 


134 


GENESIS. 


XXX. 


1^  And  she  said  unto  her,  Is  it  a  small  matter  that  thou 
hast  taken  my  husband?  and  wouldest  thou  take  away 
my  son's  mandrakes  also  ?  And  Rachel  said,  Therefore 
he  shall  lie  with  thee  to  night  for  thy  son's  mandrakes. 
16  And  Jacob  came  out  of  the  field  in  the  evening,  and 
Leah  went  out  to  meet  him,  and  said,  Thou  must  come 
in  unto  me  ;  for  surely  I  have  hired  thee  with  my  son's 
mandrakes.  And  he  lay  with  her  that  night.  17  And 
God  hearkened  unto  Leah,  and  she  conceived,  and  bare 
Jacob  the  fifth  son.  i^  ^^j  Leah  said,  God  hath  given 
me  my  hire,  because  I  have  given  my  maiden  to  my 
husband  :  and  she  called  his  name  Issachar  [There  is  re- 
ward]. 19  And  Leah  conceived  again,  and  bare  Jacob  the 
sixth  son.  20  ^j^]^  Leah  said,  God  hath  endued  me  icith 
a  good  dowry  ;  now  will  my  husband  dwell  with  me,  be- 
cause I  have  born  him  six  sons  :  and  she  called  his  name 
Zebulun  [Dwelling].  21  ^^(j  afterwards  she  bare  a 
daughter,  and  called  her  name  Dinah.  22  ^  ^j^^  Qq,j 
remembered  Rachel,  and  God  hearkened  to  her,  and 
opened  her  womb.  23  _/\^nd  she  conceived,  and  bare  a  son ; 
and  said,  God  hath  taken  away  my  reproach :  24  and  she 
•  called  his  name  Joseph ;  and  said,  Jehovah  shall  add  to 

merely  in  the  more  general  sense  of  ch.  xvi. 
11,  "The  Lord  hath  heard  thy  affliction." 

18.]  Leah  here  treats  this  new  gift ; 
of  a  son  as  a  reward  for  her  self-denial  in  I 
giving  Zilpah  to  her  husband;  but  this] 
hardly  seems  in  accord  with  her  saying  toJ 
Jacob  in  ver.  16,  where  her  "  hire  "  is  thatl 
of  her  husband  at  the  price  of  the  mandrakes. 

20.]  The  flict  of  Jacob  dwelling  with^ 
Eachel  and  not  with  herself,  is  still  on  her 
mind.  There  is  a  double  allusion  in  the 
name  Zebulun.  The  words  endued  and 
dowry  are  from  the  root  Zavad,  he  gave ; 
and  the  word  dwell  is  from  the  root  Zaval, 
he  dwelt;  1  and  d  are  often  interchanged,  as 
in  the  names  Odysseus  and  Ulysses  for  the 
same   man.  21.]  It    is   not  usual   to 

enumerate  female  descendants.  Dinah's 
name  is  mentioned  for  the  sake  of  the  his- 
tory in  ch.  xxxiv.  Jacob  had  more  daughters: 
compare  ch.  xxsvii.  35,  with  xlvi.  7. 
22—24.]  Birth  of  Joseph.  Here  again  we 
have  a  double  derivation  for  the  name,  one 
from  Asaph,  took  aicay,  the  other  from 
Yasaph,  added.     This  is  treated  by  Knobel 


i 


lying  flat  on  the  ground,  somewhat  like 
those  of  the  primrose,  but  more  than  double 
their  size.  In  the  centre  of  these  come  out 
the  blossoms  singly,  some  with  a  stalk  two 
or  three  inches  long,  some  with  scarcely  any 
stem.  They  are  cup-shaped,  of  a  rich 
purple  colour.  The  fruit  is  of  the  size  of  a 
large  plum,  quite  round,  yellow,  and  full  of 
soft  pulp.  It  has  a  peculiar  but  decidedly 
not  an  unpleasant  smell,  and  a  pleasant 
sweet  taste.  .  .  .  The  mandrake  is  imiversally 
distributed  in  all  parts  of  Palestine,  and  its 
fruit  is  much  valued  by  the  natives,  who 
still  hold  to  the  belief,  as  old  as  the  time  of 
Eachel,  that  when  eaten  it  ensures  concep- 
tion. .  .  .  We  fouud  it  in  flower  at  Christ- 
mas in  warm  situations,  and  gathered  the 
fruit  in  April  and  May.  "WTieat  harvest  is 
therefore  the  period  of  its  ripening  general- 
ly." Tristram,  Natural  Hist,  of  the  Bible,  p. 
467.  15.]    It  would  seem  then  as  if 

Jacob  habitually  lived  with  Eachel  again 
at  this   time.  17.]  Either  the   words 

God  hearkened  unto  Leah  presuppose  a 
prayer  on  her  part,  or  perhaps  they  are  used 


1j— 32. 


GENESIS. 


135 


'  me  another  son.  25  ^  j^-^^^  {^  came  to  pass,  when  Racliel 
•  had  born  Joseph,  that  Jacob  said  unto  Laban^Scnd  mc  away, 
;  that  I  may  go  unto  mine  own  phice,  and  to  my  country. 
2*5  Give  me  my  wives  and  my  children,  for  whom  I  have 
i  served  thee,  and  let  me  go  :  for  thou  knowest  my  service 
which  I  have  done  thee.  ^7  J^^^  Laban  said  unto  him,  I 
pray  thee,  if  I  have  found  favour  in  thine  eyes,  tarr//  :  I 
have  ^  learned  by  divination  that  Jehovah  hath  blessed 
me  for  thy  sake.  ^8  And  he  said.  Appoint  me  tliy  wages, 
and  I  will  give  U.  29  xind  he  said  unto  him,  Thou  knowest 
how  I  have  served  thee,  and  how  thy  cattle  was  with  me. 
30  For  it  ivas  little  which  thou  hadst  before  I  came,  and  it 
is  7101V  increased  unto  a  multitude  ;  and  JEHo^  ah  hath 
blessed  thee  since  my  coming  :  and  now  when  shall  I  pro- 
vide for  mine  own  house  also  ?  ^^  And  he  said.  What 
shall  I  give  thee  ?  And  Jacob  said.  Thou  shalt  not  give 
me  any  thing :  if  thou  wilt  do  this  thing  for  me,  I  will 
again  feed  and  keep  thy  flock.     ^'^  I  will  pass  through  all 


IVh.  xliv.  15. 
1  Kiiii;8  XX. 
33.    See  Num. 
xxiii.  3.J ; 


as  indicative  of  compilation  from  two  sources, 
as  he  finds  also  indicated  by  the  nse  of 
Elohim  in  her  first  sentence,  and  Jehovah 
in  her  second.  Keil,  who  denies  this,  refers 
her  use  of  Elohim  to  her  looking  principally 
to  the  past,  and  that  of  Jehovah  to  her 
founding  her  faith  for  the  future  on  her 
husband's  God.  But  apart  from  this  being 
very  far-fetched  in  itself,  how  does  it  agree 
with  her  stealing  her  father's  idols  in  the 
next  chapter.'  25— XXXI.  55.]    Ja- 

cob's demand  of  Laban  for  his  dismissal. 
T/isir  intrigues  and  disputes,  and  final 
agreement.      Jacob's    departtire.  25.] 

The  14  years  which  bound  Jacob  to  Laban 
had   now   expired.  27.]    Laban   con- 

fesses by  this  speech  that  the  demand  of 
Jacob  was  rightly  founded.  There  is  no 
word  in  the  original  corresponding  to 
"  tarry."  The  proper  supply  of  the  abrupt 
clause  may  be,  "  do  it  not,"  which  would 
amount  to  the  same.  The  word  rendered 
by  the  A.  V.  "  /  have  learned  by  experi- 
ence," literally  means  I  have  used  divina- 
tion, I  have  learned  by  consulting  omens  : 
see  reff.  I,aban  had  received  what  he  con- 
sidered intimations  from  his  gods,  that  Je- 
hovah, Jacob's  God,  was  blessing  him  for 
Jacob's  sake.  In  this  conviction  of  Jacob's 
value  to  him,  he  (ver.  29)  leaves  his  wages 


to  be  fixed  by  himself.  29,  ff".]  In  our  esti- 
mate of  Jacob's  conduct,  we  must  remember 
what  passed  in  these  verses.  It  was  with 
the  distinct  view  of  "providing  for  his  own 
house  also  "  that  Jacob  made  this  compact. 
Laban  might  have  known,  and  doubtless  did 
know,  that  it  would  be  hard  driven ;  and  a 
man  with  flocks  and  herds  surely  could  not 
be  ignorant  of  the  stratagem  which  Jacob 
meant  to,  and  did,  employ.  In  fact,  his  very 
precaution  in  ver.  36  shews  that  he  was 
aware  of  the  influence  of  the  spotted  cattle. 
30.]  since  my  coming  is  literally  at 
(or  in)  my  foot.  Tliis  may  mean  also,  as 
Kalisch,  wherever   I  icent.  31,    32.] 

Jacob's  proposal,  while  it  appears  at  first 
sight  generous  and  disinterested,  yet  must 
not  be  judged  except  by  its  own  terms.  It 
has  been  treated  by  some  (e.  g.  Keil)  as  if 
Jacob's  hire  were  to  be  merely  the  then  pre- 
sent abnormal  cattle,  and  as  if  the  extension 
of  the  agreement  into  the  future  were  an 
encroachment.  But  surely  the  very  nature 
of  the  case  implies  that  the  "hire"  was  to 
last  as  long  as  the  service  lasted.  Indeed  as 
much  is  implied  in  ver.  33,  where  future 
time  (sec  there)  is  carefully  included. 
32.]  With  regard  to  the  characters  of  the 
cattle,  we  are  told  (Tristram,  Nat.  Hist,  of 
Bible,  p.  144)  that  the  colour  of  the  sheep 


136 


GENESIS. 


XXX. 


e  Hos.  iv.  13, 
onlj. 

f  here  only. 
g  Ezek.  xkxi.  8, 
only. 


thy  flock  to  day,  removing  from  thence  all  tlie  speckled 
and  sjDotted  cattle,  and  all  the  dark  cattle  among  the  sheep, 
and  the  sj^otted  and  speckled  among  the  goats  :  and  of 
such  shall  be  my  hire.  33  ^q  gj^^U  my  righteousness  an- 
swer for  me  in  time  to  come,  when  thou  comest  for  my 
hire  to  inspect  it :  every  one  that  is  not  speckled  and 
spotted  among  the  goats,  and  dark  among  the  sheep,  that 
shall  be  counted  stolen  with  me.  34  \^-^^  Laban  said,  Be- 
hold, I  would  it  might  be  according  to  thy  word.  35  ^^^^ 
he  removed  that  day  the  he  goats  that  were  ringstraked 
and  spotted,  and  all  the  she  goats  that  were  speckled  and 
spotted,  and  every  one  that  had  some  white  in  it,  and  all 
the  brown  among  the  sheep,  and  gave  them  into  the  hand 
of  his  sons.  36  \t^^^  j^g  ^^^  three  days'  journey  betwixt 
himself  and  Jacob  :  and  Jacob  fed  the  rest  of  Laban's 
flocks.  37  ^  And  Jacob  took  him  rods  of  ^  green  poplar, 
and  of  the  *^ almond  and  •'^ plane  tree;  and  pilled  white 
strakes  in  them,  and  made  the  white  appear  which  was  in 


in  the  East  is  generally  white,  as  that  of  the 
goats  is  hlack.  "  But  though  black  sheep 
are  uncommon,  tawny  (or  as  they  are  called 
in  Genesis,  brown)  are  very  numerous  in 
every  flock."  33.]  in  time  to  come, 

literally,  to-morrow,  but  clearly  meaning 
as  rendered  :  for  if  the  division  were  made 
that  day,  the  literal  morrow  could  not 
be   in   question.  when   thou   comest 

for  my  hire,  to  inspect  it]  So  (but 
to  my  hire)  Kalisch.  Onkelos,  similarly, 
when  thou  comest  for  my  hire,  tchich 
shall  he  before    thy  face.       So   also  Keil. 

35,  36.]  The  whole  proceeding  is 
that  of  one  cunning  man  against  another. 
Laban  does  not  leave  the  matter  in  Jacob's 
hands,  as  proposed  ver.  32,  but  takes  it  into 
his  own,  and  entrusts  that  part  of  the  flock 
which  is  Jacob's  hire  to  his  (Laban's)  sons, 
putting  them  at  a  distance  from  his  own 
flock,  which  remains  with  Jacob,  and  keep- 
ing them  studiously  separate,  to  prevent  the 
result  which  nevertheless  Jacob's  superior 
cunning  brought  about  in  the  end. 
37 — 43.]  Jacob's  stratagem,  and  its  success. 

37.]  Gesenius  believes  the  first-men- 
tioned of  these  trees  to  be  the  styrax  or 
storax.  Tristram  thinks  the  poplar  better 
answers  the  conditions,  seeing  that  in  ref. 
Hosea  the  tree  is  described  as  a  large  one. 


under  which  idolatrous  rites  are  performed' 
whereas  the  storax  is  only  a  shrub,  rarely 
more  than  12  feet  high.  Besides,  one  kind 
of  poplar,  the  pojnilus  eiiphratica,  has  its 
name  from  its  abundance  in  that  very 
country  where  Jacob  peeled  the  rods,  in 
Haran,  between  the  Euphrates  and  the 
Tigris.  The  second  tree,  rendered  hazel  in 
A.  v.,  is  more  probabl}-,  as  given  by  the 
Vulgate,  Onkelos,  tlie  Samaritan  Pentateuch, 
and  the  old  Syriac  version,  almond.  ""We 
did  not,"  says  Dr.  Tristram,  "  observe  the 
true  hazel  wild  in  Southern  or  Central 
Palestine,  nor  was  it  likely  to  occur  in  Jleso- 
potamia,  though  it  is  common  in  the  Galilean 
and  Lebanon  districts."  The  Hebrew  word, 
luz,  occurring  only  here,  is  to  this  day  the 
Arabic  name  for  the  almond  tree.  Keil 
renders  it  «oa/;»<<  ^?-ee,hut  this  can  hardly  be, 
for  the  peeling  of  the  walnut  rods  would  pro- 
duce not  white,  almost  beyond  doubt,  but  a 
dark  colour.  The  third  tree  {'arnwn)  is 
the  oriental  plane,  and  is  thus  rendered  by 
almost  all  the  versions.  "  "We  never  saw 
the  chesnut  in  Palestine  excepting  planted 
in  orchards  in  Lebanon ;  while  the  plane 
tree,  though  local,  is  frequent  by  the  side 
of  streams  and  in  plains,  both  on  the  coast 
and  in  the  northern  parts  of  the  country. 
.   .  .   .     The  Hebrew  name,  'arnwn,   sig- 


33— XXXI.  3.  GENESIS.  137 

tlic  rods.  38  ^Ynd  he  set  tlie  rods  which  he  had  pilled  be- 
fore the  flocks  in  the  gutters  in  the  watering  troughs 
when  the  flocks  came  to  drink,  that  they  should  conceive 
when  they  came  to  drink.  ^^  And  the  flocks  conceived 
before  the  rods,  and  brought  forth  cattle  ringstraked, 
speckled,  and  spotted.  ^o  ^Ynd  Jacob  did  separate  the 
lambs,  and  set  the  faces  of  the  flocks  toward  the  ring- 
straked and  all  tlie  brown  in  the  flocks  of  Laban  ;  and 
he  put  his  own  flocks  by  tliemselves,  and  put  them  not 
unto  Laban's  cattle.  "^^  And  it  came  to  pass,  whenso- 
ever the  stronger  cattle  did  conceive,  that  Jacob  laid  the 
rods  before  the  eyes  of  the  cattle  in  the  gutters,  that  they 
might  conceive  among  the  rods.  '^'^  But  when  the  cattle 
were  feeble,  he  put  them  not  in  :  so  the  feebler  were 
Laban's,  and  the  stronger  Jacob's.  '^'■^  And  the  man  in- 
creased exceedingly,  and  had  much  cattle,  and  maidserv- 
ants, and  mcnservants,  camels,  and  asses.  XXXI.  ^  And 
he  heard  the  words  of  Laban's  sons,  saying,  Jacob  hath 
taken  away  all  that  icas  our  father's  ;  and  of  f/iaf  which 
uris  our  father's  hath  he  gotten  all  this  ^  glory.  -  And  ''i'xvi.''i2'' 
Jacob  beheld  the  countenance  of  Laban,  and,  behold,  it  teas 
not  toward  him  as  ^before.     "^  And  Jehovah  said  unto  iExodxxi.29, 

30.    Josh.  IV. 

Jacob,  Eeturn  unto  the  land  of  thy  fathers,  and  to  thy     '*'*'' 

nifies  naJied,  and  it  is  a  characteristic  of  the  that  the  device  here  mentioned  had  no  refer- 

phine  tree  that  it  annually  sheds  its  bark."  cnce  (as  some  suppose,  and  as  the  Vulg.  and 

1xh^v:im,  Nat.  Hist,  of  Bible,  ]}.  2>i:b.  Onkelos   render   in   the   main)  to  the  two 

38.]  The  effect  produced  is  illustrated  hy  lambing  times,    the   stronger    lambs    bein"- 

many  writers  on  natural  history,  and  is  said  yeaned  in  autumn  and  the  feebler  in  spring : 

to  prevail  especially  among  shfep.  40.]  but  simply  regarded  the  distinction  between 

There  is  some  difficulty  in  this  verse.     The  the  stronger  and  the  weaker  individuals  on 

meaning  seems  to  be,  that  when  these  ab-  each  occa.sion.     If  a  difficulty  be  sugfcsted 

normal  lambs  were  produced,  Jacob  separ-  by  the  probability  that  these  would  be  pro- 

ated  tliem,  and  took  care  that  the  flocks  (of  miscuously  mingled,  it  is  easy  to  reply  that 

Labaii)  should  always   look  towards   them  Jacob  as  the  shepherd  had  power  to  classify 

(setting  tliem  to  leeward  of  Laban's  flocks),  the  flock  as  he  pleased.  43.]  literally, 

and  all  his  dark  sheep  he  took  care  to  pre-  the   man   broke  forth,   expanded,  largely 

sent  to  the  sight  of  Laban's  flocks,  keeping  largely.     It  has  been  observed  that  in  the 

the  two  apart,  so  that   ordinarily  Laban's  wholeof  this  narrative  of  Jacob's  stratagems, 

flocks  saw  nothing  but  streaked  and  brown  the  sacred  names  do  not  once  occur-, 

cattle.     Thus   he    further   helped    out    his  XXXl.  I— IQ.]  Alienation  of  Laban.   Jacob 

stratagem  above  detailed.     The  words  in  the  is  divinely  commanded  to  return  home;  he 

flock  of  Laban  are  puzzling,  unless  they  re-  takes  cotmsel  with  his  wives.  1.   this 

fer  to  the  whole  sentence,  as  if  a  comma  were  glory]  See   reff.,    literally,   weight.      Bp. 

after  brown.     One   can   hardly  venture  to  Wordsworth  appositely  refers  to  St.  Paul's 

render  them  "  <Mf«?T/s  the  flock  of  Laban,"  '■'■  tcelcjht  of  glorij,"   2  Cor.  iv.   7.  2.] 

as  Kalisch.  41,  42.]  It  is  probable  as  before  is  literally,  as  in  reff.,  yesterday 


138  GENESIS.  XXXI. 

kindred ;  and  I  will  be  with  thee.  ^  And  Jacob  sent  and 
called  Rachel  and  Leah  to  the  field  unto  his  flock,  ^  and 
said  unto  them,  I  see  your  father's  countenance,  that  it  is 
not  toward  me  as  ^  before  ;  but  the  God  of  my  father  hath 
been  with  me.  ^  ^j^d  ye  know  that  with  all  my  power 
I  have  served  your  father.  7  And  your  father  hath  de- 
^  N"eh.:v!\2!^'  cclved  me,  and  changed  my  wages  J  ten  times;  but  God 
zechl'^iiL'23.  sufiered  him  not  to  hurt  me.  ^  If  he  said  thus.  The 
speckled  shall  be  thy  wages ;  then  all  the  cattle  bare 
sj)eckled  :  and  if  he  said  thus,  The  ringstraked  shall  be 
thy  hire ;  then  bare  all  the  cattle  ringstraked.  ^  Thus 
God  hath  taken  away  the  cattle  of  your  father,  and  given 
them  to  me.  ^^  And  it  came  to  pass  at  the  time  that  the 
cattle  conceived,  that  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,  and  saw  in  a 
dream,  and,  behold,  the  rams  which  leaped  upon  the 
cattle  icere  ringstraked,  speckled,  and  grisled.  ^^  And  the 
angel  of  God  spake  unto  me  in  a  dream,  saying,  Jacob  : 
And  I  said,  Here  am  I.  ^^  And  he  said.  Lift  up  now  thine 
eyes,  and  see,  all  the  rams  which  leap  upon  the  cattle  are 
ringstraked,  speclded,  and  grisled :  for  I  have  seen  all 
that  Laban  doeth  unto  thee.  ^^  I  am  the  God  of  Beth-el, 
where  thou  anointedst  the  pillar,  and  where  thou  vowedst 
a  vow  unto  me :  now  arise,  get  thee  out  from  this  land, 

and  the   third  day,  i.  e.  the   day  before,  not  a  Tision  seen  years  before,  as  some  repre- 

4.]  He  sent  for  his  wives  out  of  the  sent  it,  but  the  substance  of  the  vision  which 

family  tent,  which   was   apparently  at  this  he  has  just  seen,  and  which  had  been  the 

time  (ver.   19)  joined  to  that  of  Laban, — •  occasion  of  his  sending  for  his  wives.     This 

that  he  may  take  freer  counsel  with  them,  is  evident  from  ver.   13,  where  he   relates 

Notice  the   order  of  the   names,  reversing  God's  command   to   him  to  leave  Mesopo- 

Laban's  saying,  ch.  xxix.  26.  6-]  The  tamia.     Nor  is  there  any  real  difficulty  in 

whole  speech  of  Jacob  is  inconsistent  with  this  view,  as  even  Keil  fancies  there  is.     He 

the  view  maintained,  e.  g.  by  Kalisch,  that  insists  on  the  present  tense,  doeth,  ver.  12, 

he    had    cheated    and    overreached    Laban  as  shewing  that  this  could  not  have  been  at 

throughout.  And  vv.  7, 8  reveal  to  us  another  the  end  of,  but  must  have  been  during  the 

contribution  to  our  judgment  on  this  matter,  progress  of,  the  years  of  service.     But  we 

Laban  had  done  all  he  could  to  overreach  on  have  no  reason  to  think  that  Laban's  be- 

his  side :    he  had  frequently  (ten   times  is  haviour  towards  him  altered  at  the  end  of 

used   to   signify  very  often,  see    reff.)  and  the  time,  or  even  that  there  icas  any  "end 

capriciously  changed   the    form   of  Jacob's  of  the  time."      Strictly  speaking,  Laban's 

hire ;  but  all  to  no  purpose  :  God  defeated  endeavour  to  defraud  liim  extended  through- 

his  schemes  and  turned  them  against  himself,  out.  11.  the  angel  of  God]  See  ch.  xxi. 

Thisfact,  thus  brought  into  witness  by  Jacob,  17,   and  note,  ch.  xvi.   7.     Here,  as  else- 

but  not  previously  recorded  here,  is  regarded  where,  the  angel,  or  messenger,  plainly  speaks 

by  Knobel  as  having  been  in  the  original  in  the  person   of  God  Himself.  13.] 

documents,  but  omitted  by  the  compiler  of  The  heart  of  Jacob  is  encouraged,  and  the 

Genesis.  10,  S.  ]  He  relates  to  his  wives,  command  of  God  to  him  is  carried  home  with 


4—21. 


GENESIS. 


139 


and  return  unto  the  land  of  tli}^  kindred.  ^^  And  Rachel 
and  Leah  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Is  there  yet  any 
portion  or  inheritance  for  us  in  our  father's  house  ?  ^^  Are 
we  not  counted  of  him  strangers  ?  for  he  hath  sold  us,  and 
hath  quite  devoured  also  our  money.  ^^  For  all  the  riches 
which  God  hath  taken  from  our  father,  that  is  our's,  and 
our  children's :  now  then,  whatsoever  God  hath  said  unto 
thee,  do.  i'  *\  Then  Jacob  rose  ujj,  and  set  his  sons  and 
his  wives  upon  camels;  ^^  and  he  carried  away  all  his 
cattle,  and  all  liis  goods  which  he  had  gotten,  the  cattle  of 
his  getting,  which  he  had  gotten  in  Padan-aram,  for  to 
go  to  Isaac  his  father  in  the  land  of  Canaan.  ^^  And 
Laban  went  to  shear  his  sheep  :  and  Rachel  had  stolen  the 
^  images  that  icere  her  father's.  -^  And  Jacob  deceived  the 
heart  of  Laban  the  Aranitcan,  in  that  he  told  him  not  that 
he  fled.  21  gQ  ]^q  gg^j^  with  all  that  he  had;  and  he  rose  up, 
and  passed  over  the  river,  and  set  his  face  toward  the  mount 


;  Judg.  xvii.  5, 
&c.     1  Siim. 
XV.  23;  xix. 
1:!,  16.    2 
Kings  xxiii. 
24.    T.ztV. 
xxi.  21.    Hos. 
iii.  1.    Zcch. 
X.  2,  only. 


power,  hj-  the  a.ssurance  that  He  who  is  now 
speaking  to  him  is  the  same  God  who  re- 
ceived his  worship  and  his  vow  when  he  left 
the  land  to  which  he  is  now  ordered  to  re- 
turn. 14,  ff.]  The  answer  of  his  wives 
is  the  only  loyal  one  they  could  make,  and 
is  again  entirely  against  tlie  idea  of  guilt  on 
Jacob's  part.  It  is  simply  founded  on  the 
facts  which  have  gone  before  in  the  history. 
Their  father  had  sold  them  to  Jacob  :  they 
were  entirely  severed  from  him,  and  he  spared 
no  pains  to  shew  them  this ;  Jacob's  earn- 
ings, which  were  theirs  also,  their  fatlierwas 
endeavouring  to  defraud  them  of.  So  that 
their  consent  is  freely  given  to  do  that  which 
God  liad  commanded  their  husband. 
15.]  quite  devoured  is  literally,  eating  hath 
eaten,  as  so  often.  17—21.]  Jacob's 
flight  from  Ilaran.  19.]  Laban  had  left 
the  encampment  and  gone  to  his  flocks 
to  superintend  the  sliearing.  Rachel,  who 
apparently  was  still  at  least  partly  an  idola- 
tress, carried  away  her  father's  Teraphim, 
or  household  idols  ("as  ^'Eneas  carried  away 
the  Penates  out  of  Troy."  Knobel),  that  she 
might  be  under  the  protection  of  her  paternal 
gods. 

The  history  and  archtcology  of  the  Tera- 
phim are  very  curious.  Both  will  be  found 
entered  into  in  Smith's  Bibl.  Diet.  vol.  ii. 
pp.  195 — 197,  in  Mr.  Stuart  Poole's  article 


on  Magic.  The  results  only  can  be  here 
stated.  The  derivation  of  the  word  Tera- 
phim is  wholly  uncertain.  The  images 
called  by  that  name  arc  nowhere  described: 
but  from  ref.  1  Sam.  it  would  seem  that  they 
were  of  considerable  size,  large  enough  to  be 
taken  for  the  figure  of  a  man.  They  were 
probably  objects  of  pre-Abrahamite  idolatry, 
putaway  by  order  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxv.  2  —4), 
but  retained  even  in  Joshua's  time  (Josh, 
xxiv.  14),  and  notwithstanding  his  exhorta- 
tion, abandoned  only  for  a  space  (Judg. 
xvii.,  xviii.).  They  were  also  known  to 
the  Babylonians,  being  used  by  them 
for  divination  (Ezek.  xxi.  21).  In  rcf. 
Zech.  we  find  them  consulted  for  oracular 
answers,  as  also  apparently  in  ref.  2  Kings. 
]\Ir.  Poole  does  not  think  there  is  any  evi- 
dence that  they  were  worshipped.  As  in 
this  first  recorded  case  of  Laban,  so  in  sub- 
sequent ones,  their  use  seems  to  have  been 
simultaneous  with  the  acknowledgment  of 
tlie  true  God.  See  The  Land  and  the 
Book,  p.  369,  where  an  illustration  is  given. 
21.]  Mount  Gilead  is  the  eastern 
frontier  of  Palestine  towards  the  desert. 
Kalisch  objects  that  Jlount  Gilead  is  S.  of 
the  Jabbok,  whereas  Jacob  did  not  cross  the 
Jabbok  till  after  his  interview  with  Laban, 
who  overtook  him  in  Mount  Gilead.  The 
only  solution  seems  to  be  that  pointed  out  by 


140 


GENESIS. 


XXXI. 


m  Deut.  xxvii 
32.     Neh.  V. 
Jib  xii.  6. 
Prov.  iii.  27 
Micah  ii.  1. 


Gilead.  ^2  And  it  was  told  Laban  on  the  third  day  that 
Jacob  was  fled.  23  And  he  took  his  brethren  with  him, 
and  pursued  after  him  seven  days'  journey  ;  and  they 
overtook  him  in  the  mount  Gilead.  24  And  God  came  to 
Laban  the  Aramaean  in  a  dream  by  night,  and  said  unto 
him,  Take  heed  that  thou  speak  not  to  Jacob  ^  either  good 
or  bad.  2-5  9^  Then  Laban  overtook  Jacob.  Now  Jacob 
had  pitched  his  tent  in  the  mount :  and  Laban  with  his 
brethren  pitched  in  the  mount  of  Gilead.  26  And  Laban 
said  to  Jacob,  What  hast  thou  done,  that  thou  hast  de- 
ceived my  heart,  and  hast  carried  away  my  daughters,  as 
captives  tal-cii  with  the  sword  ?  27  AYherefore  didst  thou 
flee  away  secretly,  and  steal  away  from  me  ;  and  didst  not 
tell  me,  that  I  might  have  sent  thee  away  with  mirth,  and 
with  songs,  with  tabret,  and  with  harp  ?  28  ^j^d  j^ast  not 
sufiered  me  to  kiss  my  sons  and  my  daughters  ?  thou  hast 
now  done  foolishly  in  so  doing.  29  j^  {^  m  jj^  the  power  of 
my  hand  to  do  you  hurt :  but  the  God  of  your  father  spake 
unto  me  yesternight,  saying,  Take  thou  heed  that  thou 
speak  not  to  Jacob  either  good  or  bad.  ^^  And  now, 
though  thou  wouldest  needs  be  gone,  because  thou  sore 
longedst  after  thy  father's  house,  yet  wherefore  hast  thou 
stolen  my  gods  ?      ^i  And  Jacob  answered  and  said  to 


Deut.  iii.   12,   13,   tliat  Mount  Gilead  also 
extended  N.  of  tlie  Jabbok.     Eusebius  de- 
scribes it  as  "joining  to  Lebanon." 
the  river  is  the  Euphrates.  22 — 55.] 

Labmi  jnirsues  and  overtakes  Jacob.  TIteir 
dispute,  and  final  reconciliation.  23.] 

Labau's  brethren  must  be  understood  in  the 
wider  sense,  i.  e.  as  comprehending  bis  near 
relatives.  It  would  appear  that  Jacob  had 
made   ten    days'   journey.  24.]  Com- 

pare the  similar  warning  of  God  to  Abime- 
lech,  ch.  XX.  3.  The  phrase  to  speak 
neither  good  nor  had  imports  non-inter- 
ference :  see  reff.  The  manifest  sense  in 
both  these  places  seems  to  forbid  that  which 
Knobel  would  give  here,  see  that  thou  pass 
not  from  saying  good,  viz.  in  the  ordinary 
words  of  greeting,  to  saying  bad,  in  anger 
and  dispute.  26.]  Labau's  speech  is  a 

compound,  as  Delitzsch  observes,  of  paternal 
feeling  and  hypocrisy.  27.]    On  ta- 

bret, see  Exod.  xv.  20.  "  The  custom  of 
accompanying    friends    at    their    departure 


with  music  and  song  is  still  observed  in  the 
East."  Kalisch.  These  words  of  Labau's 
must  clearly  be  ascribed  to  the  latter  of  the 
above-mentioned    sources.  28.]     By 

sons  must  be  understood  grandsons. 
29.]  As  to  the  phrase  which  opens  this 
verse,  the  Hebraists  are,  as  usual  in  any 
doubtful  point,  entirely  at  issue.  Laban 
says,  my  hand  is  le-El ;  i.  e.  either  as 
God,  or  as  strength.  It  is  as  to  these 
two  meanings  that  the  difference  lies.  If 
we  take  the  former,  the  sense  is,  there  is 
no  limit  to  my  action  except  the  strength  of 
my  hand  ;  it  is  to  me  as  God.  If  the  latter, 
the  sense  is  as  in  the  A.  Y.,  my  hand  is  suffi- 
cient in  power  to  do  you  hurt.  In  the  un- 
certainty, I  retain  the  A.  V.  In  the  reff., 
where  the  same  expression  occurs,  there  is 
the  same  diversity  of  interpretation. 
the  God  of  your  father  seems  to  shew  that 
Laban  was  not  a  worshipper  of  Abraham's 
God.  30.]  Jacob's  flight  might  have 

been  excusable,  but  what  account  could  be 


22—39.  GENESIS.  141 

Laban,  Because  I  was  afraid  :  for  I  said,  Peradventure 

thou    wouldost    take   by   force  thy  daughters   from   me. 

"^''  With  whomsoever  thou  findcst  th}'  gods,  h^t  liiin  not 

live  :  before  our  brethren  discern  thou  what  /.s  thine  with 

me,  and  take  it  to  thee.     For  Jacob  knew  not  that  llachel 

had  stolen  them.     ^^  And  Laban  went  into  Jacob's  tent, 

and  into  Leah's  tent,  and  into  the  two  maidservants'  tents; 

but  he  found  them  not.     Then  went  he  out  of  Leah's  tent, 

and  entered  into  Rachel's  tent.     ^'^  Now  llachel  had  taken 

the  images,  and  put  them  in  the  camel's  furniture,  and 

sat  upon  them.     And  Laban  searched  all  the  tent,  but 

found  them  not.     ^^  And  she  said  to  her  father.  Let  it  not 

displease  my  lord  that  I  cannot  rise  up  before  thee  ;  for 

the  custom  of  women  is  upon  me.     And  he  searched,  but 

found  not  the  images.     ^6  ^  Am(\.  Jacob  was  wroth,  and 

chode  with  Laban :  and  Jacob  answered  and  said  to  Laban, 

AYhat  is  my  trespass  ?  what  is  my  sin,  that  thou  hast  so 

^  hotly  pursued  after  me  ?    ^^  Whereas  thou  hast  searched  "53^™,-.''"'' 

all  my  stuff,  what  hast  thou  foimd  of  all  thy  household 

stuff?  set  it  here  before  my  brethren  and  thy  brethren, 

that  they  may  judge  betwixt  us  both.     ^^  These  twenty 

years  hace  I  been  with  thee  ;  thy  ewes  and  thy  she  goats 

have  not  cast  their  young,  and  the  rams  of  thy  flock  have 

I  not  eaten.     ^^  That  which  was  torn  of  beasts  I  brought 

not  unto  thee  ;  I  bare  the  loss  of  it ;  of  my  hand  didst 

given  of  his  theft  of  Laban's  gods  ?  priately  overhung  with  curtains,  so  that  it 

31,  ff.]  Jacob  first  replies  to  the  former  part  is  not  unlike  a   curtain-bed,  -while   Arabic 

of  Laban's  question.     Ilaving  in  his  inno-  writers  compare  it  to  a  house,  or  a  palm  tree: 

cence  the  stronger  side  as  to  the  latter  part,  the  light  is  let  in  by  openings  at  the  side ; 

he  lays  the  stress  on  that.  32.]  our  and  as  it  is  very  commodious  for  reposing,  it 

brethren,    i.  e.    thy  brethren  and  my  bre-  is  not  unfrcqucntly  used  in  the  tents  at  times 

thren— those  who   accompany  us  both  :  see  of  encampment."  Kalisch.  36.]  Those 

ver.  37.  33.]  It  is  somewhat  remark-  who  observe   the  divine  requital  of  Jacob's 

able  that  the  real  culprit  should  have  been  fraud  on  his  father  will  note  here  the  con- 

the  last  suspected.     It   may  serve  to  shew  temptible  position  into  which  he  is  brought, 

that  the  same  duplicity  which  rescued  Rachel  that  of  one  deceiving  another  because  he  is 

under    the    search    also    had    successfully  deceived  himself.     All  tliis  virtuous  indig- 

gained  for  her  a  character  for  freedom  from  nation  against  Laban  is  founded  on  Rachel's 

such  an  act.  34.]    "  For  the  greater  lie.  hotly  pursued  after  me  is  literally 

comfort    of  ladies   or   children   performing  flamed  out  after  me :  see  reff.     Tlie  Avholc 

long  journeys  on  camels,  a  kind  of  couch  or  of  this  speech,  the  Hebraists  point  out  to  us, 

large  chair  is  fastened  on  the  saddle  of  the  is   half-poetical,    and   its  language    highly 

animal,  and  often  one  on  each  side ;  and  in  rhetorical ;  hence  such  expressions  as  "  the 

order  to  secure  protection  againt  wind,  rain,  fear  of   Isaac  :  "  see  below.  39.]    In 

or  the  rays  of  the  sun,  the  couch  is  appro-  Exod.  xxii.  13  it  is  provided  that  one  en- 


142  GENESIS.  XXXI. 

thou  require  it,  whether  stolen  by  day,  or  stolen  by  nigbt. 
40  Thus  I  was ;  in  the  day  tbe  beat  consumed  me,  and  tbe 
frost  by  nigbt ;  and  my  sleep  departed  from  mine  eyes. 
*i  Thus  bave  I  been  twenty  years  in  tby  bouse  ;  I  served 
tbee  fourteen  years  for  tby  two  daugbters,  and  six  years 
for  tby  cattle  :  and  tbou  bast  cbanged  my  wages  ten  times. 

42  Except  tbe  God  of  my  fatber,  tbe  God  of  Abrabam,  and 
0  isa.  viii.  13.    tbo  °  fcar  of  Isaac,  bad  been  witb  me,  surely  tbou  badst 

sent  me  away  now  empty.  God  batb  seen  mine  affliction 
and  tbe  labour  of  my  bands,  and  rebuked  fhee  yesternigbt. 

43  ^  And  Laban  answered  and  said  unto  Jacob,  These 
daugbters  are  my  daugbters,  and  these  cbildren  are  my 
cbildren,  and  these  cattle  are  my  cattle,  and  all  tbat  tbou 

p  =xxii  12;  seest  is  mine  :  and  wbat  can  I  p  do  tbis  day  p  unto  tbese 
Exod.xiv.ii.  ^y  daugbters,  or  unto  tbeir  cbildren  wbicb  tbey  bave 
born  ?  44  JSTow  tberefore  come  tbou,  let  us  make  a  cove- 
nant, I  and  tbou  ;  and  let  it  be  for  a  witness  between  me 
and  tbee.  45  And  Jacob  took  a  stone,  and  set  it  up  for  a 
monument.  4G  And  Jacob  said  unto  bis  bretbren,  Gatber 
stones ;  and  tbey  took  stones,  and  made  an  beap :  and 
tbey  did  eat  tbere  upon  tbe  beap.  47  And  Laban  called 
it  Jegar-sabadutba  [Heap  of  witness]  :  but  Jacob  called 

trusted  with  the  care  of  herds  may  bring  after  all  are  his  oion,  sprung  from  him,  and 

that  which  was  torn  in  pieces  for  witness,  making  part  of  his  reputation.     So  he  pro- 

and  should  be  free   from  making  it   good,  poses  a  reconciliation  and  a  covenant.     The 

The  practice  casts  light  on  such  passages  as  phrase  do  unto,  in  the  bad  sense  of  infliet- 

Amos  iii.  12.     On  tbe  latter  clauses  see  also  ing  harm  upon,  is  found  in  reff.           44.]  let 

Exod.  xxii.  12.          40.]  "It  is  well  known,"  it,    viz.    the   covenant.             45.]  a  stone, 

says  Keil,  "  that  in  the  East,  the  hotter  the  which  is  the  token  of  the  covenant,  standing 

day  the  colder  the  night."            -41.]  On  the  in  its  place.     On  stones  set  up  for  m on u- 

change  of  wages,  and  the  ten  times,  see  on  ments,  see  on  ch.  xxviii.  18.              46.]  Ms 

ver.  7.            42.   the   fear   of  Isaac]    On  brethren  here  seems  to  include  Laban  and 

the  character  of  the  expression,  see  above,  his  company :  see  ver.  54.             47.]  It  is 

and  refF. ;  and  a  simiLir  use  of  the  word  remarkable     that  in   giving    these    names 

"fear"  as  an  object  q/fear  in  Ps.  xxxi.  11 ;  Laban  chooses  the  Chaldee,  Jacob  the  He- 

Prov.  i.   26,   27.     Onkelos  interprets  here,  brew,  for  the  same  meaning,  ''  the  heap  of 

"  He  whom  Isaac  feared."     There  may  be  witness."     "  These  words,"  says  Keil,  "  are 

something  characteristic  in  this  appellation  the  oldest  testimony  that  in  Mesopotamia, 

of  God  as  applied  to    Isaac.     He   was  the  the  mother  country  of  the  Patriarchs,  Ara- 

God  of  Abraham.    Abraham  believed  Him,  maic  or  Chaldee  was  spoken,  while  in  Canaan, 

and  obeyed  His  commands ;  Isaac  was  less  the  country  of  Jacob's  birth,  Hebrew  was 

personally  prominent  in  matters  of  the  cove-  the  vernacular.     And  hence  we  may  con- 

nant,   and  seems  throughout  his   course  to  elude,  that  Abraham's  family  had  adopted 

have  trodden  somewhat  timidly  in  the  foot-  the   Hebrew  from  the  Canaanites  (i.  e.  the 

stepsof  his  greater  father.             43.]  Laban,  Phoenicians)."      It  has  been  remarked  that 

returning  to  a  better   mind,  confesses   tbe  the  name  Galeed  is  closely  connected  with 

folly  of  injuring  Jacob's  possessions,  which  Gilead.  This  would  furnish  another  example 


:  40— XXXII.  1.  GENESIS.  143 

it  Galeed  [Heap  of  witness].     ^^  ^nd  Laban  said,  This 
heap  is  a  witness  between  me  and  thee  this  day.      There- 
'  fore  was  the  name  of  it  called  Galeed;  ^^  and  'iMizpah   ''i^.%^^'.^; 
rWatchtowerl  ;  for  he  said,  Jehovah  watch  between  me     ^j^^»i.'.xi.i. 

^      '-  -■  20  ?)  I  Mace. 

I  and  thee,  when  we  are  absent  one  from  another.  ^^  If  ''■^*- 
thou  shalt  afflict  my  daughters,  or  if  tliou  shalt  take  other 
wives  beside  my  daughters,  no  man  is  with  us ;  see,  God 
is  witness  betwixt  me  and  thee.  ^^  And  Laban  said  to 
Jacob,  Behold  this  heap,  and  behold  t/iis  monument,  which 
I  have  cast  betwixt  me  and  thee ;  ^-  this  heap  be  witness, 
and  this  monument  be  witness,  that  I  will  not  pass  over 
this  heap  to  thee,  and  that  thou  shalt  not  pass  over  this 
heap  and  this  monument  unto  me,  for  harm.  ^^  The  God 
of  Abraham,  and  the  God  of  Nahor,  the  God  of  their 
■''' her,  be  judges  betwixt  us.  And  Jacob  sware  by  the  fear 
.  X  his  father  Isaac.  ^^  Then  Jacob  offered  sacrifice  upon 
tlic  mount,  and  called  his  brethren  to  eat  bread :  and  they 
did  eat  bread,  and  tarried  all  night  in  the  mount.  ^^  And 
early  in  the  morning  Laban  rose  up,  and  kissed  his  sons 
and  his  daughters,  and  blessed  them  :  and  Laban  departed, 
and  retui'ned  unto  his  place.     XXXII.  ^  And  Jacob  went 

nf  the  allusive  ascription  of  names  which  we  address  of  Laban  to  Jacob,  after  the  manner 

:i  i\i' before  noticed  in  commenting  on  the  of  these  ancient  people."     At  all  events  the 

iiius  origins  ascribed  to  the  name  Beer-  name  is  found  long  after  as  belonging  to  a 

I  tia.             49,  50.]   These  verses  have  a  place   in   Gilead  :    see  ref.   Judges.     It  is 

parenthetical  character,  and  would  seem  to  doubtful  whether,  as  some  maintain,  Miz- 

have  been  a  subsequent  insertion,  to  connect  pah  is  identical  with  Ranioth-Gilead  :   see 

the  name  Mizpah  with  the  event.     They  this  discussed  at  Deut.  iv.  43.            absent] 

present  some  diflSculty,  but  not  so  much  as  literally,  hidden.             60.  afflict]  i.  e.   ill- 

at  first  sight  may  appear.      We  are  sur-  treat.             53.]  Laban  calls  to  witness  the 

prised  to  find  that  the  Hebrew  allusion  in  gods  (the  verb  is  in  the  plural  in  the  ori- 

the  name  Mizpah  is  taken  up  by  the  Ara-  ginal)  of  Abraham  and  Nahor  and  their  father 

ma'an  (Clialdaic)  Laban,  who  has  just  named  Terah  ;  but  Jacob  swears  only  by  the  true 

the  heap  in  Chaldee  as  distinguished  from  God,  Ilira   whom  Isaac  his  father    feared. 

Jacob's  Hebrew.     But  the  words  may  mean  54.]   It  hardly  seems  plain  whether 

this,  that  the  name  Mizpah  (rather  Ham-  this  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  sacrifice  in  the 

mizpah,  with  the  definite  article,  the  Miz-  proper  sense  or  only  a  slaying  of  victims  for 

pah)  was  given  to  it  also,  because  of  Laban's  the  feast.      The  brethren    clearly   include 

words  which  follow.     The  name  was  by  no  Laban    and    his    party.              55.]     Here 

means  an  uncommon  one.     Mr.  Grove,  in  again  the  sons  are  the  grandsons, 

the  Biblical  Diet.,  gives  no  less  than  six  dis-  XXXII.     Jacob  meets  the  host  of  God 

tinct  examples  in  Palestine.     "We  might  ad-  (1,2).     He  fears  the  encounter  icith  Esau 

duce  a  parallel  in  the  very  common  appella-  (3 — 8) ;    jyrays  for  deliverance  from   him 

tion  of  "  Beacon,"  or  "  Beacon  hill,"  in  our  (9  — 12) ;  prepares  apresoit,  and  sends  it  and 

own  country.      Mr.   Grove  thinks  that  the  his  co7npany  over  the  ford  Jabbok  (13 — 23)'; 

name  belonged  to  the  place  before,  and  that  wrestles  tcith  an  amjel,  and  has  his  name 

the  word  is  "  seized  and  played  upon,  in  the  changed  to  Israel  (24 — 32).            1.]  Jacob 


144 


GENESIS. 


XXXII. 


on  Ills  way,  and  angels  of  God  met  him.  ^  ^^j  when 
Jacob  saw  them,  he  said.  This  is  God's  camp :  and  he 
called  the  name  of  that  place  Mahanaim  [Two  camps]. 

3  And  Jacob  sent  messengers  before  him  to  Esau  his 
brother   unto    the   land    of  Seir,  the  country  of  Edom. 

4  And  he  commanded  them,  saying,  Thus  shall  ye  speak 
unto  my  lord  Esau ;  Thy  servant  Jacob  saith  thus,  I  have 
sojourned  with  Laban,  and  stayed  there  until  now  :  ^  and 
I  have  oxen,  and  asses,  flocks,  and  menservants,  and  wo- 
menservants :  and  I  have  sent  to  tell  my  lord,  that  I  may 
find  grace  in  thy  sight.  ^  ^  And  the  messengers  returned 
to  Jacob,  saying.  We  came  to  thy  brother  Esau,  and  also 
he  cometh  to  meet  thee,  and  four  hundred  men  with  him. 


was  under  the  immecliate  protection  of  God, 
and  the  holy  angels  were  round  about  his 
path.  There  is  also  significance  in  the  fact 
that  he  was  now  about  to  enter  the  land  of 
promise  where  God  was  especially  pleased  to 
tabernacle  among  men.  This  incident  may 
be  connected  with  the  promise  of  ch.  xxviii. 
15,  "I  will  bring  thee  again  into  this  land." 
The  LXX.  version  (alone)  contains  the 
singular  and  interesting  clause  after  '•  his 
■wray," — "and  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  and  saw  a 
camp  of  God  encamped," — "  and  the  angels," 
&c.  2.]  The  name  given  by  Jacob  re- 

cords his  impression,  not  that  the  angels 
were  God's  host,  but  that  the  place  was  God's 
camp :  and  he  names  the  place  two  camps, 
i.  e.  either  from  the  meeting  of  his  own  en- 
campment with  that  of  God,  or  perhaps, 
as  some  of  the  Hebraists  seem  to  think, 
merely  as  a  plural  of  dignity  or  majesty. 
Mahanaim  was  situated  S.  W.  of  Mizpahiu 
Gilead,  and  to  the  N.  (Mr.  Grove,  Bibl.  Diet., 
thinks  the  S.,  according  to  his  differing  view 
of  the  place  of  meeting  of  Jacob  and  Laban) 
of  the  river  Jabbok,  in  the  portion  of  Gad 
(Josh.  xiii.  26,  30).  Its  sanctity  was  kept 
up  by  its  being  appointed  one  of  the  Leviti- 
cal  cities,  and  thus  in  a  sense  continuing  to 
be  "  God's  camp "  (see  Josh.  xxi.  38 ;  1 
Chron.  vi.  63,  80).  It  was  Ishbosheth's 
royal  city  during  his  short  reign  of  two  years 
(2  Sam.  ii.  8,  12),  and  served  as  David's 
refuge  when  driven  out  before  Absalom  (2 
Sam.  xvii.  24,  27  ;  1  Kings  ii.  8),  being 
then  a  large  walled  city  (2  Sam.  xviii.  4). 
It  was  one  of  Solomon's  twelve  commissariat 
stations  (1  Kings  ii.  7,  14).     For  fm-ther  in- 


teresting particulars,  see  Mr.  Grove's  article 
as  above.  He  has  some  very  interesting 
remarks  on  the  curious  features  of  this  nar- 
rative :  the  mere  passing  mention  of  the 
camp  of  God,  while  the  "two  camps"  into 
which  his  own  followers  were  divided  are 
several  times  dwelt  upon  (ver.  7,  10,  22)  ; 
the  same  word  used  for  the  angels  (mes- 
sengers) of  God  and  the  messengers  of  Esau 
(vv.  1,3,  6) ;  the  remarkable  interchange  and 
parallelism  between  the  face  of  God  (ver.  30) 
and  the  face  of  Esau  as  the  face  of  God  (ch. 
xxxiii.  10) ;  the  very  name  of  the  torrent, 
seemingly  derived  from  the  wrestling  of 
the  patriarch  with  the  angel.  "  It  is,"  says 
Dean  Stanley  (cited  by  Mr.  Grove),  "  as 
if  there  were  a  coi-respondence  throughout 
between  the  human  and  the  divine,  the  inner 
and  outer  parts  of  the  event,  the  host  of  God 
and  the  hosts  of  Jacob,  the  messengers  of 
God  and  the  messengers  of  Jacob,  the  face 
of  God   and  the  face  of  Esau."  4.] 

Jacob  sends  the  messengers  in  a  spirit  doubt- 
less to  be  ascribed  to  his  consciousness  of  his 
guilt,  and  his  fear  of  its  consequences.  It  is 
somewhat  surprising  to  find  Esau  already 
dwelling  in  Mount  Seir,  seeing  that  we  are 
told,  in  ch.  xxxvi.  6 — 8,  that  the  reason  of 
his  going  there  was  the  overcrowding  of 
Gerar  from  the  joint  greatness  of  Jacob  and 
Esau.  But  the  consideration  alleged  by 
Keil  and  Delitzsch,  after  others,  that  Esau's 
alienation  and  absence  from  his  fiither's 
house  was  probably  gradual,  may  perhaps  be 
taken  as  in  some  measure  solving  the  diffi- 
culty. It  is  fair,  however,  to  state  that  it 
is  not  a  sufficient  solution.     Esau's  home 


2—14. 


GENESIS. 


145 


"  Tlicn  Jacob  was  grcatl}^  afraid  and  distressed  :  and  he 

divided  the  people  that  ira>i  ^ith  liim,  and  the  flocks,  and 

herds,  and  the  camels,  into  two  camps  ;  8  and  said,  If  Esau 

come  to  the  one  camp,  and  smite  it,  then  the  other  camp 

which  is  left  shall  escape.     ^  %  And  Jacob  said,  O  God  of 

my   father  Abraham,  and  God  of  my  father  Isaac,  even 

Jeiiovaii,  which  saidst  unto  me,  Return  unto  thy  country, 

and  to  thy  kindred,  and  I  will  deal  well  with  thee  :  ^^  I 

am  too  little  for  all  the  mercies,  and  for  all  the  truth, 

which  thou  hast  shewed  unto  thy  servant ;  for  with  my 

staff  I  passed  over  this  Jordan ;  and  noAv  I  am  become  two 

camps.     1^  Deliver  me,  I  pray  thee,  from  the  hand  of  my 

brother,  from  the  hand  of  Esau :  for  I  fear  him,  lest  he 

will  come  and  smite  me,  mother  with  children.     ^'^  And 

thou  saidst,  I  will  surely  do  thee  good,  and  make  thy  seed 

as  the    sand  of  the  sea,  which  cannot  be  numbered  for 

multitude.     ^"^  ^  And  he  stayed  there  that  same  night ; 

and  took  of  that  which  ''came  into  his  hand  a  present  r i Kir^s x. u. 

for   Esau   his    brother ;    ^^  two    hundred  she   goats,    and 


Ps.  x'c.  12 
(see  note). 


and  centre  of  operations  is  here  plainly 
Mount  Seir :  tliei'c  lie  is  found,  and  thence 
he  sets  out  with  his  large  following,  whereas 
there,  in  ch.  xxxvi.,  he  took  all  his  persons 
and  his  substance  and  went  into  the  country 
from  the  face  of  liis  brother  Jacob  :  and  it 
is  added,  "  Thus  dwelt  Esau  in  Mount  Seir." 
It  is  hardly  creditable  that  by  some  of  the 
orthodox  commentators  this  difficulty  is  not 
even  noticed.  7.]  Some  think  that  the 

prospect  of  meetinir  Esau's  lawh  ss  hordes  of 
Bedouins  distressed  Jacob.  But  doubtless 
the  common  view  is  right,  which  regards  him 
as  shrinking  from  his  oti'ended  brother,  in 
memory  of  his  threat  (ch.  xxvii.  41,  4'2),  and 
believing  that  this  large  host  was  intended 
for  an  attack  upon  him.  Esau's  real  motive 
seems  to  have  been  to  enhance  his  generous 
reconciliation  by  a  demonstration  of  his 
power  to  hurt  if  he  would.  The  word 
Mahanah  (sec  ver.  2)  is  used  throughout 
these  verses  as  signifying  the  parts  of  Jacob's 
company,  and  ought  to  have  been  carefully 
preserved  in  the  A.  V.,  as  it  is  by  the  LXX. 
It  is  caprice  of  this  kind,  rendering  this  woi-d 
'■'■host"  in  ver.  2,  '■'■band''  in  ver.  7, and  "■com- 
pany "  in  ver.  8,  which  has  so  obscured  the 
meaning  of  Scripture  for  English  readers. 
9 — 12.]  Jacob's  prayer.   Observe  the 


exactness  of  this  address  to  God  as  contrasted 
with  Laban's  appellation  of  Him  in  ch.  xxxi. 
53.  10.]  The  Hebrew  expression  is  little 
among  all  the  mercies,  &c.,  i.  e.  too  little  to 
have  received,  less  than  all.  In  saving  two 
camps  he  does  not  use  the  form  Mahanaim 
as  in  ver.  2,  but  sh'nay  Mahanoth,  taking  a 
different  form.  This  is  worth  notice,  in 
connexion  with  the  remarks  quoted  on  ver. 
2.  11.]  The  concluding  words,  mother 

with  children,  like  "■root  and  branch,"  be- 
token utter  extirpation  of  a  family  or  a  com- 
munity :  compare  Hosea  x.  14.  13 — 23.] 
His  present,  and  his  preparations  for  meet- 
ing Esau,  there]  i.e.  at  Mahanaim,  which 
by  the  spirit  of  the  narrative  could  not  be 
far  from  both  Jordan  and  Jabbok.  The  ex- 
pression, which  came  into  his  hand,  imports 
which  he  had  earnud  and  gotten.  I  have 
changed  "to"  for  into,  as  expressing  this 
somewhat  more  clearly.  The  words  of  the 
A.  V.  seem  rather  to  import,  which  came 
uppermost,  which  were  the  first  to  present 
themselves  ;  whereas  the  gift  was  most  care- 
fully selected  and  ordered.  Tiie  whole  pur- 
pose is  evidently  to  di'in-ecate  wrath. 
14,  15.]  We  are  told  that  the  proportionate 
numbers  are  those.bcst  calculated  for  breeding. 
The  arrangements  and  orders  in  vv.  16 — 20 


146  GENESIS.  XXXII. 

twenty  he  goats,  two  hundred  ewes,  and  twenty  rams, 
1^  thirty  milch  camels  with  their  colts,  fort}^  kine,  and  ten 
bulls,  twenty  she  asses,  and  ten  foals.  ^'^  And  he  delivered 
them  into  the  hand  of  his  servants,  every  drove  by  them- 
selves; and  said  unto  his  servants,  Pass  over  before  me, 
and  put  a  space  betwixt  drove  and  drove.  ^7  And  he  com- 
manded the  foremost,  saying,  When  Esau  my  brother 
meeteth  thee,  and  asketh  thee,  saying,  Whose  art  thou  ? 
and  whither  goest  thou  ?  and  whose  are  these  before  thee  ? 
18  then  thou  shalt  saj^.  They  he  thy  servant  Jacob's ;  it  is 
a  present  sent  unto  ni}^  lord  Esau :  and,  behold,  also  he  is 
behind  us.  ^^  And  so  commanded  he  the  second,  and  the 
third,  and  all  that  followed  the  droves,  saying,  On  this 
manner  shall  ye  speak  unto  Esau,  when  ye  find  him. 
20  And  say  ye  moreover,  Behold,  thy  servant  Jacob  in  be- 
hind us.  Eor  he  said,  I  will  appease  him  with  the  pre- 
sent that  goeth  before  me,  and  afterwards  I  will  see  his 
face  ;  peradventure  he  will  accept  of  me.  21  Qq  ^ent  the 
present  over  before  him  :  and  himself  stayed  that  night 
in  the  camp.  —  And  he  rose  up  that  night,  and  took  his 
two  wives,  and  his  two  womenservants,  and  his  eleven 
sons,  and  passed  over  the  ford  Jabbok.  ^3  And  he  took 
them,  and  sent  them  over  the  brook,  and  sent  over 
that  he  had.     24  ^  And  Jacob  was  left  alone  ;  and  there 

arc  just  those  best  calculated  to  mollify  an  ii.  37).  It  intersects  the  mountain-range  of 
angry  man.  Esau  is  to  meet  each  generous  Gilead.  Its  modern  name  is  Wady  Zuika. 
present  separately,  that  the  effect  may  be  Its  banks  are  fringed  with  thickets  of  cane 
again  and  again  repeated.  Each  time  with  and  Oleander,  and  are  clothed  above  with 
the  same  deferential  words,  and  the  same  oak  forests.  See  Porter's  Handbook,  and 
assurance  that  Jacob  was  not  about  to  shrink  his  art.  in  the  Biblical  Diet.  24 — 32.] 
from  meeting  him.  All  this  lies  in  his  own  Jacob  tcrestles  with  an  angel.  Change  of 
reasoning,  ver.  20.  21.]  There  is  no  his  name.  It  would  appear  that  Jacob  re- 
reason,  with  Bp.  "Wordsworth,  to  suppose  mained  on  the  hither  bank  of  the  torrent, 
that  he  fortified  himself  there,  because  the  when  he  had  sent  over  all  that  he  had.  It 
word  camp  occurs  here :  it  has  occurred  was  for  him  a  solemn  crisis,  and  he  sought 
throughout,  as  noticed  above ;  and  he  would  retirement  and  solitude.  To  give,  as  Kalisch, 
hardly  fortify  himself  in  a  position  he  an  entirely  spiritual  meaning  to  the  wonder- 
meant  to  leave  before  meeting  the  enemy,  ful  scene  which  follows  is  little  better  than 
22.]  His  two  women-servants,  Bilbah  trifling  with  it.  'Wliatever  be  the  interpret- 
and  Zilpah,  belonged  to  his  own  family,  ation  of  this  historj-,  which  is  perhaps  the 
being  the  mothers  of  his  sons.  The  sons  strongest  example  of  anthropomorphism  in 
were  all  of  tender  age  at  this  time.  The  the  whole  of  Scripture,  tlicre  can  be  no 
river  or  torrent  Jabbok  was  "  the  border  doubt  that  if  the  sacred  narrative  be  good 
of  the  children  of  Amnion "  (Dent.  iii.  16;  for  anything,  it  has  its  two  sides,  the 
Josh.  xii.  2  :  see  also  iSTum.  xxi.  24 ;  Deut.  spiritual  and  the  outward.      Xot  only  did 


15—32. 


GENESIS. 


147 


"wrestled  a  man  with  liim  until  the  breaking  of  the  day. 
2^  x\.nd  when  he  saw  that  he  prevailed  not  against  him,  he 
touched  the  hollow  of  his  thigh  ;  and  the  hollow  of  Jacob's 
thigh  was  out  of  joint,  as  he  wrestled  with  him.  26  ^^nd 
he  said,  Let  me  go,  for  the  day  breaketh.  And  he  said, 
I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except  thou  bless  me.  ^7  Xnd  he 
said  unto  him,  What  is  thy  name  ?  And  he  said,  Jacob. 
28  And  he  said.  Thy  name  shall  be  called  no  more  Jacob, 
but  Israel  [Contender  with  God]  :  for  thou  hast  con- 
tended with  God  and  with  men,  and  hast  prevailed, 
2^  And  Jacob  asked  /liiii,  and  said.  Tell  lac,  I  pray  thcc, 
thy  name.  And  he  said,  Wherefore  is  it  f/icd  thou  dost 
ask  after  my  name  ?  And  he  blessed  him  there.  ^^  And 
Jacob  called  the  name  of  the  place  Peniel  [Face  of  God]  : 
for  I  have  seen  God  face  to  face,  and  my  life  is  preserved. 
31  And  as  he  passed  over  Pcnuel  the  sun  rose  upon  him, 
and  he  halted  ujDon  his  thigh.      '^'^  Therefore  the  children 


the  incident  betoken  a  mighty  crisis  in 
Jacob's  inner  lite,  but  it  also  was  aceonir- 
panied  by  supernatural  tokens  of  the  kind 
indicated  in  the  narrative.  The  man  here 
spoken  of  is  an  appearance  of  God,  that 
appearance  of  which  we  have  before  spoken, 
whose  words  are  uttered  in  the  Person  and 
name  of  God  Ilimsclf.  24.]  The  word 

for  wrestled  is  only  found  in  this  place,  and 
is  said  to  be  an  ancient  form.  From  it 
{Javatjk)  is  the  name  of  the  torrent,  Jabbok. 
25.]  In  tliis  symbolic  struggle  we  may 
perhaps  discern  the  spiritual  meaning.  Jacob 
had  too  much,  and  often  in  his  life,  wrestled 
with  and  resisted  God,  and  God  prevailed 
against  him  by  the  power  of  alUictions — 
crippling  him  in  his  lamily  and  his  personal 
happiness — causing  him  to  enter  into  life 
maimed,  rather  than  being  whole  to  be  lost. 
And  the  power  and  struggles  of  Jacob's 
faitli  prevailed  to  hold  the  blessing  from 
God,  but  not  without  that  faith  being  sad- 
dened by  repentance.  The  triumph  was 
greater  tlian  the  defeat :  for  by  the  former 
he  obtained  the  name  of  the  Contender  with 
God,  whicli  holy  theocratic  name  descended 
to  his  posterity,  and  became  their  natural 
•appellation.  the  hollow  of  the  thigh] 

AVhere  passes  tlie  neivus  iscltiuduiis,  the 
greatest  of  the  sinews,  descending  through 
the  leg  to   the  aukle.  26.J   The   im- 


mortal must  not  be  seen  by  mortals  in  that 
day  which  lights  them  to  ordinary  work : 
their  apparitions  occur  in  the  night  when 
this  world's  light  is  withdrawn.  The  idea 
has  been  universal,  and  here  tinds  the  sanc- 
tion. Jacob's  was  the  true  pertinacity  of 
faithful  etfectual  prayer.  Compare  llosea 
xii.  4,  where  his  prevailing  is  ascribed  to  his 
"  weeping  "  and  making  supplication  unto 
the   angel.  28.]    Israel,   from   Sara, 

the  same  word  wliich  gave  meaning  to  tiie 
name  Sarai,  and  El,  God.  iSo  that  tlie 
meaning  is  doubtful  between  "  a  Prince  of 
God,"  and  "  a  Contender  with  God." 
29.]  The  name  of  the  divine  messenger  is 
not  to  be  told  to  men  :  so  in  Judges  xiii.  ]  7, 
18.  See  also  Exod.  iii.  13,  14  ;  Levit.  xxiv. 
11 ;  Isa.  ix.  6  ;  Eev.  xix.  12.  30]  On 

the  remarkable  parallelisms  in  this  passage 
between  the  divine  and  the  human,  see  note, 
ver.  2.  31.]  No  account  has  been  given 

by  the  Hebraists  of  the  change  in  the  spell- 
ing of  the  name  Peniel  to  Penuel.  It  has 
been  suggested  that  the  latter  may  have  been 
the  commonly  recognized  local  name,  and 
that  the  slight  change  to  Peniel  may  have 
been  made  to  suit  the  etymological  deriva- 
tion. Commentators  have  drawn  attention 
to  the  parallel  case  of  St.  Paul,  who  after 
an  abundance  of  divine  revelations,  received 
a  thorn  in  the  tlesh,  2  Cor.  xii.  7.  32.] 


148 


GENESIS. 


XXXIII. 


of  Israel  eat  not  of  the  sinew  of  the  hip,  which  is  upon  the 
hollow  of  the  thigh,  imto  this  day  :  because  he  touched 
the  hollow  of  Jacob's  thigh  in  the  sinew  of  the  hip. 
XXXIII.  1  And  Jacob  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  looked,  and, 
behold,  Esau  came,  and  with  him  four  hundred  men.  And 
he  divided  the  children  unto  Leah,  and  unto  Rachel,  and 
unto  the  two  handmaids.  ^  And  he  put  the  handmaids 
and  their  children  foremost,  and  Leah  and  her  children 
behind,  and  Rachel  and  Joseph  behind.  ^  And  he  passed 
over  before  them,  and  bowed  himself  to  the  ground  seven 
times,  until  he  came  near  to  his  brother.  ^  And  Esau  ran 
to  meet  him,  and  embraced  him,  and  fell  on  his  neck, 
and  kissed  him :  and  they  wept.  ^  And  he  lifted  up  his 
eyes,  and  saw  the  women  and  the  children  ;  and  said,  Who 
«re  those  with  thee?  And  he  said.  The  children  which 
God  hath  graciouslj^  given  thy  servant.  ^  Then  the 
handmaidens  came  near,  they  and  their  children,  and  they 
bowed  themselves.  ^  And  Leah  also  with  her  children 
came  near,  and  bowed  themselves  :  and  after  came  Joseph 


This  practice  has  no  sanction  in  the  law, 
but  is,  "unto  this  day"  in  which  we  live 
also,  rigidly  observed  by  the  Jews.  A  strict 
Jew  cannot,  for  that  reason,  eat  of  a  leg  of 
mutton  which  has  come  from  a  Christian 
butcher. 

There  is  some  doubt  about  the  appellation 
of  the  sinew  in  this  verse,  from  an  uncer- 
tainty as  to  the  meaning  of  the  Hebrew  root 
of  the  word  used.  The  more  probable  sense 
of  the  term  is  that  given  in  the  text,  which 
is  preferred  by  Gesenius,  Knobei,  Keil, 
Kalisch,  and  other  Hebraists.  But  Gesenius 
confesses  that  '^  the  sinew  ivhich  shrank" 
(A.  v.),  or  which  failed,  is  also  a  legitimate 
rendering. 

XXXIII.  Meeting  of  Jacob  and  Esau 
(1—16).  Jacob  settles  at  Sheehcm  (17—20). 
1,  2.]  The  arrangement  is  one  of  dis- 
trust and  timidity.  The  least  cared  for  are 
put  in  the  bruut  of  the  possible  danger.  But 
there  is  no  cowardice :  he  advances  to  the 
front  himself.  It  is  not  asserted,  but  may  be 
fairly  taken  as  implied,  that  Each  el  and 
Joseph  were  behind  Leah  and  her  children. 
The  Hebrew  is  as  our  text,  the  same  word 
being  used  for  behind  in  both  cases.  Com- 
pare ver.  7.  3]  He  bowed  himself, 
after  the  Eastern  fashion,  bending  the  body 


so  that  the  face  nearly  touches  the  ground. 
He  did  this  seven  times,  to  denote  the  com- 
pleteness of  his  humiliation,  and  his  deep 
sense  of  the  guilt  by  which  he  had  merited 
his  brother's  displeasure.  The  text  gives 
us  to  understand  that  these  obeisances  were 
made  not  on  the  same  spot,  but  one  after 
another   as   he  approached  Esau.  4.] 

Very  different  is  the  behaviour  of  the  reck- 
less and  generous  Esau.  We  can  hardly 
read  this  description  without  being  reminded 
of  another  penitent  in  Luke  xv.  20,  to  whom 
the  same  gracious  reception  was  granted. 
The  very  words  used  by  our  Lord  in  the 
Greek  there  are  the  same  as  those  of  the 
LXX.  here.  The  Masoretic  editors  of  the 
Hebrew  text  have  set  dots  over  the  word 
"  kissed-him,"  which  are  generally  explained 
as  expressing  a  doubt  of  the  genuineness  of 
the  kiss.  Surely  it  need  not  be  doubted, 
but  is  entirely  in  keeping  with  Esau's  cha- 
racter. A  very  curious  substitution  for  the 
word  was  given  by  some  of  the  Jewish  com- 
mentators, "he  bit  him  :"  and  the  Targum 
of  Jonathan  explains  the  weeping  of  Jacob 
to  be  occasioned  by  pain  in  the  neck,  that  of 
Esau   by   pain   in  the  teeth  !  5 — 7.] 

Jacob's  wives  and  children  attracting  Esau's 
attention,    are    presented  to    him    and    do 


1— IG.  GENESIS.  149 

near  and  Hacliel,  and  (licy  bowed  themselves.  ^  And  ho 
said,  "What  meniicd  thou  by  all  this  fhost  which  I  met  ?  +"<'''•  ™"'''- 
And  he  said,  These  arc  to  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  my 
lord.  ^  And  Esau  said,  I  have  abundance,  my  brother; 
keep  that  thou  hast  unto  thyself.  ^'^  xVnd  Jacob  said.  Nay, 
I  pray  thee,  if  now  I  have  found  grace  in  tliy  sight,  thou 
wilt  receive  my  present  at  my  hand  :  for  therefore  I  have 
seen  thy  face,  as  though  I  had  seen  the  face  of  God,  and 
thou  wast  pleased  with  me.  ^^  Take,  I  pray  thee,  my 
blessing  that  is  brought  to  thee  ;  because  God  hath  dealt 
graciously  with  me,  and  because  I  have  everything.  And 
he  urged  him,  and  he  took  it.  ^^  And  he  said.  Let  us  take 
our  journey,  and  let  us  go,  and  I  will  go  by  thy  side. 
^•^  And  he  said  unto  him,  My  lord  knoweth  that  the  chil- 
dren are  tender,  and  the  flocks  and  herds  giving  suck  are 
with  me :  and  if  men  should  overdrive  them  one  da}^,  all 
the  flock  will  die.  ^'^  Let  my  lord,  I  pray  thee,  pass  over 
before  his  servant :  and  I  will  lead  on  softly,  according  to 
the  pace  of  the  cattle  that  goeth  before  me  and  according 
to  the  pace  of  the  children,  until  I  come  unto  my  lord 
unto  Seir.  ^^  And  Esau  said,  Let  me  now  leave  with  thee 
soDie  of  the  folk  that  are  with  me.  And  he  said,  What  need- 
eth  it  ?  let  me  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord,     i^  51  So 

reverence  before  liim.     The  order  observed  relation  ;  the  other  was  clear  in  this  matter, 

here  coiilirnis  the  ordinary  interpretation  of  pass  over,  in  vcr.  14,  nuist  be  apparently 

ver.    2.             8—11.  The  jtresejit  next  at-  understood  as  applying- to  Jordan.     But  \vc 

tracts  Esau's   attention.      The   same  word  find  Jacob  next  at  Succotii,  E.  of  Jordan  : 

{Mahana/i)  is  again  used  as  before.  see   below.     And   it  does  not   appear  why 

9,    10.]    Esau's   generous  answer  does   not  Esau  should  have  to  cross  Jordan  to  get  to 

satisfy  Jacob,  because  the  non-acceptance  of  Seir.     The  whole   scene  of  this   interview 

the  oll'ered  gift  would  leave  doubtful  the  fact  seems  to  need  better  localizing  than  it  has 

of  entire  reconciliation.     Jacob  might  truly  yet  met  with.     Again,  it  would  seem  from 

say,  not  in  mere  compliment,  that  the  siglit  this  vei'se  as  if  Jacob  also  were  directing  his 

of  Esau's  face  had  been  to  him  as  the  sight  course  toward  Seir ;  and  this  is  hardly  met 

of  God's  face,  discerning  as  he  did  in  liis  by  saying,  as  Keil,  that  he  probably  meant 

brother's  altered  mind  to  him  a  sign  of  the  to   visit   .Esau   at  Seir  at  some  subsequent 

divine   favour.             13,    14.]    The    excuse  time.             15.]    Esau  is  anxious  that  his 

was   genuine.       Tender   children,   such   as  brother  should  have  an  escort  from  among 

many  of  Jacob's  were,  would  be  injured,  and  his  followers.     We  can  hardly  fail  to  sec  in 

flocks  in  milk,  or  witii  young,  would  die  even  this  reply  a  lingering  of  mistrust,  if  nut  of 

with    u    day's    overdriving;    and    therefore  his  brother,  yet  of  his  wild  followers.     The 

could  not  keep  pace  with  Esau  and  his  men.  rendering  is  somewhat  uncertain.     It  may 

Observe  Jacob  addresses  Esau  always  as  "mi/  be  as  in  A.  V.,  which,  in  doubt,  I  have  rc- 

Ivrd,"  but  Esau  speaks  to  Jacob  as  "»jy  tained ;  or  it  may  be  as  Kalisch  gives  it: 

brother."     The  one  had  a  guilty  conscience,  "  tc/terefore  do  I  thus  Jlnd  grace  in  tlie  eyes 

which  forbade  him  to  touch  ou  the  brotherly  of  my  lord ; "     Other  renderings  are  giveu  : 


150 


GENESIS. 


XXXIIT. 


tJosh.xxiv.32. 
Job  xlii.  11, 
only. 


Esau  returned  that  day  on  his  way  unto  Seir.  ^7  And  Jacob 
journeyed  to  Succotli,  and  built  him  an  house,  and  made 
booths  for  his  cattle :  therefore  the  name  of  the  place  is 
called  Succoth  [Booths].  ^^  ^  And  Jacob  came  ^in  peace 
to  the  city  of  Shechem,  which  is  in  the  land  of  Canaan, 
when  he  came  from  Padan-aram  ;  and  pitched  his  tent 
before  the  city.  ^^  ^^d  he  bought  a  parcel  of  a  field, 
where  he  had  sj)read  his  tent,  at  the  hand  of  the  children 
of  Ilamor,  Shechem's  father,  for  an  hundred  *  pieces  of 
money.     '^^  And  he  erected  there  an  altar,  and  called  it 


the  LXX.  have,  "  ^Vhy  this?  it  is  enough, 
that  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  my 
lord;"  the  Vulgate,  '■^  There  is  no  need: 
this  is  all  I  ivant,  to  /ind,"  &:c.  On  any  of 
these   the   sense   is   the   same.  17.] 

Succoth  is  another  of  those  placesVhose  site 
is  as  yet  wholly  unascertained,  and  our  view 
as  to  even  its  pro.ximate  situation  must  de- 
pend on  the  whole  theory  which  we  adopt  as 
to  the  meeting-place  of  Jacob  and  Laban. 
Mr.  Grove  {Biblical  Diet.)  says,  "  From  the 
itinerary  of  Jacob's  return  it  seems  that 
Succoth  lay  between  Peniel,  near  the  ford  of 
the  torrent  Jabbok,  and  Shechem  (compare 
Gen.  xxxii.  30,  and  xxxiii.  18).  In  accord- 
ance with  this  is  the  mention  of  Succoth  in 
the  narrative  of  Gideon's  pursuit  of  Zcbah 
and  Zalmunna  (Judg.  viii.  5 — 17).  Ilis 
course  is  eastwai'd — the  reverse  of  Jacob's — 
and  he  comes  first  to  Succoth  and  thence  to 
Penuel,  the  latter  being  further  up  the 
mountain  than  the  former  (vcr.  8,  '  he  went 
up  thence').  ...  It  would  appear  from 
this  passage  that  it  lay  to  the  East  of  Jordan, 
which  is  corroboi'ated  by  the  fiict  that  it  was 
allotted  to  the  tribe  of  Gad  (Josh.  xiii.  27)." 
Jerome  also  sets  it  "  on  the  other  side  of  Jor- 
dan, in  the  district  of  Scythopolis,"  so  that  it 
cannot  by  any  probability  be  the  place  gener- 
ally called  by  this  name,  which  is  W.  of  Jor- 
dan and  considerably  N.  of  Jabbok  ( ]Vadi/ 
Zurka) ;  and  known  also  as  Scythopolis  and 
Bethshean  :  nor  again  with  Sakut,  which 
Burckhavdt  thought  he  had  identified  as 
Succoth,  also  on  the  "W.  side  of  the  Jordan. 
It  would  appear  that  Jacob  lived  for  some 
time  in  Succoth.  Knobel  calls  this  impro- 
bable, seeing  that  he  was  returning  to  his 
father's  house.  But  as  Keil  suggests,  he 
might  have  gone  thence  and  visited  his 
father  :  and  his  great  establishment  could 
not  well  have  found  place  with  Isaac.     Be- 


sides, it  appears  that  Dinah  was  grown  up 
when  he  came  to  Shechem,  and  she  must 
have  been  hardly  more  than  an  infant  when 
he  left  Laban.  13.]  There  is  consider- 

able uncertainty  about  the  construing  of  this 
verse.  It  seems  very  improbable  that  the 
word  Salem  should  be  a  proper  name,  as  the 
A.  v.,  after  the  LXX.  and  Vulgate,  has  ren- 
dered it.  No  such  place  is  known  in  the 
nciglibourhood  of  Sichem  (Xablus),  nor 
mentioned  elsewhere  in  the  Bible.  The 
meaning  is  far  more  probably  "  in  peace," 
and  the  reference  is  to  eh.  xxviii.  21,  where, 
in  his  prayer,  Jacob  speaks  of  coming  again 
to  his  father's  house  in  peace.  And  so  it  is 
taken  by  most  of  the  Hebraists.  On  Shechem, 
see  ch.  xii.  6,  8.  19.]  This  is  tlie  first 

possession  of  land,  as  land,  by  the  Patriarchs 
in  the  country  of  Promise.  In  ch.  xxxvii. 
12  we  find  that  Jacob,  then  dwelling  at 
Hebron,  had  his  flocks  at  Shechem.  The 
piece  of  money  here  mentioned  is  expressed 
by  an  unusual  word  (reft'.),  Kesitah.  Of 
this  word  two  interpretations  have  been 
given.  1.  A  latnh,  as  A.  V.  in  margin  here, 
following  the  LXX.,  Vidgate,  old  Syriac, 
Samaritan  Pentateuch,  and  the  Targum  of 
Onkelos.  But  Gesenius  remarks  that  there 
is  nothing  in  the  etymology  favouring  this, 
and  that  in  the  patriarchal  days  the  practice 
of  barter  had  given  place  to  that  of  pur- 
chasing by  weighed  silver  :  see  ch.  xxiii.  16  ; 
xlvii.  16.  2.  The  other  interpretation  makes 
the  Kesitah  a  piece  of  money,  or  a  precious 
metal,  of  some  kind :  of  what  value  it  is 
quite  uncertain.  This  is  favoured  by  Acts 
vii.  16,  which  must  refer  to  this  transaction. 
Some  have  supposed  the  medium  to  have 
been  a  coin  impressed  with  the  figure  of  a 
lamb:  but  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that 
coined  money  was  at  this  time  in  use.  The 
word  Kesitah  comes  from  a  root  signifying 


17— XXXI Y.  6. 


GENESIS. 


151 


El-elohc-Isracl  [God  (El),  tlie  God  of  Israel].  XXXIV. 
1  And  DInali  the  daughter  of  Leah,  which  she  bare  unto 
Jacob,  went  out  to  see  the  daughters  of  the  land.  ^  ^Ynd 
Shechem  the  son  of  Ilanior  the  Ilivite,  prince  of  the 
country,  saw  her  ;  and  he  took  her,  and  lay  -with  her,  and 
"  ravished  her.  ^  ^y^^j  j^j^  gQ^j  clave  unto  Dinah  the  " 
daughter  of  Jacob,  and  he  loved  the  damsel,  and  ''  spake 
unto  the  heart  of  the  damsel.  ^  And  Shechem  spake  unto 
his  father  Ilamor,  saying,  Get  me  this  damsel  to  wife. 
5  And  Jacob  heard  that  he  had  ^defiled  Dinah  his  daughter :  » 
now  his  sons  were  with  his  cattle  in  the  field :  and  Jacob 
held  his  peace  until  they  were  come.  ^  ^  And  Hamor  the 
father  of  Shechem  went  out  imto  Jacob  to  commune  with 


Ju.li.  xix. 
2-»  ;  XX.  5.    2 
Snm.  xiii.  22. 
Lam,  V.  11. 
ch.  1.  21. 
Uos.  ii.  14. 


i.  fi,  &c. ; 
i.  U  ; 

li.  n. 


fo  weigh,  or  balatice.  20.]  Tliis  whole 

transaction  was  an  act  of  faith  on  the  part  of 
Jacob.  The  purchase  of  land,  and  that  in 
tlie  very  place  wlicre  God  had  first  promised 
Abraham  that  the  land  should  be  his,  shewed 
his  conviction  in  the  certainty  of  that 
2)roniise  as  renewed  to  him  and  his  seed; 
the  erection  of  an  altar  on  this  his  own  land 
connected  the  act  of  purchase  with  the  God 
in  whose  promise  he  trusted :  and  the  nam- 
ing of  that  altar  bespoke  special  faith  in  the 
symbolic  meaning  of  the  name  which  God 
had  given  him,  and  its  endurance  in  his  pos- 
terity. In  the  buihling  of  an  altar  on  that 
spot  he  had  been  preceded  by  Abraham, 
ch.  xii.  7. 

XXXIV.  DinaJCs  seduction  by  Shechetyi ; 
the  vengeance  taken  on  him  and  his  by 
Simeon  and  Levi.  1.]  Dinah  was  ap- 

parently about  thirteen  when  tliis  happened, 
an  age  at  which  Oriental  maidens  are  ripe 
for  marriage.  She,  as  already  remarked  on 
ch.  xxxiii.  17,  was  but  a  child  when  Jacob 
left  Padan-aram  ;  but  there  had  been  a  con- 
siderable time  spent  in  Succoth.  Joseph, 
who  was  not  far  from  the  same  age  as  Dinah, 
was  seventeen  when  he  was  sent  to  his 
brethren,  ch.  xxxvii.  2.  There  is  no  abso- 
lute fixity  in  any  of  these  suggested  dates ; 
but  neither  is  there  any  assignment  of  dates 
which  would  render  this  history  improbable. 
The  idea  that  Dinah  must  have  been  a  mere 
child  at  this  time  has  nothing  in  the  narra- 
tive to  support  it,  and  the  implication  in  ch. 
xxxiii.  17  is  against  it. 

Observe,  this  is  Jacob's  first  great  trouble 
and  in  it  he  is  the  victim  of  deceit  on  the 


part  of  his  own  sons,  as  he  bad,  in  his  time 
deceived  his  own  father.  1.]  No  abso- 

lute blame  is  conveyed  in  this  mention  of 
Dinah's  act,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
it  is  mentioned  here  for  warning,  and  as 
having  led  to  the  dephn-able  consequences 
which  followed.  2.]   The  proceeding 

was  merely  the  carrying  out  of  that  which 
had  been  in  two  cases  with  Sarah,  and  in 
one  with  Rebekah,  stopped  before  its  sad 
issue.  According  to  the  usual  practices  of 
heathen  society,  it  had  nothing  noteworthy 
in  it.  But  it  is  already  strongly  condemned 
and  thought  matter  of  the  sternest  revenge 
in  the  patriarchal  family.  Nothing  can 
more  strikingly  shew  the  different  moral 
atmosphere  of  the  two  societies.  For  the 

Hivite,  see  ch.  x.  17.  As  regards  the  fact, 
it  should  be  remarked  that  no  gradual 
temptation  and  seduction  is  described,  but 
an  act  of  violence,  as  will  be  seen  by  refer- 
ring to  the  use  of  the  same  word  in  the  reff. 
This  ought  to  have  been  carefully  observed 
in  the  English  version,  especially  as  the 
verb  in  vv.  5,  13,  27,  is  another,  and  really 
signifies  to  deflc.  It  would  therefore  ap- 
pear that  Dinah  suff'ered,  rather  than  con- 
sented to,  the  penalty  of  her  vain  curiosity. 

3.]  Notwithstanding,  there  Avas  true 
aff'ection  between  the  two.  Shechem  spoke 
to  her  heart,  i.  e.  strove  to  gain  her  afl'ec- 
tion:  see  reff.  4.]    For  this  was  the 

parents'  matter:  seech,  xxi.  21;  xxiv.  1,  &c. 

5.]  The  verb  used  here  (see  above) 
is  not  the  same  as  that  in  ver.  2.  Its  usage 
will  be  seen  in  reff.  Jacob  held  his  peace, 
i.e.  took  no  step:  see  2  Sara.  xix.  11.     It 


152 


GENESIS. 


XXXIV. 


:  =  Detit. 
xxii.  21. 
Judg.xix.23. 


y  Josh.  vii.  15. 
Jutlg.  sx.  6, 


xviii.  25, 
only. 


b  =  2  Chron. 
xxii.  10  (Ps. 
cxxxvii.  6  ?). 


him.  7  ^n(J  the  sons  of  Jacob  came  out  of  the  field  when 
they  heard  it :  and  the  men  were  grieved,  and  they  were 
very  wroth,  because  he  had  '^  wrought  folly  y  in  Israel  in 
lying  with  Jacob's  daughter  ;  which  thing  ought  not  to 
be  done.  ^  And  Ilamor  communed  with  them,  saying, 
The  soul  of  my  son  Shechem  longeth  for  your  daughter : 
I  pray  you  give  her  him  to  wife.  ^  And  make  ye  mar- 
riages with  us,  and  give  your  daughters  unto  us,  and  take 
our  daughters  unto  you.  ^^  And  ye  shall  dwell  with  us  : 
and  the  land  shall  be  ^  before  you ;  dwell  and  trade  ye 
therein,  and  get  you  possessions  therein.  ^^  And  Shechem 
said  unto  her  father  and  unto  her  brethren,  Let  me  find 
grace  in  your  eyes,  and  what  ye  shall  say  unto  me  I  will 
give.  12  ^gk  me  never  so  much  '^  dowry  and  gift,  and  I 
will  give  according  as  ye  shall  say  unto  me :  but  give  me 
the  damsel  to  wife.  ^^  \^y\^  the  sons  of  Jacob  answered  She- 
chem and  Ilamor  his  father  deceitful!}',  and  ^  laid  a  plot, 
because  he  had  defiled  Dinah  their  sister :  ^'^  and  they 
said  unto  them.  We  cannot  do  this  thing,  to  give  our  sis- 
ter to  one  that  is  uncircumcised  ;  for  that  ivere  a  reproach 
unto  us  :  ^^  but  in  this  will  we  consent  unto  you :  If  ye 
will  be  as  we  be,  that  every  male  of  you  be  circumcised  ; 
1^  then  will  we  give  our  daughters  unto  you,  and  we  will 
take  your  daughters  to  us,  and  we  will  dwell  with  you, 
and  we  will  become  one  people.  ^^  But  if  ye  will  not 
hearken  unto  us,  to  be  circumcised ;  then  will  we  take  our 


would  appear,  from  Jacob's  speech  in  ver.  30, 
that  he  was  inclined  to  compromise  the 
matter.  7.]  The  expression  wrought 

folly  in  Israel  manifestly  bclnngs  to  a  later 
time  (see  reff.),  and  betrays  the  hand  of  a 
subsequent  editor.  It  may  have  been  used 
by  Moses,  as  it  was  by  Joshua  (ref.) ;  but 
could  hardly  have  been  found  in  any  docu- 
ment dating  previously  to  the  constitution 
of  a  community  known  by  the  name  Israel. 
The  last  clause  of  the  verse  is  a  weighty 
testimony,  on  the  part  of  the  sacred  writci', 
against  the  enormity  of  the  crime.  The 
words  are  still  simpler  than  would  appear: 
the  notion  of  ought  not  is  only  implied  in 
them :  •which  is  not  done,  is  not  the  cus- 
tom, is  the  literal  rendering  :  see  a  similar 
construction  in  ch.  xx.  9;  xxix.  26. 
8-  your  daughter]  Spoken  to  the  father  and 


the  brothers,  as  being  her  natural  guardians: 
see  ver.  17.  10.  the  land  shall  be  he- 

fore  you]  Free  to  your  choice :  see  reff. 
12.]  The  dowry  (reff.)  Avas  the  present 
which  the  bridegroom  gave  to  the  parents  or 
relatives  of  the  bride.  The  case  provided 
for  iu  ref.  Exod.  is  in  all  features  but  one 
the  same  as  this.  The  gift  was  the  present 
to  the  bride.  The  two  are  distinguished  in 
the  narrative,  ch.  xxiv.  .53.  13.]  The 

ordinary  interpretation,  "  and  said,"  or 
'■^  and  spoke,"  is  rejected  by  the  Hebraists, 
— Gesenius,  Knobel,  Keil,  all  adopting  the 
rarer  sense  of  the  Hebrew  verb  f^arar,  found 
without  doubt  in  reff.  2  Chron.  and  perhaps 
in  the  Psalms  also.  Onkelos  gives  "  and 
spoke  suhtUhj  ;  "  the  Vulgate,  "  being  angry." 

17.]  On   our  daughter,  see  ver.   8. 

19.]  Shechem  had  no  hesitation  iu 


7—27.  GENESIS.  153 

daugliter,  and  wc  will  bo  gone.  ^^  And  their  words 
pleased  Ilamor,  and  Shecbcni  Ilamor's  son.  ^^  And  the 
young  man  deferred  not  to  do  the  thing,  because  he  had 
delight  in  Jacob's  daughter :  and  he  teas  more  honoured 
than  all  the  house  of  his  father.  2^  ^  And  Ilamor  and 
Shechem  his  son  came  unto  the  gate  of  their  city,  and 
communed  with  the  men  of  their  city,  saying,  21  These 
men  are  peaceable  with  us;  therefore  let  them  dwell  in 
the  land,  and  trade  therein ;  for  the  land,  behold,  it  is 
lai'ge  on  all  sides  before  them  ;  let  us  take  their  daughters 
to  us  for  wives,  and  let  us  give  them  our  daughters.  22 
Only  herein  will  the  men  consent  unto  us  for  to  dwell 
with  us,  to  be  one  peo^jle,  if  every  male  among  us  be  cir- 
cumcised, as  they  are  circumcised.  23  s/kiH  i^ot  their  cat- 
tle and  their  substance  and  every  beast  of  their's  be  our's? 
only  let  us  consent  unto  them,  and  they  will  dwell  with 
us.  2i  And  unto  Ilamor  and  unto  Shechem  his  son 
hearkened  all  that  went  out  of  the  gate  of  his  city ;  and 
every  male  was  circumcised,  all  that  went  out  of  the  gate 
of  his  city.  25  ^  And  it  came  to  pass  on  the  third  day, 
when  they  were  sore,  that  two  of  the  sons  of  Jacob,  Simeon 
and  Levi,  Dinah's  brethren,  took  each  man  his  sword, 
and  came  upon  the  city  boldly,  and  slew  all  the  males. 
26  And  they  slew  Hamor  and  Shechem  his  son  with  the 
'edffe  of  the    sword,  and  took  Dinah  out  of  Shechem's  cExod.xvii.is. 

O  '  ^um.xxl.  24. 

house,  and  went  out.     27  The  sons  of  Jacob  came  upon     ""h.vY."i''' 


complying  :  tlic  words  do  not  imply  that  he  father  :    see    ch.    xxxvii.    21,    ff. ;  xlii.    22. 

forthwith  did  that  which  was  proposed,  but  Simeon   and   Levi  were   the    two   next    of 

are   anticipating.       The  latter   clause   does  Dinah's  brothers.  Quotations  are  given  from 

not  mean  that  his  disposition  was  more  hon-  travellers  in  tlie  East,  illustrating  the  seve- 

ourahle,  but  that  he  stood  in  the  highest  rity  with  which  brotliers  avenge  insult  to  a 

place  of  public  honour  and  esteem,  and  his  sister's  honour.     Burckhaidt  gives  a  case  in 

consent  would  therefore  ensure  that  of  all.  wliich  three  brothers  endeavoured  to  kill  their 

20.]  On  the  gate  of  their  city,  on  the  sister's  betrothed,  merely  on  account  of  some 

place  of  assembly  and  council,  see  ch.  xxiii.  innocent  caress.  26.]   The    expression 

4—10.  21.]  Literally,  it  is  large  of  with  the  edge  (lit.  the  face,  mouth)  of  the 

hands  to  their  faces,  i.  e.   it  is   large   to  sword   (retf.)   denotes  relentless  execution. 

riglit  and  left  before  them.  23.]  By  For  anything  tliat  we  gather  from  the  nar- 

cattle,  as  in  ch.  iv.  20,  is  meant  pasturing  rative  itself,  Dinali  was  detained  against  her 

and  grazing  flocks  and  herds,  and  by  every  will.     Nothing  has  been  said  to  imply  that 

beast  is  meant  beasts  of  burden,  as  camels  she    returned    the    affection    of    Sliechem. 
and    asses    (Num.    xxxii.    26).             25.]  27.]  This   verse   is   not   coupled   to 

Reuben  seems  to  have  taken  no  part,  being,  those  which  went  before,  and  hence  some 

as   firstborn,   especially  responsible  to    his  have  regarded  vv.  27 — 29  as  an  insertion. 


154 


ge:n'esis. 


XXXIV. 


dExod.  T.  21. 


+  E1. 


the  slain,  and  spoiled  the  city,  because  ttey  had  defiled 
their  sister.  28  They  took  their  sheep,  and  their  oxen, 
and  their  asses,  and  that  which  icas  in  the  city,  and  that 
which  nrts  in  the  field,  2!)  and  all  their  wealth,  and  all 
their  little  ones,  and  their  wives  took  they  captive,  and 
spoiled  even  all  that  was  in  the  house.  30  ^jj(j  Jacob 
said  to  Simeon  and  Levi,  Ye  have  troubled  me  to  '^make 
me  to  stink  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  land,  among  the 
Canaanites  and  the  Perizzites  :  and  I  being  few  in  number, 
they  shall  gather  themselves  together  against  me,  and  slay 
me ;  and  I  shall  be  destroyed,  I  and  my  house.  ^^  And 
they  said,  Should  he  deal  with  our  sister  as  with  an  har- 
lot ?  XXXV.  1  And  God  said  unto  Jacob,  Arise,  go  up 
to  Beth-el,  and  dwell  there :  and  make  there  an  altar 
unto  t  God,  that  appeared  unto  thee  when  thou  fleddest 


Koil  oTijects  to  this  that  the  insertnr  would 
have  taken  care  to  put  in  the  copula  also, 
and  regards  the  abruptness  as  characteristic  of 
the  transaction,  which  is  surely  improbable. 
The  sons  of  Jacoh  are  apparently  the 
other  sons  of  Jacob,  as  the  A^ulgate  renders. 
It  is  no  objection  to  this  that  no  blame  is 
laid  on  them  in  their  father's  dying  words  in 
ch.  xlix.  Simeon  and  Levi  were  the  chief 
perpetrators  of  the  crime.  30.]  On  the 

Canaanites  and  Perizzites,  see  ch.  xii.  6  ; 
xiii.  7.  few  in  number  is  literally  people 

(men)  of  number,  i.  e.  a  body  of  persons 
easily  counted.  Tlie  fear  expressed  by  Jacob 
was  a  very  natural  one,  and  might  have 
come  to  pass,  but  for  the  reason  given  in 
ch.  XXXV.  5.  That  this  was  not  the  only 
cause  of  Jacob's  horror  at  the  conduct  of 
his  sons  is  shewn  by  his  dying  speech,  ch. 
xlix.  5,  where  their  moral  delinquency  is 
fully  asserted.  31.]    This    had    been 

done,  in  that  she  had  first  fallen  victim  to 
Shechem's  lust,  and  then  had  been  kept  in 
his  house.  The  exasperated  brothers  keep 
out  of  view  altogether,  like  angry  men,  any 
circumstances  on  the  other  side.  The  whole 
history  points  to  what  was  so  often  Israel's 
sin  in  after  time — the  double  fault  of  min- 
gling with  the  idolatrous  people  around  them, 
and  using  immoral  means  to  vindicate  their 
national  pre-eminence.  Compare  e.  g.  the 
whole  of  Judges  iv.,  v. 

XXXV.      1 — 15.    Jacob  hij  divine  com- 
mand goes  to  Bethel.     God  renews  to  him 


the  promise  and  the  change  of  7iame  :  and 
he  reneios  the  name  Bethel.  It  was  now 
many  years  (not  less  than  30)  since  Jacob 
had  made  the  vow  to  Jehovah  in  Bethel. 
This  vow  he  had  not  as  yet  performed.  And 
now  the  divine  command  enjoins  on  him  im- 
mediately to  do  so.  Kalisch  thinks,  and  with 
probability,  that  one  reason  which  had 
hitherto  hindered  him  may  have  been,  that 
whereas  the  performance  of  the  vow  would 
imply  an  entire  devotion  of  him  and  his  to  Je- 
hovah (see  its  terms,  ch.  xxviii.  20 — 22), 
the  state  of  his  household  with  regard  to  the 
retention  of  strange  gods  would  by  no 
means  permit  this.  Certainly  this  view  falls 
in  well  with  our  vv.  2 — 4,  in  which  he  in- 
augurates his  journey  to  Bethel  by  clearing 
his  household  of  objects  of  idolatrous  wor- 
ship. Several  things  in  this  narrative  ap- 
pear like  repetitions  of  what  has  been  related 
before.  The  re-naming  of  Jacob,  ver.  10;  the 
naming  of  Bethel,  ver.  15;  the  setting  up  of 
a  monument,  ver.  14  ;  coupled  with  the  fact 
that  in  all  this  history  the  divine  name  is 
Elohim,  whereas  in  all  that  other  about  Bethel 
(ch.  xxviii.  10 — 22),  it  is  Jehovah  :  these 
considerations  make  it  at  least  probable  that 
the  sources  of  our  narrative  are  not  one,  but 
several.  1.]  God  (Jehovah)  had  ap- 
peared to  him,  ch.  xxviii.  13.  Knobel  says 
this  statement  is  not  exact,  as  there  was  no 
actual  appearance  in  ch.  xxviii.  But  surely 
the  words  "  behold  Jehovah  stood  above  it  " 
cannot  well  be  otherwise  understood. 


JS_XXXV.  8. 


GENESIS. 


]55 


F.ick.  XX.  7, 

IK,  XXXvii.il. 

fKxu<l.xxix.4; 

xl.    12.     Lev. 

viii.  G. 
crxniLxix.  in, 

-.     Zich.  ill. 
3-0. 


Mill  the  fiico  of  Esau  thy  brother.  2  Tlicn  Jacob  said 
iiiito  his  houschokl,  and  to  all  that  ircre  with  him,  '^Tut  'llf-^ 
away  the  strange  gods  that  arc  among  you,  and  be  ^ clean, 
and  ^change  your  garments :  ^  and  let  us  arise,  and  go 
up  to  Bcth-el ;  and  I  will  make  there  an  altar  unto  God, 
who  answered  me  in  the  day  of  my  distress,  and  was  with 
me  in  the  way  which  I  went.  ^  xVnd  they  gave  unto 
Jacob  all  the  strange  gods  which  nrre  in  their  hand,  and 
a/l  their  '^earrings  Avhich  wcreiw  their  cars;  and  Jacob  hid  *■  IT^.  u'jut!' 
them  under  the  oak  which  was  by  Shechem.  ^  And  they 
journeyed:  and  the  'terror  of  God  was  upon  the  cities  '''xxxn/jJ-al.' 
that  tcorc  round  about  them,  and  they  did  not  pursue  after 
the  sons  of  Jacob.  ^  ^  So  Jacob  came  to  Luz,  which  is 
in  the  land  of  Canaan,  that  is,  Beth-el,  he  and  all  the 
people  that  icere  with  him.  7  And  he  built  there  an  altar, 
and  called  the  place  El-beth-cl  [God  of  Bethel]  :  because 
there  God  was  revealed  unto  him,  when  he  fled  from  the 
face  of  his  brother.  ^  But  Deborah  Rebekah's  nurse  died, 
and  she  was  buried  beneath  Beth-el  under  an  oak :  and 


2—4.]  TliG  strange  gods  have  been  partly 
alreiidy  accounted  for  by  Eachel  having 
stolen  her  father's  Tcrapliim  (ch.  xxxi.  19, 
34)  ;  and  it  seems  probable  from  ch.  xxxi. 
53,  compared  with  Joshua  xxiv.  2,  that 
Jacob's  camp  followers  and  servants  were 
partly  made  up  of  idolaters.  Such  a  mixture 
was  prohibited  among  the  worshippers  of 
Jehovah  (see  rcff.),  and  would  defile  His 
sanctuary  (Ezek.v.  11;  xxii.  3,  f. ;  xxxvi.  18; 
conipaie    2   Kings  xxi.    4).  change 

your  garments]  See  reff.  IThe  garments 
bore  a  considerable  part  afterwards  in  the 
provisions  concerning  Levitical  cleanness  and 
rmclcanness  :  see  Levit.  xiii.  to  xv. 
8.]  God  had  answered  Jacob  throughout 
the  days  of  his  distress,  and  moi'e  especially 
in  his  deliverances  from  Laban  and  from 
Esau.  4.]  "  Earrings  were  frequently 

used  as  amulets,  believed  to  arrest  evil,  or  to 
act  as  a  charm ;  they  were  often  covered 
•with  allegorical  ligures  or  mysterious  sent- 
ences, according  to  the  deities  to  which  they 
were  consecrated ;  they  formed  therefore 
one  of  the  ordinary  iu.struments  of  super- 
stitious usages."  Abridged  from  Kalisch. 
See  also  rcff.  hid  them]  i.  e.  buried 
them.  In  the  repetition  of  this  same  act  of 
puritication  by   Joshua    (Josh.    xxiv.    26) 


mention  is  again  made  of  an  oalc  (or  tere- 
binth) at  Shechem.  The  Hebraists  tell  us 
that  we  must  not  understand  by  this  terra 
any  particular  tree,  but  one  tree  among 
many.  5.]  the  terror  of  God,  which 

held  back  the  cities  from  taking  vengeance 
on  Jacob's  sons  for  the  massacre  at  Shechem, 
was  evidently  a  supernatural  panic  instilled 
by  God  into  their  minds,  not  the  fear  of 
God,  as  commonly  understood.  The  word 
itself  occurs  only  here ;  but  its  cognates  are 
used  in  the  same  sense  in  reff. ;  and  we  have 
the  fear  of  Jehovah  similarly  used  in  Exod. 
xxiii.  27  ;  2  Chrou.  xiv.  14.  6.]  On  Luz 

and  Bethel,  see  on  ch.  xxviii.  7.]  was 

revealed  is  not  tlic  same  word  as  appeared 
in  ver.  1,  and  should  have  been  kept  distinct 
in  the  A.  Y.  The  verb  is  here  plural,  and 
perhaps  not  without  reason,  as  it  was  a 
vision  of  God  accompanied  by  the  holy 
angels.  8.]  The  occasion  of  this  being 

mentioned  is  not  clear,  nor  how  Deborah, 
who  had  accompanietl  Rebekah  to  Canaan, 
ch.  xxiv.  59,  came  in  tlie  train  of  Jacob. 
Some  have  supposed  that  slic  may  have  been 
sent  from  his  mother  according  to  her  pro- 
mise, ch.  xxvii.  45.  Jlay  it  not  have  well 
been  that  on  Picbekah's  deatli,  which  pro- 
bably had  happened  before    this,  she  may 


156 


GENESIS. 


XXXV. 


j  El  Shaddai  ; 
see  cb.  xvii.l 


the  name  of  it  was  called  AUon-bachutli  [Oak  of  weeping]. 
^  •[[  And  God  appeared  unto  Jacob  again,  Avlien  lie  came 
out  of  Padan-aram,  and  blessed  him.  ^^  And  God  said 
unto  bim,  Thy  name  is  Jacob  :  thy  name  shall  not  be 
called  any  more  Jacob,  but  Israel  shall  be  thy  name  :  and 
he  called  his  name  Israel.  ^^  And  God  said  unto  him,  I 
am  J  God  Almighty  :  be  fruitful  and  multiply ;  a  nation 
and  a  company  of  nations  shall  be  of  thee,  and  kings  shall 
come  out  of  thy  loins ;  ^^  and  the  land  which  I  gave 
Abraham  and  Isaac,  to  thee  I  will  give  it,  and  to  thy 
seed  after  thee  will  I  give  the  land.  ^^  ^^ud  Qod  went 
up  from  him  in  the  place  where  he  talked  with  him.  i* 
And  Jacob  set  up  a  pillar  in  the  place  where  he  talked 
with  him,  a  pillar  of  stone :  and  he  poured  a  drink  offer- 
ing thereon,  and  he  poured  oil  thereon.     ^'^  And  Jacob 


have  been  transferred  to  the  favourite  son  of 
her  foster-child  ?  She  was  sure  to  have  been 
much  about  him  in  his  infancy.  We  have 
before  remarked  that  Jacob  must  be  sup- 
posed to  have  visited  Isaac  at  Hebron  before 
this.  It  is  noticeable,  that  the  great  pro- 
phetess Deborah  dwelt  under  a  palm-tree 
not  far  from  this  neighbourhood  (Judg.  iv. 
5),  between  Bethel  and  Eamah.  the 

name  of  it  was  called,  literally  [people], 
called  its  name.  This  word,  hachuth  for 
mourning,  occurs  only  here,  and  a  similar 
word,  bechith,  with  the  same  meaning,  only 
in  ch.  1.  4,  in  a  portion  attributed  by  Knobel 
to  the  same  writer  as  this.  9 — 15.]  It 

is  hardly  possible  to  imagine  this  a  continu- 
ous portion  of  the  same  narrative  with  what 
■we  have  just  been  reading.  Doubtless  in- 
genious reasons  may  be  discovered  why  it 
should  be  so  accounted,  but  they  are  very 
far-fetched,  and  only  credible  by  those  who 
earnestly  wish  to  believe  them.  The  furthest 
that  the  unbiassed  reader  can  go  in  their 
direction  is  to  conclude  that  this  appearance 
is  one  not  related  before  ;  that  it  is  taken 
from  some  document  independent  of  that 
which  contained  the  change  of  name  in  ch. 
xxxii. ;  and  that  the  change,  which  as  matter 
of  accurate  detail  took  place  on  that  occasion, 
is  here  generally  related.  It  is  of  course 
possible  that  this  appearance  may  have  been 
taken  as  an  opportunity  for  solemnly  ratify- 
ing the  change  of  name  then  made  ;  but  if 
we  hold  this,  we  must  ba  prepared  for  the 


improbability  of  ten  years  having  elapsed, 
during  which  the  name  Israel  must  have 
been  in  use,  between  the  first  change  and 
this  ratification.  And  then  there  is  no- 
thing in  ver.  15  to  imply  that  this  was  a 
renewal  of  the  name  Jiethel :  the  whole 
narrative,  vv.  9 — 15,  stands  by  itself  and 
could  not  be  taken,  except  for  considera- 
tions foreign  to  itself,  as  other  than  a 
first  account  of  the  things  narrated.  This^ 
is  one  of  the  places  which  seem  to  me  to 
stamp  almost  with  certainty  the  composition 
of  Genesis  out  of  independent  documents. 
9.J  The  words  when  he  came  out  of 
Padan-aram  can  hardly  be  fitted  into  the 
course  of  this  chapter's  history,  but  are  a 
generalizing  introduction  to  the  incident 
about  to  be  related.  Jacob  had  now  been 
ten  years  or  mure  in  Canaan,  dwelling  at 
Succotb,  dwelLng   at   Shechem.  10.] 

On  the  signification  of  the  new  name,  see 
ch.  xxxii.  28.  11.]  The  blessing  is  ex- 

pressed in  terms  strongly  reminding  us  of 
ch.  xvii.  1 — 8,  where  see  notes.  It  is  a 
solemn  renewal  of  the  patriarchal  promises 
to  Jacob  :  and  that  in  an  appearance  of  God 
to  him  face  to  face,  as  He  had  appeared  to 
Abraham  :  compare  ch.  xvii.  22.  The  lan- 
guage is  singularly  and  studiedly  corre- 
spondent. 14.]  Before  (ch.  xxviii.  8) 
he  had  poured  oil  on  the  pillar,  now  he 
adds  a  drink-off"ering,  viz.  a  libation  of  wine. 
15.]  Kalisch  endeavours  to  treat  this 
as   if  it  were   a  different  place  from   that 


!i— 25. 


GENESIS. 


157 


'I  lied  tlie  name  of  llic  place  where  God  spake  ■with  him, 
r>(>lh-cl.  ^^  ^  And  they  journc^'cd  from  Beth-cl ;  and 
tiiere  was  ^ some  distance  to  come  to  Ephrath  :  and  Rachel 
(  availed,  and  she  had  hard  laboiir.  ^7  And  it  came  to 
p  iss,  when  she  was  in  hard  labour,  that  the  midwife  said 
unto  her,  Fear  not;  thou  shalt  have  this  son  also.  ^^ 
And  it  came  to  pass,  as  her  soul  was  in  departing,  (for 
she  died)  that  she  called  his  name  Bcn-oni  [Son  of  my 
grief]  :  but  his  father  called  him  Benjamin  [Son  of  hap- 
piness]. 19  And  Rachel  died,  and  was  buried  in  the  way 
to  Ephrath,  which  is  Bethlehem.  20  And  Jacob  set  a 
j^illar  upon  her  grave  :  that  is  the  pillar  of  Rachel's  grave 
unto  this  day.  -^  ^  And  Israel  journeyed,  and  spread  his 
tent  beyond  the  tower  of  Edar.  22  ^  And  it  came  to 
pass,  when  Israel  dwelt  in  that  land,  that  Reuben  went 
and  lay  with  Bilhah  his  father's  concubine  :  and  Israel 
heard  iL  Now  the  sons  of  Jacob  were  twelve :  ^3  {\iq 
sons  of  Leah ;  Reuben,  Jacob's  firstborn,  and  Simeon, 
and  Levi,  and  Judah,  and  Issachar,  and  Zcbulun :  ^i  the 
sons  of  Rachel ;  Joseph,  and  Benjamin :  ^j  and  the  sons 


■which  he  had  namod  Bethel  in  ch.  xxviii. 
But  there  is  nothing  to  support  such  an 
idea.  16 — 20.]    Birth  of  Benjamin. 

Bachel's     death     and    burial.  16.] 

some  distance,  literall)',  a  distance  of 
land.  There  is  something  pathetic  about 
the  precise  designation  of  the  spot,  so  sad  in 
memory  to  the  patriarch.  It  would  seem  as 
if  the  notice  had  come  from  him  before 
■whose  eyes  that  tract  of  land,  with  the  ele- 
vated Bethlehem  at  the  end  of  it,  had 
remained  unforgotten  in  after  life  :  compare 
ch.  xlviii.  7,  ■where  tlie  expression  occurs  as 
here,  and  in  the  mouth  of  Jacob.  The 
LXX.  has  a  curious  addition  here  :  it  runs, 
"  And  Jacob  left  Bethel,  and  pitched  his  tent 
opposite  the  tower  of  Gadcr  (sec  below,  ver. 
21)  :  and  it  came  to  pass,  when  he  drew  near 
to  Chahratha,  to  come  to  Ephratha,  Rachel," 
&c.  The  Vulgate  has  also  a  curious  render- 
ing, "  But  going  out  thence  he  came  in  the 
spring  time  to  the  country  which  leads  to 
Ephrata."  The  tomb  of  Rachel  is  one  of 
those  sites  in  Palestine  which  can  hardly 
be  questioned.  The  traditional  spot  is  about 
half  an  hour  north  of  Bethlehem.  The  pre- 
sent building  is  merely  "  an  ordinary  Moslem 


tomb  of  a  holy  person,  a  small  square  build- 
ing of  stone  witli  a  dome,  and  witliin  it  a 
tomb  in  the  ordinary  Mohammedan  form, 
the  whole  plastered  over  with  mortar." 
Biblical  Diet.  17.]  It  was  this  very  con- 

fidence, that  she  should  have  another  son, 
that  she  expressed  at  Joseph's  birth,  ch. 
XXX.  24.  On  the  well-known  grave  of 
Rachel,  see  1  Sam.  x.  2.  Tlic  unto  this 
day  gives  no  certain  date,  but  evidently  be- 
longs to  a  period  later  than  Moses  ;  to  a 
time  when  the  sites  of  the  Land  of  Promise 
were  known  to  the  Jews  by  dwelling  in  it. 

21,    22.]     Ecuhen's   deed  of  shame. 

21.]  Migdal-eder,  or  the  tower  of 
Edar  (flocks),  meaning  probably  a  watch- 
tower  for  the  guarding  of  the  ilocks  (see  2 
Kings  xviii.  8;  2  Chron.  xxvi.  10;  xxvii. 
4),  is  said  by  Jerome  to  be  1000  paces  from 
Bethlehem.  It  is  mentioned  only  here,  and 
is  at  present  iniknown.  22.]  Jacob's 

sin  is  visited  on  him  by  degrees,  stroke  after 
stroke.  The  notice,  Israel  heard  it,  points 
to  this,  and  serves,  besides,  to  connect  this 
account  with  the  mention  of  this  deed  in  the 
last  speech  of  Jacob,  ch.  xlix.  4.  The  LXX. 
adds  at  the  end  of  the  verse,  "  .'Vnd  it  ap- 


158 


GENESIS. 


XXXV. 


of  Billiali,  RadLel's  handmaid ;  Dan,  and  Naplitali :  26 
and  the  sons  of  Zilpah,  Leah's  handmaid ;  Gad,  and 
Asher :  these  are  the  sons  of  Jacob,  which  were  born  to 
him  in  Pudan-aram.  27  ^  And  Jacob  came  unto  Isaac 
his  father  unto  Mamre,  unto  the  city  of  Arbah,  which  is 
Hebron,  where  Abraham  and  Isaac  sojourned.  28  ^\^^(i 
the  days  of  Isaac  were  an  hundred  and  fourscore  years. 
29  And  Isaac  gave  up  the  ghost,  and  died,  and  was 
gathered  unto  his  people,  being  old  and  full  of  days  :  and 
his  sons  Esau  and  Jacob  buried  him.  XXXVI.  ^  Now 
these  are  the  generations  of  Esau,  who  is  Edom,  2  Esau 
took  his  wives  of  the  daughters  of  Canaan ;  Adah  the 
daughter  of  Elon  the  Ilittite,  and  Aholibamah  the  daugh- 
ter of  Anah  the  daughter  of  Zibeon  the  Hivite ;    ^  and 


peared  wicked  in  his  sight."  The  use  of 
Israel  for  Jacob  in  this  small  portion  is  re- 
markable. See  ch.  xxxvii.  3  ;  xlv.  28  ;  xlvi. 
30 ;  1.  2.  It  is  found  in  all  these  places  iu 
connexion  with  solemnity  or  pathos. 
26 — 29.]  Jacob's  return  home,  and  Israel's 
death.  The  notice  in  ver.  26  is  not  strictly- 
correct,  for  Benjamin  was  born  in  Canaan 
after  his  return.  Such  a  matter  is  of  no 
consequence  where  it  occurs,  but  should 
warn  us  not  to  press  similar  notices,  the  in- 
correctness of  which  is  not  so  obvious. 
27.]  See  ch.  xiii.  18;  xxiii.  2.  29.]  In 

ch.  xlix.  31  the  place  of  Isaac's  burial  is  said, 
as  might  have  been  expected,  to  have  been 
the  cave  of  MachpeLih,  which  Abraliam  pur- 
chased for  a  burying-place  (ch.  xxiii.  19,  f.). 
The  history  of  Isaac  is  brought  to  an  end 
here,  because  the  object  of  the  sacred  narra- 
tive is  henceforth  Jacob  and  his  fortunes, 
and  he  is  now  established  in  his  father's 
house  at  Hebron.  Isaac  really  survived 
Jacob's  return  to  Hebron  12  years.  This 
may  be  seen  as  follows  :  Isaac  was  60  when 
Jacob  was  born  (ch.  xxv.  26),  consequently 
Jacob  Avas  120  at  his  father's  death.  But  he 
was  130  at  his  migration  to  Egypt  (ch. 
xlvii.  9),  which  therefore  was  10  years  after. 
At  that  time  Joseph  was  between  39  and 
40  (compare  ch.  xli.  46,  47,  and  ch.  xlv.  6). 
But,  seeing  he  was  17  when  he  was  sold  into 
Egypt  (ch.  xxxvii.  2) ,  and  23  years  elapsed 
between  that  and  Jacob's  migration,  Isaac 
must  have  survived  Joseph's  selling  into 
Egypt  between  12  and  13  years.  Hence 
it   also  follows   that   Joseph  was   sold  im- 


mediately on   Jacob's   coning   to  Hebron. 

XXXVI.  Esau  and  the  Edomites.  As  iu 
ch.  xxv.  the  history  gives  the  genealogies  of 
Abraham's  descendants  by  other  wives  in 
order  to  dispose  of  them,  and  to  treat  the 
line  of  Isaac,  so  here  it  gives  the  genealogies 
of  the  descendants  of  Esau  in  order  to  have 
done  with  them  and  to  advance  in  the  line 
of  Jacob.  In  both  cases  the  races  enumer- 
ated are  those  which  iu  subsequent  limes  had 
to  do  with  Israel. 

1 — 8.]   Esau's  wives  and  sons.     His  re- 
moval to  Mount  Seir,  and  its  cause. 
1.]  Esau  was  called  Edom,  as  related  ch. 
xxv.  30.     The  same  notice  is  appended  iu 
vv.  8,  19,  43.  2,  3.]  There  is  consider- 

able difficulty  about  the  names  of  Esau's 
wives.  Comparing  this  account  with  the 
previous  one  in  ch.  xxtI.  34,  xxviii.  9,  we 
find  that  two  of  the  three  names  are  entirely 
different.     There  it  is  said  that  Esau  took 

1.  Judith,  the  daughter  of  Beeri  the  Ilittite ; 

2.  Bashemath,  the  d.  of  Elon  the  Hittite  ;  3. 
Mahalath,  the  d.  of  Ishmael,  sister  of  xs'^e- 
baioth  ;  whereas  here  the  d.  of  Elon  the 
Hittite  appears  as  Adah,  and  Ishmael's  d., 
the  sister  of  Nebajoth,  as  Bashemath.  It  is 
hai'dly  possible,  using  one's  common  sense, 
not  to  recognize  some  confusion  here.  Both 
accounts  have  Bashemath  as  one  of  Esau's 
wives.  According  to  ch.  xxv.  she  is  d.  of 
Elon  the  Ilittite  ;  according  to  this  account, 
she  is  d.  of  Ishmael.  This  is  one  element  of 
confusion.  One  woman  could  not  answer 
both  these  descriptions,  and  it  is  drawing  a 
little  too  largely  on  our  credulity  to  ask  us 


2G— XXXVL 


GENESIS. 


159 


Eashematli  Islimaers  daughter,  sister  of  Nebajoth.  *  And 
Adah  bare  to  Esau  Eliphaz ;  and  BasLeniath  bare  Reuel ; 
'^  and  Abolibauiah  bare  Jeush,  and  Jaalain,  and  Korah  : 
these  are  the  sons  of  Esau,  which  were  born  unto  him  in 
the  land  of  Canaan.  ^  And  Esau  took  his  wives,  and  his 
sons,  and  his  daughters,  and  all  the  persons  of  his  house, 
and  his  cattle,  and  all  his  beasts,  and  all  his  substance, 
A\  hich  he  had  got  in  the  land  of  Canaan ;  and  went  into 
the  country  from  the  face  of  his  brother  Jacob.  7  Yov 
their  riches  were  more  than  that  they  might  dwell  toge- 
ther ;  and  the  land  wherein  they  were  strangers  could  not 


to  accept  two  wives  of  Esau  both  called 
Lasbeniath.  Loth  accounts  cannot  be  ac- 
curate. Then  the  third  wife,  who  in  ch. 
XXV.  is  Judith,  the  d.  of  Bee7-itl\e  Hittite,  is 
lieic  AhoUbamah,  the  d.  of  Anah  tlie  d.  of 
Ziheon  the  Hicite.  And,  as  if  to  make  con- 
fusion worse  confounded,  it  appears  from 
vv.  20,  25  that  AhoUbamah  was  the  d.  of 
A  nail  tlie  son  of  Zibcon,  the  son  of  Seir  the 
Ilorite.  And  even  there  we  have  some  ap- 
parent confusion  between  two  Anahs,  one 
the  son,  and  the  other  the  grandson,  of 
Seir :  for  although  it  would  at  first  sight 
seem  that  the  Anah  of  ver.  2o  is  the  son  of 
Seir,  taken  in  his  order  between  Zibeon  and 
Dishon,  yet  from  tlie  express  description  of 
Anali  in  ver.  24  it  would  seem  as  if  it  were 
he  tliat  is  taken  up  in  ver.  25,  which  view  is 
confirmed  by  AhoUbamah  being  mentioned 
as  his  daughter,  who,  as  we  were  before  told, 
was  [grand]  daughter  of  Zibeon.  Another 
simihir  element  of  confusion  is  found  again 
in  ver.  26,  where  Dishon,  anoth.er  of  tlic  sons 
of  Seir,  in  his  order,  is  again  synonymous 
with  a  Dishon  son  of  Anah  in  ver.  25.  The 
various  shifts  resorted  to  by  those  comment- 
ators who  are  determined  to  reconcile  at  all 
hazards  are  more  amusing  than  creditable, 
and  are  really  not  worth  recounting.  The 
only  honest  conclusion  must  be  with  Kalisch, 
"  We  are  obliged  to  confess  that  the  Hebrew, 
text,  though  containing  several  inipurtant 
coincidences,  evidently  embodies  two  ac- 
counts, irreconcileably  difl'erent."  And  even 
thus  we  shall  still  require  the  hypothesis  that 
sui^scquent  changes  have  further  confused 
the  two  accounts. 

The  coincidences  arc — 1.  That  Esau  had 
three  wives.  2.  That  one  was  a  daughter  of 
Elou  the  Hittite.     3.  That  another  was  a 


daughter  of  Ishmael,  and  sister  of  Xebaioth. 
4.  That  one  of  the  three  was  called  Bash- 
emath.  How  anyone,  with  these  data  be- 
fore him,  can  resist  the  inference  that  Gene- 
sis is  compounded  of  various  independent 
documents,  entirely  passes  comprehension. 
Only  two  of  the  wives  were  daughters  of 
Canaan,  properly  speaking,  even  as  they  are 
described  here.  As  the  genealogy  of  AhoU- 
bamah is  given  vv.  20,  25,  she  was  also 
not  a  Canaanite,  for  the  Horites  seem  to 
have  .been  the  aboriginal  inhabitants  :  see 
ch.  xiv.  6  ;  Deut.  ii.  12.  But  this  does  not 
apply  to  her  description  here.  It  is  quite 
capricious  to  alter  Hivite  into  Horite  here, 
as  even  Kuobel  proposes  :  and  for  any  pur- 
poses of  harmonizing,  useless,  as  will  be 
seen  from  what  has  been  said.  In  fact,  it 
would,  while  removing  the  discrepancy  in 
the  Gentile  descriptions  of  AhoUbanuih,  in- 
troduce another  into  these,  vv.  2,  3.  4,  5.] 
Esau's  Jive  sons.  Of  these  we  may  observe — 
1.  That  the  eldest  is  synonymous  with  the 
friend  of  Job,  wlio  is  called  (comp.  ver.  11) 
the  Temanite  :  2.  That  the  second  is  synony- 
mous with  the  father-in-law  of  Moses,  Exod. 
ii.  18,  there  called  ^'priest  of  Midian." 
6—8.]  The  cause  of  Esau's  removal  to 
SIouTit  Seir  apparently  operated  after  Jacob's 
full  return  to  Hebron,  and  taking  possession, 
in  his  father's  extreme  old  age,  of  all  that 
was  Isaac's ;  and  we  have  here  recorded 
not  the  cause  of  Esau's  first  dwelling  at  Seir, 
but  that  of  his  final  and  entire  removal. 
Jacob  was  the  acknowledged  head  of  the 
house,  and  the  swarm  cast  off  was  that  of 
the  really  elder,  but  now  by  force  of  circum- 
stances become  the  younger  brother, 
cattle  and  beasts,  as  often  before,  the  for- 
mer being  the  sheep  and  kiue,  the  latter  the 


160 


GENESIS. 


XXXVI. 


lJer.xlix.7,2n. 
Eztk.xxv.13. 
Amos  i.  12. 
Hab.  iii.  3. 


bear  tliein  because  of  tbeir  cattle.  ^  Tbus  dwelt  Esau  in 
mount  Seir  :  Esau  is  Edom.  ^  ^[  And  these  are  tlie  gener- 
ations of  Esau  the  father  of  the  Edomites  in  mount  Seir  : 
10  these  are  the  names  of  Esau's  sons  ;  Eliphaz  the  son  of 
Adah  the  wife  of  Esau,  Reuel  the  son  of  Bashemath  the  wife 
of  Esau.  11  And  the  sons  of  Eliphaz  were  ^Teman,  Omar, 
Zepho,  and  Gatam,  and  Kenaz.  12  ^^i^  Timna  was  con- 
cubine to  Eliphaz  Esau's  son ;  and  she  bare  to  Eliphaz 
Amalek :  these  were  the  sons  of  Adah  Esau's  wife,  i^ 
And  these  are  the  sons  of  Reuel ;  Nahath,  and  Zerah, 
Shammah,  and  Mizzah  :  these  were  the  sons  of  Bashemath 
Esau's  wife,  i^  9^  j^^-^d  these  were  the  sons  of  Aholibamah, 
the   daughter  of  Anah   the   daughter  of  Zibeon,  Esau's 


beasts  of  Inirden,  asses  and  camels, 
the  country]  Ileb.  the  land=:  went  forth  ; 
hardly  as  Kalisch,  "  into  another  country." 
Mount  Seir  is  the  mountain  ridge  ex- 
tending along  the  east  side  of  the  valley  of 
Arabah,  from  the  Dead  Sea  to  the  Elanitic 
Gulf.  The  name  signifies  rovgh,  or  rugged. 
"  The  view  from  Aaron's  tomb  on  Hor,  the 
centre  of  Mount  Seir,  is  enough  to  shew  its 
appropriateness.  The  sharp  and  serrated 
ridges,  the  jagged  rocks  and  cliffs,  the 
straggling  bushes  and  stunted  trees,  give 
the  whole  scene  a  sternness  and  rugged- 
ness  almost  unparalleled."  ]\Ir.  Grove, 
Biblical  Did.,   whose    art.    see.  On 

Esau  is  Edom,   see   above.  9—28.] 

Genealogy  of  the  sons  of  Esau.  And 
herein  (10  — 13)  the  sons  of  Adah  and 
Bashemath.  Observe  these  two  of  Esau's 
wives  have  their  sons  and  their  grandsons 
enumerated,  whereas  of  Aholibamah  (ver.  14) 
only  the  sons  appear.  The  same  distinction 
is  observed  when  the  dukes  are  enumerated 
below.  Of  these  names,  Eliphaz  and  Reuel 
have  been  observed  on  before.  Teman  is 
elsewhere  in  Scripture  the  name  of  an 
Edomitish  territory  (see>eff. ).  Its  inhabit- 
ants enjoyed  a  repute  for  wisdom  (Jer.  xlix. 
7 ;  Baruch  iii.  22,  23),  and  from  it  came 
Elipbaz  the  Temanite,  Job's  wisest  friend. 
Knobel  makes  it  probable  that  Teman  was 
in  N.E.  Idumsea.  Euscbius  and  Jerome 
mention  a  Thaiman,  15  Roman  miles  from 
Petra.  See  on  vv.  34,  42.  Omar  is  recog- 
nized bv  Knobol  in  the  present  name  of  an 
Arab  tribe,  Beni-Amyner,  in  N.  Edom  and 
S.    Palestine.     Another   Arab   tribe   in   S. 


Palestine  is  called  Ammareh.  Zepho] 

In  1  Chron.  i.  36  called  Zephi.  Knobel 
mentions  a  place  Szajteh  or  Szophia  (Sa- 
fieh  in  Van  de  Velde's  map),  S.  of  the  Dead 
Sea,  where  many  Arab  tribes  fix  their 
winter-quarters.  But  he  does  not  regard 
the  identification  as  certain.  Gatam] 

In  the  LXX.  Gotham.  See  ver.  16.  Knobel 
compares  Jodham,  the  name  of  an  Arab 
tribe ;  but  there  is  no  certainty.  Kenaz 
represents  the  Kcnezites,  Xum.  xxxii.  12; 
Josh.  xiv.  14,  of  whom  Caleb  was  one, 
and  Othniel  bis  brother.  Josh.  xv.  17;  Judg. 
iii.  9 — 11.  See  note  on  ch.  xv.  19.  The 
name  Kenaz  was  borne  by  a  grandson  of 
Caleb,  1  Chron.  iv.  1.5  (but  the  text  is 
doubtful).  From  ver.  42  Kenaz  was  also  a 
town.  12.]  Timna,  again,  is  a  place, 

ver.  40.  It  is  a  question  much  debated, 

whether  the  Amalek  mentioned  here  is  or  is 
not  the  ancestor  of  the  well-known  people  of 
that  name.  The  mention  of  the  Araalekites 
in  ch.  xiv.  7  (see  there),  coupled  with  the 
Amorites,  certainly  seems  to  imply  that  that 
people  were  existing  at  that  early  period. 
If  so,  then  this  Amalek  must  be,  as  Knobel 
and  others  suppose,  distinct  from  that  other, 
and  probably  that  of  a  mere  portion  of  the 
great  Amalekite  people.  The  same  seems  a 
lawful  inference  from  xxiv.  20  :  see  there. 
13.]  The  second  division  of  the 
Edomites.  None  of  the  names  in  this  verse 
are  traceable  among  the  Arab  tribes.  The 
old  geographers  mention  a  tribe  Sameni, 
who  may  be  connected  with  Shammah,  but 
nothing  is  known  of  their  habitat. 
14.]    The  third  division.     Its  two   former 


8— 23.  GENESIS.  161 

wife :    and    she    bare    to    Esau    Jcush,   and  Jaalam,  and 

Korah.     1-5  ^f  Those  were  ™ sheiks  of  the  sons  of  Esau:   ■"iii's^i;'-]!;., 

tlie    sons   of  Eliphaz    the   firstborn  son  of  Esau :    sheik     ^il^w.  xv!.' 

Toman,  sheik  Omar,  sheik  Zepho,  sheik  Kenaz,  ^'^  sheik 

Korah,   sheik  Gatam,  a)i(l  sheik  Amalek :  these  arc  the 

sheiks  f//af  came  of  Eliphaz  in  the  kind  of  Edom  ;  these 

urrc  the  sons  of  Adah.     17  1[  And  those  air  the  sons  of 

Eouel    Esau's    son ;     sheik   Nahath,    shoik    Zerah,    sheik 

Slianimah,  shoik  INFizzah  :  there  are  the  sliciks  i/iaf  came 

of  Itouol  in  the  hind  of  Edom ;  these  arc  the  sons  of  Ba- 

shomath    Esau's  wife.      ^^  %  And  these  are  the  sons  of 

Aholibumah    Esau's    wife ;    sheik   Joush,    sheik    Jaahun, 

shoik  Korah :  these  iccrc  the  sheiks  f/iat  came  of  Aholi- 

bamah  the  daughter  of  Anah,  Esau's  wife.     ^^  These  are 

the  sons  of  Esau,  who  is  Edom,  and  these  are  their  sheiks. 

20  ^  "These  are  the  sons  of  Seir  the  Horite,  who  "inhabited  "js^jj"'- 

the  huid;  Lotan,  and  Shobal,  and  Zibeon,  and  Anah,  21  °  xxiii.'s"'!" 

and  Dishon,  and  Ezer,  and  Dishan :  these  are  the  sheiks     3J:  •'"''«•  '• 

'of  the  Ilorites,  the  children  of  Seir  in  the  land  of  Edom. 

2-  And  the  children  of  Lotan  were  Ilori  and  Homam  ;  and 

Lotan 's  sister  iras  Timna.     ^3  ^Vnd  the  children  of  Shobal 

were  these  ;  Alvan,  and  Manahath,  and  Ebal,  Shei)ho,  and 

names  arc  untraceable  ;  the  latter,  Korah,  is  not  the  habit  of  Genesis  to  give  pedigrees  of 

foil  11(1  in  the  Wady  A'«)a7iy  (A"i(ra;e/t  iu  Van  mere  heathen   races,  unconnected  witii  the 

de  Yckle's  map),  S.E.   of  the   Dead    Sea.  main   stream   of  the  sacred   history.     The 

15  —  19.]   The  sheikhs,  or  leaders  of  Horites  signify  properly  dwellers  in  caves, 

the  Edomite  tribes.     Knobel  maintains  that  from  the  Hebrew  llor,  a  cave.     The  land  of 

the  word  Altiph,  here  used  of  all  these,  is  Edom  is  full  of  "  holes  in  the  rocks."     See 

not  an  individual,  the  chief  of  the  tribe,  but  Job   xxx.  6.     To   this   day   tlie   picture   of 

tlic  tiihe  or  gens  itself.     But  he  is  opposed  wretchedness  given  in  tliat  passage  is  realized 

by  the  general  consent  of  commentators:  see  among  tlie  lower  tribes  of  the  land  of  Edom. 

reif.     In  the  following  list  the  name  Korah  Seven  divisions  of  tlie  Ilorites  are  mentioned, 

occurs  among  the  sons  of  Eliphaz,  where  it  and  are  deduced  from  Seir  as  their  ancestor, 
is  not  found  in  the  previous  enumeration, —  22.]  Tlic  name  Lotan,  Knobel  recog- 

and   again   among    those    of    Aholibamah.  nizes  in  a  wild  and  inliiispital)le  tribe,  the 

This  is  prob.ibly  owing  to  some   mistake.  Lyatbineh,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  I'etra. 

The  Samaritan  text  omits  the  name  among  Hori   again  reminds  us   of  the   troglodyte 

the  sons  of  Elipliaz,  but  it  is  not  to  be  trust-  habits  of  the  race  :  see  above.     Hemam  is 

ed  in  this  list,  as  it  evidently  corrects,  e.  g.  recognized   in   a   town  mentioned  by  geo- 

it  h;is  in  ver.  2  Mahalath  for  Bashemath,  to  graphers  ancient  and  modern  as  S.  of  Petra 

accord  with  ch.   xxviii.   9.  20  —  30.]  on  ^Nfnunt  Sherab.     On  Tininah,  see  above, 

The  genealogy  of  the  Horites,  the  inhabit-  ver.  12.  23.]   Shobal  is  the  name  used 

ants  of  the  land,  i.  e.  before  the  Edoniites  by  the  chroniclers  of  the  Crusades  for  the 

came  in  (Deut.  ii.  12,  22).     This  genealogy  part  of  Arabia  S.  of  Kerek,  i.  c.  for  Edom  ; 

must  be  inserted  on  account  of  their  subse  •  but  tliey  I'efcr  this  name  to  I  sbliak,  eh .  xx v.  2. 

quent  connexion  with  the  Edomitcs,  as  it  is  See  also  Judith  iii.  1  in  tlie  Vulgate.     Alvaa 

M 


162 


GENESIS. 


XXXVI. 


Onam.  ^4  And  these  are  the  children  of  Zibeon  ;  both 
Ajah,  and  Anah  :  this  icas  that  Anah  that  found  the  warm 
springs  in  the  wilderness,  as  he  fed  the  asses  of  Zibeon  his 
father.  ^5  And  the  children  of  Anah  icere  these  ;  Dishon, 
and  Aholibamah  the  daughter  of  Anah.  26  And  these 
are  the  children  of  Dishon ;  Hemdan,  and  Eshban,  and 
Ithran,  and  Cheran.  ^7  The  children  of  Ezer  are  these  ; 
Bilhan,  and  Zaavan,  and  Akan.  28  The  children  of 
Dishan  are  these  ;  Uz,  and  Aran.  29  These  arc  the  sheiks 
tliat  came  of  the  Horites ;  sheik  Lotan,  sheik  Shobal,  sheik 
Zibeon,  sheik  Anah,  ^^  sheik  Dishon,  sheik  Ezer,  sheik 
Dishan  :  these  arc  the  sheiks  tJiat  came  of  Ilori,  accord- 
ing to  their  sheiks  in  the  land  of  Seir.  ^^  ^  ^And 
these  are  the  kings  that  reigned  in  the  land  of  Edom, 


is  supposed  to  be  reproduced  in  the  Alawin, 
a  tribe  of  evil  repute  N.  of  Akaba. 
Manahath]  I'toleniy  mentions  a  place  west- 
ward of  Petra  called  Monuchiatis,  which 
possibly  is  connected  witli  tliis  name. 
Shepho  is  perhaps  connected  with  Mount 
Shdfeh,  N.  of  Akaba.  Ebal  and  Onam  are 
untraceable.  24-]  Zibeon  is  wholly  un- 

known. Ajah  is  traced  in  the  Haiwat,  a 
tribe  of  evil  repute  N.  of  tlie  Elanitic  Gulf. 
On  Anah  bcinjj  the  son  of  Zibeon,  see  on  ver. 
1.  The  translation  mules  in  the  A.  V.  {giants 
in  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch  and  in  Onkelos) 
seems  to  be  abandoned,  and  warm  springs 
supposed  to  be  the  right  one.  These  might 
be  the  warm  springs  in  the  Wadi/  el  Asal,  S. 
of  the  Dead  Sea,  or  perhaps  those  yet  hotter 
springs   in    the    Wacly    Hamad.  25.] 

There  is  some  confusion  in  this  list,  as  be- 
fore noticed  on  ver.  1.  This  Anah  is  evi- 
dently the  son,  not  the  grandson,  of  Seir, 
as  the  pedigree  is  not  pursued  beyond  the 
second  generation  from  Seir.  children 

is  literally  sons,  a  terra  elsewhere  used  as 
the  technical  one  in  genealogies  even  where 
only  one  son  is  mentioned,  e.  g.  ch.  xlvi. 
23;  Num.  xxvi.  8;  1  Chron.  i.  41  (where 
Dishon  only  is  mentioned)  ;  ii.  8.  26.] 

The  name  Hemdan  is  traced  in  a  portion  of 
the  tribe  Omran,  called  Bumady,  E.  and 
S.E.  of  Akaba,  and  also  N.  of  Petra,  and 
further  N.  still,  in  the  land  of  Moab.  Esh- 
ban is  traced  in  another  portion  of  the  same 
tribe  called  Usbany.  Ithran  and  Cheran 
are  unknown  ;  as  also  are  27.  ]  Ezer, 

and  Zaavan ;  Bilhan  is  very  uncertain  ;  but 


Akan  is  found  in  a  tribe  on  the  Elanitic  Gulf, 
named  by  the  old  geograpliers  Acheni, 
and  a  place  Achana,  mentioned  in  Eusebius, 
where  David  is  supposed  to  have  built  ships. 
28.]  Uz  is  in  all  probability  connected 
with  the  country  of  Job, — see  Mr.  Bevan's 
art.  in  Biblical  Diet.,  and  note  on  Job  i.  1. 
Pliny  mentions  a  tribe  named  Areni  in  East 
Idumaea.  But  some  suppose  that  Aram 
should  rather  be  read,  and  that  we  have  here 
a  record  of  a  mingled  tribe  of  Edomites  and 
Aramaeans.  Knobel  supposes  Dishon  and 
Dishan  mere  forms  of  the  simpler  Dish, 
wliich  word  is  found  in  the  Arab  race  Dcish, 
mentioned  by  geographers  as  dwelling  near 
the    Dedanites.  29,    30.]  'I  his  list  of 

sheikhs  of  the  Ilorites  is  coincident  with  that 
of  the  sons  of  Seir.  31—39.]  List  of 

Edomite  kings.  The  perplexing  portion  of 
ver.  31  is  the  addition  of  the  words  which 
ch)sc  it.  It  is  hardly  possible  in  any  spirit 
of  fairness  to  regard  them  as  other  than  a 
token  of  at  least  the  clause  itself  being 
written  after  the  kingdom  in  Israel  had  been 
established.  Those  interpreters  who  are  de- 
termined to  make  all  tilings  square  have 
managed  to  Wrest  them  into  a  prophetic  de- 
claration, dependent  on  the  promise  to  the 
I'atriarchs  that  kings  should  descend  from 
them  (ch.  xvii.  6;  xxxv.  11)  :  others  have 
connected  them  with  the  provisions  of  Moses 
concerning  the  kingdom.  Dent.  xvii.  14 — 20, 
Of  course  we  do  not  deny  that  either  of  these 
explanations  is  possible.  The  question  for 
us  is  not  tliat,  but  whether  any  such  explana- 
tion is  natural,  or  would  have  been  thought 


24—40. 


GENESIS. 


1G3 


before  there  reigned  any  king  over  the  children  of 
Israel.  32  ^^^  ]3g]j^  ^jjg  ^^^  ^f  j^^pj.  i-eigncd  in  Edoni : 
and  the  name  of  his  city  irns  Dinhabah.  33  ^Vnd  Bela 
died,  and  Jobab  the  son  of  Zerah  of  iBozrah  rciirned  in 
his  stead.  34  ^pfj  Jobab  died,  and  TTusham  of  tlie  land  of 
Temani  reigned  in  his  stead.  35  J^^^d  Husham  died,  and 
Hadad  the  son  of  Bcdad,  who  smote  Midian  in  the  field 
of  Moab,  reigned  in  his  stead :  and  the  name  of  his  city 
tens  Avith.  36  ^^d  Iladad  died,  and  Samlah  of  Masrckah 
reigned  in  his  stead.  37  ^^nd  Samlah  died,  and  Saul  of 
Kehoboth  b//  the  river  reigned  in  his  stead.  38  ^j^^  Saul 
died,  and  Baal-hanan  the  son  of  x\chbor  reigned  in  his 
stead.  39  ^Ynd  Baal-hanan  the  son  of  Achbor  died,  and 
Hadad  reigned  in  his  stead  :  and  the  name  of  his  city  was 
Pan ;  and  his  wife's  name  fcaa  Mehetabel,  the  daughter  of 
Hatred,  the  daughter  of  Mezahab.  ^^  And  these  are  the 
names  of  the  sheiks  fhaf  came  of  Esau,  according  to  their 
families,  after  their  places,  by  their  names  ;  sheik  Timnah, 


q  I»a.  TXXiT.  8; 
Ixiii.  I.  Jer. 
xlix.  l:t,22.C 
Amos  i.  r.;. . 


of,  unless  for  a  preconceived  purpose.  There 
is  to  our  mind  far  less  violence  done  to  our 
faith  by  supposing  this  clause,  or  even  the 
whole  list  (if  Idunncan  kings,  to  be  a  later 
insertion,  than  by  such  (as  it  seems  to  me) 
forcing  of  the  plain  sense  of  words.  None 
of  tliese  kings  of  Edom  are  known.  In  the 
triumjjbant  song  of  Jloses  and  the  children 
of  Israel,  Exod.  xv.  15,  mention  is  made  of 
the  s/ici/cs  of  Edom;  but  in  Num.  xx.  14, 
ff.,  we  find  Closes  asking  permission  of  the 
kin(/  of  Edom  to  pass  through  his  land.  So 
that  it  is  perhaps  not  to  he  assumed  that  tlie 
rule  of  sheiks  in  Ed 'Ui  was*  superseiled  by 
that  of  kings.  32.]  It  is  curious  to  find 

so  near  a  sonnd  to  Balaam  son  of  Bcor  in 
tlic  Bela  sou  of  Beer  of  this  verse.  The 
Je\vi>li  expositors  remark  on  the  similarity. 
Dinhabah  is  not  known.  33.]  Bozrah 

is  known  to  us  as  an  Kdomite  city  from  reff. 
The  name  survives  in  the  village  Bxisairch, 
midway  between  Tetra  and  the  Dead  Sea. 

34.]  On  Temani,  see  ver.  II. 
35.]  This  defeat  of  Midian  is  otherwise  quite 
unknown  to  us.  36.]  The  name  Mas- 

rekah  signifies  place  of  grapes,  and  hence 
Knobel  has  thought  that  it  may  be  pointed 
out  by  large  ruins  between  Petra  and 
Schobek,  described  by  Burckhardt,  where 
a  tribe  dwells  largely  cultivating  grapes,  ex- 


porting raisins  in  abundance  to  Gaza,  and 
selling  them  to  the  Syrian  pilgrims. 
37.]  Kehoboth  is  a  very  common  name.  It 
has  been  by  some  supposed  to  be  on  the  Eu- 
phrates (see  Mr.  Grove,  Biblical  Diet.),  but  it 
is  difficult  to  see  how  that  can  be.  Eusebius 
and  Jerome  speak  of  a  place  Robotha  in 
Edom  in  their  time  :  and  the  word  nahar, 
here  rendered  river,  is  used  of  small  brooks 
as  well  as  of  great  rivers.  39.]  From 

the  circumstance  of  this  Hadar  (called  in  1 
Chron.  i.  50  Hadad,  apparently  in  error)  not 
being  said  to  have  died,  and  from  the  par- 
ticular enumeration  of  the  names  of  his  wife 
and  her  father  and  graudfatiier,  it  has  been 
not  without  probability  supposed  that  this 
king  of  Edom  was  reigning  at  the  time  of 
the  writer:  and  if  so,  this  may  have  been 
the  king  of  whom  i\roses  requested  safe  pas- 
sage as  related  in  Num.  xx.  14,  ff.  In  1 
Chron.  i.  51  the  historian  has  inserted  the 
supplementary  notice,  "  Iladad  died  also." 
40—43.]  The  sheikhs  of  Edom,  and 
their  chief  toicjis.  There  were  13  tribes 
(vv,  11 — 14),  and  only  11  towns  are  named. 
Therefore  some  tribes  had  no  town,  being,  it 
may  be  supposed,  nomads.  On  Timnah, 
see  ver.  12.  Most  of  tiicse  places  are  un- 
known. Aholibamah  means  dweUintj  on 
high,  and  is  probably  to  be  sought  on  the 


164 


GENESIS. 


XXXYI. 


10,  27  ;    XXV. 
12, 19  i  xxxvi. 


sheik  Alvah,  sheik  Jetheth,  ^i  sheik  Aholibamah,  sheik 
Elah,  sheik  Pinoii,  ^^  sheik  Kenaz,  sheik  Teman,  sheik 
Mibzar,  '^^  sheik  Magcliel,  sheik  Iram  :  these  be  the  sheiks 
of  Eclom,  according'  to  their  habitations  in  the  Land  of 
their  possession  :  this  is  Esau  the  father  of  the  Edoniites. 
XXXVII.  1  And  Jacob  dwelt  in  the  land  wherein  his 
father  was  a  stranger,  in  the  land  of  Canaan.  ^  i- These 
are  the  generations  of  Jacob.  Joseph,  being  seventeen 
years  old,  was  feeding  the  flock  with  his  brethren  ;  and 
he  was  a  lad  with  the  sons  of  Bilhah,  and  with  the  sons 
of  Zilpah,  his  father's  wives  :  and  Joseph  brought  imto  his 
father  their  evil  report.  ^  J^ow  Israel  loved  Joseph  more 
than  all  his  children,  because  he  was  the  son  of  his  old  age  : 
and  he  made  him  a  coat  of  mani/  colours.  ^  And  when  his 
brethren  saw  that  their  father  loved  him  more  than  all  his 


highest  part  of  jMniint  Seir.  Elah,  other- 
wise F.lath,  says  Knobel,  now  Allah  on  the 
Eed  Sea.  Pinon  appears  to  be  the  same  as 
Punon,  a  ])lafc  of  encampment  of  the  Is- 
raelites, where  Moses  lifted  up  the  brazen 
serpent  (compare  Num.  xxi.  9  with  xxxiii. 
42).  There  were  there  brass  (copper)  mines, 
to  which  afterwards  many  Christian  confess- 
ors were  condemned.  It  is  described  in  tlie 
patristic  writings  as  between  Petra  and  Zoar. 
On  Kenaz  and  Teman,  see  ver.  11.  Knobel 
thinks  that  Mibzar  represents  Petra.  The 
meaning  of  the  word  is  a  fortress,  and  Petra 
(rock)  was  so  called  from  its  extraordinary 
strength:  see  Jer.  xlix.  16,  17;  Obad.  3; 
also  Ps.  cviii.  10  (Ix.  9) ;  2  Kings  xiv.  7, 
and  note.  Eusebius  and  Jerome  mention  a 
large  village  Mahsara  in  Gabalene  which 
belonged  to  Petra.  Magdiel  signifies  the 
praise  of  God,  and  Knobel  thinks  it  may 
have  been  the  site  of  a  temple.  Iram  is 
unknown.  The  LXX.  here  and  in  1  Chron. 
have  for  this  name  Znphoin. 

XXXVII. — L.  The  history  of  Jacob. 
All  that  is  now  left  is  to  pursue  the  fortunes 
of  Jacob.  And  the  whole  story  of  Joseph  is 
for  this  purpose  most  important.  It  is  the 
introduction  to  the  migration  of  Jacob  and 
his  family  into  Egypt,  on  which  depended 
the  subsequent  history  of  the  chosen  people. 
1.]  The  copula  is  by  the  Yulgate 
rendered  "But,"  and  doubtless  there  is  a 
slightly  adversative  force  intended.      The 


Edomites,  inhabitants  of  TMpunt  Seir,  have 
been  before  us.  Esau  had  quitted  the  land 
of  promise,  and  branched  off  from  the  line 
of  the  Covenant  blessing;  but  Jacob  re- 
mained there.  in  the  land  whereinhis 
father  was  a  stranger,  tlnis  recalling  the 
oft-repeated  promise  of  God,  in  the  land 
of  Canaan,  thus  specified  by  name.  Here 
then  we  have  the  posture  of  the  heir  of  the 
promises— dwelling  in  Canaan,  and  waiting 
on  Providence  to  unfold  his  future  course. 
2.]  Xow  the  writer  passes  with  this 
formal  title  (see  above  on  reff.)  to  tlie  his- 
tory of  Jacob  for  the  rest  of  the  sacred  book. 
Jacob's  previous  acts  and  annals  belong 
to  the  history  of  Isaac.  Tj'terally,  was 
feeding  (tending)  with  his  brothers  among 
the  sheep.  In  the  next  clause  it  is  express- 
ed that  he  served  under  his  brothers,  Bil- 
hah's  and  Zilpah's  s(ms.  It  was  their  place 
to  instruct  him  in  the  work  of  a  shepherd. 
The  word  for  evil  report  is  derived  from  a 
root  signifying  to  creep,  or  approach  in- 
sidiously. No  slur  is  intended  on  the  cha- 
racter of  Joseph,  with  which,  as  Kalisch 
well  remarks,  depravity  and  meanness  were 
totally  at  variance.  3.]  Joseph  was 
born  when  his  father  was  90.  See  note,  ch. 
XXXV.  29.  On  the  use  of  the  name  Israel  in 
passages  of  pathos,  see  above,  on  ch.  xxxv. 
22.  The  expression  here  rendered  a  coat  of 
many  colours,  and  literally  a  tunic  of 
parts,  occurs  again,  2  Sam.  xiii.  18,  of  the 


41— XXXVII.  13. 


GENESIS. 


1G5 


brethren,  tlicy  hated  Lim,  and  could  not  speak  peaceably 
unto  bini.  ^  %  And  Joseph  dreamed  a  dream,  and  he  told 
if  his  brethren  :  and  they  hated  him  yet  the  more.  ^  And 
he  said  unto  them,  Uear,  I  pray  you,  this  dream  which  I 
have  dreamed :  ^  for,  behold,  we  icere  binding  sheaves  in 
the  field,  and,  lo,  my  sheaf  arose,  and  also  stood  upright ; 
and,  behold,  your  sheaves  stood  round  about,  and  made 
obeisance  to  my  sheaf.  8  ^^(i  j^ig  brethren  said  to  him, 
Shalt  thou  indeed  reign  over  us  ?  or  shalt  thou  indeed 
have  dominion  over  us  ?  And  they  hated  him  yet  the 
more  for  his  dreams,  and  for  his  words.  ^  ^j  And  he 
dreamed  yet  another  dream,  and  told  it  his  brethren, 
and  said.  Behold,  I  have  dreamed  a  dream  more ;  and, 
behold,  the  sun  and  the  moon  and  the  ^eleven  stars  made  s- 
obeisance  to  me.  ^^  And  he  told  it  to  his  father,  and  to 
his  brethren :  and  his  father  rebuked  him,  and  said  unto 
him,  What  is  this  dream  that  thou  hast  dreamed  ?  Shall 
I  and  thy  mother  and  thy  brethren  indeed  come  to  bow 
down  ourselves  to  thee  to  the  earth  ?  ^^  And  his  brethren 
envied  him ;  but  his  father  observed  the  saying.  ^^ 
51  And  his  brethren  went  to  feed  their  father's  flock  in 
Shechem.     ^^  And  Israel  said  unto  Joseph,  Do  not  thy 


!  Kings 


garment  worn  by  king's  daughters.  Another 
interpretation  of  vcr.  3  is  that  whereas  the 
onlinary  garment  for  youtli  in  the  East  is 
simply  a  body  coat  without  sleeves  reach- 
ing to  the  knees,  this  was  with  sleeves  and 
reaching  to  the  feet.  So  Joseph  us  lierc. 
5 — 11.]  His  brethren-'s  hatred  is  in- 
creased, and  his  father's  rebuke  ineurrtd,  by 
his   two   ambitious    dreams.  8.]    Ms 

dreams — the  fact  of  his  liaving  thus  dreamt : 
his  words— the  fact  of  liis  having  told  tliem. 
Or  does  this  last  mean,  his  continued  evil  re- 
port of  tliem  to  their  father .'  9,  f.] 
First  he  tells  the  second  dream  to  his 
brethreti  witli  wliom  he  was,  and  then  to  his 
fatlier  and  his  assembled  (or,  tlic  rest  of  liis) 
brethren  at  home.  This  second  dream  re- 
lated not  only,  as  the  first,  to  his  brethren, 
but  to  his  father  and  mother  also.  10.] 
In  Jacob's  rebuke,  tlie  words  "  1  and  thy 
mother"  have  been  regarded  as  an  incon- 
sistency, considering  that  Rachel  had  been 
some  time  dead.  Some  of  those  wlio  re- 
pudiate this  have  drawn  from  them  an  in- 


ference that  Jacob  looked  for  a  resurrection. 
But  both  are  wrong.  The  inconsistency 
vanishes  when  we  come  to  relleit  tliat  it  was 
as  much  in  Joseph's  dream,  and  Jacob  merely 
recites  it  in  interpreting  it:  and  as  to  the 
other  view,  surely  it  was  not  in  the  other 
world  tliat  the  dream  was  to  find  its  fulfilment. 
It  never  teas  fulfilled  :  for  Leah,  who  only 
could  have  been  regarded  as  standing  in 
Piachel's  place  to  Joseph,  died  before  the 
migration  into  Egypt:  compare  cli.  xlvi.  8, 
ff.,  with  .\lix.  31.  Knobil  connects  the 
11  stars,  Joseph  himself  being  the  twelfth, 
with  the  fact  that  the  signs  of  tiie  Zodiac 
were  not  unkn(  wn  to  the  Isiaelites  (reff.). 
Tiie  word  for  observed  in  the  EXX.  is  very 
nearly  that  u>ed  by  St.  Luke  wlun  he  re- 
latis  that  "  His  motlier  kept  all  the.-e  things," 
ch.  ii.  19.  12—24]  His  brclhrvn plot 

his    death.       Bevben    dissuades    it. 
12.]    In  ch.  xxxiii.   19  we  hear  of  Jacob's 
buying  a  fit  Id  in  Shechem.     It  would  seem 
that  he  had  there  a  station  for  liis   ilocks. 
13.]  It  would  appear  that  Joseph  had 


166  GENESIS.  XXXVII. 

brethren  feed  tlie  flock  in  Sliechem  ?  come,  and  I  will 
send  thee  unto  them.  And  he  said  to  him,  Here  am  I. 
1*  And  he  said  to  him,  Go,  I  pray  thee,  see  whether  it  he 
well  with  thy  brethren,  and  well  with  the  flocks ;  and 
bring  me  word  again.  So  he  sent  him  out  of  the  vale  of 
Hebron,  and  he  came  to  Shechem.  ^'^  And  a  certain  man 
found  him,  and,  behold,  he  uris  wandering  in  the  field  : 
and  the  man  asked  him,  saying,  What  seekest  thou  ?  ^^ 
And  he  said,  I  seek  my  brethren :  tell  me,  I  pray  thee, 
where  they  feed  tJieir  flocks.  17  And  the  man  said.  They 
are  departed  hence ;  for  I  heard  them  say,  Let  us  go  to 
Dothan.  And  Joseph  went  after  his  brethren,  and  found 
them  in  Dothan.  ^^  And  Avhen  they  saw  him  afar  ofi", 
even  before  he  came  near  unto  them,  they  conspired 
against  him  to  slay  him.  ^^  And  they  said  one  to  another, 
Behold,  this  lord  of  dreams  cometh.  20  Come  now  there- 
fore, and  let  us  slay  him,  and  cast  him  into  some  j)it,  and 
we  will  say.  Some  evil  beast  hath  devoured  him :  and  we 
shall  see  what  will  become  of  his  dreams,  ^i  ^^^  Reuben 
t»er. 22.  hcard  it,  and  he  '^delivered  him  out  of  their  hands;  and 

said,  Let  us  not  kill  him.     22  And  Eeuben  said  unto  them, 

left  his  brethren  and  was  living  at  home  (see  still  called  "Tell  Dothan,"  with  a  ruined 

ver.  4) ;  but  his  father  wishes  him  again  to  aqueduct  and  other  remains  of  antiquity  at 

consort  with  them.     There  is  besides  some  its  base.     See  Van  de  Yelde's  Memoir  to  ac- 

traee  of  anxiety  in  Jacob's  mind  for  fear  his  company  the  map  of  Palestine,  p.  308.     Dr. 

sons  may  have  been  involved  in  some  evil  Thomson (Lajjf/aju/iJooA,  p.  466)  says,  "The 

matter.             I4.j  The  sending  of  a  lad  of  neighbourhood  affords  the  very  best  pastur- 

seventeen,  and  one  so  beloved,  all  the  way  age :  and  at   the  base  of  the  mound   is   a 

from    Hebron  to  Shechem,  is  a  noticeable  fountain  where  the  brethren  of  Joseph  may 

feature  in  the  narrative.     He  appears,  from  have  watered  their  flocks."             18,  f.j  The 

■ver.  15,  to  have  gone  alone.             17.]  Do-  Chrislian  reader   can  hardly  fail  to  be  re- 

than  is  only  mentioned  in  2  Kings  vi.  13—  minded  of  the  language  of  our  Lord's  parable, 

19,  as  the  scene  of  the  miracle  of  Elisha's  Matt.    xxii.  38,  nor   to  apply  the  parallel, 

servant's    eyes    being   opened    to   see    the  19.]  The  expression,  lord  of  dreamers, 

heavenly  hosts  wliich   guarded  his  master,  is  used  in  bitter  scorn.             20.]  'i  he  name 

It  is  apparently  mentioned  in  the  Book  of  Dothaim,  of  which  Dothan  is,  says  Kalisch, 

Judith,  iv.  6 ;  "vii.  3 ;  viii.  3,  as  Dothaim.  a  contracted  form,  signifies  double  cistern. 

It  seems  from  Judith  iii.  9,  where  however  "  I  am  not  aware,"  says  Dr.  Thomson,  "that 

the  words  in  the  original  "  near  Dotrea,"  are  there  still  exist  old  cisterns  about  Dotliaim, 

printed  in  our   English    Bibles,  without  a  but  there  are  very  few  ancient  sites  where 

shadow  of  authority,  ''near  unto  .hid(ea"( !)  they  are  not  to  be  found."   "  The  traditional 

to  be  on  the  S.   side   of  the  plain   of  Jcz-  '  pit,'  at    the  N.  extremity  of  the   Sea   of 

reel,  between  Scythopolis  and  Geba.      Ac-  Gennesareth,  is  much  too  far  Northward." 

cording  to  Eusebius  and  Jerome  it  lay   12  Kalisch.             21.]    We   have   seen  on  ch. 

Roman  miles  N.  of  Samaria.     And  just  in  xxxiv.  25  that  Eeuben,  as  the  firstborn,  had 

that  place  travellers  have   found  a  mound  a  peculiar  responsibility.             22.  lay  no 


14—28. 


GENESIS. 


1G7 


Shed  no  blood,  hut  cast  him  into  tliis  pit  that  ?'s  in  the 
wiklerness,  and  "hiy  no  hand  upon  him  ;  that  he  might 
deliver  him  out  of  their  hands,  to  bring  him  back  to  his 
father  again.  ^3  ^  ^Yj^j  {^  came  to  pass,  when  Joseph  was 
corae  unto  his  brethren,  that  they  stript  Joseph  of  his 
coat,  the  coat  of  manij  colours  that  iras  on  him ;  24  Qjid 
they  took  him,  and  cast  liim  into  a  pit :  and  the  pit  was 
empty,  there  icas  no  water  in  it.  2o  ^Ynd  they  sat  down  to 
eat  bread :  and  they  lifted  up  their  eyes  and  looked,  and, 
behold,  a  compan}^  of  Ishmaelitcs  came  from  Gilcad  with 
their  camels  bearing  tragacanth  and  ^balm  and  ^ladanum, 
going  to  carry  if  down  to  Egyjot.  ^G  And  Judah  said  unto 
his  brethren.  What  profit  is  it  if  we  slay  our  brother,  and 
conceal  his  blood  ?  27  Come,  and  let  us  sell  him  to  the 
Ishmaelitcs,  and  let  not  our  hand  be  upon  him ;  for  he  is 
our  brother  and  our  flesh.  And  his  brethren  were  con- 
tent. 28  Then  there  passed  by  Midianites  merchantmen  ; 
and  they  drew  and  lifted  up  Joseph  out  of  the  pit,  and 


uch.  xxii.  12. 
I.xod.  XXIV. 
11.     tlrut. 

xiii.   9    (AcU 
Xii.  I). 


vJcr.  viil.22 
xlvi.  II  ;  U. 

will,  xliii.  : 
onlv. 


hand  upon  him]  i.  e.  put  him  not  to  death : 
sue  veil'.  It  IS  a  strange  feature  in  the  moral 
constitution  of  the  brethren  that  they  could 
be  pi'rsua(k^d  to  satisfy  their  revenge  and 
imagine  that  their  guilt  was  loss,  by  letting 
Joseph  perish  in  the  pit,  rather  than  shed 
his  blood.  On  this  use  of  cisterus,  see  Jer. 
xxxviii.  6;  Lain.  iii.  53.  23.]  See  on 

ver.  3.  According  to  Eastern  habits,  it 
would  be  his  only  garment.  lie  entered 
Egypt  naked,  as  was  the  custom  with  slaves 
and  captives,  Isa.  xx.  4,  in  strange  contrast 
to  his  subsequent  array  of  pomp,  ch.  xli.  42. 
25.]  The  highway  from  Gilead  to 
Egypt  still  passes  by  the  Tell  Dothaim,  to 
Ramleh,  Gaza,  and  Egypt.  The  first  men- 
tioned of  these  articles  of  commerce  is  pro- 
nounced to  be  the  gum  of  the  Astragalus 
tragarantha,  a  thorny  shrub  found  through- 
out the  East,  figured  in  Tristram's  Nat.  Hist, 
of  Bible,  p.  394;  the  second,  halm,  is  else- 
whi;re  connected  with  Gilead  (reff.) :  it  was 
a  very  precious  gum  obtained  from  the  bal- 
sam tree,  almost  peculiar  to  Palestine.  See 
Jlr.  Drake's  art.  in  the  Biblical  Diet,  and 
Tristram's  Nat.  Hist,  of  the  Bible,  p.  337, 
M'here  the  plant  is  figured.  The  third  item, 
erroneously  rendered  in  the  A.  V.  (here 
and  in  ref.)  myrrh,  is  the  ladanum,  or  gum 
of    the  cistus  creticus,   said   to    have   been 


originally  combed  from  the  beards  of  goats 
which  browse  upon  the  plant,  but  now  beaten 
from  the  shrub  by  a  kind  of  wliip,  from 
which  it  is  afterwards  scraped.  See  Biblical 
Diet,  and  Tristram,  p.  458,  where  tlio 
plant  is  figured.  26.]  Jiidah's  speech 

shews  tluit  during  the  meal,  and  in  Eeu- 
ben's  absence,  the  purpose  had  been  altered, 
and  t!ie  first  plan  of  slaying  Joseph  again 
adopted.  On  this  view,  which  is  Knobel's, 
conceal  his  blood  means,  escape  detection 
for  his  murder.  Kaliseh  takes  another  view, 
and  thinks  that  daring  tlic  meal  their  con- 
science troubled  them,  and  Judah  only  gavo 
expression  to  their  thoughts  that  "  blood 
cimcialed"  was  blood  still;  meaning  by 
blood  concealed,  his  obscure  death  in  the  pit. 
28.]  The  notice  contained  in  the  first 
clause  seems  to  belong  to  a  different  account 
from  that  which  we  have  been  as  yet  reading. 
The  idea  maintained  by  some  commentators 
(even  Keil  here)  that  the  same  persons  in  the 
course  of  the  same  sentence  could  be  Ishinael- 
ites  and  iSIidianites,  will  hardly  be  enter- 
tained except  by  those  who  are  determined 
to  carry  through  a  thing  at  all  hazards.  In 
ch.  xxxix  1  it  is  the  Islimaelites  who  s(dd 
Joseph  into  Egypt;  in  ch.  xl.  15  he  de- 
scribes himself  as  "  stolen  out  of  the  land  of 
the  Hebrews."     All  such  variations  arc  not 


168 


GENESIS. 


XXXVII. 


X  ch.  XX.  16  ; 

xxxiii.  19; 
xlv.22.  Judg. 
ix.  4  ,   xvi.  n. 
2  Kings  V.  5, 
al. 


jNu 


30. 
Deut.  xxxii. 
22.  Job  xi.  8; 
xiv.  A.  Prnv. 
XXX.  13.  Isa. 
V.  U.  Hab. 
ii.  5. 


sold  JosepTi  to  the  Istmaelites  for  ^  twenty  pieces  of  silver  : 
and  they  brought  Joseph  into  Egypt.  ^9  ^  ^j^([  Reuben 
returned  unto  the  pit ;  and,  behold,  Joseph  was  not  in  the 
pit ;  and  he  rent  his  clothes.  30  ^^d  he  returned  unto 
his  brethren,  and  said,  The  child  is  not ;  and  I,  whither 
shall  I  go  ?  31  ^i2cl  they  took  Joseph's  coat,  and  killed  a 
kid  of  the  goats,  and  dipped  the  coat  in  the  blood ;  32  ^nd 
they  sent  the  coat  of  man//  colours,  and  they  brought  if  to 
their  father  ;  and  said,  This  have  we  found  :  know  now 
whether  it  be  thy  son^s  coat  or  no.  33  And  he  knew  it, 
and  said,  It  is  my  son's  coat ;  an  evil  beast  hath  devoured 
him  ;  Joseph  is  without  doubt  rent  in  pieces.  34  And 
Jacob  rent  his  clothes,  and  put  sackcloth  upon  his  loins, 
and  mourned  for  his  son  many  duys.  35  And  all  his  sons 
and  all  his  daughters  rose  up  to  comfort  him  ;  but  he  re- 
fused to  be  comforted ;  and  he  said,  For  I  will  go  down 
into  the  ^  grave  unto  my  son  mourning.  Thus  his  father 
wei:)t  for  him.  36  And  the  Midianites  sold  him  into  Egj-pt 
unto  Potiphar,  an  officer  of  Pharaoh's,  chief  of  the  guard. 
XXXYIII.  ^  And  it  came  to  pass  at  that  time,  that  Judah 


to  be  ovemclJcn,  but  to  gather  instruction 
from.  It  is  clear  that  there  is  notliiiig  in 
them  which  invalidates  the  consistency  of  the 
narrative,  or  they  would  not  have  been 
allowed  to  remain  together  in  the  text, 
twenty  pieces]  Or  shekels:  the  original  has 
no  word  ;  see  reff.  29,  30.]   Reuben 

comes  again  to  the  cistern,  in  pursuance  of 
his  plan  of  ver.  22,  but  finds  not  Joseph, 
whither  shall  I  go  ?]  i.  e.  what  will 
become  of  me?  35.]  Tiiis  announce- 

ment is  startling  after  the  deed  which  they 
have  done.  But  there  is  no  limit  to  human 
hypocrisy.  the    grave   is  Skeol,   the 

place  of  departed  spirits.  The  A.  V.  some- 
times renders  it  by  hell,  sometimes  by  the 
pit.  36.]  The  word  here  is  Medauim, 

whereas  in  ver.  28  it  was  Midianim  :  and 
from  ch.  xxv.  2,  Medan  and  Midian  were 
two  different  descendants  of  .Abraham. 
Potiphar  is  the  abbreviated  form  of  Poti- 
pherah  :  see  ch.  xli.  50.  The  LXX.  express 
both  by  Petlphres.  The  word  rendered 
officer  is  liteially  eunuch  ;  but  this  name 
appears  to  have  been  given  to  others  among 
royal  officers  than  those  to  whom  it  properly 
belonged.      In  ch.  xl.  2  the  same  term  is 


applied  to  the  butler  and  baker.  Potiphar 
was  captain  or  cliief  of  the  executioners,  for 
so  the  expression  literally  means.  He  ap- 
pears, from  ch.  xxxix.  20,  to  have  have  had 
the  charge  of  the  royal  prison. 

XXX\'in.  The  history  of  Judah  and 
his  dawjhter-in-law  Tainar.  The  object  of 
this  parenthetical  chapter  seems  to  be  to 
shew  how  near  the  offspring  of  Jacob  were 
to  falling  into  the  habits  and  loathsome  sins 
of  the  Canaanitish  peoples  ;  and  to  pave 
the  way  for  the  history  of  their  removal  into 
the  land  of  Egypt,  which  took  place  by 
means  of  Joseph's  being  sold  and  carried 
thither.  At  the  same  time  it  defines  and 
accounts  for  tiie  two  main  branches  in  the 
kingly  line  of  Judah. 

1.]  Judah  seems  to  have  intended  to  break 
away  from  the  house  of  his  father,  but  by 
the  hint  given  in  ver.  26  to  have  been 
shocked  by  the  enormity  of  the  sins  in 
which  he  thus  became  involved,  and  to  have 
returned  again.  The  time  is  marked,  by 
the  fact  that  Judah  was  still  with  his  bre- 
thren at  the  sale  of  Joseph  into  Egypt,  as 
being  after  that  incident.  He  irent  dutni, 
because  Hebron,  where  Jacob  dwelt,  is  in 


29— XXXVIII.  11. 


GENESIS. 


1G9 


went  do\^Ti  from  liis  brethren,  and  turned  in  to  a  ceilain 
Adullumite,  whose  name  vas  Ilirah.  2  ^^fj  Judah  saw 
there  a  daughter  of  a  certain  Canaanite,  whose  name  /ras 
Shuah  ;  and  he  took  her,  and  Avent  in  unto  lier.  "^  And 
she  conceived,  and  hare  a  son  ;  and  he  caHed  his  name  Er. 
'^  And  she  conceived  again,  and  hare  a  son  ;  and  she  called 
his  name  Onan.  '^  And  she  yet  again  conceived,  and  bare 
a  S071  ;  and  called  his  name  Shelah  :  and  he  was  at  Chezib, 
when  she  bare  him.  ^  And  Judah  took  a  wife  for  Er  his 
firstborn,  whoso  name  iras  Tamar.  7  And  Er,  Judah's 
firstborn,  was  wicked  in  the  sight  of  the  Loiii);  and 
the  Lord  slew  liim.  ^  And  Judah  said  unto  Onan,  Go 
in  unto  th}'-  brother's  wife,  and  marry  her,  and  raise  up 
seed  to  thy  brother.  ^  And  Onan  knew  that  the  seed 
should  not  be  his  ;  and  it  came  to  pass,  when  he  went  in 
imto  his  brother's  wife,  that  he  spilled  it  on  the  ground, 
lest  that  he  should  give  seed  to  his  brother.  ^^  And  the 
thing  which  he  did  displeased  the  Lord  :  wherefore  he 
slew  him  also.  ^^  Then  said  Judah  to  Tamar  his  daughter 
in  law,  Remain  a  widow  at  thy  father's  house,  till  Shelah 
my  son  be  grown :  for  he  said,  Lest  peradventure  he  die 


the  ninuntnin  country  of  Jiulah  (Josh,  xv, 
5i),  and  Adullam  (soc  Josli.  xv.  3.3)  in  the 
plain  (or  vulk'v,  ib.  33).  This  phice  (Josli. 
xii.  1.5)  was  tlie  scat  of  a  Canaanitish  king  : 
it  was  in  its  iieighbourliood  tliat  David 
sheltered  in  a  cave  from  the  pursuit  of  Saul 
(I  Sam.  xxii.  1,  2) ;  it  was  from  hence  that 
the  tliree  mighty  men  broke;  througli  tlie  host 
of  the  Philisiinesand  fetched  David  the  water 
from  the  well  at  15ethlehcm  (2  Sam.  xxiii. 
13,  ff.).  Rehoboam  built  one  of  his  forts  there 
(2  Chron.  xi.  7),  which  was  afterwards  cele- 
brated (.Micah  i.  15).  After  the  captivity 
it  was  still  an  inhabited  town  (Neh.  xi.  30), 
and  is  mentioned  later  still  in  2  Mace.  xii. 
38.  The  site  has  never  been  satisfactorily 
identilied.  Van  de  Velde  believes  it  to  he 
Deir  Diippan,  about  two  hours  N.  of  Beit 
Jiboin  (Eleutheropolis).  Thencighbourliood 
consists  of  limestone  hills,  pierced  with 
many  caves.  2.]  Notice  that  Shuah  is 

the  name,  not  of  Judah's  wife,  but  of  her 
fathrr  :  see  ver.  12.  5.]  Chezib  is  not 

mentioned  elsewhere,  but  is  probably  ident- 
ical with  Aclizib  (Josli.  xv.  4-1  ;  Micah  i. 
14),  and  Chuzeba  (1  Chron.  iv.  22),  in  the 


low  country  of  Judah.  In  the  place  in  1 
Chron.  the  men  of  Chozeba  arc  numbered 
among  the  sons  ofSficlu/i.  'I'hey  had,  in  the 
taking  possession  of  the  land  of  promise, 
gravitated  to  the  birthplace  of  their  ancestor, 
and  its  neiglihourhood.  In  connexion  with 
this  circumstance  tlie  mention  of  that  birth- 
place here  is  remarkable.  6.]  The  name 
Tamar  in  Hebrew  signifies  a  jialm-trec,  but 
this  is  no  token  that  she  was  of  Semitic  blood. 
The  names  of  Melchizcdek  and  Abimclcch 
are  parallel  cases.  7.]  Tlierc  is  no  detailed 
explanation  of  the  reason  of  tlie  death  of  £r, 
hut  it  would  seem  by  what  follows,  ver.  10, 
to  have  been  something  connected  with  the 
peculiar  sins  which  brought  destruction  on 
the  Canaanitish  races.  8.]  On  the  law 
and  practice  of  leviiatic  marriage  (so  called 
from  the  Latin  levir,  a  brotlier-in-law)  sec 
note  on  Deut.  xxv.  5,  ff.  and  Matt,  xxiii.  ff. 
11.]  From  Levit.  xxii.  13  we  learn 
that  it  was  usual  for  a  widow  without  chil- 
dren to  return  to  her  father's  house.  Judah 
had  no  intention  to  give  Tamar  to  Shelah, 
althougli  he  professed  it.  He  had  the  fear 
with  which  the  story  of  Tobit  has  familiar- 


170  GENESIS.  XXXYIII. 

also,  as  his  brethren  did.  And  Tamar  went  and  dwelt  in 
her  father's  house.  ^^  ^  And  in  process  of  time  the 
daughter  of  Shuah,  Judah's  wife,  died  ;  and  Judah  was 
comforted,  and  went  up  unto  his  sheepshearers  to  Timnath, 
he  and  his  friend  Hirah  the  Adullamite,  ^^  And  it  was 
told  Tamar,  sajnng,  Behold  thy  father  in  law  goeth  up  to 
Timnath  to  shear  his  sheep,  ^^  And  she  put  her  widow's 
garments  off  from  her,  and  covered  her  with  a  vail,  and 
wrapped  herself,  and  sat  in  the  gate  of  Enaim,  which  is 
by  the  way  to  Timnath  ;  for  she  saw  that  Shelah  was 
grown,  and  she  was  not  given  unto  him  to  wife,  ^^  AVlien 
Judah  saw  her,  he  thought  her  to  be  an  harlot ;  because 
she  had  covered  her  face,  ^^  And  he  turned  unto  her  by 
the  way,  and  said.  Go  to,  I  pray  thee,  let  me  come  in  unto 
thee ;  (for  he  knew  not  that  she  teas  his  daughter  in  law.) 
And  she  said.  What  wilt  thou  give  me,  that  thou  maycst 
come  in  unto  me  ?  ^^  _^n(J  \xe  said,  I  will  send  thee  a  kid 
from  the  flock.  And  she  said,  "Wilt  thou  give  me  a  pledge, 
till  thou  send  it  ?  ^^  And  he  said,  What  pledge  shall  I 
give  thee?  And  she  said.  Thy  signet,  and  thy  string, 
and  thy  staff  that  is  in  thine  hand.  And  he  gave  them 
her,  and  came  in  unto  her,  and  she  conceived  by  him.  i^ 
And  she  arose,  and  went  away,  and  laid  by  her  vail  from 
her,  and  put  on  the  garments  of  her  widowhood.     -^  And, 

ized  us,  that  she  was  a  fatal  wife,  hringing  herself,  perhaps  indicated  some  act  sub- 
death  on  her  succe-^sive  husbands.  12.]  sequent  to  the  mere  veiling  herself — pos- 
The  situation  of  Tiinnah,  or  Timnatha  (for  sibly  the  wrapping  some  large  mantle  over 
Timnath  appears  to  be  an  error)  is  uncer-  her.  There  is  some  doubt  about  the  place 
tain.  It  seems  to  have  been  Judah's  station  where  she  sat  by  the  way.  I  have  given  it  as 
for  his  flocks,  and  to  have  been  above  where  the  I. XX.  and  the  Samaritan,  and  Kalisch, 
he  was  before.  It  is  perhaps  the  Timnah  Knobel,  and  Keil.  Others  think  it  is  the 
in  Josh.  XV.  57,  a  town  in  the  mountain  passage  by  two  fountains.  If  we  take  the 
country  of  Judah.  See  Mr.  Grove's  article  proper  name,  Enaim  may  perhaps  be  the 
in  the  Biblical  Diet.  It  must  be  distin-  same  as  Enam,  in  the  low  country  of  Judah, 
guished  from  a  fnmtier  town  of  Dan  and  Josh.  xv.  34.  17.]  The  present  of  a 
Judah  between  Rt  thshemesh  and  Ekron,  kid  is  found  in  Judg.  xv.  1  as  sent  from 
in  the  plain,  Josh.  xv.  10;  xix.  43  (in  the  Samson  to  his  wife.  18.]  She  chooses 
latter  place  called  Timnathah).  On  sheep-  those  things  that  might  best  identify  Judah. 
shearing  feasts,  see  1  Sam.  xxv.  4  ;  2  Sam.  The  signet  was  worn  inside  the  garments, 
xiii.  23.  14.]  See  Judith  x.  3.  The  suspended  round  the  neck  with  a  silk  string 
covering  herself  with  a  veil  was  to  prevent  (Cant.  viii.  6;  Jer.  xxii.  24;  flag.  ii.  23). 
her  recognition  by  Judah  :  but  the  act  seems  Both  these  she  asks  for,  and  for  tlie  staff  in 
also  to  have  some  reference  to  the  character  his  hand.  Herodotus  tells  us  that  every 
she  was  assuming :  see  Job  xxiv.  15.  The  Babvlonian  carried  a  staff,  adorned  with  a 
subsequent  expression,  wrapped  or  covered  carving  of  some  flower,  or  fruit,  or  animal. 


12—30.  GENESIS.  171 

Judali  sent  the  kid  by  the  hand  of  his  fricud  the  Adul- 
huiiite,  to  receive  his  pledj^e  from  the  woman's  hand :  but 
he  found  her  not.  ^i  Xhen  he  asjced  the  men  of  that 
phice,  saying,  Where  is  the  harlot,  at  Enaim  by  the  way 
side  ?  x\.nd  they  said,  There  was  no  harlot  in  this  place. 
2-  And  he  returned  to  Judah,  and  said,  I  cannot  find  her; 
and  also  the  men  of  the  place  said,  t/iaf  there  was  no  bal- 
lot in  this  jilnce.  23  \■^■^^[  Judah  said,  Let  her  take  if  to 
her,  lest  we  be  shamed:  behold,  I  sent  this  kid,  and  thou 
hast  not  found  her.  -^  ^  And  it  came  to  pass  about  three 
months  after,  that  it  was  told  Judah,  saying,  Taniar  thy 
daughter  in  law  hath  played  the  harlot ;  and  also,  behold, 
she  is  with  child  by  whoredom.  And  Ju(Udi  said.  Bring 
her  forth,  and  let  her  be  burnt.  -'^  When  she  icas  brought 
forth,  she  sent  to  her  father  in  law,  saying,  By  the  man, 
whose  these  are,  am  I  with  child  :  and  she  said,  Discern, 
I  pray  thee,  M-hose  are  these,  the  signet,  and  string, 
and  staff.  26  And  Judah  acknowledged  t//c/ii,  and  said. 
She  hath  been  more  righteous  than  I ;  because  that  I  gave 
her  not  to  Shelali  my  son.  And  he  knew  her  again  no 
more.  ^7  ^  And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  time  of  her  travail, 
that,  behold,  twins  irere  in  her  womb.  ^8  ^j^d  {^  came  to 
pass,  when  slie  travailed,  that  the  one  put  out  liis  hand : 
and  the  midwife  took  and  bound  upon  his  hand  a  scarlet 
thread,  saying,  This  came  out  first.  29  ^i[^^  i^,  came  to 
pass,  as  he  drew  back  his  hand,  that,  behold,  his  brother 
came  out :  and  she  said.  How  hast  thou  broken  forth  ? 
tJti>i  breach  he  upon  thee :  therefore  his  name  was  called 
Pharcz  [Breach],    ^o  \t^^  afterward  came  out  his  brother, 

21.]  The  name  by  which  Ilirah  calls  pronounced  upon  Taniar  as  being  now  by 

her  is  literally  a  holy  woman.     In  the  horrid  marriage  one  of  the  huly  race.       Had  she 

religious  rites  of  the  goddess  Ashtoreth  the  merely  been   punished  as  the  betrothed  of 

priestesses  or  female  devotees  were  harlots,  Selah,  she  would  have  been  stoned:  see  Levit. 

who  sat   and  solicited  the  passers-by:    see  xx.  10;   Deut.  xxii.  23,  tf  ;  Ezek.  xvi.  40; 

Jcr.  iii.  "2;  Ezek.  xvi.  2o  ;  Baruch  vi.    43.  John  viii.  5.             26.]  Judah  recognizes  in 

23.]  The  meaning  is,  then,  since  we  this  the  retribution  ior  his  own  injustice  to 

cannot  liud  her,  let  her  keep    the  pledge,  Tamar,  and  an  apology  for  lier  crime.  Butin- 

notwiilistanding  its  superior  value,  lest  we  asniuch  as  Ilebre^v  customs  afterwards  sanc- 

incur  shame  on  account  of  the  business.  tioned  by  the  law  (Lcvit.  xviii.  15  ;  xx.   12) 

24.]    The  punishment  of  burning  for   un-  condemned  such  an  act  as  incest,  he  repeated 

chastity  was  afterwards  by  the  law  reserved  it  not.           29.]   Most  commentators  regard 

for  the  daughters  of  priests:  see  Levit.  xxi.  9.  the  saying  of  the  midwife  as  allusive  to  the 

And  Knobel  thinks  that  this  sentence  was  division  of  the  kingdom,  by  which  a  breach 


172 


GENESIS. 


XXXIX. 


that  had  the  scarlet  thread  uj)on  his  hand :  and  his  name 
was  called  Zarah  [Sunrise].  XXXIX.  ^  And  Joseph  was 
brought  down  to  Egypt ;  and  Potiphar,  an  officer  of 
Pharaoh,  captain  of  the  guard,  an  Egyptian,  bought  him 
of  the  hands  of  the  Ishmaelites,  which  had  broujrht  him 
down  thither.  2  ji^^^^  Jehovah  was  with  Joseph,  and  he 
was  a  prosperous  man ;  and  he  was  in  the  house  of  his 
master  the  Egyptian.  ^  And  his  master  saw  that  Jehovah 
uris  with  him,  and  that  Jehovah  made  all  that  he  did  to 
prosper  in  his  hand.  ^  And  Joseph  found  grace  in  his 
sight,  and  he  served  him  :  and  he  made  him  overseer  over 
his  house,  and  all  that  he  had  he  put  into  his  hand.  ^ 
And  it  came  to  pass  from  the  time  that  he  had  made  him 
overseer  in  his  house,  and  over  all  that  he  had,  that  Je- 
hovah blessed  the  Egyptian's  house  for  Josephs  sake  ; 
and  the  blessing  of  Jehovah  was  upon  all  that  he  had  in 
the  house,  and  in  the  field.  ^  And  he  left  all  that  he  had 
in  Joseph's  hand  ;  and  with  him  he  knew  not  ought,  save 
the  bread  which  he  did  eat.  7  ^  And  Joseph  was  a  goodly 
person,  and  well  favoured.      And  it   came  to  pass  after 


was  made  in  the  sovereignty  of  the  house  of 
David,  wliich  came  of  the  line  of  Pharez. 

The  chronology  of  this  chapter  and  of 
the  events  whicli  depend  on  it  is  not  easy. 
Jacob  was  at  least  88  at  the  time  of  Judah's 
birth,  seino;  he  was  78  at  the  time  of  his 
flight  to  Haran,  and  served  7  years  before  he 
married  Leah,  and  this  was  his  fourth  son 
by  her  (see  ch.  xxix.  31  —  35),  some  time 
having  elapsed  before  she  bore  him  any 
children  (ib.  20,  25,  31).  And  he  was  130 
at  the  time  of  his  migration  to  Egypt  (ch. 
xlvii.  9).  So  that  we  have  barely  42  years' 
interval.  But  in  that  time  Judah  has  grown 
up  sons,  has  grandsons  by  their  widows,  one 
of  whom  has  two  sons,  Hezron  and  liamul, 
who  went  down  into  Kgypt  with  Jacob  and 
his  family  (ch.  xlvi.  12).  All  thismayhave 
been,  but  requires  the  utmost  limits  of  pos- 
sibility in  each  case,  for  3  X  14=  42, — 
and  Shelah,  the  youngest  of  the  three  sons, 
was  grown  up  before  Judah's  intercourse 
with  Tamar. 

XXXIX.  Joseph  in  Potiphar'' s  house  and 
in  prison.  The  question  as  to  tlie  probable 
date  of  Joseph's  arrival  in  Egypt  is  too  diffi- 
cult and  complicated  for  treatment  in  these 


notes.  It  will  be  found  discussed  at  length 
in  Mr.  Stuart  Poole's  article  in  the  Biblical 
Dictionary.  On  the  whole,  it  seems  pro- 
bable that  the  date  was  ab(mt  1900  B.  c, 
under  the  dynasty  of  shepherd  kings,  who 
ruled  mainly  in  Lower  Egypt.  On  Potiphar 
and  his  office,  see  notes,  ch.  xxxvii.  36. 
2—5.]  Notice  the  introduciion  of  the 
sacred  name  Jehovah  for  the  first  time  into 
Joseph's  history.  He  seems  to  have  lield 
the  same  place  in  bis  master's  house  which 
Eliezer  held  in  Abraham's  (ch.  xv.  2  ;  xxiv. 
2).  6.]  The  wi>rds  are  literally,  knew 

not  any  thing  with  him,  i.  e.  says  Knobel, 
in  cumpaiiv,  in  partner.-liip,  with  Joseph  :  the 
association  with  one  so  careful  and  faithful 
enabled  liim  to  do  without  personal  know- 
ledge of  his  affairs.  But  this  committal  of 
his  affairs  to  Joseph  did  not  extend  to  any- 
thing concerning  his  food,  for  that  would 
have  been  an  abomination  :  see  on  ch.  xliii. 
32.  So  also  Keil.  The  concluding  words 
of  this  verse  introduce  what  follows. 
7.]  We  are  told  by  both  ancient  and  modern 
writers  that  female  chastity  ever  has  been  at 
a  low  ebb  in  Egypt.  Li  the  case  of  one 
particular  mentioned   in   the   note   on   ch. 


1—20.  GENESIS.  ITJi 

tlaese  things,  that  his  master's  wife  east  her  eyes  upon 
Joseph  ;  and  she  said,  Lie  with  me.  ^  But  he  refused, 
and  said  unto  his  master's  wife,  Behokl,  my  master  wot- 
teth  not  what  is  with  mo  in  the  house,  and  he  halli  com- 
mitted all  that  he  hath  to  my  luind  ;  ^  f/wrc  is  none 
greater  in  this  house  than  I ;  neither  hath  he  kept  back 
any  thing  from  me  but  thee,  because  thou  art  his  wife : 
how  then  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness,  and  sin  against 
God?  ^^  And  it  came  to  pass,  as  she  spake  to  Joseph 
da}'  by  day,  that  he  hearkened  not  unto  her,  to  lie  by 
her,  or  to  be  with  her.  ^^  And  it  came  to  pass  on  a  certain 
day,  that  he  went  into  the  house  to  do  his  business ;  and 
t/icir  iras  none  of  the  men  of  the  house  there  within.  ^^ 
And  she  caught  him  by  his  garment,  saying,  Ijie  with 
me :  and  he  left  his  garment  in  her  hand,  and  flcfl,  and 
got  him  out.  ^^  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  she  saw  that 
he  had  left  his  garment  in  her  hand,  and  was  fled  forth, 
1^  that  she  called  unto  the  men  of  her  house,  and  spake 
unto  them,  saying,  See,  he  hath  brought  in  an  Hebrew 
unto  us  to  mock  us ;  he  came  in  unto  me  to  lie  with  me, 
and  I  cried  with  a  loud  voice :  ^^  and  it  came  to  pass, 
when  he  heard  that  I  lifted  up  my  voice  and  cried,  that 
he  left  his  garment  with  me,  and  fled,  and  got  him  out. 
1*'  And  she  laid  up  his  garment  by  her,  until  his  lord 
came  home.  ^^  And  she  spake  unto  him  according  to 
these  words,  sajdng,  The  Hebrew  servant,  which  thou 
hast  brought  unto  us,  came  in  unto  me  to  mock  me  :  ^^ 
and  it  came  to  pass,  as  I  lifted  up  my  voice  and  cried, 
that  he  left  his  garment  with  me,  and  fled  out.  ^^  And 
it  came  to  pass,  when  his  master  heard  the  words  of  his 
wife,  which  she  spake  unto  him,  saying,  After  this  manner 
did  thy  servant  to  me ;  that  his  wrath  Avas  kindled.  20 
And    Joseph's  master  took   him,  and   put   him  into  the 

xxxvii.  36,  being  accurate,  some  explanation  20.]  It  has  been  suggested  that  Poti- 

may    be   sii<rgc5ted   of    the   incident    here,  phar  could  not  have  altogether  believed  the 

9.]    The   God-fearing   character   of  report  of  his  wife,  seeing  that  such  a  crime 

Joseph  is  nobly  brought  out  by  his  plain  on  the  part  of  a  slave  would  certainly  have 

and  decisive  reply.     Compare  ch.  xlii.  18.  met  with  a  much  severer  punishment.     Poti- 

14.]  From  ch.  xliii.  32  we  learn  that  phar  was  able  to  do  what  he  did,  being  hy 

the  Hebrews  were  an   abomination   to  the  his  office  supreme  over  the  prison  and  its  in- 

Egyptians,  so  that  the  name  she  uses  was  mates.      From  ch.  xl.  3  we   learn    further 

calculated  to  enlist  the  servants  ou  her  side,  that  the  prison  was  in  Potiphar's  house,  and 


174  GENESIS.  XXXIX. 

prison,  a  place  where  the  king's  prisoners  were  bound : 
and  he  was  there  in  the  prison.  21  ^  ^wi  Jehovah  was 
with  Joseph,  and  shewed  him  mercy,  and  gave  him  favour 
in  the  sight  of  the  keeper  of  the  prison.  22  }^^^  \\q 
keeper  of  the  prison  committed  to  Joseph's  hand  all  the 
prisoners  that  Kere  in  the  prison  ;  and  whatsoever  they 
did  there,  he  was  the  doer  of  it.  23  The  keeper  of  the 
prison  looked  not  to  any  thing  that  was  under  his  hand ; 
because  Jehovah  was  with  him,  and  that  which  he  did, 
Jehovah  made  it  to  prosper.  XL.  ^  And  it  came  to  pass 
after  these  things,  that  the  butler  of  the  king  of  Egj^pt 
and  his  baker  had  offended  their  lord  the  king  of  Egypt. 
2  And  Pharaoh  was  wroth  against  two  of  his  officers, 
against  the  chief  of  the  butlers,  and  ajjainst  the  chief  of 
the  bakers.  ^  And  he  put  them  in  ward  in  the  house  of 
the  captain  of  the  guard,  into  the  prison,  the  place  where 
Joseph  teas  bound.  *  And  the  captain  of  the  guard 
charged  Joseph  with  them,  and  he  served  them  :  and  they 
continued  a  season  in  ward.  ^  ^  And  they  dreamed  a 
dream  both  of  them,  each  man  his  dream  in  one  night, 
each  man  according  to  the  interpretation  of  his  dream, 
the  butler  and  the  baker  of  the  king  of  Egypt,  which 
were  bound  in  the  prison.  ^  And  Joseph  came  in  unto 
them  in  the  morning  and  looked  upon  them,  and,  behold, 
they  icere  distressed.  7  And  he  asked  Pharaoh's  officers 
that  were  with  him  in  the  ward  of  his  lord's  house,  saying, 
Wherefore  are  your  faces  sad  to  daj^  ?     ^  And  they  said 

under  his  own  superintendence.     The  two  in  this  place  disquisitions  on  the  use  of  wine 

accounts  are  not,  as  Knobel  suggests,  dis-  in  Egypt,  which  is  thought  to  present  some 

crcpant,  but  in  perfect  accord.     The  keeper  difficulty.     There  is  of  course  none  about  the 

of  the  prison,  in  our  vv.  21 — 23,  is  obviously  intcrpi'ctation    of    the    office — "one   who 

an  inferior  officer,  who  was  charged  with  tlie  makes  to  drink,"  or  the  cupbearer, — since  it 

actual  discipline  of  the  prison  :  and  the  com-  is  fully  defined  by  the  dream.     But  it  is  said 

mission,  given  to   Joseph  in   ch.  xl.  4,  by  by  Herodotus  and  Plutarch,  tliat  tlie  culture 

Potiphar,  is  quite  what  might  be  expected  of  the  vine,  and  wine  altogether,  were  un- 

on  the  report  of  the  keeper,  joined  to  his  known  to  the  Egyptians.     But  this  has  been 

own  high  value  for  his  former  steward.  abundantly  disproved  by  representations  of 

XL.  Joseph  interprets  the  dream  of  the  the  vine  and  the  winepress  on  the  monuments 

chief  butler  and  the  chief  baker.     The  two  of  the  earliest  dynasties;  and  Herodotus  in 

officers   (or  eunuchs)  here  mentioned   were  other    portions  of  his  history  implies  that 

of  high  standing,  and  Potiphar  (for  he  was  both  were  well  known.     See  also  Kuin.  xx. 

chief  of  the  guard  or  of  the  executioners)  put  6;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  47  ;  cv.  33.  5.J  Each 

them  iinder  the  charge  of  Joseph,  who  also  man  according  to  the  interpretation  seems  to 

waited  on  them.     The  commentators  have  mean,  each  man  a  diverse  dream,  as  also  the 


21— XL.  18.  GENESIS.  175 

unto  liim,  We  have  dreamed  a  dream,  and  there  is  no  in- 
terpreter of  it.     And   Joseph  said   unto   tliem,  Do  not 
interpretations  belong  to  God  ?  tell  me  them,  I  pray  you. 
^  And  the  chief  butler  told  his  dream  to  Joseph,  and  said 
to  him.  In  my  dream,  behold,  a  vine  ican  before  me  ;  ^^  and 
in  the  vine  were  three  branches  :  and  it  icaa  as  thouo-li  it 
budded,  and  its   blossoms  shot   forth ;    and  the    clusters 
thereof  brought  forth  ripe  grapes :  ^^  and  Pharaoh's  cup 
ivaa  in  ni}'  hand  :  and  I  took  the  grapes,  and  pressed  them 
into  Pharaoh's  cup,  and  I  gave  the  cup  into  Pharaoh's 
hand.    ^'^  And  Joseph  said  unto  him.  This  /s  the  interjjret- 
ation   of  it :    The  three  branches  are  three  days  :  13  yg^ 
within  three  daj's  shall  Pharaoh  '^lift  up  thine  head,  and  ^2  Kings xx.. 
restore    thee   uiito    thy    place :     and   thou    shalt   deliver 
Pharaoh's  cup  into  his   hand,  after  the   former  manner 
when  thou  wast  his  butler.     ^'^  But  think  on  me  when  it 
shall  be  well  with  thee,  and  shew  kindness,  I  pray  thee, 
unto   me,  and  make  mention  of  me  unto  Pharaoh,  and 
bring  me  out  of  this  house :  ^^  for  indeed  I  was  stolen 
away  out  of  the  land  of  the  Hebrews :  and  here  also  have 
I  done  nothing  that  they  should  put  me  into  the  dungeon. 
1*^  When  the  chief  baker  saw  that  the  interpretation  was 
good,  he  said  unto  Joseph,  I  also  was  in  my  dream,  and, 
behold,  I  had  three  baskets  of  white  bread  on  my  head  :   ^7 
and  in  the  uppermost  basket  there  icaa  of  all  manner  of 
food  for  Pharaoh,  the  work  of  the  baker ;  and  the  birds 
did  eat  them  out  of  the  basket  upon  my  head.     ^^  And 
JoseiDh    answered   and    said.   This    is    the    interpretation 

interpretations  were  diverse.  8.]  Ob-  olive  branches  into  tlie  lamps  is  exactly 
serve  again  Joseph's  reference  to  God.  parallel.  14,  f.]  We  may  observe  at  once 
11.]  Some  (e.  g.  Roseninuller)  have  Joseph's  faith,  and  his  cliarity.  lie  has 
thought  that  this  has  reference  to  the  fact  hope  in  the  future  notwithstanding  all  ad- 
asserted  by  Uerodotus  (see  above),  and  tliat  verse  appearances;  and,  in  pleadin>'-  liis  own 
the  process  described  does  not  imply  the  innocence,  he  says  not  an  angry  word  ao-ainst 
use  of  fermented  wine.  But  this  can  hardly  any  who  had  mistreated  liim.  15.1 
be,  as  we  have  representations  of  drunken  He  mentions  the  fact  of  his  abduction  from 
persons  on  the  ancient  Egyptian  monuments :  his  father's  house  by  tlie  simple  name  of 
and  the  reason  for  the  form  of  action  must  be  stealing  or  abducting  him,  shewing  the  cau- 
obscure.  Pos-ibiy  it  may  have  been  merely  tion  of  one  who  would  not  involve  his 
asymbolismbulonging  to  the  dream:  the  juice  brethren  in  disgrace  before  a  stranger:  and 
squeezed  into  the  cup  signifying  the  wine  he  names  the  land  of  Canaan,  the  land  of 
which  ultimately  should  result  from  such  the  Hebrews,  to  identify  himself  with  that 
squeezing.  Compare  Zeeh.  iv.  12,  where  race,  rather  than  with  the  Canaanites. 
the  pouring  of  oil  (in  the  vision)  from  the  19.]  The   explanation   seems   to    be 


176  GENESIS.  XL. 

thereof:  The  three  baskets  are  three  days  :  ^^  Yet  within 
three  days  shall  Pharaoh  lift  up  thy  head  from  off  thee, 
and  shall  hang  thee  on  a  tree ;  and  the  birds  shall  eat  thy 
flesh  from  off  thee.  20  ^  A.n(\.  it  came  to  pass  the  third 
day,  irJtich  ivas  Pharaoh's  birthday,  that  he  made  a  feast 
unto  all  his  servants  :  and  he  lifted  up  the  head  of  the 
chief  butler  and  of  the  chief  baker  amons:  his  servants. 
2^  And  he  restored  the  chief  butler  unto  his  butlership 
again ;  and  he  gave  the  cup  into  Pharaoh's  hand :  22  jj^it 
he  hanged  the  chief  baker :  as  Joseph  had  interpreted  to 
them.  23  Yet  did  not  the  chief  butler  remember  Joseph, 
but  forgat  him.  XLI.  ^  And  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end 
of  two  full  years,  that  Pharaoh  dreamed  :  and,  behold,  he 
stood  by  the  river.  2  And,  behold,  there  came  up  out  of 
the  river  seven  well  favoured  kine  and  fatfleshed ;  and 
»joi,vm. u,  they  fed  in  the  ^ sedge.  ^  And,  behold,  seven  other  kine 
came  up  after  them  out  of  the  river,  ill  favoured  and  lean- 
fleshed  ;  and  stood  by  the  ofl/o'  kine  upon  the  brink  of  the 
river.  "*  And  the  ill  favoured  and  leanfleshed  kine  did  eat 
up  the  seven  well  favoured  and  fat  kine.  So  Pharaoh 
awoke.  ^  And  he  slept  and  dreamed  the  second  time : 
and,  behold,  seven  ears  of  corn  came  up  upon  one  stalk, 

that  the  chief  baker  ■was  to  beheaded,  and  shewing  that  the  word  as  written  was  well 

his  body  huns:  up  in   disgrnce :  see    Deut.  understood   by   them.     In    ref.    the   LXX. 

xxi.  22,  23;  Josh.  x.  26  ;  2  Sam.  iv.  12.  render  the  word  by  Am^owms  (rush).     Jerome 

XL!.]    Pharaoh's  dreams,  and  Joseph's  exphiins  it  to  mean,  "  all  the  green  plants 

interpretation  of  them.  '\        I.]  the  river  tliat  grow  in  the  marsh."     In  Isa.  xix.  7, 

(stream),  where  the  scene  is  in  Egypt,  or  the  where  there  is  no  such  word  in  the  Hebrew, 

river  of  Er^ypt  (ch.  xv.  18;  see  note  there),  the  LXX.  have,  "the  green  ac/;j  all  round  the 

are  the  usual  appellations  of  the  Nile  in  the  river."         3,  4.]  The  second  dream  exactly 

0.  T.     But  the  word  for  these  two  is  not  the  corresponds.     On  the  symbolism  of  both  it 

same  :  the  former  (ha-yeor),  the  stream,  is  may  be  remarked,  tliat  the  Nile  is  the  con- 

used  here  and  in  Exodus,  wluMcas  in  the  difion  of  fertility  in  Egypt,   and  that  the 

other  expression  it  is  Nahar  Mizraiju,  tlie  bull  (Osiris)   was  the   symbol  of  the   Nile. 

foi-mer  being  the  ordinary  word  for  "river."  The  cow,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  hiero- 

The  word  here  used   is  said  to  be  derived  glyphical   paintings,    represents    the    earth, 

from  an  Egyptian  root  signifying  a  dyke  or  agriculture,  and  food.     And  Isis, — to  whom 

channel,  and  never  is  applied  as  a  proper  the  cow  was  especially  sacred,  and  who  is 

name  to  other  than  the  Nile,  except  in  Dan.  represented  horned,  and  also  under  the  form 

xii.  5,  IF.,  where  it  means  the  Tigris.         2.]  of  a  cow,^is  the  goddess  of  the  all-nourish- 

The   word   for    sedge,    or    reed-grass,   is  ing  earth,  or  of  tlie  land  fructified  by  the 

achoo,   also  an  Egyptian  word.     It  is  re-  Nile.     On  the  further  signification,  see  note, 

markable  that  the  LXX.,  making  their  ver-  ver.  26.             5  —  8.]  The  second  dream  in- 

sion  in  Alexandria,  preserve  this  word  as  it  terprets  its  If.     The  seven  ears  on  one  stalk 

is;    "they  fed  in  the  achi:"    and  so  the  is  supposed  to  point  to  the  triticitm  cotnpo- 

Coptic  translator,  also    an   Egyptian,  both  sidmi,  or  Egyptian  wheat,  of  which  this  is  a 


19— XLI.  16.  GENESIS.  177 

rank    and    good.      ^  And,    behold,    seven    thin    ears   and 

blasted  with  the  east  wind  sprung  up  after  thera.     7  And 

the  seven  thin  ears  devoured  the  seven  rank  and  full  ears. 

And  Pharaoh  awoke,  and,  behold,  ii  ira.s  a  dream.     8  Ji^nd 

it  canio  to  pass  in  the  morning  that  his  spirit  was  troubled; 

and  he  sent  and  called  for  all  the  '^  maaicians  of  Eji-vpt,   '"■•''••  yM"""- 

and  all  the  wise  men  thereof:  and  Pharaoh  told  them  his     oI'ik' dId"" 

dream  ;  but  f/tcrc  iras  none  that  could  interpret  them  unto     ;'!i/,Uij.' 

Pharaoh.     ^  ^|  Then  spake  the  chief  butler  unto  Pharaoh, 

saying,  I   do  renicniber  my  faults  this  day :   ^^  Pharaoh 

was  wroth  with  his  servants,  and  put  me  in  ward  in  the 

captain  of  the  guard's  house,  both  me  and  the  chief  baker: 

1^  and  we  dreamed  a  dream  in  one  night,  I  and  he ;  we 

dreamed  each  man  according  to  the  interpretation  of  his 

dream.     ^^  And  tho'e  teas  there  with  us  a  young  man,  an 

Hebrew,  servant  to  the  captain  of  the  guard ;  and  we  told 

him,  and  he  interpreted  to  us  our  dreams ;  to  each  man 

according  to  his  dream  he  did  interpret.     ^'"^  And  it  came 

to  pass,  as  he  interpreted  to  us,  so  it  was ;  me  he  restored 

unto  mine  office,  and  him  he  hanged.     ^^  ^\  Then  Pharaoh 

sent  and  called  Joseph,  and  they  brought  him  hastily  out 

of  the  dungeon  :  and  he  shaved  himself,  and  changed  his 

raiment,  and  came  in  unto   Pharaoh.      ^'^  And  Pharaoh 

said  unto  Joseph,  I  have  dreamed  a  dream,  and  there  is 

none  that  can  interpret  it :  and  I  have  heard  say  of  thee, 

thai  thou  canst  understand  a  dream  to  interpret  it.  ^^  And 

peculiarity.     "The  East  wind,  blowinj^  from  the   cliicf  butler  means  partly   his   offence 

the  sandy  steppes  and  deserts.in  the  vicinity  against  his  king,  partly  his  forgetfulness  of 

of  the  Red  Sea,  and  from  the  Arabic  peniu-  his  benefactor.  11.]  See  on  ch.  xl.  5. 

sula,  olten  withers  the  vegetation  of  Lower  14.]  The  fact  of  Joseph  having  shaved 

Egypt,  and   completely  destroys   the  labour  himself  is  in  striking  accord  with  the  Egypt- 

and  the  hopes  of  tlie  husbandman  "  Kalisch.  ian  custom,  which  was  to  let  the  beard  and 

The  word  rendered  magicians  comes  from  a  hair  grow  in  mourning  only — otherwise  most 

root   signifying    to    cut    in,  or  engrave,  or  scrupulously  shaving  :  whereas  the  llebrcws 

scratch   (other  conjectural  derivations   may  cultivated  the  hair  and  beard  and  shaved  in 

be  seen  in  Kalisch's  note).     These  persons  token  of  mourning  (see  2  Sam.  x.  4,  5  ;  Isa. 

were  those  elsewhere  called  the  i//t'ro-(7r«wi-  xv.  2  ;  Jer.  xvi.  6;  xli.  5  ;  Amos  viii.  10). 

mateis,  those  whose  duty  it  was  to  inscribe  lie  changed  his  raiment,  from  the  ordinary 

the     hieroglyphical    inscriptions.       Janncs  habit  of  the  prison  to  that  of  ordinary  life 

and  Jambres  are  cited  by  Eusebius  as  the  or  even  of  festal   rejoicing.      The  fact  of 

chiefs  of  the  Hierogramniateis.     The  word  his  having  it  in  his  power  to  do  so  shews 

occurs  only  (see  reff.)  in  this  Egyptian  por-  that  he  was  not  treated  as  ordinary  prisoners 

tion  of  the  Pentateuch  and  in  the  Book  of  are  :  see  ch.  xxxix.  22,  23.  16-]  It  is 

Daniel,   wiiich  imitates  tlie  diction  of  the  not  in  me,  literally,  «o<  «7i<o  »if,  i.  e.  with - 

earlier  Scriptures.  9.]    By   his   sins,  out  me.     Kotice  again,  as  characteristic  of 


178  GENESIS.  XLI. 

Josepli  answered  Pliaraoli,  saying,  It  is  not  in  me :  God 
shall  give  Pliaraoli  an  answer  of  peace.  ^7  And  Pliaraoli 
said  unto  Joseph,  In  my  dream,  behold,  I  stood  upon  the 
bank  of  the  river :  ^^  and,  behold,  there  came  up  out  of 
the  river  seven  kine,  fatfleshed  and  well  favoured  ;  and 
they  fed  in  the  sedge :  ^^  and,  behold,  seven  other  kine 
came  up  after  them,  poor  and  very  ill  favoured  and  lean- 
fleshed,  such  as  I  never  saw  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt  for  bad- 
ness :  20  and  the  lean  and  the  ill  favoured  kine  did  eat  up 
the  first  seven  fat  kine :  ^i  and  when  they  had  eaten  them 
up,  it  could  not  be  known  that  they  had  eaten  them  ;  but 
they  n-ere  still  ill  favoured,  as  at  the  beginning.  So  I 
awoke.  22  And  I  saw  in  my  dream,  and,  behold,  seven 
ears  came  up  in  one  stalk,  full  and  good :  ^3  and,  behold, 
e  here  only.  scvon  oars,  "^withered,  thin,  and  blasted  with  the  east 
windj  sprung  up  after  them  :  ^4  and  the  thin  ears  devoured 
the  seven  good  ears :  and  I  told  this  unto  the  magicians ; 
but  there  was  none  that  could  declare  it  to  me.  ^5  ^  And 
Joseph  said  unto  Pharaoh,  The  dream  of  Pharaoh  is  one : 
God  hath  shewed  Pharaoh  what  he  is  about  to  do.  26  ^he 
seven  good  kine  are  seven  years ;  and  the  seven  good  ears 
are  seven  years  :  the  dream  is  one.  27  And  the  seven  thin 
and  ill  favoured  kine  that  came  up  after  them  are  seven 
years ;  and  the  seven  empty  ears  blasted  with  the  east 
wind  shall  be  seven  years  of  famine.  28  This  is  the  thing 
which  I  have  spoken  unto  Pharaoh :  What  God  is  about 
to  do  he  sheweth  unto  Pharaoh.  29  Behold,  there  come 
seven  years  of  great  plenty  throughout  all  the  land  of 
Egypt :  ^^  and  there  shall  arise  after  them  seven  years  of 
famine ;  and  all  the  plenty  shall  be  forgotten  in  the  land 
of  Egypt ;  and  the  famine  shall  consume  the  land  ;  ^^  and 
the  plenty  shall  not  be  known  in  the  land  by  reason  of 
that  famine  following ;  for  it  shall  he  very  grievous.  ^2  And 

Joseph    the   immediate   reference   to    God.  19  and  21.      Tlie  first  epithet  of  the  thin 

What  follows  is  literally,  "  God   will  an-  ears  in  ver.  22  is  added,  and  is  a  word  oc- 

swer  the  peace  of  Pharaoh,"   a  pregnant  curring  here  only  in  this  sense.     It  seems  to 

construction    meaning,  "  God  will  give  the  signify    dnj   or    hard,    but    it    is    said   to 

answer  and  that  answer  such  an  one  as  shall  he  uncertain.     Gesenius  owns  to  having  no 

be  for  the  welfare  of  I'haraoh."         17 — 24.]  clue  to  its  interpretation.     The  LXX.  and 

Pharaoh    tells   his    dream,  but   not  in  the  the  Vulgate  omit  all  rendering  of  it. 

very  words  of  the  previous  narrative,  add-  25—36.]     Joseph's    interpretation    of   the 

in<^  some  particulars,  e.  g.  the  end  of  ver.  dream,  and  advice  thereiipo7i.  32.]  See 


17—42.  GE]^ESIS.  179 

for  (liat  the  dream  was  doubled  unto  Pliaraoli  twice ;  it  is 
because  the  thing  is  established  by  God,  and  God  will 
shortly  bring  it  to  pass.  33  2iow  therefore  let  Pharaoh 
look  out  a  man  discreet  and  wise,  and  set  him  over  the 
land  of  Egypt.  ^^  Let  I*haraoh  do  tlii>^,  and  let  him  ap- 
point officers  over  the  land,  and  take  up  the  fifth  part  of. 
the  land  of  Egypt  in  the  seven  plenteous  years.  '^■^  And 
let  them  gather  all  the  food  of  those  good  years  that  come, 
and  lay  up  corn  '^  under  the  hand  of  I^haraoh,  and  let  ""l.^'llf /Ill's, 
them  keep  food  in  the  cities.  ^G  ^^^^  ^Ju^t  food  shall  be 
for  store  to  the  land  against  the  seven  years  of  famine, 
which  shall  be  in  the  land  of  Egj^t ;  that  the  land  be  not 
cast  off  through  the  famine.  '^''  ^  And  the  thing  was  good 
in  the  eyes  of  Pharaoh,  and  in  the  eyes  of  all  his  servants. 

28  And  Pharaoh  said  unto  his  servants,  Can  we  find  such 
a  one  as  this   ?>,  a  man  in  whom  the  Spirit  of  God  is  ? 

29  And  Pharaoh  said  unto  Joseph,  Forasmuch  as  God  hath 
shewed  thee  all  this,  t/icre  is  none  so  discreet  and  wise  as 
thou  art :  "^^  thou  shalt  be  over  my  house,  and  according 
unto  thy  word  shall  all  my  people  be  ruled :  only  in  the 
throne  will  I  be  greater  than  thou,  ^i  And  Pharaoh  said 
unto  Joseph,  See  I  have  set  thee  over  all  the  land  of 
Egypt.  '^^  And  Pharaoh  took  off  his  ring  from  his  hand, 
and  put  it  upon  Joseph's  hand,  and  arrayed  him  in  vest- 
ures of  fine  linen,  and  put  a  gold  chain  about  his  neck ; 

1  Kings  xi.  9  ;  Job  xxxiii.  14;  Ps.  Ixii.  11.  shall  my  people  he  ruled.  Some  of  the 
33,  f.]  Joseph  gives  this  advice,  as  Ilebraists  (o.  g.  Gescnius,  Knobel)  render  it, 
emboUk'Ued  by  the  position  which  his  inter-  "  07i  thij  mouth  shall  my  people  kiss,"  and 
prctation  of  I'haraoli's  dream  had  given  hiiu.  interpret  it  of  the  kiss  of  homage.  But  most 
But  it  is  done  in  all  simplicity,  with  that  of  the  others  believe  tlie  meaning  to  be  as  in 
openness  which  characterized  Joseph  :  com-  the  text,  objecting  that  the  kiss  of  homage 
pare  his  bearing  to  his  temptress,  ch.  xxxix.  was  reserved  for  princes.  67.]  The 
9  ;  to  tlie  chief  baker,  ch.  xl.  18.  34.  signet-ring  (the  Hebrew  word  for  wliich  is 
take  up  the  fifth  part]  i.  e.  lay  on  a  tax  of  derived  from  a  root  signifying  to  dip,  because 
a  fifth  of  the  produce.  35.  vmder  the  the  ring  is  dipped  in  tlic  sealing  matter  to 
handj  i.e.  subject  to  tlie  control:  see  reff.  make  the  impression)  has  always  conveyed  the 
37 — 42.]  The  exaltation  of  Joseph,  power  of  the  wearer,  and  the  royal  signet 
Pharaoh  and  his  court  are  at  once  struck  carried  with  it  the  authority  of  the  ring : 
with  the  appositencss  of  the  interpretation,  see  Esther  iii.  10 ;  viii.  2.  On  the  vestures 
and  unhesitatingly  adopt  it  as  the  true  one.  of  fine  linen  we  may  remark  that  the  pricst- 
The  Spirit  of  God  was  sliewn  to  be  in  him,  hood,  the  foremost  caste  of  Egypt,  wore 
both  by  tiie  interpretation,  and  by  the  wis-  only  linen  and  cotton  garments,  and  no 
dom  of  words  with  which  he  had  followed  it  woollen.  The  golden  chain  is  found  adorn- 
up.  40.]  There  is  some  dithculty  in  ing  the  neck  of  persons  of  distinction  in  tiic 
the  phrase  rendered,  according  to  thy  word  Egyptian  wall-paintings.            43.]  i.  e.  his 


180  GENESIS.  XLI. 

^■^  and  he  made  him  to  ride  in  the  second  chariot  which  he 
"^ft?reh"fe«V  had;  and  they  cried  f  before  him,  Bow  the  knee:  and  he 
made  him  ruler  over  all  the  land  of  Egypt,  ^4  ^^^ 
Pharaoh  said  unto  JosejDh,  I  am  Pharaoh,  and  without 
thee  shall  no  man  lift  up  his  hand  or  foot  in  all  the  land 
of  Egypt.  ^'5  And  Pharaoh  called  Joseph's  name  Zaphnath- 
paaneah  [Saviour  of  the  world,  or  Revealer  of  secrets]  ; 
and  he  gave  him  to  wife  Asenath  the  daughter  of  Poti- 
erer.sn.  ch.  j^hcrah  prlcst  of  ^On.  And  Joseph  went  out  over  all  the 
land  of  Egypt.  ^^  H  And  Joseph  u-as  thirty  years  old 
when  he  stood  before  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt.  And 
Josejih  went  out  from  the  presence  of  Pharaoh,  and  went 
throughout  all  the  land  of  Egypt.  ^7  And  in  the  seven 
plenteous  years  the  earth  brought  forth  by  handfuls. 
^S  And  he  gathered  up  all  the  food  of  the  seven  years, 
which  were  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  laid  up  the  food  in 
the  cities :  the  food  of  the  held,  which  teas  round  about 
every  city,  laid  he  up  in  the  same.  ^^  And  Joseph 
gathered  corn  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  very  much,  until  he 
left  numbering  ;  for  it  was  without  number.  ^^  And  unto 
Joseph  were  born  two  sons  before  the  years  of  famine 
came,  which  Asenath  the  daughter  of  Poti-pherah  priest 
of  On  bare  unto  him.     ^^  And  Joseph  called  the  name  of 

chariot  was  the  noxt  to  the  royal  state  cliariot  is,  one  who  belongs  to  Ra,  or  the  stm.  The 
in  splendour.  The  word  Abrech,  rendered  priestly  caste  was  the  royal  caste  also.  The 
'■^  Bow  the  knee,''  is  of  entirely  obscure  origin,  kings  chosen  out  of  the  militaiy  caste  Avere 
It  is  not  known  whether  it  is  Hebrew  or  adopted  into  the  priestly  caste,  and  taught 
Egyptian.  Tlie  marginal  rendering  in  the  the  mysteries  known  to  it  alone.  That  this 
A.  v.,  "tender  father,"  is  allowed  to  be  a  was  the  case  with  Joseph  is  evident  from  ch. 
mistake.  On  the  whole  the  rendering  of  the  xliv.  5.  On  was  the  popular  name  of  Beth- 
A.  V.  is  that  most  approved,  though  by  no  shemesli  or  Ileliopolis,  these  names  meaning 
means  certain.  I  have  therefore  placed  the  t?ie  house  or  city  of  the  Sun.  The  Egyptian 
literal  rendering  in  the  margin.  44.]  sacred  name  was  Ha-Ea,  with  the  same  sig- 
I  am  Pharaoh,  i-  e.  king,  which  the  name  nification.  Cyril  of  Alexandria,  living  in 
implies  ;  I  have  power  to  decree  this.  I'oyP*'  ^^1^  ^'*  signifies  the  sun  also.  It 
45.]  The  name  given  to  Joseph  has  been  was  on  the  E.  side  of  the  Pelusian  branch  of 
variously  understood.  Jerome  interpreted  the  Nile,  just  below  the  point  of  the  Delta, 
it  in  the  Yulgate  Snhator  Mundi  (Saviour  and  about  20  miles  N.E.  of  Memphis.  For 
of  the  world) ;  and  the  LXX.  write  it  Pson-  all  particulars  about  it,  see  Mr.  Stuart 
thomphanech ,  which  may  perhaps  be  made  Poole's  art.  in  the  Biblical  Diet.  46.] 
in  Coptic  to  mean  this.  It  has  been  also  Respecting  the  chronology  of  Joseph's  life, 
rendered  "  the  revealer  of  ?n;/steries,"  so  see  above  on  ch.  xxxv.  29.  49.]  The 
Onkelos,  and  the  old  Syriac.  Kalisch  pre-  astonishing  fertility  of  the  Egj-ptian  corn 
fers  the  former.  It  has  been  before  remarked  has  been  shewn  by  the  results  of  sowing 
on  ch.  xxxvii.  nit.,  that  Poti-pherali  is  the  grains  found  in  ancient  tombs  and  mummy- 
same  name  as  Potiphar.     The  signification  cases.            51.]  Connected  with  the  naming 


43-XLII.  5.  GENESIS.  181 

the  firstborn  Manasscli  [^rulviiig  to  forget]  :  For  God, 
said  he,  Lath  made  mc  forget  all  my  toil,  and  all  my 
father's  house.  ^"  And  the  name  of  the  second  called  ho 
Ephraim  [Double  fruitfulness]  :  For  God  hath  caused  me 
to  be  fruitful  in  the  land  of  ray  affliction.  ^^  ^  ^^^  ^\q 
seven  years  of  plenteousness,  that  was  in  the  land  of 
Egypt,  were  ended.  ^^  And  the  seven  years  of  dearth  be- 
gan to  come,  according  as  Joseph  had  said:  and  the  dearth 
was  in  all  lands ;  but  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt  there  was 
bread.  ^'^  And  when  all  the  land  of  Egypt  was  famished, 
the  people  cried  to  Pharaoh  for  bread  :  and  riiaraoh  said 
unto  all  the  Egyptians,  Go  unto  Joseph  ;  wliat  he  s:iith 
to  3'ou,  do.  ^^  And  the  famine  was  over  all  the  face  of 
the  earth  :  and  Joseph  opened  all  the  storehouses,  and 
sold  unto  the  Egyptians ;  and  the  famine  waxed  sore  in 
the  land  of  Egypt.  ^"^  And  all  countries  came  into  Egypt 
to  Joseph  for  to  buy,  because  that  the  famine  was  sore  in 
all  lands.  XLII.  ^  Now  when  Jacob  saw  that  there  was 
corn  in  Egypt,  Jacob  said  unto  his  sons.  Why  do  je  look 
one  upon  another  ?  ^  And  he  said.  Behold,  I  have  heard 
that  there  is  corn  in  Egj'pt :  get  you  down  thither,  and 
buy  for  us  from  thence  ;  that  we  may  live,  and  not  die. 
3  ^  And  Joseph's  ten  brethren  went  down  to  buy  corn  \\\ 
Egypt.  ^  But  Benjamin,  Joseph's  brother,  Jacob  sent 
not  with  his  brethren  ;  for  he  said.  Lest  peradventure 
mischief  befall  him.  ^  And  the  sons  of  Israel  came  to 
buy  com  among  those  that  came :  for  the  famine  was  in 

of  Joseph's  first  son  is   the  question   first  logists  say,  shown  by  the  expression  the  land 

raised  in  the  fifth   century   by  Tlieodoret,  of  my   affliction    below.     It  was   this,  in 

how  it  came  to  pass  that  in  all  this  tiuie  virtue  of  iiis  slavery  and  imprisonment,  not 

during  which  Joseph  was  in  highest  power  of  his  exile,  from  home.     Ilis  subsequent 

in  Egypt,  he  had  never  comnninieated  with  affectionate  treatment  of  his  fiither  and  his 

his  latlier.     Surely  it  is  no  sufficient  answer  brethren  only  increases  the  difficulty  of  his 

to  this   to  say,  with  Keil,    that  the  over-  long   silence.              53—67.]    The  famine. 

whelming  sense  of  God's  wondrous  purposes  56.]  The  storehouses  are  literally,  all 

for  him  in  Egypt  so  occupied  his  mind,  as  to  in  which  [there  Iras']  in  iheiu,  viz.  corn, 

preclude  the  thouglit  of  such  communication.  XLII. — XI.,V.]  Joseph  diid  his  brethren. 

The  problem  must  be  left  unsolved  ;  and  is,  1.]  look  one  upon  another,  in  want 

we  cannot  help  feeling,  further  complicated  of  counsel,  and  dispair.              4.]   Uenjamin 

by  the  apparent  prominence  into  which   his  was  emphatically  the  son  of  Jacob's  old  age. 

forgctfulnt'ss  of  his  father's  house  is  thrust  But  at  this  time  he  was  a  grown-up  man, 

by  the  naming  of  this  his   first-born  son.  and  at  the    migration  into  Egypt   had  ten 

That  he  retained  aff'ectionatc  remembrance  sons  :  see  ch.  xlvi.  21.          5.]  among  those 

of  his  father's  house  is  not,  as  some  apo-  that  came   is  graphically  expressed  iu  the 


182 


GENESIS. 


XLII. 


viii.  8;  X.  5. 
(Ezek.  iv.  20 ; 
vii.  24.)  Dan. 
ii.  10,  15;  iv. 
17,  25,  20,  32  ; 
T.  21,29,  onlv. 


g  little  one : 
see  ch.  ix, 

h  ch.  v._24. 


the  land  of  Canaan.  ^  And  Joseph  was  the  *' govern  or  over 
the  land,  and  he  it  was  that  sold  to  all  the  people  of  the 
land :  and  Joseph's  brethren  came,  and  bowed  down  them- 
selves before  him  u-ifh  their  faces  to  the  earth.  7  And 
Joseph  saw  his  brethren,  and  he  knew  them,  but  made 
himself  strange  unto  them,  and  spake  roughly  unto  them ; 
and  he  said  unto  them,  Whence  come  ye  ?  iVnd  they 
said,  From  the  land  of  Canaan  to  buy  food.  ^  And  Joseph 
knew  his  brethren,  but  they  knew  not  him.  ^  And  Joseph 
remembered  the  dreams  which  he  dreamed  of  them,  and 
said  unto  them.  Ye  are  spies ;  to  see  the  nakedness  of 
the  land  ye  are  come.  ^^  And  they  said  unto  him,  Nay, 
my  lord,  but  to  buy  food  are  thy  servants  come.  ^^  We 
are  all  one  man's  sons ;  we  are  true  men,  thy  servants 
are  no  spies.  ^^  And  he  said  unto  them.  Nay,  but  to 
see  the  nakedness  of  the  land  ye  are  come.  ^^  And  they 
said.  Thy  servants  are  twelve  brethren,  the  sons  of  one 
man  in  the  land  of  Canaan ;  and,  behold,  the  ^  youngest 
is  this  day  with  our  father,  and  one  ^is  not.  ^^  And 
Joseph  said  unto  them.  That  is  ii  that  I  spake  unto  you, 
saying.  Ye  ore  spies :  ^^  hereby  ye  shall  be  proved  :  By 


Hebrew,  in  the  midst  of  those  that  came : 
the  crowd  approached  and  were  scrutinized 
by  Joseph,  and  in  the  midst  of  them  were 
his  brethren.  6.]  The  word  rendered 

governor,  Shalit,  is,  except  here,  said  to  be 
only  found  in  the  books  contemporary  with 
and  following  the  captivity.  Salatis  is  given 
by  Josephusas  the  title  of  the  first  .shepherd- 
king.  The  root  is  found  in  the  title  Sultan. 
Joseph's  dreams  (compare  ver.  9)  were  not 
literally  fulfilled,  liis  father  being  absent ; 
nor,  as  observed  on  ch.  xxxvii.  10,  could 
they  ever  be,  seeing  that  his  mother  was 
dead.  But  in  spirit  they  were.  Joseph 
recognized  his  brothers,  they  having  been 
already  grown-up  men  M-hen  he  was  sold, 
and  retaining  now  tlieir  former  costume ; 
they  did  not  recognize  him,  who  had  grown 
from  boyhood  to  manliood,  and  besides  was 
in  a  habit  and  with  adornment  strange  to 
their  eyes,  and  spoke  a  tongue  not  under- 
stood by  them.  It  might  well  be  suspected 
that  tliey  were  spies,  especially  if  the  time 
usually  assumed  for  their  visit,  that  of  the 
dynasty  of  the  shepherd-kings,  be  correct. 


For  tliis  dynasty,  we  are  told  by  IManetho, 
was  ever  in  fear  of  invasion  from  the  then 
powerful  Assyrians  ;  and  Joseph  us  says  that 
on  that  account  they  fortified  the  Eastern 
side  of  Egypt.  Hence  men  arriving  from 
Asia,  and  especially  Jacob's  sons,  who  from 
their  Chaldaic  origin  were  more  like  the 
Eastern  Semitic  peoples  than  Canaanites, 
might  well  arouse  suspicion  as  to  their  being 
Assyrian  spies.  The  nakedness  of  the  land 
may  well  refer  to  its  being  easily  accessible, 
having  fewer  strong  places  than  other  coun- 
tries. 11.]  The  force  of  this  answer 
lies  in  the  im[n'obability  that  one  man  would 
expose  so  large  a  number  of  his  family  to  the 
perilous  life  of  spies,  who  found  no  (iiiarter 
when  detected.  true,  literally  upright, 
men,  not  bearing  a  double  character. 
14.]  i.  e.  what  I  said  is  still  not  disproved, 
but  awaits  disproof  as  follows,  to  be  gathered 
from  your  own  account  of  yourselves. 
15.]  .loseph  swears  by  the  life  of  Pharaoh. 
See  similar  instances  among  the  Ilibrcws 
themselves,  1  Sam.  xvii.  55;  2  Sam.  xi.  11, 
both,  however,  in  addresses  to  the  king.     A 


6—23. 


GENESIS. 


183 


the  life  of  Pharaoli  j^c  sliall  not  go  forth  lience,  except 
your  3'oungcst  brother  come  hither.  ^^  Send  one  of  3'ou, 
and  let  hiiu  fetch  your  brother,  and  ye  shall  be  kept  in 
prison,  that  your  words  may  be  proved,  whether  ihcrc  he 
any  truth  in  you  :  or  else  by  the  life  of  Pharaoh  surely  ye 
are  spies.  ^^  And  he  put  them  all  together  into  ward 
three  days.  ^^  And  Joseph  said  unto  them  the  third  day, 
This  do,  and  live ;  for  I  fear  God :  ^^  if  ye  he  true  men, 
let  one  of  your  brethren  be  bound  in  the  house  of  your 
prison  :  go  ye,  carry  corn  for  the  famine  of  your  houses : 
-0  but  bring  your  youngest  brother  unto  me  ;  so  shall  your 
words  be  verified,  and  ye  shall  not  die.  And  they  did  so. 
21  ^1  And  they  said  one  to  another,  We  are  verily  guilty 
concerning  our  brother,  in  that  we  saw  the  anguish  of  his 
soul,  when  he  besought  us,  and  we  would  not  hear ;  there- 
fore is  this  distress  come  upon  us.  ^2  ^nd  Reuben  an- 
swered them,  saying.  Spake  I  not  unto  you,  saying.  Do  not 
sin  against  the  child ;  and  ye  would  not  hear  ?  therefore, 
behold,  also  his  blood  is  required.     23  Xji([  ^j^gy  J^i^ew  not 


similar  form  occurs  in  the  address  of  Abigail 
to  David,  1  Sam.  xxv.  26,  so  tliat  it  was  not 
confined  to  royalty.  Knobul  suggests  that 
Joseph  may  have  feared  that  they  had  treated 
Benjiimiu  as  they  had  treated  hiinstlf,  and 
took  this  way  of  easing  liis  anxiety. 
16,  17.]  Ills  iirst  proposal  is  a  severe  one,  and 
tended  to  bring  them  to  tliat  sense  of  their 
guilt  whieh  they  afterwards  expressed. 
18 — 20.]  This  second  proposal  is  more 
nKMcifiil.  It  is  introduced  by  the  assertion 
I  fear  God,  inlplyin^■  that  he  did  not  wish 
to  press  matters  with  har.-h  severity  against 
tliem,  nor  to  as  ume  tlieir  obnoxious  cha- 
racter as  proved,  before  they  had  the  oppor- 
tunity of  answering  his  challenge  to  disprove 
it.  Tliis  do  and  live,  i.  e.  by  doing  this, 
take  the  only  way  of  escape  fnmi  the  death 
which  awaits  you  as  spies.  Luther  well  re- 
marks, that  these  hard-hearted  men  were  to 
be  broken  and  rendered  penitent.  'J  heir  lie, 
"one  is  not,"  had  shewn  tlieni  to  be  hard- 
ened in  and  carelos  about  tlieir  great  sin. 
This  moved  Joseph  to  try  their  hearts  more 
thoroughly.  The  trial  was  certainly  un- 
pleasant enough,  and  yet  proceeded  from  an 
intcntiim  perfVctly  void  of  anger,  towards 
tlieni.     "  i,"  adds  Luther  characteristically, 


"  should  have  handled  them  more  roughly." 
By  the  words,  "  and  Ihey  did  so,"  the  fol- 
lowing narrative  is  anticipated,  as  Joseph 
proposed,  so  it  took  place.  21,  if.]  The 

frame  of  mind  which  it  was  Joseph's  object 
to  produce  was  produced.  To  this  many 
things  must  have  contributed  ;  among  them, 
doubtless,  the  contrast  between  their  treat- 
ment of  their  brother  and  that  which  they 
were  now  receiving.  They  had  consigned 
him,  innocent,  to  death  by  starvation,  while 
they,  though  presumed  to  be  guilty  as  spies, 
were  to  receive  bread  for  the  hunger  of  their 
households,  and  to  have  a  chance  of  final 
escape.  There  is  no  need,  in  interpreting  this 
verse,  to  suppose,  as  Kiiobel  does,  any  dis- 
crepancy of  varying  accounts.  The  whole 
hangs  together  perfectly  well.  Selling  a  lad 
into  slavery  was  surely  a  crime  Avhich  an 
awakened  guilty  conscience  might  well  re- 
present to  it>elf  as  equivalent  to  his  murder. 
22.]  It  is  remarkable  that  this  charge 
is  laid  upon  them  by  Ileuhen,  who  at  the 
time  (eh.  xxxvii.  22)  was  the  one  who  coun- 
selled them  to  "  shed  no  blood."  The  mask 
is  dropped  from  his  self-deceit,  and  be  sees 
that  that  cruelty  which  be  advised  was  in 
reality  nothing  short  of  that  which  they  had 


184  GENESIS.  XLII. 

tliat  Joseph  understood  them  ;  for  tlie  interpreter  was  be- 
tween them.  24  ^jj(j  \^Q  turned  himself  about  from  them, 
and  wept ;  and  returned  to  them  again,  and  communed 
with  them,  and  took  from  them  Simeon,  and  bound  him 
before  their  ejes.  25  ^  Then  Joseph  commanded  to  fill 
their  vessels  with  corn,  and  to  restore  every  man's  money 
into  his  sack,  and  to  give  them  provision  for  the  way :  and 
thus  did  he  unto  them.  26  \^y^  ^j^gy  laded  their  asses 
with  the  corn,  and  departed  thence.  27  And  as  one  of 
them  opened  his  sack  to  give  his  ass  provender  at  the  halt- 
ing place,  he  espied  his  money ;  for,  behold,  it  icas  in  his 
sack's  mouth.  28  And  he  said  unto  his  brethren.  My  money 
is  restored;  and,  lo,  if  is  in  my  sack:  and  their  heart  failed 
t/icw,  and  they  were  afraid,  saying  one  to  another,  What 
is  this  f//af  God  hath  done  unto  us  ?  29  ^  And  they  came 
unto  Jacob  their  father  unto  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  told 
him  all  that  befell  unto  them  ;  saying,  ^o  The  man,  n-Jto  is 
the  lord  of  the  land,  spake  roughly  to  us,  and  took  us  for 
spies  of  the  country.  31  And  we  said  imto  him,  AYe  are 
true  ?nen  ;  we  are  no  spies  :  ^2  -^e  be  twelve  brethren,  sons 
of  our  father ;  one  is  not,  and  the  youngest  is  this  day 
with  our  father  in  the  land  of  Canaan.  ^3  And  the  man, 
the  lord  of  the  country',  said  unto  us.  Hereby  shall  I  know 

intended.     But  more  is  done  by  this  speech  have  been  among  the  most  active  in  the   sin 

of  Reuben's:    see   on  ver.    24.              33.]  against  Joseph.            25,  if.]  They  appear  to 

Joseph  had  completely  put  on  the  Egyptian,  liave  had,  besides  their  vessel  or  sacks  of  corn 

According  to  the  usual  views  of  the  time  at  for  the  famine  of  their  households,  each  a  sack 

which  this  happened,  the    kings  of  Egypt  for  piuvender  for  their  assLS  by  the  way.    It 

were   of  Semitic   origin,  but   doubtless   all  was  at  the  mouth  of  this  sack  that  Joseph 

public  matters  were  transacted  in  the  Egypt-  had   the  money    placed.      And  when    they 

ian  language.             the  interpreter]  i.  c.  the  came  to  rest  for  the  night  (it  is  deceptive  to 

official   court   interpreter.              24.]    This  think  of  the  place  as  answering  in  any  sense 

first  softening  of  Joseph's  is  not  enough,  nor  of  the  word  to  our  iiin)  one  of  tlum  opened 

does  it  turn  him  from  his  fixed  purpose   of  his  sack  to  give  provender  to  his  ass  (and  to 

bringing    Benjamin   to   Egypt.     He   takes  those  of  the  rest,  for  this  is  implied  liy  ver. 

Simeon,  the  second  in  age,  because  Reuben  3o),  and  found  the  money.             28.]  their 

the  eldest,  besides  being  the  natural  leader  heart  failed  them,  literally,  went  out :  they 

of  them  all  in  their  journey  and  return,  had  had  no  courage  left.     They  were  evidently 

shewn  himself  at  Shechem,  and  again  by  his  on  their  return  to  be  charged    with    being 

words  here,  the  best  aff"ected  towards  Joseph,  thieves  as  well  as  spies,  and  they  regard  this 

Whetlier,  as  Knobel  conjectures,  there  was  as  another  item  in  God's  retribution  for  their 

any  special  reason,  besides  his  being  second  sin.             29,  ff".]   The  generally  unfavour- 

in  age,  which  made  liini  take  Simeon,  we  able  character  of  their  report  is  borne  out 

cannot  say.     Certainly  his  subsequent  eha-  by  the  discovery  of  Iheir  money  in    every 

ractei-ization  by  his  father  (eh.  xlis.  5)  is  sack.     It  now  appears  certain  that  they  are 

not  against  the  assumption  that  he  might  to  be    hardly   dealt  with   on   their  return. 


24— XLIII.  5.  GENESIS.  1.S5 

that  yc  ai'e  true  men;  leave  one  of  your  brethren  Iicrc  with 
me,  and  take  food  for  the  famine  of  your  households,  and 
bo  gone  :  ^^  and  bring  your  youngest  brother  unto  mc : 
then  shall  I  know  that  yc  arc  no  spies,  but  f/iat  yc  are  true 
vicn  :  so  will  I  deliver  you  your  brother,  and  yc  shall 
traffiek  in  the  land,  ^o  ^  j^^^^  [^  came  to  pass  as  they 
emptied  their  sacks,  that,  behold,  every  man's  bundle  of 
mone}-^  nris  in  his  sack :  and  when  both  they  and  their 
father  saw  the  bundles  of  money,  they  were  afraid.  ■^^  And 
Jacob  their  father  said  unto  them.  Me  have  ye  bereaved 
of  my  children :  Joseph  is  not,  and  Simeon  is  not,  and  ye 
will  take  Benjamin  aica// :  on  me  come  all  these  things. 
37  And  Eeuben  spake  unto  his  father,  saying.  Slay  my 
two  sons,  if  I  bring  him  not  to  thee  :  deliver  him  into  my 
hand,  and  I  will  bring  him  to  thee  again.  ^^  And  he 
said.  My  son  shall  not  go  down  with  you ;  for  his  brother 
is  dead,  and  he  is  left  alone  :  if  mischief  befall  him  by  the 
way  in  the  whicli  ye  go,  then  shall  ye  bring  down  my 
gray  hairs  Avith  sorrow  to  the  grave.  XLIII.  i  And  the 
famine  was  sore  in  the  land.  2  j>^i^([  {^^  came  to  pass,  when 
they  had  eaten  up  the  corn  which  they  had  brought  out  of 
Egypt,  their  father  said  unto  them.  Go  again,  buy  us  a 
little  food.  3  ji^ii^  Judah  spake  unto  him,  saying.  The 
man  did  solemnl}^  protest  unto  us,  saying.  Ye  shall  not  see 
my  face,  except  your  brother  be  with  you.  ^  If  thou  wilt 
send  our  brother  with  us,  we  will  go  down  and  buy  thee 
food :  5  but  if  thou  wilt  not  send  /iiin,  w'e  will  not  go 
down  :  for  the  man  said  unto  us.  Ye  shall  not  see  my  face, 

36.]  Jacob's  argument  of  complaint  second  time,  taking  icith  them  Benjamin. 
is,  that  on  him  all  this  comes  :  it  is  to  them  2  ]  Jacob  seems  to  have  forgotten  the 
matter  of  negotiation,  but  to  him  of  loss  and  condition  of  their  again  going  down  to  Egypt, 
sorrow,  for  it  is /(js  children  who  are  being  3  —  10.]  J udali  did  not  state  the  mat- 
wasted  away  by  it.  37,  f.]  To  this  Reu-  tcr  accurately,  if  the  account  in  ch.  xli.  be 
ben,  tiio  (irsthorn  and  responsible,  answers  exact;  for  Joseph,  according  to  that  account, 
that  not  on  his  father's  children  alone  shall  had  not  cnqnind  as  he  here  states :  it  was 
the  stroke  descend — he  will  venture  his  own  true  that  eiicumstiinccs  had  forced  it  out  of 
as  pledges  for  the  safety  of  Benjamin.  It  them,  but  that  did  not  amount  to  what  he 
must  he  owned  to  be  somewhat  of  a  strange  here  says.  But  it  would  appear,  from  ch. 
way  of  ensuring  the  safety  of  a  son,  to  add  xliv.  19,  that  this,  and  not  that,  was  what 
two  grandsons  to  tiie  loss  if  such  should  really  happened.  Sec  note  there.  It  has 
happen.  38.]  But  the  aged  father  will  been  suggested  that  Judah  intervened  be- 
not  be  persuadtd:  his  heart  is  wrapped  up  cause  Reuben  liad  already  tried  his  utmost 
in  his  youngest  son.  in  vain,  and  Levi,  who  was  next  eldest,  was 
XLIII.]  Joseph's  brethren  visit  E<ji/pt  a  implicated  in  the  affair  about  Shechcm,  and 


186 


GENESIS. 


XLIII. 


except  your  brotlier  he  witli  you.  ^  And  Israel  said, 
Wherefore  dealt  ye  ho  ill  witli  me,  as  to  tell  the  man 
whether  ye  had  yet  a  brother  ?  7  And  they  said,  The  man 
asked  us  straitly  of  our  state,  and  of  our  kindred,  saying, 
Js  your  father  yet  alive  ?  have  ye  another  brother  ?  and 
we  told  him  according-  to  the  tenor  of  these  words  :  could 
we  certainly  know  that  he  Avould  say.  Bring  your  brother 
down  ?  ^  And  Judah  said  unto  Israel  his  father.  Send 
the  lad  with  me,  and  we  will  arise  and  go ;  that  we  may 
live,  and  not  die,  both  we,  and  thou,  and  also  our  little 
ones,  9  I  will  be  surety  for  him  ;  of  my  hand  shalt  thou 
require  him  :  if  I  bring  him  not  unto  thee,  and  set  him  be- 
fore thee,  then  let  me  bear  the  blame  for  ever:  ^^  for  except 
we  had  lingered,  surely  now  we  had  returned  this  second 
time.  11  And  their  father  Israel  said  unto  them.  If  it 
must  he  so  now,  do  this  ;  take  of  the  j)ride  of  the  land  in 
your  vessels,  and  carry  down  the  man  a  present,  a  little 
balm,  and  a  little  honey,  spices,  and  myrrh,  nuts,  and 
almonds  :  ^^  and  take  other  mone}^  in  your  hand  ;  and  the 
money  that  was  brouglit  again  in  the  mouth  of  your  sacks, 


therefore  unanceptable  to  his  father.  9.] 

let  me  bear  the  blame  for  ever  is  literall)',  I 
shall  sin  to  thee  all  the  days.  See  the 
faithfulness  of  Judah  to  his  uiulertakiiijr,  ch. 
xliv.  18,  ff.  It  was  this  which  affected 
Joseph  so  that  he  cciild  no  longer  refrain, 
ch.  xlv.  1.  11.]  On  the  use  of  Israel 

for  Jacob,  see  above,  cli.  xxxv.  22.  If  it 

must  he,  or  If  it  is  :  if  that  is  really  the  state 
of  the  case.  the  pride  of  the  land  is 

literally,  the  song  of  the  land,  i.  e.  tliatfnr 
which  the  land  is  celebrated.  See  a  similar 
expression  in  Jcr.  li.  41,  where,  however,  the 
Hebrew  word  is  not  the  same  as  here.  The 
practice  of  conciliating' great  men  by  presents 
is  still  universal  in  the  East.  Compare  ch. 
xxxii.  14,  ff.;  1  Kings  x.  25;  Matt.  ii.  11. 
The  items  of  the  present  are — (1)  balm  or 
balsam,  explained  at  eh.  xxxvii.  2-5  ;  (2) 
honey.  This  is  probably  not  honey  of  bees, 
which  was  probably,  as  now,  very  plentiful 
in  Egypt,  but  tlie  thick  inspissated  juice  or 
jelly  of  grapes,  which  still  is  manufactured 
in  Palestine  and  exported  from  Hebron  to 
Egypt.  In  Ezek.  xxvii.  17  it  seems  to  be 
this  honey  wliich  is  spoken  of;  (3)  traga- 
canth,   explained   at   ch.    xxxvii.    25 ;     (4) 


ladanum,  ditto;  (5)  pistachio-nuts,  the  fruit 
of  the  pistachia  vera,  a  tree  allied  to  the 
terebinth,  found  in  dry  and  rocky  situations, 
and  consequently  not  common  in  Lower 
Egypt.  Aleppo  is  still  famous  for  pistachio- 
nuts.  "They  are  of  the  shape  of  the 
almond,  but  rounder  and  glossy,  generally  of 
a  pretty  red  hue  when  fresh,  and  the  kernel 
a  bright  green,  with  the  flavour  of  the  wal- 
nut." Tristram.  (6)  Almonds  hardly  need 
explanation.  The  Hebrew  name  signifies  to 
hasten,  the  almond  being  the  first  of  all  trees 
to  shew  its  blossoms  in  the  spring.  Hence  a 
play  on  words  in  Jer.  i.  11,  12,  where  see 
note.  P'rom  the  fact  of  almonds  forming 
part  of  this  present,  it  would  seem  that  the 
tree  was  not  common  in  Egyi)t.  A  paltry 
objection  has  been  brought  against  this  part 
of  tlie  narrative,  that  the  sending  of  these 
articles  by  Jacob  is  incongruous,  in  the 
presence  of  famine  in  Palestine.  But  (1) 
every  one  of  these  articles  may  have  been 
kept  in  store  ;  and  (2)  none  of  them  are  of 
tliiit  kind  which  would  necessarily  be  af- 
fected by  sneh  seasons  as  would  cause  the 
failure  of  wlieat.  12.]  The  meaning 

is  not,    as  would  appear   from   the  A.  Y., 


6—21.  GENESIS.  187 

cany  it  again  in  j-our  hand  ;  pcraclvcnturc  it  ican  an  o^-cr- 
siglit :  13  take  also  your  brother,  and  ariose,  go  again  unto 
the  man  :  i'*  and 'God  Ahnighty   "ive  you  mcrcv  before  > K'. smnnu. 

G         J        G  J  J  hru  I'll.  xvii. 

the  man,  that  he  may   send  away  with  you  your  other     '*''''*''•"• 

brother,  and  Benjamin.     If  I  be  bereaved  of  my  children, 

I  Jam  bereaved.     ^^  %  And  the  men  took  that  present,  J';','-4'^'"^,h 

and  they  took  double  money  in  their  hand,  and  Benjamin;     '^ixri!)'^"' 

and  rose  up,  and  Avent  down  to  Egj'pt,  and  stood  before 

Joseph.     1^'  And  when  Joseph  saw  Benjamin  Avith  them, 

he  said  to  him  that  was  over  his  house.  Bring  tJie  men 

into  the  house,  and  shiy,  and  make  ready ;  for  tJicsc  men 

shall   dine   with  me   at  noon.      ^''  And   the  num  did  as 

Joseph  bade  ;  and  the  man  bi'ought  the  men  into  Joseph's 

house.     ^"^  And  the  men   were  afraid,  because  they  were 

brought  into  Josej^h's  house ;  and  they  said,  Because  of 

the  money  that  was  returned  in  our  sacks  at  the  first  time 

are  we  brought  in  ;  that  he  may  cast  himself  upon  us,  and 

fall   upon  us,  and  take  us  for  bondmen,  and  our  asses. 

19  And  they  came  near  to  him  that  was  over  Josejjh's 

house,  and  they  communed  with  him  at  the  door  of  the 

house,    -0  and    said,    ^  0    sir,    w^e  came    indeed  down    at  ^  ^-h-  """•  le- 

■^  '  '  r.xod.  IV    10, 

the  first  time  to  buy  food  :  -^  and  it  came  to  pass,  when     "' 
we  came  to  the  inn,  that  we  opened  our  sacks,  and,  behold, 
eccnj  man's  money  ivas  in  the  mouth  of  his  sack,   our 
money  in  full  weight :  and  we  have  brought  it  again  in 

that   tliey    were   to   take   three  payments,  We  know  abundantly  from  Ilerodotus  and 

—  double  money  besides  that  which  was  in  other    authorities    that   it  was    only   from 

tlieir   sacks — but   that   they   were   to  take  certain  animals  tiiat  the  royal  and  priestly 

mimey  of  a  second,  i.  e.  the  same,  amount,  castes   abstained,  and   only  certain    among 

And  so  they  describe  what  they  had  done,  them  that   abstaimd   altogellier:    and   the 

thi)u;;h  not  witli  the   same  Hebrew  woid,  eating  of  biids   was   general.                 18.] 

ver.  22.             14]  El  Shaddai,  see  as  in  They  think  that   they  are   treated   in  this 

marg.           mercy,  literally,  bowels;  see  on  exceptional  way  fur  tiie  purpose  of  judgment 

ver.  30.    There  is  a  characteristic  ditl'cruncc  in  upon  them  for  tluir  tlal't.                casthim- 

the  mode  of  nii  ntionin^'  the  two,  your  other  self  is  literally,  roll  himself:  see  Jub  .\xx. 

brother,  and  Benjamin.             15.]  double  ^'i-            20.]  0  sir  appear^  to  be  literally, 

money  is  right  lure  :  the  Hebrew  words  are  Pray,    sir, — "'Me  prat/   tliee,    sir,"    LXX. 

in  ilitfirent  order.             16.]  As  before  (ch.  The  same  phrase  is  lound  in  reff.             21.J 

xlii.  7),  it  seems  that  all  who  came  to  buy  The  diveruence  heie  from  the  more  exact 

passed   before   Jo.seph,    so   that  he   distin-  account  given  in  ch.  xlii.  27,  35  is  no  more 

giii.-hcd  his  brethren  among  the  crowd,  and  than  was  natural  under  the  circum?tances. 

Benjamin  with  them.     The  objection  which  In  rebiting  to  a  stranger,  especially  one  of 

has  been  here  again  found,  that  the  higher  wliuni  we  are  in  awe,  we  are  apt  to  suppress 

castes  of  the  Egyptians  ate  no  animal  food,  details,  even  at  the  expense  of  some  trifling 

only  shews  the  ignorance  of  the  objectors,  inaccuiacy.     Truth  in  such  cases  is  not  the 


188 


GENESIS. 


XLIII. 


m  1  Kin^s  iii. 


26. 
11.   Is 


.  xlv 


6;  ver.  14. 
Zech.  vii.  9, 
al.    See  Phil. 
ii.  1 ;  Philem. 
7, 12. 


our  hand.  ^2  And  other  money  have  we  brought  down  in 
our  hands  to  buy  food :  we  cannot  tell  who  put  our  money 
in  our  sacks.  ^3  And  he  said,  Peace  he  to  you,  fear  not : 
your  God,  and  tlie  God  of  your  father,  hath  given  jou 
treasure  in  your  sacks :  I  had  your  money.  And  he 
brought  Simeon  out  unto  them.  24  Aud  the  man  brought 
the  men  into  Josej)h's  house,  and  gave  iliem  water,  and 
they  washed  their  feet ;  and  he  gave  their  asses  provender. 

25  And  they  made  ready  the  present  against  Joseph  came 
at  noon  :  for  they  heard  that  they  should  eat  bread  there. 

26  ^  And  when  Joseph  came  home,  they  brought  him  the 
present  ^  which  icas  in  their  hand  into  the  house,  and  bowed 
themselves  to  him  to  the  earth.  27  And  he  asked  them  of 
tJieir  welfare,  and  said.  Is  your  father  well,  the  old  man  of 
whom  ye  spake  ?  /v  he  yet  alive  ?  28  And  they  answered, 
Thy  servant  our  father  is  in  good  health,  he  is  yet  alive. 
And  they  bowed  down  their  heads,  and  made  obeisance. 
29  And  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  saw  his  brother  Ben- 
jamin, his  mother's  son,  and  said.  Is  this  your  younger 
brother,  of  whom  ye  spake  unto  me  ?  And  he  said,  God 
be  gracious  unto  thee,  my  son.  "^^  And  Joseph  made 
haste ;  for  his  ™  heart  yearned  upon  his  brother :  and  he 
sought  ivheve  to  weep ;  and  he  entered  into  his  chamber, 


coincidence  of  details,  but  the  identity  of  re- 
sult. 23.]  The  steward  is  in  his  mas- 
ter's secret,  and  acts  under  confidential 
orders.  Peace  be  to  you  is  here  not  the 
mere  formula  of  greeting,  but  a  mode  of 
reassuring:  compare  tlie  same  use  in  Judg. 
vi.  23.  There  is  nothing  in  the  steward's 
following  words  to  imply  that  he,  or  any  of 
Joseph's  household,  liad  renounced  idolatry. 
The  meaning  intended  to  be  conveyed  by 
them  to  those  whom  they  addressed  was, 
that  their  family  tutelar  God  had  cared  for 
them  in  this  manner.  We  know,  and  they 
knew  who  this  God  was:  but  all  we  can 
fairly  infer  from  the  steward's  words  is  that 
the  frequent  mention  of  such  a  family  God 
by  his  master  had  impressed  him,  and  sug- 
gested the  words  in  the  deception  which, 
after  all,  he  was  playing  on  his  hearers. 
Literally,  your  money  came  to  me. 
25.]  Their  feelings  must  have  wonderfully 
altered  since  they  were  brought  to  the  house, 


ver.    18.  27.]    Joseph's   question   is 

literally.  Is  there  peace  to  your  father  .  .  ? 
and  their  answer.  There  is  peace  to  thy 
servant  our  father.  The  same  expr<  ssion 
with  the  same  meaning  occurs  in  Joab's 
treacherous  words  to  Amasa,  2  Sam.  x.\.  9. 
29.]  There  is  notliing  in  the  address 
my  son  tending  in  any  way  to  disturb  the 
c'.ironology  of  Jacob's  family.  Joseph's 
position,  as  well  as  his  superior  age,  if,  even 
of  a  few  years,  would  justify  the  expi'ession. 
Of  course  it  must  be  confessed  tliat  tiiere  is 
throughout  something  to  us  in  the  estimate 
of  Benjamin  and  the  words  used  respecting 
him,  inconsistent  with  the  idea  tliat  he  was 
at  tliis  time  father  of  10  sons  (eh.  xl\i.  21, 
where  see  notes).  In  ver.  8  and  ch.  xliv. 
30 — 34,  he  is  '^  the  lad,"  "a  little  c/ii/d," 
in  ch.  xliv.  20.  But  this  is  not  affcctid  by 
the  jjassagc  now  before  us.  30.]  his 

heart,  literally,  his  belly,  yearned,  liter- 
ally,   waxed   hot.       The    expression   is   a 


xi.  13. 


22-XLIY.  5.  GENESIS.  189 

and  wept  tlicrc.  ^^  And  he  washed  liis  face,  and  went 
out,  and  refrained  himself,  and  said,  Set  on  bread.  32  x^^d 
they  set  on  for  him  by  himself,  and  for  them  by  them- 
selves, and  for  the  Egyptians,  which  did  eat  with  him,  by 
themselves :  because  the  Egyptians  might  not  eat  broad 
with  the  Hebrews;  for  that  is  an  abomination  unto  the 
Egyptians.  ^"^  And  they  sat  before  him,  the  firstborn  ac- 
cording to  his  birthright,  and  the  youngest  according  to 
his  youth  :  and  the  men  marvelled  one  at  another,  ^i  And 
he  took  aud  soit  messes  unto  them  from  before  him  :  but 
Benjamin's  mess  was  five  times  so  much  as  any  of  their's. 
And  they  drank,  and  "were  merry  with  him.  XLIV.  " s";,!."}.  u'. 
1  And  he  commanded  him  that  was  over  his  house,  saying, 
Fill  the  men's  sacks  tcith  food,  as  much  as  the}'  can  cari-y,  liuK-'i^'G; li! 
and  put  every  man's  money  in  his  sack's  mouth.  ~  And 
put  my  cup,  the  silver  cup,  in  the  sack's  mouth  of  the 
youngest,  and  his  corn  money.  And  he  did  according  to 
the  word  that  Joseph  had  spoken.  ^  As  soon  as  the  morn- 
ing was  light,  the  men  were  sent  away,  they  and  their 
asses.  ^  And  when  they  were  gone  out  of  the  cit}',  and 
not  7/ei  far  off,  Joseph  said  unto  him  that  was  over  his 
house,  Up,  follow  after  the  men ;  and  when  thou  dost 
overtake  them,  say  unto  them,  Wherefore  have  ye  re- 
warded evil  for  good  ?     ^  Is  not  this  it  in  which  my  lord 

familiar  one  in  the  0.  and  X.  T.  :  see  rcff.  It  is  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Ilomeric 
31.]  After  washing  away  the  traces  of  poems,  wliere  the  hirgest  and  best  pieces  arc 
his  emotion,  he  orders  the  table  to  be  reserved  for  eminent  guests,  or  double  por- 
sprcad.  32.]  Historians  describe  to  us  tions,  as  at  the  Spartan  common  meals  for 
tlie  extreme  exclusivcness  of  the  Egyptians,  the  kings,  as  related  by  Herodotus.  The 
Tliey  kept  all  the  castes  separate  at  meals  :  number  five  seems  to  have  been  in  especial 
Joseph  liimself,  as  chief  minister  of  state,  or  regard  in  Egypt  :  see  ch.  xli.  34;  xlv.  22; 
perhaps  as  belonging  by  marriage  to  the  xlvii.  2,  2-1 ;  Isa.  xix.  18.  The  reason  is 
priestly  caste,  eats  by  himself,  the  members  stated  to  have  been,  that  the  Egyptians 
of  his  suite  and  court  by  themselves,  and  the  recognized  only  five  planets.  The  older 
Hebrews  separate  again.  Herodotus  tells  versions  translate  the  word  which  we  ren- 
us  that  an  Egyptian  never  kissed  a  Greek,  der  were  merry  more  ciY.nsAy—viebriali 
nor  would  use  a  knife  or  other  implement  sunt,  as  the  ^'ulgate.  And  tlicre  is  hardly 
belonging  to  a  Greek,  nor  would  eat  even  any  escaping  this,  seeing  that  it  is  tlie  identi- 
lawful  flesh  if  cut  by  a  Greek.  See  on  ch.  cal  word  used  of  Xoah  in  Gen.  ix.  21  and  in 
xxxix.  6.  33.]  Doubtless  this  was  done  many  other  places  (reff.),  where  it  is  impos- 
to  produce  in  them  the  impression  tliat  sible  to  suppose  any  more  favourable  inter- 
Joseph  was  possessed  of   supernatural  in-  pretation  admissible. 

sight:  compare  ch.  xliv.  5,  15.  34.]         XLIV.    Joseph's  further  (Jevice  io  detain 

This  was  the  practice  in  the  East,  by  way  his  brother.     Judah's  deprecniion.  6.] 

of  honouring  guests  :  see  1  Sam.  ix.  23,  f.  "  The  ancient  Egyptians,  and  still  more  the 


190  GENESIS.  XLIY. 

drinketli,  and  whereby  indeed  lie  divinetli  ?  ye  tave  done 
evil  in  so  doing.  ^  ^  And  he  oyertook  tliem,  and  lie 
spake  unto  them  these  same  words.  ^  And  they  said  unto 
och.xvm.25;  liim,  Whoreforo  saith  my  lord  these  words?  °Be  it  far 
from  thy  servants  to  do  according  to  this  saying  :  ^  be- 
hold, the  mono}",  which  we  found  in  our  sacks'  mouths, 
we  brought  again  unto  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Canaan  : 
how  then  should  we  steal  out  of  thy  lord's  house  silver  or 
gold  ?  ^  With  whomsoever  of  thy  servants  it  be  found, 
both  let  him  die,  and  we  also  will  be  my  lord's  bondmen. 
1^  And  he  said,  Now  also  let  it  he  according  unto  your 
words :  he  with  whom  it  is  found  shall  be  my  servant ; 
and  ye  shall  be  blameless.  ^^  Then  they  speedily  took 
down  every  man  his  sack  to  the  ground,  and  opened  every 
man  his  sack.  ^^  And  he  searched,  and  began  at  the 
eldest,  and  ended  at  the  youngest :  and  the  cu]3  was  found 
in  Benjamin's  sack.  ^^  Then  they  rent  their  clothes,  and 
laded  every  man  his  ass,  and  returned  to  the  city. 
1'*  ^  And  Judah  and  his  brethren  came  to  Joseph's  house ; 
for  he  u'as  yet  there :  and  they  fell  before  him  on  the 
ground.  ^^  And  Joseph  said  unto  them,  What  deed  is 
this  that  ye  have  done  ?  wot  ye  not  that  such  a  man  as  I 
can  certainly  divine  ?     i*^  And  Judah  said,  What  shall  we 

Persians,  practised  a  mode  of  divination  from  the    Solomon   among   the   ancient    Persian 

goblets.    Small  pieces  of  gold  and  silver,  to-  kings,  the  founder  of  Perscpolis  ;   and  Alex- 

gether  with    precious   stones,  marked  with  ander  the  Great,  so  eager  to  imitate  Eastern 

strange  figures  and  signs,  were  thrown  into  manners,  is  said  to  have  adopted  the  sacred 

the  vessel,  after  which  certain  incantations  goblets  also."  Kalisch.     The  LXX.  render 

were  pronounced,  and  the  evil  demon  was  the  Hebrew  word  Gevia  by  Kondu,  which 

invoked  ;    the  latter  was  then  supposed  to  seems  to  have  been  the  Egyptian  name ;  the 

give  the  answer,  either  by  intelligible  words,  Hindoo  priests  still  call  their  sacred  vessels 

or  by  pointing  to  some  of  the  characters  on  Kundi.        The     word     rendered    divinetb 

the  precious  stones,  or  in  some  other  more  [nichesh)    means    to    hiss    like    a    serpent 

mysterious  manner.     Sometimes  the  goblet  (tiachas/i),    and  hence  to  murmur  incanta- 

was  filled  with  pure  water,  upon  which  the  tions.     There  is  no  proof  that  Joseph  himself 

sun  was  allowed  to  play,  and  the  figures  really  practised  this  divination  :  the  whole 

thus  formed,  or  which  a  lively  imagination  intent  is  to  inspire  terror  into  his  brethren, 

fancied  it  saw,  were  interpreted  as  the  desired  and    impress   them  with    his    supernatural 

omen:    a  method  of  taking  auguries   still  character.  12,   13.]    Now  took  place 

employed  in  Egypt  and  Nubia.    The  goblets  the  true  proof  of  them.     Would  they  give 

were  usually  of  a  spherical  form  ;  and  from  up  Benjamin,  their  father's  darling,  as  they 

this  reason,  as  well  as  because  they  were  be-  had  before  got  rid  of  Joseph  .'     or  would 

lieved  to  teach  man  all  natural  and  many  they  faithfully  defend  him   that  had  been 

supernaturalthiugs,  they  were  called 'celestial  entrusted  to  them  ?    In  ver.  17  Joseph  tests 

globes.'     Most  celebrated  was  the  magnifi-  them   by   proposing  to   separate  Benjamin 

cent  vase  of  turquoise  of  the  wise  Jemsheed,  from  them.       Juduh  answers  for  the  rest, 


G— 27.  GENESIS.  191 

sa}' unto  my  lord?  what  shall  wo  speak?  or  how  shall 
wc  clear  ourselves?  God  fhatli  found  out  the  iniquity  of  +"*-eioiiim. 
thy  servants :  behold,  we  arc  my  lord's  servants,  both  we, 
and  he  also  with  whom  the  cup  is  found.  ^"  And  he  said, 
Be  it  far  from  me  to  do  so  :  hut  the  man  in  whose  hand 
the  cujD  is  found,  he  shall  be  ray  servant ;  and  as  for  you, 
get  you  up  in  peace  unto  your  father.  ^^  ^  Then  Judah 
came  near  unto  him,  and  said,  Oh  my  lord,  let  thy  serv- 
ant, I  pray  thee,  speak  a  word  ^in  my  lord's  ears,  and  let  Psam  ivm 
not  thine  auger  burn  against  thy  servant :  for  thou  art  evcu  "'"'' 
as  Pharaoh.  ^^  M3'  lord  asked  his  servants,  saying,  Have 
ye  a  father,  or  a  brother  ?  ^^  And  we  said  unto  my  lord, 
We  have  a  father,  an  old  man,  and  a  child  of  his  old  age, 
a  little  one  ;  and  his  brother  is  dead,  and  he  alone  is  left 
of  his  mother,  and  his  father  lovcth  him.  -^  And  thou 
saidst  unto  thy  servants.  Bring  him  down  unto  me,  that 
I  may  set  mine  eyes  upon  him.  22  ^^j^  ^g  ^.^[^  ^^^^^  j^y. 
lord,  The  lad  cannot  leave  his  father:  for  if  he  should  leave 
his  father,  hk  father  would  die,  23  ^^^  thou  saidst  imto 
thy  servants,  Except  your  youngest  brother  come  down 
with  you,  ye  shall  see  my  face  no  more.  24  ^^^  \^  came 
to  pass  when  we  came  up  unto  thy  servant  my  father,  we 
told  him  the  words  of  my  lord,  ^o  }^-^^  qu^,  father  said. 
Go  again,  and  buy  us  a  little  food.  ^6  And  we  said,  "We 
cannot  go  down  :  if  our  youngest  brother  be  with  us,  then 
will  we  go  down  :  for  we  may  not  see  the  man's  face,  ex- 
cept our  youngest  brother  he  with  us.  -''  And  thy  servant 
my  father  said  unto  us.  Ye  know   that  my  wife  bare  me 

as  having  in  the  previous  pleading  with  his  be  in  prayer."  in  my  lord's  ears  i.  e. 
father  (xliii.  8,  if.)  guaranteed  the  safety  pressin;;ly  and  intimatily  :  see  rell'. 
of  Benjamin :  see  note  there.  And  this  is  19.]  This  is  the  same  statement  as  we  have 
why  prominence  is  given  to  him  in  ver.  14.  had  from  the  brethren  to  tlicir  father  ch. 
The  moment  Benjamin  was  in  peril  Judah,  xliii.  7,  and  it  hence  appears  that  it  was 
as  the  responsible  party,  comes  to  the  front,  the  exact  state  of  the  case,  or  Judah  would 
Josepli  was  still  in  his  house,  waiting,  doubt-  not  have  ventured  to  appeal  to  Joseph's  re- 
less,  the  issue  of  the  device.  18,  fF.]  collection  of  it.  20.]  On  the  words  a 
Kalisch  justly  calls  this  pleading  speech  of  little  one,  see  note,  eh.  xliii.  29.  his 
Judah's  "  one  of  the  masterpieces  of  Hebrew  brother  is  dead]  .See  uw.  ch.  xlii.  22. 
composition."  Its  beauty  mainly  consists  in  22.]  Literally,  he  will  leave  his  father, 
the  simple  and  pathetic  statement  of  facts,  and  he  ■will  die.  27—29.]  'J'he  savings 
Luther  says,  'I  would  that  I  could  pray  so  of  Jacob  on  several  occasions,  and  indeed 
well  to  our  Lord  God,  as  Judah  prays  here  that  which  he  may  be  supposed  to  have  said, 
to  Joseph,  for  it  is  a  perfect  example  of  are  put  together.  my  wife]  Hardly 
prayer  and  of  the  earnestness  which  should  because  he  counted  Eachcl  his  only  true  wife, 


192  GENESIS.  XLIY. 

two  sona :  ^8  and  the  one  went  out  from  me,  and  I  said, 
Surely  lie  is  torn  in  pieces ;  and  I  saw  liim  not  since  : 
29  and  if  ye  take  tliis  also  from  me,  and  mischief  befall 
him,  ye  shall  bring  down  my  gray  hairs  with  sorrow  to 
the  grave.  ^^  Now  therefore  when  I  come  to  thy  servant 
my  father,  and  the  lad  be  not  with  us ;  seeing  that  his 
qisam. xTiu.  Q soul  Is  bouud  vip  iu  the  lad's  soul;  ^^  it  shall  come  to 
pass,  when  he  seeth  that  the  lad  is  not  u-ifh  vs,  that  he  will 
die :  and  thy  servants  shall  bring  down  the  gray  hairs  of 
thy  servant  our  father  with  sorrow  to  the  grave.  ^2  Pqj. 
thy  servant  became  surety  for  the  lad  unto  my  father,  say- 
ing, If  I  bring  him  not  unto  thee,  then  I  shall  bear  the 
blame  to  my  father  for  ever,  33  Now  therefore,  I  pray 
thee,  let  thy  servant  abide  instead  of  the  lad  a  bondman 
to  my  lord ;  and  let  the  lad  go  up  with  his  brethren. 
3*  For  how  shall  I  go  up  to  ni}^  father,  and  the  lad  be  not 
with  me  ?  lest  peradventure  I  see  the  evil  that  shall  come 
on  my  father.  XLY.  ^  Then  Joseph  could  not  refrain 
himself  before  all  them  that  stood  by  him ;  and  he  cried, 
Cause  every  man  to  go  out  from  me.  And  there  stood  no 
man  with  him,  while  Joseph  made  himself  known  unto 
his  brethren.  ^  ^Ynd  he  Avept  aloud  :  and  the  Egyj)tians 
and  the  house  of  Pharaoh  heard.  ^  ji^^^^  Joseph  said  unto 
his  brethren,  I  am  Joseph  ;  doth  my  father  yet  live  ?  And 
his  brethren  could  not  answer  him ;  for  they  were  troubled 
at  his  pi'esence.  *  And  Joseph  said  unto  his  brethren, 
Come  near  to  me,   I  pray  you.     And  they  came  near. 

nor  would  such  a  thought  surely  have  been  own  suite  outside  and  that  of  Pharaoh  heard 

uttered  by  a  son  of  Leah's.     It  is,  however,  him  (not,  heard  of  it)  :  this  conclusion  of  the 

remarkable,  that  in  tlie  enumeration  in  ch.  verse  is  manifestly  connected  with  the  fact  of 

xlvi.  Rachel  is  emphatically  called  "Jacob's  his  weeping  aloud.     "We  must  therefore  in- 

icife,"  ■which  title  is  not  given  to  Leah.  fcr  that  Joseph's  official  residence  was  in,  or 

32.]  As  in  ch.  xliii.  9,  the  concluding  words  close  by,  the  royal  palace.     In  ver.  16  we 

are  literally,  "  /  sJiall  have  sinned  to  mxj  are  told  that  the  news  of  that  which  had 

father  all  the  days."  happened  were  told  in  Pharaoh's  house;  but 

XLY.    The  recognition.     Joseph  sends  for  that  was  a   distinct  matter.  3.]  The 

his  father.  1.]  The  pleading  of  Judah  question  which  their  former  intelligence  had 

has   conquered,    not   the    determination    of  again  and  again  solved  is  again  asked  by 

Joseph,  which  had  no  real  existence,  but  his  Joseph.     But  this  is  an  exqiiisite  stroke  of 

power  of  repressing  his  feelings.      But  he  truth.     He  now  has  entered  into  a  different 

will  not  have  the  Egyptians  know  the  de-  relation  with  them.     The  "  old  man,  your 

tails  of  his   brethren's  crime  and  his  own  father,"  is  now  become  "my  father."     Be- 

secret  history.  2.]  Literally,  he  uttered  fore,  it  was  a  question  of  courtesy ;  but  now, 

his  voice  in  weeping.     As  he  did  so,  his  of  love.  4.]  He  calls  them  nearer,  and 


28— XLY.  14.  GENESIS.  103 

And  he  said,  I   am  Joscpli  your  brother,  whom  ye  sohl 

into  Egypt.     ^  Now  thcrelbrc  be  not  grieved,  nor  angry 

with  yourselves,  that  ye  sold  me  hither :  for  God  did  send 

me  before  jom  to  preserve  life.     ^  For  these  two  years 

hath  the  famine  been  in  the  hmd :  and  yet  there   are  five 

years,  in  the  which  there    shall  neither  he  ploughing  nor 

harvest.     "^  And  God  sent  me  before  you  to  preserve  you 

a  'remnant  in  the  earth,  and  to  save  your  lives  by  a  great  '  j,?,' ^iiv' ?  ^' 

deliverance.     ^  So  now  it  was  not  you  that  sent  me  hither, 

but  God :  and  he  hath  made  me  a  father  to  Pharaoh,  and 

lord  of  all  his  house,  and  a  ruler  throughout  all  the  land 

of  Eg^-pt.     ^  Haste  ye,  and  go  up  to  my  father,  and  say 

unto  him,  Thus  saith  thy  son  Joseph,  God  hath  made  me 

lord  of  all  Egypt :  come  down  unto  me,  tarry  not :  ^^  an(j 

thou  shalt  dwell  in  the  land  of  Goshen,  and  thou  shalt  be 

near  unto  me,  thou,  and  thy  children,  and  thy  children's 

children,  and  thy  flocks,  and  th}'  herds,  and  all  that  thou 

hast :   1^  and  there  will  I  nourish  thee ;  for  yet  there  are 

five  3'ears  of  famine ;  lest  thou,  and  thj^  household,  and 

all  that  thou  hast,  come  to  poverty.    ^2  And,  behold,  j'our 

eyes  see,  and  the  eyes  of  my  brother  Benjamin,  that  it  is 

my  mouth  that  speaketh  unto  j^ou.     i^  ^^^  j  yg  shall  tell 

my  father  of  all  my  glory  in  Egypt,  and  of  all  that  ye 

have  seen  ;  and  ye  shall  haste  and  bring  down  my  father 

hither.     ^"^  And  he  fell  upon  his  brother  Benjamin's  neck, 

gives  tlicra  more  detailed  proof,  at  tlie  same  5).     The  LXX.  render  the  word  here  and  in 

time  fathoming  by  bis  simple  words  the  very  cb.  xlvi.  34  by  "  Geseni  of  Arabia  :  "  and 

depth  of  that  guilt  with  which   their  con-  we  know  from  Herodotus  and  Strabo  that 

science  was  charging  them,  and  endeavouring  the  ancients  reckoned  the  Eastern  cities  of 

to  remove  it.  5.]  As  Luther  remarks,  Egypt,   Heliopolis   and   Ileroopolis,    as    in 

"  You  sold  me,  but  God  bought  me  for  His  Arabia.     So    that   it  was    to   the   N.E.   of 

good  purposes."  8.]  So  in   1  Mace.  Egypt,  where  even  now  is  the  most  fertile 

xi.  32,  King  Demetrius  writes  to  his  father  part  (see  ch.  xlvii.  6,  11)  and  in  the  neigh- 

Lasthenes.  2  Chron.  ii.  12;  iv.  16.  10.  bourhood  of  the  capital,  where  Joseph  dwelt. 

the  land  of  Goshen]  Otherwise  called  (ch.  11.]  come  to  poverty  is  literally,  be- 

slvii.  11)  "  the  land  of  Raa7nses."     Knobel  come  a  possession,  i.  o.  be  sold  into  slavery, 

says  that  the  Elohist  alone  knows  it  by  this  This  was  really  the  case  witli  the  Egyptians 

latter  name.     It  was  to  the  East  of  the  Nile  themselves  as  the  result  of  the  famine  :  see 

as  lying  nearest   to   the   immigrants   from  ch.  xlvii.    19,  fF.  12.]  Ue  challenges 

Canaan;  and  neither  at  this  time,  nor  in  the  any  possible  thought  that  niiglit  doubt  his 

history  of  the  Exodus,  do  we  hear  of  any  identity,  appealing  to  all,  and  to  that  one 

crossing  of  the  river.     But  it  must  have  ex-  who  knew  him  best.     I'robably,  in  this  his 

tended  to  the  Nile,  witness  the  hiding  of  the  speecli  to  them,  he  had  rcsimicd  a  peculiar 

infant  j\Ioses,  ancj    the  regrets  for  the  fish  and  familiar  way  of  speech   by  whieii    he 

which  they  used  to  cat  in  Egypt  (Num.  xi  might  be  infallibly  known  to  be  their  brother. 

0 


xxxviii.  21. 
Job  xxxix. 

27.    Eccl. 
liii.  2, 


194  GENESIS.  XLY. 

and  wept ;  and  Benjamin  wept  upon  his  neck,  l^  More- 
over he  kissed  all  his  brethren,  and  wept  upon  them  :  and 
after  that  his  brethren  talked  with  him.  i^  ^  And  the 
fame  thereof  was  heard  in  Pharaoh's  house,  saying, 
Joseph's  brethren  are  come  :  and  it  pleased  Pharaoh  well, 
and  his  servants.  ^^  And  Pharaoh  said  unto  Joseph,  Say 
unto  thy  brethren,  This  do  ye ;  lade  your  beasts,  and  go,- 
get  you  Tinto  the  land  of  Canaan  ;  ^^  and  take  your  father 
and  your  households,  and  come  unto  me  ;  and  I  will  give 
you  the  good  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  je  shall  eat  the 
fat  of  the  land.  ^^  Now  thou  art  commanded,  this  do  ye; 
take  you  carriages  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  for  your  little 
ones,  and  for  your  wives,  and  bring  your  father,  and  come. 
20  And  let  not  your  eyes  spare  your  furniture ;  for  the 
good  of  all  the  land  of  Egypt  is  your's.  ^i  And  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel  did  so :  and  Joseph  gave  them  carriages, 
Exod.  ^  according  to  the  ® commandment  of  Pharaoh,  and  gave 
them  provision  for  the  way.  22  "Po  all  of  them  he  gave 
each  man  changes  of  raiment ;  but  to  Benjamin  he  gave 
three  hundred  pieces  of  silver,  and  five  changes  of  raiment. 
23  And  to  his  father  he  sent  after  this  manner ;  ten  asses 
laden  with  the  good  things  of  Egypt,  and  ten  she  asses 
laden  with  corn  and  bread  and  meat  for  his  father  by  the 
way.  24  So  he  sent  his  brethren  away,  and  they  departed: 
and  he  said  unto  them,  See  that  je  fall  not  out  by  the 

15.]  Only  after  lie  had  thus  embraced  firm  his  friendly  feeling  to  them,  dismisses 

them  and  wept  over  them,  have  they  courage  them  with  costly  presents— giving,  as  before, 

to  talk  with  him.  16 — 20.'\  Pharaoh'' s  five  times  as  much  to  Benjamin  as  to  the 

invitation  to  them  to  come  to  Egypt.     The  others,  besides   a    rich    present    in   silver, 

promise  of  the  good  of  the  land,  the  fat  of  Garments  were  and  are  the  usual  present  in 

the  land,  does  not  here  seem  to  refer  to  their  the  East :  see  Judges  xiv.  12  ;  2  Kings  v.  5, 

being  located  in    Goshen,  but  to  bountiful  22,  f.  24.]  He  was  afraid  that  they 

and  rich  supply  of  their  present  wants :  see  might  begin  to  discuss  and  allot  the  blame 

ver.  23,  and  ch.  xxiv.  10.     The  king  orders  belonging  to  each  for  selling  him  into  Egypt. 

Joseph  to  send  carriages  for  their  transport,  This,  to  quarrel,  or  fall  out,  is  the  sense  of 

and  we  know  that  Egypt  was  from  of  old  the  same  Hebrew  word  in  Prov.  xxix.  9  ; 

rich  in  carriages  and  horses  :  see  ch.  xli.  43;  Isa.  xxviii.  21.     On  the  other  hand,  Kalisch, 

xlvi.  29  ;    1.  9  ;  Exod.  xiv.  6,  fF.  ;  xv.  1,  4,  Gesenius,    and   others    maintain   the   sense 

19 ;  also   1  Kings  x.  28,  f.  ;  Isa.  xxxi.    1 ;  '■'Be  not  afraid ;  "  meaning,  of  any  after 

xxxvi.   9.  20.]    Make  no   trouble  at  plot  of  mine  to  terrify  or  bring  you  back  as 

leaving  behind  your  possessions  in  Canaan,  before.     So  the  Hebrew  word  in  Exod.  xv. 

household  furniture,  and  the  like.    The  word  14;  Deut.  ii.  25  ;  1  Sam.  xiv.  15,  al.     But 

is  literally  your  utensils,  articles  of  house-  surely  the  former  sense  is  the  better  ;  and 

hold  use.  21.]  commandment,  literally,  Knobel    brings    a     grammatical    objection 

mouth :  see  reff.  22.]  Joseph,  to  con-  against    the    other.  25—23.]     They 


15— XLYI.  8.  GENESIS.  195 

way.     -'^  If  And  they  went  up  out  of  Egj'pt,  and  came 

into  the  land  of  Canaan  unto  Jacob  their  father,  ^g  and 

told  him,  saying,  Joseph  is  yet  alive,  and  he  is  governor 

over  all  the  land  of  Egypt.     And  Jacob's  heart  fainted, 

for  he  believed  them  not.     27  _/^nd  they  told  him  all  the 

words  of  Joseph,  which  he  had  said  unto  them  :  and  when 

he  saw  the  carriages  which  Joseph  had  sent  to  carry  him, 

the  spirit  of  Jacob  their  father  revived  :  28  and  Israel  said. 

Is  is  *  enough  ;  Joseph  my  son  is  yet  alive  :  I  will  go  and  *  N^m.xw'a. 

see   him   before   I   die.     XLYI.  ^  And   Israel   took   his     xxiv.i6™i 

Kings  XiX.  4. 

journey  with  all  that  he  had^  and  came  to  Beer-sheba,  and 
offered  sacrifices  unto  the  God  of  his  father  Isaac.  2  And 
God  spake  unto  Israel  in  the  visions  of  the  night,  and  said, 
Jacob,  Jacob.  And  ho  said,  Here  a))i  I.  ^  And  he  said, 
I  con  God,  the  God  of  th}^  father :  fear  not  to  go  down 
into  Egypt ;  for  I  will  there  make  of  thee  a  great  nation  : 
^  I  will  go  down  with  thee  into  Egypt ;  and  I  will  also 
surely  bring  thee  up  a<jain  :  and  Joseph  shall  put  his  hand 
upon  thine  ej^es.  ^  And  Jacob  rose  up  from  Beer-sheba  : 
and  the  sons  of  Israel  brought  Jacob  their  father,  and 
their  little  ones,  and  their  wives,  in  the  carriages  which 
Pharaoh  had  sent  to  carry  him.  ^  And  they  took  their 
cattle,  and  their  goods,  which  they  had  gotten  in  the  land 
of  Canaan,  and  came  into  Egypt,  Jacob,  and  all  his  seed 
with  him  :  7  his  sons,  and  his  sons'  sons  with  him,  his 
daughters,  and  his  sons'  daughters,  and  all  his  seed 
brought  he  with  him  into  Egypt.  ^  H  And  these  are  the 
names  of  the  children -of  Israel,  which  came  into  Egj'pt, 

reach,  and  at  length  persuade,  Jacob.  to  the  God  of  his  fathers  in  prospect  of  the 

26.]  fainted  is  perhaps  literally,  remained  new  life  that  awaited  him  in  Egypt.     It  is 

cold.     He  had  had  too  much  experience  of  true,  God  had  predicted  this  very  migration 

deceit  to  believe  easily  a  strange  tale  like  in  a  vision  to  Abraham,  ch.  xv.  13 — 16,  but 

this.  27.]  Warmth  and  life  returned  that  may  not  have  been  before  Jacob's  mind, 

to  his  spirit.  28.]  Tlie  phrase  It  is  couched  as  it  was  in  somewhat  mysterious 

enough  renders  the   simple   Hebrew  word  terms.  4.]  The  promise,  I  will  surely 

rai\  i,  e.  much :  see  reff.  bring  thee  up  again,  does  not  refer  to  the 

XLVi .]     Jacob's    migration    to    Egijpt.  bringing    up    of  Jacob   when   dead,   to  be 

1 — 7.]  He  came  from  Hebron :  see  buried  in  Canaan, — for  there  was  in  that  no 

ch.  xxxvii.  14.     Abraham   and   Isaac   had  Divine  interposition, — but  to  theliringing  up 

called  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jehovah  at  his  descendants  at  the  Exodus,  which  is  ever 

Beersheba  :  see  ch.  xxi.  33  ;  xxvi.  25.     It  said  to  have  been  God's  act,  with  his  mighty 

may  well  be  that  the  mind  of  Jacob  was  not  hand  and  outstretched  arm.  8 — 28.] 

easy  at  leaving  the  land  of  promise,  and  he  Catalogue    of  Jacob's  sons,   grandchildren, 

wished  to  perform  an  act  of  solemn  adhesion  and   great-grandchildren  who    went    down 


196  GENESIS.  XLYI. 

Jacob  and  his  sons :  Reuben,  Jacob's  firstborn.  ^  And 
tbe  sons  of  Reuben  ;  Hanocb,  and  Pballu,  and  Hezi-on, 
and  Carmi.  ^^  ^  And  the  sons  of  Simeon ;  Jemuel,  and 
Jamin,  and  Obad,  and  Jacbin,  and  Zobar,  and  Sbaul  tbe 
son  of  a  Canaanitisb  woman.  ^  ^  And  tbe  sons  of  Levi ; 
Gersbon,  Kobatb,  and  Merari.  ^^  ^  And  tbe  sons  of 
Judab  ;  Er,  and  Onan,  and  Sbelab,  and  Pbarez,  and  Zarab : 
u ch. xxxTiii.!    but  Er  and  Onan  "died  in  tbe  land  of  Canaan.     And  tbe 

7—10. 

sons  of  Pbarez  were  Hezron  and  HamuL  i^  ^  And  tbe 
sons  of  Issacbar  ;  Tola,  and  Pbuvab,  and  Job,  and  Sliim- 
ron.  ^*  H  And  tbe  sons  of  Zebulvm  ;  Sered,  and  Elon, 
and  Jableel.  ^^  Tbese  be  tbe  sons  of  Leab,  wbicb  sbe  bare 
unto  Jacob  in  Padan-aram,  witb  bis  daug-bter  Dinab :  all 
tbe  souls  of  bis  sons  and  bis  daughters  were  tbirty  and 
tbree.  ^"^  ^  And  tbe  sons  of  Gad ;  Zipbion,  and  Haggi, 
Sbuni,  and  Ezbon,  Eri,  and  Arodi,  and  Areli.  ^"^  ^  And 
tbe  sons  of  Asber ;  Jimnab,  and  Isbuab,  and  Isui,  and 
Beriab,  and  Serab  tbeir  sister :  and  tbe  sons  of  Beriab ; 
Heber,  and  Malcbiel.  ^^  Tbese  are  tbe  sons  of  Zilpab, 
wbom  Laban  gave  to  Leab  bis  daughter,  and  tbese  sbe 
bare  unto  Jacob,  even  sixteen  souls.  ^^  Tbe  sons  of  Racbel 
Jacob's  wife ;  Joseph,  and  Benjamin.  20  ^  And  unto 
Joseph  in  the  land  of  Egypt  were  born  Manasseb  and 
Ephraim,  which  Asenatb  the  daughter  of  Poti-pherab 
priest  of  On  bare  unto  him.  21  ^  And  tbe  sons  of  Benja- 
min icere  Belah,  and  Becher,  and  Asbbel,  Gera,  and 
Naaman,  Ehi,  and  Rosh,  Muppim,  and  HujDpim,  and  Ard. 
22  These  are  the  sons  of  Rachel,  which  were  born  to  Jacob : 
all  the  souls  were  foui'teen.  23  ^  And  the  sons  of  Dan  ; 
Hushim.  24  ^  And  the  sons  of  Naphtali ;  Jahzeel,  and 
Guni,  and  Jezer,  and  Shillem.  25  These  are  tbe  sons  of 
Bilbah,  which  Laban  gave  unto  Rachel  bis  daughter,  and 
she  bare  tbese  unto  Jacob  :  all  the  souls  were  seven.  26  XW. 

into  Egypt.     The  cliildrcn  are  ranged  ac-  16 — 18.]    The  two   sons  of  Zilpah, 

cording    to  their  mothers,  as    are  those    of  Leali's  tnaid,  and  their  children,  sixteen  in 

Esau  in  eh.  xxxvi.  9,  fF.             9 — 15.   The  number.             19 — 22.]  RacheVs  two  sons, 

six  sons,  and  daiiffhter  of  Leah.     The  whole  and    their   children,  fourteen    in   number. 

number  of  these,  excluding  Er  and  Onan,  is  23 — 25.]  BilhaKs  two  sons,  and  their 

32.     But  seeing  that  they  are  stated  to  be  children,  seven  in  mimber.             26,  f.]  So 

33  in  ver.   15,  and    that  ^'^  Jacob   and  his  that  we  have  33  +    16   +   14  +  7  =  70. 

sojis"  are  mentioned  in  ver.  8,  it  is  plain  But  of  these  Jacob  himself  and  Joseph  and 

that  he  himself  is  reckoned  to  this  fii'st  lot.  his  two  sons  are  not  counted  in  ver.  26,  so 


9—33. 


GENESIS. 


197 


tlie  souls  that  came  witli  Jacob  into  Egypt,  wliicli  came 
out  of  lii.s  loins,  besides  Jacob's  sons'  wives,  all  the  souls 
ivcrc  threescore  and  six ;  ^"  and  the  sons  of  Joseph,  which 
were  born  him  in  Egypt,  Z6r/"<f  two  souls  :  all  the  souls  of 
the  house  of  Jacob,  which  came  into  Egypt,  trerc  three- 
score and  ten.  28  ^[  j^^i^  j^e  gcjj^  Judah  before  him  unto 
Joseph,  to  direct  his  face  unto  Goshen ;  and  they  came 
into  the  land  of  Goshen.  29  ^Vnd  Joseph  made  ready  his 
chariot,  and  went  up  to  meet  Israel  his  father,  to  Goshen, 
and  '^presented  himself  unto  him  ;  and  he  fell  on  his  neck,  ^ 
and  wept  on  his  neck  a  good  while.  ^^  And  Israel  said 
unto  Joseph,  Now  let  me  die,  since  I  have  seen  thy  face, 
because  thou  art  yet  alive.  ^^  And  Joseph  said  unto  his 
brethren,  and  unto  his  father's  house,  I  will  go  up,  and 
shew  Pharaoh,  and  say  unto  him.  My  brethren,  and  my 
father's  house,  which  iccrc  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  are  come 
unto  me ;  ^'^  and  the  men  are  shepherds,  for  their  trade 
hath  been  to  feed  cattle ;  and  they  have  brought  their 
flocks,  and  their  herds,  and  all  that  they  have.  ^'^  And  it 
shall  come  to  pass,  when  Pharaoh  shall  call  you,  and  shall 


21;  XXXV.  1, 
9 ;  xlviii.  3. 


that  66  arc  left  :  and,  adding  in  these  four, 
we  have  (as  in  vcr.  27)  70.  Several  remarks 
occur  to  us  on  this  catalogue.  (1.)  The  LXX. 
in  ver.  27  insert  the  following  words : 
"  There  were  also  sons  of  Manasseh,  ichich 
his  Syrian  concubine  bare  unto  him; 
Machir.  And  Machir  begat  Galaad.  And 
the  sons  of  Ephraim  thebrother  of  Manasseh ; 
Suta/ani  and  Taam:  and  the  sons  of  Suia- 
lam  ;  Edom."  And  in  ver.  27,  to  correspond 
with  this  addition  of  five  persons,  they  make 
the  whole  number  7-5.  This  appears  to  have 
been  put  together  by  the  aid  of  our  ch.  1.  23, 
and  Num.  xxvi.  29,  35.  This  reckoning  is 
followed  by  Stephen  (Acts  vii.  14),  who  as 
a  Hellenistic  Jew  naturally  goes  by  the 
LXX.  (2.)  The  list  is  probably  neither 
complete  nor  accurate,  and  must  be  re- 
garded rather  as  a  formal  than  as  an  histori- 
cal document.  For  (a)  there  were  all 
Jacob's  daughters,  ch.  xxxvii.  35,  and  our 
ver.  7,  and  his  sons'  daughters,  ver.  7,  of 
whom  no  mention  is  made  except  in  the  two 
cases  of  Dinah  and  Serah.  (6)  The  whole 
difficulty  respecting  the  progeny  of  Judah 
(see  notes  on  ch.  xxxviii.  29),  as  also 
that   regarding   Benjamin's   ten  sons  (ver. 


21),  is  most  likely  to  be  solved  not  by 
stretching  the  limits  of  probability  so  as  to 
make  all  square  with  fact,  but  by  regarding 
such  catalogues  as  this  as  rather  formal  tlian 
historical.  (3.)  On  the  variations  in  names 
and  their  forms  between  |this  account  and 
those  in  Num.  xxvi.  and  in  1  Chron.  11,  ff. 
see   notes  in   those    places.  28 — 34.] 

Meeting  of  Jacob  and  Joseph.  Judah  ap- 
pears to  have  been  sent  straight  to  Joseph, 
to  obtain  from  him  directions  as  to  the  laud 
of  Goshen,  and  then  to  have  returned  to  his 
father  with  the  directions  and  to  have  guided 
them  into  the  land  of  Goslicn.  Here  the 
LXX.  have  '^setit  Judah  before  him  to  Joseph 
to  meet  him  at  Ueroopolis,  at  the  land  of 
Harnesses ; "  and  in  the  next  verse  where 
we  have,  after  the  Hebrew,  to  Goshen,  they 
have  "to  Ueroopolis."  See  above  on  ch. 
xlv.    10.  29.]    presented  himself  is 

literally  appeared,  a  word  almost  reserved 
for  divine  appearances  (relf. )  :  and  Knobel 
thinks  it  is  used  here  as  according  with  the 
royal  pomp  with  which  Joseph  was  invested, 
went  up  is  used  of  going  to  Goshen 
which  was  N.  of  ^Icmphis  :  but  again  in 
ver.  31  go  up  is  used  of  going  from  Goshen 


198  GENESIS.  XLVI. 

say,  What  is  your  occupation  ?  3*  tliat  ye  stall  say,  Thy 
servants'  trade  hath  been  about  cattle  from  our  youth  even 
until  now,  both  we,  a)id  also  our  fathers  :  that  ye  may 
dwell  in  the  land  of  Goshen ;  for  every  shepherd  is  an 
abomination  unto  the  Egyptians.  XLYII.  i  Then  Joseph 
came  and  told  Pharaoh,  and  said.  My  father  and  my 
brethren,  and  their  flocks,  and  their  herds,  and  all  that 
they  have,  are  come  out  of  the  land  of  Canaan ;  and,  be- 
hold, they  are  in  the  land  of  Goshen.  2  And  from  among 
his  brethren  he  took  five  men,  and  presented  them  unto 
Pharaoh.  ^  And  Pharaoh  said  unto  his  brethren,  "What 
is  your  occupation  ?  and  they  said  unto  Pharaoh,  Thy 
servants  are  shepherds,  both  we,  and  also  our  fathers. 
*  They  said  moreover  unto  Pharaoh,  For  to  sojourn  in  the 
land  are  we  come ;  for  thy  servants  have  no  pasture  for 
their  flocks ;  for  the  famine  is  sore  in  the  land  of  Canaan : 
now  therefore,  we  pray  thee,  let  thy  servants  dwell  in  the 
land  of  Goshen.  ^  And  Pharaoh  spake  unto  Joseph,  say- 
ing. Thy  father  and  thy  brethren  are  come  unto  thee  : 
6  the  land  of  Egypt  is  before  thee ;  in  the  best  of  the  land 
make  thy  father  and  brethren  to  dwell ;  in  the  land  of 
Goshen  let  them  dwell  :  and  if  thou  knowest  any  men  of 
activity  among  them,  then  make  them  rulers  over  my 
cattle.  "^  And  Joseph  brought  in  Jacob  his  father,  and 
set   him   before   Pharaoh :  and   Jacob   blessed   Pharaoh. 

to  Pharaoh,  either  because  that  was  to  the  be  taken  as  soldiers  by  Pharaoh.  But  it  seems 

royal  presence,   or  because  it  was  up   the  clear,  from  the  use  elsewhere,  that  the  word 

stream  of  the  Nile.             34.]  It  might  seem  must  be  sometimes  taken  as  meaning  from 

strange  that  such  a  direction  should  be  given  the  number  of,  i.e.  from  among.     So  Gese- 

under  the  reign  of  the  shepherd-kings,  as-  nius  and  Kalisch.     On  the  use  of  the  number 

suming  that  this  was  the  period  of  Jacob's  five,  see  above,  on  ch.  xliii.  34.             3,  f.] 

visit.     But  Knobel  well  suggests  that  they  They  answer  as  Joseph  had  bidden   them, 

could  not  change  the  thoughts  and  customs  ch.  xlvi.  33.               7.]  It  has  been  asked 

of  the  Egyptians,  which  this  describes.     The  why  the  father  was  not  introduced  first.  The 

offer  to  Jacob  and  his  sons  of  the  best  of  the  answer,  I  conceive,  will  be  found  in  the  fact 

land  and  of  comparative  separation  from  the  that  the  sons  represented  the  occupation  of 

Egyptians,  would  seem  rather  to  favour  the  the   family,    on  which   would    depend   the 

idea  that  the  shepherd-kings  were  reigning,  situation  of  their  location  in  the  land.    Theirs 

XLYII.    1  — 12.]    Joseph    presents  his  was  the  business   interview;    his   was   one 

father  and  five  of  his  brethren  to  Pharaoh,  only  of  form  and  courtesy.    The  "blessing" 

A  possession  is  assigned  them  in  the  land  of  spoken   of  seems   to   have  been   that  which 

Barneses.             from  among  his  brethren  is  was   customary   at   greeting    (compare   ch. 

literally,  from  the  end  of  his  brethren,  and  xxvii.    23,   where  this  blessing    is  distinct 

some  have  supposed  that  Joseph  presented  from  the  more  solemn  one  that  follows),  and 

only  the  weakest,  who  would  not  be  likely  to  not  any  marked  form  of  benediction  such  as 


34— XLYII.  14. 


GENESIS. 


199 


^  And  Pharaoh  said  unto  Jacob,  How  old  art  thou?  ^  And 
Jacob  said  unto  Pharaoh,  The  daj's  of  the  years  of  my 
wanderings  are  an  hundred  and  thirty  years  :  few  and 
evil  have  the  days  of  the  years  of  my  life  been,  and  liave 
not  attained  unto  the  days  of  the  years  of  the  life  of  my 
fathers  in  the  days  of  their  wanderings.  ^^  And  Jacob 
blessed  Pharaoh,  and  went  out  from  before  Pharaoh. 
11  U  And  Joseph  placed  his  father  and  his  brethren,  and 
gave  them  a  possession  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  in  the  best 
of  the  land,  in  the  land  of  Ranicses,  as  Pharaoh  had  com- 
manded. 1^  And  Joseph  nourished  his  father,  and  his 
brethren,  and  all  his  father's  household,  with  bread,  ac- 
cording to  t/icir  families,  ^^  ^  And  t/iere  was  no  bread  in 
all  the  earth ;  for  the  famine  nris  very  sore,  so  that  the 
land  of  Egypt  and  the  land  of  Canaan  fainted  by  reason 
of  the  famine.  ^"^  And  Joseph  gathered  up  all  the  money 
that  was  found  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  in  the  land  of 
Canaan,   for  the  corn  which  they  bought :    and  Joseph 


the  mystic  intcrpretei-s  have  ascribed  to  Jacob 
in  the  character  of  heir  of  the  promise.  So 
also  in  ver.  10,  at  their  parting.  Probably 
it  is  intended  that  Jacob  approached  and  left 
Pharaoh  with  some  such  words  as  "  God 
save  the  king,"  or  "0  king,  live  for  ever:" 
compare  2  Sam.  xvi.  16 ;  Dan.  ii.  4  ;  v.  10. 
9.]  Jacob's  answer  is  characteristic. 
He  feels  that  his  life  is  drawing  to  an  end, 
and  compares  his  130  years  with  the  175  of 
Abraham  (ch.  xxv.  7)  and  the  180  of  Isaac 
(ch.  XXXV.  28)  :  they  seem  to  him  few,  and 
■wlicn  he  thinks  how  they  hav^e  been  spent — 
all  those  years  of  exile  and  servitude,  followed 
by  wandering  and  then  by  cruel  deceit  and 
mourning — they  seem  to  him  evil  also.  And 
they  were  years  of  wandering,  well  called  a 
pilgrimage,  as  were  those  of  his  fathers.  It 
is  well,  however,  to  retain  here  the  simpler 
term  wanderings,  as  from  this  passage  pil- 
grimage is  so  wedded  to  its  figurative  mean- 
ing as  to  have  lost  all  allusion  to  the  wander- 
ing from  which  occasion  was  first  found  for 
its  use.  11.]  The  land  of  Rameses  is 

mentioned  here  only.  The  city  (Rameses  or 
Eaarascs)  is  mentioned  Exod.  i.  11  ;  xii.  37; 
Num.  xxxiii.  3,  5.  On  the  probable  situa- 
tion, and  other  particulars  connected  with 
the  name,  see  Mr.  Stuart  Poole's  art.  in  tlie 
Biblical  Did.  13  —  26.]    Increase  of 


the  famine  ;  Joseph's  policy,  and  its  results. 
13.]  The  famine  was  universal,  and 
the  two  countries  with  which  the  Hebrews 
were  connected  are  especially  mentioned  as 
being  exhausted  by  it.  14.]    Much 

questioning  has  arisen  over  the  policy  of 
Joseph  as  related  in  tliis  passage.  Kaliseh 
spends  eiglit  pages  of  virtuous  indignation 
over  his  cruel  and  treacherous  behaviour, 
and  puts  the  enquiry  to  which  he  offers  no 
satisfactory  answer,  "  Is  not  his  person,  de- 
scribed in  so  bright  and  almost  sublime  traits, 
at  once  stained  by  the  execrable  meanness  of 
sacrificing  the  happiness  of  a  nation  to  sub- 
servient sycophancy  for  a  tyrannical  dy- 
nasty.^" But  we  may  remark,  that  his 
animadversions  all  proceed  on  one  assump- 
tion, quite  unwarranted  by  the  history,  viz. 
that  the  people  of  Egypt  were  aware  of,  and 
believed,  the  approach  of  the  years  of  famine. 
Doubtless  the  fact  of  Pharaoh's  dreams,  tlieir 
interpretation  and  the  elevation  of  Joseph  in 
consequence,  were  matters  of  publicity.  But 
what  a  wide  interval  tlicrc  is  between  this 
and  a  personal  prevision  on  the  part  of  the 
people  for  the  coming  want,  any  one  knows 
who  has  any  experience  of  the  popular  mind. 
The  people's  own  confession  that  Joseph 
had  saved  their  lives  (ver.  2.5)  includes  a  con- 
fession of , their  own  improvidence.     Assum- 


200  GENESIS.  XLYII. 

broiiglit  tlie  money  into  Pharaoh's  house.  ^^  And  when 
money  failed  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  in  the  land  of 
Canaan,  all  the  Egyptians  came  unto  Joseph,  and  said, 
Give  us  bread  :  for  why  should  we  die  in  thy  presence  ? 
for  the  money  faileth.  ^^  And  Joseph  said,  Give  your 
cattle  ;  and  I  will  give  you  for  your  cattle,  if  money  fail. 
17  And  they  brought  their  cattle  unto  Joseph  :  and  Joseph 
gave  them  bread  in  exchange  for  horses,  and  for  the  flocks, 
and  for  the  cattle  of  the  herds,  and  for  the  asses  :  and  he 
TrExod.xv.i3.  "^fed  them  with  bread  for  all  their  cattle  for  that  year. 

2  Chron.  J 

•  $xS'.'22.'  1^  When  that  year  was  ended,  they  came  unto  him  the 
xMi^xiix*'  second  year,  and  said  unto  him.  We  will  not  hide  if  from 
^"'  ■  ■'  my  lord,  how  that  our  money  is  spent ;  my  lord  also  hath 
our  herds  of  cattle  ;  there  is  not  ought  left  in  the  sight  of 
my  lord,  but  our  bodies,  and  our  lands  :  ^^  Avherefore  shall 
we  die  before  thine  eyes,  both  we  and  our  land  ?  buy  us 
and  our  land  for  bread,  and  we  and  our  land  will  be  serv- 
ants unto  Pharaoh  :  and  give  iis  seed,  that  we  may  live, 
and  not  die,  that  the  land  be  not  desolate.  ^0  And  Joseph 
bought  all  the  land  of  Egypt  for  Pharaoh  ;  for  the  Egypt- 
ians sold  every  man  his  field,  because  the  famine  prevailed 
over  them  :  so  the  land  became  Pharaoh's.  ^^  And  as  for 
the  people,  he  removed  them  into  the  cities  from  one  end 

ing  that,  wc  may  fairly  say  that  many  data  arc  enumerated  in  Exod.  ix.  3,  where  see 

are  wanting  before  we  can  pronounce  on  the  note.    Hetei  them  is  literally,  He  led  them: 

relative  change  made  in  their  state  by  the  it  is  the  same  word  as  in  ref.  Exod.,  TItou  . .  . 

results  of  Joseph's  policy.     It  is  impossible  hast  guided  them  in  thy  strength,  &c.     But 

for   us    to   say    whether    the    condition    of  it  appears  also  to  import  feeding  or  caring 

nominal    serfdom   in   which   it    left   them,  for :  possibly  from  the  pastoral  relation  :  as 

coupled  as  it  was  with  the  change  mentioned  the  command  rendered,  '■^  Feed  my  sheep" 

in  ver.   21,   were   not   preferable   to    their  (Johnssi.  16)  is  literally,  "Lear/,  o?-s/k7j/(«y7, 

former   one.      At    all    events,   this  ground  tny  sheejJ."     This  idea  is  borne  out  by  the 

is  safe  :  until   we   know  very    much  more  reff.             18,]   It  is  literally,  "  Now  that 

of    the   political   and    economical  state  of  our  money  and  our  herd  of  cattle  is  spent 

the  people  we  are  by  no  means  justified  in  unto  my  lord,"  the  construction  being  what 

branding  with  reproach,  still  less  in  suppos-  is  called  a  pregnant  one.         19.]  Wherefore 

ing  that  the  sacred  writer  means  to  brand  shall  we  die  .  .  .  both  we  and  our  land  1  is 

with  reproach,  a  character  so  high  and  gen-  another  example  of  the  same  construction, 

erons  as  Joseph's  is  throughout  described.  The  latter  clause  is  explained  at  the  end  of 

The  intention  evidently  is  to  produce  on  the  the  verse,  where  it  is  said,  that  the  land  be 

mind  of  the  reader  an  impression  of  a  com-  not  desolate.           21.  ]  The  land  having  be- 

bination  on  the  part  of  Joseph  of  wisdom  come  Pliaraoh's,  the  habitations  on  it  were 

and  humanity,  together  with  steadfast  loyalty  bis  also.     And  in  piu'suance  of  this  right 

to  his  royal  master.     And  I  submit  that  we  Joseph  removes  the  people  into  the  cities, 

are  in  no  position  to  find  fault  with  that  im-  congregating    them    together     from     their 

pression.               17.]  The  animals  of  Egypt  previous  scattered  life   in  the  fields.     This 


15—26. 


GENESIS. 


201 


of  the  borders  of  Egypt  even  to  the  oflicr  end  thereof. 
2-  Only  the  land  of  the  priests  bought  he  not ;  for  the 
priests  had  a  portion  asHtgncd  them  of  Pharaoh,  and  did  cat 
their  portion  which  Pharaoh  gave  them  :  wherefore  they 
sold  not  their  lands.  23  Then  Joseph  said  unto  the  people, 
Behold,  I  have  bought  you  this  day  and  your  land  for 
Pharaoh  :  lo,  here  is  seed  for  you,  and  ye  shall  sow  the 
laud.  24  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  increase,  tliat 
j'-c  shall  give  the  fifth  jwr/  unto  Pharaoh,  and  four  parts 
shall  be  your  own,  for  seed  of  the  field,  and  for  your  food, 
and  for  them  of  your  households,  and  for  food  for  your 
little  ones.  2j  And  they  said.  Thou  hast  saved  our  lives  : 
let  us  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord,  and  we  will  be 
Pharaoh's  servants.  26  And  Joseph  made  it  a  law  over 
the  land  of  Egypt  unto  this  day,  that  Vhavaoh  should  have 
the  fifth  ^jw^;  except  the  land  of  the  priests  only,  which 


had  the  obvious  advantage  of  locating 
them  ch).se  to  the  corn-magazines,  besides 
other  collateral  political  advantages.  The 
Samaritan  rentateuch  and  the  LXX.  have 
followed  another  reading  of  this  verse,  which 
makes  the  sense  to  be,  "  he  enslaved  them  to 
him  (Diaraoh)  as  bondmen."  And  this 
reading  is  preferred  by  Knobel.  But  Keil 
(p.  277,  note)  has  shewn  that  it  is  very  im- 
probable. 22.]  portion  has  been  un- 
derstood in  two  ways :  (1)  which  is  Kalisch's 
interpretation,  that  tliey  had  a  definite  por- 
tion of  land  constitutionally  allotted  them, 
which  they  could  not  alienate.  But  surely 
this  does  not  agree  wdth  the  text  which  speaks 
of  their  eating  the  portion,  given  them  by 
Pharaoh  (an  expression  no  way  explained  by 
Kalisch's  admission  that  it  applied  only  to 
their  time  of  actual  service  as  priests).  And 
besides,  how  would  a  fixed  freehold  of  land 
have  helped  them  in  time  of  famine  ?  (2) 
which  is  surely  right,  the  priests  had  daily 
rations  from  the  king,  so  that,  although  their 
lands  were  rendered  useless  by  the  famine, 
they  had  no  reason  to  sell  them.  Traces  of 
this  practice  arc  found  in  Herodotus'  ac- 
count of  Egypt  (ii.  37),  and  in  Diodorus 
Siculus  (i.  73,  75).  The  former  says  of  the 
Egyptian  priests,  "  and  they  enjoy  no  few 
advantages.  For  they  do  not  consume  nor 
expend  any  of  their  private  resources,  but 
have  sacred  provisions  of  corn  food  baked 
for  them,  and  an  ample  allowance  for  each 


of  flesh  of  geese  and  of  beeves  day  by  day.' 
24.]  The  royalty  here  proposed  for 
the  occu])iers  of  the  land  to  pay  does  not, 
sa)'s  Knobel,  appear  exorbitant.  The  tenth 
of  the  produce  of  the  soil,  and  also  of  the 
flocks,  seems  to  have  been  a  common  royal 
tribute:  see  1  Sam.  viii.  1.5,  17,  and  note, 
Levit.  xxvii.  30.  The  kings  of  Syria  received 
from  the  conquered  Jews  (1  Mace.  x.  30)  a 
third  of  the  seed  (i.  e.  cereal  crops},  and  half 
the  fruit  of  the  trees.  The  Jlesscnians  had 
to  pay  half  the  produce  of  the  land  to  the 
Spartans  (Pausanias) :  and  still  heavier  pro- 
portions are  stated  to  be  paid  by  modern  tri- 
butaries, e.g.  in  Ispalian  the  occupiers  of  royal 
lands,  whohavescedalso  furni.shed  them, have 
to  pay  back  three-fourths  of  the  produce. 
25.]  We  have  before  cited  this  as  a  testi- 
mony that,  however  we  may  fail  entirely  to 
see  through  it,  Joseph's  policy  was  at  least 
regarded  by  the  subjects  of  it  as  popular. 
26.]  Knobel  remarks,  that  this  account  is 
confirmed  by  history.  Diodorus  Siculus  re- 
lates that  the  only  possessors  of  land  in 
Egypt  were  the  king,  the  priestly  and  the 
warrior-caste;  from  these  the  occupiers 
rented  the  land.  Ilerodotus  also  (ii.  168) 
names  the  warrior-caste  as  land-owners, 
while  here  we  have  named  as  such  only  the 
king  and  the  priests.  But  this  may  be  ex- 
plained. In  another  place  (ii.  141)  Hero- 
dotus relates  that  Sethos  (contemporary  with 
Sennacherib  and  Isaiah)  took  away  from  tho 


202 


GENESIS. 


XLYII. 


became  not  Pharaoli's.  27  ^  And  Israel  dwelt  in  tlie  land 
of  Egypt,  in  the  country  of  Goshen  ;  and  they  had  posses- 
sions therein,  and  grew,  and  multiplied  exceedingly. 
28  And  Jacob  lived  in  the  land  of  Egypt  seventeen  years : 
so  the  whole  age  of  Jacob  was  an  hundred  forty  and  seven 
years,  29  And  the  time  drew  nigh  that  Israel  must  die : 
and  he  called  his  son  Joseph,  and  said  unto  him,  If  now 
I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  put,  I  pray  thee,  thy 
hand  under  my  thigh,  and  deal  kindly  and  truly  with  me ; 
bury  me  not,  I  pray  thee,  in  Egypt :  ^0  if^i  j  Tf^[l\  \[q  with 
my  fathers,  and  thou  shalt  carry  me  out  of  Egypt,  and 
bury  me  in  their  burying-place.  And  he  said,  I  will  do 
as  thou  hast  said.  ^^  And  he  said,  Swear  unto  me.  And 
he  sware  unto  him.  And  Israel  bowed  himself  upon 
the  bed's  head.  XL VIII.  l  And  it  came  to  pass 
after  these  things,  that  one  told  Joseph,  Behold,  thy 
father  is  sick  :  and  he  took  with  him  his  two  sons,  Ma- 


warrior-caste  the  portions  of  land  whicli  pre- 
vious kings  had  given  them.  Evidently 
then  the  warriors  obtained  their  grants  of 
land  from  some  king  subsequent  to  the  time 
of  Joseph.  27 — 31.]  Israel  multijAies. 

Jacob  has  an  interview  ivith  Joseph  in  2)ro- 
spect  of  his  death.  27.]  Is  evidently  an- 

ticipatory, corresponding  with  Exod.  i.  7. 
29,  f.]  This  sending  for  Joseph  in 
anticipation  of  death  is  entirely  distinct  from 
tliat  in  ch.  xlviii.,  where  we  read  of  the  act- 
ual approach  of  death  in  Jacob's  last  sick- 
ness. On  the  form  of  oath  here  prescribed, 
see  ch.  xxiv.  2,  note.  The  promise  is  ex- 
acted here  in  general  terms,  which  Jacob 
again  exacts  of  all  his  sons,  ch.  xlix.  29,  if., 
in  detail.  The  performance  of  it  by  them  is 
related  ch.  1.  4 — 13.  The  concluding  words 
of  this  chapter  have  been  the  subject  of  a 
curious,  and  in  the  estimation  of  sober  men, 
a  childish  mistake.  Their  literal  rendering 
is  as  in  A.  V.  And  similarly  the  Vulgate, 
— Israel  adored  God,  turning  to  the  head  of 
the  bed.  But  the  LXX.  here,  as  also  the  an- 
cient Syriac  and  Latin  versions,  have,  "  and 
Israel  uiorshipped  upon  the  top  of  his  staff ." 
The  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrevvs 
(xi.  21),  following  as  usual  the  LXX.,  thus 
quotes  the  verse  :  and  the  Vulgate  there  has 
strangely  and  erroneously  rendered,  "  and 
adored  the    top    of   his   staff."     It    would 


hardly  be  credited  were  it  not  the  disgrace- 
ful fact,  that  this  is  the  chief  authority  cited 
by  the  Eomish  Church  for  the  adoration  of 
images  !  The  whole  ambiguity  has  arisen 
from  the  Ilebrew  word,  77ith,  signifying,  with 
one  set  of  vowel  points,  a  bed  (mittah),  and 
with  another,  a  staff  [matteh).  But  the 
LXX.  themselves  have  translated  the  same 
word  bed  two  verses  further  on,  ch.  xlviii.  2. 
See  the  whole  discussed  in  my  note  on  the 
passage  in  Hebrews,  Kalisch  thinks  that 
the  words  have  no  reference  to  any  act  of 
worship,  but  merely  mean  that  Jacob,  having 
sat  up  (see  ch.  xlviii.  21)  to  speak  to  Joseph 
and  to  exact  and  receive  his  oath,  lay  down 
again.  Knobel,  with  more  likelihood  (com- 
pare esp.  Heb.  xi.  21),  thinks  that  it  was  an 
act  of  reverence  in  thankfulness  to  God  for 
the  fulfilraent  of  his  last  wish.  See  a  similar 
act  of  David's,  1  Kings  i.  47. 

XLVIIL  Jacob's  last  sickness.  His 
adoption  and  blessing  of  Joseph's  tico  sons. 
1.]  one  told  Joseph  — the  verb  is 
indefinite  ;  merely,  it  was  told  to  Joseph. 
So  also  in  ver.  2.  Joseph  is  supposed  by 
Kalisch  to  have  taken  with  him  his  sons,  as 
apprehensive  that  they,  being  half-Egyptian, 
might  miss  their  part  in  the  family  inherit- 
ance. But  it  seems  more  probable  that  the 
design  of  Jacob,  expressed  in  ver.  5,  was 
previously  known  to  him.      The  sons  were 


27— XLYIII.  10.  GENESIS.  203 

nasscli   and  Epliralm.      2  ^^^^  qh^  Iq\^  Jacob,  and    said, 

Behold,    tliy   son    Joseph  comcth  unto  thee :    and  Israel 

strengthened    himself,    and    sat    upon    the    bed.      ^  And 

Jacob  said  unto  Joseph,  fGod  Almighty   appeared  unto  +ELSuiDD»i. 

me  at  Luz  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  blessed  me,  ^  and 

said   unto  me,  Behold,   I  will  make    thee  fruitful,  and 

midtiply  thee,  and  I  will  make  of  thee   a   multitude  of 

people  ;  and  M'ill  give  this  land  to  thy  seed  after  thee  for 

an  everlasting  possession,      ^  ^  And  now  thy  two  sons, 

which  were  born  unto  thee  in  the  land  of  Egypt  before  I 

came  unto  thee  into  Egypt,  are  mine ;  Ephraim  and  Ma- 

nasseh  shall  be  mine,  as  Reuben  and  Simeon.     ^  And  thy 

issue,  which  thou  begcttest  after  them,  shall  be  thine,  a)id 

shall  be  called  after  the  name  of  their  brethren  in  their 

inheritance.     ^  And  as  for  me,  when  I  came  from  Padan, 

Rachel  died  by  me  in  the  land  of  Canaan  in  the  way,  when 

yet  there  was  but  a  little  way  to  come  unto  Ejjhrath  :  and 

I  buried  her  there  in  the  way  of  Ephrath ;  the   same  is 

Beth-lehem.     ^  And  Israel  beheld  Joseph's  sons,  and  said. 

Who  are  these  ?     ^  And  Joseph  said  unto  his  father,  They 

are  my  sons,  whom  God  hath  given  me  in  this  place.    And 

he  said.  Bring  them,  I  pray  thee,  unto  me,  and  I  will  bless 

them.     10  Now  the  ej^es  of  Israel  were  dim  for  age,  so  iltat 

ho  could  not  see.     And  he  brought  tlicm  near  unto  him ; 

about  22  years  old  :  see  ch.  xli.  50.  to  rank  under  the  heads  of  Ephraimites  and 

2.  strengthened  himself  ]  i.e.  exerted  him-  Manassitcs,  and  thus  tobe  Joseph's  only.  We 

self,  used  all  his  strength,  to  receive  his  son.  do  not  read  of  any  more  such  sons  :  if  there 

3.]  On  El  Shaddai,  see  ch.  xvii.  1 ;  were  such,   they   and   their   progeny   were 

and  on  the  incident  reformed  to,  ch.  xxviii.  simply  merged  among  the  Ephraimites  and 

13,  19.  5.]  Joseph  himself  had  been  Manassitcs  (Xum.  xxvi.   28 — 37  ;   1  Chron. 

adopted  among,  and  was  reckoned   to,  the  vii.  14 — 29  ;  Josh,  xvi.,  xvii.)     See  a  long 

Egyptians    (see  eh.   xli.  45),  but  his  place  account  of  the  fortunes  of  the  two  tribes  of 

among  Jacob's  sons,  so  far  from  remaining  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  in  Kalisch  on  this 

empty,  shall  be  doubly  filled — by  his  two  place.  7.]    The   mention   of  Rachel, 

sons,  who  shall  rank  with  their  uncles,  and  Jacob's  beloved  wife,  comes  in  opportunely, 

be    as    truly   progenitors   of  tribes    as  the  seeing  that  by  the  last-mentioned  arrange- 

two  elder  of  those,  Reuben  and  Simeon.    In  nicnt  her  memory  had  been  in  some  measure 

point  of  numbers  in  the  second  year  after  tlie  compensated  for  the  fewness  of  her  children. 

Exodus,  these  two  together  exceeded  all  their  Seech,  xxxv.  16,  and  note  on  the  peculiar 

uncles  except  Judah  (Num.  i.  33,  35.  Kalisch  local  designation  of  the  spot  of  the  sad  event, 

has  fallen  into  the  mistake  of  numbering  the  Some  interpret  by  me  to  mean  at  my  side  : 

warriorsof  Judah  47,000  instead  of  74,000):  but  Kalisch  denies  this,  and  explains  it  as 

and  at  another  time,  "  after  the  plague,"  merely  meaning  that  she  was   taken  from 

they  exceeded  all,  Judah  included.  6.]  him.  8.]    Jacob   knew   Joseph's   sons 

But  any  future  sons  of  Joseph  were  not  to  perfectly,  but  did  not  discern  them  owing  to 

be  Jacob's,  i.  e.  not  named  as  his  sons,  but  his  imperfection  of  sight.      And  probably 


204 


GENESIS. 


XLYIII. 


X  ch.  xvii.  1. 
y  Ps.  xxiii.  1 

xxviii.  9. 


and  lie  kissed  them,  and  embraced  tliem.  ^^  And  Israel 
said  unto  Josej^b,  I  liad  not  thoiiglit  to  see  thy  face :  and, 
lo,  God  hath  shewed  me  also  thy  seed.  ^2  And  Joseph 
brought  them  out  from  between  his  knees,  and  he  bowed 
himself  with  his  face  to  the  earth,  i^  And  Joseph  took 
them  both,  Ephraim  in  his  right  hand  toward  Israel's  left 
hand,  and  Manasseh  in  his  left  hand  toward  Israel's  right 
hand,  and  brought  them  near  unto  him.  ^^  And  Israel 
stretched  out  his  right  hand,  and  laid  it  upon  Ephraim' s 
head,  who  icas  the  younger,  and  his  left  hand  upon  Ma- 
nasseh's  head,  guiding  his  hands  wittingly ;  for  Manasseh 
tvas  the  firstborn.  ^^  H  And  he  blessed  Joseph,  and  said, 
The  God,  before  whom  my  fathers  Abraham  and  Isaac  did 
^walk,  the  God  which  ''fed  me  all  my  life  long  unto  this 
day,  1^  the  Angel  which  redeemed  me  from  all  evil,  bless 
the  lads  ;  and  let  my  name  be  named  on  them,  and  the 
name  of  my  fathers  Abraham  and  Isaac ;  and  let  them 
grow  into  a  multitude  in  the  midst  of  the  earth.  ^^  And 
when  Joseph  saw  that  his  father  laid  his  right  hand  upon 
the  head  of  Ephraim,  it  displeased  him  :  and  he  held  up 


since  he  last  saw  them  they  had  grown  from 
boyhood  to  maturity.  12.]   The  young 

men  had  been  standing  at  Jacob's  knees  as 
he  sat  upon  the  couch  and  embraced  them. 
It  is  surely  mere  perversity,  when  Kuobel 
says  that  the  Elohist,  as  sliewn  by  ver.  8, 
thinks  of  them  as  little  children.  In  all 
probability  they  had  been  kneeling  before 
Jacob,  and  did  so  again  when  they  were 
brought  up  to  be  blessed.  14.]    The 

act  of  laying  on  of  hands,  here  for  the  first 
time  mentioned,  is  found  inXum.  xxvii.  18 — 
23  ;  Deut.  xxxiv.  9  ;  Matt.  xix.  13  ;  Acts  vi. 
6;  viii.  17,  &c.,  as  accompanying  benediction 
or  investiture  with  office,  and  has  been  re- 
tained throughout  the  Christian  Church  in 
both  these  senses.  The  words  rendered 
guiding  his  hands  wittingly  may  also 
mean  crossing  his  hands  :  but  the  leading 
Hebraists  prefer  the  other  rendering. 
15-]  Joseph,  i.e.  Ephraim  and  Manasseh, his 
representatives.  We  have  the  same  form  of 
comprehension  of  the  two  in  the  dying  bless- 
ing of  Jacob,  ch.  xlix.  22  ;  of  Moses,  Deut. 
xxxiii.  13,  ff.  16.]  The  Angel  cannot 

be  a  created  Angel,  but  as  in  reff.  the  Angel 
of  God's  presence  :  the  Messenger'who  spake 


with  Divine  authority  and  as  Himself  Divine. 
We  must  not  be  hasty  to  see,  with  the 
more  fanciful  of  the  orthodox  commentators, 
an  indication  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Blessed 
Trinity  in  this  threefold  appellation  of  God. 
For  there  is  in  reality  and  in  honest  truth 
no  such  hidden  meaning  in  the  words.  Our 
imaginative  friends  lay  a  stress  on  the  verb 
bless,  being  not  in  the  plural  but  in  the  singu- 
lar. But  how  should  it  be  in  the  plural, 
seeing  that  each  designation  belongs  to  one 
and  the  same  God  ?  Surely  the  God,  before 
whom  Abraham  and  Isaac  walked,  the  God 
who  fed  Jacob,  the  God  who  manifested 
Himself  to  him  in  delivering  him  from  evil, 
is  one  and  the  same.  Much  mischief  is 
done  unwittingly  to  the  truth  of  Christianity 
by  obtruding  on  all  occasions  these  I'emote 
and  fanciful  allusions,  and  it  will  be  a  happy 
time  for  Scriptural  exegesis  when  it  shall 
everywhere  keep  back  and  pass  thcin  by. 
There  are  abundance  of  direct  and  undeni- 
able foreshadowings  of  Christian  doctiine 
without  entering  on  doubtful  ground. 
my  name]  Israel :  and  let  them  be  counted 
Abraham's  seed  and  Isaac's.  There  is 
special  reference  to  the  blessing  of  the  Divine 


11— XLIX.  1. 


GENESIS. 


205 


his  father's  hand,  to  reniovo  it  from  Ephraim's  head  unto 
Manasseh's  head,  i^  And  Joseph  said  unto  his  father, 
Not  so,  my  ftxther  :  for  this  is  the  firstborn  ;  put  thy  right 
hand  upon  liis  head.  ^^  ^n(j  jjig  father  refused,  and  said, 
I  know  it,  my  son,  I  know  if :  he  also  shall  become  a 
people,  and  he  also  shall  be  great :  but  truly  his  younger 
brother  shall  be  greater  than  he,  and  his  seed  shall  become 
a  multitude  of  nations.  20  ^mj  }^q  blessed  them  that  day, 
saying,  In  thee  shall  Israel  bless,  saying,  God  make  thee 
as  Ephraim  and  as  Manasseh  :  and  he  set  Ephi-aim  before 
Manasseh.  21  ^nd  Israel  said  unto  Joseph,  Behold,  I  die: 
but  God  shall  be  with  you,  and  bring  you  again  unto  the 
land  of  your  fathers.  22  Moreover  I  have  given  to  thee 
one  portion  above  thy  brethren,  which  I  took  out  of  the 
hand  of  the  Amorite  with  my  sword  and  with  my  bow. 
XLIX.     1  And  Jacob  called  unto  his  sons,  and  said. 


promise  on  the  seed  of  Abraham  and  (ch. 
xxi.  12)  of  Isaac.  19.]  I  know  it,  i.e. 

am  aware  of  the  relative  ages  of  the  youths. 
The  prophecy  began  to  be  fulfilled  even  in 
the  time  of  ]\Ioses,  for  in  Num.  i.  33,  35,  in 
the  second  year  after  the  Exodus,  Ephraim 
numbered  8300  more  than  Manasseh.  But 
in  Num.  xxvi.  34,  37,  "  after  the  plague," 
we  have  the  ratio  more  than  reversed,  for 
whereas  Manasseh  has  52,700,  Ephraim  has 
but  32,500,  and  is  indeed,  with  the  exception 
of  Simeon,  the  smallest  of  the  tribes.  But, 
later,  Ephraim  assumed  the  chief  place  among 
all  the  northern  tribes,  and  the  name  became 
identical  with  that  of  Israel  itself.  The 
commencement  of  this  rise  was  probably 
under  Joshua,  himself  an  Ephraimitc.  The 
various  steps  of  its  rise  and  progress  are 
admirably  given  in  Mr.  Grove's  article 
"  Ephraim  "  in  the  Biblical  Diet.  It  would 
exceed  my  limits  even  to  summarize  them. 
20.]  On  In  thee  shall  Israel  bless, 
see  the  discussion  of  Knobcl's  view  of  ch. 
xii.  3.  The  difference  of  this  meaning  and 
that  is  well  expressed  by  Kalisch, — "  The 
tribe  of  Joseph  was  only  regarded  as  an  ex- 
ample of  prosperity  for  the  rest  of  the  He- 
brews, whereas  the  Israelites  were  viewed  as 
the  cause  of  blessing  for  all  the  other 
nations."  21,  f.]  Connected  with  Jacob's 
prophecy  of  the  return  of  his  race  to  Canaan, 
is  his  apportionment,  corresponding  to  the 
division  of  the  tribe  of  Joseph,  of  two  lots  of 


the  land  of  promise  to  him.  The  designa- 
tion of  the  land  as  taken  out  of  the  hand  of 
the  Amorite  (an  apparently  general  name  for 
the  dwellers  on  the  mountains :  see  on  ch. 
xiv.  7)  by  Jacob's  sword  and  bow  is  spoken 
in  the  anticipatory  spirit  of  a  prophet,  as- 
suming as  done  that  which  his  descendants 
should  do.  See  the  expression  repeated,  in 
form  of  expression  almost  verbatim,  Josh, 
xxiv.  12. 

XLIX.  1 — 32.]  Jacob's  dying  prophecy. 
Respecting  the  authenticity  and  prophetic 
significance  of  this  portion,  we  may  remark, 
that  there  seems  to  be  nothing  which  tends 
to  throw  the  slightest  doubt  on  either,  ex- 
cept the  a  priori  assumption  of  the  ration- 
lists,  that  prophecy  is  impossible.  Xo  charge 
is  brought  against  its  style  or  diction  as  in- 
consistent with  the  rest  of  the  sacred  book 
Avhich  relates  to  this  period  ;  no  betrayal  is 
found  of  adaptation  to  after  circumstances  by 
minute  accuracies  of  prophetic  detail :  the 
whole  is  vague  and  mysterious,  rather  fore- 
shadowing dimly,  than  describing  recogniz- 
ably what  afterwards  happened  to  the  tribes. 
On  the  whole,  we  may  safely  say  that, 
granting  any  one  of  tlie  circumstances  which 
invest  Jacob  with  a  sacred  character,  or  any 
one  of  the  incidents  which  connect  him  with 
a  Divine  calling  and  covenant,  then  the  fact 
of  his  delivering  such  a  discourse  as  this, 
reaching  into  the  future  of  his  sons,  carries 
no  difficulty  with  it  and  need  provoke  no  in- 


206 


GENESIS. 


XLIX. 


2  Nnm.  xxiv. 
14.     Deut.  iv. 
30;  xxxi.  29. 
Isa.  ii.  2. 
Jer.  xxiii.  20; 
XXX.  24; 
xlviii.  47  ; 
xlix.  »9. 
Ezek.xxxTiii. 
16.     Dan.  x.  . 


Deut.  xxi.  17. 
Ps.  Ixxviii. 


Gather  yourselves  togetlier,  tliat  I  may  tell  you 

That  which  shall  befall  you  ^in  the  latter  days. 

2  Gather  yourselves  together,  and  hear,  ye  sons  of  Jacob ; 
And  hearken  unto  Israel  your  father. 

3  ^  Reuben,  thou  art  my  firstborn. 

My  might,  and  the  ^  beginning  of  my  strength, 
The  excellency  of  dignity,  and  the  excellency  of  power : 

4  Boiling  over  like  water,  thou  shalt  not  excel ; 


credulous  question.  To  tbosewho  hold  no 
such  peculiar  character  to  have  helonged  to 
the  patriarch,  not  this  discourse  only,  but  the 
whole  history,  must  he  divested  of  founda- 
tion in  fact.  And  it  is  really  curious  to 
study  the  rationalist  commentaries  here.  All 
sorts  of  periods  are  assigned  to  the  poem  : 
that  of  Moses,  that  of  Joshua,  that  of  Saul, 
that  of  David,  that  of  Solomon,  that  of  the 
divided  kingdom  :  further  they  cannot  carry 
it,  as  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch  would  refute 
the  hypothesis.  In  each  of  these  periods  in- 
genious writers  have  found  especial  fitness 
in  the  words,  till  the  brain  reels  with  the 
confusion  worse  confounded.  All  this  gives 
way  to  simplicity  and  verisimilitude,  if  we 
will  but  give  the  old  story  credence  and  be- 
lieve that  the  dying  man  of  God  spoke  these 
words  as  here  given  to  us.  Difficulties 
enough  there  are  in  them ;  but  those  very 
difficulties  are  its  best  apology.  "Were  we 
reading  a  post-event  prophecy,  we  should  be 
pretty  sure  not  to  meet  with  them. 
1.]  This  is  apparently  consecutive  on  what 
was  last  related.  in  the  latter  days, 

literally,  in  the  sequel  of  the  days  (see  relf.), 
found  nearly  exclusively  in  prophetic  pas- 
sages, and  especially  in  Messianic  prophecies. 
Perhaps  we  ought  not  to  define  the  reference 
of  the  time  more  closely  than  by  regarding 
it  as  pointing  to  aftertimes  geTxevdWj. 
3, 4.]  Reuben,  the  firstborn,  appears  in  many 
points  not  to  have  been  by  any  means  the 
worst  of  the  brethren.  He  took  no  part  in 
the  deed  of  violence  and  treacliery  against 
the  Shechemites  (ch.  xxxiv.) ;  he  dissuaded 
his  brethren  from  the  murder  of  Joseph,  and 
wished  to  restore  him  to  his  father  (ch. 
xxxvii.  22,  29  ;  see  also  xlii.  22)";  he  offered 
to  become  surety  for  the  safety  of  Benjamin 
(ch.  xlii.  37).  But  the  dark  spot  of  his  life, 
and  one  which  abode  upon  the  mind  of  his 
father, — so  that  he  disregarded  his  off'ered 
suretyship  for  Benjamin, — was  his  foul  sin 
with  Bilhah  his  father's  concubine  (ch.  xxxv. 


22).  First,  Jacob  gives  him,  more  by  way 
of  contrast  than  of  praise,  his  rightful  de- 
scription of  pre-eminence  and  dignity  as  first- 
born. "We  have  already  seen,  on  more 
than  one  occasion,  the  value  in  which  the 
birthright  was  held,  and  the  kind  of  pre- 
eminence which  it  gave.  Jacob  himself  had 
purchased  it  of  Esau  (ch.  xxv.  31)  :  the  first- 
born had  the  social  pre-eminence  (ch.  xliii. 
33),  claimed  a  right  to  admonish  the  rest 
(xlii.  22),  took  on  him  special  responsibility 
(xxxvii.  21  ;  xlii.  37).  In  Isaac's  blessing 
of  Jacob  (xxxvii.  29)  lordship  over  his 
brethren  is  conveyed  to  him  ;  and  in  Deut. 
xxi,  17  the  right  of  the  firstborn  is  descrilied 
as  consisting  in  a  double  portion  of  the  in- 
heritance. The  word  rendered  strength  also 
signifies  grief,  and  is  so  given  by  the  Vul- 
gate. But  it  would  seem  as  if  the  two  verses, 
3  and  4,  were  intended  to  be  in  contrast,  and 
so  this  meaning  would  be  alien  from  the 
former  of  them.  There  are  some  wonderful 
renderings  of  the  latter  portion  of  the  verse, 
e.  g.  that  of  the  LXX.,  "  hard  to  be  borne, 
hard  in  thy  self-will ;  "  that  of  the  Samari- 
tan, "  excelluig  in  pride  and  excelling  in  im- 
prudence ; "  that  of  Onkelos,  if  it  can  be 
called  a  translation  at  all,  "  Tho2i  shouhlest 
have  received  three  portions, — birthright, 
priesthood,  and  kingdom."  The  Vulgate 
has,  ^^ first  in  gifts,  greater  in  comtnand." 
4.]  But  this  pre-eminence  Picuben 
has  by  his  licentiousness  forfeited.  The 
metaphor  is  from  the  bubbling  over  of  water 
in  boiling ;  it  is  a  form  of  the  same  word 
which  is  rendered  lightness  in  Jer.  xxiii.  32, 
and  light  (both  with  reference  to  the  cha- 
racter of  false  prophets)  in  Zeph.  iii.  4.  It 
is  here  a  substantive  with  an  abstract  mean- 
ing :  "  ebullition,"  as  Kalisch  has  it. 
thou  shalt  not  excel]  i.  e.  shalt  not  hold 
thy  place  of  dignity  as  firstborn.  The  transi- 
tion to  the  third  person  at  the  end  of  the 
verse  is  also  found  in  vv.  9,  26.  It  seems 
here  to  take  place  in  a  kind  of  horror,,  and 


2—6. 


GENESIS. 


207 


Because  thou  wentcst  up  to  thy  father's  bed  ; 
Then  dcfilcdst  thou  it :  he  went  up  to  my  couch. 
^  ^  Simeon  and  Levi  are  brethren  ; 
Weapons  of  cruelty  are  their  swords. 
6  My  sold,  come  not  thou  into  their  secret : 

My  ^glor}^,  be  not  thou  united  wuth  their  assembly 
For  in  their  anger  they  slew  men, 


.  Tii.  0; 
i.  'J  ,  XXX. 

)  Ivii.  H. 


to  be  addressed  as  it  were  to  the  other  sons. 
5 — 7.]  Simeoyi  and  Levi.  We  know 
nothing  of  the  two  "brethren"  except  the 
deed  of  treachery  and  cruelty  here  dwelt 
upon,  and  the  fact,  unaccounted  for  in  tho 
history,  that  Joseph  cliose  Simeon  to  remain 
bound  as  an  hostage  in  Egypt.  In  the  ex- 
pression, are  brethren,  more  is  nicaut  than 
the  mere  fact  of  l)irth  :  they  were  also  joined 
in  a  brotherhood  of  dishonour  and  cruelty. 
The  renderings  of  the  latter  part  of  the  verse 
are  very  various.  That  of  the  A.  Y.  seems 
to  have  hardly  any  authority.  The  LXX. 
has  (and  so  nearly  the  Samaritan),  "  they 
accomplished  the  iniquity  of  their  purpose;" 
the  Vulgate,  "  warring  vessels  of  iniquity  ;  " 
the  Syriae,  "  vessels  of  madness  by  their  na- 
ture ; "  the  Targum  of  (Jnkelos,  "  being'men 
of  courage,  they  did  a  brave  deed  in  the  land 
of  their  pilgrimage."  This  may  serve  to 
shew  how  great  is  the  difficulty  of  deciding. 
The  rendering  in  the  text  is  that  of  the  great 
majority  of  Hebraists.  A  summary  of  the 
others  may  be  seen  in  Kalisch,  p.  744. 
6.]  my  glory  is  used,  as  in  retf.,  for  the 
centre  and  treasure  of  my  personal  being. 
Similarly  we  have  used  "  mine  only  one," 
Ps.  xxii.  21 ;  xxxv.  17-  The  last  words  of 
the  verse  appear  without  deubt  to  requii-e 
the  rendering  in  the  text.  The  verb  may 
import  "overthrew,  digged  down,"  but  the 
substantive  cannot,  except  by  an  alteration  in 
the  vowel  pointing  of  the  present  Hebrew  text. 
On  the  concluding  words  of  the  verse  we 
may  remark,  that  they  furnish  no  mean  ar- 
gument for  the  genuineness  of  the  prophecy, 
seeing  that  they  contain  no  allusion  to  the 
subsequent  exaltation  of  the  tribe  of  Levi  to 
the  exclusive  honour  of  the  priesthood  and 
service  of  the  tabernacle.  It  is  a  remark  of 
Bp.  Wordsworth's,  that  it  is  "  very  honour- 
able to  Moses,  the  great  Hebrew  leader  and 
lawgiver,  who  was  himself  of  the  tribe  of 
Levi,  that  he  has  recorded  these  words  of 
reproof  and  censure  from  the  lips  of  Jacob." 
But  surely  it  is  descending  to  a  lower  view 


of  Genesis  than  the  Bishop  usually  takes,  to 
see  in  it  only  a  reflection  of  tlie  personal 
character  of  Moses.  Berhaps  it  is  hardly 
possible  to  trace  the  fultilmeut  of  these  words 
in  the  subsequent  fortune  of  the  tribes.  It 
is  true  that  Simeon  at  the  second  numbering 
by  Moses  (Num.  xxvi.  14)  had  sunk  to  the 
lowest  population  of  all  the  tribes,  and  that 
it  is  altogether  passed  over  in  the  blessing 
of  Moses  in  Deut.  xxxiii. ;  and  it  is  even 
nearer  to  the  purpose  that  in  the  allotting  of 
the  land,  Simecm  had  no  proper  division  of 
its  own,  but  only  certain  cities  within  the 
lot  of  Jiidah  (Josh.  xix.  1—9).  On  the 
other  hand  in  1  Chron.  iv.  24—43,  commonly 
cited  to  bear  out  this  view,  it  is  given  as  a 
reason  for  the  emigration  of  the  Simeonites, 
their  great  increase  and  prosperity,  the  op- 
posite being  predicated  of  one  family  only, 
that  of  Mishma,  ver.  27.  Whatever  coun- 
tenance however  the  view  might  be  supposed 
to  find  as  regards  Simeon,  is  entirely  uLkmU 
when  we  come  to  the  case  of  Levi;  The 
sentence  pronounced  here  on  the  brethren  is 
one  of  punishment  for  treachery  and  cruelty. 
To  find  in  the  scattering  of  the  Levites 
through  all  Israel  in  the  most  honourable  of 
all  positions,  that  of  ministers  of  God,  a  fid- 
filment  of  such  a  sentence,  is  surely  mere 
trifling:  compare  Num.  iii.  12,  45;  viii.  5 
to  end;  Deut.  xxxiii.  10.  To  say  again  that 
the  curse  here  pronounced  was  afterwards 
turned  to  blessing,  is  only  an  evasion  ;  for  if 
so,  how  can  it  be  said  in  any  sense  to  have 
been  fulfilled.^  Had  the  tribes  spoken  of 
been  Dan,  the  idolater,  and  Benjamin,  the 
object  of  his  brethren's  vengeance,  something 
might  have  been  said  for  the  fulfilment  in 
their  subsequent  fortunes.  As  it  is,  we  must 
regard  the  words  as  referring  to  their  being 
deposed  from  their  right  of  primogeniture, 
and  giving  place  to  the  younger  Judah. 
They  were  united  as  brothers  in  their  power- 
ful deed  of  treachery  and  blood  ;  l>ut  such 
union  should  not  prevail :  it  should  be  di- 
vided and  scattered,  and  they  too,  like  lieu- 


208 


GENESIS. 


XLIX. 


c  Neh.  ix.24, 
a;.  Dan.  xi 
3,16. 


d  =Nnm.  xxiv. 

n.    Ps.  xiv. 

6.    Isa.  xiv. 
5.  Ezek.  xix. 
11,14.    Amos 
i.  3.     Zech.x. 
U. 


And  in  their  *=  selfwill  they  hamstrung  oxen. 

7  Cursed  he  their  anger,  for  it  is  fierce  ; 

And  their  wrath,  for  it  is  cruel : 
I  will  divide  them  in  Jacob, 

And  scatter  them  in  Israel. 

8  ^  Judah,  thou  art  he  whom  thy  brethren  shall  joraise : 

Thy  hand  shall  he  on  the  neck  of  thine  enemies  ; 
Th}^  father's  children  shall  bow  down  before  thee. 

9  Judah  is  a  lion's  whelp  : 

From  the  prey,  my  son,  thou  art  gone  up : 
lie  stooped  down,  he  couched  as  a  lion. 

And  as  an  old  lion  ;  who  shall  rouse  him  up  ? 
1*^  The  "^sceptre  shall  not  dej^art  from  Judah, 


ben,  should   enjoy   no  leadership  over  the 
family.  8—12.]    Judah.      The   first 

clause  of  ver.  8  contains  an  allusion  to  the 
name  Judah,  which  (ch.  sxix.  35)  signified 
jiraise.  Already  in  his  lifetime,  Judah  was 
distinguished  among  the  brethren.  It  was 
he  who  prevented  the  intended  murder  of 
Joseph  (xxxvii.  26),  who  guaranteed  the 
safety  of  Benjamin  (xliii.  S),  and  made  a 
noble  pleading  in  order  to  fulfil  it  (xliv. 
14,  ff.),  and  who  was  sent  before  to  Joseph 
as  the  herald  of  Jacob's  arrival.  And  corre- 
spondent to  this  pre-eminence  were  the  for- 
tunes of  the  tribe  of  Judah.  It  was  the 
most  populous  at  both  tlie  numbcrings 
(Xum.  i.  27  ;  xxvi.  22)  ;  it  had  the  preced- 
ence in  the  marches  through  the  wilderness 
(Xum.  X.  14)  ;  to  it  belonged  Bezaleel,  the 
architect  of  the  tabernacle  (Exod.  xxxi.  2 ; 
xxxviii.  22),  and  Caleb,  one  of  the  only  two 
of  those  alive  at  the  Exodus  who  were 
allowed  to  enter  the  land  of  promise  (Xum. 
xiii.  6,  30;  xiv.  6,  30),  and  who  received  the 
patriarchal  city  of  Hebron  as  his  portion. 
Judah,  iu  the  division,  got  the  whole  of  S. 
Canaan.  To  follow  the  fortunes  of  this  dis- 
tinguished tribe  afterwards  would  be  super- 
fluous. All  may  be  included  iu  '■'our  Lord 
sprancf  out  of  Jvda,"  (Ileb.  vii.  14).  The 
literal  rendering  is  Judah,  thou,  thy 
brethren  shall  praise  thee  :  we  have 
similar  constructions  inch.  xvii.  4;  xxiv.  27. 
The  idea  of  the  lion  is  already  before  the 
speaker,  and  as  the  paw  of  the  lion  seizes  the 
neck  of  the  prey,  so  he  represents  Judah  as 
having  his  hand  on  the  neck  of  his  enemies. 
In  the  concluding  clause  the  period  of  Judah's 


sovereignty  under  David  and  Solomon  is 
prophesied.  In  ch.  xxvii.  29,  in  the  similar 
promise  made  to  Jacob,  the  bowing  down  is 
predicated  of  his  mother's  sons.  This  ex- 
pression would  not,  if  used  here,  include  all 
the  tribes,  which  it  is  evidently  intended  to 
do.  It  was  now  well  known,  by  experience 
in  the  case  of  Joseph,  what  these  words  im- 
ported. 9.]  Judah,  the  kingly  tribe,  is 
likened  to  the  lion,  the  king  of  beasts,  who 
has  taken  his  prey  in  the  plain  and  is  return- 
ing to  his  mountain  habitation  (Cant.  iv.  8), 
a  description  eminently  fitting  Judah,  whose 
lot  was  in  the  hills,  and  their  forays  in  the 
level  country  of  the  Philistines  (Judg.  i.  18, 
f. ;  2  Sam.  v.  17—21).  In  Deut.  xxxiii.  20 
Gad,  in  v.  22  Dan,  and  in  Num.  xxiii.  24 ; 
xxiv.  9,  the  whole  of  Israel,  is  likened  to 
a  lion.  It  is  from  this  prophecy  that  the  re- 
markable title  of  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah  is  given  to  Christ,  Rev.  v.  5.  10.] 
This  verse  is  distinctly  a  prophecy  of  govern- 
ment in  the  line  of  Judah,  and  of  its  con- 
tinuance up  to  a  certain  point.  "What  that 
point  is  depends  on  the  meaning  of  the  diflicult 
and  unexampled  word  Shii.oh.  The  common 
understanding  of  that  word  is  that  it  desig- 
nates Christ,  and  that  the  prophecy  found  its 
fulfilment  in  the  extinction  of  tlie  Iduma3an 
kingdom  of  Herod  soon  after  the  birth  of 
our  Lord.  Historically,  this  view  is  entirely 
untenable.  For  the  kingdom  in  the  line  of 
Judah  came  entirely  and  irrecoverably  to 
an  end  nearly  600  years  before  that  date. 
For  50  years  Judasa  was  subject  to  the  Chal- 
da\ans ;  then  for  200  years  a  province  of 
Persia;  thcu  for  1C3  years  under  the  sue- 


7—10. 


GENESIS. 


209 


Nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his  feet, 
Until  Sliiloh  come  ; 

And  unto  him  s/iall  be  the  obcdicuce  of  nations. 


cessors  of  Alexander.  When  the  Jews  re- 
gained their  independence  they  were  ruled 
by  the  Maccabees,  who  were  of  the  tribe  of 
Levi,  not  of  Judah  ;  63  years  before  Christ 
Palestine  was  eontiucred  by  Ponipey  and 
became  subject  to  Rome.  And  Ilerod,  who 
was  probably  not  a  Jew  at  all,  was  merely  a 
tributaiT  of  Rome.  If  tliere  be  any  meaning 
in  words,  the  sceptre  had  departed  from 
Judah  many  hundred  years  before  the  birth 
of  Christ.  It  is  very  well  for  the  maintainers 
of  this  theory  to  say  that  "the  determination 
of  this  question  is  of  minor  importance ;  "  in 
real  fact  it  is  of  primary  and  essential  im- 
portance:  and  the  very  commentator  from 
whom  the  above  words  are  quoted,  rejects 
other  interpretations  as  "  receiving  no  con- 
firmation from  history,"  whereas  of  the 
common  one  he  refuses  to  let  history  be  the 
criterion.  Nor  again  will  any  fiction,  such 
as  that  the  lineage  of  Christ  traced  by  St. 
Mattliew  through  Abraham  and  David  is  a 
roi/al  lineage,  or  that  the  words  of  the  angel 
to  the  Virgin  Mary,  "the  Lord  God  shall 
give  to  him  the  throne  of  his  father 
David,"  imply  that  David's  kingdom  had 
never  ceased,  serve  to  defend  the  commonly 
received  interpretation  as  to  the  continuance 
of  royal  power  in  and  its  departure  from  the 
tribe  of  Judah.  Whether  the  word  may 
designate  Christ,  is  quite  independent  of 
this  forcing  of  the  course  of  history.  The 
words  of  the  prophecy  do  not  necessarily 
imply  a?ii/  departure  of  that  \vhieh  is  meant 
by  the  sceptre,  or  ruler's  staff,  from  Judah. 
They  are  quite  consistent  witli  this  remain- 
ing in  Judah  until  and  including  the  event 
mentioned.  If  they  im|)ort  only  the  pre- 
eminence enjoyed  by  Judah  in  possessing 
the  royal  city  of  David  and  being  the  first 
tribe  and  that  wiiich  gave  name  to  the 
chosen  people,  this  indeed,  unlike  the  actual 
kingdom,  though  for  a  time  suspended,  was 
restored,  and  never  ceased  until  Christ  came 
and  lifted  the  tribe  to  yet  more  glorious  em- 
inence. But  let  us  now  consider  the  words 
themselves.  The  term  tor  sceptre  meansa  rod, 
or  sprout ;  it  is  the  ordinary  term  for  tribe 
(ver.  16,  e.  g.),  the  tribes  being  regarded  as 
sprouts  from  the  main  stem.  It  is  also 
used  for  the  rod  of  coiTCCtion  (2  Sam.  vii. 


14;  Job  ix.  34;  Ts.  Ixxxix.  32;  Trov.  x. 

13,  al  fr.),  and  finally  for  the  rod  of  govern- 
ment, a  sceptre  :  sec  refF.  And  there  can  be 
no  doubt  tiuit  such  is  the  meaning  here. 
Tiie  word  rendered  lawgiver  in  the  A.V. 
seems  rather  to  signify  again  a  sceptre,  or 
statt"or  rod  of  office,  which  in  figures  of  kings, 
e.  g.  those  at  Persepolis,  rests  on  their  body 
and  is  held  between  their  feet.  Others, 
taking  the  meaning  Imor/iver,  regard  the 
words  between  his  feet  as  applying  to  pro- 
geniture,  as  in  Diut.  xxviii.  57,  "the  young 
one  that  winvAh  J'roin  beticeen  her  feet ;" 
and  so  the  LXX.  and  Vulgate  render,  "  out 
of  his  thighs:"  and  Onkelos,  ^'■from  his 
children's  children."  See  2  Kings  xviii. 
27  ;  Isa.  vii.  20  ;  Ezek.  xvi.  28.  A  similar 
way  of  speaking  is  found  in  Jcr.  xxx.  21. 
We  now  come  to  consider  the  word  Siiiloh, 
in  which  lies  the  kernel  of  the  whole  diffi- 
culty. First,  there  is  a  variation  among  the 
Hebrew  J\ISS.  as  to  the  form  of  the  word 
itself,  tending  to  cast  some  doubt  upon  its 
meaning.  Of  the  principal  versions,  the 
LXX.  renders,  "  until  the  things  reserved  for 
him.  shall  come  ;  "  the  Vulgate,  "  uutil  he 
shall  come,  who  is  to  be  sent ;  "  the  old 
Syriae,  "  xmlil  he  comes  tvhose  it  is."  The 
Samaritan  has,  '•  until  the  peaceful  one 
come  ;  "  the  Targuni  of  Onkelos,  "  until  the 
Messiah  come,  whose  is  the  kingdom."  The 
rendering  now  preferred  by  many  learned  He- 
braists would  take  Shiloh  as  the  well-known 
city  of  that  name,  being  the  abode  of  the 
tabernacle  and  place  of  assembly  of  Israel. 
This  view  is  taken  by  Bleek,  Ilitzig,  Ewald, 
and  Kalisch.  Butthisinterpretation,  1.  In  no 
way  fulfils  the  historical  conditions.  Judah's 
rogal  leadership  did  not  eominence  at  all  be- 
fore the  assembling  of  Israel  at  Shiloli :  and 
in  whatever  sense  the  sceptre,  &e.,  be  under- 
stood, Judah's  glories  were  more  after  than 
before  that  event.  And  2.  The  mention  of  a 
local  name  of  so  little  import  at  the  time 
would  be  very  unnatural.  The  only  other 
instance  in  this  prophecy  is  that  of  Zidon, 
ver.  13,  a  place  well  known  from  the  most 
ancient  times,  eh.  x.  19.  Our  choice  seems 
to  lie,  in  the  uncertainty  about  the  genuine 
Hebrew  word  itself,  between  the  two  allu- 
sions— (1)  to  peace,  or  the  peaceful  one,  (2)  to 


210 


GENESIS. 


XLIX. 


11  Binding  his  foal  unto  tlie  vine, 

And  his  ass's  colt  unto  the  choice  vine ; 
He  washed  his  garments  in  wine, 

And  his  clothes  in  the  blood  of  grapes  : 

12  His  eyes  being  dark  with  wine, 
And  his  teeth  white  with  milk. 

12  ^  Zebulun  dwelleth  at  the  shore  of  the  sea  ; 


sending.  If  the  former  be  adopted,  then  the 
primary  reference  may  be  to  Solomon,  with 
the  great  Messianic  reference  behind.  And 
there  seems  to  be  some  support  for  this  in 
the  words  of  David,  1  Chron.  xxviii.  3,  ff. 
There  he  recounts  to  the  princes  of  Israel 
how  God  would  not  suffer  him,  a  man  of 
blood,  to  build  His  temple  ;  then  he  pro- 
ceeds, "  Howbeit  Jehovah  the  God  of  Israel 
chose  me  before  all  the  house  of  my  father 
to  be  king  over  Israel  for  ever ;  for  He  hath 
chosen  Judah  to  be  the  ruler :  and  of  the 
house  of  Judah,  the  house  of  my  father  : 
and  among  the  sons  of  my  father  lie  liked 
me,  to  make  me  king  over  Israel ;  and  of  all 
my  sons  (for  Jehovah  hath  given  me  many 
sons)  he  hath  chosen  Solomon  my  son  to  sit 
upon  the  throne  of  the  kingdom  of  Jehovah 
over  Israel."  Now  Solomon  signifies /^eafe- 
able,  and  this  very  reason  is  alleged  in  1 
Chron.  xxii.  9  why  he  was  chosen  to  build 
God's  temple.  He  was  a  "  man  of  rest"  (ib.). 
So  that  this  exposition,  especially  when 
joined  with  what  follows  (see  below),  has 
much  to  recommend  it,  in  the  midst  of  the 
imcortainty.  If  we  take  the  second  view 
proposed,  and  consider  the  mysterious  word 
to  be  connected  with  sending,  we  have  in 
favour  of  this  the  somewhat  obscure  allusion 
in  the  saying  of  Moses,  Exod.  iv.  13,  where 
he  says,  "  Send,  0  Lord,  by  the  hand  which 
thou  wilt  send  "  (the  verb  being  there  used 
from  which,  among  others,  this  word  may  be 
derived),  or  the  hardly  less  obscure  allusion 
in  John  ix.  7,  where  it  is  said  that  Siloam  "  is 
by  interpretation,  Se7it."  In  this  case  the 
word  will  apply  to  the  Messiah  alone.  The 
subject  will  be  found  well  discussed  in  Mr. 
Twisleton's  art.  in  the  Biblical  Diet. 
"  Shiloh  "  (who  takes  the  locnl  view),  and 
in  Bp.  "Wordsworth's  Commentary  in  this 
place,  and  most  fully  of  all  by  Keil,  in  his 
Commentary. 

In  the  midst    of  all   the  uncertainty  we 
have  this  hardly  deniable  meaning,  that  the 


leadership,  the  royal  pre-eminence,  of  Judah, 
should  wax  onward  till  the  Prince  of  Peace, 
or  till  He  who  was  to  be  sent,  should  come : 
then  attaining  its  climax  in  the  obedience  of 
the  nations  to  Him  whose  name  is,  for  what- 
ever reason,  Shiloh.  This  last  rendering 
is  preferred  by  the  Hebraists  to  that  in  the 
A.  V.  11,  12.]  These  words  refer  to 

the  fertility  and  abundance  of  Judah's  lot  in 
the  land  of  promise.  "  The  vine  will  be  so 
abundant  that  the  people  will  tie  to  it  their 
animals,  as  if  it  were  a  common  tree  ;  the 
wine  will  be  valued  no  higher  than  the  water 
in  which  garments  are  washed."  Kalisch. 
Compare  the  saying  about  Solomon  1  Kings 
X.  27;  also  Job  xxix.  6;  Judg.  iii.  18; 
Amos  ix.  13.  The  ass,  besides  being  the 
ordinary  beast  of  burden,  is  the  symbol  of 
peace  :  see  Zech.  ix.  9.  The  territory  of 
Judah  produced  the  best  wine  in  Canaan : 
see  what  is  related  of  the  neighbourhood  of 
Hebron,  Num.  xiii.  23  ;  of  Engedi,  Cant.  i. 
14 ;  compare  also  2  Chron.  xxvi.  10  ;  and 
had  also  abundant  pastures,  1  Sam.  xxv  2  ; 
Amos  i.  1  ;  2  Chron.  xxvi.  10.  13.] 

Zebulun,  the  sixth  son  of  Leah  (ch.  xxx. 
20),  is  placed  before  his  elder  brother 
Issachar  (ib.  18)  for  no  reason  that  we  can 
assign.  His  name  signifies  dwelling,  and 
hence  perhaps  the  form  of  the  prophecy, 
though  the  same  verb  from  which  Zebulun 
is  derived  is  not  used  here.  Zebulun  occupied 
parts  in  the  N.  E.  of  Palestine,  between  Asher 
and  Naphtali  to  the  N.  and  Issachar  to  the  S. 
(Josh.  xix.  10—16,  27,  34),  extending  in  the 
E.  to  the  Sea  of  Tiberias  (Matt.  iv.  13),  and 
in  the  W.  to  Mount  Carmel  and  the  Medi- 
terranean (Josh.  xix.  11), — to  the  borders  of 
Phoenicia  (Zidon).  But  this  is  doubted  by 
both  Keil  and  Knobel,  who  say  that  so  much 
is  not  found  in  the  division  related  by 
Joshua,  onlv  in  Jospphus,  who  says  that 
Zebulun  dwelt  about  Carmel  and  the  sea  and 
reached  to  Ptolemais  (Acre).  Still  if  this 
were  so  at  any  time,  the  prophecy  had  its 


11—17. 


GENESIS. 


211 


Even  at  the  shore  of  ships ; 

And  his  side  is  next  unto  Zidon. 
i'^  ^  Issachar  is  a  strong  ass 
Couching  down  between  two  burdens  : 
15  And  he  saw  rest  that  it  inoi  good, 

And  the  land  that  it  iras  pleasant ; 
And  bowed  his  shoulder  to  bear. 

And  became  a  servant  unto  tribute. 
1^  ^  Dan  shall  judge  his  people, 
As  one  of  the  tribes  of  Israel. 
17  Let  Dan  be  a  serpent  by  the  way, 

An  adder  in  the  j^ath. 


fulfilment.  At  all  events  it  is  hereby  saved 
from  tlie  imputation  of  being  a  description 
after  the  event,  of  Joshua's  or  David's  time. 
We  hear  nothing  of  Zebulun  in  the  patri- 
archal history.  On  tlie  subsequent  fortunes 
of  the  tribe,  compare  Num.  i.  30  ;  xxvi.  27; 
Judg.  i.  30  ;  iv.  6,  10  ;  v.  14,  18 ;  vi.  35  ; 
xii.  11,  12;  and  Mr.  Grove's  article  in  the 
Biblical  Did.  14,   15.]  Issachar,  the 

fifth  son  of  Jacob  by  Leah  (ch.  xxx.  17), 
was  also  of  no  note  among  the  brethren. 
But  the  tribe  became  famous  by  taking  part 
in  the  war  of  Deborah  and  Barak  against 
Jabin,  Judg.  v.  15.  Their  portion  was  in 
the  midst  of  the  land,  and  contained  the  fer- 
tile and  beautiful  plains  of  Jezreel,  Esdrae- 
lon,  and  Megiddo.  There  seems  no  historic 
trace  of  the  tribe  having  become  (as  Kalisch 
asserts)  averse  from  war  and  fulfilling  the 
character  here  predicted.  We  find  them  in 
1  Chron.  vii.  1 — 5  described  as  valiant  men 
of  might  ;  again  we  have  them, taking  a  lead 
in  the  measures  by  which  David  was  estab- 
lished as  king  in  Hebron,  and  described  as 
"  men  that  had  understanding  of  the  times, 
to  know  what  Israel  ought  to  do."  One  of 
the  judges.  Tola  (Judg.  x.  1)  was  of  this 
tribe,  and  two  of  the  kings  of  Israel,  Baasha 
and  Elah  his  son  (1  Kings  xv.  27— xvi.  10). 
16—18.]  Dan.  The  sons  of  Leah 
are  now  exhausted,  and  those  of  Billiah  and 
Zilpah  are  taken.  Of  these,  Dan  is  the 
eldest  (ch.  xxx.  6).  The  prophecy,  as  in  the 
case  of  Zebulun,  plays  on  the  name,  which 
(see  as  above,  ch.  xxx.  6)  means,  ''jurlffe." 
In  order  to  understand  it,  we  must  briefly 
recall  the  history  of  the  tribe.  In  the  divi- 
sion of  the  land,  Dan's  porticm  is  that  lying 
W.  of  Benjamin  and  Ephraim,  and  N.  of  the 


Philistines  (Josh.  xix.  4'? — 48),  extending  to 
the  sea  (Josh.  xix.  46;  Judg.  v.  17),  and 
toucliing  Judah  on  the  S.  E.  It  was  the 
smallest  of  all  the  portions,  and  because 
it  was  too  little,  the  Danites  conquered 
Leshem  (Laish),  far  north  at  the  foot  of  Le- 
banon, and  called  it  Dan  (Josh.  xix.  47  ; 
Judg.  xviii.  1,  fl'.).  That  portion  was  still 
further  circumscribed  by  the  Amorites,  who 
forced  the  Danites  from  their  fertile  plains 
into  the  mountain  (Judg.  i.  34).  So  the 
tribe  fell  away,  and  became  divided,  the 
northern  portion  into  idolatry  (Judg.  xviii. 
14—31),  while  the  southern  portion,  partly 
perhaps  owing  to  mixed  marriages  with  the 
Canaanites,  partly  from  its  own  insignificance, 
dwindled  away,  became  in  fact  absorbed  into 
Judah  (even  in  Joshua's  time  various  Danite 
cities  are  also  reckoned  to  Judah,  comp.  Jer. 
xix.  41,  with  XV.  33,  and  with  2  Chron.  xi. 
10).  Once  indeed  in  the  history  Dan  comes 
to  the  front  in  the  person  of  its  great 
hero  Samson  (Judg.  xiii. — xvi.) ;  butinjlater 
times  it  altogether  drops  out.  There  is  no 
genealogy  of  Dan  in  1  Chron.  ii. — xii.,  and 
no  mention  of  the  tribe  in  the  sealing  of  the 
144,000  in  Rev.  vii.  We  may  observe  that 
the  tribe  furnished  one  of  the  two  artificers 
of  the  tabernacle,  Aholiab  (Exod.  xxxi.  6), 
and  also  Hiram  or  Huram,  the  artificer  of 
Solomon's  temple  (2  Chron.  ii.  14;  in  1 
Kings  vii.  14  he  is  said  to  have  been  of 
Naphtali).  With  regard  to  the  prophecy, 
the  sense  of  ver.  16  seems  to  be,  in  refer- 
ence to  Samson,  that  Dan,  though  not  one 
of  the  leading  tribes,  should  yet  take  his 
part  in  the  government  of  Israel.  In  ver.  17 
we  have  perhaps  an  allusion  to  the  surprise 
and  conquest  of  Laish,  or  perhaps  again  a 


212  GENESIS. 

That  bitetli  the  horse  heels, 

So  that  his  rider  falleth  backward. 
IS  I  have  waited  for  th}^  salvation,  0  Lord. 

19  %  Gad,  a  troop  shall  press  him  : 
But  he  shall  press  upon  the  heel. 

20  From  Asher  is  fatness,  his  bread : 
And  he  shall  yield  rojal  dainties. 

21  ^  Naphtali  is  a  hind  let  loose : 
He  giveth  goodly  words. 


XLIX. 


fuvthcr  description  of  the  heroic  course  of 
Samson.  Tlic  adder  is  "  the  cerastes  has- 
selquistii  of  naturalists,  the  well-known 
horned  snake,  a  small  serpent  of  a  sandy 
colour  with  pale  hrown  or  sometimes  black- 
ish irregular  spots,  rarely  exceeding  a  foot  or 
18  in.  in  length,  and  well  known  in  the  sandy 
deserts  of  Abyssinia,  Egypt,  the  Sahara,  and 
Arabia  Petraja."  Tristram.  Its  habit,  Dr. 
T.  goes  on  to  state,  is  to  coil  itself,  usually  in 
the  camel's  footmark,  in  the  sand,  and 
thence  suddenly  to  dart  out  on  any  passing 
animal.  Horses  are  in  the  greatest  terror 
■when  one  is   seen  ahead.  18.]  Some 

commentators  refer  these  words  to  the  pro- 
phecy, and  believe  them  to  answer  to  the 
prayer  of  Samson,  Judg.  xvi.  28.  Others  re- 
gard the  words  as  an  exclamation  of  the  dying 
patriarch,  longing  for  his  dissolution.  The 
objection,  that  such  an  ejaculation  would 
hardly  have  found  a  place  in  a  prophecy  like 
this,  is  weighty  :  but  it  does  not  reach  to 
denying  that  the  words  may  be  an  ejacula- 
tion, in  prospect  of  the  wars  and  struggles  of 
Israel,  and  spoken  in  Israel's  name.  And  so 
the  principal  commentators  take  them  :  e.  g. 
Kalisch,  Delitzsch,  Keil,  Knobel.  A  refer- 
ence beyond  this,  to  the  great  final  Messianic 
salvation  for  Israel,  has  been  generally  ac- 
know^ledged  by  all  who  recognize  the  higher 
significance  of  0.  T.  history.  Even  in  the 
later  Targums  (as  cited  by  Keil)  the  Mes- 
sianic sense  is  fully  acknowledged.  Some 
of  the  Fathers  saw  in  ver.  17  a  prophecy  of 
Antichrist,  who  was  to  spring  out  of  Dan,  as 
our  Lord  out  of  Judah.  19.]   Gad  was 

the  eldest  son  of  Zilpah,  Leah's  maid  (ch. 
XXX.  10,  11).  On  his  name,  see  text  and 
note  there.  The  rendering,  "  a  troop 
Cometh"  there,  seems  to  have  been  intro- 
duced owing  to  the  drift  of  the  prophecy 
here.     The  portion  of  Gad  was  about  the 


centre  of  the  country  E.  of  Jordan,  embrac- 
ing, with  Reuben,  half  Gilead  (Deut.  iii. 
12),  half  the  land  of  the  Amorites  (Josh, 
xiii.  25).  The  tribe  came  to  distinction  in 
the  person  of  Jephthah  (Judg.  xi.,  xii.).  The 
character  of  the  tribe  was  fierce  and  warlike: 
compare  the  blessing  of  Moses,  Deut.  xxxiii. 
20,  and  the  description  of  the  Gadites  who 
joined  David  in  the  wilderness,  1  Chron.  xii. 
8 :  see  also  the  remarkable  narrative,  1 
Chron.  v.  18 — 22.  And  this  is  well  describd 
by  the  restless  and  predatory  habits  indicated 
in  the  prophecy.  20.]  Asher  was  the 

second  son  of  Zilpah,  ch.  xxx.  13.  His 
portion  was  from  Carmel  to  the  Phoenician 
frontier  (Josh.  xvii.  10,  11;  xix.  24-31; 
Judg.  i.  31,  32).  In  the  latter  of  these 
places  we  learn  that  Asher  was  unable  to 
drive  out  the  Canaanites,  but  dwelt  among 
them.  Their  teritory  was  eminently  fertile ; 
and  in  the  blessing  of  Moses,  Asher  is 
described  as  "dipping  his  foot  in  oil" 
(Deut.  xxxiii.  24,  where  see  further  notices). 
The  meaning  seems  to  be,  the  food  or  bread 
which  comes  of  Asher  is  fat.  There  is  per- 
haps a  play  on  the  name  Asher  (blessed). 
By  the  latter  clause  of  the  verse  seem  to  be 
foretold  the  rich  exports  which  this  territory- 
should  send  to  its  neighbours :  see  Ezck.; 
xxvii.  17  ;  Acts  xii.  20.  The  tribe  seems  to 
have  loved  ease,  and  kept  away  from  the 
wars  of  Israel  (Judg.  v.  17,  18) ;  it  never 
furnished  any  judge  or  hero  to  Israel ;  it  is 
omitted  in  the  list  of  rulers  (1  Chron.  xxvii. 
16—22)  in  David's  time.  21.]  NaphtaU 

w^as  the  second  son  of  Bilhah  (ch.  xxx.  8). 
The  territory  of  the  tribe  was  bounded  on 
the  W.  by  Asher,  S.  by  Zebulun,  E.  by  Ma- 
nasseh,  and  N.  by  the  valley  which  separates 
the  two  ranges  of  the  Lebanon :  see  further 
on  Deut.  xxxiii  23.  The  great  glory  of  the 
tribe  was  the  victory  under  Deborah  and 


]8— 26. 


GENESIS. 


2-  ^  Josepli  is  a  fruitful  bou<>'li, 

A  fruitful  bou^h  by  a  avcU  ; 
Tlic  branches  run  over  the  wall : 
23  They  harassed  him,  and  shot  at  him, 
And  hated  him,  eirn  the  masters  of  arrows. 
2*  But  his  bow  abode  in  strength, 

And  the  ^arms  of  his  hands  were  made  strong 
From  the  hands  of  the  Mighty  One  of  Jacob, 

From  whence,  the  "^Shepherd,  the  f'' stone  of  Israel: 
25  From  the  God  of  thy  father,  he  shall  help  thee  ; 
And  the  f  Almighty,  he  shall  bless  thee 
With  blessings  of  heaven  from  above, 
Blessings  of  the  deep  that  lieth  under, 
Blessings  of  the  breasts,  and  of  the  womb  : 
2^  The  blessings  of  thy  father  have  prevailed  above  the 
blessings  of  the  eternal  mountains. 


frh.  nlviii.  15. 

Ph.  IXXX.   I. 

;  Deui.  xxxii. 
4.     Ua  XMi. 

10;  XXX.  VJ. 


Barak  (Judg.  iv.,  v.),  the  latter  of  whom  was 
sprung  from  it.  And  to  tliis  the  words  of 
the  prophecy  are  generally  referred.  But 
C(msiderable  doubt  rests  on  their  meaning. 
The  LXX.,  followed  by  Ewald,  render, 
Naphtali  is  a  siatehj  tree  {terebi?ilh,  Ew.), 
having  beautiful  branches  {he  hath  a  goodly 
crest,  Ew.).  The  old  Syriac  gives  it,  Xaphtali 
is  a  swift  messenger.  But  the  A.  V.  is  pre- 
ferred by  most  of  the  Hebrai.sts,  varying 
however  between  let  loose  and  graceful  or 
tall.  Knobel  renders  the  adjective,  hunted, 
pursued.  The  simile  is  supposed  to  denote 
swiftness,  and  perhaps  to  have  connexion 
■with  the  name  of  Jsaphtali's  hero,  Barak, 
which  signifies  light)nng.  The  second  part 
of  the  verse  is  generally  taken  as  referring 
to  the  triumphal  song  of  Deborah  and 
Barak,  Judg.  v.  It  is  impossible  to  mention 
these  interpretations,  without  feeling  on  what 
wholly  uncertain  ground  we  are  treading 
throughout  our  comments  on  this  chapter. 
22 — 26.]  Joseph,  here  treated  as  one, 
not  divided  into  the  two  tribes  Ephraim  and 
Manasseh.  This  is  to  be  accounted  for  by 
remembering  that  this  is  properly  the  bless- 
ing of  the  twelve  sons  of  Jacob,  and  not, 
although  this  is  in  some  sense  predicated  of 
them  in  ver.  28,  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 
The  first  point  adduced  is  Joseph's  fruitful- 
ness  :  see  before  on  ch.  xlviii.  16 — 19.  The 
literal  rendering  ot  ver.  22  is,  '"Son  of  a  fruit- 
tree  is  Joseph,  son  of  a  fruit-tree  over  a 


well;  daughters  ascend  over  a  wall." 
But  it  is  said  to  be  a  Ilebrew  usage  to  em- 
ploy the  word  sons,  and  daughters,  for  the 
brandies  and  twigs  of  a  tree.  It  does  not, 
however,  appear  that  the  same  word  {ben)  as 
here  is  elsewhere  found  in  this  sense,  but  other 
like  words  are,  e.  g.  suckling  (mase.)  in  Job 
xiv.  7  ;  Isa.  liii.  2, — and  fem.  in  Ezek.  xvii. 
22  ;  I's.  Ixxx.  11.  This  interpretation  is  the 
general  one,  though  we  must  confess  that  it 
has  not  the  slightest  possible  support  in  any- 
thing but  consent  of  interpreters.  The  other 
interpretations  have  found  no  favour,  and  are 
not  worth  recounting.  23.]  It  is  no 

small  argument  against  the  common  inter- 
pretation of  ver.  22,  that  tlie  figure  which  it 
introduces  is  entirely  drojiped  in  this  verse. 
These  words  are  supposed  to  point  at  the 
constant  wars  of  the  Ephraimites  with  the 
neighbouring  Itura;ans,  Hagarenes,  &e.  : 
see  also  Josh.  xvii.  16 — 18.  24  ]  the 

arms  here  are  not  weapons,  but  limbs.  The 
word  is  used  here  as  in  rett".  to  signify 
strength.  25.]  The  portions  of  Ephraim 

and  Manasseh  were  among  the  choicest  of 
all  the  land  of  promise,  Deut.  xxxiii.  13. 
The  blessings  of  the  breast  and  the  womb 
are  probably  to  be  understood  generally,  of 
fertility  and  fecundity,  of  course  including 
tlie  increase  of  herds  and  (locks,  and  the  pro- 
vision of  milk,  in  the  laud  one  of  whose 
praises  it  was,  that  it  Jioiced  with  milk. 
26.]  This  verse  has  been  very  vari- 


214 


GENESIS. 


XLIX. 


i  ver.  17  ;  ch. 

XXV.  8;  XXXV. 

29.    Num. 
,    XX.  26. 

Deut.  xxxii. 


The  delight  of  the  everlasting  hills : 
They  shall  be  on  the  head  of  Joseph, 

And  on  the  crown  of  the  head  of  him  that  was  separate 
from  his  brethren. 

27  5[  Benjamin  shall  ravin  as  a  wolf  : 

^In  the  morning  he  shall  devovir  the  prey, 
^And  at  night  he  shall  divide  the  spoil. 

28  ^  All  these  are  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel :  and  this  is 
it  that  their  father  spake  unto  them,  and  blessed  them ; 
every  one  according  to  his  blessing  he  blessed  them.  29 
And  he  charged  them,  and  said  unto  them,  I  am  to  be 
^gathered  unto  my  people  :  bury  me  with  my  fathers  in 
the  cave  that  is  in  the  field  of  Epliron  the  Hittite,  ^o  [i^ 
the  cave  that  is  in  the  field  of  Machpelah,  which  is  before 
Mamre,  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  which  Abraham  bought 


ously  understood.  According  to  the  render- 
ing of  the  A.  v.,  the  meaning  is,  in  refer- 
ence to  Joseph's  future  distinction  among 
the  tribes,  that  Jacob's  blessing  of  him  has 
had  more  effect  than  the  blessing  of  Jacob's 
ancestors  on  him,  even  to  the  bound  of  the 
height  of  the  mountains  above  the  earth. 
The  rendering  in  the  text  is  that  given  by 
the  LXX.,  following  the  reading  of  the 
Samaritan  Pentateuch,  and  approved  by  Gese- 
nius,  Kalisch,  and  Knobel,  and  is  defended 
by  Hab.  iii.  6,  where  nearly  the  same  He- 
brew expression  is  used  as  here,  and  by  the 
parallel  passage  in  the  blessing  of  Moses, 
Deut.  xxxiii.  15.  The  latter  part  of  the 
verse  is  repeated  in  the  blessing  of  Moses, 
Deut.  xxxiii.  16.  The  Hebrew  of  the  last 
clause  of  the  verse  contains  three  words  only, 
as  does  the  last  clause  but  one,  which  is  in 
parallelism  with  it,  and  is  literally,  and- 
to-the-crown-of-the  head-of  -  the  -  Nazarite 
(separated,  or  consecrated  one)  of-Ms-bre- 
thren :  and  similarly  the  Vulgate  renders 
these  last  words.  The  meaning  is,  of  him 
that  is,  by  distinction  and  supei'iority  of 
blessing,  separated,  distinguished  among  his 
brethren.  Kalisch  would  render  it  crowned, 
which  the  word  will  also  bear,  and  would 
refer  it  to  the  kingdom  of  Ephraira. 
28.]  benjamin,  the  youngest,  has  ascribed 
to  him  the  character  of  a  warrior  eager  for 
spoil.  And  this  was  borne  out  in  the  history 
of  the  tribe.  Although  one  of  the  smallest 
in    Israel,  it  maintained  its  warlike  repute 


through  even  despei-ate  fortunes.  It  took 
part  in  the  great  victory  over  Sisera  (Judg. 
V.  14),  and  afterwards  maintained  a  war 
against  all  Israel  on  account  of  the  outrage 
at  Gibeah  (Judg.  xx.).  Of  this  tribe  sprung 
the  judge  Ehud  (Judg.  iii.  15)  ;  and  it  bore 
the  sceptre  in  the  person  of  the  first  king  of 
Israel,  Saul.  The  warlike  character  of  the 
Benjaminites  appears  in  other  places  in  the 
history  :  compare  2  Sam.  ii.  15  (Judg.  xx. 
15,  16) ;  1  Chron.  viii.  40  ;  xii.  2  ;  2  Chron. 
xiv.  8  ;  xvii.  17.  in  the  morning  .  . . 

and  at  night]  i.  e.  at  all  times :  see  rtff. 
28.]  The  tribes  are  twelve,  according 
to  the  actual  number  of  the  sons  of  Jacob 
who  were  gathered  together  to  receive  his 
dying  blessing ;  not  thirteen,  as  they  were 
in  matter  of  fact  wlien  Genesis  was  written. 
Jacob  is  said  to  have  blessed  them  all,  not- 
withstanding that  some  of  the  prophecies 
respecting  them  (e.g.  Reuben,  Simeon,  Levi, 
and  in  some  measure  Issachar)  are  unfavour- 
able. The  term  is  used  therefore  only  in  a 
looser  meaning ;  and  it  is  qualified  by  the 
last  clause  of  the  verse,  implying  that  the 
ble-ssing  was  modified  according  to  the  cir- 
cumstances of  each.  29 — 33.]  Last 
charge,  and  (hath,  of  Jacob.  On  gathered 
unto  my  people,  see  note,  ch.  xxv.  8.  The 
promise  iiad  been  before  exacted  from  Joseph, 
ch.  xlvii.  29 — 31.  And  indeed  he  alone  had 
the  power  to  carry  it  out.  But  it  is  here 
repeated  in  presence  of  them  all,  and  not 
without  a  reference  to  the  harmonious  co- 


27— L.  4. 


GENESIS. 


215 


with  the  field,  of  Ephron  the  Ilittite  for  a  possession  of  a 
buryiugphico,  ^^  (there  they  buried  Abraham  and  Surah 
his  wife  ;  there  they  buried  Isaac  and  Kebekah  his  wife  ; 
and  there  I  buried  Leah.)  ^^  A  purchase  of  the  field  and 
of  the  cave  that  is  therein  from  the  children  of  Heth.  '■^^ 
And  when  Jacob  had  made  an  end  of  commanding  his 
sons,  he  gathered  up  his  feet  into  the  bed,  and  J  yielded  up  J 
the  ghost,  and  was  gathered  unto  his  people.  L.  ^  And 
Joseph  fell  upon  his  father's  face,  and  wept  upon  him,  and 
kissed  him.  2  And  Joseph  commanded  his  servants  the 
physicians  to  embalm  his  father :  and  the  physicians  em- 
balmed Israel.  3  And  forty  days  were  fulfilled  for  him ; 
for  so  are  fulfilled  the  days  of  those  which  are  embalmed  : 
and  the  Egyptians  mourned  for  him  threescore  and  ten 
days.  *  And  when  the  days  of  his  mourning  were  past, 
Joseph  spake  unto  the  house  of  Pharaoh,  saying,  If  now  I 
have  found  grace  in  your  ej^es,  speak,  I  pray  you,  in  the  ears 


ch.  vl.  17;  Tii. 
21  ;  XXV.  8; 
ZXXV.29,  al. 


operation  of  all  the  sons  in  tlie  burial :  see 
ch.  1.  15,  ff.  There  is  no  ground  for  seeing 
any  inconsistency  in  the  two  accounts 
(Knobel).  On  all  particulars  respecting  the 
burial-place,  see  ch.  xxiii.,  and  notes. 
31.]  The  burial  of  Sarah  is  related  cli.  xxiii. 
19  ;  that  of  Abraham,  xxv.  9;  that  of  Isaac, 
XXXV.  29.  That  of  llebekah,  and  that  of 
Leah,  are  here  first  mentioned.  Such  simple 
particulars  belong  to  a  narrative  which 
sprung  not  out  of  careful  subsequent  ar- 
rangement, but  out  of  the  fragmentary 
notices   of  real    life.  32.]  Ver.   31  is 

parenthetical,  and  ver.  32  resumes.  33.] 

Jacob  had  made  an  etfort,  and  sat  upon  the 
bed  to  receive  Joseph ;  and  apparently  had 
so  remained  during  the  blessing  of  his  sons. 
In  this  attitude  his  feet  were  probably  out 
of  bed,  over  the  side  of  the  couch.  He  now 
gathered  them  into  the  bed,  and  lay  down. 
On  yielded  up  the  ghost,  see  reff.  and 
note  on  eh.  xxv.  8. 

L.  1  — 13.  ]  Jacob's  burial.  2.]  In  Egypt, 
•which  was  renowned  as  the  home  and  centre 
of  medical  science,  there  were  physicians  for 
every  portion  of  the  body,  and  thus  many 
would  naturally  be  attached  to  the  suite  of 
Joseph.  Herodotus  tells  us  that  the  em- 
balmers  were  a  separate  class  of  men.  This 
may  have  become  the  case  by  the  time  tiiat 
historian  wrote  (Cent.  V.  before  Christ),  or  the 


embalmers  may  have  been  under  the  orders 
of  tlie  physicians.  The  body  of  Jacob  was 
embalmed  perhaps  as  a  matter  of  course, 
seeing  he  was  connected  with  one  high  in 
ofEcc,  perhaps  as  being  about  to  be  trans- 
ported to  Canaan.  3.]  The  historians, 
Herodotus  and  Diodorus  Siculus,  give  70 
days  as  the  time  occupied  by  the  process  of 
embalming.  But  their  description,  as  re- 
marked above,  applies  to  times  long  subse- 
quent to  these;  and,  besides,  not  only  iu 
many  particulars  are  they  not  in  accord  with 
each  other,  but  the  existing  evidence  of 
mummies  docs  not  bear  out  their  accounts. 
A  very  full  resume  of  the  subject  will  be 
found  in  Kalisch,  pp.  768—775.  The  Is- 
raelites mourned  for  Aaron  (Num.  xx.  29) 
thirty  days  only, — and  the  same  for  Moses 
(Deut.  xxxiv.  8):  see  also  Deut.  xxi.  13. 
But  Jacob  was  mourned  for  as  a  king,  who 
was  honoured  in  Egypt  by  72  days'  mourn- 
ing. 4,  5.]  It  is  naturally  ques- 
tioned, why  Joseph  should  speak  to  the 
court,  and  not  to  Piiaraoh  himself.  Various 
answers  have  been  given:  some  supposing 
that  Joseph's  office  had  ceased  with  the 
years  of  famine  ;  others,  that  another  Pha- 
raoh had  succeeded  during  the  28  years 
since  Joseph  was  appointed.  But  the  more 
probable  and  generally  accepted  answer  is 
that  Joseph  was  in  a  state  of  mourning,  dur- 


216 


GENESIS. 


of  Pharaoh,  saying,  ^  My  father  made  me  swear,  saying, 
Lo,  I  die  :  in  my  grave  which  I  have  digged  for  me  in  the 
land  of  Canaan,  there  shalt  thou  bury  me.  Now  therefore 
let  me  go  up,  I  pray  thee,  and  bury  my  father,  and  I  will 
come  again.  ^  And  Pharaoh  said,  Go  up,  and  bury  thy 
father,  according  as  he  made  thee  swear.  7  ^  And  Joseph 
went  up  to  bury  his  father :  and  with  him  went  up  all 
the  servants  of  Pharaoh,  the  eklers  of  his  house,  and  all 
the  elders  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  ^  ^^^^  ^11  the  house  of 
Joseph,  and  his  brethren,  and  his  father's  house :  only 
their  little  ones,  and  their  flocks,  and  their  herds,  they 
left  in  the  land  of  Goshen.  ^  And  there  went  up  with  him 
both  chariots  and  horsemen  :  and  the  company  was  very 
great,  i^  And  they  came  to  the  threshing-floor  of  Atad, 
which  is  beyond  Jordan,  and  there  they  mourned  with  a 
great  and  very  sore  lamentation  :  and  he  made  a  mourn- 
ing for  his  father  seven  days,  ii  And  when  the  inhabit- 
ants of  the  land,  the  Canaanites,  saw  the  mourning  in  the 


inf»  which  it  was  the  custom  to  neglect  the 
personal  appearance,  and  that  thus  he  could 
not  well  appear  before  Pharaoh.  Be  this  as 
it  may,  it  is  no  small  mark  of  truthfulness  in 
a  narrative  when  such  enquiries  have  to  be 
made  as  to  matters  beneath  the  surfoce. 
digged]  Seeing  that  this  was  not  literally 
the  case,  Knobel  supposes  the  Hebrew  word 
ought  to  be  otherwise  read,  and  to  signify 
boxtght.  But  surely  there  is  no  need  for 
this.  In  a  second-hand  report  of  a  trans- 
action, what  is  more  usual  tlian  the  use  of  a 
common  term  of  this  kind,  even  though  the 
actual  fact  may  not  be  described  by  it  ? 
The  very  word  is  used  of  King  Asa's  sepul- 
chre, "  which  he  had  digged  for  himself," 
in  2  Chron.  xvi.  14  ;  but  no  one  supposes 
that  he  really  had  done  this.  6—9.] 

The  journey.  We  may  observe  that  in  this 
portion,  as  in  eh.  xlvii.  29  ff.,  Joseph  is  the 
one  responsible  jierson  and  actor,  whereas  in 
vv.  12,  13  "  his  sons  "  are  the  agents.  This 
is  traced  (.')  to  the  separate  narratives  of  the 
Jehovist  and  Elohist,  vv.  12,  13  being  re- 
garded as  consecutive  on  ch.  xlix.,  and  this 
portion  of  the  narrative  as  following  on  ch. 
xlviii.  end.  10,  11.]  The  halt  and  tlie 

special  mourning  appear  to  have  taken  place 
as  here  described,  and  then  the  family  alone 
to  have  gone  on  to  Hebron.     There  have 


been  grave  doubts  about  the  situation  of  the 
halting-place  and  the  direction  of  the 
journey.  One  or  two  things  may  be  laid 
down.  (1)  There  is  no  accounting  for  the 
circuitous  character  of  such  a  journey,  ig- 
norant as  we  are  of  the  circumstances  of  the 
times  with  regard  to  obstruction  by  war  or 
hostile  tribes;  (2)  beyond  Jordan  can- 
not surely  he  interpreted  as  written  from  the 
position  of  Moses  on  the  E.  of  Jordan,  but 
must  bear  its  accustomed  meaning,  i.  e.  E. 
of  the  Jordan.  We  are  wholly  ignorant  of 
the  site  of  the  "floor  of  Atad."  Jerome  places 
it  at  Beth-hoglah,  between  Jericho  and  the 
river,  i.  e.  to  the  W.  of  Jordan;  but  his 
writing  at  Bethlehem,  still  calls  it  "  bcynnd 
Jordan."  He  derives  the  name  Beth-hoglah, 
place  of  encircling,  from  the  dancing  round, 
after  the  manner  of  mourners.  Two  points 
have  been  cited  as  evidence  on  the  respective 
sides  :  (a)  the  fact  that  after  this  mourning, 
Jacob  was  carried  into  the  land  of  Canaan, 
implying  that  it  was  outside  Canaan  ;  (6) 
tliat  the  inhabitants  of  the  land,  tlie  Canaan- 
ites, saw  the  mourning,  and  therefore  it 
must  have  been  in  Canaan.  On  the  former 
point,  perhaps  much  stress  must  not  be  laid : 
see  above.  On  the  latter  we  may  say,  that 
though  on  the  E.  of  the  Jordan,  the  place 
may  have  been  visible  I'rom  the  other  side. 


5—21.  GENESIS.  217 

floor  of  Atad,  they  said,  This  is  a  grievoiis  mourning  to 
the  Egyptians  :  wherefore  the  name  of  it  was  called  Abel- 
mizraini,  which  is  beyond  Jordan,  i-  And  his  sons  did 
unto  him  according  as  he  commanded  them  :  ^^  for  his  sons 
carried  him  into  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  buried  him  in 
the  cave  of  the  field  of  ^lachpelah,  which  Abraham  bought 
with  the  field  for  a  possession  of  a  burying- place  of  Ephron 
the  Ilittite,  before  Mamre.  ^^  H  And  Joseph  returned 
into  Egypt,  he,  and  his  brethren,  and  all  that  went  up  with 
him  to  bury  his  father,  after  he  had  buried  his  father.  ^^ 
^[  And  when  Joseph's  brethren  saw  that  their  father  was 
dead,  the}'  said,  Joseph  will  peradvcnture  hate  us,  and  will 
certainly  requite  us  all  the  evil  which  we  did  unto  him. 
1^  And  they  sent  a  messenger  imto  Joseph,  saying.  Thy 
father  did  command  befoi'c  he  died,  saying,  ^'  So  shall  ye 
say  unto  Joseph,  Forgive,  I  pray  thee  now,  the  trespass 
of  thy  brethren,  and  their  sin  ;  for  they  did  unto  thee  evil : 
and  now,  we  pray  thee,  forgive  the  trespass  of  the  servants 
of  the  God  of  thy  father.  And  Joseph  wept  when  they 
spake  unto  him.  ^^  And  his  brethren  also  went  and  fell 
down  before  his  face ;  and  they  said.  Behold,  we  le  thy 
servants.  ^^  And  Joseph  said  unto  them,  Fear  not :  for 
am  I  in  the  place  of  God  ?  ^O  \yiii  ^s  for  you,  ye  thought 
evil  against  me  ;  bi(f  God  meant  it  unto  good,  to  bring  to 
pass,  as  it  is  this  day,  to  save  much  j^eople  alive.     -^  Now 

On  the  whole,  this  must  remnin  a  point  iin-  We  have  a  similar  construction  in  Vs.  xxvii. 
cleared.  The  name,  the  floor  of  Atad,  1 3.  16.  ]  they  sent,  from  Goshen  to 
may  be  from  the  name  of  its  possessor  (2  Memphis.  It  lias  been  suggested  that  pro- 
Sam,  xxiv.  16  ;  1  Chron.  xiii.  9),  or  from  the  bably  Benjamin  was  the  messenger.  There 
fact  of  the  buck-thorn  (in  Hebrew  Atad)  is  no  reason  for  charging  the  brethren  with 
growing  about  the  spot.  The  threshing-  inventing  this  command  of  their  father, 
floor  was  a  circular  space,  cleared  and  18.]  Tlu y  were  encouraged  by  the  report  of 
smoothed  for  the  purpose.  Abelmizraim,  the  messenger,  and  themselves  came  to 
as  at  "present  pointed  in  our  Hebrew  text,  Memphis  to  Joseph.  19—21.]  Joseph 
signifies  not  the  mourning,  but  the  meadow,  cannot  regard  himself  as  in  (lod's  place,  to 
of  the  Egyptians.  But  tlie  vowel  points  arc  see  througii  the  motives  and  deserts  of  men. 
traditional  only,  and  date  from  no  earlier  God  had  had  mysterious  and  beneficent  de- 
than  the  6th  century  alter  Christ.  12,  signs  which  were  accomplished  even  by  the 
13.]  See  above.  15 — 21.]  JosepJCs  carrying  out  of  their  evil  thoughts  against 
brethren  fear  his  anger  after  their  father's  himself:  and  with  God  it  was  for  him  to 
death.  He  reassures  them.  15.]  The  leave  it.  Knobcl  remarks  on  ver.  21  that  it 
literal  rendering  is,  //"  (as  we  say,  suppose)  assumes  the  famine  to  be  still  going  on  ;  but 
Joseph  should  hate  us  and,  &c.,  the  sentence  surely  this  need  not  be  so  taken.  His 
breaking  off  unfinished,  and  requiring  a  fill-  nourishing  of  them  need  not  mean  more 
ingup,  ^' that  uould  be  our  rtn7i,"  or  the  like,  than  taking  protective  care  of  them.     And 


218 


GENESIS. 


L.  22—26. 


therefore  fear  ye  not :  I  will  nourish  you,  and  your  little 
ones.  And  lie  comforted  them,  and  spake  kindly  unto 
them.  22  ^  ^jj(j  Joseph  dwelt  in  Egypt,  he^  and  his 
father's  house  :  and  Joseph  lived  an  hundred  and  ten 
years.  ^3  And  Joseph  saw  Ephraim's  children  of  the  third 
generation :  the  children  also  of  Machir  the  son  of  Ma- 
nasseh  were  born  upon  Joseph's  knees.  24  And  Joseph 
said  unto  his  brethren,  I  die :  and  God  will  surely  visit 
you,  and  bring  you  out  of  this  land  unto  the  land  which 
he  sware  to  Abraham,  to  Isaac,  and  to  Jacob.  ^5  And 
Joseph  took  an  oath  of  the  children  of  Israel,  saying,  God 
will  surely  visit  you,  and  ye  shall  carry  up  my  bones  from 
hence.  20  gg  Joseph  died,  being  an  hundred  and  ten  years 
old :  and  they  embalmed  him,  and  he  was  put  in  a  coffin 
in  Egypt. 


as  it  is  this  day  refers  to  tlie  abiding  re- 
sult of  his  care  during  the  famine,  as  you 
see  by  the   present  state  of  Egypt. 
22— 26  ]    Death  of  Joseph.  23.]   He 

saw  Ephraim's  sons  of  the  third,  i.  e. 
either,  sons  helongimj  to,  or  sons  of,  the 
third  generation.  If  the  former,  then  his 
(Joseph's)  great,— if  the  latter,  his  great- 
great — grandchildren.  Ephraim  is  put  first, 
as  having  been  preferred  to  iNIauasseh  in  the 
blessing,  ch.  xlviii.  8,  ff.  were  born, 

i.  e.  placed  when  new-born,  for  his  recogni- 
tion and  blessing.  See  ch.  xx.x.  3.  24.] 
Joseph,  iu  faith  (Heb.  xi.  22)  in  the  promises 


of  God  (ch.  xlvi.  4),  prophesies  the  Exodus, 
and  commands  the  removal  of  his  own  body 
accordingly.  So  strong  is  his  faith  in  the 
event,  that  he  does  not  command  them  to 
carry  him  immediately  to  Canaan.  Or  per- 
haps he  knows  that  after  his  death  there 
■would  be  no  one  with  sufficient  authority  to 
carry  out  such  a  command. 

The  mummy  of  Joseph  was  put,  as  was 
the  duty  of  the  embalmers,  in  a  chest  of 
wood,  such  as  may  be  seen  in  our  museums 
to  this  day.  And  when  the  children  of 
Israel  went  up  from  Egypt  they  carried  it 
■with  them,  Exod.  xii.  19. 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  MOSES, 


EXODUS. 


I.  1  And  tliese  are  tlie  names  of  the  children  of  Israel, 
which  came  into  Egypt;  every  man  and  his  household 
came  with  Jacob.  ^  Heuben,  Simeon,  Levi,  and  Judah, 
2  Issachar,  Zebulun,  and  Benjamin,  ^  Dan,  and  Naphtali, 
Gad,  and  Asher.  ^  And  all  the  souls  that  came  out  of  the 
loins  of  Jacob  were  seventy  souls :  and  Joseph  was  in 
Egypt  already.     ^  And  Joseph  died,  and  all  his  brethren, 


Title.]  In  the  Hebrew  this  book  is  known 
as  Shcmoth  (the  names),  or  We-eleh  Shemoth 
(and  these  are  the  names),  from  the  opening 
•words.  In  the  LXX.  and  the  Vulgate  the 
title  is  the  Exodus,  or  going  out,  from  tlic 
main  historical  subject  of  the  book,  or  rather 
of  its  former  portion,  ch.  i.  to  xv.  21. 

I.  The  increase  of  Israel,  and  their  op- 
pression in  Egypt.  In  order  to  the  setting 
forth  of  the  former  of  these,  the  book  begins 
(1 — 7)  bj'  a  statement  of  the  names  and 
number  of  the  children  of  Israel  who  went 
down  into  Egypt.  And]  By  the  con- 

necting particle  the  unity  of  this  second 
book  with  the  first  is  declared.  The  words 
with  Jacob  may  be  connected  with  the 
former  part  of  the  verse,  as  in  all  the  ancient 
versions,  which  came  into  Egypt  with 
Jacob  ;  or  with  the  latter,  as  in  the  A.  V., 
which  follows  the  punctuation  of  the  present 
Hebrew  text.  Kalisch  maintains  the  former 
arrangement,  considering  that  the  other  im- 
pairs the  simplicity  of  the  sense.  The  last 
•words  are  literally,  man  and  his  house 
came.  2,  f.]  The  arrangement  of  the 

sons  is,  as  in  Gen.  xxxv,  23 — 26,  according 
to  their  mothers,  only  Joseph  is  here 
omitted,  for  the   reason  given  in  ver.   5. 


6.]  The  number  of  seventy  is  made 
out  thus  :  the  sons'  wives  not  being  counted, 
we  have  (1)  11  sons:  (2)  as  in  Gen. 
xlvi.  8,  ff.,  4  sons  of  Reuben,  6  of  Simeon, 

3  of  Levi,  3  and  2  grandsons  of  Judah,  4 
of  Issachar,  3  of  Zebulun,  Dinah,  7  sons  of 
Gad,  4  and  1  daugliter  of  Aslier,  and  2 
grandsons,  10  sons  of  Benjamin,  1  of  Dan, 

4  of  Naphtali,  ■=z  6G  in  all :  to  whom  must 
be  added  Joseph  and  his  2  sons,  excepted 
from  the  immigrants  but  having  come  out  of 
the  loins  of  Jacob  :  and — for  there  can  hardly 
be  a  doubt  of  this — Jacob  himself,  not  ful- 
filling the  latter  condition,  but  included 
amongst  the  immigrants. 

The  "  for"  of  the  A.  Y.  tends  to  mislead: 
the  original  has  "  and,"  meaning  that 
Joseph  (and  his  household,  as  by  ver.  1) 
being  in  Egypt  already,  must  be  added  to 
the  others.  6.]  The  death  of  Joseph  has 

been  before  related  in  Gen.  1.  26.  It  is  liow- 
ever  recapitulated  here  as  formally  introduc- 
ing the  close  of  the  former  period  of  Israel's 
Egyptian  life.  Knobel  regards  this  as  tlie 
relation  of  the  event  by  the  Elohist,  the 
Jehovist  having  inserted  the  former  mention. 
7.]  In  this  statement  we  have  almost 
reproduced  the  terms  of  the  blessing  pro- 


220 


EXODIJS. 


a  =  Deut. 
xxxii.  17. 

Judg.  V.  8. 
Ecct\  i.  9. 
Isa.  xlii.  9. 
Ezek.  xi.  19, 
&c. 


b  1  Kin^s  ix. 
19.     2  Chron. 
Tlii.  4,  6  ; 


and  all  that  generation.  "^  And  the  children  of  Israel  were 
fruitful,  and  increased  abundantly,  and  multiplied,  and 
waxed  exceeding  mighty ;  and  the  land  was  filled  with 
them.  8  ^  Now  there  arose  up  a  ^new  king  over  Egypt, 
which  knew  not  Joseph.  ^  And  he  said  unto  his  people. 
Behold,  the  people  of  the  children  of  Israel  are  more  and 
mightier  than  we  :  ^^  come  on,  let  us  deal  wisely  with  them ; 
lest  they  multiply,  and  it  come  to  pass,  that,  when  there  fall- 
eth  out  any  war,  they  join  also  unto  our  enemies,  and  fight 
against  us,  and  get  them  up  out  of  the  land.  ^^  Therefore 
they  did  set  over  them  taskmasters  to  afflict  them  with  their 
burdens.     And  they  built  for  Pharaoh  ^  store-cities,  Pithom 


nounccd  upon  Noah,  Gen.  viii.  17;  ix.  7. 
The  words,  and  the  land  was  filled  with 
them,  cannot  be  understood  of  the  land  of 
Goshen  alone,  which  was  (Gen.  xlvii.  27 ; 
ch.  ix.  26,  al.)  the  especial  habitation  of 
Israel,  but  must  mean  the  whole  land  of 
Egypt,  as  is  also  implied  in  ch.  v.  12,  and 
by  the  statement  in  ch  iii.  22,  that  the 
Israelites  were  interspersed  among  the 
Egyptians.  8 — 14.]    The  oppress ioti  of 

Israel  by  the  Er/tjptians.  The  new  king 
who  arose  appears  not  to  have  been  merely 
another  king,  in  ordinary  succession,  but  a 
king  of  a  new  dynasty,  foreign  to  the  tradi- 
tions and  maxims  of  his  predecessors.  The 
Hebrew  word  here  used  for  new  occurs  in 
retF.  in  the  same  distinctive  sense.  Josephus 
gives  this  fact  thus  :  "  the  kingdom  having 
passed  into  another  dynasty."  This  might 
Avell  be,  as  dynasties  of  different  origin  and 
character  rapidly  succeeded  one  another  in 
the  early  history  of  Egypt.  There  is  a  re- 
markable expression  in  Isa.  Iii.  4,  which 
would  seem  to  indicate  that  this  oppressor 
of  Israel  was  of  Assyrian  extraction  ;  and 
the  same  appears  to  be  implied  in  Isa.  x. 
24,  26.  The  question,  under  what  histori- 
cally-known kings  of  Egypt  the  oppression, 
and  the  Exodus,  respectively  took  place  (for 
it  is  hardly  likely  that  they  were  under  the 
same)  is  one  of  great  difficulty  and  uncer- 
tainty, and  any  discussion  of  it  would  far 
pass  the  limits  of  a  note.  The  reader  is  re- 
ferred to  ]\Ir.  Stuart  Poole's  article  in  the 
Biblical  Diet.,  where  he  will  find  a  short  dis- 
cussion of  the  matter.  9.]  It  seems 
somewhat  strange  that  the  Israelites  were 
more  in  number  than  the  native  subjects  of 


this  king.  Hence  we  may  infer  either  that 
the  language  is  that  of  exaggeration  to  stir 
up  alarm  in  the  people,  or  that  this  king 
reigned  over  only  a  portion  of  Egypt,  and 
feared  the  hostility  of  the  other  portion. 
"  Till  the  times  of  Sesostris,"  says  Kalisch, 
"  Egypt  was  not  united  under  one  mighty 
ruler,  but  it  consisted  of  almost  as  many 
states  as  it  comprised  cities,  or  at  least  dis- 
tricts, without  connexion  or  unity.  Al- 
though Thebes  maintained  during  a  long 
epoch  a  predominant  influence,  it  had  con- 
stantly to  resist  the  dangerous  and  powerful 
rivalry  of  IMemphis,  which  became  later  the 
chief  residence  of  the  Egyptian  kings,  and 
to  repel  the  hostilities  of  many  other  colonies, 
■which,  mostly  founded  and  governed  by 
priests,  had  sufficient  resources  to  maintain 
their    autonomy."  10.]    See    on    last 

verse.  From  the  concluding  words,  and 
get  them  up  out  of  the  land,  it  appears 
that  the  Israelites  are  already  dealt  with  as 
a  subject  people  important  to  be  retained  in 
the  country.  This  is  the  spirit  which  per- 
vades the  dealings  of  the  subsequent  Pha- 
raoh of  the  Exodus,  and  which  is  openly 
shewn  in  ch.  xiv.  5.  11.]  The  object 

was  to  crush  down  their  spirits  and  to  check 
their  multiplying.  Aristotle  mentions  this 
as  a  means  whereby  tyrants  keep  down  their 
people,  and  cites  the  Egyptian  pyramids  as 
examples.  The  cities  Avbich  the  Israelites 
were  compelled  to  build  were  store-cities, 
not,  as  the  A.  V.  seems  to  imply,  for  the  lay- 
ing up  of  treasure,  but  for  the  storing  of  the 
fruits  of  the  eai'th  :  see  ret!'.  Pithom] 

All  that  is  with  any  definiteness  known 
about  this  city  is  that  the  name  may  safely 


'—15. 


EXODUS. 


221 


and  Raamses.  ^^  But  the  more  they  afflicted  them,  the  more 
they  multiplied  and  grew.  And  they  were ''distressed  be- 
cause of  the  children  of  Israel.  ^-^  And  the  Egyi)tians  made 
the  children  of  Israel  to  serve  with  rigour  :  i"*  and  they 
made  their  lives  hitter  with  hard  bondage,  in  morter,  and 
in  brick,  and  in  all  manner  of  service  in  the  field,  and  with 
all  their  service,  wherein  they  made  them  serve  with 
rigour.  ^^  %  And  the  king  of  Egypt  spake  to  the  nebrcw 
mid  wives,  of  which  the  name  of  the  one  icati  Shiplirah,  and 


Grn 

xxvi 

. 

4lt. 

I.tv. 

XX 

23. 

Num 

xxi 

S.  xxil. 

:). 

1  Kill 

HI 

Til.  6,  16. 


be  assumed  identical  with  Pa/umus  of  He- 
rodotus. The  name  is  compounded  of  Pa,  the 
same  prefix  as  occurs  in  Bu-bastis  (Pi-beseth 
or  Pa-bast)  and  Bu-siris,  signifying  abode, 
and  Tum  or  Atum,  a  name  of  the  sun  :  and 
we  have  Thoum  as  the  name  of  a  city  near 
to,  or  in,  tlie  district  of  Ileliopolis. 
Raamses]  There  seems  no  doubt  that  this 
and  the  Eameses  of  eh.  xii.  37  (see  note 
there,  and  also  on  Gen.  xlvii.  11)  represent 
the  same  place,  and  that  a  town  in  the  land 
of  Goshen,  on  its  western  side.  The  name 
is  that  of  several  Egyptian  kings,  but  seems 
to  afford  no  clue  as  to  tlie  date  of  the  Exodus. 
It  is  remarkable  that  the  LXX.  give  this 
sentence  thus,  and  they  built  strong  cities  for 
Fharaoh,  both  Peitho,  and  Ratnesses,  and 
On,  which  is  Ileliopolis.  Mr.  Stuart  Poole, 
whose  articles  on  both  names  arc  well  worth 
consulting,  sums  up,  "  As  we  find  Thoum 
and  PaUimus  and  Ramcses  in  or  near  to  the 
land  of  Goshen,  there  can  be  no  reasonable 
doubt  that  we  have  here  a  correspondence  to 
Pithom  and  Kaamses,  and  the  probable  con- 
nexion of  both  with  IIelioj)olis  conlirms  the 
conclusion.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  Coptic 
version  of  Gen.  xlvi.  28  mentions  Pithon  for, 
or  instead  of,  the  Heriiopolis  of  the  LXX. 
(see  there)."  Josephus  interprets  Raamses 
to  be  Ileliopolis,  which  is  hardly  likely,  as 
this  latter  is  called  On  in  the  sacred  text, 
and  as  the  LXX.,  writing  in  Egypt,  distin- 
guish tlie  two.  12.]  Their  policy  not 
succeeding,  the  Egyptians  conceived  a  loath- 
ing and  disgust  for  the  chihlren  of  Israel, 
so  the  Hebraists  understand  the  word  ren- 
dered were  grieved  by  the  A.  V.  And  this 
sense  is  amply  borne  out  by  the  reff.  But 
the  same  word  is  used  of  the  feeling  of  IMoab 
because  of  the  children  of  Israel  in  Num. 
xxii.  3,  and  that  certainly  was  not  abhor- 
rence so  much  as  distress  and  alarm. 
13,  14.]  There  seems  to  be  an  advance  in 


the  narrative  of  the  hardships  inflicted  on 
the  Israelites.  The  "  hunhnis  "  in  ver.  II 
were  public  works :  these  verses  indicate 
that  they  were  generally  made  private  slaves. 
Wlien  tliis  also  failed  to  stop  their  increase, 
the  unnatural  measure  of  vv.  15,  ff.  was 
adopted.  The  illustration  of  the.se  former 
details  is  found  in  the  subsr(jueiit  histnrv, 
see  ch.  v. :  and  tliat  of  all  service  in  the 
field  refers  probably  to  the  hard  labour  of 
watering  the  ground  :  sec  Dent.  xi.  10. 
Joseplius,  Ant.  ii.  9,  gives  as  examples  of 
their  works,  the  digging  of  canals  to  the 
Kile,  and  making  dams,  — the  building  of  the 
pyramids,  and  of  walls  round  the  cities. 
and  with]  This  last  clause  dejienils,  like  tlic 
rest  of  tlie  verse,  on  they  made  their  lives 
bitter,  above.  "  Rossellini  gives  a  liighly 
interesting  drawing,  copied  from  the  walls  of 
a  tomb  near  Thebes  and  generally  believed 
to  represent  the  oppressed  Israelites  making 
bricks  under  the  Egyptian  taskmasters." 
Kalisch.  The  drawing  is  from  the  tomb  of 
Beksliara,  an  officer  of  the  court  of  Thothmcs 
III.  about  1444  i$.c.  It  is  given  in  tlie 
Biblical  Diet,  under  BiucK,  vol.  i.  p.  229. 
15 — 22-]  The  ki))g  commands  the 
slaughter  of  the  male  infants.  The  mid- 
wives  disobey.  It  has  been  much  debated 
whctlier  these  mid  wives  were  Hebrews  or 
Egyptians.  Joseplius  sup[)oses  the  latter; 
and  several  modern  interpreters  adopt  his 
view,  mainly  inHuenced  by  the  improhahility 
of  Pliaraoh  having  given  orders  to  llelirew 
women.  But  surely  the  improbability  is  fir 
greater  that  the  Hebrew  women  should  have 
allowed  themselves  to  have  been  delivered  by 
Egyptians;  and  the  whole  narrative,  names 
included  (see,  however,  below),  presupposes 
that  these  women  were  servants  of  tlie  true 
God.  If  we  adopt  the  other  view,  we  must 
render,  instead  of  the  Hebrew  midwives, 
"the  midwives  of  the  Hebrew  women,"  or, 


222 


EXODUS. 


I. 


the  name  of  tlie  other  Puah :  ^^  and  lie  said,  When  ye  do 
the  office  of  a  midwife  to  the  Hebrew  women,  and  see  the 
^  birth  ;  if  it  he  a  son,  then  ye  shall  kill  him  :  but  if  it  he  a 
daughter,  then  she  shall  live.  ^7  But  the  midwives  feared 
f  God,  and  did  not  as  the  king  of  Egypt  commanded  them, 
and  saved  the  men  children  alive.  ^^  And  the  king  of 
Egypt  called  for  the  midwives,  and  said  unto  them.  Why 
have  ye  done  this  thing,  and  have  saved  the  men  children 
alive  ?  1^  And  the  midwives  said  unto  Pharaoh,  Because 
the  Hebrew  women  are  not  as  the  Egyptian  women  ;  for 
they  are  lively,  and  are  delivered  ere  the  midwife  come  in 


as  Kalisch,  '  the  women,  who  served  as  mid- 
wives  to  the  Hebrews."  But  this,  though 
apparently  allowable,  seems  clumsy  and  un- 
necessary. Two  only  are  mentioned,  pro- 
bably as  being  chief  of  their  trade  :  so  we 
have  the  chief  butler  and  chief  baker.  Gen. 
xl.  1.  SMphrah,  in  Hebrew,  bright- 

ness, or  beauty.  But  Mr.  Stuart  Poole 
{Biblical  Diet.)  suggests  that  the  name  has 
also  an  Egyptian  sound,  Phra  being  the 
sun:  in  which  case,  however,  the  Hebrew 
spelling  would  slightly  differ  from  that  now 
found.  Puah,  in  Arabic,  shinijig.     No 

Egyptian  meaning  has  been  given  for  this 
name.  The  following  expression  has  been 
much  controverted.  The  word  literally  sig- 
nifies two  stones,  but  is  applied  in  ref.  Jer. 
to  the  wheels  of  a  potter,  which,  though  of 
wood,  are  similar  to  the  two  mill-stones  in 
form  and  motion.  The  similitude  of  creation, 
or  birth,  to  the  making  of  a  potter's  vessel  is 
often  found  in  Scripture  :  e.  g.  Job  x.  9; 
sxxiii.  6  ;  Isa.  xxix.  16;  xlv.  9;  lxiv.8;  Jer. 
xviii.  6.  Hence  it  has  been  inferred  by  some 
Hebraists  that  the  word  here  signifies  the 
place  of  birth,  the  mouth  of  the  womb, 
whence  the  babe  issues,  as  the  vessel  from 
the  wheels  of  the  potter.  Thus  recently 
Knobel  and  Keil.  The  two  other  principal  in- 
terpretations are — 1.  That  the  word  signifies 
the  stools  on  which  the  women  sat  or  knelt 
to  be  delivered,  but  it  is  objected  that 
there  is  no  evidence  of  any  such  having  been 
used.  2.  That  it  is  the  stone  vessel, — called 
the  stones,  or  being  double,  itself  and  cover, 
— in  which  the  infants  were  washed : — 
but  it  is  justly  objected  that  both  the  sex 
would  have  been  previously  ascertained,  and 
the  best  opportunity  for  the  cruel  deed  passed 
by,   before   the   child  was   brought  to  be 


washed.  These  considerations  induce  me  to 
decide  for  the  meaning  first  given,  and  I 
have  expressed  it  by  a  paraphrase.  17.] 

The  midwives  feared  the  true  God.  This 
could  be  hardly  said  of  Egyptians,  whose 
religion  was  a  compound  of  the  grossest 
superstitions.  We  must  remember,  however, 
that  Joseph  used  the  very  same  expression, 
Gen.  xlii.  18,  when  speaking  in  the  charac- 
ter of  an  Egyptian.  18,  f.]  In  judging 
of  such  a  portion  of  the  narrative,  we  must 
remember,  not  our  own  maxims  of  Christian 
morality,  but  the  practice  of  the  ancient 
books  which  we  are  reading,  which  is  not 
to  drive  every  word  to  the  judgment-seat  of 
a  stern  ethical  discrimination,  but  to  treat 
human  actions  with  more  allowance  than  is 
permitted  to  our  clearer  moral  light.  Bear- 
ing this  in  mind  will  save  us  from  the  shuf- 
fling and  presuming  casuistry  which  even 
Keil  quotes  from  Augustine  :  "God  rewarded 
the  midwives  not  because  they  lied,  but  be- 
cause they  shewed  mercy  to  the  people  of 
God:  consequently  it  was  not  their  deceit 
but  their  humanity  which  was  rewarded  ; — 
benignity  of  mind,  not  iniquity  of  lying 
(benignitas  mentis  non  iniquitas  mentientis): 
and  for  that  good,  God  forgave  this  evil."  It 
is  the  bounden  duty  of  an  expositor  to  protest 
against  such  morality  which,  if  applied  to 
our  own  acts,  would  sanction  any  kind  of  de- 
viation from  truth.  Some  well-meaning  per- 
sons have  suggested  that  there  was  truth 
after  all  in  the  midwives'  excuse,  or  (so 
Prof.  Murphy)  that  "  the  mothers,  hearing 
the  order  of  Pharaoh,  did  not  admit  the 
midwife."  But  ver.  17  cuts  away  the  ground 
from  all  such  feeble  special-pleading. 
For  the  words  they  are  lively,  the  Vulgate 
has,  "  they  themselves  know  how  to  deliver 


IG— II.  3. 


EXODUS. 


223 


unto  them.  20  Therefore  God  dealt  well  with  the  mid- 
wives  :  and  the  people  multiplied,  and  waxed  very  mighty. 
21  And  it  came  to  pass,  because  the  midwivcs  feared  God, 
that  he  made  them  houses.  22  ^ji(j  Pharaoh  charffed  all 
his  people,  saying.  Every  son  that  is  born  ye  shall  cast 
into  the  river,  and  every  daughter  ye  shall  save  alive. 
II.  1  And  there  went  a  man  of  the  house  of  Levi,  and 
took  fo  wife  a  daughter  of  Levi.  2  X\\^  the  woman  con- 
ceived, and  bare  a  son  :  and  she  saw  him  that  he  icas  a 
goodly  child :  and   she  hid   him   three   months.     3  ^^^(i 


themselves ;"  but  it  would  appear  that  this 
interpretation  originates  in  a  mistake. 
Pharaoh  appears  to  have  believed  the  mid- 
wives,  or  their  punisliment  must  have  fol- 
lowed. 21.  he  made  them  houses] 
i.  e.  apparently  blessed  them  with  families, 
which  in  Israel  was  looked  upon  as  a  great 
blessing:  see  Gen.  xxiv.  60;  xxx.  11,  13, 
and  as  the  reward  of  piety,  Deut.  vii.  14 ; 
Ps.  cxxvii.  3 ;  cxxviii.  3.  22.]  It  is 
naturally  understood,  that  this  command 
applied  only  to  the  Plebrews'  children.  But 
the  rabbinical  traditions  report  that  all  male 
children,  Egyptian  as  well  as  Hebrew,  were 
to  be  thrown  into  the  Nile,  inasmuch  as  it 
had  been  predicted  that  a  deliverer  of  Israel 
would  arise,  and  it  was  not  known  whether 
he  were  to  be  an  Egyptian  or  a  Hebrew. 

The  command  in  our  text  may  not  have 
been  followed  out,  any  more  than  the  pre- 
vious one  to  the  midwives,  or  it  may  have 
been  only  in  force  for  a  time,  or  it  may  have 
been  but  partial  in  its  operation  on  Israel, 
■who  mostly  dwelt  in  a  part  of  Egypt  far  off 
from  the  Nile.  This  Pharaoh  is  (see  ch.  ii. 
23)  distinct  from  the  Pharaoh  of  the  Exodus, 
more  than  eighty  years  after.  By  his  time 
Israel  had  multiplied  even  more  still,  and  had 
become  a  powerful  nation. 

II.  1 — 10.]  The  birth  and  bringine/  up  of 
Moses.  A  more  particular  account  of  the 
parents  of  Moses  is  given  in  ch.  vi.  16 — 20. 
"We  there  learn  that  the  man's  name  was 
Amram,  and  that  he  was  son  of  Kohath, 
and  grandson  of  Levi.  The  expression  here 
used,  a  daughter  of  Levi,  as  appears  from 
that  place,  is  not  a  general  but  a  strict  de- 
scription ;  for  Amram  "  took  him  Jnchebed 
his  father's  sister  to  wife."  2.]  Moses 

was  not  the  first  offspring  of  the  marriage : 
Aaron  and  Miriam  were  both  older  ;  indeed, 


as  we  see  here,  the  latter  was  a  grown  girl 
before  Moses'  birth.  Knobel  has  hence  sup- 
posed, believing  the  words  here,  by  the 
analogy  of  Hos.  i.  3  ;  Gen.  xxxviii.  2,  f. ; 
iv.  1,  17,  to  imply  that  the  child  was  the 
firstborn  of  the  marriage,  that  Aaron  and 
]\Iiriam  were  by  a  former  wife.  This  view 
he  considers  to  be  favoured  by  the  circum- 
stance that  Aaron  and  Miriam  combined 
against  Moses  (Num.  xii.  1),  and  that 
Miriam  is  described  as  Aaron's  sister  (ch. 
XV.  20).  This  hypothesis,  as  he  himself 
confesses,  is  refuted  by  Num.  xxvi.  59, 
where  it  is  distinctly  stated  that  Jochebed 
was  the  mother  of  the  three ;  but  he  sup- 
poses a  discrepancy  between  the  two  places. 
This  surely  is  a  creation  of  difficulties  where 
none  really  exist.  2.]  Aaron  had  ap- 

parently been  born  before  the  cruel  order 
for  destruction  of  the  male  children.  This 
hiding  of  the  babe  is  well  described  by  Prof. 
Murphy  to  have  taken  place  from  maternal 
aftection,  the  beauty  of  the  child,  and  hope 
in  God  combined.  In  Ileb.  xi.  23,  the  act 
is  said  to  have  been  a  fruit  of  faith.  Trust 
in  God  was  at  the  foundation  of  her  deed. 
In  the  Hebrew,  goodly  is  simply  tov,  good, 
the  term  used  in  Gen.  i.  tliroughout,  and  in 
ver.  31,  to  designate  God's  works  as  they 
came  from  His  hands.  This  may  have  some 
connexion  with  Stephen's  remarkable  addi- 
tion in  Acts  vii.  20,  wliere  he  says  tiiat 
Moses  was  "  beautiful  to  (or  in  the  sight  of) 
God."  Josephus  relates  that  God  appeared 
in  a  dream  to  Aniiam  before  the  birtli,  and 
revealed  to  him  the  future  greatness  of  the 
child.  Thus  the  beautiful  simplicity  of  the 
story   is   lost.  3.]    There   may   have 

been  faith  even  in  the  form  of  the  cradle 
chosen.  The  word  tevah,  used  here  for  the 
ark  in  which  the  mother  laid  her  babe,  is 


224 


EXODUS. 


II. 


e  Job  viii.  11 
Isa.  xviii.'i 
XXXV.  7, on 

fGen.  xi.  3; 
xiv.  10,  on 

g  Isa.  xxxiv. 


when  sTie  could  not  longer  hide  him,  she  took  for  him  an 
;  ark  of  ^ bulrushes,  and  daubed  it  with  ^slime  and  with  ^j^itch, 
'^-  and  put  the  child  therein ;  and  she  laid  it  in  the  flags  by 
9^  the  river's  brink.  ^  And  his  sister  stood  afar  ofi"^  to  wit 
what  would  be  done  to  him.  ^  ^f  And  the  daughter  of 
Pharaoh  came  down  to  bathe  at  the  river  ;  and  her  maidens 
walked  along  by  the  river's  side ;  and  when  she  saw  the 
ark  among  the  flags^  she  sent  her  maid,  and  she  fetched 
it.  ^  And  when  she  had  ojjened  if,  she  saw  the  child : 
and,  behold,  a  boy  weeping.  And  she  had  compassion  on 
him,  and  said.  This  is  one  of  the  Hebrews'  children. 
7  Then  said  his  sister  to  Pharaoh's  daughter,  Shall  I  go 
and  call  to  thee  a  nurse  of  the  Hebrew  women,  that  she 
may  nurse  the  child  for  thee  ?  ^  And  Pharaoh's  daughter 
said  to  her.  Go.     And  the  maid  went  and  called  the  child's 


only  found  besides  in  the  narrative  of  the 
deluge.  As  Noah  made  an  aik  for  the  safety 
of  his  house,  so  she  for  that  of  her  darling 
babe.  The  bulrushes  are  doubtless  the 
papyrus,  the  triangular  lofty  reed  which 
formerly  grew  in  abundance  on  the  marshy 
banks  of  the  Nile,  and  was  used  by  the 
Egyptians  for  weaving  baskets,  mats,  san- 
dals, and  for  the  manufacture  of  pajyer,  so 
called  from  the  circumstance.  She  smears 
the  cradle  inside  with  bitumen  (literally,  she 
asphalted  it  with  asphalt),  to  bind  it  to- 
gether and  make  it  soft  to  the  infant's  tender 
skin,  and  outside  with  pitch,  to  render  it 
Avaterproof.  she  laid  it  in  the  flags, 

i.  e.  the  tall  flowering  rushes  [alga  nilotua) 
by  the  brink,  to  prevent  it  from  being  carried 
away  by  the  stream  ;  Josephus,  however, 
inconsistently  with  the  sacred  story,  describes 
it  as  floating  down  when  seen  by  the  princess. 
4,  fi'.]  It  can  hardly  have  been  acci- 
dent that  she  laid  the  child,  and  set  Miriam 
to  watch,  just  at  the  place  where  the  princess 
came  to  bathe.  We  can  hardly  suppose 
that  the  spot  was  not  one  commonly  fre- 
quented for  that  purpose.  Josephus  reports 
the  name  of  the  princess  to  have  been  Ther- 
viuthis ;  and  Kalisch  quotes  from  Cahen 
[Precis  du  systeme  hieroghjphique)  that  a 
name  Tomrots  has  been  deciphered  on  an 
Egyptian  monument.  But  Eusebius  (after 
Artapanus)  gives  her  name  as  Merrhis;  Syn- 
cellus  as  Pharia;  the  Arabic  traditions  as 
Asiat.     The  seclusion  in  which  women  were 


kept  generally  in  the  East  did  not  prevail  in 
ancient  Egypt.  Wilkinson  gives  (iii.  389)  a 
bath  scene  of  an  Egyptian  lady  with  four 
maids  attending  her.  The  Egyptians 
ascribed  sacred  virtue  to  the  Nile  water ; 
and  there  may  have  been  some  religious  pur- 
pose in  this  bathing.  If  so,  the  time,  as  well 
as  the  place,  may  have  been  matter  of  special 
design  on  the  part  of  the  mother,  for  such 
ceremony  was  usual,  especially  at  the  time 
of  the  Nile's  rising.  It  is  observable  that 
Josephus  evades  the  apparent  difficulty  of 
the  king's  daughter  thus  publicly  bathing  by 
making  her  merely  come  down  to  walk  by 
the  river.  6.]    In  the  Hebrew  words 

rendered  by  the  A.  V.  "■the  babe  tcept,'^ 
thei'e  is  no  definite  article.  Some  supposed 
that  she  knew  it  to  be  a  Hebrew  child  by  the 
fact  of  its  circumcision.  But  tliis  practice 
was  common  to  the  Egyptians  also.  More 
probably  it  was  by  inference  from  its  ex- 
posure in  the  river.  7.]  Miriam  acts 
on  the  spur  of  the  princess's  compassion,  as- 
suming what  was  in  her  mind  regarding  the 
child.  No  Egyptian  woman  would  be  likely 
to  undertake  the  duty  of  nursing  a  Hebrew 
child:  compare  Gen.  xliii.  32.  Josephus 
makes  it  refuse  the  milk  of  the  Egyptian 
nurses  ;  again,  inconsistently  with  the  sacred 
text,  according  to  which  all  this  happened 
then  and  there,  on  the  spot.  8.]  the 
maid  is  in  Hebrew  a  word  implying  a  grown 
girl.  Aaron  (ch.  vii.  7)  was  but  three  years 
older   than   Moses,    so  that    Miriam  must 


4—11. 


EXODUS. 


225 


mother.  9  ^^(j  Pharaoh's  daughter  said  unto  her,  Take 
this  child  away,  and  nurse  it  for  me,  and  I  will  give  iJn'e 
thy  wug-es.  And  the  woman  took  the  child,  and  inirscd  it. 
^'^  And  the  child  grew,  and  she  brought  him  unto  Pharaoh's 
daughter,  and  he  became  her  son.  And  she  called  his  name 
Moses  :  and  she  said,  Because  I  drew  him  out  of  the  water. 
^^  H  And  it  came  to  pass  in  those  days,  when  Moses  was 
'^  grown,  that  he  went  out  unto  his  brethren,  and  looked  on 
their  burdens :  and  he  spied  an  Egyptian  smiting  an  Hebrew, 


have  been  by  much  the  oldest  of  the  three  : 
see  on  ch.  xiv.  20.     The  fact  of  the  princess 
disobeying  her  father's  commaiid  in  adoptiii.g 
the   babe,  so   far  from   beinf^  a  diliiculty,  as 
some  have  made  it,  is  the  very  impress  of 
truth  itself.     If  there  is  a  thing  too  strong 
for  man's  laws,  it  is  woman's  heart.     "Wit- 
ness Antigone  burying  her  brother.  9.] 
It  must  be  understood  tliat  from  this  time 
the  mother  became  in  some  sense  the  recog- 
nized servant  of  the   princess,  for  otherwise 
how  would  she  enjoy  more  safety  with  her 
babe  than  before  }     Hostile  enquiry  would 
be  disarmed  by  proof   that  slie  was  bring- 
ing up  the    child   for   Pharaoh's  daughter. 
So  that  the  proceeding  could  not  have  been 
altogether  secret,  and  must  have  been  shel- 
tered under  the  power  enjoyed  by  royalty. 
10.]   When  her  duty   as   nurse  was 
over,  she  brings  her  boy  to  the  princess,  who 
formally  adopts  him.     P^om  what  has  been 
above  advanced,  there  is  no  reason  to  assume 
that  any  secrecy  was  observed.     In  Acts  vii. 
22  and  Philo's  Life  of  Moses  we  learn  that 
he  was  brought  up  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the 
Egyptians.     Kalisch  and  others  have  made 
a  great  point  of  proving  that  the    Mosaic 
law   was   independent   of    this   training   of 
Moses.     But  surely  this  is  a  matter  of  very 
trivial  importance.     It  is  no  more  strange 
that  the  wisdom  of  Egj-pt  should  have  been 
incorporated  into  the  Law,  than  that  the 
philosophy  of  Egypt  should  have  furnished 
the  vocabulary  for  expressing  the  doctrines 
of  the  Gospel.     The  name  by  which  Pha- 
raoh's daugliter  called  the  child  has  been 
variou.sly  interpreted.     Josephus,  taking  the 
Greek  form  of  the  name,  Mouses,  says  (Ant. 
ii.  9.  6)  tliat  the  Egyptians  call  water  Mo, 
and  uses  tliose  who  are   rescued   from    it. 
But  elsewhere  (against  Apion,  i.  31)  he  says 
that    Mod   is   water   in   Egyptian ;  and   so 


Philo  and  others.  But  the  interpretation 
given  in  the  text  here  is  a  Hebrew,  not  an 
Egyptian,  one  ;  and  the  name  is  referred,  for 
the  sake  of  the  Jewish  readers,  to  the  He- 
brew verb  Mashah,  drew.  See  more  respect- 
ing the  name  in  Kalisch,  and  in  Dean  Stan- 
ley's art.  in  the  Biblical  Diet. 

11—20.]  Flifiht  of  Moses  to  Midi  an. 
11.]  in  those  days,  i.  e.  in  the  same 
period  of  Egyptian  oppression  which  in- 
cluded the  birth  of  IVloses.  The  expression 
sometimes  has  a  very  wide  extent :  compare 
Judg.  xix.  1.  The  LX."*^.  render,  "  in  those 
many  days."  The  traditional  length  of  the 
period  of  Moses's  becoming  grown  (Hcb. 
great,  see  ref. )  ^'a.s  forty  years:  compare 
Acts  vii.  23.  The  many  strange  accounts 
given  of  him  during  this  period  are  sum- 
marized by  Dean  Stanley,  as  above.  The 
account  in  Heb.  xi.  24 — 26  simply  and  in 
the  letter  characterizes  his  act  and  motive 
when  he  fled,  not  during  this  time.  But  the 
attachment  to  his  own  people  and  to  their 
God  must  have  accompanied  him  throughout 
and  have  matured  liis  Hnal  resolve.  Even  so 
we  may  infer  bad  liis  patriotism  been  grow- 
ing and  coming  to  a  head,  before  the  incident 
here  related  could  have  taken  place.  As 
Stephen  shews  (Acts  vii.  25),  he  must  have 
in  his  mind  matured  his  view  of  himself  as 
the  future  deliverer  and  judge  of  Israel,  be- 
fore he  undertook  thus  first  to  deliver  and 
then  to  judge  between  his  brethren.  Faith 
was  throughout  his  guiding  principle,  de- 
pendence on  his  divine  mission,  and  on  God, 
who  called  him  to  it. 

Observe  the  stress  laid  in  this  verse  on  the 
word  his  brethren.  It  was  this  feeling 
which  was  uppermost  in  his  mind,  the  tie 
which  bound  him  to  Israel,  and  his  mission 
of  deliverance.  12.]  Surely  the  com- 

mentators, ancient  and  modern,  miglit  have 


226 


EXODUS. 


II. 


i  ch.  xxiii.  1. 
,  Deut.  XXV. 


j  1  Sam.  XX.  4. 
1  Kings  V.  5. 


one  of  his  brethren.  12  ^^d  lie  looked  this  way  and  that 
way,  and  when  he  saw  that  there  was  no  man,  he  slew  the 
Egyptian,  and  hid  him  in  the  sand.  ^^  And  when  he  went 
out  the  second  day,  behold,  two  men  of  the  Hebrews  strove 
together  :  and  he  said  to  ^him  that  did  the  wrong,  Where- 
fore smitest  thou  thy  fellow  ?  ^'^  and  he  said,  Who  made 
thee  a  prince  and  a  judge  over  us?  Jintendest  thou  to 
kill  me,  as  thou  killedst  the  Egyptain  ?  And  Moses  feared, 
and  said,  Surely  this  thing  is  known.  ^^  Now  when 
Pharaoh  heard  this  thing,  he  sought  to  slay  Moses.  But 
Moses  fled  from  the  face  of  Pharaoh,  and  dwelt  in  the  land 
of  Midian  :  and  he  sat  down  by  a  well.     ^^  Now  the  priest 


spared  themselves  the  task  of  apologizing 
for  this  act  of  Jloses.  Augustine  this  time 
speaks  the  language  of  common  sense,  when 
he  says,  comparing  this  act  with  that  of 
Peter  in  the  garden,  "  Each  of  them,  not  hy 
blameable  cruelty,  but  by  excess  of  brave 
spirit,  passed  the  ordinary  rule  of  justice: 
each  through  hatred  of  another's  wickedness, 
the  one  through  love  of  his  brother,  the 
other  of  his  Lord,  carnal  in  both  cases,  yet 
love,  committed  a  sin."  Yet  how  much  bet- 
ter and  more  dignified  is  the  account  given 
by  Stephen — "  he  thought  they  would  have 
understood  how  that  God  by  his  hand  was 
giving  deliverance  to  them."  Moses  hid 
him  in  the  sand,  wliich  shews  that  the 
place  was  on  the  border  of  the  desert,  "the 
sand  of  the  desert  then,  as  now,  running 
close  up  to  the  cultivated  tract."  Stanley. 
13,  f.]  The  same  consciousness  of  his 
mission  influences  him  in  his  dealing  with 
his  brethren.  But  they  did  not  recognize  it. 
The  fact  that  it  was  his  rejection  hy  his 
brethren  which  drove  him  out,  not  the  anger 
of  the  Egyptians  in  the  first  place,  is  the 
point  of  Stephen's  argument  in  adducing  his 
example.  him  that  did  the  wrong] 

literally,  the  wicked  person — so  in  rcff. 
14.  intendest]  Ileb.  sayest — so  in  refF. 
15.]  The  king  is  named  by  his  title :  it  is  not 
said  whetlier  it  was  the  same  under  whom 
Moses  was  born.  On  tlie  (in  my  estimation) 
insoluble  difticulty  occasioned  by  the  expres- 
sion in  Ileb.  xi.  27,  "By  faith  he  forsook 
Egypt,  not  fearing  the  anger  of  the  king," 
see  note  there.  It  is  very  diflicult  to 

say  what  land  of  Midian  is  meant.  For 
the  Midianites  with  whom  we  have  been 
hitherto  acquainted  in  the  sacred  story  dwelt 


east  of  Palestine,  and  traded  with  their 
caravans  through  Palestine  to  Egypt :  com- 
pare Gen.  XXV.  1 — 4  ;  xxxvii.  28,  36.  And 
we  afterwards  learn  of  tliem  that  they,  with 
the  Amalckites  and  children  of  the  East, 
ravaged  the  land  of  Israel,  Judg.  vi.  3  :  we 
have  them  in  alliance  with  the  Moahites, 
Num.  xxii.  4,  7;  xxv.  1,  6,  17,  18,  wdiere 
Moses,  then  on  the  plains  of  Moah,  is  com- 
manded to  smite  them  :  see  also  Num.  xxxi. 
1,  Josh.  xiii.  21,  and  Gen.  xxxvi.  25.  If 
therefore  this  Midian  be  a  portion  of  the 
better  known  land  bearing  that  name,  we 
must  seek  it  on  the  East  of  the  Red  Sea  and 
of  the  Sinaitic  peninsula.  And  this  is  con- 
firmed by  the  fact  that  Hobab,  Moses'  brother- 
in-law,  expressed  his  wish  to  leave  the  camp 
and  regain  his  own  home,  at  the  point  where 
Israel  was  leaving  Sinai  and  marching  N. 
Eastwards  to  Edom  ;  also  that  when  Moses 
is  leaving  Midian  on  his  return  to  Egypt,  he 
passes  Sinai  and  there  meets  Aaron  coming 
to  meet  him  from  Egypt,  ch.  iv.  27.  Sinai 
was  distinct  from  Midian,  as  ch.  xviii.  27 
and  the  already  cited  Num.  x.  30  prove. 
Knobel  goes  into  the  matter  at  some  length, 
and  adduces  interesting  evidence  from  the 
ancient  geographers,  Ptolemy  and  others,  to 
shew  tliat  these  Midianites  were  the  Marani 
or  Mariani,  on  the  southern  point  of  the 
Sinaitic  peninsula.  The  word  dwelt  is 

manifestly  an  anticipation,  and  the  subse- 
quent narrative  relates  not  to  an  incident 
happening  some  time  during  his  sojourn, 
but  to  his  first  arrival  in  the  neighbourhood, 
the  well,  not  a  well :  the  chief 
spring,  the  "  well  of  Midian."  16.]  The 

priest  of  Midian  appears  to  have  held  much 
the  same  position  as  Melchisedek  at  Salem 


12—23. 


EXODUS. 


227 


of  Midian  had  seven  daughters  :  and  they  came  and  drew 
n-ater,  and  filled  the  troughs  to  water  their  father's  flock. 

17  And  the  shepherds  came  and  drove  them  away  :  but 
Moses  stood  up  and  helped  them,  and  watered  their  flock. 

18  And  when  they  came  to  Reuel  their  father,  he  said, 
How  is  it  that  ye  are  come  so  soon  to  day  ?  ^^  and  they 
said,  An  Egj'ptian  delivered  us  out  of  the  hand  of  the 
shepherds,  and  also  drew  water  enough  for  us,  and  watered 
the  flock.  '^^  And  he  said  unto  his  daughters.  And  where 
is  he  ?  why  is  it  that  ye  have  left  the  man  ?  call  him, 
that  he  may  eat  bread,  ^i  And  Moses  was  content  to  dwell 
with  the  man :  and  he  gave  Moses  Zipporah  his  daughter. 
22  And  she  bare  him  a  son,  and  he  called  his  name  Ger- 
shom  [Exile]  :  for  he  said,  I  have  been  a  stranger  in  a 
strange  land.  23  ^  And  it  came  to  pass  in  process  of  time, 
that  the  king  of  Egypt  died  :  and  the  children  of  Israel 


(Gen.  xiv.  18).  "Whether  he  was  the  civil 
head  of  the  tribe  does  not  appear.  Tlie 
Scripture,  Joscphus,  and  Philo  designate 
him  only  as  their  priest :  later  legends  call 
him  their  chief  or  sheikh.  He  was  a  wor- 
shipper of  the  true  (Semitic)  God,  as  his 
name  Reu-el  testifies.  After  the  words, 
seven  daughters,  the  LXX.  add  "  keeinng 
the  flocks  of  their  father  Jothor.'"  Tiiis 
plainly  was  so,  and  the  ynung  maidens  in  the 
district  are  even  now  thus  employed,  as 
modern  travellers  testify.  17.]  These 

shepherds  were  slaves,  watching  the  flocks. 
We  here  see  the  same  love  and  carrying  out 
of  justice  which  seem  to  have  distinguished 
the  character  of  Moses,  and  broke  out  before 
when  he  slew  the  Egyptian,  ver.  11. 
18.]  The  priest  of  Midian  is  here  called 
Reuel  or  Raguel,  but  elsewhere  (ch.  iii.  1 ; 
iv.  18  ;  xviii.  1,  &c  )  Jethro.  Some  have 
supposed  that  Reuel  was  Jethro's  father; 
but  there  seems  no  need  for  this.  The 
LXX.  in  this  very  passage  (see  above)  use 
both  names  for  the  same  person.  And 
Knobel  has  pointed  out  that  Keuel  or 
Eaguel  (see  Gen.  xxxvi.  4 ;  1  Chron.  ix.  8  ; 
Tobit  vi.  10)  may  well  have  been  the  per- 
sonal name,  Jetlier  or  Jethro  that  of  otiice, 
signifying  as  it  6.ws  pre-eminence.  19-] 

They  took  Jloses  for  an  Egyptian  from  his 
dress,  or  his  speech,  or  perhaps  from  his  re- 
port of  himself.  20.]  Characteristic  of 
Eastern  hospitality.     The  benefactor  ought 


to  have  been  invited  in  to  partake  of  the 
family  meal :  on  the  expression  compare 
Gen.  xxxi.  54.  21,  f.]  An  agreement 

was  made,  i.  e.  that  Moses  should  remain, 
probably  serving  Jethro,  as  Jacob  did  Laban. 
And  the  social  result  was  the  same  :  he 
married  Jethro's  daughter.  Knobel  sup- 
poses she  is  intended  by  the  Cushite 
(Ethiopian)  woman  in  Num.  xii,  1.  See 
there.  22.]  Notwithstanding  his  ap- 

parent settlement  in  the  tamily  of  Jethro, 
Moses  regards  his  sojourn  as  a  state  of 
banishment,  for  he  names  his  firstborn 
Exile.  He  sighs  after  his  own  people  and 
God's  covenant.  We  learn  from  ch.  iv.  21  tf. 
more  of  the  cause  of  this — that  Zipporah  his 
wife  had  no  sympathy  with  him  in  this  mat- 
ter. See,  on  the  naming  of  his  other  son, 
ch.  xviii.  4.  These  names  form  a  link  which 
keeps  the  life  of  Moses  continuous  through 
the  long  break  of  forty  years.  23—25.] 

These  verses  are  in  fact  the  introduction  to 
the  great  change  related  in  the  following 
chapter.  in  process  of  time  is  literally, 

in  these  many  days,  viz.  lioni  the  birth  of 
Moses  to  that  of  his  son  in  Midian. 
Whether  this  king  were  the  same  as  the  one 
mentioned  in  ch.  i.  8  f.  is  uncertain.  Pro- 
bably he  was  the  Pharaoh  from  whom  Moses 
fled.  This  new  king  was  the  Pharaoh  of  the 
Exodus.  On  his  accession  the  chddren  of 
Israel  had  reason  to  hope  for  a  change  in 
their  oppressed  condition,  in  which   hope, 


228 


EXODUS. 


11. 


XXX 

x.O.  Job 

XXX 

V.  4.  Ps. 

cxliv 

.3. 

1  Josh 

\iu.  2. 

Judg 
12 

.  xviii. 

m  ch. 

V.  27; 

xviii 

.5;  xxiv 

13. 

1  Kin£fs 

xix. 

8.     See 

sighed  by  reason  of  tlie  bondage,  and  tliey  cried,  and  tbeir 
cry  came  up  unto  God  by  reason  of  the  bondage.  ^4  ^iid 
God  beard  tbeir  groaning,  and  God  remembered  bis 
covenant  witb  Abraham,  with  Isaac,  and  with  Jacob,  ^o 
And  God  looked  upon  the  children  of  Israel,  and  God 
^had  respect  unto  them.  III.  i  Now  Moses  kept  the  flock 
of  Jethro  his  father  in  law,  the  priest  of  Midian  :  and  he 
led  the  flock  to  the  ^  back  of  the  desert,  and  came  to  the 
™  mountain  of  God,  even  to  Horeb.  ^  ^nc|  an  angel  of  Je- 
hovah appeared  unto  him  in  a  flame  of  fire  out  of  the 


however,  they  were  bitterly  disappointed. 
They  renewed  their  earnest  prayers  for  de- 
liverance, and  God  heard  them.  Compare 
Deut.  xxvi.  7.  The  last  words  are  literally, 
and  God  knew,  no  pronoun  t/ieyn  being 
expressed :  the  verb  is  used  ia  a  similar 
sense  in  ref. 

III.,  IV.      The  call  of  Moses  ;  his  return 
into  Egypt.  l.J  It  is  characteristic  of 

the  Sinaitic  peninsula,  that  only  the  flock 
of  Jethro  is  named  here  and  in  ch.  ii.  16, 
and  no  herds ;  there  being   no  fodder   for 
larger  cattle,  only  sheep    and   goats,   as.ses 
and  camels,  and  no  kine,  are  kept  in  Sinai. 
On   the   name   Jethro,  see    on    ch.  ii.   18. 
Jethro's  home  was  divided  from  Horeb  by 
desert.     And  Moses  crossed  to  the  back  part 
(as  spoken  of  from  Jethro's  home)   of  this 
desert,  and  came  to  Horeb.     This  would  be 
intelligible  if  Jethro  dwelt  near  the  present 
Eas  Mohammed,    at    the    S.    apex  of   the 
peninsula.      The  neighbourhood  of  Mount 
Sinai  was  fertile  and  abounding  with  springs 
(see  Stanley,   Sinai  and  Palestine,  p.   18), 
and  is  even  now  the  resort  of  the  Bedouin 
tribes  during  the  summer  heats.     Josephus 
describes    it    as    "  admirable    for    pasture, 
abounding  in  excellent  grass."     Ant.  ii.  12, 
1.     Stephen,  in  Acts  vii.  30,  describes  this 
as    happening    "  in    the    desert    of  Mount 
Sinai."     The  relation  of  the  names  Horeb 
and    Sinai   has   not   been   exactly   defined. 
Dean  Stanley's  account  is—"  1.  In  Exodus, 
Leviticus,    and   Numbers  Si7iai  is   always 
and   exclusively  used  for  the  scene  of  the 
giving  of  the  Law,   Horeb  being  only  used 
t^ice— for  the  scene  of  the  burning  bush 
and  of  the  striking  of  the  rock,  Exod.  iii. 
1 ;  xvii.   6,  are  doubtful ;    Exod.  xxxiii.  6 
is   ambiguous.     2.    In  Deuteronomy  Ho7-eb 
is  substituted  for  Sinai,  the  former  being 


always  used,  the  latter  never,  for  the  Moun- 
tain of  the  Law.     3.  In  the  Psalms  the  two 
are  used  indifferently  for  the  Mountain  of 
the  Law.     4.  In   1   Kings  xix.  8  it  is  im- 
possible to  determine  to  what  part,  if  to  any 
special  part,  Horeb  is  applied."     Sinai  and 
Palestine,  p.   29.      The  words  of  God  are 
omitted  by  the  LXX.     This  designation  is 
found  in  reff.,  and  doubtless  arose  from  the 
great  theocratic  significance  of  the  mountain 
in  after  times.     Knobel  regards  the  use  of 
the  phrase  as  a  mark  of  the  later  narrator, 
to  whom  he  refers  this  portion  of  the  history. 
But   at   the   same   time    he   acknowledges, 
judging  from  vv.  5,  18,  that  Horeb  was  be- 
fore this  a  holy  place  of  pilgrimage  to  the 
ancient  Arabs.     ,       2.]    an  angel  of  Je- 
hovah is  very  shortly  shewn  to  bi-  God  Him- 
self.    We  have  before  had  examples  of  this, 
and  shall  have  again  :     see    Gen.    xvi.    7, 
13;  xxi.   17,  18;  xxii.  11,  12;    xxxi.  11, 
13;  xlviii.   15,   16;  ch.  xiii.   31,  compared 
with  xiv.  19  ;  xxiii.   20—23;  Judg.   vi.   11 
—  16;    xiii.    20  —  23;    Hosea   xii.    4,   5. 
Knobel  remarks  upon  this,  that  though  in 
most  cases,  and  especially  in  the  later  0.  T. 
books,  the  angel  apperrs  as  separate  from 
God  and  a  being  of  a  different  kind,  in  these 
places  of  the  pre-captivjty  books  he  seems 
to  be  one  with  God  Himself,  the  Hebrew 
word  for  angel  being  in  its  original  meaning, 
work  or  service,  and  then  a  delegate  or  mes- 
senger, the  bush  appears  to  be  used 
much  as  it  is  now  with  regard  to  the  wild 
parts,  e.  g.  of  Australia;    the   coppice,    or 
thorn-thicket.  The  name  of  the  busli,  Seneh, 
which   probably   has  given  its   appellation 
to  Sinai  itself,  is   that  of   the  wild   thorny 
acacia  {Mimosa  nilotica)  which  everywhere 
abounds  still  in  the  peninsula.     The  fire  is 
the  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence:  see  ch. 


24— III.  8. 


EXODUS. 


229 


midst  of  the  busli :  and  ho  looked,  and,  Lchohl,  the  hush 
"  burned  with  fire,  and  the  bush  was  not  "  consumed.  '^ 
And  Moses  said,  I  will  now  Pturn  aside,  and  see  this 
great  sight,  why  the  bush  is  not  burnt.  ^  And  when 
Jehovah  saw  that  he  turned  aside  to  see,  God  called 
unto  him  out  of  the  midst  of  the  bush,  and  said,  Closes, 
Moses.  And  he  said,  Here  am  I.  ^  And  he  said.  Draw 
not  nigh  hither:  ''put  off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet, 
for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  is  holy  ground.  ^ 
And  he  said,  I  am  the  God  of  thy  ^"  father,  the  God  of 
Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob.  And 
]\Ioses  hid  his  face  ;  for  he  was  afraid  to  look  upon  God. 
"^  *i\  And  Jkhovah  said,  Seeing  I  have  seen  the  atiiictiou 
of  my  people  which  are  in  Egypt,  and  have  heard  their 
cry  by  reason  of  their  taskmasters ;  for  I  know  their  sor- 
rows ;  ^  and  I  am  come  down  to  deliver  them  out  of  the 
hand  of  the  Egyptians,  and  to  bring  them  up  out  of  that 
land  unto  a  good  land  and  a  large,  unto  a  *  land  flowing 
with  milk  and   honey ;    unto    the  place  of  the   Canaan- 


n  Deut.  IT.  U  ; 

V.  23. 
0  Hi.  cattn  ; 


q  Josh.  r.  15. 


r  =  oh.  XV.  2  ; 
xviii.4.    See 
2  KinRs  XX. 
6.    'I  (  hrua. 
xxi.  12. 


3.      Lev.  XX. 
24.     Num. 

xiii.  27  ;  xiT. 
8;  xvi.  U. 
Deut.  vi.  3  ; 
xi.  9  ;  xxvi. 
9,  15 ;  xxvii. 
3  1  xxxi.  20. 
Josh.  V.  6. 
Jer.  xi.  ■>; 
xxxii.  22. 
E/.ck.  XX.  6, 
14. 


xix.  18;  xxiv.  17;  1  Kings  xix.  12;  Ezck. 
i.  27,  28  ;  viii.  2  (ileb.  x.  27 ;  xii.  29,  &c.). 
See  also  Geu.  xv.  17;  Isa.  iv,  5;  also  ch. 
xiii.  21,  where  Jehovah  went  before  Israel 
iu  a  pillar  ot  fire.  In  the  case  before  us  the 
fire  was  nut  a  burning,  only  a  shining,  iianie; 
the  thorn-bush  was  seen  among  aud  through 
it,  but  was  not  consumed  by  it.  The  sym- 
bolizing interpreters  have  seen  in  the  tiery 
thorn-bush  an  emblem  of  Israel  in  the  fur- 
nace of  Egypt,  but  not  consumed,  Ps.  cxviii. 
18.  But  this  seems  a  confusion  of  figure. 
Far  better,  if  we  must  pursue  into  symbol- 
ism, take  the  direct  significance — Israel  the 
lowly  thorn-bush— the  tire,  the  Divine  pre- 
sence, sparing  to  consume.  Kalisch  reminds 
us  that  the  Scottisli  Church  has  chosen  for 
its  emblem  the  burning  bush,  with  the  motto 
"nee  tamen  cousumebatur"  (and  yet  it  was 
not  consumed).  3.]    The   vision    was 

seen  beside  the  way  or  mountain  i)ath  which 
Moses  was  taking.  He  had  to  turn  aside 
(retf.)  to  approarh  the  bush.  4.j  The 

practice  nf  removing  the  sandals  on  entering 
sacred  places,  and  even  houses  on  visits  of 
courtesy,  has  ever  been,  and  still  is,  general 
in  the  East  (see  Kiiobel  anil  Keil  here).  The 
same  command,  iu  almost  the  same  words,  is 
given  to  Joshua  in  ref.     The  place  was  holy 


ground,  onaccount  of  its  vicinity  to  the  Divine 
presence.  6  ]  Tlie  words  thy  father, 

as  in  retf.,  are  to  be  taken  colleetivi'ly,  as  re- 
presenting the  wiiole  of  the  patriarchs  with 
whom  God's  covenant  was  made.  It  will  be 
remembered  that  our  Lord  adduces  this  self- 
designation  of  God  against  the  Sadducecs, 
as  proving  that  tlie  fathers  were  still  living 
unto  God.  It  may  serve  as  a  caution  against 
the  driving  everything  into  theological  sym- 
bolism, to  state  that  some  ancient  and 
some  modern  commentators  see  the  doctrine 
of  the  Blessed  Trinity  in  the  "  threefold  " 
mention  of  God  in  this  verse.  But,  first, 
the  mention  is  fourfold;  and,  secondly, 
such  an  allusion,  if  consistently  carried  out, 
would  lead  to  an  inference  respecting  the 
three  patriarciis  distinctively,  as  preposterous 
as  it  is  unwarranted. 

Moses  hid  his  face,  as  did  Elijah  on  the 
same  spot  (1  Kings  xix.  13),  and  as  do  even 
tlie  seraphim  ministering  round  the  tlirone 
(Isa.  vi.  2).  Compare  also  Dent,  xviii.  16, 
and  Acts  xxii.  11.  7— 10.]  I  am  come 

down — anthropologically  said,  as  in  Gen.  xi. 
5.  This  is  the  first  designation  of  the  land 
of  Canaan  in  these  terms  of  high  laudation, 
which  are  hereinafter  frequently  repeated  : 
see  retf.     Knobel  states  that  the  expression 


230  EXODUS.  III. 

ites,  and  the  Hittites,  and  the  Amorites,  and  the  Periz- 
zites,  and  the  Hivites,  and  the  Jebusites.  ^  And  now, 
'xvui.V;"'  behold,  the  *  cry  of  the  children  of  Israel  is  *come  unto 
me :  and  I  have  also  seen  the  oppression  wherewith  the 
Egyptians  oppress  them.  10  Come  now  therefore,  and  I 
will  send  thee  unto  Pharaoh,  that  thou  mayest  bring 
forth  my  people  the  children  of  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  il 
^  And  Moses  said  unto  God,  Who  am  I,  that  I  should 
go  unto  Pharaoh,  and  that  I  shoidd  bring  forth  the 
children  of  Israel  out  of  Egypt  ?  12  ^^^  ]^g  g^id,  Cer- 
tainly I  will  be  with  thee ;  and  this  shall  he  a  token 
unto  thee,  that  I  have  sent  thee :  When  thou  hast 
brought  forth  the  people  out  of  Egypt,  ye  shall  serve  God 
upon  this  mountain,  i^  And  Moses  said  unto  God,  Be- 
hold, u-Jien  I  come  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  and  shall 
say  unto  them.  The  God  of  your  fathers  hath  sent  me  unto 
you  ;  and  they  shall  say  to  me,  What  is  his  name  ?  what 
shall  I  say  unto  them  ?  ^^  And  God  said  unto  Moses,  I 
AM  THAT  I  AM  :  and  he  said.  Thus  shalt  tliou  say  unto 
the  children  of  Israel,  I  AM  hath  sent  me  unto  you.  ^^ 
And  God  said  moreover  unto  Moses,  Thus  shalt  thou  say 

never  occurs  in  the  original  docuraent,  but  pledge  required  faith,  as  well  as  to  obey  the 

only  in  the  supplemental  narrations.     The  command ;  but  in  our  weakness  we  are  more 

expression  is  proverbial  rather  than  literal,  apt  to  gird  ourselves  to  great  and  indefinite 

The  chief  glory   of   Palestine  consisted  in  duties,  when  they  are  bound  on  to  definite 

corn,  oil,  and  wine,  which  can  only  be  pro-  and  concrete  facts:  and  He  who  gave  this 

verbially  included  in  the  words.     By  honey  token,  knew  what  was  in  man.              13,  f.] 

some  understand  the  sweet  juice  of  the  grape,  The  Egyptians  had  various  gods,  and  Israel, 

as  in  Gen.  xliii.  11,  where  see  note.     Bat  if  long  used  to  their  practices,  would  be  sure 

the   words   ai'e    proverbial,  it   may  not  be  to  enquire  after  the  name  of  tlie  God  of  their 

necessary  so  strictly  to  define  them.     The  fathers  whose  messenger  Moses  was ;   how 

six  nations  at  that  time  inhabiting  Canaan  was  HE  to  be  named  to  tliem  .'             14.] 

are  specified  :  see  Gen.  x.  15  ;  xv.  20,  and  God,  in  this  holy  reply,  asserts  and  explains 

notes.              9.]  the  cry  ....  is  come  :  see  the  sacred  name  Jehovah,  by  which  He  was 

refF.             11,  12.]  ]\loscs,  who  once  claimed  not  now  first  known  :  compare  Gen.  xv.  7, 

to  be  a   ruler  and  diliverer,  has,  remarks  and  note  on  cli.  vi.  3.     That  name  is  ex- 

Keil,  learnt  humility  in  the  school  of  Midian,  plained  to  have  its  root  in  the  eternal  self- 

and  mistrusts  himself  for  so  great  a  mission,  existence  of  God.     God  is  that  which  He  is; 

Rather,  it  is  the  Divine  presence  which  has  He  is  the  eternal  self-existent  one.    And  this 

taught  him  to  "abhor"  himself.  Job  xlii.  5,  simplicity  of  His  self-existence  is  to  be  the 

6.  Tiie  same  self-depreciation  as  a  messenger  main  point  of  His  designation  to  Israel:  say 

to  Pliaraoh  is  found  again  ch.  vi.  12.  to  them,  I  AM  (Ehyeh)  hath  sent  me.  And 

12.]  The  pledge  was  redeemed  by  the  long  15.]  Tliis  root  of  the  Divine  name  is 

sojourn  of  Israel  at  tlie  base  of  Sinai,  the  to  be  further  specified   in  the  name  itself, 

establishing  of  God's  covenant  with   them  Jehovah.     The  very  form  of  the  command 

there,  and  the  setting  up  there  of  the  taber-  may  serve  to  shew  that  this  sacred  name  was 

nacle  of  God's  presence.     To  believe  in  the  no  new  one.     "Jehovah  the  God  of  your 


9—18. 


EXODUS. 


2;ji 


unto  the  children  of  Israel,  Jehovah,  the  God  of  your 
fathers,  the  God  of  Abraluim,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the 
God  of  Jacob,  hath  sent  me  unto  you :  this  is  my  name  for 
ever,  and  this  is  my  memorial  unto  all  generations.  ^^  Go, 
and  gather  the  elders  of  Israel  together,  and  say  unto  them, 
Jehovah,  the  God  of  your  fathers,  the  God  of  Abraham, 
of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob,  appeared  unto  me,  saying,  I  have 
surely  regarded  you,  and  that  which  is  done  to  you  in 
Egvpt:  ^7  and  I  have  said,  I  will  bring  you  up  out  of  the 
alHiction  of  Egypt  unto  the  land  of  the  Canaanites,  and 
the  Hittites,  and  the  Amorites,  and  the  Perizzites,  and  the 
Hivites,  and  the  Jebusites,  unto  a  land  flowing  with  milk 
and  honey.  ^^  And  they  shall  hearken  to  thy  voice  :  and 
thou  shalt  come,  thou  and  the  elders  of  Israel,  unto  the  king 
of  Egypt,  and  ye  shall  say  unto  him,  Jehovah  the  God  of 
the  Hebrews  hath  "  met  with  us  :  and  now  let  us  go,  we 


I  ch.  W.  24;  T. 
3.    Num. 
xxiii.  3,4,  16 


fathers"  was,  of  necessity,  an  appeal  to 
previous,  though  perhaps  too  mucli  forgotten, 
knowledge  of  Him  who  was  thus  announced 
to  them.  No  strange  new  name  would 
have  recalled  to  them  the  God  of  their 
fathers.  By  the  closing  words  of  the  verse, 
this  name  is  to  be  the  enduring  appellation 
of  God  to  the  Jewish  people.  It  is  well 
known  that  the  Jews  do  not,  aud  have  not 
for  ages,  pronounced  this  name,  and  that 
the  very  vowels  with  which  it  is  to  be 
enunciated  are  matter  of  dispute,  having 
been  lost  and  replaced  by  others  from  the 
word  Adonai,  Lord,  wliich  Uiey  use  instead 
of  tills  name.  Our  English  version,  by 
following  that  example,  has, occasioned  much 
confusion  and  loss  of  force  in  passages  like 
the  present,  where  it  is  of  importance. 

Observe,  that  this  saying  of  God  to  Moses 
stamps  for  all  ages  the  Unity  and  IVrsonality 
of  God  as  the  centre  of  belief  respecting 
Ilim.  It  is  beside  the  scope  of  this  com- 
mentary to  enter  into  speculations  respecting 
the  name  itself.  They  will  be  J'ouud  in 
abundance  in  Knobel's  commentary,  and  a 
full  summary  in  Mr.  Wriglifs  article  in 
the  Biblical  Diet.  16.]  The  elders 

appear  to  have  been  the  heads  (or  sheikhs) 
of  the  houses  in  the  tribes.  We  meet  with 
them  in  ch.  iv.  29  ;  xii.  21 ;  xix.  7,  and  in 
all  these  places  as  the  representatives  of  the 
whole  people.  They  accompany  Moses,  or 
Moses  aud  Aaron,  on  weighty  occasions,  as 


in  ver.  18  here,  ch.  xvii.  5,  6;  xviii.  12; 
xxiv.  1,  9.  Their  existence  and  office  seems 
to  infer  an  organization  in  Israel,  which 
must  have  arisen  in  Egypt  before  the  days 
of  their  oppression  begaa.  18.]  In  the 

subseciucnt  history  it  does  not  ajjpear  that 
the  elders  of  Israel  ever  accompanied  Moses 
and  Aaron  into  I'haraoh's  presence. 
hath  met  with  us]  i.  e.  specially  appeared 
to  us,  and  given  us  intimation  of  that 
which  follows.  There  certainly  is  a  diffi- 
culty about  the  terms  of  this  message  to 
Pharaoh,  hardly  to  be  got  over,  as  some 
commentators,  e.  g.  Keil,  Kalisch,  "Words- 
worth, &c.,  attempt  to  do.  Their  explana- 
tion is,  that  God,  foreseeing  the  hard- 
heartedness  of  Pharaoh,  instructs  them  to 
approach  him  first,  not  with  a  demand  of 
dismission  from  his  land,  which  he  would  be 
sure  to  refuse,  but  with  the  more  moderate 
one  of  a  three  days'  journey  to  saciifice  : 
and  that  when  this  had  been  proffered, 
conceded,  and  then  the  permission  retracted, 
God  instructed  Moses  and  Aaron  to  make 
the  fuller  demand  of  entire  dismission  (ch. 
vi.  10).  Unfortunately,  the  facts  do  not 
bear  out  this.  Long  after  ch.  vi.  10,  the 
three  days'  journey  was  still  demanded ;  and 
when  Pharaoh  conceded  (ch.  x.  8  —  11)  all 
that  that  request  really  included,  but  not  all 
that  the  ulterior  design  required,  the  con- 
cession was  rejected.  The  whole  proceeding 
surely  must  tend  to  confirm  in  the  ingenuous 


232 


EXODUS. 


III. 


13,  and  very 
frequently. 
feo/'row^Exod. 
xxii.  14.     2 


beseech  thee,  three  days'  journey  into  the  wilderness,  that 
we  may  sacrifice  to  Jehovah  our  God.  ^^  ^  And  I  am  sure 
that  the  king  of  Egypt  will  not  let  you  go,  no,  not  by  a 
mighty  hand.  20  And  I  will  stretch  out  my  hand,  and 
smite  Egypt  with  all  my  wonders  which  I  will  do  in  the 
midst  thereof :  and  after  that  he  will  let  you  go.  ^i  And 
I  will  give  this  people  favour  in  the  sight  of  the  Egyptians: 
and  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that,  when  ye  go,  ye  shall  not 
go  emj)ty :  ^2  \y•^^^^  every  woman  shall  "^  ask  of  her  neigh- 
bour, and  of  her  that  sojourneth  in  her  house,  jewels  of 
silver^  and  jewels  of  gold,  and  raiment :  and  ye  shall  put 


mind  the  impression  that  was  before  made 
by  the  history  of  the  midwives,  that  we  are 
not  here  in  the  region  of  what  is  now  recog- 
nized and  upheUl  as  the  morality  of  Chris- 
tians. Those  who  are  determined  to  evade 
this  conclusion  in  the  reading  of  the  0.  T. 
are  compelled  to  have  recourse  to  those 
shifts  and  evasions  of  special  pleading  which 
more  than  anything  serve  the  cause  of  un- 
belief. The  futility  of  the  account  attempted 
here  is  manifest;  for  if  "God  knew  that 
Pharaoh  would  not  grant  to  the  Israelites 
even  that  just  and  moderate  request,  and 
that  by  refusing  this,  his  pride  and  obstinacy 
would  become  so  manifest  to  all,  that  every- 
body must  acknowledge  the  judgments  and 
punishments  inflicted  upon  Pharaoh  as  just 
and  fully  merited  "  (Kalisch),  it  might  in  a 
moment  be  replied  on  J'haraoh's  behalf,  that 
he  was  not  deceived  by  the  milder  request, 
but  refused  it  in  his  wisdom,  seeing  behind 
it  the  design  of  final  departure.  In  this  way 
do  such  interpretations  uuilo  their  own  work. 
19.]  It  might  be  added  to  the  fore- 
going observations,  that  in  the  Divine  words 
themselves  no  such  issue  as  the  failure  or 
success  of  the  mere  scheme  of  a  three  days' 
journey  to  sacrifice  is  thought  of:  the  "  let- 
ting them  go  "  is  throughout  used  of  their 
final  dismissal  and  of  nothing  else.  The 
simple  account  to  be  given  by  the  honest 
Scripture  student,  however  it  may  offend 
our  more  elevated  and  enlightened  views  of 
morality,  is  this,  that  God  has  in  view,  and 
speaks  of  to  Moses,  the  ultimate  and  entire 
deliverance  of  Israel  from  Egypt ;  that  He 
was  pleased  to  sanction,  and  even  to  order, 
Moses  to  obtain  this  deliverance  under  the 
pretext  of  a  three  days'  journey  to  sacrifice. 
Further  we   need   not   search.      This    was 


God's  will  then :  we  know  His  will  now.  If 
Scripture  itself  asserts  the  imperfection  of 
the  former  dispensation,  why  should  we  be 
restlessly  anxious  evermore  to  disprove  that 
imperfection .'  Knobel  regards  the  idea  of 
the  three  days'  journey  as  peculiar  to  the 
later  narrator,  and  maintains  that  the 
original  history  knew  only  of  the  demand  of 
entire  dismission  as  in  ch.  vi.  10.  The  last 
words  of  the  verse  are  variously  rendered. 
Knobel,  with  the  LXX.,  Vulgate,  Luther, 
de  Wette,  and  others,  give  them  "  unless  by 
a  mighty  hand,"  i.  e.  without  the  inttuence 
of  God's  mighty  judgments;  but  Kali.sch  and 
other  Hebraists  maintain  that  the  Hebrew 
word  introducing  the  clause  cannot  mean 
"  wilcss,"  but  must  be  rendered,  as  in  A.  V., 
no,  not,  or  not  even.  In  support  of 
this  latter  it  may  be  remembered  that,  even 
after  all  the  plagues,  Pharaoh  retracted  his 
permission  when  he  saw  that  the  Israelites 
were  gone.  21,  22.]  Here  again   our 

commentators  are  much  exercised  to  justify 
the  morality  of  the  Divine  announcement. 
Surely  they  might  have  spareil  tlicmselves 
the  trouble.  Tlie  borrowing  and  lending 
took  place  not  in  a  strict  and  proper  sense  ; 
but  the  oppressed  people  spoiled  their  op- 
pressors by  means  of  the  anxiety  of  the  latter 
to  get  rid  of  them  under  the  pressure  of  dire 
calamity.  And  this  is  shewn  by  the  fact 
that  the  verb  rendered  in  the  A.  V.  '■'■bor- 
row" has  not  necessarily  this  meaning.  It 
simjdy  means  ask,  demand,  and  is  so  ren- 
dered in  more  than  a  hundred  places  where 
it  occurs  (see  refi'.),  and  only  in  very  few  can 
the  signification  of  borrowing  or  lending  be 
held,  and  even  then  the  general  meaning  of 
ask,  including  the  particular  case  of  borrow- 
ing, will  suffice.     It  was  a  borrowing  with- 


19— I Y.  7, 


EXODUS. 


233 


ihem  upon  your  sons,  and  upon  your  daughters  ;  and  ye 
shall  spoil  the  Egyptians.  IV.  ^  And  Moses  answered 
and  said,  But,  behold,  they  will  not  believe  me,  nor  hearken 
unto  my  voice :  for  they  will  say,  Jehovah  hath  not  ap- 
peared unto  thee.  ^  ^j^^  Jehovah  said  unto  him,  AVhat 
is  that  in  thine  hand?  And  he  said,  A  ^rod.  ^  And  he  said. 
Cast  it  on  the  ground.  And  he  cast  it  on  the  ground,  and 
it  became  a  serpent ;  and  Moses  fled  from  before  it.  ^  And 
Jehovah  said  unto  !Moses,  Put  forth  thine  hand,  and  take 
it  by  the  tail.  And  he  put  forth  his  hand,  and  caught  it, 
and  it  became  a  rod  in  his  hand  :  ^  that  they  may  believe 
that  Jehovah,  the  God  of  their  fathers,  the  God  of  Abra- 
ham, the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob,  hath  ap- 
peared unto  thee.  ^  ^  And  Jehovah  said  furthermore  unto 
him.  Put  now  thine  hand  into  th}^  bosom.  And  he  put  his 
hand  into  his  bosom  :  and  when  he  took  it  out,  behold,  his 
hand  was  leprous  as  ^  snow.       ^  And  he  said,  Put  thine 


'  Exod.  Ac, 
freq.  1  Siini 
xiv.  -n,  43. 


:  Num.  xii.  10. 
2  Kings  V. 27. 


out  intent  to  return,  and  a  lendinj^  without 
hope  of  receiving  again.  When  Knobel,  on 
the  other  side,  tries  to  sliew  that  the  bor- 
rowinj:^  was  for  the  pretended  sacrifice,  that 
tlie  people  might  oiler  in  festal  raiment,  we 
replj-  that  at  the  last  dire  catastrophe  there 
is  no  question  of  the  pretended  sacritice. 
Pharaoh,  when  he  comes  to  himself  again 
after  the  terror,  has  no  idea  that  Israel  is 
encamped  three  days  off  in  the  wilderness 
and  will  again  return  ;  but  at  once  says,  ch. 
xiv.  5,  "  Why  have  we  done  this,  that  tee 
have  let  Israel  (/o  from  serving  us  /  "  On 

ye  shall  put  them  upon  your  sons,  and  upon 
your  daughters,  Knobel  remarks,  that  the 
children  of  both  sexes  of  the  Fellahs  in 
Egypt  to  this  day  go  naked,  and  the  same 
probably  was  the  case  with  the  Hebrews  as 
a  servile  race.  The  spoiling  of  Egypt  was 
but  the  right  of  Israel,  who  had  been  so 
long  spoiled  of  just  wages  by  servile  oppres- 
sion. 

IV.  1 — 9.]  The  distrust  of  Hoses,  and 
God's  reassm'ance  of  him  by  two  miracidous 
signs,  and  promise  of  a  third.  The  dis- 
trustful assertion  of  Moses  was  in  fact  a 
questioning  of  the  very  words  of  God  (ch. 
iii.  18),  '■^  they  shall  hearken  to  thy  voice." 
But  God  condescended  to  his  infirmity  and  re- 
assured him.  When  his  distrust  reaches  its 
height  at  ver.  10,  he  earns  a  sharp  rebuke 


and  a  peremptory  command.  The  distrust 
in  this  case  was  prompted  by  the  fact  of 
Israel's  degraded  and  a|  parently  God-for- 
saken state,  and  the  withdrawal  of  Divine 
appearances    since     the    patriarchal    days. 

2.]  The  rod  of  iloscs  was  perhaps 
his  sheplierd's  statf.  The  word,  in  its  sig- 
nification of  branch,  is  that  commonly  used 
to  designate  the  tribes  of  Israel.  It  is  not 
the  word  used  for  the  sluplierd's  rod  or  staff 
in    Ps.    xxiii.    4.  3,  4.]    There    was 

doubtless  symbol  here.  The  rod  was  em- 
blematic of  Moses'  power  of  ruling  or  guid- 
ing. This  power  becomes  to  him  a  danger, 
as  he  apprehended  a  danger  which  he  was 
even  now  fleeing  from  ;  but  when  grasped,  it 
becomes  a  rod  in  his  hand, — leads  him  on  to 
new  degrees  of  leadership  and  power.  Such 
might  be  the  effect  of  the  miracle  on  tlie 
mind  of  Moses  himself;  on  the  peoi)le  it 
would  at  once  produce  the  belief  required. 

6.]  The  form  of  the  verse,  in  the 
second  per.son,  shews  that  it  continues  the 
words  of  the  Lord  from  the  last  command, 
after  a  pause  for  the  effect  of  Moses'  obedi- 
ence to  that  command.  This  sign  was  ex- 
hibited not  only  to  the  Israelites  (ver.  30), 
but  also  to  Pharaoh,  ch.  vii.  10,  if.  6,  7.] 
The  second  sign;  leading  him  to  see  that 
God,  who  could  delegate  to  him  the  power 
of  producing  and  healing  the  deadly  disease 


234 


EXODUS. 


lY. 


hand  into  tty  bosom  again.  And  lie  put  his  hand  into  his 
bosom  again  ;  and  pkicked  it  out  of  his  bosom,  and,  be- 
hold, it  was  turned  again  as  his  other  flesh.  ^  And  it  shall 
come  to  pass,  if  they  will  not  believe  thee,  neither  hearken 
to  the  y  voice  of  the  first  sign,  that  they  will  believe  the 
y  voice  of  the  latter  sign.  ^  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  if 
they  will  not  believe  also  these  two  signs,  neither  hearken 
unto  thy  voice,  that  thou  shalt  take  of  the  water  of  the 
river,  and  pour  it  upon  the  dry  land:  and  the  water  which 
thou  takest  out  of  the  river  shall  become  blood  upon  the 
dry  land.  ^^  ^  And  Moses  said  unto  Jehovah,  I  beseech 
thee,  0  my  Lord,  I  am  not  a  man  of  words,  neither  here- 
tofore, nor  since  thou  hast  spoken  unto  thy  servant,  for  I 
am  slow  of  mouth,  and  slow  of  tongue.  ^^  And  Jehovah 
said  unto  him.  Who  hath  made  man's  mouth  ?  or  who 
maketh  the  dumb,  or  deaf,  or  the  seeing,  or  the  blind  ? 
have  not  I  Jehovah  ?  ^2  J^ow  therefore  go,  and  I  will  be 
with  thy  mouth,  and  teach  thee  what  thou  shalt  say.  ^^ 
And  he  said,  0  my  Lord,  send,  I  pray  thee,  by  the  hand 


of  leprosy,  avrs  fully  able  to  empower  him 
for  the  work  which  He  required.  Keil, 
guided  by  the  words  of  Moses,  Num.  xi.  11, 
12,  understnnds  the  symbolism  to  refer  to 
Israel,  first  in  its  de<jraded  state,  then  in  its 
state  of  liberation  by  Moses.  Bp.  "Words- 
worth unites  both  views.  The  white  leprosy 
(reff.)  was  that  form  with  which  the  He- 
brews were  best  acquainted  and  the  most 
difficult  of  cure.  See  art.  "Leper"  in  Bibli- 
cal Diet.  8,  9.]  The  third  sign,  kept 
in  reserve  in  case  of  the  failure  of  the  two 
others  to  convince  the  people.  If  Moses 
was  endowed  with  the  power  to  turn  the 
Egyptians'  boast,  the  salutary  and  life-givin» 
water  of  the  Nile,  into  blood,  it  was  a  pledge 
that  his  delegMted  power  should  prevail  over 
all  the  power  of  Egypt.  See  this  sign  ex- 
panded into  a  general  plague,  ch.  vii.  10,  flf. 
the  voice  of  the  first  ...  of  the 
latter  sign,  i.  e.  the  testimony,  or  intent, 
of  the  signs.  10 — 17.]  Moses'  distrust 
is  not  yet  overcome.  His  personal  gifts  are 
not  in  his  estimation  equal  to  the  mission 
with  which  he  is  entrusted.  And  especially 
in  the  matter  of  speech.     The  word  rendered 

0  in  A.  V.  is  said  to  be  a  contracted  form  of 

1  pray  thee,   or  I  beseech  thee ;  and  its 
meaning  to  be  equivalent  to  "  May  it  please 


thee," — a  form  of  deprecation  of  displeasure, 
which  Moses  anticipated.  heretofore  is 

literally  yesterday  or  the  day  before.  The 
slow  of  mouth  and  slow  of  tongue  seems  to 
point  to  some  natural  defect  in  speech. 
Neither  by  nature  was  Moses  an  apt  speaker, 
nor  had  this  infirmity  been  removed  since 
God  had  begun  to  speak  to  him.  The  diffi- 
culty of  expression  under  which  he  physically 
laboured  continued  even  in  making  these  re- 
plies to  the  Divine  vision.  Only  thus  it 
seems  to  me  can  we  understand  his  words ; 
a  mere  incapacity  for  eloquence  would  not 
thus  be  spoken  of,  as  unaffected  by  the  short 
time  which  had  elapsed  during  his  confer- 
ence with  God.  11,  12.]  By  this  re- 
buke, accompanied  with  a  promise  of  Divine 
help,  every  reasonable  ground  of  Moses' 
backwardness  was  taken  away.  And  now 
he  is  driven  to  the  real  reason  of  it  —  his 
want  of  will  to  undertake  the  Divine  mission. 
13.]  The  request  is  equivalent  to 
praying  God  to  send  by  some  other  tlian 
himself.  Some  have  seen  a  mystic  prophetic 
sense  in  the  words,  and  held  them  to  mean 
that  God  should  send  Him  whom  He  was 
about  some  day  to  send,  viz.  the  Messiah, 
to  M'ork  this  deliverance.  14.]  God's 
anger  is   kindled  by  the  backwardness   of 


8—20. 


EXODUS. 


235 


of  him  u-Jiom  thou  wilt  send.  !■*  And  the  anger  of  Jehovah 
was  kijidled  against  Moses,  and  he  said,  Do  I  not  know 
Aaron  the  Levite  thy  brother,  that  he  can  speak  well  ? 
And  also,  behold,  he  cometh  forth  to  meet  thee  :  and  when 
he  seeth  thee,  he  will  be  glad  in  his  heart.  ^^  And  thou  shalt 
speak  unto  him,  and  put  the  words  in  his  mouth  :  and  I 
will  be  with  th}'  mouth,  and  with  his  mouth,  and  will  teach 
you  what  ye  shall  do.  ^^  And  he  shall  be  thy  spokesman 
unto  the  people :  and  he  shall  be,  ecen  he  shall  be  to  thee 
instead  of  a  mouth,  and  thou  shalt  be  to  him  instead  of 
God.  17  And  thou  shalt  take  this  rod  in  thine  hand, 
wherewith  thou  shalt  do  the  signs.  '^^  ^  And  Moses  went 
and  returned  to  Jcthro  his  father  in  law,  and  said  unto 
him,  Let  me  go,  I  pray  thee,  and  return  unto  my  brethren 
which  are  in  Eg3'pt,  and  see  whether  they  be  yet  alive. 
And  Jethro  said  to  Moses,  Go  in  peace.  ^^  And  Je- 
hovah said  unto  Moses  in  Midian,  Go,  return  into  Egypt: 
for  all  the  men  are  dead  which  sought  thy  life.  20  ^\^nd 
Moses  took  his  wife  and  his  sons,  and  made  them  to  ride 
upon  ^-  the  ass,  and  he  returned  to  the  land  of  Egypt :  and 


KingbXiii.  13. 


IMoscs  to  undertake  the  mission.  It  is  diffi- 
cult to  sii)'  why  Aaron  should  he  dosii^nated 
the  Levite,  seeinji^  that  Moses  was  a  Levite 
also,  and  that  the  ofBcial  meaning  of  a 
Levite  was  not  yet  assigned,  and,  had  it 
been,  would  not  have  furnished  the  reason 
of  which  we  are  in  search.  Kalisch  seems 
to  come  nearest  to  giving  it — that  the  ex- 
pressitm  is  perliaps  used  as  more  special  and 
extendid  designation  of  4-aron,  as  in  the 
case  of  "thy  son,  thy  only  one  •whom  thou 
lovest,  Isaac."  But  this  hardly  seems 
enough.  16.]  On  this  is  grounded  the 

close  relation  between  Moses  and  Aaron, 
which  we  find  subsisting  throughout. 
17,  ff.]  It  were  useless  to  deny  with  some  of 
the  commentators,  that  there  are  in  this  nar- 
rative abundant  traces  of  different  sources  of 
the  hi.--tory,  and  various  fragmentary  notices. 
Tlie  mention  of  the  rod  comes  in  somewhat 
strangely  here  after  all  that  has  been  im- 
plied concerning  it  in  vv.  1 — 9,  which 
would  make  his  taking  it  with  him  a 
matter  of  course.  The  notice  in  ver.  18 
continues  the  history  which  has  ^extended 
from  ver.  1  ;  but  again  the  notice  in  ver.  19 
seems  to  betoken   the  commencement  of  a 


new  and  distinct  account  of  Moses  parting 
from  Midian.  After  the  distinct  command 
given  to  him  in  ver.  12,  it  is  strange  to  find 
the  idea  of  returning  into  Egypt  announced 
de  novo,  and  a  totally  different  reason  as- 
signed for  the  return.  It  is  plainly  futile 
to  say  with  Keil,  that  when  Moses  had 
obtained  Jethro's  consent  to  his  journey,  God 
further  stimulates  him  to  it,  by  assurance 
that  ail  danger  in  Egypt  was  over.  Any 
ingenuous  child  may  see  that  such  is  not 
the  spirit  of  the  narrative.  20  ]  The 

two  boys,  Gershom  (ch.  ii.  22)  and  Eliezer 
(ch.  xviii.  4),  were  therefore  of  tender  age, 
and  the  marriage  of  Moses  must  have  taken 
place  far  on  in  the  forty  years  of  his  stay  in 
Midian.  Tliis  again  is  an  inference  we 
should  hardly  have  drawn  from  ch.  ii.  21, 
22.  We  have  but  one  son  spoken  of  there, 
and  again  but  one  son  in  ver.  25.  Knobel 
suspects  that  not  banaiv,  his  sons,  but  beno, 
his  soti,  ought  to  be  read.  But  it  is  much 
more  probable  that  the  fragmentary  charac- 
ter of  the  history  has  occasioned  the  varia- 
tions, the  ass,  because  it  is  assumed 
tiuit  such  a  beast  of  burden  be  longed  to  the 
household  :  so  in  reff.  the  rod  of  GodJ 


236 


EXODUS. 


lY. 


a  Gen.  xlii.  27. 


Moses  took  the  rod  of  God  in  liis  hand.  21  ^j^j  Jehovah 
said  unto  Moses,  When  thou  goest  to  return  into  Egypt, 
see  that  thou  do  all  those  wonders  before  Pharaoh,  which 
I  have  put  in  thine  hand  :  hut  I  will  harden  his  heart,  that 
he  shall  not  let  the  people  go.  22  And  thou  shalt  say  unto 
Pharaoh,  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  Israel  is  my  son,  evoi  my 
firstborn  :  23  r^i^^  J  g^y  unto  thee.  Let  my  son  go,  that  he 
may  serve  me :  and  if  thou  refuse  to  let  him  go,  behold, 
I  will  slay  thy  son,  even  thy  firstborn.  24  ^  ^jj^j  j^  came 
to  pass  by  the  way  in  the  '"*  halting  place,  that  Jehovah 


The  rod  of  vv.  1 — 5,  afterwards  so  famous. 
Knobel  points  out  that  this  rod  is  evermore  in 
the  Jehovistic  portions  of  the  narrative  in  the 
liand  of  Moses,  and  that  he  works  his  won- 
ders with  it — tlie  smiting  of  the  Nile  (ch. 
vii.  15,  17),  the  hail  (ch.  ix.  23),  the 
locusts  (ch.  X.  13),  the  passage  of  the  Red 
See  (ch.  xiv.  Ifi),  the  water  from  the  rock 
(ch.  xvii.  5  ;  Num.  xx.  8,  ff.),  the  fight 
with  the  Amalekites  (ch.  xvii.  9)  ;  whereas 
in  the  Elohistic  portions  it  is  ever  found  in 
Aaron^s  hand,  and  he  is  the  wonder-worker, 
stretching  it  out  at  Moses'  command  :  e.  g. 
at  the  turning  into  a  serpent  (ch.  vii.  9,  f.), 
the  waters  into  blood  (ch.  vii.  19,  f.),  the 
plague  of  frogs  (ch.  viii.  5),  the  flies  (cli. 
viii.  12,  f.).  But  Knobel  himself  seems  to 
furnish  the  key  to  the  diflerence  when  he 
further  suggests  that  this  shepherd's  staS'  of 
Moses  (ver.  2)  hardly  seems  to  be  the  same 
with  the  rod  of  Aaron,  which  is  paralleled 
with  the  rods  of  the  Egyptian  magicians, 
ch.  vii.  12.  If  the  two  rods  were  different, 
the  whole  is  consistent.  The  prevalence  of 
the  rod  in  ancient  literature,  as  designating 
prophets  and  holy  men,  is  remarkable. 
Chryses  the  priest  in  Homer,  and  Tiresias 
the  prophet,  Circe  the  enchantress,  and 
Hermes  the  divine  messenger,  and  Cassan- 
dra the  prophetess  in  iEscliylus,  bear  the 
staff  as  their  ensign  of  office  :  and  the 
Koman  augurs  were  known  by  their  lituus, 
or  bent  staff,  which  they  carried,  and  used 
in  taking  their  auguries.  21.]  literally, 

see  all  the  wonders  that  I  have  put  in  thy 
hand,  and  thou  shalt  do  them  before 
Pharaoh,  &c.  This  is  the  first  mention  of 
doing  the  wonders  before  Pluxi'aoh — hitlierto 
it  had  been  before  the  people.  Reference  is 
made  to  God's  wonders  which  He  would  do 
in  the  midst  of  Egypt,  ch.  ill.  20.     On  the 


hardening  of  Pharaoh's  heart  much  dis- 
cussion lias  been  spent  in  vain.  When  it  is 
all  done,  we  are  no  nearer  to  a  solution  of 
the  Divine  sovereignty  and  human  freewill 
than  we  were  before.  Each  is  true,  the  one 
from  the  idea  of  God,  the  other  from  the 
idea  of  man  ;  and  further  than  that  we  .shall 
never  attain.  Bp.  AVordsworth  has  a  statis- 
tical table  by  which  he  shews  that  it  is  said 
six  times  that  the  Lord  hardened  Pharaoli's 
heart,  but  it  is  first  said  seven  times  that 
Pharanh  hardened  his  own  heart:  "Pha- 
raoh's will  was  therefore  free."  And  this  is 
a  fair  sample  of  the  sort  of  argument  used 
on  tlie  matter.  22,  23.]  The  first  nine 

plagues  wrought  by  the  intervention  of 
Moses  should  but  harden  Pharaoh's  heart ; 
therefore  God  Himself  would  intervene  with 
a  greater  than  tliese.  The  tenth  plague  was 
announced  by  ]\[oses  (ch.  xi.  4,  f.),  but 
wrought  by  God  Himself  (xii.  29).  The 
similitude  of  Israel  to  God's  so7i  is  frequent: 
compare  Hos.  xi.  1  ;  Isa.  xlv.  11 ;  Ixiii.  8. 
He  is  also  God's  beloved,  or  firstborn,  Jer. 
xxxi.  9  ;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  27  ;  Mai.  i.  6  ;  ii.  10. 
See  also  Dent.  xiv.  1,  2;  xxxii.  18;  and 
ch.  xix.  5.  that  they  may  serve  me] 

See  ch.  iii.  18,  and  note. 

24 — 26.]  This  surprising  occurrence  m'.ist 
be  accounted  for  by  remembering  that  Moses 
was  an  Israelite,  bound  to  God  by  the 
covenant  of  circumcision,  and  that  he  was 
bringing  his  family  to  Egypt  uncircumcised, 
having  apparently  conceded  this  point  to  the 
national  habits  of  his  wife.  God  had  at- 
tached to  the  neglect  of  circumcision  the 
penalty  of  death  (Gen.  xvii.  14).  Horo  God 
met  with  him  we  are  left  to  surmise  :  pos- 
sibly in  a  dangerous  stroke  of  illness  or  sud- 
den incapacity,  as  would  appear  from  his 
inability  to  circumcise  his  own  child.     This 


21—31. 


EXODUS. 


237 


^  met  him,  and  souglit  to  kill  bim.  25  Then  Zipporah  took 
a  sharp  <=  stone,  and  cut  oft'  the  foreskin  of  her  son,  and 
cast  it  at  his  feet,  and  said,  Surely  a  blood}-  husband  art 
thou  to  me.  26  go  ]^q  jet  him  go :  then  she  said,  A  bloody 
husband  thou  art,  because  of  the  circumcision.  27  ^f  And 
Jehovah  said  to  Aaron,  Go  into  the  wilderness  to  meet 
Moses.  And  he  went,  and  met  him  in  the  mount  of  God, 
and  '^  kissed  him.  28  \^^^  ;Moses  told  Aaron  all  the  words 
of  Jehovah  who  had  sent  him,  and  all  the  signs  which 
he  had  commanded  him.  29  ^  ^j^fj  Closes  and  Aaron 
went  and  gathered  together  all  the  elders  of  the  children 
of  Israel :  '■^'^  and  Aaron  spake  all  the  words  which  Jk- 
HOVAH  had  spoken  unto  Moses,  and  did  the  signs  in  the 
sight  of  the  people.  ^^  And  the  people  believed  :  and 
when  they  heard  that  Jehovah  had  visited  the  children  of 
Israel,  and  that  he  had  looked  upon  their  aftliction,  then 


bch.iii.  IS.t.fT. 


d  Gen.  zxiiii.i. 


took  place  not  in  the  inn,  for  tliere  were  not 
and  are  not  in  tlie  East  anj-  buildings  corre- 
sponding to  our  inns  (see  on  ref.),  but  at 
tlie  resting-place  for  the  night.  The  sharp 
stone  was  a  knife  of  flint,  such  as  were  used 
before  metals  were  common,  and  as  are 
found  even  now  in  great  numbers  near  the 
haunts  of  ancient  peoples.  It  is  said  to  have 
been  retained  as  the  instrument  of  circum- 
cision, on  account  of  the  fancied  injury  done 
by  metal  to  the  wound.  See  Josh.  v.  2. 
The  Egyptians,  Herodotus  tells  us  (ii.  86), 
used  flint  knives  to  open  the  bodies  for  em- 
balming. And  Pliny  (II.  N.  xxxv.  12)  says 
the  priests  of  Cybele  used  similar  instru- 
ments for  castration  :  so  Catullus  also  in  his 
Atys.  "Even  now,"  says  Kalisch,  "those 
Jewish  male  children  who  die  before  the 
eighth  day  from  their  birth  are  circumcised 
with  stone  knives."  It  is  diflficultto  say 

what  exactly  was  done  by  Zipporah  ;  at 
trhose  feet  she  cast  the  foreskin  of  her  son 
(on  the  singular,  see  above  on  ver.  20,  that 
it  was  Eliezer,  and  he  a  new-born  babe,  there 
is  not  a  particle  of  ground  to  infer) ;  or  to 
whom  she  addressed  the  words.  Kalisch 
supposes  that  she  put  tlie  prepuce  at  the 
boy's  own  feet  (it  is  literally,  made  [it] 
to  touch  his  feet^ ,  and  addressed  the  words 
to  him,  seeing  that  a  newly  circumcised 
child  was  called  "  a  bridegroom  of  the 
covenant."  But  this  seems  unlikely.  Zip- 
porah would  hardly  be  aware  of  this  Jewish 


name,  if  it  then  existed  ;  and  even  if  she 
were,  the  cliild  could  in  no  sense  be  said  to 
be  a  bridegroom  to  her.  It  is  much  more 
probable  that  it  was  at  the  feet  of  Moses, 
and  that  the  words  were  addressed  to  him. 
In  ver.  26  we  have  the  real  order  of  tlie  in- 
cidents :  the  performance  of  the  rite  was 
followed  by  tiie  deliverance  of  Moses  from 
tlie  peril,  whatever  it  was  :  and  when  that 
was  accomplished,  then  she  called  him  a 
bridegroom  of  blood,  in  reference  to  his  life 
having  been  bought,  and  himself  as  it  were 
re-married  to  her,  at  the  price  of  the  child's 
blood.  It  is  probable  that  Zipporah  and  her 
sons  were  sent  back  from  this  spot,  for  we 
find  in  ch.  xviii.  2  f.  that  they  had  been 
during  the  Exodus  in  Slidian.  27,  f.] 

God  had  already  given  Aaron  the  command 
to  go  and  meet  hi.s  brother,  where  ho  spoke 
with  Moses  in  Midian,  and  announced  his 
coming  to  meet  him.  Sloses  returns  by 
Jlount  Horeb :  probably  that  was  tlie  ac- 
customed way,  in  which  he  would  he  likely 
to  meet  Aaron.  The  brothers  salute  one 
another  after  the  Eastern  manner :  see  reff. 
29—31.]  The  two  brothers  at  once 
proceed  to  perform  the  Divine  command, 
Aaron  acting  as  the  spokesman  (ver.  16), 
and  recounting  God's  dealings  with  Moses. 
We  may  notice  that  Aaron  also  did  the  signs, 
not  Moses :  see  above  on  ver.  20.  As  God 
had  announced  (iii.  18),  the  people  believed, 
viz.  that  God  had  sent  Moses  and  Aaron  for 


238 


EXODUS. 


e  ch.  iii.  18, 
reff. 


f  Job  iii.  18. 


,  ill.  12: 


Ix.  n.    Zech. 
X.4. 
g  Num.  xi.  16. 
Dcut.  i.  15 ; 
xvi.  18. 
Josh.  Tiii.33; 
xxiv.  1,4.    2 
Clnon.  xxvi. 
11,  al. 


ttey  bowed  tlieir  heads  and  worshipped.  V.  ^  And  after- 
ward Moses  and  Aaron  came,  and  said  to  Pharaoh,  Thus 
saith  Jehovah,  the  God  of  Israel,  Let  my  people  go,  that 
they  may  hold  a  feast  unto  me  in  the  wilderness.  ^  And 
Pharaoh  said,  Who  is  Jehovah,  that  I  should  obey  his 
voice  to  let  Israel  go?  I  know  not  Jehovah,  neither  will 
I  let  Israel  go.  ^  And  they  said,  The  God  of  the  Hebrews 
hath  ^  met  with  us :  let  us  go,  we  pray  thee,  three  days' 
journey  into  the  desert,  and  sacrifice  unto  Jehovah  our 
God  ;  lest  he  fall  upon  us  with  pestilence,  or  with  the 
sword.  4  And  the  king  of  Egypt  said  unto  them.  Where- 
fore do  ye,  Moses  and  Aaron,  disturb  the  people  from  their 
works  ?  get  you  unto  your  burdens.  ^  And  Pharaoh  said, 
Behold,  the  people  of  the  land  now  are  many,  and  ye  make 
them  rest  from  their  burdens.  ^  And  Pharaoh  commanded 
the  same  day  the  ^  taskmasters  of  the  people,  and  their 
^ofiicers,    saying,  7  Ye    shall   no   more    give  the  people 


their  deliveranre.  That  this  their  faith  did 
not  always  hold  out  is  no  objection  to  the 
entireness  of  their  first  belief.  Compare  ch. 
vi.  9.  It  must  be  remembered  that  this  was 
the  first  excitement  of  the  Divine  messages  : 
suffering  and  time  blunted  their  ardour  after- 
wards. 

V.  11 — 19.]  Moses  and  Aaron  report 
God's  command  to  Pharaoh.  The  oppression 
of  Israel  increased  thereby.  At  tliis  first 
application  there  is  no  mention  of  signs  and 
wonders :  it  is  merely  a  report  of  the  com- 
mand of  Jehovah.  This  name  is  unknown 
to  Pharaoh, — a  sufficient  proof,  as  Kalisch 
remarks,  that  it  was  not  Egyptian  in  its 
origin  ;  a  proof  also  that  Israel's  worship 
hitherto  had  not  been  that  of  Jehovah  by 
name,  otherwise  the  ap|iellation  would  not 
have  been  unknown  to  the  king.  And  this 
shews  that  this  sacred  name  was,  not  now 
first  made  known,  but  brought  into  formal  and 
special  use  as  that  of  Israel's  God,  in  com- 
pliance with  the  Divine  command  of  ch.  iii. 
15.  It  was  a  solemn  revival  of  the  confes- 
sion of  the  God  of  their  fathers  :  see  ch.  iv. 
31 ;  also  note,  chap.  vi.  3,  and  Lev.  xvii.  7. 
3.]  The  demand  is  again  repeated,  in 
the  form  of  a  request,  and  grounded  on  the 
now  better  explained  fact,  that  their  national 
God — possibly  the  term  Hebrews  extended 
more  widely  in  Pharaoh's  mind,  and  was 
one  of  more  majesty  than  the  now  degraded 


name  of  Israel — had  met  with  (reff.)  them, — 
i.  e.  given  them  a  command :  and  a  fear  is 
expressed  which  Moses'  own  experience  (ch. 
iv.  24)  warranted,  lest  the  neglect  of  the 
Divine  command  might  be  visited  with 
deadly  judgments.  4,  5.]  But  Pharaoh 

views  the  whole  as  an  attempt  to  make  Israel 
idle,  and,  inasmuch  as  they  are  now  numer- 
ous, to  render  them  dangerous  to  his  govern- 
ment, ch.  i.  10,  11.  In  consequence,  Pharaoh 
proceeds  to  make  the  labour  of  the  people  yet 
more   sore   and    oppressive.  6.]  task- 

masters, literally  drivers,  the  very  word 
used  in  modern  slave-countries  :  see  reff. 
The  officers  were  apparently  Israelites, 
subordinated  to  the  taskmasters,  and  ac- 
countable to  them  for  the  performance  of 
the  daily  tale  of  work.  "  Even  now  the 
Arabic  Fellahs,  whose  position  is  very 
analogous  to  that  of  the  Israelites  described 
in  our  text,  are  treated  by  the  Turks  in  the 
same  manner.  Arabic  overseers  have  to  give 
an  account  of  the  labours  of  their  country- 
men to  the  Turkish  taskmasters,  who  often 
chastise  them  mercilessly  for  the  real  or  im- 
puted offences  of  the  Arabic  workmen." 
Kalisch,  citing  modern  travellers.  On  the 
use  of  the  title  {Shoterim),  see  reff.  7] 

Sun-hardened  bricks,  made  of  clay  mixed 
with  chopped  straw,  form  the  ordinary 
material  of  the  ancient  Egyptian  buildings. 
It  seems  to  be  quite  a  mistake  to  regard,  as 


Im.  V 

.24; 

Xlvii 

14. 

J.H-l   1 

i.  5. 

N:,h. 

i.  11). 

Ol.ud 

1-. 

j  Jnsh. 

X.  15 

xvii. 

Prov 

xix. 

2 

1—15.  EXODUS.  o;39 

**  straw  to  make  brick,   as  licrctofore  :    let  them  so  and  hOfn.xxir.M. 

<5  Juilit.  xix. 

gather  straw  for  themselves.  ^  ^Vnd  the  tale  of  the  bricks,  ''"'''''■ 
which  they  did  make  heretofore,  ye  shall  lay  upon  tliem  ; 
3'e  shall  not  diminish  oitf/ht  thereof:  for  they  be  idle; 
therefore  they  cr}^  saying,  Let  us  go  and  sacrifice  to  our 
God.  ^  Let  there  more  work  be  laid  upon  the  men,  so 
that  they  may  be  occupied  therein,  and  may  not  regard 
vain  words.  ^^  ^  And  the  taskmasters  of  tlie  poojjle  went 
out,  and  their  officers,  and  they  spake  to  the  people,  say- 
ing, Thus  saith  Pharaoh,  I  will  not  give  you  straw.  ^^  Go 
ye,  get  you  straw  where  ye  can  find  it :  yet  not  ought  of 
your  work  shall  be  diminished.  ^^  gQ  ^j^g  people  were 
scattered  abroad  throughout  all  the  land  of  Egypt  to 
gather  '  stubble  instead  of  straw.  ^'^  iVnd  the  taskmasters  i  ci.. 
J  were  urgent,  saying.  Fulfil  your  works,  the  task  of  the 
day  on  its  day,  as  when  there  was  straw.  i*  And  the 
officers  of  the  children  of  Israel,  which  Pharaoh's  task- 
masters had  set  over  them,  were  beaten,  and  demanded, 
Wherefore  have  ye  not  fulfilled  your  task  in  making  brick 
both  yesterday  and  to  day,  as  heretofore  ?  ^^  ^  Then  the 
officers  of  the  children  of  Israel  came  and  cried  unto  Pha- 
raoh, saying,  Wherefore  dealest  thou  thus  with  thy  serv- 

Luthcr  has  done  in  his  version,  tlie  straw  which  was  still  in  the  f^rountl  at  ch.  ix.  32, 
(pi'operly,  chopped  or  comminuted  straw,  where  see  note  on  tlie  various  times  of  tlio 
and  so  in  rcff.)  as  used  for  burning  the  plagues.  13, 14.]  Tlie  Egyptian 'drivers' 
bricks.  Our  rendering,  straw  to  make  were  severe  (literally,  strait,  or  tight :  see 
brick,  which  is  that  of  the  LXX.  and  Yul-  on  Josh.  xvii.  1.5)  on  the  Hebrew  ofHceis, 
gate,  gives  the  right  view.  Brick-kilns  and  would  not  hear  even  of  any  distribution 
were  not  unknown  in  Egypt,  compare  Jer.  of  the  tasks  over  more  time  to  allow  of  the 
xliii.  9 ;  but  the  other  method  of  making  gathered  stubble  being  brought  in  :  they 
brick  was  the  prevalent  one.  See  Biblical  required  the  task  of  the  day  on  its  day. 
Diet.  i.  p.  229,  where  is  an  engraving  of  Such  is  the  literal  rendering,  and  it  gives 
captives  making  bricks  at  Thebes.  Some  more  vividness  to  the  description.  "  It  will 
of  the  sun-baked  bricks  are  without  straw ;  be  known  to  our  readers,  that  even  at  present 
but  this  was  not  to  be  the  case  here  :  the  the  rule  of  the  stick  is  generally  prevalent  in 
labour  of  the  people  was  to  be  increased  by  many  parts  of  the  East.  Neither  rank, 
their  having  to  seek  straw  for  themselves,  learning,  nor  old  age  can  protect  against  the 
12.]  The  people  had,  besides  their  ruthless  tyranny  of  the  stick."  Kalisch. 
brick-making,  to  collect  stubble  which  15—19.]  "The  kings  of  Egypt  pro- 
might  serve  as  chopped  straw.  It  was  usual,  bably  held  on  certain  days  a  sort  of  oj)cn 
as  shewn  in  almost  all  the  reff.,  to  burn  the  court  or  divan,  as  usual  in  Oriental  monarch- 
stubble  when  thoroughly  dry,  which  thus  ies,  when  every  subject  was  allowed  to  ap- 
served  as  manure  for  the  succeeding  crop,  pear  to  seek  justice  or  to  claim  redress." 
The  gathering  of  stubble  by  the  children  of  Kalisch.  and  they  say  to  us,  Make 
Israel  must  therefore  have  taken  place  after  brick,  i.s  literally,  "  and  bricks,  saying  to 
harvest,  and  before    tlie   wheat   was  sown  us,  make."  • 


240 


EXODUS. 


t  Heb.  tin. 


ants  ?  1^  Tliere  is  no  straw  given  unto  tliy  servants,  and 
tliey  say  to  us,  Make  brick  :  and,  behold,  thy  servants  are 
beaten,  and  thy  people  f  are  blamed.  ^7  g^t  he  said.  Ye 
are  idle,  ye  are  idle  :  therefore  ye  say,  Let  us  go  and  do 
sacrifice  to  Jehovah.  ^^  Go  therefore  now,  and  work  ;  for 
there  shall  no  straw  be  given  you,  yet  shall  ye  deliver  the 
tale  of  bricks.  ^^  And  the  officers  of  the  children  of  Israel 
did  see  f/iat  they  ivere  in  evil  case,  after  it  was  said.  Ye  shall 
not  minish  ought  from  your  bricks  of  your  daily  task.  20 
%  And  they  met  Moses  and  Aaron,  who  stood  in  their  way, 
as  they  came  forth  from  Pharaoh  :  ^i  and  they  said  unto 
them,  Jehovah  look  upon  you,  and  judge  ;  because  ye 
have  made  our  savour  to  be  abhorred  in  the  eyes  of  Pha- 
raoh, and  in  the  eyes  of  his  servants,  to  put  a  sword  in 
their  hand  to  slay  us.  22  ^^^  Moses  returned  unto  Je- 
hovah, and  said.  Lord,  wherefore  hast  thou  so  evil  en- 


The  meaninp;  of  the  conchTding  words  of 
the  verse  has  been  much  controverted.  The 
A.  v.,  which  makes  them  mean  merely  "  thi/ 
servants  {toe)  are  beaten  for  a  fault  ivhich 
is  not  ours,  but  that  of  thine  oum  people,'" 
seems  to  stand  ahnost  alone.  The  two  lines 
of  interpretation  may  be  descrilied  as  beino;, 

1.  That  which  applies  thy  people  to  the 
Efiyptians ;  and  thy  people  sins.  This, 
which  is  the  rendering  of  the  Targuraof  On- 
kelos,  and  many  others,  including  of  the 
moderns  Keil  and  Kalisch,  is  a  more  serious 
form  of  that  adopted  by  the  A.  Y.  It  is  not 
merely  "  we  are  punished  for  the  fault  of  thy 
people;"  but,  "tliy  people  incurs  guilt, 
commits   sin,   by   this   proceeding."      But, 

2.  The  view  which  takes  thy  people  as  mean- 
ing the  Israelites  is  much  better  supported, 
and  it  would  appear  more  correct.  The 
LXX.  have,  "  thou  wilt  therefore  do  in- 
justice to  thy  people  ;  "  and  so  the  Vulgate, 
"  injustice  is  done  against  thy  people  ;  "  and 
the  Samaritan  Pentateuch,  '■'thou  doest  in- 
jury to  thy  people ;"  hut  in  the  Version,  '■'■the 
faMlt  i>  with  thee:'  The  old  Syriac  has 
'■Hhou  sinnest  against  thy  people."  Of 
modern  Hebraists,  Ivnobel  is  strong  for  the 
reference  of  thy  people  to  Israel.  His  note 
is,  "  literally,  and  thy  people  sins,  i.  e. 
Israel,  which  is  yet  thy  people,  is  involved 
in  sin  and  reckoned  guilty  (Gen.  xliii.  9), 
are  treated  as  offenders  and  not  as  a  people 
belonging  to  thee,  the  king."     It  seems  cer- 


tainly in  favour  of  this,  that  there  is  not 
in  the  original  any  such  contrast  as  the  ''but" 
expresses,  nor  any  such  emphasis  as  is  given 
by  ''thine  oivn."  It  is  simply,  "and  thy 
people  sins."  It  is  also  in  favour  of  it  tliat 
the  distinction  between  thy  servants,  the 
officers,  who  were  beaten,  and  thy  people, 
the  Israelites,  who  were  blamed,  is  a  very 
natural  one  :  and  the  saying,  in  the  mouth 
of  persons  petitioning  for  mercy,  much  more 
natural  than  one  which  would  imply  flying 
in  the  face  of  the  king,  by  whose  order  the 
straw  had  been  withheld.  I  have  therefore 
adopted   the    second   view.  20—23.} 

The  feai's  of  Moses  begin  to  be  realized : 
Israel  shrinks  back  at  the  first  appearance  of 
discouragement,  and  Moses  and  Aaron  are 
stigmatized  as  the  cause.  20.]  Literally, 

who  stood  for  the  meeting  of  them,  to 
hear  from  them  what  liad  been  their  success 
with  the  king.  On  the  figure  our  savour, 
&c.,  see  Gen.  xxxiv.  30.  By  the  last  words 
is  meant  that  their  inopportune  interference 
had  furnished  to  Pharaoh  a  definite  handle, 
as  it  were  a  weapon  presented  to  him,  where- 
with to  crush  Israel.  22,  23.]  There- 
upon Moses  returned  to  Jehovah,  i.  e. 
sought  Him  with  his  old  feeling  of  back- 
wardness ;  returned  to  his  work  of  deprecat- 
ina:  the  mission  on  which  God  had  sent  him. 
"What  had  happened  was  not  provided  for  in 
God's  previous  announcements  to  him,  and 
was  too  much  for  his  present  faith.     The  re- 


IG— VI.  3. 


EXODUS. 


241 


treated  this  people  ?  why  is  it  t/iat  thou  hast  sent  me  ?  23 
For  since  I  cajne  to  Pharaoh  to  speak  in  thy  name,  he 
hath  done  evil  to  this  people ;  neither  hast  thou  delivered 
thy  people  at  all.  VI.  ^  Then  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses, 
Now  shalt  thou  see  what  I  will  do  to  Pharaoh  :  for  with  a 
strong  hand  shall  he  let  them  go,  and  with  a  strong  hand 
shall  he  drive  them  out  of  his  land.  2  ^^^^  Qq^  spake 
unto  Moses,  and  said  unto  him,  I  am  Jehovah  :  ^  and  I 
appeared  unto  Abraham,  unto  Isaac,  and  unto  Jacob,  by 


fusal  of  Pharaoh,  and  his  coercion  hy  signs 
and  wonders,  this  was  hefore  him,  hut  not 
the  increase  of  the  oppression  at  the  very 
first  endeavour. 

VI.  1 — 8.]  God  replies  (o  Moses. 
1.]  All  this  sliall  turn  out,  not  to  the  greater 
affliction  of  Israel,  hut  to  the  ultimate  dis- 
comfiture of  Pharaoh,  and  the  high-handed 
deliverance  of  Israel.  Compare  ch.  xii.  31 — 
39.  2,  ft'.]  God  renews  His  commission 

atid  His  self-revelation  to  Moses.  The  oc- 
casion of  this  solemn  inauguration  of  the 
mission  of  Moses  and  Aaron  is  taken  to  in- 
sert the  genealogical  notice  of  the  heads  of 
the  houses  of  the  tribes  until  Levi,  from 
whom  the  descent  of  Moses  and  Aaron  is 
given.  The  whole  of  this  portion  is  remark- 
ably illustrative  of  the  fragmentary  and  com- 
pound character  of  this  part  of  the  history. 
This  is  still  further  shewn  by  what  follows 
with  regard  to  the  Divine  name.  2,  3.] 

These  verses  have  been  the  crttx  of  inter- 
preters. It  may  be  well  to  put  the  reader  in 
possession  of  the  two  principal  views  respect- 
ing them.  Knobel,  who  adheres  rigidly  to 
the  Elohistic  and  Jehovistic  division  of  the 
narrative,  writes  as  follows  :  The  writer  as- 
sumes three  degrees  of  revelation  and  know- 
ledge of  God,  confining  himself  naturally  to 
Israel,  and  the  line  from  Adam  leading  up 
from  Israel  to  Adam.  The  first  is  the  time 
before  Abraham.  To  the  patriarchs  of  this 
period  God  was  only  the  Godhead  generally ; 
at  that  time  lie  revealed  Himself  not  to 
human  knowledge  with  more  distinctness 
than  generally  as  the  Godhead ;  men  knew 
Him  only  as  a  higher  Divine  Being  above 
themselves,  without  having  any  more  accur- 
ate idea  of  Him.  For  this  period  the  writer 
uses  only  the  most  general  designation  of 
God  in  the  0.  T.,  the  name  Eloiiim,  God- 
head, but  never  represents  God  as  introduc- 
ing Himself  to  men  until  the  declaration  "  I 

w  ■ 


am  Elohim,"  and  grounding  any  revelation 
on  that  appellation.  The  second  step  is  tlie 
period  from  Abraham  to  Moses.  To  the 
patriarchs  of  this  time  God  came  nearer  : 
He  appeared  to  them,  wliich  He  had  not 
done  before ;  He  designated  Himself  to  them 
as  El  Shaddai,  the  Powerful,  the  Alniirjhty  : 
they  had  not  only  a  general  idea  of  the  God- 
head, but  knew  God  more  definitely  as  the 
Mighty  and  Powerful  One,  compared  with 
whom  the  Godheads  imagined  by  others  had 
no  power.  For  this  period  the  writer  keeps 
in  his  narrative  the  designation  Eloiiim  :  the 
name  El  Shaddai  is  found  only  in  the 
mouth  of  God  (Gen.  xvii.  1  ;  xxxv.  11 ; 
Exod.  vi.  3)  or  in  those  of  the  patriarchs 
(Gen.  xxviii.  3;  xlviii.  3),  who  however  also 
use  Eloiiim  (Gen.  xxviii.  4 ;  xxxix.  9 ;  xl. 
8 ;  xli.  16,  25,  28,  32).  Parallel  with  this 
are  the  Edoniite  speakers  in  the  Book  of  Job, 
who  belong  to  the  pre-Mosaic  period,  and 
who  use  only  the  Divine  names  Eloaii,  El, 
and  Shaddai.  The  third  step  is  the  time 
after  Moses.  It  was  he  who  first  learned, 
by  Divine  revelation,  that  God,  who  was 
known  by  the  patriarchs  before  Abraham  as 
the  Godhead  generally,  and  by  thepatriarclis 
since  Abraham  as  the  eminently  miglity,  was 
the  only,  or  the  alone  true,  God.  To  him 
God  named  Himself  as  Jehovah,  the  Being, 
the  One  only  truly  existent  God,  besides 
whom  there  is,  there  veritably  exists,  no  other 
God  (see  on  ch.  iii.  14).  Henceforth  the 
writer  uses  for  the  most  part  this  name  of 
God.  In  his  narrative,  the  advance  of  wor- 
ship paid  to  God  corresponds  to  the  advance 
of  knowledge  of  God.  Before  Abraham,  it 
was  only  walking  with  God  (Gen.  v.  22,  24; 
vi.  9) ;  after  Abraham,  circumcision  and 
drink  offering  (Gen.  xvii.  10,  ff. ;  xxxv.  14) ; 
after  Moses,  sanctuary,  priesthood,  offering, 
festal  times,  formal  purity,  and  generally,  a 
detailed  cultus.       "  It   is,"    adds   Knobel, 

K 


242 


EXODUS. 


YI. 


k  El  Shaddai. 
Gen.  xvii.  1 ; 
xxviii.  3  ; 
XXXV.  11 ; 
xliii.  14; 
xlviii.  3 ; 
xlix.  25. 
Num.  xxiv. 
4,  16.     Ruth 
i.  20,  21.    Ps. 
Ixviii.  14; 
xri.  1.    Isa. 
xiii.6.  Ezek. 
1.24;  X.  5. 
Joel  i.  15. 
Job,  passim. 


m  Deut.  iv.  34 ; 
V.  15;  vii.  19, 
&c.     1  Kings 


the  name  of  ^G:odi  Almighty,  but  by  my  name  JEHOVAHl 
was  I  not  known  to  them.  *  And  I  have  also  established! 
my  ^covenant  with  them,  to  give  them  the  land  of  Canaan, , 
the  land  of  their  sojournings,  wherein  they  sojourned.  ^ 
And  I  have  also  heard  the  groaning  of  the  children  of  I 
Israel,  whom  the  Egyptians  keep  in  bondage  ;  and  I  have 
remembered  my  covenant.  ^  Wherefore  say  unto  the 
children  of  Israel,  I  am  Jehovah,  and  I  will  bring  youi 
out  from  under  the  burdens  of  the  Egyptians,  and  I  will! 
rid  you  out  of  their  bondage,  and  I  wiU  redeem  you  with  a 
^  stretched  out  arm,  and  with  great  judgments  :  7  and  I 
will  take  you  to  me  for  a  people,  and  I  will  be  to  you  a. 
God :  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah  your  God, 
which  bringeth  you  out  from  under  the  burdens  of  the 
Egyptians.    ^  And  I  will  bring  you  in  unto  the  land,  con- 


"  labour  in  vain  to  reduce  into  harmony  with 
the  clear  and  definite  view  of  the  Elohist,  the 
Jehovistic  narrations  of  the  knowledge  and 
worship  of  God  in  the  pre-Mosaic  period." 
Opposed  to  this  view  is  that  of  those  who 
maintain  that  the  name  Jehovah  had  been 
long  in  use,  both  in  the  period  before  Abra- 
ham and  in  that  between  Abraham  and  Moses, 
but  that  its  full  significance  as  the  appellation 
of  Israel' s  covenant-God  was  n  o  w  first  brought 
out.  It  is  but  fair  to  say  here  that  Knobel's 
theory,  as  he  states  it  above,  can  only  be  car- 
ried out  by  a  considerable  amount  of  arbi- 
trary tampering  with  the  Hebrew  text,  and 
that  appearances,  to  the  fair  and  unprejudiced 
reader,  are  certainly  in  favour  of  the  other. 
The  pre-Abrahamic  patriarchs,  the  post- 
Abrahamic,  knew  the  sacred  name  Jehovah 
as  an  appellation  of  God,  but  not  as  the  appel- 
lation by  which  He  chose  to  reveal  Himself. 
Very  much  of  Knobel's  note  is  true  :  there 
were  undoubtedly  these  steps  in  the  revela- 
tion of  the  Godhead,  to  be  followed  by  other 
and  clearer  revelations,  as  the  Sun  of  Right- 
eousness approached  the  eastern  horizon ; 
but  as  with  those  latter,  so  with  these 
former,  that  which  was  one  day  to  be  clearly 
revealed  was  not  totally  unknown  up  to  that 
day,  but  was  known  only  in  an  imperfect  and 
shadowy  manner.  This  name  Jehovah, 
little  used,  fallen  perhaps  into  disuse  (ch.  iv. 
31)  in  Israel,  was  from  this  time  brought  out 
in  all  its  divine  meaning,  and  made  to  be  the 
One  and  ordinary  name  of  the  God  of  Israel. 


El  Shaddai,  see  above  in  the  extract  from 
Knobel,  is  God  the  mighty,    or,    as  other- 
wise explained,  a  reduplication  of  the  idea 
of  might,  from  ool,  to  be  strong,  and  Shadad, 
to  exert  power  ;  it  is  found  only  in  the  places  ■[ 
mentioned  in  reff.  with  the  exception  of  the  ' 
whole  of  Job,  where  it  is  the  usual  apella-  •] 
tion  of  God,  occurring  no  less  than  31  times.  ,j 
In  Genesis  (probably  always,  see  on  Gen.  .1 
xlix.   25)  and  here  only    (besides  Ezek.  x. . 
25)   is   the   El   expressed :    elsewhere   the  ■ 
name  is  simply  Shaddax.      The  appearance 
of  God  to  Isaac  by  this  name  is  not  recorded 
in  the  history,  but  Isaac  uses  the  name  in  i 
blessing  Jacob,  Gen.  xxviii.  3.  4.]  The 

covenant  was  established  separately  with  each 
one  of  the  three  patriarchs  :  see  reff.  5.] 

God  remembered  His  covenant,  for  it  was 
made  not  only  with  the  patriarchs  them- 
selves, but  with  their  seed  after  them  for 
ever.  See  especially  Gen.  xvii.  7,  19.  6.] 
The  promise  of  deliverance  is  here  made 
more  in  detail,  and  the  manner  of  it  speci- 
fied. This  is  the  fii'st  occurrence  of  the  ex- 
pression a  stretched-ont  arm,  afterwards  so 
frequent  (reff.).  7.]  This  is  a  renewal 

of  the  promise  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  after 
him,  in  Gen.  xvii.  7.  It  was  formally  ful- 
filled in  the  declaration  prescribed  to  Moses 
at  Sinai,  ch.  xix.  5.  8.]  The  continual 

repetition  of  the  covenant  promise  in  con- 
nexion with  the  name  Jehovah  marks 
forcibly  the  inauguration  of  that  sacred  name 
as  the  future  appellation  of  the  God  of  Israel. 


4—14. 


EXODUS. 


243 


cerning  the  which  I  did  swear  to  give  it  to  Abraham,  to 
Isaac,  and  to  Jacob ;  and  I  will  give  it  you  for  an  herit- 
age :  I  am  Jehovah.  9  ^  And  Moses  spake  so  unto  the 
children  of  Israel :  but  they  hearkened  not  unto  Moses  for 
"  depression  of  spirit,  and  for  cruel  bondage.  ^^  And  Je- 
hovah spake  unto  Moses,  saying,  ii  Go  in,  speak  unto 
Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt,  that  he  let  the  children  of  Israel 
go  out  of  his  land.  ^^  And  Moses  spake  before  Jehovah, 
saying,  Behold,  the  children  of  Israel  have  not  hearkened 
unto  me ;  how  then  shall  Pharaoh  hear  me,  who  am  of 
uncircumcised  lips  ?  ^^  And  Jehovah  spake  unto  Moses 
and  unto  Aaron,  and  gave  them  a  charge  unto  the  children 
of  Israel,  and  unto  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt,  to  bring  the 
children  of  Israel  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt.  ^^  ^  These 
he  the  heads  of  their  fathers'  houses :  The  sons  of  Reuben 


n  Xiim.  xxi.  4. 


I  did  swear]  Literally,  lift  up  mine 
hand :  see  Gen.  xiv.  22,  reft'.  This  oath  is 
recorded  in  Gen.  xxii.  16,  ff. ;  see  xxvi.  3. 

9.]  The  words  of  the  A.  V.  "  anguish 
of  spirit,"  if  taken  in  the  primitive  meaning 
of  anguish,  from  angustioe,  narrowness, 
exactly  express  the  meaning  of  the  original. 
But  now  a?ignish  has  lost  this  reference  to 
narrowness,  and  simply  implies  exceeding  dis- 
tress. It  is  better  therefore  to  take  some  ex- 
pression which  may  more  nearly  represent  the 
original.  Kalisch  has  "  shortness  of  breath," 
which  is  too  material  and  has  even  a  touch  of 
absurdity.  The  best  word  which  occurs  is 
depression,  implying  some  weight  depress- 
ing, 11.]  We  have  in  this  message 
again  no  trace  of  the  three  days'  journey  to 
sacrifice  :  it  is  a  simple  command  to  set  the 
children  of  Israel  free.  So  also  in  ch.  vii. 
2  ;  xi.  10,  being,  as  Knobel  maintains,  the 
uniform  testimony  of  the  original  Elohistic 
narrative.  12.]  Here  again  appears  the 
characteristic  backwardness  of  Jloses.  He 
replies  before  Jehovah,  lit.  in  the  face  of 
Jehovah,  shewing  that  a  Divine  appearance 
is  recorded  :  so  also  in  ver.  30.  The  ex- 
pression uncircumcised  lips  is  found  only 
here  and  in  the  repetition,  ver.  30.  It  must 
of  course  be  taken  figuratively,  and  accord- 
ing to  the  analogy  of  an  tmcircumcised  ear 
(Jer.  vi.  10),  i.  e.  an  ear|  not  that  cannot 
hear,  but  that  will  not  hearken  (ib.  v.  21 ; 
Isa.  vi.  10) ;  an  uticircumcised  heart  (Lev. 
xxvi.  41  ;  Deut.  x.  16  ;  Jer.  iv.  4  ;  ix.  26), 


i.  e.  a  heart  sltiw  to  feci  and  to  'obey.  The 
uncircumcised  lips  will  tlius  mean  lips,  not, 
as  some  have  thought,  physically  long  and 
protruding,  but  slow  to  speak,  and  inapt,  as 
in  ch.  iv.  10,  11.  This  natural  infirmity  of 
Moses  again  recurs  as  an  excuse  why  he 
should  not  report  God's  command  to 
Pharaoh.  13.]  This  verse  again  gives 

a  general  statement  of  the  Divine  command 
to  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  apparently  in  con- 
nexion with  vv.  26,  27  ;  this  introducing, 
and  those  closing,  the  genealogical  table 
which  leads  to  the  identification  of  this 
Moses  and  Aaron.  It  seems  far  better  thus 
to  account  for  this  verse  than,  as  Knobel,  to 
take  it  as  a  reply  to  j\Ioses'  question  in  ver. 
12,  by  the  association  of  Aaron  with  him. 

14 — 27.]  The  genealogy  of  Moses  and 
Aaron,  following  upon  the  solemn  mention 
of  the  eminent  brothers.  It  comes  in  con- 
textually  and  appropriately,  and  those  who 
have  treated  it  as  a  fragment  which  has 
found  its  way  into  the  text  have  certainly 
made  a  mistake.  The  genealogy  mainly 
concerns  Aaron,  as  the  elder  brother,  and 
the  progenitor  of  the  Jewish  priesthood. 
14.]  the  heads  of  their  fathers' 
houses  are  the  chiefs  of  the  families,  e.  g. 
the  sons  of  Reuben,  &c.,  enumerated  below. 
The  genealogical  table  begins  with  the 
families  of  the  first-born  son  of  Israel,  then 
proceeds  with  those  of  the  second,  thus 
coming  regularly  to  Levi  the  third,  in  the 
line  of  descent  from  whom  are  Aaron  and 


244  EXODUS.  YI. 

tlie  firstborn  of  Israel ;  Hanoch,  and  Pallu,  Hezron,  and 
Carmi :  these  he  tlie  families  of  Reuben.  ^^  And  the  sons 
of  Simeon ;  Jemuel,  and  Jamin,  and  Ohad,  and  Jacbin,  and 
Zobar,  and  Sbaul  tbe  son  of  a  Canaanitisb  woman  :  these 
are  the  families  of  Simeon.  ^^  ^  And  these  are  the  names  of 

"xxvifa.^'''  'tte  sons  of  Levi  "according  to  their  generations  ;  Gershon, 
and  Kohath,  and  Merari :  and  the  years  of  the  life  of  Levi 
ivere  an  hundred  thirty  and  seven  years,  i"  %  The  sons  of 
Gershon ;  Libni,  and  Shimi,  according  to  their  families. 
i^And  the  sons  of  Kohath  ;  Amram,  and  Izhar,  and  Hebron, 
and  Uzziel :  and  the  years  of  the  life  of  Kohath  ^l•ere  an 
hundred  thirty  and  three  years.  ^^  And  the  sons  of 
Merari ;  Mahali  and  Mushi :  these  are  the  families  of  Levi 
according  to  their  generations.  20  And  Amram  took  him 
Jochebed  his  father's  sister  to  wife  ;  and  she  bare  him 
Aaron  and  Moses :  and  the  years  of  the  life  of  Amram 
u-ere  an  hundred  and  thirty  and  seven  years.  21  ^  And 
the  sons  of  Izhar  ;  Korah,  and  Nepheg,  and  Zithri.  22 
And  the  sons  of  Uzziel ;    Mishael,  and   Elzaphan,    and 

•  Zithri.       23  And  Aaron  took  him  Elisheba,  daughter  of 

Amminadab,  sister  of  Naashon,  to  wife  ;  and  she  bare  him 

Moses,  for  the  sake  of  whom  the  table  is  in-  cousin,  '■'thedavghterofhisfather'sbrother," 

serted.  14 — 16.]  The  sons  of  Reuben  LXX.     After  the  words  Aaron  and  Moses, 

and  of  Simeon  and  of  Levi  are  the  same,  and  the  LXX.  and  Samaritan  Pentateuch  add, 

under  the  same  names,  as  in  Gen.  xlvi.  9,  10,  "  and  Miriam  their  sister,"  probably  from 

which  see.     Compare  also  Num.  xxvi.  5 ;  1  Num.  xxvi.  59.  21.]  Compare  Num. 

Chron.  v.  3  ;  iv.  24  ;  vi.  1,  16.    After  their  xvi.  1 ;  1  Chron.  vi.  37,  38.  22.]  Lev. 

enumeration  the  years  of  Levi's  life  are  stated,  x.  4  ;  Num.  iii.  20.     No  family  of  the  third 

besides  the  additional  particular  that  the  sons  son,  Hebron,  is  named  here:  but  in  Num. 

of  Levi  are  to  be  given  according  to  their  iii.  27  ;  xxvi.  58,  we  read  of  "  the  family  of 

generations  or  begettings  (reff.).  17,11'.]  the  Hebronites."      See  also  1  Chron.  xxvi. 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  no  account  is  given  23,  30,  31,  in  which  two  last  verses  some, 

in  this  genealogy  at  what  age  the  sons  in  names  are  mentioned.     See  more  particulars 

each  case  were  begotten,  and  in  consequence  concerning  them  in  1  Chron.  xv.  9 ;  xxiii. 

it  is  impossible  by  its  means  to  arrive  at  any  19  ;  xxiv.  23  ;  xxvi.  31.  23.]  See  Ruth 

definite  chronological  conclusion  as  to  the  iv.  19,  20  ;  Matt.  i.  4.    Naashon  was  (Num. 

final  result.      I  have  dealt  with  the  matter  i.    7)  prince  of  Judah  during  the  journey 

as  far  as  the  length  of  the  sojourn  of  Israel  through  the  wilderness.     Thus  Aaron,   the 

in  Egypt  is  concerned  in  the  note  on  ch.  xii.  third  from  Levi  by  the  father's  side,  and  the 

40.     These  grandsons  of  Levi  appear  again  second  by  the  mother's,  wedded  Elisheba,  the 

Num.  iii.  18 — 20.  See  also  Num.  xxvi.  57,  fi'.  fifth  in  descent  from  Judah.    Such  inequali- 

20.]  Also  definitely  stated  in  Num.  ties,  startling  at  first  sight,  are  not  uncommon 

xxvi.  59.     This  kind  of  marriage  was  after-  even  now  in   families,    and  were  doubtless 

wards  forbidden  by  the  law  :  see  Levit.  xviii.  of  much  more  frequent  occurrence  at   the 

12.     The  LXX.,  Vulgate,  and  old  Syriac  in  period   of    this   history.       On   Nadab   and 

consequence  make  Jochebed  to  be  Amram's  Abihu,  see  ch.  xxiv.  1,  9  ;  xxviii.  1  ;  Lev. 


15— YII.  1. 


EXODUS. 


245 


Nadab,  and  Abihu,  Eleazar,  and  Ithaniar,  24  ^Ynd  tlio 
sons  of  Korah  ;  Assir,  and  Elkanali,  and  Abiasapli  :  tlieso 
are  the  families  of  the  Korhitcs.  -'*  And  Ek-azar  Aaron's 
son  took  him  one  of  the  daughters  of  Putiel  to  wife ;  and 
she  bare  him  Phinehas  :  these  ave  the  heads  of  the  fathers 
of  the  Levites  according  to  their  families.  '-^^^  These  are 
that  Aaron  and  Moses,  to  whom  Jehovah  said,  Bring  out 
the  children  of  Israel  from  the  land  of  Egypt  p  according 
to  their  armies.  ■  ^7  These  are  they  which  spake  to  Pha- 
raoh king  of  Egypt,  to  bring  out  the  children  of  Israel 
from  Egypt :  these  are  that  Moses  and  Aaron.  ^8  ^  And 
it  came  to  pass  on  the  day  tchcn  Jehovah  spake  unto 
Moses  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  -^  that  the  Lord  spake  unto 
Moses,  saying,  I  am  Jehovah  :  speak  thou  unto  Pharaoh 
king  of  Egypt  all  that  I  say  unto  thee.  ^^  And  Moses 
said  before  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  am  of  uncircumcised  lips, 
and  how  shall  Pharaoh  hearken  unto  me  ?  YII.  ^  And 
Jehovah  said  unto  Moses,  See,  I  have  made  thee  a  god  to 


pch.  xii.  51. 
Num.  i.  3, 
52;  ii.3,  9, 
fl. ;  X.  14^  10. 
tl ,  xxxiii.  1. 
S(eilnii.4; 
xii.  n,',41. 


X.  1  ;  Num.  iii.  2 — i  ;  xxvi.  60,  f. ;  on 
Eleazar,  Num.  iii.  32 ;  xix.  3.  He  suc- 
ceeded his  father  in  the  office  of  high  priest, 
Num.  XX.  26,  28,  al.  ;  was  the  colleague  of 
Joshua  in  distributing  Israel's  inheritance  in 
the  land  of  promise,  Josh.  xiv.  1  ;  xix.  51  ; 
xxi.  1  ;  and  survived  Joshua,  Josh.  xxiv.  33. 
Ithamar  held  oilice  with  his  brethren 
as  priest,  ch.  xxviii.,  was  appointed  to  preside 
over  the  Levites  in  the  work  of  the  tabernacle, 
ch.  xxxviii.  21 ;  Num.  iv.  28,  33,  but  is  not 
elsewhere  mentioned  in  the  Pentateuch,  but 
see  1  Chron.  xxiv.  4—6.  ,  Eli  the  high 
priest  was  of  the  house  of  Ithamar  (see  on 
1  Chron.  xxiv.  2),  and  the  high  priesthood 
remained  in  this  line  till  Solomon  (1  Kings 
ii.  26,  27)  thrust  out  Abiathar,  and  substi- 
tuted Zadok  of  Eleazar's  line.  24.]  On 
Korah  and  his  sons,  see  Num.  xxvi,  10,  11, 
from  which  it  appears  that,  notwithstanding 
what  is  stated  in  Num.  xvi.  32,  33,  "  the 
children  of  Korah  died  not."  25.] 
Nothing  is  known  of  Putiel.  In  the  more 
modern  Jewish  traditions  he  is  identified  with 
Jethro  tlie  Midianite  (!)  see  Biblical  Diet. 
Phinehas  is  frequently  mentioned  in 
the  sacred  history :  see  Num.  xxv.  6,  If. ; 
xxxi.  6;  Josh.  xxii.  13.  He  was  high 
p  riest  at  the  time  of  the  outrage  at  Gibeah 
and  the  war  against  Benjamin,  Judg.  xx.  27, 


28.  There  is  a  slight  intimation  in  thia 
verse  of  the  age  of  the  narrative.  It  was 
written  after  the  birth  of  Phinelias,  but 
probably  before  that  of  any  more  descend- 
ants of  the  direct  priestly  line. 

26,  27.]  The  geneah)gy  having  now  ad- 
duced all  requisite  particulars  respecting  the 
descent  and  families  of  Aaron  and  Moses,  the 
history  formally  identities  them  as  the  same 
Aaron  and  Jloses  who  were  commissioned  to 
deliver  Israel,  and  who  spoke  to  Pharaoh  in 
course  of  that  their  mission.  Aaron  stands 
first  in  the  mention  immediately  following 
the  genealogy.  He  was  the  elder,  and  the 
genealogy  had  mainly  concerned  him.  But 
Moses  stands  first  at  end  of  ver.  27  when 
the  liistory  is  about  to  be  resumed,  as  offici- 
ally by  his  mission  the  chief.  On  the  ex- 
pression, used  of  Israel,  according  to  their 
armies,  see  reff.  It  is  attributed  by  Knobcl 
to  the  Elohist  alone.  28—30.]  A  taking 

up  again  and  recapitulation  of  vv.  2,  11,  12. 

VII.  1 — 7.]  General  declaration  by  God 
of  His  commission  to  Moses  and  Aaron,  and 
summarij  of  the  history  tchich  is  to  follow. 
1.]  God  replies  to  the  distrustful 
question  of  Moses  by  declaring  the  exact 
parts  of  himself  and  Aaron  in  that  which  He 
would  do  with  them.  The  two  brothers  (see 
also  ch.  iv.  16)  are  to  stand,  as  regards  Pha- 


246 


EXODUS. 


yii. 


qch 
41,5 
i.  3 


;.26,  xii. 
1.  Num. 
ii.  32. 


Pharaoli :  and  Aaron  thy  brother  shall  be  thy  prophet. 
2  Thou  shalt  speak  all  that  I  command  thee :  and  Aaron 
thy  brother  shall  speak  unto  Pharaoh,  that  he  send  the 
children  of  Israel  out  of  his  land.  ^  ^^d  I  will  harden 
Pharaoh's  heart,  and  multiply  my  signs  and  my  wonders 
in  the  land  of  Egypt.  ^  j^^it  Pharaoh  shall  not  hearken 
unto  you,  that  I  may  lay  my  hand  ujjon  Egypt,  and  bring 
forth  "imine  armies,  my  peoj)le  the  children  of  Israel,  out 
of  the  land  of  Egypt  by  great  judgments.  ^  And  the 
Egyptians  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah,  when  I  stretch 
forth  mine  hand  upon  Egypt^  and  bring  out  the  children 
of  Israel  from  among  them.  ^  And  Moses  and  Aaron  did 
as  Jehovah  commanded  them,  so  did  they.  ^  And  Moses 
u-as  fourscore  years  old,  and  Aaron  fourscore  and  three 


raoh,  in  the  relation  in  which  God  Himself 
and  a  prophet  inspired  by  Him  stand  to  His 
people.  The  one  is  to  be  the  inspirer  and 
commander  of  the  other.  And  precisely  so 
we  tind  it  in  vv.  9,  19 ;  ch.  viii.  5,  16  ;  but 
not  beyond  that.  After  that  (e.  g.  in  ch. 
viii.  20,  ff. ;  ix.  1,  ff.,  10,  ff.,  22,  ff.,  29  ;  x. 
12,  f.,  21,  f.)  the  wonders  are  done  either 
immediately  by  the  Divine  act  or  through 
the  intervention  of  Moses  alone.  3.] 

See  on  ch.  iv.  21.  4.]  lay  my  hand, 

i.  e.  in  a  hostile  manner,  compare  ch.  iii.  20  ; 
ix.  3.  5.]  The  Egyptians  were  to  be 

convinced  that  Jehovah  was  the  true  God, 
by  their  own  false  gods  falling  before  Him 
(ch.  xii.  12)  :  but  this  was  a  knowledge  of 
discomfiture,  not  of  conversion ;  Israel  was 
by  the  same  series  of  judgments  to  acquire 
the  same  knowledge  (ch.  x.  2)  ;  but  this  was 
to  be  a  knowledge  of  conversion  and  attach- 
ment. God's  sword  is  two-edged.  6.] 
This  verse  contains  the  summary  of  the  fol- 
lowing history ;  and  the  next  specifies  the 
exact  date  in  the  lives  of  the  two  brothers  at 
the  time  of  the  plagues  aud  the  Exodus. 

VII.  8— XII.  36.]  The23lacjuesofEgi/i7t, 
and  deliverance  of  Israel.  It  would  much 
exceed  the  limits  of  these  notes  to  follow 
Xnobel  through  his  setting  forth  of  the  sup- 
posed Elohistic  and  Jehovistic  portions  of 
this  narrative,  and  Keil  through  his  refuta- 
tion of  the  same.  "We  may  fairly  say  that, 
as  usual  in  such  cases,  there  has  been 
exuberance  of  fancy  and  want  of  precision  on 
the  one  side,  Knobel  having  failed  to  make 
out  his  distinctions  in  several  cases,  both  as 


to  the  historical  and  verbal  differences  be- 
tween the  two  narrators  :  and  on  the  other 
side  the  common,  and  to  us  unaccountable, 
timid  anxiety  to  derive  the  whole  narrative 
from  one  and  the  same  pen  at  one  and  the 
same  time.  While  we  may  not  follow  into 
all  its  particularities  the  Elohistic  and  Jeho- 
vistic theory,  common  sense  and  honesty 
cannot  surely  deny  the  coexistence  in  our 
present  Exodus  of  various  streams  of  narra- 
tion, dropped  and  taken  up  alternately,  the 
circumstantial  assumptions  of  the  one  inde- 
pendent of  those  of  the  other.  No  discredit 
is  thereby  cast  upon  the  entire  history  as  we 
now  have  it,  and  the  hypothesis  of  conse- 
quent incoherence  in  the  whole  can  only  be 
justified  by  the  previous  hypothesis  of  inca- 
pacity and  want  of  intelligence  in  the  ulti- 
mate author  of  the  history.  The  authority 
and  significance  of  the  whole  are  much  more 
efi!"ectually  maintained  by  those  who  readily 
acknowledge  the  obvious  phenomena  of  the 
compound  text,  than  by  those  who  in  timid 
anxiety  for  the  fate  of  a  pre-conceived  theory, 
employ  page  after  page  in  fighting  against 
them.  This  is  strikingly  shewn  in  the  pro- 
cedure of  Keil,  who  in  his  zeal  to  shew  the 
identity  of  the  narrators  of  the  various  mira- 
cles, entirely  sets  aside  the  positive  assertion  of 
the  sacred  text  in  ch.  ix.  22, 23  respecting  the 
command  being  given  to  Moses,  and  the  rod 
stretched  forth  by  him, — saying  that  both  had 
reference  to  Aaron,  but  that  in  consequence  of 
theemploymentof  Aaron's  agency  havingbeen 
so  many  times  related,  it  is  not  now  specified. 
No  such  foe  as  the  over-zealous  advocate. 


2—13. 


EXODUS. 


247 


years  old,  when  they  spake  unto  Pharaoh.  ^  ^  ^^d 
Jehovah  spake  unto  Moses  and  unto  Aaron,  saying,  ^ 
"When  Pharaoh  shall  speak  unto  you,  saying,  Shew  a 
miracle  for  you :  then  thou  shalt  say  unto  Aaron,  Take 
thy  rod,  and  cast  it  before  Pharaoh,  and  it  shall  become  a 
serpent.  ^^  <[|  ^^^  Moses  and  Aaron  went  in  unto  Pha- 
raoh, and  they  did  so  as  Jehovah  had  commanded :  and 
Aaron  cast  down  his  rod  before  Pharaoh,  and  before  his 
servants,  and  it  became  a  *"  serpent.  ^^  Then  Pharaoh  also 
called  the  wise  men  and  the  sorcerers :  now  the  magicians 
of  Egypt,  they  also  did  in  like  manner  with  their  enchant- 
ments. 12  Yov  they  cast  down  every  man  his  rod,  and 
they  became  serpents  :  but  Aaron's  rod  swallowed  up  their 
rods.     13  And   Pharaoh's   heart   was   hardened,  and   he 


^ 


8,  9.]  God  gives  a  preliminary  direction 
as  to  a  sign  before  Pharaoh,  corresponding 
to,  but  on  the  face  of  the  history  independ- 
ent of,  the  sign  to  be  shewn  to  the  people  iu 
ch.  iv.  2,  ff.,  21.  We  may  observe  that 
whereas  in  those  former  places  Moses  was 
to  shew  the  sign,  now,  in  strict  correspond- 
ence with  the  words  of  God  in  ver.  1,  it  is 
Aaron :  and  the  rod,  which  in  ch.  iv.  was 
that  of  Moses,  is  now  that  of  Aaron,  the 
text  admitting  no  other  interpretation.  See 
below.  10 — 13.]  This  direction  is  car- 

ried out.  Here  first  we  meet  with  the 
sorcerers  of  Egypt.  Some  of  the  comment- 
ators trouble  themselves  and  their  readers 
to  prove  that  these  were  mere  impostors  or 
jugglers.  But  the  sacred  text  evidently 
implies  their  genuineness  as  magicians, 
gifted  with  supernatural  power.  Nor  does 
Scripture  anywhere  deny  to  the  agents  of 
the  evil  one  the  possession  of  supernatural 
gifts :  see  especially  2  Thess.  ii.  9.  These 
magicians,  or  Hierogrammateis,  of  Egypt, 
were  of  great  fame.  See  on  Gen.  xli.  8  ; 
and  for  fuller  particulars,  Mr.  Stuart  Poole's 
careful  and  able  article  "  Magicians "  in 
the  Biblical  Diet.  Tradition  preserved  the 
names  of  two  of  the  principal  of  these 
Egyptian  wise  men,  as  Jannes  and  Jambres : 
see  on  2  Tim.  iii.  8.  It  is  to  be  ob- 

served that  the  Hebrew  word  here  used  for 
serpent  is  not  that  used  in  ch.  iv.  2,  tf. 
{nachash,  so  Gen.  iii.  1,  and  generally),  but 
tannin,  a  monster  (Gen.  i.  21).  See  below 
on  vv.  14 — 18.  12.]  The  spirit  of  the 

narrative  is  not  that  the  magicians'    acts 


were  imposture,  and  that  of  Moses  and 
Aaron  genuine,  but  that  the  two  coincided 
up  to  a  certain  point,  and  after  that  the 
power  of  the  magicians  failed :  compare  ch. 
viii.  19.  Even  here  the  superiority  of 
Jehovah  is  shewn  by  Aaron's  rod,  in  its 
changed  form  as  a  serpent,  swallowing  up 
theirs.  14 — 25.  J    The  plague  of  turn- 

ing the  Nile  iiito  blood.  It  is  hardly  pos- 
sible to  resist  the  evidence  of  our  having  here 
two  distinct  forms  of  the  narrative  blended 
together.  In  the  former  Moses  is  aluue. 
The  command  is  given  him  to  go  and  meet 
I'haraoh  with  the  rod  which  was  turned  into 
a  serpent  (nachash,  not  tannin,  as  in  vv.  10, 
13),  viz.  that  which  he  had  in  his  hand,  ch. 
iv.  2,  fF.  In  the  other  (ver.  19)  Moses  is 
commanded  to  order  Aaron  to  take  his 
(Aaron's)  rod,  and  stretch  out  his  hand,  ifcc. 
In  the  former  it  is  the  river  which  is  to  bo 
smitten,  in  the  other,  all  the  waters  in 
Egypt.  In  the  former  we  have  the  object 
specitied — the  journey  to  serve  God  in  the 
wilderness,  which  also  appeared  in  the  cor- 
responding narrative,  ch.  iii.  18.  Again, 
the  narrative  in  ver.  20,  with  the  hardly 
noticeable  exception  of  the  words  "  Moses 
and  Aaron,"  joins  naturally  to  vv.  14 — 18. 
The  river  only  is  mentioned,  he  (Moses) 
lifts  up  the  rod ;  Pharaoh  turns  (from  the 
meeting,  ver.  15)  to  his  house  ;  the  Egypt- 
ians obtain  water  by  digging  round  about 
the  river  (ver.  24),  which  hardly  agrees 
with  ver.  19,  nor  could  the  magicians  have 
done  so  with  their  enchantments,  if  all  the 
waters  iu  Egypt  had    previously  become 


248 


EXODUS. 


yii. 


t5f - 


!  literally, 
heavy,  ch. 
iv.  10  (twice); 
viii.  24  ;  ix.  3, 
&c.;  xvii.  12; 
xviil.  18. 
Proy.    xxvii. 
3,al.. 


t  Isa.  i.  14.  Jer. 


hearkened  not  unto  tliem  ;  as  Jehovah  had  said.  ^^  51  ^nd 
Jehovah  said  unto  Moses,  Pliaraoli's  heart  is  ^stubborn,  he 
refuseth  to  let  the  people  go.  ^^  Get  thee  unto  Pharaoh 
in  the  morning ;  lo,  he  goeth  out  unto  the  water ;  and 
thou  shalt  stand  by  the  river's  brink  against  he  come ; 
and  the  rod  which  was  turned  to  a  serpent  shalt  thou  take 
in  thine  hand,  i^  ^j^d  thou  shalt  say  unto  him,  Jehovah 
the  God  of  the  Hebrews  hath  sent  me  unto  thee,  saying, 
Let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  me  in  the  wilder- 
ness :  and,  behold,  hitherto  thou  wouldest  not  hear.  ^7 
Thus  saith  Jehovah,  In  this  thou  shalt  know  that  I  am 
Jehovah  :  behold,  I  will  smite  with  the  rod  that  is  in  mine 
hand  upon  the  waters  which  are  in  the  river,  and  they 
shall  be  turned  to  blood.  ^^  And  the  fish  that  is  in  the 
river  shall  die,  and  the  river  shall  stink ;  and  the  Egypt- 
ians shall  4othe  to  drink  of  the  water  of  the  river.  ^^  51 
And  Jehovah  spake  unto  Moses,  Say  unto  Aaron,  Take 
thy  rod,  and  stretch  out  thine  hand  upon  the  waters  of 
Egypt,  upon  their  streams,  upon  their  rivers,  and  upon 
their  ponds,  and  upon  all  their  pools  of  water,  that  they 


Wood,  as  there  ■would  have  been  none  left 
to  operate  upon.  Take  out  ver.  19  (and 
the  words  "  aiicl  Aaro7i,"  from  ver.  20,  but 
this  is  not  necessary, — Moses  and  Aaron  may 
■well  have  carried  out  the  command  given  to 
Moses  alone),  and  all  the  narrative  runs 
smoothly  and  continuously.  But  it  requires 
a  strong  bias  in  favour  of  the  unity  of  the 
history,  to  maintain  that  after  a  distinct 
command  to  Moses  to  go  and  meet  Pharaoh, 
and  a  direction  what  to  say  to  him,  another 
new  command  to  the  two  brothers,  both 
covering  a  portion  of  the  other,  and  extend- 
ing beyoud  it,  should  be  inserted  between 
the  utterance  of  and  the  obedience  to  that 
former  order.  14.]  On  the  word  which 

I  have  rendered  stubborn,  see  rcfF. 
15.]  Pharaoh  perhaps  ■went  out  each  morn- 
ing, or  on  some  special  day,  to  pay  the 
accustomed  honour  to  the  Kile :  see  on  ch. 
ii.  5.  Some  suppose  it  was  to  see  how  high 
the  water  bad  risen,  it  being  in  the  time  of 
the  inundation  ;  but  if  so,  the  river's  brink 
■would  hardly  be  so  definitely  named.  On 
the  rest  of  the  verse,  see  above.  16.] 

See   on  ch.    iii.    18.  18.]  The   Nile 

abounded  in  all  kinds  of  fish,  enough  not 


only  for  food  in  Egypt,  but  for  considerable 
trade  in  exportation.  See  Num.  xi.  5  ;  Isa. 
xix.   8.  shall  lothe  is  a  good  para- 

phrase. The  verb  is  literally  shall  labour, 
or  weary  themselves  (reff.).  The  LXX. 
rendering,  s/iall  not  be  able,  is  not  so  good 
here,  tliough  it  came  to  that:  see  vv.  21, 
25.  19.]  On  this  verse  as  belonging  to 

another  form  of  the  narrative,  see  above,  and 
compare  ver.  9,  where  the  general  command 
is  given,  of  which  this  ordering  of  Aaron 
by  Moses  is  an  example.  Knobel,  in  his 
anxiety  to  make  the  whole  of  this  (vv.  19 — 
25)  the  narrative  of  the  Elohist,  maintains 
that  only  the  Nile  and  its  derivative 
waters  are  intended  in  this  verse.  But 
surely,  though  by  far  the  greater  part  of  the 
water  in  Egypt  is  derived  from  this  source, 
such  an  acceptation  of  the  verse  is  im- 
possible. There  was  both  well  and  cistern 
water  in  Egypt.  Besides  the  greater  stores 
of  water,  even  the  lesser  ones  in  vessels  at 
home,  whether  stone  troughs  where  they 
purified  the  Nile  water  with  almond-paste, 
or  wooden  bowls  for  common  use,  should  be 
turned  into  blood.  To  deny  this,  in  anxiety 
to  provide  the  magicians  with  water  (ver.  22) 


14— VIII.  1.  EXODUS.  249 

may  become  blood  ;  and  that  there  may  be  blood  througb- 
out  all  the  land  of  Egypt,  both  in  resi^eh  of  wood,  and  in 
vessels  of  stone.  ^0  ^^^  Moses  and  Aaron  did  so,  as  Je- 
hovah commanded ;  and  he  lifted  up  the  rod,  and  smote 
the  waters  that  were  in  the  river,  in  the  sight  of  Pharaoh, 
and  in  the  sight  of  his  servants  ;  and  all  the  waters  that 
were  in  the  river  were  turned  to  blood.  '^^  And  the  fish 
that  was  in  the  river  died ;  and  the  river  stank,  and  the 
Egyptians  could  not  drink  of  the  water  of  the  river  ;  and 
the  blood  was  throughout  all  the  land  of  Egypt.  22  ji^^^ 
the  magicians  of  Egypt  did  so  with  their  enchantments : 
and  Pharaoh's  heart  was  hardened,  neither  did  he  hearken 
unto  them ;  as  Jehovah  had  said.  -^  And  Pharaoh 
turned  and  went  into  his  house,  neither  did  he  "set  his  '^t^.'-^^.w. 
heart  to  this  also.  -^  And  all  the  Egyptians  digged 
round  about  the  river  for  water  to  drink ;  for  they  could 
not  di'ink  of  the  water  of  the  river.  25  ^j^^  seven  days 
were  fulfilled,  after  that  Jehovah  had  smitten  the  river. 
VIII.  1  And  Jehovah  spake  unto  Moses,  Go  imto  Pha- 
raoh, and   say  unto  him,  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  Let  my 

is  to  deal  unfairly  with  the  text.    The  words  tion,  see   reff.              24.]    Ilcre,  again,  it 

^'vessels   of"    are    necessarily   understood  would  seem,  if  all  vessels  and  stores  of  water 

both  times.             20.]   See  above.     Either  in  Egypt  had  been  tilled  with  blood,  that 

(1.)  The  brothers  carried  out  what  God  had  the  resource  here  mentioned  would  have  led 

commanded  Moses  alone  ;  or  (2.)  The  words  to  labour  in  vain  ;  but  if  only  the  river  w^ere 

and  Aaron  may  have  been  the  result   of  affected,  the  labour   here  described  would 

arranging    the    compound    history.      The  have  been  worth   their   while.              25.] 

latter  Avould  appear  likely  from  what  fol-  This  state  of  the  river  lasted  a  whole  week, 

lows,  for  he  lifted  seems  better  to   corre-  Or,  perhaps,  we  are  to  connect  these  words 

spend  to  what  went  befoiH3  than  to  ver.   19.  with  ch.  viii.  1,  and  understand  thence  that 

Observe  that,  as  in  ver.  17,  it  is  here  the  seven  days  elapsed  between  the  smiting  of 

waters  that  are  in  the  river  which  are  the  river  and  the  next  speaking  of  Jehovah 

smitten.              22.]    The    magicians    took  to  Jloscs.     That  would,  in  fact,  imply  the 

water,  not  belonging  strictly  to  the  waters  same  thing,  as  no  remission  of  the  plague  is 

that  were  in  the  river,  and  by  their  arts  recorded.     "With    the   various   rationalistic 

turned  it  into   blood.      This  again  would  speculations  as  to  a  natural  cause  for  this 

hardly  fit  ver.  19.     It  has-been  suggested  phenomenon,  we   have  no  concern.     It   is 

that  they  might  have  obtained  water  from  described  in  our  narrative  as  supernaturally 

the   land   of   Goshen ;  but  such  matter  is  caused,    by    Divine   command    and    for    a 

altogether  outside  the  narrative,  which  says  special  purpose.     These  speculations   seem 

nothing  here  of  what  befell  Israel.     As  far  to  have  been  peculiarly  attractive  in  this 

as  it  shews,  they  suflercd  as  well  as  the  instance,  as  even  Keil  indulges  in  them.     A 

Egyptians.     We  first  read  of  the  severance  notice  and  summary  refutation  of  them  may 

made  between  the  two  peoples  in  ch.  viii.  be  seen  in  Mr.  Stuart  Poole's  article  on  the 

22.               23.]    viz.    from    the    interview  Plagues  of  Egypt  in  the  Biblical  Diet. 

commanded   in   ver.    15.      On   setting  the  VIII.   1 — 15.]    The   second  plague  — of 

heart,  i.  e.  giving  serious  practical  atten-  frogs.     \Ve  may  observe  that  the  same  ap- 


cv.  30,  only. 


250  '       EXODUS.  VIII. 

people  go,  that  they  may  serve  me.     2  ^jj,j  ff  ^]^q^  refuse 
to  let  them  go,  behold,  I  will  smite  all  thy  borders  with 

^taviii°45r'  the  "^  frogs  :  ^  and  the  river  shall  bring  forth  frogs  abund- 
antly, which  shall  go  up  and  come  into  thine  house,  and 
into  thy  bedchamber,  and  upon  thy  bed,  and  into  the 
house  of  thy  servants,  and  upon  thy  people,  and  into  thine 
■^  ovens,  and  into  thy  kneading-troughs :  *  and  the  frogs 
shall  come  up  both  on  ^  thee,  and  upon  ^  thy  people,  and 

^Ih  ix  il'-^i'  ^pon  all  ^thy  servants.  ^^  And  Jehovah  spake  unto 
6.  seever.3.  j^joggg^  g^y  uuto  Aarou,  Stretch  forth  thine  hand  with  thy 
rod  over  the  streams,  over  the  rivers,  and  over  the  ponds, 
and  cause  frogs  to  come  up  upon  the  land  of  Egypt.  ^ 
And  Aaron  stretched  out  his  hand  over  the  waters  of 
Egypt ;  and  the  frogs  came  up,  and  covered  the  land  of 
Egypt.  7  And  the  magicians  did  so  with  their  enchant- 
ments, and  brought  up  frogs  upon  the  land  of  Egypt.  ^ 
%  Then  Pharaoh  called  for  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  said, 
Intreat  Jehovah,  that  he  may  take  away  the  frogs  from 
me,  and  from  my  peoj)le ;  and  I  will  let  the  people  go, 
that  they  may  do  sacrifice  unto  Jehovah.  ^  And  Moses 
said  unto  Pharaoh,  Glory  over  me :  when  shall  I  intreat 

parent  intermingling  of  narratives  occurs  ing  vessels  and  ovens  would  be  prepared  the 
here  as  was  before  noticed  on  ch.  vii.  19.  king's  own  food,  as  in  Gen.  xl.  17.  6.] 
First,  Jehovah  commands  Moses  to  go  to  See  on  ch.  vii.  19.  Here,  as  there,  in  the 
Pharaoh  and  announce  the  coming  plague,  corresponding  former  narrative,  the  river 
There  we  have  the  infliction  of  the  plague,  only  is  mentioned ;  in  the  other,  all  the 
preceded  by  a  command  to  Moses  to  tell  waters  of  Egypt.  7.]  Again  we  find 
Aaron  to  stretch  forth  his  rod,  &c.  2.]  some  dilEculty  in  imagining  the  course  of 
the  frogs,  viz.  which  always  were  present  incidents.  If  the  general  swarming  of  frogs 
in  myriads  in  Egypt,  but  wei-e  now  to  be  had  taken  place  and  was  going  on,  how 
multiplied  into  a  plague.  In  the  language  could  the  magicians  do  the  same  ?  "We  are 
of  hieroglyphics,  the  figure  of  the  frog  sig-  driven  to  suppose  that  the  plague  took  place 
nifies  tmdtitude.  But  this  infliction  is  some-  by  paroxysms,  day  by  day,  or  at  some  in- 
thing  totally  distinct  from  the  ordinary  tervals :  and  that  during  some  lull  of  the 
swarming  of  these  animals  in  Egypt.  Mr.  swarming  the  magicians  had  power  to  pro- 
Poole  (as  above)  notices  that  this  plague  was  duce  it.  8.]  The  spirit  of  Pharaoh  be- 
peculiarly  distressing  to  the  Egyptians  be-  gins  to  be  broken  by  the  infliction.  His 
cause  the  frog  was  among  their  sacred  ani-  magicians,  it  seems  implied,  could  imitate 
mals.  Knobel  adduces  at  considerable  length  but  could  not  remove  the  plague.  He 
the  testimonies  of  travellers  as  to  the  swarm-  sends  for  Moses  and  Aaron  (so  also  ver. 
ing  of  frogs  in  Egypt.  They  are  ordinarily  25;  ch.  ix.  27;  x.  16)  to  intercede  with 
kept  under  by  the  ibis  and  the  stork.  The  Jehovah  that  the  plague  may  be  removed, 
month  of  their  appearing  is  September,  9.  Glory  over  me]  The  meaning 
whereas  this  plague  was  evidently  iu  the  of  this  somewhat  difficult  expression  seems 
spring.  3,  4.]  They  were  to  come  to  be,  that  Moses  recognizes  in  Pharaoh's 
both  into  all  places  and  domestic  vessels,  request  a  confession  of  the  power  of  Jeho- 
and  on  the  persons  of  all.     In  these  knead-  vah,  and  in  order  to  make  that  power  appear 


2—17. 


EXODUS. 


251 


for  thee,  and  for  thy  servants,  and  for  thy  people,  to  de- 
stroy the  frogs  from  thee  and  thy  houses,  tlmt  they  may 
remain  in  the  river  only  ?  i*^  And  he  said,  To  morrow. 
And  he  said,  Be  it  according  to  thy  word  :  that  thou 
mayest  know  that  tJicre  is  none  like  unto  Jehovah  our 
God.  11  And  the  frogs  shall  depart  from  thee,  and  from 
thy  houses  and  from  thy  servants,  and  from  thy  people  ; 
the}^  shall  remain  in  the  river  only.  ^2  ji^-^^  Moses  and 
Aaron  went  out  from  Pharaoh  :  and  Moses  cried  unto 
Jehovah  because  of  the  frogs  which  he  had  brought  upon 
Pharaoh,  i^  And  Jehovah  did  according  to  the  word  of 
Moses  ;  and  the  frogs  died  out  of  the  houses,  out  of  the 
villages,  and  out  of  the  fields,  i*  And  they  gathered  them 
together  upon  heaps  :  and  the  land  stank.  ^'^  But  when 
Pharaoh  saw  that  there  was  >' respite,  he  hardened  his 
heart,  and  hearkened  not  unto  them ;  as  Jehovah  had 
said.  1*^  %  And  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses,  Say  imto 
Aaron,  Stretch  out  thy  rod,  and  smite  the  dust  of  the 
land,  that  it  may  become  gnats  throughout  all  the  land  of 
Egypt.  17  And  they  did  so ;  for  Aaron  stretched  out  his 
hand  with  his  rod,  and  smote  the  dust  of  the  earth,  and 


J  Esth.  IT.  U. 


to  liim  iu  its  almightiness  abases  himself, 
as  the  advocate,  to  nothing  iu  the  presence 
of  Pharaoh,  his  client — as  much  as  to  say, 
"  Thou  hast  now  taken  the  only  and  certain 
■way  for  the  removal  of  the  plague  :  it  is  for 
thee  to  say  when,  aud  it  shall  be  removed : 
I  am  only  the  doer  of  thy  bidding  with  Him 
who  is  all  powerful."  The  ancient  versions 
do  not  give  the  word  thus,  but  render  it, 
*'■  Appoi7it  a  time  to  me."  Modern  He- 
braists, however,  with  some  slight  modifica- 
tion of  explanation,  adopt  the  other  ren- 
dering. So  Knobel,  Keil,  Kalisch,  &c. 
Tlie  river  was  the  proper  and  accustomed 
place  of  the  frogs.  10.]  By  Pharaoh's 

saying  To-morrow,  the  interview  was  pro- 
bably at  night.  12.]  because  of  the 
frogs,  is  literally,  because  of  the  matter 
(or  war)  of  the  frogs.  brought  upon] 
Literally,  appointed  to.  13.]  In  the 
words,  the  houses,  the  villages,  and  the 
fields,  we  have  another  form  of  expression 
from  that  iu  ver.  3,  betokening  perhaps  an 
independent  source.  14.  upon  heaps] 
Literally,  heaps,  heaps.  15.  respite] 
Literally,  breathing,  ref. 


16—19.]  The  third  plague  —  of  gnats. 
Here  the  warning  given  on  the  two  previous 
occasions,  by  sending  Moses  to  Pharaoh, 
drops  out,  and  we  take  up  the  narrative  at 
the  command  to  Moses  to  order  Aaron  to 
stretch  out  his  rod :  see  on  ch.  vii.  19,  and 
on  ver.  5.  16-]  The  fertile  dark  earth 

of  the  valley  of  the  iS'ile  was  also  one  of  the 
deities  of  Egypt ;  and  this  in  its  turn  be- 
comes changed  into  a  plague  to  its  worship- 
pers. The  word  rendered  lice  by  the  A.  Y. 
(Kinnim)  is,  it  seems  confessed,  to  be  inter- 
preted gnats  or  mosquitos.  The  LXX.,  who 
are  of  considerable  authority  as  writing  in 
Egypt,  render  it  thus,  and  Knobel  and 
others  give  abundant  extracts  from  travel- 
lers, and  authors  ancient  and  modern,  to  the 
same  effect.  17.]  The  same  difficulty 

occurs  as  before,  see  on  ver.  7,  but  can 
hardly  be  similarly  met.  The  failure  of  the 
magicians  in  this  instance  is  explained  by 
Knobel  to  have  bten  caused  by  the  differing 
nature  of  the  plague.  The  former  wonders 
were  only  bringing  forth,  and  changing  into, 
things  already  existing,  whereas  this  was  a 
new  creation.     13ut  surely  there  was  just  as 


252 


EXODUS. 


VIII. 


z  here,  and  Ps. 
lxxviii.45;  cv. 
31,  only.    See 
cli.  xii.  38. 
Neh.  xiij.  3. 


the  gnats  were  in  man,  and  in  beast ;  all  the  dust  of  the 
land  became  gnats  throughout  all  the  land  of  Egypt,  ^^ 
And  the  magicians  did  so  with  their  enchantments  to 
bring  forth  gnats,  but  they  could  not :  so  there  were  gnats 
upon  man,  and  upon  beast.  ^^  Then  the  magicians  said 
unto  Pharaoh,  This  is  the  finger  of  God  :  and  Pharaoh's 
heart  was  hardened,  and  he  hearkened  not  unto  them  ;  as 
Jehovah  had  said.  20  ^  ^^^j  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses, 
Rise  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  stand  before  Pharaoh ; 
lo,  he  Cometh  forth  to  the  water ;  and  say  unto  him.  Thus 
saith  Jehovah,  Let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve 
me.  ^1  Else,  if  thou  wilt  not  let  my  people  go,  behold,  I 
Avill  send  the  ^  swarm  upon  thee,  and  upon  thy  servants, 
and  upon  thy  people,  and  into  thy  houses  :  and  the  houses 
of  the  Egyptians  shall  be  full  of  the  swarm,  and  also  the 
ground  whereon  they  are.  22  ^nd  I  will  sever  in  that 
day  the  land  of  Goshen,  in  which  my  people  dwell,  that 
no  swarm  shall  be  there ;    to  the  end  thou  mayest  know 


raucli  a  new  creation  in  educing  the  swarms 
of  frogs,  or  in  bringing  blood  out  of  water. 
The  reason  of  the  failure  is  not  given. 
19.]  The  connexion  of  this  verse  has  been 
somewhat  obscured  by  our  promiscuous  use 
of  the  Divine  names.  The  magicians  do 
not  acknowledge  the  plague  as  the  work  of 
Jehovah,  Israel's  God,  but  as  a  work  of 
divine  agency,  of  God  in  their  own  sense, — 
and  not  that  of  Moses  and  Aaron.  What 
Moses  and  Aaron  did,  they  could  do ;  but 
this  in  which  they  had  failed,  was  no  work 
of  men,  but  of  God.  So  they  disparage, 
instead  of  exalting,  the  agency  of  Moses  and 
Aaron,  and  the  result  is  that  Pharaoh's  heart 
is  hardened.  Compare  the  remarkable  allu- 
sion to  this  answer  in  Isa.  xix.  11,  ff. 

20—32.]  The  fourth  plagtie—of—f  (see 
below).  In  this  case  the  commission  of 
Moses  to  forewarn  Pharaoh  is  related  as  in 
the  two  first  plagues ;  but  the  subsequent 
account  of  the  ordering  of  Aaron  to  perform 
the  wonder  is  not  given.  It  is  in  this  case 
the  act  of  Jehovah  Himself,  ver.  24.  As  in 
ch.  vii.  15,  Moses  is  to  meet  Pharaoh  as  he 
goes  forth  early  to  the  water  :  see  there. 
21.]  It  is  a  difficult  and  apparently 
unanswerable  question,  of  what  this  plague 
consisted.  The  Hebrew  text  has  simply 
swarms,  nothing  being  added  to  indicate  of 


what  the  swarms  were  to  be.  Consequently 
very  various  conjectures  have  been  made. 
Flies  are  perhaps  the  most  probable,  if  one 
kind  of  animal  only  is  to  be  understood, 
which  from  the  context  seems  to  be  the  case. 
The  fly  (Isa.  vii.  18)  was  characteristic  of 
Egypt,  and  is  described  by  travellers  as  the 
greatest  plague  there  even  at  this  day,  set- 
tling on  the  tender  parts  of  the  eyes  and  nose 
and  irritating  almost  to  madness  both  man 
and  beast.  The  LXX.,  whose  authority  is 
great  on  Egyptian  matters,  render,  "  the 
dog-fly,^'  upon  which  Jerome  ventured  an 
ingenious  conjecture,  changing  one  letter, 
that  it  should  be,  a  mixture  of  flies,  as  A.  V. 
in  reff.  Psalms.  Kalisch  supposed  the  swarm 
to  have  consisted  of  beetles,  and  gives  tra- 
vellers' descriptions  of  the  swarms,  and  the 
destructive  habits  of  those  insects.  In  this 
uncertainty,  I  have  thought  it  best  to  leave 
the  literal  Hebrew.  The  best  supply  per- 
haps would  be  "  of  insects  ;  "  but  even  then 
we  should  be  foreclosing  a  matter  which  the 
text  leaves  open.  22.]  This  is  the  first 

mention  of  a  difference  between  Egypt  and 
Israel  in  the  matter  of  the  plagues.  There 
may  have  been  before  a  personal  and  provi- 
dential distinction.  Now  for  the  first  time 
it  is  territorial.  22.]  Pharaoh  was  to 

be  convinced,  as  Enobel  well  remarks — (1.) 


18—30.  EXODUS.  •  253 

that  I  am  Jehovah  in  the  midst  of  the  earth.  23  \j^^  j 
will  put  ''redemption  between  my  people  and  thy  people  :  "^x/x.'i'^,,.. 
to  morrow  shall  this  sign  be.  24  ^Vnd  Jehovah  did  so  ;  and  ''  *' 
there  came  a  grievous  swarm  into  the  house  of  Pharaoh,  and 
into  his  servants'  houses,  and  into  all  the  land  of  Egypt :  the 
land  was  corrupted  by  reason  of  the  swarm.  -'  ^f  And 
Pharaoh  called  for  IMoses  and  for  Aaron,  and  said.  Go  ye 
sacrifice  to  your  God  in  the  land.  26  ^Vnd  Moses  said,  It 
is  not  meet  so  to  do ;  for  we  shall  sacrifice  the  abomina- 
tion of  the  Egyptians  to  Jehovah  our  God :  lo,  shall  we 
sacrifice  the  abomination  of  the  Egj^ptians  before  their 
eyes,  and  will  they  not  stone  us  ?  27  "We  will  go  three 
days'  journey  into  the  wilderness,  and  sacrifice  to  Jehovah 
our  God,  as  he  shall  command  us.  28  \j^^  Pharaoh  said, 
I  will  let  3^ou  go,  that  ye  may  sacrifice  to  Jehovah  your 
God  in  the  wilderness  ;  only  ye  shall  not  go  very  far 
away :  intreat  for  me.  29  And  Moses  said,  Behold,  I  go 
out  from  thee,  and  I  will  intreat  Jehovah  that  the  swarm 
may  depart  from  Pharaoh,  from  his  servants,  and  from  his 
people,  to  morrow :  but  let  not  Pharaoh  deal  deceitfully 
any  more  in  not  letting  the  pcoj)le  go  to  sacrifice  to  Je- 
hovah.    ^^  And  Moses  went  out  from  Pharaoh,  and  in- 

That   Israel's  God  was  the  inflicter  of  the  animals  which  it  was  not  lawful  in  Egj-pt  to 

plagues;  (2.)  That  He  had  power  over  Egypt  kill,  ami  to  the  killing  of  which  death  was 

also  ;  (3.)  That  He  was  everywhere  the  high-  attached  as   the   penalty.      The   Egyptians 

est  Power, — the  only  true  God.             23.]  held  the  cow,  and  in  some  parts  the  goat, 

The  word  rendered  division  in  the  A.  V.  is  sacred,  and  these  animals  could  not  be  sacri- 

acknowledged  to  bear  no  such  meaning.     In  ficed  as  was  the  practice  of  Israel,  without 

reff.  it   is   redemption,  and   the  verb  from  danger  in  Egypt.     But  others,  among  whom 

which  it  is  derived  is  the  ordinary  word  for  are  Keil  and   Ilengstenberg,  suppose  it  to 

to  redeem.     The  c?js!l»«c<to?i  was  in  fact  are-  mean  that  the  Israelites  would  not  comply 

demption  for  Israel,  only  preliminary  to  that  with  the  Egyptian  rules  about  cleanness  and 

greater  redemption  at  the  Passover  :  and  it  fitness  in  the  sacrificed  animals,  and  so  their 

might  fairly  be  said  to  be  placed  between  them  sacrifices  would   be   in   the  eyes   of  Egypt 

and  the  Egyptians,  who  had  it  not.  abominations.     The    former    interpretation 

24.]  The  swarm  appears  to  have  covered  the  seems  the  more  probable.             28. J  Pressed 

face  of  the  earth,  and  to  have  defiled  every-  by  the  present  plague,  Pharaoh  concedes  the 

thing.             25.]  See  on  ver.  8.     This  is  a  journey  of  three  days   into  the  wilderness, 

further  step  in  the  impression  made  on  Pha-  The  concluding  words  are  addressed  to  Moses 

raoh.     He  is  ready  to  consent  to  the  sacrifice,  and  Aaron,  and  do  not  include  the  people, 

provided  it  is  in  the  land,  but  has  no  idea  They  arc   taken  up   again   in   vv.    29,   30. 

of  letting  Israel  go.            26.]  This  objec-  29.]  Moses  had   been  once  deceived 

tion  of  Moses  is  understood  in  two  diff'erent  (ver.    1.3),    and    therefore    warns    Pharaoh 

ways.     Some,  with  whom  are  Knobel  and  against  repeating  the  treachery.     Afterwards 

Kalisch,  suppose  it  to  mean  that  the  children  (ch.  ix.  30)  he  becomes  better  accustomed  to 

of  Israel  would  have  to  sacrifice  to  Jehovah  Pharaoh  and  his  people. 


254  EXODUS.  YIII. 

treated  Jehovah,  ^i  jt^^^  Jehovah  did  according  to  the 
word  of  Moses  ;  and  lie  removed  the  swarm  from  Pharaoh, 
from  his  servants,  and  from  his  people  ;  there  remained 
not  one.  ^^  And  Pharaoh  hardened  his  heart  at  this  time 
also,  neither  would  he  let  the  people  go.  IX.  ^  Then 
Jehovah  said  unto  Moses,  Go  in  unto  Pharaoh,  and  tell 
him.  Thus  saith  Jehovah  the  God  of  the  Hebrews,  Let 
my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  me.  ^  J'or  if  thou  re- 
fuse to  let  them  go,  and  wilt  hold  them  still,  ^  behold,  the 
''^^^iii''"''  ~^'  ^liand  of  Jehovah  is  upon  thy  cattle  which  is  in  the  field, 
upon  the  horses,  upon  the  asses,  upon  the  camels,  upon  the 
oxen,  and  upon  the  sheep :  there  shall  be  a  very  grievous 
murrain.  ^  And  Jehovah  shall  sever  between  the  cattle 
of  Israel  and  the  cattle  of  Egypt :  and  there  shall  nothing 
die  of  all  that  is  the  children's  of  Israel.  ^  And  Jehovah 
appointed  a  set  time,  saying,  To  morrow  Jehovah  shall 
do  this  thing  in  the  land.  ^  And  Jehovah  did  that  thing 
on  the  morrow,  and  all  the  cattle  of  Egypt  died :  but  of 
the  cattle  of  the  children  of  Israel  died  not  one.  7  And 
Pharaoh  sent,  and,  behold,  there  was  not  one  of  the  cattle 
of  the  Israelites  dead.      And  the  heart  of  Pharaoh  was 

IX.  1 — 7.]  The  fifth  plague  —  murrain  6.]  The  words  all  the  cattle  of 
This  narrative  again  belongs  to  the  same  Egypt  died  must  not  be  literally  under- 
class as  ch.  vii.  14—18;  viii.  1 — 4,  20 — 24.  stood,  for  in  ver.  19,  a  portion  of  the  .same 
The  commission  is  given  to  Moses  only:  he  narrative  as  this  (see  on  ver.  13),  we^flnd 
is  to  go  and  speak  to  Pharaoh.  In  this  case  the  cattle  spoken  of  as  still  existing.  Even 
the  narrative  of  the  plague  is  confined  to  the  strictest  of  the  literalists  acknowledge 
this  narrator,  and  finds  no  place  in  the  this  liere,  but  find  it  convenient  to  ignore 
recital  of  the  other.  3.]  In  the  He-  such  acknowledgment  in  other  places.  By 
brew,  the  words  a  very  grievous  murrain  comparing  ver.  25  with  ch.  x.  12  it  is  plain 
are  in  opposition  with  the  hand  of  Jehovah  that  we  must  take  the  general  statements  of 
above.  The  form  which  this  adverse  hand  the  history  with  a  very  wide  allowance, 
was  to  take  was  that  of  a  heavy  pestilence.  And  in  common  fairness  it  must  be  observed, 
Of  the  animals  named,  horses  are  uniformly  if  this  is  undeniably  the  case  in  some  cases 
associated  with  Egypt :  see  on  Deut.  xvii.  where  the  history  itself  is  its  own  witness, 
16,  and  compare  Gen.  xlvii.  17  and  ch.  how  can  we  justify  resisting  a  similar  wide 
siv.  9,  23  ;  xv.  1  ;  asses  as  well  as  mules  understanding  of  the  narrative  in  other 
are  found  continually  represented  on  the  cases }  What  right  have  we  to  deal  with 
Egyptian  monuments ;  camels  are  very  sel-  the  word  of  God  deceitfully,  and  to  choose  for 
dom,  if  at  all,  thus  found.  See  a  conjecture  ourselves  when  we  shall  fight  for  the  letter, 
on  this  in  the  note  Gen.  xii.  16.  Oxen  and  and  when  we  shall  give  it  up  ?  7.] 
sheep  require  no  notice.  See  again  Mr.  The  distinction  was  perhaps  interpreted  by 
Stuart  Poole's  interesting  article  on  the  Ten  Pharaoh  as  meaning  that  in  this  case  the 
Plagues,  Biblical  Diet.  4.]  See  ch.  God  of  the  Hebrews  had  prevailed ;  but 
viii.  22.  Between  this  and  the  following  there  might  be  a  reverse,  and  the  Egyptian 
verses  it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  message  gods  might  hereafter  get  the  advantage, 
was  delivered  and  had  no  effect  on  Pharaoh.  He  regards  it  as  a  mere  contest  of  national 


31— IX.  12. 


EXODUS. 


255 


hardened,  and   he   did  not  let  the  people  go.     8  ^  ^^d 

Jehovah  said  unto  Moses  and  unto  Aaron,  Take  to  you 

handfuls  of  *^ ashes  of  the  '^furnace,  and  let  Moses  sprinkle  <^^"<'"r,\j. 

it  toward  the  heaven  m  the  sight  of  Pharaoh.     ^  And  it     oni""'' 

shall  become  small  dust  in  all  the    land  of   Egypt,  and 

shall  be  a  *'boil  breaking  forth  in  ^blisters  upon  man,  and 

upon  beast,  throughout  all  the  land  of  Egypt.     ^^  ^^^j 

they  took  ''ashes  of  the  furnace,  and  stood  before  Pharaoh  ; 

and  Moses  sprinkled  it  up  toward  heaven  ;  and  it  became 

a  boil  breaking  forth  icifh  blisters  upon  man,  and  upon 

beast.     ^1  And  the  magicians  could  not  ^^ stand  before  Moses  k^'  "''"  '*• 

°  Prov.  xxvii.  7, 

because  of  the  boils ;  for  the  boil  was  upon  the  magicians,     """'  ""'■ '" 
and  upon  all  the  Egyptians.     ^^  ^^nd  Jehovah  hardened 
the  heart  of  Pharaoh,  and  he  hearkened  not  unto  them  ; 


cl.ovitxiil.  1«, 
&c.  Di'ut. 
Jtxvlii.  27,  3S. 
•JKini!»xx.7. 
Jobh.7.  Isa. 
xxxuil.  21, 

f  here  only. 


deities.  8 — 12.]    The  sixth  plague  — 

boils  and  blisters.  This  portion  of  the 
narrative,  specifying  the  joint  commission  of 
Moses  and  Aaron,  ranges  with  ch.  vii.  8 — 
13,  19—24  ;  viii.  5—7,  16—19.  Knobel 
thinks  that  in  the  original  narrative  this 
followed  the  plague  of  flies,  viii.  IG — 19, 
and  preceded  the  death  of  the  first-born,  ch. 
xii.  1,  if.  In  the  progress  of  the  history, 
we  now  come  from  the  infliction  of  plagues 
on  the  comforts  of  life,  and  on  possessions  ; 
to  its  incidence  on  the  jyersons  of  the  Egypt- 
ians. 8.]  The  furnace  appears  to 
have  been  that  for  smelting  metal  (or  per- 
haps for  burning  lime,  in  which  case,  as 
Bp.  "Wordsworth  remarks,  Egypt  would  be 
stricken  through  anotlicr  of  the  sources  of 
her  pride  ;  her  pyramids  and  treasure  cities 
having  come  out  of  the  lime-kiln),  and  the 
ashes  to  have  been  the  sla'ck,  or  drossy  soot, 
left  or  thrown  out  after  use.  It  was  to  be 
sprinkled  toward  heaven,  to  indicate  its  dis- 
persion through  the  air  over  all  the  land, 
as  in  ver.  22  the  rod  was  to  be  stretched 
toward  heaven,  the  quarter  wlience  the  hail 
was  to  come.  Kalisch  mentions  a  barbarous 
custom  of  burning  human  victims  in  certain 
cities  of  Egypt  consecrated  to  the  evil 
genius  Typbon,  and  scattering  their  ashes  in 
the  air  "  in  hope  that  with  the  dust  the 
blessings  of  heaven  would  spread  over  the 
country."  If  this  were  so,  it  would  at  least 
give  significance  to  the  acthere enjoined. 
in  the  sight  of  Pharaoh  implies  another 
audience.  It  would  appear  from  the  other 
portion  of  the  narrative  that  he  might  com- 


monly be  met  going  to  the  river  in  the 
morning    (ch.  vii.    15;  viii.  20).  9.] 

Various  notices  have  been  collected  of  dire 
eruptive  diseases  prevalent  in  Egypt ;  but 
they  are  no  further  to  our  present  purpose 
than  as  shewing  a  predisposition  in  the 
climate  and  people  to  produce  the  miraculous 
eflt'ect  hei-e  recorded.  It  will  be  observed 
that  beasts  are  here  mentioned,  notwith- 
standing what  is  said  in  ver.  6  :  see  there, 
and  on  ver.  19.  10.]  There  seems  to 

be  here  a  transference  of  action  from  Aaron 
to  Moses,  which  appears  for  the  first  time  in 
this  portion  of  tlie  narrative.  When  the 
two  act  together,  which  tliey  now  do  in 
taking  the  handfuls,  Moses,  as  the  more  im- 
mediate representative  of  God,  does  the  act 
of  power  without  delegation  to  Aaron. 
11.]  The  position  of  the  magicians  becomes 
more  and  more  degraded.  Not  only  are 
they  powerless  (ch.  viii.  14),  but  they  are 
themselves  attlicted  with  the  plague,  and 
totally  discomfited.  On  the  form  of  ex- 
pression, see  reS".  12.]  Here  for  tlie 
first  time  we  read  that  Jehovah  hardened 
the  heart  of  Pharaoh.  Without  going  into 
the  fanciful  distinctions  between  this  and 
the  former  expressions  (ch.  vii.  13  ;  viii.  15, 
19,  32  ;  ver.  7),  which  some  have  discovered, 
we  may  say  that  it  is  at  least  implied  that 
the  very  progress  of  the  Divine  judgments 
resulted  in  a  corresponding  insensibility  to 
their  purpose.  God  Himself  was  the  agent 
in  hardening  Pharaoh's  heart,  inasmuch  as 
the  more  he  was  afflicted  the  more  he  be- 
came  stubborn    and  wilful    in    resistance. 


256 


EXODUS. 


IX. 


■fHeb.  made 
thee  to  stand. 


as  Jehovah  had  spoken  unto  Moses.  ^^  51  Aiid  Jehovah 
said  unto  Moses,  Rise  up  early  in  tlie  morning,  and  stand 
before  Pharaoli,  and  say  unto  Mm,  Thus  saith  Jehovah 
the  God  of  the  Hebrews,  Let  my  people  go,  that  they 
may  serve  me.  ^^  For  I  will  at  this  time  send  all  my 
plagues  upon  thine  heart,  and  upon  thy  servants,  and 
upon  thy  people  ;  that  thou  mayest  know  that  there  is 
none  like  me  in  all  the  earth.  ^^  For  now  I  might  stretch 
out  my  hand,  and  smite  thee  and  thy  people  with  pesti- 
lence ;  and  thou  shouldest  be  cut  off  from  the  earth.  ^^  But 
in  truth  for  this  cause  have  I  f  spared  thee,  for  to  shew  in 
thee  my  power  ;  and  that  my  name  may  be  declared 
throughout  all  the  earth.  17  As  yet  exaltest  thou  thyself 
against  my  people,  that  thou  wilt  not  let  them  go  ?  ^^ 
Behold,  to  morrow  about  this  time  I  will  cause  it  to  rain 
a  very  grievous  hail,  such  as  hath  not  been  in  Egypt  since 
the  foundation  thereof  even  until  now.  ^^  Send  therefore 
now,  and  gather  thy  cattle,  and  all  that  thou  hast  in  the 
field  ;  for  upon  every  man  and  beast  which  shall  be  found 


Obserye  that  all  ideas  of  a  progress  in  the 
form  of  expression  being  consistently  main- 
tained, are  erroneous ;  inasmuch  as  in  yer. 
35  we  have  again  the  former  expression, 
simply,  the  heart  of  Pharaoh  was  hard- 
ened. 

13 34.]  The  seventh  plague — hail.  Here 

again  we  meet  with  that  portion  of  the  nar- 
rative in  which  Moses  alone  receives  the 
commission  and  acts  upon  it  (see  above,  ch. 
vii.  14—18 ;  viii.  1—4,  20—24  ;  ix.  1—7). 
Here  again  we  have  no  concurrence  of  the 
narratives,  but  all  is  confined  to  one  nar- 
rator, known  by  Knobel,  &c.,  as  the  Jehovist, 
or  later   supplementer.  13.]    In   the 

same  terms,  Moses  is  commissioned  in  ch. 
vii.  15;  viii.  20.  It  was  the  time  when  the 
king  went  to  the  river,  perhaps  for  his  devo- 
tions. 14.  thine  heart]  i.  e.  tMjself : 
see  Jer.  iv.  18;  also  ib.  ver.  10.  On  the 
combination  here,  see  ch.  viii.  4,  reff.  in  the 
same  narrative.  The  object  of  the  plagues 
is  to  bring  to  Pharaoh  and  his  people  the 
knowledge  of  the  supreme  and  exclusive 
Godhead  of  Jehovah.  15.]  God  might 
have  at  once  cut  off  Pharaoh  and  his  people, 
but  thus  afflicted  them  short  of  destruction, 
to  give  an  example  of  His  power,  and  to 
declare  His  name  upon  earth.      The  render- 


ing adopted  for  this  verse  is  that  approved 
by  the  principal  Hebraists.  St.  Paul  quotes 
this  verse  in  Pom.  ix.  17,  with  the  Greek 
word  signifying  have  raised  thee  xtp :  see 
note  there.  Whichever  sense  we  take,  the 
meaning  comes  to  the  same.  God's  main- 
tenance of  Pharaoh  was  with  a  view  to  shew 
His  mighty  power,  and  to  spread  the  know- 
ledge of  His  name.  Observe,  that  these 
threatening  words  serve  for  a  general  intro- 
duction to  the  three  final  plagues  which 
follow.  17.]  This  verse  need  not  be 

interrogative  :  it  is  more  naturally  merely 
declarative :  "  Thou  still  exaltest  thyself,  &:c. 
Well  then,  as  a  consequence  of  this,"  &c. 
But  in  English  we  express  this  meaning  by 
the  interrogative  and  the  answer.  18.] 

since  the  foundation  thereof  is  expressed 
in  ver.  24,  since  it  became  a  nation. 
Thunderstorms,  accompanied  by  hail,  are 
not  unknown  in  Eg}'pt,  but  are  of  rare 
occurrence,  and  almost  universally  harmless. 
This  their  occasional  and  comparatively 
light  character  is  implied  by  the  description 
here.  19—21.]  See  on  vv.  6,  9.     Ob- 

serve, that  there  is  here  a  command  given 
which  would  put  a  distinction  between  those 
Egyptians  who  feared  the  threatening  of  Je- 
hovah and  those  who  set  not  their  heart  unto 


16—27.  EXODUS.  257 

in  the  field,  and  shall  not  bo  brought  home,  the  hail  shall 
come  down  iipon  them,  and  they  shall  die.  20  jj^  |]mt 
feared  the  word  of  Jehovah  among  the  servants  of  Pha- 
raoh made  his  servants  and  his  cattle  flee  into  the  houses : 
^1  and  he  that  '^set  not  his  heart  unto  the  word  of  Je-  "^  SL^iafM. 
HOVAH  left  his  servants  and  his  cattle  in  tlie  field,  22  ^|- 
And  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses,  Stretch  forth  thine  hand 
toward  heaven,  that  Jthere  may  be  hail  in  all  the  land  of 
Egypt,  upon  man,  and  upon  beast,  and  upon  every  herb 
of  the  field,  throughout  the  land  of  Egypt.  23  ^^^  Moses 
stretched  forth  his  rod  toward  heaven  :  and  Jehovah  sent 
Hhunder  and  hail,  and  the  fire  came  down  upon  the  earth;  ' Tix/'iS^*  i»: 
and  Jehovah  rained  hail  upon  the  land  of  Egypt.  21  ^q  3/9.  '""'• 
there  was  hail,  and  fire  J  mingled  with  the  hail,  very  jEzck.  i.  4. 
grievous,  such  as  there  was  none  like  it  in  all  the  land  of 
Egypt  since  it  became  a  nation.  25  And  the  hail  smote 
throughout  all  the  land  of  Egypt  all  that  iras  in  the  field, 
both  man  and  beast ;  and  the  hail  smote  every  herb  of  the 
field,  and  brake  every  tree  of  the  field.  2G  Only  in  the  land 
of  Goshen,  where  the  children  of  Israel  were,  was  there  no 
hail.  27  ^  Ancl  Pharaoh  sent,  and  called  for  Moses  and 
Aaron,  and  said  unto  them,  I  have  sinned  this  time :  Je- 
ho\'ah  is  righteous,  and  I  and  my  peoj)le  arc  the  sinners. 

it,  i.  c.  regarded  it  not.      On  the  expression  -was  still  left  enough  by  the  hail  to  make  its 

fearing  the  word  of  the  Lord,  see  Prov.  xiii.  demolition  by  the  locusts  a  heavy  plague. 

13.  22,  If.]  The  morrow  is  come,  and  See  remarks  upon  ver.  6.  26.]  This 

the  threat  is    fulfilled.     We  have  here,  as  and  the  locusts  are  supernatural  plagues,  in 

before  in  ch.  vii.   15,  17,  the  rod  of  Moses  the  time  of  their  incidence  and  their  intensity 

appointed  and  used  as  the  instrument  of  in-  only.     Otherwise  they  keep  the  character- 

fiicting  the  plague.     In  the  other  portion  of  istics  of  ordinary  occurrences,  and  amongst 

the  narrative  it  is  Aaron  who  is  to  stretch  these  is  this,  of  partiality  as  to  location  of 

forth  the  rod  at  the  command  of  Moses  :  see  the    thunderstorm  :    in    Goshen   there   was 

ch.    vii.    (8,    9),     19;     viii.  5,  16.  none.  27—34.]      The     effect     upon 

thunder]  Literally,  voices  :  see  reff.  Pharaoh  ;    the  removal  of  the  jdague  bij  in- 

fire,  i.  e.  lightning,  came  towards,  upon,  tercession  of  Moses  ;  Pharaoh' s  heart  again 

the  earth.  24.  fire  mingled  with  the  hardened.  27.]    Pharaoh's  confession 

hail]  Some   understand  lire  conglomerated  reaches  further  than  belbre,  even  to  the  ac- 

into  balls  in  tlie  midst  of  tlie  hail  :  the  ex-  knowledgment  of  personal  guilt :  Jehovah  is 

pression  is  fire  comprehending,  or  infolding  in   the   riglit, — he   and    his   i)e(iple  in  the 

itself,  as  in  ref.   Ezek.     The  meaning  may  wrong.     But  it  is  only  this  time  :  he  does 

be  lightning  continuous,  seeming   like  one  not  include  the  former  times.     It  is  a  touch 

mass  of  fire  (so  Knobel),  or  lightning  flash-  of  nature  in  the  narrative,  that  tlie  spirit  of 

ing,     infolding    itself,     among     the     hail.  Pharaoh  is  di.'^mayed  by  the  awful    and  to 

25.]  Here  again  the  general  language  him  unusual  terrors  of  the  thunderstorm, 

must  be  taken  by  the  reader  in  a  modified  At  such   times  even  the  bravest  and  hardest 

sense.     For  we  find  (ch.  x.  12)  that  there  are  freciuently  alfrighted  by  an  unaecount- 

s 


258  EXODUS.  IX. 

''Nlmxvif"  ^^  Intreat  Jehovah  (for  it  is  '^enough)  that  there  be  no 
more  voices  of  God  and  hail ;  and  I  will  let  you  go,  and 
ye  shall  stay  no  longer.  ^9  ^nd  Moses  said  nnto  him, 
As  soon  as  I  am  gone  out  of  the  city,  I  will  spread  abroad 
my  hands  unto  Jehovah  ;  and  the  thunder  shall  cease, 
neither  shall  there  be  any  more  hail ;  that  thou  mayest 
know  that  the  earth  is  Jehovah's.  ^O  'Q^i  ^g  for  thee  and 
thy  servants,  I  know  that  ye  will  not  jei  fear  Jehovah 
God.  ^1  And  the  flax  and  the  barley  was  smitten :  for 
the  barley  was  in  the  ear,  and  the  flax  was  boiled.     ^^  ]3^^ 

iisaxxTiii.25.  the  wheat  and  the  ^ spelt  were  not  smitten:  for  thev  were 

Ezek.  iv.  9,  -*■  */ 

°'''^"  not  grown  up.     ^^  And  Moses  went  out  of  the  city  from 

Pharaoh,  and  spread  abroad  his  hands  unto  Jehovah  : 
and  the  thimders  and  hail  ceased,  and  the  rain  was  not 
poured  upon  the  earth.  ^^  And  when  Pharaoh  saw  that 
the  rain  and  the  hail  and  the  thunders  were  ceased,  he 
sinned  yet  more,  and  hardened  his  heart,  he  and  his  serv- 
ants. ^°  And  the  heart  of  Pharaoh  was  hardened,  neither 
would  he  let  the  children  of  Israel  go ;  as  Jehovah  had 
spoken  by  Moses.  X.  ^  And  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses, 
Go  in  unto  Pharaoh :  for  I  have  hardened  his  heart,  and 
the  heart  of  his  servants,  that  I  might  shew  these  my 
signs  before  him :  ^  and  that  thou  mayest  tell  in  the  ears 

able  panic.  28.]  On  it  is  enougli,  see  vated  in  Egypt ;  in  fact,  that  country  was  the 
reff.  The  -words  voices  of  God  should  be  linen  market  of  the  ancient  world  (Kalisch). 
preserved  in  the  translation^  as  being  alluded  The  flax  was  boiled  or  balled,  had  its  little 
to  by  Moses  below.  29.]  Moses  was  to  ball-like  seed-vessels  on  it.  The  grain  ex- 
pray  when  he  got  out  of  the  city,  perhaps  pressed  in  the  A.  V.  by  "  rie"  is  agreed  to 
to  some  holy  place  of  prayer.  "We  find  him,  be  spelt,  rye  not  being  cultivated  so  far  south, 
in  ch.  vi.  12,  ordered  to  go  from  the  presence  The  Egyptians  made  bread  of  spelt. 
of  God  in  to  Pharaoh.  Possibly  this  may  not  grown  up]  Literally,  were  dark,  or  were 
have  to  do  with  the  certainty  of  Pharaoh's  as  yet  nonapparent  or  but  recently  grown  up. 
knowledge  that  the  earth  is  Jehovah's,  that  33.]  JRecapitulates  ver.  29,  with  the 
Moses  could  not  pray  in  a  city  of  the  additional  notice  that  the  storm  had  been 
Egyptians,  but  in  a  place  separate  and  accompanied  with  pouring  rain, — a  marvel 
dedicated  to  Jehovah.  30.]  Moses  in  Egypt.  34.]  sinned  yet  more,  in 
knows  that  notwithstanding  this  Pharaoh  allusion  to  his  own  confession,  ver.  27,  to 
will  not  fear  Jehovah  Elohim,  as  God.  He  which  the  addition  of  his  servants  also 
had  spoken  of  the  voices  of  God,  it  was  true,  refers.  35.]  Knobel  refers  this  verse, 
but  did  not  yet  fully  acknowledge  Him  who  which  seems  to  repeat  the  foregoing,  to  the 
was  God  in  truth.  31,  32.]  Notice  of  other  or  Elohist's  portion  of  the  narrative, 
the  effects  of  the  plague.  Barley  becomes  on  account  of  expressions  used  only  by  him. 
ripe  in  Egypt  in  March,  and  was  generally  X.  1 — 20.]  The  eighth  plague — the  lo- 
cut  in  April.  See  on  this  as  a  chronological  c^tsts.  This  belongs  to  the  same  narrative 
notice,  on  ch.  xii.  1.     Flax  was  much  culti-  as  ch.  ix.  13 — 34.            1,  2.]  "We  have  the 


XXXI. 

Num.  xxii. 


28— X.  7.  EXODUS.  O-VJ 

of  thy  son,  and   of  tli}^  son's  son,  wliat    tliinf^s    I  liavc 

"^vrouglit  in  Egypt,  and  my  signs  wbicli   I   have  done  "^'^^^^ 

among  them;  that  ye  may  know  tliat  I  am  Jehovah 

3  And  Moses  and  Aaron  came  in  unto  Pharaoh,  and  said 

unto  him,  Thus  saith  Jehovah  God  of  the  Hebrews,  How 

long  wilt  thou  refuse  to  humble  thyself  before  me  ?  let 

my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  me.     ^  Else,  if  thou 

refuse  to  let  my  people  go,  behold,  to  morrow  will  I  bring 

the  locusts  into   thy  border  :  ^  and  they  shall  cover  the 

°  face  of  the  earth,  that  one  cannot  be  able  to  see  the  earth :  » ^^^-  ^^ ' ; 

xxii.  5,  U. 

and  they  shall  eat  the  residue  of  that  which  is  escaped, 
-which  remaineth  imto  you  from  the  hail,  and  shall  eat 
every  tree  which  groweth  for  you  out  of  the  field :  ^  and 
they  shall  fill  \\ij  houses,  and  the  houses  of  all  thy  serv- 
ants, and  the  houses  of  all  the  Egyptians ;  which  neither 
thy  fathers,  nor  thy  fathers'  fathers  have  seen,  since  the 
day  that  they  were  upon  the  earth  unto  this  day.  And 
he  turned  himself,  and  went  out  from  Pharaoh,  7  And  • 
Pharaoh's  servants  said  unto  him.  How  long  shall  this  och.xxiii.ss; 
man  be  a  "snare  unto  us?  let  the  men  so,  that  thcv  may     "uLvi>:i6. 

o     '  J  J  Jo^ll.xx^i.l3. 

serve  Jehovah  their  God :    knowest  thou  not  yet  that     ull'.v^i.iV.ai. 


same  end  of  God's  dealings  with  Pharaoh  rendered  the  Hebrew  literally,  trusting  to 

specified,  eh.  iv.  21 ;  vii.  5.     See  also,  with  the  context  for  a  riglit  understanding  of  the 

reference  to  the  similar  effect  on  Pharaoh  English   sentence,    in    which    the    relative 

himself,  ch.  ix.  13 — 16.     But  we  have  here  woidd  properly  apply  to  "  </ie  bowses."     He, 

for  tlie  first  time  the  far-reaching  purpose  i.  c.  Moses,  though  IMoses  and  Aaron  were 

announced,  of  the  transmission  by  report  of  represented  in  ver.  3  as  speaking  jointly, 
these   Jehovah's   wonderful   dealings    from  7.]  Now  for  the  first  time  the  courtiers 

generation  to  generation   in  Israel.     As  a  of  Pharaoh  are  dismayed  with  the  prospect  of 

sample  of  this  transmission,  see  Ps.  Ixxviii.  the  coming  ruin.    It   is  minutely  character- 

and  cv.    For  what  things  I  have  wrought  istic,  that  this  happens  on  the  threatening  of 

in  Egypt,  the  LXX.   have,    '^  how  I  have  the  locusts:  see  below  on  vv.  14,  15. 

mocked  the  Egyptians"  (see  2nd  and  3rd  a  snare]  A  net  or  trap,  to  catch  us  for  our 

reff.),  and  the  Vulgate,  "  hoio  inanij  times  I  ruin  :  see  retf.  man  is  not  expressed  in 

have  afflicted  the  Egyptians.''    EuttheA.V.  the  Hebrew,  so  that  the  ancient  versions 

appears  to  be  right.  3.]  Moses  is  com-  have  understood  it,  this  matter:  the  LXX. 

manded — Moses  and  Aaron  obey.     We  may  render,  '■'■How  long  shall  this  be  a  disgrace 

infer   that  the  same  was  the  case  on  the  tous^"  and  the  A'ulgate,  " //o?o /ow^r  shall 

other  occasions  where  it  is  not  so  specified,  ice  suffer  this  offence?"     But  the  A.  V.  is 

and   thus  the  two  narratives  approximate,  preferred  by  the  Hebraists.  the  men] 

that  they  may  serve  me]  viz.  in  the  "They  mean,"  saj-s  Knobel,  "as  is  shewn 

sacrifice  in  the  wilderness :  see  ver.  7.  by  what  follows,  not  the  whole  people,  but 

4.]  On  the  locusts  see  below,  note  on  vv.  the  men  only."     Keil,  on  the  other  hand, 

14,    15.  5]    the   face,    literally,    the  says,  Ila-anoshiin  means  not  the  tnen,  but 

eye,  of  the  earth  (see  retl'.),  i.  e.  its  appear-  the  people.     The  courtiers  wish  for  tiie  dis- 

ance,  its  outlook.  6.]  which,  i.  e.  such  mission  of  tlie  whole  people,  which  Moses 

locusts  as:   see  ver.   14.     The  A.  V.  has  demanded ;  but  Pharaoh,  on  the  other  hand, 


260 


EXODUS. 


X. 


Egypt  is  destroyed  ?  ^  And  Moses  and  Aaron  were  brouglit 
again  unto  Pharaoh :  and  he  said  unto  them,  Go,  serve 
Jehovah  your  God :  hut  who  are  they  that  shall  go  ? 
9  And  Moses  said,  We  will  go  with  our  young  and  with 
our  old,  with  our  sons  and  with  our  daughters,  with  our 
flocks  and  with  our  herds  will  we  go ;  for  we  mud  hold 
a  feast  unto  Jehovah.  ^^  And  he  said  unto  them,  Let 
Jehovah  be  so  with  you,  as  I  will  let  you  go,  and  your 
little  ones :  see,  evil  is  in  your  purpose.  ^^  J^ot  so  :  go 
now  ye  that  are  men,  and  serve  Jehovah  ;  for  that  ye  did 
desire.  And  they  were  driven  out  from  Pharaoh's  pre- 
sence. 12  ^  And  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses,  Stretch  out 
thine  hand  over  the  land  of  Egypt  for  the  locusts,  that 
they  may  come  up  upon  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  eat  every 
herb  of  the  land,  ercn  all  that  the  hail  hath  left.  ^^  And 
Moses  stretched  forth  his  rod  over  the  land  of  Egypt,  and 
Jehovah  brought  an  east  wind  upon  the  land  all  that 
day,  and  all  that  night ;  and  when  it  was  morning,  the 
east  wind  brouo'ht  the  locusts.     ^^  And  the  locusts  went 


■will  only  allow  the  dismission  of  the  men 
(Haggevarhn).  And  it  would  appear,  from 
the  absence  of  examples  of  the  use  of  the 
former  more  general  term  for  the  male 
sex  only,  that  Keil  is  right.  8.]  who 

are  they  that  shall  go  ■?  literally,  who  and 
who   (are)  the   goers?  9.]  The  law 

required  only  the  presence  of  the  males  at 
the  sacred  feasts :  see  ch.  xxiii.  17  ;  xxxiv. 
23  ;  Deut.  xvi.  16  ;  but  customarily  all  took 
part  therein.  Compare  Deut.  xvi.  11,  14; 
1  Sam.  i.  7  ;  Luke  ii.  41,  ff.  The  women 
also  took  part  in  the  religious  pilgrimages 
of  the  Egyptians.  10.]  As  much  as  to 

say,  I  only  wish  that  the  help  of  your  God 
may  be  as  likely  to  you  as  it  is  that  I 
should  give  in  to  this  request.  evil  is 

in  your  purpose]  Literally,  is  before  you. 
Pharaoh  shews  them  that  he  suspects  treach- 
erous intent  in  their  request.  So  Knobel, 
Keil,  and  Kalisch,  after  the  LXX.  and  Vul- 
gate. The  other  rendering,  "  evil  is  before 
you,"  i.  e.  *'  you  are  in  peril  and  seekifig 
your  rui7i,"  is  that  of  the  A.  V.  and  va- 
rious interpreters.  The  Targum  of  Onkelos 
unites  both  :  "see  that  the  evil  tohich  you 
think  to  do  stands  against  yourselves." 
12 — 15.]    The  2}erforma)ice   of  the 


threat.  Here  again  Moses  is  the  sole  agent, 
locusts]  It  would  exceed  the  limit 
of  a  note  to  cite  the  descriptions  of  travel- 
lers and  residents  in  the  East,  in  ancient  and 
modern  times,  of  the  destructive  ravages  of 
these  insects.  One  of  the  most  terrible  and 
graphic  is  that  in  the  prophet  Joel,  i.  6 — 
ii.  11.  Others  may  be  found  in  Mr.  Hough- 
ton's art.  in  the  Biblical  Diet.,  in  Dr. 
Tristram's  Nat.  Hist,  of  the  Bible,  p.  306, 
and  in  Kalisch's  notes  here.  In  these,  every 
particular  of  the  account  here  is  substanti- 
ated in  the  minutest  manner.  Only  in  the 
past  years  of  1868  and  1869  the  N.  of 
Palestine  has  been  twice  devastated  by  lo- 
custs in  the  manner  here  described. 
12.]  all  that  the  hail  hath  left :  see  above 
on   ch.   ix.   6,   25.  13]  We  are  told 

in  the  accounts  above  referred  to  that  it 
is  commonly  the  S.W.  wind  which  brings 
the  locusts  to  Egypt,  from  Libya.  But 
the  diiferencc  between  this  and  an  ordin- 
ary visitation  was,  the  magnitude  and  uni- 
versality of  it  (locusts  commonly  visiting 
only  a  circumscribed  portion  of  land),  and 
accordingly  the  east  wind  blows  all  day  and 
all  night,  bringing  the  locusts  from  a  more 
than  usual  distance,  and  in  vaster  quantities. 


8-20. 


EXODUS. 


2G1 


up  over  all  the  land  of  Eu^ypt,  and  rested  in  all  the 
borders  of  Egj'pt :  very  grievous  tccre  tlicij  ;  before  theui 
there  were  no  such  locusts  as  they,  neither  after  thcni 
shall  be  such.  ^^  For  they  covered  the  face  of  the 
whole  earth,  so  that  the  land  was  darkened ;  and  they  did 
eat  every  herb  of  the  land,  and  all  the  fruit  of  the  trees 
which  the  hail  had  left :  and  there  remained  not  any 
green  thing  in  the  trees,  or  in  the  herbs  of  the  field, 
through  all  the  land  of  Egypt.  ^^  ^  Then  Pharaoh  called 
for  Moses  and  Aaron  in  haste ;  and  he  said,  I  have  sinned 
against  Jehovah  your  God,  and  against  you.  ^7  j^'qw 
therefore  forgive,  I  pray  thee,  my  sin  only  this  once,  and 
intreat  Jehovah  your  God,  that  he  may  take  away  from 
me  this  death  only,  i^  And  he  went  out  from  Pharaoh, 
and  intreated  Jehovah.  ^^  And  Jehovah  turned  a  mighty 
strong  wind  of  the  sea,  which  took  away  the  locusts,  and 
cast  them  into  the  Red  sea ;  there  remained  not  one  locust 
in  all  the  borders  of  Egypt.  20  j^^^^  Jehovah  hardened 
Pharaoh's  heart,  so  that  he  would  not  let  the  children  of 


14.]  On  the  latter  part  of  the  verse, 
compare  Joel  ii.   2.  15.]    The  land 

was  darkened,  i.  e.  the  face  of  the  earth  was 
covered  with  them  :  compare  ver.  5.  Some 
understand  it  that  while  flying,  they  ob- 
scured the  light  of  the  sun  (Joel  ii.  10), 
which  is  the  testimony  of  travellers  respect- 
ing their  coming  swarms ;  but  on  account 
of  the  immediately  preceding  words  and  of 
ver.  5,  this  does  not  seem  so  probable  here. 
16 — 20.]  The  favourable  but  evan- 
escent effect  upon  Pharaoh.  Now  first 
Pharaoh  hastens  to  send  for  ]\Ioses  and 
Aaron  ;  now  first  he  becomes  conscious,  not 
only  of  offence  generally,  but  of  sin  against 
Jehovah,  and  against  Israel ;  but  we  may 
observe  that  whatever  his  penitent  expres- 
sions may  imply,  there  is  this  time  no  pro- 
mise of  granting  the  demand  of  Israel.  The 
request  to  intercede  for  him  is  put  more  as 
a  personal  matter— he  would  bear  anything 
but  this  one  fatal  infliction.  His  repentance 
is  one  of  terror  only.  It  has  been  super- 
ficially objected  that  the  wind  of  the  sea 
must  have  been  written  in  Palestine,  because 
there  only  can  the  west  wind,  which  would 
take  away  the  locusts  into  the  Eed  Sea,  be 
thus  called.  But  to  say  nothing  of  the 
reply,  that  the   Hebrew  language,   which 


grew  up  in  the  patriarchal  sojourn  in  Pales- 
tine, would  keep  this  term,  just  as  an  Italian 
in  Holland  would  call  the  north  wind  a 
tramontane  (Bp.  Wordsworth),  we  must 
remember  that  it  is  a  pure  assumption  that 
this  was  a  west  wind :  a  wind  of  the  sea, 
coming  from  the  N.  W.,  would  exactly  do 
what  is  required,  as  the  Red  Sea  is  S.  E. 
from  Egj-pt.  the  Red  Sea]  Literally, 

the  Sea  of  Suph,  here  first  mentioned. 
There  is  considerable  doubt  to  what  the 
name  Suph  refers.  It  has  generally  been 
interpreted  sea-weed ;  but  this  has  been  of 
late  questioned,  and  Knobel,  who  has  de- 
voted some  space  to  the  inquiry  (on  ch. 
xiii.  18),  inclines  to  think  that  the  name 
means  reed.  He  decides,  however,  against 
the  idea  that  the  sea  was  named  merely 
from  the  fact  of  reeds  existing  on  its  banks, 
but  believes,  mainly  on  the  ground  of  the 
absence  of  the  article  ha  before  Suph,  that 
there  must  have  been  some  town  of  that 
name,  after  which  the  Western  arm  was 
called.  Knobel  sees  in  the  occurrence  of 
some  unusual  terms,  e.  g.  " /Ae  children 
of  IsraeV  (as  also  in  ch.  is.  3.5),  for  which 
this  narrator  usually  has  "  (he  people,"  the 
"  darkening  of  the  ground"  ver.  15,  "  this 
death,"  ver.  17,  &c.,— the  fact  that  "ci-ery 


262 


EXODUS. 


Israel  go.  21  ^  And  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses,  Stretcli 
out  thine  hand  toward  heaven,  that  there  may  be  darkness 
over  the  land  of  Egypt,  even  darkness  ichich  may  be  felt. 
22  And  Moses  stretched  forth  his  hand  toward  heaven ; 
and  there  was  a  thick  darkness  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt 
three  days  :  23  they  saw  not  one  another,  neither  rose  any 
from  his  place  for  three  days :  but  all  the  children  of 
Israel  had  light  in  their  dwellings,  24  ^  And  Pharaoh 
called  unto  Moses,  and  said,  Go  ye,  serve  Jehovah  ;  only 
let  your  flocks  and  your  herds  be  stayed :  let  your  little 
ones  also  go  with  you.  25  And  Moses  said,  Thou  must 
give  us  also  sacrifices  and  burnt  ofierings,  that  we  may 
sacrifice  unto  Jehovah  our  God.  26  Qur  cattle  also  shall 
go  with  us ;  there  shall  not  an  hoof  be  left  behind ;  for 
thereof  must  we  take  to  serve  Jehovah  our  God ;  and  we 
know  not  with  what  we  must  serve  Jehovah,  until  we 
come  thither.     27  ^  But  Jehovah  hardened  Pharaoh's 


tree''  is  mentioned  in  ver.  5,  and  only  "■the 
fndt  of  the  trees "  in  ver.  15,  and  that 
there  is  no  mention  in  ver.  15  of  the 
threatened  visitation  of  the  houses  in  ver. 
6,  that  the  "  Jehovist"  has  probably  taken 
ver.  12 — 20  word  for  word  from  some  older 
source. 

21 — 26.]  The  ninth  plague — darkness. 
This  follows  without  announcement  or 
threat  to  Pharaoh,  and  without  any  act  in 
his  presence,  dilfering  thereby  from  the 
similarly  unannounced  plague  of  the  boils 
in  ch.  ix.  8,  fif.,  which  was  produced  in  Pha- 
raoh's presence.  This  narrative  also  belongs 
to  the  "Jehovist"  as  the  last.  21.] 

The  closing  words  of  the  verse  have  been 
interpreted  in  two  ways — (1.)  As  A.  V.,  with 
the  LXX.,  Vulgate,  Samaritan  Pentateuch 
(not  Version),  and  the  majority  of  comment- 
ators, and  one  shall  feel,  or  handle  the 
darkness  ;  it  shall  be  so  thick  tliat  it  shall 
be  like  a  palpable  substance  ;  (2.)  With  the 
Jerusalem  Targum,  Le  Clerc,  and  others, 
7nen  shall  grope  in  the  darkness.  Eut  the 
Hebraists  object  to  this  that  the  verb  only 
means  this  in  another  voice  from  that  used 
here.  22.]  a  thick  darkness  is  liter- 

ally, a  blackness  of  darkness,  the  doubling 
of  the  same  word  carrying  the  signification 
of  intensity.  23.]  The  natural  phe- 

nomenon of  which  this  miraculous  darkness 


has  been  supposed  to  have  been  an  intensi- 
fication is  shewn  by  Mr.  Stuart  Poole  in  the 
Biblical  Diet.  (art.  "  Plagues")  to  have  had 
little  or  no  correspondence  with  what  is  here 
described.  Neither  the  simoom,  with  its 
sand-storms,  nor  the  hot  electrical  wind 
called  the  Chamsin, produces  actual  darkness : 
the  former  lasts  no  more  than  a  few  minutes, 
and  the  latter  is  not  thicker  than  a  yellow 
fog.  It  is  noticeable,  however,  that  the 
LXX.  seem  to  connect  the  plague  with  one 
of  these,  for  they  render  in  ver.  22  for  a 
thick  darkness,  "  darkness  and  7nist  and 
tempest."  By  this  distinction,  now  made 
sharper  than  ever,  between  the  Egyptians 
and  the  Israelites,  was  clearly  shewn  the 
Divine  wrath  on  the  one,  and  the  Divine 
favour  on  the   other.  24—26.]    The 

immediate  effect  on  Pharaoh.  This  time  it 
is  Moses  alone  who  is  sent  for  :  see  above, 
ch.  ix.  27,  and  x.  16.  A  progress  is  visible 
in  the  breaking  down  of  Pharaoh's  ob- 
stinacy ;  now  he  will  allow  all  the  people  to 
go— only  the  flocks  and  herds  are  to  be 
fixed,  or  stayed, — apparently  as  a  pledge  for 
their  own  return,  for  the  king  seems  to  have 
suspected  treachery  throughout.  26.] 

not  an  hoof,  i.  e.  not  the  most  insignificant 
part  of  our  flocks  and  herds.  27 — 29.] 

Put  Pharaoh,  confirmed  in  his  suspicion  and 
hardened  in  proportion  to  his  resistance  to 


21— XI.  3. 


EXODUS. 


2G3 


heart,  and  he  -tt'oiikl  not  let  them  go.  ^8  ^^^  Pharaoh 
said  unto  him,  Get  thee  from  me,  take  heed  to  thyself, 
see  my  face  no  more ;  for  in  that  day  thou  seest  ray  face 
thou  shalt  die.  ^9  Xi\(\.  Closes  said.  Thou  hast  spoken  well, 
I  will  see  thy  face  again  no  more.  XI.  ^  And  Jehovah 
said  unto  Moses,  Yet  will  I  bring  one  plague  more  upon 
Pharaoh,  and  upon  Egypt ;  afterwards  he  will  let  you  go 
hence :  when  he  shall  let  you  go,  he  shall  surely  thrust 
you  out  hence  altogether.  '^  Speak  now  in  the  ears  of  the 
IDeojDle,  and  let  every  man  ask  of  his  neighbour,  and  every 
woman  of  her  neighbour,  jewels  of  silver,  and  jewels  of 
gold.  3  ^Ynd  Jehovah  gave  the  people  ftivour  in  the  sight 
of  the  Egyptians.  Moreover  the  man  Moses  ivas  very 
great  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  in  the  sight  of  Pharaoh^s  serv- 


the  Divine  will,  withdraws  bis  consent  on 
this  last  condition  being-  insisted  on.  More 
tban  tbis,  be  drives  Moses  from  bis  pre- 
sence, and  tbreatens  death  to  hira  if  he  ever 
enters  it  again.  Moses  accepts  the  condition, 
knowing  that  the  last  plague  would  work 
its  own  effect  without  a  formal  demand. 
On  the  comparison  of  tbis  with  cb.  xi.  8, 
see  below. 

XI.  1 — 3.]  We  have  here  an  announce- 
ment of  the  tenth  and  final  plague ;  direc- 
tions connected  with  the  departure  of  the 
people  ;  and  a  notice  of  the  estimation  in 
which  Moses  was  held  in  Egypt.  The 
narrative  is  here  curiously  broken  and  inter- 
mingled. It  seems  hardly  worth  while,  as 
even  Knobel  has  done,  to  attempt  to  arrange 
the  sections  so  as  to  fit  one  another.  He 
supposes  that  our  vv.  4 — S  continue  without 
break  the  narrative  ch.  x.  24 — 29,  and  that 
the  words  of  Moses,  v.  4,  ff.,  followed 
during  the  same  final  interview  with  Pha- 
raoh. But,  considering  that  Pharaoh  again 
sent  for  Moses  and  Aaron,  ch.  xii.  31,  the 
continuity  of  the  narrative  is  hardly  pre- 
served by  tbis.  It  is  better  smxly  to  take 
these  final  notices  as  general, — either  un- 
dated, except  by  the  contest, — or  as  im- 
plying that  in  spite  of  the  threat  of  Pharaoh 
and  the  declaration  of  ;\Ioscs  (x.  28,  29), 
other  interviews  did  take  place.  The  con- 
necting notices  in  the  text  are  too  slender  to 
build  any  consistent  hypothesis  upon.  Of 
all  which  have  been  built,  tlie  most  unten- 
able is  that  of  Hp.  "Wordsworth,  that  Jloses 
"received  a  Divine  message  in  Pbaraob's 


presence  (a  message,  be  it  remembered, 
directed  towards  the  people  more  than  to- 
wards Pharaoh,  and  followed  by  a  historical 
notice  regarding  its  result),  and  proceeded  to 
utter  it"  (which  he  did  not,  for  the  speech 
of  jMoscs  vv.  4 — 8  is  entirely  distinct  from 
that  message,  and  can  only,  with  the  most 
ingenious  contrivance,  be  connected  with 
the  first  clause  of  it).  Equally  futile  is 
Kalisch's  attempt  to  account  for  tlie  place  of 
the  section  by  beginning  it,  "  And  the  Lord 
bad  said.  ..."  There  is  absolutely  no  dif- 
ference between  the  original  words  here, 
and  in  the  places  referred  to  below. 
1,  2.]  This  declaration  and  command  fall,  by 
their  terms,  into  the  period  after  the  ninth 
and  before  the  tenth  pla^^ue.  They  arc 
introduced  by  the  same  words  as  similar 
Divine  intimations  throughout  the  history  : 
compare  ch.  iv.  21 ;  vi.  1,  2,  10,  29;  vii.  1, 
14,  19 ;  viii.  1,  5,  16,  20 ;  ix.  1,  13,  22  ;  x. 
1,  12,  21  ;  there  is  not  the  least  intimation 
that  they  hold  any  other  place  than  tliat 
which  this  analogy  would  assign  them,  viz. 
of  one  of  the  progressive  revelations  of  God 
to  Moses  as  to  his  course  with  regard  to 
Pharaoh  and  the  people.  2,  3.]  This 

had  been  foreshadowed  by  God  in  ch.  iii.  21, 
22,  and  we  have  the  carrying  out  of  it  in 
ch.  xii.  35,  36.  On  the  substitution  of  ask  for 
'^borrow"  of  the  A.  V.,sec  on  ch.  iii.  22.  Tlie 
notioe  of  the  greatness  of  Moses  can  neither 
be  used  against  bis  authorship,  as  has  been 
done  by  many,  nor /or  it,  as  Pp.  Wordsworth. 
The  question  is  not,  as  be  puts  it,  between 
what    Moses  himself  would   have  written, 


264 


EXODUS. 


XI. 


p  Deut.  xi.  6  ; 
Judg.  viii.  5. 


ants,  and  in  the  sight  of  the  people.  ■*  And  Moses  said, 
^hus  saith  Jehovah,  About  midnight  will  I  go  out  into  the 
midst  of  Egypt :  ^  and  all  the  firstborn  in  the  land  of 
Egypt  shall  die,  from  the  firstborn  of  Pharaoh  that  sitteth 
upon  his  throne,  even  unto  the  firstborn  of  the  maidserv- 
ant that  is  behind  the  mill ;  and  all  the  firstborn  of  beasts. 
6  And  there  shall  be  a  great  cry  throughout  all  the  land 
of  Egypt,  such  as  there  was  none  like  it,  nor  shall  be  like 
it  any  more.  7  But  against  any  of  the  children  of  Israel 
shall  not  a  dog  move  his  tongue,  against  man  or  beast : 
that  ye  may  know  how  that  Jehovah  doth  put  a  differ- 
ence between  the  Egyptians  and  Israel.  ^  And  all  these 
thy  servants  shall  come  down  unto  me,  and  bow  down 
themselves  unto  me,  saying.  Get  thee  out,  and  all  the 
people  that  p  follow  thee :  and  after  that  I  will  go  out. 


and  what  "  a  forger  "  would  have  written. 
By  putting  the  dilemma  thus,  the  real 
alternative  of  some  one  other  than  Moses, 
and  yet  7iot  a  forger,  is  adroitly  kept  out  of 
sight.  4 — 8.]  Announcement  by  Moses 

of  the  last  great  plague.  We  have  no  notice 
here  when  and  to  whom  Moses  made  this. 
But  from  ver.  8  it  was  manifestly  to  Pha- 
raoh, and  in  his  presence.  From  what  has 
been  said  above,  we  can  hardly  suppose  it  to 
have  been  at  the  same  interview  as  that 
•which  ended  at  ch.  x.  29  :  see  the  previous 
note.  about  midnight]     What   mid- 

night is  not  specified,  nor  I  conceive  can 
we  go  into  such  accurate  detail  with  the 
fragmentary  history  as  to  reason  with  Keil 
upon  the  interposition  of  the  ordinance  of 
the  passover,  and  at  least  4  days  :  see  ch. 
xii.  3,  if.  We  do  not  know  whether  this  an- 
nouncement may  not  have  been  made  on 
the  very  evening  preceding  the  Exodus. 
The  notice  of  ch.  xii.  1  is  in  its  very  terms 
indefinite  as  to  time :  see  there.  The 
anthropomorphical  expression,  I  will  go  out 
into  the  midst  of  Egypt,  is  reproduced  in 
ch.  xii.  12,  in  the  form  I  will  pass  througli 
the  land  of  Egypt.  The  figure  is  not  un- 
common in  the  0.  T. 

The  mill  consisted  of  two  stones  placed 
on  the  ground,  the  upper  one  turned  by  two 
women  sitting  face  to  face,  both  holding 
the  handle  :  see  Matt.  xxiv.  41,  the  Land 
and  the  Book,  pp.  526-7,  and  Mr.  Wright's 
art.  "  Mills  "  in  Biblical  Diet.      The  dis- 


tinctive sense  of  behind  the  mill  has  not 
been  explained  ;  the  LXX.  and  the  Vulgate 
render  "ai  the  mill,"  "6y  the  mill."  The 
firstborn  enjoyed  throughout  the  East 
great  and  exclusive  privileges  :  compare  the 
history  of  Esau  and  Jacob,  and  see  Gen. 
xlix.  3,  and  the  legal  provision  of  Deut.  xxi. 
16.      Compare    also  ch.   iv.    23.  6.] 

such  as,  literally,  which,  as  in  ch.  ix.  18. 
7.]  The  same  proverbial  expression 
of  not  a  dog  moving  his  tongue  is  found 
Josh.  X.  21;  Judith  xi.  19.  On  the  differ- 
ence put  between  the  Egyptians  and  Israel, 
see  ch.  viii.  23  ;  ix.  4.  8.]   This  an- 

nouncement was  doubtless  fulfilled  when, 
ch.  xii.  33,  the  Egj-ptians  urged  the  people 
to  depart ;  but  from  ch.  xii.  31  it  was 
Pharaoh  himself  wlio  sent  for  Moses  and 
Aaron,  and  urged  them  to  get  them  forth 
and  their  people.  Knobcl  adduces  the 
similar  instance  of  difference  in  detail  be- 
tween ch.  iii.  18  and  v.  1.  shall 
come  down]  This  phrase  is  used,  according 
to  Knobel,  because  the  king's  palace  is  con- 
ceived as  standing  on  a  greater  elevation 
than  ordinary  dwellings  ;  Kalisch,  however, 
denies  this,  and  refers  it  to  the  Hebrew 
idiom,  whereby  going  from  a  higher  place 
in  dignity  to  a  lower  is  thus  expressed. 
The  two  come  virtually  to  the  same, 
that  follow  thee,  literally,  are  at  thy  feet : 
see  reff.  The  notice,  that  Moses  went  out 
from  Pharaoh  in  a  great  anger,  literally,  a 
heat  of  anger,  though  it  might  be  joined 


4— XII.  3. 


EXODUS. 


2G5 


And  he  went  out  from  Pharaoh  in  a  great  anger. 
9  And  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses,  Pharaoh  shall  not 
hearken  unto  you ;  that  my  wonders  may  be  multi- 
plied in  the  land  of  Egypt.  ^^  j^^^  Moses  and  Aaron  did 
all  these  wonders  before  Pharaoh  :  and  Jehovah  hardened 
Pharaoh's  heart,  so  that  he  would  not  let  the  ehildren  of 
Israel  go  out  of  his  land.  XII.  ^  And  Jehovah  spake 
unto  Moses  and  Aaron  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  saying,  2 
This  month  shall  be  unto  you  the  beginning  of  months :  it 
shall  he  the  first  month  of  the  year  to  you.  ^  H  Speak  ye 
imto  all  the  congregation  of  Israel,  saying.  In  the  tenth 
day  of  this  month  they  shall  take  to  them  every  man  a 
lamb,  1  according  to  the  'house  of  their  fathers,  a  lamb  for 


q  ch.  Ti.  11.    ! 

Clirnn.  xx». 

6;    XXXV.  12. 
r  Gen.  vii.  1  ; 

XXX.  311. 

Prov.  xxxi. 


not  unnaturally  to  ch.  x.  29,  yet  doe.s  not 
seem  the  most  appropriate  phrase  to  describe 
the  calm  acceptance  of  I'haraoh's  threat 
there  related.  The  anger  may  have  been 
there  when  he  spoke,  ch.  x.  29,  but  it  was 
latent,  not  in  a  fury,  as  here.  9.]  A 

general  notice,  how  Jehovah  revealed  to 
Moses  the  fruitlessness  of  all  his  woi'ds  to 
move  the  stubborn  heart  of  Pharaoh.  If 
it  belongs  specially  to  this  particular  time 
in  the  history,  the  multiplication  of  the 
wonders  refers  to  the  two  greatest  which 
followed,  viz.  the  death  of  the  firstborn, 
and  the  overthrow  of  Pliaraoh's  host  in  the 
Eed  Sea.  But  it,  like  the  following  notice, 
may  perhaps  be  general,  and  not  to  be  con- 
fined to  this  particular  time.  10.]  A 
general  notice  of  God's  wonders  done  by 
His  commissioned  servants,  and  I'liaraoh's 
hardness  of  heart,  before  .the  great  con- 
cluding catastrophe,  which  is  also  intro- 
duced by  the  first  enjoined  ordinance  of 
Israel's  new  life,  ch.  xii.  1 — 28.  It  is  im- 
possible to  read  the  conclusion  of  this 
chapter  without  being  reminded  of  the  very 
similar  ending  of  the  chapter  in  St.  John 
(xii.)  which  precedes  the  narrative  of  the 
great  Passover  itself:  compare  especially 
John  xii.  37,  '•^Although  he  had  done  all 
these  miracles  before  them,  yet  believed  they 
not  on  Him," — in  words  almost  the  repro- 
duction of  those  used  here. 

XII.  1 — 28.]  The  ordinance  of  the  Pass- 
over. The  deliverance  from  Egypt  was  as  it 
were  the  birthday  of  Israel  as  God's  special 
people  (see  ch.  vi.  6,  7,  and  compare  the 
imagery  of  Hosea  ii.  and  Ezek.  xvi.).     The 


great  ordinance  therefore  which  was  to  in- 
troduce and  celebrate  this  deliverance  was 
instituted  in  Egypt  itself.  Hence  the 
mention  of  this  in  ver.  1  ;  hence  the  ap- 
pointed beginning  of  the  year  with  the  moiitii 
of  the  Exodus.  In  the  passage  1 — 28,  1  — 
14  contains  the  Lord's  command  for  the  in- 
stitution of  the  Passover ;  15 — 20,  the  same 
for  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  ;  21 — 28, 
the  delivery  of  tlie  command  respecting  the 
passover  to  Israel  by  Moses.  1.]  This 

portion  of  the  law  given  in  Egypt  is  intro- 
ductory to  the  main  body,  given  in  Sinai  and 
in  the  plains  of  Moab.  2.  This  month] 

viz.  the  month  then  present;  in  the  writing 
ascribed  by  Knobel  and  others  to  tlie 
original  (Elohistic)  writer,  always  known  as 
the  first  month  (ch.  xl.  2,  17;  Lev.  xxiii. 
5  ;  Num.  ix.  1 ;  xxviii.  16  ;  xxxiii.  3) :  in 
the  supplementary  portions  as  the  month 
of  Abib,  i.  c.  the  month  of  ears,  when  the 
corn  comes  into  car  (ch.  xiii.  4  ;  xxiii.  15  ; 
xxxiv.  18  ;  Deut.  xvi.  1).  After  the  cap- 
tivity it  was  known  as  Nisan  (Xeh.  ii.  1  ; 
Esth.  iii.  7).  It  very  nearly  coincides  with 
our  April.  From  this  time  the  Jews  appear 
to  have  had  two  beginnings  of  the  year ;  ac- 
cording to  the  sacnd  reckoning,  with  tlie 
month  Abib,  the  "frst  month  ;  "according 
to  the  civil  reckoning,  witli  the  month  Tisri, 
the  seventh  month.  See  on  all  the  minutia)  of 
these  reckonings  Mr.  Stuart  Poole's  articles 
"  Chronology  "  and  "  Year,"  in  the  Biblical 
Diet.  3.]  The  congregation  were  to 

be  addressed  througli  their  elders  :  sec  ver. 
2 1 .  every  man  a  lamb  is  afterwards  ex- 

plained in  detail  to  mean  one  for  a  family  or 


266 


EXODUS. 


XII. 


an  house  :  *  and  if  the  household  be  too  little  for  the  lamb, 
let  him  and  his  neighbour  next  unto  his  house  take  it  ac- 
cording to  the  number  of  the  souls  ;  eveiy  man  ®  according 
to  his  eating  shall  make  your  count  for  the  lamb.  ^  Your 
lamb  shall  be  without  blemish,  a  male  of  a  year  old :  ye 
shall  take  it  out  from  the  sheejD,  or  from  the  goats :  ^  and 
ye  shall  keep  it  up  until  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  same 
month  :  and  the  whole  assembly  of  the  congregation  of 


a  combination  of  families  :  sec  below. 
according  to  the  house  of  their  fathers]  See 
reff.  :  in  tbe  repetition  of  this  command,  ver. 
21,  it  is,  according  to  your  families,  lit.  gen- 
erations. The  meaning  is  that  the  passover- 
companies  were  not  to  be  promiscuously  com- 
posed, but  to  consist  each  of  one  family,  or 
(ver.  4)  compounded  of  two  families,  or 
even  of  more,  as  would  appear  if  tbe  last 
clause  of  ver.  4  were  followed  out.  The 
ordinary  number  fixed  among  the  Jews  was 
ten.  That  this  number  was  not  strictly 
adhered  to  appears  from  our  Lord's  last 
Passover,  in  which  Pie  sat  down  with  the 
Twelve,  Matt.  xxvi.  23.  At  this  first  insti- 
tution all  apparently  were  to  partake.  When 
the  laws  of  cleauness  and  unclcanness  were 
introduced,  the  legally  unclean  were  to  post- 
pone it  for  a  month  :  see  Num.  ix.  9 — 11. 
5.  without  blemish]  See  on  1  Pet.  i. 
19,  and  note,  John  i.  29.  Every  oiiering 
to  God  was  to  be  unblemished,  Lev.  xxii. 
19,  if.  a  male]   So  with  all  animals 

oifered  in  burnt-ofrering,  Lev.  i.  3,  10. 
of  a  year  old]  Literally,  son  of  a  year, 
which  expression  is  always  used  of  one  who 
has  completed  tbe  portion  of  time  named. 
So  Isaac  is  a  son  of  eight  days  (Gen.  xxi.  4) 
when  circumcised  (see  Lev.  xxi.  3) ;  in  Lev. 
xxvii.  5 — 7  the  expression  is  five  times 
used,  and  each  time  as  signifying  tbe  com- 
pletion of  tbe  five  years,  twenty  years,  &c. 
So  in  ch.  XXX.  14  ;  Num.  i.  3,  and  elsewhere. 
Jonah's  gourd  was  "  son  of  the  night  "  when 
it  bad  grown  tbe  night  through,  Jonah  iv. 
10.  So  that  "  of  the  first  year  "  (A.  V.)  is 
hardly  accurate.  Tbe  time  is  fixed  as  being 
that  of  perfected  symmetry  and  full  vigour. 
or  from  the  goats]  Tiiis  alternative  does 
not  seem  to  have  been  allowed  by  Jewish 
tradition,  which  permitted  the  lamb  only  to 
be  offered.  Knobel  and  Ewald  imagine,  led 
by  Deut.  xvi.  2  ;  2  Cliron.  xxx.  24  ;  xxxv. 
7,    that   subsequently    bullocks    also    were 


offered  at  tbe  passover.  But  in  Deut.  xvi. 
2  "thy  flock  and  thy  herd"  seems  only  a 
general  formula,  and  in  Cbron.  it  is  not  im- 
plied that  tbe  bullocks  were  for  the  passover 
offering.  6.]   The  four  days  keeping 

up  has  been  by  some  supposed  to  have 
reference  to  \ki%  four  generations  (Gen.  xv. 
16)  during  which  Israel  bad  been  "  kept  up  " 
in  Egypt  preparatory  to  becoming  God's 
special  people.  Others  think  that  it  was 
to  allow  time  for  Israel  to  think  of  and 
converse  of  God's  mercies  to  them  in  their 
deliverance ;  but  this  fails  to  give  any 
account  of   the    four   days.  in    the 

evening]  See  margin.  The  interpretations 
of  the  obscure  phrase  are  various.  I  give 
them  from  Kaliscb's  report.  (1.)  The  Tar- 
gum  of  Onkelos  has  "  between  the  two  su7is," 
which  in  Talmudical language  is  said  to  mean 
between  sunset  and  the  time  when  the  sun's 
light  disappears  in  the  west,  and  to  include 
about  an  hour  and  twenty  minutes.  So  also 
the  Karaite  Jews,  tbe  Samaritans,  and  tbe 
Arabians.  (2.)  Kimchi  and  other  Jewish 
interpreters  explain  it,  between  the  full 
westering  of  the  sun,  i.  e.  tbe  beginning  of 
tbe  lengthening  of  tbe  shadows,  to  his 
disappearance.  Against  this  Kaliscb  quotes 
(but  ?  )  Deut.  xvi.  6,  where  it  is  commanded 
to  kill  tbe  passover  "at  even,  at  the  going 
doivn  of  the  su7t,"  and  objects  that  the 
words  here  cannot  apply  to  the  afternoon. 
(3.)  Still  less  admissible  is  tbe  view  that 
the  former  evening  began  with  tbe  first 
westering  of  tbe  sun  at  noon.  This  is  refuted 
by  ch.  xxix.  39,  41,  where  this  same  expres- 
sion is  used  of  the  time  of  evening  sacrifice, 
which  cannot  have  been  at  noon.  (4.) 
Tbe  traditionally  accepted  time,  acted  upon 
in  tbe  temple  service,  was  between  about  3 
p.  m.,  when  the  beat  begins  to  decrease, 
till  sunset  :  or,  as  described  by  Josephus  (B. 
J.  vi.  9,  3),  from  tbe  ninth  to  the  eleventh 
hour.     And  this  seems  the  most  probable, 


4—10. 


EXODUS. 


207 


Israel  shall  kill  it  fin  the  evening.  7  And  they  shall 
take  of  the  blood,  and  strike  it  on  the  two  side  posts  and 
on  the  u^jper  door  post  of  the  houses,  wherein  thc}^  shall 
eat  it.  8  And  they  shall  eat  the  flesh  in  that  night, 
roast  with  fire,  and  unleavened  bread;  and  with  'bitter 
/icrbs  they  shall  eat  it.  ^  Eat  not  of  it  raw,  nor  sodden  at 
all  with  water,  but  roast  iiith  fire  ;  his  head  with  his  legs, 
and  with  the  purtenance  thereof.  ^^  And  ye  shall  let  no- 
thing of  it  remain  until  the  morning  ;  and  that  which  re- 


+  Hl*b.  hrtirem 
the  ttco  even- 


though  it  may  have  arisen  not  so  much  out 
of  an  interpretation  of  the  words  in  the  text 
as  out  of  a  necessary  extension  of  the  time 
wlien  so  hirge  a  number  of  victims  had  all  to 
be  slain  in  the  temple,  Ilitzig  holds  that 
tlie  two  evenings  are  the  periods  immediately 
preceding  and  following  sunset,  and  between 
the  two  evenings,  the  precise  moment  of 
sunset.  And  certainly  this  derives  some 
support  from  Deut.  xvi.  6,  though  practically 
obedience  to  it  would  have  been  impossible, 
even  at  the  first  institution.  See  this  further 
illustrated  in  note  to  Matt.  xxvi.  17 — 19, 
and  Rev.  S.  Clark's  article  on  "  Passover  " 
in  the  Biblical  Diet.  the  whole  as- 

sembly] Xot  that  it  was  to  be  killed  in  as- 
seinbhj,  but  in  each  house.  The  words  set 
forth  the  generality  of  the  obligation.  After- 
wards, the  Levites  killed  it  for  the  people, 
see  2  Chron.  xxx.  17  (though  ver.  15  leaves 
it  undecided  as  to  the  generality  of  the 
people);  xxxv.  3 — 11  ;  Ezra  vi.  20.  7.] 

The  regular  practice  under  the  law  was  to 
sprinkle  the  altar  with  the  blood  of  the  offer- 
ing, Lev.  i.  5 ;  iv.  5.  But  in  Egypt,  where 
there  was  no  tabernacle  and  no  altar,  each 
house  was  the  place  of  ottering,  and  was 
treated  as  an  altar.  Of  houses  as  well  as  of 
cities,  the  door,  or  gate,  was  the  representa- 
tive part:  see  ch.  xx.  10 ;  Deut.  v.  14  ;  xii. 
17,  &c.  The  door  consisted  of  lintel,  posts, 
and  threshold.  Of  these  the  two  former 
only  were  to  be  sprinkled,  as  the  blood  on 
tlie  threshold  would  be  liable  to  be  trodden 
underfoot  (Keil).  The  sprinkling  was  signi- 
ficant of  atonement  and  cleansing  fi-om  sin, 
for  it  was  to  be  performed  (ver.  22)  with 
hyssop,  invariably  used  in  the  law  when 
cleansing  from  sin  was  symbolized,  Lev. 
xiv.   49,  ff.  ;    Xum.   xix.  18,  f.  they 

shall  take,  i.  e.  the  father  of  each  household 
where  the  passover  was  eaten.  Very  early 
this  part  of  the  duty  began  to  fall  away  :  we 


find  in  Deut.  xvi.  5  the  concentration  to  the 
place  of  the  tabernacle,  and  by  inference  to 
the  ministers  of  the  tabernacle,  already  be- 
gun. "When  this  was  so,  the  sprinkling  of 
the  doors  could    no    longer  be  carried  out. 

8,  9.]  in  that  night,  viz.  tlie  night 
between  the  Uth  and  the  loth  of  themontli. 

roast  with  fire]  The  passover  lamb 
was  to  be  roast  with  lire,  apparently  that  the 
analogy  between  it  and  the  burnt-ofi'ering 
might  be  as  far  as  possible  complete.  In 
ordinary  sacrifices  the  part  offered  to  the 
Lord  was  consumed  by  fire ;  the  portion 
of  the  offerers  was  boiled  (1  Sam.  ii.  13,  ft".  : 
see  also  ch.  xxix.  31  ;  Lev.  vi.  21  ;  viii. 
31 ;  Num.  vi.  19  ;  Ezck.  xlvi.  20,  24;  Zech. 
xiv.  21).  In  burnt-ofierings  all  the  flesh 
was  burnt  (Lev.  i.  9) ;  and  in  the  passover, 
the  entireness  of  the  lamb  was  of  tlie  very 
essence  of  the  ordinance,  symbolizing  the 
community  of  God's  people  in  tlie  one  body : 
compare  1  Cor.  v.  7;  x.  17,  and  the  carry- 
ing out  of  the  same  symbolism  with  regard 
to  the  crucified  body  of  the  Lord,  the  real 
Paschal  Lamb,  John  xix.  33,  if.  un- 

leavened bread  was  to  be  eaten  with  it, 
leaven  (see  below)  being  generated  of  corrup- 
tion, and  so  symbolic  of  decay  and  foulness : 
subsequently  in  the  law,  this  prescription  of 
unleavenedness  was  extended  over  all  offer- 
ings of  a  cereal  character  :   see   Lev.  ii.  11. 

with  (literally,  upon)  bitter  herbs 
(literally,  bitternesses,  sec  rcf.).  'i'hcse 
are  variously  interpreted  as  wild  lettuce, 
endive,  chicory;  and  it  seems  agreed  that 
the  bitterness  as  the  foundation  of  the  meal 
symbolized  the  bondage  of  Egypt,  upon 
which  supervened  the  Lord's  deliverance, 
represented  by  the  passover.  9.]  See 

above.  10.]  This  same  rule,  that  no- 

thing was  to  be  left  over  the  day  of  ofi'ering, 
was  enacted  respecting  the  sacrifice  of  peace- 
ofl'erings  (Lev.  vii.   15),  and   of  sin-ofi'er- 


268 


EXODUS. 


XII. 


u  1  Kings  xviii. 

46.     2  Kings 

iv.  29. 
V  Josli.  ix.  5,13. 

Acts  xii.  B. 
wGen.xxxii.lO. 

2  Kings  iv.29. 

Mark  vi.  8. 
X  Deut.  XX.  -3. 

2  Kings  vii. 

15.    Ps.  xxxi. 

22. 


malnetli  of  it  until  tlie  morning  ye  shall  burn  with.  fire. 
11  ^  And  thus  shall  ye  eat  it;  with  your  >* loins  girded, 
your  "^  shoes  on  your  feet,  and  your  "^  staff  in  your  hand ; 
and  ye  shall  eat  it  in  ^  haste  :  it  is  a  passover  unto  Je- 
hovah. 12  Yov  I  will  pass  through  the  laud  of  Egypt  in 
that  night,  and  will  smite  all  the  firstborn  in  the  land  of 
Egypt,  both  man  and  beast ;  and  against  all  the  gods  of 
Egypt  I  will  execute  judgment :  I  am  Jehovah.  13  ^j^j 
the  blood  shall  be  to  you  for  a  token  upon  the  houses 
where  ye  are :  and  when  I  see  the  blood,  I  ^dll  pass  over 
you,  and  the  plague  shall  not  be  upon  you  for  destruction, 
when  I  smite  the  land  of  Egypt.     14  ^^^  i)^{^  ^^j  gj^^^u 


ings  (ib.  iv.  12,   20,  21).  11.]    It   is 

obvious  that  this  injunction  as  to  the  man- 
ner of  eating  the  Passover  applied  only  to 
the  first  time  of  its  celebration  in  Egypt. 
The  loins  were  to  be  girded — the  long  loose 
robes  bound  up  round  the  waist ;  the  san- 
dals on  the  feet,  as  was  the  custom  when  a 
long  or  rough  journey  was  to  be  under- 
taken ;  the  staff  in  the  hand,  betokening 
the  same  purpose ;  and  it  was  to  be  eaten 
in  haste,  literally,  in  trepidation  or  anxiety, 
see  reff.,  as  the  occasion  was  fearful  and 
urgent.  it   is   a  passover   unto  Je- 

hovah] The  word  pcsach  here  first  occur- 
ring, it  will  be  well  to  give  an  account  of  it. 
The  following  is  mainly  taken  from  Keil : 
"  The  word  pesach  comes  from  pasach,  pro- 
perly to  spring  or  to  hop,  from  which  mean- 
ing two  significations  are  derived — (1.)  to 
limp  or  be  lame,  halt,  1  Kings  xviii.  21 ;  2 
Sam.  iv.  4,  al. ;  (2.)  To  pass  over,  mostly 
used  figuratively  in  the  sense  of  to  spare  ; 
and  so  here,  vv.  13,  23,  27,  of  the  passing 
of  the  angel  of  destruction  over  the  door 
sprinkled  with  blood.  Hence  the  word 
pesach  came  into  use, — for  the  lamb  itself, 
the  instrument  whereby  the  passing  over 
was  insured,  so  vv.  21,  27;  2  Chron.  xxxv. 
1,  13,  al., — for  Xh&  preparation  of  the  lamb 
by  Divine  ordinance  for  the  feast,  or  the 
celebration  of  the  feast  itself,  so  ver.  11 
(this  place) ;  Lev.  xxiii.  5  ;  Num.  ix.  6,  al.  ; 
and  lastly,  it  was  transferred  to  the  whole 
seven  days  of  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread, 
which  began  with  the  passover  meal,  Deut. 
xvi.  1 — 8,  and  to  the  ofi"erings  brought 
during  that  period,  Deut.  xvi.  2  ;  2  Chron. 
xxxv.  1,  7."  12,   13.]  Explanation  of 

the  name  pesach  or  passover.  in  that 


night]  "  This  night "  of  the  A.  V.  is  not  a 
necessary  rendering,  and  does  not  agree  with 
the  facts,  for  the  words  were  spoken  before 
the  tenth  day  of  the  month,  and  the  night 
was  that  of  the  fourteenth.  The  same 
Hebrew  words  are  rendered  in  that  night, 
ver.  8.  It  is  very  doubtful  what  is  intended 
by  the  judgment  against  all  the  gods  of 
Egypt.  In  Num.  xxxiii.  4,  the  words  are 
repeated,  and  connected  with  the  burying 
of  the  first-born.  Hence  it  has  been  sup- 
posed that  the  destruction  of  the  first-born 
is  meant  by  the  phrase,  seeing  that  among 
them  would  be  many  animals  worshipped 
by  the  Egyptians.  Calvin  supposes  that  the 
judgment  would  consist  in  the  demonstra- 
tion of  the  worthlessness  of  the  help  and 
guardianship  of  Egypt's  gods.  But  it  must 
be  confessed  that  both  these  explanations 
fall  short  of  any  satisfactory  elucidation  of 
the  words.  The  Pseudo-Jonathan  gives  a 
perhaps  more  likely  interpretation,  when 
he  refers  it  to  a  destruction  of  the  images  of 
Egypt's  gods  :  "  the  molteti  images  shall  li- 
quefy, those  of  stone  shall  be  smitten  in 
pieces,  those  of  earth  be  broken  vp,  those  of 
wood  shall  be  burtit  to  ashes:"  compare 
1  Sam.  V.  3,  f.  We  have  very  similar  de- 
nunciations in  Isa.  xix.  1 ;  Jer.  xliii.  13  ; 
xlvi.  25;  Ezek.  xxx.  13,  in  thi-ee  of  which 
places  is  a  distinct  reference  to  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  images.  But  if  this  is  meant, 
there  is  of  course  far  more  beneath  it :  the 
gods  of  Egypt  are  demoniac  powers,  and 
Jehovah's  discomfiture  of  them,  beginning 
with  the  failure  of  the  magicians,  was  to  be 
consummated  this  final  night.  13.]  On 

the  words,  I  will  pass  over  you,  see  above. 
14.]   That  day, — the  fourteenth  of  Abib, — 


11—17. 


EXODUS. 


2G9 


be  unto  you  for  a  memorial ;  and  ye  shall  keep  it  a  feast 
to  JEHO^-A^  throughout  your  generations ;  ye  shall  keep 
it  a  feast  Isy  an  ordinance  for  ever.  ^^  Seven  days  shall 
ye  eat  unleavened  bread ;  even  the  first  day  ye  shall  put 
away  leaven  out  of  your  houses :  for  whosoever  eateth 
anything  leavened  from  the  first  day  until  the  seventh 
day,  that  soul  shall  be  cut  ofi"  from  Israel.  ^^  And  in  the 
first  day  there  shall  be  an  >'holy  convocation,  and  in  the 
seventh  day  there  shall  be  an  >' holy  convocation  to  you;  no 
manner  of  work  shall  be  done  in  them,  save  that  which 
every  man  must  eat,  that  only  may  bo  done  of  you.  ^7 
And  ye  shall  observe  the  feast  o/' unleavened  bread  ;  for  in 
this  selfsame  day  have  I  brought  your  armies  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt :  therefore  shall  ye  observe  this  day  in  j-our 


■  I.erit  xxlil. 
2,  3,4,  7,§, 
21,  27,  3S,  3«, 
37.     Num. 
iiviii.  IS,  36, 
2G  .  XXIX.  1, 
7,  \i. 


was  to  Israel  (see  above)  the  birthday  of 
new  life  unto  Jehovah,  therefore  its  cele- 
bration bad  for  him  an  everlasting  signifi- 
cance. And  now  that  the  true  Israel  is 
brought  in,  and  the  real  Passover  sacrificed, 
the  significance  has  not  ended.  There  is  no 
more  any  sanctity  of  times  and  seasons  (Col. 
ii.  16,  17),  but  the  great  deliverance  of 
humanity  eifected  in  our  Passover  is  for 
us  also  an  everlasting  celebration. 
15 — 20.]  Prescriptions  for  the  seven  days' 
feast  of  unleavened  bread,  to  follow  the 
celebration  of  the  passover.  There  is  some 
difficulty  about  the  ;;foce  of  these  directions. 
Either  they  were  not  actually  given  till  after 
the  Exodus,  or  the  second  clause  of  ver.  17 
is  spoken  by  anticipation,  of  God's  purpose  as 
a  thing  accomplished.  The  question  must  be 
regarded  in  combination  with  the  declaration 
of  our  vv.  34,  39,  which  assign  a  pragmatic 
reason  for  Israel's  bread  being  unleavened 
during  the  days  following  the  passover.  See 
also  on  ver.  21.  This  being  so,  it  seems  to 
me  that  we  have  no  resource  but  to  suppose 
that  these  directions  (vv.  15 — 20)  were  given 
after  the  Exodus,  but  have  been  in  the 
arrangement  of  the  history  inserted  here,  to 
relate  at  once  the  complete  institution  of  the 
passover  ordinance.  So  Kaliscb  and  Kcil. 
Indeed,  the  narrative  itself  leads  to  tlie  same 
conclusion,  for  the  general  formal  terms  of 
ver.  18,  In  the  first  montli,  on  the  four- 
teenth day  of  the  month,  do  not  correspond 
with  the  purely  occasional  wording  of  vv.  2, 
3,  this  month,  the  tenth  day  of  this  month. 
And  the  command  to  put  away  leaven  out 


of  the  houses  looks  like  a  subsequent  com- 
mand to  that  in  ver.  8,  which  would  foUow 
as  matter  of  course  on  it  if  a  synchronous 
part  of  the  same  command.  15.]  There 

is  some  little  uncertainty  left  here  as  to  the 
precise  time  of  tlie  prescribed  absence  of 
the  leaven  from  the  houses.  From  all  that 
has  been  said  on  the  subject  it  would  appear 
that  the  putting  away  of  leaven  was  to 
take  place  on  the  fourtcentii,  du  the  evening 
of  which  day  tlie  passover  was  sacrificed  ;  so 
that  tlie  eating  of  unleavened  bread,  be- 
ginning with  the  passover  feast,  would  last 
tlirough  seven  days,  from  the  evening  of  the 
fourteenth  till  the  evening  of  the  twenty- 
first.  The  terms,  first  day  and  seventh  day, 
in  our  verse,  are  obviously  used  of  tlie 
duration  of  the  feast.  During  this  time 
there  was  to  be  no  leaven  "in  all  thy 
quarters  in  the  land  of  promise,"  ch.  xiii.  7. 
16.]  an  holy  convocation,  i.  e.  an 
assembly  for  religious  worship  ;  litcrallv,  a 
convocation  of  holiness :  compare  Num.  x. 
2  ;  Ezek.  xlvi.  3,  9.  For  the  use  of  the 
word,  see  refi'.  The  prescription  of  ab- 
stinence from  work  is  a  lighter  one  than  tliat 
which  applied  to  the  Sabbaths.  This  pro- 
hibition only  regarded  servile  work  (Lev. 
xxiii.  7) ;  that  extended  to  all  work  wiiat- 
ever,  even  making  a  fire,  seething  and 
baking  (ch.  xvi.  23  ;  xxxv.  3).  17.] 

On  the  chronological  inference,  see  above, 
ver.  15.  The  reason  here  given  is  a  sym- 
bolical one.  The  purity  of  the  new  life  of 
Israel,  begun  with  this  day,  is  to  be  free 
from  all  the  leaven  of  Egypt  (compare  il  utt 


270 


EXODUS. 


XII. 


1  ver.  43,  reff. 


a.  Judg.  iv.  6  ; 
V.  U  ;  XX.  J7. 

Job  xxi.  as. 


generations  by  an  ordinance  for  ever.  ^^  51  In  the  first 
month,  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  at  even,  ye 
shall  eat  unleavened  bread,  until  the  one  and  twentieth 
day  of  the  month  at  even,  i^  Seven  days  shall  there  be 
no  leaven  found  in  your  houses :  for  whosoever  eateth  that 
which  is  leavened,  even  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  the 
congregation  of  Israel,  whether  he  be  a  stranger,  or  ^born 
in  the  land.  ^0  Ye  shall  eat  nothing  leavened  ;  in  all  your 
habitations  shall  ye  eat  unleavened  bread,  ^i  ^  Then 
Moses  called  for  all  the  elders  of  Israel,  and  said  unto 
them,  ^Go  and  take  you  a  lamb  according  to  your  families, 
and  kill  the  passover.  22  ^^(j  jq  shall  take  a  bunch  of 
hyssop,  and  dip  it  in  the  blood  that  is  in  the  bason,  and 
strike  the  lintel  and  the  two  side  posts  with  the  blood  that 
is  in  the  bason  ;  and  none  of  you  shall  go  out  at  the  door 
of  his  house  until  the  morning.  23  j^q^  Jj^hovah  will  pass 
through  to  smite  the  Egyptians  ;  and  when  he  seeth  the 
blood  upon  the  lintel,  and  on  the  two  side  posts,  Jehovah 
will  pass  over  the  door,  and  will  not  suffer  the  destroyer  to 


xvi.  5—12  ;  1  Cor.  v.  8).  And  for  this 
reason  it  was,  that  contempt  of  this  com- 
mand was  to  be  visited  with  cutting  off  from 
Israel.  But  the  ordinance  arose  out  of, 
and  was  commemorative  of,  the  haste  in 
which  Israel  was  thrust  out  of  Eg;)-pt : 
see  vv.    34,    39.  18—20.]    More   de- 

tailed directions^  On  the  wording,  see 
above.  The  stranger  is  by  some  (as  Keil) 
supposed  to  mean  the  non-Israelite  and  un- 
circumcised,  who  sojourns,  be  it  temporarily 
or  for  life,  among  Israel ;  by  others  (as 
Kalisch),  the  so-called  proselyte  of  right- 
eousness, who  was  circumcised  and  in  every 
respect  an  Israelite.  Kalisch  also  supposes 
those  born  in  the  land  not  to  mean  the 
Israelites,  but  the  descendants  of  proselytes. 
But  the  other  view  seems  simpler.  Kalisch's 
objection  that  the  sojourners  could  not  be 
cut  off  from  the  congregation  of  Israel 
because  they  never  belonged  to  it,  looks  for- 
midable, but  is  not  really,  as  the  words 
may  be  used  in  their  widest  meaning. 
21 — 28.]  Report  hy  Moses  of  the  Divine 
command  to  the  elders  of  Israel,  in  which 
it  may  be  observed  that  there  is  no  report  of 
the  ordinance  of  unleavened  bread,  but  of 
that  of  the  passover  only.  22.]  The 

rendering  of  the  A.  V.,  "  Draw  out  and 


take"  though  defended  by  Kalisch,  is  im- 
pugned by  Knobel  and  Keil ;  and  the  LXX. 
and  Vulgate  render  as  the  text,  taking  the 
verb  intransitively.  The  same  word  is  used 
thus  in  reff.  22.]    This  part  of  the 

detail  of  the  ordinance  is  now  introduced 
for  the  first  time.  About  the  hyssop,  there 
has  been  much  controversy  as  to  what  plant 
it  was.  It  will  come  before  us  again  on 
Lev.  xiv.  4,  as  the  ordained  vehicle  of 
purification  by  blood.  Dr.  Tristram  {Nat, 
Hist,  of  the  Bible,  p.  455,  ff.)  believes  it  to 
be  the  caper  plant,  and  shews  that  it  fulfils  all 
the  conditions  of  the  use  of  the  hyssop  in 
tbe  Bible.  Others  have  seen  in  it  a  species 
of  thyme,  or  origanum.  The  Hebrew  word 
ezob  being  simply  reproduced  in  the  Greek 
of  the  LXX.  and  the  Latin  of  the  Vulgate, 
we  have  no  data  except  the  uses  of  the  plant. 
It  is  something  in  favour  of  Dr.  Tristram's 
view,  that  the  caper  is  to  this  day  known  by 
the  Arabs  as  asuf,  a  name  nearly  akin  to 
ezob.  See  also  I\Ir.  Wright's  article  in  the 
Biblical  Diet.,  and  Dean  Stanley,  tiinai  and 
Palestine,  p.  21.  The  iujunction  that  none 
is  to  leave  his  house  that  night  is  one  of 
securit)^,  as  only  where  the  blood  was 
sprinkled  would  safety  be  found.  23.] 

The  destroyer  seems  to  be  the  obvious  and 


18-29. 


EXODUS. 


271 


come  in  unto  your  houses  to  smite  you.  24  x-^d.  ye  shall 
observe  this  word  for  an  ordinance  to  thee  and  to  tliy  sons 
for  ever.  2o  ^^j  {^  &]iix\\  conic  to  pass,  wlicn  ye  be  come 
to  the  hand  whicli  Jehovah  will  give  yen,  according  as  he 
hath  promised,  that  ye  shall  keep  tliis  service.  2G  ^\^,^(|  j^ 
shall  come  to  pass,  when  your  children  shall  say  unto  you, 
"What  mean  ye  by  this  service?  27  that  ye  shall  say.  It  in 
the  sacrifice  of  a  passovcr  unto  Jkhovah,  who  passed  over 
the  houses  of  'the  children  of  Israel  in  Egypt,  when  he 
smote  the  Egyptians,  and  delivered  our  houses.  And  the 
people  bowed  the  head  and  worshipped.  28  ^^d  the 
children  of  Israel  went  away,  and  did  as  Jehovah  had 
commanded  Moses  and  Aaron,  so  did  they.  29  ^  ^nd  it 
came  to  pass,  that  at  midnight  Jehovah  smote  all  the 
firstborn  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  from  the  firstborn  of  Pha- 
raoh that  sat  on  his  throne  unto  the  firstborn  of  the  cap- 
tive that   teas  in  the  dungeon ;  and  all  the  firstborn  of 


natural  interpretation  of  tlie  Ilebrew  word. 
So  the  LXX.  take  it,  and  so  the  writer  to 
the  Hebrews,  following  the  LXX.  But 
this  does  not  pass  altogether  unquestioned. 
Kuobel  urges  tliat  the  very  same  Hebrew 
word  is  used  in  ver.  13  in  the  sense  of 
destruction, — that  there  is  not  in  the  whole 
history  any  mention  of  an  angel  employed 
in  destroying  the  Egyptians,  but  that  in  vv. 
12,  13,  23,  27,  29,  it  is  Jehovah  alone  who 
goes  through  the  land  smiting  the  Egypt- 
ians, executing  judgment  on  their  gods,  and 
passing  over  the  houses  of  Israel.  He  also 
urges,  what  will  be  variously  estimated  ac- 
cording as  the  theory  is  or  is  not  adopted, 
that  the  Elohist  never  mentions  an  angel  in 
his  whole  work.  On  the  same  side  is 
Kalisch.  We  may  perhaps  venture  to  clear 
the  ground  by  observing  that  there  is  really 
no  implication  of  an  angel  in  the  use  of  the 
personal  word,  but  only  a  dark  and  mys- 
terious allusion  to  Him  who  destroyed. 
The  angel  is  imported  apparently  from  the 
subsequent  narrative  of  the  plague  in  David's 
time,  2  Sam.  xxiv.  15 — 17.  It  is  obvious 
that  Ps.  Ixxviii.  49  cannot  be  alleged  here, 
being  entirely  vague  and  general,  and 
capable  of  intcrpi'etation  as  referring  to  all 
the    plagues     indiscriminately.  24.] 

this  word,  viz.  the  injunction  as  to  the 
passover.  25.]    So   also   ch.   xiii.    5. 


Knobcl  regards  vv.  24 — 27  as  an  insertion 
of  a  later  writer,  and  adduces  the  use  of  the 
word  "•service"  in  this  sense  as  found  licre 
and  in  xiii.  5,  but  never  in  the  Elohistic 
account.  27.]  The  peoi)le — the  elders, 

ver.  21,  only  were  present, — signify,  and  in 
ver.  28  carry  out  their  obedience  to  the 
Divine  command.  In  the  latter  verse  it  is 
obvious  that  the  words  apply  only  to  that 
part  of  the  command  which  admitted  of 
imnuHliate  performance,  viz.  vv.  21,  22. 

29 — 36.]  The  slaying  of  tliejirst-born  in 
Egijpt.  The  deliverance  of  hrael. 
29.  at  midnight]  Of  what  day  is  understood 
from  the  narrative,  by  comparing  ver.  G 
with  ver.  12.  It  was  between  the  fourteenth 
and  the  fifteenth  of  the  month.  It  is  quite 
in  vain  to  attempt  to  base  this  event  on  the 
ordinary  pestilences  common  in  Egypt.  It 
was  altogether  above  nature,  and  wrouglit 
by  Jehovah  Himself.  Even  if  we  could 
find  a  natural  basis  for  the  other  plagues, 
there  is  none  for  this.  In  the  mention  of 
every  first-born  dying  we  must  not  imagine 
that  every  person  died  of  wlmtever  age  who 
was  a  first-born,  but  that  those  sons  and 
daughters  who  were  first  born  in  their  father's 
house,  and  as  yet  undivided  from  it,  died. 
Compare  ch.  xi.  5,  where  "  the  maidservant 
that  is  behind  the  mill"  answers  to  our 
captive  that  was  in  the  dungeon. 


272 


EXODUS. 


XII. 


cattle.  ^^  And  Pharaoli  rose  up  in  the  night,  he,  and  all 
his  servants,  and  all  the  Egyptians  ;  and  there  was  a  great 
cry  in  Egypt ;  for  there  was  not  a  house  where  there  urns 
not  one  dead.  ^^  ^  And  he  called  for  Moses  and  Aaron 
by  night,  and  said,  Rise  up,  and  get  you  forth  from  among 
my  people,  both  ye  and  the  children  of  Israel ;  and  go, 
serve  Jehovah,  as  ye  have  said.  22  Also  take  your  flocks 
and  your  herds,  as  ye  have  said,  and  be  gone  ;  and  bless 
me  also.  ^'^  And  the  Egyj)tians  were  urgent  upon  the 
people,  that  they  might  send  them  out  of  the  land  in 
haste ;  for  they  said,  We  he  all  dead  men.  34  ^^^^  i\^q 
people  took  their  dough  before  it  was  leavened,  their 
kneadingtroughs  being  bound  up  in  their  clothes  upon 
their  shoulders.  ^^  And  the  children  of  Israel  did  accord- 
ing to  the  word  of  Moses  ;  and  they  asked  of  the  Egypt- 
ians jewels  of  silver,  and  jewels  of  gold,  and  raiment :  "^ 
and  Jehovah  gave  the  people  favour  in  the  sight  of  the 


30.]  This  cry  \vas  prophesied,  ch.  xi.  6. 
We  hear  of  another  cry  at  midnight,  Matt. 
XXV.  5.  The  last  clause  of  the  verse  was 
literally  true  of  every  house  that  was  really 
a  house,  a  family  complete.  In  all  such 
statements  the  exceptions  readily  suggest 
themselves.  See  similar  general  statements 
to  be  similarly  taken,  Isa.  Ivii.  1  ;  Jer.  v. 
1 ;    Micah  vii.   2.  31.]    There   is   no 

discrepancy  with  ch.  x.  29,  as  the  circum- 
stances were  such  as  might  well  account  for 
the  resolve  being  broken,  even  if  it  had  not 
been  already  (ch.  xi.  8)  ;  nor  with  ch.  xi. 
8,  for  the  fact  of  Pharaoh's  sending  for 
Moses  and  Aaron  does  not  exclude  that  of 
multitudes  of  atHicted  Egyptians  crowding 
to  him  with  the  request  to  be  gone.  The 
words  of  Pharaoh  in  his  terror  combine  the 
two,  the  granting  of  the  actual  request  of 
Moses,  to  go  and  serve  Jehovah,  witli  an 
assumption  and  desire  of  that  which  he  had 
all  along  suspected  to  be  the  real  motive  of 
their  journey, — the  entire  departure  from 
Egypt.  32.]  The  flocks  and  the  herds 

had  been  the  subject  of  dispute  after  the 
last  plague,  ch.  x.  29.  There  does  not 
appear  any  reason  for  supposing  with  Knobel 
that  the  king's  urgency  was  only  for  a  tem- 
porary absence.  In  ch.  xiv.  5  it  is  not  that 
the  Egyptians  had  been  deceived,  but  that 
they   had   been  so   soft-hearted    as   to   let 


Israel  go,  which  is  expressed  in  their  woi'ds 
of  self-reproach.  bless  me  also]  These 

again  are  the  words  of  a  heart  for  the  time 
thoroughly  softened  and  broken  by  the  loss 
of  his  first-born.  When  they  prayed  to 
Jehovah,  it  was  not  now  to  be  for  mere 
deliverance  from  this  or  that  plague,  but  for 
mercy  and  favour  in  his  distress.  33.] 

The  Egyptians  were  afraid,  not  lest  tliis 
particuhir  plague  should  extend  further,  for 
it  had  been  definitely  announced  that  it 
should  smite  the  first-born  only,  but  lest 
some  other  terrible  plague  should  take  off 
those  who  remained.  34.]  See  below 

on  ver.  39.  Even  without  that  further 
notice,  this  would  shew  that  the  command 
to  keep  the  seven  days'  feast  of  unleavened 
bread  was  not  yet  known  to  them  :  they 
intended  to  leaven  the  dough,  had  not  haste 
prevented  them  ;  the  kneading-troughs  con- 
tained the  dough.  The  clothes  here  spoken 
of  were  the  outer  cloaks  of  a  square  shape, 
which  when  worn  were  thrown  over  the 
inner  clothing,  and  at  other  times  were  used 
for  wrapping  and  carrying  various  things. 
35,  36.]  Here  again  (see  previous  remarks 
on  ch.  iii.  22),  there  is  not  a  word  in  the 
text  about  borrowing  or  lending  (see  on  ref. 
1  Sam.).  The  Hebrews  demanded,  and  the 
Egyptians  in  their  panic  encouraged  them 
to  demand,    the    articles   mentioned.     The 


30—37. 


EXODUS. 


273 


Egyptians,  and  they  ''encouraged  them  to  ask.  And  they 
'spoiled  the  Egyptians.  ^7  ^  ^Vnd  the  children  of  Israel 
journeyed  from  Ramescs  to  Succoth,  about  six  hundred 


b  I  Sam.  I.  28. 

c  Gen.  xxxl.  9, 
16.    1  Mam. 
XXX.  -a.   Vt. 
cxix.  U. 


verb  is  the  same  in  both  vcr.'sos :  they 
asked,  in  ver.  3o, — they  made  them,  i.  e. 
encouraged  them,  to  ask,  in  ver.  ;5(5.  We 
may  observe  that  the  proccciling  is  no- 
■where  treated  as  one  coming  into  question 
at  all  as  to  its  morality ;  and  that  specula- 
tions on  this  matter,  such  as  are  freely 
indulged  in  by  the  commentators,  are  at 
least  out  of  place.  It  is  remarkable  how 
prominent  a  part  this  circumstance,  the  en- 
riching of  Israel  at  the  cost  of  the  Egypt- 
ians, has  played  since  the  first  announce- 
ment of  the  Exodus  to  Abraham  :  compare 
Gen.  XV.  14  ;  ch.  iii.  '21,  22  ;  xi.  2,  3,  in 
which  latter  place  it  would  almost  appear 
that  the  process  must  have  begun  even 
before  the  last  plague.  It  was  regarded  all 
the  way  through  as  a  lawful  booty  gained 
from  enemies,  who  had  long  oppressed  and 
defrauded  them.  37—42.]  The  Exodus 

from  Egypt.  The  whole  portion  from  this 
point  to  ch.  xiii.  22  is  singularly  made  up 
of  detached  fragments,  which  it  is  almost 
impossible  to  assign  to  their  various  writers. 
Ver.  39  repeats  again  matter  already  related 
vv.  33,  34;  ver.  51  reproduces  ver.  41,  the 
terms  only  being  varied;  vv.  43 — 49  repeat 
with  additional  particula;'s,  but  without  any 
specification  as  to  time,  the  ordinance  already 
given  vv.  3—10,  21—27;  ver.  50  is  the 
echo  of  ver.  28.  Then  in  ch.  xiii.,  vv.  1,  2 
relate  to  an  ordinance  taken  up  again  in  11, 
12,  If.,  but  broken  in  upon  by  another  ordi- 
nance, vv.  3 — 10  ;  ver.  9  is  reproduced  in 
ver.  16  ;  the  main  narrative,  with  the  Divine 
name  Elohim  and  not  Jehovah,  is  resumed, 
or  rather  taken  up,  from  the  very  point  of 
the  Exodus,  in  vv.  17 — 19,  and  the  notice 
of  the  bones  of  Joseph  inserted ;  and  then 
the  resumption  of  the  journey  from  Succoth, 
joining  to  our  ver.  37,  tf.,  takes  place  at  vei-. 
20,  ending  with  the  notice  of  the  pillar  of 
cloud  and  fire  as  the  token  of  Jehovah's 
presence.  Without  undertaking  to  appor- 
tion these  several  pieces  as  some  have  done, 
I  submit  that  common  fairness  requires  the 
recognition  of  them  as  independent  frag- 
ments put  together  at  some  time  when  the 
writing  of  the  whole  history  was  under- 
taken ;  such  putting  together  not  detracting 
from  the  character  of  the  narrative,  nay, 


betokening  reverent  care  on  the  part  of  the 
sacred  writer  in  conserving  the  original 
accounts.  To  resist  this  evidence  of  various 
origin  and  compound  character  seems  to  me 
to  be  as  foolish  as  it  is  unfair.  It  may  hap- 
pen at  some  time  that  we  may  be  able  by 
careful  distinction  of  diction  and  of  char- 
acter to  assign  each  portion  to  its  separate 
writer.  If  this  has  not  at  present  beea 
satisfactorily  done,  it  is  not  for  orthodox 
commentators  on  that  account  to  cast  dis- 
credit on  all  reverent  examination  of  the 
composition  of  the  sacred  text,  and  to  main- 
tain its  absolute  unity  and  contemporaneity 
in  sjiite  of  plain  evidence. 

37.]  The  children  of  Israel  set  out,  as  here 
related,  from  Rameses  (see  ch.  i.  11),  a  town 
on  the  western  side  of  the  land  of  Goshen. 
Their  departure  was  probably  towards  the 
morning  (see  Xum.  xxxiii.  3)  of  the  fifteenth 
of  Abib.  The  result  of  the  last  plague  hav- 
ing  been  definitely  announced  by  God  some 
days  before,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that 
all  preparation  would  have  been  made  for 
departure,  and  the  route  agreed  on,  so  that 
there  might  be  no  delay.  Very  consider- 
able uncertainty  rests  upon  the  geography  of 
the  Exodus.  We  do  not  know  exactly  where 
Eameses  is  to  be  placed,  and  the  name  Suc- 
coth (tabernacles  or  tents)  is  too  vague  to 
admit  of  local  assignment.  At  the  same  time, 
there  is  no  improbability,  as  has  been  some- 
times represented,  in  the  account  of  their  first 
three  days'  journey.  Days'  journeys  they 
certainly  appear  to  have  been,  for  when  the 
host  spent  more  than  one  day  between  statiou 
and  station,  it  is  specially  noticed :  see  Num. 
xxxiii.  8,  and  x.  33 ;  also  ch.  xv.  22.  The  three 
first  of  these  embrace  together  a  distance  of 
about  forty-five  miles,  giving  fifteen  miles  a 
day.  This  might  easily  be  accomplished  by 
the  men  (and  strong  women)  on  foot,  and  the 
children  and  the  feeble  on  beasts  of  burden. 
Let  it  be  remembered — (1.)  That  all  possible 
haste  would  be  made ;  (2.)  That  in  mention- 
ing the  places  of  bivouac,  the  head-quarters 
of  the  camp  alone  would  be  specified ;  the 
"  mixed  multitude"  might  be  lagging  behind. 
The  nu7nber  here  stated  has  appeared 
to  some  incredible.  But  it  has  been  again  and 
again  shewn  that  for  such  a  fertility  as  is  pre- 

T 


274 


EXODUS. 


XII. 


thousand  on  foot  that  were  men,  beside  children.  ^8  ^j^^  a 
mixed  multitude  went  up  also  with  them ;  and  flocks,  and 
herds,  even  very  much  cattle.  ^^  And  they  baked  un- 
leavened cakes  of  the  dough  which  they  brought  forth  out 
of  Egypt,  for  it  was  not  leavened ;  because  they  were 
thrust  out  of  Egypt,  and  could  not  tarry,  neither  had  they 
prepared  for  themselves  any  victual.  ^^  ^  Now  the  so- 
journing of  the  children  of  Israel,  which  they  sojourned 


dicateclof  Israel  in  Egypt,  the  reckoning  is  not 
only  within  bounds  of  probability,  but  actu- 
ally moderate.  If  there  were  about  600,000 
men  (the  exact  number  was  603,550,  be- 
sides the  Levites,  who  were  22,000.  Com- 
pare Num.  ii.  32;  iii.  39),  there  would  be 
about  2,400,000  in  all.  Now,  if  the  time  of 
the  sojourning  was  (see  below)  215  years  := 
7  generations,  and  70  persons  went  down 
into  Egypt,  an  ordinary  average  of  children 
per  family  would  produce  the  number,  allow- 
ing for  a  moderate  intermarrying  with  Egypt- 
ian wives.  On  the  supposed  difficulty  of 
sustenance  for  such  a  multitude  during  the 
journeys  in  the  wilderness,  see  note  on  ch. 
xvi.   3.  38.]  This   mixed   multitude 

seems  to  have  consisted  of  Egyptians  and 
other  non-IsraeUtes  :  see  ch.  ix.  20,  where 
we  read  of  some  that  feared  the  word  of 
Jehovah  among  the  Egyptians,  x.  7  ;  xi. 
3.  "VVe  hear  of  them  again  in  Num.  xi.  4  ; 
Dent.  xxix.   11.  39.]   We  here  have 

the  reason  why  they  ate  unleavened  bread 
during  the  first  days  after  the  Exodus.  On 
this  cu'curastance  was  founded  the  ordinance 
of  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread,  the  in- 
stitution of  which  has  been  anticipated  in 
vv.   15 — 20.  40.]    This  chronological 

notice  as  it  stands  in  the  Hebrew  text  is 
positive  and  definite.  Those  who  accept 
that  text  as  the  very  words  of  Divine  inspira- 
tion have  no  right  to  set  it  aside  on  account 
of  its  difficulty,  as  has  been  done,  e.  g.  by 
Bishop  "Wordsworth,  on  the  testimony  of  the 
Samaritan  Pentateuch  and  the  LXX.  The 
matter  stands  thus :  In  Gen.  xv.  13  Je- 
hovah foretold  to  Abram  that  his  seed  was 
to  be  a  stranger  in  a  land  not  theirs,  and 
should  serve  the  people  of  that  land  and  be 
aifiicted  by  them,  for  400  years, — the  round 
number  being  there  taken, — the  land  being, 
on  any  fair  interpretation,  one  and  the  same 
land,  and  the  afflicting  people  whom  Israel 
were  to  serve,  one  and  the  same  people.  The 


attempts  to  evade  this  are  beneath  notice.  In 
agreement  with  the  prophecy,  we  have  it 
here  stated  that  the  sojourning  of  Israel  in 
Egypt  was  430  years :  and  the  assertion  is 
made  still  more  definite  by  the  addition 
that  on  the  very  day  which  ended  that 
period,  the  hosts  of  Jehovah  left  Egypt, 
But  there  is  here  an  insuperable  difliculty, 
patent  in  the  text  itself.  For,  from  eh. 
vi.  20,  Amram,  father  of  Moses,  married 
Jochebed,  his  father  Kohath's  sister,  and 
daughter  of  Levi.  Now,  allowing  the  very 
utmost  period  of  Levi's  life,  the  length  of 
which  is  stated  (ch.  vi.  16)  at  137  years,  for 
the  birth  of  Jochebed  (an  allowance  put  out 
of  the  question  by  the  tenor  of  the  Abrahamic 
history)  ; — seeing  that  Levi  was  about  45 
when  Jacob  went  into  Egypt,  and  Moses  was 
80  at  the  Exodus,  we  should  have  137  —  45 
=::  92  years  after  the  going  down  to  Egypt, 
for  Jochebed's  birth.  We  may  reduce  this 
by  40  years  at  least,  even  thus  making 
Jochebed  to  be  born  in  the  97th  year  of 
Levi's  life.  So  that  we  shall  have  430  —  62 
—  80  =  298,  for  Jochebed's  age  when  Moses 
was  born,  which  of  course  involves  an  im- 
possibility. In  seeking  for  a  solution,  we 
may  observe  that  the  Samaritan  text  and 
the  LXX.  here  have  "  the  sojourning  of  the 
children  of  Israel  which  they  (the  Alexandrine 
MS.  of  the  LXX.  adds,  and  their  fathers) 
sojourned  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  the  land 
of  Canaan,  teas  four  himdred  and  thirty 
years : "  and  that  this,  although  entirely 
discrepant  from  the  Hebrew  text,  represents 
the  same  account  of  the  matter  as  that 
adopted  by  St.  Paul  in  Gal.  iii.  17,  where  he 
makes  the  law  430  years  subsequent  to  the 
promise  made  to  Abraham.  Josephus  also 
{Ant.  ii.  15.  2)  gives  the  same  account. 
And  it  has  been  very  commonly  adopted  by 
Jewish  and  Christian  writers.  Probably  it 
is  the  true  account  :  but  let  it  be  observed 
that  it  simply  sets  aside  the  sacred  text. 


38—46. 


EXODUS. 


275 


in  Egj'pt,  iras  four  hundred  and  thirty  years,  "i^  And  it 
came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  the  four  hundred  and  thirty 
years,  even  the  selfsame  day  it  came  to  pass,  that  all  the 
hosts  of  Jehovah  went  out  from  the  land  of  Egypt.  ^-  It 
is  a  night  to  be  observed  unto  Jehovah  ibr  bringing  them 
out  from  the  land  of  Egypt :  this  is  that  night  of  Jehovah 
to  be  observed  unto  all  the  children  of  Israel  in  their 
generations.  ^-^  ^  And  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses  and 
Aaron,  This  is  the  ordinance  of  the  passover  :  There  shall 
no  '^strano'er  eat  thereof:  "^^  but  every  man's  servant  that  <i  ccn  .vh.  u, 

C  •'  27.     Levit. 

is  bought  for  money,  when  thou  hast  circumcised  him,     '""'"■ 
then  shaU  he  cat  thereof.     "^^  A  "^foreigner  and  an  hired  *  u"; "vio*" 
servant  shall  not  eat  thereof.     ^'^  In  one  house  shall  it  be      "■  "*  * 
eaten ;  thou  shalt  not  carry  forth  ought  of  the  flesh  abroad 


That  text  is  accepted  as  the  truth  of  the 
matter  by  many  considerable  names,  e.  g.  in 
later  times,  Kalisch,  Kail,  and  Knobel. 
41.]  the  selfsame  day  (literally,  in 
the  body  of  this  day)  would  seem  to  imply 
that  the  day  of  Israel's  departure,  viz.  the 
fifteenth  day  of  Abib,  exactly  corresponded 
■with  the  day  of  Jacob's  coming  into  Egypt. 
For  we  surely  cannot  maintain  with  Keil 
that  the  selfsame  day  has  no  reference  to 
the  period  mentioned,  but  only  indicates  the 
fifteenth  of  Abib  before  (ver.  12,  ff.) 
mentioned.  42.]  There  are  various  in- 

terpretations of  this  verse,  containing  as  it 
does  a  word  (shi»imu7'i»i)  used  here  only. 
The  expression  both  times  is  a  night  of 
watchings,  or  preservings.  Some  Jewish 
interpreters  understand  tlie  word  the  first 
time  as  applying  to  the  watch  which  Jehovah 
kept  over  his  people,  and  the  s'econd  time  of 
the  watch  which  the  Jews  were  to  keep  in 
commemoration  of  this.  So  also  in  sub- 
stance Keil.  To  this  double  meaning 
Kalisch  very  naturally  objects,  as  also  to  the 
sense  oi watching  altogether,  seeing  that  such 
an  observance  was  never  part  of  the  Jewish 
practice  on  that  night.  He  contends  for 
the  sense  given  by  the  A.  Y.,  which  is  also 
upheld  by  Knobel  and  by  Gesenius,  a 
kindred  word,  from  the  same  root,  being 
often  used  for  the  observations  or  celebra- 
tions of  sacred  rites. 

43—49.]  Bcpeated  and  more  detailed  in- 
junctions as  to  the  passover.  The  pertin- 
ence of  this  insertion  here  is  supposed  to  con- 
sist in  the  circumstance  (ver.  38)  of  a  mixed 


multitude  having  gone  up  out  of  Egj-pt  with 
Israel.  But  this  may  well  be  questioned, 
seeing  that  the  passover  was  celebrated  pre- 
viously to  the  Exodus,  and  to  the  attachment 
of  this  multitude.  Far  more  probably  it  be- 
longs to  the  completion  of  all  the  primary 
prescriptions  regarding  the  rite  and  its  ac- 
companying ordinances,  Avhicli  arc  here  col- 
lected, before  the  wilderness-journey  is  en- 
tered upon.  The  substance  of  this  portion 
of  the  Divine  command  is  to  set  forth  the 
strictly  theocratic  and  Israelitish  character 
of  the  ordinance.  no  stranger,  literally, 

no  son  of  a  stranger,  as  being  outside  the 
people  of  Jehovah.  44.]  But  all  the 

families  of  Israel  were  bound  to  observe  it, 
and  in  consequence  all  who  by  incorporation 
had  become  members  of  such  families.  This 
could  be  done  by  circumcision  only.  For 
man's  servant,  Kalisch  prefers  "  fnale  serv- 
ant." 45.]  A  foreigner  represents  the 
word  commonly  rendered  by  sojourner,  the 
stronger  word  being  requi.site  here,  to  mark 
that  he  is  one  outside  Israel,  and  not  merely 
a  casual  Israelitish  visitor.  The  same  is  un- 
derstood of  the  hired  servant— that  he  is 
hired  from  without,  not  a  brother.  46.] 
This  further  partieularizesinjunctionsalready 
virtually  given  in  vv.  4,  9,  10.  I'liili/  was 
the  great  essential  ground-feature  of  the  sym- 
boli.sm.  There  was  to  be  no  division,  eitlier 
of  the  victim  or  of  the  partakers.  All  were 
to  belong  to  the  sacred  people,  and  all  in 
their  social  (betokening  their  national)  com- 
pleteness were  to  partake  of  one  sacrifice. 
The  Christian  will  not  fail  to  perceive  the 


276 


EXODUS. 


XII. 


42 ;  xxiv.  22. 

Ps.  xxxvii. 
35  (see  note 
tliere). 


out  of  the  house ;  neitlier  shall  ye  break  a  bone  thereof. 
47  AH  the  congregation  of  Israel  shall  keep  it.  ^^  And 
when  a  stranger  shall  sojourn  with  thee,  and  will  keep  the 
passover  to  Jehovah,  let  all  his  males  be  circumcised,  and 
then  let  him  come  near  and  keep  it ;  and  he  shall  be  as 
f  ver.  19.  Lev.  onc  that  is  ^born  in  the  land:  but  no  uncircumcised  person 

XVi.29;  xxiil.  ^ 

shall  eat  thereof.  ^^  One  law  shall  be  to  him  that  is 
^homeborn,  and  unto  the  stranger  that  sojourn eth  among 
you.  ^^  Thus  did  all  the  children  of  Israel ;  as  Jehovah 
commanded  Moses  and  Aaron,  so  did  they.  ^^  And  it 
came  to  pass  the  selfsame  day,  that  Jehovah  did  bring  the 
children  of  Israel  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  by  their  armies. 
XIII.  1  And  Jehovah  spake  unto  Moses,  saying,  2 
Sanctify  unto  me  all  the  firstborn,  whatsoever  openeth 
the  ^womb  among  the  children  of  Israel,  both  of  man  and 
of  beast :  it  is  mine.  ^  ^  And  Moses  said  unto  the  people, 
Remember  this  day,  in  which  ye  came  out  from  Egj^t,  out 
of  the  '^ house  of  bondmen;  for  by  strength  of  hand  Je- 


g  Num.  iii.  12  ;] 

xii.  12.    Job 

X.  18.    Hos. 

ix.  14. 
h  ver.  14.    ch. 

XX.  2.    Deut. 

V.  6  ;  vii.  12  ; 

vii.  8;  viii. 

14;  xiii.  5,10. 

Josh,  xxiv.n. 


deep  significance  of  this,  -n-hich  it  is  not  the 
object  of  this  commentary  to  point  out.  The 
last  clause  of  this  verse  is  adduced  by  St. 
John  (xix.  36)  as  having  been  literally  ful- 
filled in  the  body  of  Christ,  our  Passover. 

48.]  This  further  specifies  circumci- 
sion as  the  one  condition  of  admission  to  the 
partaking  of  the  passover,  and  that  not  of 
individual  only  but  of  the  whole  family  of 
him  who  wished  to  participate.  In  the 
covenant  made  with  Abraham's  seed,  all 
families  of   the  earth  were  to  be  blessed. 

49.]  One  law,  viz.  that  of  the  abso- 
lute necessity  of  circumcision  in  all  cases  :  in 
other  words,  of  the  absolute  co-extensiveness 
of  the  rite  with  the  theocracy.  home- 

born,  see  reff. :  i.  e.  an  Israelite. 

60,  51.]  Closing  forrmilce,  foimd  also  in 
vv.  28,  41.  It  seems  far  more  natural  to 
take  ver.  50  thus,  as  simply  helping  to  close 
in  the  narrative  of  the  Exodus  itself,  than 
with  Knobel  and  Keil,  after  some  of  the 
Jewish  interpreters,  as  anticipatory,  and  re- 
ferring to  subsequent  occasions  when  the 
children  of  Israel  had  the  opportunity  of  ful- 
filling these  precepts,  e.  g.  Num.  ix.  4,  5, 
where  the  same  general  notice  is  appended. 
Ver.  51  forms  the  solemn  close  to  the  history 
of  Israel  in  Egypt.  the  selfsame  day] 

Again  literally,  in  the  body  of  the  day,  is  re- 


peated as  a  sort  of  refrain,  hardly  as  apply- 
ing to  the  day  when  the  immediately  preced- 
ing commands  were  given. 

XIII.  1—16.]  Ordinances  belonging  to 
the  passover.  The  setting  apart  of  the  first- 
born (1,  2)  ;  the  commemorating  of  the  day 
of  the  Exodus  (3,  4) ;  the  seven  days'  feast 
of  unleavened  bread  to  be  observed  in  the 
land  of  promise  (5 — 10);  the  setting  apart 
of  the  first-born  to  be  similarly  observed  (11 
— 16).  On  the  separate  portions,  see  be- 
low. 1,  2.]  These  commands  appear 
to  have  been  given  in  Succoth,  the  first  halt- 
ing station  of  Israel.  On  the  ground  of  this 
sanctifying,  or  setting  apart  for  Jehovah  of 
the  first-born,  see  below,  on  ver.  15.  Here, 
the  command  is  simply  given,  without  the 
reason  or  the  details  there  appended.  Kno- 
bel assigns  this  to  the  original  Elohistic 
narrative,  and  finds  this  confirmed  by  the 
expressions  used.  3,  4.]  Injunction  to 
remember  the  day  of  their  deliverance  from 
Egypt,  followed,  vv.  6 — 10,  by  the  ordinance 
of  the  seven  days'  feast  of  unleavened  bread. 
The  whole  is  parallel  with  ch.  xii.  14 — 20, 
and,  like  that,  is  introduced  by  mention  of 
the  hallowing  of  the  day  itself  of  their  de- 
liverance. It  is  in  fact  the  same  narrative 
under  a  diff"ering  form,  and  with  the  addi- 
tion of  the  command  to  make  the  injunction 


47— XIII.  11. 


EXODUS. 


277 


iiovAH  brought  you  out  from  this  place :  there  shall  no 
leavened  bread  be  eaten.  *  This  day  came  ye  out  in  the 
month  Abib.  ^  %  And  it  shall  be  when  Ji:iio\ah  sliall 
bring  thee  into  the  land  of  the  Canaanites,  and  llie  Ilit- 
tites,  and  the  Amorites,  and  the  Ilivites,  and  the  Jebusites, 
which  he  sware  unto  th)^  fathers  to  give  thee,  a  land 
*  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  that  thou  shalt  keep  this  i 
service  in  this  month.  ^  Seven  days  thou  shalt  eat  un- 
leavened bread,  and  in  the  seventh  day  shall  be  a  feast  to 
Jehovah.  "  Unleavened  bread  shall  be  eaten  seven  days ; 
and  there  shall  no  leavened  bread  bo  seen  with  thee, 
neither  shall  there  be  leaven  seen  with  thee  in  all  thy 
quarters.  ^  ^  ^^(i  thou  shalt  tell  thy  son  in  that  day, 
saying,  This  is  done  because  of  that  ichich  Jehovah  did 
unto  me  Avhen  I  came  forth  out  of  Egypt.  ^  And  it  shall 
be  for  a  sign  unto  thee  upon  thine  hand,  and  for  a  me- 
morial between  thine  eyes,  that  the  law  of  Jehovah  may 
be  in  thy  mouth :  for  with  a  strong  hand  hath  Jehovah 
brought  thee  out  of  Egypt.  ^^  Thou  shalt  therefore  keep  j 
this  ordinance  in  his  season  Jfrom  year  to  year.     ^^  ^  And 


ch.  iii.  e,  reff. 


Judff, 
xxi.  I 
Sam. 


a  sign  and  a  memorial,  and  its  reason. 
the  house  of  bondmen]  So  literally,  and  so 
rendered  by  tlie  A.  V.  at  Deut.  vii.  8,  a 
comparison  derived  from  the  strong  room  or 
building  in  which  slaves  were  kept  at  night, 
chained,  and  whence  they  were  sent  out  to 
their  work  in  the  morning :  see  reff. 
4.]  The  expression  literally  is,  This  day  are 
ye  coming  out.  The  Exodus  was  tlicn 
going  on,  not  yet  accomplished.  the 

month  Abib]  This  is  the  first  time  that  the 
month  is  so  named.  See  note  on  ch.  xii.  2. 
5.]  Parallel  with  eh.  xii.  28.  Five 
principal  nations  of  the  promised  land  are 
here  mentioned :  see  Gen.  xv.  19,  where 
ten  are  named,  but  not  the  Hivites  ;  ch.  iii. 
8,  17,  where  six  are  named,  including  all 
these  and  adding  the  Perizzites  ;  Deut.  vii. 
1,  where  seven  are  named,  including  all 
these  and  adding  the  Girgashites  and  Periz- 
zites. These  two  last  are  added  here  by 
the  Samaritan  text  and  the  LXX.  On  the 
various  tribes  named,  sec  on  Gen.  x.  15 — 17. 
The  enumeration  of  these  tribes,  the  men- 
tion of  the  land  flowing  with  milk  and 
honey,  and  of  the  oath  of  Jehovah,  are  all 
stated  to  be  characteristic  of  the  supple- 


mental,   or    Jehovist,    narrator    (Knobcl). 

6,  7.]  Parallel  to  ch.  xii.  15—20, 
varying  in  the  last  day  only  of  the  seven 
here  specified  as  a  solemn  feast,  whereas 
there  both  the  first  and  last  are  mentioned. 

8.]  Seech,  xii.  26,  27  :  that,  however, 
is  said   of  the   ordinance  of  the  passovcr. 

9.]  These  words  appear  to  be  used 
both  here  and  in  ver.  16  not  in  a  material 
but  a  figurative  sense.  I  deal  with  plujlac' 
teries  on  ver.  16,  where  the  expression  is 
more  material  than  here.  But  it  is  here 
that  the  lawgiver's  aim  is  made  apparent, 
that  the  law  of  Jehovah  may  be  in  thy 
mouth,  which  would  bo  tlie  cftcct  not  of 
a  literal  and  outward,  but  of  an  inward 
and  spiritual  compliance  with  the  precept. 

10.]  Literally,  from  days  to  days, 
i.  e.  as  often  as  the  days  come  round,  as 
wc  say,  from  year  to  year :  see  reff.  '  \ 
11 — 16.]  Repetition,  irith  additional  detail, 
of  the  ordinance  of  setting  apart  the  first- 
horn.  It,  like  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread, 
is  to  come  into  force  after  the  entry  into  the 
promised  land.  Tiie  further  details  respect- 
ing the  firstlings  of  beasts  are  given  in  ch. 
xxii.   30 ;   Num.   xviii.    15—18.     Those  of 


278 


EXODUS. 


XIII. 


1  Gen.  XXX.  33. 


xi.  18,  only. 


it  shall  be  when  Jehovah  shall  bring  thee  into  the  land 
of  the  Canaanites,  as  he  sware  unto  thee  and  to  thy 
fathers,  and  shall  give  it  thee,  ^2  that  thou  shalt  set  apart 
unto  Jehovah  all  that  openeth  the  ^womb,  and  every 
firstling  that  cometh  of  a  beast  which  thou  hast ;  the 
males  are  Jbhovah's.  ^^  And  every  firstling  of  an  ass 
thou  shalt  redeem  with  a  lamb ;  and  if  thou  wilt  not  redeem, 
it,  then  thou  shalt  break  its  neck  :  and  all  the  firstborn  of 
man  among  thy  sons  shalt  thou  redeem.  ^^  H  And  it 
shall  be  when  thy  son  asketh  thee  Un  time  to  come,  say- 
ing, What  is  this  ?  that  thou  shalt  say  unto  him.  By 
strength  of  hand  Jehovah  brought  us  out  from  Egypt, 
from  the  house  of  bondmen :  ^^  and  it  came  to  pass,  when 
Pharaoh  would  hardly  let  us  go,  that  Jehovah  slew  all 
the  firstborn  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  both  the  firstborn  of 
man,  and  the  firstborn  of  beast :  therefore  I  sacrifice  to 
Jehovah  all  that  openeth  the  womb,  being  males  ;  but  all 
the  firstborn  of  my  children  I  redeem,  i*^  And  it  shall  be 
for  a  token  upon  thine  hand,  and  for  "^frontlets  between 


clean  beasts  were  not  redeemable,  but  were 
absolutely  the   Lord's.  13.]    The  ass 

is  taken  as  the  most  obvious  example  of  the 
unclean  among  beasts :  the  order  to  redeem 
extended  to  all  the  unclean,  Num.  xviii.  15. 
The  first-born  of  man  were  to  be  redeemed 
at  a  price  of  five  shekels  each,  Num.  iii.  46, 
47  ;  xviii.  16.  The  firstling  might  be  de- 
voted by  vow  to  the  Lord  as  being  His 
already :  see  Lev.  xxvii.  26,  f.  All  further 
details  see  in  the  places  referred  to. 
14,  15.]  The  account  to  be  given  of  this 
ordinance  to  future  generations :  viz.  that 
when  Jehovah  destroyed  all  the  first-born 
of  man  and  beast  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  He 
spared  for  Himself  all  the  first-born  of  Is- 
rael, both  man  and  beast.  We  afterwards 
learn  (Num.  iii.  12,  f.)  that  the  first-born 
were  originally  destined  to  the  special  service 
of  Jehovah,  but  that  he  afterwards  took  the 
Levites  instead  of  them.  in  time  to 

come  is  literally,  to-morrow,  so  in  ref. 
16.]  The  same  method  is  taken  as  in  ver.  9, 
of  impressing  on  the  children  of  Israel  the 
importance  of  the  ordinance  and  the  duty  of 
observing  it.  On  these  verses,  and  on  Deut. 
vi.  8 ;  xi.  18,  the  Talmudists  and  other 
Jewish  interpreters   (e.   g.   even    Kalisch) 


ground  the  practice  of  wearing  tepbillin 
or  phylacteries  :  see  Matt,  xxiii.  5.  These 
tephillin,  in  the  form  to  which,  through 
tradition,  they  have  attained,  "  consist  of 
small  square  leather  boxes,  those  of  the 
ha7id  with  one  leather  thong,  which  is  tied 
round  the  left  arm  and  the  fingers ;  those  of 
the  head  with  a  double  thong,  which  hangs 
down  at  both  sides  of  the  head.  The  box 
contains,  on  parchment  strips,  the  following 
four  sections  from  the  Pentateuch  :  1.  About 
the  sanctification  of  the  first-born,  Exod. 
xiii.  1 — 10.  2.  Further  precepts  about  the 
same  subject,  vv.  11—16.  3.  The  observ- 
ance of  the  law  and  its  injunction  to  the 
rising  generation,  Deut.  vi.  4 — 9.  And,  4. 
The  blessing  attending  the  strict  adherence 
to  the  Divine  precepts,  Deut.  xi.  13 — 21." 
Kalisch.  The  four  passages  are  in  fact 
those  respecting  which  the  supposed  com- 
mand to  bind  them  is  given.  That  the 
whole  interpretation  is  erroneous  will  be 
seen  at  once  by  comparing  such  passages  as 
Prov.  iii.  3  ;  vi.  21 ;  vii.  3  ;  Cant.  viii.  6  ; 
Isa.  xlix.  18;  Jer.  xxii.  2i  ;  Hag.  ii.  23. 
When  Kalisch  objects  to  the  adducing  of 
these  passages,  that  they  are  poetical,  it  is 
simply  begging  the   question.     We  main- 


12—18. 


EXODUS. 


279 


thine  eyes  :  for  by  strengtli  of  hand  Jehovah  brought  us 
forth  out  of  Egypt.  ^7  ^[  ^n^  jt  came  to  pass,  when  l*ha- 
raoh  had  let  the  people  go,  that  God  led  tlieni  not  thvowjh 
the  way  of  the  land  of  the  Philistines,  although  that  uas 
near ;  for  God  said.  Lest  peradventure  the  people  repent 
when  they  see  war,  and  they  return  to  Egypt :  ^'^  but 
God  made  the  people  to  turn  by  the  way  of  the  wilderness 


tain  that  these  arc  poetical  likewise,  and 
that  it  is  impossible  to  dissociate  the  poet- 
ical element  from  these  sayings  of  Closes. 
What,  for  example,  is  the  stretchcd-out  arm, 
the  strength  of  hand,  with  which  Jehovah 
brought  them  out  of  Egj'pt  ?  What  is  such 
an  expression  as  the  law  of  the  Lord  being  in 
their  mouth,  but  poetical  ?  What  right  have 
we  to  require  that  the  one  shall  be  inter- 
preted literally  of  texts  worn  on  the  brow 
and  hand,  and  to  dispense  with  interpreting 
the  other  that  texts  shall  be  carried  in  the 
mouth  ?  And  what  Kalisch  urges,  of  com- 
mands being  attached  to  texts  in  Deut.  vi. 
9  and  xi.  20  which  cannot  be  taken  figura- 
tively, such  as  "  Thou  shall  write  them  on 
the  door-posts  of  thine  hottse  and  on  thy 
gates,"  and  consequently  themselves  re- 
quiring a  literal  interpretation,  is  equally 
futile.  If  this  be  so,  then  each  command 
stands  on  its  own  ground.  Those  who 

wish  to  see  more  particulars  respecting  the 
phylacteries  will  tind  them  in  Kalisch  on 
this  place,  and  Mr.  Farrar's  article  "  Front- 
lets "  in  Biblical  Diet.  The  word  here 
used  for  frontlets  {totaphoth)  is  of  uncer- 
tain derivation.  The  Jewish  name  for  phy- 
lacteries, tephillin,  is  not  found  in  Scrip- 
ture, nor  is  there  any  trace  of  the  practice 
of  wearing  them  before  the  captivity.  It 
has  been  supposed  that  the  Jews  learned  it 
from  the  Babylonians,  among  whom  Jerome 
tells  us  it  was  prevalent.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  it  was  a  superstition  of  late  date. 
It  is  rejected  by  the  Karnite  Jews,  who 
maintain  the  figurative  sense  of  these  pass- 
ages. 17 — 19.]  A  notice,  in  which 
remarkably  enough  the  name  Elohim  stands 
instead  of  Jehovah,  which  has  been  used  as 
yet,  with  the  exception  of  passages  in  chap- 
ters i. — iii.,  throughout  the  whole  book. 
Tills  seems  to  indicate  distinctness  of  origin 
for  this  incorporated  fragment.  Even  those 
who  are  fondest  of  finding  subjective  reasons 
for  the  change  of  the  Divine  names  have,  as 
far  as  I  have  seen,  abstained  here.     Seeing 


that  Israel  was  especially  the  people  of  Je- 
hovah, and  is  iiere  spoken  of  as  under  Ilia 
special  guidance,  we  might  expect  to  find 
that  His  special  name  iiere  if  anywhere. 

17.]  Succoth,  their  first  station,  seems  to 
have  been  the  general  rendezvous  after  their 
hasty  fiight,  and  from  thence  their  journey 
proper  began.  From  that  point  (somewhere 
on  the  E.  of  Egypt,  and  S.  E.  probably  of 
Rameses)  to  Palestine,  through  the  land 
of  the  Philistines,  the  usual  caravan  way,  is 
but  short.  "  From  Rameses  to  Gaza  is  a 
straight  and  much  frequented  way  of  eight 
to  ten  days,  either  northwards,  through  the 
pass  of  bjcbel-el-Tih,  or  more  eastwards, 
through  that  of  Djebel-el-Edshmeh ;  and 
the  sons  of  Jacob  journeyed,  in  not  many 
days,  from  Palestine  to  Egypt  to  buy  corn.' 
Kalisch.  The  Philistines  were  known  as  a 
warlike  people,  who  would  not  have  allowed 
Israel  to  enter  Palestine  without  resistance, 
for  which  (see  ch.  xiv.  10,  fl".)  the  people 
were  not  as  yet  prepared.  18.]  The 

independence  of  this  portion  of  the  account 
is  also  shewn  by  the  fact  that  this  way  must 
have  been  previously  determined  on  by  Moses 
in  consequence  of  what  had  been  Divinely 
announced  to  him  in  ch.  iii.  12.  Both 
reasons  concurred ;  indeed,  the  one  here 
stated  may  have  been  in  the  Divine  purpose 
the  leading  one,  involving  the  other 
the  wilderness  of  the  Red  Sea]  Again,  and 
usually,  the  Sea  of  Suph,  first  mentioned 
in  ch.  X.  19,  where  see  note.  They  turned 
southward,  towards  the  desert  lying  between 
the  cultivated  land  and  the  Western  Gulf. 
They  went  up  harnessed,  i.  e.  in  arms  and 
in  rank,  not  in  a  loosely  arranged  multitude. 
Such  is  the  alleged  meaning  of  the  word, 
which  occurs  here  and  in  rttf.  only.  Some 
connect  it  with  the  numeral _;?re,  and  explain 
it  fve  in  a  rank.  But  the  more  probable 
connexion  of  the  word  is  with  loins,  and  the 
account  of  it,  that  it  implies  with  their  loins 
girt.  The  LXX.  curiously  render,  "  The 
children  of  Israel  tcent  up  in  the  fifth  gen- 


280 


EXODUS. 


XIII. 


n  Josh.  i. 
iv.  13. 
tii.  11, 


Judg. 
only. 


of  the  Red  sea :  and  the  children  of  Israel  went  up  ^har- 
nessed out  of  the  land  of  Egypt.  ^^  And  Moses  took  the 
bones  of  Joseph  with  him  :  for  he  had  straitly  sworn  the 
children  of  Israel,  saying,  God  will  surely  visit  you  ;  and 
ye  shall  carry  up  my  bones  away  hence  with  you.  ^0  ^ 
And  they  took  their  journej^  from  Succoth,  and  encamped 
in  Etham,  in  the  edge  of  the  wilderness.  2i  And  Jehovah 
went  before  them  by  day  in  a  pillar  of  a  cloud,  to  lead 
them  the  way ;  and  by  night  in  a  pillar  of  fire,  to  give 
them  light ;  to  go  by  day  and  night :  22  J^e  took  not  away 
the  pillar  of  the  cloud  by  day,  nor  the  pillar  of  fire  by 
night,  from  before  the  people.  XIY.  ^  And  Jehovah 
spake  unto  Moses,  saying,  2.Sj)eak  unto  the  children  of 
Israel,  that  they  turn  and  encamp  before  Pi-hahiroth,  be- 


eration,  kc.  19.]  Notice  respecting  the 

bones  of  Joseph  :  see  Gen.  1.  24,  25. 
20.]  Second  journey  —  Succoth  to  Etham. 
The  situation  of  Etham  is  placed  by  Mr. 
Stuart  Poole  (art.  "Exodus"  \i\  Biblical  Diet.) 
at  the  present  Seba  Biar,  or  seven  wells, 
where  the  cultivated  land  ceases,  about  three 
miles  from  the  western  sides  of  the  ancient 
head  of  the  gulf.  It  lies  at  the  S.  of  the 
bitter  lakes  through  which  the  present  Suez 
canal  passes.  The  wilderness  here  is  called 
in  Num.  xxxiii.  8,  "  the  toilderness  of 
Etham,"  hvii  in  our  ch.  xv.  22,  "  the  tcilder- 
7iess  of  Shur"  (see  Gen.  xvi.  7).  21, 

22.]  The  pillar  of  fire  and  cloud.  From 
this  point  Israel  left  inhabited  land  and 
journeyed  through  the  wilderness ;  and 
Jehovah  Himself  undertook  their  guidance, 
until  they  came  again  to  a  peopled  land. 
An  analogy  has  been  found  between  the 
pillar  of  fire  and  cloud  and  the  kindled  fire 
which  went  before  caravans  or  armies  in  the 
East.  Quintus  Curtius  relates  of  Alexander, 
as  he  went  through  Babylonia  and  Susiana, 
that  "he  set  a  pole  {vertica)  which  could  be 
seen  on  every  side,  over  the  royal  tent, 
which  shewed  a  signal  conspicuous  to  all, 
seen  as  a  fire  by  night  and  as  smoke  by 
day. "  And  such  notices  are  interesting  and 
useful,  except  when  they  are  treated  as 
accounting  for  and  exhausting  the  theocratic 
narrative.  All  that  we  can  say  of  them  is, 
that  Jehovah  may  have  been  pleased  to  base 
upon  an  existing  practice  His  method  of 
manifesting  His  guarding  and  leading  pre- 


sence to  His  people.  "We  are  in  this  narra- 
tive not  in  the  region  of  the  legendary  and 
mythical,  but  of  the  supernatural  and  Divine. 
This  daily  and  nightly  presence  was  by 
means  not  of  tvro  pillars,  but  of  one :  see 
ch.  xiv.  24 ;  see  also  vv.  19,  20 ;  xl.  38  ; 
Num.  ix.  15,  16.  In  it  was  present  "  the 
angel  of  God  "  (ch.  xiv.  19),  i.  e.  the  Divine 
presence  personally  ;  in  it  appeared  "  the 
glory  of  Jehovah,"  ch.  xvi.  10;  xl.  34; 
Num.  XV.  1,  42.  It  was  an  elementary 
appearance,  made  use  of  by  Him  who  ap- 
pointed and  rules  the  elements,  to  signify  to 
His  people  His  immediate  presence  and 
guardianship  :  see  other  notices  of  this  con- 
tinued miracle  in  Num.  x.  34 ;  xiv.  14 ; 
Deut.  i.  33 ;  Neh.  ix.  12  ;  Ps.  cv.  39  ;  also 
notes  on  ch.  xxxiii.  9  ;  Num.  xii.  5  ;  Deut. 
xxxi.  15.  22.  ]  He  took  not  away,  viz. 

from  this  time  :  the  narrative,  treating  of 
the  beginning  of  the  journey,  does  not  specify 
the  end  of  this  appearance. 

XIV.  Passage  of  the  children  of  Israel 
through  the  Red  Sea,  a7id  destruction  of 
Pharaoh  and  his  hosts.  The  questions  of 
detail  will  be  treated  as  they  arise  in  the 
text.  In  the  discussion  of  the  probable 
locality,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Mr.  Stuart 
Poole's  article  "  Eed  Sea,  passage  of "  in  the 
Biblical  Diet. 

2.]  They  had  hitherto,  according  to  the 
view  above  taken,  been  going  eastward  up 
the  valley  known  as  the  "\Vady-el-Tumeylat. 
At  the  end  of  that  valley  lay  Etham,  or 
Seba  Biar.     From  that  point  they  were  to 


19— XIY.  5. 


EXODUS. 


281 


tween  "Migdol  and  the  sea,  over  against  Baal-zephon :  be- 
fore it  shall  ye  encamp  by  the  sea.  ^  And  Pliaraoh  will 
say  of  the  children  of  Israel,  They  arc  entangled  in  the 
land,  the  wilderness  hath  shut  them  in.  *  And  I  will 
harden  Pharaoh's  heart,  that  he  shall  follow  after  them  ; 
and  I  will  be  honoured  upon  Pharaoh,  and  upon  all  his  host ; 
that  the  Egyptians  may  know  that  I  am  Jehovah.  And 
they  did  so.  ^  51  And  it  was  told  the  king  of  Egypt  that 
the  people  fled  :  and  the  heart  of  Pharaoh  and  of  his  serv- 
ants was  turned  against  the  people,  and  they  said.  Why 
have  we  done  this,  that  we  have  let  Israel  go  from  serving 


o  Stc  Gen.  xi. 
4.    Jo.ll.  Xf. 
37.    JudK- 
viii.  17.    lia. 
T.  i,  al. 


turn  (literally,  return,  but  on  no  hypothesis 
can  the  literal  sense  be  pressed),  and 
evidently  southward,  tor  thus  only  could  it 
be  said  that  the  wilderness  had  shut  them 
iu ;  and  they  were  to  encamp  by  the  sea, 
i.  e.  by  what  was  then  the  western  shore  of 
the  western  gulf.  before  Pi-hahiroth] 

This  is  most  probably  an  Egyptian  word, 
Pi  being  the  article,  and  Hah-  or  Hach- 
iroth  the  real  name  :  the  signitication  being 
"  the  bed  of  reeds.'"  There  is  a  tract  with 
this  very  name  (in  Arabic,  Ghuweyhet-el- 
boos)  about  the  spot  even  now  ;  but  in  the 
cliauge  which  has  taken  place  in  the  situa- 
tion of  the  gulf,  a  natural  feature  of  this 
kind  would  be  liable  to  shift.  Migdol  is 
akin  to  the  Hebrew  expression  for  a  military 
watch-tower,  or  look-out  in  a  vineyard  (see 
rell'.).  Perhaps  there  may  have  been  such 
a  tower  on  one  of  the  hills  near  the  sea,  or 
a  place  named  after  one.  The  name  occurs 
again  as  a  local  one  in  Egypt,  Ezek.  xxix. 
10 ;  XXX.  6 ;  Jer.  xliv.  1  ;  xlvi.  14.  See 
Mr.  Stuart  Poole's  art.  "  Mig'dol "  in  Biblical 
Diet.  over    against    Baal-zephon] 

That  much  stress  is  not  to  be  laid  upon  any 
distinction  between  the  words  before  and 
over  against  will  be  seen  by  their  being 
inditfei  ently  used  here,  in  ver.  9,  and  in 
Num.  xxxiii.  7,  where  the  people  are  said  to 
have  encamped  "  before  Mi(,dol"  and  iu  ver. 
8  that  they  departed  "/row  6e/o»-e//a/i«;-o<A." 
All  that  can  be  decided  is  that  Migdol  and 
Baal-zephon  must  have  been  opposite  to  one 
another,  and  the  latter  behind  Pi-hahiroth 
with  reference  to  the  Israelites.  The  name 
has  by  almost  all  commentators  been  con- 
nected with  Typhon,  "a  place  sacred  to 
Typhon,"  an  idea  which  Mr.  Stuart  Poole 
characterizes  as  a  very  bold  conjecture,  seeing 


that  we  have  no  ground  for  considering  the 
name  Typhon  to  be  either  Egyptian  or 
Semitic.  He  inclines  to  give  the  word  a 
Hebrew  derivation,  and  suppose  it  to  be 
named  from  a  watch-tower  on  the  frontier, 
like  Migdol.  See  his  art.  as  above. 
3.]  The  object  of  this  change  of  route  is 
distinctly  stated  to  have  been  to  produce 
this  inference  in  the  mind  of  Pharaoh.  This 
being  so,  it  must  evidently  be  treated  as  a 
deviation  from  the  way  for  a  special  purpose, 
and  cannot  be  involved  in  any  consider- 
ations regarding  the  natural  route  to  be 
taken.  And,  i.  e.  and  then,  the  result 

which  will   follow.  4.]    This   would 

shew  itself  in  that  hardness  of  heart,  which 
seemed  broken  down  by  the  last  great 
plague,  returning  and  inducing  Pharaoh  to 
attempt   to   recover   his   nation   of    slaves. 

6—9.]  Pursuit  by  the  Egyptians. 
5.]  It  certainly  seems  implied  in  the  pre- 
vious verses  tliat  the  change  of  route  there 
enjoined  would  cause  Pharaoh  to  imagine 
that  the  people  had  lost  themselves.  This 
he  would  learn  by  scouts,  or  by  the  return 
of  some  of  the  mixed  multitude,  ch.  xii.  38. 
In  this  portion,  however,  the  mere  flight  of 
the  people  is  the  moving  cause  of  Pharaoh's 
regret  and  of  his  pursuit.  The  two  portions 
are  independent,  but  not  inconsistent.  In 
matter  of  fact,  the  two  might  very  naturally 
combine.  But  a  natural  interpretation  of 
the  narrative  will  require  a  delay  of  some 
days  at  Pi-hahiroth,  during  which  Pharaoh 
might  receive  the  news  which  should  lead 
him  to  the  inference  in  ver.  3.  The  regret 
described  would  naturally  have  place  on 
the  next  day  after  the  Exodus,  after  the 
burial  of  the  first-born.  There  is  perhaps  a 
trace  in  the  narrative  of  Pharaoh's  having 


282  EXODUS.  XIY. 

p  =  Num.  xxi.  US  ?  ^  And  lie  made  ready  his  chariot,  and  took  his  p  people 
Deut.  11.32;    .^"^j^  j^*^  .  7  g^j^jj  ]^g  took  SIX  Hundred  cliosen  chariots^  and 

q  ch.  xv.  4.  all  the  chariots  of  Egypt,  and  ^  captains  over  every  one  of 
them.  S  And  Jehovah  hardened  the  heart  of  Pharaoh 
king  of  Egypt,  and  he  pursued  after  the  children  of  Israel : 
and  the  children  of  Israel  went  out  with  an  high  hand. 
^  But  the  Egyptians  pursued  after  them,  all  the  horses 
and  chariots  of  Pharaoh,  and  his  horsemen,  and  his  army, 
and  overtook  them  encamping  by  the  sea,  beside  Pi-hahi- 
roth,  before  Baal-zephon.  ^^  ^  And  when  Pharaoh  drew 
nigh,  the  children  of  Israel  lifted  up  their  eyes,  and,  be- 
hold, the  Egyptians  marched  after  them ;  and  they  were  sore 
afraid:  and  the  children  of  Israel  cried  out  unto  Jehovah. 

11  And  they  said  unto  Moses,  Because  there  were  no  graves 
in  Egypt,  hast  thou  taken  us  away  to  die  in  the  wilder- 
ness ?  wherefore  hast  thou  dealt  thus  with  us,  to  carry  us 
forth  out  of  Egypt  ?  ^^  /§  not  this  the  word  that  we  did 
tell  thee  in  Egypt,  saying,  Let  us  alone,  that  we  may 
serve  the  Egyptians  ?  For  it  had  been  better  for  us  to  serve 
the  Egyptians,  than  that  we  should  die  in  the  wilderness. 

12  If  And  Moses  said  unto  the  people.  Fear  ye  not,  stand 

now  discovered  that  the  pretext  of  a  three  as  in  Joh  sxxviii.  15.  9.]  The  ex- 
days'  journey  was  only  to  cover  the  design  pression  his  army  here  can  hardly  be  un- 
of  final  flight ;  but,  as  before  observed  (see  derstood  of  infantry,  which  would  be  un- 
on  ch.  X.  10),  this  seems  to  have  been  sus-  suitable  for  so  rapid  a  pursuit.  "We  find 
pected  by  the  king  throughout.  6,  7.]  only  chariots  and  cavalry  mentioned  in  the 
Pharaoh  took  his  people,  i.  e.  his  army :  triumphant  song,  ch.  xv.  So  that  the  fight- 
see  reff.  Egypt  was  always  celebrated  for  ers  from  and  attendants  on  the  chariots 
its  chariots  and  horses  :  see  Isa.  xxxi.  1 ;  must  probably  be  meant.  On  the  situation 
xxxvi.  9.  There  is  some  doubt  about  the  of  the  camp,  see  above.  10.]  the 
word  the  rendering  of  which  by  the  A.  V.  Egyptians,  literally,  Egypt-  They  cried 
captains,  I  have  preserved  because  no  other  to  Jehovah,  but  not  in  faith  ;  only  as  men 
seems  to  have  established  a  preference  over  in  peril  and  distrust.  11.]  The  Israel- 
it.  It  seems  to  import  '■'■third  ■meti;"  ites  remembered  the  vast  necropolis  attached 
Jerome  explains  it,  olScers  of  the  second  to  several  of  the  cities  in  Egypt,  and 
rank  after  the  king  ;  but  some  believe  it  to  "looked  with  Egyptian  horror  at  the  pros- 
mean  captain  over  the  three  who  are  sup-  pect  that  their  carcases  should  be  left  on  the 
posed  to  have  been  the  complement  of  the  face  of  the  wilderness."  Mr.  Stuart  Poole, 
war-chariot.  Again,  over  every  one  of  them  12.]  This  refers  perhaps  to  the 
is  rendered  by  the  Vulgate,  over  all  his  host,  speech  of  the  officers  to  Moses  and  Aaron  in 
8.]  The  latter  clause  imports  that  ch.  v.  21 ;  but  it  doubtless  had  happened 
Israel  did  not  escape  ignominiously,  as  such  often  during  the  grievous  and  increased  op- 
pursuit  would  naturally  suggest,  but  went  pression  of  the  people  in  Egypt :  compare 
out  with  the  high  hand  of  Jehovah  over  ch.  vi.  9.  13.]  The  LXX.  render, 
them  (Isa.  xxvi.  11),  publicly  and  tri-  moved  perhaps  by  the  consideration  that 
umphantly.  Or  the  high  hand  may  refer  Israel  did  actually  see  again  the  Egyptians 
to  their  own  lofty  spirit  and  warlike  attitude,  dead,   "  in  the  manner  in  which  ye  have 


6—20.  EXODUS.  283 

still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  Jehovah,  wliich  lie  will 
shew  to  you  to  day  :  for  the  Egyptians  whom  ye  have 
seen  to  day,  ye  shall  sec  them  again  no  more  I'or  ever. 
^'^  Jehovah  shall  fight  for  you,  and  ye  shall  'liold  your  rccn.xxxir.s. 
peace.  ^^  51  And  Jehovaii  said  unto  Closes,  "Wherefore 
criest  thou  unto  me  ?  speak  unio  the  children  of  Israel 
that  they  go  forward  :  i^  but  lift  thou  up  thy  rod,  and 
stretch  out  thine  hand  over  the  sea,  and  divide  it :  and 
the  children  of  Israel  shall  go  on  dry  grouud  through  the 
midst  of  the  sea.  ^7  And  I,  behold,  I  will  harden  the 
hearts  of  the  Egyptians,  and  they  shall  follow  them  :  and 
I  will  get  me  honour  upon  Pharaoh,  and  upon  all  his 
host,  upon  his  chariots,  and  upon  his  horsemen.  ^^  And 
the  Egyptians  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah,  when  I 
have  gotten  me  honour  upon  Pharaoh,  upon  his  chariots, 
and  upon  his  horsemen.  ^^  ^  And  the  angel  of  God, 
which  went  before  the  camp  of  Israel,  removed  and  went 
behind  them ;  and  the  pillar  of  the  cloud  went  from  be- 
fore their  face,  and  stood  behind  them:  ^^  and  it  came  be- 
tween the  camp  of  the  Egj^ptians  and  the  camp  of  Israel ; 
and  it  was  a  cloud  and  darkness,  but  it  gave  light  by 
night :  so  that  the  one  came  not  near  the  other  all  the 

seen  the  Egyptians  to-day  ye  shall  see  them  Thus  the  Targums,  and  almost  all  the  inter- 
ne more  for  ever."  But  this  is  objected  to  prcters,  including  Kalisch,  Knohcl,  and  Kcil. 
by  the  Hebraists.  15]  The  narrative  But  surely  this  is  not  necessary,  and  does 
leaves  it  to  be  understood  that  IMoses,  after  not  correspond  to  the  words  of  the  text. 
what  he  had  said  to  the  people,  betook  him-  Those  words  simply  state  again  of  the  pillar, 
self  in  prayer  to  God.  16.]  He  is  in  its  changed  position,  that  which  we  had 
commanded  to  lift  up  his  rod,  to  shew  the  before  heard  of  it  in  eh.  xiii.  23,  that  it  was 
direct  agency  of  God  in  the  matter.  In  vv.  (in  its  ordinary  state  by  day)  a  pillar  of 
24,  2fi,  27  we  hear  of  lotoses  stretchbig  out  cloud, — cloud  and  darkness, — but  gave  liglit 
his  hand  over  the  sea,  but  nothing  of  the  by  night.  And  thus  the  purpose  of  which 
rod.  This  is  in  agreement  with  the  features  the  last  clause  announces  the  fulfilment  was 
of  the  two  narratives  throughout ;  see  ch.  answered.  It  divided  tlie  two  hosts  by  day 
iv.  20,  and  note  there.  If  the  children  of  with  a  barrier  of  cloud,  by  niglit  with  a 
Israel  advanced  before  the  miracle  took  barrier  of  fire.  On  the  common  acceptation, 
place,  then  indeed  was  Heb.  xi.  29  signally  the  words  by  night  are  altogether  super- 
verified,  that  "they  passed  hy  faith  tlirough  fluous  and  out  of  place.  The  pillar  could 
the  Red  Sea."  19,  20.]  On  the  angel  only  be  a  cloud  and  darkness  to  the  Egypt- 
of  God,  see  note  above,  ch.  xiii.  21.  There  ians  hij  day,  for  by  night  all  is  darkness; 
is  a  difficulty  in  the  rendering  of  ver.  20.  whereas  it  could  only  give  light  to  Israel  at 
Literally,  in  the  Hebrew,  it  stands  thus  :  night,  for  by  day  all  is  light.  So  that  thus 
and  it  was  cloud  and  darkness,  and  illu-  there  would  be  no  simultaneous  contrast, 
minated  the  niglit.  The  general  view  has  Sec  Josh.  xxiv.  7,  where  it  is  only  said  that 
been  that  the  pillar  presented  darkness  to  Jehovah  put  darkness  between  Israel  and 
the  Egyptians,  but  light  to  the  Israelites,  the  Egyptians.  21.]  On  the  stretching 


284 


EXODUS. 


XIY. 


s  Job  xii.  17,19. 
Ps.  cxxv.  5. 
Ezek.  xxxii. 


t  Gen.  xxxii. 
8,  fF. ;  xxxiii. 

8  ;  1.  9. 


night.  21  ^n(j  Moses  stretched  out  his  hand  over  the  sea ; 
and  Jehovah  caused  the  sea  to  ^jjart  by  a  strong  east 
wind  all  that  night,  and  made  the  sea  dry,  and  the  waters 
were  divided.  22  ^jj(j  i]^q  children  of  Israel  went  into 
the  midst  of  the  sea  upon  the  dry  ground :  and  the  waters 
were  a  wall  unto  them  on  their  right  hand,  and  on  their 
left.  23  ^  ^j^fi  i)^Q  Egyptians  pursued,  and  went  in  after 
them  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  even  all  Pharaoh's  horses, 
his  chariots,  and  his  horsemen.  24  And  it  came  to  pass, 
that  in  the  morning  watch  Jehovah  looked  unto  the 
%ost  of  the  Egyptians  through  the  pillar  of  fire  and  of  the 
cloud,  and  troubled  the  *host  of  the  Egyptians,  25  ^nd 
took  off  their  chariot  wheels,  and  brought  them  into  diffi- 
culty :  so  that  the  Egyptians  said.  Let  us  flee  from  the 
face  of  Israel ;  for  Jehovah  fighteth  for  them  against  the 
Egyj)tians.     26  ^  And  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses,  Stretch 


out  the  hand,  see  note  ahove,  ver.  16.  The 
miraculous  effect  is  thus  described :  God 
sent  a  strong  east  wind  which  beat  upon 
that  part  of  the  sea  where  the  passage  was 
to  take  place,  and  drove  back  the  waters 
each  way.  The  phenomenon  was  by  this 
carefully-stated  circumstance  kept  totally 
distinct  from  any  that  could  be  produced  by 
an  unusually  low  tide,  accompanied  by  an 
unusually  strong  wind.  That  such  com- 
binations do  produce  wonderful  effects  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Suez,  is  testified  by 
travellers.  But  that  circumstance  only 
furnishes  another  instance  of  God  being 
pleased  to  use  the  workings  of  nature  as  the 
basis  for  His  miraculous  manifestations. 
Jehovah  caused  the  sea  to  go,  i.  e.  to  part : 
the  word  is  rendered  lead  away  in  reff.  Job, 
run  in  ref.  Ezek.,  lead  forth  inxeL  Ps.  The 
f/o  back  of  the  A.  V.  hardly  gives  the  right 
idea,  but  represents  more  the  driving  in  one 
direction  only.  dry  is  literally,  dry- 

ness:    see    Gen.   viii.    13.  23.]   The 

pursuit  of  the  Egyptians  appears  to  have 
been  almost  immediate,  so  that  only  the 
pillar  of  fire  and  cloud  separated  the  two 
hosts.  Thus  the  Israelites  would  have  for 
the  most  part  safely  reached  the  other  side 
by  the  time  the  Egyptian  host  was  all  within 
the  bed  of  the  sea.  It  does  not  appear 
whether  the  Egyptians  followed  seeing  the 
miracle  and  trusting  to  its  continuance,  or 
simply  in  the  darkness  and  seeing  the  pillar 


move  on.  24.]  The  Hebrews  divided 

the  night  into  three  watches:  this  was  the 
third  or  morning  watch,  from  about  2 
A.M.  to  sunrise.  We  cannot  infer,  either 
from  this  verse  or  from  Ps.  Ixxvii.  IS  (which 
need  not  refer  specially  to  this  incident), 
that  the  troubling  was  by  means  of  a  storm. 
Nay,  the  narrative  itself  forbids  such  a 
rationalization,  by  simply  relating  the 
miraculous  act  of  God  in  looking  through 
the  pillar  of  fire  and  cloud,  and  by  implying 
that  no  tempestuous  agency  was  on  the  sea 
till  Moses  lifted  his  hand  again.  As  little 
can  we  understand  this  looking  of  Jehovah 
unto  the  host  of  the  Egyptians  to  have  been 
a  breaking  out  of  fire  through  the  dark 
portion  of  the  pillar,  supposed  in  the  ordin- 
ary interpretation  to  have  been  turned 
towards  the  Egyptians.  It  was  some  terrible 
revelation  of  His  presence  dismaying  the 
pursuers  at  once.  the  host,  literally, 

the  camp  :  so  in  reff.  25-]  Even  those 

who  rationalize  on  ver.  24  are  obliged  to 
confess  that  the  narrative  here  can  express 
no  other  than  direct  agency.  The  inter- 
ference would  appear  to  be  that  God  made 
their  chariots  to  advance  with  difficulty  in 
the  rough  bed  of  the  sea,  wheels  coming  oflT, 
and  thus  the  whole  pursuit  became  involved 
in   trouble   and   delay.  26,  27.]    The 

immediate  effect  of  the  action  enjoined 
appears  to  have  been  to  cause  the  wind 
to  cease  by  which  the  sea  had  been  parted, 


21— XY.  1. 


EXODUS. 


28o 


out  thine  hand  over  the  sea,  that  the  waters  may  come 
again  upon  the  Egyptians,  upon  their  chariots,  and  upon 
their  horsemen.  27  And  Moses  stretched  forth  his  hand 
over  the  sea,  and  the  sea  returned  to  his  strength  when 
the  morning  appeared  ;  and  the  Egyptians  fled  against  it; 
and  Jehovah  overthrew  the  Egyptians  in  the  midst  of  tlie 
sea.  28  And  the  waters  returned,  and  covered  the  chariots, 
and  the  horsemen,  a)id  all  the  host  of  Pharaoh  that  came 
into  the  sea  after  them  ;  there  remained  not  so  much  as 
one  of  them.  29  -q^^  ^he  children  of  Israel  walked  upon 
dry  latid  in  the  midst  of  the  sea ;  and  the  waters  iccrc  a 
wall  unto  them  on  their  right  hand,  and  on  their  left.  30 
Thus  Jehovah  saved  Israel  that  day  out  of  the  hand  of 
the  Egyptians ;  and  Israel  saw  the  Egyptians  dead  upon 
the  sea  shore.  31  And  Israel  saw  the  great  "work  which  " 
Jehovah  did  upon  the  Egyptians  :  and  the  people  feared 
Jehovah,  and  believed  Jehovah,  and  ''his  servant  Moses.  " 
XY.  1  Then  sang  Moses  and  the  children  of  Israel  this 
song  unto  Jehovah,  and  spake,  saying. 


Num.  xii.7,f. 
Diut.  xxxiv. 


r.,  1,  13,  15; 
>iii.  31,33,  al. 


or  even  to  reverse  its  action  in  combination 
■with  the  returning  tide.  The  Egyptians 
fled  against  it  (more  properly,  to  meet  it) 
is  interpreted  by  Knohel  that  one  part  fled 
from  the  waves  coming  from  the  S.,  another 
from  the  opposite,  and  so  each  met  the  ad- 
vancing sea.  They  could  not  flee  the  direct 
way,  as  it  was  blocked  up  by  their  own  host. 
29.]  Is  a  repetition  of  ver.  22  ;  not 
exact  in  its  place  here,  seeing  that  before 
this  Israel  had  passed  over,  but  generally 
stated.  30.]  The  circumstance  of  the 

bodies  of  the  Egyptians  being  cast  up  on  the 
eastern  shore  seems  to  favour  the  idea  that 
an  opposite  or  westerly  wind  was  used  to 
bring  the  sea  again  to  its  strength. 
31.]  work  is  literally  hand,  as  in  rcfF. 
They  entered  the  sea  in  faith,  and  the  pro- 
duct of  their  deliverance  was  increase  of 
faith.  See  the  similar  expression  used  on 
the  effect  of  our  Lord's  first  miracle,  John 
ii.  11.  Knobel  remarks  that  the  expression, 
Jehovah's  servant,  as  applied  to  IMoscs, 
occurs  only  in  the  portions  not  due  to  the 
Elohist :  see  reff. 

XV.  1 — 18.]  Thanksgiving  so7ig  of  praise 
for  Israel's  deliverance.  Respecting  this 
song  of  triumph  opinions  have  no  otherwise 


differed  than  according  as  men's  estimates  of 
tlic  reality  or  otherwise  of  prophecy  differ. 
Writers  like  Ewald  and  Knobel,  with  whom 
there  is  no  such  thing  as  an  exaltation  of 
human  thought  by  Divine  influence,  regard 
every  onward  reaching  reference  in  it  as  evi- 
dence that  it  was  composed  after  the  fact  to 
which  that  reference  is  made.  But,  even 
taking  such  an  opinion  on  its  very  lowest 
ground,  is  it  likely  that  in  the  song  of 
triumph  of  a  people  setting  forth  with  a 
definite  ultimate  object,  the  return  to  the 
land  of  their  fathers,  no  allusion  would  be 
made  to  their  anticipations  as  regarded  the 
entrance  into  that  land .'  The  course  of 
patriarchal  history,  as  I  have  endeavoured  to 
shew  in  the  notes,  was  sulKcicnt  to  have  sug- 
gested every  allusion  here  made  :  see  on  ver. 
17.  But  there  is  no  need  for  us  to  confine 
ourselves  to  this  lowest  ground.  Ilcdding 
distinctly  to  the  fact  of  a  Divine  leading  and 
inspiration  in  the  history  of  Israel,  we  see 
these  popular  yearnings  and  anticipations 
fixed,  and  lifted  into  prophecy  by  the  Spirit 
who  dwelt  in  Moses.  For  tliat  his  was  the 
composition  is  clearly  implied  by  the  narra- 
tive. A  remark  of  Ilerdcr's,  quoted  by 
Kalisch,  is  well  worth  remembering  when 


286 


EXODUS. 


XV. 


I  will  sing  unto  Jehovah,  for  lie  liath  triumphed  glori- 
The  horse  and  his  rider  hath  he  cast  into  the  sea.   [ously : 


such  criticisms  as  those  of  Knohel  and  Ewald 
are  urged  upon  us  :  "  If  this  poem  contains 
parts  which,  it  might  seem,  could  not  well 
have  been  sung  in  that  period,  it  must  be 
remembered  that  the  temple,  the  holy 
places,  and  the  land  which  the  Israelites 
were  destined  to  occupy,  existed  already 
clearly  in  God's  and  Moses's  minds  ;  and  the 
latter  prepared  the  people  successfully  for 
the  exertions  and  sacrifices  necessary  for  the 
realization  of  their  hopes." 

The  ode  may  be  divided  into  (a)  the  ex- 
ordium, or  refrain,  responded  to  in  ver.  21 
by  Miriam  and  the  women,  ver.  lb;  (^) 
three  principal  portions  or  strains,  as  ar- 
ranged in  the  text ;  and  an  ascriptive  conclu- 
sion, ver.  18.  Of  these  strains  the  two 
former,  vv.  2 — 5,  6 — 10,  are  retrospective, 
celebrating  the  overthrow  of  the  Egyptians; 
the  third,  vv.  11 — 18,  after  a  reminiscence 
of  the  same  great  act  of  God,  becomes  pro- 
spective, celebrating  Jehovah's  mercies  which 
should  follow  after  this  same  pattern  of 
triumph.  Within  these  larger  divisions, 
the  sentences  are  arranged,  whether  for  re- 
sponsive singing  or  merely  in  poetic  struc- 
ture, in  parallelisms,  as  also  given  in  the 
text. 

All  sorts  of  fanciful  conjectures  have  been 
made  as  to  the  imagined  metre  in  which  the 
song  was  composed.  They  are  not  worth 
setting  before  the  English  reader.  Not  one 
of  them  has  been  substantiated  even  by  the 
remotest  probability,  and  the  absurdity  of 
them  may  be  instanced  by  one  specimen, 
that  of  Josephus  and  others  describing  the 
ode  as  composed  in  hexameter  verse,  a  form 
of  metre  wholly  alien  from  the  Hebrew 
language. 

This  song  is  honoured  among  the  Jews  by 
being  commonly  call  S/iirah,  the  song,  par 
excellence.  "  It  is  not  only  publicly  recited 
in  the  synagogues  on  the  seventh  day  of  the 
passover,  when  the  transit  of  the  Israelites 
is  believed  to  have  taken  place,  but  it  has 
been  embodied  in  the  daily  prayers."  Ka- 
lisch. 

1  a.]  Introduction.  It  is  time  surely 
that  we  should  claim  to  have  done  with  such 
trifling  as  that  set  down  here  by  Knohel, 
that  it  is  "  extremely  improbable  that  the 
song  should  have  been  sung  by  all  Israel 
immediately  after  the  passage  of  the  Red 


Sea."  To  take  again  the  very  lowest  ground,  , 
the  assertion  of  the  text  would  be  satisfied 
by  what  is  related  in  ver.  21,  that  the  bur- 
den, or  refrain,  of  ver.  1  b  was  repeated  in 
chorus  by  Miriam  and  the  women.  But  we 
may  well  believe  much  more  than  this.  Mo- 
ments of  exultant  triumph  have  been  known 
to  inspire  whole  crowds  with  united  senti- 
ment and  utterance ;  and  when  we  add  to 
this  the  suggestions  of  a  specially  present 
Divine  Spirit,  we  may  surely  further  believe 
that  the  host,  or  many  of  them,  may  have 
joined  in  exulting  recitation  of  the  principal 
parts  of  this  glorious  hymn,  whether  by  pre- 
vious dictation  of  Moses,  such  as  must  be 
pi'cscribed  in  vv.  20,  21,  or,  which  is  less 
likely,  in  spontaneous  outburst.  unto 

Jehovah]  i.  e.  in  honour  of,  with  reference 
to.  In  some  parts  the  song  is  a  direct  ad- 
dress to  Jehovah:  compare  vv.  6—8,  10 — 
13,  16,  17.  16.]    The  subject,  or  bur- 

de7i :  repeated  in  chorus  by  Miriam  and  the 
women,  vv.  20,  21.  The  declarative  singu- 
lar number  here  is  changed  to  the  hortative 
plural  in  the  chorus,  ver.  21.  This  use  of 
the  first  person  singular  in  vv.  1,  2  makes 
perhaps  the  recitative  by  Moses  alone  pro- 
bable, hath  triumphed  gloriously]  I 
have  left  these  words  uuclianged,  consecrated 
as  their  sound  is  by  the  glorious  chorus  in 
Israel  in  Egypt.  They  not  unfairly  repre- 
sent the  Hebrew,  which  is  literally,  in  mag- 
nifying is  magnified.  The  words  have  a 
further  reference  than  to  the  then  present 
occasion.  By  this  triumph  Jehovah  is  mag- 
nified— His  name  lifted  up  among  men.  So 
the  blessed  Maiden's  song  of  triumph,  the 
Magnificat ;  so  the  future  song  of  Moses 
and  the  Lamb  (Rev.  xv.  3)  begins  with  the 
same  strain  of  magnifying  God.  thrown 
into  the  sea]  Description  of  the  act  from  the 
result,  which  was  as  if  they  had  been  cast 
into  the  sea.  Literally,  the  sea  came  upon 
them.  To  regard  this  (Knohel)  as  an  in- 
consistency with  the  previous  narrative  is 
surely  the  merest  trifling.  As  to  the  depth 
of  the  part  of  the  sea  which  was  dried,  they 
only  will  find  oflTence  in  it  who  reject  the 
miracle,  and  to  them  the  whole  is  fiction. 
Compare  Neh.  ix.  11.  2 — 5.]  First 
strain.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  re- 
sponsive chorus  of  Miriam  may  have  been 
given  after  the  opening  words  of  Moses,  and 


1—7. 


EXODUS. 


287 


2  '^  Jah  is  my  ^^  strength  and  my  song  : 

And  is  become  my  salvation  : 
This  is  my  God,  and  I  will  glorify  him  : 
My  father's  God,  and  I  will  exalt  him. 

3  Jehovah  is  a  J' man  of  war : 
Jehovah  is  his  name. 

4  Pharaoh's  chariots  and  his  host  hath  he  cast  into  the  sea : 

And  the  ^flower  of  his  '^captains  are  drowned  in  the 
^  The  depths  cover  them  :  [lied  sea. 

They  sank  into  the  bottom  as  a  ^  stone. 

6  Thy  right  hand,  0  Jehovah, 

Is  become  glorious  in  power : 
Thy  right  hand,  0  Jehovah, 

<=Dasheth  in  pieces  the  enemy. 

7  And  in  the  greatness  of  thine  excellency  thou  '^over- 

[throwest  them  that  "^rise  up  against  thee: 
Thou  sendest  forth  thy  wrath. 

It  consumeth  them  as  stubble. 


»  See  not*. 

I  I'a.  Vlii.  3; 

xxix.  I : 

Ixvlli.  34; 

xcix.l. 


r  Josh.  XTii.  1. 
2  Sum.  XTii. 


z  Heb.  ehoict. 

Soe  Gen. 

xxili.  8,  reff. 
•  cli.  xiv.  7. 

b.Kev.  xviii.21. 


c  Judi;.  X.  8, 
only. 

d  P«.  xx\iii.  5. 

1  C'hron.  xx, 

1. 
e  cli.  xxxii.  25. 

Deut.  xxxiii. 

II.     i>8.  XTiLl. 


at  the  end  of  each  portion  or  strain.  Jaii.] 
This  name  is  the  abbreviation  of  Jehovah. 
It  seems  to  have  passed  from  this  song  into 
the  Psalms,  where  it  is  found  43  times  :  sec 
especially  Ps.  Ixviii.  4.  Besides  the  Psalms, 
it  is  found  only  in  oh.  xvii.  16 ;  Isa.  xii.  2  ; 
xsvi.  4  ;  xxxviii.  11,  bis.  It  is  frequently 
found  in  composition,  as  in  IlaUehi-jah, 
^'praise  ye  Jah."  my  strength]    So 

literally.  But  the  Hebraists  contend  that 
the  word  also  means  7;>-ajse,  and  instance  the 
reff.  as  examples.  In  all  these,  however,  the 
primitive  meaning  strength  will  satisfy  the 
context.  The  whole  expression  recurs,  Ps. 
cxviii.  14 ;  Isa.  xii.  2,  and  kindred  expres- 
sions in  Ps.  xviii.  2  ;  xxviii.  7.  I  will 
glorify  Him]  The  A.  V.,  /  will  prepare 
Him  an  habitation,  seems  to  be  in  error. 
The  LXX.,  Vulgate,  Syriac,  and  most  inter- 
preters have  as  the  text.  3.  a  man  of 
war]  i.  e.  one  versed  and  mighty  in  war 
(Ps.  xxiv.  8).  The  title  is  applied  to  men 
by  way  of  honour  in  the  reff.  4.]  On 
captains,  see  note,  ch.  xiv.  7  ;  and  on  Red 
Sea,  note,  ch.  x.  19.  5.  cover  them] 
The  Hebrew  tense  which  has  been  in  the 
A.  v.,  and  by  the  commentators,  rendered 
sometimes  by   a  perfect,   sometimes   by   a 


future,  according  to  the  supposed  require- 
ments of  the  meaning,  has  been  in  our  text 
with  a  view  faithfully  to  preserve  the  origin- 
al in  its  simplicity,  uniformly  rendered  by 
a  present.  See  for  example,  dasheth,  ver. 
6;  overthrowest,  &c.,  ver.  7;  and  vv.  12, 
14 — 16,  tf.  Those  which  we  have  rendered 
as  past  tenses  are  preterites  in  the  Hebrew. 
6 — 10.]  Second  straiti.  7.]  the  great- 

ness of  thine  excellency,  literally,  the 
abundance  of  thine  exaltation  or  height, 
thou  overthrowest]  The  word  is 
commonly  used  of  pulling  doum  buildings, 
so  Judg.  vi.  28 ;  1  Kings  xix.  10  ; 
Isa.  xiv.  17,  and  frequently.  In  the  reff. 
the  sense  is  as  here.  The  expression,  send- 
ing forth  wrath  or  anger  is  found  in  Ezek. 
vii.  3.  The  allusion  is  perhaps  to  the  look- 
ing of  Jehovah  through  the  pillar  of  fire  on 
the  Egyptian  host,  ch.  xiv.  24.  The  whole 
similitude  is  illustrated  by  Isa.  ix.  18  ;  x. 
17  ;  see  also  Isa.  v.  24  ;  Nch.  i.  10.  8.] 

the  breath  of  thy  nostrils  was  the  strong 
east  wind  which  caused  the  sea  to  recede  : 
see  Ps.  xviii.  15.  piled  up]     So  Ka- 

lisch  :  the  word  is  found  only  here,  and  sig- 
nifies to  be  exalted  or  lifted  up  :  see  ch.  xiv. 
22.  the  waves]  The  contrast  in  the 


288 


EXODUS. 


XY. 


Ps.  Ixxxviii. 

16,  14. 
Isa.  xliv.  3. 
r  Josh.  iii.  13, 
16.     Ps. 


h  Heb.  soil!. 
See  Gen. 


Deut.  xii.  20, 
al.    Eccl.  vi. 


j  Judg.  V.  25. 

1  Sam.  iv.  8. 

2  Chron. 
xxiii.20. 
Neh.  iii.  5. 

,  Ezek.xvii.23. 
Nah.  ii.  5 ; 
iii.  18. 


8  And  witli  the  breath  of  thy  nostrils  the  waters  were 

The  ^  waves  stood  upright  as  an  ^heap,  [piled  up, 

The  depths  were  congealed  in  the  heart  of  the  sea. 

9  The  enemy  said,  I  will  pursue,  overtake,  divide  the  spoil : 
My  ^desire  shall  be  satisfied  upon  them. 

I  will  draw  my  sword, 

My  hand  shall  ^destroy  them. 

10  Thou  didst  blow  with  thy  breath,  the  sea  covered  them : 
They  sank  as  lead 

In  the  J  lordly  waters. 

11  Who  is  like  thee  among  the  gods,  0  Jehovah  ? 

"Who  is  like  thee,  glorious  in  holiness, 
Fearful  in  praises, 
Doing  wonders  ? 


original  hety^een  forcing  and  standing  is  not 
suggested  by  the  word  floods,  which  is  as 
often  used  in  English  of  a  standing  water  as 
of  a  flowing.  as  heaps]  Kalisch  pre- 

fers mounds,  but  one  fails  to  appreciate  the 
difference.  The  word  used  is  of  obscure 
derivation,  but  is  found  again  in  reff.,  and  its 
meaning  pretty  clearly  defined.  con- 

gealed, or  coagulated,  as  if  by  frost— sud- 
denly arrested  and  made  fast.  9.]  So 
the  effect  of  sudden  consecutive  action  is 
given  in  Judg.  v.  27  ;  Isa.  xxvi.  5.  Com- 
pare the  well-known  Veni,  vidi,  vici. 
desire  is  literally  soul,  but  evidently  to  be 
understood  as  in  reff.  desire  or  lust,  viz.  of 
destruction  and  vengeance.  shall  de- 
stroy them]  Of  this  moaning  there  can  be 
little  doubt,  though  the  verb  originally  means 
to  possess  or  occupy.  The  derived  sense 
seems  to  be  arrived  at  by  that  of  occupying 
the  place  of,  i.  e.  driving  out  or  annihilating. 
The  meaning  in  ref.  is  decisive.  In  Judg. 
i.  29,  ff.  the  verb  is  repeatedly  used  for  to 
occupy  the  place  of,  i.  e.  to  drive  oxit,  expel, 
i.  e.  destroy  :  compare  ib.  22—25. 
10.  They  sank]  Ivnobel  would  connect 
the  word  thus  rendered  [tsalal)  with  one  of 
the  same  sound  signifying  clanging  oxjmig- 
ling,  and  would  refer  it  to  the  hurtling  or 
o-urgling  sound  of  sinking  in  the  water  ;  but 
other  Hebraists,  including  Gesenius,  are 
against  him,  and  simply  understand  it  of 
sinking,  Gesenius  objecting  that  there  is  no 
similarity  in  the  sounds  compared.  the 
lordly  waters]    The  adjective  is  thus  ren- 


dered in  ref.  Judg.  It  is  commonly  used 
(see  other  refl'.)  to  express  magnificence  or 
nobility. 

11 — 18.]  Third  strain.  We  now,  with 
a  general  ascription  of  praise  to  Jehovah 
(ver.  11)  and  a  short  reference  to  His  recent 
mighty  deeds  (vv.  12,  13),  pass  on  to  the 
future, — the  similar  protection,  safe  guid- 
ance, and  deliverance  which  He  should  fur- 
nish to  His  people  in  bringing  them  into  the 
land  of  promise.  11.]  Bishop  Words- 

worth remarks,  that  the  opening  words  of 
this  verse,  Mi  camocah  ha-elim  Jehovah, 
were  afterwards  inscribed  on  the  standards 
of  the  Maccabees  in  their  wars  against  An- 
tiochus,  and  that  from  the  initial  letters  of 
these  words  their  name  of  Maccabees  was  de- 
rived, the  gods  certainly  are  the  idols 
of  the  heathen,  classed  by  way  of  comparison 
with  the  true  God,  according  to  constant 
and  undoubted  usage  of  Scripture.  See  Ps. 
Ixxi.  9 ;  Ixxxvi.  8  ;  Isa.  xliv.  10,  15  ;  xlv. 
20 ;  xlvi.  6  al.  fr.,  and  compare  1  Cor.  viii. 
5,  6.  Besides,  we  must  not  forget  that  what 
had  passed  had  been  specially  announced  by 
God  as  a  judgment  upon  the  gods  of  Egypt, 
ch.  xii.  12.  glorious  in  holiness] 
Here,  as  in  Ps.  Ixxvii.  13  in  A.  V.,  the  LXX. 
has  rendered  "  in  the  sanctuary.'"  But 
there,  as  here,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that 
holiness  is  the  true  rendering.  Holiness  is 
the  exclusive  attribute  of  Jehovah,  the  true 
God.  It  is,  above  all  other  attributes.  His 
especial  glory.  It  includes  purity  un- 
spotted, justice  unfailing,  love  unbounded. 


8—17. 


'  EXODUS. 


289.. 


1-  Thou  strctcliedst  out  thy  right  hand, 

The  earth  swalloweth  them.        '  [dccmcst; 

13  Thou  leddest  in  thy  me^cy  the  people  which  thou  re- 
Thou  guidest  them  in  thy  strength  unto  thy  holy  habitu- 
1^  The  people  heard  ;  they  arc  afraid  :  [tion. 

Sorrow  took  hold  on 

The  inhabitants  of  Philistia. 
1'^  Then  were  amazed  the  sheikhs  of  Edom  ; 

The  might}^  ones  of  Moab, 

Trembling  taketh  hold  on  them  : 
All  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan  melted  awa}'. 
1*^  There  falleth  upon  them  fear  and  dread :  [stone: 

By  the  greatness  of  thine  arm  they  are  still  as   a 
Till  these  pass  by  thy  people,  0  Jehovah, 

Till  these  pass  by  the  people  which  thou  purchasedst. 
1"  Thou  bringest  them  in  and  plantest  them  in  the  moun- 
tain of  thine  inheritance  : 


^  . 


See  on  eh.  xix.  6.  Fearful  in  praises] 

Man  we  may  praise  with  enthusiasm,  with 
generosity,  with  allowance:  God  we  can 
only  praise  with  fear.  "  He  is  terrible  in 
His  doing  toward  men "  (Ps.  Ixvi.  5),  so 
that  all  our  celebration  of  His  acts  must  be 
tonpered  with  fear.  We  have  to  fear  that 
our  praise  will  be  wanting  in  divine  fitness, 
and  excessive  through  human  unfitness. 
12.]  Introduces,  with  the  opening  wonder  of 
God's  doing,  the  prophecy  which  is  to  fol- 
low, regarding,  as  Kcil  well  remarks,  that 
the  singer  regards  all  His  wonders  as  implied 
and  contained  in  that  one.  13.]  On 

the  rendering  of  the  Hebrew  tenses  in  this 
and  following  verses,  sec  note,  ver.  5.  The 
holy  habitation  of  God  is  the  land  of  promise : 
scel's.  Ixxviii.  .51 ;  Gen.  xxviii.  16, 17;  xxxi. 
13  ;  XXXV.   7.  14,  15.]  The  inhabit- 

ants of  Philistia  who  dwelt  nearest  to  Egypt 
would  first  hear  of  the  wonderful  deliverance 
of  Israel.  It  is  no  small  confirmation  of  tlie 
genuineness  of  this  sacred  song  and  of  its 
contemporaneity  with  the  events  among 
which  it  is  placed,  that  these  tribes  are 
named  in  the  order  in  which  they  would  be 
likely  to  receive  tlie  news,  and  that  the 
poetic  description  of  the  effects  produced  on 
them  docs  not  accurately  in  matter  of  fact 
correspond  to  the  events.  We  do  not  learn 
that  the  Philistines  or  Edomitcs  shewed  any 
especial  terror  at  the  coming  of  Israel ;  in- 


deed, Edom  refused  them  a  passage  and  ob- 
liged them  to  make  a  circuit  round  their 
land.  The  king  of  Moab  indeed  was  afraid, 
and  sent  vainly  for  Balaam  to  curse  them, 
but  they  were  not  allowed  (Dent.  ii.  9)  to 
invade  the  territory  of  Jloab,  and  Moab  'by 
no  means  ceased  to  be  a  most  troublesome 
adversary  to  them  :  see  Jlr.  Grove's  exhaust- 
ive article  "Moab"  in  the  Biblical  Did.  And 
so  far  were  all  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan 
from  melting  away,  that  they  were  never 
nearly  exterminated,  and  remained  among 
the  Israelites.  No  one,  writing  after  the 
events  had  happened,  could  have  thus  ex- 
pressed himself.  Keil  remarks  that  another 
evidence  in  the  same  direction  is  the  classing 
the  inhabitants  of  Canaan  with  Edom,  Moab, 
and  the  Pliilistines, — importing  a  period 
when  the  command  for  the  extirpation  of 
the  Canaanitcs  had  not  as  yet  been  given. 
On  the  chiefs  or  sheikhs  of  Edom,  see  Gen. 
xxxvi.    1.5.  16.]    See    Isa.    xxiii.    2. 

The  passing  by  here  spoken  of  is  the  pass- 
ing through  or  by  their  territory,  which 
would  take  place  in  the  course  of  their  jour- 
ney to  Canaan.  Knobel,  consistently  with 
his  view  of  the  whole  passage  as  written 
\o\\%  post  eventum,  wants  to  refer  the  words 
to  the  passing  over  Jordan.  On  this  view, 
see  above.  17.]  the  mountain  of  Je- 

hovah's inheritance  has  hctM   variiiu>ly  un- 
derstood.    Knubcl  thinks  it  means  Canaan, 
u 


290 


EXODUS. 


XV. 


A  '^ place  for  thy  dwelling  didst  thou  make,  0  Je- 

[hovah  : 
A  ^sanctuary,  0  Lord,  did  thine  hands  establish. 
18  Jehovah  reig-neth  for  ever  and  ever. 


1^  For  the  horse  of  Pharaoh  went  in  with  his  chariots  and 
with  his  horsemen  into  the  sea,  and  Jehovah  brought 
again  the  waters  of  the  sea  upon  them ;  but  the  children 
of  Israel  went  on  dry  land  in  the  midst  of  the  sea.  20 
%  And  Miriam  the  prophetess,  the  sister  of  Aaron,  took  a 
timbrel  in  her  hand ;  and  all  the  women  went  out  after 
her  with  timbrels  and  with  dances.  21  j^^^^  Miriam  an- 
swered them,  Sing  ye  to  Jehovah,  for  he  hath  triumphed 
gloriously ;  the  horse  and  his  rider  hath  he  thrown  into 


referring  to  Lev.  xxv.  23,  and  for  the  ex- 
pression mountain  as  denoting  the  whole 
land,  to  Deut.  iii.  25  ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  44.  But 
this  last  place  is  used  by  Keil  to  shew  that 
it  is  not  the  hill  country  or  the  land  at  all, 
but  tlie  mountain  before  signalized  as  God's 
dwelling-place  by  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac. 
Keil  further  remarks,  "That  in  ver.  17,  at 
this  early  period,  a  mountain  is  already 
spoken  of  as  Jehovah's  habitation,  denotes 
no  'prophecy  after  the  event,'  but  is 
genuine  prophecy,  having  hoAvever  its  na- 
tural foundation  in  this,  tliat  mountains  were 
generally  the  site  of  divine  service  and 
sanctuaries,  as  we  see  Moses  was  fully  aware, 
Gen.  xxii.  2  ;  Ex.  iii.  1,  2.  Compare  such 
passages  as  Num.  xxii.  41  ;  xxxiii.  52  ;  Mic. 
iv.  1,  2.  In  the  fulfilment  it  is  the  Mount 
Zion,  on  which  Jehovah  reigns  enthroned 
among  His  people."  See  Rev.  xiv.  1,  com- 
pared with  Ps.  XV.  1  ;  Isa.  Ivii.  13.  the 
place  is  Jerusalem ;  and  in  Jerusalem  the 
temple,  see  refl'.,  not  the  land  of  Canaan. 
And  the  sanctuary  is  not  the  tabernacle  in 
the  wilderness,  which  could  not  be  said  to  be 
established,  the  word  being  ordinarily  used 
of  firm  and  stable  erection  :  see  reff. 
18  ]  This  serves  as  a  solemn  conclusion  to 
the  whole  song,  ver.  19  being  shewn  by  its 
style,  which  is  narrative  prose,  not  strictly 
to  belong  to  it,  but  being  probably  inserted 
as  explanatory.  It  would  seem  to  come  in 
as  a  natural  appendage  to  the  song,  and  to 
have  fiirmed  part  of  the  document  containing 
it.  The  verse  is  included  in  the  song  in  the 
Jewish  scrolls  of  the  law  :  but  Kalisch  re- 


marks that  the  diction  is  perfectly  prosaical, 
without  rhythm  or  parallelism.  Of  course 
it  will  at  once  be  seen,  that  it  cannot  form 
part  of  the  same  history,  and  from  the  same 
source,  as  ch.  xiv.  28,  29, — repeating  as  it 
does  by  way  of  explanation  the  facts  already 
given  there  in  nearly  the  same  M'ords.  But 
there  is  no  inconsistency  in  detail  with  that 
passage,  as  some  have  supposed.  20.] 

Sririam  was  sister  of  Moses  as  well  as  of 
Aaron,  but  seems  to  be  coupled  with  Aaron 
in  order  to  leave  Moses  standing  alone  as 
the  specially  appointed  of  God  to  lead  and  to 
give  laws  to  Israel :  see  on  Num.  xii.  1,  6  — 
8,  10.  She,  as  well  as  her  brothers,  had  the 
gift  of  prophecy  from  God,  which  seems  to 
have  shewn  itself  in  leading  the  women  of 
Israel  in  sacred  things.  The  (i.  e.  her)  tim- 
brel, tuph  in  the  Hebrew,  in  other  languages 
ti/»ipa7nmi,  tambour,  tabor,  tambourine,  was 
apparently  much  what  the  last-named  instru- 
ment is  now,  a  hoop  with  a  piece  of  parch- 
ment stretched  over  it,  and  armed  with  pieces 
of  brass  to  make  a  jingling  sound.  It 
was  played  principally  by  women.  See 
Judg.  xi.  34 ;  1  Sam.  xviii.  6  ;  Ps.  Ixviii. 
25  ;  with  the  song  and  dance,  Judith  iii.  7 ; 
Jer.  xxxi.  4  ;  and  in  feasts,  Isa.  v.  12  ;  xxiv. 
8  ;  but  not  exclusively  by  women  :  comp.  1 
Sam.  X.  5  ;  2  Sam.  vi.  5.  See  also  Job 
xxi.  12  ;  Isa.  xxx.  32.  It  is  figured,  as  used 
by  the  modern  Egyptian  dancing-girls,  in  the 
art.  "  Timbrel "  in  the  Biblical  Diet. 
21.]  The  chorus,  as  now  in  the  "  Israel  in 
Egypt,"  consisted  of  the  repetition  of  the 
leading  strain,  with  the  first  person  singular 


18—26. 


EXODUS. 


291 


the  sea.  ^2  gg  ]\Xoses  brought  Israel  from  the  Red  sea, 
and  they  went  out  into  the  wilderness  of  Shur ;  and  they 
went  three  days  in  the  wilderness,  and  found  no  water. 
2^  ^[  And  when  they  came  to  Marah,  they  could  not  drink 
of  the  waters  of  Marah,  for  they  n-crc  bitter  :  therefore  the 
name  of  it  was  called  Marah  [Bitterness].  24  _^mi  ^\^q 
people  murmured  against  Moses,  saying,  What  shall  we 
drink?  2o  ^Ynd  he  cried  unto  Jehovah;  and  Jkuovah 
sliewed  him  a  tree,  u-Jiich  when  he  had  cast  into  the  waters, 
the  waters  were  made  sweet :  there  he  made  for  them  a 
"statute  and  an  ™ ordinance,  and  there  he  "^ proved  them.   «> '""h. xxir. 

'23. 

2'^  and  said,  If  tliou  wilt  diligently  hearken  to  the  voice  of  "  il;.ut.'vi*;  2, 
Jehovah  thy  God,  and  wilt  do  that  which  is  right  in  his 
sight,  and  wilt  give  car  to  his  commandments,  and  keep 
all  his  statutes,  I  will  put  none  of  these  diseases  upon  thee, 
which  I  have  brought  upon  the  Egyptians :  for  I  am  Je- 


Diut. 

lU ,  XJCXiii.  8. 


cliangcd  into  the  liortatory  second  plural. 
22.— XYIII.  27.]  The  journey  to  ainai. 
And  herein  (22—27)  the  journey  from  the 
Red   Sea  to    Marah   and   EUm.  the 

wilderness  of  Shur]  This  name  lias  before 
occurred  in  Genesis  :  see  on  ch.  xvi.  7  ;  xx. 
1 ;  XXV.  18,  The  wilderness  includes  the 
district  lying  E,  of  Egypt  between  the  Medi- 
terranean and  the  top  of  the  Red  Sea.  It 
is  called  in  Xum.  xxxiii.  8,  "  the  u-ilderness 
of  Etham,"  and  Josephus  renders  it  by  "  the 
desert  of  Pelusiuin."  Mr.  Holland,  in  his 
article  on  the  recent  survey  of  Sinai,  says  of 
tlie  desert  S.  of  Suez,  "  Some  12  or  15 
miles  from  the  coast,  and  parallel  to  it,  runs 
Jebel  er  llaliab,  appearing  iu  the  distance  as 
a  long  flat-headed  range  of  white  clifi's, 
■whicli  form  as  it  were  a  wall  inclosing  the 
desert  on  the  X.  Ilence  probably  arose  the 
name  of  tlic  '  wilderness  of  Shur,'  for  the 
meaning  of  the  name  Sliuris  a  wall." 
23,  If.]  A  satisfactory  site  has  been  found  for 
Marah.  Ilowarah,  at  the  head  of  Wady 
Amiirah,  where  even  now  caravans  halt  in 
their  journey  to  Sinai,  possesses  a  spring  at 
times  so  bitter  that  neither  men  nor  camels 
can  drink  of  it.  There  is  no  reason  to  sup- 
pose that  the  miraculous  cfl'ect  would  be 
permanent,  nor  does  the  example  of  2  Kings 
ii.  21  prove  anything  in  this  matter.  It  is 
manifestly  idle  to  speculate  about  herbswhich 
have  tlie  power  to  sweeten  brackish  water  : 
the  incident  is  related  as  special  and  miracul- 


ous, due  to  Divine  intervention  :  and  there 
our  specidation  cuds.  If  there  were  such 
trees,  then  God  founded,  as  so  often,  His 
miraculous  action  on  sometliing  already  fami- 
liar to  men's  minds.  One  feature  distin- 
guishes our  narrative  from  anything  which 
we  have  as  yet  read.  It  is  the  first  which 
is  distinctly  pronounced  to  be  typical,  and 
gives  rise  to  an  ordinance  and  an  instruction 
founded  on  the  nature  of  the  incident.  Tlie 
people  murmured,  therefore  Jehovah  proved 
them  (see  reif.)  as  follows.  Against  their 
murmurings  lie  set  obedience  to  Ilini  :  if 
they  would  change  the  one  for  the  other,  tlien 
lie  would  remove  from  them,  as  typified  in 
this  deadly  water  (the  Arabs  to  this  day  call 
tlie  spring  at  Ilowarah  "  destruction  "),  all 
judgments  and  calamities  of  bodily  disease, 
and  be  their  Healer,  as  He  had  healed  the 
bitter  water.  And  this  j)lain  indication  of  a 
typical  meaning  in  tlie  miracle  justifies  the 
comment  of  the  Christian  Fathers,  who,  from 
TertuUian  in  the  third  century  downwards, 
have  seen  in  this  healing  tree  a  type  of  the 
Cross  of  Christ,  which  is  set  for  the  healing 
of  men.  Compare  with  this  conditional 
promise  (repeated  in  substance  Dcut.  vii.  15) 
tlie  corresponding  threat  on  disobedience, 
Deut.  xxviii.  27,  60.  See  also  Ezek.  xlvii. 
7 — 9.  We  may  observe  that  no  trace  is 
found  of  the  name  Marah,  except  in  this 
Scripture    narrative.  27.]    Elim     (so 

named  also  Xum.  xxxiii.  9,  us  one  of  their 


292 


EXODUS. 


xy. 


HOVAH  that  healetli  tliee.  27  ^  And  tliey  came  to  Elim, 
wliere  iceve  twelve  wells  of  water,  and  threescore  and  ten 
palm  trees :  and  tliey  encamjjed  there  by  the  waters. 
XVI.  1  And  they  took  their  journey  from  Elim,  and  all 
the  congregation  of  the  children  of  Israel  came  unto  the 
wilderness  of  Sin,  which  is  between  Elim  and  Sinai,  on 
the  fifteenth  day  of  the  second  month  after  their  departing 
out  of  the  land  of  Egypt.  ^  And  the  whole  congregation 
of  the  chiklren  of  Israel  murmured  against  Moses  and 
Aaron  in  the  wilderness  :  ^  and  the  children  of  Israel  said 
imto  them,  "Would  that  we  had  died  by  the  hand  of  Jeiio- 


camping  places)  is  genovally  acknowledged 
to  be  the  present  Wady  Glnuundel,  2|  liours 
S.E.  of  Mara,  and  even  now  a  famous  water- 
ing-place of  the  Arabs.  There  is  pretty  good 
water,  and  in  the  rainy  season  a  considerable 
stream,  running  into  the  Red  Sea.  Travel- 
lers speak  also  of  the  vegetation  in  this  val- 
ley, especially  the  palms  and  tamarisks,  and 
rank  high  grass.  The  name  means  hir/h  or 
strong  trees.  See  Stanley,  Sinai  and  Pales- 
tine, Appendix,  No.  76.  I  may  add  that  Mr. 
Holland,  in  his  article,  concurs  in  the  above- 
mentioned  view,  inclining  however  to  place 
Elim  on  a  raised  plain  above  the  S.  bank  of 
Wady  Ghurundol. 

XVI.    Quails  and  tnnnna  in  the  tcihler- 
7iessofSin.  1.]  Between  the  encamp- 

ment at  Elim,  and  the  coming  to  the  wilder- 
ness of  Sin,  there  was,  Num.  xxxiii.  10,  11, 
an  encampment  by  the  Red  Sea.  But  the 
present  history,  careful  only  about  remark- 
able incidents,  passes  it  over.  On  the  topo- 
graphical questions  connected  with  this  part 
of  the  route,  see  Stanley,  Sinai  and  Pales- 
tine, pp.  37,  S.  Knobel  says,  "They  must 
have  gone  from  Ghurundcl  to  the  upper  end 
of  the  Wady  Tayibeh,  then  have  followed  it 
westwards,  and  have  encamped  at  its  mouth 
near  the  present  Eas  Zelima,  the  distance 
being  about  8  leagues."  The  further  jour- 
ney is  much  debated.  The  discussion  will 
be  found  in  Stanley,  as  above.  The  route 
for  which  there  appears  most  to  be  said  is 
that  by  Wady  Mokatteb  and  Wady  Feiran, 
leading  up  directly  to  the  present  or  tradi- 
tional Sinai.  The  whole  of  this  district, 
described  here  as  between  Elim  and  Sinai, 
is  probably  the  wilderness  of  Sin.  The  idea 
that  the  plain  by  the  sea  extending  S.  from 
Eas  Zelima  is  meant,  seems  to  be  inconsist- 


ent with  the  definite  local  notice  given  in 
the  text.  The  objection  to  the  above  sug- 
gested route,  urged  by  Knobel,  tliat  these 
valleys  abound  with  water  and  vegetation, 
and  that  they  certainly  would  have  been  con- 
tested by  the  local  tribes,  is  a  weiglity  one  : 
and  the  view  maintained  by  him  (andsliarcd 
also  by  Keil)  that  the  wilderness  of  Sin  is 
the  great  sandy  plateau  Debbet  er  Eaiiibli, 
between  the  desert  of  Et-Tih  and  Sinai,  is 
at  least  in  harmony  with  the  great  features 
of  the  sacred  narrative.  This  plateau  begins 
near  Elim  and  stretches  S.  Eastwards  towards 
the  range  in  which  Sinai  must  be  inchukd. 
Knobel  accounts  for  the  detour  to  the  en- 
campment near  the  sea  by  the  necessity  of 
finding  water,  there  being  none  of  gdiul 
quality  between  Ghurundel  and  the  A\'ady 
Naseb  in  the  direct  line.  But  Mr.  Hollaiul, 
with  much  more  reason,  holds  the  Israelites 
to  have  gone  down  Wady  Tayibeh  to  the 
sea,  the  inland  detour  having  been  occa- 
sioned by  the  blufl:'of  the  Hammam  Pharaoan 
interrupting  the  coast  march,  and  the  wilder- 
ness of  Sin  to  be  the  plain  (El  j\Iurkali)  ex- 
tending from  the  moutli  of  W.  Tayibeh  for 
several  miles.  Thence  he  holds  them  to 
have  gone  up  the  Wady  Feiran  :  see  below. 
1  b — 3.]  They  had  eaten  the  passover 
on  the  Jifteenih  day  of  the  first  month, 
therefore  they  had  been  a  month  coming  to 
the  wilderness  of  Sin,  during  which  period 
their  store  of  provision  brought  from  Egypt 
had  doubtless  been  exhausted.  Would 

that  we  had  died]  Literally,  Who  will  grant 
us  to  have  died  .  .  .  .  ?  A  sudden  death  by 
the  last  fearful  plague  seemed  to  them  pre- 
ferable to  this  lingering  death  by  famine. 
Compare  Job  xxi.  13.  Kalisch  demurs  to 
this,  and  interprets  dying  by  the  hand  of 


27— XYI.  9. 


EXODUS. 


293 


II  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  when  we  sat  by  the  flesh  pots,  ami 
when  we  did  eat  bread  to  the  full ;  for  ye  have  bronoht 
IS  forth  into  this  wilderness,  to  kill  this  whole  assembly 
with  hunger.  ^  ^  Then  said  Jehovah  unto  Moses,  Bc- 
old,  I  will  rain  °bread  from  heaven  for  you  ;  and  the  oJ«hnvi.3i,(r. 
eople  shall  go  out  and  gather  every  day  suilicient  for  the 
ay,  that  I  may  Pprove  them,  whether  they  will  walk  in  my  p ch. xv. js.rdr, 
aw,  or  no.  ^  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  on  the  sixth 
day  they  shall  prepare  that  which  they  bring  in  ;  and  it 
shall  be  twice  as  much  as  they  gather  daily.  ^  And  Moses 
and  Aaron  said  unto  all  the  children  of  Israel,  At  even, 
then  ye  shall  know  that  JKIIO^'AH  hath  brought  j'ou 
forth  from  the  land  of  Egypt :  7  and  in  the  morning,  then 
ye  shall  see  the  glory  of  Jehovah  ;  for  that  he  hear- 
eth  your  murmurings  against  Jehovah  :  and  what  are  we, 
that  ye  murmur  against  us  ?  ^  And  Moses  said,  This  sha/l 
be,  when  Jehovah  shall  give  you  in  the  evening  flesh  to 
eat,  and  in  the  morning  bread  to  the  full;  for  that  Jeho- 
vah hearcth  your  murmurings  which  ye  murmur  against 
him  :  and  what  are  we  ?  j'our  murmurings  are  not  against 
us,  but  against   Jehovah.     ^  ^  And  Moses  sj^ake   unto 


God  to  signify  dying  in  old  age  and  by  a 
natural  death.  But  tliis  does  not  seem  so 
probable.  Tliis  was  the  third  occasion  of 
Israel's  murmuring:  see  eh.  xiv.  11;  xv. 
24.  On  the  abundance  in  Egypt,  see  Num. 
xi.  5.  4,  5.]  Promise  of  the  manna. 

Here  observe,  that  the  plainest  declaration 
is  made  of  the  miraculous  nature  of  this  sup- 
ply. Whatever  natural  phenomenon  may 
have  underlain  the  provision  of  manna,  the 
supplying  it  from  day  to  da}-,  and  tlie  with- 
holding it  on  the  sixth  day,  were  the  special 
and  immediate  acts  of  Jehovah  Himself. 
every  day  sufficient  for  the  day] 
Literally,  the  matter  of  the  day  in  this  day ; 
see  Matt.  vi.  11,31.  On  the  proving  them, 
see  on  reff.  5.]  That  is,  on  the  sixth 

day,  when  they  prepared,  i.  e.  set  in  order, 
what  they  brought  in,  they  should  find  it  to 
be  double  the  quantity  which  they  had 
gathered  on  other  days  :  see  below  on  ver. 
22,  23.  The  words  do  not  imply  any  com- 
mand to  gather  twice  as  much  as  on  other 
days,  as  sometimes  misunderstood,  nor  is 
any  reason  here  assigned  for  the  announce- 
ment :  see  again  as  below,  and  on  the  report 


to  Ptoses  l)y  the  ciders,  on  ver.  22.  6.] 

The  bread  from  heaven  of  ver.  4  seems  to 
have  included  botii  the  quails  and  the  manna, 
and  Moses  and  Aaron  received  details  re- 
specting the  supply,  wliich  the  history  does 
not  relate.  The  people  had  said,  "  ye  have 
brought  us  forth  :"  they  were  to  be  made  to 
know  that  it  was  not  Moses  and  Aaron,  but 
Jehovah  Himself.  8.  ]  As  indicated  by 

the  italic,  the  sentence  in  the  original  does 
not  contain  the  opening  words ;  but  the 
principal  Hebraists  agree  that  it  needs  some 
such  clause  to  connect  it  with  the  foregoing. 
9—12.]  Here  we  have  again  one  of 
those  reca])itulations  so  often  occurring  in  the 
history,  and  apparently  betokening  independ- 
ent origin,  and  a  slightly  ditiVring  report  nf 
the  same  or  parallel  incidents.  Tlie  com- 
mand here  given  might,  but  for  what  follows, 
be  consecutive  on  ver.  8.  But  when  Jehovah 
speaks  to  Moses  out  of  the  cloud,  He  com- 
mands iiira  to  say  to  them  the  very  thing 
Avhich  he  has  already  said,  ver.  8,  so  that 
it  would  seem  that  ver.  9  is  really  consecu- 
tive on  ver.  3,  and  that  vv.  4,  5  represent 
in  another  form  the  wordsof  Jehovah  in  ver. 


294 


EXODUS. 


XYI. 


Aaron,  Say  unto  tlie  whole  congregation  of  the  children 
of  Israel,  Come  near  before  Jehovah  :  for  he  hath  heard 
your  murmurings.  ^^  And  it  came  to  pass,  as  Aaron 
spake  unto  the  whole  congregation  of  the  children  of 
Israel,  that  they  looked  toward  the  wilderness,  and,  be- 
hold, the  glory  of  Jehovah  appeared  in  the  cloud.  ^^ 
^  And  Jehovah  spake  unto  Moses,  saying,  ^'^  I  have  heard 
the  murmurings  of  the  children  of  Israel :  speak  unto 
them,  sajang,  At  even  ye  shall  eat  flesh,  and  in  the  morn- 
ing ye  shall  be  filled  with  bread ;  and  ye  shall  know  that 
I  am  Jehovah  your  God,  ^^  And  it  came  to  pass,  that 
at  even  the  quails  came  up,  and  covered  the  camp  :  and 
in  the  morning  the  dew  lay  round  about  the  host.     ^^  And 


12.  In  ver.  7  they  were  losee  the  glory  of 
Jehovah  in  the  morning,  when  they  should 
have  bread  to  the  full:  whereas  in  ver,  10 
the  glory  appears,  and  out  of  it  tlie  announce- 
ment of  the  eating  in  the  morning  is  made. 
AVith  such  evidence,  we  cannot  surely  in 
fairness  reject  the  inference  that  parallel  ac- 
counts have  been  united  in  the  sacred  narra- 
tive. It  is  quite  vain,  with  Keil  and  others, 
to  maintain  that  the  appearance  of  the  glory 
in  ver.  10  is  not  that  announced  in  ver.  7. 
before  Jehovah]  Spoken  probably  in 
anticipation  of  the  appearance  which  im- 
mediately follows.  Knobel  understaiuls  the 
words  as  importing  that  space  in  front  of  the 
tent  of  Moses  where  afterwards  the  taber- 
nacle was  erected.  But  this  seems  doubtful; 
and  much  more  probably,  as  Keil,  they  ad- 
vanced towards  the  pillar  of  cloud.  10.] 
toward  the  wilderness  would  be  in  the 
very  direction  in  which  they  were,  in  their 
unbelief,  reluctant  to  advance :  not  neces- 
sarily, as  Knobel,  towards  Mount  Sinai,  as  if 
Jehovah  were  considered  permanently  abid- 
ing there.  God  indicated,  by  this  appear- 
ance, that  He  always  went  before  His  people 
and  could  supply  them  even  when  earthly 
means  failed.  The  glory  of  Jehovah 
was  manifested  in  a  fiery  appearance  :  see  ch. 
iii.  2;  xiii.  21;  xl.  34;  Lev.  ix.  23,  24; 
:\um.  xiv.  10  ;  xvi.  19,  42.  11.]  It  is 
understood  that  Jehovah  spake  with  Moses 
out  of  the  cloud  of  fire.  12. J  It  would 
here  seem  that  this  appearance  took  place 
on  the  morning  before  the  quails  came  in 
the  evening :  compare  what  has  been  said 
above.            13.]  There  seems  no  reason  to 


depart  from  the  ordinary  rendering  of  the 
Hebrew  word  sclav  by  quail.  It  is  singu- 
lar, and  has  the  definite  article  :  the  quail. 
The  whole  description,  here  and  in  Num. 
xi.  31,  32,  answers  to  the  well-known  habits 
of  these  birds,  and  the  Arabic  name  for 
them'  even  now  is  Salica.  In  the  spring 
they  migrate  northwards  from  Africa,  and 
flying  low,  especially  Avhen  wearied,  are 
taken  or  come  to  ground  in  immense  multi' 
tudes.  Dr.  Tristram  says,  '■  I  have  myself 
found  the  ground  in  Algeria,  in  the  month 
of  April,  covered  with  quails  for  an  extent 
of  many  acres  at  daybreak,  where  on  the 
preceding  afternoon  there  had  not  been  one. 
They  were  so  fatigued  that  they  scarcely 
moved  till  almost  trodden  upon :  and  al- 
though hundreds  were  slaughtered,  for  two 
days  they  did  not  leave  the  district."  The 
present  writer  has  seen  the  S.  coast  of  the 
island  of  Capri  surrounded  by  a  net  on  poles 
about  four  feet  high  at  a  short  distance  from 
the  beach,  set  to  catch  the  quails,  and  was 
told  that  enormous  multitudes  were  on  some 
days  thus  captured.  Many  more  examples 
to  the  same  effect  are  accumulated  by  Kno- 
bel. Pliny  relates  that  they  settle  in  such 
multitudes  on  the  rigging  of  ships,  as  to 
overturn  them.  The  Divine  interference  was 
shewn  in  bringing  the  quails  to  the  precise 
spot  of  the  Israelitish  camp.  The  final 
clause  of  the  verse  is  interpreted  to  mean 
that  a  dense  mist  settled  round  the  camp, 
condensing  in  dew.  14.]  This  having 

cleared  olf,  the  manna  was  found.  a 

small  round  thing]  The  Hebrew  word  so 
rendered  is  found  only  here.  It  appears,  after 


10—18. 


EXODUS. 


295 


wlien  the  dew  that  lay  was  gone  up,  behold,  upon  the  face 
of  the  wilderness  there  lay  a  small  round  thing,  as  small  as 
the  hoar  frost  on  the  ground.  ^^  And  when  the  children 
of  Israel  saw  it,  they  said  one  to  another,  It  w  iMan  [i.  e. 
"What  ?]  :  for  they  wist  not  what  it  teas.  And  Moses  said 
unto  them,  This  is  the  bread  which  Jehovah  hath  given 
you  to  eat.  ^^  5[  This  is  the  thing  which  Jehovah  hath 
commanded,  Gather  of  it  every  man  *' according  to  his  eat- 
ing, an  omer  for  every  man,  according  to  the  number  of 
your  persons ;  take  ye  every  man  for  them  which  are  in 
his  tent.  ^7  And  the  children  of  Israel  did  so,  and  gathered, 
some  more,  some  less.  ^^  xVnd  they  measured  it  with  the 
omer,  he  that  gathered  much  had  nothing  over,  and  he 
that  gathered  little  had  no  lack ;  they  gathered  every  man 


1  TT.  3I,33,3S. 
Num.  XI  6,7, 
S.  Dcut.  VIII. 
3,  Ifi.  Jo>b. 
».  12(bi.,. 

Ni-h.  IX.  -at. 

V».  Ixxviii. 
21.    Julin  v|. 

ai.ia.    Hfv. 

ii.  n,  only, 
gli.  xii.  4. 


all  that  has  beeu  said  on  it,  to  be  rightly 
translated,  or  at  least  approximately  well 
expressed.  The  variety  of  meaning  next 
favoured  by  commentators  is  that  of  coagu- 
lated, or  run  together.  15.]  The  de- 
rivation of  the  name  manna  is  very  uncer- 
tain. The  ordinary  idea,  that  manna  (lleb, 
man)  carries  a  question,  What  is  this  f  is 
perhaps  the  best  supported.  Kuobel  ques- 
tions this,  on  the  ground  that  man  instead 
of  }nah,  the  ordinary  Hebrew  interrogative 
pronoun,  could  not  have  been  put  into  the 
mouth  of  the  Israelites  by  the  sacred  writer. 
But  others  answer  to  this,  that  the  unusual 
form  was  probably  the  popular  dialect. 
Knobel  would  derive  the  name  from  an 
Arabic  root  signifying  a  gift  or  a  grant. 
But  Keil  objects  that  this  root  itself  is  not 
aucient,  and  is  derived  from  the  very  word 
manna  {/nan).  So  that  pe'rhaps  we  may 
safely  abide  by  the  old  explanation.  On  the 
nature  of  the  manna,  see  note,  vv.  31,  35. 
The  speech  of  Moses  here,  as  well  as  God's 
words  in  ver.  4,  entirely  distiuguish  it  from 
all  merely  natural  produce.  16 — 21.] 
Directions  for  the  daily  gathei'ing  of  the 
manna,  and  their  result.  On  the  omer,  see 
note,  ver.  36.  17,  18.]  These  verses 
stand  literally  thus :  And  the  sons  of  Israel 
did  so,  and  they  gathered ;  the  increaser, 
and  the  diminisher.  And  they  measured 
with  the  omer,  and  the  increaser  got  no- 
thing over,  and  the  diminisher  got  nothing 
short,  tfcc.  They  have  received  two  inter- 
pretations: the  first,  that  of  the  ancient 
Jewish  authorities,  that  every  one,  however 


little  or  however  much  he  had  gathered, 
when  he  came  to  measure  the  quantity  in  liis 
tent,  found  as  many  omcrs  as  there  were 
mouths  in  his  family  ;  the  second,  whicli  is 
that  of  Calvin,  Le  Clerc,  and  Christian  in- 
terpreters generally,  that  the  vhole  which 
had  been  gathered  was  put  into  one  heap, 
and  when  measured  it  was  found  exactly  to 
fit  the  number  of  mouths,  an  omer  for  eacli, 
the  superfluity  of  one  man's  gatluring 
compensating  the  deficiency  of  another's. 
But  surely  this  last  is  an  explaining  away  of 
the  simple  assertion  of  our  text,  to  say  no- 
thing of  the  great  improbability  of  its  hy- 
pothesis of  all  being  poured  into  one  great 
heap.  The  former  interpretation  must  there- 
fore be  accepted.  It  involves  this  dilheulty, 
that  the  idle  gatherer  would  apparently  thus 
have  his  family  quota  furnished  him  without 
his  own  labour,  and  if  this  were  carried  to 
the  extreme,  none  need  more  than  cover  tlic 
bottom  of  his  vessel,  and  the  rest  would  bo 
supcrnaturally  supplied.  But  the  answer 
would  be  that  we  are  bound  to  understand 
the  miracle  as  pre-supposing  boniijide  action 
in  the  too-little-gatherers.  God  defeated  the 
greediness  of  the  too -much-gatherers,  and 
helped  the  weakness  of  the  too-littlc-gather- 
crs  :  but  in  the  case  of  tiicsc  latter,  aidc-loi 
et  Dieu  Vaidvra  was  a  necessary  condition. 
And  when  St.  Paul  uses  this  verse  as  an 
illustration  in  2  Cor.  viii.  15,  he  distinctly 
assumes  this  condition,  saying,  "  ichcre 
there  is  a  ready  tnind,"  literally,  "  uhcre 
readiness  of  tnind  is  pre-existing,"  a  man  is 
accepted  according  to  that  he  hath,  not  au- 


296 


EXODUS. 


XVI. 


t  Or,  rest. 


according  to  his  eating.  19  ^nd  Moses  said,  Let  no  man 
leave  of  it  till  the  morning.  20  Notwithstanding  they 
hearkened  not  unto  Moses ;  but  some  of  them  left  of  it 
until  the  morning,  and  it  bred  worms,  and  stank :  and 
Moses  was  wroth  with  them.  2i  j^^^  ^]^gy  gathered  it 
every  morning,  every  man  according  to  his  eating :  and 
when  the  sun  waxed  hot,  it  melted.  22  ^  j^^^^  j^  came  to 
pass,  f//at  on  the  sixth  day  thej'-  gathered  twice  as  much 
bread,  two  omers  for  one  man :  and  all  the  rulers  of  the 
congregation  came  and  told  Moses.  23  And  he  said  unto  them, 
This  is  that  which  Jehovah  said,  *To  morrow  is  a  rest, 
an  holy  f  sabbath  ujito  Jehovah  :  bake  what  ye  will  bake, 
and  boil  what  ye  will  boil ;  and  all  that  is  over  lay  up  for 
you  to  be  kept  until  the  morning.  24  And  they  laid  it  up 
till  the  morning,  as  Moses  bade :  and  it  did  not  stink, 
neither  was  there  any  worm  therein.  25  And  Moses  said, 
Eat  that  to  day ;  for  to  day  is  a  sabbath  unto  Jehovah  : 
to  day  ye  shall  not  find  it  in  the  field.     26  gj^  days  ye 


cording  to  that  he  hath  not.  19.]  The 

manna  was  to  serve  for  daily  bread,  not  for  a 
laid  np  and  prospective  store.  Knobel  re- 
minds us  that  in  the  East  the  general  prac- 
tice is  to  eat  bread  of  the  same  day,  not  of 
yesterday.  20.]  it  bred  worms  is  liter- 

ally, worms  grew. 

22 — 30.]  Sequel  of  the  announcement  in 
ver.  5.  In  pursuance  of  the  Divine  an- 
nouncement, when  that  which  was  gathered 
on  the  sixth  day  was  set  in  order,  "  pre- 
pared," measured,  it  turned  out  to  be  twice 
as  much  as  on  other  days,  two  omers  per 
man.  This  miraculous  circumstance,  that 
God  had  given  them  "  on  the  sixth  day  the 
bread  of  two  days"  (ver.  29),  is  reported  by 
the  rulers  to  Moses.  Then,  ver.  23,  he  ex- 
plains to  them  that  this  was  the  meaning 
(see  ref.)  of  what  God  had  said,  viz.  of  the 
announcement  made  to  him  by  God,  ver.  5, 
that  the  morrow  was  a  rest,  "  a  rest  of  holi- 
ness "  to  Jehovah,  and  oti  that  account  it  was 
that  the  miracle  had  happened.  In  other 
words,  the  institution  of  the  day  of  rest, 
which  was  coeval  with  the  creation  of  man, 
was  now  to  be  practically  put  in  force  in 
Israel.  Whatever  observation  of  that  day 
there  may  have  been  in  patriarchal  times, 
it  is  manifest  that  during  the  bondage  in 
Egypt  there  can  have  been  none,  and  by 


this  circumstance  it  is  to  be  revived.  This 
is  the  simplest  way  of  understanding  all  that 
passed.  To  suppose  that  ver.  5  contains  a 
command  to  the  people  to  gather  twice  as 
much  on  the  sixth  day,  and  that  they  did  so, 
and  that  the  rulers,  ignorant  of  the  command, 
came  and  told  Moses,  is  to  involve  the  narra- 
tive in  inextricable  difficulties.  a  rest, 
an  holy  Sabbath]  Literally,  a  (great)  rest, 
a  rest  of  holiness.  This  is  the  tirst  time 
that  the  word  Sabbath  occurs.  It  signifies 
rest,  and  may  often  be  thus  rendered  :  but 
its  technical  usage  as  applied  to  the  seventh 
day  begins  with  this  its  first  occurrence,  and 
must  usually  be  maintained.  bake 
what  ye  will  bake,  &c.]  It  is  uncertain 
whether  these  words  are  to  be  taken  as  ap- 
plying to  the  whole  double  allowance  for  the 
two  days,  or  only  to  that  for  the  sixth  day. 
The  latter  seems  most  probable,  for  if  the 
other  were  the  case,  the  remainder  which  was 
kept  over  to  the  next  day  being  cooked, 
could  hardly  be  compared  with  that  which 
was  left  over  before,  for  it  would  naturally 
be  less  liable  to  incur  putrefaction.  Besides 
which,  the  very  form  of  the  sentence  seems 
to  favour  this  view :  "bake  and  boil  as  much 
as  you  will,  and  that  which  is  over  lay  up," 
&c.,  i.  e.  after  baking  and  boiling  what  you 
will.     On  the  other  view,  there  would  have 


19—33. 


EXODUS. 


29: 


shall  gather  it ;  but  on  the  seventh  day,  the  sabbath,  in  it 
there  shall  be  none.  27  ^  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  there 
went  out  some  of  the  people  on  the  seventh  day  for  to 
gather,  and  they  found  none.  28  And  jEiunAii  said  unto 
Moses,  IIow  long  refuse  ye  to  keep  my  coiununubneiits 
and  ray  laws?  20  gcp^  foj.  that  Jkhovah  hath  given  you 
the  sabbath,  therefore  he  giveth  you  on  the  sixtli  day  the 
bread  of  two  days ;  abide  ye  every  man  in  his  place,  let 
no  man  go  out  of  his  place  on  the  seventh  day.  ^^  So  the 
people  rested  on  the  seventh  day.  ^i  And  the  house  of 
Israel  called  the  name  thereof  *  ^lan  :  and  it  u-an  like  cori- 
ander secd^  white  ;  and  the  taste  of  it  was  like  wafers  made 
with  honey.  ^2  ^  And  Moses  said,  This  is  the  thing  which 
Jehovah  commandeth,  Fill  an  omer  of  it  to  be  kept  for 
your  generations  ;  that  they  may  sec  the  bread  wherewith 
I  have  fed  you  in  the  wilderness,  when  I  brought  you  forth 
from  the  land  of  Egypt.  ^"^  And  Moses  said  unto  Aaron, 
Take  a  vessel,  and  put  an  omcr  full  of  f  manna  therein, 


+  Hcb.  Man, 


to  be  supplied  after  "all  which  is  over," — 
when  you  have  eaten  to-day's  portion.  It 
is  time  that  in  the  subsequent  injunctions 
concernin_<r  the  Sabbath  it  is  forbidden  to 
kindle  a  tire  on  that  day  :  but  we  do  not  ab- 
solutely know  that  the  manna  required  cook- 
ing to  make  it  eatable  at  all.  It  is  observ- 
able that  in  ver.  25  Moses  does  not  tell 
them  to  bake  or  boil  the  Sabbath  portion, 
but  merely  '■'Eat  that  to-day."  28.] 

The  question  here  is  somewhat  surprising, 
seeing  that  no  commandments  or  laws  had 
as  yet  been  given,  except  those  concerning 
the  passover  and  the  feast  of  unleavened 
bread.  Israel  had  indeed  often  already 
murmured  against  God  (see  ch.  xiv.  11 ;  xv. 
24;  and  ver.  2),  and  to  this  may  be  the 
reference.  It  can  hardly  be  to  the  single 
command  concerning  the  Sabbath  :  but  the 
question  may  merely  characterize  generally 
their  spirit  of  disobedience.  29.  let 

no  man  go  out  of  his  place]  "  Eabbinical 
tradition  has  from  these  words  deduced  the 
prohibition,  that  no  Israelite  shall  go  fur- 
ther than  2000  yards,  i.  e.  6  stadii,  or  750 
Eoman  paces  (the  Sabbath  day's  journey. 
Acts  i.  12)  ;  for  that  was  the  distance  of  the 
holy  tabernacle  from  the  remotest  part  of 
the  Hebrew  camp."     Kalisch. 

31.]  This  comes  in  again  as  a  part  of  an 


interrupted  description,  joining  on  most 
naturally  to  ver.  15,  where  thiir  saying  to 
one  another,  "  It  is  man,"  leads  on  to  the 
statement  that  this  became  its  ordinary  name. 
In  these  two  places  only  have  I  retained  the 
Hebrew  word,  Man.  It  seemed  necessary 
here,  where  especial  reference  is  made  to  the 
origin  of  the  name  :  but  the  word  has  an 
awkward  sound  in  English,  and  in  the 
nine  other  places  where  it  occurs  (besides 
this  chapter)  I  have  kept  to  the  common 
name.  The  LXX.  and  Vulgate  have  been 
inconsistent  in  their  usage,  sometimes  giv- 
ing it  as  mail,  sometimes  as  tnanna.  The 
coriander  seed  is  that  of  the  coriandrum 
sativum,  cultivated  in  England  for  confec- 
tionery, and  wild  in  Egypt  and  Palestine. 
The  seed  is  globular,  grayish-coloured,  and 
hollow,  the  surface  marked  with  fine  stripes. 
It  has  a  pleasant  spicy  flavour.  "  AVe  found 
it,"  says  Dr.  Tristram,  "  abundant  in  tho 
valley  of  the  Jordan."  In  Numbers  xi.  8  it 
is  said  that  the  taste  of  the  manna  was  as  of 
fresh  (or  dainty)  oil. 

32 — 34.]  It  is  to  be  laid  up  and  kept  for 
a  memorial.  What  is  meant  by  before  Je- 
hovall  in  vv.  32,  33  is  explained  by  vi  r.  34, 
before  the  Testimony,  or  before  tlie  Law, 
i.  e.  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  in  which  the 
Law  Avas  to  be  deposited,  ch.  xxv.  16,  21, 


298 


EXODUS. 


XVI. 


and  lay  it  up  before  Jehovah,  to  be  kept  for  your  genera- 
tions. ^^  As  Jehovah  commanded  Moses,  so  Aaron  laid 
it  up  before  the  Testimony,  to  be  kept.  ^^  And  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel  did  eat  the  manna  forty  years,  until  they 
came  to  a  land  inhabited ;  they  did  eat  the  manna,  until 
they  came  unto  the  borders  of  the  land  of  Canaan.     ^6  ]S}^ow 


22.  All  this  manifestly  belongs  to  the  some- 
what later  period,  when  the  tabernacle  was 
set  up,  and  the  ark  of  the  covenant.  The 
word  rendered  pot  in  the  A.  V.  is  found  only 
here,  and  seems  to  be  derived  from  a  verb 
signifying  iveaving  or:  plaiting.  It  was  more 
probably  a  basket  of  some  description  :  and 
so  the  Coptic  version  renders  it.  I  have 
thought  it  better  to  preserve  the  general 
term  vessel.  35.]  This  notice  is  mani- 

festly due  to  a  period  after  the  manna  had 
ceased,  and  Israel  had  entered  Canaan.  By 
no  possibility  can  that  be  true  which  some 
(e.  g.  Bp.  Wordsworth)  have  maintained  in 
anxiety  to  secure  the  authorship  of  Moses 
for  every  word  of  the  Pentateuch,  "this 
sentence  shews  that  the  Book  of  Exodus  did 
not  pass  out  of  the  hands  of  Moses  till  a 
little  before  his  death  :"  for  the  mauua  did 
not  cease  till  the  day  following  the  eating  of 
the  corn  of  Canaan  on  the  morrow  after  the 
passover  in  Gilgal  (Josh.  v.  12) ;  and  the 
command  to  Joshua  to  pass  over  Jordan 
was  prefaced  by  the  words  "  Moses  my 
servant  is  dead  "  (Josh.  i.  2).  This  is  only 
an  example  of  a  kind  of  crirticism  which 
needs  to  be  entirely  cleared  away  before  the 
word  of  God  can  be  fairly  dealt  with. 
Kalisch  would  change  a  land  inhabited 
into  "  the  land  which  they  loere  to  inherit," 
seeing  that  they  did  "  pass,  before  their 
entrance  into  Canaan,  through  many  in- 
habited countries,  for  instance,  those  of 
Sihon  and  Og."  But  he  stands  alone,  and 
the  rendering  seems  neither  necessary  nor 
allowable  ;  whatever  fragments,  so  to  speak, 
of  inhabited  land  they  may  have  passed 
previously,  it  was  Canaan  which  was  espe- 
cially and  entirely  to  them  the  inhabited 
land.  the   borders]   Heb.   the   end, 

i.  e.  as  we  should  call  it,  meaning  the  same 
thing,  the  beginning ;  till  they  entered,  that 
is,  the  land  of  Canaan.  It  is  not  meant 
that  during  the  whole  of  this  period  they 
had  no  other  sustenance  :  the  herds  which 
they  had  brought  out  of  Egypt  had  not 
failed  them  at  Sinai  (ch.  xxxiv.  3),  nor  even 


when  they  were  about  to  pass  through  Edom 
(Num.  XX.  19),  nor  even  when  the  Pteuben- 
ites  and  Gadites  petitioned  to  be  settled  on 
the  E.  of  Jordan  (Num.  xxxii.  1).  It  is 
plain  that  they  had  bread  (Lev.  viii.  2,  26, 
31)  and  meal  (Lev.  ix.  4;'  x.  12;  xxiv.  6, 
fi'.  ;  Num.  vii.  13,  &c.),  and  that  they 
bought  food  and  water  from  the  Edomites 
(Deut.  ii.  6).  And  from  Josh.  i.  11  we  see 
that  the  staple  of  their  victuals  must  have 
been  other  than  manna,  for  there  they  are 
commanded  to  lay  in  three  days'  provision, 
and  the  manna  would  not  keep  from  day  to 
day.  But  it  was  granted  to  them  during  all 
this  time  to  help  out  other  provision,  and 
probably  it  was  the  only  food  of  those  who 
could  not  afford  the  rarer  and  costlier  kinds. 
It  is  only  mentioned  specially  after  this  in 
Num.  xi.  7,  ff.,  at  thcu-  first  breaking  up 
from  Sinai,  and  in  Num.  xxi.  5,  during  the 
circuit  of  Edom,  and  after  the  death  of 
Aaron.  The  mention  in  Josh.  v.  12  has 
already  been  noticed.  This  miraculous  sup- 
ply, like  many  others  of  the  Divine  inter- 
ference in  this  history,  was  grounded  upon 
natural  phenomena.  The  natural  manna  is 
still  found  in  the  peninsula  of  Sinai  in  May, 
June,  and  July,  and  most  abundantly  in 
the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  Sinai  itself, 
— in  the  Wadys  Feiran  and  Es  Sheikh, 
Ghurundcl  and  Taiyibeh.  It  distils  in  the 
warm  nights,  especially  after  rain,  from  the 
branches  of  the  turfa,  a  kind  of  tamarisk. 
It  falls  in  small  balls  on  the  ground  beneath, 
is  gathered  before  sunrise,  and  melts  in  the 
heat.  It  has  the  appearance  of  gum  and 
the  taste  of  honey,  and  when  taken  in  some 
quantity  acts  as  a  mild  purgative.  So  far 
there  is  an  analogy.  But  the  multiplication, 
and  the  continuance  of  the  supply,  and  that 
without  reference  to  production  from  trees, 
remove  this  incident  from  the  realm  of  na- 
tural phenomena  into  that  of  supernatural. 
For  further  details  concerning  the  manna,  see 
the  Biblical  Diet,  and  Stanley,  Sinai  and 
Palestine.,  p.  26,   note.  36.]    On  the 

various  Hebrew  measures  see  Mr.  Bevan's 


4 

V 


34-XYII.  6. 


EXODUS. 


299"" 


an  oraer  is  tlie  tenth  ^wr^  of  an  cpbah.  XYII.  ^  And  all 
the  cong•rcgatio^  of  the  children  of  Israel  journc}'e(l  from 
the  wilderness  of  Sin,  after  their  journeys,  according  to 
the  commandment  of  Jehovah,  and  pitched  in  Hephidim: 
and  there  was  no  water  for  the  people  to  drink.  2  ^Vhere- 
fore  the  people  did  chide  with  Moses,  and  said,  Give  us 
water  that  we  may  drink.  And  Moses  said  unto  them, 
Why  chide  ye  with  me  ?  wherefore  do  ye  "  temj)t  Jkhovah  ? 
3  And  the  people  thirsted  there  for  water ;  and  the  people 
murmured  against  Moses,  and  said.  Wherefore  is  this  that 
thou  hast  brought  us  up  out  of  Egypt,  to  kill  us  and  our 
children  and  our  cattle  with  thirst  ?  ^  And  ]\Ioses  cried 
unto  Jehovah,  saying,  What  shall  I  do  unto  this  people  ? 
they  be  almost  ready  to  stone  me.  ^  And  Jehovah  said 
unto  Moses,  Go  on  before  the  people,  and  take  with  thee 
of  the  elders  of  Israel ;  and  thy  rod,  wherewith  thou 
"^smotest  the  river,  take  in  thine  hand,  and  go.  ^  Behold, 
I  wiU  stand  before  thee  there  upon  the  rock  in  Iloreb ; 


1  Sum.  xiT.  22. 
Ta.  Ixxvlii. 
1»,  XIV.  »; 


art.  ""Weights  and  Measures"  in  the  Biblical 
Diet.  From  E/.ck.  xlv.  11  \vc  learn  that 
the  epliah  was,  in  its  turn,  the  tenth  part  of 
the  homer.  The  absolute  capacity  of  these 
measures  is  matter  of  considerable  doubt. 
Ill  the  article  above  referred  to  the  omer  is 
given  as  estimated, — by  Josephus  at  nearly 
nine-tenths  of  a  gallon,  by  the  Kabbinists 
at  less  than  four-hlths. 

XVII.  1 — 7.]  Lack  of  water  in  Repkidim; 
striking   of   the   rock    in    Iloreb.  1. 

after  their  journeys]  i.  e.  (see  ref.)  with 
the  intervention  of  some  stages  and  encamp- 
ments not  here  mentioned  :  viz.  Dophkah 
and  Alush,  Num.  xxxiii.  13,  14  (where  see 
notes).  Nothing  particular  having  hap- 
pened at  either  of  these  stages,  they  are  left 
unnoticed  by  the  history.  Rephidim] 

i.  e.  rests,  or  stays.  The  situation  may  be 
approximately  given.  From  ver.  6  and  ch. 
xviii.  0  it  was  quite  near  to  Iloreb.  From 
ch.  xix.  2  ;  Num.  xxxiii.  15,  the  next  day's 
encampment  was  in  the  wilderness  of  Sinai. 
The  members  of  the  recent  survey  were  di- 
vided about  the  exact  site  of  Ilepliiditn,  Mr. 
Holland  placing  it  in  the  pass  of  El  Matiyeh 
in  the  "Wady  es  Sheikh,  while  the  others 
placed  it  in  W'ady  Feiran,  a  short  distance 
below  the  spot  where  "Wady  Alcyatruns  into 
it  from  Jebel  Serbal.   Mr.  Ilolluud's  reasons 


for  supporting  his  view  may  be  seen  in  his 
article  as  above,  and  he  has  made  a  fair 
statement  of  the  other  side.  Dean  Stanley 
also,  alter  Hitter,  thinks  that  Rephidim  must 
be  in  the  "Wady  Feiran:  see  his  Sinai  and 
Palestine,  pp.  40,  4l,  and  Dr.  llayman's 
art.    in   the    Biblical   Diet.  2.]   The 

people  tempted  Jehovah  in  that  they  doubted 
His  power  or  Ilis  will  to  sup[)ly  tliem.  See 
relf.  4,  5.]  This  is  the  first  mention  of 

sto7iing.  It  was  the  ordinary  capital  punish- 
ment (see  art.  "Punishments"  in  Biblical 
Diet.),  and  from  its  nature  was  especially 
likely  to  have  been  resorted  to  in  the  dry  and 
stony  east  as  a  tumultuary  mode  of  putting  to 
death.  Of  such  character  appears  to  have 
been  the  stoning  of  Stephen,  Acts  vii.  57,  58, 
where  see  notes.  Moses  was   to  take 

some  of  the  elders  as  witnesses  :  the  miracle 
was  not  to  be  seen  by  the  people  generally. 
"We  have  the  same  care  exhibited  for  the 
secrecy  of  the  Divine  works  of  wonder,  in 
Gen.  xix.  17;  xxii.  5  ;  xxxii.  29.  6.] 

The  miracle  was  to  be  wrought  not  by  any 
power  of  Jloses,  but  by  the  special  presence 
of  God  on  the  spot.  This  makes  the  conduct 
of  Moses  and  Aaron  on  tlie  other  similar  oc- 
casion. Num.  XX.  10,  the  more  inexcusable, 
and  the  words  of  God  there  (ver.  11)  more 
solemn ;  sec  note.    The  very  name  Horcb 


300 


EXODUS. 


XYII. 


w  Dent.  \i.  16  ; 

ix.  22;  xxxiii. 

8. 
X  Num.  XX.  13, 

24;  xxvii.  U. 

Deut.  xxxii. 

51. 

y  Num.  xiv.  43, 


1,  ff. ;  xxvii. 
8;  XXX.  l,ff. 
2Sam.  viii.l2. 


and  tlioii  shalt  smite  the  rock,  and  there  shall  come  water 
out  of  it,  that  the  people  may  drink.  And  Moses  did  so 
in  the  sig-ht  of  the  elders  of  Israel.  7  And  he  called  the 
name  of  the  place  '^Massah  [Temptation],  and  ^Meribah 
[Chiding],  because  of  the  chiding  of  the  children  of  Israel, 
and  because  they  tempted  Jehovah,  saying.  Is  Jehovah 
among  us,  or  not?  ^  ^  Then  came  ^Amalek,  and  fought 
with  Israel  in  Rephidim.  ^  And  Moses  said  unto  Joshua, 
Choose  us  out  men,  and  go  out,  fight  with  Amalek :  to 
morrow  I  will  stand  on  the  top  of  the  hill  with  the  rod  of 
God  in  mine  hand.  ^^  go  Joshua  did  as  Moses  had  said 
to  him,  and  fought  with  Amalek :  and  Moses,  Aaron,  and 
Hur  went  uj)  to  the  top  of  the  hill.     ^^  And  it  came  to 


signifies  dry  and  hard,  so  that  there  was 
that  in  the  command  itself  which  set  forth 
the  paradox  and  the  miracle.  It  is  impos- 
sible to  assign  any  satisfactory  locality  to  this 
miracle.  Some,  among  whom  is  Knobel, 
have  supposed  its  site  to  have  been  the  spot 
called  by  the  Arabs  Sassafeh,  one  of  the 
highest  summits  of  Horeb,  whence  the  whole 
plain  Er  llahah  is  commanded.  But  this 
seems  unnecessary,  and  is  against  the  whole 
evidence  which  points  out  Er  llahah  as  the 
site  of  the  encampment  before  Sinai,  which 
itself  is  now  almost  shewn  to  have  been  Ras- 
Sassafeh  ;  and  also  against  the  spirit  of  the 
narrative,  for  thus  the  miracle  would  be 
visible  to  the  whole  multitude.  The  tradi- 
tions respecting  the  rock  are  given  by 
Kalisch,  and  the  probability  of  imposition 
being  practised  by  the  monks  on  the  spot  is 
discussed.  7.]  On  difficulties  attend- 

ing the  subsequent  use  of  these  names  (reff.), 
see  notes,  Num.  xx.  13. 

8 — 16.]  Isi'aePsJiffht  with  Amalek.  From 
Deut.  XXV.  17,  ff.,  it  appears  that  the  Amalek- 
ites,  whose  dwelling  was  near  the  Sinaitic 
peninsula,  harassed  the  children  of  Israel, 
smiting  the  hindmost  of  them,  being  ap- 
parently jealous  of  this  irruption  of  strangers 
into  their  fertile  valleys  round  Sinai.  On 
the  question  respecting  the  descent  of  this 
Amalek  from  Esau,  see  Gen.  xxxvi.  2.  The 
history  of  the  Amalekites  after  this  will  be 
found  in  the  various  passages  referred  to  in 
the  margin.  9.  ]  This  is  the  first  men- 

tion of  Joshua.  He  is  called  by  this  name 
also  in  ch.  xxiv.  13  ;  xxxii.  17  ;  xxxiii.  11 ; 
Num.  xi,  28  ;  according  to  Knobel,  all  Jeho- 


vistic  passages.  The  Elohistic  narrative  re- 
lates, Num.  xiii.  8,  16,  that  his  name  was 
Oshea,  and  that  Moses  called  him  Joshua. 
The  last  name  imports  "  Jehovah  the 
Saviour,"  or  "whose  help  is  Jehovah," 
answering  to  the  German  "  Goithelf."  He 
already  appears  here  as  the  commander  of 
the  armies  of  Israel.  He  was  of  the  tribe  of 
Ephraim,  see  Num.  xiii.  8.  the  hill  is 

variously  assigned  according  to  the  foregoing 
interpretations.  On  the  rod  of  God, 

see  note,  ch.  iv.  20.  10.]  Hur  is  first 

here  mentioned  :  he  appears  again  in  ch. 
xxiv.  14  in  company  with  Moses.and  Aaron. 
He  seems,  from  ch.  xxxi.  2 ;  xxxv.  30 ; 
xxxviii.  22,  to  have  been  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah,  and  the  grandfather  of  the  eminent 
workman  Bezaleel.  He  is  not  further  men- 
tioned in  the  Pentateuch.  But  in  1  Chron. 
ii.  19,  20,  we  learn  that  he  was  great-grand- 
son of  Judah,  Caleb  being  his  father  by  a 
second  wife  Ephrath  (see  ib.  ver.  50,  and  iv. 
4  ;  and  remarks  on  Josh.  xiv.  6,  where  Caleb 
is  called  "  the  S07i  of  Jephunnch  the  Kenez- 
ite").  Hur  is  said  by  Josephns  (Aiit.  iii. 
2,  4)  to  have  been  the  husband  of  Miriam. 
This,  if  true,  might  account  for  his  associa- 
tion with  Moses  and  Aaron  ;  if  fictitious, 
may  have  been  an  inference  from  that  asso- 
ciation. 11,  12.]  This  is  a  passage  the 
symbolism  of  which  lies  so  much  on  the  sur- 
face, that  it  is  impossible,  in  exegesis,  to  pass 
it  altogether  by.  It  was  the  first  and  the 
most  strongly  marked  conflict  of  Israel  with 
the  heathen  world.  It  was  to  be  plainly 
declared  that  Israel's  help  was  from  God : 
that  conquest  was  not  of  their  own  strength, 


-15. 


EXODUS. 


301 


pass,  when  Moses  held  up  his  luincl,  that  Israel  prevailed: 
and  when  he  let  down  his  hand,  Araalek  prevailed.  ^- 
But  Moses'  hands  ico'e  heavy ;  and  they  took  a  stone,  and 
put  it  under  him,  and  he  sat  thereon  ;  and  Aaron  and  llur 
stayed  up  his  hands,  the  one  on  the  one  side,  and  tlie  other 
on  the  other  side;  and  his  hands  were  steady  until  the 
going  down  of  the  sun.  ^^  \i^([  Joshua  discomfited  Ama- 
lek  and  his  people  with  the  edge  of  the  sword.  ^^  And 
Jehovah  said  unto  Moses,  "Write  this  for  a  memorial  in 
the  book,  and  rehearse  U  in  the  ears  of  Joshua  :  for  I  will 
utterly  put  out  the  remembrance  of  Amalek  from  under 
heaven.     ^'^  And  Moses  built  an  altar,  and  called  the  name 


but  simply  of  Him,  and  because  they  were 
His  people.  And  accordinj^ly  Jloses,  re- 
presenting Israel  (by  Divine  direction,  we 
may  well  assume,  though  so  much  is  not  de- 
clared), takes  the  rod  of  God,  that  instru- 
ment through  which  Ilis  power  had  before 
been  exercised,  and  holds  it  up  to  heaven, 
the  hand  or  hands  being  in  the  universally 
recognized  position  of  prayer,  or,  if  this  seem 
importing  too  much  into  the  explanation, 
symbolizing  plainly  connexion  between  him- 
self and  God.  As  long  as  this  is  maintained, 
Israel  prevails ;  when  it  is  intermitted,  Israel 
fails.  Tlie  bearing  of  the  symbolism  on 
]\lessiauic  typology  and  on  the  religious  life 
of  men  and  communities  of  men,  is  obvious, 
but  it  is  not  witliin  the  province  of  this  com- 
mentary to  dwell  on  it.  The  process  of 
the  action  seems  to  have  been  this.  IMoses  at 
first  held  up  his  right  hand  with  the  rod : 
when  that  was  wearied,  his  left  :  when  both 
were  wearied  singly,  the  two  together  :  when 
this  failed  Aaron  and  Ilur  held  up  the  two, 
both  holding  the  rod  together.  Knobel  re- 
marks that  the  hand  only  is  mentioned  in 
other  places  in  this  book  where  the  hand 
with  the  rod  is  necessarily  understood :  see 
eh.  viii.  5  compared  with  G  ;  ix.  22,  23  ;  x. 
12,  13.  13.]  Amalek  and  his  people 
is  perhaps  only  a  mode  of  indicating  the 
Amalekites, — perhaps  means  the  Amalekites 
and  others  who  accompanied  them  as  fol- 
lowers or  allies.  14.]  The  first  men- 
tion of  perpetuating  the  memory  of  an  inci- 
dent in  a  book.  The  expression  the  book, 
which  is  the  liter  *  rendering,  seems  to 
imply  that  there  was  a  known  and  recognized 
book  iu  which  the  inci  'ents  of  Israel's  his- 


tory were  entered.  And  this  seems  to  re- 
ceive support  from  other  passages :  see  ch. 
xxiv.  4,  7,  where  we  read  of  "the  book  of  the 
covenant."  In  xxxiv.  27  Moses  is  com- 
manded to  write  these  words,  as  if  a  recog- 
nized book,  in  which  to  write,  were  already 
in  existence  ;  in  Num.  xxxiii.  1,  2  we  are 
told  that  Moses  wrote  all  the  journeys  of  the 
Israelites  by  command  of  the  Lord  ;  in  Deut. 
xxviii.  Gl  "  the  book  of  this  law  "  is  spoken 
of :  see  also  Num.  v,  23  ;  1  Sara.  x.  25.  We 
may  conclude  that  this  incident  was  directed 
to  be  recorded  in  the  book  of  the  journey- 
ings  which  Moses  kept. 

The  memorandum  was  to  bo,  besides  bcin"' 
committed  to  writing,  enjoined  in  the  ears 
of  Joshua,  seeing  tliat  he  would  have  in 
charge  the  settling  of  Israel  in  the  Land  of 
Promise,  and  after  that  settling  the  rooting 
out  of  Amalek  was  to  take  place  :  see  Deut. 
XXV.  19.  The  idea  of  Keil,  that  it  was 
merely  to  strengthen  Joshua's  trust  in  God, 
is  beneath  the  requirement  of  the  context. 
A  prophecy  of  the  result  of  this  injunction 
is  found  in  the  mouth  of  Balaam,  Num. 
xxiv.  20.  The  injunction  came  practically 
into  remembrance  in  the  days  of  Saul,  1 
Sam.  XV.,  but  was  not  entirely  fullilled  :  see  I 
Sam.  XXX.  1—20  ;  2  Sam.  viii.  11,  12 :  even 
down  to  Ilezekiali's  time ;  see  1  Chron.  iv, 
42.  15,  16.]  This  altar  seems  not  to 

have  been  erected  for  sacrifice,  but  as  a 
memorial,  as  in  Gen.  xxxiii.  20 ;  see  this 
purpose  fully  set  forth  and  vindicated  in  the 
case  of  the  Ileubenites,  Gadites,  and  Manas- 
sites,  Josh.  xxii.  15 — 34.  Ver.  16  is  very 
difiicult.  It  would  really  appear  as  if  the 
present  Ilebrew  text  could  hardly  be  correct. 


302 


EXODUS. 


XYII. 


of  it  Jehovah-nissi  [Jehovah  my  banner]  :  ^^  for  he  said, 
tliat  a  hand  is  on  the  f  throne  of  J  ah,  war  to  Jehovah 
with  Amalek  from  generation  to  generation.  XVIII.  ^ 
When  Jethro,  the  priest  of  Midian,  Moses^  father  in  law, 
heard  of  all  that  God  had  done  for  Moses,  and  for  Israel 
his  peojile,  and  that  Jehovah  had  brought  Israel  Qut  of 
Egypt ;  2  then  Jethro,  Moses'  father  in  law,  took  Zipporah, 
Moses'  wife,  after  he  had  sent  her  back,  ^  and  her  two 
sons  ;  of  which  the  name  of  the  one  icas  Gershom  [Exile]  ; 
for  he  said,  I  have  been  an  alien  in  a  strange  land :  *  and 
the  name  of  the  other  was  Eliezer  [My  God  k  help]  ;  for 
the  God  of  my  father,  said  he,  teas  mine  help,  and  delivered 
me  from  the  sword  of  Pharaoh :  ^  and  Jethro,  Moses' 
father  in  law,  came  with  his  sons  and  his  wife  unto  Moses 


The  altar  is  called  Jehovali-nissi,  and  for 
this  naming  a  reason  is  to  be  rendered.  As 
the  text  now  stands,  the  reason  is,  that  a 
hand  (is)  on  the  Kehs  of  Jah,  war  is  to 
Jehovah  against  Amalek  from  generation 
to  generation.  Now  this  word  Kchs  is 
found  only  here,  and  can  only  be  interpreted 
by  an  hypothesis  of  some  kind.  The  ma- 
jority of  translators  and  commentators  have 
supposed  it  to  be  an  abbreviated  form  of 
Kisseh,  a  throne.  But  how  should  the  name 
Jehovah-HJs.sj  be  accounted  for  by  the  word 
Kisseh,  even  supposing  that  to  be  meant  .■" 
The  Hebrew  word  tiehs,  differing  from  Kehs 
only  as  the  letter  j,  noon,  differs  from  3, 
caph,  means  standard  or  banner,  and  is  the 
very  word  used  in  the  foregoing  appellation, 
Jehovah-nissi.  "We  can  hardly  help  be- 
lieving that  nehs  and  not  Kehs  must  be  the 
original  text.  This  is  the  view  taken  by 
Le  Clerc,  Michaclis,  Gcsenius,  De  Wctte, 
Knobel,  and  others.  In  this  case  the  mean- 
ing would  be,  the  hand  is  on  the  banner  of 
Jah,  i.  e.  the  Lord  has  ever  His  banner  in 
His  hand,  is  ever  waging  war,  which  would 
be  a  natural  expression,  especially  after  the 
long-sustained  attitude  of  Moses,  for  the 
perpetuity  of  war  on  the  part  of  Jehovah 
against  Amalek.  Still,  we  must  deal  with 
the  text  as  we  have  it,  in  the  absence  of  any 
existing  various  readings,  however  improba- 
ble its  forms  may  appear.  And  it  must 
be  owned,  that  as  it  now  stands  the  text 
does  not  seem  to  convey  any  definite  mean- 
iuff.     The  hand  on  the  throne  is  said  vari- 


ously to  imply  an  oath,  and  to  be  God's  hand 
on  His  throne,  or  to  import  Moses's  hand 
which  was  lifted  up  to  God's  throne  in 
prayer,  or  to  be  Amalek's  hand  lifted  against 
God's  throne,  i.e.  His  people  Israel,  or  to 
be  the  interceding  and  ruling  hand  of  Christ 
on  God's  throne.  I  fairly  own  that  one  of 
these  seems  to  me  as  irrelevant  as  the  other, 
and  not  one  of  them  to  have  the  remotest 
reference  to  the  endurance  of  God's  war  with 
Amalek.  I  have  therefore  left  the  text  in 
its  obscurity,  inserting  in  the  margin  the 
alternative,  and  as  it  seems  to  me  the  far 
more  probable  rendering. 

XVIII.  Visit  of  Jethro  to  Moses.  On 
Jethro,  see  ch.  ii.  18  ;  iii.  1,  ff,  and  notes. 
The  interchange  of  the  Divine  names  in  this 
narrative  is  to  be  observed,  but  hardly  can 
be  always  rendered  account  of.  In  this  first 
verse,  e.  g.,  there  seems  no  reason  why  a 
difference  should  be  made,  or  why  the  re- 
verse order  should  not  have  been  adopted. 

2.]  There  has  been  no  previous  men- 
tion of  this  sending  back  of  Zipporah.  It 
probably  took  place  after  the  incident  re- 
lated, ch.  iii.  24,  26  :  see  note  there. 
3,  4.]  The  birth  and  naming  of  Gershom  has 
been  related,  nearly  in  the  same  words,  in 
ch.  ii.  22.  Nothing  has  hitherto  been  said 
of  Eliezer,  but  "  his  sons  "  are  spoken  of  in 
ch.  iv.  30,  see  note  there.  The  name  Eliezer 
is  in  signification  nearly  allied  to  Joshua, 
"God"  standing  inslfead  of  "Jehovah." 
The  German  Gotthelf  would  express  both. 

5.]  Jethro  appears  to   have   visited 


IG— XVIII.  12. 


EXODUS. 


303 


into  the  wilderness,  wliero  he  encamped  at  tlic  mount  of 
God  :  6  and  he  said  unto  Moses,  I  thy  lather  in  law  Jethro 
am  come  unto  thee,  and  thy  wife,  and  her  two  sons  with 
her.  7  ^  And  Moses  went  out  to  meet  his  father  in  law, 
and  did  obeisance,  and  kissed  him ;  and  they  asked  each 
other  of  their  welfare ;  and  they  came  into  the  tent.  8 
And  Moses  told  his  father  in  law  all  that  Jehovah  had 
done  unto  Pharaoh  and  to  the  Egj-ptians  for  Israel's  sake, 
and  all  the  travail  that  had  come  upon  them  by  the  wav, 
and  how  Jehovah  delivered  them.  ^  And  Jethro  rejoiced 
for  all  the  goodness  which  Jehovah  had  done  to  Israel, 
whom  he  had  delivered  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Eg3'ptians. 
10  And  Jethro  said,  Blessed  he  Jehovah,  who  hath  de- 
livered you  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Egyptians,  and  out  of 
the  hand  of  Pharaoh,  who  hath  delivered  the  people  from 
under  the  hand  of  the  Eg}q3tians.  ^^  Now  I  know  that 
Jehovah  is  greater  than  all  the  gods :  for  in  the  thing 
wherein  they  dealt  proudly  lie  was  above  them.  12  And 
Jethro,  Moses'  father  in  law,  took  a  burnt  offering  and 


Moses  at  Rcphidim.  We  already  know  that 
that  encampment  was  close  to  Iloreb,  and 
here  we  liave  Moses  "  encamped  at  the 
mount  of  God."  The  visit  seems  to  have 
been  after  the  battle  with  Amalek  :  hardly, 


that  such  reference  of  them  is  too  narrow, 
and  that  they  apply  to  the  whole  dealings  of 
God  in  requital  of  Egypt's  pride  against 
Israel.  12.]  It  would  seem  as  if  there 

were  some  general  mode  of  ofl'ering  common 


as  Kurtz  supposes,  in  consequence  of  Israel's    to  Israel,  and  to  those  who,  though  outside 


victory,  or  that  would  have  been  mentioned 
in  ver.  1.  Jethro  came  in  consequence  of 
hearing  of  the  wonders  in  Egypt  and  of  the 
Exodus ;  possibly  owing  to  previous  agree- 
ment with  ]\Ioses,  who  was  divinely  informed 
that  his  march  would  lead  him  to  ilorcb 
(ch.  iii.  12).  6.]  he  sftid,  i.  e.  by  mes- 

sengers :   the  meeting  follows.  7,  ff.] 

Moses  does  all  eastern  honour  to  the  emin- 
ence of  Jethro  :  brings  him  into  his  tent, 
and  informs  him  of  the  details  of  the  deliver- 
ances of  which  he  had  generally  heard,  and 


tlie  covenant  of  Jehovali,  yet  recognized  the 
true  God.  It  is  not  said  that  Jethro  ottered 
to  Jehovah,  tliough  he  recognized  Ilis 
supereminent  greatness :  he  knew  Ilim  not 
as  Jehovah,  not  being  within  Ilis  covenant. 
This  is  a  notable  instance  of  intercom- 
munion under  even  that  dispensation  which 
most  jealously  and  exclusively  fenced  about 
the  unity  of  faitli  and  worship.  The  place 
M'as  most  probably  that  previously  indicated, 
ch.  xvi.  9,  as  '■'^ before  Jehovah,"  or  it 
might  have  been  that  the  sacrifices  were 


of  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  the  vie-  ottered  on  the  altar  of  ch.  xvii.  15.    But  sec 

tory  over  Amalek.    Here  all  is  to  tlie  praise  note  there.  The  oflerings  were  of  two  kinds : 

of  Jehovah,  the  God  of  Israel,  whom  thereby  the  burnt  oflfering,  tliat  which  was  lifted  up 

Jethro  recognizes   as  greater  than  all  the  on  the  altar  and  entirely  consumed,  and  the 

gods.     Some  understand  the  latter  clause  of  thank    ott'crings,   those  parts   of  the   slain 

ver.  11  as  meaning  that  Jehovah  had  requited  victim  which  were  not  consumed  but  sinij)ly 

\ipon  the  Egyptians,  by  destroying  them  in  oifcrcd,  and  then  partaken  of  by  the  offerers, 

the   water,    that   which    they   had   devised  The  various  sacrifices  will  be  explained  in 

against  the  Hebrews,  by  casting  their  chil-  the  places  where  they  are  enjoined.     Moses 

dreu  into  the  waters.  But  Neh.  ix.  10,  where  is  not  mentioned  among  those  that  camp, 

these  words  are   plainly  referred  to,  shew  because  he  was  the  host,  the  entertainment 


304  •      EXODUS.  XYIII. 

fhank  offerings  for  God  :  and  Aaron  came,  and  all  the 
elders  of  Israel,  to  eat  bread  with  Moses'  fother  in  law 
before  God.  ^^  ^  And  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  that 
Moses  sat  to  judge  the  people  :  and  the  people  stood  by 
Moses  from  the  morning  unto  the  evening.  ^^  And  when 
Moses'  father  in  law  saw  all  that  he  did  to  the  people,  he 
said,  What  is  this  thing  that  thou  doest  to  the  people  ? 
why  sittest  thou  thyself  alone,  and  all  the  people  stand  by 
thee  from  morning  unto  even  ?  ^'^  And  Moses  said  unto 
his  father  in  law,  Because  the  people  come  unto  me  to  en- 
quire of  God :  1^  when  they  have  a  matter,  they  come 
unto  me ;  and  I  judge  between  one  and  another,  and  I  do 
make  them  know  the  statutes  of  God,  and  his  laws.  ^"^  And 
Moses'  father  in  law  said  unto  him.  The  thing  that  thou 
doest  is  not  good.  ^^  Thou  wilt  surely  wear  away,  both 
thou,  and  this  people  that  is  with  thee :  for  this  thing  is 
too  heavy  for  thee ;  thou  art  not  able  to  perform  it  th}'- 
self  alone.  ^^  Hearken  now  unto  my  voice,  I  will  give 
thee  counsel,  and  God  shall  be  with  thee  :  Be  thou  for  the 
people  to  God-ward,  that  thou  mayest  bring  the  causes 
unto  God :  ^o  and  thou  shalt  teach  them  ordinances  and 
laws,  and  shalt  shew  them  the  way  wherein  they  must 
walk,  and  the  work  that  thej!^  must  do.  21  Moreover  thou 
zSeeGen.xxii.  shalt  ^ providc  out  of  all  the  people  able  men,  such  as  fear 

8.   Isa.xxviii.  ^  ,  -^         ^ 

^^-  God,  men  of  truth,  hating  covetousness ;  and  place  such 

takinij  place  in  his  tent.  The  eating  bread,  meaning  seems  to  be  well  expressed  in  tlie 
as  in  ret'.,  is  not  to  be  confined  to  the  literal  A.V.,  and  can  hardly  be,  as  Kalisch  and  Keil 
sense  of  the  words  :  it  was  the  partaking  of  make  it,  that  Moses  was  to  be  to  the  people 
the  flesh  of  the  victim  oflfered.  It  took  place  instead  of  God,  ui  the  place  of  God.  He  was 
before  God,  i.  e.  in  the  spot  where  God  had  to  be  for  them  in  the  presence  of  God,  i.  e. 
been  worshipped  by  the  sacrifice.  as  their  representative,  to  bring  their  diffi- 
13 — 26.]  Moses  was  the  depository  of  the  culties  and  questions  to  God  for  decision,  and 
oracles  of  God  for  Israel,  and  reported  to  on  those  causes,  thus  brought,  were  to  be 
them  His  (then  unwritten)  statutes  and  laws,  grounded  (ver.  20)  precedents  which  might 
This  he  had  hitherto  done  entirely  in  his  rule  future  action.  21.  provide]  Liter- 
own  person.  Such  labour  was  too  hard  for  ally,  look :  see  rcif.  There  is  an  apparent 
him,  and  the  waiting  whole  days  during  the  difficulty  as  to  the  numbers  of  these  rulers 
necessary  delays  of  decision  was  too  hard  for  or  judges :  if  all  here  mentioned  were  ap- 
the  people.  There  is  notliing,  as  Keil  sup-  pointed  for  600,000  men,  their  numbers 
poses,  improbable  in  Knobel's  view,  that  tlie  would  be,  for  the  tens,  60,000  ;  for  the  fifties, 
cases  which  arose  formed  the  ground  on  12,000;  for  the  huudred.s,  6000  ;  for  the  thou- 
which  statutes  and  laws  were  based ;  indeed,  sands,  600  ;  in  all,  78,600  rulers  or  judges, 
ver.  20  seems  to  require  such  an  under-  (The  argument  against  this  calculation  iu 
standing.  18.]  The  literal  words  are,  Keil  is  ingenious,  but  would  go  entirely  to 
Fading  thou  wilt   fade.              19.]   The  explain  away  the  assertions  of  the  text.  His 


13— XIX.  1. 


EXODUS. 


over  tlicm,  to  he  rulers  of  tliousancls,  and  rulers  of  lunulreds, 
rulers  of  fifties,  and  rulers  of  tens:  -^  and  let  tlicin  jud^e 
the  people  at  all  seasons :  and  it  sliall  be,  that  every  great 
matter  they  sliall  bring  unto  thee,  but  every  small  matter 
tliey  shall  judge :  so  make  it  easy  for  thyself,  and  tliey 
shall  bear  it  with  thee.  23  jf  ^hou  shalt  do  this  thing,  God 
shall  strengthen  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  able  to  endure, 
and  all  this  peoj)lo  shall  also  go  to  their  place  in  ijcace. 
2^  So  Moses  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  his  father  in  law, 
and  did  all  that  he  had  said.  25  ^^^([  Moses  chose  able 
men  out  of  all  Israel,  and  made  them  heads  over  the 
people,  rulers  of  thousands,  rulers  of  hundreds,  rulers  of 
fifties,  and  rulers  of  tens.  26  \Yi(\.  they  judged  the  people 
at  all  seasons  :  the  hard  causes  they  brought  unto  ]\Ioses, 
but  every  small  matter  they  judged  themselves.  27  ^f  ^^Vnd 
Moses  let  his  father  in  laAV  depart ;  and  he  Avent  his  way 
into  his  own  land.  XIX.  ^  In  the  third  month  of  the 
going  forth  of  the  children  of  Israel  out  of  the  land  of 
Egypt,  the  same  day  came  they /y^^o  the  wilderness  of  Sinai. 


305 


view  is  that  the  thousands,  hundreds,  fifties, 
and  tens  import  only  greater  and  smaller 
families,  and  are  no  numerical  guides  at  all. 
On  his  support  of  this  view  from  Deut.  i.  15, 
see  there.)  Either  the  words  of  vv.  24,  25 
must  not  he  taken  literally,  and  must  mean 
only  that  the  principle  was  generally  fol- 
lowed, or  the  subsequent  arrangement  men- 
tioned in  Num.  xi.  16,  ff.,  as  prescribed  by 
God  Himself,  may  have  been  a  remedy  pro- 
posed for  the  inconveniences  of  this  present 
system.  See  notes  there.  It  is  also  some- 
what surprising  that  in  a  congregation, 
which  so  frequently  and  largely  manifested 
a  rebellious  and  murmuring  spirit,  so  large 
a  number  should  have  been  found  possessing 
the  high  qualifications  here  specified.  Yet 
it  would  appear  from  the  subsequent  nar- 
rative that  the  number  of  those  thus  ap- 
pointed must  have  been  very  considerable, 
for  in  Num.  xxv.  5  we  find  Moses  com- 
manding "■all  the  jud(jcs  of  Israel"  to  slay 
those  who  were  joined  to  Baal-peor.  23.] 

The  rendering  given  of  this  verse  is  that  of 
the  LXX.,  approved  by  Geseuiusand  others, 
and  seems  best  to  suit  the  context.  If 
■we  follow  that  of  the  A.V.  the  meaning  will 
be,  "  If  thou  do  this,  and  it  meet  uith  the 


Divine  approval,"  &c.  to  their  place] 

i.  e.  to  Canaan,  the  spot  for  which  they  are 
bound.     On  vv.  24,  25,  sec  above. 
27.]  jMidian  was  no  part  of  the  Sinaitic  dis- 
trict, hut  a  land  by  itself.    See  on  ch.  ii.  15, 
and  Num.  x.  30. 

XIX.  Arrival  at  Sinai,  and  2}>'epai-ation 
for  the  covenant.  Vv.  I,  2  contain,  as 
is  found  so  often  in  this  book,  two  concur- 
rent accounts  of  the  same  matter.  The 
former  part  of  ver.  2  connects  with  cb. 
xvii.  1,  and  is  repeated  in  the  enumeration 
in  Num.  xxxiii.  15,  but  is  a  chronological 
notice,  of  the  same  character  as  those  in  ch. 
xii.  41,  51 ;  xvi.  1.  In  the  specification,  in 
the  third  month,  ....  the  same  day,  it 
is  uncertain  wliat  day  of  tlie  nionlh  is  nn  ant. 
Knubel  and  Keil  maintain  tliat  the  same 
day  means  only  at  that  time,  in  tliat  month, 
and  that  no  nearer  date  is  here  given,  citing 
for  this  the  specifications  of  time  in  Num. 
ix.  1 ;  XX.  1,  where  however  no  mention  of 
da>j  is  made.  Kalisch  renders,  //;  the  third 
neio  moon,  hut  Ilengstenberg  ami  Keil  have 
shewn  that  the  Hebrew  word  is  nowhere  in 
the  Pentateucli  used  in  this  sense,  nor  indeed 
necessarily  anywhere  else.  Lut  it  must  l)c 
acknowledged    that,    irrespectively   of   any 

X 


306 


EXODUS. 


XIX. 


2  And  they  departed   from   Rephldim,  and  came  to  the 
wilderness  of  Sinai,  and  encamped  in  tlie  wilderness  ;  and 


question  about  the  import  of  the  word,  the 
gpneral  inference  would  seem  to  be  that 
the  same  day  would  imply  the  very  day 
that  it  began  to  be  the  third  month,  i.  e. 
the  first  day  of  the  month.  2.]  This 

verse  raises  the  whole  question  of  the  lo- 
cality of  Sinai  and  the  place  of  the  encamp- 
ment.* In  discussing  this,  we  may  per- 
haps be  permitted  to  set  aside  at  once,  as 
not  fulfilling  the  Egyptian  conditions  of  the 
problem,  the  hypothesis  which  would  place 
Mount  Sinai  much  further  east  in  Arabia, 
and  would  make  the  eastern  arm,  the  pre- 
sent Gulf  of  Akaba,  the  Red  Sea  of  the 
Israelites'  passage.  The  spot  of  that  passage 
was  only  three  days'  journey  removed  from 
their  starting-point  in  Egypt,  a  description 
which  cannot  possibly  answer  to  any  point  of 
the  Gulf  of  Akaba.  Assuming  then  that  the 
present  Gulf  of  Suez  is  the  "  Red  Sea  "  with 
which  we  have  to  deal,  we  have  to  seek  for 
]SIount  Sinai  in  the  triangular  piece  of  land 
which  divides  the  two  gulfs.  Now  there 
are  certain  conditions  which  any  assigned 
mountain  must  fulfil.  (1.)  It  must  be  easy 
of  approach,  and  have  before  it  a  space  large 
enough  for  the  children  of  Israel  to  as- 
semble. (2.)  It  must  be  a  prominent  moun- 
tain rising  abriiptly,  or  nearly  so,  from  the 
underlying  plain.  We  read  of  the  people 
standing  at  the  nether  part  of  the  mount 
(ch.  xix.  7).  It  must  also  have  been  ac- 
cessible from  that  plain,  since  hounds  were 
set  about  it  (ib.  23).  (3.)  There  must  have 
been  plentiful  supply  of  water  and  pasturage 
close  by. 

Now  of  the  mountains  within  the  piece  of 
land,  there  are  but  two  which  in  any  way 
come  up  to  these  conditions,  Jebel  Serbal 
and  Jebel  Miisa.  The  former  of  these  is  the 
most  imposing  feature  in  the  peninsula,  and 
of  itself  would  be  chosen  as  the  likeliest 
spot.  But  (1.)  It  is  not  visible  from  any 
point  of  the  valleys  which  surround  its  base. 
(2.)  The  two  valleys  (see  the  map),  Wadys 
Aleyat  and  Ajelah,  which  run  from  its 
base  to  Wady  Eeiran,  are  filled  with  boulders 
and  torrent  beds,  and  most  unsuitable  for 
a  large  encampment.     And  there  is  not,  as 

*  In  the  whole  of  the  following  note  I  have 
been  helped  by  Mr.  Holland's  article  on  the  re- 
cent "  Explorations  in  the  peninsula  of  Sinai." 


once  supposed,  any  plain  between  them ; 
on  the  contrary,  the  intervening  space  is  a 
chaos  of  rugged  mountains  intersected  by 
deep  ravines.  The  members  of  the  late 
Survey  Expedition  were  unanimous  against 
Jebel  Serbal  as  having  any  claims  to  be  the 
Sinai  of  the  Law. 

In  examining  Jebel  Musa,  they  found  as 
follows.  The  Ras  Sufsafeh,  forming  not  a 
distinct  mountain,  but  the  N.  portion  of 
Jebel  Miisa,  rises  up  precipitously  from  the 
bottom  of  the  plain  of  Er  Raheh  to  a  height 
of  about  2000  feet,  and  "  stands  out  in 
lovely  grandeur  against  the  sky  like  a  huge 
altar"  (Stanley).  It  is  bounded  by  Wady  el 
Deir,  "  the  Valley  of  the  Convent,"  on  the 
E. ;  Wady  Shuraich,  a  steep  and  rocky 
valley,  on  the  "W.  This  last  is  separated 
by  a  narrow  ridge  (Jebel  Fara)  from  "Wady 
Leja,  lying  still  further  W.  On  the  S.  two 
smaller  valleys  run  into  "Wady  Sebaiyeh 
and  separate  it  from  the  neighbouring  moun- 
tains. So  far,  the  conditions  seem  to  be 
fulfilled.  Some  have  advocated  the  south- 
ern and  highest  peak  of  Jebel  Miisa  as 
being  Sinai,  and  have  placed  the  encamp- 
ment in  "Wady  Sebaiyeh.  But  that  valley 
could  hardly  have  been  the  spot.  It  does 
not  lie  immediately  below  the  mountain,  i 
and  there  is  nowhere  extent  enough  for  the  I 
camp.  On  the  contrary,  the  plain  of  Er 
Raheh  is  the  most  suitable  spot  imaginable 
for  the  assembling  of  many  thousands  of 
people.  It  is  upwards  of  two  miles  long 
and  half  a  mile  broad.  It  slopes  (contrary 
to  the  statement  hitherto  made)  towards 
the  foot  of  the  mountain,  at  about  300  yards 
from  which  there  runs  across  the  plain  a 
low  semicircular  mound  forming  a  kind  of 
natural  theatre,  while  further  distant  on 
either  side  of  the  plain  the  slopes  of  the 
enclosing  mountains  would  afford  seats  to 
an  almost  unlimited  number  of  spectators. 
"The  members  of  our  expedition,"  says  Mr. 
Holland,  "  were  as  unanimous  in  their  con- 
viction that  the  Law  was  given  from  Ras 
Sufsafeh  to  the  Israelites  assembled  in  the 
plain  of  Es  Raheh,  as  they  had  been  unani- 
mous in  rejecting  Serbal  as  the  mount  of 
giving  the  Law."  Particulars  are  afterwards 
adduced  respecting  the  possible  enlargement 
of  the  encampment  into  a  ncighbouiing  val- 


2—7. 


EXODUS. 


307 


there  Israel  encamped  before  the  mount.     3  ^^d  Moses 
I  went  up  unto  f  God,  and  Jkhoa  ah  called  unto  him  out  of  + 
!  the  mountain,  sajang,  Thus  shalt  thou  say  to  the  house  of 
Jacob,  and  tell  the  children  of  Israel ;  ^  Ye  have  seen  what 
I  did  unto  the  Egyptians,  and  hoic  I  bare  you  on  "eagles'  • 
Avings,  and  brought  you  unto  myself.     ^  ^^^^  therefore,  if 
ye  will  obey  my  voice  indeed,  and  keep  my  covenant,  then 
ye  shall  be  a  ^peculiar  treasure  unto  me  above  all  people :  »> 
for  all  the  earth  is  mine :  ^  and  ye  shall  be  unto  me  a 
kingdom  of  priests,  and  an  holy  nation.     These  are  the 
words  which  thou  shalt  speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel. 
7   ^  And  Moses  came  and  called   for  the  elders   of  the 


nput.xxviil. 
4U;  XXIII.  II, 
\'i.    'i  Sum.  i. 


31,  al. 

Deut.  Tii.  8: 
xiv.  2;  xxvi. 
IH.  I  CliKin. 
XX  ix.  3.  St'C 
Keel.  ii.  8. 
AIno  \.v\.  XX. 
W.  l'». 
cxxxv.  4. 


ley  at  the  mouth  of  Wady  Leiffa,  and  shew- 
ing that  there  is  no  spot  in  tlie  peninsuhi  so 
well  supplied  with  water  as  the  neiglibour- 
hood  of  Jehel  Milsa.  This  point  being 
considered  as  fixed,  the  whole  route  has  to 
be  arranged  accordingly,  and  this  has  been 
dune  approximately  by  the  recent  survey,  in 
a  manner  wliich  I  have  in  the  main  fol- 
lowed through  the  preceding  cliaptcrs. 
3.]  Moses  knew  before  tlie  Exodus  that  the 
people  would  worship  God  upon  tliis  moun- 
tain (ch.  iii.  12).  Hither  then  he  liad  led 
them,  and  on  his  arrival  had  gone  up  to  the 
Divine  Presence.  Keil  suggests  that  the 
cloudy  pillar  may  have  witlidrawn  itself  to 
the  mountain.  However  this  may  have 
been,  doubtless  Moses  had  received  an  inti- 
mation in  obedience  to  which  he  went  up. 
He  docs  not  appear  at  first  to  have  ap- 
proached the  summit,  nor  as  yet  had  God 
descended  on  Mount  Sinai.  ,  The  Divine 
Presence  was  withdrawn  into  the  fastnesses 
of  the  mountain,  and  from  thence  Jehovah 
called  to  him.  the  house  of  Jacob] 

This  is  the  only  place  in  the  rentateuch 
where  Israel  is  so  called.  This  first  utterance 
of  Jehovah  from  Sinai  opens  by  reminding 
Israel  of  His  deliverance,  and  promising 
them  special  adoption  as  His  people,  on  con- 
dition of  obedience.  on  eagles'  wings] 
The  eagle  is  swift  and  vigorous  of  tliglit, 
and  more  than  other  birds  careful  for  the 
flying  and  the  safety  of  its  young :  see  retf. 
The  bird  is,  strictly  speaking,  not  the  eagle, 
but  the  griffon  {gnjps  fulvus),  the  great 
vulture :  see  Dr.  Tristram's  account,  Nat. 
Hist,  of  Bible,  p.  172,  if.  The  most  inter- 
esting of  the  retf.  is  that  in  Deut.  xxxii.  11, 


12,  where  the  pertinency  of  this  comparison 
is  shewn  by  Moses,  in  an  enlarged  treatment 
of  tlie  similitude.  unto  myself,  i.  e.  to 

Mount  Sinai,  where  was  God's  earllily  dwell- 
ing-place. In  Rev.  xii.  4  this  similitude  is 
referred  to,  where  were  given  to  the  woman 
the  two  icings  of  the  great  eagle,  that  she 
might  fiy  into  the  toildeiixess.  It  has  been 
remarked  that  the  similitude  is  of  interest 
as  mentioned  by  Moses,  seeing  that  in  Ejrypt 
the  gritl'on  vulture  was  sacred  to  tlie  goddess 
of  maternity.  5.]  This  verse  is  much 

alluded  to  in  the  N.  T.,  and  the  expressions 
used  in  it  of  Israel  applied  to  the  Christian 
Church.  See  Acts  xx.  28 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  20 ; 
vii.  23  ;  Eph.  i.  14  ;  Titus  ii.  14  ;  1  Tet.  ii. 
9.  The  expression  here,  a  peculiar  treasure, 
is  literally  a  hoard  or  treasure  specially  set 
aside.  See  the  same  form  of  expression  in 
retf,,  where  equivalent  descriptions  are  given 
of  Israel.  This  Israel  was  to  be,  not  because 
Jehovah  was  their  national  God  and  not  the 
God  of  other  nations  also ;  but  inasmuch  as 
all  the  earth  is  His,  He  chooses  out  of  all 
the  nations  Israel  to  be  in  an  especial  man- 
ner His.  And  this  is  further  expanded  in 
ver.  11,  by  saying  that  tliey  sliould  be  to 
God  a  kingdom  of  priests,  i.  c.  a  realm  the 
denizens  of  which,  compared  to  the  rest  of 
mankind,  were  to  be  as  tlie  priests  compared 
to  the  rest  of  a  nation  ;  in  other  words,  an 
holy  nation.  See  again  St.  Peter's  use  of 
these  words  1  Pet.  ii.  o,  where  he  follows 
up  the  figure  of  prie-thood.  The  expression 
is  found  in  the  0.  T.  only  here.  On  the 
holiness  of  the  nation  and  those  in  it,  sec  ch. 
xxii.  31 ;  Deut.  xiv.  21  ;  Isa.  Ixii.  12.  We 
may  observe  that  these  words  contain  the 


308 


EXODTJS. 


XIX. 


c  Gen.  xxxvii. 
U.  Deut.  1.' 
32,  35.  Josh. 
xxii.  32. 

dPs.  xviii.  11, 

,  ff. ;  civ,  3.  Isa. 

xix.  1 ;  xxix. 


e  1  Sam.  xx.  36, 
37.  Ps.  xi  2. 
3  Kings  xiii. 
7,  al.  ' 


people,  and  laid  before  them  all  tliese  words  wliicli  Jeho- 
vah commanded  him.  8  ^^d  all  the  people  answered  to- 
gether, and  said.  All  that  Jehovah  hath  spoken  we  will 
do.  And  Moses  '^brought  again  the  words  of  the  people 
unto  Jehovah.  ^  ^^(j  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses,  Lo,  I 
come  unto  thee  in  a  '^  thick  cloud,  that  the  people  may  hear 
when  I  speak  Avith  thee,  and  believe  thee  for  ever.  And 
Moses  told  the  words  of  the  fteople  unto  Jehovah.  ^^ 
^  And  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses,  Go  unto  the  people,  and 
sanctify  them  to  day  and  to  morrow,  and  let  them  wash 
their  clothes,  ^^  and  be  ready  against  the  third  day :  for 
the  third  day  Jehovah  will  come  down  in  the  sight  of  all 
the  people  upon  mount  Sinai.  ^^  And  thou  shalt  set  bounds 
unto  the  people  round  about,  saying,  Beware  to  yourselves, 
of  going  up  into  the  mount,  or  touching  the  border  of  it : 
whosoever  toucheth  the  mount  shall  be  surely  put  to  death : 
^^  there  shall  not  an  hand  touch  him,  but  he  shall  be 
stoned  with  stones,  or  ^shot  with  a  dart;  whether  beast 


whole  substance  of  God's  spiritual  covenant 
with  Israel,  and  are  among  the  most  import- 
ant in  the  whole  history.  7.]  before 
them,  literally,  as  A.  V.,  before  their  faces, 
but  there  is  no  need  here  rather  than  else- 
where to  express  tliis  common  idiom. 
8.]  This  was  the  acceptance  of  the  covenant 
by  the  people,  Moses  acting  strictly  as  me- 
diator  or   go-between    in   the   transaction. 
And  this  his  mediatorship  was   to  be  sub- 
stantiated   (ver.    9)    by    the    speaking    of 
Jehovah,  present  in  the  darkness  of  a  cloud, 
with  Moses,  and  the  people  hearing.     Then 
they  would  believe  for  ever  in  the  Divine 
mission  and  authority  of  Moses.     This  sub- 
stantiation of  the  mission  of  Moses  was  to 
extend  to  the  people's  hearing  not  of  the 
whole  law,  but  only  of  the  ten  command- 
ments, for  these  only   Jehovah  spake,  and 
added  no  more.  Dent.  v.  22  ;  see  also  ch.  xx. 
18,  20.     The  darkness  of  clouds  is  the  ac- 
customed investiture  of  the  Divine  presence, 
see  reff.     The  repetition  of  the  notice  that 
Moses  told  the  people's  words  to  Jehovah 
would  almost  look  as  if  a  mention  of  Moses 
having  conveyed  God's  last  announcement 
to  them  and  their  answer  had  dropped  out. 
10 — 13.]    Formal  precautio7is  to  be 
taken  in  preparation  for  the'manifestation  of 
God.    The  people  were  to  be  sanctified,  as 


was  the  household  of  Jacob,  Gen.  xxxv,  2. 
Minute  regulations  for  lustral  washings  are 
given  in  Levit.  xv.  5,  &c.  They  were  very 
much  used  in  Egypt,  and  were  doubtless 
generally  known  in  their  ceremonial  use  in 
Israel.  12.]    By  what  follows  in  ver. 

23  it  appears  that  this  command  of  setting 
bounds  was  meant  of  placing  a  material  fence 
around  the  bottom  of  the  actual  rise  of  Sinai, 
so  that  tlie  people  could  not  break  through. 
13.]  None  were  to  share  his  crime  by 
approaching  to  touch  him,  but  he  was  to  be 
put  to  death  from  a  distance,  either  by  ston- 
ing or  by  a  cast  of  a  javelin  or  arrow.  The 
literal  words  are,  by  stoning  he  shall  be 
stoned,  or  by  shooting  shall  be  shot.  The 
last  clause  is  not  without  dithculty.  The 
LXX.  has  an  extraordinary  translation : 
"  when  the  voices  and  the  trumpets  and  the 
cloud  have  departed  from  the  mountain," 
they  shall  go  up  upon  the  mountain. 
And  similarly  the  Targum  of  Onkelos,  but 
without  the  additions  ■.  and  the  old  Sp'iac, 
"when  the  trumpet  shall  be  silent."  This 
shews  that  the  difficulty  was  felt,  and  a 
various  reading  devised  to  meet  it.  For  ac- 
cording to  the  narrative,  ver.  16,  the  trumpet 
sounded  and  the  people  came  out  and  stood 
on  the  nether  part  of  the  mount,  before  God 
spoke  in  their  hearing  with  Moses.     The 


S-19. 


EXODUS. 


309 


or  rmm,  it  shall  not  live  :  when  the  trumpet  soundcth  lonj^, 
lliey  shall  come  up  into  the  moimt.  ^*  %  And  Moses  went 
down  from  the  mount  unto  the  people,  and  sanctified  the 
]>(>ople;  and  they  Avashed  their  clothes.  ^'^  And  he  said 
unto  the  peoj)le,  Be  ready  against  the  third  day:  come 
not  near  a  woman.  ^^  ^  And  it  came  to  pass  on  the  third 
day  in  the  morning,  that  there  were  thunders  and  light- 
nings, and  a  thick  cloud  upon  the  mount,  and  the  voice 
of  the  trumpet  exceeding  loud  ;  so  that  all  the  people  that 
n-as  in  the  camp  trembled.  ^7  And  Moses  brought  forth 
the  people  out  of  the  camp  to  meet  with  God ;  and  they 
stood  at  the  nether  part  of  the  mount,  ^^  And  mount 
Sinai  was  altogether  on  a  smoke,  because  Jehovah  de- 
scended upon  it  in  fire:  and  the  '"smoke  thereof  ascended  fCc 
as  the  smoke  of  a  furnace,  and  the  whole  mount  quaked 
greatly.     ^^  And  when  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  sounded 


difficulty  consists  in  the  same  term  being 
used  in  the  command  at  the  end  of  the  verse 
as  had  been  used  in  the  prohibition  in  ver. 
12.  These  two  actions  are  the  same,  that  of 
going  up  into  the  mount.  They  were  not  to 
do  it  under  pain  of  death,  but  when  the 
trumpet  sounded  long,  they  were  to  do  it. 
It  would  be  an  injunction  of  no  import  to 
order  them  to  come  up,  as  Knobel  agrees 
with  the  LXX.,  &c.,  in  supposing,  after  the 
Divine  manifestations  were  over.  These 
lasted  many  weeks,  and  these  words  mani- 
festly relate  to  something  to  be  done  by  the 
people  during  this  present  day's  events.  I 
cannot  solve  the  difficulty.  Keil  supposes 
that  when  the  trumpet  gave  the  signal,  jMoses 
brought  the  people  out  of  'their  boundary 
and  up  the  lower  hills.  This  agrees  well 
with  a  i}rimd  facie  view  of  the  narrative  of 
vv.  IG,  17,  but  does  not  satisfy  the  identity  of 
the  terms  noticed  above,  nor  indeed  ver.  23. 
trumpet]  "  loi^e/,  a  joyful  sound,  y»6J- 
lum  :  thence  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  which 
was  used  to  announce  the  jubilee ;  perhaps 
connected  with  the  same  root  as  Jubal,  Gen. 
iv.  21.  The  word  here  used  is  different  from 
that  in  ver.  16,  19."  Bp.  "Wordsworth. 
14,  15.]  On  the  conclusion  of  ver. 
1.5,  see  Levit.  xv.  16—18.  16.]  thun- 

ders, literally  voices  :  see  ch.  ix.  23,  ff.  It 
is  added,  Deut.  iv.  11,  that  "  the  mountain 
burned  with  f  re  unto  the  heart  of  heaven." 
This  was  the   descent  of   God,  announced 


ver.  9.  Knobel  remarks,  "  As  God  enters 
Jerusalem  in  the  ark  with  shouts  and  blow- 
ing of  trumpets  (2  Sam.  vi.  15;  Ps.  xlvii. 
6;  Ixviii.  18,  f.),  so  lie  appears  on  Sinai, 
accompanied  by  angels  (see  the  LXX. 
Deut.  xxxiii.  2  ['  and  the  angels  with 
Him']).  Similar  is  the  announcement  of 
the  INIessiah  at  Ilis  coming  being  accom- 
panied by  angels,  and  one  ot  them  blowing 
the  trumpet  (Matt.  xvi.  27;  xxv.  31;  1 
Thess.  iii.  13  ;  iv.  16)."  17.]  It  would 

appear  as  if  the  people  had  been  hitherto 
restrained  within  their  camp,  and  now  were 
brought  (not  all  of  them,  but  naturally  a 
chosen  portion  only)  out  of  the  camp  to  the 
bounds  which  had  been  set  around  the  mount, 
ver.  23.  These  bounds  were  on  the  lower 
portion  of  the  mount  itself,  so  that  the  people 
could  stand  outside  tliem  and  yet  be  at  the 
nether  part  of  the  mount.  But  this  ex- 
planation does  notremovc  the  dilliculty  above 
stated,  on  ver.  13.  18.]  See  I's.  xviii. 

7—13  ;  Heb.  xii.  18—20.  19.]  Moses 

enquired  the  Divine  pleasure,  and  God  an- 
swered him  by  a  voice,  i.  e.  spoke  His 
commands  plainly  in  the  hearing  of  the 
people :  those  being  the  ten  command- 
ments, which  follow,  ch.  xx.  1.  That  these 
arc  intended,  and  not  a  separate  and  pre- 
liminary voice,  the  whole  context,  and  the 
parallel  account  in  Deut.  v.,  prove.  But 
between  ver.  19  and  the  consecutive  words 
in  ch.  XX.  1  comes  in  another,  and  subsidiary 


310 


EXODUS. 


XIX. 


long,  and  waxed  louder  and  louder,  Moses  spake,  and  God 
answered  him  by  a  voice.  20  ^^d  Jehovah  came  down 
upon  mount  Sinai,  on  the  top  of  the  mount :  and  Jehovah 
called  Moses  iq)  to  the  top  of  the  mount ;  and  Moses  went 
up.  21  ^12^  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses,  Go  down,  charge 
the  people,  lest  they  break  through  unto  Jehovah  to  gaze, 
and  many  of  them  perish.  22  ^^^  \q^  ^]jg  priests  also, 
which  come  near  to  Jehovah,  sanctify  themselves,  lest 
Jehovah  break  forth  upon  them.  23  ^^i  Moses  said 
unto  Jehovah,  The  people  cannot  come  up  to  mount 
Sinai :  for  thou  chargedst  us,  saying.  Set  bounds  about  the 
mount,  and  sanctify  it.  24  j^^^^  Jehovah  said  unto  him. 
Away,  get  thee  down,  and  thou  shalt  come  up,  thou,  and 
Aaron  with  thee :  but  let  not  the  priests  and  the  people 
break  through  to  come  up  unto  Jehovah,  lest  he  break 
forth  upon  them.  25  gQ  Moses  went  down  unto  the  people, 
and  said  it  unto  them.     XX.  l  And  God  spake  all  these 


account  of  the  descent  of  God  on  Sinai,  and 
of  the  limitation  of  the  people,  and  of  the 
command  to  Moses  to  come  up  with  Aaron, 
ending  with  the  notice  that  Moses  went 
down  to  the  people,  and  spoke  to  them ; 
after  which  the  spoken  commands  of  God 
in  ch.  XX.  come  in  abruptly  and  inconsecu- 
tively.  This  seems  the  only  way  of  under- 
standing the  insertion  of  vv.  20 — 25. 
20.]  This  coming  down  of  God  has  (see 
above)  been  already  related,  vv.  16,  if.  The 
going  up  of  Moses  to  the  top  of  the  mount 
does  not  seem  in  the  order  of  things  to  have 
taken  place  till  later,  see  ch.  xx.  21.  And 
the  warning  of  ver.  21,  ff.,  is  in  a  measure 
correspondent  to  that  of  vv.  12,  13.  Yer. 
23  comes  in  rather  curiously,  and  would 
almost  seem  to  refer  to  some  command  not 
hitherto  related,  for  we  have  had  no  order 
from  God  to  set  bounds  about  the  mount, 
or  to  sanctify  it.  The  verse  is  a  reminis- 
cence of  ver.  12,  and  represents  the  same 
facts,  but  is  otherwise  expressed,  and  as  the 
same  narrator  could  hardly  have  given  it. 

21.]  For  it  is  death  to  man  to  be- 
hold God:  see  Gen.  xvi.  13  ;  ch.  xxxiii.  20. 

22.]  Who  are  these  priests  ?  ^Ye 
have  in  the  narrative  no  mention  of  a  priest- 
hood before  ch.  xxviii.  1,  ff.,  where  Aaron 
and  his  sons  are  specially  devoted  to  the 
priestly  office.     The  persons  here  mentioned 


must  have  been  those,  whoever  they  were, 
that  exercised  the  office  before  that  appoint- 
ment was  made.  Priests  of  some  sort  there 
must  have  been  (see  ch.  xxiv.  5),  or  no 
sacrifice  could  ever  have  been  offered.  Pos- 
sibly they  were  the  first-born,  as  the  Jewish 
interpi-eters  think;  possibly  the  princes  of  the 
people,  as  others,  and  as  seems  perhaps  im- 
plied in  ver.  24,  "  thepriesfs  and  the  people," 
but  we  cannot  speak  with  certainty.  Wiio- 
ever  they  were,  they  were  to  sanctify 
(specially  purify)  themselves,  lest  Jehovah, 
being  Avroth  with  them,  visit  them  with 
vengeance.  Knobel  directs  attention,  as 
he  has  done  often  before,  to  the  charac- 
teristic anthropomorphism  of  this  paren- 
thetic narrative.  23.]  See  remarks 
on  ver.  13,  which  certainly  to  our  pre- 
sent understanding  seems,  unless  violence 
be  done  in  the  rendering  (as  in  A.  V.),  to  be 
hardly  in  agreement  with  this.  24.] 
The  Divine  response  takes  no  note  of  the 
reply  of  Moses  in  ver.  23,  but  reiterates  the 
command  to  charge  the  priests  and  the 
people  not  to  break  through.  25.]  After 
this,  Knobel  supposes  the  giving  of  the  De- 
calogue followed  in  this  narrative  also. 
Moses  went  down  to  the  people  and  abode 
with  them  while  God  spake  the  ten  com- 
mandments. He  is  with  the  people  at  the 
end  of  them,  ch.  xx.  19,  ff. 


20— XX.  2.  EXODUS. 

words,  saying,    2  I  af)^   Jehovah   tliy   God,  whlcli   liave 


311 


XX.  1 — 17.]  The  ten  commandments. 
It  would  much  cxccod  the  limits  of  a  general 
commentary  to  enter  upon  the  various  ques- 
tions respecting  tlie  Decalogue.  We  may 
briefly  state — 1.  llespeeting  the  two  reports 
of  it  contained  in  the  rentateuch,  viz.  here 
and  Deut.  v.  6 — 18 :  that  this  one  is  beyond 
all  (juestion  the  older  and  tiie  more  exact,  as 
will  be  shewn  in  the  notes  on  Deuteronomy. 
2.  Kespecting  the  division  into  command- 
ments :  that  while  it  is  evident  these  were 
ten  in  number,  "  the  ten  words,"  cli.  xxxiv. 
28  (see  also  Deut.  iv.  13  ;  x.  4),  no  division 
into  these  ten  is  suggested  anywhere  in  the 
sacred  text.  Consequently,  various  divisions 
have  been  current.  The  oldest  testimony  is 
found  in  Piiilo,  who  wrote  about  the  time  of 
our  Lord,  and  thus  divides :  (1)  Strange 
gods,  (2)  Images,  (3)  The  name  of  God, 
(4)  The  Sabbath,  (5)  Parents,  (G)  Adul- 
tery, (7)  Murder,  (8)  Theft,  (9)  False 
witness,  (10)  Covetousness.  With  this  Jo- 
sephus  agrees,  except  that  instead  of  follow- 
ing the  LXX,  in  the  order  of  (6)  and  (7),  he 
keeps  to  the  Hebrew  text,  which  is  the 
order  in  tlie  A.  V.  This  division  was  fol- 
lowed by  Calvin,  and  is  that  adopted  in  the 
Reformed  ChiU'ches  and  by  the  modern  Greek 
Catechism. 

The  next  important  division  is  that  which 
unites  into  one  commandment  vv.  3 — 6, 
and  divides  ver.  17  into  two.  This  has  no 
primitive  support  in  both  its  features,  al- 
though some  of  the  earliest  Fathers  seem  to 
have  made  vv.  3 — 6  one  commandment.  It 
is  iirst  found  in  its  completeness  in  Augus- 
tine, who  counts  ver.  17  as  two,  but  trans- 
poses the  order  of  the  opening  clauses  to 
that  found  in  Deut.  v.  21,  placing  the  neigh- 
bour's wife  before  his  house :  the  only  ar- 
rangement, be  it  noted,  which  can  even 
seem  to  justify  such  a  division  of  the  verse. 
The  Latin  Fathers  and  teachers  who  followed 
adopt  this  division,  and  it  is  that  of  the 
Roman  Catholics  and  of  the  Lutheran 
Church. 

A  third  division  is  that  which  regards 
ver.  2  as  the  Iirst  commandment,  vv.  3 — 6 
as  the  second,  and  ver.  17  as  the  tenth. 
This  is  found  mentioned  as  early  as  Cyril  of 
Alexandria  (Cent.  V.),  and  it  is  stated  as 
possible  by  Jerome.  It  is  also  left  as  possi- 
ble in  the  uncertain  earlier  arrangements  of 
Clement   of    Alexandi-ia    (Cent.    III.)    and 


others.  It  hns  had  considerable  support 
among  the  Taluiudical  writers  and  tho 
nudiicval  Kabbis. 

The  disputes  about  the  divisions  which 
follow  from  the  various  punctuation  of  our 
present  Hebrew  text  do  not  admit  of  notico 
in  this  commentary.  The  division  which 
most  commends  itself  to  us  is  tiic  first  men- 
tioned, provided  that  ver.  2,  the  statement 
of  tho  fact  that  Jehovah  is  the  God  of  Israel, 
and  of  His  great  deed  of  deliverance  of  Israel, 
be  included  in  the  first  commandment.  The 
division  of  ver.  17  into  two  commandments 
we  regard  as  altogether  illogical,  the  sin  for- 
bidden being  one  and  the  same,  towards 
whatever  possession  of  our  neighbour's  the 
desire  may  be.  On  the  other  band,  the  sin 
forbidden  in  ver.  3  is  not  identical  with  that 
forbidden  in  vv.  4,  5,  seeing  that  a  man  might 
have  other  gods  than  Jehovah  without  wor- 
shipping images. 

Another  question  occurs,  as  to  the  division 
of  the  ten  commandments  between  the  two 
tables  on  which  they  were  written  (ch.  xxiv. 
12;  xxxi.  18;  xxxii.  15,  19;  xxxiv.  1,  2, 
28;  Deut.  iv.  13;  v.  22;  ix.  10,  11).  And 
here  again  the  more  ancient  evidence  is  also 
the  more  trustworthy,  that  five  command- 
ments were  written  on  each  table,  lor  the 
form  and  distribution  of  the  Decalogue  itself 
support  such  a  division.  The  five  former 
commandments  prescribe  duties  towards  God 
and  parents,  the  giver  of  all  life  and  tho 
earthly  propagators  of  it ;  towards  those  set 
over  men  and  higher  than  them.  The  five 
latter  regard  conduct  towards  equals  and 
fellow-men.  The  former  enjoin  pieti/,  the 
latteT  pi'obity.  To  this  are  added  the  con 
siderations — (n)  That  to  each  of  the  former 
five  a  motive  is  attached :  to  none,  however, 
of  the  latter ;  (6)  That  in  each  of  the  five 
former  the  words  Jehovah  thy  God  occur, 
and  in  none  of  the  five  latter.  The  logicid 
connexion  of  the  commandments  will  be 
found  under  each  below.  It  is  only  left  to 
remark  that  it  is  not  without  reason  that 
the  Decalogue  holds  its  supcreminent  and 
exclusive  place  at  the  head  of  the  whole  law. 
Its  simple  but  comprehensive  ordinances  are 
the  foundation  of  all  that  follows ;  and 
hardly  anything  can  be  found  in  the  subse- 
quent expansion  of  the  Law  in  detail  which 
is  not  grounded  upon  or  derived  from  the 
Decalogue   itself.  2,   3.J    The  first 


312 


EXODUS. 


XX. 


brouglit  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of 
2  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  ^beside  me. 


gGen.xxxi.50.     Iionflmpn 
Ueut.  XIX.  9.       UUllUlUeii. 


*" &"''^'2 Kin4'  *  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  ^graven  image,  or 
icviii.  ^isa.  any  form  that  is  in  heaven  above,  or  that  is  in  the  earth 

IL  19,  »1.  -^ 

beneath,  or  that  is  in  the  water  under  the  earth :  '^  thou 
shalt  not  bow  down  thyself  to  them,  nor  ^  serve  them :  for 
I  Jehovah  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God,  visiting  the  iniquity 
of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and  fourth 
gc)ierafio)i  of  them  that  hate  me ;  ^  and  shewing  mercy 
unto  the  thousandth  generation  of  them  that  love  me,  and 


i  ch.  iii.  12. 
2  Kings  X.  18. 
Isa.  XIX.  21. 
Jer.  xliv.  3. 


coynmandment.  Jehovah  the  God  of  Israel 
to  be  held  the  only  God.  Knobel,  from  -vvhom 
much  that  has  preceded  is  derived,  makes 
ver.  2  alone  the  first  commandment.  The 
objection  to  this  is,  that  it  contains  no  com- 
mand, except  by  implication.  It  is  better  to 
regard  the  exclusive  holding  of  Jehovah  as 
God  as  the  first  commandment.  Again,  to 
regard  (as  Kcil  and  others)  ver.  2  as  a 
mere  introduction,  and  ver.  3  as  the  first 
commandment,  is  objectionable,  as  it  leaves 
the  first  without  a  ?notive,  and  thus  incom- 
mensurate with  the  others  of  the  first  table. 
The  motive  of  this  first  commandment  is  the 
deliverance  of  Israel  from  Egypt.  And  un- 
doubtedly this  same  motive  is  to  be  supplied 
from  this  first  in  the  four  remaining  com- 
mandments of  this  table,  where  "  Jehovah 
thy  God"  occurs.  no  Other  gods]  As, 

e.  g.,  the  host  of  heaven  (Deut.  iv.  19) :  the 
gods  of  the  heathen  nations  (ch.  xxiii.  24), 
whose  very  names  were  not  to  be  mentioned 
(ch.  xxiii.  13).  beside  me]  Such  is  the 

generally  received  interpretation,  and  not  as 
A.  v.;  ''^before  me,"  i.e.  "m  7ny  presence," 
is  possible,  but  does  not  seem  so  well  to  suit 
ver.  23.  In  our  Liturgical  Decalogue  we 
have  but  me,  which  expresses  the  right 
meaning.  The  commandment,  as  also  all 
those  which  are  expressed  negatively  in  form 
of  prohibition,  implies  the  opposite  corre- 
sponding duty,  in  this  case  that  detailed  in 
Deut.  vi.  4,  5. 

4 — 6.]  The  second  cominandme7it.  Pro- 
hibition of  image  worship.  The  motive  of 
this  commandment  is  the  jealousy  of  God, 
not  allowing  the  outward  payment  of  wor- 
ship due  to  Him  to  be  given  to  another  than 
Himself.  Knobel's  objection  that  unless 
we  unite  ver.  3  to  this  commandment,  the 
motive,  which  reaUy  belongs  to  ver.  3  as 


much  as  to  ver.  4,  will  be  detached  from 
that  verse,  will  prove  too  much,  for  that 
motive  belongs  just  as  much  to  ver.  2,  the 
exclusiveness  of  God's  right  to  Israel's  wor- 
ship being  implicitly  asserted  there  also. 
And  it  must  also  be  remembered  that  by 
this  commandment,  not  so  much  the  having 
other  gods  is  forbidden  as  the  worship  of 
Jehovah  Himself  by  means  of  images.  Ihat 
this  is  so  is  evident  from  Deut.  iv.  15, 
where  the  ground  of  this  prohibition  is 
stated  as  being  that  they  saw  no  form  when 
Jehovah  spoke  to  them.  The  various  kinds 
of  forms  are  also  in  that  passage  explained. 
Those  in  heaven  above  are  (the  stars  and 
host  of  heaven,  and)  birds ;  those  in  the 
earth  beneath  men  and  beasts  and  land  rep- 
tiles ;  those  in  the  water  under  the  earth 
fishes   and   water    reptiles.  5.]    The 

bowing  down  is  in  prayer ;  the  serving,  in 
sacrifice,  see  relf.  Keil  remarks  well,  that 
the  latter  part  of  ver.  5  and  ver.  6  apply 
to  the  first  and  second  commandments  alike 
(see  argument  against  Knobel  above).  Je- 
hovah is  jealous  (Deut.  vi.  lo)  as  Israel's 
only  God,  and  will  not  sufi'er  the  transfer  of 
His  honour  to  another:  see  ch.  xxxiv.  14 ;  He 
is  jealous  as  a  spirit,invisible  by  man,  and  will 
not  sufler  that  His  invisible  glory  to  be  trans- 
ferred to  material  figures :  see  Rom.  i.  23 ; 
Isa.  xlii.  8;  xlviii.  11.  The  third  genera- 
tion is  taken  by  some  as  the  grandchildren, 
by  others  as  the  great  grandchildren.  The 
latter  seems  most  probable,  see  ch.  xxxiv.  7. 
6.]  JS'ot  "  MM<o  thousands,"  as  the 
A.  v.,  but  as  in  the  text,  as  is  evident  from 
Deut.  vii.  9.  In  Hebrew,  the  same  word 
serves  as  the  cardinal  and  ordinal  number 
in  the  case  of  a  thousand.  The  extension 
of  God's  mercy  vastly  exceeds  that  of  his 
wrath.     It  is  hardly  worth  mentioning,  as 


3—10. 


EXODUS. 


313 


keep  my  commandments.  7  Thou  slialt  not  Jtake  the  iiaino  ' 'Nu"'"i!ii.7, 
of  Jehovah  thy  God  ^in  vain;  for  Jehovah  will  not 
^hokl  him  guiltless  that  takcth  his  name  in  vain.  '^  '"Re- 
member the  sabbath  daj^,  to  keep  it  holy.  9  Six  days  shalt 
thou  labour,  and  do  all  thy  work :  i^  jj^t  the  seventh  day 
shall  be  rest  unto  Jeho-wvh  thy  God :  thou  shalt  not  do 


>■•.  Ixxxl.  3; 

rxxxix.  'M. 
klV  111.  J,. 

xh.  (I; 

cxxxlx.20. 

lu.  lix.  «. 
Ich.  ixxiv.7. 
1  kinK>  ti.  9. 

Job  IX.  iH.X. 

u    r>.  xix. 

13.  Jcr.  XXX. 


plain  to  all,  tlaat  the  art  of  sculpture  is  not 
forbidden  by  this  coniinandmeiit,  nor  indeed 
the  practice  of  sculpture  for  religious  uses 
of  decoration,  kc,  seeing  it  was  prescribed 
to  Moses  (eh.  xxv.  18;  xxvi.  31;  Num. 
xxi.  9),  and  practised  by  Solomon  with  tlie 
Divine  approval  (1  Kings  vii.  25,  fF. ;  com- 
pare viii.  16).  What  is  forbidden  is  the 
use  of  any  such  images  as  assistants  to  or 
vehicles  of  worship.  The  oniinary  practice 
of  the  Romish  Church  is  in  direct  violation 
of  this  commandment,  and  they  accordingly 
omit  it  from  their  Decalogue  in  their  author- 
ized catechism,  being  afraid  to  teach  it  to 
their  people. 

7.]  The  third  commandment.  Prohi- 
bition of  2}rofime  use  of  the  name  of  God. 
Some,  among  whom  is  Kalisch,  regard  this 
commandment  as  directed  only  against  per- 
jury :  but  it  manifestly  is  of  far  wider  ex- 
tent. The  verb  rendered  take  means  to 
take  up  or  lift  up ;  it  is  applied  in  retf.  to 
raising  or  uttering  a  false  rumour,  to  taking 
up  a  parable,  to  blowing  up  a  trumpet,  to 
lifting  up  a  prayer.  Hence  we  may  deduce, 
tliat  it  is  here  equivalent  to  uttering,  raising 
up  out  of  silence  into  speech.  Some  have 
supposed  the  words  rendered  in  vain  to 
mean/o/  a  lie,  so  as  to  sanction  or  bear  wit- 
ness to  a  falsehood.  Doubtless  this  would 
be  one,  and  a  very  marked,  way  of  breaking 
the  commandment ;  but  the  signification  of 
the  words  is  far  wider,  being,  into  empti- 
ness or  waste :  see  reft".,  in  all  of  which  it 
is  rendered  vanity.  The  meaning  of  the 
prohibition  is  as  commonly  understood,  that 
the  name  of  Jehovah  is  not  to  be  invoked, 
nsed,  uttered  to  no  purpose,  unadvisedly, 
lightly,  or  wantonly,  much  less  to  sanction 
untruth.  By  the  last  clause  of  the  verse  a 
connexion  is  established  with  the  last  com- 
mandment, where  there  is  mention  of  the 
visiting  of  guilt.  The  word  used  is  a  re- 
markable one,  the  root  signifying  purifica- 
tion by  sacrifice :  Jehovah  will  not  purify, 
absolve,  reckon  as  innocent :  see  relf.,  where 
the  Ilebrew  word  occurs  in  the  same  sense. 


cli.  xiii.  3. 

8  — 11,]  The  fourth  oommandment.  Ob- 
servance of  the  Sabbath  day.  The  first 
word  of  this  commandment,  remember,  has 
been  imagined  to  presuppose  a  foreknow- 
ledge of  the  ordinance  here  formally  en- 
joined, liut  the  expression,  especially  as 
qualified  by  the  following,  to  keep  it  holy, 
hardly  carries  so  much  as  this.  The  day 
was  to  be  remembered  for  the  sake  of  being 
kept  holy,  i.  c.  was  to  be  thought  of  and 
observed  on  its  weekly  recurrence,  not 
neglected  and  forgotten.  In  other  words, 
memory  enjoined  is  not  so  much  of  the  past, 
as  in  the  future :  forget  not  to  keep  holy 
the  sabbath  day  :  see  reff.  In  Deut.  v.  12 
the  equivalent  word  to  this  Eemember  has 
no  trace  of  memory  of  the  past,  but  imports 
exactly  as  we  have  here  interpreted,  "  ob- 
serve," "  keep."  The  fact,  that  the  special 
honour  of  the  seventh  day  dated  from  the 
Creation,  remains :  but  it  can  hardly  be 
alluded  to  in  these  words  as  they  now  stand. 
The  institution  of  the  Sabbath  had  been 
first  formally  brought  before  Israel  by  the 
doubling  of  the  manna  on  the  sixth  day,  see 
on  ch.  xvi.  22,  if. ;  and  with  this  view  Deut. 
V.  15  also  agrees,  where  the  Exodus  is  ex- 
pressly assigned  as  the  reason  of  the  in- 
junction to  keep  the  Sabbath.  In  Deut.  v. 
12,  16,  the  words,  '^  as  Jehovah  thy  God 
commanded  thee,"  are  added  to  this  and 
to  the  first  clause  of  the  next  commandment: 
sec  there.  The  keeping  it  holy  is  after- 
wards explained.  9.]  This  verse  is 
not  an  absolute  command,  as  some  have 
treated  it,  to  devote  every  day  but  the 
Sabbath  to  work,  for  thus  it  would  have 
been  contradicted  by  the  Law  itself,  which 
prescribed  days  of  rest  which  were  not 
Sabbaths,  liut  it  is  a  command  for  the 
sake  of  the  exception  which  is  to  follow ;  in 
the  secondary  and  background  of  the  com- 
mandment, not  in  its  front  and  main  regard. 

10.]  The  seventli  day,  on  the  contrary, 
shall  be  rest  unto  Jeiiovah,  sec  ch.  xvi. 
23.  It  is  far  better  here  to  keep  the  mean- 
ing of  the  Ilebrew  Sabbath,  rather  than 


314 


EXODUS. 


XX. 


# 


any  work,  thou  and  tliy  son  and  tliy  daugliter,  thy  man- 
servant and  thy  maidservant  and  thy  beast,  and  thy 
stranger  that  is  within  thy  gates  :  ^^  for  in  six  days  Jeho- 
vah made  heaven  and  earth,  the  sea,  and  all  that  in  them 
is,  and  rested  the  seventh  day  :  wherefore  Jehovah  blessed 
the  sabbath  day,  and  hallowed  it.  ^^  ^  Honour  thy  father 
and  thy  mother :  that  thy  days  may  be  long  upon  the 
land  which  Jehovah  thy  God  giveth  thee.  ^^  Thou  shalt 
not  kill.     14  Thou  shalt  not   commit  adultery.     ^^  Thou 


the  technical  term  Sabbath,  for  thus  we 
have  the  exception  set  both  in  contrast  to 
the  work  which  has  preceded,  and  in  con- 
nexion with  Jehovah's  rest,  which  follows. 
The  persons  included  in  the  prohibition  are 
divided  by  the  absence  of  the  copulative 
before  thy  manservant,  into  two  classes  : 
(1.)  The  family  of  the  house,  (2.)  All  be- 
longing to  it.  The  gates  within  which  the 
stranger  is  are  those  of  the  city  or  village, 
see  Deut.  xiv.  21,  not  the  doors  of  the 
private  house.  The  general  character  of 
this  prohibition  is  illustrated  in  detail  in 
many  subsecjuent  places,  as  e.  g.  with  refer- 
ence to  field-work,  ch.  xxxiv.  21 ;  to  wine- 
pressing  and  merchandise-making,  Neh.  xiii. 
15 ;  to  bearing  burdens,  Jcr.  xvii.  21 ;  to 
buying  and  selling  generally,  Amos  viii.  5  ; 
to  gathering  wood.  Num.  xv.  32,  ff. ;  to 
lighting  fires  in  private  houses,  ch.  xxxv. 
3.  On  the  addition  in  Deut.  (v.  14),  see 
there,  and  on  ch.  xxiii.  12.  The  motive  of 
rest  is  not  adduced  here :  see  below. 

11.]  Here  follows  the  motive  for  the  com- 
mand :  the  fact  that  God  after  the  six  days 
of  creation  rested  on  the  seventh  day,  and 
on  that  account  that  day  was  a  holy  one. 
Therefore  Israel,  whose  it  was  (Deut.  viii. 
6;  X.  12;  xi.  22;  xxvi.  17)  to  walk  in  the 
ways  of  Jehovah  their  God,  were  to  do  as 
He  did,  and  rest  on  that  day.  This  likeness 
to  God  must  not  be  left  out  of  sight,  as  Keil 
maintains,  seeing  that  it  was  a  prominent 
point  ever  kept  in  Israel's  view :  see  Lev. 
xi,  44 ;  xix.  2 ;  xx.  26.  For  this  another 
motive  is  substituted  in  Deut.  v.  15,  see 
there.  On  the  great  fact  referred  to,  see 
notes.  Gen.  ii.  2,  and  compare  ch.  xxxi.  17. 

12.]  The  fifth  commandment.  Command 
of  honour  to  parents,  the  ?notive  being  the 
prospect  of  long  life  in  the  land  of  promise. 
Observe,  we  are  still  on  the  ground  of  "  duty 
to  God,"  and  have  not  yet  entered  on  "  duty 


to  man's  neighbour."  This  commandment, 
in  its  mention  of  Jehovah  thy  God,  in  its 
appending  a  motive  to  the  command,  in  its 
prescribing  reverence  to  those  above  a  man, 
Avho  stand  to  him  in  the  place  of  God,  be- 
longs to  the  first,  not  to  the  second,  table. 
The  wider  application  of  this  command  to 
all  who  stand  in  any  degree  in  the  place  of 
parents,  whether  in  domestic  or  in  civil  life, 
needs  no  explanation  here.  See  the  refer- 
ences made  to  this  commandment  in  Matt. 
XV.  4 ;  Eph.  vi.  2.  In  the  former  of  these 
our  Lord  asserts  its  Divine  authority;  in  the 
latter,  St.  Paul  refers  to  it  as  the  first  cotn- 
mandment  with  promise :  see  note  there. 
Long  life  was  ever  esteemed  under  the  old 
dispensation  as  happiness,  and  as  the  reward 
of  piety.  See  Deut.  iv.  40 ;  v.  33  ;  vi.  2 ; 
xi.  9;  xxii.  7 ;  1  Kings  iii.  14;  on  the  other 
hand,  see  Prov.  xx.  20  ;  xxx.  17.  In  the 
parallel,  Deut.  v.  16  (cited  by  St.  Paul  as 
above),  the  words  "  a7id  that  it  may  go  well 
with  thee"  are  added.  As  Knobel  well  re- 
marks, they  may  be  regarded  as  included 
here  also,  by  the  mention  of  the  happy  laud 
of  promise. 

13.]  The  sixth  commandment.  Prohibi- 
tion of  nncrder.  Here  (see  above)  begins  the 
second  table,  containing  those  conmiaud- 
ments  which  concern  duties  towards  fellow- 
men.  Of  these  the  first  concerns  life,  man's 
greatest  treasure  (Job  ii.  4),  called  his 
one  thing  or  only  one  in  Ps.  xxii.  24  ;  xxxv. 
17;  see  also  our  Lord's  saying,  Matt.  xvi. 
26.  On  the  extent  of  this  prohibition,  see 
Matt.  V.  21,  22;  and  in  the  Law  itself,  ch. 
xxi.  12,  14,  IS;  Lev.  xix.  14;  Deut.  xxii.  8. 

14.]  The  seventh  commandment.  Prohibi- 
tio9i  of  adultery.  Next  to  a  man's  life  comes 
she  whom  he  loves  as  one  with  himself:  hold- 
ing a  place  next  to  his  own  person,  and  far 
before  all  his  goods.  See  Gen.  ii.  24  ;  Prov. 
xii.  4  ;  xix.  14  ;  xxxi,  10,  f.    See  the  Divine 


11-18. 


EXODUS. 


315 


slialt  not  steal.  ^^  Thou  shalt  not  be  a  false  "witness 
ag-ainst  th}^  neighbour.  1"  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neigh- 
bour's house,  thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wile, 
nor  his  manservant,  nor  his  maidservant,  nor  his  ox,  nor 
his  ass,  nor  anj^  thing  that  is  thy  neighbour's.  ^^  ^  And 
all  the  people  °saw  the  thundcrings,  and  the  lightnings, 
and  the  noise  of  the  trumpet,  and  the  mountain  smoking: 
and  when  the  people  saw  it,  they  i'  were  moved,  and  stood  ^  I 


nch.  xxlil.  I. 
Urul.  xdl.t  ; 
XIX.  \i. 
hutli  iv.  9— 
II.      lu.  «iii. 


0  =  Grn.xlli.l. 
lu.  xliv.  16. 
Jcr.  xxxiU. 


comment  on  tliis  command,  Matt.  v.  28 ; 
and  the  legal  extunsions  of  it  in  ch.  xxi.  19  ; 
Levit.  xviii. ;  xix.  19,  f.,  29;  xx.  10,  tf.,  &c. 
The  LXX.  (perliaps  by  mere  mistake,  as  they 
follow  the  common  order  in  Ucut.  v.)  put 
this  commandment  and  the  eighth  before 
the  sixth. 

15.]  The  eighth  commandment.  Prohibi- 
tion of  theft.  Next  in  value  follow  the  neigli- 
bour's  goods,  which,  like  his  person  and  his 
clearest  possession  of  all,  must  be  inviolable 
by  us.  See  extensions  of  this  literal  com- 
mand in  ch.  xxi.  33 ;  xxii.  13,  25,  tf. ;  Levit. 
xix.  13. 

16.]  The  ninth  commandment.  Prohibi- 
tion of  false  tcitness  against  another.  It  is 
possible  to  injure  a  neighbour  without  laying 
hands  on  his  pei-sun,  his  wife,  or  his  goods, 
— by  that  which  shall  put  all  these  in  peril, 
viz.  undermining  his  character  by  false  testi- 
mony against  him.  This,  then,  is  also  pro- 
vided against  The  A.  V.,  fiimiliar  as  its 
sound  is  to  us,  is  hardly  near  enough  to  the 
original,  which  is  literally,  Thou  shalt  not 
answer  against  thy  neighbour  as  a  witness 
of  falsehood :  the  word  witness  being  not 
neuter,  of  the  thing  testified,  but  masculine, 
of  him  that  testifies:  see'reff.  On  the 
slightly  varying  sentence  in  Deut.  v.  20,  sec 
there.  This  command  is  further  extended 
in  other  places,  see  ch.  xxiii.  1  (Xum.  xxxv. 
30;  Deut.  xvii.  6;  xix.  lo,  16,  H".);  xxii. 
13,  flF. 

17.]  The  tenth  commandment.  Prohibi- 
tion of  greedy  desire.  Of  all  the  acts  forbid- 
den in  this  second  table  selfish  desire  is  the 
root.  Therefore  it,  as  well  as  they,  is  for- 
bidden. First,  the  house  is  not  to  be  desired, 
i.  e.  the  household  (Gen.  xv.  2  ;  Job  viii.  15), 
including  all  the  particulars  which  follow, — 
wife,  servants,  cattle,  goods.  Thus  the 
whole  holds  together  as  one  commandment. 
In  Deut.  V.  21  the  wife  is  put  first,  proba- 
bly to  keep  the  order  of  the  seventh  and 


eighth  commandments.  The  same  order  is 
adopted  here  by  the  LXX.,  who  also  insert 
from  Ueut.,  "  nor  his  field,"  as  does  also  the 
Samaritan  text.  This  order  is  necessary  for 
those  who  wi.sh  to  split  this  tentli  into  two 
commandments.  See  above  (m  ver.  1.  There 
is  no  mention  liere  of  his  horse,  seeing  that 
horses  were  almost  practically  unknown,  and 
indeed  almost  forbidden  to  the  Israelites 
(Deut.  xvii.  IG ;  IIos.  i.  7;  xiv.  3).  But 
the  LXX.  version,  which  was  made  in  Egypt, 
where  horses  abounded,  has  inserted  alter 
his  ox  nor  his  ass,  "  nor  any  beast  of  his." 
Here  the  Samaritan  rentateuch  has  this 
curious  and  characteristic  addition  :  "  When 
Jehovah  thy  God  shall  have  brought  thee  into 
the  land  of  the  Canaanitcs,  tchither  thou  goest 
to  possess  it,  thou  shalt  set  up  for  thee  ttco 
great  stones,  and  thou  shalt  plaster  them 
with  lime,  and  thou  shalt  write  upon  those 
sto?ies  all  the  words  of  this  law.  And  when 
thou  shalt  have  passed  over  Jordan,  thou 
shalt  set  up  those  stones  which  I  command 
thee  this  day,  in  the  Mount  Gerizim,  and 
thou  shalt  build  there  an  altar  to  Jehovah 
thy  God,  an  altar  of  stones  :  thou  shalt  not 
lift  up  iron  upon  them.  Thou  shalt  build 
that  altar  to  Jehovah  thy  God  of  unhewn 
stones,  and  thou  shalt  ojf'er  upon  it  whole 
burnt-offerings  to  Jehovah  thy  God,  and 
shalt  sacrifice  peace-offerings,  and  shalt  cat 
there,  and  shalt  rejoice  before  Jehovah  thy 
God  in  that  tnountain,  beyond  Jordan,  be- 
hind the  way  of  the  sunsittiug,  in  the  land 
of  the  Canaanite  tcho  inhabiteth  the  plain 
opposite  Gilgal,  near  the  oak  of  Moreh,  to- 
wards Sichem"  (see  Deut.  xi.  29,  30). 

18—21.]  Compare  Deut.  v.  29—33,  where 
a  fuller  account  is  given  of  this  same  in- 
cident. The  verb  saw  is  used  of  all  the 
objects  which  follow,  as  in  retf.,  meaning 
perceived.  thunderings]  lit ,  voices, 

they  were  moved,  viz.   with   frar,  .-^ee  relf. 
19]  they  said  unto  Moses,  viz.  the 


316 


EXODUS. 


XX. 


afar  off.  ^^  And  they  said  unto  Moses,  Speak  tliou  yvith. 
us,  and  we  will  hear  :  but  let  not  God  speak  with  us,  lest 
we  die.  ^^  And  Moses  said  unto  the  people.  Fear  not :  for 
God  is  come  to  prove  you,  and  that  his  fear  may  be  before 
your  faces,  that  ye  sin  not.  ^l  And  the  peoj)le  stood  afar 
off,  and  Moses  drew  near  unto  the  thick  darkness  where 
God  was.  22  ^  And  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses,  Thus  thou 
shalt  say  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  Ye  have  seen  that  I 
have  talked  with  you  from  heaven.  ^3  Ye  shall  not  make 
with  me  gods  of  silver,  neither  shall  ye  make  unto  you 
gods  of  gold.  24  ^  An  altar  of  earth  thou  shalt  make  unto 
me,  and  shalt  sacrifice  thereon  thy  burnt  offerings,  and 
thy  peace  offerings,  thy  sheep,  and  thine  oxen :  in  all 
places  where  I  cause  my  name  to  be  remembered  I  will 


heads  of  the  tribes,  and  the  elders,  as  ex- 
plained Dout.  V.  23.  All  this  is  given  there 
much  more  fully.  20.]  This  coming  to 

prove  them  has  hcfore  been  asserted,  ch.  xv. 
25 ;  xvi.  4.  The  awful  appearance  of 
Jehovah  was  to  impress  them  with  fear. 
In  Deut.  the  order  is  given  that  they  are 
to  get  them  back  into  their  tents  again. 
21.]  It  appears  from  the  narrative  in 
ch.  xix.  24  that  Aaron  also  went  up  into 
the  mountain :  see  ch.  xxiv.  1,  2.  It  is 
there  stated  that  Moses  went  to  the  top  : 
here,  that  he  drew  near  to  the  cloud  which 
covered  the  Divine  presence. 

22 — XXII.  33.]  The  Jit-si  injunctions  of 
the  Law,  divided  into  three  heads:  1.  (xx. 
22—26)  The  prescribed  form  of  worship; 
2.  Laws  for  Israel,  («)  in  their  civil  relations 
to  one  another  (xxi.  1 — xxiii.  13) ;  [b)  in 
their  theocratic  relation  to  Jehovah  (xxiii. 
14 — 19) ;  3.  The  place  towards  Israel  which 
Jehovah  would  hold  (xxiii.  20 — 33). 

22 — 26.]  The  injunctions  regarding  wor- 
ship open  with  recalling  the  positive  proof 
just  furnished  to  Israel,  of  the  being  and 
presence  of  Jehovah.  from  heaven,  be- 
cause he  had  come  down  on  Sinai,  and 
because  Sinai  itself  was  uplifted  high  in 
the  material  sky.  23.]  God  is  a  spirit, 

and  nuis*  be  worshipped  in  spirit.  Any 
material  representation  will  not  set  forth 
Jehovah,  but  will  be  with  Him,  i.  e.  some- 
thing besides  Him.  Those  who  think  they 
worship  Him  through  an  image  do  not  in 
fact  worship  Him  alone,  but  Him  a)id  the 
image.  24.]   An  altar  is   needed,  to 


symbolize  the  lifting  up  of  the  offering  pre- 
sented to  Jehovah  in  heaven.  But  the 
Divine  Spirit  is  not  to  be  honoured  in  the 
prime  act  of  worship,  by  a  wrought  altar 
of  man's  device.  Man's  work  would  but 
unconsecrate  it:  it  is  to  consist  of  simple 
earth,  or  if,  for  more  endurance,  stone  be 
used,   it   must    be    unwrought.  25.] 

tool  is,  literally,  sword,  any  cutting  instru- 
ment ;  in  this  case,  of  course,  adapted  for 
stone.  These  general  directions,  fitted  for 
various  places  where  God  would  have  His 
name  honoured  by  remembrance,  do  not 
come  into  collision  with  those  afterwards 
given  (ch.  xxvii.  1,  ff.)  for  the  special  altar 
to  be  erected  in  the  tabernacle.  These  rules 
wci-e  to  apply  to  such  cnses  as  Josh.  viii.  30, 
at  Ebal,  where  these  rules  are  recited  and 
recorded  to  have  been  observed :  as  Judg. 
vi.  25,  at  Ophrah ;  as  Judg.  xxi.  4,  and  1 
Sam.  vii.  17,  at  Mizpeh ;  as  on  Mount 
Carmel,  1  Kings  xviii.  31,  f.  :  and  we  may 
add,  as  at  Gilgal,  where  the  twelve  stones 
taken  out  of  Jordan,  "pitched"  for  a  me- 
morial by  Joshua,  were  evidently  an  altar  : 
compare  Josh.  ix.  6,  27  ;  1  Sam.  x.  8  ;  xi.  14, 
15 ;  xiii.  7,  9,  &c.  The  places  where  Je- 
hovah caused  his  name  to  be  remembered 
were  such  as  the  above-mentioned,  and 
others,  where  God  had  specially  manifested 
Himself.  "We  have  an  interesting  example 
in  Judg.  xiii.  19,  where  God  had  caused 
His  name  to  be  remembered  by  the  appear- 
ance of  His  angel,  and  Manoah  offered 
sacrifice  to  Him  on  a  rock,  which  is  thence 
called  "<Ae  altar''  ver.  20. 


19— XXI.  6. 


EXODUS. 


317 


come  unto  tlicc,  and  I  will  bless  thee.  2-5  ^^d  if  thou  wilt 
make  me  an  altar  of  stone,  thou  shalt  not  build  it  of  hewn 
stone  :  for  if  thou  lift  up  thy  tool  ajjon  it,  thou  hast  pol- 
luted it.  26  jVf cither  shalt  thou  go  up  by  steps  unto  mine 
altar,  that  thy  nakedness  be  not  discovered  thereon. 
XXI.  1  Now  these  are  the  judgments  which  thou  shalt  set 
before  them,  2  jf  i\^q^  \^^y  a^  Hebrew  servant,  six  years 
he  shall  serve :  and  in  the  seventh  he  shall  go  out  free  for 
nothing.  3  jf  \^q  came  in  by  himself,  he  shall  go  out  by 
himself:  if  he  were  married,  then  his  wife  shall  go  out 
with  him.  ^  If  his  master  have  given  him  a  wife,  and  she 
have  born  him  sons  or  daughters ;  the  wife  and  her  chil- 
dren shall  be  her  master's,  and  he  shall  go  out  by  himself 
^  And  if  the  servant  shall  plainly  say,  I  love  my  master, 
my  wife,  and  my  children  ;  I  will  not  go  out  free  :  ^  then 


26.]  Man  approaches  the  altar  of  God  as 
a  sinner,  to  offer  sacrifice  in  expiation  for 
sin.  The  fruit  of  sin  is  shame,  and  shame 
after  sin  was  (Gen.  iii.  7)  first  connected 
witli  that  portion  of  the  body  of  which  tlie 
manifestation  is  here  forbidden  in  approach- 
ing God.  This  order  docs  not  seem  to  have 
been  observed  with  regard  to  the  altar  pre- 
scribed for  the  tabernacle,  ch.  xxvii.  1,  ff., 
which  seems  to  have  had  steps  (Lev.  ix. 
22),  and  on  that  account  to  have  necessi- 
tated the  order  in  ch.  xxviii.  42,  f. 

XXI.  1— XXIII.  13.]  Laws  applying  to 
civil  relations  in  Israel.  And  first  come 
laws  as  to  personal  rights  (vv.  2 — 11)  :  and 
of  those,  2 — 6.]  tiiose  regarding  scares. 

See  Deut.  xv.  12 — 18,  whye  the  rules  are 
given  more  in  detail,  and  are  accompanied 
with  motives.  2.]  An  Hebrew  might 

have  sold  himself  into  slavery  from  poverty 
(Lev.  XXV.  39),  or  might  be  sold  in  default 
of  restitution  for  theft  (ch.  xxii.  3).  The 
rules  here  given  for  the  Hebrew  male  serv- 
ant hold  also  for  the  female,  see  Deut.  xv. 
12.  This  law  about  six  years'  service  was 
modified  by  the  institution  of  the  year  of 
jubilee :  see  Lev.  xxv.  40,  where  it  is  or- 
dained that  the  Hebrew  slave  was  to  be  set 
free  on  the  year  of  jubilee,  come  when  it 
might.  But  remarkably  enough,  when  in 
Zedekiah's  days  Jeremiah  was  commissioned 
to  enforce  the  law,  it  is  not  the  subsequent 
rule,  of  the  year  of  jubilee,  but  this,  of  the 
serving   six   years  and  going   free  ou  the 


seventh,  which  is  appealed  to :  see  Jcr. 
.\xxiv.  13,  14.  It  hardly  needs  pointing 
out  that  the  whole  regulation  rests  on  sab- 
batical grounds.  The  six  days'  work  earns 
the  seventh  day's  rest,  and  so  the  six  vears' 
work  rest  on  the  seventh.  3.]  by  him- 

self, is,  literally,  with  his  body,  with  no- 
thing but  his  person,  see  Gen.  xlvii.  18; 
Neh.  ix.  37.  4.]  This,  though  in  strict 

accordance  with  the  law  of  property,  was  a 
hard  rule,  and  in  consequence  is  modified 
and  softened  by  what  follows.  AVe  shall 
continually  find  examples  of  this  in  the 
Mosaic  law :  see  Lev.  xxv.  39,  43,  53,  al. 
The  only  wife  who  could  be  given  the  He- 
brew bondman  must  have  been  previously  a 
bondwoman  of  his  master'.s,  and  as  such 
would  probably  (not  certainly)  be  a  heathen. 
If  she  were  a  Hebrew  her  retention  by  tlie 
master  would  only  last  till  the  seventh  year 
of  her  servitude.  But  it  is  importing  too 
much  into  this  simple  ordinance  to  regard  it, 
as  some  have  done,  as  intended  to  discourage 
Hebrews  from  marrying  heathen  wives. 
Such  a  side-intention  would  agree  but  ill 
with  the  full  and  merciful  recognition  of 
the  marriage  in  tlie  next  verse.  6,  6.] 

Provision  fur  the  slave  to  retain  his  place 
if  he  be  minded.  In  the  parallel,  Deut.  xv. 
16,  17,  no  mention  is  made  of  the  motive  of 
love  for  wife  or  children,  but  only  of  loving 
"  t/iee  and  thine  house  :"  and  the  ordinance 
is  extended  to  bondwomen  likewise. 
6.]  The  words  unto  God  have  been  almost 


318 


EXODUS. 


XXI. 


q  =1  Sam.  i. 

22.   Compare 

then  vv. 11, 

28. 
r  Ocn.  XX.  17; 

ixi.l".  Judg. 

ix.  18. 


6  Jer.  iii.  20. 
Mai.  ii.  li. 


his  master  shall  bring  him  unto  God  :  and  shall  bring  him 
to  the  door,  or  unto  the  door  post ;  and  his  master  shall 
bore  his  ear  through  with  an  aul ;  and  he  shall  serve  him 
^for  ever.  7  ^  And  if  a  man  sell  his  daughter  to  be  a 
^maidservant,  she  shall  not  go  out  as  the  menservants  do. 
8  If  she  please  not  her  master,  who  hath  betrothed  her  to 
himself,  then  shall  he  let  her  be  redeemed :  to  sell  her  unto 
a  strange  nation  he  shall  have  no  power,  seeing  he  hath 
^ dealt  deceitfully  with  her.  ^  And  if  he  have  betrothed 
her  unto  his  son,  he  shall  deal  with  her  after  the  manner 
of  daughters.     ^^  If  he  take  unto  him  another  woman  ;  her 


universally  rendered  "  before  the  judges.'^ 
This  would  naturally  be  so  in  fact;  but 
surely  there  is  no  need  to  turn  translation 
into  interpretation.  Unto  God  will  mean 
the  same  as  the  frequent  expression  "  before 
JehovaJ/,"  viz.  to  some  place  of  God's 
especial  presence ;  and  such,  in  the  case  in 
hand,  would  be  a  place  of  judgment,  where 
the  genuineness  of  the  case  might  be  com- 
petently judged  of.  In  ver.  22,  where  the 
judges  are  mentioned,  the  word  is  not  as 
here,  Elohim,  but  phelilim.  The  ceremony 
of  boring  his  ear  against  the  door-post  seems 
to  have  imported  merely  the  attachment,  or 
nailing,  of  him  to  the  house.  The  Tal- 
mudists  suppose  the  door-posts  to  have 
been  chosen  as  having  been  sprinkled  with 
the  paschal  blood,  and  therefore  M'itnessing 
the  Divine  redemption  and  sovereignty ; 
and  the  ears,  as  having  heard  God's  com- 
mandments. This  fiincy  surely  would  be 
refuted  by  the  door  being  here  first,  and 
in  Deut.  exclusively,  mentioned.  Tlie  door 
received  no  paschal  blood.  See  more  in 
Kalisch.  On  the  supposed  reference  to  this 
in  Ps.  xl.  6,  see  notes  there,  and  on  Heb. 
X.  5.  for  ever  has  generally  been  un- 

derstood for  life,  as  in  ref.  But  some  of 
the  Jewish  interpreters  understood  it  till 
the  pear  of  jubilee,  influenced  by  the  idea 
that  then  all  property  returned  to  its  original 
condition;  see  Lev.  xxv.  41.  The  reply, 
that  the  jubilee  ordinance  modified  these 
rules  made  before  it,  will  hardly  hold,  see- 
ing that  the  same  expression,  for  evei",  is 
used  in  Deut.  xv.  17. 

7  —  11.]  The  case  of  a  Hebrew  girl  sold 
by  her  father.  A  complication  is  here  in- 
troduced by  the  nature  of  the  case.  A  girl 
thus  sold,  in  the  then  relations  of  society, 


almost  naturally  became  the  secondary  wife, 
or  concubine,  of  her  master :  see  reff.,  where 
the  word  ^'■maidservant"  implies  this  re- 
lation. And  this  secondary  wife  possessed 
certain  connubial  rights,  on  which  legisla- 
tion was  founded.  She  became  a  part  of 
her  master's  family,  therein  differing  from 
a  male  slave,  and  therefore  was  not  to  go 
out  as  he  did.  8.]  There  is  a  difficulty 

here,  arising  from  an  apparent  error  in  the 
spelling  of  a  Hebrew  word.  Zo,  written  as 
here  with  an  aleph,  means  not :  written 
with  a  rati,  it  means  to  him.  The  latter 
meaning  would  certainly  seem  to  be  here 
required.  And  the  Jfasorites,  who  edited 
the  present  Hebrew  text,  have  noted  14 
other  places  (among  them  Lev.  xi.  21 ;  xxv. 
30)  where  the  same  clerical  error  seems  to 
have  been  made.  We  retain  therefore  the 
text  of  the  A.  V.  rather  than  "who  hath 
not  betrothed  (or  espoused)  her."  In  the 
case  contemplated  he  is  to  let  the  father 
buy  her  back  again,  or  to  sell  her  to  a 
brother  Hebrew.  And  this  because  he  has 
dealt  deceitfully,  or  treacherously,  by  her, 
broken  his  covenant  of  marriage  with  her : 
see  reff.,  where  the  same  expression  is  used. 
The  same  rule  is  said  (see  Knobel)  to  be 
observed  among  the  modern  Arabs. 
9.]  This  case  was  and  is  common  in  the 
East.  The  father  buys  a  concubine  for  his 
son,  to  keep  him  from  looser  living.  In  such 
a  case  she  is  to  be  treated,  not  as  a  slave, 
but  as   a   daughter.  10.]    There    is 

some  doubt  whether  the  him  apply  to  the 
father  himself  or  to  the  son.  In  either 
case  the  rule  as  regards  the  Hebrew  girl 
remains  the  same.  She  was  not  to  be  worse 
treated  on  account  of  her  being  associated 
with  another  who  by  the  nature  of  the  case 


-19. 


EXODUS. 


319 


Mlesh-meat,  her  raiment,  and  her  marriage  rights,  shall  lie 
not  diminish.  ^^  And  if  he  do  not  these  three  unto  her, 
then  shall  she  go  out  free  without  money.  ^2  ^  ][p  t]^,,^ 
smitcth  a  man,  so  that  he  die,  shall  be  surely  put  to  death. 
1^  And  if  a  man  lie  not  in  wait,  hut  God  deliver  Jilm  into 
liis  hand;  tlicn  I  will  appoint  thee  a  place  whither  he 
shall  flee.  ^^  But  if  a  man  come  "presumptuously  upon 
his  neighbour,  to  slay  him  with  guile  ;  thou  shalt  take  him 
from  mine  altar,  that  he  may  die.  ^'^  ^[  And  ho  that 
smiteth  his  father,  or  his  mother,  shall  be  surely  put  to 
death,  i*^  ^[  And  he  that  stcaleth  a  man,  and  sellcth  him, 
or  if  he  be  found  in  his  hand,  he  shall  surely  be  put  to 
death.  ^7  ^  And  he  that  ciu-seth  his  father,  or  his  mother, 
shall  surely  be  put  to  death.  i^  1[  And  if  men  strive 
together,  and  one  smite  another  with  a  stone,  or  with  It  in 
fist,  and  he  die  not,  but  kecpoth  Jtis  bed:  ^^  if  he  rise 
again,  and  walk  abroad  upon  his  staff",  then  shall  he  that 
smote  him  be  quit :  only  he  shall  pay  for  the  loss  of  his 
time,  and  shall  cause  him  to  be  thoroughly  healed.     20 


1  ch.  XTlil.  U. 
l)rut.  i.4S: 


was  preferred  to  her,  her  flesh-meat 

is  mentioned,  being  the  superior  kind  of 
food,  and  this  ordinance  having  in  view 
persons  who  were  well  off  and  could  afford 
a  household  thus  described.  her  mar- 

riage rights]  The  word  occurs  only  here, 
and  is  thus  explained  by  the  chief  authori- 
ties. The  A.  V.  "  duty  of  marriage  "  means 
the  same  thing  :  see  1  Cor.  vii.  3.  11.] 

these  three,  viz.  the  giving  her  in  full  her 
meat,  her  raiment,  and  her  marriage  rights : 
not,  as  some,  the  three  obligations  arising 
out  of  the  three  cases  supposed,  which  woidd 
rather  require  one  of  these  three, 

12 — 21.]  Laws  relatingto  the  takingoflife. 

12.]  Deliberate  murder  is  to  be  pun- 
ished with  death,  see  Gen.  ix.  6 ;  Lev.  xxiv. 
17,  and  that  without  regard  to  the  time 
when  death  may  follow  the  blow.  13.] 

But  accidental  homicide  will  be  hereafter 
specially  provided  for  :  see  Num.  xxxv.  9,  ff. 
By  God  here  is  to  be  understood  God  directly, 
without  the  intervention  of  human  intent. 

14.]  presumptuously,  i.  e.  uplifting 
himself  to  the  unwarranted  design  of  taking 
life :  see  reff.  The  altar  seems,  as  with 
most  ancient  nations,  to  have  been  the  place 
of  sanctuary:    see  1  Kings  i.  50;    ii.   28. 


]\rore  particulars  are  given  respecting  cases 
of  premeditated  murder  in  Lev.  xxxv.  16, 
ff.;  Deut.  xix.   11.  15.]  Parents  arc 

next  to,  and  in  place  of,  God,  and  therefore 
the  lifting  up  a  hand  or  even  the  tongue 
(ver.  17)  against  them,  is  punishable  with 
the  heaviest  of  penalties.  16.]  This  is 

limited  by  Deut.  xxiv.  7  to  the  case  where 
the  stolen  person  was  one  of  his  brethren  the 
children  of  Isracd.  But  not  the  least  sanc- 
tion can  thence  be  derived  for  modern  kid- 
napping into  slavery :  for  all  men  are  now 
brethren.  in  his  hand]  i.  e.  that  of  the 

stealer.  On  ver.  17,  see  above,  and  com- 

pare Matt.  XV.  4  with  Mark  vii.  10,  and 
both  with  our  ver.  1.  18,  f.]  The  ca.'ie 

of  heavy  personal  injury  not  resulting  in 
death.  Two  things  result  by  implication 
from  this  law: — 1.  That  if  death  take  place 
before  the  injured  person  gets  about,  ver.  12 
comes  into  force.  2.  That  if  it  result  after 
that,  the  striker  is  blanu  less.  the  loss  of 

his  time  is  literally  his  rest,  his  sabbath  : 
and  the  last  clause  is,  in  healing  shall  heal 
him,  i.  e.  sliall  pay  his  doctor's  hill.  The 
case  here  contemplates  restoration  I'w  sound- 
ness. Where  this  was  not  so,  the  Ux 
talionis  prevailed:    see  Lev.  xxiv.   19,  20. 


320 


EXODUS. 


XXI. 


^  And  if  a  man  smite  his  servant,  or  his  maid,  witli  a  rod, 
and  he  die  under  his  hand ;  it  shall  be  surely  avenged. 
21  Notwithstanding,  if  he  continue  a  day  or  two,  it  shall 
not  be  avenged  :  for  he  is  his  money.  ^2  ^  jf  jj^gj^  strive, 
and  hurt  a  woman  with  child,  so  that  her  fruit  depart //'o^i 
her,  and  yet  no  mischief  follow :  he  shall  be  surely  punished, 
according  as  the  woman's  husband  will  lay  upon  him ; 
and  he  shall  pay  as  the  judges  determine.  23  ^^^^  {f  (^^y 
mischief  follow,  then  thou  shalt  give  life  for  life,  24  eye  for 
eye,  tooth  for  tooth,  hand  for  hand,  foot  for  foot,  25  burn- 
ing for  burning,  wound  for  wound,  stripe  for  stripe.  26 
^  And  if  a  man  smite  the  eye  of  his  servant,  or  the  eje  of 
his  maid,  that  it  perish ;  he  shall  let  him  go  free  for  his 
eye's  sake.  27  And  if  he  smite  out  his  manservant's  tooth, 
or  his  maidservant's  tooth  ;  he  shall  let  him  go  free  for  his 


20,  21.]  If  a  slave  be  struck,  the  case 
is  different.  This  applies  not  only  to  non- 
Hebrews.  It  is  true  (see  Lev.  xxv.  44,  ff.) 
that  out  of  these  the  ordinary  ranks  of  slaves 
■were  to  be  supplied :  but,  as  in  ver.  2,  there 
were  certain  circumstances  under  which 
Hebrews  became  slaves,  and  they  then  came 
under  such  rules  as  this.  See  Kcil  here  against 
Ivnobel  and  others.  The  rod  was  the  com- 
mon instrument  of  pimishmcnt :  see  Prov.  x. 
13;  xiii.  24;  xxiii.  13;  Isa.  ix.  4.  The 
method  and  amount  of  this  avenging  are  not 
prescribed.  The  Talmudical  expositors  say, 
by  death  with  the  sword;  but  this  obviously 
cannot  be,  or  the  words  would  have  been 
corresponding  :  probably  it  was  by  a  fine  in 
proportion  to  the  nature  of  the  case.  If  the 
slave's  life  were  not  taken  on  the  spot,  but 
he  lingered,  no  vengeance  was  to  be  taken, 
seeing  that  the  slave  himself  was  a  valuable 
possession,  and  the  loss  of  him  to  his  master 
was  mulct  enough.  It  is  very  difficult  to 
see  the  distinction  between  the  two  cases : 
why  the  avenging  should  apply  to  the  former 
if  not  to  the  latter,  and  should  not  apply  to 
the  latter,  if  to  the  former.  The  reason 
assio'ned  by  Bp.  Wordsworth,  that  his  sur- 
vival proved  the  injury  to  be  "  not  wilful, 
but  accidental,"  will  hardly  convince  many. 
Keil's  view  that  such  survival  would  shew 
that  the  master  did  not  intend  to  kill  the 
slave  'on  .the  spot  is  hardly  better,  for  the 
supposition  in  ver.  20  of  itself  assumes  this. 
Perhaps  we  do  not  thoroughly  understand 
the  rule. 


22 — 27.]  Examples  of  personal  injury  and 
their  treatment.  22,  f.]  The  case  supposed 
is  that  of  two^en  fighting,  and  the  wife  of 
one  of  them  interfering  to  part  them :  see 
Dent.  xxv.  11.  her  fruit  depart]  Liter- 

ally, children  come  forth,  the  plural  express- 
ing the  vagueness  of  the  supposition.  It  is 
clear  that  the  case  supposes  premature  birth 
or  miscarriage,  and  not,  as  Kcil  imagines,  the 
birth  of  a  living  child.  Kalisch  renders  the 
last  words,  "  he  shall  bring  it  before  the 
judges  :  "  they  seem  literally  to  be  he  shall 
give  (pay)  by  (the  intervention  of)  judges, 
or  arbitrators.  The  fine  would  be  for  the 
danger  occasioned  to  the  life  of  the  woman, 
and  the  loss  to  the  husband  by  the  death  of 
the  child.  The  LXX.  have  a  curious  ren- 
dering here:  "and  her  child  depart  frotn 
her,  if  it  be  7wt  full g  formed,  he  shall  pa g  a 
fine  according  as  the  woman  s  husband  shall 
appoint,  and  he  shall  fitie  it  icith  valuation  : 
but  if  it  be  fully  formed,  he  shall  give  life 
for    life,"    &c.  .23]    Mischief— to 

whom  ?  Keil  interprets  it,  to  mother  or 
child.  But  (see  above)  hy  hypothesis  the 
latter  perishes.  It  is  therefore  the  mother 
that  is  here  thought  of:  and  the  prescrip- 
tion is  a  particular  case  of  the  lex  ialionis, 
more  generally  enforced  Lev.  xxiv.  19,  ff., 
where  see  note.  26,  f.]  In  the  case  of 

slaves  there  shall  be  no  lex  talionis :  the 
punishment  of  the  cruel  master  shall  be  the 
loss  of  his  property  ;  the  recompense  to  the 
injured  slave   the   recovery  of   his   liberty. 

28 — 32.]  Laiv   in  case  of  injury  to  tlie 


20— 3G.  EXODUS.  301 

tootli's  sake.  28  ^  jf  j^i  ox  gore  a  man  or  a  woman,  that 
tliey  die  :  then  the  ox  shall  be  surely  stoned,  and  his  flesh 
shall  not  be  eaten  ;  but  the  owner  of  the  ox  s/inil  be  quit. 
2^  But  if  the  ox  were  wont  to  push  with  his  horn  in  time 
jjast,  and  it  hath  been  testified  to  his  ov7icr,  and  he  hath 
not  kept  him  in,  but  that  he  hath  killed  a  man  or  a  woman ; 
tlie  ox  shall  be  stoned,  and  his  owner  also  shall  be  put  to 
death.  30  jf  there  be  laid  on  him  a  sum  of  money,  tlicn 
he  shall  give  for  the  ransom  of  his  life  whatsoever  is  laid 
upon  him.  ^i  Whether  he  have  gored  a  son,  or  have  o-oied 
a  daughter,  according  to  this  judgment  shall  it  be  done 
unto  him.  ^2  If  the  ox  shall  push  a  manservant  or  a  maid- 
servant ;  he  shall  give  unto  their  master  thirty  shekels  of 
silver,  and  the  ox  shall  be  stoned.  33  ^  ^j^(^  jf  j^  ^^^r^y^  sij. jj 
open  a  pit,  or  if  a  man  shall  dig  a  pit,  and  not  cover  it,  and 
an  ox  or  an  ass  fall  therein ;  ^i  the  owner  of  the  pit  shall 
make  it  good,  and  give  money  unto  the  owner  of  them ; 
and  the  dead  bcasf  shall  be  his.  35  ^  ^^(j  jf  q^^q  man's  ox 
hurt  another's,  that  he  die ;  then  they  shall  sell  the  live 
ox,  and  divide  the  money  of  it ;  and  the  dead  o,v  also  they 
shall  divide.  36  Qr  if  it  be  known  that  the  ox  hath  used 
to  push  in  time  past,  and  his  owner  hath  not  kept  him  in ; 

person  bij  an  animal.     Seo  Gen.  ix.  5.     In  shekels,   perhaps   tlie   ordinary  price   of  a 

oil.  XX.  10  we  see  that  the  domestic  animals  slave,  as  50  was  the  price  of  an  Israelite's 

are  regarded  as  part  of  a  man's  household,  freedom,  Lev.  xxvii.  3.     See    ^latt.  xxvii. 

and  as  such  they  come  under  a  mode  of  15 ;    Zech.    xi.    12,   f.     Kcil   remarks  that 

human  responsibility:  see  also  Lev.  xx.  15.  other  ancient  nations  had  laws  for  the  pun- 

The  flesh  was  not  to  be  eaten  as  being  un-  ishmcnt  of  beasts  that  killed  or  wounded  a 

clean,  through  the  sliedding  of  innocent  blood,  man,  but   none   had   one   for    making   the 

Num.  XXXV.  33.     The  master  is  punished  by  owner   responsible,  because  none   knew  of 

the  loss  of  his  beast.  29-]  In  the  case  human  life  in  its  character  as  the  image  of 

here  supposed,  the  master  is,  by  his  careless-  God. 

ness,  an  accomplice,  as  it  were,  in  the  guilt,         33 — 36.]  littles  for  cases  of  hurt,  inhere 

and  deserves  the  same  punishment.    But  in-  not  7nen   but    other   animals  are   victims. 
asmuch    as  carelessness  is  not  malice  pre-  33,  f.  ]   Case  of  accident  by  careless- 

pense,  option  is  given  him  to  commute  his  ness.     The  causer  of  the  death  of  another 

punishment  for  a  fine,  laid  on  him,  as  we  man's   ox   or  ass   (the   two   most  valuable 

naturally  supply  from  ver.  22,  by  the  slain  animals  among  the  Hebrews)  was  to  give 

person's   relatives,    and    approved    by   the  money  (naturally,   the   price  of  the  living 

judges.  31.]  And  the  same  law  holds  animal),  and  to  possess  the  carcase, 

good  in  case  a  child  of  eitlicr  sex  under  age  35,  f  ]  In  the  case  of  accidental  slaughter  of 

he  the  victim.     All  the  children  of  Israel,  one  man's  ox  byanotlicr's  the  live  and  dead 

young  and  old,  were  holy.  32.]  If  a  animals  were  to  be  sliared, — the  live  by  sale, 

slave  or  bondmaid,  the  penalty  of  blood  was  the   dead   by   division.      IJut   in   the   case 

to  be  exacted  from  the  animal,  but  that  of  answering  to  that  in  ver.  29  flie  live  ox  is 

carelessness   was   not   to   exceed    30   silver  to  be  paid  in  exchange  for  the  dead  one. 


322 


EXODUS. 


XXII. 


he  shall  surely  pay  ox  for  ox ;  and  the  dead  shall  be  his 
own.  XXII.  1  If  a  man  shall  steal  an  ox,  or  a  sheep,  and 
kill  it,  or  sell  it ;  he  shall  restore  five  oxen  for  an  ox,  and 
four  sheep  for  a  sheep.  ^  ^  If  a  thief  be  found  breaking 
up,  and  be  smitten  that  he  die,  there  sJiall  he  no  avenging 
of  blood  for  him.  ^  If  the  sun  be  risen  upon  him,  there 
shall  he  avenging  of  blood  for  him  ;  for  he  should  make  full 
restitution ;  if  he  have  nothing,  then  he  shall  be  sold  for 
his  theft.  ^  If  the  theft  be  openly  found  in  his  hand  alive, 
whether  it  be  ox,  or  ass,  or  sheep ;  he  shall  restore  double. 
^  *f  \i  a.  man  shall  cause  a  field  or  vineyard  to  be  eaten, 
and  shall  allow  his  beast  to  stray,  and  shall  feed  in  another 
man's  field ;  of  the  best  of  his  own  field,  and  of  the  best 
of  his  own  vinej^ard,  shall  he  make  restitution.  ^  ^  If  fire 
break  out,  and  catch  in  thorns,  so  that  the  stacks  of  corn, 
or  the  standing  corn,  or  the  field,  be  consumed  therewith ; 
he  that  kindled  the  fire  shall  surely  make  restitution,       ^ 


XXII.  1 — 14.]  Laxcs  respecting  theft, 
borroioing,  and  damage.  The  different  pro- 
portions in  which  reparation  is  to  be  made 
for  an  ox  or  a  sheep  (or  goat,  the  Hebrew 
■word  being  one  for  smaller  cattle  generally  : 
see  A.  v.,  Isa.  xliii.  23;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  17, 
20)  arc  due  apparently  to  the  fact  that  the 
ox,  as  the  companion  of  man's  labour  at  the 
plough,  has  a  value  in  the  eyes  of  its  master 
far  exceeding  tbat  of  a  sheep,  and  the 
loss  of  one  might  stop  his  tillage  altogether. 
The  law  of  fourfold  restoration  for  a  sheep 
is  cited  by  David  in  reply  to  Nathan's 
famous  parable,  2  Sam.  xii.  6,  and  alluded 
to  as  a  general  rule  by  Zacchaus,  Luke  xix. 
8.  The  restoring  sevenfold  of  Prov.  vi.  31 
is  perhaps  only  a  general  expression.  With 
this  verse  is  intimately  connected  ver.  4, 
and  the  difference  between  the  two  enact- 
ments is  probably  to  be  found  in  this,  that 
the  thief  who  bas  sold  or  slain  the  stolen 
animal  bas  advanced  further  in  crime,  and 
has  also  made  actual  restitution  of  the  thing 
stolen  more  difficult,  and  consequently  the 
injury  a  deeper  one.  2,  3.]  Thelato  in 

case  of  homicide  for  housebreaking.  The 
two  second  members  of  the  sentences  are 
literally,  no  blood  for  him  and  blood  for 
him:  i.  e.  he  shall  not.  and  he  shall,  be  the 
subject  of  avenging  of  blood.  The  difference 
being,  that  by  breaking  house  or  fold  under 


cover  of  night,  he  renders  himself  justly 
liable  to  the  worst  suspicion  that  can  arise, 
and  must  suffer  the  consequences  :  if  by 
day,  there  is  light  to  discern  him  and  his 
object,  and  he  must  not  be  blindly  dealt 
with.  As  in  xxi.  20,  hoic  his  slaj-er  is  to 
be  punished  is  left  to  the  judges  to  deter- 
mine. 4.]  On  the  rationale,  see  above 
on  ver.  1.  The  literal  words  are,  If  the 
theft  in  finding  be  found,  i.  e.  if  there  be 
no  doubt  about  the  finding.  The  "  certainly  " 
of  the  A.  Y.  hardly  suggests  this.  Again, 
it  is  literally,  from  an  ox  even  to  an  ass, 
even  to  small  cattle.  5.  ]  It  is  plain 
by  the  meaning  of  the  Hebrew  verb  "  allow 
to  stray,"  and  mere  fact  of  simple  resti- 
tution being  ordered,  that  injury  to  a  neigh- 
bour's field  by  accidental  sti-aying,  and  not 
by  intentional  encroachment,  is  intended. 
The  A.  y.  rather  favours  the  latter  idea. 
The  Samaritan  Pentateuch  and  the  LXX. 
have,  "  he  shall  make  restitution  out  of  his 
own  field  according  to  its  fruit.  But  if  he 
eat  dozen  all  the  field,  he  shall  make  rcsti- 
tutio7i  out  of  the  best,"  &c.  6.]  This 
might  well  be  from  the  universal  practice  of 
burning  the  weeds  and  roots  when  the 
ground  has  been  cleansed  after  the  harvest. 
See  Isa.  v.  24 ;  xlvii.  14. 

7 — 15.]   Laics  7-egarding  things  deposited 
or  borroived.  7.]   stuff,  i.  e.  any  kind 


1—15. 


EXODUS. 


323 


%  If  a  man  shall  deliver  unto  liis  neig-libour  money  or  stuff 
to  keep,  and  it  be  stolen  out  of  the  man's  house ;  if  the 
thief  be  found,  let  him  pay  double.  «  If  the  thief  be  not 
found,  then  the  master  of  the  house  shall  be  brought  unto 
God,  to  see  whether  he  have  put  his  hand  unto  his  neigh- 
bour's goods.  9  For  every  matter  of  trespass,  for  ox,  for 
ass,  for  sheep,  for  raiment,  or  for  any  lost  thiug,  Avhich  a 
man  declareth  to  be  so,  the  cause  of  both  parties  shall  come 
before  God ;  a)id  whom  God  sliall  condemn,  ho  shall  p;iy 
double  unto  his  neighbour.  10  jf  r^  j^^^j^  (i^^^iivd.  ^mto  liis 
neighbour  an  ass,  or  an  ox,  or  a  sheep,  or  any  beast,  to 
keep  ;  and  it  die,  or  be  hurt,  or  driven  away,  no  man  see- 
ing it :  11  fl/cii  shall  an  oath  of  Jehovah  be  between  them 
both,  that  he  hath  not  put  his  hand  unto  his  neighbour's 
goods ;  and  the  owner  of  it  shall  accept  thereof,  and  he 
shall  not  make  //  good,  i^  ji^^id  if  it  be  stolen  from  his 
charge,  he  shall  make  restitution  unto  the  owner  thereof- 
12  If  it  be  torn  in  pieces,  then  let  him  bring  it  for  witness, 


and  he  shall  not  make  good  that  which  Avas  torn. 


14 


%  And  if  a  man  borrow  an  animal  of  his  neighbour,  and  it 
be  hurt,  or  die,  the  owner  thereof  being  not  with  it,  he 
shall  surely  make  it  good,     i'^  But  if  the  owner  thereof  be 


of  goods  whatever.  In  Deut.  xxii.  5 ;  Isa. 
Ixi.  10,  the  Mord  is  used  of  garments :  let 
him  pay  double,  as  in  ver.  4.  8.]  Hire 

again  we  have  the  expression  unto  God 
(Ha-Elohim) :  and  I  have  rendered  it,  as  in 
ch.  xxi.  6,  simply,  leaving  the  inference  to 
he  drawn  that  it  must  be  to  Judges  sitting 
with  theocratic  power.  See  note  there.  The 
LXX.  and  Vulgate  render,  "  aiid  he  shall 
swear  that  he  hath  not,"  &c. :  and  this  is 
defended  by  Knobcl  and  Ivalisch.  But  Keil 
impugns  it,  and  apparently  with  reason. 
9.]  to  be  so,  viz.  to  he  matter  of 
trespass.  On  the  coming  before  God,  and 
God  condemning,  see  above. 

10 — 13.]  0/  animals  given  in  charge  to 
another.  These  rules  have  a  reference  back 
to  the  last,  and  would  tend  to  define  in  some 
uncertain  cases  the  action  of  the  judges  in 
ver.  9.  The  case  here  supposed  would  arise 
when  a  flock  or  herd  was  entrusted  to  a 
shepherd  or  neatherd.  Cattle  would  often 
he  driven  away  by  the  predatory  expedi- 
tions of  enemies  ;  compare  1  Chron.  v.  21; 


2  Chron.  xiv.  15;   Job  i.   15,   17;   and  a 
figurative  use  of  the  fact  in  Jer.  xiii.   17. 
11.]  he,  i.  c.  the  person  to  wjioni  the 
trust  was  committed.  12.]  The  A.  V. 

"  from  him  "  does  not  express  the  original, 
which  is  de  chez  lui,  from  his  premises,  or 
from  his  custody.  And  herein  lies  the  dif- 
ference from  the  case  in  ver.  10.  lie  ought 
to  keep  a  guard  over  his  own  premises  or 
charge,  which  would  not  be  expected  of  him 
in  the  other  case.  See  Gen.  xxxi.  39. 
restitution,  apparently  single,  or  perhaps 
according  to  that  prescribed  in  case  of  sim- 
ple theft,  viz.  double.  13.]  The  car- 
case, or  part  of  it,  would  in  some  cases  be  a 
testimony  that  the  depositary  had  exerted 
himself  to  defend  the  deposit  (sec  1  Sam. 
xvii.  34,  f. ;  Amos  iii.  12):  or  at  least  would 
substantiate  the  fact  of  the  violent  death.  If 
no  such  evidence  were  forthcoming,  the  case 
would  go  by  default  against  the  depositary. 
14,  15]  Itijiirg  to  borrowed  and  hired 
a7iimals.  The  difference  made  by  the  owner's 
presence  would  be,  that  he  would  have  seen 


324 


EXODUS. 


XXII. 


12.     1  Sam. 


witli  it,  lie  shall  uot  make  it  good  :  if  it  ie  an  hired  ihmij, 
it  came  for  its  hire.  ^^  ^  And  if  a  man  entice  a  maid  that 
is  not  betrothed,  and  lie  with  her,  he  shall  surely  endow 
her  to  be  his  wife.  ^^  If  her  father  utterly  refuse  to  give 
her  unto  him,  he  shall  pay  money  according  to  the  '^  dowry 
of  virgins,  ^^  1[  Thou  shalt  not  suffer  a  witch  to  live.  ^^ 
5[  Whosoever  lieth  with  a  beast  shall  surely  be  put  to 
death.  20  ^  jjg-  i\^q^  sacrificeth  xmto  gods,  save  unto  Je- 
hovah only,  he  shall  be  ^devoted.  2i  ^  Thou  shalt 
neither  vex  a  ^stranger,  nor  oppress  him:  for  ye  were 
strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt.  2-  ^  Ye  shall  not  afHict 
any  widow,  or  fatherless  child.  23  jf  ^hou  afflict  them  in 
any  wise,  and  they  cr}'-  at  all  unto  me,  I  will  surely  hear 
their  cry ;  ^^  and  my  wrath  shall  wax  hot,  and  I  will  kill 
you  with  the  sword  ;  and  your  wives  shall  be  widows,  and 


that  the  calamity  was  unavoidable,  or  if 
avoidable,  he  did  not  prevent  it :  whereas  in 
case  of  his  absence  no  evidence  as  to  this 
point  would  exist,  and  in  default  of  it  judg- 
ment must  go  against  the  borrower.  If  it 
were  hired,  then  the  contract  of  hiring  in- 
cluded the  possibility  of  accident,  and  that 
was  enough.  But  of  course  this  implies 
that  the  injury  was  bona  fide  an  accident, 
and  not  owing  to  malice,  fraud,  or  negli- 
gence. 16,  17.]  A  girl  belongs  to  her 
father  as  long  as  she  is  unbetrothed  (ch.  xxi. 
7),  and  her  case  is  treated  accordingly  in 
connexion  with  the  rights  of  property.  A 
seducer  is  bound,  if  the  father  consents,  to 
marry  her  whom  he  has  seduced.  (It  would 
be  well  if  this  were  also  the  law  among  our- 
selves :  see  a  note  of  Bp.  Wordsworth  here.) 
In  this  case  he  had  to  pay  the  accustomed 
dowry  (see  on  Gen.  xxxiv.  12  ;  and  the  some- 
what different  enactment  in  Deut.  xxii.  29, 
where  the  amount  is  fixed  at  fifty  pieces  of 
silver).  If  the  father  refused  his  consent, 
the  seducer  was  to  pay  a  fine  equal  to  the 
usual  dowry  of  a  virgin:  see  above.  On 
the  seduction  of  a  betrothed  virgin  see  Deut. 
xxii.  23. 

18 — 30.]  Various  enactments.  It  is  not 
easy  to  discover  any  connexion  with  M'hat 
has  preceded  :  and  in  the  original  the  con- 
text is  broken  off  by  the  dropping  of  the  If 
which  has  hitherto  strung  together  the  en- 
actments. The  use  of  the  somewhat  un- 
usual not  suffer  to  live  instead  of  "put  to 


death  "  has  been  variously  accounted  for, 
but  is  deprived  of  weight  by  the  usual  ex- 
pression being  found  in  the  repeated  enact- 
ment, Lev.  XX.  27.  There  too  we  find  the 
masculine  gender  used,  whereas  here  the 
feminine  seems  to  imply  the  fact  that  such 
persons  were  most  frequently  of  that  sex. 
19.]  See  Lev.  xviii.  23;  xx.  15. 
20.]  shall  he  devoted,  i.e.  to  Jehovah, 
in  which  case  death  was  imperative:  see  ref. 
Lev.  In  rendering  the  expression  we  ought 
not  to  explain  it,  but  to  keep  to  the  expression 
of  the  original.  21 — 27-]  La%rs  against 

oppression :  first  of  the  stranger,  Canaanitish 
and  remaining  among  them  (ref.),  or  not 
Canaanitish, — answering  to  their  own  posi- 
tion in  Egypt :  not  the  proselyte,  as  some 
interpreters,  which  would  make  void  the 
motive  assigned.  The  LXX.  clearly,  in 
using  the  word  " prosehjtos,"  had  no  such 
meaning  as  that  which  proselyte  now  bears, 
for  it  adds,  ye  u-ere  "proselytoi"  w  the 
land  of  Egypt.  On  the  sense  see  the  fuller 
ch.  xxiii.  9;  also  Lev.  xix.  34;  Deut.  x. 
19  ;  xxiv.  18,  22.  Then  if  not  a  stranger, 
much  less  the  destitute  and  poor  of  your 
own  people :  the  widow  and  fatherless.  See 
diflTerent  instances  of  their  oppression  in  Isa. 
i.  23;  Jer.  v.  28;  Deut.  xxiv.  17;  xxvii. 
19;  Job  xxiv.  3;  Isa.  x.  2;  Micah  ii.  9; 
2  Kings  iv.  1 ;  Job  xxiv.  9.  On  the  other 
hand,  special  kindnesses  were  to  be  shewn 
to  such  persons:  compare  Deut.  xxiv.  19  — 
21,  29;  xvi.  11,  14;  xxvi.  12,  13.  24.] 


1  (J— XXIII.  1. 


EXODUS. 


325 


your  chilclren  fatherless.  25  ^  jf  ^i^qu  lend  money  to  ayii/ 
of  my  people  that  is  poor  by  tlice,  tliou  sliult  not  be  to  him 
as  an  J"  exactor,  neither  shalt  thou  lay  upon  him  usury.  26 
If  thou  at  all  take  thy  neighbour's  raiment  to  pledge,  thou 
shalt  deliver  it  unto  him  by  that  the  sun  goeth  down :  27 
for  that  is  his  covering,  it  only  is  his  raiment  for  his  skin : 
wherein  shall  he  sleep  ?  and  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when 
he  crieth  unto  me,  that  I  will  hear ;  for  I  am  gracious. 
2!^  ^f  Thou  shalt  not  revile  God,  nor  curse  the  ruler  of  thy 
people.  29  ^  Thou  shalt  not  delay  to  qfer  thy  ''fulness  and 
thine  outflowing  :  the  firstborn  of  thy  sons  shalt  thou  give 
unto  me.  ^O  Likewise  shalt  thou  do  with  thine  oxen,  and 
with  thy  sheep :  seven  days  it  shall  be  with  his  dam  ;  on 
the  eighth  day  thou  shalt  give  it  me.  ^i  ^  ^^d  y^  shall 
be  holy  men  unto  me  :  neither  shall  ye  eat  amj  flesh  that  is 
torn  of  beasts  in  the  field  ;  ye  shall  cast  it  to  tlie  dogs. 
XXIII.  1  Thou  shalt  not  raise  a  false  report :  put  not  thine 


2Klnciiv.  1. 
!'•.  .IX.  11. 
lu.  1.  1.  < 


;  Nnm.  xriii. 
xxii.  i>. 


We  have  a  similar  tlireat  in  Tsa.  ix.  17. 
25 — 27.]  Nor  may  the  poor  and  needy 
be  oppressed  iu  lending  or  in  withholding 
the  pledge.  On  the  not  taking  usury  see 
on  the  general  command,  Lev.  xxii.  35,  fF.  : 
and  on  the  restoring  the  garment,  the  more 
detailed  injunctions,  Deut.  xxiv.  10,  S.  I 
am  gracious,  i.  c.  merciful,  taking  compas- 
sion on  him.  The  word  is  rendered  ^^  ffra- 
cious  "  always  in  the  A.  Y.,  seeing  that  of  the 
twelve  times  of  its  occurrence  it  is  five  times 
coupled  with  '■^merciful."  28.]  Blas- 

phemy of  God  and  rebellious  contempt  of 
rulers  come  under  the  same  category  of 
crime :  fear  thou  Jehovah  and  the  kinr/, 
I'rov.  xxiv.  21 ;  see  also  1  Pet.  ii.  17.  Some 
have  supposed  that  judges  or  magistrates  arc 
meant  by  Elohim  here,  and  so  A.  V. ;  but, 
as  before,  it  seems  best  to  keep  the  name  to 
its  sacred  and  simple  meaning  where  possi- 
ble, and  so  the  modern  Ilebraists,  Gesenius, 
Knobcl,  Kcil,  Kalisch.  Still  less  can  the 
view  of  Josephus  and  some  Jewish  expositors 
be  taken,  that  by  this  verse  they  were  for- 
bidden to  speak  evil  of  the  gods  of  the 
nations.  Such  an  idea  was  foreign  to  the 
Law,  in  which  all  those  gods  are  but  vanity : 
see  ch.  xxiii.  13.  The  punishment  for  blas- 
phemy was  death,  Lev.  xxiv.  11,  ff.  The 
reader  will  remember  St.  I'aul's  citation  of 
the  second  of  these  prohibitions  in  Acts  xxiii. 


5.  The  word  rendered  ruler  is  commonly 
used  in  the  law  of  the  chiefs  of  the  tribes, 
see  Num.  vii.  10,  and  throughout:  some- 
times of  those  of  the  divisions  of  the  tribes, 
Num.  iii.  24,  fF.  ;  but  also  of  kinr/s,  1  Kings 
xi.  34;  Ezck.  xii.  10,  al.  29,  30.]   Of 

the  offering  of  frst-fruits  to  God.  Tlie 
literal  words  are,  Thou  shalt  not  retard  thy 
fulness  and  thy  tear.  This  term  fulness 
is  used  only  in  refi'.,  and  there  in  the  same 
ambiguous  sense  as  here.  Although  there- 
fore it  probably  means  first-fruits  here,  it  is 
best  not  to  render  it  by  an  explanation,  but 
to  be  faithful.  By  thy  tear  is  meant  the 
first  and  choicest  of  the  llowing  of  thine  oil 
and  wine.  See  on  the  matter,  ch.  xxiii.  19  ; 
Deut.  xxvi.  2 — 4.  On  the  last  clause  see  ch. 
xiii.  2,  12,  and  more  detail  on  Num.  iii.  12. 
30.  ]  See  on  Lev.  xxii.  27.  31.]  The 
dedication  of  the  first-born  was  but  symbolic 
of  the  whole  people  being  God's :  see  ch.  iv. 
22.  On  the  injunction  of  the  latter  part  of 
the  verse  sec  Lev.  xvii.  15,  where  its  ground, 
as  preventing  the  incurring  of  uncleanncss, 
is  further  stated.  Tlie  Israelites  were  to  be 
especially  clean,  as  being  God's  peculiar 
people. 

XXin.    1 — 9.]    Rules  for  social  duties. 
1.]  The  two  clauses  are  closely  con- 
nected :  the  first  leads  on  to  the  second.     A 
false  report  is  literally  a  report  of  nothing- 


326 


EXODUS. 


XXIII. 


hand  with  the  wicked  to  be  a  witness  for  violence.  2 
%  Thou  shalt  not  follow  a  multitude  to  do  evil ;  neither  shalt 
thou  answer  in  a  cause  to  decline  after  many  to  wrest 
judgment :  ^  U  Neither  shalt  thou  give  advantage  to  a  poor 
man  in  his  cause.  ■*  H  If  thou  meet  thine  enemy's  ox  or 
his  ass  going  astray,  thou  shalt  surely  bring  it  back  to  him 
again.  ^  If  thou  see  the  ass  of  him  that  liateth  thee  lying 
under  his  burden,  and  wouldest  forbear  to  loose  it  for  him, 
thou  shalt  surely  loose  it  with  him.  ^  Thou  shalt  not  wrest 
the  judgment  of  thy  poor  in  his  cause.  ^  Keep  thee  far 
from  a  false  matter ;  and  the  innocent  and  righteous  slay 
thou  not :  for  I  will  not  justify  the  wicked.  ^  ^  And  thou 
shalt  take  no  gift :  for  the  gift  blindeth  them  that  see,  and 
perverteth  the  matters  of  the  righteous.  ^  ^  Also  thou 
shalt  not  oppress  a  stranger :  for  ye  know  the  heart  of  a 
stranger,  seeing  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt. 


ness  :  as  we  say  of  a  false  rumour,  "  there  is 
nothing  in  it.''  a  witness  for  violence, 

i.  c.  to  bring  about  an  oppressive  act. 
2.]  It  is  disputed  -wbethcr  tbcse  verses  are 
addressed  to  magistrates  or  to  ordinary 
men.  The  latter  seems  tbe  most  probable, 
as  there  is  no  indication  of  a  special  refer- 
ence. If  so,  the  law  M'ill  moan  that  none 
are  to  allow  themselves,  in  giving  testimony, 
to  be  inclined  to  the  popular  side  in  neglect 
of  truth  and  justice.  The  word  judgment 
is  not  in  the  original,  the  verb  being  used 
absolutely,  but  is  rightly  supplied  :  see  ver. 
6,  where  it  is  expressed.  3.]  Literally, 

adorn  a  poor  man,  i.  e.  give  him  additional 
favour  on  account  of  his  being  poor.  The 
A.  V.  '■^countenance''  may  express  too 
much, — as  if  it  meant  that  a  poor  man  was 
to  be  deterred  from  seeking  justice.  See 
the  same  enjoined  Lev.  xix.  15.  4,  5.] 

And  not  cnly  such  injustice,  but  lack  of 
kindly  service  owing  to  aversion  to  a  per- 
son is  forbidden.  The  same  is  re-enacted 
more  at  large  in  Deut.  xxii.  1 — 4.  As  Bp. 
Wordsworth  observes,  this  precept  is  pre- 
paratory to  the  evangelical  command,  "  Love 
your  enemies,"  Matt.  v.  43 — 45;  Rom.  xii. 
19 — 21.  There  is  some  difficulty  in  ver.  5. 
The  verb  rendered  "help"  in  the  A.  Y. 
primarily  signifies  to  loose  (from  bands  or 
chains),  and  hence,  and  most  commonly,  to 
leave.  Gesenius  and  some  others  (Kcil, 
e.  g.)  believe  that  the  verb  is  used  here  first 


in  its  ordinary,  and  secondly  in  its  primary, 
meaning:  thou  shalt  forbear  to  leave  it  to 
him  (i.  e.  thou  shalt  not  leave  the  animal 
to  him,  to  manage  as  he  may),  tJiou  shalt 
surely  loose  it  (the  ass)  u'ith  him  (i.  e.  help 
thine  enemy  to  free  the  animal  from  its 
burden).  But  why  should  not  the  verb  be 
used  both  times  in  its  primary  sense  ?  Why 
sliould  Ave  not  render,  "  and  M'ouldest  forbear 
to  loose  it  for  him,  thou  slialt  surely  loose 
it  with  him  .'  "  Thus  we  need  not  have  re- 
course to  two  senses,  and  all  seems  easy, 
aud  in  accordance  with  the  parallel,  Deut. 
xxii  4.  The  other  renderings  may  be  seen 
discussed   in   Kalisch,  pp.  445-7.  6-] 

Seems  best  to  cohere  with  ver.  3,  and  vv.  4, 
5  to  be  an  insertion  interrupting  the  con- 
test. The  command  is  the  converse  of  that 
in  ver.  3, — the  poor  is  not  to  be  disad- 
vantaged  any  more  than  advantaged  on  ac- 
count of  liis  poverty.  7.]  States  the 
general  principle  of  uprightness  and  equity, 
on  the  motive  of  the  unerring  judgment  of 
the  righteous  God.  8.]  The  custom 
of  the  East  (and  not  qf  the  East  only)  is  to 
approach  witnesses  and  judges  with  presents 
to  win  their  favour.  It  is  literally,  blind- 
eth the  open  (eyes),  perverteth  the  mat- 
ters (the  cause)  of  the  righteous,  i.  e. 
turns  aside  the  cause  of  the  righteous  from 
its  proper  issue.  See  1  Sam.  viii.  3. 
9.]  This  is  not  a  simple  repetition  of  ch. 
xxii.  21.     It  is  placed  here  in  reference  to 


2—16. 


EXODUS. 


327 


10  And  six  years  thou  slialt  sow  thy  land,  and  slialt  gather 
in  the  fruits  thereof :  lM)ut  the  seventh  ijcar  thou  shalt 
let  it  rest  and  lie  still;  that  the  poor  of  thy  people  may 
eat:  and -what  they  leave  the  beasts  of  the  held  shall  eat. 
In  like  manner  thou  shalt  deal  with  thy  vineyard,  and 
with  thy  olivcyard.  i-  tSix  days  thou  shalt  do  thy  work, 
and  on  the  seventh  day  thou  shalt  rest :  that  thine  ox  and 
thine  ass  may  rest,  and  the  son  of  thy  handmaid,  and  the 
stranger,  may  be  '*  refreshed.  ^^  And  in  all  tilings  that  I 
have  said  unto  you  be  circumspect :  and  make  no  mention 
of  the  name  of  other  gods,  neither  let  it  be  heard  out  of 
thy  mouth.  ^^  ^  Three  times  thou  shalt  keep  a  feast  unto 
me  in  the  year.  ^^  Thou  shalt  keep  the  feast  of  unleavened 
bread :  (thou  shalt  eat  unleavened  bread  seven  days,  as  I 
commanded  thee,  in  the  time  appointed  of  the  month  Abib; 
for  in  it  thou  camcst  out  from  Egypt :  and  none  shall  ap- 
pear before  me  empty :)  ^^  and  the  feast  of  harvest,  the 
firstfruits  of  thy  labours,  which  thou  hast  sown  in  the  field  : 


rh.  XX\\.  17. 

'1  Sam.  xtI. 
14. 


doing  justice,  as  in  Dcut.  xxiv.  17;  xxvii. 
19.  And  we  have  tlie  former  motive  pi-css- 
ed  lioiiie  by  the  romindiiiij  them  that  they 
knew  the  feelings  of  a  stranger.  lie  feels 
himst4f,  as  Knobel  observes,  enough  al- 
ready oppressed  by  his  situation  as  such.  , 

10 — -19.]  Laws  about  sacred  times,  of 
■which  the  sabbatical  year  is  the  first  men- 
tioned. The  former  verses  of  the  passage, 
10 — 12,  serve  as  a  transition  from  what 
has  gone  before  to  what  follows,  resting  the 
ordinance  on  the  interests  of  the  poor.  Then 
witli  ver.  13  the  context  passes  to  a  positive 
ordinance.  On  vv.  10,  11,  see  Lev.  xxv. 
2 — 7,  where  the  same  commands  are  given 
more   in  detail.  12.]    The  ground  of 

tlie  sabbatical  year,  the  day  of  rest  itself,  is 
again  enjoined,  but  now  in  strict  reference 
to  the  context,  not  as  a  solemn  ordinance 
to  Jehovah,  but  with  tlie  motive  of  rest  and 
refreshment  (literally,  breathing)  to  a  man's 
cattle  and  dependents.  13.  j  The  former 

clause  serves  as  a  solemn  conclusion  and 
caution  regarding  the  rules  which  have  pre- 
ceded; the  latter  leads  on  to  what  follows, 
by  enforcing  loyalty  to  Jehovah  alone  and 
repudiation  of  all  other  gods.  See  on  the 
form  of  this  command,  I'sal.  xvi.  4  ;  Hosea 
ii.  17  ;  Zech.  xiii.  2. 

14 — 17.]    Three  yearly  feasts  ordained. 


These  ordinances  are  repeated,  and  several 
singular  features  in  the  present  context  re- 
cur in  ch.  xxxiv.  18 — 26.  See  also  Num. 
xxviii.  18—31;  Deut.  xvi.  16,  17;  and  2 
Chron.  viii.  13.  15.]  To  the  recitation 

of  what  was  commanded  in  ch.  xii.  ID,  f. 
and  ch.  xiii.  6,  f.,  is  added  the  injunction, 
not  to  appear  before  God  empty,  i.  c,  to 
bring  gifts  according  to  God's  bounty  to 
each,  Deut.  xvi.  17.  These  gifts  would  be 
partly  the  passover  lambs,  of  which  a  share 
was  the  Lord's  (ver.  18),  partly  the  thank- 
offerings  at  the  passover  of  wliich  we  read 
2  Chron.  xxx.  22.  This  ord<T,  not  to  ap- 
pear before  God  empty,  which  is  here  at- 
tached to  one  feast  only,  belongs  to  all  three 
in  Deut.  xvi.  16,  17.  16.]  The  .second 

feast,  called  here  the  feast  of  harvest,  is 
otherwise  the  feast  of  necks  (ch.  xxxiv.  22  ; 
Deut.  xvi.  16).  It  was  to  be  kept  fifty 
days  after  the  waving  of  the  sheaf  of  the 
first-fruits,  Lev.  xxiii.  15,  f.,  and  was  hence 
called  Pentecost,  the  fiftitth.  The  Jewish 
writer  I'hilo  calls  it  the  feast  of  first-fruits. 
The  third  feast  is  that  of  ingathering, 
the  time  of  which,  depending  on  tlie  occur- 
rence of  harvest,  is  not  here  specified.  Hut 
in  Lev.  xxiii.  34 ;  Num.  xxix.  12,  it  is 
fixed  to  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  seventh 
mouth.     Keil  directs  attention  to  the  fact. 


328 


EXODUS. 


XXIII. 


and  the  feast  of  ingathering,  in  the  end  of  the  year,  when 
thou  gatherest  in  thy  labours  out  of  the  field.  17  Three 
times  in  the  year  all  thy  males  shall  appear  before  the 
Lord  Jehovah,  i^  Thou  shalt  not  offer  the  blood  of  my 
sacrifice  with  leavened  bread  ;  neither  shall  the  fat  of  my 
feast  remain  until  the  morning.  19  The  first  of  the  first- 
fruits  of  thy  land  thou  shalt  bring  into  the  house  of  Jeho- 
vah thy  God.  Thou  shalt  not  seethe  a  kid  in  its  mother's 
milk.     20  ^  Behold,  I  send  an  Angel  before  thee,  to  keep 


that  it  is  not  said  "  when  thou  hast  gathered  " 
(A.  V..),  but  when  thou  gatherest :  the 
feast  was  during,  not  at  the  end  of,  harvest. 
He  also  insists  on  it,  that  the  end  of  the 
year,  here  spoken  of,  is  not  a  formal,  but 
only  an  economical  description  of  the  time, 
at  the  end  of  the  agricultural  year  as 
measured  by  the  works  of  the  field.  This 
third  feast  is  called  the  feast  of  tabernacles 
in  Lev.  xxiii.  34;  Deut.  xvi.  16:  see  there. 
17.]  Of  this  nothing  is  said  in  the 
ordinance  of  these  feasts,  Lev.  xxiii.  4,  ff., 
but  it  appears  in  Deut.  xvi.  16,  with  the 
specification  of  "t«  the  place  which  he  shall 
choose.'"  By  the  mention  of  males,  women 
were  not  excluded :  see  1  Sam  i.  3,  ff. ;  nor 
children,  see  Luke  ii.  41,  ff. 

18,  19.]  Various  ordi?iances  relating  to 
the  manner  of  offering  to  God  at  these 
times.  18.]  In  the  parallel  ch.  xxxiv. 

25,  for  offer  we  have  slay.  with  is  liter- 
ally over,  not  meaning  local  superimposi- 
tion,  but  supcraddition,  i.  e.  while  leavened 
bread  is  in  thine  house.  As  the  ofi'erer's 
portion,  so  God's  (see  Lev.  iii.  16,  and  com- 
pare Lev.  vii.  23—25),  was  to  be  consumed 
then  and  there.  The  commands  here  given 
are  restricted  to  the  three  feasts :  but  it 
would  appear  from  Lev.  ii.  11;  vii.  15; 
xxii.  30,  that  tlie  same  applied  to  all  sacri- 
fices. Keil  understands  the  fat  of  my  feast 
(as  he  would  render)  to  refer  to  that  of 
the  passover  only,  the  feast  jaar  excellence,  as 
specified  in  ch.  xxxiv.  25.  He  says  the 
command  would  have  been  unnecessary  in 
the  case  of  ordinary  sacrifices,  as  the  fat  was 
always  biu-nt  at  the  time  of  ofi'ering.  19.] 
This  rule  refers  to  the  second  of  the  three 
feasts,  and  enjoins  the  ofi'ering  in  God's 
house  of  the  very  earliest  of  the  fruits ;  see 
Lev.  xxiii.  17  for  more  particulars.  Per- 
haps also  the  waving  of  the  first  sheaf.  Lev. 
xxiii.  10,  is  intended.  The  second  rule  (which 


is  repeated  in  the  same  connexion  in  ch. 
xxxiv.  26,  and  in  another  in  Deut.  xiv.  21) 
is  understood  generally  by  the  Jewish  com- 
mentators to  forbid  altogether  the  cooking 
of  fiesh  in  milk  :  so  Onkelos,  "  ye  shall  not 
eat  flesh  tvith  milk."  According  to  this 
idea,  its  mother's  milk  is  a  general  expres- 
sion, without  reference  to  any  particular  she 
goat.  Eut  this  seems  doing  violence  to  the 
text :  and  tlie  general  view  to  be  preferable, 
which  regards  the  command  to  be  one  pro- 
hibiting an  act  which  turns  the  merciful 
provision  of  the  Creator  for  sustenance  into 
an  accomplice,  as  it  were,  in  the  destruction 
of  life.  The  command  is  a  precious  one,  as 
shewing  the  Divine  care  even  for  those 
natural  feelings  which  we  are  apt  to  set  down 
as  sentimental,  and  to  hold  too  much  in 
contempt.  Some  suppose  that  the  command 
has  a  reference  to  some  pagan  superstitious 
practice.  20—33.]   Promises   of  Je- 

hovah's presence  and  help  by  means  of  an 
angel,  aiid  directions  how  to  reverence  and 
obey  him ;  also  j)romises  that  Israel  shall 
prevail  over  the  natioyis  of  Canctati,  and 
orders  respecting  their  treatment  of  those 
natio7is.  20.]  It  is  beside  the  purpose 

of  this  commentary  to  enter  into  a  theolo- 
gical discussion  whether  or  not  this  angel 
were  personally  identical  with  our  blessed 
Lord.  We  know  that  lie  is  the  manifesta- 
tion to  us  of  the  Father  :  but  we  also  know 
that  there  is  every  difference  between  the 
way  in  which  God  spoke  to  the  fathers  by 
angels  and  messengers,  and  that  in  which 
He  now  speaks  to  us  by  His  Son.  On  such 
ground  we  do  not  venture  to  tread,  nor  to 
aflirm  that  because  Malachi  calls  Christ  the 
Angel  of  the  Covenant,  therefore  every 
angel  manifesting  the  Divine  Presence  and 
clothed  with  the  Divine  attributes  must 
necessarily  be  our  Lord  Himself.  Such 
speculations  seem  to  us  to  lead  to  no  result, 


17—28. 


EXODUS. 


329 


thee  in  the  way,  and  to  bring  tlice  into  the  place  wliicli  I 
liave  preiiared.  -^  Beware  of  liini,  and  obey  his  voice, 
provoke  him  not ;  lor  he  will  not  pardon  your  transgres- 
sions :  for  my  name  is  in  him.  -'-  For  if  thou  shalt  indeed 
obey  his  voice,  and  do  all  tliat  I  speak ;  then  I  will  be  an 
enemy  unto  thine  enemies,  and  an  adversary  unto  thine 
adversaries.  -^  For  mine  Angel  shall  go  before  thee,  and 
bring  thee  in  unto  the  Amorites,  and  the  Ilittites,  and  the 
Perizzites,  and  the  Canaanites,  the  Ilivites,  and  the  Jebus- 
ites :  and  I  will  cut  them  off.  -^  Thou  shalt  not  bow 
down  to  their  gods,  nor  serve  them,  nor  do  after  their 
works :  but  thou  shalt  utterly  overthrow  them,  and  quite 
break  down  their  f  images.  25  ^^^  jq  shall  serve  Jeho- 
vah your  God,  and  he  shall  bless  thy  •'bread,  and  thy 
^  water ;  and  I  will  ttdvc  sickness  away  from  the  midst  of 
thee.  20  ^  There  shall  nothing  cast  their  young,  nor  bo 
barren,  in  thy  land :  the  number  of  thy  days  I  will  fulfil. 
2'  I  will  send  my  fear  before  thee,  and  will  ^  trouble  all  the 
people  to  whom  thou  shalt  come,  and  I  will  make  all  thine 
enemies  turn  their  backs  unto  thee.     ^8  ^^d  I  will  send 


+  or,  pUlaru 

b  Ina.  iil.  1  ; 
XXX.  'Jl; 
xxxiii.  10. 


and  to  be  altogether  beyond  our  powers. 
See  notes  on  ch.  iii.  2,  and  on  the  phices 
there  referred  to  ;  and,  besides,  ch.  xxxii.  31 ; 
xxxiii.  2.  In  xxxiii.  14,  15  the  expres- 
sion is  varied  for  "  the  Face  of  God  "  going 
with  them.  The  visible  metliod  of  the  lead- 
ing of  this  angel  was  by  the  piUar  of  lire  and 
cloud:  see  ch.  xiv.  19.  21.]  He  is  no 

ci-eated  angel,  but  a  form  of  the  Divine 
I'rescnce,  bearing  the  name  pf  Jehovali,  as 
in  ch.  xiii.  21,  and  clothed  with  His  attri- 
butes, and  indeed  identified  in  action  (ver. 
22)  with  Him  :  for  it  is  not  said,  "  he  will  be 
an  enemy,"  &c.,  but  "/  will  be,"  as  equi- 
valent :  and  (23)  the  way  in  which  this  will 
be  shewn  is  by  his  going  before  thee,  and  his 
cutting  off  the  nations.  And  (24,  If.)  this 
obedience  to  him  will  be  shewn  by  utter 
separation  from  those  nations  and  their 
idolatry.  Keil  observes  that  these  images 
were,  strictly  speaking,  memorial  pillars  or 
engraved  upright  stones  dedicated  to  tlicir 
gods :  and  refers  to  1  Kings  xiv.  23,  wliich 
see.  On  the  breaking  down  commanded, 
see  ch.  xxxiv.  13  ;  !Num.  xxxiii.  52 ;  l)iut. 
vii.  5,  25  ;  xii.  2.  25,  If.]  The  temporal 

blessings  which  should  follow  serving  Je- 


hovah'thcir  God.  bread  and  water,  as  in 
reff.,  for  the  chief  nourishments  of  life.  On 
the  promise  of  immunity  from  sickness,  see 
ch.  XV.  26 ;  and  the  opposite  set  forth,  Lev. 
xxvi.  16  ;  Dent,  xxviii.  21,  if.  26.]  Sec 

Lev.  xxvi.  9;  Deut.  xxviii.  11;  xxx.  9. 
The  latter  clause  implies  that  thy  days  shall 
not  be  cut  short  by  accident  or  failure  of 
strength,  but  sliall  iill  up  the  allotted  life  of 
man.  See  a  similar  promise  with  regard  to 
the  days  of  the  Messiah,  Isa.  Ixv.  20. 
27.]  Literally,  will  give  thine  enemies' 
necks  toward  thee  :  see  I'sal.  xviii.  40  ;  x\i. 
12  ;  and  compare  Josh.  vii.  8,  12.  28.] 

"  The  hornet,"  says  Dr.  Tristram,  "  is  abund- 
ant in  the  Holy  Land ;  the  species  are  larger 
tliau  ours :  instances  arc  on  record  in  pro- 
fane history,  where  hornets  have  multiplied 
to  such  a  degree  as  to  become  a  pest  to  the 
inhabitants.  But  it  is  probable  here— con- 
sidering tliat  nothing  is  related  of  any  such 
material  allies  of  Israel,  and  that  in  reff. 
Josh.,  where  the  hornet  is  stated  to  have 
been  sent,  and  to  have  driven  out  Silion  and 
Og,  we  know  that  they  were  otherwise  over- 
come— that  the  word  is  metaphorically  used 
of  a  panic,  and  means,  as  Augustine  inter- 


330 


EXODUS. 


XXIII. 


d  Deut.  Tii.  20. 


^hornets  before  tliee,  wliicli  sliall  drive  out  tlie  Hivite,  tlie 
Canaanite,  and  the  Hittite,  from  before  thee.  -^  I  will  not 
drive  them  out  from  before  thee  in  one  year ;  lest  the  land 
become  desolate,  and  the  beast  of  the  field  multiply  against 
thee.  30  ]3y  little  and  little  I  will  drive  them  out  from 
before  thee,  until  thou  be  increased,  and  inherit  the  land. 
21  And  I  will  set  thy  bounds  from  the  Hed  sea  even  unto 
the  sea  of  the  Philistines,  and  from  the  desert  unto  the 
river  :  for  I  will  deliver  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  into 
your  hand ;  and  thou  shalt  drive  them  out  before  thee. 
•^^  Thou  shalt  '^make  no  covenant  with  them,  nor  with  their 
gods.  ^'^  They  shall  not  dwell  in  thy  land,  lest  they  make 
thee  sin  against  me :  for  if  thou  serve  their  gods,  it  will 
surely  be  a  snare  unto  thee.  XXIY.  ^  And  unto  Moses 
he  said,  Come  up  unto  Jehovah,  thou,  and  Aaron,  Nadab, 
and  Abihu,  and  seventy  of  the  elders  of  Israel ;  and  wor- 
ship ye  afar  off.     ^  And  Moses  alone  shall  come  near  Je- 


prcts  it,  "  sharp  stings  of  fear,  by  -wbicli 
flyin;;  rumours  stung  them  so  that  they  fled." 
See  "\Visd.  xii.  8.  On  ver.  29,  see  the  fuller 
Deut.  vii.  22.  31.]  See  the  boundaries 

given  in  the  promise  to  Abraham,  Gen.  xv. 
18.  Then  it  was  from  the  river  of  Egypt 
(see  note  there)  to  the  Euphrates.  Here, 
from  tlie  Red  Sea  to  the  Mediterranean,  and 
from  the  desert,  i.  e.  the  Arabian  desert,  to 
the  Euphrates.  See  also  Deut.  xi.  24  ;  Josh. 
i.  3.  These  limits  were  approached  in  Solo- 
mon's time,  but  never  seem  to  have  been 
reached.  The  promise,  be  it  noticed,  was 
conditional  on  Israel's  perfect  loyalty  and 
obedience,  and  the  condition  was  never  ful- 
filled. 32.]  Ref.  Josh,  was  an  ex- 
ceptional case. 

XXIV.]  The  narratives  in  this  chapter 
are  remarkably  intertwined.  That  of  vv. 
1,  2,  9 — 11,  16,  17,  proceeds  continuously, 
and  the  same  is  the  case  with  that  of  vv. 
3—8,  12—15,  and  18.  1.]   It  is  not 

clear  on  what  portion  of  the  preceding  his- 
tory this  immediately  follows.  The  last 
notice  of  Moses  was  in  ch.  xx.  21,  where  he 
"drew  near  to  the  thick  darkness  ichere 
God  was,"  and  received  from  God  the 
^'Judgments"  which  have  since  been  de- 
tailed. On  this  seem  continuously  to  fol- 
low our  vv.  3 — 8.  Knobel  thinks  that  our 
vv.  1,  2  follow  on  ch.  xix.  25,  where  Moses 


had  been  down  to  speak  to  the  people  after 
the  Divine  prohibition  of  their  ascending 
into  tlie  mount.  And  Kcil's  objection  to  this, 
that  the  words  And  unto  Moses  he  said 
imply  that  God  had  been  hitherto  speaking 
to  others  and  not  to  Moses  (whereas  on 
Knobel's  view  what  had  been  previously 
spoken  was  the  Decalogue  which  was  ad- 
dressed to  the  people  and  Moses),  is  not 
valid,  for  two  reasons  :  1.  That  unto  Moses 
lie  said  might  very  well  be  the  transitii)ii 
from  the  general  address  (to  Moses  and  the 
people)  to  the  particular  address  to  Moses 
himself:  and,  2.  That  these  introductory 
words  might  well  be  due  to  the  arranger  of 
the  compound  narrative,  in  order  to  set  this 
notice  in  its  present  place.  Knobel's  view 
is  made  very  probable  by  the  same  matter, 
of  the  people  not  going  up,  being  here 
dwelt  on,  as  there,  in  ch.  xix.  25.  See  notes 
there.  Nadab  and  Abihu  were  Aaron's  two 
eldest  sons,  see  ch.  xxviii.  1.  The  idea  of 
Bp.  Wordsworth,  that  "  their  presence  was 
required  at  this  time  because  the  precepts 
now  to  be  delivered  concerned  the  taber- 
nacle and  priesthood  to  which  Aaron  and 
his  sons  were  to  be  consecrated,"  does  not 
agree  with  the  fact  that  Moses  alone  re- 
ceived all  those  precepts  while  he  was  forty 
days  up  in  the  mount,  and  Aaron  was  with 
the  people  below:  compare  vv.  14,  18  with 


29— XXIY.  8. 


EXODrS. 


331 


HOVAii :  but  they  sliall  not  come  nigh  ;  neither  sluill  llio 
people  go  up  with  him.  3  ^  ^j^j  Moses  came  unci  tokl 
the  people  all  the  words  of  Jehovah,  and  all  the  judg- 
ments :  and  all  the  people  answered  with  one  voice,  and 
said.  All  the  words  which  Jehovah  hath  said  will  we  do. 
*  And  Moses  wrote  all  the  words  of  Jehovah,  and  rose  up 
early  in  the  morning,  and  builded  an  altar  under  the  hill, 
and  twelve  pillars,  according  to  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 
^  And  he  sent  ''young  men  of  the  children  of  Israel,  which 
offered  burnt  oiler ings,  and  sacrificed  peace  oll'erings  of 
oxen  unto  Jehovah.  ^  And  Moses  took  half  of  the  blood, 
and  put  it  in  basons ;  and  half  of  the  blood  he  sprinkled  on 
the  altar.  7  And  he  took  the  book  of  the  covenant,  and 
read  in  the  audience  of  the  people  :  and  they  said.  All  that 
Jehovah  hath  said  will  we  do,  and  be  obedient.  ^  And 
Moses  took  the  blood,  and  sprinkled  it  on  the  people,  and 
said.  Behold  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  which  Jehovah 


ch.  xxxiil.  11. 
■1  >am.  x»ill. 
l.V  I  Kini:> 
XX.  U.  S.O 
A>:U  V.  C,  10. 


ch.  xxxii.  1.  This  going  up  was  merely 
for  the  purpose  of  worsliip,  i.  c.  of  a  solemn 
approach  to  God  and  entering  into  llis 
presence  :  see  vv.  9 — 11,  which  in  the  nar- 
rative follow  immediately  on  ver.  2. 

3 — 8.  Follows  upon  ch.  xxiii.  33,  in  obe- 
dience to  God's  command,  ch.  xx.  22 ;  xxii. 
1.  The  words  of  Jehovah  and  the  judg- 
ments which  Moses  told  the  people  were  ch. 
XX.  22  ;  xxiii.  33  :  not  the  decalogue,  which 
the  people  themselves  had  heard.  The 
answer  of  the  people  in  ver.  3  is  the  same  as 
it  had  been  in  ch.  xix.  8,  when,  so  to  speak, 
the  preliminaries  of  the  covenant  were 
propounded  to  them.  4.]  Moses  now 

commits  to  writing  the  commands  which  he 
had  received — exclusive  again  of  the  deca- 
logue, M"hich  was  engraved  on  tables  of 
stone  by  God  himself.  A  book  has  been 
already  mentioned  ch.  xvii.  14,  but  this  one 
would  naturally  be  a  separate  one.  That 
was  of  the  wars  of  the  Lord ;  this  of  the 
covenant,  ver.  7.  The  altar  was  for  the 
coming  ceremony  ;  the  12  stone  pillars  (pro- 
bably in  a  circle  round  the  altar)  not  only 
symbolized  tiie  12  tribes,  but  possibly  also 
indicated  their  places,  or  those  of  their  repre- 
sentatives, at  the  ratifying  of  the  covenant. 
On  these  12  stones,  see  Jo.sh.  iv.  8,  20 ;  1 
Kings  xviii.  31,  32.  5.]  These  young 

men  are  called  in  the  Targum  of  Oukclos 


"  the  first-born  of  the  sons  of  Israel ;"  and 
ch.  xxii.  29  seems  to  favour  this.  The 
Levites  were  afterwards  taken  by  God  in 
lieu  of  the  lirst-born  (Num.  iii.  12,  41,  4o), 
who  before  that  seem  to  have  ministered  in 
holy  things.  Or  they  may  have  been  serv- 
ants of  Moses,  as  Joshua  was :  see  ch. 
xxxiii.  11,  where  he  is  called  "  Moses's 
servant,  a  young  man."  Keil  prefers  this 
view,  inasmuch  as  not  the  whole  people 
but  only  the  70  had  part  in  this  sacrilice. 
Bat  this  reasoning  rests  on  a  view  of  the 
narrative  which  in  our  opinion  is  quite  un- 
tenable. In  the  present  section  we  have 
nothing  to  do  with  the  70  :  it  is  the  whole 
people  who  arc  concerned  (vv.  7,  8).  On 
burnt-offerings,  see  Lev.  i.  ;  on  peace- 
oflferings.  Lev.  iii.  6 — 8.]  The  blood 

of  expiation  is  offered  to  God,  and  sprinkled 
upon  man,  but  not  clhcacious  unless  its 
work  of  cleansing  as  well  as  of  clearing 
from  guilt  be  jjerformcd.  Tiierefnre  Moses 
sprinkles  half  the  blood  on  the  altar, 
then  binds  tiie  penple  to  the  iioly  covenant, 
then  sprinkles  the  otlur  half  on  the  people. 
The  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
includes  the  book  of  the  covenant  also  among 
the  things  sprinkled:  see  notes  on  lltb.  ix. 
19.  It  is  called  the  blood  of  the  covenant, 
as  that  by  which  the  covenant  was  ratilifd 
and  became  efficacious.  The  Christian  mean- 


332 


EXODUS. 


XXIY. 


^^ 


hatli  made  witli  you  concerning  all  these  words.  ^  ^^  Then 
went  up  Moses,  and  Aaron,  Nadab,  and  Abihu,  and  seventy 
of  the  elders  of  Israel :  ^^  and  they  saw  the  God  of  Israel : 
and  there  was  under  his  feet  as  it  were  a  paved  work  of  a 
sapphire  stone,  and  as  it  were  the  body  of  heaven  in  his 
clearness.  ^  ^  And  upon  the  nobles  of  the  children  of  Israel 
he  laid  not  his  hand :  also  they  saw  God,  and  did  eat  and 
drink.  ^^  ^  ^j^d  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses,  Come  up  to 
me  into  the  mount,  and  be  there :  and  I  will  give  thee 
tables  of  stone,  with  the  law,  and  commandments  which  I 
have  written";  to  teach  them.  ^^  ^^j  Moses  rose  i;p,  and 
his  minister  Joshua :  and  Moses  went  up  into  the  mount 
of  God.  ^^  And  he  said  iinto  the  elders,  Tarry  ye  here  for 
us,  until  we  come  again  unto  you :  and,  behold,  Aaron  and 
Hur  are  with  you  :  if  any  man  have  any  matters  to  do,  let 
him  come  unto  them.  ^^  And  Moses  went  up  into  the 
mount,  and  a  cloud  covered  the  mount.  ^^  And  the  glory 
of  Jehovah  abode   upon  mount   Sinai,    and  the   cloud 


ing  of  this  -will  be  seen  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews.  It  is  not  the  pLace  to  insist  on  it 
here. 

9 — 11.]  Continuation  of  tv.  1,  2.  Je- 
hovah's comniiind  to  Moses  there  is  carried 
out.  10.]  They  saw  a  form  in  which 

God  was  pleased  to  appear  to  them — the 
glorious  appearance  of  the  God  of  Israel. 
"They  saw,"  says  Knobel,  "the  form  of 
God  clothed  in  glory  and  splendour  (see  ch. 
xvi.  10) :  and  accordingly  the  writer  uses 
(ver.  11)  not  Jehovah,  but  Elohim."  God 
Himself,  as  He  is,  none  can  see,  and  live, 
see  ch.  xxxiii.  20.  What  they  saw  we 
know  not :  clearly  not  so  much  as  Moses 
was  allowed  to  see,  "  the  form  of  Jehovah," 
Num.  xii.  8;  see  .also  ver.  1.  Dent.  iv.  12, 
15,  which  by  a  careless  observance  might  be 
supposed  inconsistent  with  this,  do  not  re- 
late to  the  same  occasion,  but  to  that  in  ch. 
xix.  16,  if.,  when  the  decalogue  was  given. 
Compare  the  progression  in  deiiniteness  in 
Isa.  vi.  1,  where  no  form  of  God  is  de- 
scribed;  Ezek.  i.  26,  where  HE  is  described 
as  in  a  human  form  ;  and  Dan.  vii.  9,  13  ; 
and  the  notes  on  those  places.  The  pave- 
ment of  sapphire  (sky  blue)  betokened  that 
Ilis  footstool  was  heaven :  and  the  same  is 
indicated  by  the  celestial  clearness  described. 
The  very  same  particulars  are  found  in  the 


vision   of  Ezekiel,   i.    26.  11.]    The 

nobles  (literally,  the  separated,  i.e.  selected), 
apparently  the  same  as  the  70, — for  none 
others  were  present, — were  allowed  without 
inquiry  to  see  the  Divine  vision.  God  did 
not  lay  His  hand,  i.  e.  did  not  break  forth 
(ch.  xix.  22)  upon  them.  And  they  partook 
of  the  sacrifice  there  before  God. 

12—15.]  Continuatio7i  of  yy.S—S.  After 
the  covenant  had  been  ratified,  God  called 
Moses  up  into  the  mount  to  receive  the  two 
tables.  He  is  to  be  there,  i.  e.  to  tarry  a 
considerable  time.  The  principal  purpose  is 
to  receive  the  tables  (see  ch.  xxsi.  18),  but 
also  to  receive  the  ordinances  respecting  the 
tabernacle,  whicli  follow.  He  takes  Joshua 
with  him,  commending  the  elders,  and  by 
implication  the  people,  to  Aaron  and  Hur 
(see  ch.  xvii.  10)  for  government  and  guid- 
ance. In  saying  here  he  did  not  mean  the 
very  spot  on  the  mount  where  he  left  them, 
but  below,  in  contrast  to  himself  and  Joshua 
who  were  going  up  (see  ch.  xxxii.  1,  tf.). 
Joshua  went  up  with  him,  though  it  is  not 
here  specified  :  see  ch.  xxxii.  17. 

16,  17.]  Connects  ivith  vv.  9—11.  This 
abiding  of  the  glory  six  days  on  the  mount 
does  not  seem  to  form  any  part  of  the  history 
which  we  have  just  left,  inasmuch  as  we  are 
repeatedly  told  that  Moses  was  in  the  mount 


!1— XXY.  4. 


EXODUS. 


333 


covered  it  six  days :  and  the  seventh  day  he  called  unto 
Moses  out  of  the  midst  of  the  cloud.  ^7  And  the  sight  of 
the  glory  of  Jkiiovaii  icas  like  devouring  tiro  on  the  top  of 
the  mount  in  the  eyes  of  the  children  of  Israel.  ^^  And 
Moses  went  into  the  midst  of  the  cloud,  and  gat  liim  up 
into  the  mount :  and  Moses  was  in  the  mount  forty  days 
and  forty  nights.  XXV.  i  And  Jehovah  spake  unto 
Moses,  saying,  ^  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  tliat 
they  bring  me  an  offering :  of  every  man  that  givcth  it 
s willingly  with  his  heart  ye  shall  take  my  offering,  ^ 
And  this  is  the  offering  which  ye  shall  take  of  them;  gold, 
and  silver,  and  ^  brass,  '^  and  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet. 


g  <-h.  ssrt'.  5, 


forty  days  and  forty  nights,  but  not  more. 
But  it  may  without  forcing  be  interwoven 
into  the  progress  of  that  other  narrative. 
After  Moses  and  Joshua  left  the  elders  and 
went  up  into  the  mount,  the  glory  was  visi- 
ble to  the  people  below  six  days,  and  in  the 
seventh  there  was  a  special  call  to  Moses 
(heard  perhaps  by  the  people)  to  approach 
nearer  to  God.  This  would  be  the  time  of 
his  separation  from  Joshua,  who  did  not 
(ver.  1)  come  near  to  Jehovah.  On  ver.  17, 
see  ch.  xix.  18.  18.]  Connects  either 

with  ver.  15,  or  with  the  preceding :  see 
above.     On  its  contents,  see  ch.  xxxiv.  28. 

XXV.  1 — XXXI.  17.]  Ordinances  of  the 
Tabernacle  and  the  Priesthood.  The  whole 
of  tliis  portion  belongs  in  the  main  to  the 
earlier  or  Elohistic  narrator,  as  also  does 
the  almost  exact  repetition  of  it  all  in  chap- 
ters XXXV. — xl.  Ilis  favourite  words  and  ex- 
pressions occur  throughout  them  both,  as 
will  be   seen   by  the   notes'.  1 — 9.] 

Tlie  order  for  an  otiering  for  the  sanctuary 
of  Jehovah. 

2.]  The  word  rendered  an  offering,  and 
constantly  used  in  Scripture  for  this  mean- 
ing, is  derived  from  a  root  signifying  to  lift, 
or  t}iake  high,  such  offerings  being  lifted  up 
from  earth  and  lower  uses  to  God  in  heaven  : 
see  further  in  notes  on  Lev.  ii.  9 ;  vii.  32. 
See  the  result  of  tliis  command,  ch.  xxxv.  20 
— 29 ;  xxxvi.  5 — 7.  It  has  been  well  remarked 
by  Ivnobul,  that  in  the  earliest  or  Elohistic 
narrative  (see  above)  the  yai-owrafi/e  disposi- 
tion of  Israel  to  God  and  His  covenant  are 
dwelt  upon  ;  while  the  later  narrative  notes 
more  their  shortcomings  and  rebellions. 
that  givetli  willingly  with  his  heart  is  lit- 


erally, whom  his  heart  shall  make  willing : 
see  ref.  3.]  First,  metals.    Tlie  various 

apportionments  of  these  in  the  tabernacle 
and  its  vessels  will  be  seen  as  we  proceed. 
They  were  used  in  order  of  value,  the  most 
precious  for  those  things  wliich  in  the  sym- 
bolism were  nearest  to  God  :  and  the  further 
from  Him,  the  less  costly.  Iron  is  not  men- 
tioned, brass  is  not  the  mixture  of  cop- 
per and  zinc  now  so  called,  whicli  was  not 
known  to  the  Hebrews,  but  probably  cop- 
per only  :  see  reff.,  which  have  been  chosen 
to  illustrate  this  point.  See  also  note  on 
Gen.  iv.  22.  4.]  Secondly,  colours. 
These  are  violet-jmrple,  then  red-purple, 
then  scarlet,  or  crimson.  The  first  of  these 
colours  was  extracted  from  the  shell-lish 
called  murex,  I'cspccting  whicli  tliere  is  con- 
siderable uncertainty.  It  was  the  precious 
colour  worn  by  kings  and  princes,  and  known 
to  us  as  "  the  purple."  The  second  was  also 
extracted  from  a  shell-fish,  called  2)Hrpura. 
The  third  is  expressed  in  the  Hebrew  by  the 
words  worm  of  the  red.  The  worm  is  the 
coccus  ilicis  of  Liun;eus,  found  on  the  ilex 
aquifolia.  Kalisch  suggests  that  the  word 
vermilion  may  best  express  the  colour,  liav- 
ing  itself  a  worm  {vermes)  in  its  composi- 
tion. Thirdly,  stujf's  and  other  materials. 
(a)  linen.  The  word  for  this  is  said  to  be 
Egyptian.  In  Ezek.  xxvii.  the  prophet 
calls  fine  linen  by  this  name  when  speaking 
of  Egypt  (ver.  7),  and  by  another  (ver.  16) 
when  speaking  of  Syria.  It  would  seem 
that  both  cotton  and  linen  fabrics  are  in- 
cluded in  the  word,  but  that  linen  alone  is 
to  be  understood  by  it  when  speaking  of  tlie 
tabernacle  and  sacred  uses  :  see  notes  on  ch. 


334 


EXODUS. 


XXY. 


i  Gen.xli.  42. 

Proi.  xxxi. 

22,  al  fr. 
j  So  Num.xxxi. 

20.     1  Sam. 

Xix.  13,  Hi. 
k  ch.  xxvi.  14; 

xxxix.  34. 
1  ch.  xxvi.  14 ; 

xxxix.  34. 

Ezek.  xvi.  10. 


n  Deut.  iv.  17. 
3  Kings  xvi. 
10.  Ps.cxliv 


and  ^fine  linen,  and  J  goats'  hair,  ^  and  ^  ranis'  skins  dyed 
red,  and  ^seals'  skins,  and  acacia  wood,  ^  oil  for  tlie  liglit, 
spices  for  anointing  oil,  and  for  sweet  incense,  ^  onyx 
stones,  and  stones  to  be  set  intheephod,  and  in  the  breast- 
plate. ^  And  let  them  make  me  a  sanctuary ;  tliat  I  may 
™ dwell  among  tbem.  ^  According  to  all  that  I  bave 
sbewed  tbee,  after  the  *^ pattern  of  the  tabernacle,  and  the 
pattern  of  all  the  instruments  thereof,  even  so  shall  ye 
make  it.  ^^  And  they  shall  make  an  ark  of  acacia  wood  : 
two  cubits  and  a  half  shall  he  the  length  thereof,  and  a 


xxviii.  42 ;  Ezek.  xliv.  17,  18.  (6) 
hair,  in  the  Hebrew,  simply  goats,  but  the 
nieauing  is  undoubted  :  compare  relf. 
6.]  [c)  Leather.  On  the  rams'  skins  dyed 
red,  see  reff.  On  the  other  animal,  which 
the  A.  V.  renders  badger,  there  is  consider- 
able doubt.  The  badger  is  found  in 
Palestine.,  but  can  hardly  have  been  suf- 
ficiently common  in  the  wilderness  of  Sinai 
to  have  provided,  as  it  did  (ch.  xxvi.  14),  an 
outer  covering  for  the  tabernacle.  The 
Hebrew  word  used  {tachash)  is  easily  iden- 
tified, says  Dr.  Tristram,  by  the  present 
Arabic  tiichash,  which  is  a  general  name  for 
the  various  species  of  seals,  dugongs,  and 
dolphins,  found  in  the  Red  Sea.  The  du- 
gong,  of  which  several  species  are  taken  in 
the  eastern  seas,  is  a  curious  marine  animal 
of  considerable  size,  the  skin  of  which  might 
■well  answer  for  the  purpose  of  an  outer 
covering  to  the  tabernacle.  But  as  the  skin 
of  the  dugong  is  coarse  and  thick,  and  the 
name  also  includes  the  seal,  and,  as  in  ref. 
Ezek.,  the  shoes  of  the  Jewish  ladies  are 
said  to  be  made  of  these  same  skins,  I  have 
thought  seal-skins  the  more  probable,  or,  at 
all  events,  the  more  intelligible  English 
rendering,  {d)  wood.  The  shittim  (kept 
in  its  Hebrew  form  by  the  A.  V.)  is  the 
acacia  segal,  the  only  timber  tree  of  any 
size  in  the  Arabian  desert.  Dr.  Tristram 
describes  it  as  a  gnarled  and  thorny  tree, 
somewhat  like  a  solitary  hawthorn  in  its 
habit,  but  much  larger.  The  timber  is  very 
hard  and  close-grained,  with  a  darker  heart, 
and  admirably  adapted  for  fine  cabinetwork. 
It  is  now  important  in  commerce  as  yielding 
the  gum  Arabic.  The  reader  should  be 
reminded  that  the  acacia  has  no  connexion 
Avith  the  species  commonly  known  by  that 
name  in  England,  which  is  a  papilionaceous 


tree,  and  properly  called  rohinin.  The  real 
acacia  is  a  mimosa,  with  yellow  ball-like 
flowers.  The  acacias  in  the  Sinaitic  penin- 
sula have  of  Lite  been  destroyed  by  the 
Arabs  to  make  charcoal.  See  Stanley,  p. 
2o.  (e)  Oil  and  spices.    On  the  former 

kind,  see  ch.  xxvii.  20,  21 ;  Lev.  xxiv.  1 — 4  : 
and  on  the  latter,  ch.  xxx.  23,  ff.  On  the 
incense,  ch.  xxx.  34,  fF.  7.]  (/)  Preci- 

ous stones.  On  the  onyx,  see  note,  Gen.  ii. 
12,  and  for  the  use  of  the  precious  stones 
(Heb.  stones  of  fulness,  a  similar  usage 
occurs  ch.  xxviii.  16,  17,  20 ;  xxxi.  5,  and 
in  other  places),  ch.  xxviii.  17,  ff . ;  xxxix. 
10,  ff.  The  precious  stones  were  oft'ered  by 
the  rulers :  see  ch.  xxxv.  27.  For  the 
cphod  and  the  breastplate,  see  ch.  xxviii. 
4—35. 

8.]  The  object  of  these  offerings  Avas  to 
make  a  dwelling-place  for  God :  see  vcr.  22, 
and  the  reff.  9.]  The  past,  I  have 

shewed  thee,  need  not,  as  Knobel  endeavours 
to  do,  in  order  to  establish  a  discrepancy  be- 
tween the  narratives,  be  interpreted  to  mean 
that  God  had  already  shewn  Moses  the  pat- 
tern spoken  of,  but  that  when  the  ofi'erings 
should  be  made  and  the  tabernacle  built, 
then  He  uould  have  shewn  them  these 
things.  This  use  of  the  past  tense  is  fa- 
miliar to  all.  This  pattern  (see  reff.)  "was 
(ver.  40)  shewn  to  Sloses  i7i  the  mount.  He 
there  saw,  not  the  heavenly  worship  itself, 
nor  anything  belonging  to  it,  but  a  pattern, 
or  representation,  of  the  tabernacle  which 
he  was  to  make,  which  pattern,  as  well  as 
the  tabernacle  constructed  after  it,  was  but 
a  type  of  heavenly  things.  The  mount  was 
not  heaven,  only  an  earthly  similitude  of 
heaven.  See  Heb.  viii.  5  ;  ix.  23  ;  and  Acts 
vii.  44. 

10—22.]    The  ark  of  the  testimony.     See 


5—17. 


EXODUS. 


335 


cubit  and  a  half  the  breadth  thereof,  and  a  cubit  and  a  half 
the  height  thereof.  ^^  And  thou  shalt  overlay  it  with  pure 
gold,  within  and  without  shalt  thou  overlay  it,  and  shalt 
make  upon  it  a  "band  of  gold  round  about,  i-  And  thou  ° 
shalt  cast  four  rings  of  gold  for  it,  and  put  them  in  the 
four  feet  thereof;  two  rings  in  the  one  side  of  it,  and  two 
rings  in  the  other  side  of  it.  i^  ^j^i  tj^^ou  gj^ajl;  make 
staves  of  acacia  wood,  and  overlay  them  with  gold.  ^"^  And 
thou  shalt  put  the  staves  into  the  rings  by  the  sides  of  the 
ark,  that  the  ark  may  be  borne  by  them,  i^  The  staves 
shall  remain  in  the  rings  of  the  ark :  they  shall  not  be 
taken  from  it.  ^'^  And  thou  shalt  put  into  the  ark  the 
testimony  which  I  shall  give  thee.  i~  And  thou  shalt  make 
a  mercy  scat  of  pure  gold:  two  cubits  and  a  half  sZ/aU  be 
the  length  thereof,  and  a  cubit  and  a  half  the  breadth 


ch.  XXX.  3,  r.  ; 

xxxvtii.'j,  II, 
2R :  vtr.  SI, 
only. 


also  ch.  xxxvii.  1 — 9.  10.]  On  shittim 

or  acacia  wood,  see  note  ver.  5.  The  length 
of  the  cubit  (see  note  on  Gen.  vi.  15)  being 
assumed  at  21  inches,  the  size  of  the  avk 
wonkl  be  4  ft.  4^  in.  long,  by  2  ft.  71  in. 
broad  and  high,  i.  e.  about  the  size  of  a 
seaman's  large  chest.  11.  withm  and 

without.  See  note  on  ref.  Gen.  This 
overlaying  seems  almost  beyond  doubt  to 
have  been  (jihling,  M'hich  we  know,  from 
numerous  remains,  was  well  known  and 
practised  in  Egypt.  Tlie  round  staves  (ver. 
1-3)  and  the  carved  flower-work  in  Solo- 
mon's temple  (1  Kings  vi.  28,  35)  could 
hardly  be  overlaid  with  gold  in  any  other 
manner.  The  word  rendered  crown  in  A. 
V.  is  derived  from  a  verb  signifying  to 
enclose  or  include,  and  is  more  probably  a 
band.  It  occurs  only  in  reference  to  the 
ark,  the  table  of  shewbread,  and  the  altar  of 
incense.  See  reflf.  12.]  Tlie  rings  were 

to  be  attached  not  to  the  four  corners  (as 
A.  v.),  but  to  the  four  feet,  so  that  when 
borne  the  ark  might  be  clear  and  high 
above  the  shoulders  of  the  priests.  This, 
from  its  comparatively  small  size,  might 
well  be,  the  rings  being  not  pendulous,  but 
fixed.  "NVe  see  from  ch.  xxxii.  4  that  the 
casting  of  metals  was  known  and  practised 
by   the    Israelites.  13,   14.]    On  tlie 

overlaying  see  above,  ver.  11.  15.] 

See  note   on   Num.   iv.   6.  16.]    The 

testimony  which  I  shall  give  thee  is  un- 
derstood by  Kuobel  to  refer  to  the  law  yet 


to  be  given,  as  the  original  (Elohistic) 
narrative,  as  he  apportions  it,  lias  not  as 
yet  contained  anything  corresponding  to  the 
decalogue.  But  in  order  to  this  he  is  obliged 
to  regard  ch.  xl.  20  as  an  anticipatory 
notice,  which  is,  to  say  the  least,  forced 
and  unnatural.  It  is  far  more  reasonable  to 
understand  the  future  tense  as  applying  to 
the  law  in  its  completed  form,  when  that 
should  be.  The  word  rendered  testimony 
might  be  also  translated  revelation  or  mani- 
festation. It  occurs  frequently  in  Exodus, 
Leviticus,  and  Numbers,  but  never  in  Deut- 
eronomy. See  ch.  xvi.  34,  and  note. 
17 — 22.]  Directions  respecting  the  mercy- 
seat-  This,  which  was  to  be  put  above 
upon  the  ark,  was  the  most  important  and 
significant  portion  of  the  whole  of  the  S3'm- 
bolic  furniture  of  the  tabernacle.  That  it 
was  a  mere  cover  of  the  ark  is  (1 )  contrary  to 
the  meaning  of  the  root,  which  is  main- 
tained by  Keil  never  to  have  had  the  mere 
signification  of  to  cover  in  the  material  sense, 
but  always  to  have  implied  covering  in  a 
figurative  sense,  as  of  sins,and  (2)  also  against 
probability,  as  the  ark  itself  being  all  of 
wood,  had  doubtless  its  own  covering  of 
acacia  wood,  whereas  this  is  to  be  made  of 
pure  gold.  The  LX.X.,  seeing  this,  have 
rendered  the  word  a  cover  of  exj)iation,  and 
the  Vulgate,  expiatoritim.  Our  word  niercy- 
seat  expresses  the  meaning  very  well,  as  it 
was  there  that  the  blood  of  expiation  was  to 
be  sprinkled,  and  there  that  Jehovah  would 


336  EXODUS.  XXY. 

thereof.  ^^  And  thou  shalt  make  two  clierubim,  gold ; 
beaten  work  shalt  thou  make  them,  in  the  two  ends  of  the 
mercy  seat.  ^^  And  make  one  cherub  on  the  one  end,  and 
the  other  cherub  on  the  other  end :  of  the  mercy  seat  shall 
ye  make  the  cherubim  on  the  two  ends  thereof.  -^  And 
the  cherubim  shall  stretch  forth  wings  on  high,  covering 
the  mercy  seat  with  their  wings,  and  their  faces  shall  look 
one  to  another ;  toward  the  mercy  seat  shall  the  faces  of 
the  cherubim  be.  ^i  And  thou  shalt  put  the  mercy  seat 
above  upon  the  ark ;  and  in  the  ark  thou  sbalt  put  the 
testimony  that  I  shall  give  thee.  22  And  there  I  will  meet 
with  thee,  and  I  will  commune  witb  thee  from  above  the 
mercy  seat,  from  between  the  two  cherubim,  which  a7'e 
upon  the  ark  of  the  testimony,  of  all  things  which  I  will 
give  thee  in  commandment  unto  the  children  of  Israel.  23 
^  Thou  shalt  also  make  a  table  of  acacia  wood :  two  cubits 
shall  he  the  length  thereof,  and  a  cubit  the  breadth  there- 
of, and  a  cubit  and  a  half  the  height  thereof.  24  And 
thou  shalt  overlay  it  with  pure  gold,  and  make  thereto  a 
band  of  gold  round  about.  25  And  thou  shalt  make  unto 
it  a  border  of  an  hand  breadth  roimd  about,  and  thou  shalt 
make  a  golden  band  to  the  border  thereof  round  about. 
26  And  thou  shalt  make  for  it  four  rings  of  gold,  and  put 
the  rings  in  the  four  corners  that  are  on  the  four  feet  there- 
of. 27  Over  against  the  border  shall  the  rings  be  for  places 
of  the  staves  to  bear  the  table.     28  And  thou  shalt  make 

appear  and  manifest  Himself  (vcr.  22).  The  vrcre  of  olive  wood,  gilt:  see  1  Kings  vi. 
above  defended  view  is  corroborated  by  the  23 — 28.  20.]  one  to  another,  literally, 
circumstance  that  in  1  Chron.  xxviii.  11  the  man  to  his  brother.  21.]  The  in- 
holy  of  holies  is  called  the  house  of  the  junction  to  put  into  the  ark  the  testimony 
mercy-seat.  Were  this  a  mere  cover  of  the  is  repeated  apparently  to  remind  Moses  that 
ark,  such  a  name  could  never  have  been  this  was  to  be  done  before  the  mercy-seat 
used.  The  mercy-seat  was,  as  having  to  was  superimposed.  22.]  See  ch.  xxx. 
be  laid  on  the  ark,  to  be  of  exactly  the  same  6,  36  ;  Num.  vii.  89,  23—30.]  The 
dimensions :  see  ver.  10.  18.]  Tfte  table  of  sheicbread.  Such  tables  for  ofier- 
cherubim.  On  these  see  note,  Gen.  iii.  24,  ings  were  common  to  many  forms  of  heathen 
and  the  art.  "  Cherub  "  in  Smith's  Biblical  temple-worship  :  but  the  ordinance  of  shew- 
Dict.  All  we  can  de3uce  for  certain  re-  bread  was  peculiar  to  the  worship  of  Je- 
specting  them  from  this  passage  is  that  they  hovah.  For  particulars  respecting  the  situ- 
had  outstretched  wings,  and  faces  of  some  ation  of  this  table,  and  the  ordinance  of 
kind.  They  were  to  be  beaten  work,  \'.  c.  the  shewbread,  see  ver.  35 ;  Lev.  xxiv.  5, 
not  cast,  solid,  but  hammered  out  of  plates  ;  fF.  Apparently,  from  vv.  24,  25,  the  table 
and  probably,  by  what  follows  (ver.  19),  itself  was  to  have  a  band  of  gold,  and  also 
out  of  the  same  plate  of  gold  as  the  mercy-  the  border,  or  wooden  casing  round  the 
seat  itself.    In  Solomon's  temple  the  cherubs  edge,  was  to  have  another  such  band.     It 


18—35. 


EXODUS. 


337 


the  staves  q/" acacia  wood,  and  overlay  them  with  gold;  that 
the  table  may  be  borne  with  them.  29  ^^j^fj  ^hou  slialt 
make  the  dishes  thereof,  and  spoons  thereof,  and  ^cans 
thereof,  and  i  cups  thereof,  to  pour  out  withal :  pure  gold 
shalt  thou  make  them.  30  ^^fj  thou  shalt  set  upon  the 
table  showbread  before  me  alway.  ^i  ^f  ^j^^j  thou  shalt 
make  a  candlestick,  pure  gold :  beaten  work  shall  the 
candlestick  be  made:  its  '"base  and  ^ shaft,  its  'cups,  its 
"  knobs,  and  its  flowers,  shall  be  of  it.  32  ^^(i  (^i^.  branches 
shall  come  out  of  the  sides  of  it ;  three  branches  of  the 
candlestick  out  of  the  one  side,  and  three  branches  of  the 
candlestick  out  of  the  other  side :  ^3  three  cups  made  like 
unto  almonds,  a  knob  and  a  flower  in  one  branch ;  and 
three  cups  made  like  almonds  in  the  other  branch,  a  knob 
and  a  flower :  so  in  the  six  branches  that  come  out  of  the 
candlestick,  ^i  Xj^^  {j^  the  candlestick  shall  be  four  bowls 
made  like  unto  almonds,  ivith  their  knobs  and  their  flowers. 
35  And  there  shall  be  a  knob  under  two  branches  of  the 


p  ch.xxx>iu 
16.     Num.ir* 
7.    I  riirnn. 
xxviii.  n, 
.ml,. 

q  <h.  xxx»ll. 


Gen.  xxiv.2. 
Num.  V.  27. 
al.  It. 
Gen.  xli.  5. 
1  KinKS  xiv. 
15.  Iita.  vi. 
zn,  al. 

Grn.  xliT,  2. 
JlT.  XXXV.  5. 
Here  and  ch. 
xxxviii.  paft-* 
tim.  BraiHes, 
Ainns  ix.  I . 
Zeph.  u.  U, 
only. 


was  (vv.  26,  27)  to  have  rings  beneath  tlie 
border  at  the  four  corners  where  were  tlie 
toct,  and  staves  to  carry  it,  as  had  the 
ark,  and  the  staves  were  to  be  similar  (ver. 
28).  In  both  cases  the  feet  are  named, 
though  no  direction  has  been  given  respect- 
ing them,  being  taken  as  matter  of  course. 

29.]  the  dishes  (their  name  imply- 
ing depth)  were  apparently  130  shekels' 
weight  each  (Num.  vii.  13,  &c.),  and  were 
large  deep  vessels,  probably  for  putting  on 
the  showbread ;  the  spoons  (the  name 
meaning  a  hollow  6a?)r/)- were  apparently 
10  shekels  in  weight  (Num.  vii.  14,  &c.), 
and  were  for  the  incense  which  was  (Lev. 
xxiv.  7)  to  be  offered  with  the  showbread  ; 
the  cans  are  in  A.  V.  covers  ;  but  apparently 
in  error :  these  two  last-mentioned  vessels 
belong  to  the  drink-offerings,  and  tbese 
cans  were  apparently  shallow  vessels  to  pour 
the  wine,  while  the  cups  (or  jugs)  were  to 
bring  the  wine  in.  See  reff.,  in  the  last  of 
which  the  A.  V.  renders  the  word  ct(ps  :  as 
also  in  tlic  last  reff.  for  the  latter  word. 

30.]  See  Lev.  x.\iv.  4,  ff.  I  have 
altered  the  spelling  of  sAe?cbread  to  show- 
bread,  as  many  English  readers,  not  being 
aware  of  the  import  of  tlie  first  syllable, 
pronounce  it  "  s/ioe-brcad."  The  Hebrew 
name  signilies  bread  of  faces,  or  bread  of 
(the)  face:  the  word  for /ace  existing  only 


in  the  plural,  we  cannot  determine  the  num- 
ber in  English.  It  seems  agreed,  however, 
that  the  word  is  to  be  taken  as  applying  to 
God,  before  whom  the  bread  was  laid  up : 
and  this  seems  to  be  proved  by  1  Sam.  xxi. 
6,  where  the  showbread  is  said  to  have  been 
"  take7i  from  before  the  Face  of  Jehovah." 
Tlie  name  has  been  very  variously  rendered  : 
by  the  LXX.  as  '■^loaves  of  2^resence ;"  liy 
the  Vulgate  as  "  bread  of  setting  forth."  So 
also  in  the  X.  T.,  Matt.  xii.  4  ;  but  in  Ileb. 
ix.  2  '^  the  setting  forth  of  the  loaves,  which 
is  called  holi/."  31 — 40.]    The  golden 

candlestick.  This  candlestick,  from  being 
of  pvire  gold,  is  called  in  eh.  xxxi.  8 ;  xxxix. 
37;  Lev.  xxiv.  4,  '^  the  pure  candlestick." 
All  was  to  be  pure  : — the  base,  literally  the 
thigh,  or  seat  (reff.) ;  the  shaft,  or  main 
stem, — the  word  being  kanch,  reed,  or 
cane ;  the  cups,  or  calyxes  ;  the  knobs,  little 
balls  or  apples  ;  the  flowers  (see  description 
below).  of  it,. as  in  ver.  19,  of  one  piece 

with  and  forming  a  whole  with  it. 
32,  33.]  These  brandies  again  are  shafts, 
canes,  or  stems,  but  subsidiary,  each  carry- 
ing a  calyx  with  knob  and  flower  like  those 
of  an  almond.  This  last  rendering  has  been 
doubted  by  Knobel  and  others,  but  ap- 
parently without  reason.  34,35.]  On 
the  main  stem,  called  here  the  candlestick, 
arc  to  be  four  such  calyies  with  balls  and 


338 


EXODUS. 


XXV.  36—40. 


■  ch.  xxxvii. 

2:i.    Num.  iv. 

a    1  Kings 

\ii.  49. 

2  Chron.  iv. 

21.    Isa.  vi.  6. 
V  ch.  xxvii. .'). 

Lev.  xvi.  12. 

Num.  xvi.  37, 

ff. 


same,  and  a  knob  under  two  branches  of  the  same,  and  a 
knob  under  two  branches  of  the  same,  according  to  the  six 
branches  that  proceed  out  of  the  candlestick.  ^6  Their 
knobs  and  their  branches  shall  be  of  it :  all  of  it  shall  he 
one  beaten  work  of  pure  gold.  ^7  ^-^^  thou  shalt  make  the 
seven  lamps  thereof:  and  they  shall  put  on  the  lamps 
thereof,  and  they  shall  give  light  over  against  it.  ^8  ^j^^ 
the  '^ tongs  thereof,  and  the  "^  snufFdishes  thereof,  shall  he 
pure  gold.  "^'-^  Of  a  talent  of  pure  gold  shall  he  make  it, 
with  all  these  vessels.  '^^  And  look  that  thou  make  them 
after  their  pattern,  which  was  shewed  thee  in  the  mount. 


flowers :  i.  e.  each  pair  of  branches,  being 
three,  is  to  spring  out  of  such  a  flower-cup, 
iind  the  termination  of  the  main  shaft  is  to  be, 
like  tlie  rest,  one  such.  36.]  of  it  again, 

i.  e.  as  above  (vv.  19,  31),  of  one  piece,  form- 
ing one  whole.  '  37.]  The  seven  lamps 
were  to  be  made,  and  then  put  on  the  finials 
of  the  seven  stems.  The  A.  V.  has  taken  the 
verb,  which  literally  means  to  cause  to 
ascend,  as  meaning  to  light ;  whereas  it 
rather  imports  to  put  up  upon  the  stems. 
This  is  shewn  by  these  lamps  being  called 
the  lamps  of  setting  vp,  ch.  xxxix.  37.  The 
probable  interpretation  of  the  latter  part  of 
the  verse  is  to  be  found  in  the  circumstance 
that  the  candlestick,  in  the  arrangement  of 
the  tabernacle  (ch.  xxvi.  35),  was  to  stand 
toward  the  south,  i.  e.  against  the  southern 
side  of  the  holy  place,  and  to  cast  its  light 
toward  the  north,  the  side  over  against  it. 
This  it  might  do,  either  simply  from  its 
position,  or  by  having,  as  Knobel  supposes, 
small  snouts  or  vents,  out  of  which  the  wicks 
came,  and  the  vents  turned  toward  the  north. 
38.]  The  tongs,  for  pulling  up  and 
cleansing  the  wick,  answering  to  snulfers  for 
candles.  The  snuff-dishes,  receptacles  for 
the  refuse  snuff.  In  the  reff.  the  same  word 
is  used  for  coal-vessels,  or  shovels,  to  receive 
coals,  and  is  rendered  Jire-patis,  censers,  or 
axh-pans.  39.]  The  whole  mass  of 
pure  gold,  out  of  which,  beaten  out  and 
hollow,  the  candlestick  and  its  fittings  were 
to  be  made,  was  a  talent  in  weight.  The 
mass  and  present  value  of  a  talent  of  gold 


are  matters  of  considerable  doubt,  the  latter 
being  set  down  variously  at  from  £4000  to 
£6000  (see  the  elaborate  but  somewhat  con- 
fusing art.  on  Weights  and  Measures  in 
the  Biblical  Diet.).  It  is  to  be  observed  that 
no  dimensions  are  prescribed  for  the  candle- 
stick. The  Eabbis  report  that  it  was  about 
five  feet  high.  The  interesting  figure  of  the 
seven-branched  candlestick,  now  sculptured 
inside  the  arch  of  Titus  at  Rome  as  carried 
in  triumph,  cannot  be  above  3  ft.  6  in.  high, 
judging  by  the  size  of  the  men  who  bear 
it.  But  it  (see  it  given  in  art.  "  Candle- 
stick" in  Biblical  Diet.)  was  not  apparently 
even  the  genuine  successor  of  the  original, 
and  is  adorned  with  fabulous  Pagan  grifllns, 
which  cast  much  doubt  on  its  having  any 
trustworthy  resemblance  even  to  the  candle- 
stick of  the  Ilerodian  temple.  he,  i.  e. 
whoever  is  entrusted  with  the  workmanship. 

all  these  vessels  is  defined  in  ch. 
xxxvii.  24  to  mean  merely  the  appurten- 
ances of  the  candlestick,  not  any  previously 
prescribed.  Into  the  sj-mbolism  of  the 
golden  or  pure  candlestick  it  is  not  the 
province  of  this  commentary  to  enter.  In 
its  main  features  it  will  be  obvious  to  the 
reader,  and  it  may  be  found  elucidated  by 
Keil  and  Bp.  "Wordsworth,  the  former  taking 
the  Jewish,  the  latter  exclusively  the  Chris- 
tian, significance.  The  places  of  Scripture 
which  bear  on  the  subject,  and  under  which 
it  will  be  so  far  found  in  each  case  treated, 
are  Zech.  iv. ;  Rev.  i.   20;  John  viii.    12. 

40.]  See  on  ver.  9. 


«<^ 


THE    EXU. 


JOHN    CHILDS   AND    SON,    PKINTEKS. 


Date  Due 


