ie 


ee 


3 
alas i 
ee 


NORTHEASTER 
ESSEX 


PRO 
N 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2024 


https://archive.org/details/annotatedbibleho0001arno 


ane 
G| 
rst 


The Annotated Bible 


The Holy Scriptures Analyzed 
and Annotated 


by 
ARNO C. GAEBELEIN, D.D. 


Founder of Our Horr 


Volume I 
THE PENTATEUCH 


SOUTHERN BIBLE BOOK HOUSE 


Travelers Rest, South Carolina 


THE MASTER'S COLLEGE 
POWELL LIBRAR' 
SANTA CLARITA, CA 91321 


Copyright 1913, by A. C. Gaebelein 


GENESIS 


CONTENTS 


Page 
Introductionj2). coe a ees Pe ree 1 
Revelation or Myth2 swe 8. 2 ed ee oe eee 7 
The: Division 3.72 ee ne ere ls ie eee 12 
The Analysis and Annotations..................... 14 
Genesis.‘and Geology vse tees oe oon eee 88 
Dictionary of Proper Names....................-.. 91 


Chronological Arrangement.................00+e00- 101 


The Book of Genesis. 


Introduction. 


The first Book of the Bible is called in the Septuagint 
(the Greek translation of the Old Testament) “Gene- 
sis.” Genesis means “Origin.” The Hebrews call it 
by the first Hebrew word “Bereshith.”—In the Begin- 
ning. It is the Book of all beginnings. We can trace 
here the beginnings of creation and everything else, 
except God, who has no beginning. The Book of Gene- 
sis is the great foundation upon which the entire 
revelation of God rests. The marvellous structure of 
the Bible, composed of the different books, written by 
different instruments of the Spirit of God at different 
times, is built upon this great, majestic Book. It is 
the root out of which the tree of God’s revelation has 
grown. Internal evidences prove the most complete 
unity, that it is the work of one chosen instrument, 
Moses, and that it is not of a composite authorship. 
But more than that, the Book of Genesis establishes the 
Divine Unity of the Bible. The last Book of the Bible, 
the Revelation, confirms this. Genesis tells of the 
origin of all things; Revelation reveals the destiny of 
all things. 

It is an interesting study, profitable and suggestive, 
to trace the great doctrines of the Bible in this first 
Book. They are all found somewhere in Genesis, either 
in typical foreshadowings or in direct words. Here, 
too, we may discover the dispensational and prophetic 
truths of the Bible in germ. Genesis iii:15 is the pre- 
diction out of which the rest of prophecy has been 
developed. The entire New Testament in its doctrinal 
statements rests upon this Book. It is quoted there 


2 THE BOOK -OF GENESIS. 


as the Word of God scores of times. If the revelations 
of Genesis, especially the opening chapters, the supreme 
foundation, if these chapters were myths, the entire 
New Testament would have to be given up as un- 
authoritative. Indeed, the great doctrines in Romans, 
starting from the fact that man is a fallen being and 
lost, would be just as much myths, if the fall of man 
were amyth. The Lord Jesus Christ has put His seal 
to this great Book. 


The Criticism of Genesis. 


The Book of Genesis, being the foundation of the 
whole Bible, and of such vast importance, it does not 
surprise us that the enemy of the Truth of God has 
directed first of all his attacks against this Book to 
break down its authority. A hundred years ago and 
less the cunning inventions of the father of lies, 
directed against the inspiration of Genesis and its 
unity, occupied mostly, if not altogether, the minds of 
theologians and scholars. It is different now. The 
stock of trade of the destructive critics, differing but 
little from that of accredited infidels, has become the 
common property of evangelical Christendom. The 
rationalistic theories concerning the date and author- 
ship of Genesis are now liberally and almost universally 
displayed. In theological seminaries they are openly 
taught and hundreds of men, who claim to be teachers 
of the oracles of God, deny the inspiration of the Book 
of Genesis. 


The Paternity of Higher Criticism. 


That such a denial is not of God is self evident. But 
it is interesting to examine the source from which the 
destructive criticism of Genesis and the Pentateuch 
has come. The man who has been called the “Sir Isaac 
Newton of Criticism” is Jean Astruc. He was a French 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 3 


physician, a freethinker, who led a wicked, immoral life. 
In 1753 this man gave to the world his doubts in a work 
which he called, “Conjectures Regarding the Original 
Memoirs in the Book of Genesis.” In this work he 
taught that the use of the two names of God in Genesis, 
Elohim (translated by God) and Jehovah (translated 
by Lord) showed that two different documents were 
used in the composition of the Book. The hypothesis 
of a Jehovist and Elohist writer, so called, was invented 
by this unsaved man.’ It was, however, reserved for 
a German scholar and rationalist to formulate the 
denial of the unity and inspiration of Genesis into a 
system. This man was Professor Eichhorn. He coined 
the phrase, “Higher Criticism,” and is therefore called 
the “father” of it. He introduced successfully into the 
theological institutions of Germany the theory of 
Astrue. On account of his great learning his invented 
higher criticism took hold upon the minds of thousands 
of people. But who was Professor Eichhorn? Let 
another Higher Critic give the answer. Ewald, himself 
such a powerful factor of this most dangerous in- 
fidelity, wrote: “We cannot fail to recognize that, 
from the religious point of view the Bible was to him 
a closed Book.” 

Such is the Paternity of the now widely accepted 
‘Higher Criticism:” an immoral, infidel Frenchman and 
an unconverted, blind leader of the blind, a German 
Professor. 


Their Disciples. 


After Eichhorn came other men, such as Vater and 
Hartman, who tried to undermine the Mosaic author- 
ship of Genesis by still another theory. Professor De- 
Wette, of Heidelberg, followed closely in the steps of 
infidel Eichhorn. Bleeck taught still another theory. 
Then we mention Ewald, Hupfeld, Prof. Kuenen, Dr. 
Davidson, Robertson Smith, Canon Driver, George 


4 THE BOOK OF “GENESIS: 


Adams Smith, Professor Briggs, W. Harper, Marcus 
Dods and many others, who may all be fitly called the 
disciples of the immoral Frenchman and the infidel 
German. For instance, George Adams Smith saith: 
“The framework of the first eleven chapters of Genesis 
is woven from the raw material of myth and legend.” 
And the works of this man and others are now sold at 
popular prices by so called “Christian Publishers.” 


A Complicated Science. 


They call this kind of criticism scientific. It surely 
has all the marks of so called science. Speculation, un- 
certainty and complicated statements are the leading 
characteristics of this criticism. They claim now that 
the Pentateuch (the five Books written by Moses) were 
never written by him, but that these Books consist of 
four diverse documents. These they designate as fol- 
lows: 1. The Jehovist. 2. The Elohist. 3. The Deut- 
eronomist. 4. The Priestly Code. The authorship of 
Moses has been completely given up and it is claimed 
that the earliest part of the Pentateuch was perhaps 
written 600 years after Moses’ death. They put the 
date of the greater part of these five Books after the 
Babylonian captivity. 

A writer has recently given a fine description of this 
higher critical “scientific” nonsense, part of which we 
quote: 


“They conjecture that these four suppositive documents were 
not compiled and written by Moses, but were probably con- 
structed somewhat after this fashion: For some reason, and at 
some time, and in some way, someone no one knows who, or 
why, or when, or where, wrote Jehovist. Then someone else, 
no one knows who, or why, or when, or where, wrote another 
document, which is now called Elohist. And then at a later 
time, the critics only know who, or why, or when, or where, an 
anonymous personage, whom we may call Redactor I, took 
in hand the reconstruction of these documents, introduced new 
material, harmonized the real and apparent discrepancies, and 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 5 


divided the inconsistent accounts of one event into two separate 
transactions. Then some time after this, perhaps one hundred 
years or more, no one knows who, or why, or when, or where, 
some anonymous personage wrote another document, which they 
styled Deuteronomist. And after awhile another anonymous 
author, no one knows who, or why, or when, or where, 
whom we will call Redactor II, took this in hand, compared 
it with Jehovist and Elohist, revised them with considerable 
freedom and, in addition, introduced quite a body of new 
material. Then someone else, no one knows who, or why, or 
when, or where, probably, however, about 525, or perhaps 425, 
wrote the Priestly Code; and then another anonymous Hebrew, 
whom we may call Redactor JII, undertook to incorporate 
this with the triplicated composite Jehovist, Elohist and Deut- 
eronomist, with what they call radactional additions and in- 
sertions.”’* 

This describes the infidel mudpuddle into which these 
“great” scholars have plunged and into which they 


would like to lead the sheep and even the little lambs. 


The Mosaic Authorship. 


“All tradition, from whatever source it is derived, 
whether inspired or uninspired, unanimously affirms 
that the first five Books of the Bible were written by 
one man, and that man was Moses. There is no 
counter-testimony in any quarter.” With these words, 
Prof. William Henry Green begins his learned work on 
the Unity of Genesis. Other learned men in past gen- 
eration up to the present time stand firm for the 
Mosaic authorship of Genesis, and thereby affirm the 
fact of revelation. The cry of the Higher Critics— 
“ripe scholarship,” “access to better sources,” etc.— 
is a bluff. The best scholarship stands by the Truth. 
Some of the arguments advanced against Moses as 
writer of Genesis are exactly the argument for it and 
the evidences of inspiration. For instance, the use of 
the name of God as Elohim and Jehovah. Elohim is 


*Canon Hague. 


6 THE BOOKY OF GENESEE. 


the name of God as Creator—Jehovah is His name as 
entering into covenant relation with man. The use of 
these names is a precious evidence of the work of the 
Spirit of God and not an evidence of different writers 
and documents. 

The highest authority that Moses wrote Genesis and 
the other four Books, and that Genesis is the revelation 
of God, is the Lord Jesus Christ. He spoke repeatedly 
of Moses and reminded His hearers of the historic facts 
as given in Genesis. This fact is met by the critics 
with the statement that our Lord was not a critical 
scholar and limited in His knowledge. Such state- 
ments are akin to blasphemy, 


Needed Information. 


The information concerning the criticism upon this 
great Bible Book we are about to study is much 
needed. Many Christians hear of Higher Criticism 
without knowing what it is and how it originated. The 
information given shows that it originated with 
wicked men and that it is an attempt to destroy the 
very foundations upon which the whole Scriptures rest. 
Sometimes Higher Critics have a way of telling unin- 
formed Christians that the views they hold are the 
consensus of the best scholarship. This is untrue. 
Others, again, who have imbibed these views hide the 
worst features of them. For this reason we deem it 
expedient to give this information. 

The study of Genesis will deepen the faith in the in- 
spiration and revelation of the first Book of the Bible. 
There is nothing which convinces of the Divinity of the 
Bible like the prayerful and spiritual study of the Bible 
itself. And the Bible has nothing to fear. It needs 
neither apology nor concessions, 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS, 7 


Revelation or Myth? 


A FEW OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED, 


From the sides of Infidelity, Higher Criticism and a 
certain class of Scientists objections are made against 
the opening chapters of Genesis. Not only is the 
Mosaic Authorship denied but the revelation contained 
in these chapters is branded as unscientific and at vari- 
ance with the facts revealed by Science. Others class 
these sublime truths concerning Creation, the Fall of 
Man, the Deluge, etc., with the legends of primitive na- 
tions and thus the fact of revelation is altogether de- 
nied. Inasmuch as these wicked statements are heard 
on all sides from pulpits and chairs of educational in- 
stitutions, it becomes necessary that we consider briefly 
some of these objections and uncover their absolute 
worthlessness. The purpose of our work forbids a more 
extended treatment of these objections. Many helpful 
and interesting books have been written by scholars 
against these attacks. Elsewhere in this booklet the 
reader will find a number of works mentioned which 
deal with these attacks in a masterly way, 


Is the Creation Account Contradicted by Science? 


That the Creation account is unscientific and in clash 
with the discoveries of modern science is one of the com- 
mon statements. It has, however, no foundation what- 
ever. The proofs that there is no error in the account 
of Creation as revealed in the first chapter of Genesis, 
have been furnished bv the investigation of Science. 
The order of creation as given in the first chapter is 
the order, which, after years of searching—the most 
laborious searching—Science has discovered. Over and 


d THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


over again has Science with its guesses and specuiations 
been forced to bow in submissicn before the simple and 
orief description of the Creation ir God’s Word. There 
is no clash between the Bible and the results of true 
scientific research. Geology, astronomy and other 
sciences nave had to retrace their steps more than once 
and acknowledge their mistake; the first chapter of 
Genesis will never have to do that. Years ago scien- 
tists ridiculed the divine statement that the first thing 
called into existence was light; “let there be light,” and 
that the sun was made on the fourth day. That sneer 
is forever silenced, for science has found out that light 
existed first. Again for a long time it was denied that 
vegetation came first before animal life was on this 
globe. This denial has likewise been stopped by scien- 
tific discoveries. Other evidences that the Bible is 
right and science had to accept the truthfulness of the 
Creation account we must pass by. What scientists 
should explain is, how in a simple record of a few 
verses, which antedates all scientific research and dis- 
covery, such accurate information is given without any 
error whatever. Where did Moses get his marvellous 
knowledge from which the scientific research of nine- 
teenth century confirms correct in every way? There 
is only one answer. It is the revelation of God. 

This becomes still more evident when the Creation 
chapter in Genesis is compared with the conceptions of 
the origin of the earth as found in the records of the 

Idest nations. What ridiculous things were believed 
concerning creation and the universe! Why did Moses 
not write the same childish things but instead gives a 
majestic account of the creation of the earth and the 
heavens? The answer is and ever will be, his account 


is the revelation of God how the earth and the heavens 
came into existence. 


TLE ROOK VORMGENESIS: 9 


Is There a Contradiction Between the YVirst and Second 
Chapters of Genesis? 


Another favorite argument against the infallible 
record of Creation is that the first and second chapters 
are contradictory. A certain N. Y. preacher stated 
some years ago in Appleton’s Magazine this supposed dif- 
ficulty. He said, “How can we trouble about reconciling 
Genesis and Science” while the two accounts of the first 
two chapters ‘‘are so hopelessly at variance?” Criticism 
has used this alleged discrepancy as an argument for 
its infidel theories. There is, however, no contradiction 
between these two chapters. The second chapter in 
Genesis is not another history of creation nor does it 
contradict the account in the first chapter. The histor- 
ical account of creation as a whole is found in Genesis 
i-ii:8. The division of chapters in the authorized 
version is unfortunate. From chapter ii:4 to the close 
of the chapter we have not a historical account of crea- 
tion at all, but a divine statement of the relationships 
of creation, that is, man’s place init as its head. There 
are no contradictions in anything. Genesis 1:27 is said 
to clash with ii:21-22. Such a clash does not exist. 
Gen. i:27 does not say that man and woman were 
created together, nor does it say that the woman was 
created directly and not formed as revealed in the 
second chapter. 


The Myths of Ancient Nations. 


It is a well known fact that ancient nations such as 
theChaldeans, Egyptians, Phoenicians, Hindus, possessed 
myths in which one can hear now and then a faint echo 
of a primeval revelation and knowledge, which must 
have been in possession of all mankind at one time. 
That such was the case Romans i:21-23 fully confirms. 
All mankind knew God and was acquainted with the 
great facts of history, the events recorded in the first 


10 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


eleven chapters of Genesis. As they became vain, their 
foolish heart was darkened, they rushed into idolatry. 
Their traditions, however, here and there give glimpses 
of the truth they once knew. It is impossible to give 
here evidences of it as discovered in the Assyrian 
tablets, which have something to say of the creation 
and the deluge, known now as “the Chaldean Genesis.” 
Other traces are found in ancient Phoenician sources 
as well as in India, among the Romans and the Greeks, 
Babylonians, Chinese and other nations. However, all 
these, including “the Chaldean Genesis” are miserable 
contortions. There are a few resemblances and many 
more differences between the Biblical and especially 
the Babylonian accounts. It is claimed that Moses, or 
since Moses did not write according to this infidel 
theory, somebody else, made use of these myths in 
writing the opening chapters of Genesis. This far 
fetched invention has no foundation at all. The Book 
of Genesis is not the offspring of Babylonian tradition. 
God gave to Moses the account of creation and the be- 
ginnings of history by direct revelation as the blessed 
foundation of all subsequent revelation in His holy 
Word. The man, who boasts of scholarship, and brands 
the first eleven chapters of Genesis as myths, putting 
them alongside of the traditions of ignorant ancient 
nations, but reveals his ignorance and blindness, 


The Deluge. 


This great catastrophe has also been denied and 
ridiculed. It is painful to mention all these denials, but 
it is needful to call attention to these attacks on the 
foundation of the Bible. Hundreds of men, who claim 
to be exponents of Christianity speak of Noah as a 
myth and the deluge reported in Genesis as an un- 
confirmed event. Traditions of the flood are found 
among all nations and exhibit in many cases a very 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 1 


striking agreement with the divinely given record. 
These traditions are found in India, China, Egypt and 
Greece as well as among the Chaldeans and Babyloni- 
ans. Peruvians, Mexicans, Greenlanders and the Teu- 
tonic races possess these traditions. Geology also give 

the most decisive evidence of such a judgment by water 
‘through which the earth passed. The surface of the 
‘earth exhibits a deposit, which originated after a uni- 
versal flood and which is called diluvial (flood) land. 
Vast quantities of bones and teeth of antediluvian 
animals, masses of rock and boulder, carried by the 
flood, are found in this diluvial deposit. Many pages 
could be filled with such evidences. 


Nothing Left Unattacked. 


Nothing has been left unattacked in the opening 
chapters of Genesis. The existence of Paradise, the fall 
of man, the curse, the story of Cain and Abel, Enoch’s 
translation, the tower of Babel and every other recorded 
event has been denied and is increasingly denied. That 
our Lord referred repeatedly to these first chapters of 
the Bible and thereby confirmed their historicity and 
revelation, is not at all taken in consideration by these 
enemies of the Word of God. 

But the foundation rock of the Bible, the Book of 
Genesis stands as firm as it ever stood. It can never be 
moved. Let them dig away! Let them dash against it 
with their heads. They will perish, but God’s Word 
abideth forever. In a day when apostasy sweeps 
through Christendom like a mighty avalanche, let us 
cling closer to the living Word of the living God and 
hold fast the testimony of its inerrancy. And now 
with thankful hearts and a prayer for the Holy Spirit’s 
guidance we come to the Book itself. 


12 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


The Division of Genesis. 


Every book of the Bible has a key and also hints 
on the division of the book. The correct way in unlock- 
ing the Book is to use the key and the Division as 
given by the Holy Spirit in the Book itself. The Book 
of Genesis has been divided in perhaps more different 
ways than any other Book.* In looking through Genesis 
for a characteristic word we have no difficulty in find- 
ing it in the word “Generations.” (Hebrew: Toledoth.) 
It is used eleven times in this Book. The first time the 
word generations occurs is in chapter ii:4. The Crea- 
tion Account stands therefore by itself. This gives us 
twelve sections. 


I. The Creation Account i-ii:3. 

II. The Generations of the Heavens and the Earth 
1:4-1Vv. 

III. The Generations of Adam v-vi:8. 

IV. The Generations of Noah vi:9-ix:29. 

V. The Generations of the Sons of Noah x-xi:9. 

VI. The Generations of Shem xi:10-26. 

VII. The Generations of Terah xi:27-xxv:11. 

VIII. The Generations of Ishmael xxv:12-18. 

IX. The Generations of Isaac xxv :19-xxxv. 

X. The Generations of Esau xxxvi:1-8. 

XI. The Generations of Esau’s Sons xxxvi:9-43. 

XII. The Generations of Jacob xxxvii:2-1:26. 


We fully agree with the scholarly remarks of Prof. 
Green about the importance of this division. “These 
titles are designed to emphasize and render more 
prominent and palpable an important feature of the 


*Dr. Campbell Morgan has recently added another. He 
Jivides Genesis in three parts: Generation—Degeneration—Re- 
generation. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS, 13 


nook, the genealogical character of its history. This 
results from its main design, which is to trace the line 
of descent of the chosen race from the beginning to the 
point where it was ready to expand to a great nation, 
whose future organization was already foreshadowed, 
its tribes being represented in the twelve sons of Jacob, 
and its tribal divisions in their children. The geneaio- 
gies contained in the book are not merely incidental or 
subordinate, but essential, and the real basis of the 
whole. They are not to be regarded as addenda to the 
narrative, scraps of information introduced into it; they 
constitute the skeleton or framework of the history 
itself.” 

“There is, accordingly, a regular series of genealo- 
gies of like structure, or rather one continuous gene- 
alogy extending from Adam to the family of Jacob. 
This is interrupted and suspended from time to time, 
as occasion requires, for the sake of introducing or in- 
corporating facts of the history at particular points 
where they belong; after which it is resumed again 
precisely at the same point, and proceeds regularly as 
before until it reaches its utmost limit, thus embracing 
the entire history within itself.” 

It is interesting to note the beginning and the end 
of these sections. We leave this as a suggestion with 
the reader. The reign of death after the entrance of 
sin is in full evidence in these sections. “Death reign- 
ed from Adam to Moses” (Romans v:14). The last sec- 
tion ends with Joseph’s death “and he was put in a 
coffin in Egypt.” 

In our annotations, following the above division, we 
shall trace the historical account and point out some 
spiritual and dispensational truths giving many 
hints, which may be followed in a more extended study 


of this great Book. 


14 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


Part I1.—The Creation Account. 


Chapter I-II:3. 


The manner in which the Book of Genesis begins 
leaves no doubt that it is the revelation of God. The 
creation account is historical truth. The question is 
how was it given? An answer to this question claims 
that the Jews obtained the account from the records 
of other nations concerning the origin of the universe 
and that they altered it according to their own religious 
ideas. This is an impossibility. The ancient heathen 
nations considered God and the universe one and had 
absolutely no knowledge of the existence of God inde- 
pendent of the universe, nor did they know anything 
of a creation of the world. Here is something wholly 
different from all the theories, mythologies and other 
inventions of the human race. How then was it given? 
By revelation of God is the only answer. No human 
being knew anything about the origin of the heavens 
and the earth. Man cannot by searching find out God, 
nor can man discover how the earth was created and 
all things came into existence. How ridiculous the 
statements and opinions on the creation of men called 
great thinkers, not to speak of the equally foolish be- 
liefs of the nations of the past. But here is what God 
makes known, how He called all things into existence. 
He makes known that the universe is not eternal but 
that He created it. The whole account is of wonderful 
grandeur and yet of the greatest simplicity; so simple 
that a child can read it and understand the truth, but 
so profound that the greatest men have bowed before 
ats 

It is not the purpose of this Bible Study Course to 
enter into details or we would write at length on the 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 15 


Evolution theory with its invented “proto-plasm.” 
There are many questions which the Evolutionists can- 
not answer and many difficulties, which they cannot 
explain. Their scientific assertions and speculations 
require one to believe what is against reason, while 
God never expects us to believe what is contrary to 
reason. It is far more simple to accept God’s revela- 
tion. “By faith we understand that the worlds have 
been framed by the Word of God, so that what is seen 
hath not been made out of things which appear” (Hebr. 
xi:3). This disposes of Evolution and the other theo- 
ries of unbelieving men, who reject God’s Word. 

The statement which one hears so often from sneer- 
ing lips that the Creation account is unscientific has no 
foundation. That it is non-scientific is an entirely dif- 
ferent matter. Galileo the astronomer truthfully said, 
“The Scriptures were given, not to tell us how the 
heavens go, but to teach us how to go to heaven.” Yet, 
as already mentioned in our introduction, Science had 
to acknowledge over and over again the correctness 
of the Creation Account and withdraw the objections 
and assaults which had been made. 


CHAPTER I[:1. THE ORIGINAL CREATION OF GOD. 
A Ruined Creation. The Brooding Spirit (verse 2). 


The Restoration of the Earth. 


1. The First Day.—Light (verses 3-5). 

2. The Second Day.—The dividing of the waters (verses 6-8). 

3. The Third Day.—The earth out of the waters. Vegetable 
life appears (verses 9-13). 

4. The Fourth Day.—The Lights in the Heavens (verses 14- 
19). 

5. The Fifth Day.—Living Creatures in the waters and in 
the air (verses 20-23). 

6. The Sixth Day.—-Living Creatures made. Man created in 
God’s Image (verses 24-31). 

7. The Seventh Day.—God’s rest (ii:1-3) 


The first verse of the Book of Genesis and of the 


oa 


16 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


whole Bible stands alone in majestic greatness. Like 
some mountain peak rising from the valley in solitary 
grandeur with its snow-capped summit, it inspires awe. 
In the Hebrew the verse is composed of seven words. 
When that Beginning was in which God created the 
Heavens and the earth is not revealed. It must have 
been many millions of years ago; God only knows it 
and Science can never discover it. It is incorrect to 
say that it was 6,000 years ago. God does not speak 
of Himself; no statement concerning His existence or 
His eternity is given. How different from the myths 
and speculations of pagan nations. God’s Name men- 
tioned for the first time in the Bible is “Elohim.” It is 
in the plural indicating God’s great dignity and power 
as well as the fact that God is triune. (See the “Let 
us make man,” in verse 26.) Elohim is God’s Name 
as Creator. This verse answers all the different “isms” 
about God and His creation, while its depths cannot be 
sounded. Here Atheism is answered; Polytheism (the 
many gods of the heathen) is exposed to be false. The 
verse disproves Materialism as well as Pantheism, that 
Gd and the Universe are one. 


ft is of the greatest importance to understand that 
the condition in which the earth (not the heavens) is 
described in the second verse is not how God created 
it in the beginning. Scripture itself tells us this. Read 
Isaiah xlv:18. The Hebrew word for “without form” 
is tohu, which means waste. “The earth was waste and 
void.” But in the passage of Isaiah we read, “He 
created it not a waste.” The original earth passed 
through a great upheaval. A judgment swept over it, 
which in all probability must have occurred on account 
of the fall of that mighty creature, Lucifer, who fell by 
pride and became the Devil. The original earth, no 
doubt, was his habitation and he had authority over it 
which he still claims as the Prince of this world. Luke 
iv:5-6 shows us this. The earth had become waste and 


Lie BOOK OF GENESIS. 17 


void; chaos and darkness reigned. What that original 
earth was we do not know, but we know that animal 
and vegetable life was in existence long before God 
began to restore the earth. The immense fossil beds 
prove this. But they likewise prove that man was not 
then on the earth. Between the first and second verses 
of the Bible there is that unknown period of millions of 
years of which geology gets a glimpse in studying the 
crust of the earth. God waited His own time in 
majestic calmness when He would begin to carry out 
His plans He had made before the foundation of the 
world. 

When that time arrived God began to bring order 
into the chaos and restored His creation so that the 
earth which is now and the heavens above came forth. 
The Spirit moving (brooding) upon the waters and His 
Word were the agents through which it was accom- 
plished. Read John i:1-3; Col. i:15-16; Hebr. i:2-3. We 
do not follow the historical account and the six days’ 
work, but call attention to the correspondency between 
the first three days and the last three. The seventh 
day stands by itself. 

First Day: Light. 

Second Day: Dividing of Waters. 

Third Day: The earth out of the waters; vegetable life. 

Fourth Day: Solar system; lights. 

Fifth Day: Life in the waters. 

Sixth Day: Life on the earth. Man created. 

Seventh Day: God rests. 

The word “create” is used only three times. In the 
first verse it applies to the original creation, when God 
called everything into existence out of nothing. Then 
we find it in verse 21 in connection with the calling 
forth of living creatures (Nephesh—soul) and in verse 
27 in connection with Man. The other word used is 
the word “made.” This necessitates the existence of 
material which is shaped into something; the word 
“create” does not require existence of matter. 


18 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


The Light which came forth on the first day was 
light before the Sun, a fact well known to science. 


The creation of Man is the crowning act of the 
Creator and precedes His rest. “Let us make Man” is 
the counsel of the Godhead. God then created man in 
His own image. In the second chapter we read that 
He formed him out of the dust of the earth and breath- 
ed into his nostrils and man became a living soul. 


The deeper Lessons of the Creation. The Creation 
account has a most interesting typical and dispensa- 
tional meaning. In dealing with the individual in re- 
demption and dealing with ruined creation by the fall 
of man, God follows the order of the six days’ work.* 
We give a few hints. The ruined creation wasted and 
void, covered with the dark waters and in darkness is 
the picture of fallen Man. The two agents God used in 
the restoration of the ruined creation, the Spirit and 
the Word are the agents of the new birth. “Born of 
the Spirit” and of the “incorruptible seed of the Word 
of God.” In redemption God uses the word “create” 
not the word “made, ’ because what we receive by faith 
in His Son is not a mending of an old nature, but we are 
a new creation; created in Christ Jesus. David prayed, 
“Create in me a clean heart.” The work of the first day 
is touched upon in 2 Cor. iv:6. “For God, who com- 
manded the light to shine out of darkness hath shined 
in our hearts.” When that light shines upon us it re- 
veals the ruin of ourselves. The second day brings be- 
fore us the separation, which follows the manifestation 
of the light. The third day stands for resurrection, for 
the earth came out of the waters and brings forth 
grass, herbs and trees, yielding fruit. Throughout the 


*We recommend to every student of this Book F. W. Grant’s 
“Genesis in the Light of the New Testament,” where this is 
fully developed. 


THE OOK OF GENESIS. 19 


entire Bible this meaning of the third day may be 
traced.* The spiritual truth here is that if the Light 
has shown in and we believe we are “risen with Christ” 
and the fruit bearing, which is the result of this. The 
fourth day directs our attention heavenward; there we 
are seated together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. 
The fifth day brings before us again the restless waters 
and the life manifested there. Out of the midst of 
these waters life comes. Even so in Christian ex- 
perience down here. The sixth day points to the time 
of the completion of the new creation, while the seventh 
day reveals the eternal Rest. 

Dispensationally the lessons from the First chapter 
in Genesis are still more interesting. 


The First Day: The Age before the Flood. The Light 
shines in. 

The Second Day: The Age of Noah. 

The Third Day: The Age of Abraham and his seed. 

The Fourth Day: The present Age. Christ the Sun; 
the Moon typical of the church. Individual be« 
lievers represented by stars. 

The Fifth Day: The restless waters. The Times of 
the Gentiles ending, ‘‘the sea and the waves roar- 
ing.” The great tribulation. 

The Sixth Day: The Kingdom rule established ovee 
the earth in the Second Coming of Christ. 

The Seventh Day: The eternal Ages. God is all In 
all. 


It is equally interesting to see that the same dis- 
pensational truths gather around the names of seven 
of the prominent actors of the Book of Genesis. These 


*It is the day of resurrection and restoration. Gen. xxii:4; 
x1:20-22; xlii:18; Ex. xv:22; xix:11; Numb. vii:24; Josh. ii:16; 
2 Kings xx:5; Esther v:1; ix:18; Hos. vi:2; John ii:1; Luke 
xiii: 23, 


20 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


are: Adam, Seth, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and 
Joseph. We quote from another: 


Adam gives us the beginning, when, with the entrance of 
God’s Word, light comes into the soul of a sinner, and God meets 
him as such with the provision of His grace (chap. iii). 

Then (chap. iv and v), we have the history of the two “seeds,” 
and their antagonism,—a story which has its counterpart in the 
history of the world at large, but also in every individual soul 
where God has wrought, and where the “flesh lusteth against 
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, and these are con- 
trary the one to the other.” 

Next, Noah’s passage through the judgment of the old world 
into a new scene, accepted of God in the sweet savor of sacri- 
fice, is the type of where salvation puts us—“in Christ, a new 
creation: old things passed away, and all things become new” 
(chap. vi-xi:9). 

Abraham’s Canaan-life—pilgrim and stranger, but a wor- 
shiper, gives us the fruit and consequence of this—a “walk in 
Him” whom we have received (chap. xi:10-xxi). 

Then, Isaac, our type as “sons” (Gal. iv:28), speaks to us of 
a self-surrender into a Father’s hands, the door into a life of 
quiet and enjoyment, as it surely is (chap. xxii-xxiv:33). 

Jacob speaks of the discipline of sons, by which the crooked 
and deceitful man becomes Israel, a prince with God,—a chasten- 
ing of love, dealing with the fruits of the o/d nature in us (chap. 
xxvi:34; xxxvii:1). 

While Joseph, the fullest image of Christ, suffers, not for sin. 
but for righteousness’ sake, and obtains supremacy over the 
world and fulness of blessing from the Almighty One, his 
strength.* 


How marvellous all this is! And yet we touch only 
upon the surface. The highest evidence for the Word 
of God is the Word itself. No man or human genius 
could have ever produced such a document as the First 
Chapter of Genesis, which contains in embryo all the 
subsequent revelations of God. It is God’s Revelation. 


*Genesis in the Light of the New Testament. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 7AN 


Part IIl.—The Generations of the 


Heavens and the Earth. 


Chapters II:4—IV:26. 
CHAPTER II:4-25. 
Man in Innocency befcre the Fall. 


. The Earth his abode (verses 4-6). 

- The Creation of Man (verse 7). 

. The Garden of Eden (verses 8-14). 

. Man in the Garden. His Commission (verses 15-17). 
a. To keep the Garden. 
b. The Commandment. 

5. No helpmeet for Adam found (verses 18-20). 

6. The formation of the woman (verses 21-22). 

7. The Union (verses 23-25). 


m oo bo Ht 


This is not a new version of the Creation or a repeti- 
tion of the account in the preceding chapter. The re- 
lationships of the created Man to nature and to His 
Creator are now more specifically introduced. The 
Name of God appears now no longer as “Elohim” but 
another Name precedes the word Elohim; it is the 
Name “Jehovah.” This name is used because it is the 
Name of God in relationship with Man. Jehovah is the 
Son of God. 

In verse 7 we have the Creation of Man revealed. 
Jehovah God formed him out of the dust of the earth; 
He breathed into His nostrils the breath of life. Here 
is that which distinguishes Man from the Beast. The 
animals also are living souls, but not immortal. Man 
alone became a living soul by the inbreathing of Jeho- 
vah Elohim and that constitutes man immortal. 

The Garden of Eden was situated in a fertile, 
pleasant plain, somewhere near the two streams still 
known by their names, the Euphrates and the Tigris 
(Hiddekel). The tree of life represents Christ, while 
the rivers of water are clearly the types of the Holy 


ZZ THE’ BOOK, OF (GENESIS, 


Spirit. What the tree of knowledge of good and evil 
was no one knows. The command was given to test 
man in his innocency. Adam unfallen had not the 
knowledge of good and evil. That knowledge was 
acquired by the fall. The test, therefore, involved not 
some great moral evil but simply the authority and 
right of God to prohibit something. The tree of 
knowledge then represented responsibility. 

“Thou shalt surely die” means literally “dying thou 
shalt die.’ This does not mean “eternal death,” but 
“physical death.” 

The formation of the woman is highly typical. Adam 
is the figure of Him who was to come (Rom. v:14) the 
last Adam. Here Christ and the Church are fore- 
shadowed. The deep sleep into which Adam was put 
by Jehovah Elohim is typical of the death of the Cross. 
The woman, built out of His side, is the type of the 
Church. As the helpmeet of Adam was bone of his 
bone, and flesh of his flesh and also the bride of Adam, 
so is the church the Body and the Bride of Christ. The 
woman was brought to Adam and presented to him. 
But Christ will present the Church to Himself (Eph. 
v:27). Marriage is indicated in verse 24 and quoted 
in Matth. xix:5; 1 Cor. vi:16, and Eph. v:31: Both 
were naked, the suitable condition for innocence. 


CHAPTER IVI. 
The Fall of Man. 


. The Serpent and the Woman (verses 1-5). 

. The Fall and the immediate Results (verses 6-7). 

. Jehovah Elohim questions Adam (verses 8-12). 

. His question to the woman (verse 13). 

The Curse upon the Serpent (verses 14-27), 

. The first Prophecy (verse 15). 

The Sentence upon the Woman (verse 16). 

. The sentence upon the Man (verses 17-19). 

. The Faith of Adam and God’s Answer (verses 20-21). 

- The Expulsion and the guarding Cherubim (verses 22-24). 


SOWMAARMA WHE 


he 


THE BOOK OF “GENESIS. 23 


Another actor is now introduced, the Adversary of 
God. His Person and his history are not revealed here. 
The last Book of the Bible speaks of him as “the great 
dragon, that old serpent, called the Devil and Satan” 
(Rev. xii:9). Our Lord called him “the murderer 
from the beginning” and “the father of lies.”” He used 
a creature of the field to deceive the woman and to ruin 
the restored creation by the introduction of sin. The 
word “Serpent” is in the Hebrew “Nachash,’ which 
means “a shining one.” It is evident that this creature 
was not then a reptile like the serpent of to-day. The 
curse put the serpent into the dust. This creature 
Satan possessed and perhaps made still more beautiful 
so as to be of great attraction to the woman. He 
transformed himself in this subtle way, “The Serpent 
beguiled Eve through his subtlety” (2 Cor. xi:3), “And 
no marvel; for Satan himself transforms himself into 
an angel of light” (2 Cor. xi:14). Of this marvellous 
Being having access to the Garden of Eden we read in 
Ezekiel xxviii :18. 

Some brand the opening verses of Genesis III as 
myth. If it were, all else in God’s Word concerning 
Man and his redemption would collapse. Others look 
upon it as an allegory, but it is a historical fact and 
this revelation gives the only explanation of the origin 
of evil and its existence. 


Speaking to the woman he awakened doubt in God’s 
Word. In speaking of God he avoided the word “Je- 
hovah;” but only spoke of God. Then he acts as the 
accuser of God and uttered his lie, which, as the father 
of lies he still continues “ye shall not surely die.” The 
crime of the devil by which he fell, that is, pride, is also 
shown in the words “‘ye shall be as gods.” The woman 
listened to the tempter’s voice. She saw it was good 
and that it was pleasant; she desired, she took, she ate 
and gave unto her husband. It is the beginning of the 


24 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes and the pride of 
life.* 

Their eyes were opened at once. They discovered 
their nakedness and made themselves coverings from 
fig leaves. When they heard the voice of Jehovah 
Elohim they hid themselves. Shame and fear were 
the immediate results of the fall. What the first 
parents did to hide their nakedness by sewing figleaves 
together is still the natural man’s occupation. Man 
attempts by the labor of his hands, by his religious 
profession and morality to cover his nakedness. 

Jehovah Elohim came to seek that which was lost. 
Adam did not seek the Lord, but the Lord sought him 
and Eve. 


The curse was then pronounced upon the Serpent and 
the earth was cursed on account of Man and sentence 
pronounced upon the Man and the Woman. The evi- 
dences of all this are about us. The sentence “dying 
thou shalt die,” that is physical death, the wages of 
sin, was not executed at once. 

The first prophecy in verse 15 announces the Seed of 
the Woman, Christ, and His triumphant work over the 
Serpent and his work as well as the death of the Seed. 
Out of this first prediction all prophecy is developed. 
Space forbids to enlarge upon this great verse. 

Adam believed God’s Word for he called now his 
wife “Eve.” The word Eve is “Chavah” in Hebrew, 
and means “Life.” God answered his faith by making 
unto Adam and Eve clothes of skin. Jehovah Elohim 
must have slain an animal, perhaps a lamb, to provide 
the skin. The first blood must then have been shed 
and the Lord provided the covering for Adam and Eve. 
Its meaning as a type needs no further comments. 


*Compare with the temptations of the last Adam, the Lo 
Jesus, in the wilderness. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. as 


They were driven out of Eden so as to avoid the 
possibility of taking of the tree of life and live for- 
ever. This is used as an argument that man through 
the fall lost his immortal soul. It only refers to the 
body. If they had eaten of the tree of life they would 
have lived forever in the body and physical death 
would then not have been possible. 

The Cherubim are not symbols but actual Beings. 
We find them elsewhere revealed, Ps. xviii:10; Ezek. 
i:5; x:1; Rev. iv and v. The flaming burning sword is 
symbolic of the holiness of God. 

With the Third chapter of Genesis the waiting of 
the Heavens and of the Earth began. Heaven waiting 
to send Him forth to deal with the question of sin 
and the earth waiting for redemption and deliverance. 
What marvellous chapters these first three chapters 
of the Bible are! The entire Word of God rests upon 
them and is linked with them. 


CHAPTER IV. 
After the Fall. The Two Seeds. 


1. Cain and Abel. 1-2. 

2. Their Offerings. 3-5. 

8. The Divine Remonstrance. 6-7. 

4, Abel Slain by his Brother. 8. 

5. Cain’s Judgment. 9-16. 

6. Cain and his Offspring. The Progress of the World. 
17-24. 

7, Seth in Place of Abel. 25-26. 


This chapter is filled with many lessons. Here are 
types of the Seed of the Woman, Christ. Christ as the 
Good Sheperd, the death of Christ, the shedding of 
blood, the atonement, righteousness by faith, the self- 
righteousness of the sinner and his rejection are here 
indicated. We find in this chapter types of the Jewisn 
Nation and their blood guiltiness as well as the record 
of the progressing civilization of that age. 


THE MASTER'S COLLEGE 
POWELL LIBRARY 
SANTA CLARITA, CA 91321 


26 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


Eve’s first son was Cain. (Acquired of Jehovah.) This 
tells of her faith; she believed her first born was the 
promised Seed. Cain, however, is the type of the 
natural man, the flesh, the offspring of the Serpent. 
The second son born was Abel. ( Vapor.) 

Cain’s offering and worship was that of the natural, 
self-righteous man, who needs no blood, but trusts in 
his character and good works. Cain did not believe in 
what Jehovah Elohim had declared concerning sin, 
the penalty of sin; and he did not believe in the pre- 
diction of Gen. iii:15. God had cursed the ground, 
but Cain brought of the fruit of the ground. To-day 
the masses of professing Christians “go in the way of 
Cain” (Jude 10-11). 

Abel’s offering consisted of the firstlings of the 
flock. He believed himself a sinner who had deserved 
death. He believed in substitutionary sacrifice (Heb. 
<1-4) 

Abel is a type of Christ. Abel was a Shepherd. 
There is no report of evil about him. He was hated 
by his brother without a cause. Abel died on account 
of his brother’s sin. 

Cain, who hated his brother Abel, foreshadows the 
Jew, who rejected Christ and delivered Him into the 
hands of the Gentiles and shed innocent blood. As 
Cain had blood guiltiness upon himself, the blood of 
his brother Abel, so there is blood guiltiness upon the 
Jewish race. ‘His blood be upon us and our children,” 
was their demand. Cain’s judgment is typical of the 
punishment which came upon the Jewish people. Like 
Cain, they were driven from Him; became wanderers 
over the face of the earth; bearing a mark, everybody 
is against them. Cain went with his wife (one of his 
sisters) to the Land of Nod. He built a city. His 
nope was in earthly things. The progress of the Cain- 
ites is given. Polygamy began with Lamech. Jubal 


THE BOOK. OF ‘GENESIS, PH) 


became inventor of harp and pipe. Tubal-Cain was the 
worker in brass and iron. Then there is a song of 
defiance celebrating murder. The age advanced in 
civilization, inventions, making the earth under the 
curse attractive; on the other hand, lust, violence, vice 
and crime increased. But Cain’s seed was also religious 
following Cain’s worship. The name of El (God) ap- 
pears in some of Cain’s offspring. 

The third son of Adam was Seth. From him springs 
the Seed. Seth is the type of Christ risen from the 
dead. Abel, the first, died; Seth, the second, lives. 
“Then people began to call at the name of Jehovah.” 
True worship is only possible in the Second Man, Christ 
risen from the dead. 


28 THE, BOOK OF GENESIS: 


Part IlI.—The Book of the 


Generations of Adam. 
Chapter V-VI:8. 


CHAPTER V. 
Adam and his Seed Through Seth. 
1. Adam. 1-5. 6. Jared. 18-20. 
2. Seth. 6-8. 7. Enoch. 21-24. 
8. Enos. 9-11. 8. Methuselah. 25-27. 
4. Cainan. 12-14. 9. Lamech. 28-31. 
5. Mahalaleel. 15-17. 10. Noah. 32. 


Here we find the record of the Seed of Seth. There 
is a striking contrast with the record of the Cainites 
in the previous chapter. The Cainites were progres- 
sive, built cities and made inventions. Nothing is said 
of the God-fearing generations in this chapter accom- 
plishing great earthly things. They were pilgrims and 
strangers, waiting for better things. In the Fourth 
chapter the word “die” is not mentioned. Nothing is 
said of the duration of the life of Cain and his seed. 
Eight times in the Fifth chapter we read, “and he 
died.” One did not die. We learn from this that the 
Lord keeps a record of the lives, the work and the 
years of His people. His Saints are in His hands. 

The names of ten generations translated give a 
startling revelation. In them we read the faith of the 


pious generations before the Flood and for what they 
waited. 


Adan. Man. Jared... ceeccccn. Descends. 
Seths..2-2 22 Set. Enoch................... Teaching. 
Enos Frailty. Methuselah...Death sent away. 
Cainan................. Deplorable. Lamech............ Powerful. 
Mahalaleel ....The Blessed God. Noah................ Rest, Comfort. 


‘The record of Enoch must be compared with Jude, 
14-16 and Hebrews, xi:5. He was translated before 
the great judgment swept over the earth. Enoch is a 
type of the living Saints at the close of the present age, 
who will be changed in a moment. in the twinkling of 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 29 


an eye. Study Enoch’s walk, Enoch’s faith, Enoch’s 
testimony, Enoch’s suffering and Enoch’s translation 
with the help of the New Testament passages. 


CHAPTER YI:1-8. 
The Increasing Corruption. 
1. The Sons of God and the Daughters of Men. 1-2. 
2. The Warning of Jehovah. 3. 
3. Increased Wickedness. 4-6. 
4. Judgment Announced. 7. 
5. Noah Found Grace. 8. 


The question is who are the sons of God who took 
the daughters of men. The general view is that the 
sons of God were the pious descendants of Seth and 
the daughters of men, the Cainitish offspring. How- 
ever, there are strong arguments against it. 

1. There is no proof in the text that the daughters of 
men were only the descendants of the Cainites. The 
text supports the view that in “daughters of men” the 
natural increase of the whole human family is meant. 
and not a special class. 

2. The theory that “Sons of God” must mean pious 
people can likewise not be sustained. The term Sons of 
God is never applied in the Old Testament to believers. 
Isaiah xliii:6 refers to the future gathering of the 
godly remnant of Israel. That the believer is a son 
of God, predestinated to the son—place, with the spirit 
of sonship in him, crying, “Abba, Father,” is exclusive- 
ly a New Testament revelation. 

8. The result of the marriage of the sons of God 
with the daughters of men were children, who were 
heroes, men of the Name. If the sons of God were 
simply the pious Sethites, who mixed with the Cain- 
ites, it is hard to understand why the offspring should 
be a special race, heroes, men of the Name. The giants 
were Nephilim, which means “the fallen ones.” 

“Sons of God” is the term applied in the Old Testa 
ment to supernatural beings, both good and evil 


30 THE ‘BOOK OF GENESIS, 


Angels good and fallen are termed sons of God in the 
Old Testament. Satan himself is reckoned among the 
sons of God in Job i:6, and ii:1. The term sons of 
God must mean here supernatural evil beings. These 
evil beings came down out of the air and began to take 
possession of such of the daughters of men as they 
chose. 


“For if God spared not the angels which sinned, but 
cast them down to hell, and delivered them unto chains 
of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment; and spared 
not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth, a 
preacher of righteousness, bringing in the Flood upon 
the world of the ungodly” (2 Pet. ii:4, 5). 


Here we have a New Testament hint on Genesis 
vi:1-5. The Scripture declares that the fallen angels 
are still loose; here, however, are angels, which sinned 
and God did not spare them. Another passage in 
Jude’s Epistle is still more significant: “And the angels 
which kept not their first estate, but left their own 
habitation, He hath reserved in everlasting chains un- 
der darkness unto the Judgment of the great day.” 
This statement in Jude is linked with the sin of Sodom 
and Gomorrha. 


We stand not alone in this exposition. “The sons of 
God, in my judgment, mean the same beings in Gene- 
sis as they doin Job. This point will suffice to indicate 
their chief guilt in thus traversing the boundaries 
which God appointed for His creatures. No wonder 
that total ruin speedily ensues. It is really the basis 
of fact for not a few tales of mythology which men 
have made up.” * God has veiled the awful corruption 
and we dare not intrude into the secret things. 


May we remember that our Lord has told us, “As it 


was in the days of Noah, so shall it be when the Son of 
Man cometh.” 


*“W. Kelly; Lectures on the Pentateuch. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 31 


The Spirit of God was then pleading with men. His 
work as the hindering one is indicated in verse 3. 

Read, 1 Peter iii :20, “For Christ indeed once suffered 
for sins, the just for the unjust, that He might bring 
us to God; being put to death in flesh but made alive in 
the Spirit, in which also going He preached to the 
spirits, which are in prison, heretofore disobedient, 
when the long-suffering of God waited in the days of 
Noe, while the ark was preparing.” This passage does 
not teach that Christ after His death, went into Hades 
to preach, but the meaning is that His Spirit through 
Noah preached to the spirits of men living at that time, 
and who were then disobedient and are now in prison. 

God in His long-suffering waited yet 120 years, dur- 
ing which His Spirit preached through the preacher of 
righteousness, calling to Repentance. 

The withdrawing of the Spirit of God is clearly 
taught in 2 Thess. ii:7. This age will end in the same 
manner as the age before the Flood, “‘the Spirit not 
always pleading with man.” 

Jehovah, beholding the earth, saw that the wicked- 
ness of man was great, and every imagination of the 
thoughts of his heart only evil continually. Before we 
read Jehovah’s verdict, “for he indeed is flesh.” And 
again, “The end of all flesh is come before me, for the 
earth is full of violence through them, and behold, I 
will destroy them with the earth.” 


Part 1V.—The Generations of Noah. 


Chapters VI: 9—IX: 29. 
CHAPTER VI:9-22. 
Before the Flood. 


1. Noah Walked with God. 9-10. 

2. The Earth Filled with Violence. 11-13. 

3. The Building of the Ark Commanded. 14-21. 
4, Noah’s Obedience. 22, 


32 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


It was Grace which constituted Noah just and en- 
abled him to walk with God. Hebrews xi:7 gives a full 
definition of Noah’s faith. Seven things are shown con- 
cerning Noah: 


Warned: of Godit2o. 2 eee ee ee The Ground of Faith. 
Things} Not; Seen ini. ete ee The Realm of Faith. 
He Feared... The Exercise of Faith. 
Prepared ancArke ose we anne eee The Work of Faith. 
Saved His" House. ice een ene The Result of Faith. 
Condemned the Wor dn..c.cccccccccceccessssssenssenen The Testimony of Faith. 
Heir of Righteousness... cccceesessssssssssseessseneee The Reward of Faith. 


The ark is a type of Christ. The word “gopher” 
means atonement, and the word “pitch,” meaning the 
same, is translated more than seventy times in the 
Bible by “to make atonement.” 

The ark had a window above—looking towards 
Heaven and not upon the earth and its judgment be- 
neath. It had one door and only one in the side. All 
blessedly applicable to Christ and salvation. The deluge 
which came, flood of waters, covering all, so that 
the end of all flesh came, is a type of the death of 
Christ. In His death judgment was passed and exe- 
cuted upon all flesh. The waves and billows rolled over 
His innocent head. He passed through death and 
judgment for us and has made Himself our perfect 
ark, our hiding place. In Him we are lifted above the 
judgment waters. 


CHAPTER VII. 
Noah in the Ark. The Judgment by Water. 

1. Commanded to Enter the Ark. 1-4. 

2. Noah’s Obedience. 5-9. 

3. The Judgment by Water. 10-24. 

Noah is a type of the Lord Jesus. In the one, Noah, 
his house was saved. He carried them above and 
through the judgment waters. Noah is also a type of 
the Jewish remnant which will pass through the great 
tribulation and the judgments to come. 

The ark of gopher wood, pitched inside and outside 


EAE BOOK VOPR. GENESTS. 33 


with pitch, is a type of the Lord Jesus Christ; Noah 
preparing the ark, the type of Christ, accomplishing 
salvation, having finished it. 

The deluge is a type of the death of Christ. “All 
Thy billows and Thy waves have gone over Me” 
(Ps. xlii:7). This was done when on the cross. He 
who knew no sin was made sin for us. As the earth 
was covered in the deluge, so the judgment passed over 
Yim, in whom the end of all flesh has come. 

“And Jehovah said unto Noah, ‘Come thou and all 
thy house into the ark.’” After the ark was finished 
came the invitation to enter in. The invitation “Come” 
still goes forth. “Come unto Me”’—will it last for- 
ever ? 

The beasts, clean and unclean, taken into the ark, 
as well as the fowls of the air, give us the hint that 
creation will share the blessed effects of salvation. The 
subsequent prophetic Word and Romans viii:19-23, tell 
us of a coming deliverance of groaning creation. 

“And they that went in unto Noah, went in male and 
female of all flesh, as God (Elohim) had commanded 
him, and the Lord (Jehovah) shut him in” (verse 16). 
In this verse we have Elohim and Jehovah used. God, 
as Creator, had commanded Noah; Jehovah had an- 
nounced the judgment, and the ark which had been pre- 
paring represented the patient and merciful Jehovah. 
And now as the hour of mercy was past, Jehovah shut 
the door. He who had given an open door shut it at 
last. 

Noah and his house in the ark were saved and safe. 
And so are we in Christ Jesus our Lord. 

“The rain was forty days and forty nights upon the 
earth” (verse 12). Here for the first time in the Word 
do we find the number forty. It is not the last time. 
Forty means endurance and testing. Moses was fort:7 
jays on the mountain, his life was divided into three 


34 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


forties. Forty years Israel was in the wilderness. 
Elijah knew the forty days, and Ezekiel lay forty days 
on his right side, a typical action (Ez. iv). Jonah 
preached, “yet forty days and Nineveh shall be de- 
stroyed;” and Christ was forty days in the wilderness 
to be tested. 

CHAPTER VIII. 


Noah Remembered. 


. Noah Remembered. 1-3. 

. The Ark Resting. 4-5. 

The Raven Sent Forth. 6-7. 

. The Sending Forth of the Dove. 8-12. 
The Waters Dried up. 12-14. 

. The Command to Leave the Ark. 15-17. 
- Noah’s Obedience. 18-19. 

. The Altar and the Covenant. 20-22. 

Especially instructive are verses 6 to 12 in our chap- 
ter. Noah opened the window at the end of forty days, 
and he sent forth a raven. This bird flew to and fro 
until the waters were dried up from off the earth. 

Then he sent forth a dove three times. The first 
time she found no resting place, and Noah took her 
back into the ark. The second time she returned with 
an olive leaf in her mouth, and the third time she did 
not return at all, and finds her abiding place in the 
earth. | 

That the dove is the type of the Holy Spirit needs 
hardly to be stated. In this outward symbolic form 
He came upon our Lord. But what does the black raven 
represent? The raven is the type of evil, a repre- 
sentative of the god of this age and the flesh as well. 
We may see in the raven flying to and fro until the 
waters were dried up, a type of the prince of the power 
in the air, the devil. His work and activity the devil 
describes himself as “going to and fro in the earth, 
and walking up and down in it” (Job. i:7; and 
ii:2). He is doing this still, but there is a time com- 
ing when the black raven will stop his restless flight. 


OIA MP wd 


CHE BOOK OF “GENESIS, 35 


When this present age ends with Divine wrath re- 
vealed once more, and the waves of Divine judgment 
have rolled over the earth, then Satan, the devil, that 
old serpent, will be bound a thousand years. 

The dove and her threefold departure is a type of the 
coming and presence of the Holy Spirit in the earth 
sent forth from the Lord. 


First, she comes forth and finds no resting place. 
This represents the Holy Spirit in the Old Testa- 
ment, where he was not present in the earth to find 
a rest, to abide. The second departure of the dove 
may be taken as a type of the Holy Spirit’s presence in 
this age. The dove found a resting place and still she 
did not stay, but came back to the ark with an olive 
leaf. This olive leaf was the witness that the judg- 
ment waters had passed and that new life had devel- 
oped. It also signifies peace. So the Holy Spirit is 
present in this age as the result of the finished work of 
Christ. The third time the dove did not return. So 
there is an age in the future when the Holy Spirit will 
be poured upon all flesh. During the first and second 
sending forth of the dove, the raven was also present. 
Both flew over the earth. When the dove went forth 
the third time the waters were gone and there was no 
more raven. 


The word “altar” is mentioned here for the first time 
in the Bible. The altar is for worship. Here then wor- 
ship is for the first time revealed. We worship, having 
passed from the old into the new, standing on the 
ground of resurrection. We know that death and judg- 
ment is passed, and therefore we worship in Spirit and 
in truth. Christ is our altar; and in the sacrifices Noah 
brought, Christ is also typically represented. Only he 
is a true worshiper who knows Christ and the perfect 
work He has done. “Jehovah smelled the sweet savor.” 
This reminds us of John iv: “But the hour cometh, and 


36 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


now is, when the true worshipers shall worship the 
Father in Spirit and in truth, for the Father seeketh 
such to worship Him.” Not service is a sweet savor 
to God, but worship. 


CHAPTER IX. 
The Earth Replenished. 
The Divine Commission. 1-7. 
The Covenant with Noah. 8-11. 
The Token of the Covenant. 12-17. 
The Family of Noah. 18-19. 
Noah’s Drunkenness. 20-24. 
. Noah’s Prophecy. 25-27. 
. Noah’s Death. 28-29. 

A new start is made after the judgment by water 
and Noah is blessed by God. Like Adam and Eve 
they are commissioned to fill the earth, but nothing 
is said of having dominion over the earth. 

In Genesis 1:29 we read that man was to eat the 
green herb and the fruit of the trees, but now there 
is permission given to eat every moving thing that 
liveth. It seems clear that before the deluge meat 
was not eaten. There are not a few advocates of total 
abstinence from meat in our day. The adherents of 
delusions like Theosophy and others tell us that a 
vegetable diet will ennoble man, deliver him from the 
lust of the fiesh, make him pure and good and fit to 
approach God. With all the abstinence from meat be- 
fore the deluge the people were not better, but ended 
in the flesh and perished in it. In 1 Tim. iv we read 
of those who live in the latter times and depart from 
the faith, and among the characteristics given is the 
following: “Forbidding to marry, and commanding 
to abstain from meats which God has created to be 
received with thanksgiving of them which believe and 
know the truth. For every creature of God is good, 
and nothing to be refused, if it be received with 
thanksgiving.” 


Noa YN 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 37 


And why is the blood made so prominent? Four 
times we read the word “blood” in verses 4-6. The 
book of Leviticus gives the answer, ‘For the life of 
the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it to you 
upon the altar, to make an atonement for your souls; 
for it is the blood that maketh an atonement for the 
soul” (Lev. xvii:11). The sanctity of the blood is 
here shown forth. Even the hunter in Israel had to 
keep it in view. ‘And whatsoever man there be of the 
children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn 
among you which hunteth, or catcheth any beast or 
fowl that may be eaten; he shall even pour out the 
blood thereof, and cover it with dust. For it is the 
life of all flesh; the blood of it is for the life thereof; 
therefore I said to the children of Israel, Ye shall eat 
the bloed of no manner of flesh; for the life of all flesh 
is the blood thereof; whosoever eateth it shall be cut 
off” (Lev. xvii:13, 14). So the hunter had to stop, and 
pour out the blood. All points to the blood of the 
Lamb. 

God established His covenant with Noah and his 
seed and put the token of the covenant in the clouds. 
The rainbow speaks of a passed judgment of His sal- 
vation and remembrance. 

Another universal judgment by water will never 
come again (verse 15). Another judgment is in store 
for this planet. ‘The world that was then, being 
overflowed with water, perished; but the heavens and 
the earth, which are now, by the same word are kept 
in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judg- 
ment and perdition of ungodly men”’ (2 Pet. iii:6-7). 

Interesting is Noah’s Prophecy after his drunken- 
ness. 

Ham (black) is not mentioned in the curse, but the 
son of Ham, Canaan (the merchantman). Ham’s deed 
reveaied the unbelieving condition of his heart, while 


38 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


Shem’s and Japheth’s action manifest divine grace in 
covering up the nakedness. God’s eye beheld Canaan 
and his subsequent career in his descendants. He 
inherits the curse. How literally it was carried out! 
Shem, meaning “Name,” becomes the family in which 
Jehovah, the Name, is to be revealed. Jehovah is the 
God of Shem. Soon we shall see a son of Shem, 
Abram, and his seed becoming the depository of 
Jehovah’s revelation. “ Later Jehovah speaks and re- 
veals His name by which He wishes to be known 
forever to another son of Shem, Moses. “Thus shalt 
thou say unto the children of Israel, Jehovah, the God 
of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac 
and the God of Jacob hath sent me unto you; this is 
my name forever, and this is my memorial unto all 
generations” (Ex. iii:15). He does not call Himself 
“the God of Japheth” but “the God of Shem.” Shem’s 
supremacy is here indicated. It is a far-reaching 
prophecy. 

Japheth means “expansion.” His sons are Gomer, 
Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, Tiras, and the 
sons of Gomer and Javan are mentioned in the next 
chapter. They expanded and Japheth dwells in the 
tents of Shem, partakes of Shem’s blessing and re- 
sponsibility. Some take “He shall dwell in the tents 
of Shem,” the “he” as referring to God, but this is 
incorrect. It means Japheth and reminds us of the 
parable of the olive tree in Romans xi. 

Shem’s blessing consisted (1) In being the carrier 
of the Name, Jehovah. (2) In controlling Canaan and 
being the master over him. (3) The giving shelter 
to Japheth and let him be sharer of the blessing. It 
is the germ of all following prophecy and we wait still 
for its end fulfillment. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 39 


Part V.—The Generations 
of the Sons of Noah. 


Chapter X-XI:9, 


CHAPTER X. 
Shem, Ham and Japheth and Their Seed. 


1. The Sons of Japheth. 2-5. 

2. The Sons of Ham. 6-20. 

8. The Sons of Shem. 21-82. 

Here we have the beginning of the nations. God 
knows them and keeps track of the nations of the 
earth. The order of the sons of Noah is here 
changed. Japheth comes first. Ham/’s place is un- 
changed. Shem comes last. This order is given in 
view of Noah’s prophecy. Among the descendants of 
Ham we find Nimrod, a mighty hunter. His name 
means “Let us rebel.” Here also we find Babel men- 
tioned for the first time. Babylon has for its founder 
“a mighty one in the earth—a mighty hunter.” Men- 
tioned here for the first time Babylon is seen springing 
from the race which is under a curse, and having for 
its founder a mighty one in the earth, a second Cain. 
We have here the birth of Babylon, while the entire 
Bible, from now on to the xviii chapter of the “Book 
of the Revelation of Jesus Christ,” gives us its devel- 
opment, its Satanic opposition to all that is from 
above, and its final great fall and destruction. Babylon! 
what a sinister word! Both city and system, such as 
is seen in its finality in Revel. xvii and xviii, are Satan’s 
stronghold. 

It would be interesting to follow all these names and 
trace them in the Scriptures and in history. But this 
we cannot do. 


40 THE “BOOK OP GENESIS, 


CHAPTER XI:1-9. 
‘he fower of Babel and the Scattering of the Nations. 


1. The Unity of the Nations in Shinar. 1-2. 

2. Their Attempt: “Let us make.” 3-4. 

3. The Divine Answer! “Let us go down.” 5-7. 
4, The Result. 8-9. 


All the earth had one language. This is also provek 
by philological research. The whole human family 
journeyed together. They left the mountainous re- 
gions and went down to the plain. This expresses 
their descent morally; they turned away from God, 
though they had the knowledge of God (Rom. i:18-19). 

Notice the absence of the name of God in the begin- 
ning of the chapter. They had excluded Him. ‘They 
Said 7. let us make ... .. ... and they had .. .. .. 
let us build ourselves .. .. .. let’ us make ourselves a 
name.” It is self-exaltation and defiance of God. It 
was full rebellion against God. 

The tower they attempted to build was to reach 
into heaven. It is the first concentrated effort of man 
against God His maker and against Jehovah. It rep- 
resents a God-defying and man-deifying confederacy. 
We cannot follow Babylon in its different aspects. 
There was the ancient city, the enemy of Jerusalem. 
There is the present day Babylon, a lifeless, professing 
Christendom, both Romanism and Protestantism. 
There is the future Babylon (Rev. xvii-xviii). Con- 
centration and confusion marks Babylon. Compare 
the “Let us” here with the prophetic Second Psalm, 
when in the future, nations will confederate against 
God and His anointed. God came down in divine irony 
to look at their city and tower and to scatter them hy 
the confusion of languages. And when the rebellion 
of the Second Psalm is reached, He will laugh and 
hold them in derision. 


aE BOOK “OF GENESIS: 41 


Part VI.—The Generations of Shem. 


CHAPTER XI:10-26. 


From Shem to Terah. 


Here again we find 10 names prominent. The same 
number we have in Genesis v. Both genealogies in 
chapters v and xi end with a man to whom God re- 
veals Himself and with each a new dispensation 
begins, Noah and Abram. Notice the decreasing years 
of life. Shem was 600 years old, the grandfather of 
Abram only 148. The line of Shem was degenerating; 
some of the names indicate this. Terah (Delay), the 
father of Abram, was an idolator. The descendants 
of Shem worshipped idols (Joshua xxiv:2). When the 
line of Shem had failed God called Abram. 


Part VII.—The Generations of Terah. 
| Chapter XI:27—XXV:11. 


CHAPTER XI:27-32. 
Terah’s Family and his Death. 


Terah with the persons mentioned in verse 31 went 
forth from Ur to go into the land of Canaan. Terah 
died in Haran. Chapter xii:1 and Acts vii:1-4 makes it 
clear that this going forth was by divine revelation. 


CHAPTER XII. 
The First Events in Abram’s Life. 

1. The Call and the Promise. 1-3. 

2. Abram’s Obedience. 4-6. . 

8. The Second Communication of Jehovah. 1-9. 

4. Abram in Egypt. First Denial of Sarai. 10-20. 

We come now to a new beginning, the Abrahamic 
covenant. It marks the beginning of that wonderful 


42 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


race, the seed of Abraham, the people of Israel. 
Abraham’s name is mentioned 74 times in the New 
Testament. How closely his history is interwoven into 
New Testament doctrine. This may be learned by 
consulting the following passages: John viii:56; Acts 
vii:2; Rom. iv:1-16; Gal. iii:6-18; Heb. xi:8-19; James 
ii:21-23. What a satanic lie it is to brand the existence 
of this great man of God as a myth! Such is often 
done in “Christian” (?) schools and pulpits. We give 
a few hints on this chapter: 


The Sovereign Grace of God in the call of Abram. 
Shem had the promise of the Name. Jehovah was to 
reveal Himself in Shem. We learned from the eleventh 
chapter that the line of Shem had run into decay and 
was departing from God. In the midst of this ruin 
in which Abram was involved, he became the object 
of divine election and Jehovah in His Grace manifested 
Himself to Abram and called him. 

The delay at Haran. “The God of Glory appeared 
unto our father Abraham, when he was in Meso- 
potamia, before he dwelt in Charran.” “Then came he 
out of the land of the Chaldeans, and dwelt at Char- 
ran; and from thence, when his father was dead, he 
removed him into this land, wherein ye now dwell” 
(Acts vii:2-4). The call came to Abraham in Meso- 
potamia. They left their country and dwelt in Haran. 
Here Abram tarried till his father Terah died. The 
delay in going to the land to which God had called him 
was on account of Terah. Typically, Terah stands for 
the flesh, the ties of nature. This is always in the 
way to carry out fully the call of God and enter into 
full and blessed realization of God’s calling. While 
delaying in Haran (Haran means “parched’’), God did 
not reveal Himself anew to Abram. 


Death set Abram free, and by death freed from the 
ties of nature he journeyed on to the land of Canaan. 


tHE BOOK OF GENESIS. 43 


The death of Terah, the liberating factor in Abram’s 
experience, is typical of the death of the Lord Jesus 
Christ. We have died in Him. The cross of Christ 
has set us free. 

Abram was “sanctified unto obedience.” Sanctified 
means “separated.” The call of God meant separation 
for Abram. “Get. thee out of thy country and from 
thy kindred, and from thy father’s house.” Now there 
was no further delay. “Abram departed, as the Lord 
had spoken to him.” The calling involved obedience 
which was readily yielded. All this is typical of the 
individual believer. 

It was by Faith. What faith is stands here fully 
manifested. “By faith Abraham, when he was called 
out into a place which he should after receive for an 
inheritance, obeyed; and he went out, not knowing 
whither he went” (Hebr. xi:8). He took God’s infall- 
lible Word and left all; walked by faith and not by 
sight; he hoped for things he saw not. Faith ever 
finds its most precious resting place upon the naked 
Word of God. 

The Promises. ‘‘And I will make of thee a great 
nation, and I will also bless thee and make thy name 
great; and thou shalt be a blessing. And I will bless 
them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee; 
and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed” 
(verses 2 and 3). And all God promised to Abram 
He hath kept. Every word has been literally fulfilled. 
Nations upon nations who hated Abraham’s seed, his 
natural descendants, have found to their great sorrow 
how true Abraham’s God is. These promises still hold 
good. To the seed of Abraham belong still the promises 
(Rom. ix:4). The nations of the earth, all the families 
are unconsciously waiting to be blessed by Abraham’s 
seed. Salvation is still of the Jews. 

Abram worships. He built an altar unto Jehovah, 
who appeared unto him. Again he built an altar, with 


44 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


Bethel on the west and Ai on the east, and there he 
called upon the name of Jehovah. The revelation of 
Jehovah produces worship. The basis of worship is a 
conscious and precious relation with Jehovah. Abram 
knew Jehovah’s grace toward him, therefore he wor- 
shipped Him and called upon His name, 

Abram’s failure was the result of leaving Bethel and 
going down to Egypt (typical of the world). 

CHAPTER XIII. 
The Return from Egypt. Separation from Lot. 


1. Back to Bethel. 1-4. 

2. The Strife. 5-7. 

3. The Separation. Lot in Sodom. 8-13. 

4. The Third Communication of Jehovah. 14-18. 


Abram is graciously brought back. Abram could 
not have remained in Egypt forever. So the believer 
who has wandered away from the Lord will be restored. 
How precious the altar at Bethel must have been to 
him. Dispensationally Abram’s going down to Egypt 
foreshadows the going down of his posterity. 

Lot’s character is brought out in his selfish choice. 
He had not so much followed the Lord as he followed 
Abram. He is self-centered, and unlike Abram looking 
to the things unseen, he is occupied with the things 
which are seen, with the earth and earthly possession. 
Lot is a type of the world-bordering, carnally minded, 
professing Christian. He lifts up his eyes and beholds 
a well-watered plain, beautiful as the garden of the 
Lord. He chooses all the plain of Jordan and pitched 
his tent toward Sodom. That Sodom and Gomorrah 
were fast ripening for the day of burning and destruc- 
tion, that the men in Sodom were wicked and_ sinners 
well known in the day when Lot made his choice, is 
not taken into consideration by him. There was no 
prayer, no consultation with the Lord from the side 
of Lot. His eyes behold only the beautiful and well 
watered plain; there must have been a feverish 


THE BOOK -OF GENESIS. 45 


haste to make his decision. Nor did Lot go at once 
into Sodom. He nears Sodom gradually. Perhaps at 
first he had no thought of having fellowship with the 
wicked men of Sodom, but he got there all the same. 
All is written for our learning. Decline begins grad- 
ually, but always leads into the world. 

And Abram gazed too over the fertile plains. Some 
time after he looked again. ‘‘And he looked toward 
Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the 
plain, and beheld, and lo, the smoke of the country 
went up as the smoke of a furnace” (xix:28). Was 
Abram sorry then for his choice? Do not look upon 
the fairness of the world; remember a little while 
longer and wrath and judgment will be poured upon 
the world now under condemnation. 

Another communication and promise is received by 
Abram from Jehovah. 


CHAPTER XIV. 
The First Recorded War. Lot’s Deliverance. 


. The Battle of the Confederacy. 1-10. 
. Sodom and Gomorrah spoiled. 11-13. 
. Abram’s Rescue. 14-16. 7 

. Sodom’s King to meet Abram. 17. 

. Melchizedek. 18-20. 

. The King’s Offer and Abram’s Answer. 21-24. 

The record of the first war is here foreshadowing 
the last great warfare still to come. Amraphel, King 
of Shinar, has been historically located by excavated 
tablets in 1901. The code of Amraphel (Kham- 
murabi) was discovered in Susa. It dates back to 
2139 B. C. Some 800 years the laws of Amraphel 
governed the people of Central Asia. The discovery 
of this code was a severe blow to Higher Criticism 
which claimed that writing before Moses was unknown 
What interests us most is Melchizedek. He is men 
tioned as a type of Christ in Psalm cx and Hebrew 


Aor COD 


46 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


vii. This chapter in Hebrews must be read with 
Genesis xiv. 

Melchizedek was a human being. We do not believe 
that he was a supernatural being manifested in the 
form of man. He was King of Peace and King of 
Righteousness and Priest as well, uniting the office 
of Priest and King and Prophet in himself. The way 
he is introduced in this first book, where genealogies 
abound, without descent, having in this sense neither 
beginning of days nor end of life (Heb. vii:3), makes 
him a very strong type of Christ, the Son of God. 

Like Melchizedek, Christ unites in His person King- 
ship and Priesthood. However, though Christ is a 
priest after the order of Melchizedek, He does not yet 
fully exercise His Melchizedek priesthood. As priest 
after the order of Melchizedek He must have His own 
throne, for which He is still waiting on the throne of 
His Father. 

Therefore when He comes again He will be the 
Priest upon His throne and crowned with many 
crowns (Zech. vi:12-14). 

The sinister temptation of Sodom’s King was re- 
jected by Abram because Melchizedek had made 
known the Name of God in a new way “The most high 
God.” Abraham uses this new title and adds “Je- 
hovah” to “the most high God.” 


Dispensationally it shows the future events after the 
conflict, the time of wars by corifederacies of nations, 
in which the seed of Abraham will be so much con- 
cerned, when the enemies of God and of Israel will be 
overcome, and the King of Peace, the King of Right- 
eousness, the great Priest, the Lord Jesus Christ, will 
appear to bless His earthly people. Then Israel will 
acknowledge Him as Abram did Melchizedek... “The 
Most High God,” is one of God’s millennial names. 


THE: BOOK OF GENESIS. 47 


CHAPTER XV. 


The Fourth Communication. The Covenant and the Vision. 


. The Fourth Communication. 1. 
. Abram’s Answer. 2-3. 

. The Promised Seed. 4-5. 
Abram Constitute Righteous. 6. 
. Continued Communication. 17-8. 
. The Divided Animals. 9-11. 

. The Vision. 12-17. 

. The Covenant Made. 18-21. 


OBNMK TWN 


The connection with the previous chapter is ex- 
tremely precious. Abram had honored the Lord and 
now the Lord honored him. Then the seed is promised. 
That seed promised is Isaac; Christ is typified by him. 
“Abram believed in the Lord and He counted it to him 
for righteousness.” The fourth chapter of Romans 
must be closely studied at this point for it is the com- 
mentary to the promise given and Abram’s faith. He 
is commanded to take the different animals and to 
divide them. 

All these animals are mentioned later in the book of 
Leviticus and as sacrifices are typical of Christ, while 
the fowls which came down upon the carcasses and 
which Abraham drove away (Gen. xv:ll) are types 
of evil. (See Matthew xiii, the birds which pick up 
the seed; the fowls which make nests in the tree.) 
But the divided pieces and the turtledove and pigeon, 
exposed to the fowls, are also typical of Israel, divided 
and cut through, while the fowls may be taken as 
types of nations who feast upon Israel. The deep sleep 
which fell upon Abraham, signifying death, and the 
horror of a great darkness, are likewise types of what 
was to come upon the seed of Abraham. After God 
had spoken of the coming affliction of the children of 
Abraham and announcing the judgment of their 
troubles, a smoking furnace and a burning lamp 
passed between the pieces. The smoking furnace. th2 


48 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


spectacle of a fire and the dark smoke from it, showed 
to the eye, what God had spoken to the heart of His 
servant. The smoking furnace is the type of Egypt 
and the tribulation through which the sons of Jacob 
and their seed had to pass. The burning lamp is the 
type of God’s presence with them. Thus we read: 
“But the Lord hath taken you and brought you forth 
out of the iron furnace, out of Egypt to be unto Him 
a people of inheritance, as ye are this day” (Deut. 
iv:20; 1 Kings viii:51). In Egypt the fire burned, as 
in the furnace, and the great darkness settled upon 


Abraham’s seed. 
CHAPTER XVI. 
Abraham and Hagar. 


. Sarai’s Suggestion. 1-3. 

. Abram’s Action. 4. 

. Sarai and Hagar. 5-6. 

. Hagar in the Wilderness. 17-9. 

. The Birth of Ishmael Announced. 10-14. 
. Ishmael Born. 15-16. 


The fifteenth chapter may be called Abram’s faith 
chapter. The sixteenth is the chapter of unbelief. It 
was impatience which forced Sarai and Abram to act 
for themselves. Unbelief is impatience and impa- 
tience is unbelief. Faith waits patiently for the Lord, 
and on the Lord, to act. “He that believeth shall not 
make haste.” Abram and Sarai attempted to help 
the Lord to fulfill His promise. What a failure they 
made of it! On account of it there was great trouble 
in his house. 

But the incident has a deeper meaning. Read Galat. 
iv:21-31. This gives us the typical meaning and how 
the Lord overruled even this failure. Sarai represents 
the Covenant of Grace; Hagar the Law Covenant. 
Hagar was an Egyptian; Sarai a Princess. The law 
brings into bondage, Grace makes free. 

Abram was eighty-six years old when Ishmael was 
born. The next chapter tells us that Abram was 


AaAaoTRWN 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 49 


ninety and nine years old when the Lord spoke to him 
again. Thus for thirteen years Abram’s life seems to 
have been barren of communications from the Lord. 
What a harvest of the flesh. 


CHAPTER XVII. 
The Fifth Communication. The Covenant Repeated. 


. The Communication. Abram Worships. 1-3. 
. The Enlarged Promise. 4-8. 

The Covenant Sign. 9-14, 

Sarah’s Seed Promised. 15-16. 

The Laughter of Abraham. 17. 

Abraham’s plea for Ishmael. 18-22. 
Abraham’s Obedience. 23-27. 


Nek ee 


The promises which the Lord now gives to Abram 
are most complete. His name is changed; he is now 
to be called Abraham, which means “the Father of 
many,” because he is to be the Father of many 
nations. 

Upon this follows the institution of circumcision. 
This is a portion which is extremely rich in its teach- 
ings. Let us notice that in Romans the Holy Spirit 
explains the meaning of this ceremony. “For we say 
that faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteous- 
ness. How was it then reckoned? when he was in 
circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in circumci- 
sion, but in uncircumcision. And he received the sign 
of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith 
which he had yet being uncircumcised . .. .” 
(Rom. iv:10, 11). Circumcision was, therefore, the 
seal of righteousness of faith. Some fourteen years 
previous Abram had been constituted righteous, be- 
cause he believed God, and it was counted unto him 
for righteousness. First Righteousness by faith and 
then the seal. Of believers it is said in the New Testa- 
ment that they are circumcised. “In whom also ye are 
circumcised with the circumcision made without hands 


50 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


in putting off the body of the flesh by the circumcision 
of Christ” (Col. ii:11). The circumcision of Christ is 
the death of Christ; in Him the body of the flesh is 
put off. We have died with Him, are dead and buried 
and risen with Him. “For we are the circumcision, 
which worship God in the spirit and rejoice in Christ 
Jesus and have no confidence in the flesh” (Phil. iii:3). 

Sarai’s name is also changed. The promised seed is 
to be from her. “His name is to be Isaac” which 
means laughter. The end of the chapter shows Abra- 
ham’s obedience. : 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


The Sixth Communication. Jehovah Visits Abraham. 


. The Manifestation. 1-2. 

. Abraham’s Welcome. 3-8. 

The Promise Repeated. 9-10. 

. Sarah’s Laughter. 11-15. 

. The Departure Towards Sodom. 16. 
. Abraham’s Intercession. 17-33. 


One to Ne 


This most remarkable visitation was the answer of 
Jehovah to Abraham’s obedience of faith. The one in 
the middle was none other than Jehovah in human 
form; the other two were angels. “Before Abraham 
was I am,” He said when on earth. Here Abraham is 
face to face with Him. 

Sarah’s laughter when the son is promised to her 
is the laughter of unbelief. She looked to her womb, 
which was a grave. Her laughter was made the occa- 
sion of that blessed word Jehovah spoke. “Is any- 
thing too hard for the Lord?” From the place of 
sweet communion they now proceed towards the scene 
where a great judgment was to be enacted. 

“Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do?” 
is another gracious word. Abraham was the friend of 
God. The Lord said to His disciples,. “The servant 
knoweth not what his Lord doeth, but I have called 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS, 51 


you friends; for all things that I have heard of My 
Father I have made known unto you” (John xv). Yes, 
He has told us all about the things to come, the doom 
of the world and the secrets of His coming. And then 
follows that wonderful intercession before the Lord. 
How he pleads! What humility and yet boldness! 
Blessed privilege of all saints the prayer of interces- 
sion, which the great Intercessor, the Lord Jesus 
Christ, loves to hear from the lips of His children, for 
it is the echo of His own heavenly occupation, 


CHAPTER XIX, 
The Destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. 


The Angels Visit. 1-5. 

Lot and the Sodomites. 6-11, 

The Destruction of Sodom Announced. 12-12 
. Lot and his Sons-in-law. 14. 

. Lot Brought Forth. 15-17. 

. Lot’s Request. 18-20. 

. The Escape. 21-25. 

. Lot’s Wife. 26. 

. Abraham Looks on. 27-29. 

. Lot’s Shame. 30-388. 


SOMNIAMA WDE 


= 


This is a chapter of judgment. How great the con- 
trast with the preceding one! There Abraham sat 
under the tent door and the Lord appeared unto him; 
here two angels come to Sodom at even and Lot sits 
in the gate of Sodom. Joyfully Abraham had run to 
meet the heavenly visitors and willing the Lord and 
His companion had entered in to be comforted by 
Abraham. Lot invites the angels likewise but they 
said “Nay; but we will abide in the street all night.” 
Only after Lot pressed upon them greatly “did they 
enter his house.” The feast was not like Abraham’s 
feast of fine meal and a calf, but only unleavened 
breads Poor, selfish Lot! He had gone down to 
Sodom; from the tent pitched toward Sodom he had 


52 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


landed in Sodom and there he had no longer a tent, 
but he had a house. He had settled down and given 
up his character as pilgrim. His daughters had be- 
come perfectly at home in Sodom and married 
unbelieving Sodomites. More than that Lot had taken 
a position in Sodom. “He sat in the gate of Sodom” 
and the mob said “This fellow came into sojourn and 
he will be judge” (verse 9). He held an influential 
position there and most likely attempted the reforma- 
tion of Sodom. That he was greatly troubled is learned 
from the New Testament ...... .. “he was vexed with the 
filthy conversation of the wicked” (2 Peter ii:7). Lot 
is the picture of thousands of Christian believers, who 
are carnally minded and worldly. There are many who 
have settled down in the world, from which they have 
been separated and delivered by the death of Christ 
and Jike Lot they will be saved “so as by fire.” 


From the fourth verse to the eleventh in this chap- 
ter we find a short description of the awful wickedness 
of Sodom. Its gross immoralities, the fearful fruits of 
the lust of the fiesh have since then become proverbial. 
In this connection we may well remember the words of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, “Likewise also as it was in the 
days Of Lot. even thus shall it be in the day when 
the Son of Man cometh” (Luke xvii:28-30). This 
Christian age will not end in universal righteousness; 
it will end in apostasy from God and His Word, in 
iniquity and lawlessness, and these will be followed by 
a fiery judgment. Indications of such an ending of 
this age of boasted progress are numerous and be- 
coming more pronounced. Among these immoralities, 
the looseness of the marriage ties, and adulteries are 
prominently in the lead. The great cities of Christen- 
dom are modern Sodoms and the immorality in them 
is perhaps worse than in the ancient, lewd cities of 
the valley of Jordan. This wi!l be getting worse and 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 53 


worse and the end will be judgment. And now the 
angels give the message of the impending judgment. 
Sodom was to be destroyed by fire. Lot believed the 
message, but when he had spoken the word to his 
two sons-in-law, “Up get you out of this place; 
for the Lord will destroy this city,” they took it as 
a joke and believed not. They might have been saved 
if they had believed. They perished in Sodom. Even 
so it is now at the end of this age. “Knowing this first, 
that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking 
after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise 
of His coming?” (2 Pet. iii:3, 4). If one preaches and 
teaches the soon coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, to 
be revealed from heaven with His mighty angels in 
flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not 
God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord (2 
Thess. i:7, 8), he is laughed at and scorned, called a 
pessimist. Perhaps the two sons-in-law called Lot a 
pessimist. 

Notice Verse 24. “Then Jehovah rained upon Sodom 
and Gomorrah brimstone and fire from Jehovah out of 
heaven.” Here was a Jehovah on earth and He called 
to Jehovah in Heaven. 

Lot’s history ends in shame. Moab and Ammon be- 
gotten in wickedness have a history of shame. No 
record is given of the death of Lot. 


CHAPTER XX. 
Abraham in Gerar. 

1. Abraham in Gerar. 1. 

2. Second Denial of Sarah. 2. 

3. God’s Dealing with Abimelech. 3-7. 

4, Abimelech and Abraham. 8-18. 

Wote Abraham’s going down to Egypt in Chapter 
Xi and now going to Gerar and denying again Sarah. 

in chapter XXVI Isaac goes also to Gerar and Genies 
Benekah. It shows what the flesh is. 


54 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


But Abraham is greatly honored by the Lord. The 
Lord called him a prophet. Abraham prayed and God 
healed Abimelech. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


Isaac and Ishmael. The Covenant with Abimelech. 


. Isaac’s Birth. 1. 

. His Circumcision. 4-8. 

. Ishmael Mocking. 9. 

. Sarah’s Demand. 10-11. 

. God Speaks to Abraham. 12-13. 

. Hagar and Ishmael Cast out. 14-16. 
. The Intervention of God. 17-21. 

. The Covenant with Abimelech. 22-34. 


OaNOoarwhd 


Isaac, the promised Seed, was born at the set time 
as God had spoken. 

As there was a set time when the promised Son was 
born to Abraham, so there was an appointed time 
when God gave His Son “when the fulness of time was 
come, God sent forth His Son.” There is also a set 
time, when the First begotten will be brought into the 
world again, His second Coming. Then it will be the 
set time for Israel, too, when God remembers His 
promises and when He visits and does all, what He 
has spoken concerning them. “Thou shalt arise and 
have mercy on Zion; for the time to favor her, yea, 
the set time is come” (Psalm cii:13). 

Isaac’s name means laughter, the laughter of God in 
view of man’s helplessness. Isaac the promised one, 
the only one, in his wonderful birth and in his name 
is a type of the promised seed, the Lord Jesus Christ. 
He is God’s laughter over Satan, Sin and Death. 

Sarah laughed again, but it is the laughter of joy. 
The word the Lord spoke to her: “Ts anything 
too hard for the Lord?” wrought faith in her heart. 
“Through faith also Sarah herself received strength 
to conceive seed, and was delivered of a child when 


ZHE-BOOK OF GENESIS. 55 


ghe was past age, because she judged Him faithful 
who had promised” (Heb. xi:11). We have called at- 
tention before to the allegory in Gal. iv:21-31. This 
passage gives meaning to the historical account. Sarah 
stands for the Grace Covenant; Hagar for the Law 
covenant. As soon as the Seed came (Christ) the Law 
was cast out. The Law was only the schoolmaster 
till Christ came. Hagar’s son also typifies the flesh. 
Isaac is typical of the nature which Grace bestows. 

No sooner was Isaac weaned and a great feast made 
than the son of Hagar, the Egyptian, mocked. Ishmael 
manifests his true character. As long as there was no 
Isaac, nothing is heard of Ishmael; the presence of 
Isaac makes known what was in the son of the bond- 
woman. The presence of the new nature makes known 
what the flesh really is and it is fulfilled what is writ- 
ten “The flesh lusteth against the Spirit and the Spirit 
against the flesh.” 

Here we have also a dispensational picture. Accord- 
ing to the passage in Galatians Hagar corresponds to 
Jerusalem which is now, the one who is in bondage with 
her children. As Hagar wandered in the wilderness 
so the natural descendants of Abraham have become 
wanderers. It is on account of that “covenant of 
Grace” that rich Grace in the Lord Jesus Christ, which 
they rejected that they are cast out. But they are like 
Hagar in the wilderness of “Beer-sheba,”’ which means 
translated, “Well of the oath,” reminding us of the oath 
of God and His gifts and calling, which are without re- 
pentance. Like Hagar’s eyes their eyes are blinded 
and they see not the “well of water” which is for them. 
A time, however, will come when their eyes will be 
opened and when they shall draw water out of the 
wells of salvation (Isaiah xii:3). The rest of the 
chapter is taken up with the record of the covenant, 
which Abimelech made with Abraham. He, who had 
been healed in answer to the prayer of Abraham, now 


56 THE BOOK OF GENESIS, 


acknowledges openly that God is with his servant. This 
shows the faithfulness of God to His promises. Abra- 
ham is blest and is a blessing. In the Grove of Beer- 
sheba he called on the name of Jehovah, the everlast- 
ing God. 
CHAPTER XXII. 
The Testing of Abraham. 


- God’s Command. v. 1. 

. Abraham’s Obedience. 3-6. 

. Isaac’s Question and Abraham’s Answer. 17-8. 

. Isaac upon the Altar. 9-10. 

The Interference from Above. 11-12. 
Jehovah-Jireh. 13-14. 

The Second Message and Abraham’s Return. 15-19. 
. Nahor’s Offspring. 20-24. 

God now tested Abraham. True faith has to bs 
tested; it is an evidence that there is faith when testy 
come upon the believer. God knew Abraham, and 
when the proper moment had come in his life, Go) 
spake the words to him by which he was to be tested 
What a test it was! That promised son, that belovet 
one to take him and to slay him upon an altar! Reasoyv 
might have said, God promised this son, he was given 
by God’s own power, all my hope and expectation cen- 
ter in him; how can God demand him to be slain? 
But faith does not question God’s Word, and has na 
“why?” to ask of God. Such faith was manifested by 
Abraham when in the beginning God told him to go 
out of his land, to a land that He would show him. 
He went out in faith and knew not whither he went. 
But God brought him to the land. He knew God’s 
faithfulness. And now once more he is asked to go 
out, to the land of Moriah to an unknown mountain, 
and to take his beloved son along to give him up. 
Was his heart really all for God? Does he love Him 
and depend on Him supremely? Would he be willing 
to part with the only one and give him up? This is 
the test. The record shows there was not a moment’s 


ONAaATRoON Re 


PE pOOK OF GENESIS: 57 


hesitation on Abraham’s side. No word escaped from 
his lips. The only answer which he gave to God 
was that he rose up early in the morning and began at 
once the journey with Isaac. What an obedience it 
was! 


What a word of faith it was when he said, “Abide 
ye here with the ass, and I and the lad will go yonder 
and worship and come again to you.” Hebrews xi:17- 
19 gives us the secret of it. 


We behold them going together, Isaac now carrying 
the wood. Abraham laid the wood upon him. An 
old Hebrew exposition of Genesis paraphrases this by 
saying “he laid the wood upon him in the form of a 
cross.” And only once does Isaac speak asking for the 
lamb. To which Abraham replied, “My son, God Him- 
self will provide a lamb for a burnt offering.” Then 
they go together, and Isaac opened not his mouth again 
‘like a lamb led to slaughter.” He allows himself to 
be bound upon the altar. He had absolute confidence 
in his father and is willing to be slain by him; there 
was no struggle to be free. He is obedient to his 
father Abraham, even obedient unto death. The typi- 
cal meaning of the event is as simple as it is precious. 
Isaac is the type of that “Only Begotten.” In Abra- 
ham we behold “The Father,” who spared not His only 
begotten Son, but delivered Him up for us all. But 
how great the contrast! God gave Him, the Son of His 
love for a sinful, rebellious world. And when the hour 
came and the Son was nailed upon the wood there was 
no hand to stay. He was led to slaughter like a lamb 
and opened not His mouth; and then we hear Him cry, 
“My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me?” 
God’s hand was upon Him and He, the Holy One, was 
smitten by God. This is the lamb God himself has 
provided; ‘‘the ransom” He has found, typified also by 
the ram caught in the thicket. And in the angel of 


58 THE BOOK OFWGENESIS: 


Jehovah, He Himself was present upon the scene, 
knowing all that which He would do and suffer, when 
the appointed time had come. How wonderful is His 
written Word! And we touch in these brief notes but 
a little of the foreshadowings and truths revealed in 
this chapter. The binding of Isaac upon the altar and 
the taking from the altar foreshadow the death and 
resurrection of Christ. 

“Jehovah-jireh,” the Lord has seen, is the great 
foundation. From that provision, the gift of His Son 
and His obedience unto death, even the death of the 
cross, flows forth the great redemption: Jehovah-roph- 
ecah (Exodus xv:26), the Lord thy healer, is next. 
Then follow Jehovah nissi, the Lord my banner, (vic- 
tory Exod. xvii); Jehovah Shalom, Jehovah is peace 
(Judges vi:24); Jehovah roi, Jehovah, my shepherd 
(Psa. xxiii:1); Jehovah Zidkenu, Jehovah our right- 
eousness (Jerem. xxiii:5, 6); Jehovah Shamma, 
Jehovah is there (Hz. xlviii:35). 


CHAPTER XXIII. 
The Death of Sarah. 

a-Sarah Diesheel-2: 

2. The Grave Obtained. 3-18. 

8. The Burial of Sarah. 19-20. 

We call the attention to the typical meaning of the 
death of Sarah. 

She is the type of the nation Israel and her death in 
this chapter signifies the death of Israel, nationally. 
This must be brought in connection with the previous 
chapter. There we learned that Isaac was upon the 
altar and taken from it. This is typical of the death 
and resurrection of the true Isaac, the promised One, 
the Lord Jesus Christ. Immediately after, Sarah dies, 
the one from whom Isaac came. And so after the Lord 
Jesus Christ had died and was raised from the dead, 
the nation from whom He came, according to the flesh, 


fate BOOK OF” GENESIS: 59 


passes off the scene. Israel, like Sarah, is buried in the 
midst of the children of Heth, that is the Gentiles. 
But Israel has the promise of restoration typified by 
resurrection. God has promised to open the national 
grave of Israel and bring them back to the land, which 
He has given to the seed of Abraham forever. This 
typical application becomes still more striking and 
irrefutable by what follows in the twenty-fourth chap- 
ter. Here we find the call of the Bride who is to com- 
fort Isaac, after his mother’s death. 

It is interesting that Sarah is the only woman, 
whose age is mentioned in the Bible. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 
The Bride Sought for Isaac. 


The Commission to the Servant. 1-9. 

The Obedience and Prayer of the Servant. 10-14. 
The Prayer Answered. 15-21. 

The Gifts of the Servant. 22-26. 

The Servant Received. 27-33. 

The Servant’s Message. 34-36. 

The Commission and Answered Prayer Stated. 37-49. 
The Bride Chosen. 50-60. 

. The Journey to meet Isaac. 61. 

. The Meeting and the Marriage. 62-67. 

This is one of the longest chapters in the Bible. The 
connection with the previous chapters is obvious. Ali 
has a typical meaning. The promised Son is the type 
of the Lord Jesus Christ. When he was upon the altar 
and taken from the altar we saw a prophetic picture 
of the death and resurrection of our Lord. In the 
preceding chapter the death of Sarah stands for the 
national death of Israel from whom Christ came 
according to the flesh; this national setting aside of 
Israel occurred after Christ was risen from the dead 
and had returned to the Father. And here in chapter 
xxiv we behold Isaac, the Son and Heir, with the 
Father and the Father sending forth his servant to 


25>) 8 BS GE ATS Go SS 


_ 


60 THE BOOK VOFPeGEN Bats. 


seek a bride for Isaac. Typically we see in this chap- 
ter the call and homebringing of her, who is the com- 
fort of the Son, after Israel’s failure and national 
death, the Church. 

Abraham is now old (140 years). He was very rich 
in possessions, but his greatest treasure was the Son 
of his love who was with him in Canaan. And Isaac 
is the father’s delight and the object of his love and 
thoughts. He is to have a wife to share his riches. 
In sending forth the servant (probably Eleazar) Abra- 
ham tells him twice, “Beware thou that thou bring 
not my son thither again.” The Son is not to leave the 
father’s side; the bride is to be brought to him. And 
Abraham is assured of the success of the mission of 
the servant. 

The application is easily made. Canaan, where the 
three dwell, Abraham, the father; Isaac, the Son, and 
the servant, is the type of the Heavens. Abraham 
typifies the Father and Isaac the Son. The Son who 
died, raised from the dead, seated as the Heir of all 
things at the right hand of God, is to have one destined 
from before the foundation of the world to share His 
Riches and His Glory. For her, the Church, He died 
and purchased her with His Blood. For the pearl of 
great price He sold all He had. 


And whom does the Servant foreshadow? He is the 
oldest servant; he ruled over all Abraham had; he was 
with him from the beginning. Who is represented by 
the servant who went forth in obedience and whose 
sublime mission was crowned with such results? The 
Servant is the type of the Holy Spirit. He was sent 
forth after Christ was glorified and with the day of 
Pentecost He began His blessed mission on earth. The 
testimony of the Holy Spirit and His work in calling 
out the church is blessedly foreshadowed in this chap- 
ter. He testified of the Father and the Son; how rich 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 61 


the father is and that Isaac is the heir of all the riches. 
And so the Holy Spirit does not speak of Himself but 
of the Father and of the Son and makes known the 
eternal purposes of the Father, and as the Servant’s 
mission did not fail, so the mission of the Holy Spirit 
in the present age cannot fail. 

And richer still, in typical meaning, is the story of 
the chosen one, Rebekah. We give a very few hints. 
She heard the message the servant brought. She be- 
lieved all he said. She had never seen Isaac and she 
was attracted to him. The jewels of silver and of gold 
and the raiment the servant gave to Rebekah were the 
evidences of the riches of the unseen bridegroom and 
the tokens of his love. And when they asked her, 
“Wilt thou go with this man?” she answered, “I will 
go.” There was no delay. 


All is very simple in its application. The sinner 
hears the testimony and is to believe the report. If 
the Word is received in faith and accepted then we 
receive “the earnest of our inheritance,” the Holy 
Spirit. The heart through grace becomes detached 
from the world and attached to Him, who loveth us and 
whom we love, though we have never seen Him. 

“The Servant took Rebekah and went his way.” 
He took charge of her. How long the journey lasted 
we do not know. Most likely she was ignorant of the 
journey and how soon she was to meet Isaac. But the 
bridegroom Isaac must have ever been in her heart and 
before her eyes. And so are God’s called out ones, 
who constitute the church, while on the journey, in 
charge and keeping of the Holy Spirit. We do not 
know how long the journey towards the meeting place 
may last. 

From the well of Lahai-roi (The living and the 
seeing One) Isaac came. Isaac and Rebekah met. 
The servant presented her to Isaac and gave his report. 


62 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


As Isaac came forth from Lahai-roi, so our Lord will 
come forth from the place where He is now. He will 
come into the air to meet His own. (1 Thessal. 
iv:15-18). No doubt Isaac waited for Rebekah and as 
Rebekah expected to meet him so are we to wait for 
His Son from heaven. We shall see Him as He is. 
Before the night came Isaac took her into his tent, 
and then the marriage (Rev. xix). 


CHAPTER XXV:1-11. 
Abraham’s Posterity From Keturah. His Death, 
1. Abraham’s Offspring from Keturah. 1-4, 


2. Isaac the Heir. 5-6. 
3. Abraham’s Death and Burial. 7-11. 


Abraham’s marriage to Keturah and the offspring 
from her concludes the history of this remarkable 
character. That this took place after Isaac’s marriage 
(typifying the marriage of the Lamb) makes it very 
interesting. After the church is completed and the 
present age ends the seed of Abraham will be blessed 
for the nations of the earth and nations will be born 
and walk in the light. This will be the result after 
Israel’s restoration. Then all the families of the earth 
will be blessed in Abraham’s seed. Abraham’s posterity 
from Keturah stands for the millennial nations. 

And Isaac is seen above all these. He stil! dwelt at 
Lahai-rci. He alone is the Heir and the others re- 
ceived only gifts. So Christ is the Heir of God and 
His church will be with him far above all the earthly 
blessings of the age to come. Abraham died 175 years 
old, which means, he lived till Jacob and Esau were 15 
years old. The phrase “gathered to his people” is uséd 
only of six persons. Of Abraham (xxv:8); Ishmael 
(verse 17); Isaac (xxxv:29); Jacob. (xlix:29-33) 
Aaron (Numb. xx:24), and Moses (Deut. xxxii:50). 
Here we add a few words translated from the Gexmar 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 63 


and written by Dr. Kurtz, late Professor of the Uni- 
versity of Dorpat: 


“The human race has had four ancestral heads, to each of 
whom the divine blessing is granted: “Be fruitful and mul- 
tiply.” Of these, Abraham is the third; for he, too, is tho 
head and founder of a new race, or of a new development. 
The direct reference of that blessing, in the case of the first 
and second, is to descendants after the flesh; in the case of the 
fourth (Christ, see Psalm 22:30—110:8; Isa. 53:10, to a spirit- 
ual seed, but in the case of Abraham, to both; for his spiritual 
seed was appointed to be manifested through the medium of his 
seed according to the flesh, agreeably to the promise: “in thee 
and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.” 
The children of Abraham, according to the flesh, are countless 
in number. Nations have arisen and disappeared, but his de- 
scendants proceed onward, through all ages, unmixed and un- 
changed. Their history is not yet closed; the blessing given to 
his seed, still preserves them unharmed, under every pressure 
of the nations around them, and amid all the ravages of time. 
But the peculiar feature which distinguishes Abraham does not, 
properly, belong to him naturally, as a member of the human 
family, or as an individual of a particular nation, but is found 
in his spiritual character. Where this character, which is faith, 
is manifested, we find the true children of Abraham (Gal. 3:7, 
29; Rom. 9:6-8).—Faith was the polar star, the very soul, of 
his life. The ancient record, anticipating a development of two 
thousand years, remarked of him, first of all: “He believed in 
the Lord; and he counted it to him for righteousness” (Gen. 
15:6); and after these two thousand years had elapsed, Christ 
said of him: “Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw iv, 
and was glad” (John 8:56). Abraham’s true position and im- 
portance cannot, therefore, be fully appreciated, until we recog- 
nize in him the father of them that believe (Rom. 4:11); and 
innumerable as the stars of heaven, and glorious as they are, 
are his spiritual children, the children of his faith.” 


64 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 
Part VIII.—The Generations of Ishmael. 


Chapter XXV:12-18. 

1. Ishmael and his Sons. 12-16. 

2. The Death of Ishmael. 17-18. 

In chapter xvi:12 we find the prediction that Ishmael 
should dwell in the presence of his brethren. In verse 
18 we find the fulfilment. The names we find here 
may be traced in other Scriptures. For instance in 
Isaiah lx, the great chapter of the Millennial King- 
dom, we have Nebajoth and Kedar mentioned (verse 
7). The number twelve, twelve princes, links Ishmael 
closely with Israel. When Israel is blest in the future 
and receives the promised Land for his glorious pos- 
session, the posterity of Ishmael will not be forgotten. 


Part IX.—The Generations of Isaac. 


Chapter XXV:19—XXXV:29. 
CHAPTER XXV:19-34. 
Esau and Jacob. 

1, Rebekah Barren and the Answered Prayer. 19-22. 

2. The Birth of Esau and Jacob. 23-26. 

38. The Growth of the Boys. 27-28. 

4, Esau sells his Birthright. 29-34. 

It was 25 years after Abraham entered Canaan be- 
fore Isaac was born. It was 20 years after Isaac’s 
marriage before the birth of Esau and Jacob. The 
barren condition of Rebekah led Isaac to exercise faith 
and to cast himself upon the Lord for help. And He 
answered him. God delights to take up what is weak 
and barren and manifest His power in answer to 
prayer. Before the children were born the Lord had 
declared, “the elder shall serve the younger.” The 
struggle in Rebekah’s womb reminds us of the struggle 
between the two seeds (Ishmael and Isaac) in Abra- 
ham’s household. God’s sovereignty is here solemnly 
made known. He knew them before they were born 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 65 


and He made his choice according to His own sovereign 
will and purpose. “And not only this; but when 
Rebekah also had conceived by one, even by our father 
Isaac (for the children being not yet born, neither hav- 
ing done good or evil, that the purpose of God accord- 
ing to election might stand, not of works but of Him 
that calleth), it was said unto her, The elder shall serve 
the younger, as it is written, Jacob have I loved but 
Esau have I hated” (Rom. ix:11-13). That this does 
not refer to any unconditional and eternal condemna- 
tion is clear.“ It must be noticed that the statement 
“Esau have I hated” does not appear in Genesis, but 
in the last book of the Old Testament. Then the char- 
acter and defiance of Edom had become fully estab- 
lished. In Genesis the Lord speaks only of having 
chosen Jacob and what creature of the dust can 
challenge His right to do so. 

_ Then Esau sold his birthright. It fully brought out 
the defiance of his wicked heart. Hebrews xii:16-17. 
The blessings of the birthright he sold consisted in 
three things: 1. The Father’s blessing and the place 
of head of the family. 2. The honor of being in the 
direct line of the promised One—Shem-Abraham-Isaac. 
3. The exercise of the domestic priesthood. All 
this Esau despised for a carnal gratification. How 
numerous are his followers in our days who might have 
greater blessings, but they are lovers of pleasure more 
than lovers of God. 


CHAPTER XXVL 
Isaac in Gerar. 


. The Famine. 1. 

. Jehovah Appears unto Isaac. 2-5. 

. Isaac in Gerar; Denies Rebekah. 6-11. 

. Isaac’s Prosperity; the Digging of Wells. 12-22 
. Jehovah Appears at Beer-sheba. 23-25. 

. Isaac and Abimelech. 26-33. 

. The Wives of Esau. 34-35. 


NSarnhwond 


66 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


When the famine came Jehovah commanded Isaac 
not to go to Egypt. As Isaac is the type of Christ 
risen from the dead and Egypt is the type of the 
world, this command has a significance. Isaac is sep- 
arated from Egypt as Christ and His people are, who 
share in Him a heavenly place. We also notice, while 
the Lord spoke to Abraham that his seed should be 
like the sand of the sea (the natural descendants) and 
the stars of heaven (the spiritual seed) to Isaac the 
Lord promises the seed as the stars of heaven; this 
confirms the typical character of Isaac. 

In Gerar he failed as his father failed. And while 
Sarah was seized by Abimelech, Rebekah is not touched 
nor separated from Isaac. Christ and His church are 
inseparable. 

The digging of the wells and Isaac’s patience fully 
manifests his character; a little picture of the patient 
suffering of the Son of God ‘‘Who when He was reviled, 
reviled not again; when He suffered, He threatened 
not.” Then Jehovah appeared unto him again and 
he receives still greater blessings as the reward of his 
obedience. 

When Esau was 40 years old he manifested his 
defiance still more by taking wives of the Hittites to 
the grief of his parents. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 
The Story of Jacob. The Deception of Rebekah and Jacob. 


. Esau sent for. 1-4. 

. Rebekah’s Deception. 5-17. 

. Jacob’s Deception. 18-25. 

. Jacob Blessed. 26-29. 

The Discovery. 30-40. 

. Esau hates Jacob. 41. 

. Rebekah Advises Jacob to flee. 42-46. 


NAT wo DH 


With this chapter the story of Jacob begins. Three 
periods of his life are especially to be noticed. 1. His 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 67 


life in Canaan. 2. His departure from the land and 
his servitude in Padan—Aram. 3. His Return to the 
Land. The history of his descendants, the people 
Israel, may be traced in this. They were in the land; 
now they are away from the land scattered among the 
nations; like Jacob they will return to the land. Isaac 
knew the Word of God, “the elder shall serve the 
younger,” yet he wanted to bless Esau. This was 
failure on his side. “Yet he blessed Jacob by faith. 
Heb. xi:20. Rebekah wants to comply with the diviné 
declaration but uses unholy means trying to aid God 
by her own devices to fulfill His Word. Jacob obeys 
his mother and makes use of the deception. Esau 
deceives, too, for he claimed a blessing to which he had 
no right before God and man. The flesh and its sinful 
ways is fully manifested in this chapter, nevertheless 
the will of God was accomplished. 
Isaac lived after this event 43 years longer, but 
with this he passes from the page of history. Of his 
death and burial by Esau and Jacob we hear later. His 
life was characterized by patient endurance and suffer- 
ing and his faith consisted in quietness and waiting. 


CHAPTER XXVIII 
Jacob’s Departure to Pandan-Aram. His Vision. 

1. Isaac sends Jacob away. His Blessing. 1-5. 

2. Esau’s Action. 6-9. 

3, Jacob’s Vision and Vow. 10-22. 

We enter with this upon the interesting wanderings 
of the third Patriarch Jacob. God was pleased to reveal 
Himself to the three illustrious men, Abraham, Isaac 
and Jacob, as he did not before. In Exodus iii:4-15 
Jehovah reveals Himself to Moses and Jehovah calls 
Himself “the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and 
the God of Jacob. This is my name forever.” In 
Abraham, as we have seen, we have the type of the 


68 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


Father; in Isaac the type of the Son and now in Jacob 
we shall find the type of the work of the Holy Spirit. 
Jacob in his history foreshadows the history of Jacob’s 
sons. 


Jacob’s departure stands for Israel’s expulsion from 
their own land to begin their wanderings and suffer- 
ing, till they are brought back again to the land sworn 
to the heads of the nation. In the chastening which 
passed over him we see God’s governmental dealings 
with Israel. 


The vision at Bether is mentioned by our Lord in 
John i:51. The Jehovah who stood above the ladder 
Jacob saw is the same who spoke to Nathaniel, “Here- 
after ye shall see heaven open and the angels of God 
ascending and descending upon the Son of Man.” It is 
the vision of the future. Jehovah in that vision gave 
the promise of the land to Jacob and told him that his 
seed shall be as the dust of the earth. Notice while 
to Isaac the promise is of a heavenly seed to Jacob a 
seed as the stars of heaven is not mentioned. SBtill 
more was promised to Jacob. Read verse 15. “I will 
not leave thee until I have done that which I have 
spoken to thee about.” Here again is Sovereign Mercy. 
What did Jacob do to merit all this? Why should 
God meet him thus? Did he think of the Lord and call! 
on Him for mercy before he slept on the stone? 
Nothing whatever. And Jehovah kept His promise 
and did all He had promised. “I will not leave thee” 
is a repeated promise. See Deut. xxxi:6; Josh. i:5; 
1 Chronicle xxviii:20; Hebrews xiii:5-6. “Happy is he 
that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is 
in Jehovah his God” (Ps. exlvi:5). And He is our God 
and our Lord and in His Grace keeps and leads us and 
does all He has promised. Thus God met Jacob at 
Bethel (the house of God), assured him of His watch- 
ing cxre over him and of a return home in peace. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 69 


Though Israel is now nationally set aside and they are 
dispersed, yet God watches over them, keeps them and 
will lead them back in His own time. 

The ridiculous claim that “the coronation stone” in 
London is the stone upon which Jacob slept needs no 
refutation. Leading geologists declare unanimously 
that this stone did not come from Palestine. 


CHAPTER XXIX, 
Jacob with Laban. 


. Jacob’s Arrival at Padan Aram. 1-14. 
. His Service for Rachel. 15-20. 

. Laban’s Deception. 21-25. 

. Jacob Receives Rachel. 26-81. 

. Leah’s Sons. 32-35. 


The Lord brought him to Padan Aram, where he 
was to dwell as an exile for twenty years. During 
these twenty years Jehovah did not manifest Himself 
to him, even as Israel dispersed among the nations has 
no communications from the Lord. His sojourn in 
Padan Aram produced suffering, the disciplinary deal- 
ings of God with him. He reaps in a measure what he 
had sown. He deceived his father Isaac and now Laban 
deceives him in different ways, especially by substitut- 
ing Leah for the beloved Rachel. A week after he 
received Leah, Rachel was given to him. But though 
he possessed her, he had to serve seven years for her. 

Interesting are the names of the sons of Leah. 
Reuben (Behold a Son!); Simeon (Hearing); Levi 
(Joined); Judah (Praise). It is the order of the 
Gospel. 


oF WN 


CHAPTER XXX. 
Jaceb with Laban. 


. The Sons of Bilhah: Dan and Naphtali. 1-8. 

. The Sons of Zilpah: Gad and Asher. 9-13. 

. The Children of Leah: Issachar, Zebulon and Dinah. 14-20 
. The Birth of Joseph. 22-24. 

. Jacob’s Request to Return. 25-26. 

. Laban’s Confession and Jacob’s Prosperity. 27-43. 


Aor wd 


70 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


Little comment is needed on this. The avarice and 
deceit of Laban is matched by the dexterity and cun- 
ning of Jacob. Joseph’s birth marks an important 
event. It is then that Jacob said unto Laban, “Send me 
away that I may go unto mine own place and to my 
country.” All this is likewise typical. ~ Rachel the 
first loved represents Israel; Leah, the Gentiles. The 
names Reuben, Simeon, Levi and Juda (see transla- 
tions) tell out the story of His Grace towards the 
Gentiles. Rachel, the barren, was remembered and 
gave birth to Joseph (adding), the one who was made 
great among the Gentiles and the deliverer of his 
brethren, and therefore the type of Christ. How inter- 
esting that Jacob thought at once of returning when 
Joseph had been born. But he had to wait six years 
more. 


CHAPTER XXXI. 
Jacob’s Servitude Ended and Flight from Laban. 


. Laban’s Behavior and God’s Commandment. 1-10. 
. The Dream Vision to Return to the Land. 11-16. 

. Jacob’s Flight. 17-21. 

. Laban Warned. 22-24. 

. Laban’s Accusation. 25-30. 

. Jacob’s Answer. 31-42. 

. The Covenant Between Jacob and Laban. 43-55. 


Qaorrwon pe 


The twenty years had expired. Laban’s hatred and 
the hatred of his sons had increased. When the crisis 
had been reached the voice of Jehovah was heard. 
“Return unto the land of thy fathers and to thy 
kindred; and I will be with thee.” This is the first 
time Jehovah spoke since the vision at Bethel. Jacob 
then laid the matter before his wives and relates a 
dream in which the angel of the Lord had spoken to 
him. What comfort it must have been for him to hear 
“T have seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.” The 
Lord watched over Jacob and though Laban hated him 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 71 


Jacob prospered. So Israel in the dispersion, hated by 
the Gentiles, increases and prospers. ' 

Rachel and Leah consented to flee and Jacob departs 
with his great wealth, his cattle and his goods. Soon 
Laban pursued and overtook Jacob. God warned 
the Syrian to beware how he treated Jacob. It seems 
that the main reason of the pursuit were the teraphim 
(household gods) which Rachel had stolen and which 
Laban wanted to recover. Idolatry was practised in 
the household of Laban, though he used the name of 
Jehovah (verse 49). The dialogue between Jacob and 
Laban is intensely interesting. . 

CHAPTER XXXII. 
Jacob’s Fear of Esau. At Peniel. 

. The Vision at Mahanaim. 1-2. 
. The Message to Esau. 3-5.. 
Esau’s Coming and Jacob’s Fear. 6-8. 
. Jacob’s Prayer. 9-12. 
. Preparing to meet Esau. 13-23. 
. Jacob’s Prayer at Peniel. 24-32. 


What a welcome it was when he came near to his 
land, that the angels of God met him. They were 
like divine ambassadors sent to welcome him back to 
assure him of God’s presence and protection. When 
the remnant of Israel returns in the future to the 
promised land, the angelic hosts will not be absent. 
They have a share in the regathering and restoration 
of the people Israel (Matth. xxiv:31). But he faced 
the greatest trouble, his brother Esau. Fear drives 
him to prayer. It is a remarkable prayer. 1. He 
acknowledges his utter unworthiness. 2. He gives 
God the Glory for all he has received. 3. He cries for 
deliverance. 4. He reminds God of the promises given 
at Bethel. And the Lord heard and answered his 
prayer. The returning remnant of Israel during the 
great tribulation will confess and pray in the same 


manner. 
The night experience at Jabbok was not a dream, 


a a 


72 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


nor a vision, but an actual occurrence. The same per- 
son who appeared to Abraham at Mamre (chapt. xviii) 
appeared to Jacob that night. It is often stated that 
Jacob wrestled with the Lord who came to him that 
night; it is the other way, the Lord wrestled with 
Jacob. And He appeared in that memorable night as 
Jacob’s enemy and opponent. Jacob uses the same 
carnal weapons with which he had in the past con- 
tended against God; he meets Him in his own natural 
strength. That stubborness is overcome by the Lord 
touching the hip-joint of Jacob, dislocating it. In this 
way He completely crippled his strength and now Jacob 
could wrestle no more. In utter weakness and help- 
lessness he could but cling to Him and ask a blessing. 
“By his strength he had power with God, yea he had 
power over the angel and prevailed; he wept and made 
supplication unto Him” (Hos. xii:3-4). The weeping 
and supplication was his strength. His name is changed. 
From now on his name is “Israel”—a Prince with God. 
And the descendants of Jacob, at the time of Jacob’s 
trouble (Jerem. xxx:7), will make a similar experience 
and have their Peniel. 
CHAPTER XXXIII. 
The Reconciliation of Esau. 
1. Jacob meets Esau. 1-17. 
2. In the City of Shechem. The Altar Erected. 18-20. 
The reconciliation is effected, but Jacob is the same 
man of deceit. He tells his brother he will follow him 
to Seir. But he goes instead to Succoth. He built an 
altar there, but it is not the worship God expected. 
He should have gone to Bethel and fulfilled his vow. 
CHAPTER XXXIV. 
Defilement of Dinah. 
1. The Defilement. 1-3. 
. Hamor’s Proposal. 4-12. 


2 
3. The Deceitful Answer of Jacob’s Sons. 13-24. 
4. The males of Shechem Slain. 25-29. 

5. Jacob’s Shame and Grief. 30-31. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 73 


If Jacob after the Peniel experience had gone to 
Bethel instead of building a house at Succoth and buy- 
ing a parcel of a field, perhaps this sad event might 
never have occurred. God permitted it for the humilia- 
tion of His servant Jacob. Again he reaps what he 
had sown and the deceit of the father is reflected in the 
deceit of some of his sons. 


CHAPTER XXXV. 
Jacob at Bethel. Three Deaths. 


. The Divine Command. 1. 

. The Defilement put Away. 2-4. 

. The Journey to Bethel and the Altar. 5-7. 
. Deborah, Rebekah’s Nurse Dies. 8. 

God Appears to Jacob. 9-15. 
Benoni-Benjamin. Rachel’s death. 16-20. 
. The Twelve Sons of Jacob. 21-26. 

. Isaac’s Death. 27-29. 


OAD AH ope 


The Lord did not leave Jacob in Shechem amidst the 
evil and corrupting influences. The Lord now reminded 
him of what had happened long ago and of the unful- 
filled vow he had made when he had his dream-vision. 
And he responded. His house, however, was first 
cleansed from the defilement; the strange gods among 
them, most likely teraphim or household gods, had to 
be put away. After that was done he gave the order 
to go to Bethel to make an altar there unto God. They 
gave up their gods and earrings; the latter must have. 
been in the shape of figures representing idols~: And! 
after this cleansing they became a mighty host, the 
terror of God fell upon the cities through which they 
journeyed. The altar is built and the place called El 
Bethel (God of the House of God). Rebekah’s nurse 
died. After chapter xlix:31 Rebekah is no longer 
mentioned; not even her death.. This corresponds 
with that which she typifies, the church. Jacob as we 


74 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


learned foreshadows the history of the earthly people 
of God and as that is related no more mention of 
Rebekah is made. Then God met him again and Jacob 
becomes Israel in reality. 

Rachel gives birth to another son at Ephrath and 
dies there. The one born has a double name. “Benoni,” 
which means “Son of Sorrow”; “Benjamin”, which is 
“the Son of the right hand.” Here we have another 
type of the Lord Jesus Christ, His humiliation and 
exaltation. Bethlehem is here mentioned for the first 
time in the Bible. 

After the names of the twelve sons of Jacob are 
given and Reuben’s evil deed is recorded we hear of the 
death of Isaac. He died 180 years old and his sons 
Esau and Jacob buried him. We now add a little 
diagram, which gives the family tree of the Patriarchs 
down to the end of this Book. 


TERAH. 
| 
Haran, Nallor. yee 
(of Milcah.) | 
| | 
(of Hagar.) (of Sarah.) 
tecah, Milcah, Lat, ae Ishmael. Isaac 


(of Rebekah.) 


ee ep aT 
hoa, Ammon. pes Rebekah! 


| | 
Leah, Rachel. Esau, dhdom ) J Hee diraet,) 


| 
(of oe (of Bilhah,) (of Zila) 
V re | | | i 
ad Eiht Dan, Naphtali Gad, Asher. 
evi, Juda f Rachel. 
Issachar, Zebulun, a ie zs 
Dinah, 


J Ey ee ey 


Ephraim, Mattusen 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 75 


Part X.—The Generations of Esau. 
Chapter XXXVI:1-8. 


1. Esau in Canaan, his Wives and Sons. 1-5, 
2. Esau Leaving Canaan; in Edom. 6-8. 


Part XI.—The Generations of Esau 
in Mount Seir. 


Chapter XXXVI:9-43. 


. Sons of Esau. 9-10. 

- Sons of Eliphaz. 11-12. 

. sons of Reuel. 18. 

. Sons of Aholibamah. 14. 

. Dukes of Eliphaz. 15-16. 

. Dukes of Reuel. 17. 

. Dukes of Jeush, 18. 

. Dukes of Horite and Kings of Edom. 20-43. 


ONHRoKR WD 


We point out a few interesting facts in these two 
generations of Esau and Esau’s sons. In verse 6 we 
read that Esau went into the country from the face of 
his brother Jacob. It came at last to a pronounced and 
complete separation between Esau and Jacob. Jacob 
dwelt in the land in which his father was a stranger. 
And Edom became the treacherous foe to the people 
of Israel. Read Obadiah, verses 8-16. From the con- 
cubine of Eliphaz was born Amalek, one of the terrible 
enemies of Israel with whom there was to be a con- 
tinual warfare. Exod. xvii:8, 14. 

And what a prolific progeny of the wicked Esau! 
The Hebrew names tell the story of their expansion, 
their wickedness and power. What was not of God 
developed rapidly, as it does now, in the earth. 


76 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


Part XI]—The Generations of Jacob. 


Chapter XXXVII-L:26. 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 
The Story of Joseph. 


. Jacob Dwelling in Canaan. 1. 

. Joseph’s Character and Feeding the Flock. 2. 
. Beloved of His Father. 3. 

. Hated by his Brethren. 4. 

The Dream of the Sheaves. 5-8. 

The Dream of the Sun, Moon and Stars. 9-11. 
Joseph seeks his Brethren. 12-17. 

. The Plot Against Joseph. 18-22. 

. Joseph in the pit and Sold. 23-28. 

10. Reuben’s Grief. 29-30. 

11. The Deception of Jacob’s Sons. 31-32. 

12. The Grief of Jacob. 33-35. 

13. Joseph in Egypt. 36. 


WOHOARAAR WDE 


The Story of Joseph is one of the most interesting 
in the whole Bible. The Holy Spirit has devoted more 
space to the life of Joseph than He devoted to Abra- 
ham. The reason for this must be sought in the fact 
that the story of Joseph foreshadows the story of 
Christ. Some critics have made out that the Story of 
Joseph is an invention and that the record was writ- 
ten hundreds of years after Moses. However, archeo- 
logical evidence has fully and completely established 
the historical character of Joseph. Two of the El 
Amarna tablets show that a Semite held such a high 
position as attributed to Joseph. Others, while they 
believe in the historicity of Joseph, deny that his life 
is typical of our Lord. Such a denial is akin to spiritual 
blindness. It is true nowhere is a statement made that 
Joseph typifies Christ, but throughout this age all 
teachers of the Word have treated the life of Joseph 
as foreshadowing Christ. Stephen in his great ad- 
dress before the Jewish council mentions Joseph (Acts 
vii :9-14) ; the Messianic application must have been in 
his mind. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 77 


The life of Joseph falls into two periods; his humili- 
ation and his exaltation. In these two parts the suffer- 
ings of Christ and the Glory that should follow are 
blessedly foreshadowed. There is no other type so per- 
fect as that of Joseph. In our annotations we shall 
not be able to point out all the comparisons; only the 
leading ones we give as a hint.* 

Israel loved Joseph more than all his sons and that 
reminds us of Him who is the Father’s delight. Joseph 
was separated from evil, even as Christ was. Joseph 
had a coat of many colors, the expression of the Fath- 
er’s love; thus God honored His Son. And as Joseph 
was hated by his brethren without a cause, so Christ 
was hated. (John xv:25.) The dreams foretold Joseph’s 
future exaltation; he saw things in heaven and things 
on earth bowing before him, even as before Christ 
things in heaven and on earth must bow the knee. 

Then the father sent forth his beloved Joseph to 
seek his brethren who were lost. Israel put Joseph into 
their hands. All this foreshadows God’s unspeakable 
gift in sending His only begotten Son into this world 
to seek what is lost. 

Then note the following typical suggestions. When 
he came to his brethren, they conspired against him 
to slay him. “Come now therefore let us slay him, and 
cast him in some pit.” And in John v:16 it is written 
that the Jews sought to slay Christ. They stripped 
him of his coat, as our Lord was stripped of His gar- 
ment. He was cast into the pit and they sat down to eat 
bread. And the Pharisees who had delivered up the 
Lord Jesus sat down to eat the passover, while the 


*We have a little booklet “Joseph and His Brethren” con- 
taining several addresses as delivered by us to Jewish audiences. 
The reader will find there a more complete description of the 
typical character of Joseph. (Price 5 cts.) 


78 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


soldiers, who had parted the garments sat down 
to watch them. They sold him as the Lord was sold 
and Judah was the one who said “let us sell him.” 
This brings the betrayal by Judas to our mind. 

And Jacob is deceived by his sons as he deceived 
his father. The coat stained by the blood of a kid re- 
minds us of the skin of the kid with which he had de- 
ceived Isaac. 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

Judah and Tamar. 

. Judah’s Marriage to the Canaanitish Woman, 1-2. 
. His Sons: Er, Onan and Shelah. 3-5. 
. Tamar Married to Er and Onan. 6-10. 
. Tamar Waiting for Shelah. 11. 
. Her Deception and Judah’s Sin. 12-26. 
. The Birth of Pharez and Zarah. 27-30. 

Historically this chapter comes before the 37th. The 
higher critics are one against the other in their unbe- 
lieving speculations over the composition of this chap- 
ter. It is inserted here for a most interesting purpose. 
Judah’s history foreshadows the history of the Jews 
after they had rejected the Lord Jesus. His connec- 
tion with a Canaanite (trafficker) and his marriage to 
the daughter of Shuah (riches) shows what the Jews 
have been ever since they rejected Christ. His off- 
spring is Er (enmity) and Onan (wickedness) till the 
significant third one comes, the sprout (Shelah) point- 
ing to the godly remnant of that nation in the future.* 

And Tamar’s sin, so dark and vile, shows forth the 
Grace of God. We find her name and the names of her 
two sons in the Genealogy of Christ. Matth. I. 


a nP De 


CHAPTER XXXIX, 


Joseph in Egypt. 
1. In Potiphar’s house. 1-6. 
2. Tempted by Potiphar’s Wife. 7-18. 
8. Joseph in Prison. 19-28. 


*On that remnant see Study Pamphlets on Isaiah. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 7S 


Potiphar, the master of Joseph, was an officer of Phar- 
aoh. His name means “devoted to Ra,” a god of Egypt. 
Why is it stated a number of times that Potiphar was 
an Egyptian? Discoveries have shown that Egypt had 
come at that time under a new dynasty; therefore 
it is repeatedly stated that Potiphar, the Egyptian, was 
retained in his official position. Joseph in Egypt is the 
type of Christ among the Gentiles. Jehovah blessed the 
Egyptian’s house for Joseph’s sake. 

The temptation of Potiphar’s wife brings out the 
marvellous character of Joseph. The critics in reject- 
ing this story have dug their own pit into which they 
have fallen. A number of critics (Von Bohlen, Tuch 
and others) claim “that Joseph could never have seen 
his master’s wife, for the women were secluded and 
had separate apartments.” Monuments and Egyptian 
paintings have shown that the women were not seclu- 
ded, but mingled freely with the men. Woman in the 
hieroglyphics is called neb-t-en pa, which means “Mis- 
tress of the house.” An ancient papyrus was discov- 
ered containing “the Romance of the two brothers.” 
It contains an episode similar to that of our chapter. 
It fully bears out the fact that the temptation of 
Joseph is not a myth and it is thought that this event 
in Joseph’s life formed the basis for the Romance of 
the two brothers. 

Joseph suffered innocently, but the prison in which 
he was confined becomes the high road to power and 
glory. How much greater were the sufferings of Him, 
who was not only innocent, but holy. 


CHAPTER XL, 
Joseph the Interpreter of Dreams, 
4. The Fellow Prisoners. 1-8. 
2. The Dream of the Chief Butler. 9-11. 
8. The Interpretation. 12-13. 
4. Joseph’s Reguest. 14-15. 


80 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


5. The Dream of the Chief Baker. 16-17. 
6. The Interpretation. 18-19. 

7. The Fulfilment. 20-22. 

8. Joseph Forgotten. 23. 


He was reckoned among the transgressors. To the 
one he spoke the word concerning life, while the other 
heard the message of death. Thus Christ was reckoned 
among the evildoers. To the one crucified with Him 
He said, “Today thou shalt be with me in Paradise,” 
while the other malefactor railed and died in his sins. 

Critics do not believe even this simple story and 
deny the culture of vines in Egypt. But the Egyptian 
paintings have given them the lie. They picture the 
pressing of the grapes in a cup, which was a religious 
ceremony. Joseph was forgotten; two years longer he 
had to remain in prison. What exercise of patience 
and faith he must have had! 


CHAPTER XLI. 
Joseph’s Exaltation. 


. Pharaoh’s Dreams. 1-7. 

. Joseph Brought from the Prison. 8-15. 

. Joseph’s Humility. 16. 

The Revealer of Secrets. 17-382. 

. Joseph’s Wise Council. 33-36. 

. Pharaoh’s Answer. 37-40. 

. Joseph’s Exaltation and Marriage. 41-46. 


AATF wWNe 


All is so simple that little comment is needed. The 
dreams impressed Pharaoh, because the cow was a 
sacred animal, the emblem of Isis. At last Joseph is 
remembered and brought out of the prison and his 
raiment is changed. All this finds an application in the 
life of our Lord. He was taken out of the grave. Com- 
pare verse 16, Joseph’s humility, with the humility of 
another Hebrew prisoner, Daniel in Babylon. (See Dan. 
ii:27-30.) 

The seven years of plenty and the seven years of 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 8} 


famine are typical. This age will close with the seven 
years of tribulation. 


And this dream of Pharaoh and Joseph’s interpreta- 
tion has been remarkably confirmed by the hieroglyphic 
inscriptions. One was discovered in 1908 which tells of 
the seven years of famine, because the Nile did not 
overflow. It has been ascertained that this was the 
very time when Joseph was in Egypt.* 


Then follows Joseph’s exaltation. The name of this 
Pharaoh was Apepi. His father and grandfather were 
for a time co-regents with him. He recognized the 
presence of the Spirit of God in Joseph. Note the 
beautiful comparisons with our Lord. Pharaoh said, 
“T have set thee over ail the land of Egypt.” Of Christ 
we read, “Thou didst set Him over the works of thy 
hands.” Joseph said, “God hath made me lord of all 
Egypt” and Christ is “Lord over all.” Joseph is arrayed 
in royal vesture, and Christ is crowned with glory and 
honor. The word “Abrech” was cried before him. 
This word means “Bow the Knee.” According to Prof. 
Sayce of Oxford “Abrech” is the Sumerian “Abrok,” 
which means the seer. This would call for prostration. 
Thus every knee must bow before our exalted Lord. 
The name by which he was called is in the Septuagint 
“Psomtomphanech.” This is an Egyptian name, mean- 
ing “Saviour of the World.” The word Zaphneth- 
paaneach means “Revealer of Secrets.” Even so Christ 
after He was rejected by His own brethren became the 
Revealer of Secrets and the Saviour of the world. 


Before the seven years of famine came Joseph re- 
ceived his bride, Asenath, the Gentile, and Christ will 
have His beloved with Him before the years of tribula- 
tion and judgment come. All had to come to Joseph 


*See for full report “Our Hope,” October, 1908. 


82 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


for corn, as all must come to Christ for the bread of 
life. 
CHAPTER XLII. 
The First Visit of Joseph’s Brethren. 
. Joseph’s Brethren Sent to Egypt. 1-5. 
. Joseph Meets His Brethren. 6-16. 
. Put in Prison for Three Days. 17. 
. Joseph’s Demand. 18-20. 
. The Accusing Conscience. 21-23. 
. Joseph Wept. Simeon Bound. 24. 
. The Return of the Nine. 25-38. 

The famine years bring Joseph’s brethren to repent- 
ance and after the deepest exercise Joseph makes him- 
self known to them and they find forgiveness and deliv- 
erance. Thus it will be during the tribulation of the 
last days of the present age. The remnant of Israel 
will pass through that time called “Jacob’s troukle” and 
be saved out of it. Then the Lord Jesus Christ will 
make Himself known to His brethren, according to the 
flesh. 

Joseph’s treatment of his brethren, whom he recog- 
nized, was harsh, so that they might be led to acknowl- 
edge their sin. And they readily confess their guilt on 
account of having sold their brother and take the harsh 
treatment and imprisonment they received as a just 
retribution. And Joseph understood all their words so 
that he wept. And He who was rejected by His own 
has a loving sympathy for this nation. Simeon remains 
behind; while Joseph demands Benjamin. The grief of 
Jacob is pathetic. 


ARANPRWOND eS 


CHAPTER XLIII. 
The Second Visit to Joseph. 


1. The Journey to Egypt With Benjamin. 1-15. 
2. The Kindness of Joseph. 16-34. 


CHAPTER XLIV. 
The Feigned Dismal and the Bringing Back. 


1. The Cup Concealed and the Dismay. 1-13. 
2, The Return to Joseph’s House. 14-34. 


HAE BOOK OF GENESIS. 83 


CHAPTER XLV. 
Joseph Reveals Himself. 


1. He Reveals Himself. 1-3. 

2. His Address. 4-13. 

8. He Kissed His Brethren. 14-15. 

4, Pharaoh’s Command. 16-20. 

5. His Brethren Sent Away; Their Return to Jacob. 21-28. 


These three chapters belong together because they 
lead up to the great climax in the story of Joseph. The 
nobility of the character of Joseph is here fully brought 
out. Besides being a wise man, the great statesman of 
Egypt, he had a heart of tender love. Seven times we 
read of Joseph that he wept. The trial with the cup, 
which had been hidden in Benjamin’s sack, was the 
needful and decisive test. Benjamin had become the 
object of Jacob’s love. The trial with the cup was to 
bring out whether they cherished the same bitter feei- 
ings against Benjamin which had governed their con- 
duct towards Joseph. Their behaviour now reveals the 
great change which had taken place. They confess that 
their iniquity has been found out and Judah, the 
spokesman, manifests the most affectionate reverence 
for his old father and the ardent love for his younger 
brother. 


But who is able to describe the scene when Joseph 
made himself known to his brethren, when they had 
come the second time? It is a chapter of great tender- 
ness. Some day He who was rejected and disowned by 
His brethren, the Lord Jesus Christ, will come the 
second time. Then when the deep anguish, the soul 
exercise of the Israel of the end time has reached the 
climax, He will come and they that nierced Him shall 
look upon Him. He will forgive them their sins and 
remember them no more. Rom. xi:26-27. 


84 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


CHAPTER XLYI. 


Jacob Goes Down to Egypt. 


1. Israel’s Departure and the Vision. 1-4. 

2. The Journey and the Arrival in Egypt. 5-7. 

3. The Offspring of the Sons of Jacob. 8-27. 

4, Israel Meets Joseph. 28-30. 

5. Joseph’s Directions Concerning Pharaoh. 31-84. 


The whole family of Jacob, consisting of seventy 
souls, exclusive of the wives and the servants, came to 
Egypt. Once more God appears to Israel, but addresses 
him as Jacob. He gives him permission to go down to 
Egypt and assures him of His presence. They were 
directed to the land of Goshen, which was east of 
Memphis. And what a meeting it was, when Joseph 
fell around his father’s neck and kissed him! 


“This emigration to Egypt was, without doubt, directed by 
the Lord for the purpose of guarding against the dispersion 
of the family, as well as against its admixture with strangers, 
during the important period which had arrived, in which it was 
appointed to be developed as a nation; neither of these un- 
favorable results, which would have been inevitable in Canaan, 
could follow in Egypt: for Goshen afforded ample room for 
their increasing numbers, on the one hand, while, on the other, 
the aversion of the Egyptians to shepherds (ch. 46:34) effectu- 
ally prevented the formation of ties between them by inter- 
marriage. Besides, the opportunity which was furnished for 
becoming acquainted with the wisdom of Egypt, and also the 
pressure of the future bondage, may have both been designed 
to serve, in the hands of God, as means for training and 
cultivating the chosen nation. And the transition from a no- 
madic to an agricultural life, which was designed to constitute 
the foundation of the polity of Israel on acquiring independence 
and a home in the promised land, may also be assigned, in its 
incipient stages, to this period.”* 


*Kurtz, Sacred History. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 85 


CHAPTER XLVIIL. 
The Settlement in Goshen. 


1. Before Pharaoh. 1-10. 
2. The Settlement. 11-12. 
3. Joseph’s Wise Administration. 13-26. 
4, Jacob’s Request. 27-31. 


Jacob and some of his sons were presented to 
Pharaoh, who received them graciously, and Jacob 
blessed Pharaoh. The great and powerful monarch of 
the great land Egypt was blessed by the poor old Jacob. 
He is more than blessed, but a blesser, a type of what 
Israel is yet to be for the nations of the earth. 

There is no discrepancy in verse 11, for Goshen is 
also called Rameses. We likewise get a glimpse in this 
chapter of the wonderful administration of Joseph dur- 
ing the years of famine. Verse 27 speaks of Israel’s 
prosperity in the land. Notice how the names of Jacob 
and Israel are used. He requested to be buried in 
Canaan and Joseph promised to carry out his wish. 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 
Jacob adopts Ephraim and Manasseh. 


The Sons of Joseph brought to Jacob. 1-2. 
. The Words of Jacob. 3-7. 

. Ephraim and Manasseh presented. 8-14. 

. Jacob’s Blessing. 15-16. 

. Joseph’s Interference. 17-20. 

. Jacob’s last words to Joseph. 21-22. 


FO oo bo 


The adoption of Joseph’s sons is interesting and in- 
structive. As the offspring of the Gentile wife Asenath 
they were in danger of becoming gentilized and thus 
forget their father’s house. Jacob frustrated this by 
adopting the sons. It was an action of faith. . “By 
faith, Jacob, when he was dying, blessed both the sons 


86 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


of Joseph; and worshipped leaning on the top of his 
staff’ (Hebrews xi:21). Again the younger is pre- 
ferred. When Jacob speaks of “the Angel, the Re- 
deemer” (literal translation) he speaks of Jehovah 
who appeared unto him, whom he met face to face at 
Peniel. Full of hope dying Jacob predicted the return 
of his offspring to the land of Canaan. 


CHAPTER XLIX. 
Jacob’s Prophecy. 


1. The Call of Jacob. “Gather yourselves together.” 1-2. 
2. The Prophecy concerning his sons. 3-27. 

Reuben. 3-4. 

Simeon and Levi. 5-%. 

Judah. 8-12. 

Zebulun. 13. 

Issachar. 14-15. 

Dan. 16-18. 

Gad. 19. 

Asher. 20. 

Naphtali. 21. 

Joseph and Benjamin. 22-27, 


The last words of Jacob to his sons are often called 
“the blessings.” What he said is rather a prophecy. 
Concerning Judah he saith the most because from 
Judah there was to come the Shiloh, that is, the 
Messiah. Jacob’s prophecy covers in a remarkable 
way the entire history of Israel, past, present and 
future. We give a few brief hints, which will be help- 
ful in a closer study of this important chapter. Seven 
periods of Israel’s history are given here. 

I, Reuben, Simeon and Levi show the character of 
the nation up to the time of Christ. II. Judah points 
clearly to the period of this nation when our Lord was 
on the earth. III. Zebulun and Issachar, where the 
sea and commerce, indolence and service are prominent, 
describes Israel scattered among the nations during 
this age IV. Dan shows Israel apostate during Anti: 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 87 


Christ. (Dan is left out in Revel. VII). V. Gad, Asher 
and Naphtali describe the godly remnant during the 
great tribulation. VI. Joseph speaks of the second 
coming of Christ; and VII. Benjamin, the Son of the 
right Hand, of the righteous rule of the King. 


CHAPTER L. 
The Burial of Jacob. Joseph’s Return and Death. 

1. The Grief of Joseph. 1-3. 

2. The Burial. 4-13. 

3. The Return to Egypt. 14-23. 

4. The Death of Joseph. 24-26. 

This great Book which begins with the perfect and 
good creation of God ends with a burial and the last 
words are “a coffin in Egypt.” What havoe sin has 
wrought. Jacob died 147 years old and after his body 
was embalmed was carried to Canaan. Read in connec- 
tion with Joseph’s death Exod. xiii:19; Josh. xxiv:32 
and Hebrews xi:22. 


88 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


Genesis and Geology. 


Genesis is a revelation from God; Geology is a discovery of 
man. A revelation from God can be augmented by God only; 
a discovery by man may be improved, matured, advanced, 
ripened progressively, till the end of the world. We therefore 
assume that Genesis is perfect beyond the possibility of con- 
tradiction or improvement by us; and we equally assume that 
Geology, because the discovery of man, and the subject of the 
investigation of man, may be improved by greater experience 
and more profound acquaintance with those phenomena which 
lie concealed in the bosom of the earth, waiting for man to 
evoke, explain, and arrange them. I am sure, therefore, that 
Genesis, as God’s Word, is beyond the reach of the blow of the 
geologist’s hammer; or the detection of a single flaw by micro- 
scope or telescope; it will stand the crucible of the chemist; 
and the severer the ordeal to which it is subjected, the more 
pure, resplendent, and beautiful it will emerge, indicating its 
origin to be from above, and its issue to be the glory of God, 
and the supreme happiness of mankind. Geology has before 
now retraced its steps; Genesis never. Before now it has been 
discovered, that what were thought to be facts incontrovertible 
were fallacies. It is found that phenomena described and dis- 
cussed as true, were mistakes and misapprehensions, which 
maturer investigations have disposed of; and therefore I am 
not speaking dormatically and without reason, when I say, that 
while Genesis must be true, Geology—having already erred, may 
err again, and some of its very loudest assertions, made rashly 
by those who have least acquaintance with its data—may yet 
be proved to be wrong. But certain facts in it are now beyond 
all dispute. Let Geology and Genesis be alleged to clash, and 
the discovery from the depths of the earth contradict the text 
from the page of the Bible; in such a case, I would submit first 
these questions: Are you sure that there is a real contradic- 
tion between the fact of Geology and the text of the Bible. 
or is it only a contradiction between the fact discovered py 
science, and the interpretation that you put upon the text of tne 
Bible? In the next place, if there be in any instance contradic- 
tion between a clear text of the Bible and a supposed fact or 
discovery made by the geologist, my inference, and without 
hesitation, is, that the geologist must have made a mistake, 
that Moses has made none: and therefore the advice we give to 
the geologist is, not to say, God’s work beneath contradicts 
God’s Word without, but Just to go back again, read more care- 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 89 


fully the stony page, excavate more laboriously in the subter 
ranean chambers of the earth, and a maturer acquaintance 
with the facts of science may yet elicit the desirable result, 
that there is harmony where we thought discord, and perfect 
agreement where to us there seemed only discrepancy and con- 
flict. We have instances of the possibility of some deductions 
of science being wrong in other departments of it. Astronomy 
was once quoted as contradicting the express declarations of 
the Word of God; maturer acquaintance with it has proved its 
perfect coincidence. Again, the hieroglyphics on the banks of 
the Nile, as deciphered by Young and Champollion, were in- 
stanced to prove a far greater age of the human race than that 
declared in the Bible; but subsequent investigation showed that 
the hieroglyphics were wrongly interpreted, not that God’s 
Word was untrue. The traditions of the Chinese were viewed 
as upsetting the records of the Mosaic history, but subsequent 
investigation have proved that those were wrong, and that God’s 
Word is true. 


The Bible, whether we take it in Genesis or in the Gospels, 
contains no error; it has not a single scientific error in it. Yet 
it was not designed to teach science; but wherever it touches 
the province of science, it touches so delicately that we can see 
the main object is to teach men how to be saved, while its slight 
intimations of scientific principles or natural phenomena have 
in every instance been demonstrated to be exactly and strictly 
true. Jf the Bible said in any part of it, as the ancient 
philosopher alleged, that there were two suns, one for the upper 
hemisphere, and the other for the lower, then science would 
prove that Scripture was wrong; or if the Scripture said, as 
the Hindoos believe, that the earth is a vast plain, with con- 
centric seas of milk, honey, and sugar, supported by an elephant, 
and that the earthquakes and convulsions of the globe are the 
movements of that elephant as he bears it on his back,—then 
science would have proved that to be absurd; and if Scripture 
had asserted it, such assertion would be demonstrably untrue. 
But the striking fact is that you find no such assertion, nor 
anything approaching such assertions in the Bible. -Iow comes 
it to pass, then, that Moses has spoken so purely and truly 
on science where he does speak, and has been silent where there 
was such a provocative to speak—his very silence being as sig- 
nificant as his utterance? How happens it that Moses, with 
no greater education than the Hindoo, or the ancient philosopher, 
has written his book, touching science at a thousand points so 
accurately, that scientific research has discovered no flaws in 
it; and has spoken on subjects the most delicate, the most diffi- 


90 THE “BOOK “OF (GENESIS, 


cult, the most involved; and yet in those investigations which 
have taken place in more recent centuries, it has not been 
shown that he has committed one single error, or made one 
solitary assertion which can be proved by maturest science or 
the most eagle-eyed philosopher to be incorrect scientifically 
or historically? The answer is, that Moses wrote by the inspira- 
tion of God, and therefore what he writes are the words of 
faithfulness and of truth—Cumings. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS, 91 


Dictionary of the Proper Names 
of Genesis with their Meaning. 


A 


Abel—Vanity, Vapor. _ 
Abel-mizraim—Mourning of Egypt. 
Abidah—Father of Knowledge. 
Abimael—My Father from God. 
Abimelech—My Father is King. 
Abraham—Father of many. 
Abram—Father exalted. 
Accad—Band; City of Nisibis. 
Ackbar—Mouse; swift. 
Adah—Adorned. 

Adam—Man (red). 

Adheel—Sorrow from God. 
Admah—Red earth. 
Adullamite—From Adullam; Restingplace. 
Aholibamah—Tent of the high place. 
Ahuzzath—Possession. 

Ajah—A young hawk. 
Akan—Wresting. 
Allon-bachuth—Oak of Weeping. 
Almodad—Beyond measure. 
Alvah—Wickedness. 
Alvan—Unrighteous. 

Amalek—A nation that licks up, 
Amorite—Mountain dweller. 
Amraphel—Uttering dark sentences. 
Anah—An answer. 
Anamin—Gushing of the waters. 
Aner—Exile; sprout. 
Aram—Exalted. 

Aran—Wild Goat. 

Ararat—High or holy ground. 
Arbah—F our. 
Ard—(Uncertain)—Fugitive. 
Areli—Lion of God. 

Arioch—Strong Lion. 

Arkite—One who gnaws. 
Arodi—Roaming, untamed. 
Arphaxad—Laying on or at the side, 
Arvadite—Break loose, wanderer. 


92 THE BOOK OF “GENESIS 


Asenath—Devoted to the goddess Neith. 

Ashbel—Fire of Bel; or, Correction of God. 

Asher—Happy. 

Ashkenay—Scattered Fire. 

Ashteroth-Karnaim—Double Horned Astarte. (Phoenician) 
Venus). 

Asshur—Step. 

Asshurim—Steps. 

Atad—Bramble. 

Avith—Ruins. 


B 


Baal-hanan—Baal is merciful. 
Babel—Confusion. 
Bashemath—Pleasant smell. 
Becher—First born. 
Bedad—Solitary, separate. 
Beeri—My Well 
Beer-lahai-roi— Well of the Living and Seeing. 
Beersheba—Well of the Oath. 
Bela—Devouring. 
Benammi—Son of my people. 
Benjamin—Son of the right hand. 
Ben-oni—Son of my Sorrow. 
Beor—Torch, Burning. 
Bera—Excelling in Evil. 
Beriah— Unfortunate. 
Bethel—House of God. 
Bethlehem—House of Bread. 
Bethuel—Separated of God. 
Bilhah—Timid. 

Bilhan—Their Fear. 
Birsha—Son of Wickedness. 
Bozrah—Sheep fold. 
Buz—Contempt. 


Cc 
Cain—Acquisition. Acquired of Jehovah 
Cainan—Deplorable. 
Calah—Completion, old age. 
Calneh—Complete wailing. (Cal-neh.) 
Canaan—Merchant. Trafficker. 
Caphtorim—Crowns. 
Carmi—My vineyard. 
Casluhim—Barren Mountains. 
Chedorlaomer—Handful of Sheaves. 
Cheran—Their Lamb; Joyous shouts. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


Chesed—Meaning is unknown. 
Chezib—Lying. 
Cush—Black. 

E 
Damascus—City of Activities. 
Dan—Judging. 
Deborah—Bee, or Her. Words. 
Dedan—Their leading forward. 
Diklah—Palm tree. 
Dinah—Vindicated; Judgment. 
Dinhabah—She gives Judgment. 
Dishan—Their threshing; a Gazelle, 
Dishon—A thresher. 
Dodanim—Leader, or Loves. 
Dothan—Decrees. 
Dumah—Silence. 

E 
Ebai—Heaps of barrenness. 
Eber—He that passes over, a passenger. 
Edar—A flock. 
Eden—Delight; according to others, a plain 
Edom—Red. 
Ehi—My Brother. 
Elah—Strength, an oak. 
Elam—Forever, eternal. 
El-bethel—God, God’s House. 
Eldaah—God’s Knowledge. 
El-elohe-Israel—God, the God of Israel. 
Eliezer—My God is Help. 
Eliphaz—My God is fine Gold. 
Elishah—My God is Salvation. 
Ellasar—Of uncertain meaning. 
Elon—Mighty; Oak. 
El-paran—The might of their adorning, 
Emims—tTerrors. 
En-misphat—Fountain of Judgment. 
Enoch—Dedicated; Teaching. 
Enos—Frail, mortal man. 
Ephah—Darkness. 
Epher—A young hart. 
Ephraim—Great fruitfulness, doubly fruitful. 
Ephron. ¢ fawn; of dust. 
Ephrath—Fruitful. 
Er—Watcher. Stirring up, or, Enmity. 
Eri—My Watching. My Enmity. 


93 


94 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


Erech—Length. 
Esau—Hairy. 
Eschol—A cluster. 
Eshban—Very red. 
Ethiopia—Black. 
Euphrates—Fruitfulness, sweet water. 
Eve—Life; Life giver. 
Ezbon—Uncertain meaning; perhaps, Hastening of the Son 
Ezer—Help. 

G 
Gad—Good Fortune is come; invading. 
Gaham—F lame, Burning. 
Galeed—Heap of witness. 
Gatam—Coming in touch. 
Gaza—Fortified. 
Gera—Rumination. 
Gerar—Sojourning. 
Gershon—Outcast, stranger. 
Gether—Turning aside, a spy. 
Gihon—Breaking forth. 
Gilead—Rocky, Heap of witness. 
Girgasites—Dwellers in swamps. 
Gomer—Completion. 
Gomorrah—Heap or bundled together. 
Goshen—Meaning obscure. 
Guni—Protected. 


H 
Hadar—Honor, ornament. 
Hadad—Sharp, noisy. 
Hadoram—Exalted people. 
Hagar—Flight, sojourner. 
Haggi—My feast. 
Hai—Ruins. 
Ham—Hot, Black, Sunburnt. 
Hamathite—Defender, Fortress. 
Hamor—An ass. 
Hamul—One who has been pitied. 
Hanoch—Dedicated. 
Haran—Their Mountain. Parched. 
Havilah—Trembling in pain (childbirth), 
Hazarmaveth—Court of Death. 
Hazezon-Tamar—Pruning of the Palm. 
Hazo—Vision. 
Heber—A company; also, passing through. 
Hebron—Fellowship, 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 95 


BH moem—Destruction, Crushed. 
Hemdan—Delight. 

Heth—Dread, Fear. 

Hezron—Walled in; division of song. 
Hiddekel—The swift; Tigris. 
Hirah—Nobility. 

Hittite—Same as Heth. 
Hivite—Together, villagers; winding. 
Hobah—Hiding place. 

Hori 
Horites 
Hul—Wvrithing in pain. 
Huppim—Coverings. 
Husham—Haste. 
Hushim—Hasters. 
Huz—cCounsellor, 


Dwellers in caves. 


I 
Irad—City of Witness. 
Iram—Belonging to their City. 
Isaac—Laughter. 

Iscah—Gaze upon, or she will see. 
Ishbak—He will remain. 
Ishuah—He will be equal. 

Ishmael : 

Ishmaelites t God will hear. 
Israel—Prince with God. 
Issachar—Bringing Wages; He will be hired. 
Isui—He will level. 


I 
Jaalam—He will hide. 
Jabal—A River. 
Jabbok—He will pour out. 
Jachin—He will establisn. 
Jacob—The supplanter. 
Jahleel—Hope of God. 
Jahzeel—Alloted of God. 
Jamin—Right Hand. 
Japheth—Expansion. 
Jared—Descent 
Javan—Clay. (Greece). 
Jebusite-—Treader down. 
Jegarsahadutha—Heap of Witness. 
Jehovah-Jireh—The Lord will see. 
Jemuel—Day of God. 


96 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


Jerah—Moon. 
Jetheth—Strengthener; a nail. 
Jetur—Encircle, Defence. 
Jeush—Gathering together. 
Jezer—Form, Purpose. 

Jidlaph—He will weep. 
Jimnah—Right Handed, Prosperity. 
Job—One who returns. 
Jobab—Crying aloud. 
Jokshan—Ensnaring. 

Joktan—He will be small 
Jordan—Descending. 

Joseph—Let him add. 
Jubal—Musician. 

Judah—Praise. 

Judith—Jewish; Praising. (In phoenician form) 


K 


Kadesh—Set apart; Devoted to licentious idolatry. 
Kadmonites—Ancients. 
Kedar—Dark skinned. 
Kedemah—Eastward. 
Kemuel—Congregation of God. 
Kenaz—Hunter. 
Kenites—Acquiring. 
Kenizzites—Hunter. 
Keturah—Incense, Fragrance. 
Kirjath-arba—City of Four. 
Kittim—Subduers. 
Kohath—Congregation; Waiting. 
Korah—Ice. 

L 


Laban—White. 

Lahai-roi—The living and seeing one. 
Lamech—Powerful. 

Leah—Weary. 

Lehabim—F lames. 
Letushim—Hammered ones. 
Leummim—Nations. 

Levi—Joined. 

Lot—Covering. 

Lotan—Covering up. 

Login {of uncertain meaning; perhaps, to shine. 


Luz—Perverting. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


M 
Maachah—Oppression. 
Machir—Seller. 
Machpelah—Double, Folded together. 
Madai—My extension. 
Magdiel—Preciousness of God. Others: Mighty Tower. 
Magog-——Expansion, overtowering. 
Mahalaleel—Praise of God. The Blessed God. 
Mahalath—String Instrument; Harp; also, to be Weak. 
Mahanaim—Two hosts or camps. 
Malchiel—My King is God. 
Mamre—Fatness, Strength. 
Manahath—Gift; Resting place. 
Manasseh—Forgetfulness. 
Marah—Bitterness. 
Masrekah—Vineyard. 
Massa—Bearing patiently; a burden; an utterance 
Matred—Thrusting forward. 
Medan—Strife. 
Mehetahel—Benefited of God. 


Mehujael—Destroyed of God; or, biot out that Jah is God 


Merari—My bitterness. 
Mesha—Deliverance brought. 
Meshech—Diawing out. 
Mesopotamia—Exalted. 
Methusael—Dying who are of Goa 
Methuselah—Death sent away. 
Mezahab—Waters of Gold. 
Mibsam—Sweet Smell. 
Mibzar—Defence. 

ae t Contention, Strife. 
Milcah-—Queen. 

Mishma—Hearing. 
Mizpah—Watch-tower. 
Mizraim—Egypt; double distresses. 
Mizzah—F rom sprinkling. 
Moab—From Father; Water of Father. 
Mappirm—Anxieties; shakings. 


N 
Naamah—Pleasantness. 
Naaman—The same as Naamah. 
Nahath—Rest. 


Nahor—Snorter. 


97 


98 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


Naphish—Refreshment. 
Naphtali—My Wrestling. 
Naphtuhim—Openings. 
Nebajoth—Exalted places. 
Nimrod—Rebel. 
Nineveh—House of Ninus. 
Noah—Comfort. 

0 
Obal—Stripped of leaves. 
Ohad—To be wild; Joined together. 
Omar—Eloquent. 
On—Light; Sun (Egyptian). 
Onam—Vanity, Iniquity. 
Onan—Iniquity. 
Ophir—Abundance. 

P 
Padan-aram—Plain of Aram. Mesopotamia. 
Paran—Abundancce of foliage. 
Pathrusim—Southern countries. 
Pau—Crying out. 
Peleg—Division. 
Peniel—F ace of God. 
Perrizites—Country folks. 
Phallu—Distinguished. 
Pharaoh—The King; a title. 
Pharez—Breach. 
Phichol—Mouth of All. 
Philistines—Land of wanderers, 
Phut—Extension. 
Phuvah—Mouth. 
Pildash—Flame of Fire. 
Pinon—Distraction. 
Pison—Great Increase. 
Potiphar—Egyptian: Devoted to Ra. 
Poti-phera—The same meaning. 


R 
Raamah—Roaring, Thunder. 
Rachel—An ewe. 
Rameses—Son of the Sun. 
Rebekah—-Tying; Rope. 
Rehoboth—-Streets. 
Rephaims—Giants. 
Resen—Bridle. 
Reu—Friend, associate. 
Reuben—Behold a Son. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


Reuel—Friend of God. 
Reumah—Exalted. 
Riphath—Crushing. 
Rosh—Chief, Head. 


Ss 
Sabtah—Breaking through. 
Salah—Sent forth. 
Salem—Peace. 
Samlah—Covering, Enwrapping. 
Sarah—A Princess. 
Sarai—My Princess. 
Sauli—Asked for. 
Seba—Drink thou; Drunkard. 
Seir—Rough, hairy. 
Sephar—Numbering, Census. 
Serah—A Princess; same as Sarah, 
Sered—Fear, trembling. 
Serug—A Branch. 
Seth—Set, appointed. 
Shalem—Peace. 
Shamah—Hearing. 
Shaul—Asked for. (Saul). 
Shaveh-Kiriathain—Plain of Cities, 
Sheba—To the oath. 
Shebah—The same. 
Shechem—Shoulder. 
Shelah—Sent forth; Sprout. 
Sheleph—Drawn out. 
Shem—Name. 
Shemeher—Name of Wing. 
Shepo—Prominent. 
Shillem—Retribution. 
Shimron—A Keeper. 
Shinab—Tooth of Father. 
Shinar—Dispersing. 
Shobab—Backsliding. 
Shuah—Sink down, depression. Also: Riches. 
Shuni—Quiet; My rest. 
Shur—A wall. 
Sichem—Shoulder. 
Siddim—Plains; Name of a Valey. 
Sidon—Fishing. 
Simeon—Hearing in obedience. 
Sinite—Clay. 
Sitnah—Accusation, enmity. 


99 


100 THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


Sodom— Scorching, Burning; Arabic: Locked up. 
Succoth—Booths. 
Syria—Lifted up; Sublime. 
Y 

Tamar—A Palm tree. 
Tarshish—Subjection, Scattering. 
Tebah—Slaughtering. 
Tema—Desert, Southern region. 
Teman—tThe same. 
Terah—Delay. 
Thahash—Badger, seal. 
Tidal—TIear, Reverence. 
Timna—Restraint. 
Timnah—The same. 
Timnath—A portion. 
Tiras—Desire. 
Togarmah—Breaking bones. 
Tola—Little Worm. (Cocus-cacti: from which comes the scarlet 

color). 
Tubal—F lowing forth. 
Tubal-cain—Coming forth of Cain. 


U 
Ur—Light. 
Uz—Counsel. 
Uzal—Flooded, going to and fro. 


Z 
Zaavan—Great unrest. 
Zaphnath-paaneah—Revealer of Secrets. 
Zarah—Sun rising. 
Zeboim—Troops. 
Zeboiim—The same. 
Zebulun—Habitation. 
Zemarites—Double cuttings off 
Zepho—Watchfulness. 
Zerah—Rising of light. 
Zibeon—Of many colors. 
Zilpah—Dropping. 
Zillah—Shadow. 
Zimran—Their song. 
Ziphim—Smelters. 
Zohar—Whiteness, light. 
Zuzims—Murmuring, commotiong, 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


101 


Chronological Arrangement of Some Leading Persons 


and Events in Genesis. 


The Creation of Adam.......... 4004 
The Birth of Seth............... 8874 
ISNOSmDORN se tne cee 3769 
Cainanmpornie dite eee 3679 
Mahaleel born... . 3609 


Jared born. 


Methuselah born... 3317 
Enoch’s translation................ 3017 
Noahisubirthe 2222 2948 
eENOW E1OOC sec c cae neers 2348 
Peleg borne a.com st eee 2247 
Na bere DOIN i nacsccsetscscns 2155 
eran’ Saipirth cece 2126 
INOah?s’ death cstenssaceons 1998 
Abraham’s birth....................... . 1996 
Abraham’s Call in UV......... 1945 
Terah’s deathei.cc.coence . 1921 


Second Call to Abraham...... 1921 
Abraham in Egypbt...........-.. 1920 
ERIS WRRCCUIT cy ceene 1912 


B. C, 
Abraham takes Hagar.......... 1911 
The birth of Ishmael............ 1910 
The Covenant sign given... 1897 
Birth OLeisaaceesssnse 1896 
Sarah’s death................ 1859 
Isaac’s marriage 
ACO DM DOL aoe eens 
Abraham’s death.................... 
Marriage of Esau...... 
Death of Ishmael... 
DACOD SMe be een eee aL i59 
Mis Marria ges...ec.ccccccsssssessecee 2 L752 
DACODIS ie t rece ree 1739 
Meets his brother... 1738 
Jacob at Bethel... 1731 
Death of Rachel... 1728 
JOSCPIESO] Cee ereeee eer ae 1727 
Joseph in Egy ptaeeccccccesn ay a bralyy 


Death, of stsaacese eee LLG 
Joseph interprets dreams... 1715 
Egyptian famine................ 1707-01 
DACOD SEOCAU Rane eaeeereer 1689 
Joseph’s death..ermnnenncne 1635 


¢ 
> S37 ae 
IST as 
ites wanes 
tna fwlodp dg 
of Ted hotel - 
lS yore’ 
pemud Wey vein 


ela King " 


jim t'syk = 
dieliaget #iheedt 
rw mrad" a's faslt ey 
: yaoie with, 
er aely 
Tl viet 


ahi vse 
st Ned soit 
, _ 5 ieee ‘e 

lei batteesS, : 

r restart I 


Qin ae. Th. 


a 


EXODUS 


CONTENTS 


Introduction... sc eo ee ee 105 
Divisions of Exodus................... ah estates 110 
Analysis and Annotations...................... 112 
The Journey towards the Promised Land; Israel 
at/Sinale. con: sce oe ae ee ee ee 145 
Appendix A—The Atonement Money........... 184 


Appendix B—The Jewish Year.................. 196 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 105 


The Book of Exodus. 


Introduction. 


The word “Exodus” means “way out” or “going 
forth.” The Book has been given this Greek name because 
it relates the history of the deliverance of the children of 
Israel from the house of bondage and how they were led 
forth by the power of God. It needs hardly to be 
stated that this second Book of the Pentateuch is closely 
linked with Genesis. Without the events recorded in the 
final chapters of Genesis, the Book of Exodus would have 
no meaning; without the continuation of the story of Israel 
in Egypt, the Book of Genesis would be in an unfinished 
state. The promises given by God to the Patriarchs which 
we find recorded in Genesis, make this Book a necessity. 
For instance, we read in Genesis xv:18, 14: “And He said 
unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be stranger 
in a land that is not theirs and shall serve them; and they 
shall afflict them four hundred years; and also that nation, 
whom they shall serve, will I judge; and afterward they 
shall come out with great substance.” To Jacob the Lord 
said, “I am God, the God of thy Father; fear not to go 
down to Egypt; for I will there make a great nation of 
thee” (Genesis xlvi:3). The fulfilment of these predictions 
and promises, as well as others, are seen in the Book of 


Exodus. 
‘s6And” 


The close connection with the Book of Genesis is also 
learned by the first little word with which Exodus begins. 
It is the Hebrew conjunction “Ve.” The Authorized 
version has translated it with “Now,” but it really means 
“And.” Each of the four books, which, besides Genesis 
constitute the Pentateuch, begins with this little word. It 
fully establishes the fact that these books form one great 


106 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


record and must have been written by one instrument. 
Originally the present division of the writings of Moses into 
five books did not exist. He wrote in a continuous way, 
which formed one record. The division into five parts, 
we doubt not, was made under the guidance of the Holy 
Spirit. 


The Higher Criticism. 


The Book of Exodus has been treated by the Higher 
Critics in the same manner as the first Book of the Bible. 
Its inspiration and the Mosaic authorship have been denied 
as well as the great judgments and miracles of which we 
read in Exodus. What ridiculous inventions have been made 
to explain some of the miracles wrought by the power of 
God we care not to follow. 

The school of the destructive Bible Criticism claims that 
Exodus is of a composite origin. The same confusing non- 
sense of a “Jehovist-Elohist-Priestly” narrative with a 
number of redactors, with which they disseet Genesis, has 
been applied to Exodus. Canon Driver, an ardent disciple 
of the fathers of Higher Criticism,* makes the following 
statement: “The two main sources used in Exodus are 
those now generally known as ‘Jehovist-Elohist,’ the chief 
component parts of which date probably from the seventh 
or eighth century before Christ, and the ‘Priestly’ which 
is generally considered to have been written during or shortly 
after the Babylonian Captivity.” According to these state- 
ments Moses had nothing whatever to do with the compo- 
sition of this Book. We do not care to invite our readers 
to a closer inspection of this Higher Critical dissecting room, 
nor do we wish to burden our pages with the infidel asser- 
tions of these so-called “learned men.” It is a hopeless 
labyrinth of theories and contradictions, which lead grad- 
ually but surely into the outer darkness. Yet these per- 
nicious inventions are taught in many colleges and semi- 
naries of the different evangelical denominations. 


~£On the paternity of Higher Criticism see our booklet on “Genesis.” 


‘THE BOOK OF EXODUS. ~— 107 


A Jewish rabbi of considerable learning, after a close 
examination of the arguments produced by the Critics, has 
of late shown their absolute worthlessness from a literary 
point of view. He declares “All these and similar analyses 
of the sources of Exodus and the conclusions based thereon 
are entirely wrong. . . . The theory that the Book 
of Exodus was compiled from previous works is not suffi- 
ciently supported; and the attempt to analyze it into its 
component parts is a hopeless one, for all the elements of 
the book are closely welded together into one harmonious 
whole.”’* 

But it does not take scholarship to discover the truth of 
the last sentence, that “all the elements of the book are 
closely welded together into one harmonious whole.” Every 
inteliigent reader of Exodus makes this discovery. The 
impression is at once created that only one person wrote 
this book, and that this person was intimately acquainted 
with the history of the period which Exodus treats. That 
the author was Moses is indisputable. 

In Exodus xxiv:4 we read, “And Moses wrote all the 
words of the Lord.” In Chapter xxxiv:27 another command 
to write is given, ““Write thou these words.” The Hebrews 
speak of the Pentateuch as “The Law,” and “The Law of 
Moses.”” The Book of the Law, the Law of Moses, now 
divided into five parts, was in existence at the time of 
Joshua. (Joshua 1:8.) 


b The Witness of the New Testament. 


Our Lord Jesus Christ, the infallible Son of God, perfect 
in knowledge, said to the Sadducees: “And as touching the 
dead, that they rise, have ye not read in the Book of Moses, 
how in the bush God spake to him, saying, I am the God of 
Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob.” 
(Mark xii:26). Our Lord thus gives positive evidence that 
Exodus is the Book of Moses. See also Luke xx:37. Exodus 


*Rabbi Dr. Benno Jacob of Goettingen, Germany. 


108 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


is quoted twenty-five times by Christ and His apostles, and 
there are almost as many allusions to it scattered throughout 
the New Testament books. The rejection of the inspiration 
of Exodus means the rejection of the inspiration of the entire 
New Testament, and worse than that, it means the rejection 
of the testimony of the Son of God. 


Israel’s Birthday Book. 


The Book of Exodus may well be called “Israel’s Lirthday 
book.” Israel entered Egypt as a family and left Egypt as 
a nation, brought forth by the Grace and Power of God. 
Jehovah calls Israel ““My Son, my Firstborn.”” (Ex. iv:22.) 

The national birthday of Israel is recorded in this book. 
First we find the travail pains in the house of bondage, pre- 
ceding the birth. The birth itself takes place in the twelfth 
chapter, when sheltered by blood they went out, to leave 
Egypt behind. The memorable month in which they were 
redeemed by blood was now to be “‘the beginning of months,” 
the beginning of a new year, the starting point of their 
national existence. Then followed their deliverance and 
redemption by the power of God at the Red Sea, the giving 
of the Law and Statutes and their divine calling as a nation 
to be “a kingdom of priests and an holy nation.” 


Typical Teachings. 


Perhaps no other Old Testament book is so rich in typical 
teachings as Exodus. The power of Satan and God’s Salva- 
tion by Blood are most clearly revealed in the first part of 
the Book. The Lord Jesus Christ and His work in redemp- 
tion are foreshadowed throughout the book. The two great 
phases of the Gospel of God, so fully and blessedly revealed 
in the Epistle to the Romans, are found in type in Exodus. 
These two phases are, Redemption from the guilt of sins 
and Redemption from the power of sin. The former is seen 
in type in Israel’s Passovr experience, and the latter is typ- 
ified by the overthrow and destruction of the Egyptians in 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 109. 


the Red Sea. These two great events give us two aspects 
of the death of Christ. 

And how rich and full in typical meaning is the tabernacle 
with its different appointments and its priesthood. Here we 
find Christ everywhere. Various experiences of God’s 
people may be traced in the conflicts and victories of Israel, 
their failure and unbelief. The annotations of the different 
chapters take notice of all this. 


Dispensational Foreshadowings. 


Equally important are the dispensational foreshadowings. 
Israel’s suffering in Egypt is typical of their history of sor- 
row and tears until their final restoration and the fulfillment 
of God’s promises to them as a nation takes place. God’s 
dealing in judgment with Egypt foreshadows future judg- 
ments in store for the world. The deliverance out of Egypt 
is a pattern of their future deliverance, when they will be 
brought back. To this Jeremiah xvi:14 refers: “Therefore, 
behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more 
be said, As the Lord liveth that brought up the children of 
Israel out of the land of Egypt, but, As the Lord liveth that 
brought up the children of Israel from the land of the North, 
and from all the countries, whither He had driven them.”’ 
The life of Moses, as a type of Christ, gives other dispensa- 
tional hints of great interest. It is a most blessed Book. 
May He guide us by His Spirit and unfold its precious truths 
to our hearts. 


110 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


The Divisions of Exodus. 


We do not find in the Book of Exodus a characteristic 
word like the word “generation” in Genesis, which points 
out the division in that Book. Exodus contains a continuous 
story. We believe the key text for this Book is found in the 
third chapter, in the words which the Lord spoke out of the 
burning bush to Moses, whom He called to be the leader 
of His people. We find them in Chapter iii:7, 8. 

“And the Lord said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people 
which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their task- 
masters; for I know their sorrows;and I am come down to deliver 
them out of the hand of the Egyptians; and to bring them up out of 
the land unto a good land flowing with milk and honey, unto the place 
of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Periz- 
zites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites.”’ 

These are beautiful words. They tell us that the Lord 
took notice of the affliction of His people and heard their cry. 
He was now ready to act in their behalf and to deliver them 
out of the house of bondage. In the eighth verse we have 
the two parts of Exodus indicated. The Lord announced 
two things He would do for His people. 1. I am come down 
to deliver them out of the hands of the Egyptians.. 2.. And 
to bring them up out of the land unto a good land flowing 
with milk and honey. Exodus has two great Parts which 
correspond to these two statements. 


I. ISRAEL’S DELIVERANCE OUT OF THE HANDS OF 
THE EGYPTIANS. Chapter i-xv:21. 


The House of Bondage. Chapter i. 
Moses the Chosen Deliverer. Chapter ii-iv:28. 
Moses and Aaron in Egypt. Chapter iv:29-vii:13. 


4. The Nine Plagues; the Tenth Judgment Announced. 
Chapter vii:14—xi:10. 


5. Redemption by Blood. The Passover and the Law 
of the Firstborn. Chapter xii-xiii:16. 


6. Redemption by Power. Chapter xiii:17-xiv:31. 
7. The Song of Redemption. Chapter xv:1-21. 


De Bhd ars 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 111 


I], THE JOURNEY TOWARDS THE PROMISED LAND. 
ISRAEL AT SINAL Chapter xv:22-xl. 


1. The Experiences in the Wilderness. Chapter xv:22- 
XVili :27. 

2. At Sinai. The Covenant and the Law. Chapter xix- 
xxiv :18. 

3. The Tabernacle and the Priesthood. Chapter xxv— 
xxxi:18. 

4. Israel’s Sin and Rebellion. Chapter xxxii. 

5. Moses’ Intercession and its Results. Chapter xxxiii— 
XXxiv :35. 

6. The Building of the Tabernacle. Chapter xxxv- 
XXxix :43, 
| %. The Tabernacle Set Up. The Finished Work and 
the Glory. Chapter xl. 


We learn from this division and analysis that the first 
section begins with the groans of the enslaved people in the 
house of bondage and ends with the Song of Redemption, 
sung by the redeemed and delivered nation. The beginning 
of the second section shows the redeemed people in the 
wilderness of Shur and describes their experiences; it ends 
with the finished work and the glory of the Lord filling the 
Tabernacle. Both sections are prophetic. Israel’s groans 
and captivity will end in deliverance. Their wilderness 
wanderings will yet terminate in a future of glory, with 
Jehovah in their midst, 


112 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


Analysis and Annotations. 
I. Israel’s Deliverance Out 
of the Hands of the Egyptians. 


Chapter i-xv 21. 
1. The House of Bondage. 


CHAPTER I. 


The Names of the Children of Israel; their Increase. 1-7. 
The New King and his Policy. 8-11. 

The Continued Increase. 12. 

Their Hard Bondage. 13, 14. 

The Midwives Commanded. 15, 16. 

. Their Disobedience and God’s Reward. 17-21. 
Pharaoh’s Charge to all his People. 22. 


ROE OR Vom 


The opening verses take us back once more to the end of 
Genesis; as already stated the word “‘now”’ (literally, “‘and’’) 
makes Exodus a continuation of the previous book. They 
had come into Egypt while Joseph was already there. Joseph 
and all his brethren had passed away, but their descendants 
multiplied rapidly. The Hebrew word “increased” means 
“swarmed.” The seventh verse emphasizes their wonderful 
increase both in numbers and in power. Inasmuch as a 
comparatively short time had elapsed after Joseph’s death, 
some 64 years only, infidelity has sneered at the description 
of this increase. It is generally overlooked that besides the 
70 souls which came into Egypt a very large number of ser- 
vants must have accompanied them. Abraham had 318 
servants born in his house. Jacob had a still larger number. 
And they had been received into the covenant, though they 
were not natural descendants. The command of circum- 
cision extended to “every man child in your generations, 
he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any 
stranger, which is not thy seed.” (Gen. xvii:12.) There may 
have been thousands of such servants besides immense herds 
of cattle. Yet even this does not fully explain the great 
increase. It was miraculous, the fulfillment of the promises 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 113 


given to the patriarchs. God witnessed thereby that they 
were His people. 

The Egyptian account given by their historian Manetho, 
speaking of the Hyksos, the Shepherd Kings of the East, is 
in all probability a distorted account of the increase and 
influence of the Israelites. A new King, or dynasty, then 
arose. Josephus, the Jewish historian, states: ‘“The govern- 
ment was transferred to another family.””’ The debt which 
Egypt owed to Joseph was forgotten. 

The increasing Israelites filled the Egyptians with terror, 
hence the attempt to crush them by hard labor and the cruel 
taskmasters. ‘They were used in the construction of some of 
the great monumental buildings and became the slaves of 
the Gentiles. The ruins of cities bear witness to it, for they 
were composed of crude brick and in many of them straw 
was not used. (Chapter v:10-12.) The oppression was in 
degrees. But the more they were afflicted, the more they 
multiplied and grew. Here we may read the history of Israel 
among the Gentiles. Their increase and expansion has pro- 
duced what is known as “Anti-Semitism.” The Gentiles 
fear the Jews. Their miraculous increase always takes place 
when oppression and persecution is upon them. When they 
are oppressed then God’s time for deliverance draws nigh. 

Their oppression and sorrow in Egypt was also permitted 
for their own good. The idolatry of Egypt began to corrupt 
the chosen people. See Joshua xxiv:14; Ezek. xx:5-8; xxiii:8. 

The attempt to destroy all the male children follows next. 
Satan, who is a murderer from the beginning, manifested his 
cunning and power in this way. He desired to destroy the 
seed of Abraham so as to make the coming of the Promised 
One impossible. The murder of Abel was his first attempt. 
Here is an attempt on a larger scale, which was followed by 
many others. See Exodus xiv, 2 Chron. xxi:4, 17; xxii:10; 
Esther iii:6, 12, 13; Matt. ii, etc. Throughout the history 
of Israel during this age Satan has made repeated attempts 
to exterminate this wonderful people, because he knows 
God’s purposes concerning their future. His final attempt 
is recorded in Rev. xii. 


114 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


Pharaoh was the instrument of Satan, and is a type of him. 
Blessed is the record of the faithful Hebrew midwives. They 
were pious women. Satan tried to use woman again for his 
sinister purposes, but he failed. Later we find that the 
wicked Pharaoh was defeated by the faith of a Hebrew 
mother and by the loving kindness of his own daughter. 
(Chapter ii.) And God rewarded the actions of these women. 
They received honors; their families increased and were 
blest. When Pharaoh sees his attempt frustrated he appealed 
to his own people to commit wholesale murder. They began 
to sow an awful seed; the harvest came when years later 
there was no house in Egypt without one dead, when the 
firstborn were slain. Gal. vi:7 applies also to nations, “* What- 
soever a man soweth, that he shall also reap.” God honored 
the Hebrew midwives because they honored Him. The 
retribution came upon cruel Egypt in God’s own time. 

And yet there are other lessons. Egypt is the type of the 
world; Pharaoh the type of the Prince of this world. The 
bondage of sin and the wretchedness of God’s people, still 
undelivered, are here depicted. God permitted all so that 
they might groan for deliverance. The house of bondage 
opens the way for redemption by blood and by power. 


2. Moses the Chosen Deliverer. Chapter ii-iv:28. 
CHAPTER II. 
Moses: His Birth and Education. His Choice and Exile. 


His Birth and Concealment. 1-4. 
His Rescue and Education. 5-10. 
His Choice and Failure. 11-14, 
His Exile. 15-20. 

His Marriage. 21, 22. 

The Answered Cry. 23, 24. 


SO CO = 


The history of the chosen deliverer, recorded by himself 
under the guidance of the Spirit, follows the dark picture of 
Israel’s suffering. He was the offspring of a son and daugh- 
ter of Levi. His name was Amram (Chapter vi:20 and Num. 
xxvi:59). His wife’s name Jochebed. As we saw in Genesis, 
Levi means “joined,” and Levi was the third son of Jacob. 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 11s 


(Gen. xxix:32-35.) Here we have a typical hint of the true 
Mediator, joined to God and man. Levi was Jacob’s third 
son, and Moses the third child of a son of Levi. The 
number “three” is the number of resurrection. It all fore- 
shadows Christ. Pharaoh’s command had been to cast the 
male children into the river. The river is the type of death 
(Jordan, for instance). By death Satan tried to oppose 
God’s purposes. The babe was in danger of death; Satan’s 
hatred through Pharaoh was directed against this child as 
Herod through Satan’s instigation tried to kill the new born 
King in Bethlehem. 

The child was beautiful. Acts vii:20 states he was (lit- 
erally) “beautiful to God.” For three months he was hid 
and then his own mother prepared the ark of bulrushes and 
laid him in the reeds at the river’s brink, in the place of 
death. The word “ark’’ is the same as in Gen. vi:14 and 
the pitch with which it was daubed reminds us likewise of 
Noah’s ark. The dark waters were kept out. It was not 
alone the natural love of the mother which acted, but faith. 
“By faith Moses, when he was born, was hid three months 
by his parents, because they saw that the child was beauti- 
ful; and they were not afraid of the King’s commandment.” 
(Heb. xi:23.) What faith this was! First they saved the 
child by faith for three months and then the mother’s faith 
prepared the little casket, the place of safety, and in faith 
committed the ark of bulrushes to the river’s brink. But 
while faith depends on God’s power and trust in God’s word, 
it also fears nothing. They were not afraid of the King’s 
commandment. And God acted as he always will in answer 
to faith. He guided Pharaoh’s daughter to the very spot 
where the child rested with his sister standing afar off, 
Her faith did not fully measure up to the faith of the mothers 
but even this was God’s leading. According to Jewish tradi- 
tion the name of Pharaoh’s daughter was Thermoutis. The 
weeping babe stirred her compassion. And what these tears 
accomplished! Not the smiling face, but the tear-stained 
countenance of sorrow, lead to the far-reaching results of 
deliverance. How it reminds us of Him who was the Man 


116 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


of Sorrows, who wept and went into the dark waters of death 
and judgment. 

The mother receives her child again, whom she gave up in 
faith, and then the child becomes the son of Pharaoh's 
daughter, who gave him the Egyptian name “Moses,” which 
means “Saved from the water.” The beautiful faith of 
Moses’ mother here meets its full reward; Satan is con- 
founded; and the marvelous wisdom of God is displayed. 
Who would have thought that the one who had said, “If it 
be a son, then ye shall kill him,” and, again, “Every son 
that is born ye shall cast into the river,” should have in his 
court one of those very sons, and suck “a son.” The devil 
was foiled by his own weapon, inasmuch as Pharaoh, whom 
he was using to frustrate the purpose of God, is used of God 
to nourish and bring up Moses, who was to be His instru- 
ment in confounding the power of Satan. Remarkable prov- 
idence! Admirable wisdom! Truly, Jehovah is “wonderful 
in counsel and excellent in working.”” May we learn to trust 
Him with more artless simplicity, and thus our path shall be 
more brilliant, and our testimony more effective.* 

In Egypt Moses received his instruction and education. 
What followed is more freely revealed by Stephen in his 
Spirit-given message. 

And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was 
mighty in words and in deeds. And when he was full forty years old, 
it came into his heart to visit his brethren the children of Israel. And 
seeing one of them suffer wrong, he defended him, and avenged him 
that was oppressed, and smote the Egyptian: For he supposed his 
brethren would have understood how that God by his hand would 
deliver them; but they understood not. And the next day he shewed 
himself unto them as they strove, and would have set them at one again, 
saying, Sirs, ye are brethren; why do ye wrong one to another? But 
he that did his neighbor wrong thrust him away, saying, Who made 
thee a ruler and a judge over us? Wilt thou kill me, as thou didst the 
Egyptian yesterday?—(Acts vii:22-28.) = 

He had learned the wisdom of Egypt, but not yet the 
wisdom of God. He manifested zeal for his brethren, but it 
was not according to knowledge. He attempted a deliy- 
erance before the time. Yet it was an action in faith. 


*C. H. McIntosh on “Exodus.” 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 117 


By faith Moses, when he was come tec years, refused tobe called the 
son of Pharaoh’s daughter. Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the 
people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; Esteem- 
ing the 5, Lat of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt: 
for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward. By faith he 
forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king: for he endured, as 
seeing him whoisinvisible. (Heb. xi:24-26.) 

He acted in self will, assuming the office of a judge and 
leader, without having received the divine call. It was 
faith, nevertheless, which led Moses into this path and to 
make this remarkable choice. His heart was filled with deep 
sympathy for his suffering kinsmen and he yearned for their 
salvation. He was, however, not received by them; they 
rejected him. He left the palace and, perhaps, the throne, 
and came to his own to take up their cause. It all points to 
Him, who left the glory and came to His own and they 
received Him not. When Moses came the first time to his 
brethren to deliver them, “‘they understood not.” (Acts vii: 
25.) But they understood when he came the second time, as 
Israel will understand, when He, who is greater than Moses, 
comes the second time. 

He became an exile in Midian and met Reuel. His name 
also is Jethro (iii:1). Reuel means “Friend of God.” He 
also was a priest, no doubt a true worshipper of God. 
Moses received a daughter of the Midianite, Zipporah, for 
his wife. Rejected by his own people, he entered into union 
with a Gentile. All this is typical. Christ after His first 
coming, rejected by His own, receives her, who shares His 
rejection and who will come with Him, when He comes the 
second time. The church is here indicated. 

The forty years spent by Moses in Midian were, as we 
express it, the best years of his life. He had forty years’ 
training in Egypt, and then the Lord took him aside into 
His school to train him for the great work for which he had 
been chosen. In the obscurity of the desert he was prepared 
to be “‘a vessel fit for the Master’s use.”” How blessed must 
have been his experience, away from man, away from 
Egypt’s pleasures, alone with God. Thus the Lord has dealt 
with all His servants. Elijah came forth out of the wilder- 
ness and went back to Cherith; Ezekiel was alone at the 


118 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


river Chebar. Paul spent his schooling days in Arabia. 
Blessed are His servants who follow His leading into the 
desert place, to find their never-failing source of strength 
in communion with their Lord, who receive their service from 
Himself, and then go forth to serve. 

We give a little diagram of the genealogy of Moses and 
his brother Aaron. 


LEVI. 
| 

| | I 
Kohath. Gershon. Merari. 
Amram. 

(of Jochebed.) 
| | | 
Miriam. Aaron. Moses. 
| | | | 
Nadab. Abihu. Eleazar. Ithamar. 


| 
16 8 
courses of priests. (1 Chron. ch. 24.) 


CHAPTER It. 
The Burning Bush. The Call and Commission of Moses. 


The Vision of the Burning Bush. 1-3. 
Jehovah Speaks and Calls Moses. 4-10. 
Moses’ Answer. 11, 12. 

The Name Revealed. 13, 14. 

The Commission of Moses. 15-18. 
The Promise. 19-22. 


Gi) ae 


The two last verses of the preceding chapter form the 
introduction to the great manifestation of Jehovah in the 
burning bush and the call of Moses. God’s time had come. 
He heard their groaning, He remembered the covenant, and 
looked upon His suffering people. The scene is at Horeb, 
called here the mountain of God by anticipation. Moses had 
become a shepherd, that occupation which the Egyptians 
despised. (Gen. xlvi:34.) It was part of God’s training by 
which he became “‘very meek above all the men which were 
upon the face of the earth.” (Num. xii:3.) In his shepherd 
character he is the type of Christ. 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 119 


The burning bush is the picture of the suffering people, 
the wretched slaves in Egypt. It was athornbush. Thorns 
being the results of sin, it typifies the sinfulness and worth- 
lessness of the people. The fire is the symbol of their suffer- 
ing and tribulation. It has the same meaning as the 
“smoking furnace” Abraham saw in his vision. Later God 
called Egypt the “iron furnace.” (Deut. iv:20.) The thorn- 
bush, however, is not consumed. All the fires of persecution 
and tribulation could not consume Israel. In the flame of 
the fire in the midst of the burning bush the angel of the 
Lord appeared. This was the secret of the preservation of 
the bush; God was there and kept them. “When thou 
walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither 
shall the flame kindle upon thee.” (Is. xliii:2). He is with 
all His people in their affliction; He preserves them and 
carries them through the fire. But the fire is also the figure 
of God’s consuming and purifying holiness. All that is 
unholy must be consumed by the fire. “Our God is a con- 
suming fire.” 

The angel of Jehovah, who addressed Moses out of the 
burning bush reveals His name. It shows that the Angel of 
Jehovah (God the Son) is God. He calls Himself the God of 
Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob. The 
triune God is thus revealed as Father, Son and Holy Spirit. 
In Abraham as the Father, in Isaac as the Son and in the 
experience of Jacob as the Holy Spirit. Our Lord quotes 
these words and silenced with them the unbelieving Sad- 
ducees, who rejected the doctrine of resurrection. (Matt. 
xxii:31, 32.) The words Jehovah spoke to Moses are the 
expressions of His sovereign Grace. What had they merited? 
What could they do to secure His intervention? Nothing 
whatever. They were in Egypt, a lot of miserable slaves, 
given more or less to idolatry, a sinful people. It was Grace 
which looked upon them and heard their cry. It was Grace 
which came down to deliver them. The work of salvation 
He came to do was all His own work. It foreshadows His 
coming down in incarnation for the work of salvation. 
Note the five words: 1. I have surely seen the affliction of 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


my people. 2. I have heard their cry. 3. I have known their 
sorrow. 4. I have come down to deliver them. 5. And to 
bring them up out of the land into a good land. He is 
ever the same, Jehovah, who changeth not. He ever sees, 
hears and knows and acts in behalf of His people. He never 
leaves nor forsakes. 


And when the Lord called Moses to send him to Pharaoh 
to lead His people forth, he answered, What am I that I 
should go to Pharaoh and that I should bring forth the chil- 
dren of Israel out of Egypt? Forty years before in self- 
confidence he had undertaken the work and had run before 
he was sent, and now he had learned humility and his weak- 
ness. God answered his confessed distrust with the all- 
sufficient assurance, “I will be with thee.”” When He sends 
forth He goes along to accomplish His own purposes. What 
encouragement for all who wait on the Lord and conscious 
of their own weakness, go forth in service. 


In response to another question, God reveals His name. 
‘And God said unto Moses, I am that I am, and He said, 
Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, Z am hath 
sent me unto you.” God had made Himself known to Abra- 
ham as Jehovah (Gen. xv:7). But here He gives the explan- 
ation of His name Jehovah. The patriarchs knew the name 
Jehovah, but the blessed significance of that name was not 
known to them. He reveals Himself as the Self Existing 
One, thelamthatIam. He isthe One, which is, which was, 
which is to come. (Rev. i:4.) And this wonderful name of 
the Unchanging, Living One, the Eternal, the Name unsearch- 
able in its depths is the Name of our Lord who has re- 
deemed us. When about to act in the deliverance of His 
enslaved people to lead them out and to bring them in, He 
makes Himself known as the J am. “Before Abraham was 
Iam.” (John viii:58.) Our ever-blessed Lord is the I am, 
who spoke to Moses. And what is Jehovah, the I am for 
His people? Well has it been said, “Jehovah, in taking this 
title, calling Himself ‘I am,’ was furnishing His people with 
a blank check, to be filled up to any amount. He calls 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 121 


Himself J am, and faith has but to write over against that 
ineffably precious name whatever we want.” 

In verse 15 we have the hint of Jehovah’s eternal relation- 
ship with His people Israel. He is still and ever will be the 
God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob. “This is my name 
forever and this is my memorial unto all generations.” Here 
is the hope for Israel. He hath not cast them away; He is 
their God still and His gifts and calling are without repent- 
ance. 

The commission to Moses follows, and Jehovah telling 
beforehand that the King of Egypt would not let them go 
also promises Moses that He would smite Egypt and that 
when the Exodus takes place, they were not to go empty- 
handed. This is in fulfillment of a previous promise. (Gen. 
xv:14.) 

CHAPTER IV:1-28. 
Moses’ Objections. Jehovah’s Answer. The Return to Egypt. 


. The First Objection. 1. 

The Two Signs and Jehovah’s Assurance. 2-9. 
The Second Objection. 10. 

Jehovah’s Answer. 11, 12. 

Moses’ Request. 13. 

Jehovah’s Anger and Answer. 14-17. 

The Command to Return to Egypt. 18-23. 
The Event by the Way in the Inn. 24-26. 
The Meeting of Moses and Aaron. 27, 28. 


OMIM Ow oo ors 


The division of chapters at this point is unwarranted. 
Moses’ objections reveal his unbelief and self-distrust. Jeho- 
vah’s patience and condescending grace are blessedly mani- 
fested. Moses first expressed his doubt that the people 
would not believe him and his mission. Though he saw the 
vision of the burning bush and heard Jehovah’s voice, which 
assured him of His presence and power, yet did he not believe. 
His former experience with his people, and the fact that gen- 
erations had passed since Jehovah had appeared to an Israel- 
ite must have led him to express this doubt. 

The Lord gave him three signs. The rod cast down, which 
became a serpent; the leprous hand; and the water turned 
into blood. The first two signs were carried out in Jehovah’s 


122 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


presence. Moses cast his rod on the ground and it became a 
serpent, and he fled from it. In obedience to Jehovah’s 
command, Moses took the serpent by the tail and it became 
arod. The rod Moses held was his Shepherd’s rod. It is the 
emblem of government and power. Moses cast it on the 
ground and out of his hand the rod became a serpent. The 
serpent stands for the power of Satan. Egypt (the type of 
the world) is under the control of Satan. The serpent was 
worshipped in Egypt. It was used as the emblem of the god- 
dess Ranno and also used as a sign of royalty. The serpent, 
Satan, had usurped the place of government and power. But 
Jehovah can deal with the serpent and this is seen by Moses’ 
taking the serpent by its tail so that it became a rod. The 
sign was to inspire and teach confidence. The sign of the 
leprous hand teaches another lesson. Sin, typified by lep- 
rosy, and cleansing from sin are indicated in this sign. 
Israel was in a leprous condition, but the power of Jehovah 
could cleanse his people. When Moses came the first time 
to deliver his people, they treated him as an outcast; but 
when he put his hand in his bosom the second time to act 
the reproach was removed. 

The third sign teaches how the blessing, the water of the 
Nile is to be changed into curse. It is the sign of judgment to 
come upon Egypt. Moses, in receiving these signs and the 
power to enact them, is a type of Christ. He will take the rod, 
the government, into His blessed hand, and then Satan’s 
dominion ends. He will cleanse and restore His people and 
smite Egypt, the world, with judgment. 

Moses’ second objection was his slow speech and slow 
tongue. The same unbelief is here in evidence. Had he but 
believed “I will be with thee,” and that the “I am” would 
be His tongue and his speech, this objection would never 
have come from his lips. 

How gracious Jehovah’s answer: “Now, therefore, go, I 
will be with thy mouth and teach thee what thou shalt say.” 
Every servant of the Lord, who serves under Him, can 
appropriate this great promise. And still Moses hesitates. 
What patience from the side of the Lord! He now makes 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 123 


another gracious provision. Aaron is to be his spokesman. 
This for was Moses’ humiliation. Then Moses’ objections 
were silenced. Grace is fully illustrated in the call of Moses 
and how the Lord dealt with him. 

Jethro sanctions his return to Egypt. The Lord prepared 
his way as He always does, when He sends forth His ser- 
vant. He took his wife and sons, who were still young, for 
he set them on an ass. This shows that his marriage to Zip- 
porah did not take place immediately after his arrival in 
Midian. Then he took his rod, which is now called “‘the 
rod of God,” and the Lord gave him the solemn message to 
Pharaoh. Israel is to be nationally God’s firstborn son. 
Jehovah’s demand is, Let my son go, that he may serve me. 
God’s firstborn is to be brought out of Egypt, where service 
for God was impossible. Then follows the message of death 
and judgment for Egypt. 

What comes next is closely connected with the message to 
Pharaoh. There was a stumbling block in Moses’ family. 
Circumcision, which stands for the sentence of death, had 
not been executed in the case of one of Moses’ sons. No 
doubt Zipporah made objections to this rite and kept her 
husband back from doing what he knew was imperative. 
This failure of Moses stood in his way to carry out the 
divine commission. The hand of the Lord was upon Moses, 
and he was in danger of being cut off for his sin, for he had 
been disobedient and yielded to his wife. Then Zipporah 
is forced to do herself what she hated and the reproach was 
removed. The words “surely a bloody husband art thou to 
me,”’ were addressed to Moses. She had been forced, as it 
were, to purchase him again by the shedding of the blood of 
her beloved son. She received him back as one who had been 
in the realm of death and was joined to him anew. It must 
have been there that Moses brought the sacrifice of separ- 
ation by sending Zipporah and the sons back to Jethro. 
(Chapter xviii:2.) What a meeting it must have been which 
took place between Aaron and Moses. They met in the 
Mount of God and kissed each other. Compare with Num. 


Sais eos 


1.24 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


3. Moses and Aaron in Egypt. Chapter iv:29—vii:13. 
CHAPTER IV:29—V:23. 
Before the Elders and Before Pharaoh. 


Before the Elders of Israel. iv:29~31. 

Before Pharaoh, and his Answer. v:1—4. 

The Increased Oppression. 5-19. 

Israel’s Complaint and Moses’ Prayer. 20-23. 


Peer 


The people were willing and believed. Notice they believed 
after the signs were done. Faith was followed by worship. 
It is almost a constitutional thing with the Jew to see first 
and then believe. Compare with John xx:26-29. 

Then the messengers of God appeared before Pharaoh. 
This must have been in his capital Zoan. (Psalms lxxviii:43.) 
Jehovah made of Pharaoh seven demands. They are found 
in Chapters v:1; vii:16; viii:1; viii:20; ix:1; ix:18; x:3. 
Satan’s power now becomes more fully manifested. Israel 
is Jehovah’s people and He must have His chosen ones out 
of Egypt and fully delivered. The objects of his love and 
grace must be completely freed from the miserable slavery 
of sin and Satan. The typical application as to man’s con- 
dition as a sinner is so well known that we need not to follow 
it in detail. 

Pharaoh’s attitude is that of defiance, though he spoke 
the truth when he said, “I know not Jehovah.” The threat 
of coming judgments is disbelieved. His answer was increased 
burdens marked by the most awful cruelty. It was Satan’s 
rage through Pharaoh in anticipation of Jehovah’s interven- 
tion in the redemption of His people. As far as Israel is 
concerned this will yet be repeated during the great tribu- 
lation. Then Satan’s wrath will be great, for he knows his 
time is short and the Lord will deliver the remnant of Israel. 
(Rey. xii:12-17.) It is the same in the individual experience. 
Satan will not let his victims.go. When sin and the power of 
the flesh is felt, then comes the conflict and Satan’s rage. 

What discouragement for the poor slaves in Egypt! They 
had rejoiced in faith and worshipped because Jehovah’s 
servants had announced deliverance, and now a darker night 
had settled upon them; but it was only the harbinger of the 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 125 


glad dawn of the redemption. They murmured while Moses, 
deeply perplexed, turned to the Lord in prayer. Moses was 
a great man of prayer. He cast his burden upon the Lord 


CHAPTER VI:1-27. 
Jehovah’s Answers. The Genealogy. 


1. Jehovah Answers Moses. 1-13. 
2. The Genealogy. 14-27. 


’ 6é 


Moses’ “wherefore” and “why,” his outburst of impa- 
tience, is graciously met by Jehovah. In His answer he speaks 
more fully of Himself as Jehovah, and what he will do in 
behalf of His afflicted and oppressed people. I am Jehovah, 
is His solemn declaration. Note the continued utterances of 
what He is and what He will do. I appeared unto Abraham; 
I have heard; I have remembered; I will bring you out; 
I will rid you out of their bondage; I will redeem you; I will 
take you to be for me a people; I will be to you a God; I will 
bring you into the land; I will give it to you for a heritage; 
I am Jehovah. In Ezekiel, Chapter xxxvi, the reader will 
find Jehovah’s “I will’ concerning the future restoration of 
His people Israel. 

No condition is mentioned; for their salvation as well as 
ours, is “not of works’ but of Grace alone. The source of 
all is His love. (Deut. vii:7, 8.) Salvation is Jehovah’s 
work and not ours. Thus while the patriarchs knew the 
name of God as Jehovah, the full revelation of Jehovah, 
working in the gracious performance of His promises, they 
knew not. Verse 3 means that they did not understand the 
name Jehovah, though they knew that name. Then follows 
the record of “‘the heads of their fathers’ houses.” He knows 
them by name. He comes down where the siaves are, and 
calls them by name, thus identifying Himself with them. 
And then He knew, as He does now, every groan, every bur- 
den, every spot upon which the whip of the cruel task- 
master had fallen. This is the precious lesson of this register 
of names. No other genealogy is found in Exodus. What a 
great Redeemer is Jehovah, our Lord Jesus Christ! All 
praise and glory be to His holy Name. 


126 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 
CHAPTER VI:28—VII:13. 


The Renewed Commission. Before Pharaoh Again. 


1. Renewed Commission and Renewed Hesitation. vi:28-30. 

2. Jehovah’s Instructions. vii:1-9. 

3. Before Pharaoh. The Sign of the Rod. 10-13. 

Once more Moses received his commission, and again he 
hesitated on account of his poor speech. After all the 
gracious words Jehovah had spoken he pleads again his 
weakness. It shows what the unbelieving heart is. Twice 
Jehovah said that Moses should be a god. A god to Aaron 
(iv:16) and a god to Pharaoh (vii:1). He received divine 
authority and power over Pharaoh, while he was to his spokes- 
man Aaron a god, because the Word he uttered to him to 
communicate to Pharaoh was the Word of the Lord. “And 
I will harden Pharaoh’s heart.”” This was stated before in 
Chapter iv:21. Eighteen times we read of the hardening of 
Pharaoh’s heart. However, different words are used in the 
Hebrew to show an important distinction. One means to 
‘make firm” or “strong.” The other, “to make stubborn.” 
These two words show Pharaoh’s hardening of his own 
heart and God’s hardening after he continued in his wicked 
way. After it is five times declared that Pharaoh hardened 
his heart, then God began His hardening and made 
Pharaoh’s heart stubborn. Pharaoh hardened himself, then 
God hardened him. Pharaoh had his opportunities and as 
he refused and continued in unbelief, God made him 
stubborn. God hardens as a judicial act because man refuses 
His Word. God never hardens first nor compels a man to be 
an unbeliever. A solemn warning is contained in this. 
Thousands harden their hearts now, and ere long apostate 
Christendom will be hardened by God withcut remedy. 
(2 Thess. ii.) 

Moses’ age was 80 years and Aaron’s 83 when they spoke 
to Pharaoh. They are before the monarch to show a miracle. 
Moses did not use his rod as before the Elders of Israel, but 
it was Aaron’s rod which was cast down and became a ser- 
pent. There is likewise another word used for serpent. In 
Chapter iv:3 it is Nachash, the same word as in Gen. iii. 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 127 


But the word used in Chapter vii is Thanin, which the Sep- 
tuagint translates Dragon. This does not show that there 
were two different records, but that the two events have a 
different significance. Aaron’s rod, which later blossomed, 
is the type of the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus, the mighty 
victor over Satan, sin and death. Aaron’s rod swallowing 
the rods of the magicians of Egypt seems to indicate the 
complete triumph of Jehovah over him who has the power 
of death. 

The question is, was the action of the magicians a real 
miracle or produced by juggling? Snake charming was car- 
ried on in ancient Egypt. However, these magicians were 
the instruments of Satan, who manifested his power through 
them. What they did were “lying wonders.” The names 
of two of these endued with demoniacal powers are given in 
2 Tim. i:8, Jannes and Jambres. Such manifestation of 
demon power is found to-day in Spiritualism and will be fully 
revealed during the days of Antichrist at the end of this age. 
(2 Thess. ii:9-12.) Pharaoh’s heart was hardened (literal 
translation) because he wilfully rejected the sign given. 


4. The Nine Plagues. The Tenth Judgment Announced. 
Chapter vii:14—xi:10. 
CHAPTER VII:14—25. 
The First Plague. 


1. The Plague Announced. 14-19. 
2. The Judgment Executed. 20-25. 


Nine judgment plagues follow, and after they had passed, 
the tenth, the great judgment, fell upon Egypt. There are 
striking and different characteristics of these plagues. Aaron 
uses his rod in the beginning of the plagues, while Moses 
stretches out his rod and hand in the last three, not counting 
the slaying of the firstborn. Some of them were announced 
beforehand, others were not announced and came without 
warning. We give them now in their order: 1. Water turned 
into blood. 2. Frogs. 3. Lice. 4. Flies. 5. Murrain. 6. Boils. 


128 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


7. Hail. 8. Locusts. 9. Darkness. See Psalm cv:26-36. 
The process of the hardening of Pharaoh’s heart progresses 
with these judgments till God hardened him completely. 
After the first plague his heart was hardened (or firm) and 
deliberately he set himself to do this. Note this process in 
Chapters viii:15;  viii:19; vili:31 and ix:7.. When this 
present age closes with the great tribulation and the vials of 
God’s wrath are poured out upon an unbelieving world, the 
hearts of the earthdwellers and Christ rejectors will be 
hardened and thus ripe for the day of wrath. The book of 
Revelation acquaints us with this solemn fact. 

“The plagues of Egypt are founded on the natural features 
which Egypt presents, so that they are unprecedented and 
extraordinary, not so much in themselves, as on account of 
their power and extent, and their rapid succession when 
Moses simply gives the command. As they are, consequent- 
ly, both natural and supernatural, they afford both to faith 
and to unbelief the freedom to choose (in Pharaoh, unbelief 
prevailed); they are, besides, adapted to convince the Egypt- 
ians that Jehovah is not merely the national God of the 
Israelites, but a God above all gods, who holds in his hand 
all the powers of nature likewise, which Egypt was accus- 
tomed to deify.’’* 

The water of the river Nile was turned into blood. The 
Nile was worshipped by the Egyptians and now this great 
river was polluted. Strange that even orthodox commen- 
tators can state that the change in the water was a change in 
color produced by red earth or by a certain water plant. 
But we know a real change took place, for the water stank 
and the fish died. Thus the Nile, known as Osiris, became an 
object of abomination and death. The messengers of Satan 
imitated this miracle also, This plague lasted seven days. 


*J. H. Kurtz, 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 129 


CHAPTER VII. 
The Second, Third and Fourth Plague. 


The Demand and the Plague of Frogs Announced. 1-4. 

The Plague Executed. 65-7. 

The Request of Pharaoh and the Frogs Removed. 8-15. 

The Divine Command for the Third Plague. 16. 

The Plague Executed. 17. 

The Confession of the Magicians. 18-19. 

The Renewed Demand. The Plague of Flies Announced. 20-23. 
The Plague Executed. 24. 

. Pharaoh’s Promise and His Refusal. 25-82. 


© WAH Ow 0 


The different demands made of Pharaoh to let God’s 
people go and Pharaoh’s objections are of much interest. 
In Jehovah’s demands to let His people go we have God’s 
purpose that His people must be completely brought out of 
Egypt (the world) and be separated unto Him. Before they 
could worship and serve Him they had to be delivered from 
Egypt. It is so with us. Pharaoh is the type of Satan, the 
god of this age. He made his objections, as Satan makes his 
opposition to a full and complete deliverance of God’s people. 
Study Pharaoh’s objections: Chapter viii:25, he says, “Go 
ye sacrifice to your God in the Jand.” Then in verse 28 he 
makes a compromise, but they must not go far away. In 
Chapter x:9-11 he desired the men to go, but the rest ana 
their belongings were to stay behind. The final compromise 
is in Chapter x:24. In these objections and compromises we 
read Satan’s attempt to keep His people ensnared with the 
world and thus hold them under his control and power. 
How well he has succeeded in Christendom. 

If we connect the last verse of the previous chapter it 
seems it was on the seventh day, the day of rest, the Sabbath, 
which Israel must have completely forgotten, when the Lord 
again spoke to Moses and announced the second plague. 
This consisted of frogs, which proceeded from the worshipped, 
sacred Nile. The rationalistic higher critics have tried to 
explain this plague also as a natural occurrence. But they 
do not explain how it is that they came as soon as Aaron 
stretched his hand over the waters of Egypt and that they 
died by the millions after Moses’ prayer. Surely Pharaoh 
was better than the modern day critics, for he acknowledged 


130 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


at least that it was a miracle of Jehovah. (Verse 8) Frogs 
were also connected with Egyptian idolatry. One Egyptian 
goddess called Hekt appears with the head of a frog. Frogs 
stand for unclean things. See Revelation xvi:13. The magi- 
cians enabled by Satan’s power also imitated this miracle. 
But with this their power in counterfeiting ceased. 

The third plague consisted in lice, or rather “gnats.” It 
came like the sixth and ninth plague, without any previous 
warning. They smote the dust and divine power for judg- 
ment brought out of the dust these tormenting insects. ‘The 
very soil of Egypt now was turned into a curse. God now 
restrained the demoniacal powers of imitation and the wicked 
magicians had to confess, not for the glory of Jehovah, but 
for their own protection, “‘this is the finger of God.” 

The fourth plague was still more disastrous and significant. 
The appeal was made in the morning. (Jeremiah xxv:4; 
xxvi:5; xxix:19.) Swarms of flies covered all Egypt. These 
were not the common house flies, but a more powerful insect, 
the bite of which was exceedingly painful. There were dif- 
ferent kinds of them. He sent divers sorts of flies among 
them, which devoured them.” (Psalms lIxxviii:45.) They 
fastened themselves upon men and tormented them. It was 
another blow against the idols of Egypt. The beetle was 
reverenced as the symbol of creative power and the Egyptian 
Sun-god had a beetle’s head. This plague did not touch 
Israel. Jehovah showed that Israel is His people. All 
the terrible punitive judgments did not touch His peo- 
ple. And this was a sign. The word “division” in verse 
23 means “redemption.” Jehovah is here clearly revealed 
as the author of the plague judgments. His supreme author- 
ity stands out prominently After the removal of this 
plague, Pharaoh hardened his heart anew. 


CHAPTER IX. 
The Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Plague. 


. Fhe Fifth Plague; The Grievous Murrain. 1-7. 
. The Sixth Plague; Boils. 8-12. 

The Warning Given. 13-21. 

. The Seventh Plague; Hail. 22-35. 


60 tO et 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 131 


In the demand God calls Himself “the Lord God of the 
Hebrews.” (See also verse 13 and x:3.) The fifth plague 
strikes animal creation. Cattle, such as mentioned in the 
opening of this chapter, formed the most important part of 
the wealth of Egypt. LEgypt’s wealth is therefore stricken. 
But God waited and warned before He executed this judg- 
ment. Jehovah’s power sheltered Israel in Goshen and not 
a beast suffered there. Notice Pharaoh’s curiosity. He sent 
to see if Israel had escaped and found that not one had died. 
What an evidence that the Lord God of the Hebrews is the 
Lord. Yet his heart was hardened. 

The next plague came without warning, unannounced. 
Moses and Aaron sprinkled the ashes of the furnace, and it 
became a boil upon man and beast. The magicians may have 
attempted then another counterfeit move, but the boils broke 
out on them. If they were of the priestly class they had 
become defiled by the nasty sores. The priests were obliged 
to be scrupulously clean in everything. The ashes of the fur- 
nace have a double meaning. Egypt in its fiery persecution 
of Israel is called a furnace. Divine retribution now came 
upon them in the boils, which must have burned as fire. 
But the furnace may have been the altar in Egypt upon 
which sacrifices were offered to their god Typhon. Most 
likely the Egyptians brought such sacrifices to stay the 
plagues, and now the very thing in which they trusted is 
turned into a plague. This plague was the first which en- 
dangered human life, and therefore the forerunner of the 
death which Pharaoh would bring upon himself and his 
people by his wicked opposition. 

The seventh plague is ushered in by a solemn warning and 
more lengthy address to Pharaoh. A very grievous hail is 
threatened to fall upon man and beast; the hail was to kill 
all found in the open field. Note verse 16 and compare with 
Romans ix:17. God dealt with Pharaoh in this way that he 
might know Jehovah and His power and that through what 
Jehovah did His name might be made known throughout the 
earth. Jehovah’s holiness, omnipotence, justice, as well as 
His patience and longsuffering are revealed in these judg- 


132 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


ments, foreshadowing all future judgments to come for this 
earth. The report cf what Jehovah had done in Egypt 
spread soon to other nations, and inspired a holy awe. (Exo- 
dus xv:14-16.) It was a loving and gracious advice God 
gave through Moses (verse 19). No doubt there were many 
Egyptians who believed and escaped. The unbelieving suf- 
fered. Divine mercy still lingered. Those of the Egyptians 
who believed the divine warning must have belonged to the 
mixed multitudes which went out with Israel. (Chapter 
xii:38). 

The fearful hail was accompanied by fire (lightning) which 
ran along the ground, and thunderings. These are called in 
ihe Hebrew “the voices of God.” The tempest is the type 
of God’s wrath in judgment. Hail is mentioned repeatedly 
in Revelation and there it is called “the plague of hail.” 
(Rev. viii:7; xi:19; xvi:21.) The plagues of Egypt will be 
repeated on this earth during the great tribulation. Note 
Pharaoh’s confession, which shows that this plague had made 
a deep impression on him (Verse 27). Pharaoh used the 
name of “Jehovah” and the name of God (Elohim). ‘“Intreat 
Jehovah that there be no more voices of God” (literal ren- 
dering). What a desperately wicked thing the human heart 
is. He sinned more after this than before. 


CHAPTER X. 
The Eighth and Ninth Plague. 


The Eighth Plague; Locusts. 1-17. 

Pharaoh’s Renewed Confession and Refusal. 16-20. 
The Ninth Plague; Darkness. 21-26. 

Pharaoh’s Anger. 27-29. 


pase Ge 


The eighth plague is introduced by another warning; the 
ninth came without it. Asa result of the eighth plague, Pha- 
raoh confessed his sin against God and against Moses and 
Aaron; but after the ninth plague drove Moses from his 
presence and threatened the divine messenger with death. 

Locusts covered the face of the whole earth and every 
green thing was destroyed. On the ravages of the locusts 
we find a vivid description in the Book of Joel. Locusts are 
typical of God’s punitive judgments. The locusts plague 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 133 


was aimed to show the impotence of the Egyptian god Ser- 
apis, in whom the Egyptians trusted as the protector against 
the locusts. Locusts are likewise mentioned in a symbolical 
way in Rev. ix:1-12. 

In the ninth plague, darkness covered Egypt for three 
days. Beautiful must have been the vision of the land of 
Goshen. Out of the dense darkness the light shone brightly 
in the miserable abodes of the children of Israel. ‘All the 
children of Israel had light in their dwellings.” Note again 
the Book of Revelation, chapter xvi:10, 11. 

The sun as the source of light was worshipped in Egypt. 
If Menephtah was the Pharaoh of the Exodus, as some hold, 
this plague has a special significance. A sculptural image 
of this Pharaoh is preserved. His hand is outstretched in 
worship, and underneath stand in hieroglyphics these words: 
“He adores the Sun; he worships Hor of the solar horizons.” 
Suddenly darkness, which could be felt, came upon Egypt. 
Pharaoh and all Egypt learned now that their idols were 
helpless. Darkness is the withdrawal of light. It stands for 
the solemn truth of the forsaking of God.* God was about 
to abandon Egypt, the darkness was the herald of it. All 
Egypt was to be plunged into the severest of all judgments, 
the death of the firstborn. This darkness was God’s final 
appeal to repentance. For three days they were shut in and 
ali business was suspended. Rich and poor, King and 
beggar, the learned and the ignorant, all classes were shrouded 
in that awful darkness. The suspense must have been fright- 
ful. What was to come next? God waited, and in that silence 
and darkness appealed to their conscience. How slow God is 
to judge; it is His strange work. In infinite patience He 
waited before He dealt the final blow to Egypt. Thus He 
waits now and warns till at last His patience ends and His 
threatened judgments sweep the earth. The last objection 
and compromise by Pharaoh is found in verse 24, but Moses 
answered “‘not an hoof shall be left behind.” Jehovah’s 


*We may well think here of the darkness which enshrouded the 
cross and the unfathomable cry of our Lord, ““My God, my God, why 
hast Thou forsaken me?” 


134 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


demands and purposes concerning the completest separation 
from Egypt stand and must be literally executed. 
CHAPTER XI. 
The Tenth Plague Announced. 

1. God’s Word to Moses and to the People. 1-3. 

2. The Tenth Plague Announced to Pharaoh. 4-8. 

8. Pharaoh’s Unbelief and his Heart Hardened. 9, 10. 

In Chapter x:29 we hear Moses say to Pharaoh, “TI will 
see thy face again no more.” In this chapter, however, we 
hear him address Pharaoh once more concerning the tenth | 
plague judgment. The announcement made to Moses and 
recorded in the first verse of this chapter occurred before the : 
interview of the previous chapter and verses 4-8 in Chapter 
xi is the continuation of Moses’ address to Pharaoh after he 
had spoken the words in Chapter x:29. The eleventh chap- 
ter is therefore a supplement to the tenth. The command 
to ask (this is the correct word, borrow is incorrect) of the 
neighbors jewels of silver and gold had already been given 
in Chapter i1i:22._ The death of all the firstborn in Egypt is 
announced to Pharaoh. A great cry shall be throughout all 
Egypt, but Israel should also be exempt of this last plague 
as the previous plagues were not shared by them. “Not a 
dog shall point his tongue (literal translation) against 
Israel;”’ promising perfect rest and peace in the coming night 
of death and sorrow. 

Verses 9 and 10 mark the close of Moses’ interviews and 
negotiations with Pharaoh, which began in Chapter vii:8. 
The right rendering of verse 9 is “And the Lord had said 
unto Moses.” Moses left Pharaoh in a great anger. Judg- 
ment was now ready to fall. 


5. Redemption by Blood. The Passover and the Law of 
the Firstborn. Chapter xii—xiii:16. 


CHAPTER XII. 


The Passover Instituted and Kept. The Death of the Firstborn and 
the Exodus. 


1. The Passover Instituted; the Feast of Unleavened Bread. 1-20 
%. The Command Given to the People and Obeyed. 21-28. 
8. The Death of the Firstborn in Egypt. 29, 30. 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 135 


The Departure of the Children of Israel. 31-36. 
From Rameses to Succoth. 37-39. 

The Fulfillment of the 430 Years. _ 40-42. 

. The Ordinance of the Passover. 43-51. 

This is the birth chapter of Israel as a nation. The birth- 
pangs are about over and the deliverance is at hand. The 
first thing announced is the change of the year (Verses 1, 2). 
A new beginning is made with the deliverance out of the house 
of bondage; the past is left behind and blotted out. This is 
typical of the new birth of the individual. The month which 
marks this new beginning is Abib, the “green ear’ month, 
because the corn was then in the ear. After the captivity it 
was called Nisan. (Neh. ii:1; Esth. iii:7.) It is our April. 

Verses 1-14 give the instructions concerning the Passover, 
and verses 15-20 those concerning the feast of unleavened 
bread. The Passover Lamb is a most blessed type of the 
Lord Jesus Christ in His work. He is the Lamb of God and 
our Passover. (John 1:29; 1 Cor. v:6, 7; 1 Peter i:18,19.) 
The chapter is extremely rich in typical foreshadowing and 
spiritual truth. The spotless character of our Lord is indi- 
cated in that the lamb had to be without blemish. Taken 
out, separated, and a male; all has a meaning. For four 
days the lamb had to be set aside before it was to be killed. 
This was done to discover if there would be a flaw, some 
defect in it, which would unfit the lamb for the sacrifice. 
Here we are reminded of the four Gospel records in which 
the holy, spotless life of Him is told out who gave His life 
for aransom. The lamb was to be killed by the whole con- 
gregation, even as it was with Christ. It was to be killed 
“between the evenings.” That is between noon and the 
night, the afternoon; that is when Christ died. And what 
more could we say of the roasting with fire and other instruc- 
tions, which all foreshadow the death and suffering of the 
Lamb of God? We call attention to the fact that Satan did 
not want to have the Lord Jesus put to death on the Pass- 
over feast. Satan knew He was the true Lamb, and he tried 
to prevent His death at the predicted time. (Matt. xxvi:5; 
Mark xiv:2.) But the Lamb of God, the true Passover, died 
at the very time appointed, thus fulfilling the Scriptures. 


SOKA? 


136 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


The shedding of the blood and its application is the promi- 
nent thing in the Passover. The word “Pesach” means to 
‘pass through,” and “to pass over.” God passed through 
Egypt in judgment; it was also liable to fall upon the people 
Israel. They were guilty before God and had deserved the 
same judgment which was about to fall upon Egypt. But 
Jehovah provided a sacrifice and in the shed blood a shelter 
and complete deliverance. The blood secured all they needed 
as a sinful people and as it was sprinkled in obedience to 
Jehovah’s command perfect peace and rest was obtained. 
“When I see the blood, I will pass over you.” The Blood 
was the token for Jehovah. They were not to see the Blood, 
but He in passing through saw the blood. Faith in what 
Jehovah had said and what had been done gave peace to all 
in the dwellings. The Blood of Christ is thus blessedly fore- 
shadowed. Peace has been made in the blood of the cross. 
Upon the Lamb of God, the holy substitute, the sentence of 
death was executed and now whenever God sees the blood 
there He passes by, no more condemnation, but perfect justi- 
fication. Wherever there is faith in the blood, there is the 
enjoyment of perfect peace. The blood of the Lamb and the 
assuring word of Jehovah, “When I see the blood I will pass 
over you,” were the solid foundations of Israel’s shelter and 
peace in that awful night of death and judgment. And they 
are our solid foundations too. We quote helpful words from 
another.* 

“While outside the house the blood of atonement spoke 
to God, to whom it was addressed; inside He provided that 
which was to satisfy them, and enable them for that path with 
Him upon which they were now so shortly to go forth. The 
lamb is theirs to feed upon, and God is bent upon their enjoy- 
ing this provision of His love. The lamb, too, must all of it 
be eaten. If the household were too little for the lamb, 
(we read nothing of the lamb being too little for the house,) 
then, says the Lord, let him and his neighbor next unto his 
house take it. God would have Christ apprehended by us. 


*Numerical Bible, Vol. I, p. 172. 


| 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 137 


He would have our souls sustained, and He would have 
Christ honored. We are to eat—to appropriate to ourselves 
what Christ is; and what we appropriate becomes, in fact, 
part and parcel of ourselves. This laying hold of Christ by 
faith makes Christ to be sustenance indeed to us, and Him- 
self to be reproduced in us. 

“Death God ordains as the food of life; and it is as shel- 
tered and saved from death that we can feed upon death. 
It is not merely vanquished and set aside; it is in the cross 
the sweet and wonderful display of divine power and love in 
our behalf, accomplished in the mystery of human weakness. 
Death is become the food of life, and the life is life eternal.” 

The eating of the Passover Lamb (verses 9-11) is full of 
meaning. It is the type of feeding upon Christ, occupation 
with His blessed Person. And that is what we need to keep 
our feet in the way of peace. 

The feast of unleavened bread is mentioned next. Leaven 
means corrpution; it is the type of sin. The lesson of holi- 
ness, which God looks for in His redeemed people, is here 
before us. The old leaven must be purged out. The leaven 
of malice and wickedness must be put away. (1 Cor. v:6-8.) 
We are delivered from the power of indwelling sin. Saved 
by grace our calling is to holiness. Spiritually to keep the 
feast of unleavened bread means to live in the energy of the 
new nature and that is the walk in the Spirit. The bitter 
herbs mentioned in verse 8 with the unleavened bread 
speak of self-denial and self-judgment. The terrible judg- 
ment fell that fourteenth day, or between the fourteenth and 
fifteenth day of Abib. All Jehovah had announced in judg- 
ment was literally carried out. There was not a house where 
*here was not one dead. So God will yet put all His predicted 
judgments for this age into execution and a hardened world 
will find out the truth of His word. 

Then the Exodus took place, and they left with the riches 
of the Egyptians. The whole experience of Israel in Egypt 
and their deliverance is typical of their coming final and 
glorious deliverance. 

From Rameses (City of the Sun) the city of earthly splen- 


138 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


dor, they went to Succoth, which means “booths.” There 
pilgrim character is now brought out. The wilderness 
begins. Redemption by blood makes us pilgrims and 
strangers, for we are no longer of the world, though we are 
in it. The mixed multitude came along. They were Egyp- 
tians stirred up by the mighty judgment events, which had 
taken place. (Num. xi:4; Neh. xiii:3.) They became a 
snare to the Israelites. 

A word on verses 40 and 41 will terminate these brief 
annotations of this remarkable chapter. The 430 years’ 
sojourning does not mean that it was 430 years since Jacob 
and his sons had come to Egypt. “The self-same day” 
means the fifteenth day of the seventh month; it was the 
day on which Abraham left Ur to go forth in obedience to 
the Divine command, 


CHAPTER XIII:1-16. 
The Sanctification of the Firstborn. 


1. The Separation Commanded. 1, 2. 
2. Remember this Day; the Memorial. 3-10. 
8. The Separation of the Firstborn. 11-16. 


The firstborn had been delivered in a special manner in 
Egypt and because Jehovah had delivered them they were 
to be sanctified unto Him. There is an inseparable connec- 
tion between redemption and holiness. What the Lord has 
redeemed He claims for Himself. Here we have a definition 
of sanctification; it is separation unto God. But let us notice 
that salvation out of the house of bondage is the foundation 
of all. The same order is more fully revealed in the New 
Testament. In Romans iii-v:11 we read of our salvation 
corresponding to the type in Exodus xii and that is followed 
by the exhortation to holiness, separation unto God. (Chap- 
ter vi.) We are saved unto holiness. The blood of atone- 
ment has sanctified us unto God. ‘The more we realize this 


great redemption by Blood, the more we shall yield ourselves 
and our members unto (zod. 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 139 


Upon verse 9 and 16 as well as Deut. vi:4-9 and xi:13-21 the 
Hebrews have built their ordinance of the phylacteries. They 
use leather strips with some Scripture verses contained in 
a small box. These they put at certain times when they 
pray upon their hand and forehead. Thus they try to fulfill 
these words literally. It is only an outward ceremony and 
corresponds to certain usages in ritualistic Christendom. They 
were to retain those commandments in their hearts and prac- 
tise them as well. The ass is especially mentioned. Why? 
It is an unclean animal and used here to show that unre- 
deemed man is on the same level with the ass and must 
either be redeemed or die. 


6. Redemption by Power. Chapter xiii:17-xiv:31. 


CHAPTER XIII:17-22. 
From Succoth to Etham. 


1. God’s Leading. 17-18. 
2. Joseph’s Bones Carried Away. 19. 
3. The Pillar of Cloud and the Pillar of Fire. 20-22. 


Jehovah now begins to lead His redeemed people forward. 
God chose their way for them, as He chooses the way for us. 
He was with His people, therefore He led them in His way. 
If His people are in His way He is with them and all is well. 
If we are not in His way He cannot be with us in the fullness 
of His power. What grace and tenderness is revealed in the 
fact that the Lord did not permit them to go through the 
land of the Philistines! They had to learn lessons in God’s 
way, which they could never have learned in the shorter way 
through the land of the Philistines. (Deut. viii:2-4.) He 
wanted them to escape trials and other experiences which 
might discourage them. Nor were they fitted for the war- 
fare which would have resulted from the journey through 
the country of the Philistines. He would not suffer to have 
them tried above that they were able to bear. He deals thus 
with all His people. “But God is faithful, who will not suffer 


140 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the 
temptation also make a way to escape that ye may be able 
to bear it.” (1 Cor. x:13.) 

It was Moses who took the bones of Joseph with him. 
They must have rested in a magnificent sarcophagus known 
to Moses. Joseph’s request was not forgotten. It may have 
been the word, which Israel remembered in the house of 
bondage; they did not lose sight of the fact that redemption 
had been promised and that Joseph had looked forward to 
it. (Gen. 1:25.) “And as the people bore his honored ashes 
through the desert, these being dead spoke of by-gone times, 
they linked the past and the present together, they deep- 
ened the national consciousness that Israel was a favored 
people, called to no common destiny, sustained by no com- 
mon promises, pressing toward no common goal.”* 

The pillar of cloud and of fire was the outward sign of 
Jehovah’s presence with His people. By day and by night 
He guarded and led His people. The Keeper of Israel does 
not sleep nor slumber. He journeys along with them. It 
was but one pillar and Jehovah was present in it. (Chapter 
xiv:24.) The glory of the Lord appeared in that cloud (xvi:- 
10; x1:34; Num. ix:15). That Glory cloud filled Solomon’s 
temple and was seen retreating and returning to heaven. 
(Ezek. xi:22-25.) It will be seen again when the King comes 
back from heaven’s glory and His glory will be established 
over Jerusalem. (Isaiah iv.) The sign of the Son of Man 
may be the Shekinah cloud. 


CHAPTER XIV. 
The Pursuit of the Enemy and Redemption by Power. 


The Coming of Pharaoh Announced. 1-4. 
The Pursuit and Israel Troubled. 5-12. 
Moses Speaks to the People. 13-14. 

The Lord Speaks to Moses. 15-18. 

The Passages through the Red Sea. 19-22. 
. The Egyptians Overthrown. 23-29. 

. The Great Work Accomplished. 30, 31. 


SE oe SRN La 


While the marching host of Israel was ignorant of Pha 


*Bishop G. A. Chadwick. 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 141 


raoh’s device and the threatening danger, Jehovah’s eye was 
watching every move the enemy made. He knew what Pha- 
raoh would do and Jehovah had planned how to deliver 
Israel completely by His power from the Egyptians. That 
Jehovah might be honored upon Pharaoh and all his host, 
He told His people to encamp in a place which made their 
position, from a human standpoint, almost hopeless. They 
were hemmed in by mountains and the sea was in front of 
them and behind them the Egyptian host was soon to appear. 
Only the outlook upward to heaven was unobstructed. From 
there help had to come. Pharaoh appeared to bring them 
back into bondage. Then the unbelief of the redeemed 
people, whom Jehovah had so marvelously led forth, is man- 
ifested. Though their lot had been so severe in Egypt and 
Jehovah’s power upon Egypt had been seen in the terrible 
judgments, yet they regretted that they had left Egypt. It 
was unbelief. They feared that the God who had taken such 
pains to deliver them out of Egypt, who had led them out 
and was visibly present with them, would now abandon 
them, so that they would die in the wilderness. How many 
Christians give way again and again to such an unreason- 
able doubt. ‘“‘Unbelief leads to interpret God in the presence 
of the difficulty, instead of interpreting the difficulty in the 
presence of God. Faith gets behind the difficulty and there 
finds God in all His faithfulness, love and power.” 

Verses 13 and 14 are the words to faith. The Lord was now 
taking up their case and fighting their battles. It was no 
longer the question of Pharaoh and Israel, but Pharaoh and 
Jehovah. But notice the words are Moses’ words, as given 
to Him by the Spirit of God. After he had spoken them 
and assured the people that all their enemies were to be wiped 
out, he began to pray, for the Lord said to him, “Wherefore 
criest thou unto Me?” This is followed by the command to 
go forward, to stretch out the rod over the sea and the assur- 
ance that the sea would be divided so that they should pass 
through to the other side. 

In verse 19 we learn that the Angel of God—that is Jeho- 
vah —who went before the camp of Israel, removed and went 


142, THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


behind them. ‘Thus the pillar of cloud descended between 
them and their enemies; they were involved in the deepest 
darkness, while Israel had light throughout the night. Moses 
did according to the word of the Lord. The east wind from 
the Lord caused the sea to go back; a strong wind, which 
blew all night, divided the sea. Higher Criticism has tried to 
explain this miracle as a natural occurrence, but they over- 
looked the fact that on the right and on their left the waters 
were a wall. It was a grave, so to speak, into which Israel 
passed, when God’s power had made the way through it. It 
was faith which led them through. “By faith they passed 
through the Red Sea as by dry land; which the Egyptians 
assaying to do, were drowned.” (Hebrews xi:29.) 

When Pharaoh and his army followed to pursue them, 
Jehovah acted in judgment. “In the morning watch Jehovah 
looked unto the host of the Egyptians through the pillar of 
fire.” It was not “a thunderstorm” which confused them, but 
they saw the Lord in His majesty and the fearful judgment 
overtook them after Moses had stretched out his hand over 
the sea. The overthrow of the Egyptians came “‘when the 
morning appeared.” Not one of them remained, but Israel 
saw the Egyptians dead upon the seashore. 

This great deliverance by the power of God has many 
lessons. It foreshadows the future judgment which is in 
store for the enemies of Israel, when the Lord ‘“‘in the morn- 
ing watch” looks upon them. Greater still are the typical 
lessons in connection with our redemption in Christ. The 
Red Sea is a type of the death of Christ. Deliverance from 
sin by being dead with Christ is the aspect which the Red 
Sea passage illustrates. It is the truth so fully brought out 
in Romans vi, vii and viii. When Israel had passed through 
the Red Sea and reached the other side, we have a type 
of resurrection. Dead with Christ and risen with Him; our 
old enemy is gone, and we can look upon our enemies as 
dead. Many pages of annotations could be given in follow- 
ing this story. We must leave the fuller application to our 
readers. Victory is on our side. Redeemed by blood, God’s 
power is with us, the power of His Spirit, who is given to us 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 143 


of God. We are not asked to fight our enemy, the old man, or 
to subdue him. God has done this for us in the death of 
Christ. 


7. The Song of Redemption. 
CHAPTER XV:1-21. 


Jehovah Acknowledged and Praised. 1-2. 
The Victory Celebrated as His Victory. 3-10. 
His Holiness Praised. 11-13. 

His Enemies Tremble. 14-16. 

Thou Shalt Bring Them in. 17-18. 

The Judgment and Salvation. 19. 

The Women Chorus. 20-21. 


SEI Le Ro 


This is a great chapter. It is the first song in the Bible. 
In Egypt was no singing for Israel but only weeping and 
groaning. Nor did they sing in Bablyon. (Psalm exxxvii:2-4.) 
There is to be a future song for Israel in connection with 
their coming great deliverance. (Isaiah xii.) Moses sang this 
song. It is his first song; his last song is that great prophetic 
outburst recorded by him in Deut. xxxii. The song of Moses, 
the servant of God, is mentioned in Rey. xv:3. 

This whole song breatheth the spirit of praise and worship. 
The destructive criticism has not left this song unchallenged. 
They object to it on account of the prophetic utterance in 
verses 17 and 18, as if this were impossible to say at that time, 
thus ruling out the inspiration by the Holy Spirit. A closer 
study of this song will be very profitable. Note the expres- 
sion “Jehovah is a man of war.” This foreshadows His 
incarnation and His coming as the mighty King, who con- 
quers his enemies. (See Psalm xlv:3; xlvi:8-9; Isaiah Ixiii: 
1-7; Rev. xix:11.) The whole song is prophetic. What Jeho- 
vah has done in the judgment of His enemies and the complete 
deliverance of His people that He will do again. It is inter- 
esting to compare this outburst of praise in which Miriam* 
(Mary) and the women joined with the song of praise of Han- 
nah (1 Sam. ii:1-10), the praise of the Mother of Our Lord 
Mary, in Luke i:46-55, and Zechariah’s words in Luke i:68- 


*Miriam is significantly called “‘Aaron’s sister,” not Moses’, She 
eould not rank with Moses. Leadership did not belong to her. She was 
subordinate to Moses, as Aaron was, 


144 THE BOOK Of EXODUS. 


79. The whole atmosphere of Exodus xv:1-21 is that of 
praise and adoration, joy and victory; such is yet in store for 
the earth and for Israel, when that goal is reached, of which 
verse 18 speaks, “Jehovah shall reign forever and ever.” 
Exodus xii foreshadows our deliverance from the guilt of 
sins (Romans i-v:11). Chapter xiii teaches God’s claim on 
those He has delivered, which is separation unto Himself. 
Chapter xiv tells in type of our deliverance from the power 
of sin. The song of redemption contained in Chapter xv 
points us to the beautiful ending of Romans viii, the song 
which every delivered believer can sing (Romans viii:31-39.) 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 145 


II, The Journey Towards the Promised 
Land; Israel at Sinai. 
Chapter XV :22-XL. 


1. The Experiences in the Wilderness. Chapter xv :22- 


XV111:27. 
CHAPTER XV:22-27. 


In the Wilderness of Shur. 


1. Marah. 22-26. 
2. Elim. 97. 


They went out into the wilderness of Shur. Shur was a 
great wall of protection which Egypt had erected. The sur- 
rounding country was called by that name. The trials of 
the wilderness journey at once begin; typical of our passage 
as redeemed ones through this world. Redemption has for a 
consequence the wilderness, We are in Christ crucified unto 
the world and the world unto us. The bitter waters are the 
first wilderness experience of the nation. It is a hint of what 
their subsequent history would be. Naomi in the Book of 
Ruth called herself ‘“Mara.”’ ‘‘Marah,”’ the bitterness, is the 
perfect picture of the world under sin and death. Then 
came the first wilderness murmuring. Six more are reported 
in Exodus and Numbers; Exodus xvi:2; xvii:2, 3; Num. xi: 
33, 34; xiv:2; xvi:41; xxi:5. God had a remedy. The tree 
is typical of the cross. The tree was not discovered by 
Moses, but by Jehovah. Christ went into the deep, dark 
waters of death; by Him the waters were made sweet for 
those who believe on Him. Now the bitterness of death is 
passed, and if we find the bitterness in the world through 
which we pass as pilgrims and strangers and we follow the 
path which He went while in the world, then murmuring will 
be forever excluded if the heart sees Christ and following in 
His steps, looks upon every bitter experience as the fellowship 


146 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


of His sufferings. Compare the tree for healing with Rev. 
xxii:2. 

In verse 26 Jehovah speaks of Himself as “Jehovah Ro- 
pheka,”’ the Lord thy Healer. The bitter waters showed them 
that they needed Jehovah in the wilderness as much as they 
needed Him in their deliverance from Egypt and Pharaoh’s 
power. And now He offers Himself as their Healer. He 
takes gracious care of His people while they follow Him in 
the path of obedience. Some have pressed this promise to 
such an extent that they say sickness in a Christian is the 
result of direct disobedience; a Christian has no need of 
being sick, etc. This is wrong, and has led into theories 
which are far from sane and scriptural. 

Marah is followed by Elim with its twelve wells of water 
and seventy palm trees. A beautiful oasis in the desert, 
giving them a foretaste of Canaan. What a place of refresh- 
ing and peace it must have been. So in our experience many 
a Marah is followed by an Elim, as the cross is followed by 
the crown. Elim means “trees,” and they must have been 
of luxuriant growth, planted by the wells of waters. So 
Israel after their Marah experience, when Jehovah has for- 
given their sins and healed all their diseases, in the day of 
their future blessing and glory, will be like trees planted at 
the water brooks and will draw water out of the wells of 
salvation. (Is. xii:3.) 


CHAPTER XVI. 
In the Wilderness of Sin. 


The Renewed Murmuring. 1-3. 

The Bread from Heaven Promised. 4-10. 

The Promise Fulfilled. The Quails and Bread Given. 11-14. 
Instructions Concerning the Gathering. 15-18. 

The Manna Corrupted. 19-21. 

The Manna and the Sabbath. 22-31. 

. The Manna kept for a Memorial. 32-36. 


SSI Cie Th de 


After they removed from Elim, they encamped by the 
Red Sea. (Num. xxxiii:10.) They came into the wilderness 
of sin. The Hebrew word means “thorn,” the bush in which 
Jehovah had appeared to Moses in the Hebrew is “Sineh,” a 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 147 


thornbush. The second murmuring takes place. This gives 
a deep glimpse into the desperately wicked condition of the 
human heart. God had brought them out of the house of 
bondage; they wished themselves back. God had sheltered 
them beneath the blood; they wished the judgment might 
have carried them away. They were ready to leave the 
ground of redemption, guided by Jehovah, and turn back to 
Pharaoh to become slaves once more. What infinite patience 
and grace the Lord manifested toward them. All this is 
repeated in the lives of many believers. It need not to be 
so and it will not, if Christ and the redemption we have in 
Him as well as our glorious inheritance which 1s before us, 
is a reality in our lives. 

Heaven offers now to minister to the daily need of such a 
people. The glory of the Lord was seen again out of the 
cloud. (Verse 7, 10.) The bread from Heaven was given. 
It is described as small in size, round, white like coriander 
seed, like wafers made with honey and hard. Rationalists 
have tried to explain the giving of this bread in a natural 
way. In a certain part of the desert is found a tree from 
which exudes at certain times an eatable gum and falls to 
the ground in the form of small cakes; this, it is claimed, 
explains the Manna. But they do not explain how it is that 
the Israelites received the Manna in every part of the des- 
ert, that they received it in such immense quantities that 
the hundred thousands were fed by it and it lasted for forty 
years. It ceased as miraculously as it was given. (Josh. v: 
12.) The word “Manna” is from the Hebrew ‘“Man-hu,” 
the question, “What is that?” It is designated as the 
bread from heaven. (Psalm Ixxviii:24; cv:40.) Our Lord 
speaks of it as the bread from heaven in John vi, a chapter 
which is of importance in connection with the typical mean- 
ing of the Manna. But quails were given first and in the 
morning the dew, and after it arose, the Manna. The quails 
and the Manna are both the types of Christ, the food for 
God’s people. The dew after which the Manna is seen, 
speaks of the Holy Spirit, who ministers Christ. Each gath- 
ered the bread which had come down according to his eat- 


148 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


ing. Each got what he wanted, and not more. So Christ 
meets the need we have of Him if only our need of Him 
were greater and felt more. 

It could not be hoarded up, but had to be gathered every 
morning. We must feed on Christ daily in living faith. 
Yesterday’s experience and enjoyment cannot feed us to-day. 
We must gather afresh, and let the dew, the Holy Spirit, 
minister Christ to our hearts. Many live on past experi- 
ences, and become puffed up. Stagnation and corruption 
follow. The Sabbath is mentioned in connection with the 
Manna and it is the first time that the Sabbath for Israel as 
a nation is spoken of. To feed on Christ, the bread from 
heaven, means rest for the soul. The keeping of the Manna 
in the golden pot (Heb. ix:4) tells us of what our Lord said 
concerning the bread from heaven, “He that eateth of this 
bread shall live forever.” The true Manna endureth to 


eternal life and we shall eat in His own presence in glory 
“the hidden Manna.” (Rev. ii:17.) 


CHAPTER XVII. 
At Rephidim. 


1. The Water from the Rock. 1-7. 
2. The Conflict with Amalek. 8-16. 


From Sin they went to Dophkah and Alush before they 
came to Rephidim. (Num. xxxiii:12, 13.) Again there was 
no water and Moses feared they might stone him. Without 
following the historical record we point out some of the most 
interesting lessons of the two events at Rephidim. The 
Rock is a type of Christ. Jehovah stood upon the rock to 
be smitten, even as “God was in Christ.” (2 Cor. v:19.) 
The smiting by the rod, used in judgment upon the river of 
Egypt, is the type of the death of Christ. There could be 
no water till the rock was smitten. There could be no water 
tili Christ had died. The water from the cleft rock is the 
type of the Holy Spirit, who was given as the result of the 
finished work of Christ. Exodus xvi and xvii go together 
and John vi and vii go together likewise. In Exodus xvi we 
dnd the Manna and in John vi the bread of life. In Exodus 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 149 


xvii the water out of the rock, the type of the Holy Spirit; 
in John vii the Lord Jesus announces the coming gift of the 
Holy Spirit. “If any man thirst, let him come unto Me 
and drink. He that believeth on Me, as the Scripture hath 
said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. But 
this He spake of the Spirit, which they that believe on Him 
should receive; for the Holy Spirit was not yet given, be- 
cause that Jesus was not yet glorified.” (John viii:37-39.) 
“They drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them, and 
that Rock was Christ.” (1 Cor. x:4.) 

The first conflict followed. There was no conflict at the 
Red Sea, but immediately after the water had been given in 
such wonderful abundance, Amalek appeared. Amalek is the 
type of the flesh. ‘The conflict illustrates Gal. v:17. “The 
flesh lusteth against the ‘spirit, and the Spirit against the 
flesh, and these are contrary, the one to the other, so that ye 
should not do the things ye would.”” The flesh and its lusts, 
which war against the soul, (1 Peter ii:11) are represented 
by Amalek. And Amalek attacked Israel, and Israel, Ama- 
lek. The attack was made when Israel in unbelief had asked, 
“Is the Lord among us or not?” Even so, when God’s 
people do not reckon in faith with the presence and the 
power of the Lord the flesh rises up; but if we walk in the 
Spirit we shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. 

Joshua is here mentioned for the first time. He was 
twenty-seven years younger than Moses, that is fifty-three 
years. He is the type of the Lord Jesus Christ, the captain 
of our salvation. Moses, on top of the hill, represents Christ 
risen from the dead and at God’s right hand, to appear in 
the presence of God for us as our advocate. Aaron and Hur 
at Moses’ side typify His priesthood of loving sympathy and 
His righteousness. (‘“Hur’” means “white,” the color used 
for righteousness.) But the hands of Christ never hang down. 
He ever liveth and intercedes for us. 

Amalek is not destroyed and the flesh is not. Amalek’s 
end comes when Christ comes. (See Num. xxiv:17-20.) 
The conflict with Amalek, the flesh, continues as long as we 
are in the body. 


150 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


In verse 14 we have the first command to Moses to write. 
Not so long ago critics claimed that writing at Moses’ time 
was unknown. The tablets of Lachish and Tel-el-Amarna 
have silenced this foolish assertion. The memorial altar, 
“Jehovah Nissi,”’ the Lord is my banner, tells us of victory. 
“The assurance of victory should be as complete as the sense 
of forgiveness, seeing both alike are founded upon the great 
fact that Jesus died and rose again. It is in the power of 
this that the believer enjoys a purged conscience and sub- 
dues indwelling sin. The death of Christ having answered 
all the claims of God in reference to our sins, His resurrec- 
tion becomes the spring of power in all the details of conflict 
afterwards. He died for us, and now He lives in us. The 
former gives us peace, the latter gives us power.” 


CHAPTER XVIII:1-27. 


Moses and Jethro. 


The Coming of Jethro. 1-5. 

Moses’ and Jethro’s Communion. 6-12. 
Jethro’s Advice. 13-23. 

Moses’ Action. 24-27. 


he oss 


This chapter concludes the first section of the second part 
of Exodus. We have in it a beautiful dispensational fore- 
shadowing of things to come. God had redeemed Israel, 
delivered them from Pharaoh’s host, manifested His power 
and had given them victory. The priest of Midian, a Gen- 
tile, now comes, having heard all that Jehovah had done for 
Moses and for Israel, his people. Zipporah, Moses’ wife, 
and his two sons are with him. What a happy reunion. 
And there was praise unto Jehovah from the lips of the Gen- 
tile as well as burnt offering and sacrifices for God. It fore- 
shadows what will take place when Israel is finally restored 
and delivered. Then the Gentiles will come and “many 
nations shall be joined unto the Lord in that day.” (Zech. 
ii:11.) Read Jeremiah xvi:14-21. First Jehovah’s power in 
the restoration of His scattered people is mentioned; then 
the coming of the Gentiles is announced. ‘The Gentiles 
shall come unto thee from the ends of the earth.” 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 151 


Moses judging, and the faithful men, fearing God, judg- 
ing with him, may well remind us of that day, when He 
who is greater than Moses will judge the earth in righteous- 
ness. Then we shall have share with Him. “Do ye not 
know that the saints shall judge the world?”’ (1 Cor. vi:2.) 

What Grace is and Grace has done and will do is the most 
beautiful and precious revelation of Exodus up to the end 
of the eighteenth chapter. Jehovah took notice of the poor 
slaves. He heard their cry. He sent them a deliverer. He 
smote Egypt with great tribulation and judgment. He shel- 
tered His people under the blood. He led them forth as His 
redeemed people. Their enemies perished through his power 
and brought them through the Red Sea. He gave them 
bread from heaven and water out of the rock. Victory was 
on their side and the Glory of His Name extended to the 
Gentiles. But over our brief and imperfect annotations we 
have to write, “Not the half has been told.” 


2. At Sinai. The Covenant and the Law. Chapter xix— 
xxiv:18. 
CHAPTER XIX. 


Israel at Sinai. The Covenant. 


Israel before Mount Sinai. 1, 2. 

The Covenant and Calling of Israel Stated. 3-6. 
The Covenant Accepted. 7-15. 

The Glory of the Lord at Sinai. 16-25. 


make ae 


Sinai is mentioned 31 times in the Pentateuch and only 
three times more in the rest of the Old Testament. In the 
New Testament the word occurs only in Acts vii:30, 38 and 
Gal. iv:24, 25. The place where the law was given is a bar- 
ren wilderness of high towering rocks. Moses went up to God 
and Jehovah reminded the people first of all of His gracious 
dealing with them. Then He revealed His purposes con- 
cerning them as a nation. They were to be His peculiar 
treasure above all people and to be unto Him a kingdom of 


152 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 
» 


priests and an holy nation. This purpose is founded upon a 
theocracy, that is, He Himself would reign over them as 
King. For this He must ask obedience from them. How 
else could they be a kingdom of priests and a separated 
people, unless they harkened to His voice and kept His cov- 
enant? But it is still the purpose of Grace. Jehovah in His 
Grace would make all this possible if they had received it. 
The Law which followed, with its principle, obedience, as 
the place of blessing, never led to the realization of Israel’s 
calling, nor ever will. When at last Israel becomes the king- 
dom of priests, it will be through Grace and not of works. 

It was a fatal thing, which all the people did when they 
answered together, ‘‘all that the Lord hath spoken we will 
do.” It was a presumptuous declaration, which sprang 
from self-confidence and showed clearly that they had no 
appreciation for that Grace which had visited them in Egypt 
and brought them hitherto. They had received grace, they 
needed grace. With the vow they had made, they had put 
themselves under thelaw. ‘The legal covenant had its begin- 
ning with the rejection of the Covenant of Grace, and the 
legal covenant ends with the acceptance of Grace. God per- 
mitted all this for a wise purpose. For what the Law serves, 
why it was given, is fully answered in the New Testament. 
(See Romans vii and Galatians iii.) In this we cannot enter 
here. 

At once the scene changes. The character of the Law they 
had chosen and its ministration unto death is manifested in 
the outward phenomena of clouds and darkness and in the 
first mention of death since they had left Egypt. ‘‘Whaso- 
ever toucheth the mount shall surely be put to death.” On 
the third day the Glory of the Lord appeared. The thunder- 
ings, lightnings, the trumpet, the trembling of the mountain, 
the voice of God, which accompany the manifestation of 
Jehovah, may be traced throughout the Bible. All this will 
be repeated in His glorious Second Coming. (Deut. xxxiii: 
1-3; 1 Sam. ii:10; Psalm xviii:7-16; Heb. iii; Rev. x:4, 
etc.) 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 153 


CHAPTER XX. 
The Covenant Revealed. 


1. The Ten Commandments. 1-17. 

2. Jehovah’s Gracious Provision. 18-26. 

This law covenant is now stated. It was given three 
times. First orally here, when God spake all these words. 
Then in Exodus xxxi Moses received the tables of stone, 
“written with the finger of God,” the same finger which 
later wrote on earth in the sand. (John viii.) The first 
tables were broken and Moses was commanded to hew two 
tables of stones upon which Jehovah again wrote the ten 
commandments. (Ex. xxxiv:1.) This law was given to Israel 
exclusively, which is seen in the opening word. The voice 
of God spoke these words so that the people heard Him 
speak. In what sense the law was given by the ministration 
of angels (Acts vii:53; Gal. iii:19; Heb. ii:2) is not revealed 
here. Our Lord has divided the ten commandments into 
two sections. The first three go together and speak of 
duties towards God and the seven which follow of duties 
towards our fellowmen. And He who gave this law ex- 
pounded the law and filled it full when He appeared on earth 
in humiliation. And after He lived that holy life on earth 
He went to the cross and the curse of the law rested upon 
Him. (Gal. iii:13.) The law given in these commandments 
shows man’s condition. Most of the commandments are 
negative, “thou shalt not.” It is a prohibition of the will 
and natural tendency of man. Man is a sinner, and the law 
was given to make a full demonstration of it. Read Rom. 
v:12-14; 20; vii:6-13; Gal. iii:19-29. May we fully under- 
stand that this law cannot give righteousness nor life and that 
it is not m force as the rule for the Christian in order to 
receive blessing from God. We are not under that Law but 
under Grace. But Grace teaches us to live righteously, 
soberly and godly in this present evil age. The righteous 
requirements of the law are fulfilled in us, who walk accord- 
ing to the Spirit. 

The altar is mentioned and in the sacrifice we behold 
Christ. ‘“‘But further, God will meet the sinner at an altar 


154 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


without a hewn stone or a step—a place of worship which 
requires no human workmanship to erect, or human effort 
to approach. The former could only pollute, and the latter 
could only display human ‘nakedness.’ Admirable type 
of the meeting place where God meets the sinner now, even 
the Person and work of His Son, Jesus Christ, where all the 
claims of law, of justice, and of conscience are perfectly 
answered! Man has, in every age and in every clime, been 
prone, in one way or another, to ‘lift up his tool’ in the 
erection of his altar, or to approach thereto by steps of his 
own making; but the issue of all such attempts has been 
‘pollution’ and ‘nakedness.’ ”’* 
CHAPTER XXI. 
Different Judgments. 

1. Master and Servant. 1-11. 

2. Concerning Injury to the Person. 12-32. 

8. Concerning Property. 32-3. 

The three chapters which follow the giving of the ten com- 
mandments give the practical application of the decalogue 
in the daily life. The duties toward the fellowmen are dem- 
onstrated in part. There are seven sections to these three 
chapters; each section contains ten precepts. 

The servant occupies the first place. He was to obtain 
his freedom for nothing after serving six years. In Deuter- 
onomy we read that the master is commanded not to let 
him go empty-handed, but give him of his flock, his thresh- 
ing floor and his winepress. In this Israel was to remember 
their own deliverance from the house of bondage. (Deut. 
xv:12-18.) If the servant chose to remain with his master 
forever, his ear was to be bored through as the sign of per- 
petual servitude. This was a custom in other nations as well 
and signified that the servant was, as it were, fastened by 
the awl to the house. (Deut. xv:17.) 

The Hebrew servant is put so prominently in the fore- 
ground because the Son of God became a servant and has 
chosen the perpetual service. Psalm xl:6 and Hebrew x:5 
show that it is typical of the Lord Jesus Christ. Notice 


*C. H. McIntosh on Exodus. 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 155 


what it says in our chapter: “And if the servant shall 
plainly say, I love my master, my wife and my children, I 
will not go out free.” It was love which decided the Hebrew 
servant to be a servant forever. And it was love which 
brought Him to this earth to do the Father’s will, and love 
for the church. “He loved the church and gave Himself 
for it.” And He loves us as individuals. This corresponds 
to the love of the servant to his wife and his children. Christ 
was a servant on earth; He is serving in glory now as the 
priest and advocate of His people, and in glory “He will 
gird Himself . . . and will come forth and serve them.” 
(Luke xii:37). 

This is followed by judgments concerning the injury of a 
person. Injury of a person had to be punished in a manner 
corresponding to the injury. The principle of retribution is 
marked throughout these laws. Smiting father or mother, 
man-stealing, and cursing the parents was punishable with 
death. Many pages might be written to follow these laws in 
detail. Read verses 23-27, and compare with Matthew v: 
38-48. 

Notice again the mention of the servant in verse 32. The 
price of a servant was thirty shekels of silver. ‘The redemp- 
tion price of a free Israelite was fifty shekels (Lev. xxvii:3); 
that of a slave, thirty shekels. How it reminds us again of 
Him who was sold for the thirty pieces of silver. (Zech. xi:12.) 


CHAPTER XXII. 
Further Judgments. 


Concerning Theft. 1-5. ; 

Concerning Neglect in Case of Fire. 6. 

Concerning Dishonesty. 7-15. ; 

Concerning Immoralities and Forbidden Things. 16-20. 
Concerning Oppression. 21-28. 

Concerning Offerings to God. 29-31. 


SA oe al 


These laws need no further comment; they are good and 
just. The wisdom of them is the wisdom from above. We 
call attention to verse 18: “Thou shalt not suffer a witch 
to live.” The nations with which Israel came in contact 


156 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


were given to the most satanic cults and the powers of Satan 
were manifested among them. Demoniacal possessions 
abounded, and witchcraft, sorceries, asking the dead, and 
other abominations were practised. Witchcraft and sor- 
ceries, communicating with the wicked spirits is therefore 
more than a possibility. It can be traced throughout the 
history of the human race and whenever nations ripened for 
judgment this form of evil became prominent. The female 
sex was then, as it is still the case, principally addicted to 
this sin. In our day it flourishes in Spiritualism, Christian 
Science, Theosophy, and other cults. 


CHAPTER XXIIL 
Further Judgments and Directions. 


Concerning Unrighteous Dealings of Various Kinds. 1-9. 
Concerning the Seventh Year. 10-13. 
Concerning the Three Feasts. 14-19. 
Promises Concerning the Pcssession of the Land. 20-33. 


le The 


We call attention to the words concerning the seventh 
year. The seventh day was the day of rest. The seventh 
year was to give the land rest; it was to rest and lie still. 
Besides this there was the jubilee year, which occurred every 
seven times seven years, that is, the fiftieth year was the 
year of jubilee, in which liberty was proclaimed. We hope 
to examine this more closely and learn its typical and pro- 
phetic significance when we reach the Book of Leviticus 
(Chapter xxv.) The seventh year was especially meant for 
the poor. Whatever grew by itself belonged to them, and 
what they left the beasts of the field were to eat. What 
gracious provision this was! How merciful and gracious our 
God is! 

The three feasts are next mentioned. The connection with 
verse 13 is obvious. It is a warning concerning other gods. 
The feasts were designed to keep Jehovah, His power and 
His grace, as a living reality before the nation. The three 
feasts are: The feast of unleavened bread in memory of the 
Exodus; the feast of the first fruits, also called the feast of 
weeks, because it came seven weeks after the feast of unleav- 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 157 


ened bread (Lev. xxiii:15-16; Deut. xvi:9), and still another 
name is “the feast of the first fruits of the wheat harvest.” 
It was now known by the name of Shavuoth. The third feast 
came on the fifteenth day of the seventh month (Lev. xxiii: 
84), and is the feast of ingathering, known as Succoth, the 
feast of tabernacles. Of all this we shall learn more in Levit- 
icus. The last clause of verse 19 has led to ridiculous specu- 
lations among the rabbis. It is looked upon by the Jews as 
a prohibition against eating flesh prepared with milk. (See 
Deut. xiv:21.) 

We must not overlook in our study verses 20-23. Who is 
this angel? He is called in Chapter xxxiii:15, “the face of 
Jehovah” (literal translation). The Name of God is in Him; 
God revealed Himself in Him. His voice must be obeyed. 
He has power to pardon transgressions or not to pardon 
them. This angel is not a created being, but the same who 
appeared in the burning bush; the same of whom Jacob said, 
“The angel, the Redeemer.”’ It is Jehovah Himself, the Son 
of God. The ancient synagogue paraphrased this person by 
using the expression ““Memra,” which means “The Word.” 
They have believed and taught that “The Word” brought 
Israel out of Egypt; “The Word” led them in the pillar of 
a cloud; “The Word” confounded the Egyptian host. And 
they paraphrased “‘the angel’? by “The Word.” 


CHAPTER XXIV:1-18. 
The Ratification of the Covenant. The Glory of Jehovah. 


1. Moses Called into Jehovah’s Presence. 1, 2. 
?. The Covenant Ratified; the Sprinkling with Blood. 3-8. 
8. In the Presence of God; Jehovah’s Glory. 9-18. 


This chapter is a fitting conclusion of this second section 
of the second part. It begins with the giving of the Law 
and ends with the Glory of the Lord. Moses alone was to 
come near to Jehovah; Aaron, Nadab and Abihu with the 
seventy elders of Israel, had to worship afar. Moses is a type 
of Christ in his exclusive privilege and attitude. Twice the 
people make the promise to keep the covenant, not realizing 


158 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


what they were doing. Then the blood was sprinkled upon 
the altar, upon the book of the covenant (Heb. ix:19), and 
on the people. In this way the covenant was ratified. This 
sprinkling of the blood here has not the meaning of atonement. 
It rather stands for the penalty of the broken covenant. 
The blood standing for life given, was a solemn warning that 
the penalty of disobedience would be death. At the same 
time the offerings and the blood point to Christ. He came and 
took the curse of the law upon Himself. When He came to 
give His life a ransom for many, the people, so occupied with 
the ordinances, the law and the traditions of men, cried, 
“This blood be upon us and upon our children.” Ever since 
bloodguiltiness rests upon them and the curse of their own 
law is their portion till they shall look upon Him whom they 
have pierced. 

The people were afar off; the leaders were not to come 
nigh, and had to worship afar off. The blood of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, however, makes nigh and we can draw nigh. 
The legal covenant ever puts man into a solemn and guilty 
distance from God; the covenant of Grace brings man nigh 
to God. The presence and glory of God appeared. Moses 
was in the mount forty days and forty nights. 


3. The Tabernacie and the Priesthood. 
Chapter XX V-XXXI:18. 
CHAPTER XXV. 
The Tabernacle. 
: ae yee eee and the Materials. 1-9, 


. The Table of Showbread. 23-30. 
. The Golden Candlestick. 31-40. 


> 09 tO et 


This is another intensely interesting portion of this great 
book. To give a few annotations and hints on the tabernacle 
is an extremely difficult task, for there is such a wonderful 
mine of wealth here that a book of hundreds of pages could 
not contain all. 


The tabernacle concerning which the Lord instructed Moses 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 159 


was the earthly place of worship of Israel; it was the means 
of a continued relationship of a holy God with a sinful people. 
But besides this the tabernacle and its worship foreshadows 
in the completest way the Person and Work of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. The epistle to the Hebrews bears witness to 
this. The types in the tabernacle are simply inexhaustible. 
The word “tabernacle” in the Hebrew is “Mishkan,” which 
means dwelling-place. The construction and arrangement 
was not left to man. God gave Moses the instructions and 
showed to him a pattern. 

The materials are mentioned first, and they are to be sup- 
plied by His willing people. The Hebrew expression is liter- 
ally, “every one whom his heart drove.” Only His people, 
not strangers, could furnish the material. And they had to 
give with the heart. The same principle holds good in the 
New Testament. The support of the Lord’s work by unsaved 
people and the methods of the world is wrong; it has not the 
blessing of God. We do not touch upon the materials now, 
but shall do so later. 

The Ark of Shittim wood is the first thing mentioned. 
Man builds differently. Man lays first a foundation, builds 
the walls, works from the outside to the inside. God begins 
within. The ark with the mercy seat is where Jehovah 
dwelt, “between the Cherubim.” It is, therefore, a type of 
Christ. The shittim wood, that is acacia, grows in the desert, 
out of a dry ground. (Is. lii:2.) It is of all the wood the 
most durable, almost imperishable. We have in it the type 
of the humanity of Christ. The gold which covered it is 
typical of His Deity. The mercy seat fitted the ark. It 
was of the same dimensions as the ark. The Hebrew word 
is ‘‘ Kapporeth,’ which means covering, and has reference 
to atonement. The two cherubim faced each other and 
looked down upon the mercy seat, where the blood was 
sprinkled. They are always seen in the Word in connection 
with the throne. Eze. i; Rev. iv. Beautiful is verse 22. 

The table of showbread still tells us of Christ, for it is of 
the same material as the ark. What was on the table, the show 
bread and all its blessed lessons we shall consider in Levit- 


160 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


icus. The table and the bread is typical of Christ, who sus- 
tains us in fellowship with God. 

The golden candlestick is the next article of furniture 
described. It was of pure gold. Three times almonds are 
mentioned. From the book of Numbers we learn that the 
almond, on the blossoming rod of Aaron, is the type of Christ 
in resurrection. The candlestick typifies Christ in heaven’s 
glory, outshining the glory of God. It also is the type of 
Him, risen from the dead, giving the Holy Spirit, who is seen 
as the sevenfold Spirit in the candlestick. See and compare 
with Rev. 1:4, 13, 20; iii:1 and iv:5. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 
The Tabernacle. Its Construction. 


The Curtains. 1-6. 

The Coverings. 7-14. 

The Boards. 15-30. 

The Vail. 31-35. 

The Hangings for the Door. 36, 37. 


Oe 99 10 


While the Tabernacle is a type of the heavenly places 
(Heb. ix:23) it is also a type of Christ, who tabernacled 
among men. The wonderful foreshadowings we find here 
down to the minutest details is an evidence of inspiration. 
We must confine ourselves to a very few things. 

The colors used were blue, purple, scarlet and white. 
Blue is the color of heaven; purple that of royalty; scarlet 
the color of blood, and the white tells of righteousness. The 
ten curtains of fine twined linen which surrounded the tab- 
ernacle typify the holy, spotless humanity of our Lord. 
How the colors tell out the blessed story of the Gospel, that 
heaven’s King came down to shed His blood, we need not to 
follow in detail. The loops of blue and taches of gold which 
unite the curtains tell of Him likewise. 

“We have here displayed to us, in the ‘loops of blue,’ 
and ‘taches of gold,’ that heavenly grace and divine energy 
in Christ which enabled Him to combine and perfectly 
adjust the claims of God and man; so that in responding to 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 161 


both the one and the other, He never for a moment marred 
the unity of His character.” 

The curtains of goat’s hair were to be a tent over the tab- 
ernacle and the tent had other coverings of rams’ skins, dyed 
red, and covering of badger’s skin. These coverings hid the 
ten curtains of fine twined linen, and their beauty. Thus He 
was not beheld in His lovely character when on earth. The 
goat’s hair covering reminds us of the divine statement, 
“He hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see 
Him, there is no beauty that we should desire Him.” (Is. 
liii:2.) The ram’s skins, dyed red, is the symbol of His devo- 
tion and obedience to God, even unto the death of the cross. 
The badger’s skins are taken to mean His holy determina. 
tion and steadfastness. 

Christ and his people are typified in the boards of shittim 
wood (the same as in the ark and the table) resting in the 
sockets of silver. The silver was the ransom money (Chap- 
ter xxx:11-13;) out of it the sockets were made. (Chapter 
XXXvill :25-28.) The whole frame work of the tabernacle 
rested in that which tells of atonement. Thus we stand in 
Christ and are one with Him, separated from the world as the 
boards were separated from the earth by the sockets of silver. 
And as we look upon this frame work, with the bars of shittim 
wood uniting the boards (typical of Christ) we may well 
think of Eph. ii:21: “In whom all the building fitly framed 
together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord.” 

The vail as described in verses 31-35 is interpreted in 
Heb. x:20. It marked the division of the holy and the most 
holy, or Holy of Holies. Like the inner curtains this vail 
typifies the holy humanity of Our Lord. That vail barred 
the entrance into the presence of God. But it was rent by the 
hand of God, when our Lord had laid down His life on the 
cross. Christ is the way into the presence of God, “by a new 
and living way, which He hath consecrated for us, through 
the vail, that is to say, His flesh.” Therefore we have bold- 
ness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus. The 
hanging for the door of the tent has the same meaning, Christ 


the way. 


162 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 
The Tabernacle Concinded. 


1. The Altsr of Brsss. ES. 
@ The Court of the Tabernacle. 2-19. 
S. The Oi for the Lamp. 20, 21. 


The brazen altar stood at the door of the tabernacle. 
Later we find in this book the golden altar of incense men- 
tioned. It stood between the golden candlestick and the 
brazen altar. This altar was lkewise of shittim wood. 
Instead of gold, here was brass, because the altar is the 
type of the cross where Christ met the burning heat of 
Divine justice. Upon this altar the burnt offermg was 
brought and wholly consumed, speaking of Him who knew 
no sin and was made sin for us. The altar was hollow, the 
sacrificial fires burned mostly within. This tells of His 
work on the cross and the sufferings “within,” when He was 
forsaken of God; they are for us unfathomable. The horns 
on the four corners of the altar indicated that His great work 
on the cross should go forth in world wide proclamation. 

The court of the tabernacle had for a wall fine twined Hnen. 
This was symbolical of the righteousness of God. This ex- 
cludes the sinner from His presence. But there was a gate 
(verse 16) in which the colors reappeared. Blue, purple and 
scarlet were seen there. The gate typifies Christ. If an 
Israelite entered through that gate in the linen wall, which 
shut him out, he found, after entering in, that the same fine 
twined men shut him in. Even =~ if we enter in 
through the one door, Christ, the righteousmess of God 
which condemned us, covers us. There were also hooks and 
fillets of silver and sockets of brass telling once more the 
story of atonement and divine righteousness executed in 
judgment. ; 


CHAPTER XXVOL 
The Priesthood. 
1. Aaren and His Seas iI. 


2. The Garments Mestioned. 2-4. 
3. The Ephed. 314. 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 163 © 


. The Breastplate. 15-30. 

. The Robe of the Ephod. 31-35. 
The Mitre. 36-38. 

The Ordinary Garments. 39-43. 


Neos 


This chapter is still richer in typical lessons, a very few of 
them we can notice. Two chapters are devoted to the 
Priesthood. Aaron is the type of Christ. The sons of Aaron 
are types of Christians representing false worshippers (Na- 
dab and Abihu) and true worshippers (Eleazar and Ithamar.) 
The holy garments are mentioned first, but not in the order 
as they were put on. ‘The correct order is found in Leviticus 
vili:7-9. The garments were for glory and beauty, typifying 
Him who is altogether lovely. The ephod stands first. 
Ephod in Hebrew means “to bind on”; it held the breast- 
plate in position. It was of gold, blue, purple, of scarlet, 
fine twined linen, with cunning work. How beautifully it 
was wrought we read in Exod. xxxix:3. The same material 
as in the curtains were used in the ephod; gold is added and 
the figures of the cherubim are absent. It all tells us of Him- 
self and His priestly service in behalf of His people. The 
two onyx stones Aaron wore on his shoulders with the namcs 
of the twelve tribes engraven, is the type of Christ, carrying 
His people upon His shoulders. The shoulder is the symbol 
of power. From the moment He puts His sheep He has 
found upon His shoulder (Luke xv:5) to the blessed day, 
when He gathers His own, He carries them in His power. 

Read verse 11 how these names were put into the stones. 
They were ineffaceable and could not be blotted out. It 
speaks of our security in Christ. The breastplate consisted 
of twelve stones. Every one of these stones has a meaning, 
which we cannot follow here, and the names of the twelve 
tribes were engraved upon these precious stones. The 
breastplate was “upon his heart when he goeth in unto the 
holy place.”” The words “upon his heart” are twice re- 
peated in verse 30. Here we have the blessed type that 
Christ carries all His people upon His heart of love. That 
the breastplate be not loosed from the ephod (verses 26-28) 
blue lace was attached. There was no possibility that the 
breastplate could shift; there is no possibility that His love 


164 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


for His own can ever grow less. His power and His love go 
together. In the breastplate there were also placed “Urim 
and Thummim,” which means “Lights and Perfections.” 
Seven times they are mentioned: Ex. xxviii:30; Lev. viii:8; 
Num. xxvii:21; Deut. xxxili:8; 1 Sam. xxvili:6; Ezra ii1:63; 
Neh. vii:65. In two of these passages only Urim is men- 
tioned and in Deut. xxxiii:8 Thummim stands first. It is 
not certain in what the Urim and Thummim consisted. Some 
think they were two costly stones drawn as a lot in difficult 
questions. Others think it was one stone which by various 
scintillations gave an answer from the Lord. Israel did not 
need to be in darkness about any matter. We possess as 
believers a gift in us to guide and direct our steps; it is the 
Holy Spirit. He is our Urim and Thummim. The robe of 
the ephod was entirely blue. Christ is our heavenly high- 
priest. Bells and pomegranates, the types of testimony and 
fruit, were around the robe. “His sound shall be heard when 
he goeth in.” That happened when He as an Priest went in 
to God and the Holy Spirit came and the gospel bells began to 
ring. And fruit in the conversion of souls ever followed. 
The bells also rang when Aaron came out from the presence 
of God. Even so when our Lord comes again a fresh testi- 
mony in power will be heard yielding wonderful fruit. 

The “holy crown” Aaron wore is equally suggestive. 
“Holiness unto the Lord” was on the golden plate. So He 
is our holy Priest and we are holy priests with Him. Read 
Zech. xiv:20, 21. 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 165 
CHAPTER XXIX. 
The Consecration of the Priests. 


Aaron and his Sons Wash with Water. v. 1-4. 
Aaron Clothed.  v. 5-7. 

The Consecration. v. 8-25. 

The Food of the Priests. v. 26-35. 

God’s Meeting Place. v. 36-46. 


SA Re 


In Leviticus we find the record of their consecration, 
which is linked there with the offerings. Here it is only the 
instruction, while in Leviticus we find the act of the conse- 
cration. We touch upon it briefly; in Leviticus, we shall 
follow it a little closer. First they were washed with water. 
This is the type of the washing of regeneration. It stands for 
the new birth, which is by the water (the Word) and the 
Spirit. (John iii:5.) It is the one washing of which our Lord 
spcke to Peter. (John xiii:10.) This puts all believers into 
the position of priests before God; we are a holy Priesthood. 
But Aaron towers above his sons; we see him separated 
from them. (Verse 5-7.) This is on account of typifying 
Christ. Aaron was washed with water like his sons because 
he was asinner. It made him typically what Christ is essen- 
tially, that is, holy. The sons of Aaron represent Christians; 
all true believers are one with Christ as Aaron’s sons were. 
But Aaron was anointed alone before the blood was shed, 
besides wearing already his priestly garments. In this he is 
a very striking type of our Lord. He was anointed with the 
oil, the Holy Spirit, in virtue of what He is in Himself. 

Notice the sacrifices brought. First, Aaron and his sons 
put their hands upon the head of the bullock, which was then 
slain. The blood was put upon the horns of the altar, and 
then all the blood was poured at the base of the altar. It 
was asin offering. Then there were tworams. ‘The first one 
was for a burnt offering. The significance of these different 
offerings we shall examine in the Book of Leviticus. The 
blood of the second ram was put upon the tip of the right 
ear, the thumb of the right hand, and the great toe of the 
right foot of Aaron and his sons. The ram was killed after 
they had laid their hands upon his head. Then the blood 


166 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


and the anointing oil was sprinkled upon them and their 
garments. This was the consecration proper. It tells us how 
they were set apart completely. Thus in redemption we are 
set apart to be a holy priesthood, to have our ears open to 
hear his voice and receive from Him, the hand set apart to 
act for Him, and the foot to walk with Him. In all this we 
see Christ and ourselves linked by Grace with Him, as 
Aaron’s sons were so fully identified with Aaron. 

Then there was the wave offering put into the hands of 
Aaron and his sons, and what this wave offering was is 
learned from verses 22, 23. It all expresses Christ, and is a 
sweet savor. The breast and the left shoulder of the ram of 
consecration (verse 22), as well as all else which had not 
been offered to God, belonged to the priests. This tells of 
practical enjoyment of the love of Christ (the breast) and 
the enjoyment of His strength (the shoulder) Who bears us 
up. It was eaten in the holy place, and unleavened bread 
had to be used. 

In verse 33 we find the English word “atonement” for 
the first time. The Hebrew word is ‘“ Kaphar,” to cover. 
Of this likewise we shall have more to say when we read the 
Book of Leviticus. 

In the concluding section of this chapter we read God’s 
promises, ‘‘where I will meet you and speak there unto thee;” 
“IT will meet with the children of Israel;” “I will dwell 
among the children of Israel.”” The meeting place is the burnt 
offering altar. The daily offerings make known what the 
work of Christ is to God. And that is the place of blessing. 


CHAPTER XXX. 
The Altar of Incense and the Worshippers. 


The Altar. v. 1-10. 

The Atonement Money; Redeemed. v. 11-16. 

The Brazen Laver; The Unction of the Spirit. v. 22-33. 
The Incense. y. 34-38. 


CUS ire 


This is a beautiful chapter, filled with blessed lessons. We 
have before us instructions concerning true, priestly wor- 
ship. The brazen altar was of shittim wood, but this altar 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 167 


is of shittim wood covered with pure gold. The altar of 
brass tells of the work of Christ on the cross when judgment 
fell upon Him. There we learn in faith that our sins and 
guilt were fully met. The golden altar typifies Christ as 
entered into heaven. He is an altar there likewise, a place 
of sacrifice, but not a bleeding sacrifice. As believers we are 
a holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable 
to God by Jesus Christ. (1 Pet. ii:5.) “By Him, therefore, 
let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, 
the fruit of our lips confessing His name.” The altar 
of incense stands for this true, heavenly worship. There is a 
warning not to offer strange incense. In Leviticus (x:1-3) 
the additional warning is against strange fire. Strange in- 
cense is that kind of worship which is called ritualistic; a 
mere outward form, which puts a man in the place of leader 
in worship. Strange fire is a soulical, emotional worship, 
which is destitute of the Holy Spirit, Who alone gives power 
to worship. 

And those who come as true worshippers must be redeemed. 
This is seen in verses 11-16. Here is a confession of the fact 
that all are lost, all on equal footing, and all need redemption. 

The brazen laver is mentioned next. This was for the 
washing of the hands and feet, symbolical of the washing of 
water by the Word, the cleansing from daily defilement. 
This is so blessedly illustrated in the washing of the feet of 
the disciples by our Lord. We must be cleansed, self- 
judged and self-denied, separated from evil, if we are to be 
true worshippers before the altar of incense. No real com- 
munion with God is possible save on the ground of personal 
holiness. Later we shall find that the laver was made of 
the looking-giasses of the assembling women (xxxviii:8). 
The Word of God is the true looking-glass where we see our- 
selves as we are, and then go to Him who is our laver for 
cleansing. 

The holy anointing oil is the type of the Holy Spirit. He 
is needed for worship in the Spirit. A closer examination of 
the principal spices and their possible meaning, we must pass 
over. Notice that this oil was not to be poured upon man’s 


168 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


flesh, ‘neither shall ye make any other like it.” (Verse 32- 
33.) “The natural man cannot receive the things of the Spirit 
of God for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he 
know them, because they are spiritually discerned.” The 
flesh is so corrupt that the Holy Spirit can have nothing to 
do with it. And how much the Spirit and His real work is 
counterfeited in these days. 

The ingredients of the incense are also given. It is typical 
of the wonderful fragrance Christ is to God. His life on 
earth, His obedience, His death on the cross, His presence in 
Glory, all He is and all He does is of unspeakable fragrance 
and value to God. 


CHAPTER XXXI. 
The Workmen. The Sabbath. 


1. The Workmen Called. v. 1-11. 
2. The Sabbath Law Emphasized. v. 12-17. 
38. Moses Receives the Tables of Stone. v. 18. 


The call of the builders of the tabernacle follows the 
instructions. The plan and worship of the tabernacle was 
by divine appointment, only God could give such a plan 
foreshadowing the redemption work of His Son. To carry 
out this plan, the Lord called His own workmen by name and 
filled them with His Spirit, so that they could do the work in 
a manner which would please Him. “I have called; I have 
given; I have filled” are the words of Jehovah showing that 
He selected and qualified the two men to undertake the work. 
The New Testament ministry rests equally in the hands of 
the Lord. He has the exclusive right to select His servants 
for the ministry. As the risen Lord in Glory He gave some 
apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and 
some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, 
for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of 
Christ. (Eph. iv:11-12.) And whom He ealls into the 
work of the ministry He also qualifies. His Spirit gives the 
wisdom and power to carry out the work into which the Lord 
calls. It is therefore all of Him; no room for boasting or 
jealousy. 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 169 


What confusion would have resulted if certain Israelites 
had decided to do part of the work and others, calling them- 
selves “superintendents,” had directed the construction of 
the tabernacle, or a committee selected the design of the 
breastplate and another committee examined drawings of the 
cherubim. Great is the confusion in the professing church 
with its man-made, self-appointed ministry, with its organ- 
izations, committees and worldly methods. The truth so 
clearly revealed in the New Testament epistles concerning 
the ministry in the body of Christ and the Holy Spirit who 
fits for this ministry, is almost entirely forgotten. But wher- 
ever there is the divine call and divine qualification through 
the Spirit of God, there the work is done and is accompanied 
by the power and blessing of God. 

The principal workman called was Bezaleel, the grandson 
of Hur of the tribe of Judah. He had an assistant in Aholiab, 
as well as others who were wisehearted and to whom God 
gave wisdom. (Verse 6.) Bezaleel means, “in the shadow of 
God;” this tells of his trust, filled with the Spirit of God in 
wisdom and understanding. He may well be taken as a type 
of the Lord Jesus Christ. Uri means “Light of Jehovah; 
and Hur means “white.” All these words point clearly to 
the great workman selected by God to fashion a dwelling 
place for Him and to make a kingdom of priests unto God, 
the Lord Jesus Christ. And as Bezaleel did all as God com- 
manded so that He was pleased, so our Lord has done the 
work in perfect wisdom to the eternal glory of God His 
Father. 

Aholiab, Bezaleel’s assistant, means “tent of my Father.” 
Ahisamach has the meaning “brother of support.’ This, 
likewise, reminds us of our Lord. Bezaleel belonged to the 
tribe of Judah, the leader in the camp of Israel, and Aholiab 
to Dan, the last inthecamp. Thus the first and the last were 
selected to do the work. What a glorious time is yet to come 
when all Israel, saved by Grace in that day of His appearing, 
filled with the Spirit and divine wisdom, erects the great 
millennial temple. (Ez. xl—xlviii.) 

The Sabbath law is re-stated and emphasized. This was 


170 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


also done when the manna was given. Here the Sabbath is 
especially mentioned as “a sign between Me and you in your 
generations.” The Sabbath is altogether a Jewish institu- 
tion; it is always mentioned when Israel is seen in their 
responsibility in the special position given to them. Here the 
penalty for breaking the Sabbath is stated for the first time; 
it is death. Notice the peculiar expression in verse 17, that 
the Lord rested on the seventh day and was refreshed. He 
must have looked forward to His own work on the cross and 
the marvellous results of this work. 

We quote from another some well-put distinctions between 
the Sabbath Israel had and could not keep, and the Lord’s 
day. This distinction is of importance in the days when 
some consciences are disturbed by teachers who would force 
the seventh day upon those who are under Grace. 

1. The Sabbath was the seventh day; the Lord’s day is 
the first. 

2. The Sabbath was a test of Israel’s condition; the Lord’s 
day is the proof of the Church’s acceptance, on wholly uncon- 
ditional grounds. 

3. The Sabbath belonged to the old creation; the Lord’s 
day belongs to the new. 

4. The Sabbath was a day of bodily rest for the Jew; the 
Lord’s day is a day of spiritual rest for the Christian. 

5. If the Jew worked on the Sabbath, he was to be put to 
death; if the Christian does not work on the Lord’s day, he 
gives little proof of life;—that is to say, if he does not work 
for the benefit of the souls of men, the extension of Christ’s 
glory and the spread of His truth. In point of fact, the 
devoted Christian who possesses any gift is generally more 
fatigued on the evening of the Lord’s day than on any other 
in the week, for how can he rest while souls are perishing 
around him? 

6. The Jew was commanded by the law to abide in his 
tent; the Christian is led by the spirit of the gospel to go 
forth, whether it be to attend the public assembly or to min- 
ister to the souls of perishing sinners.* 


*Notes on Exodus. 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. bya 


How Higher Criticism, the whole rationalistic school, and 
their brethren, the infidels, have amused themselves with 
verse 18. Why should this be thought to be impossible with 
God? Their sneers but reveal their darkened and wicked 
hearts. God had made the tables and wrote on them. 
(Chapter xxxii:16.) 


Israel’s Sin and Rebellion. 
CHAPTER XXXII. 


The People in Rebellion. v. 1-6. 

. Jehovah Threatens His Wrath. v. 7-10. 
Moses Beseeches Jehovah. v. 11-14. 

Moses Descends and in the Camp. v. 15-29, 
Moses’ Offer and Failure. vy. 30-35. 


ies as) tS 


This chapter records the breaking of the covenant by 
Israel’s sin, rebellion against Jehovah, and idolatry. Here 
we find man’s heart fully uncovered, that wicked heart of 
unbelief. What manifestations of God’s power they had 
seen! Their eyes beheld the dreadful judgments which fell 
upon the land of Egypt and wiped out the Egyptian hosts. 
They were guided by the visible sign of Jehovah’s presence. 
He had given them manna, yea, they were eating that bread 
the very day on which they rebelled. The smitten rock had 
yielded water. God had entered into covenant with them. 
And now when Moses delayed, they requested of Aaron, 
“Up, make us gods.”” God was not mentioned at all by the 
rebellious mass. It seemed Moses and not God was the 
object of their faith. The heathen had gone that way and 
“changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image 
made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed 
beasts and creeping things.” (Rom. 1:23.) The favored 
nation shows that their heart is as corrupt as the heart of the 
Gentiles, who know not God. They plunged into the degre- 
dation of idolatry. The unseen One, the One who had hon- 
ored Abraham’s faith, who spake to the fathers, was rejected 
by them, and they preferred a golden calf fashioned with a 
graving tool. And Aaron plays the leading part in this awful 
scene of degradation and wickedness. He announces a feast 


172 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


unto the Lord, after he had made the golden calf from the 
golden ear-rings.* Then the people “rose up to play”; 
wild dances, licentious and filled with the abominations of 
the heathen, the flesh let loose, is what followed. ‘The people 
were naked. (Verse 25.) 

Alas! the same has been repeated on “Christian” ground. 
The ritualistic, religious worship, appealing to the senses, 
filled with God, Christ and the Holy Spirit dishonoring coun- 
terfeits, the inventions of the “religious nature” of man 
under Satanic control, is nothing but idolatry. It rejects the 
invisible One, who demands our faith and trust, and puts 
something else in His place. That is idolatry. All God’s 
true people are in danger of that sin in the most subtle forms. 
Whenever we lean on the arm of flesh and not exclusively 
upon the “I am,” our gracious Lord, then are we guilty of 
the same sin. “Little children, keep yourselves from idols.” 
(1 John v:21.) 

As Moses went up, so our great Highpriest has gone to the 
Father. We see Him not, but we know He is there and will 
come back again. May we live by faith during His absence 
and be kept from idols. 

Then Jehovah told Moses what was going on in the camp. 
Note that he said to Moses, “thy people, which thou brought- 
est out of the land of Egypt.” The Lord puts them, so to 
speak, upon Moses and commits them into his hands. Moses 
only needed to say the word and the rebellious nation would 
lave been consumed and Moses and his offspring would 
become a new beginning. It was atest of Moses, but Jeho- 
vah knew beforehand what His servant would do. Beautiful 
is Moses’ intercession. He uses the same words the Lord 
had used. “Thy people which Thou hast brought forth out 
of the land of Egypt.” The Lord had put them into Moses’ 
hands; Moses puts them back upon the Lord. How wonder- 
ful was Moses’ intercession in their behalf. He reminds 
Him of His promises and the covenant made with Abraham, 
Isaac and Israel (avoiding the word Jacob). His intercession 
is typical of our great intercessor before the throne. 

* Copied, no doubt, after the Egyptian idol Apis. See Psa. cvi:19-20. 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 173 


The covenant was broken and the first tables of stone 
were broken. The golden calf was burnt and ground to 
powder. This was cast into the water (the brook, Deut. 
ix:21), and the children of Israel had to drink of it. They 
had to drink their own shame; a humiliating experience. 
Aaron is questioned first, and he adds a new sin to the one 
already committed. (Compare verse 24 with verse 4.) The 
sons of Levi gathered themselves to Moses. They, too, had 
shared in the rebellion, but were now the first to confess and 
take their stand with the Lord. Judgment follows and 
three thousand fell by the sword. They did not spare their 
nearest relations. (Deut. xxxili:9.) Besides this, the people 
were plagued. (Verse 35.) Moses returned to the Lord. 
But he failed in his proposition. “None of them can by any 
means redeem his brother, nor give unto God a ransom for 
him.” (Psa. xlix:7.) Yet Moses’ willingness to be blotted 
out of the Book foreshadows Him who alone could do the 
atoning work. He offered himself without spot unto God, 
(Heb. ix:14) and gave His life a ransom for many. He died 
for that nation. (John xi:51, 52.) 


5. Moses’ Intercession and its Results. 


Chapter XXXIII-XXXIV:35. 
CHAPTER XXXII. 


Repentance and Intercession. 


The Word of the Lord and the People’s Repentance. vy. 1-6. 
The Tabernacle without the Camp. v. 7. 

Moses Enters the Tabernacle. v. 8-11. 

Moses’ Prayer and Jehovah’s Answers. v. 12-17. 

Moses’ Request. v. 18-23. 


Or im 0 te 


The words of the Lord, with which this chapter begins, 
reveal Him as the covenant-keeping Jehovah. He remembers 
His covenant, though they are a stiff-necked people. Yet 
He is a holy God and if He were to be in their midst they 
would be consumed. They had to take the place in self- 
judgment and acknowledge their guilt and separation from 
the Holy One. They were obedient to this demand and 


174 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


stripped themselves of their ornaments. In this place they 
had taken the Lord could show them mercy. 

The word ‘“‘tabernacle”’ here in this chapter means “tent”’ 
and of course is not the real tabernacle, for that had not yet 
been erected. It was a tent which had been used as a place 
of worship. It now had to occupy a place outside of the 
camp. All who wanted to seek the Lord had to go to the 
“tent of meeting,” outside of the camp. See Hebrews xiii:13. 
Christ and His gospel is now rejected; the professing people 
of God are in rebellion and apostasy; the call, therefore, is 
to go outside.of the camp, bearing His reproach. Christ 
occupies this place in Laodicea, the phase of Christian pro- 
fession in these last days. He is outside, standing at the door 
and knocking. And there, “outside of the camp,” the Lord 
spake unto Moses, as a man speaketh unto his friend. 
Again he represents Christ as mediator, only our mediator 
is higher than Moses. And through Christ we have access 
into his presence. “Outside of the camp” leads to the closest 
communion with Himself. The Lord talked to Moses out of 
the cloud and then Moses turned again into the camp. 
Joshua remained in the tabernacle and did not enter the 
camp. All is written for our learning. Though we go ‘“‘out- 
side of the camp” yet we have a solemn duty and responsi- 
bility towards those in the camp. May we discharge these. 

Moses’ prayer pleads now Grace, and upon that the Holy 
One answers graciously. But His face Moses could not see. 
Read and compare with John 1:18 and xiv:9. 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 
The Result: The Second Covenant and the Glory. 


The Command to Hew Two Tables of Stone. v. 1-4. 
The Proclamation of Jehovah. v. 5-7. 

Moses’ Worship and Prayer. v. 8-9. 

The Covenant Restated. v. 10-26. 

The Second Tables Written. v. 27-28. 

The Glory upon the Face of Moses. v. 29-35. 


D> Or & 09 TO eH 


The command is given to Moses to hew two tables of stone 
like the first, which Jehovah Himself had hewn and which 
were broken by Moses. The first were hewn of one stone; 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 175 


the second of two stones. Moses was permitted to furnish 
the material for the second tables, while the Lord had fur- 
nished it for the first. The second tables were given as the 
result of the intercession of Moses. But God wrote the 
words on the second tables of stones as He had done on the 
first. 

The manifestation of Jehovah recorded in this chapter is 
deeply interesting. In chapter xxxiii:21-23 the Lord prom- 
ised Moses a vision. This is now fulfilled. Jehovah came 
down from heaven in a cloud and stood with him there; He 
proclaimed the name of Jehovah. This reminds us of Exo- 
dus xix:24. What Moses saw is not stated. The Lord had 
come down to him and the descended Lord made known the 
name of the Lord. It is a most blessed hint on the incarna- 
tion of Jehovah and the manifestation of the name of Jehovah 
through Him, who is Jehovah. “For the law was given by 
Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.” (John 
i:17.) The descended Lord makes known Grace, but also 
divine righteousness. The full manifestation of Grace could 
not be then made known; only in the cross of Christ, where 
God’s righteousness is revealed, grace shines forth in all its 
marvelous glory. In the Gospel of Jesus Christ the justifi- 
cation of the ungodly is announced as well as the glorious 
inheritance of eternity for justified believers. Of this the law 
had nothing to say, for it could not give righteousness and 
God never meant to give to man eternal glory by keeping 
the commandments. 

Moses worshipped and bowed his head toward the earth. 
His prayer to Jehovah is that He might come among them. 
He confessed the sinful condition of the people and asks for 
pardon. He includes himself. In chapter xxxiii:5 Jehovah 
called the people stiff-necked. Moses then did not use this 
word; but here when Jehovah speaks of Grace he pleads this 
charge of Jehovah for forgiveness and mercy. This is a 
blessed foreshadowing of the Gospel of Grace. But there is 
another lesson here. Moses realizes that the presence of 
Jehovah who had uttered such gracious words, if He were 
among them, would result in their forgiveness. The Holy 


176 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


One of Israel will some day be in the midst of His earthly 
people, then He will forgive their sins and remember them 
no more, and they will be His inheritance. 

In the statements of the renewed covenant the separation 
of the people from the inhabitants of Canaan is made prom- 
inent. They were to have nothing to do with the impure and 
abominable idolatries of these nations. He called His people 
unto holiness. Moreover, they were to destroy their altars, 
their images and their groves. The word groves is “Ash- 
erah.” It was an image used for the most lascivious prac- 
tices, commonly known as the phallic worship. It flourished 
among all the ancient nations, but was especially used by 
the Canaanites. When Israel later fell in with these abom- 
inations, the judgment fell upon them. The commandments 
concerning the feasts, the Sabbath, and the Firstfruits are 
repeated. 

The conclusion of this chapter is used in 2 Cor. iii. 

When Moses was on the mountain the first time to receive 
the first tables of stone no glory was seen on his face, because 
the covenant was altogether legal and not a ray of glory 
can come from that. The second time, because grace and 
mercy was mingled with it, glory shines from the mediator’s 
face. But they could not look upon that glory. He had to 
cover his face with a vail. Thus Grace and Glory is covered 
in the Law. This vail is done away in Christ. In Him Grace 
and Glory in the most perfect splendor shine forth. And it is 
a Glory which does not wane, but increases. “But we all 
with open face beholding as in a glass the Glory of the Lord, 
are changed into the same image from Glory to Glory, even 
as by the Spirit of the Lord.” (2 Cor. iii:18.) 

Of Israel it is written, “But their minds were blinded, for 
until this day remaineth the same vail untaken away in the 
reading of the Old Testament, which vail is done away in 
Christ. But even unto this day, when Moses is read, the 
vail is upon their hearts. Nevertheless, when it shall turn 
unto the Lord, the vail shall be taken away.” (2 Cor. iii: 
14-16.) And that glorious day is coming, when they will 
believe. 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 177 


6. The Building of the Tabernacle. 


Chapter XXXV-XXXIX:43. 
CHAPTER XXXV. 


The Commandments Concerning the Tabernacle Remembered and 
the Offerings. 


. The Sabbath Law Emphasized. v. 1-3. 

The Offerings Restated. v. 4-10. 

. The Tabernacle and its Furniture Restated. v. 11-19. 
. The Offerings Given. v. 20-29. 

. The Workmen and Teachers. v. 80-35. 


Orme 09 tO = 


It is interesting to review the events and steps which lead 
to this consummation in Exodus, the setting up of the 
tabernacle. After Jehovah had redeemed His people and led 
them through the wilderness to Mount Sinai, dealing with 
them in Grace, the Law covenant was made. It was broken 
by them in their rebellion and idolatry. Intercession and 
another covenant followed, mingled with Grace. And now 
there is obedience and the tabernacle is put up. And when 
it was finished the Glory filled the place, showing that God 
was well pleased. Jehovah dwelt there with His people. In 
New Testament times, the true Church is His dwelling place, 
“an habitation of God through the Spirit.”” When the age 
to come, the millennium is reached, He will again dwell! in 
the midst of Israel and manifest His visible glory in Jeru- 
salem and above the city. Then comes eternity when God 
is all in all. ‘And I heard a great voice out of heaven say- 
ing, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and He will 
dwell with them.” (Rev. xxi:3.) 

The Sabbath rest is once more mentioned. This is not a 
vain repetition, nor is it the mark of imperfection, or the work 
of different writers, as the critical school has claimed. Rest 
precedes the work, not work precedes the rest. This is the 
blessed spiritual principle. This cannot be under the Law, 
but it is blessedly so under Grace. We rest in Him, and He 
gives us so that we can labor and give back to Him. 

All the details commanded by Jehovah concerning the 
tabernacle are repeated and also the material to be fur- 


178 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


nished by the people in free will offerings. How needful was 
the repetition! He had made the specifications show what 
they were to bring, as He has shown in His Word the service 
and work He expects of His people. And then we behold 
their willing service. Men and women came and brought 
their gifts. How it must have refreshed His heart. The 
women are prominently mentioned. The willing heart and 
the cheerful giver are also seen in the New Testament. When 
in the future the day of Christ’s power dawns (His second 
coming) His earthly people, Israel, will be willing to bring 
their all to His feet: ‘““Thy people shall be willing in the day 
of Thy power.” (Psa. ex:3.) Then they will build that 
great and glorious Millennial Temple, the house of prayer 
for all nations. 

Once more the two leading workmen are mentioned by 
name and the fact is made known that the Spirit of God 
fitted them for the work. But something is added here 
which we do not find in chapter xxxi, “And He hath put in 
his heart that he may teach, both he and Aholiab, the son of 
Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan.’ Besides having the 
spirit of wisdom they also had the gift of teaching, to pass on 
to others what they had learned. 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 
The Work Carried Out. 


The Work Begun. v. 1-4. 

The Over-supply in the Offerings. v. 5-7. 

The Curtains. v. 8-13. 

The Covering of the Tent. v. 14-19. 

The Boards and the Sockets of Silver. v. 20-30. 
The Bars. v. 31-34. 

The Vail and the Hanging for the Door. v. 35-38. 


SED Or 09 tO 


In the abundant offerings, more than was needed, we see 
the results of the grace of God. Every morning the offerings 
were presented. So large was the supply that they had to 
be restrained. What a contrast with the professing people of 
God in our days! How little self-sacrifice and self-denial; 
how little willingness to spend and be spent. The methods 
used to help along the work of the Lord, such as collections 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 179 


from unbelievers, are condemned by the word of God. The 
willingness of the people was the fruit of the spirit of God. 
The different curtains and coverings, boards and bars and 
the vail and hanging were prepared. In chapter xxx we saw 
God began with that which is within; the building began 
with the outside things. 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


The Ark, the Table, the Candlestick and the Incense Altar, the Oil 
and Incense. 


The Ark, made by Bezaleel. v. 1-9. 
The Table of Shittim Wood. v. 10-16. 
The Candlestick. v. 17-24. 

The Incense Altar. vy. 25-28. 

The Oil and Incense. v. 29. 


SEES SORE 


The word of Jehovah is literally carried out, because the 
Holy Spirit was in the workmen. Compare verses 1-9 with 
xxv :10-22; verses 10-16 with xxv:23-30; verses 17-24 with 
xxv :31-40; verses 25-28 with xxx:1-10; verse 29 with xxx: 
22-38. Notice that the ark is mentioned especially as the 
work of Bezaleel. 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 
The Burnt Offering Altar, the Laver, the Court and the Metals Used. 


1. The Altar of Burnt Offering. v. 1-7. 
2. The Laver. v.8. 

3. The Court. v. 9-20. 

4. The Amount of Metal Used. v. 21-31. 


The pattern as previously given is closely followed and 
everything done according to the divine command. Nothing 
was left in the work to the choice of the workmen. They 
had the pattern and the spirit of God gave the power to 
carry it out. Thus God expects us to work and serve after 
His own pattern in the power of the indwelling Spirit. He 
will eventually carry out all His revealed plans and pur- 
poses concerning this earth. Women furnished the material 
for the laver. They gave their looking glasses, which were 
of shining metal. (See Job xxxvii:18.) They were pious 
women of Israel who gave willingly what must have been a 


180 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


costly possession. They assembled at the door of the taber- 
nacle. The Chaldean paraphrase is, “Of the mirrors of the 
women, which came to pray at the door of the Tabernacle.” 

Interesting is the estimate of the amount of metal used. 
Gold occupies the first place: 29 talents and 730 shekels 
(about $657,975). Silver was given by every male a half of 
a shekel (the atonement money). The number of men from 
20 years and upward was 603,550; so they gave 301,775 
shekels of silver. Then there was the brass (copper). Pre- 
cious metals, like gold and silver, were plentiful in Egypt, 
which had immense gold mines. 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 
The Priestly Garments. The Work Finished. 


The Material Used. v.1. 

The Ephod. v. 2-7. 

The Breastplate. v. 8-21. 

The Robe, the Bells and Pomegranate. v. 22-26. 
The Coats. v. 27-29. 

The Holy Crown. v. 30-81. 

The Work Finished. v. 32-43. 


SG Sie Cb 


Allis done “‘as the Lord commanded.” This expression is 
used seven times in chapter xxxix. (Verses 1, 5, 7, 21, 26, 
29, 31.) It is again repeated exactly seven times in chapter 
xl, the last chapter of Exodus. (Verses 19, 21, 23, 25, 27, 
29, 32.) Seven is the number of perfection and completion. 
All had been well done and Jehovah was pleased and could 
own the work, of which He was the originator. Blue, purple 
and scarlet, the colors of heaven, royalty and blood, are given 
in the preparation of the holy garments. It tells once more 
of Him who is the priest. The order is significant. The heay- 
enly color comes first, for He came from heaven’s glory. The 
kingly color next; He manifested Himself in His kingly 
power, and the blood color last, He died and shed His blood. 
Urim and Thummim are not mentioned in the list, for they 
could not be made. 

The work was finished and all presented to Moses for 
inspection. The principal parts are mentioned once more. 
With what joy Moses must have looked upon the ark, the 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 181 


curtains, the boards, the altars, the laver and the garments 
of Beauty and Glory. There was no flaw in anything. With 
what liberality and zeal the great work had been accom- 
plished. Then Moses blessed the children of Israel. 


7. The Tabernacle Set Up. The Finished Work and the 
Glory. Chapter XL. 


CHAPTER XL. 


Jehovah Gives the Directions. v. 1-15. 

Moses’ Obedience. v. 16. 

The Tabernacle Set Up. v. 17-19. 

The Ark Brought in. v. 20-21. 

The Furniture Placed. The Offerings Brought. v. 22-29. 
The Laver and the Court. v. 30-33. 

The Glory of the Lord Filled the Tabernacle. v. 34-38. 


NAn Se Wrore 


While the people had offered and the chosen workmen 
labored in the production of the tabernacle, the Lord had 
not spoken. He looked upon His people as they carried out 
His commands. But after Moses had blessed them, then 
the Lord spoke and commanded the setting up of the taber- 
nacle on the first day of the first month. He directs the plac- 
ing of the different pieces of furniture. The table with the 
shewbread was to be arranged, water to be put into the laver, 
the anointing of all was to follow, the priests to be washed, 
clothed and anointed. All was carried out again. Moses did 
according to all the Lord commanded him. The build- 
ing of the tabernacle and all the work connected with it 
occupied not quite six months. The tabernacle was reared 
in the first month in the second year on the first day of the 
month. The setting up began with the sockets, in which the 
boards were placed. The testimony was put into the ark 
(the tables of stones). Then after the ark had been brought 
in, Moses hung the curtain. The holy part of the tabernacle 
was next arranged. The table was placed on the right side 
towards the north, and the shewbread was laid upon it. Of 
all this we shall read in Leviticus, where the typical meaning 
will be pointed out. The altar of burnt offering was placed 
before the door of the dwelling of the tabernacle and the 


182 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


laver between the tabernacle and the altar. Moses burned 
sweet incense and offered the burnt offering and meat offer- 
ing. 

Ae Moses had looked upon all that had been done, he 
was well pleased and blessed the people (xxxix:43). When 
Jehovah looked upon the finished work and saw that all was 
according to His heart, He was well pleased. His approval 
was witnessed to by the cloud, which covered the tabernacle, 
and His Glory filled the place. He entered in to take pos- 
session of it. Moses had to stand back; He could no longer 
go into the place where Jehovah dwelt. 

While here the cloud covered all and the Glory filled the 
whole place, later the cloud drew back into the most holy 
place to dwell above the outspread wings of the cherubim. 
Moses and the priests could then enter the holy place with- 
out coming in touch with the sign of Jehovah’s presence, 
which was hidden from buman gaze by the curtain of the 
Holy of Holies. 

As long as the cloud rested upon the tabernacle the children 
of Israel remained in camp; when it moved, they continued 
their journey. This had a blessed meaning for the people of 
God and has its lessons for us. The cloud in its movements 
made known Jehovah’s will. We have no such external sign 
to declare the will of God to us. We have the internal pres- 
ence of the Holy Spirit. And He guides us through His word, 
which we must consult for direction and guidance. All this 
we shall find fully stated in Num. ix:15-23; when we reach 
that “‘wilderness book”? we hope to point out some of its 
lessons. 

We state once more the fact that Exodus begins with a 
groan and the first part ends with the song of redemption. 
The second part begins with Israel’s wilderness wandering 
and ends after the work was finished with the Glory of the 
Lord filling the tabernacle. The Lord Jesus Christ and His 
word is foreshadowed in the entire book. Glory is the great 
goal of all He has done. He has reached down and set the 
miserable slaves of sin and Satan free; He changes our groans 
into songs of victory, because He, the Lamb of God, shed 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 183 


His blood. He guides His people home. Glory will yet 
cover Zion, the place of His rest. In the day of His glorious 
manifestation, when He appears in Glory and Majesty as 
the King of Kings, the Glory cloud will be seen again in the 
midst of the redeemed Israel (Isa. iv:4-6). And in all eternity, 
the ages to come, His glory will be with the redeemed and 
the redeemed will share His glory. 

“And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, 
the tabernacle of God is with men, and He will dwell with 
them, and they shall be His people, and God himself shall be 
with them, and be their God. And God shall wipe away all 
tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, 
neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more 
pain: for the former things are passed away.” (Rev. xxi:3, 4.) 


184 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


APPENDIX A 
THE ATONEMENT MONEY.* 
Exodus XXX:11-16. 


The word silver in the Hebrew is frequently translated 
Money. It was indeed, the precious metal ordinarily in use, 
in all transactions of buying and selling; and even at this 
day, in many countries, it is the current money of the mer- 
chant. Francs, dollars, thalers, scudi, are all coins of silver; 
and mercantile transactions are generally calculated in one 
or other of these coins, in most of the countries of Europe, 
and indeed of the world. 

We have two memorable instances in Scripture, where life 
was bartered for silver. Joseph for twenty, and the Son of 
God for thirty pieces. The idea therefore, of price or value, 
especially attaches to this metal. It ranks also with us, as 
one of the precious metals; and though not displaying the 
brilliant glory of the gold, it is especially beautiful, by 
reason of its soft purity and unsullied whiteness; and like 
the gold, it corrodes not, and wastes not in the fining pot, 
though subjected to the intense heat of the furnace. 

The silver, used in the construction of the tabernacle, was 
all derived from the Atonement money. 

The whole range of God’s truth rests upon two great 
verities:—the Lord Jesus, the Son of God, the Son of Man 
—and His work of atonement on the cross. Throughout the 
history of God’s ancient people, type after type, and shadow 
upon shadow, reiterated the absolute necessity of atonement. 
And while the Law prescribed commandments, to obey 
which, Israel fatally pledged themselves, it at the same time, 
contained abundant ritual observances, which testified to 
man’s incapability and need, and prophesied of One, who 
while they were yet without strength, should, in due time, die 
for the ungodly. Asacovenant of works, it was a ministration 


*The Tabernacle, Priesthood and the Offerings. By Henry W. Soltau. 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 185 


of death. But to one who was really a child of Abraham, it 
must have shone out, like the face of Moses, with a prophetic 
glory; and have pointed onwards to the Lamb of God; in 
whom all the shadows of good things to come passed into 
substance. 

This type before us, of the atonement-money, preached a 
very clear and blessed Gospel. It told out the great truth, 
that birth in the flesh availed nothing. An Israelite might 
trace up, in unbroken succession, his descent from Abraham, 
or from one of Jacob’s sons. Still, that sufficed him not, if 
he desired to be entered on the roll as one of God’s soldiers 
and servants. The Jews, in the time of the Lord, could say, 
“We be Abraham’s seed”; and the Samaritan sinner claimed 
Jacob as her father. But they were captives of the devil, and 
of fleshly lusts; and their human pedigree had not raised 
them out of the dominion of sin. God had therefore enjoined 
that, whenever Israel were numbered as His people, every 
man must give a ransom for his soul. The price was fixed 
by God himself. Each man, whether poor or rich, must 
bring the same. One could not pay for another; but every 
one must tender his own ransom-money, of pure silver, and 
of perfect weight. “Half a shekel, after the shekel of the 
sanctuary, (a shekel is twenty gerahs) a half-shekel shall be 
the offering of the Lord.” (Exod. xxx:13.) Other Gospel 
truths here shine out. When the question came to be one of 
ransom, the poor and the rich, the foolish and the wise, the 
ignorant and the learned, the immoral and the moral, stood 
on the same level. Each person was estimated by God at 
the same price. He proved Himself no respecter of persons. 
And so it is still. The third chapter of the Epistle to the 
Romans defines the state of every one in the whole world, 
and levels the way for the Gospel. John the Baptist prepared 
the way of the Lord by his voice, calling all to repentance, 
declaring all to be in one condition, needing change of heart. 
And the Lord Jesus began to speak of the great salvation to 
hearts thus prepared. The chapter above referred to makes 
the path straight for the proclamation of justification through 
faith in Christ, by pronouncing that all are under sin; that 


186 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


every mouth must be silent; that all the world is guilty before 
God; and that there is no difference between the religious 
Jew, and the irreligious Gentile: for, “all have sinned, and 
come short of the glory of God.” 

Another truth enunciated in this type is, that salvation 
must be an individual, personal matter; between the soul 
and God. Every man has to bring his own half-shekel. One 
of the devices of Satan at the present day—and it is spread 
far and wide—is the way in which he obscures this truth, by 
inducing whole communities to believe they are Christians; 
made such, either by baptism, or by some formal profession 
of religiousness; and placing, in the lips of thousands, “Our 
Saviour,” and “Our Father’; and thus beguiling them into 
the thought that they are included in a general redemption 
of mankind, which affects the whole human race. Con- 
stantly, therefore, in speaking to persons, we find the reply: 
O yes, we are all sinners: and Christ has died for us all. 

Each individual Israelite had to present himself to the 
priest, bringing with him his own piece of money as a ran- 
som; and his name would then be entered in God’s book. 
The Lord Jesus, in the 6th of John, says: “Except ye eat 
the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink His blood, ye have no 
life in you.” Eating and drinking are actions which one 
cannot perform for another. The food, taken into the mouth, 
becomes one’s own, and ministers strength and nourishment 
to the body. So, the death of Christ must be appropriated 
by each to himself. The soul has to say, My Saviour; My 
Lord; My God. I have been crucified with Christ. Christ 
loved me, and gave Himself for me. Just as assuredly as the 
Israelite of old had to eat the manna he had collected for 
his own sustenance; or according to his eating, to make his 
count for the lamb. 

The half-shekel was to be of silver; the unalloyed, un- 
adulterated metal. Three things are probably here presented 
to us in type: the Lord Jesus as God—as the pure and spot- 
less One—and as giving His life a ransom for many. The 
silver, being a solid, imperishable precious metal, may have 
this first aspect: its chaste whiteness representing the sec- 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 187 


ond; and its being ordinarily employed as money or price, 
may point out its fitness as a type of the third. 

The weight was also defined by God:—‘the shekel of the 
sanctuary”; kept as a standard in the tabernacle; and per- 
haps bearing some stamp or inscription to authenticate it. 
Its weight was twenty gerahs. The half-shekel, brought by 
each man who desired to be numbered, was to be compared 
with this. God kept the just weight and the just balance; 
and his priest would neither take dross instead of silver, nor 
receive less weight of the precious metal than was required 
by the Lord. With confidence the true-hearted Israelite 
would ring out the silver sound, from his half-shekel before 
the priest: with confidence would he see it put into the 
balance. And, in the blessed antitype, with confidence does 
the believer sound out, in the ears of God, and of the great 
High Priest of His sanctuary, his full dependence on Christ 
and His precious blood. He knows that that price is up to 
the full estimate demanded by God. He has one standard 
of perfection and purity, against which He weighs the hearts, 
spirits, and actions of men. Everything short of this stand- 
ard, every one who fails to reach this sterling value, will be 
condemned; like the Babylonian prince, who was weighed 
in the balances, and found wanting. To come short of the 
glory of God, is to be in the distance and darkness of corrup- 
tion and death. How wondrous the grace, which has pro- 
vided One, in whom we are raised from the depth of human 
misery, degradation and ruin, to the height of the throne 
and glory of the Most High! How passing knowledge, that 
love of God, which has not hesitated to plunge into judgment 
and wrath, His only-begotten Son, and to shed the blood of 
Christ like water, in order to redeem, from filthiness and sin, 
the worthless and the vile; and to number them among the 
hosts of light and glory, in the courts above! 

There is a manifest allusion to the atonement-money in 
1 Peter i:18: ‘‘Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not 
redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from 
your vain conversation, received by tradition from your 
fathers; but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb 


188 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


without blemish and without spot.” An allusion, by way of 
contrast. What men consider precious metals, and free from 
impurity and corrosion, God calls “perishable” and “cor- 
ruptible.”’ He says that gold and silver “canker” and “rust.” 

The man who amasses wealth is an object of praise and 
envy. “Men will praise thee when thou doest well to thy- 
self.” (Psa. xlix:18.) But in this epistle, gain is denomi- 
nated filthy lucre. The redemption, which God has paid for 
us, is no amount of corruptible things, as silver and gold. 
Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof suf- 
ficient for a burnt-offering. Nothing less than the precious 
blood of Christ would avail. God has valued our salvation 
at no less cost, than the pouring out of His soul unto death. 

The Hebrew word, from which the words ransom and 
atonement are derived, has a variety of senses all bearing on 
the same truth. Thus, we find the word includes the thought 
of covering over our sin; as a covering of pitch covers over 
the wood on which it is spread. (Gen. vi:14.) 

The blood of atonement blots out the page of sin, and 
hides it from the eye of God. The secret sins, which have 
stood out in their glaring evil, in the light of His countenance, 
are hidden by the blood sprinkled on the mercy-seat. It 
also means, to appease or pacify. Thus Jacob sent a present 
to (atone or) appease his brother Esau. (Gen. xxxii:20.) 
“The wrath of a king is as messengers of death: but a wise 
man will (atone or) pacify it.” (Prov. xvi:14.) ‘That thou 
mayest remember, and be confounded, and never open thy 
mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am (atoned 
or) pacified towards thee.” (Ezek. xvi:63.) 

This is the sense of the word in the New Testament— 
propitiation; God’s wrath being appeased in Christ through 
the shedding of His blood. (1 John ii:2; and iv:10.) 

Pardon and forgiveness are included in the word. (Deut. 
xxi:8), “The blood shall be (atoned, or) forgiven them.” 

Hezekiah prayed, “The good Lord (atone, or) pardon 
every one.” (2 Chron. xxx:18.) Also, to reconcile. 

“A sin-offering brought in (to atone, or) to reconcile 
withal, in the holy place.” (Lev. vi:30.) 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 189 


“And when He hath made an end of (atoning, or) recon- 
ciling the holy place.” (Lev. xvi:20.) 

“Poured the blood at the bottom of the altar, and sancti- 
fied it, to make (atonement, or) reconciliation upon it.” 
(Lev. viii:15.) 

“So shall ye (atone, or) reconcile the house.” (Ezek. xlv: 
20; also 15 and 17.) 

In the New Testament also, the word atonement is syn- 
onymous with reconciliation. 

“To make reconciliation for the sins of the people. 
(Heb. 11:17.) 

“We have now received the atonement.”’ (Rom. v:11. 
Margin—Reconciliation.) 

“Reconciling of the world.” (Rom. xi:15.) 

“That he might reconcile both unto God in one body by 
the cross.” (Eph. 11:16.) 

“By Him, to reconcile all things to Himself.” (Col. 1:20.) 

To put off, or expiate—‘Mischief shall fall upon thee; 
thou shalt not be able to put it off.” (Margin—Expiate. 
Isa. xlvii:11.) 

To disannul.—‘ Your covenant with death shall be dis- 
annulled.” (Isa. xxviii:18.) 

Ransom, or, satisfaction.‘ Deliver him from going down 
into the pit: I have found a ransom.”’ (Job xxxiii:24.) 

‘A great ransom cannot deliver thee.” (Job xxxvi:18.) 

“Nor give to God a ransom for him.” (Psa. xlix:7.) 

Satisfaction.—‘ Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of 
a murderer.” (Num. xxxv:31.) 

In the New Testament.—‘To give His life a ransom for 
many.” (Matt. xx:28; Mark x:45.) 

Lastly: To purge or cleanse.—‘Purge away our sins, for 
Thy name’s sake.” (Psa. Ixxxix:9.) 

“By mercy and truth, iniquity is purged.” (Prov. xvi:6.) 

“This iniquity shall not be purged.” (Isa. xxii:14.) 

“By this, therefore, shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged.” 
(Isa. xxvii:9.) 

“The land cannot be cleansed of the blood.” (Num. 


XXxV :33.) 


190 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


We shall perceive, from these various quotations, that the 
same Hebrew word: translated Atonement, signifies also, 
Covering over; Appeasing; Forgiveness; Reconciliation; 
Expiation; Disannulling; Ransom or Redemption; Satis- 
faction; and Cleansing. 

One sense of owr word Atonement is, At-one-ment; two 
opposing parties being brought together in agreement as one. 
And the means whereby this is effected, the payment of a 
price, ransom or satisfaction. So, this beautiful type of the 
half-shekel of silver, shadows forth the precious blood of 
Christ, as the redemption price provided by God. And, 
when the sinner estimates its all-sufficient value in the pres- 
ence of God, he answers the action of the Israelite in paying 
down the silver half-shekel; as it is beautifully expressed in 
1 Pet. ii:7: “Unto you which believe, He is precious’’; or, 
as it might be rendered, “‘He is the preciousness”’; your full 
satisfaction, and value also before God. 

We have also another important aspect of truth portrayed 
in this type—viz.: that redemption brings us to, and fits us 
for God. The Israelite, who paid his ransom-money, was 
numbered as a soldier and a servant for God. A place was 
assigned him in the battlefield; and he had his position in 
the camp, appointed with reference to the tabernacle, the 
dwelling-place of God in the midst of the hosts. From hence- 
forth Jehovah was his Leader, his Lord, his King. In like 
manner, the believer is redeemed to God, by the blood of 
Christ, from the world, and from slavery to sin and Satan; 
that he may be a soldier and a servant of the Most High; 
to be led, guided, and sustained by Him, who has called him 
out of darkness, into His marvellous light. 

Two other words deserve our notice in this passage. 
(Exod. xxx:13, 14.) “Every one that passeth among them 
that are numbered.” And the word “offering,” 13-15. The 
allusion, in 13, 14, is to the sheep passing under the rod of the 
shepherd, as he numbers them. (Ezek. xx:37.) “I will 
cause you to pass under the rod: and I will bring you into 
the bond of the covenant.” The priest took the place of a 
shepherd, counting the sheep of God’s hand. And as the 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 191 


true mark of the sheep came under his eye, in the ransom- 
money offered by each, he entered each in the book of the 
covenant. So the good Shepherd has laid down His life for 
the sheep; and they are entered in the Lamb’s book of life, 
because the atonement-price has been paid for each. 

The word Offering is a peculiar word in the Hebrew, sig- 
nifying something that is lifted off the ground and presented 
on high; and is the word translated heave-offering. All the 
various offerings brought by the Israelites, as contributions 
for forming the tabernacle, and enumerated (Exod. xxv :2~7) 
are called heave-offerings. This atonement-money was a 
peculiar piece of silver, separated off to God, and lifted, as it 
were, from the earth, with the special object of being paid 
into His treasury, as a ransom for the soul. So has the Lord 
Jesus been lifted up, first on the cross, to pour out His blood 
a ransom for many; and secondly, He has been exalted, 
and made very high, “to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to 
give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins.” (Acts 
v:31.) 

This ordinance was transgressed by David, as related in 
2 Sam. xxiv, 1 Chron. xxi. Israel had settled down in 
self-contentedness and pride; David their king and shepherd, 
himself drinking into the same spirit. Satan, by God’s per- 
mission, was allowed to tempt the king, and provoke him, 
by whisperings of vanity and self-exaltation, to number 
Israel. The desire in David’s heart was, not that God might 
be glorified and His promise made manifest, in the vast 
increase of His people; but that he, the king, might congratu- 
late himself on the number of his subjects. “Number ye 
the people, that I may know.” “Bring the number of 
them to me, that I may know it.” Joab, to whom the com- 
mand was given, though himself an ambitious worldly- 
minded man, yet was keen-sighted enough to perceive that 
this desire of his master was not of God. He even had some 
insight into David’s sin. He looked upon Israel as a people 
belonging to Jehovah; and on David, as committing a tres- 
pass in having them numbered for himself. But, like all 
unbelievers, though he could point out the fault, he was not 


192 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


able to direct David to the remedy. He did not allude to 
the atonement-money. 

One result of this numbering was that even cities of the 
Hivites, and the stronghold of Tyre, were included in the 
tale; which could never have been the case had the silver 
half-shekel been required. At the present day, unconverted 
inhabitants of earth are too often classed as of the Church 
of God, by reason of the same neglect, viz.: that they are 
not required to confess openly their confidence in the precious 
blood of Christ, before being reckoned among the hosts of 
God. 

David’s heart soon smote him after the numbering was 
completed; he fully confessed his own sin and folly; he at once 
cast himself on the mercies of God for pardon, and preferred 
being dealt with in chastisement immediately from the Lord 
rather than fall into the hands of men. Accordingly, the 
plague (which had already been threatened, in Exod. xxx:12) 
broke out amongst the people; and the destroyer stayed not 
his hand until the Lord, listening to the humiliation of David, 
and appeased by the burnt-offering, presented at the thresh- 
ing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite, said—“‘It is enough.”” David 
in his intercession, manifests a soul restored to the Lord; 
and proves that he has discovered his former error; for he 
speaks of Israel as sheep, and as the people of the Lord; 
whereas he had numbered them as fighting-men, and for 
his own glory. 

Also the price of the spot for the altar is paid in shekels of 
silver. There may be some reference in this to the atonement- 
money. The apparent discrepancy between the fifty shekels, 
mentioned as the purchase-money in 2 Sam. xxiv:24, and 
the six hundred shekels of gold in 1 Chron. xxi:25, may be 
reconciled on the supposition that the former money was paid 
for the mere spot on which the altar itself was erected; 
whereas the latter was the purchase-money for the whole 
place of the threshing-floor. 

The blessed words—it is enough—were again, in principle, 
uttered by Jehovah from heaven, when He raised the Lord 
Jesus from the dead. Satisfaction had been completely made: 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 193 


the sword of vengeance had been buried in the heart of God’s 
own Son; the precious blood had been poured out; the full 
redemption-price had been rendered; and Jesus was raised 
from the dead; at once the proof of the perfect value of His 
own death, and to receive the due reward of His loving faith- 
ful obedience. “It is enough” may be a fitting superscrip- 
tion for the half-shekel ransom-money. 

It appears that the question asked of Peter, (Matt. xvii:24) 
“Does not your master pay tribute?” (or, according to the 
margin, the didrachma) had reference to this ransom-money. 
Probably the payment, which had been instituted in Exod. 
xxx, of a half-shekel, when the Israelites were numbered, had 
in course of time been converted by the Jewish rulers into a 
kind of poll-tax, payable for the uses of the temple. Peter, 
with his usual readiness, or rather rashness, answered the 
question in the affirmative, without referring, as he should 
have done, to the Lord Himself for a reply. And when he 
was come into the house, Jesus anticipated his request for 
the ransom-money, (to the payment of which he had just 
committed the Lord) by putting the question, ““What think- 
est thou, Simon, of whom do the kings of the earth take cus- 
tom or tribute? of their own children, or of strangers?” 
The Lord thus addresses him as Simon, instead of Peter. 
The Apostle had relapsed into the natural man; and Jesus 
uses the name, which Peter had received from his earthly 
parents, instead of the new name, given him on his con- 
fession of faith. 

Peter had forgotten the late glorious scene of the Trans- 
figuration, when the voice had sounded from the excellent 
glory, “This is my beloved Son: hear ye Him”; and he had 
committed two errors. Instead of harkening to Jesus, and 
learning of Him, he had acted on his own self-confident 
judgment; and instead of owning the Lord as the Son of God, 
he had lowered Him down to the position of a stranger, or 
captive, from whom a ransom was demanded by God. 

This serves to explain the Lord’s question quoted above. 
Peter replies to it—to his own condemnation—“‘Of strangers.” 
Jesus saith unto him, ‘Then are the children free.” Jesus 


194 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


came to declare the Father. “‘He that hath seen me, hath seen 
the Father.” He had come to redeem them that were under 
the law; that those who believed on Him might receive the 
adoption of sons. Liberty of sonship, and not the bondage 
of servantship, not the slavery of bondmen confined under 
rigid commandments, was the liberty that Christ came to 
proclaim. The law, even in its type of the atonement-money, 
did not intimate the blessing of sonship. Grace and truth, 
which came by Jesus Christ, placed the believer in the free- 
dom of new birth; as many as received Christ, were born of 
God. But Peter had not yet received the spirit of sonship. 
The Holy Ghost had not yet been sent from the risen Christ; 
and thus the apostle mingled up and confounded adoption and 
bondage, and lowered the Son down to the position of a 
stranger. 

This is an instructive lesson to our souls; for the spirit of 
bondage is constantly working within us. It is of the flesh, 
of nature. It springs from Simon, the son of Jonas, instead 
of from Peter, a child of God. If we have known God, or 
rather, are known of God, we are no longer aliens or strangers, 
but children and heirs; and the spirit of slavery cannot 
dwell with the spirit of the Son. Law and grace can never 
be united. 

The Lord Jesus, having claimed for Himself and Peter the 
liberty of children, adds: “Notwithstanding, lest we should 
offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast a hook, and take up 
the fish that first cometh up; and when thou hast opened his 
mouth, thou shalt find a piece of money (a stater), that take 
and give unto them for me, and thee.” Thus, one piece of 
silver, brought up from the depth of the sea, was paid into 
God’s treasury, in which piece Jesus and Peter were both 
included. There seems to be a wonderful significance in this. 
The sea yielded up the precious ransom-money. The depths, 
with their billows and waves of wrath and death, were, so 
to speak, the birth-place of atonement. Jesus rose not alone, 
but inseparably linked on with His Chureh—one with Him 
in all His own preciousness—presented in Him to God in 
glory—laid up and hidden in God’s treasury above. 


THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 195 


Whatever God’s demand against Peter, the blessed Lord 
was involved in the same demand: Peter’s responsibility 
became Christ’s—‘‘for me and thee’ —and thus is Jesus now 
in the presence of God for us, to answer every liability, to 
render payment in the full for all our infirmities and sins, to 
save, to the very end, all that come unto God by Him. He 
has bound us up with Himself, in one bundle of life; and 
we can never look upon Him now, without also beholding in 
union with Him, the whole ransomed church of God, one 
precious piece of silver in God’s temple above. 


196 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 


APPENDIX B 
THE JEWISH YEAR 


Abib or Nisan—First Month (April) Fourteenth Day— 
Passover Feast. 
Sixteenth Day— 
Firstfruits of the 
Barley Harvest. 
Zif—Second Month (May) 
Sivan—Third Month (June) Sixth Day— 
Feast of Weeks 
or Pentecost. 
Firstfruits of the 
Wheat, etc. 
Thammuz—Fourth Month (July) 
Ab—Fifth Month (August) 
Elul—Sixth Month (September) 
Tisri—Seventh Month (October) First Day— 
Feast of Trumpets. 
Tenth Day— 
Day of Atonement. 
Fifteenth Day— 
Feast of Taber- 
nacles. Succoth. 
Bul—Eighth Month (November) 
Chisley—Ninth Month (December) Twenty-fifth Day— 
Feast of Dedica- 


tion. 
Tebeth—Tenth Month (January) 
Shebat—Eleventh Month (February) 
Adar—Twelfth Month (March) Fourteenth and 
Fifteenth Day— 


Purim. 


The Jewish year begins with a feast commemorating the 
great deliverance out of Egypt. It ends with a feast com- 
memorating another deliverance. Heman is a type of the 
Anti-christ. Read Book of Esther. 


LEVITICUS 


CONTENTS 


ji ise stercliots Leviticus. 


Introduction. 


The third book of the Pentateuch is “Leviticus.” It has 
been called by this name because it gives fully the func- 
tions of the Levites. The Hebrews have given the book 
the name “‘Va-yikra,” the first word in the Hebrew text, 
meaning, “And He called.” 

The little word “and” connects the book closely with the 
preceding one. Its beautiful relation to the book of Exodus 
we hope to show later. The opening verses of Leviticus 
solemnly declare that the words contained in this book are 
the very words of Jehovah. “And the Lord called unto 
Moses and spake unto him out of the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, etc.” 
In no other book of the Bible is such stress laid upon the 
fact that Jehovah speaks, and nowhere do we find so many 
repetitions of this fact. Twenty-four times we find the Di- 
vine command, “speak unto the children of Israel’’—“‘speak 
unto Aaron.” Thirty-six times occurs the phrase—“The 
Lord spake.” ‘Twenty-one times the speaking One says, 
“I am the Lord (Jehovah), and as often, “I am the Lord 
your God.” No other proof is needed that the Lord is 
speaking on every page of this book. Moses received the 
very Word of God. He wrote the words as he had received 
them from the Lord. Any other belief is untenable. 

And here we must add the testimony of the New Testa- 
ment Scriptures. Those contain at least forty references 
to the book and its ordinances. When our Lord Jesus 
Christ, the infallible Son of God, was on earth, the book 
of Leviticus, as well as the entire Pentateuch, was known 
and believed to be the Word of God, and written by Moses. 
Our Lord set His seal to this, and repeatedly bore witness 
to the Mosaic authorship and inspiration of the Pentateuch, 


200 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


called “the Law of Moses.” How He confirms the book 
of Leviticus may be seen by turning to the following passages: 
Matthew viii:4 and Lev. xiv:3-10; Matthew xii:4 and Lev. 
xxiv:9; Matthew xv:3-6 and Lev. xx:9; John vii:22 and 
Lev. xii:3. Without giving other New Testament refer- 
ences we briefly mention the Epistle to the Hebrews, which 
contains so many allusions to the levitical institutions, the 
priesthood and sacrifices, their typical meaning and realiza- 
tion in the person and work of Christ. This remarkable 
Epistle alone, in its God-breathed unfoldings, bears an 
incontrovertible testimony to the Divine, as well as Mosaic, 
origin of Leviticus. And to this must be added another 
fact. The closer study of this book will disclose the fact 
that the different rites and Divinely appointed institutions 
are indeed the “shadow of good things to come.”” The Gos- 
pel of the Grace of God is inseparably connected with the 
entire book of Leviticus. Nowhere else do we find the 
redemption-work of Christ so fully and so blessedly told out 
as in this book. The beauty and wisdom of all is from above. 


An Astonishing Assertion. 


Leviticus, then, is by its own testimony the- Word of God. 
The Son of God and the Holy Spirit in the New Testament 
confirm this testimony. The work of Christ and the Gospel 
are foreshadowed in it and closely linked with the levitical 
institutions. In view of these great facts, believed and 
cherished by the people of God, including the most scholarly 
and devout, how astonishing is the assertion now so generally 
made by the boasting rationalistic school of “Higher Criti- 
cism,” that Leviticus is “a priestly forgery of the days after 
Ezra”! One is loath to refer again to this most dangerous 
infidelity which has become so widespread throughout all 
Christendom. Our times, however, demand a positive 
and outspoken condemnation of this modern day infidelity, 
which comes in the garb of an angel of light, with the claim 
of being reverent and devout, but behind which stands the 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 201 


dark and sneering shadow of the enemy of God. Higher 
Criticism has consigned Leviticus to a date after the Baby- 
lonian captivity. According to these “scholars” the priestly 
laws were collected in Babylonia and were brought back 
to Palestine. Some even go so far as to claim that the 
levitical institutions were influenced by the institutions 
of Babylon. But enough of this! We do not want to fill 
our pages with the inventions of those blind leaders of the 
blind. If the book of Leviticus was not written by Moses, 
given to him directly by Jehovah Himself, then this book 
is a colossal fraud and forgery. Inasmuch as so many 
“theological” professors deny the inspiration and Mosaic 
authorship of Leviticus, this book has been branded as a 
concoction of falsehoods. Such is the logical consequence. 
We let another scholar speak on this matter: “‘While the 
Lord Jesus taught in various ways that Leviticus contains 
a law given by revelation from God to Moses, these teach 
that it is a priestly forgery of the days after Ezra. Both 
cannot be right; and if the latter are in the right, then— 
we speak with all possible deliberation and reverence— 
Jesus Christ was mistaken, and was therefore unable even 
to tell us with inerrant certainty whether this or that is the 
Word of God or not. But if this is so, then how can we 
escape the final inference that His claim to have a perfect 
knowledge of the Father must have been an error; His 
claim to be the incarnate Son of God, therefore, a false 
pretension, and Christianity, a delusion, so that mankind 
has in Him no Saviour? 

“But against so fatal a conclusion stands the great estab- 
lished fact of the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead; 
whereby He was with power declared to be the Son of God, 
so that we may know that His word on this, as on all subjects 
where He has spoken, settles controversy, and is a sufficient 
ground of faith; while it imposes upon all speculations of 
men, literary or philosophical, eternal and irremovable 
limitations. 

“Tet no one think that the case, as regards the issue at 
stake, has been above stated too strongly. One could not 


202 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


well go beyond the often cited words of Kuenen on this sub- 
ject: ‘We must either cast aside as worthless our dearly 
bought scientific method, or we must forever cease to ac- 
knowledge the authority of the New Testament in the do- 
main of the exegesis of the Old.’ With good reason does 
another scholar exclaim at these words, “The Master must 
not be heard as a witness! We treat our criminals with 
more respect.’ So then stands the question this day which 
this first verse of Leviticus brings before us: In which have 
we more confidence? in literary critics, like a Kuenen or 
Wellhausen, or in Jesus Christ? Which is the more likely 
to know with certainty whether the law of Leviticus is a 
revelation from God or not? 

“The devout Christian, who through the grace of the 
crucified and risen Lord ‘of whom Moses, in the law, and the 
prophets did write,’ and who has ‘tasted the good word of 
God,’ will not long hesitate for an answer.”’* 

To this we say, heartily, “Amen.” If these critics, whose 
real difficulty is the “puffed up head” and “the empty heart’”’ 
were to turn in humility of mind and in dependence upon the 
Spirit of God to the Word itself, casting their “little learn- 
ing” to the winds, they would soon learn the wisdom of God 
and repent of their foolishness. | 


The Message of Leviticus. 


We have pointed out the fact that Leviticus has in itself 
the unmistakable imprint of Divine revelation. What then 
is its message? One word gives the answer. The word 
“Holy.” Ninety times this word is found in the twenty- 
seven chapters. And here we call the attention to its rela- 
tion to the book of Exodus. We found in our study of 
Exodus that redemption is there blessedly foreshadowed. 
The message of Leviticus is that which is the outcome of 
redemption, “Holiness unto the Lord,” “Sanctification.” 
In the New Testament the sanctification of a redeemed 


*S. H. Kellogg on “‘Leviticus.” 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 203 


people is revealed in a twofold aspect: Sanctification by 
the precious blood of atonement, and sanctification by the 
Spirit of God. The first is the foundation of all, and the 
second is the result of it. We see, therefore, that the book 
of Leviticus begins with the Divine instructions concerning 
the offerings, in which the perfect work of the Lord Jesus 
Christ and His perfect life are typically foreshadowed. It 
is perhaps the most complete as well as wonderful description 
of His work and sacrifice which we possess. In their typical 
meaning the first seven chapters can never be exhausted. 
Then follows the Divine account of the consecration of the 
priesthood, telling us typically that a redeemed and sanctified 
people, a holy priesthood (1 Pet. ii:5), can draw nigh and 
enter into His presence. Access and worship are thus most 
blessedly illustrated. Practical sanctification in a separated 
walk and holy living is demanded by the different statutes 
and laws. And these typify the work of the Holy Spirit 
in the believer. All this, and much else, makes the study 
of Leviticus of great interest and value. It is needed in 
our days. The fundamental truths of the Gospel, typically 
foreshadowed in Leviticus, are the truths mostly denied 
or belittled. And all that know the Gospel, and rest upon the 
finished work of the Lord Jesus Christ, will surely find in 
this book new beauties of Him, who is altogether lovely, 
and learn more what His great work as our substitute meant 
to Him and what it means for us. 


Prophetic Foreshadowings. 


By far the greater number of the types in Leviticus have 
found their fulfillment in the life and death, the resurrection 
and Priesthood of our Lord. Others, however, are still un- 
fulfilled. This is especially true in connection with some of 
the feasts of Jehovah. The feast of trumpets, the ingather- 
ing at the full harvest, the Sabbatic year, the year of jubilee 
await their glorious fulfillment in a future day, when Israel 
shall be restored as a nation. These prophetic foreshadow- 
ings will be pointed out in the annotations. 


204 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


The Time When Leviticus Was Given. 


Different views are held concerning the period of time 
consumed in the giving of these words of Jehovah. It is 
evident that Leviticus and Numbers i-x:10 were given 
between the first day of the first month and the twentieth 
day of the second month, that is of the second year after 
their departure from Egypt. 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 205 


The Scope and Division 
of Leviticus, 


Leviticus containing the Divine instructions for a re- 
deemed people reveals a progressive order. A rapid glance 
at the contents will demonstrate this at once. First the 
Lord gives to the people, whom He brought out of Egypt, 
His communications concerning the different sacrifices. 
After these offerings are described, and the law concerning 
them is given, the account of the consecration of Aaron 
and his sons, his fellow-priests, follows, and how they began 
their priestly functions. The judgment of Nadab and 
Abihu for presenting strange fire is closely connected with 
this. God demanding holiness in His redeemed people 
comes next in this book. The account of the great day of 
atonement, when Aaron entered the Holiest for a brief season, 
precedes the precepts for the people of God in which their 
walk in separation from evil is so fully entered upon. The 
great day of atonement is the center of the book of Leviticus; 
everything in the book is related to that day. The next 
which follows, after the giving of instructions of a holy walk, 
is the Divine appointment of the different feasts, and the 
laws connected with these feasts, especially the great year 
of Jubilee. This, with a chapter on things vowed and de- 
voted, closes the book. It is most interesting to note this 
last chapter, for it contains the consummation of the book, 
and foreshadows the time when God will receive what be- 
longs to Him, and when He will be all in all. The words 
“unto Jehovah” *—“holy to Jehovah”—‘it is Jehovah's’ — 
occur fourteen times in this last chapter. “Holy unto Jeho- 
vah” is mentioned thrice in the closing verses of Leviticus. 
And this is in keeping with the message of the book. Jehovah 
is holy; His people must also be holy. “Ye shall be holy: 
for I the Lord your God am holy” (Chapter xix:2). The last 


* The word “Lord’’ in Leviticus, as throughout the Old Testament» 
te in the Hebrew ‘‘Jehovah.” 


206 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


verse of Leviticus states once more the solemn fact of the 
beginning of the book, that Jehovah spake all these words 
unto Moses. 

This brief sketch shows the unity of the book of Leviticus 
and its progressive revelation. That it could be the patch- 
work of different writers or the product of after exilic days, 
as claimed by the rationalists, is impossible. A closer study 
of this book, so directly communicated by Jehovah to Moses, 
shows the marvellous wisdom of God. Only the Omniscient 
Lord could give such instructions and institutions, which 
foreshadow His gracious ways in redemption. We shall aim, 
as much as this is possible, in our annotations, to point out 
the wonderful types and prophecies of Leviticus. Here the 
atoning work of Christ, the results for His people, their 
privileges and responsibilities are most blessedly outlined. 
Israel’s future restoration connected with the coming day 
when they shall see Him, who is typified by Aaron, when 
they shall look upon the pierced One, and their great national 
day of atonement dawns, the millennial times of blessing 
and glory and the great Jubilee: all is more than indicated 
by the Divine communications. 


The Division of Leviticus. 


The brief outline of the scope of the book shows that the 
division is not difficult to make. As this book is so little 
known, we suggest first of all a careful reading of the book, 
noting three general parts. 

These are the following: 1. The Offerings and the Priest- 
hood (Chapter i-x). 2. Laws and Precepts (Chapters xi- 
xxil), 3. The Feasts of Jehovah (Chapters xxiii-xxvii). 
In our study we shall divide the book in a way which. we 
trust, will make the study not alone helpful, but interesting, 
We divide the book in seven parts, which we give first of all, 
so that the reader can have the contents of the entire book 
for a careful survey at his command. It will help much 
in the study of Leviticus to go over this division a number of 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 207 


times and if possible to memorize the parts and contents 
of the chapters before following the analysis and studying 
the annotations. 


I. THE OFFERINGS. THE FOUNDATION OF HOLI- 
NESS. Chapters i-vii. 


- The Burnt-Offering. Chapter i. 

The Meal-Offering. Chapter ii. 

The Peace-Offering. Chapter iii. 

- The Sin-Offering. Chapter iv-v:13. 

. The Trespass-Offering. Chapter v:14-vi:7. 

- The Laws of the Offerings. Chapters vi:8—vii:38. 


S OU Rm © DD me 


Il. THE PRIESTHOOD. THE RESULTS OF HOLI- 
NESS. Chapters viii-x. 


1. Aaron and His Sons. Their Consecration. Chapter viii. 

2. The Functions of the Priesthood Exercised. Chapter ix. 

3. Nadab and Abihu. The False Worship and its Results. 
Chapter x. 


II HOLINESS DEMANDED. Chapters xi-xv. 


1. The Clean and the Unclean. Chapter ¥i. 

Childbirth Law. Inherited Sin. Chapter xi. 
Leprosy. Type of Indwelling Sin. Chapter xiii. 
The Cleansing of the Leper. Chapter xiv. 
Concerning Issues. Man’s Weakness and Defile- 
ment. Chapter xv. 


2. 
3. 
4, 
5. 


{V. THE DAY OF ATONEMENT. IN THE HOLIEST. 


Chapters xvi-xvii. 


1. The Day of Atonement. Chapter xvi. 
2. The Testimony Concerning the Blood. Chapter xvii. 


208 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 
V. PRACTICAL HOLINESS IN DAILY LIFE. Chapters 


XVilI-Xxii. 
1. Different Relationships. Chapter xviii. 
2. Different Duties. Chapter xix. 


3. Warnings Against Special Sins and their Penalty. 
Chapter xx. 


4. Laws for the Priests. Chapters xxi-xxii. 


VI. THE HOLY FEASTS AND SET TIMES. Chapters 
XXII-XXV1. 
1. The Feasts. Chapter xxiii. 


2. Priestly Duties; the Light and the Shewbread. Chap- 
ter xxiv:1-9. 


3. Blasphemy. Israel’s Sin Foreshadowed. Chapter 
Xxiv :10-23. 


4. The Sabbatic Year and the Year of Jubilee. Chapter 


XXV. 


5. The Blessings and the Curse. Israel’s History 
Chapter xxvi. 


VII. VOWS AND DEVOTION. Chapter xxvii. 
1. The Claims of Jehovah Realized. Chapter xxvii. 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 209 


Analysis and Annotations, 
I, The Offerings. The Foundation 


of Holiness, 


Chapters i-vii. 


1. The Burnt Offering. 


CHAPTER I. 


1. The Bullock. V. 1-9. 
2. The Sheep or the Goat. Vs. 10-13, 
3. The Doves or Pigeons. Vs. 14-17. 


Jehovah spoke out of the tabernacle which had been set 
up and upon which the cloud descended, filling the Holy of 
Holies with the Glory of the Lord. Thus Leviticus is closely 
linked with the ending of the Book of Exodus. Out of that 
Glory, from between the Cherubim, the same Person spoke 
to Moses, who had spoken to Him out of the burning bush 
and on Mount Sinai. The first three chapters with which 
Leviticus opens form one utterance of Jehovah. The second 
utterance begins with Chapter iv:1. This first utterance 
of Jehovah is concerning three offerings: the Burnt-offering, 
the Meat-offering and the Peace-offering. They are dis- 
tinguished from the other two offerings by being called “a 
sweet savour (or odour) to Him.” This tells of the value 
and acceptability of these offerings. No direct reference 
to sin is made in connection with the “sweet savour”’ offer- 
ings. For Israel these three offerings were the Divinely 
appointed means to approach Him, who dwelt in the Sanc- 
tuary. The Sin and Trespass-offerings had more specially 
to do with their sins and were the means of restoring com- 
munion with God. The Burnt-offering stands first among 
the Offerings because it foreshadows in a most precious and 


210 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


simple way the perfect work of Christ, who through the 
eternal Spirit offered Himself to God. This offering was 
wholly consumed, and was therefore also called “whole Burnt- 
offering” (Deut. xxxiii:10; Psalm li:19). It was a holocaust. 
It went up entirely to God; the priests could not eat of it. 
The altar upon which it was brought was called the Altar 
of Burnt-offering, while the fire upon that altar was never 
permitted to go out. Every part of it typifies Christ offering 
Himself completely to God; the sweet odour is unto God 
and it is for the believer’s acceptance in Him. A few hints 
on this offering and the other offerings will be sufficient to 
show their typical meaning. 

First the bullock is mentioned. The ox gives us the 
highest type of Christ offering Himself. Like the sheep 
and goats used in the Burnt-offering, the ox was easily gotten. 
He needed not to be hunted or be gotten by man’s efforts; 
the ox and the other domestic animals used were, so to 
speak, ready and willing. Led from the green pastures to be 
killed before the Lord, the ox is the type of Christ, who 
left the Father’s Glory and presence to do His will and give 
Himself as the willing sacrifice (Psalm xl:6-8; Hebrews 
x:1-6). But the ox is also the type of the servant, and re- 
minds us of Christ, the obedient servant, who came not to 
be ministered to, but to minister and give His life a ransom 
for many. There was to be no blemish whatever in the 
animal. Even so Christ was without blemish, holy and un- 
defiled. The type was to be without blemish, Christ is with- 
out blemish, and the Church which He loved and for which 
He gave Himself will be through His gracious work without 
blemish, having no spot or wrinkle or any such thing (Eph. 
v :27). 

The offerer had to offer it of his own voluntary will. The 
correct rendering is (verse 3) “for his acceptance.” This 
reveals the great purpose of the Burnt-offering. Through 
Christ as the Sin-offering, as we shall see later, the believer 
knows that all sins are paid for and put away. The Burnt- 
offering leads us higher. The spotless One offered Himself 
unto God and we are accepted in Him. The believer is 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 211 


therefore completely identified with the perfect obedience 
and devotion of the Lord Jesus Christ and accepted as His 
willing sacrifice was accepted by God and a sweet odour 
unto Him. 

The offerer had to put his hand on the head of the sacrifice. 
This simple act identified the offerer with the offering. It 
also stands for faith, for the hand is for taking hold. Thus 
faith must lay hold in faith on Christ and become identified 
with Him. God and the believing soul meet in the One, 
who offered Himself. In connection with the command to 
put the hand on the head of the sacrifice we find the state- 
ment: “it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for 
him.” While we saw before the believer’s acceptance in 
Christ, here the fact is made known that the sacrifice is 
accepted in the offerer’s place and that the Burnt-offering 
makes atonement. And because “without shedding of 
blood is no remission of sins’ the ox had to be killed. The 
Hebrew word “killing” has a sacrificial meaning. The offerer 
had to slay the victim himself to indicate that he deserved 
the death which the animal suffered in his place. The next 
thing done was the sprinkling of the blood by the priests 
round upon the altar by the door of the tabernacle. Thus 
He who knew no sin was made sin for us; and His blood has 
made atonement. And how blessed it is to see it was done 
“before the Lord” (verse 5). How exceedingly precious 
and of inestimable value the devotedness of Christ, His 
obedience unto the death of the cross, and the shedding of 
His blood must be in God’s holy sight! Thus everything in 
the Burnt-offering foreshadows the blessed truth—‘“Christ 
hath given Himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God 
for a sweet smelling savour” (Eph. v:2). 

The victim was flayed, cut into pieces. His inwards and 
his legs were washed with water. The head and the fat, 
as well as the other parts including the inwards and the legs, 
were put in order on the wood upon the altar. It was then 
completely consumed by fire and rose up a sweet savour 
unto the Lord. All has its typical meaning. All is exposed 
to the Divine gaze and all witnesses to the perfection and 


7p 4 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


excellencies of Him who gave Himself. The fat is typical 
of His internal excellencies. The inwards and the legs 
washed in water apply to Christ’s holy character in His 
affections and in His walk in perfect accord with the Word 
(the water). The wood tells of His humanity which He 
took on for the suffering of death. The fire was the fire 
from heaven. It is not, as often taken here, the symbol of 
Divine wrath consuming the sacrifice, but it has another 
meaning. It is the figure of God’s perfect delight in the 
devotion of His ever blessed Son. God rested in Christ 
and found His fullest satisfaction in Him. The Hebrew 
has different words for burning. The one that is used here 
is the same as used for the burning of incense. This in itself 
shows that it has no connection with wrath. The continual 
fire upon the altar in connection with this greatest of all the 
offerings, tells us of God’s perpetual delight in the work of 
Christ, what He is and what He has done. 

What became of the skin of the ox? Chapter vii:8 gives 
the answer. It belonged to the priest. And thus the Burnt- 
offering aspect of the death of Christ covers and hides all, 
who trust in Him. 

Next we find that sheep and goats could also be brought 
as a Burnt-offering. The highest grade was the ox and the 
grades which followed, the sheep and the goat. This was 
in case the offerer was poor and could not bring the more 
costly ox. It also represents the faith of the offerer. A 
lower faith and estimate of Christ which does not reach up to 
the highest conception, however, does not affect the accept- 
ance of the offerer. The inferior offerings typified Christ 
and were therefore a sweet savour unto God, who beheld 
in all the same perfect sacrifice. Our faith should rest 
completely upon God’s estimate of Christ and His work. 
The sheep is the type of Christ in His devoted self-surrender, 
unresisting and silent (Isaish liii: 7). The goat-offering 
clearly typifies the substitutionary character of the work 
of the Lamb of God on the cross. The goat is more linked 
with the Sin-offering aspect of the death of Christ. Here 
also the fact is made known that the lamb and goat-offering 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 213 


is to be brought on the side of the altar northward before the 
Lord (verse 11). It stands typically for distance and not 
the same nearness is recognized as in the first grade offering. 

Turtle-doves and pigeons are the lowest grade of the Burnt- 
offerings. These were for the poorest of the people and they 
express typically the weakest faith in Christ and the lowest 
estimate of His work. But here also we read that it was 
accepted as an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto 
the Lord. These birds speak of Christ as do the Ox and the 
Lamb. The dove is the bird of peace, love and sorrow. 
The dove pictures Him as holy and undefiled, filled with 
tenderness and love. The bird was put to death by “wring- 
ing off its head,” the type of the violence done to Him, who 
was so tender and loving. The crop and the feathers (cor- 
rect meaning, ‘‘filth’’) were cast away. As those were un- 
clean they had to be thrown away so as to make the type 
correspond to Him, who is undefiled and holy. 


2. The Meal-offering. 


CHAPTER II. 


. The general instruction. Vs. 1-3. 

. Baked in the Oven. 4. 

Baked in a Pan. Vs. 5-6. 

Baked in a Frying Pan. V. 7. 

Presented Unto the Priest. Vs. 8-11. 

The Oblation of the Firstfruits. Vs. 12-16. 


a 


The word “meat” should be changed throughout this 
chapter to “meal.”’ This offering or oblation is closely con- 
nected with the Burnt-offering. No doubt it could not be 
brought apart from the sacrificial animal. The Meal-offer- 
ing is the type of Christ in His perfect humanity and holy, 
devoted character. It was not for atonement even as the holy 
humanity of Christ and devotedness of His life could not 
atone for sins. It is called ‘‘most holy” for in His humanity 
He was “‘that holy thing.” The fine flour, sifted and pure, 
coming from the corn of wheat, is the apt and beautiful type 


214 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


of His perfect humanity. The oil, so prominent in this offer- 
ing, is the type of the Holy Spirit. The oil was connected 
in a two-fold way with this offering. The fine flour was min- 
gled with oil. This is typical of the incarnation, His con- 
ception by the Holy Spirit, His whole being Spirit-filled. 
It is a blessed illustration of Luke i:35. Leaven was entirely 
absent. ‘“Unleavened fine flour” and “no leaven” is re- 
peatedly stated by Jehovah. It had to be excluded, for 
leaven is a type of evil, and no evil was in Him. Nor was 
any honey permitted in the fine flour. Honey is the type 
of the sweetness of human nature apart from grace; the 
picture of fallen nature in an amiable character, yet sin 
connected with it. Leaven is fermentation; and the sweet 
honey is the cause of it. It was not allowed in the fine flour, 
for nothing of an unholy sweetness was in Christ. Only 
the oil was mingled with the flour. But the oil was also 
poured upon the flour. This is the type the Holy Spirit, 
as He came upon Christ, the anointed One. He was on earth 
the One whom the Father hath sealed (John vi:27); in the 
Meal-offering “‘salt”’ had likewise a place. It is the type of the 
separating power of holiness. Believers, born again, have 
the Holy Spirit in the new nature, and by the Spirit are 
sealed. Thus we are enabled to walk even as He walked, 
and show forth His excellencies. We add here a beautiful 
tribute to the perfect humanity and the moral Glory of 
Christ: 

“This meal-offering of God, taken from the fruit of the earth, was 
of the finest wheat; that which was pure, separate and lovely in human 
nature was in Jesus under all its sorrows, but in all its excellence, and 
excellent in its sorrows. There was no unevenness in Jesus, no pre- 
dominant quality to produce the effect of giving Him a distinctive 
character. He was, though despised and rejected of men, the per- 
fection of human nature. The sensibilities, firmness, decision (though 
this attached itself also to the principle of obedience), elevation and 
calm meekness, which belong to human nature, all found their perfect 
place in Him. In a Paul I find energy and zeal; in a Peter, ardent 
affection; in a John, tender sensibilities and abstraction of thought, 
united to a desire to vindicate what he loved which scarce knew limit. 


But the quality we have observed in Peter predominates and char- 
acterizes him. In a Paul, blessed servant though he was, he did not 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 215 


repent, though he had repented. ... In himin whom God was mighty 
toward the circumcision, we find the fear of man break through the 
faithfulness of his zeal. John, who would have vindicated Jesus in 
his zeal, knew not what manner of spirit he was of, and would have 
forbidden the glory of God, if a man walked not with them. 

“But in Jesus, even as man, there was none of this unevenness. 
There was nothing salient in His character, because all was in perfect 
subjection to God in His humanity, and had its place, and did exactly 
its service, and then disappeared. God was glorified in it, and all was 
in harmony. When meekness became Him He was meek; when indig- 
nation, who could stand before His overwhelming and withering re- 
buke? Tender to the chief of sinners in the time of grace; unmoved 
by the heartless superiority of a cold Pharisee (curious to judge who 
He was); when the time of judgment is come, no tears of those who 
wept for Him moved Him to other words than ‘Weep for yourselves 
and for your children, —words of deep compassion, but of deep sub- 
jection to the due judgment of God. The dry tree prepared itself to 
be burned. On the cross, when His service was finished, tender to 
His mother, and intrusting her in human care, to one who (so to speak) 
had been His friend, and leaned on His bosom; no ear to recognize her 
word or claim when His service occupied Him for God; putting both 
blessedly in their place, when He would show that, before His public 
mission, He was still the Son of the Father, and though such, in human 
blessedness, subject to the mother that bare Him, and Joseph His 
father as under the law; a calmness which disconcerted His adversaries; 
and in the moral power which dismayed them at times, a meekness 
which drew out the hearts of all not steeled by opposition. 

Such was Christ in human nature.” * 


And frankincense was thereon. This is the fragrance, 
unspeakable in its value, as it went up from His blessed life 
to God. 

But the Meal-offering was baked in an oven, in a pan and 
in a frying pan or cauldron. These are the types of the 
testings and trials in His holy humanity. He was made 
perfect through suffering as the Captain of our salvation. 
(Heb. ii:10). The oven typifies the temptations from the 
side of Satan—known only to the Lord Himself. The pan 
tells of the more evident testings and trials through which 
He passed, enduring the contradiction of sinners and all the 
opposition and hatred heaped upon Him. ‘The frying pan 


*Synopis of the Bible—J. N. Darby. 


216 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


or cauldron speaks of the combining trials and sorrows of 
an outward and inward nature. But all, whether the oven, 
the pan or the cauldron, brought out His perfection. 

The Meal-offering was then burnt upon the altar, a sweet 
odour to Jehovah. The priests could eat the remainder 
of the Meal-offering. As priests of God, constituted thus 
through the grace of God, it is our holy and blessed privilege 
to feed on Himself, and the feeding on Christ will ever 
keep us in conscious nearness to God, and wean us away 
from earthly things. 

The oblation mentioned in verse 12 refers to the “new 
Meal-offering” in which leaven was permitted, and which 
was not tobe burnt. This we shall find more fully mentioned 
in chapter xxiii:15-20. When we reach that chapter we shall 
speak of its significance as the Wave-offering. The oblation 
of the firstfruits (verses 14-16) consisted in green ears of corn 
dried by fire, even corn beaten out of full ears. He again 
is typified here as the green corn, which was dried (roasted) 
in the fire. It points to His holy life, His death and His 
resurrection. However, all this is more fully revealed in 
the wave-sheaf after Passover in connection with Pentecost. 
This we shall find in the contents of the twenty-third chapter 
of the book. 


3. The Peace-offering. 


CHAPTER III. 


1. The Ox. Vs. 1-5. 
2. The Sheep or Goat. Vs. 6-17. 


This is the third “sweet savour offering”, and is closely 
linked with the Burnt-offering, but it differs from it, espe- 
cially, in that part of it was to beeaten. The Peace-offering 
also had the character of a Thank-offering (vii:11-13). As it 
was offered on the altar wpon the Burnt-sacrifice, it cannot 
therefore be separated from Christ offering Himself as the 
Burnt-offering. Leviticus vii:11-34 contains the law of 
the Peace-offering and tells of the eating of the Peace- -offering, 
which is not mentioned in the third chapter. It typifies 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 217 


the gracious results accomplished for the sinner by the death 
of Christ. The Blood is sprinkled upon the altar, which is 
for propitiation. Fellowship therefore results with praise 
and thanksgiving. As we shall learn more fully from the 
seventh chapter about the feeding upon the breast and the 
shoulder of the Peace-offering, we pass all this by. How- 
ever, we call attention to the prominence given to the fat 
of the sacrifice. It is the type of the inward energy of Christ, 
expressed in doing the Father’s will, even unto death; and 
this is called “the food of Jehovah.” He delights in this. 
The happy scene of how the priests, the offerer and his friends 
partook of that of which God partakes Himself, we shall see 


later. 
4. The Sin-offering. 


CHAPTER IV-V: 13. 


The Second Utterance of Jehovah. Vs. 1-2. 

The Sin-offering for the High Priest. Vs. 3-12. 

The Sin-offering for the Congregation. Vs. 13-21. 

The Sin-offering for the Ruler. Vs. 22-26. 

The Sin-offering for One of the People. Vs. 27-35. 

The Sin-offering for Special Inadvertent Offences. Chapter v:1- 


Core Me COnTOR = 


13. 


The Burnt-offering, Meal-offering, and Peace-offering 
typified the absolute and blessed perfection and devotion 
of Christ, and are therefore the sweet savour offerings. The 
remaining offerings, the Sin- and Trespass-offerings, are not 
called a sweet savour. In these offerings we see Christ 
typified as the bearer of the sins of His people. And assuch 
He had to take upon Himself the judgment of God. This, 
no doubt, is the reason why these two offerings are not called 
a “sweet savour”; for God does not delight in judgment. 
Judgment is His strange work (Isaiah xxviii:21). Note 
also that the preceding three offerings were voluntary, the 
two remaining were compulsory. Forgiveness had to be 
sought and secured by them. In the actual approach of 
man to God, the Sin-offering always occupied the first place; 
the Burnt-offering followed. As we have seen the Burnt- 


218 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


offering is mentioned first, because it tells out the perfection 
and infinite worth of Him in whom, according to the eternal 
purpose of God, we are accepted. And now as accepted 
in the Beloved One, made nigh and brought into fellowship 
with God, the need which we have on account of our sins 
is fully met in the work of Christ, who bore our sins in His 
own body on the tree. It is impossible to follow all the 
manifold types in connection with the Sin-offering for the 
priest, the ruler, and the congregation. The details of it 
demand a very careful and minute study which we cannot 
attempt in a Bible Study pamphlet. We can treat the Sin- 
offering only in a general way. The bullock is the Sin- 
offering for the anointed priest and for the whole congre- 
gation (verses 4 and 13). Like in the Burnt-offering, the 
offerers had to identify themselves with the offering by laying 
their hands on the head of the bullock. But this difference 
must be noticed: in the Burnt-offering the believer is seen 
identified with Christ and accepted in Christ; in the Sin- 
offering Christ became identified with us in our sin. Sin 
was transferred to Him as our substitute. ‘The Lord 
hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all.’ The blood then 
was sprinkled seven times before the Lord. Some of it was 
put upon the horns of the altar of incense; while the blood 
of the bullock, the greater portion of it, was poured at the 
bottom of the altar of Burnt-offering. The skin of the bul- 
lock with the whole bullock was burned without the camp. 
The Hebrew word for “‘burned”’ is different from that used 
in the Burnt-offering. The word used in connection with 
the Sin-offering is “‘saraph”; it speaks of the burning of 
judgment. The commentary to this is Hebrews xiii:11-12. 
“The bodies of those beasts whose blood is brought into the 
sanctuary by the high priest for sin, are burned without the 
camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that He might sanctify the 
people with His own blood suffered without the gate.”” With 
the case of a ruler having sinned the offering was a kid of the 
goats, a male; and in the case of any one of the common 
people having sinned through ignorance still other instruc- 
tions are given. 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 219 


“Tt is evident, therefore, that there is a graduated scale in 
these different instances. Why so? Because of a most 
solemn principle. The gravity of sin depends on the posi- 
tion of him that sins. It is not so, that man is prone to ad- 
just matters, though his conscience feels its rectitude. How 
often man would screen the offence of him that is great, if 
he could! The same might be hard on the poor, friendless, 
and despised. The life of such at any rate seems of no great 
account. It is not so with God, nor ought it to be in the 
minds and estimate of His saints. And another witness 
of this in the last instance is not without interest for our souls. 
Only to one of the common people is allowed the alternative 
of a female lamb instead of a kid (verses 32-35), the offering 
of which for his sin is reiterated with the same minute 
care, 

“When the anointed priest sinned, the result was precisely 
such as if the whole congregation sinned. When a prince 
sinned, it was a different matter, though a stronger case for 
sacrifice than where it was a private man. In short, there- 
fore, the relationship of the person that was guilty determines 
the relative extent of the sin, though none was obscure 
enough for his sin to be passed by. Our blessed Lord on 
the other hand meets each and all, Himself the true anointed 
priest, the only One who needs no offering—who could there- 
fore be the offering for all, for any. This is the general truth, 
at least on the surface of the Sin-offering. The offence was 
brought forward, confessed, and judged becomes the sub- 
stitute in this case for him that was guilty; and the blood 
was put in the care of individuals on the brazen altar, as it 
only needed to be dealt with in the place of sinful man’s ac- 
cess to God.” * 

In studying the interesting details of the Sin-offerings it 
must be remembered that all is the “shadow of good things 
to come,” and that the good things which have come, and 
which we now enjoy, as believers in Christ, are far higher 
and more blessed than the types could reveal. 


* “Introduction to the Pentateuch’’—W. Kelly. 


220 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


5, . The Trespass-offering. 


CHAPTERS V: 14-VI: 7. 


1. The Trespass Against Jehovah. Vs. 14-19. 
2. The Trespass Against Man. Chapter vi:1-7. 


The brief section which gives instruction concerning the 
Trespass-offering contains twice the statement, “Jehovah 
spake unto Moses” (v:14 and vi:1). Sin is here looked upon 
as an injury done. The Trespass-offering was always a 
ram without a blemish out of the flock (verses 15, 18; vi:6). 
First the wrong is mentioned done in holy things of Jehovah 
or something done against His commands, and secondly, 
wrongs done against his neighbor, which Jehovah also 
reckons as done against Himself. There is no need to define 
the wrong done in the holy things of Jehovah. The word 
trespass in the Hebrew means “‘to act covertly.” It was no 
doubt an attempt to defraud Jehovah in the holy things, 
as defrauding is prominent in connection with the wrong 
done to the neighbor. The offering of the ram, which, of 
course, typifies Christ, is not described here, but in chapter 
vii:1-10. But another feature is made prominent which 
contains a most interesting truth. Restitution had to be 
made in each trespass against Jehovah and against man, 
and in each case the fifth part of the whole had to be added. 
In the wrong done against Jehovah the fifth part was given 
to the priest; and in the wrong done against the neighbor 
the one who had been defrauded received it. This shows 
forth the blessed effect of the redemption-work of Christ. 
He has not only restored what He took not away, but added 
more to it. God manifested thus His gracious power by 
giving greater blessing to His people and bringing greater 
glory to Himself. 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 22) 


6, The Laws of the Offerings. 
CHAPTER VI:8-VII:38. 


The Law of the Burnt-offering. Vs. 8-13. 

The Law of the Meal-offering. Vs. 14-18. 

The Offering of the High Priest. Vs. 19-23. 

. The Law of the Sin-offering. Vs. 24-30. 

The Law of the Trespass-offering. Chapter vii:1-10 
The Law of the Sacrifice of Peace Offerings. Vs. 11-38. 


PP wo we 


After J2hovah had given to Moses by direct communi- 
cation th: different offerings, in what they were to consist, 
and how they were to be brought, different laws concerning 
these offerings were added by Jehovah. They are mostly 
addressed to Aaron and his sons (vi:8; 14; 19; 24). They 
acquaint us therefore with the relation of the priest to the 
offerings. In the law of the Trespass- and Peace-offerings 
we do not find an address to Aaron and his sons. The 
proper way to study the offerings is to consider first what 
is said in the beginning of Leviticus and then to read the 
laws of the offerings in connection with each to learn their 
relation to the priest and the people. 


The Law of Burnt-offering.—It was the duty of the priest 
to keep the Burnt-offering upon the altar and the fire of 
the altar had to be kept burning in it. It is especially 
stated that the Burnt-offering shall be upon the hearth 
upon the altar all night unto the morning. This continual 
Burnt-offering with the fire, which never went out, is the 
type of Christ, who continually offers Himself to God and 
in whom all believers have the assurance of their full ac- 
ceptance. It was different with the Sin-offering; there 
could not be a continuous Sin-offering, for Christ giving 
Hlimself as an expiatory sacrifice cannot be a continuous 
act. But it is different with the Burnt-offering. While 
on earth He ever presented Himself before God and the 
fire of His devotion never went out. And thus He con- 
tinues in the heavenly sanctuary, appearing in the presence 
of God for us. This never ceases. It is morning by morn- 


222 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


ing, evening by evening. And how blessed that the night 
is mentioned! The night is the present age; and it will be 
followed by the morning, when the day dawns. What 
comfort is here provided for us! While we are down here 
in the wilderness, tested, tried, failing and stumbling our 
perfect Burnt-offering is ever present with God and the sweet 
savour arises from it. By it we are kept, though we are 
a sinning people. It has also a blessed meaning for Israel. 
This is Israel’s night. By the Burnt-offering sacrifice 
even Israel is kept during the dark night of their unbelief 
for the blessing which shall surely come in the morning, 
when He is revealed again. Then they will behold Him 
as their Burnt-offering, whom they had despised and rejected 
during the night of wandering and tribulation; then they 
will confess their sin and acknowledge He was bruised 
on account of their iniquities. 

But while this is the blessed meaning of the Burnt-offering 
for the believer and for repenting and believing Israel, for 
the unbeliever there is another fire which will never go out. 
And we must see the practical application as well. This 
blessed continual Burnt-offering must lead His believing 
people to give themselves continually and manifest their 
devotion in practical holiness. “God delights to have us 
remind Him (though He can never forget it) of the work 
of His dear Son, and that we have here our occupation and 
live in the fragrance of His acceptance. This is really 
the foundation of all practical holiness, as it is of rest and 
satisfaction to the soul. Christ is our righteousness before 
God; we are accepted in the Beloved; in Christ we are as 
Christ, even in this world. Here the perpetual sunshine 
settles down on us; it is the true Beulah land for the saint, 
where the birds sing ever and the heart goes forth in per- 
petual melody.” * Our answer to the continuous Burnt- 
offering in our behalf must be a life of devotion to God. 
Space forbids to follow the equally precious application of 
the other priestly actions. 


*Numerical Bible. 


TY OF 
NORTHEAS BIBLE UTE LIBRARY 
EX FEL EW ek 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


The Law of the Meal-offering.—As we learned in connec- 
tion with the second chapter, the meal-offering foreshadows 
Christ on earth, that blessed and holy life which was lived 
here in entire devotion. The principal thing here is that 
Aaron and his sons, the priests, were to eat of it. God had 
His portion in it, but the priests were to share it. All 
believers are priests in Christ, and as such have this precious 
food to enjoy. That food is Christ, and that means com- 
munion with God. To enjoy Christ, feed on Him, the bread 
come down from heaven; to meditate upon all His loveli- 
ness and grace, is our blessed privilege, who are brought 
into His fellowship. Note that it says “‘it shall be eaten 
unleavened in a holy place.’’ This means that only in the 
place of separation, where grace has put us, can we enjoy 
this feast. The feeding on the meal-offering will keep us 
in the sanctuary in His presence. 


The Offering of the High Priest.—Distinct from thc gen- 
eral Meal-offering is that Meal-offering which the high 
priest had to bring on the day of his anointing. This had 
to be wholly burned unto Jehovah. No priest was permitted 
to taste this and partake of it. It had to be offered half of 
it in the morning and half of it at night. There is another 
distinction. Oil was mixed with it, but oil was not poured 
upon it. We saw what the oil mixed with the fine flour 
meant, and that the pouring of the oil upon the fine flour 
typified the Holy Spirit as He came upon Christ at His 
baptism. Now inasmuch as this pouring of the oil is omitted 
here, this Meal-offering seems to typify the blessed life of 
our Lord before His public ministry began. The hidden 
years, as we term them, were yielded completely to God, 
and as the Holy Spirit has not given us a record of those years 
we cannot feed on them. This, no doubt, is the typical 
meaning of this special Meal-offering of the high priest 
*fon the day of his anointing.” 


The Law of the Sin-offering.—This law contains interest- 
ing details concerning the Sin-offering. It had to be killed 


224 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


in the place where the Burnt-offering was killed. The 
priest that offered it for sin had to eat it, and he typifies 
Christ. This means His identification with sinners, when 
in our stead He bore our sins in His own body on the tree. 
But the priests also could eat of it. The work of atone- 
ment, the sin-bearing, no fellow priest could share with Him. 
He alone could do this great work. Nevertheless we eat 
of the Sin-offering if we identify ourselves in humiliation 
and confession with the sins and failures of the saints of 
God. The holiness of the Sin-offering is especially empha- 
sized. It is called ‘‘tmost holy.”” The earthen vessel in 
which it was boiled had to be broken and the brazen pot 
had to be scoured and rinsed. This typifies the unique 
and most precious, as well as holy character, of the great 
work accomplished by the sin-bearer on the cross. 


The Law of the Trespass-offering.—This also is called 
“most holy.” Here the killing of the sacrifice, the sprinkling 
of the blood, the presentation of the fat, etc., and the burn- 
ing upon the altar, omitted in chapter v:14—vi:7, are now 
commanded. Restitution is the prominent thing at the 
first mention of the Trespass-offering. It reveals the joy 
of God in what has been accomplished by Christ in His 
redemption work. But restitution must rest for a founda- 
tion upon atonement. This is now therefore brought out, 
in the law of the Trespass-offering. 


The Law of the Peace-offering.—But one more remains. 
We discover that the Peace-offering is removed out of its 
connection. The order in the beginning of Leviticus is: 
Burnt-offering, Meal-offering, Peace-offering, Sin-offering, 
and Trespass-offering. The first three were the “sweet 
savour Offerings.” The third sweet savour offering, the 
Peace-offering, is put last in the laws of the offering. The 
Peace-offering represents the blessed results of the work 
of Him, who has made peace in the blood of His cross, in 
Whom all who believe are justified and have peace with God. 
And the first thing mentioned is most blessed and intimate 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. Zoo 


communion and enjoyment with thanksgiving. The pierced 
cakes, unleavened mingled with oil, etc., typify Christ. In 
this blessed feast Christ, as everywhere, has the pre-eminent 
place. The enjoyment of peace and its resulting communion 
is impossible apart from Christ. We must ever let the Holy 
Spirit remind us of what He is and what He has done for us. 
But what does it mean that the Israelite had to bring an 
offering of leavened bread with the sacrifice of his Peace- 
offerings for “thanksgiving”? Leaven was forbidden at 
Passover, in the meal-offering, because it is the type of evil. 
Here and in the two loaves of the Feast of Weeks it was not 
only permitted, but commanded. In Christ there was no 
leaven; but in His saints, though made nigh by blood, there 
is still leaven, the corruption of the old nature. How har- 
monious with the teaching of the New Testament! We 
leave this to our readers to follow with prayer, searching, 
and, we trust, exercise of soul. 

Rich and full is indeed this portion, the concluding sec- 
tion; one feels like touching upon every detail and meditate 
on these precious pictures, foreshadowing our blessings and 
privileges in Christ. 

We must pass all these riches by, but pray that His 
Spirit may open up the mines of Divine wisdom 
and comfort to every child of God. But one more phase 
we mention. The priests had their portion in the Peace- 
offering. The priest, who burns the fat upon the altar rep- 
resents Christ. Aaron and his sons received the breast of 
the sacrifice. The shoulder of the  Peace-offering 
belonged to the priest for an _heave-offering. Like 
Aaron and his sons, priests of God, we can feast upon the 
breast, the type of His love, and thus enjoy His affections. 
The shoulder is the seat of power. And power belongs to 
Him alone, who loveth us and hath washed us from our 
sins in His own blood and hath made us priests and kings. 
May this first part of Leviticus (so often ignored) become 
a source of much joy and blessing to His people. The few 
hints we could give will, under God, show the way how 
these types should be studied. 


226 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


Il. The Priesthood. The Results 


of Holiness. 
Chapters viii-x. 
1. Aaron and His Sons. Their Consecration. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Aaron. Vs. 1-12. 

Aaron and His Sons. Vs. 13-21. 
The Consecration. Vs. 22-30. 
The Sacrificial Feast. Vs. 31-36. 


et Sart 


The second part of Leviticus is historical and gives the 
account of how Aaron and his sons were consecrated as 
priests and how they exercised their priesthood. The judg- 
ment, which fell upon the two sons of Aaron ends this inter- 
esting section. 

The voice of Jehovah spoke again, commanding that 
Aaron and his sons should now be taken and be consecrated. 
The ceremony took place “at the door of the tabernacle of 
the congregation.” The entire congregation of Israel was 
gathered together to witness the event. This statement 
has been severely attacked by the critics, who reject this 
report as untrustworthy inasmuch as a congregation of 
several millions could hardly have gathered at the door 
of the tabernacle. For this reason the critics have branded 
the account as legendary. “But, surely, if the words are 
to be taken in the ultra-literal sense required in order to 
make out this difficulty, the impossibility must have been 
equally evident to the supposed fabricator of the fiction; 
and it is yet more absurd to suppose that he should ever 
have intended his words to be pressed to such a rigid liter- 
ality.” * But the words do not necessarily mean that every 
individual was present at the door of the tabernacle and all 
remained there for the entire seven days of ceremonial ob- 


*S. H. Kellogg on “Leviticus,” 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 227 


servance. Perhaps only the representatives of the tribes 
were called to witness all what was done; these appointed 
leaders represented the whole assembly of Israel. All was 
carried out according to the Divine command. Not less 
than twelve times is reference made to this fact in the eighth 
chapter. It was all according to Divine appointment. 
Aaron was called of God to this office, and in this he was a 
type of Christ in His office-work as priest. “And no man 
taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, 
as was Aaron. So also Christ glorified not Himself to be 
made an high priest, but He that said unto Him, Thou art 
my Son, today have I begotten thee” (Heb. v:4-5). As 
Aaron and his work was appointed by God, so the work of 
our Lord in connection with sin. Aaron did “all the things 
which the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses,” and 
Christ completely did the will of Him that sent Him. That 
blessed will is foreshadowed in the priestly office and the 
priestly work. 

Without following the historical account in every detail 
we point out some of the leading types in this great chapter. 
The principal actors are Aaron and his sons. Aaron occupies 
the leading and prominent place; his sons are associated with 
him. He is, as stated above, a type of Christ. His sons 
typify those who are called into the priesthood in their 
Christian profession. The priesthood of the sons of Aaron 
depended upon their relationship to him. Without Aaron 
they could not be priests at all. Our relationship to Christ 
constitutes us priests. The Priesthood of Christ rests upon 
His Sonship, and believing on Him we become children of 
God and also priests with Him. The sons of Aaron typify 
the Christian profession; two of his sons were taken in a 
judgment. They foreshadow the true and the false in Chris- 
tendom. But there is still another application. Israel’s 
national priesthood is also foreshadowed. “Ye shall be unto 
me a kingdom of priests” (Exod. xix:6) is God’s calling for 
the nation. They will yet possess that priesthood. “But 
ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord, men shall call 
you the ministers of our God’ (Is. Ixi:6). This will be 


228 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


accomplished with the second coming of Christ. A part 
of the nation will then be swept away in judgment, while 
the believing remnant will exercise the functions of the 
priesthood in the kingdom. These two classes are typified 
by the sons of Aaron. 

The first thing mentioned is the “washing with water.” 
This washing of water is the type of the new birth. This is 
beautifully illustrated by the symbolical action of our Lord 
in the washing of the disciples’ feet (John xiii:2-12). The 
feet washing corresponds to the washing the priests had to 
do when they went into the tabernacle, and typifies the 
daily cleansing by the Word the believer needs to continue 
in fellowship with God. When Peter demanded to have 
his hands and head washed the Lord told him “He that is 
washed needeth not save to wash his feet, but is clean every 
whit; and ye are clean, but notall.”” By these words the Lord 
told Peter that inasmuch as they all had believed on Him, 
with the exception of Judas Iscariot, they were washed and 
clean every whit. And in other Scriptures the same symbol 
is used. “Born of the water and the Spirit’? (John iii:5). 
“The washing of regeneration” (Titus iii:5). ‘Our bodies 
washed with pure water’ (Heb. x:22). But this could 
never apply to the Lord Jesus: Christ. He needed no wash- 
ing, no regeneration, for He is holy and undefiled. 

Aaron was then clothed with the holy garments, invested 
with his official robes. These are described in detail in 
Exodus xxviii.* The investiture of the sons of Aaron took 
place after the anointing of the tabernacle and Aaron as high 
priest. Christ and His work is put into the foreground. He 
is anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows (Ps. 
xlv:7; Heb. i:9). But linked with Him are His fellows, His 
seed, the many sons He brings to glory. Their garments, 
including the breeches (Exodus xxviii:42) (not mentioned 
here), were of pure white linen, the type of the holiness and 
righteousness into which the grace of God has brought us 


*Bible Study Pamphlet No. 4 on “Exodus” gives the typical meaning 
of the garments. This description of the official dress and what is 
typified by it should be carefully studied. 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 229 


in Christ. We are a holy priesthood. See also Rev. iv:4., 
“And round about the throne were four and twenty thrones, 
and upon the thrones I saw four and twenty elders sitting 
clothed in white raiment; and they had on their heads crowns 
of gold.”” “And to her was granted that she should be ar- 
rayed in fine linen, clean and white; for the fine linen is the 
righteousnesses of the saints” (Rev. xix:8). 

The tabernacle, the altar, the laver and finally Aaron 
were anointed with the holy oil. The oil was sprinkled 
upon the altar seven times. No blood was shed for atone- 
ment. All this has its blessed significance. While by this 
ceremony the tabernacle with all what was in it was sancti- 
fied and consecrated, it also typifies the consecration of all 
through Christ. The anointing of Aaron is the type of 
the ancinting of our Lord. ‘God anointed Jesus with the 
Holy Spirit and with power” (Acts x:38). 

After the investiture of the sons of Aaron came the sac- 
rifice of the bullock for a Sin-offering. This was followed 
by the ram of the Burnt-offering. Then the sacrifice of a 
second ram, the ram of consecration. Aaron and his sons 
laid their hands upon the head of the bullock and also upon 
the heads of the rams before they were killed. The Sin- 
offering had to come first for Aaron’s sin and those of his 
sons. Aaron was a sinful man, Christ was not. But His 
gracious identification with us is here foreshadowed. The 
Burnt-offering, speaking of the perfection of Christ, was 
alone a sweet savour unto the Lord. For Aaron and his 
sons it had the meaning c: their full consecration to the 
service of God. The second ram was for consecration; 
the literal rendering from the Hebrew is “the ram of fillings,” 
because of verse 27. where we read that their hands were filled 
to wave it all as a Wave-offering before the Lord. The blood 
of this second ram was put upon the tip of the right ear of 
Aaron, upon the thumb of the right hand and upon the great 
toe of his right foot. The same was done to Aaron’s sons. 
Their whole bodies were thus set apart for the service of 
God in virtue of the blood which had been shed. It is the 
most blessed type of sanctification by that “better blood,” 


230 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


the blood of Christ. The ear is for hearing; we are set 
apart to hear the Word of God and yield obedience to it. 
The hand is set apart to serve and to do His will, and the 
feet to walk in His ways. No such sanctification was 
possible till the blood had been shed. All this foreshadows 
our sanctification by blood, and the results of this sanctifica- 
tion. The anointing oil was also sprinkled with the blood 
(of the Peace-offering) upon Aaron and his sons and their 
garments. The sacrificial feast, which followed is interest- 
ing and full of meaning. They fed upon the ram and the 
unleavened bread. 

“This sacrificial feast most fitly marked the conclusion 
of the rites of consecration. Hereby it was signified, first, 
that by this solemn service they were now brought into a 
relation of peculiarly intimate fellowship with Jehovah, 
as the ministers of His house, to offer His offerings, and to 
be fed at His table. It was further signified, that strength 
for the duties of this office should be supplied to them by 
Him whom they were to serve, in that they were to be fed 
of His altar. And, finally, in that the ritual took the specific 
form of a thank-offering, was thereby expressed, as was 
fitting, their gratitude to God for the grace which had chosen 
them and set them apart to so holy and exalted service. 

“These consecration services were to be repeated for 
seven consecutive days, during which time they were not 
to leave the tent of meeting,—obviously, that by no chance 
they might contract any ceremonial defilement; so jealously 
must the sanctity of everything pertaining to the service be 
guarded.” * 

How necessary for us who are constituted ‘‘a holy priest- 
hood to offer up spiritual sacrifices” to feed thus on Himself, 
who is ever before us in these ceremonies. It is at the 
Lord’s table, when we eat and drink in remembrance of 
Him, we feed on Him and then exercise our ho.y priesthood 
of praise and worship. The seven days mean typically 
our life down here during which our consecration continues. 


*S. H. Kellogg. 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 231 


The seven days stand for this age when a “heavenly priest- 
hood” is feasting (the church), and when the seven days 
end something new begins. The eighth day which follows 
marks this new beginning. 


2. The Functions of the Priesthood Exercised. 
CHAPTER IX. 


1. The New Offerings of the Priests. Vs. 1-14. 
%. The People’s Offerings. Vs. 15-21. 
8. The Fulness of Blessing and Glory. Vs. 22-24. 


A service follows the consecration of the priests, in which 
they officiated; hitherto Moses had acted by Divine com- 
mand. The service ordered is of great significance. For 
seven days, during the days of their consecration, a bullock 
had been offered for Aaron and his sons, and yet at the be- 
ginning of the eighth day a young calf for a Sin-offering and 
a ram for a Burnt-offering are needed. This reminds us of 
Hebrews x:4, “‘For it is not possible that the blood of bulls 
and of goats should take away sins.” But there is a deeper 
meaning here. In connection with these new offerings 
on the eighth day the promise is given “‘today the Lord will 
appear unto you,” and “the glory of the Lord shall appear 
unto you.” We must look for a prophetic, dispensational 
foreshadowing. And such we have here. 

We have seen that Aaron and his sons typify a heavenly 
priesthood, Christ, and those who are priests with Him. 
But Aaron and his sons also typify the nation Israel. While 
the seven days of the consecration feast foreshadow the 
present age in which believers in Christ feast and exercise 
the functions of their spiritual priesthood, the eighth day 
stands for the beginning of the coming age in which the Lord 
will appear unto His people Israel and when His glory is mani- 
fested. Then Israel will become the kingdom of priests. 
The Sin-offering and Burnt-offering brought again shows 
that it is in virtue of the blessed work of Christ. Then “all 


232 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


Israel,” the remnant of that day, will be saved and “there 
shall be a fountain opened to the house of David and to the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness” (Zech. 
xiii:1). The offerings for the people in our chapter suggests 
this prophetic application. When the seven days, the pres- 
ent age, is ended, then Israel will look upon Him, whom they 
have pierced and mourn for Him (Zech. xii:10). 

A still more interesting event is given in the close of our 
chapter. Aaron came down from the altar where he had 
brought the offerings to bless the people. Immediately 
upon that he withdrew and entered with Moses into the 
holy place. Moses and Aaron were then invisible to the 
people. But they came forth, and a second blessing was 
pronounced upon the people. Nothing is said of how long 
both were in the holy place. We have here the beautiful 
types of the work of Christ and the blessing, which results 
from it for His people. As Aaron came forth the second 
time, so Christ will come the second time to bless His people 
Israel with peace. Moses, the leader of the people, typifies 
kingship, and Aaron the priesthood. Both coming out of 
the holy place foreshadow the second coming of Christ, 
the King—Priest. Melchisedek was king of righteousness 
and king of peace and priest as well, the type of Christ. 
When Christ comes again He will receive His throne and be 
a priest upon that throne. All this will mean glory for Him, 
glory for the church, glory and blessing for Israel, and glory 
for the earth. Then the glory of the Lord will appear, as 
it appeared when Moses and Aaron blessed the people. 
The fire came out from before the Lord. The Shekinah- 
Glory appeared and the flashing fire falling upon the altar 
consumed the offerings and the fat. The Lord thereby 
showed His approval of all that had been done. Jewish 
tradition claims that the fire which was never to cease burp- 
ing was started in this Divine act 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 233 


3. Nadab and Abihu. The False Worship and Its Results. 
CHAPTER X. 


1. The False Worship and the Judgment. Vs. 1-7. 
2. New Instructions. Vs. 8-15. 
3. The Neglect of Eleazar and Ithamar. Vs. 16-20. 


The ceremonies were ended and the people, beholding the 
glory of the Lord, had worshipped. A terrible occurrence 
follows the beautiful ending of the previous chapter. Nadab 
and Abihu, two sons of Aaron, offered strange fire before 
Jehovah. The fire before Jehovah devoured them and they 
died before the Lord. The sin consisted in taking strange 
fire, which Jehovah had not commanded; most likely it was 
fire they produced themselves, instead of taking the fire from 
off the altar (Lev. xvi:12). The whole action was in utter 
disregard of the commandment given and an act of disobe- 
dience. This sin in the form as committed by Nadab and 
Abihu was never repeated. However, the principle of this 
sin is to be seen on all sides and in many forms in Christen- 
dom. It was “will worship.” It was doing that in their 
own will, what God had not commanded. And in Christian 
worship, so called, how much there is which is will worship! 
How numerous the carnal things, the inventions and tradi- 
tions of men, used in worship which have not alone no 
sanction whatever in the Word, but are altogether contrary 
to a true worship in the Spirit. Well has one said: ““When one 
goes into many a church and chapel and sees the multitude 
of devices by which, as it is imagined, the worship and adora- 
tion of God is furthered, it must be confessed that it certainly 
seems as if the generation of Nadab and Abihu was not yet 
extinct; even although a patient God, in the mystery of His 
long suffering, flashes not instantly forth His vengeance.” 
The fire of judgment, however, will some day fall upon all 
the false worship and make an end of it. 

What induced them to act in this way so that the judg- 
ment of God fell upon them? The warning which follows 


234 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


this incident gives a strong hint on the possible cause of 
their presumptuous deed. Read verses 8 and 9. Ihe 
warning against strong drink hints, no doubt, that they 
had been under the influence of strong drink. It must have 
been intoxication. May we remember that there is also 
another intoxication, which is a strange fire and which Got 
hates. How much of Christian service and activity is there 
which is not done under the leading of the Holy Spirit. 
Then there are the so-called “revivals,” with their purely 
soulical emotion and carnal means which are used. The 
unscriptural, and alas! sometimes even vulgar language 
used by a certain class of evangelists, aiming at excitement 
and popularity, the forced and often spurious results, 
heralded to increase the fame of the leader, the aim to receive 
large financial remuneration, etc., belongs all to the strange 
fire. In one word, all which is not done in worship and in 
service in dependence on the Holy Spirit and under His 
guidance in obedience to the Word, is strange fire. 

The judgment of the two sons of Aaron makes known the 
holiness of Jehovah, who dwelled in the midst of His people. 
In some respects it is analogous to the judgment of Ananias 
and Sapphira in the New Testament (Acts v). 

Aaron held his peace. Grace sustained him, so that he 
could submit to the Divine judgment without a murmur, 
though his heart was greatly burdened (verse 19). He and 
his sons were not to mourn the dead according to priestly 
custom. Then follows the command to abstain from the 
use of wine and strong drink when they were exercising their 
priesthood. The reason first is stated in verses 10-12. 
“That ye may put a difference between holy and unholy, 
and between unclean and clean; and that ye may teach the 
children of Israel all the statutes, which the Lord hath 
spoken unto them by the hand of Moses.” 

“The prohibition of wine and strong drink when going 
into the tent of meeting connects itself, of course, with the 
sin of Aaron’s sons: and for us plainly covers all fleshly 
stimulus, which prevents clear discernment of what is or is 
not according to the mind and nature of God. For us also 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 235 


who are called to walk in the light of God’s presence con- 
tinually, this is not a casual, but a constant rule. The im- 
pulse of nature needs the restraint of Christ’s yoke; even 
where, as the apostle says, things are lawful to us, we must 
still not be brought under the power of any (1 Cor. vi:12). 
And how easily do they acquire power!” * 

Commandments previously given to them are then re- 
stated. The judgment demanded this. All what follows 
in this chapter may be looked upon as the effect of the 
judgment which had fallen upon Nadab and Abihu. Eleazar 
and Ithamar failed in not eating the Sin-offering, and only 
the intercession of Aaron kept them from judgment. The 
earthly priesthood has failure stamped upon it. 


*Numerical Bible. 


PROPERTY OF 


BIBLE INSTITUTE LIBRARY 


LIS, NEW JERSEY 


NORTHEASTERN 


236 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


III. Holiness Demanded. 


Chapters xi-xv. 


1. The Clean and the Unclean. 


ESSEX FE 


CHAPTER XI. 


Concerning the Beasts on the Earth. Vs. 1-8. 
Concerning Things in the Water. Vs. 9-12 
Concerning Flying and Creeping Things. Vs. 13-23, 
Concerning Defilement with Dead Bodies. Vs. 24—4v. 


ee A a 


The chapters which form the third section of Leviticus 
are by some taken to give evidence that not Moses, but an- 
other person arranged the material of the book. Even men 
who do not deny the inspiration of the book claim that the 
hand of a redactor is here discovered. In their opinion 
chapter xvi should follow immediately after the tenth 
chapter, because the first verse of the sixteenth chapter 
connects with the death of Nadab and Abihu. We do not 
agree with this view, but believe that the arrangement as 
we have it, is as Moses made it. Immediately after the sol- 
emn judgment Jehovah spoke again unto Moses and Aaron. 
Each chapter begins with the statement “And Jehovah 
spake.” The holy One now demands that His people whom 
He has redeemed and made nigh, must be a holy people. 

The fact of man’s sin and defilement is fully demonstrated 
in this section. 

The eleventh chapter consists in commandments concern- 
ing clean and unclean animals. In chapter xx:24-26, the 
reason for this distinction is given. ‘‘But I have said unto 
you: Ye shall inherit the land and I will give it unto you to 
possess it, a land that floweth with milk and honey; I am 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 237 


the Lord your God, which have separated you from other 
people. Ye shall therefore put a difference between clean 
beasts and unclean, and between unclean fowls and clean; 
and you shall not make your souls abominable by beast, or 
by fowl, or by any manner of living thing that creepeth on 
the ground, which I have separated from you as unclean. 
And ye shall be holy unto me: for I the Lord am holy, and 
have severed you from other people, that ye should be 
mine.” 

Al! those beasts were unclean which do not both chew 
the cud and divide the hoof (see also Deut. xiv)—those 
fishes were unclean which have not both fins and scales— 
and those birds were unclean which are known as birds of 
prey, as well as insects (with the exception of certain locusts) 
and flying mammalia. The subject before us deserves a far 
deeper and more extended study than we can give it in a 
small pamphlet. We are obliged to confine ourselves to 
but a few hints. We need not to devote much space to the 
wisdom revealed in these laws. As God is the author of 
them they must necessarily reveal His wisdom. It is 
interesting that all civilized races abstain from the use of the 
greater part of the animals, which this code prohibits. With 
the exception of a number of forbidden animals, civilized 
nations partake of only such which these laws permit. 
And those which are commonly eaten, such as the oysters, 
the hog and others, prohibited in this code, science has 
shown to be more or less responsible for certain diseases 
and therefore dangerous as a food. The discoveries made 
by science fully demonstrate the wisdom of these distinc- 
tions between the different animals. These laws in their 
literal meaning are, of course, no longer binding; the re- 
ligious observance of them was not a permanent thing, and 
is done away with in the New Testament. The church has 
no such laws distinguishing between the clean and unclean 
animals. The clean typify the Jew and the unclean the 
Gentile. Peter’s vision on the housetop of Joppa warrants 
“his interpretation (Acts x). The clean, the Jews, and the 
unclean, Gentiles, are, in believing, gathered into the one 


238 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


body. Read Colossians ii:16-17, where the fact is stated 
that Leviticus xi is no longer in force.* 

But there is also a deeper meaning to ali this. Yet in 
looking for deeper and spiritual lessons, one must be guarded 
against a fanciful and far-fetched application. This has often 
been done. It is obvious that these laws coneerning the 
clean and the unclean, teach the path of separation, which 
Jehovah has marked out for His redeemed people. Only 
that which is clean according to the Divine estimate was to 
be their food. And we, as His redeemed people, must feed 
spiritually upon the food God has provided for us, that is 
Christ. The clean and the unclean, all show certain charac- 
teristics, which may well be studied. In the New Testament 
unclean animals are used to represent unbelievers and un- 
saved persons. The dog and the swine are thus used (2 
Peter ii:22). The sheep, as everybody knows, typifies a 
believer. The characteristics of the clean animals may 
therefore give some typical lessons on the characteristics of 
those who believe, and the unclean, characteristics of those 
who believe not. However, we repeat, these things must 
not be pressed too far. It is interesting to see the prominence 
given to the chewing of the cud and the dividing of the hoof. 
These two things found together in an animal constituted 
them clean. Those which only chewed the cud, but did 
not divide the hoof, and others dividing the hoof and not 
chewing the cud, were unclean. The feeding and the walking 
are thus made prominent. A Christian, born again, and 
therefore clean, must feed upon the Word, meditate upon 
it constantly, like “chewing the cud.” The feet stand for 
the walk, and that must correspond with the feeding upon 
the Word. The clean fish had to have fins and scales. 
The fins are for swift movement through the waters 


*While these laws have no longer a religious significance, it is wise to 
follow them as much as possible. Orthodox Jews who hold strictly 
to these dietary laws and keep them are far more free from certain 
diseases than Gentile races, which ignore these laws. It has also been 
shown by statistics that the mean duration of Jewish life averages 
much higher than that of others. 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS 239 


and the scales for defence. This too is not withoui 
meaning. 


2. Childbirth Laws. Inherited Sin. 


CHAPTER XII. 


1. The Man-child. Vs. 1-4. 
2. The Maid-child. V. 5. 
8. The Offerings. Vs. 6-8. 


The childbirth laws as contained in this chapter are full 
of meaning. The woman is constituted unclean by the 
birth of a child. When a man-child was born, she was 
to be unclean for seven days, and her purification was to 
end thirty-three days after that; forty days after childbirth.* 
In case of the birth of a maid-child the days of uncleanness 
were just double, fourteen and sixty-six. But why was this? 
The key to the spiritual meaning of this chapter is found in 
this very fact. ‘Adam was not deceived, but the woman 
being deceived was in the transgression” (1 Tim. ii:14). 
It was by the woman that the fall was brought about through 
the Serpent. The facts that sin is in the world, how it came 
into the world and that sin is inherited, transmitted from 
generation to generation are made known in this brief 
chapter. The woman is constituted unclean because she 
is a sinful creature. Her sorrow and pain in childbirth, 
which no science nor discovery can remove, is a definite 
witness to the truth as contained in the third chapter of 
Genesis. And because she is a sinful creature and unclean, 
her offspring too is sinful and unclean, for “who can bring 
a clean thing out of an unclean?” What later David ex- 
pressed, when he stood in the light, confessing his sin, is 
here seen in the childbirth laws. ‘Behold I was shapen 


*A, Bonar, in his work on “Leviticus,” makes the following con- 
jecture: ‘‘May it have been the case that Adam and Eve remained 
only forty days unfallen! These forty days would thus be a reminis- 
cence of that holy time on earth. The last Adam was forty days on 
earth after His resurrection, recalling to mind earth’s time of Paradise.” 


240 THE BCOK OF LEVITICUS. 


in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me” (Psalm 
li:5). And well may think here of her who was a sinful 
woman like every other woman, but, who, conceived by the 
Holy Spirit, Mary, the virgin. The One born of her had 
no sin, but is “that holy thing” called the Son of God (Luke 
1:35). 

On the eighth day the male child was to be circumcised. 
Both “circumcision” and “‘the eighth day” are of spiritual 
significance. The eighth day is the type of resurrection, 
the new creation. Circumcision is given in the New Testa- 
ment in its true meaning. See Romans vi:6; Col. ii:11; 
Phil. iii:3. This indicates the manner how God hath dealt 
with inherited sin in the cross of His blessed Son, our Saviour 
and Lord. Then follows the commandment concerning the 
offerings, when the days of purification were ended. It 
was for both the male and the female, the same offering, a 
lamb and a young pigeon or turtle dove. ‘And if she be 
not able to bring a lamb, then she shall bring two turtles or 
two young pigeons.” Read and compare with Luke ii:22. 


3. Leprosy. Type of Indwelling Sin. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


1. Leprosy in a Person. Vs. 1-46. 
2. The Infected Garment. Vs, 47-57. 
3. The Cleansing of the Garment. Vs. 58-59, 


The entire chapter treats of leprosy. It has been argued 
from the side of critics that the disease described here is not 
the one we know as leprosy, but only a similar disease of 
the skin. The arguments advanced to support this objec- 
tion are silenced by Matthew viii:1-4. The man who came 
to our Lord had leprosy. The Lord told him ‘show thyself 
to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for 
a testimony unto them.” From this we learn that Leviticus 
xiii and xiv speak of the real disease, so loathsome and, 
from human side, incurable. The twelfth and thirteenth 
chapters of Leviticus are closely linked together. Inherited 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 241 


sin is the theme of the preceding chapter. Its cure is also 
indicated in circumcision and the offering. Leprosy is the 
type of indwelling sin and its awful corruption. This 
horrible disease was chosen by the Lord to typify sin on 
account of its vileness. Like sin it is progressive and even- 
tually affects the whole being; it is hereditary and incurable. 
As the disease progresses the victim becomes more and 
more insensible to his dreadful condition and is even con- 
tent with it. 

“In view of all these correspondences, one need not wonder 
that in the symbolism of the law leprosy holds the place 
which it does. For what other disease can be named which 
combines in itself, as a physical malady, so many of the 
most characteristic marks of the malady of the soul? In 
its intrinsic loathsomeness, its insignificant beginnings, 
its slow but inevitable progress, in the extent of its effects, 
in the insensibility which accompanies it, in its hereditary 
character, in its incurability, and, finally, in the fact that 
according to the law it involved the banishment of the leper 
from the camp of Israel,—in all these respects, it stands alone 
as a perfect type of sin; it is sin, as it were, made visible in 
the flesh.” * 

The Lord had much to say about the examination of 
persons suspected of having leprosy, and how the disease 
was to be detected. First the case of leprosy is stated 
when it rises spontaneously, showing itself in the skin and 
the hair. Then follows the case where leprosy rises out of 
a boil and out of a burn (verses 18-28), and finally leprosy 
on the head or beard and its diagnosis (verses 27-44). 

But these general applications of leprosy as a type of sin 
does not fully explain the lessons of this chapter. We must 
remember that Israel is viewed as Jehovah’s redeemed 
people. As such they must keep out of their midst that 
which defiles. The same principle we find in the New 
Testament in connection with the church, the assembly of 
God. Leprosy, indwelling sin, showing itself in any member 


*Leviticus—S. H, Kellogg. 


242 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


of the people of God, works havoc. It dishonors God and 
defiles others. Discipline must be exercised. ‘Therefore 
put away from among yourselves that wicked person” 
(1 Cor. v:13). The priest was the person to examine closely 
the suspected person and pronounce the disease as leprosy, 
according to the signs given by the Word of God. On 
the one hand the priest had to watch that no real leper be 
kept in the congregation of Israel, and on the other hand, 
he had to be equally careful that none was put out of the 
congregation who was not a leper. “Holiness could not 
permit any one to remain in who ought to be out; and on 
the other hand, grace would not have any one out who 
ought to be in.” In the New Testament this solemn duty 
falls upon those who are spiritual (Gal. vi:1). Note how 
God commanded that the suspected one should not be 
treated in a hasty manner. After the priest had looked 
upon him, the diseased one was to be shut up for seven days. 
On the seventh day the priest was again to look on him. 
Then he was again shut up for seven more days. And after 
all the seeing and looking upon, the priest was to consider. 
It showed the necessity of great care. How easy it is to 
condemn a brother as living in sin, showing leprosy in his 
conduct; a hasty action in excluding a real child of God 
from Christian fellowship is as sinful as permitting a wicked 
person in that fellowship. We cannot enter into the different 
signs of leprosy. Much which has been written on it by 
some good men is strained. 

When an Israelite was found to have the true leprosy, 
he had to be without the camp. “And the leper in whom 
the plague is, his clothes shall be rent, and his head bare, 
and he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, and shall 
ery, Unclean, unclean. All the days wherein the plague 
shall be in him he shall be defiled; he is unclean, he shall 
dwell alone, without the camp shall his habitation be” 
(verses 45-46). Thus the poor leper was excluded from the 
congregation of Israel and from the tabernacle of Jehovah. 
The rent clothes, the bare head, the covering upon the lip, 
all showed his sad and deplorable condition. So the unsaved 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 243 


sinner is shut out from Jehovah’s presence on account of 
his defilement and has no place among the people of God. 
Without the camp! Read the solemn words in Rev. xxi:27 
and xxii:11; 15. The sinner unforgiven and not cleansed 
will be forever shut out of the presence of a holy God. And 
one, who is a child of God and belongs to the family and 
people of God, and permits indwelling sin to work out, is 
unfit for both fellowship with God and fellowship with His 
people. But notice it says, “all the days wherein the plague 
shall be in him he shall be defiled.” Here is the ray of Hope. 
Only as long:as it was in him was he excluded. Recovery 
from the evil thing which defiles and disturbs our fellowship 
is blessedly revealed in the New Testament. It has to be 
brought into the light, must be confessed and put away 
(1 John i). And above all, we have an Advocate with the 
Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. 

Leprosy in the garment is also reckoned with, and its dae 
ing by washing is commanded. A garment is that which 
belongs to a person and is used by him. It is typical of 
contamination by sin in our earthly occupation. The 
Cleansing by the Water is the type of the Word of God, 
which uncovers the leprosy in our ways and can cleanse us. 


4, The Cleansing of the Leper. 
CHAPTER XIV. 


1. The Cleansing of the Leper. Vs. 1-32. 
2. Leprosy in the House and its Purification. Vs. 33-54. 


The cleansing and restoration of the leper is full of sig- 
nificance, foreshadowing once more the blessed work of our 
Saviour. Two parts in this ceremonial are to be noticed 
first of all. The first thing done was to restore the leper 
among the people from whom he had been put away. The 
second part of the ceremony restored him fully to com- 
munion with God. The first part was accomplished on 
the first day; the second part on the eighth day. A careful 
distinction must be made between the healing and the cleans- 


244 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


ing. All the ceremonies could not heal the leper. Jehovah 
alone could heal that loathsome disease. But after the 
healing, the cleansing and restoration had to be accomplished. 
However, what was done for the leper is a most blessed 
illustration of the work of Christ and of the Gospel in which 
the believing sinner is saved, and the sinning saint cleansed 
and restored. The leper outside of the camp could not do 
anything for himself. He was helpless and could not cleanse 
himself; it had to be done for him. The priest had to make 
the start for his cleansing and restoration. He had to go 
forth out of the camp to seek the leper; the leper could not 
come to the priest, the priest had to come to him. Well 
may we think here of Him, who left the Father’s Glory 
and came to this earth, the place of sin and shame, where 
the lepers are, shut out from God’s holy presence. He came 
to seek and to save what is lost. 

The two birds which the priest commanded to be taken 
for the leper are a beautiful type of Christ in His death, 
and Christ risen from the dead. The birds are typically 
belonging to heaven. The first bird was killed in an earthen 
vessel over running water. This likewise typifies Christ. 
The earthen vessel stands for the humanity of Christ. The 
running water is the Holy Spirit, who filled Him and then 
He gave Himself and shed His precious blood. And that 
blessed blood of atonement is what cleanses from all sin, 
and on account of that blood the leper can be restored. The 
second bird did not die, but was set at liberty to take up a 
heavenward journey. The second bird was dipped into 
the blood of the bird that was killed over the running 
water. This bird typifies Christ in resurrection. The 
bird in its upward flight, singing perchance a melodious 
song, bearing upon its white wings the precious token, 
the blood, typifies Christ in His accomplished work, risen 
from the grave and going back from where He came. He 
died for our offences and was raised for our justification. 
But with the living bird there was also used the cedar wood, 
the scarlet and the hyssop; these, with the living bird. 
were dipped into the blood. What do these things signify? 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 245° 


Scarlet is the bright and flashing color, which typifies the 
glory of ihe world (Dan. v:7; Nahum ii:3; Rev. xvii:3-4; 
xviil:12; 16). Cedar wood and hyssop are things of nature. 
The cedar stands in God’s Word always for that which is 
high and lofty. The insignificant small hyssop typifies that 
which is low. 

“From the lofty cedar which crowns the sides of Lebanon, 
down to the lowly hyssop—the wide extremes and all that 
lies between—nature in all its departments is brought 
under the power of the cross; so that the believer sees in 
the death of Christ the end of all his guilt, the end of all 
earth’s glory, and the end of the whole system of nature— 
the entire old creation. And with what is he to be occupied? 
With Him who is the Antitype of that living bird, with 
blood-stained feathers, ascending into the open heavens. 
Precious, glorious, soul-satisfying object! A risen, ascended, 
triumphant, glorified Christ, who has passed into the heav- 
ens, bearing in His sacred Person the marks of an accom: 
plished atonement. It is with Him we have to do: we are 
shut up to Him. He is God’s exclusive object; He is the 
centre of heaven’s joy, the theme of angels’ song. We 
want none of earth’s glory, none of nature’s attractions. 
We can behold them all, together with our sin and guilt, 
forever set aside by the death of Christ.”* 

It is a beautiful illustration of the great truth stated in 
Galatians vi:14. ‘‘God forbid that I should glory, save in 
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is 
crucified unto me, and I unto the world.” The leper was 
sprinkled seven times with the dipped bird, scarlet, cedar 
wood and hyssop. It was put upon him. And thus it is 
upon us, redeemed by blood, to live as dead unto the world. 
Throughout the entire ceremony the leper did nothing. 
Only after the blood was sprinkled and the bird set loose 
began he to wash his clothes, shave off his hair, and wash 
himself in water. After we are saved and cleansed we must 
go to the Word and cleanse by it our habits and our ways. 


*C, H. McIntosh. 


246 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


The second part of the ceremony on the eighth day restored 
the leper completely to his privileges. All is done again 
“before the Lord,” a phrase missing in the first part of the 
ceremony, but repeatedly mentioned in the second part. 
The Trespass-offering occupies the prominent place. And 
the blood of the lamb was put upon the right ear, the thumb 
of the right hand and upon the great toe of the right foot. 
The symbolical meaning is clear; the ear is cleansed and 
restored to hear the Word; the hand to serve and the foot 
to walk. The blood of atonement in its cleansing power 
is therefore blessedly foreshadowed in this ceremony. It 
has the same meaning as it has in the consecration of the 
priests. The leper was like one who came out of the realms 
of death and corruption to become again a member of the 
priestly nation. The oil was put then upon the blood. 
Where the blood was, the oil was also applied. The work 
of the Holy Spirit in the sanctification of the redeemed 
sinner is typified by this anointing. The oil was then poured 
upon him, the type of the unction of the holy One, which 
is upon all who are redeemed by blood. 

But there is still another lesson connected with all this. 
The delay in the full acceptance of the healed and cleansed 
leper and his full reinstitution and presentation before the 
Lord on the eighth day is of deeper meaning. The eighth 
day in the Word of God represents the resurrection and the 
new creation. We are now as His redeemed people healed 
and cleansed but not yet in the immediate presence of the Lord. 
The seven days the cleansed leper had to wait for his full 
restoration and to enter in, typify our life here on earth, 
waiting for the eighth day, the blessed morning, when 
the Lord comes and we shall possess complete redemption 
and appear in the presence of Himself and behold His glory. 
The eighth day came and it was impossible for the leper, 
upon whom the blood of the sacrificial bird had been sprink- 
led, to be kept out from appearing in His presence and re- 
ceive tne blessings of full redemption. Even so there comes 
for us, His redeemed people, the eighth day. May we also 
remember that the leper, waiting for the eighth dav. had 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 247 


to cleanse himself by the washing of water (verse 9). “Hav- 
ing therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse 
ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting 
holiness in the fear of God (2 Cor. vii:1). “And every man 
that hath this hope in Him purifieth himself, even as He is 
pure” (1 John iii:3). 

Nor must we forget Israel typified in this entire ceremony. 
Israel blinded is morally like a leper. They are outside 
and separated from Jehovah on account of their condition. 
In the future the remnant of Israel will be cleansed and then 
wait for that full restoration which God in His gracious 
purposes has promised unto them. 

Then follows a description of the plague of leprosy 
in a house. Leprosy, like other diseases, is caused 
by germs. These germs existing in the blood of the 
victim also may exist outside of the body, and under 
favorable conditions, especially in darkness, multiplying 
rapidly, spread the infection over a house and its contents. 
Bacteriology after years of laborious research has discovered 
these facts. Moses did not know about these bacteria in 
a house, but Jehovah knew. 

The house with leprosy in it has often been applied to 
Israel. What was done to the house to arrest the plague 
is applied to what God did to His people. But the plague 
re-appeared and culminated in the rejection of Christ; 
then the house was completely broken down. Others 
apply it to the church and see that the leprosy has entered 
into the professing church and will some day terminate 
in the complete judgment of Christendom. We do not 
believe this to be the entire meaning of leprosy in the house. 
It likewise typifies the presence and working of sin in the place 
where man has his abode, that is, the material creation of 
God. All has been dragged down by the fall of man. All 
creation is under a bondage of corruption, made subject to 
vanity and therefore travaileth in pain and groaneth. But 
there is hope, for groaning creation is to be delivered. Then 
for the cleansing of the house the same ceremony with the 
two birds was enacted and the house was cleansed by the 


248 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


sprinkling of the blood. This is typical of the work of Christ 
as it will eventually bring blessing to all creation and all 
things will be reconciled (Col. i:20). But here is also indi- 
cated the judgment by fire which is in store for the earth 
(2 Peter iii:10). Then there will be a new heaven and a 
new earth. 


Concerning Issues. Man’s Weakness and Defilement. 


CHAPTER XV. 


1. The Uncleanness of a Man. Vs. 1-18. 
2, The Uncleanness of a Woman. Vs. 19-33. 


The whole chapter shows the deplorable physical con- 
dition into which man has been plunged by sin. The issues 
mentioned were therefore an evidence of the presence of 
sin in man’s nature with the curse upon it, and constitutes 
man and woman unclean in the sight of God. “Not only 
actions, from which we can abstain, but operations of nature 
which we cannot help, alike defile; defile in such a manner 
and degree as to require, even as voluntary acts of sin, the 
cleansing of water and the expiatory blood of a Sin-offering. 
One could not avoid many of the defilements mentioned in 
this chapter, but that made no difference; he was unclean.” 
Fallen human nature in its weakness and defilement is 
taught, and that this human nature is impure and polluting 
even in its secret workings. The blood and the water covers 
all this. It must be noticed that the water and the different 
application of water is constantly mentioned throughout 
this chapter. The water always typifies the Word by which 
our way is to be cleansed. 

“Again, we learn that human nature is the ever-flowing 
fountain of uncleanness. It is hopelessly defiled; and not 
only defiled, but defiling. Awake or asleep, sitting, stand- 
ing, or lying, nature is defiled and defiling: its very touch 
conveys pollution. This is a deeply humbling lesson for 
proud humanity; but thus it is. The book of Leviticus 
holds up a faithful mirror to nature: it leaves ‘flesh’ nothing 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 249 


to glory in. Men may boast of their refinement, their 
moral sense, their dignity: let them study the third book 
of Moses, and there they will see what it is all really worth 
in God’s estimation.’’* 

The case of the woman with an issue of blood (Matthew 
ix:18-26) is stated in verse 25-27. How great must have 
been her trial and her sorrow during the twelve years of her 
uncleanness. Still greater was her faith and the testimony 
she bore to the holy Person of our Lord. All what came 
in touch with such an unclean person became unclean. 
She believed both that her touch could not make Christ 
unclean, for He is holy, and that His power could heal her. 


*C. H. McIntosh, 


250 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


oe 


IV. The Day of Atonement. 
In the Holiest. 


Chapters xvi-xvii. 


1. The Day of Atonement. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


The Command how Aaron was to Enter. Vs. 1-8. 

The Presentation of the Offerings. Vs. 6-10. 

The Blood Carried into the Holiest. Vs. 11-19. 

The Scapegoat. Vs. 20-22. 

Aaron’s Burnt-offering and that for the People. Vs, 23-25, 
The Ceremony Outside of the Camp. Vs. 26-28. 

. Cleansed and Resting. Vs. 29-34. 


IOP ww 


A brief rehearsal of the ceremonies of this great day of 
atonement, with a few explanatory remarks, will help in 
a better understanding of this chapter. The day of atone- 
ment was for the full atonement of all the sins, transgressions 
and failures of Israel, so that Jehovah in His holiness might 
tabernacle in their midst. On that day alone the Holiest 
was opened for the high priest to enter in. That all con- 
nected with this day is the shadow of the real things to come, 
and that in the New Testament we have the blessed sub- 
stance, is well known. The Epistle to the Hebrews is in 
part the commentary to Israel’s great day of atonement. 
The way into the Holiest by the rent vail which is revealed 
in the Epistle to the Hebrews, was not made known on the 
day of atonement. The day itself was celebrated on the 
tenth day of the seventh month, and it was a Sabbath of 
rest in which they were to afflict their souls (chapter xxiii :27— 
29). What is called “afflict” was fasting, the outward sign 
of inward sorrow over sin. When this was omitted the 
atonement did not profit anything “for whatsoever soul 
it be that shall not be afflicted in that same day, he shall 
be cut off from among his people.” Only true faith mani- 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 251 


fested by repentance gives the sinner a share in the great 
work of atonement. 

Aaron is the central figure in the day of atonement. All 
is his work with the exception of the leading away of the 
scapegoat. Aaron is the type of Christ. Aaron had to 
enter the Holiest with the blood of sacrifice, but Christ en- 
tered by His own blood. “Neither by the blood of goats 
and calves, but by His own blood He entered in once into 
the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us.” 
(Heb. ix:12). Aaron had to come into the holy place with 
a Sin-offering and a Burnt-offering. Nothing is said about 
a Meal- or a Peace-offering. These would be out of keeping 
with the purpose of the day. As we have seen, the Sin- 
and the Burnt-offerings foreshadow the perfect work of 
Christ in which God’s righteous claims are met and in 
which atonement is made for the creature’s sins. Aaron 
had to lay aside his robes of beauty and glory and put on 
the white linen garments after he had washed his flesh in 
water. Christ did not need fine linen garments, nor was 
there any need in Him for washing. Aaron wearing these 
garments and washed in water typifies what Christ is in 
Himself. Aaron had to take next two kids of the goats 
for a Sin-offering and a ram for a Burnt-offering. He had 
to offer the bullock of the Sin-offering (chapter iv:3). Such 
an offering for Himself Christ did not need (Heb. vii:27). 
But Aaron’s offering was an atonement for his house. And 
Christ is Son over His house, whose house we are (Heb. iii:6). 
The bullock offering made by Aaron typifies therefore the 
aspect of Christ’s work for the church. The two goats 
were for the people Israel. Lots were cast by Aaron, and 
one goat was taken by lot for Jehovah and the other for the 
scapegoat. After the choice by lot had been made Aaron 
killed the Sin-offering for himself and his house. Then hay- 
ing taken a censer full of burning coals of fire from off the 
altar, with his hands full of sweet incense, he entered within 
the vail, into the Holiest. The cloud of incense covered the 
mercy seat. He then sprinkled the blood with his finger 
upon the mercy seat eastward and seven times before the 


252 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


mercy seat. How blessedly all this foreshadows Christ 
and His work! The incense typifies the fragrance of His 
own person, and the sprinkled blood is the type of His own 
precious blood, in which God accomplishes all His eternal 
and sovereign counsels of grace. 

“The blood which is sprinkled upon the believer’s con- 
science has been sprinkled ‘seven times’ before the throne 
of God. The nearer we get to God, the more importance 
and value we find attached to the blood of Jesus. If we look 
at the brazen altar, we find the blood there; if we look at 
the brazen laver, we find the blood there; if we look at the 
golden altar, we find the blood there; if we look at the vail 
of the tabernacle, we find the blood there: but in no place 
do we find so much about the blood as within the vail, 
before Jehovah’s throne, in the immediate presence of the 
divine glory.” 

“In heaven His blood forever speaks, 
In God the Father’s ears.” 


Then the first goat was killed and the blood was atso 
sprinkled in the same manner. “And he shall make an 
atonement for the holy place, because of the uncleanness 
of the children of Israel, and. because of their transgressions 
in all their sins; and so shall he do for the tabernacle of the 
congregation that remaineth among them in the midst of 
their uncleanness” (verse 16). “And almost all things 
are by the law purged with blood; and without shedding 
of blood is no remission. It was therefore necessary that 
the patterns of the things in the heavens should be purified 
with these; but the heavenly things themselves with better 
sacrifices than these” (Heb. ix:22-23). Christ brought the 
one great sacrifice on the cross and then entered into heaven 
itself. Having made by Himself purification of sins He 
sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. Christ 
Himself, in the Holiest, is the blood-sprinkled mercy seat. 
Aaron and his presence in the Holiest behind the vail is 
described in verse 17: “And there shall be no man in the taber- 
nacle of the congregation when he goeth in to make an 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 253 


atonement in the holy place, until he come out, and have 
made an atonement for himself, one for his household, and 
for all the congregation of Israel.’”’ We see again the differ- 
ence which is made in the atonement for Aaron and his house- 
hold and the atonement for all the congregation of Israel. 
It foreshadows the atonement made by the one sacrifice of 
Christ for the church and for Israel. Israel, however, does 
not yet possess the blessings and fruits of this atonement 
on account of their unbelief. We shall soon see how this 
great day of atonement foreshadows the forgiveness of their 
sins in the future. The true priest having gone into heaven 
with His own blood and being there alone, the day of atone- 
ment is now. And we who believe and constitute His church 
have boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus, 
by a new and living way which He hath consecrated for us 
through the vail, that is to say, His flesh. This entire age 
is the day of atonement, and it will end when He comes 
forth again. 

When the work was finished by Aaron and he had come 
forth again the live goat was brought. Aaron then put his 
hands upon it and confessed over him all the iniquities of 
the children of Israel, all their transgression, and all their 
sins. All these were put symbolically upon the head of 
the goat and a fit man sent the goat away into the wilderness. 
“And the goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto 
a land not inhabited; and he shall let go the goat in the 
wilderness.””» We cannot follow the different views ex- 
pressed on the meaning of this second goat. However, we 
mention a few. The word for scapegoat is in the Hebrew 
“Azazel.” * Some take it that Azazel is an evil being. 
Inasmuch as it saith that one goat is to be for Jehovah, and 
Jehovah is a person, and the second goat is to be for Azazel, 
Azazel must also be a person. Some critics claim that all 
this is a kind of a relic of demon-worship; such a statement 
is not only wrong, but pernicious. Others claim that the goat 
sent to Azazel in the wilderness shows Israel’s sin in rejecting 


*The different revised versions all substitute “Azazel” for scapegoat. 


254 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


Christ, and that they were on account of it delivered to 
Satan. There are still other views which we do not mention. 
Jewish and Christian expositors declare that Azazel is Satan, 
and try to explain why the goat was sent to him.* 

There is no need for all these speculations. “Azazel” 
is not at all an evil being or Satan. The Hebrew word sig- 
nifies ‘“‘dismissal’”—‘‘to depart.”’ It is translated in the 
Septuagint (Greek version of the Old Testament) with “evs 
teen apopompee, which means “to let him go for the 
dismissal.” Both goats are for Sin-offering. The first goat 
represents Christ dying for the sins of His people. The 
second goat laden with those sins which were atoned for by 
the blood of the first goat, represents the blessed effect of 
the work of Christ, that the sins of His people are forever 
out of sight. It is a blessed harmony with the two birds 
used in connection with the cleansing of the leper. 

And here the dispensational aspect comes in. Before the 
transgressions of Israel could be confessed over the scape- 
goat and before the goat could be sent forever away with its 
burden, never to return, the high priest had to come out of 
the Holiest. As long as he remained alone in the taber- 
nacle the scapegoat could not carry off the sins of the people. 
When the Lord appears the second time, when He comes 
forth out of Heaven’s glory as the King-Priest, then the 


*The best exposition we have seen on this view is by Kurtz: ‘‘The 
blood of the first goat was carried by him into the holiest of all, on this 
day (on which alone he was permitted to enter) and sprinkled on the 
mercy-seat. The sins for which atonement was thus made, were put 
upon the head of the second goat, which was sent away alive into the 
wilderness of Azazel (the evil demon, represented as dwelling in the 
wilderness), in order that the latter might ascertain all that had been 
done, and know that he no longer retained power over Israel. This 
whole transaction expressed the thought that the atonement made on 
this day was so complete, and so plain and undeniable, that even Satan 
the Accuser (Job, chap. i and ii; Zech, chap. iii; Rev. xii:10, 11) was 
compelled to acknowledge it. In the sacrifice of this day, consequently, 
the sacrifice of Christ is shadowed and typified more clearly than in 
any other, even as we read in Heb, ix:12: ‘“‘By his own blood he entered 
in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us,” 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 255 


blessed effect of His death for that nation (John xi:51) will 
be realized and their sins and transgressions will forever be 
put away. Then their sins will be cast into the depths of 
the sea (Micah vii:19) and they shall no more be remembered 
(Is. xliii:25). That this is the true meaning of the scapegoat 
taking the sins of the people into the wilderness and there- 
fore forever out of sight, we shall learn also in the twenty- 
third chapter. The feasts and holy seasons mentioned 
there are: Passover (Redemption by Blood); Firstfruits 
(Resurrection); Feast of Weeks (Pentecost); Feast of Trum- 
pets (the re-gathering of Israel); the Day of Atonement 
(when Israel repents and is forgiven); the Feast of Taber- 
nacles (Millennial times). Israel therefore is unconsciously 
waiting for Christ’s return as their forefathers waited out- 
side, till Aaron came back to put their sins on the scapegoat. 

Of the many other interesting things for brief annotation 
we but mention the rest connected with this great day 
(verse 31). In the Hebrew “Sabbath of rest” is “Sabbath 
sabbatizing.” No work had to be done on that great day. 
The work was completely on God’s side, man must not 
attempt to supplement that work. But let us also remember 
the dispensational application. When Israel’s great national 
day of atonement and repentance comes, when they shall 
look upon the One,whom they pierced and the great mourning 
and affliction of soul takes place (Zech. xii:9-12), the glorious 
Sabbath will follow. Rest and glory will come at last to 
them as His redeemed people, while the glory of the Lord 
will cover the earth and all the earth will have rest. 


2. The Testimony Concerning the Blood. 


CHAPTER XVII. 


1. Concerning Slain Animals, V. 1-9. 
2. Concerning the Eating of Blood. Vs. 10-16. 


This chapter needs little comment. Everything in this 
chapter speaks of the sanctity of the blood, what great value 
God, to whom life belongs, places upon the blood and with 


256 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


what jealous care He watches over it. The center of all is 
verse 11; “For the life of the flesh is in the blood: and I have 
given it to you upon the altar to make an atonement for 
your souls, for it is the blood that maketh an atonement for 
the soul.” Every slain animal had to bear witness to this 
fact. Even the hunter had to pour out the blood and cover 
it with dust. No blood was to be eaten. But in the New 
Testament we are commanded to eat spiritually the flesh of 


the Son of God and to drink spiritually His blood. 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 257 


V. Practical Holiness in Daily Life. 
Chapters xviii—xxii. 
1. Different Unholy Relationships. 
CHAPTER XVIII. 
. Separation and Obedience. Vs. 1-5. 
. Unholy Relationships. Vs. 6-18. 


. Vile and Abominable Practices. Vs, 19-23. 
. Judgment Threatened. Vs. 24-30. 


we 69 O we 


This section of Leviticus contains the words of Jehovah 
addressed to His people, whom He had redeemed and in 
whose midst He dwelt. They are to be a holy people. 
About thirty times in this section we find the solemn word 
“JT am Jehovah.” Ye shall be holy: for I, Jehovah your God, 
am holy. This is Jehovah’s calling for His people. Four 
times in the beginning of this chapter the Lord tells His 
people “I am Jehovah” (verses 2, 4, 5 and 6). His Name 
was upon them and therefore they are to manifest holiness 
in their life and walk. This demand and principle is un- 
changed in the New Testament, in the covenant of grace. 
His people are exhorted to walk “as obedient children, 
not fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts 
in your ignorance, but as He, who hath called you is holy, 
so be ye holy in all manner of conversation, because it is 
written, Be ye holy for I am holy” (1 Peter i:14-16). Brought 
nigh by blood, knowing the blessed relationship into which 
Grace of God has brought us, our solemn duty is to present 
our bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God. 
The Spirit of God, the Spirit of holiness and power, is be- 
stowed upon us that we can walk in the Spirit and fulfill 
not the lusts of the flesh. Israel was not to walk after the 
doings of the land of Egypt which they had left, nor after 


258 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


the doings of the land of Canaan whither they were going. 
And the church is told the same thing in the New Testament. 
“This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye hence- 
forth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their 
mind, having the understanding darkened, being alienated 
from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, 
because of the blindness of their heart; who being past 
feeling have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to 
work all uncleanness through greediness” (Eph. iv:17-19). 
And Jehovah’s words reveal all the degradations and vile 
abominations human nature, the nature of sin and death, 
is capable of. He is the searcher of hearts and Jehovah only 
can sound the depths of the desperately wicked heart of 
man. ‘The incestuous relationships against which the Lord 
warns were commonly practised among the Gentiles. 
These unholy impure things are still common in the world, 
not alone among the heathen, but also in the so-called 
civilized world. The laxity of the marriage laws, divorces 
and other evils in the same line are the curse of our age. 
Polygamy is forbidden in verse 18. All that would destroy 
the sanctity of the family and bring in abuse is solemnly 
warned against and forbidden. In the New Testament 
the Spirit of God emphasizes. the absolute purity of the 
family relation and how the Christian family is to be a 
witness of the holiness and love of Jehovah to make known 
the mystery of Christ and the church (Eph. v:22-32). 
Molech worship is forbidden. Read 1 Kings xi:7; 2 
Kings xxiii:10; Jerem. xxxii:35; vii:31 and xix:5. The awful 
worship of Molech is described in these passages. The most 
unnatural crimes and vile things mentioned in verses 22-23 
were connected with the idolatries of the nations which 
surrounded Israel. These things were practised in Egypt 
and in Canaan. Romans i:18-32 gives the inspired history 
of the degradation of the Gentile world. Idolatry and moral 
degradation always go together. The fearful road of the 
apostasy in Christendom is no exception. Rejection of 
God’s revelation leads into idolatry (not necessarily idols 
of wood and stone) and moral declension. The days of 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 259 


Lot, the grossest licentiousness of Sodom, are predicted to 
precede the coming of the Son of man (Luke xvii:26-32). 
A solemn warning concludes this chapter. The inhabi- 
tants of Canaan were to be cast out on account of their 
vileness. Jehovah would not spare His people if they 
practiced these things. They did commit all this wicked- 
ness. Israel cast out of the land, the homeless wanderer, 
bears witness to the fulfillment of this solemn warning. 


2. Different Duties. 
CHAPTER XIX. 


. Honoring Parents and Fearing God. Vs. 1-8. 

The Care of the Poor. Vs. 9-10. 

Against Stealing and Lying. Vs. 11-12. 

Against Oppression. Vs. 13-14. 

Against Unrighteousness in Judgment. Vs. 15-16. 
. Thou Shalt Love Thy Neighbor. Vs. 17-18. 
Different Commands and Prohibitions. Vs. 19-37. 


RD Rw 0 


Many of these duties enjoined upon a people called to 
holiness, the different commands and prohibitions, are of 
much interest. It is true, believers are not under the law. 
This, however, does not mean that we should refrain from 
reading and studying these commands. Jehovah changes 
not. May we remember that our call, like Israel’s, is unto 
practical holiness in life. Our responsibilities are even 
greater. Many lessons are here for us which will greatly 
help us in our walk as His people. The provision made for 
the poor (verses 9-10 compare with Ruth ii:14-16) mani- 
fests the loving care of Jehovah. God has special regard 
for the poor and the strangers. His blessed Son became 
poor and was indeed a stranger in the world He created. 
His people had no heart for Him and He was hungry, while 
His disciples had to take ears of corn from the field to satisfy 
their hunger. The Lord Himself was the owner of Israel’s 
land (Lev. xxv:23), and as owner He charged His servants 
to be unselfish in the use of the bountiful provision He was 


making for their temporal need. 


"260 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


Note the precept concerning the laborer. “The wages 
of him that is hired shall not abide with thee all night until 
the morning” (verse 13). This again reveals the gracious 
care of the Lord. How little such care and consideration 
for the poor and the servant is found in our day! If these 
simple instructions were followed the discontent of the poor 
and the unrest of the laborers would not be as prominent 
as they are now. Israel failed in this. They cheated the 
poor and the hired servants (Amos viii:5-6). What is to 
be in the last days of the present age we find in James v:4: 
“Behold the hire of the laborers, who have reaped down 
your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth; 
and the cries of them that have reaped have entered into 
the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth.” The divine plea for the 
poor and the laborer is utterly disregarded in the last days, 
and Jehovah has to take up their case. 

The deaf and the blind are also mentioned. The defence- 
less and helpless with the poor and the hired servant are the 
objects of His special care. 

In verse 19 the raising of hybrid animals is forbidden. 
Anything “mingled” God despises. His people are to 
avoid this, even in the smallest things. 

Heathen superstitions, such as using enchantments and 
observing times are forbidden by Jehovah. These are 
unworthy of a redeemed people linked with Jehovah. All 
superstitions, such as dreading certain days and numbers 
(“Friday” or “13’’), and other foolish observances, alas! 
found so much amidst professing Christians are heathenish 
and dishonor God, who alone knows and controls the welfare 
and future of His people. All “cuttings in your flesh for 
the dead’’ were also prohibited. Thus the pagans did who 
have no hope. Such sorrow, expressed in fearful lamentations 
and frenzied outbreaks, were unworthy of Israel, as they 
are more so for Christian believers (1 Thess. iv:13). Those 
who have familiar spirits (mediums) and wizards were not 
to be consulted.* 


*But it is truly most extraordinary that in Christian lands, as espe- 
cially in the United States of America, and that in the full light. re- 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 261 


It will be wise to meditate carefully on all these commands 
and prohibitions. They reveal the tenderness, the wisdom 
and the holiness of God. 


3. Warnings Against Special Sins and their Penalties. 


CHAPTER XxX. 


. Warning Against Molech-worship and Familiar Spirits. Vs. 1-8. 
. Warning Against Cursing Parents. V. 9. 

. Criminal and Vile Connections. Vs. 10-21. 

Exhortations to Obedience and Separation. Vs. 2%-@7. 


eo tO 


This chapter reveals the justice of God in dealing with 
criminals. Death penalty is most prominent. It is pro- 
nounced upon the following crimes: Molech worship; deal- 
ing with familiar spirits (Spiritualism); different forms of 
incest and sodomy. Men advocate now the abolishment 
of death penalty without considering the outraged justice 
of a holy God. The object of these severe penalties im- 
posed by Jehovah were the satisfaction of justice and the 
vindication of a broken law. A closer examination of these 
warnings and the penalties attached will reveal the serious- 
ness of the offences against the theocratic government set 
up in the midst of Israel, and the perfect justice of every 


ligious and intellectual, of the twentieth century, such a prohibition 
should be fully as pertinent as in Israel! For no words could 
more precisely describe the pretensions of the so-called modern 
spiritualism, which within the last half century has led away hundreds 
of thousands of deluded souls, and those, in many cases, not from the 
ignorant and degraded, but from circles which boast of more than 
average culture and intellectual enlightenment. And inasmuch as 
experience sadly shows that even those who profess to be disciples of 
Christ are in danger of being led away by our modern wizards and 
traffickers with familiar spirits, it is by no means unnecessary to observe 
that there is not the slightest reason to believe that this which was 
rigidly forbidden by God in the fifteenth century B. C., can now be 
well-pleasing to Him in the nineteenth century A. D. And those who 
have most carefully watched the moral developments of this latter-day 
delusion, will most appreciate the added phrase which speaks of this as 
“‘defiling’ a man.—S. H. Kellogg. 


262 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


penalty. It is a serious matter if critics find fault with these 
solemn statements, denying their authority and judging 
the holy and infallible Judge. 

The chapter gives a testimony against the awful drift of 
our times in the lax laws concerning marriage, divorces and 
its attending evils so very much in evidence among the so- 
called Christian nations.* 


4. Laws for the Priests. 


CHAPTER XXt. 


Laws Concerning the Person of the Priests. Vs. 1-6. 
Laws Concerning their Family. Vs. 7-9. 

. Laws Concerning the High Priest. Vs. 10-15. 

. Concerning Blemishes. Vs. 16-24. 


> eo 


We come now to the special laws and precepts for the 
priestly class among the people. The preceding laws 
concerned the nation as such. The requirements of the 
priests are the highest in the entire book of Leviticus. Re- 
sponsibility is always according to relationship. The priests, 
as we have seen before, typify the church. The Grace of 
God has given to us the place of nearness in Christ, access 
into the Holiest and constituted us priests. The holiness 
required of the New Testament believers corresponds to this 
blessed relationship. 


*“French law, for instance, has explicitly legalized various alliances 
which in this law God explicitly forbids, under heavy penal sanctions 
as incestuous; German legislation has moved about as far in the same 
direction; and the same tendency is to be observed, more or less, in all 
the English-speaking world. In some of the United States, especially, 
the utmost laxity has been reached, in laws which, under the name of 
divorce, legalize gross adultery,—laws which had been a disgrace to 
pagan Rome. Where God denounced the death penalty, man first 
apologizes for the crime, then lightens the penalty, then abolishes it, 
and at last formally legalizes the crime. This modern drift bodes no 
good; in the end it can only bring disaster alike to the well-being of the 
family and of the State. The maintenance of the family in its integrity 
and purity is nothing less than essential to the conservation of society 
and the stability of good government.” 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 263 


Many are the lessons given here. 2 Tim. iii:16-17 applies 
to this part of Leviticus. These divine requirements and 
laws are given even for us “for reproof, for correction, for 
instruction in righteousness.” May we read with prayer 
and ponder over these words of Jehovah. We point again 
to the marriage relation. This was especially guarded. 
Only a virgin of his own people was he permitted to take for 
wife. A woman upon whose character there wasaspot, who 
was immoral or divorced, could not be the wife of a priest. 
And should not God’s people in the New Testament, as holy 
priests, be equally cautious? We have an answer in 1 Cor. 
vii:39. No child of God, a holy priest, should unite in 
marriage with an unbeliever. The harvest from the acts 
of disobedience in unholy alliances is often disastrous. 

Interesting is this section concerning blemishes in the 
priestly generations. These blemishes were: _ blindness, 
lameness, deformity of the nose, any outgrowths in the skin, 
broken footed, broken handed, crookbacked or of small 
stature, etc. Such a one was not permitted to come nigh 
to offer the bread of his God. He could not go in unto the 
vail nor come nigh unto the altar. Nevertheless, he could 
eat the bread of his God, both of the most holy and of the 
holy. His deformity or blemish deprived him not of his 
priestly position, nor was he anything less than a son of 
Aaron. He was excluded from the functions of the holy 
priesthood. Our spiritual defects, the blemishes which 
often are upon us as a holy priesthood, typified by lameness 
(defective walk), blindness (defective sight), arrested growth 
(dwarf), etc., all these blemishes do not affect our Sonship 
nor our priestly position. But they do interfere with the 
enjoyment of the communion into which grace has brought us. 
On account of spiritual defects we cannot enter into the fullest 
exercise of our priestly privileges and functions. Yet grace 
permits us to eat of the Bread of God. 

And Christ as our Priest is without any defect or blemish. 
“For such an high priest became us, who is holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the 
heavens” (Heb. vii:26). 


264 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


‘CHAPTER XXII 


1. Care to be Exercised in Holy Things. Vs. 1-16. 
2. Care in the Enforcement of the Law of Offerings. Vs. 17-33. 


Uncleanness such as mentioned in the first part of the 
chapter prohibited the partaking of holy things. Strangers 
who did not belong to the priestly house and even the mar- 
ried daughter of the priest, not living in the priestly household, 
were not permitted to eat of the offering of the holy things. 
Holy things have to be used in a reverent and holy way. 
The same principle holds good in the New Testament. 
We may well think here of the Lord’s table. Read 1 Cor. 
x1:23-31. Coming to the Lord’s table to remember Him 
requires self-judgment. 

The instruction concerning sacrifices, their unblemished 
character and what constitute an acceptable offering are 
all of great interest with many spiritual lessons. But space 
forbids our enlarging upon them. 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 265 


VI. The Holy Feasts and Set Times, 


Chapters xxiii-xxvi. 


1. The Holy Feasts and Set Times. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


The Sabbath. Vs. 1-3. 

The Feast of Passover and Feast of Unleavened Bread. Vs. 4-8, 
The Firstfruits. Vs. 9-14. 

The Feast of Weeks. Vs. 15-22. 

The Blowing of Trumpets. Vs. 23-25. 

The Day of Atonement. Vs. 26-32. 

The Feast of Tabernacles. Vs, 33-44. 


SI? ho SN 


This is one of the grandest chapters in Leviticus, filled 
with the choicest truths and prophetic from beginning to 
end. The Holy feasts and set times, appointed by Jehovah, 
to be kept yearly by Israel, cover indeed the entire realm 
of redemption facts. The dispensational dealings of God 
with Jews and Gentiles are clearly revealed in these feasts. 
We have to look at each of these divisions separately to 
point out the way to a deeper study, which no child of God 
should neglect. 


1. The Sabbath.—This is in itself no feast, but a set time, 
a holy convocation after the six work days. What it signifies 
we have already seen in the study of Genesis and Exodus. 
The reason why the Sabbath is put here first is on account 
of its prophetic meaning. “There remaineth a rest for the 
people of God.” The Sabbath is the type of that rest yet 
to come, when redemption is consummated. When all the 
work is accomplished, foreshadowed in the feasts and set 
times of Israel, the great rest-keeping will begin. Faith can 
enjoy it even now. In the Sabbath the blessed outcome of 
all is revealed. if 


26 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


2. The Passover and Feast of Unleavened Bread.—The 
Passover, with the lamb slain and its body eaten, occupies 
the first place. It typifies the blessed work of the Lamb 
of God, His redemption work on the cross. And this is the 
foundation of every thing, as we have seen in the levitical 
offerings and ceremonial. In this finished work, and the 
shed blood, God rests, and here the believing sinner has found 
his rest. The feast of unleavened bread is closely con- 
nected with the Passover, so that it cannot be separated 
from it. Leaven stands for sin and unleavened bread for 
holiness. The feast of unleavened bread therefore typifies 
the result of the work of Christ on the cross, which is holi- 
ness. Again we meet the great truth that Jehovah has re- 
deemed His people to be separated unto Himself. They 
were not to do a servile work, but to bring an offering by 
fire unto Jehovah. On the first and on the seventh day 
no servile work was to be done. It typifies the fact that in 
redemption there is no servile work, but a joyous mani- 
festation of Christ, the sweet savour in the power of the 
Holy Spirit. 


3. The Firstfruits.—While the Passover-feast foreshadows 
the death of Christ, the waving of the sheaf of the firstfruits 
is the blessed type of the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
It was just one sheaf waved before Jehovah, the earnest of 
the harvest which was to follow. “But now is Christ risen 
from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept” 
(1 Cor. xv:20). ‘“‘But every man in his own order: Christ 
the firstfruits; afterward they that are Christ’s at His coming” 
(1 Cor. xv:23). The grain of wheat had fallen into the ground 
and died. But He liveth; the full ear of the sheaf waved 
before Jehovah typifies the abundant fruit which He brings 
unto God. And it was waved before Jehovah “‘on the morrow 
after the Sabbath.” The morrow after the Sabbath is the 
first day of the week, the glorious resurrection morning. 
In connection with the waving of the sheaf of firstfruits 
there were offerings. But of what kind? ‘An he-lamb 
without blemish for a Burnt-offering unto the Lord,” a 


THE BOOK OFLEVITICUS. 267 


Meal-offering and a  Drink-offering. No  Sin-offering 
was demanded, for that was accomplished when He died. 
The offerings were a sweet savour, telling forth once more 
the blessedness and value of His own person and work. 
And in Him we are accepted; with Him the firstfruits we 
shall be forever. 


4. The Feast of Weeks.—After seven Sabbaths had 
passed by, fifty days counted, a new Meal-offering was to 
brought and two wave loaves baken with leaven. This is 
the feast of Pentecost (named on account of the fifty days). 
It is also called the Feast of Weeks, as seven weeks had passed 
by. Exactly fifty days after the waving of the firstfruits, 
on the morrow of the Sabbath, when Christ arose, the Holy 
Spirit came down out of heaven to form the church on earth.* 


The Meal-offering as we saw in the first part of the book is 
the type of Christ in His perfect humanity. Pure flour, oil 
mingled with it, and oil poured upon it. Here it is a new 
Meal-offering. It does not typify Christ, but those who 
are one with Him, His believing people. The oil, the Holy 
Spirit came on the day of Pentecost upon them, as the oil 
was poured upon the Meal-offering. 

The two loaves, baken with leaven, typify also the church. 
Sin is still there. Pure flour was in the loaves (the new 
nature), but baken with leaven (the old nature). The two 
loaves, no doubt, refer us to the Jews and Gentiles, which 
compose the new Meal-offering. And here is the Sin- 
offering, which was absent at the waving of the sheaf of 
firstfruits on the morrow after the Sabbath. The leaven 
and the Sin-offering indicates the presence of sin, as it is 
the case. Yet the loaves are waved in the presence to 
Jehovah and fully accepted. 

The two loaves were a Wave-offering before Jehovah. 


*Of late the teaching is being circulated among Bible students that 
the church did not begin on Pentecost, but later in Antioch. This 
theory has no foundation in the Word of God. It stands disproven 
by the testimony of the New Testament. If it were true the beautiful 
ceremony here would have no meaning whatever. 


268 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


Thus the church is presented unto Him “a kind of first- 
fruits’ (James i:18); the two loaves, the product of the wheat, 
the firstfruits of Christ’s death and resurrection. 

We must not overlook verse 22. The harvest here, we 
doubt not, is the same as in Matthew xiii:39. When that 
end of the age comes, the church will be taken into the 
garner; the firstfruits will be with Christ. The poor and 
strangers, Gentiles, will even then be remembered in mercy. 


5. The Blowing of Trumpets.—With this holy convo- 
cation we are led upon new ground. The feasts we have 
followed typify that which is past; the death of Christ, the 
resurrection of Christ, and the formation of the church by 
the Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost. The three set 
times which follow, the memorial of blowing of trumpets, 
the day of atonement and the feast of tabernacles await 
their great fulfillment in the near future. The first thing 
after the two wave loaves are completely presented unto 
Jehovah, when this age is about to close, will be the blowing 
of the trumpets. It is the call of God to the remnant of 
His people, their re-gathering. A long period of time is 
between Pentecost and the blowing of the trumpets. This 
interval is the present age. The Lord does not re-gather 
His earthly remnant till His heavenly people, the church, 
is complete. Read and carefully consider Isaiah xxvii:13; 
Ivii; Joel ii:1. Matthew xxiv:31 is the re-gathering of His 
elect earthly people after He has come. But the blowing 
of the trumpets on the first day of the seventh month pre- 
cedes the great day of atonement and is the heralding of 
that approaching day. All this, studied with the light God 


has given to us in the entire Word of prophecy, is intensely 
interesting. 


6. The Day of Atonement.—We have already pointed 
out the dispensational meaning for the people of Israel in 
our annotations on the sixteenth chapter. When the great 
high priest, our Saviour and Israel’s King, comes forth out 
of the Holiest, when He comes the second time in power and 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 209 


glory, Israel will look upon Him whom they have pierced 
and mourn for Him. And He will take away their sins, 
typified by the scapegoat. “In that day there shall be 
a fountain opened to the house of David and to the inhabi- 
tants of Jerusalem for sin and uncleanness” (Zech. xiii:1). 
Their great day of atonement will be a Sabbath of rest unto 
them and glory will cover their long desolate land once 
more. 


7. The Feast of Tabernacles.—The final feast began on the 
fifteenth day of the seventh month. It is the feast, which 
comes after the sin of Israel has been removed. It was 
the feast of ingathering of the products of the year and a 
memorial of Israel’s dwelling in booths in the wilderness. 
The feast of tabernacles foreshadows the coming glory 
of the millennium, Israel’s glorious inheritance and the Gen- 
tiles gathered with redeemed Israel in the kingdon. It 
will be the time of the complete harvest, the time of rejoicing, 
when sorrow and sighing will flee away. It comes after the 
harvest (the end of the age) and the vintage (the wine- 
press of the wrath of God). How beautiful is the order in 
these three last holy convocations! The blowing of the 
trumpets; the remnant of Israel called and gathered; the day 
of atonement; Israel in national repentance looking upon 
Him, whom they pierced, when He comes the second time; 
the feast of tabernacles; the millennium. “And it shall come 
to pass that every one that is left of all the nations which 
came against Jerusalem, shall even go up from year to year 
to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, and to keep the feast 
of tabernacles” (Zech. xiv:16). It is the great memorial 
feast of millennial times. Perhaps it will be during that 
feast that the King of Israel, the King of kings, the Lord 
of lords, will appear in visible glory in Jerusalem to receive 
the homage of the representatives of the nations of the earth. 
What a day that will be! The eighth day which we meet 
here again points us to that which is beyond the millennium, 
The story of the twenty-third chapter is marvellous! Only 
God in His infinite wisdom could give us such an unfolding 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


and foreshadowing of His eternal counsels and purposes. 
We rehearse it briefly. The Sabbath is the type of the end, 
which will come after the accomplishment of all His purposes; 
the eternal rest. Passover, the type of the death of Christ; 
the waving of the firstfruits, the type of the resurrection 
of Christ; Pentecost, the type of the coming of the Holy 
Spirit for the formation of the church. Then Israel’s 
restoration and fullest blessing comes in. How blind men 
must be who can call all these beautiful things fable and 
legends! In these poor critics there is once more fulfilled 
the Word of God, “professing themselves to be wise, they 
become fools” (Rom. i:22). 


2. Priestly Duties; the Light and the Shewbread. 
CHAPTER XXIV:1-9. 


1, The Light. Vs. 1-4. 
2. The Shewbread. Vs. 5-9. 


This chapter is not disconnected from the preceding one 
as some claim; nor is the work of a redactor as the critics 
teach. It is most beautifully linked with the dispensational 
foreshadowings we found in the feasts of Jehovah. Between 
Pentecost and the blowing of the trumpets there is, as stated 
before, a long period of time. When the church was formed, 
after the sheaf of the firstfruits had been waved, Israel was 
nationally set aside and night settled upon them. Main- 
tained by the high priest, a light was to be kept shining 
continually from evening till morning; it was the light of 
the golden lampstand with its lamps. The lamp-stand 
typifies Christ and the high priest also is a type of Christ. 
Here is a hint of the testimony which shines forth in Christ 
and through the heavenly priesthood (the church), during 
the night, the present age. But Israel also will some day 
shine forth and be a light-bearer (Zech. iv:1-14). 

Then there was the shewbread. They were set in two 
rows, six on a row, upon the pure table before the Lord. 
Shewbread means literally “‘bread of the face,” that is, the 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 271 


bread before God. Pure frankincense was also put upon 
them. No doubt, dispensationally, we have in the shew- 
bread another picture of those who are now His people (the 
church), while the twelve loaves also typify Israel as a nation. 


3. Blasphemy. Israel’s Sin Foreshadowed. 
CHAPTER XXIV:10-23. 


1. The Blasphemy. Vs. 10-22. 
g. The Penalty Executed. Vs. 23. 


The blasphemer who blasphemed the Name and cursed, 
foreshadows the sin of Israel. They sinned and blasphemed 
that holy Name: and on account of the rejection of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, the curse has come upon them. But it will not 
be permanent. The remnant of Israel will be saved in the 
future day, when He comes back and they shall welcome 
Him: “Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of the Lord.” 
The Jews have based upon this incident of the blasphemer 
the traditional belief that it is sinful to pronounce the Name 
of Jehovah. For this reason they substitute the word 
“Adonai.” 

The twenty-fourth chapter shows in its first part the two- 
fold testimony maintained in the sanctuary, the light and 
the shewbread; it ends with an incident which foreshadows 
the sin of Israel when they blasphemed and rejected the Lord 


of Glory. 


4. The Sabbatic Year and the Year of Jubilee. 
CHAPTER XXV. 


The Sabbatic Year. Vs. 1-7. 

The Jubilee. Vs. 8-12. 

The Jubilee and the Land. Vs. 13-28. 

The Jubilee and the Dwelling Houses. Vs. 29-34, 
The Jubilee, the Poor and the Bondmen. Vs. 35-55. 


FTES SO PRO ies 


This is the great restoration chapter in Leviticus. All 
is connected pre-eminently with Israel’s land. The appli- 


272 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


cation, which has been made, that this chapter foreshadows 
a universal restitution of all things, including the wicked 
dead and Satan as well, is unscriptural. If such a restitution 
were true the Bible would contradict itself. The Sabbatic 
year could only be kept after Israel came into the land. 
“When ye come into the land which I give you, then shall 
the land keep a Sabbath unto the Lord.” And Jehovah 
uttered these words from Mount Sinai and not from the taber- 
nacle (Lev. i:1). Every seventh year, the land which belongs 
to Jehovah, and which was not to be sold, had to enjoy com- 
plete rest. See what gracious promises Jehovah had given 
in connection with the Sabbatic year (vs. 20-22). Jehovah 
was the Lord of the land, the owner of the land, and Israel 
received the land as a gift; they were the tenants. Beauti- 
fully the Lord said: “‘Ye are strangers and sojourners with 
Me.” When Israel sinned and broke the laws of Jehovah, 
when they did not give the land its rest, then the Lord drove 
the people out of the land. Read here xxvi:32-35. “And 
I will bring the land into desolation; and your enemies 
which dwelt therein shall be astonished at it. And I will 
scatter you among the nations, and will draw out a sword 
after you, and your land shall be desolate, and your cities 
waste. Then shall the land enjoy her Sabbaths, as long as it 
lieth desolate, and ye be in your enemies’ land; even then 
shall the land rest, and enjoy her Sabbaths. As long as it 
lieth desolate it shall rest; because it did not rest in your 
Sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it.” This prediction has been 
fulfilled. Israel is scattered among the nations of the earth 
and the land is desolate, a witness for the Word of God. 
Jehovah in giving the law concerning the Sabbatic year, 
gave to His people a picture of that coming rest, and the 
assurance of joy and blessing. But they failed. 

The year of Jubilee shows clearly the restoration which 
is in store of Israel and Israel’s land. It points once more 
to the millenial times of blessing and glory. How blessedly 
is that coming age of restoration and of glory seen in the year 
of Jubilee! Without entering into details we give a few of 
the Divine statements. What did the Jubilee year mean 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 273 


to Israel? Liberty was proclaimed; every man returned 
to his possession; every man to his family; all wrongs were 
righted and the redemption of the bondmen took place. 
Seven times the word ‘‘Return”’ is used; and oftener the word 
“Redeem.” It was the time of returning, the blessed time 
of restoration and redemption. 

And how was this year of Jubilee ushered in? By the 
sound of the trumpet of the Jubilee on the tenth day of the 
seventh month, in the day of atonement. This great year 
of returning and redemption began with the day of atone- 
ment. Most likely after the high priest had returned from 
his holy office work and sprinkling of blood; after he had 
put the sins of the people upon the scapegoat and that 
sacrificial animal bearing upon its head Israel’s sin had van- 
ished in the wilderness, the trumpet sounded. What all 
this means we have seen in the annotations of the “day of 
atonement” chapter. The year of Jubilee begins, when 
our Lord comes back from the Holiest and appears in the 
midst of His people. And this time of restoration, bless- 
ing and glory is not confined to Israel’s land. It means 
more than the promised blessings for that land. We have 
the year of Jubilee in Romans viii: 19-23. 

We must not forget the significance of the time, the 
fiftieth year. The day of Pentecost came fifty days after 
the resurrection of Christ from among the dead. And the 
fiftieth day brought, as the result of the death and resurrec- 
tion of Christ, the gift of the Holy Spirit, and the formation 
of the church began. It came on the eighth day, the first 
day of the week. The year of Jubilee may well be 
termed another Pentecost. On that day a great outpour- 
ing of the Spirit of God will take place (Joel 11:28). 
The kingdom with all its glories and blessings will be 
established upon the earth. And how much more might 
be added to these blessed foreshadowings of the good 
things to come! 


274 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


5. The Blessing and the Curse. Israel’s History. 
CHAPTER XXVI. 


1. Obedience and the Blessings. Vs. 1-13. 
2. Disobedience and the Curse. Vs. 14-39. 
3. The Restoration. Vs. 40-46. 


This great chapter is very fitting for the close of this 
yook. We have no types here, but direct utterances of 
Jehovah. Israel’s history and their future restoration is 
here predicted. He reminds them that He brought them 
out of the land of Egypt; they are His people. Therefore 
He wants obedience. If this is yielded blessings would 
be the results. These promised blessings consisted in 
abundance of rain, great fruitfulness of their land, peace 
in the land, deliverance from wild beasts and the sword, 
victory over their enemies. They would multiply and His 
covenant would be established with them; more than that, 
“T will walk among you, and will be your God and ye shall 
be my people.” What blessings Jehovah held out to them! 
They never possessed them in fulness. Some day Israel 
and Israel’s land will enter into these blessings. Then 
Moses’ last word will be true: “Happy art thou, O Israel; 
who is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, the shield 
of thy help, and who is the sword of thy excellency! and 
thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee; and thou shalt 
tread upon their high places” (Deut. xxxiii:29). 

But how dreadful the threatened judgments on account 
of a broken covenant! Judgment after judgment is an- 
nounced, one greater than the other, every blessing is changed 
into a curse and the culminating threat is expulsion from 
the God-given land and dispersion, world-wide, among the 
nations. The nation called to blessing is threatened with 
the most awful judgments and disasters. And all these 
have become historical facts. Jewish history of many 
weary centuries records the constant fulfillment of these 
solemn declarations. We have therefore in this chapter, 
in the predicted curses and the literal fulfillment, a most 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 275 


valuable and powerful evidence of inspiration. The Jew 
and his history, the land and its desolation, is God’s stand- 
ing witness for the Gentiles that the Bible is the Word of 
God. 

“The fundamental importance and instructiveness of 
this prophecy is evident from the fact that all later pre- 
dictions concerning the fortunes of Israel are but its more 
detailed exposition and application to successive historical 
conditions. Still more evident is its profound significance 
when we recall to mind the fact, disputed by none, that 
not only is it an epitome of all later prophecy of Holy Scrip- 
ture concerning Israel, but, no less truly, an epitome of 
Israel’s history. So strictly true is this that we may accu- 
rately describe the history of that nation, from the days of 
Moses until now, as but the translation of this chapter 
from the language of prediction into that of history.” * 

To this another fact must be added. It is predicted in 
this chapter that the people passing through judgment 
devastated by the sword, famine and pestilence, would 
continue to exist in their enemies’ land. Israel’s preserva- 
tion throughout the long period of these executed judgments 
is a miracle. It cannot be explained in any other way. 
And the land itself bears witness to all this. It used to be 
one of the richest of all lands. But ever since the people 
Israel are driven out of the land and no longer possess it, 
desolation has come upon it. How remarkable this is! 

“We point to the people of Israel as a perennial historical 
miracle. The continued existence of this nation up to the 
present day, the preservation of its national peculiarities 
throughout thousands of years, in spite of all dispersion 
and oppression, remains so unparalleled a phenomenon, 
that without the special providential preparation of God, 
and His constant interference and protection, it would 
be impossible for us to explain it. For where else is there 
a people over which such judgments have passed, and yet 
not ended in destruction?” ¢ 


*S. H. Kellogg—‘‘Leviticus.” 
{Prof. Christlieb. 


276 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. . 


Some have speculated on the statement that, they should 
have the judgments upon them seven times. However, 
these “seven times” cannot mean the exact duration of 
Israel’s dispersion. The “‘seven times,” however, foreshadow 
the time of Jacob’s trouble, the last seven years of the times 
of the Gentiles, during which their judgments will be the 
severest. 

This important chapter closes with a promise of restora- 
tion. Confession of sin, acknowledgment of their guilt, 
humiliation and deep sorrow for their iniquity opens the 
way to this restoration. It will at once be seen that this 
connects again with the day of atonement. It is the year 
of Jubilee. Then Jehovah remembers His covenant and 
remembers the land (verse 42). To this future repentance 
of the remnant of Israel and their re-gathering, the restora- 
tion of the Jand to the people and the people to the land, 
the ertire prophetic Word bears witness. 


THESBOOK OF LEVITICUS. 277 


VII. Concerning Vows. 


The Claims of Jehovah Realized. 
CHAPTER XXVII. 


. The Singular Vow. Vs. 1-8. 

The Sacrifice. Vs. 9-13. 

Concerning the House. Vs. 14-15. 
Concerning the Land. Vs. 16-25. 
Concerning the Firstling. Vs. 26-27. 
. Devoted Things. Vs. 28-29. 

All Holy to Jehovah. Vs. 30-34. 


ROMP ww 


This last chapter in Leviticus concerns vows and devoted 
things. Israel is still in view here. At Horeb they had 
made their vow of being obedient and devoted to the Lord, 
but they could not meet the claims of what that vow meant. 
The sanctification as demanded in this book they could 
not fulfill. But Grace is seen connected with it. The Grace 
which is yet to flow out to Israel, the chosen nation. Sancti- 
fication by law is impossible; Grace alone can sanctify. All 
mentioned is connected with the people. The house to be 
holy to Jehovah (verse 14) is Israel. The land too is men- 
tioned, as well as the year of Jubilee. The house, Israel, 
becomes Jehovah’s; and the land also belongeth then to 
Him. The thought which runs through this final chapter 
of Leviticus is that Jehovah will have His own and God finally 
will be all in all. 

May God’s Spirit lead us into these blessed types and may 
we, as His bloodbought people, sanctified in Christ, walk in 
sanctification in the power of His Spirit. 


278 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


Appendix. 


Sprinkling the Blood upon the Mercy Seat. Chap. xvi. 


In the order of the sacrifices Aaron first killed the bul- 
lock, the sin offering which was for himself to make atonement 
for himself and for his house. This bullock is three times 
recorded as the sin-offering for himself, ver. 6, 11; and where- 
ever the atonement made by it is mentioned it is said to be 
for himself and his house, ver. 6, 11, 17. So closely are the 
high priest and his house linked on together; doubtless to 
draw our attention to the oneness between Christ and 
His house—only with a striking contrast also—Aaron’s 
bullock for sin suffered for himself and his house—he being 
himself a sinner, and his house composed of sinners like 
himself.* Our High Priest knew no sin, and offered up 
Himself solely therefore on behalf of others. 

Aaron next took the censer full of coals of fire from off 
the altar before the Lord, and his hands full of sweet incense 
beaten small, and brought all within the vail, and put the 
incense upon the fire before the Lord, that the cloud of the 
incense might cover the mercy-seat upon the testimony, that 
he might not die. 

The censer was apparently a golden censer. If we refer 
to the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. ix., a description 
of the tabernacle is given us on this day of atonement. 
No incense altar is mentioned standing in the holy place: 
but the golden censer in the holiest. The cherubim also, 
shadowing the mercy-seat are called “cherubim of glory.”’ 
On this day of atonement the coals of fire were moved from 
off the incense altar, and the golden censer being filled with 
them was carried within the vail. For the time therefore, 
the incense altar was inactive, and is not alluded to prob- 
ably on that account in the 9th chapter of Hebrews. Je- 
hovah appeared in the cloud upon the mercy-seat—the cloud 
of glory—and this may be the reason why the cherubim 
are called “‘cherubim of glory.” Aaron notwithstanding 


) 


*Throughout the Epistle to the Hebrews, the high priest and the 
people are alone alluded to; there is no mention made “of his house.” 
Heb. v:3; vii:27; ix:7. The house when spoken of is God’s house, and 
Moses, not Aaron, the head over it; the whole assembly of Israel being 
included in “the house.” Heb. iii:2. 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 279 


the washing of his flesh, and the linen garments with which 
he was clothed, could not enter the holiest with the blood 
of atonement unless he could personally shelter himself 
under a cloud of incense. A perfume, not his own, but 
provided according to minute directions given by God. 
Two epithets are especially attached to the incense, 
“pure,” and “holy’—and it was to be holy for the Lord. 
(Exod. xxx:35, 37). The frankincense, which was one 
ingredient of the incense, betokened purity. The word 
“pure” is connected with it (Exod. xxx:34; Lev. xxiv:7), 
‘and the Hebrew word “‘Levohnah” has the appropriate 
signification of whiteness. One of the Hebrew words for 
the moon is almost the same as that for frankincense— 
“fair as the moon” (Cant. vi:10)._ There is one of whom it is 
truly said, “Thou art fairer than the children of men’’; 
whose unsullied purity formed a wondrous contrast with 
every other human being. A purity, a righteousness so 
made manifest upon the cross that even a Roman Centurion 
exclaimed, “Certainly this was a righteous man” (Luke 
xxili:47). The cloud of incense beaten small, as it wafted 
itself up to God, attracted with its singular perfume that 
Gentile soldier. Purity and holiness are not to be found here 
except in one whose graces were fully displayed before 
The incense was compounded of three sweet spices besides 
the frankincense, “‘stacte, onycha, and galbanum.” The 
two last are not known; but the stacte is manifestly de- 
rived from a word signifying “‘to drop,” both in the Hebrew, 
and in the Greek translation. A sweet spice that spon- 
taneously dropped from the tree which produced it. Another 
emblem of the grace of the Lord Jesus, the Son of Man. 
Grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. His paths dropped 
fatness; wherever He went, true love, sympathy, and pity 
flowed from His heart towards the weak, the weary, and 
the afflicted. He was the true Man in the midst of false- 
hood and deceit in human beings all around Him. True in 
His affection; true in His words; true in His sympathies; 
true in His rebukes of evil as well as in His forgiveness 
of sin. It is blessed to turn from the hypocrisies of our 
own hearts, and of men around us, and contemplate Him 
“who did no violence,” “neither was guile found in his 
mouth” (Isa. liii:9; 1 Pet. 11:22). There was no effort in 
Him; He simply lived, manifesting life in all He did and 
said. There was no affectation of spirituality; He was what 
He appeared to be. Thus His words and ways were not 


280 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


forced. His sanctity was not assumed. He had nothing 
to lay aside when He came into the presence of others. He 
put on nothing to gain their admiration. He was always 
Himself, living in the presence of God, ever pleasing God. 
Blessed contrast with men who have to assume religious- 
ness to hide their own evil, who think that roughness is 
sincerity, and who are unnatural oft-times even in the 
very presence of God. 

The incense “tempered together pure and holy” may 
have reference to the sweet fragrance which the Man Christ 
Jesus ever presented to God. The Israelites were for- 
bidden to make a perfume like it, “‘to smell thereto.”’ Christ 
is not to be imitated by a false humility to gratify one’s 
own self-conceit. There may be a shew of wisdom and 
humility by which men satisfy their own flesh, but this is 
like an imitation of the holy perfume to smell thereto. If 
we are imitators indeed of Him we must first have been 
washed in His precious blood, and be born of God. To 
follow Him would involve self-crucifixion instead of self- 
admiration. 

The golden censer was filled with burning coals, and 
Aaron’s hands were filled with incense. The vessel that 
held the fire—type of the holiness of God—was full. The 
altar from which that fire had originally been taken was a 
place where the holiness of God was exhibited in no scanty 
measure; and the censer was also filled, that in the very 
holiest itself that consuming fire might again be presented 
according to the divine estimate. 

The high priest’s hands were also full of sweet incense. 
He had to grasp that holy compound to the full extent of 
his ability, that his filled hands might answer to the filled 
censer. He then put the incense on the fire before the Lord, 
and the cloud of the incense covered the mercy-seat, and 
mingled with the cloud of glory upon the mercy-seat, in 
which Jehovah appeared. 

We must here draw a contrast betwixt Aaron and Christ. 
The Lord Jesus presented Himself to God on the morning 
of His resurrection—called of God an High Priest, after the 
order of Melchizedek. His entrance into heaven itself was 
like the bringing in of fresh incense before God; for He 
entered on the ground of His perfect obedience unto death, 
even the death of the cross. God had been glorified in Him, 
on that very earth where God had been so dishonoured by 
man; and when for the first time a Man stood in the presence 
of the glory of God before “the throne of the Majesty in 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 281, 


the heavens,” a cloud of human fragrance (may we not say?) 
mingled itself with the cloud of Divine glory. What a 
wondrous addition to the heaven of heavens! What an 
added glory was the entrance of the risen Man there for 
the first time as the risen man—a man able to stand before 
God on the ground of His own righteousness, His own obe- 
dience, His own purity, His own holiness; and also able to 
say to God, “I have glorified thee on the earth, I have finished 
the work which thou gavest me to do.” 

May we not with reverence contemplate this resurrection 
of Jesus, and His thus presenting Himself before God in 
heaven itself, as a marvellous change in the economy of the 
heavens? One who bore the likeness of the creature, standing 
in the midst of the throne of the Most High in such nearness 
to God? What indeed has God wrought! What marvels 
has He accomplished through His blessed Son! 

Aaron next took of the blood of the bullock and sprinkled 
it with his finger upon the mercy-seat, and before the mercy- 
seat, seven times. So also he did with the blood of the goat, 
the sin-offering for the people. Having sheltered himself 
under the cloud of incense, he was able to bring this record 
of death, the blood, and sprinkle it under the glory of God 
upon the mercy-seat, and upon the ground before the 
mercy-seat; first by way of atonement for himself and his 
house; and next on behalf of the people. 

What a singular ritual this. The emblem of death placed 
where God in His glory manifested Himself. What a 
wondrous coming together of things in themselves opposed 
to one another. A record of life powred out on account of 
sin, brought into the holy of holies. And yet how this 
shadowy ritual portrays to us the truth in which our 
souls rejoice. The great enigma of truth solved to faith in 
the death of God’s Son. 

It was said of the Aaronic high priest that “he entereth 
into the holy place every year with blood of others,” (Heb. 
ix:25;) or, as it might be rendered, strange or foreign blood- 
(alotrio,) seeing there was no affinity between the blood of a 
bullock, and a goat, and himself, a human being. It is 
written of Christ that “he by his own (idiow) blood entered 
in once into the holy places,” (Heb. ix:12;) and the word 
“his own” is again repeated, (Heb. xiii:12). 

Aaron had to make atonement for himself as well as for 
his house. His own blood would have been of no avail 
for others, or for himself, for he was a sinner. Our High 
Priest is “holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, 


282 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


and made higher than the heavens”; and what He is now in 
the glory that He was when on earth, as far as regards 
holiness and harmlessness. Free from all human infirmity 
—the Son—who offered up Himself. 

Aaron had to sprinkle the mercy-seat eastward, because 
his approach into the holiest was from the east, and he had 
to sprinkle before the mercy-seat, to establish a footing for 
himself before God; for his own feet would have defiled 
the ground before the mercy-seat. The Lord Jesus has 
His own rightful place—the Lamb as it had been slain in 
the midst of the throne—and He enables us sinners by nature 
to enter into the holiest by His blood, “‘by a new and living 
way, which he hath new made for us, through the vail, 
that is to say, His flesh.” 

We have no threat of ‘lest he die’ held out to us in our 
approaches to God; but our very way is a ling way, made 
new in contrast to all other ways of old, and ever new with 
the fresh sprinkled blood, in contrast with the blood only 
sprinkled once a year. The sacrifice of Christ is as fresh 
in all its life-giving value, and in all its cleansing power 
to-day, as it was on the very day it was first offered. The 
blood of Christ has ever its full, and fresh, and living value, 
in contrast with the blood of victims which had to be re- 
newed daily and yearly*. 

Aaron had to make atonement for the holy place, and 
for himself, his household, and the congregation of Israel. 
“The holy place,” throughout this chapter where the word 
“‘place’’ is in italics, signifies the “‘most holy,’’ ver. 2, 16, 17, 
20, 23, 27. Called “the holy sanctuary” in verse 33. No 
one was to be with him, or enter the tabernacle until he had 
completed that important work of atonement. Atone- 
ment properly speaking is all Godward; and is accomplished 
by one alone. The sinner who is atoned for has no part in 
the work. It is accomplished entirely by another. He is 
passive, and ignorant of the fact, until God reveals it to him 
by His Spirit through the Word. It is most important 
for the peace of the soul that this should be fully understood. 


*The word translated “consecrated,” is as the margin of the Bible 
has it, “new made.”’ The word “‘new” is a remarkable one, literally 
meaning “fresh slain,’ (prosphaton), and is used by the Spirit of God 
apparently to mark the contrast between the way on the day of atone- 
ment of old, when the blood must have at once ceased to keep its 
value, because it became stale, and had to be renewed every year; and 
the constant fresh value of the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb 
just slain, 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 283 


And this type makes it very plain. Not one of the con- 
gregation, nor one of Aaron’s house was with him whilst 
he thus acted for them before God. They could not be aware 
whether even he was alive in the sanctuary, or what he had 
accomplished there. They were not in any attitude of prayer 
or supplication outside; but they silently waited in sus- 
pense till he came out; then they knew he had fulfilled all 
God’s requirements; this being proved by the fact that he 
was alive. 

The whole work of atonement, from beginning to end, 
has been accomplished by Christ alone; whether we look at 
the commencement of the work in the shedding of His 
blcod on the cross, or at its completion in His resurrection 
as the great High Priest, and entering in, “once for all, by 
His own blood into the holy places, having obtained eternal 
redemption” (Heb. ix:12). This is emphatically stated in 
the Epistle to the Hebrews: “when he had by himself purged 
our sins,”’ 1:3; “‘this he did once when he offered up himself,” 
vii:27; ‘he hath appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice 
of himself,” ix:26. Alone upon the cross, the Lamb of 
God slain on account of sin. Alone in resurrection, the first- 
fruits of them that slept. Alone in the holiest with God, 
the great High Priest. He has offered one sacrifice for sins 
for ever, and has by Himself perfected the whole work of 
reconciliation which God committed to Him 

The sinner troubled in conscience on account of his sins, 
is not called upon by efforts of his own to reconcile God to 
himself. Every attempt of his own of this kind is the expres- 
sion of an unbelieving heart, calling in question the full 
eternal redemption which Christ has obtained for us. He 
has to believe in a reconciliation accomplished. An atone- 
ment completed. A salvation finished. And that by the Lord 
Jesus Himself alone. 

The “atonement for the holy place was because of the 
uncleanness of the children of Israel, and because of all their 
transgressions in all their sins’; or it might perhaps be 
rendered, ‘‘he shall make atonement upon the holy place, 
from the uncleanness of the children of Israel, and from 
their transgressions in respect to, or on account of all their 
sinsy * 

Throughout this chapter uncleanness is in the plural. 


*This would appear to be the meaning of the Hebrew preposition 
“Tamed,” placed before “all their sins.” It is frequently used in this 
sense in other parts of Scripture. 


284 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. 


(Heb. tumoth.) Uncleannesses twice in ver. 16, and once 
in ver. 19. It seems especially to refer to personal de- 
filements originating from man’s very nature, the constitu- 
tion of his body, or from disease. ‘Transgressions are also 
mentioned. Sin is that evil thing in which we are conceived, 
which renders us utterly unclean from our very birth; child- 
ren of wrath by nature. The corrupt body is an outward 
evidence of the evil taint which pervades us. Our mortal 
flesh, mortal as to every part; without a spot of it free from 
death and corruption, is a proof of what we are by nature as 
regards our whole being, unclean perishing sinners. 

Transgressions are sins made manifest in direct acts 
contrary to the revealed mind of God. Atonement had to 
be made with reference to the uncleannesses of Israel, 
and their transgressions. These two manifestations of 
evil indicating their sins. 

The law had no full type of the entire corruption of man. 
One of the objects for which it was given, was to develop 
that corruption in overt acts: “wherefore then the law? 
It was added because of transgressions” (Gal. iii:19). 

“Moreover the law entered that the offence might abound”’ 
(Rom. v:20). It was “the strength of sin” (1 Cor. xv:56). 
In the types therefore which form part of the law, we do 
not discover that great truth, that a man is so irremediably 
a sinner by nature as to need new birth, a new existence. 

Perhaps leprosy affords the nearest type of the entire 
uncleanness of the human being. But even here the priest 
could only deal with the manifestations of the disease. In 
interpreting these shadows therefore we have to go deeper 
than the types themselves. The atonement made by Christ 
does not only answer to God for us as regards our unclean- 
nesses, but also in respect to the unclean nature itself, in 
which we entered this world as children of the first Adam. 
Our unclean selves; and here we must be careful to distinguish 
between ourselves and our corrupt nature. The atonement 
made by Christ has not in any way cleansed, improved, or rec- 
onciled our flesh, our evil nature; for that is soirremediably bad 
that all that God could do with it was utterly to condemn it. 
In the death of Christ for sin, God has “condemned (damned) 
sin in the flesh” (Rom. viii:3). “Our old man is crucified 
with him that the body of sin might be destroyed,” (vi:6). 
The body of the sins of the flesh have been put off from us as 
regards all judgment and wrath of God. We (not our 
evil nature) have been reconciled to God (2 Cor. v:18; 
Col. 1:21). 


THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS. ~ 285 


This is tae great aspect of atonement. For what troubles 
us most is the constant presence of an evil heart, an evil 
nature; an inclination for sin, which will make itself to be 
felt notwithstanding all our efforts towards practical holi- 
ness, and notwithstanding we are new creatures in Christ, 
and notwithstanding the presence of the Holy Spirit dwelling 
in us. As believers we have a right to look at this, the old 
man, and say, it has been crucified; it has been condemned 
once for all; it has been judged under the full wrath of God, 
poured out upon His own Son for us. And there is “now 
no condemnation” of any kind to us—no condemnation on 
account of this evil nature which we still know to exist— 
no condemnation on account of weakness, failures, ignorances, 
sins. The uncleannesses and transgressions of the people 
entered the sanctuary of God, and had to be met by the 
blood of atonement; or otherwise wrath must have burst 
forth frora before the Lord upon the people, or God must 
remove His dwelling-place from the midst of them. 

“The patterns of things in the heavens were purified 
with these (sacrifices), but the heavenly things themselves 
with better sacrifices* than these. For Christ is not entered 
into the holy places made with hands, the figures of the 
true; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence 
of God for us” (Heb. ix:23, 24). 

Notwithstanding our manifest sins and uncleannesses, 
of which to a great extent we are unconscious, Christ has 
opened the way for us into the very glory of God—He has 
preceded us there with His own most precious blood— 
and now we can draw near with confidence, without defiling 
with our presence the holiest of all. We can confess our 
sins before the mercy-seat itself. We can bring our deep 
necessities, and find mercy and grace to help us. We can 
offer thanksgiving, praise and worship which God can accept 
because of the sweet savour of that precious blood. We can 
say, without fear, “thou hast set our iniquities before thee, 
our secret (sins) in the light of thy countenance,” (Psa. 
xe:8) because we know Christ is in the presence of God for 
us; His precious blood is in the very light of the glory of God 
on our behalf. The sins which have reached to heaven have 
been covered; blotted out by that sprinkled blood. ‘We 
have come to God, the judge of all.” We have heard 


*This is the only place where the word sacrifices occurs in the plural, 
when the death of the Lord Jesus is spoken of. In ali probability it is 
used to express the fact of His one sacrifice embracing every varied 
aspect of the many sacrifices offered under the law. 


2386 THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS: 


His sentence pronounced upon us as guilty and defiled sin- 
ners. We have seen that sentence executed in the death 
of His own Son. We have been justified from sin through 
that death, “‘justified by his blood” (Rom. v:9; vi:7). 

We have come “‘to Jesus the mediator of the new cove- 
nant”; the High Priest in the presence of God for us, minis- 
tering to us all the blessings of that new covenant. We have 
come “‘to the blood of sprinkling that speaketh better things 
than that of Abel’’; the blood of sprinkling wpon the mercy- 
seat, and bef»re the mercy-seat. God said to Cain respecting 
the blood of Abel, ‘‘the voice of thy brother’s blood crieth 
unto me from the ground, which hath opened her mouth 
to receive thy brother’s blood from thy hand” (Gen. iv:10, 
11). The blood cried for vengeance. The blood of sprink- 
ling to which we have come, speaketh incessantly mercy 
and grace; answers every accusation; calls down ceaseless 
blessings; cleanseth from all sin; utters a voice which delights 
the ear of God; and which enables Him to open His hand and 
fill us with good. The word “speaketh” is a blessed word, 
in contrast not only with the blood of Abel which cried for 
vengeance, but with the blood of bulls and of goats, which 
spoke but for a moment, and effected nothing in reality. 
Whereas this blood speaketh on and on with a ceaseless 
still small voice of power, until the day of full redemption, 
when the resurrection of the Church in glory will manifest 
for ever its mighty efficacy: and the voice of the precious 
blood will continue to sound until Israel, God’s chosen nation, 
and others redeemed out of the world during the 1000 years 
reign of Christ, are clothed with immortality. 

—Henry Soltau. 


NUMBERS 


CONTENTS 


Introduction. savy ceu nce eae aes 289 
Division"of Numbers .. 0... 7. 3 oe ee eee 293 
Analysis and Annotations...................... 295 


The Book of Numbers. 


Introduction. 


The fourth book of the Pentateuch bears in the Greek 
translation of the Old Testament (Septuagint) the title 
“Arithmoi,” of which the Latin “Numeri” and our English 
“Numbers” are translations. It is called by this name 
because the people Israel are twice numbered in this book. 
The first time when they started on their journey, and the 
second time at the close of their thirty-eight years wander- 
ing (chapters i and xxvi). The Hebrews have given to this 
book the name “Be-Midbar,” which means “in the wilder- 
ness.” 

It is the wilderness book and covers the entire period of 
Israel’s history from the second month of the second yeur 
after the Exodus from Egypt to the tenth month of the 
fortieth year. However, the years of wanderings are passed 
over in silence, only the different camps are mentioned. 
Our annotations point out the significance of this. 


The Author of Numbers. 


Numbers is closely linked with Leviticus, though it differs 
greatly from it. Moses wrote the record of the events in 
the wilderness as he wrote the instructions Jehovah gave 
concerning the worship of His people. Only a person who 
was contemporaneous with the events recorded in Numbers 
could have been the author of this book. In chapter xxxii:2 
we find a statement to the effect that Moses wrote their 
goings out according to their journeys. If Moses did not 
write the book, who then was the author? If the Mosaic 
authorship is denied the genuineness and trustworthiness 
of the entire book must be given up. Higher Criticism, so 
called, claims that Moses did not write Numbers and that 
the book itself was not contemporary with the events it 


290 NUMBERS. 


describes. They call attention that throughout the book 
Moses is referred to in the third person. They make much 
of chapter xii:3, as bearing definite testimony against Moses 
as the author.* The same documents, compilers and re- 
dactors, etc., which, as it is claimed, composed the other 
books of the Pentateuch, and put them into shape in which 
we have them, centuries after Moses lived, are also brought 
into play in connection with Numbers. It would be more 
than unprofitable to follow these foolish theories which have 
laid the foundation to the most serious denials of the revela- 
tion of God. 


Interesting History. 


The story of Numbers is of deep interest. We do not need 
to follow here the events in detail as recorded in the different 
chapters; this will be our happy task as we study this book. 
The Lord had the people numbered first. They had to show 
their pedigree that they really belonged to the people of 
God. Then the camp was set in order. The service of 
the Levites in connection with the tabernacle was appointed. 
Everything was im readiness for the journey towards the 
land and the possession of the land. Jehovah Himself 
went before the camp. Then comes the sad history of Israel’s 
failure, their murmuring and unbelief. They became wan- 
derers and their carcasses fell in the wilderness. 


In the Light of the New Testament. 


Every careful reader of the New Testament Scriptures 
knows that Numbers is there repeatedly quoted. The Lord 
spoke to Nicodemus about the serpent which Moses lifted 
up in the wilderness (chapter xxi:9) and spoke of it as a type 
of His death on the cross. Balaam is mentioned by Peter, 
Jude and in the Book of Revelation. Korah and the awful 
rebellion under him is used by Jude in his brief testimony 
concerning the apostasy of the last days. 


*For the explanation see our annotations on that chapter. 


NUMBERS. 29] 


But above all must we remember in the closer study of 
the Book of Numbers that the Holy Spirit has called special 
attention to the experiences of Israel in this book in its 
typical character and as a solemn warning for us as pilgrims 
in this present evil age. The failure of Israel on account 
of unbelief to enter into the promised land and possess it 
foreshadows the failure of Christendom to possess the 
heavenly things in Christ. We follow this more fully in 
the annotations. All this is fully authorized by the divine 
statement in 1 Cor. x:1-12. 

“Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignor- 
ant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all 
passed through the sea; And were all baptized unto Moses 
in the cloud and in the sea; And did all eat the same spiritual 
meat; And did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they 
drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that 
Rock was Christ. But with many of them God was not 
well pleased: for they were overthrown in the wilderness. 
Now these things were our examples, to the intent we should 
not lust after evil things, as they also lusted. Neither be ye 
idolaters, as were some of them; as it is written, The people 
sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Neither let: 
us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and feli 
in one day three and twenty thousand. Neither let us 
tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were de- 
stroyed of serpents. Neither murmur ye, as some of them 
also murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. Now 
all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they 
are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the 
world are come. Wherefore let him that thinketh he stand- 
eth take heed lest he fall.” 

And again it is written, “For whatsoever things were 
written aforetime, were written for our learning, that we 
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have 
hope” (Rom. xv:4). Read also Hebrews iii:7-19; iv:1-6. 
The entire wilderness experience of Israel as recorded in 
this book will yield to us deeper lessons if we seek them with 
prayer and a heart which is willing to know and to do His 


292 NUMBERS. 


will. These typical and spiritual applications have been 
made as far as our limited space permits. Much more may 
be discovered in this great book; our annotations, we hope, 
will be used, under God, to point out the way. 

The faithfulness of Jehovah in the midst of the most 
awful failures of His people and how He kept them and 
manifested His Grace towards them is one of the beautiful 
things of this book. 


The Levites and their Service. 


In the wilderness book only the service of the Levites is 
mentioned. Their responsibility in a service divinely given 
‘n taking charge of the things of the tabernacle (all typical 
of Christ and His work) is typical of our service into which 
the Lord calls each member of His body. 

In this book we find likewise the first of the greater proph- 
etic utterances of the Bible. The parables of Balaam form 
a great prophecy. The Appendix of this Study Pamphlet 
gives a full exposition. May it please God to use the analysis 
and annotations which now follow. 


The Book of Numbers, 


THE DIVISION OF NUMBERS. 


The division of this book is very simple if we follow the 


historical account It contains. 


There are three parts to it. 


We give them and the leading contents of the different 
chapters. 


I. THE PREPARATION FOR THE JOURNEY. Chapter 


aa lah 


on oot 


I-X:10. 


The People Numbered. Chapter i. 

The Camp Put in Order. Chapter ii. 

The Levites and their Ministrations. Chapter iii-iv. 
The Sanctification of the Camp and the Nazarite 
Chapter v-vi. 

The Offerings of the Princes. Chapter vii. 

The Consecration of the Levites. Chapter viii. 
Passover. Jehovah with His People. Chapter is 
The Trumpets of Silver. Chapter x:1-10. 


Il. THE JOURNEY STARTED. THE PEOPLE’S UN- 


1. 


BELIEF, FAILURE AND PUNISHMENT. Chapter 


x:11-xx1. 


The Departure and the First Failure. Chapter x: 


11-36. 


ee 
Be 
4. 
XIV. 


5. 


At Taberah and Kibroth-Hattavaah. Chapter xi. 
The Rebellion of Miriam and Aaron. Chapter xii. 
At Kadesh Barnea. Israel’s Unbelief. Chapters xii— 


Various Laws. The Sabbath Breaker. The Tassels 


upon the Garment. Chapter xv. 

6. The Rebellion of Korah. The Murmuring of the 
Whole Assembly. Chapter xvi. 

7. The Priesthood of Aaron Confirmed. Chapter xvii. 


294 NUMBERS. 


8 The Priesthood and Iniquity. The Recompense of 
the Priests. Chapter xviii. 

9. The Red Heifer and the Law of Purification. Chapter 
xIx. 

10. At Kadesh in the Fortieth Year. Murmuring and 
Conquests. Chapters xx-xxi. 


Ill. EVENTS IN THE PLAINS OF MOAB. FACING THE 
LAND. Chapters xxii-xxxvi. 


1. Balaam and His Parables. Chapters xxii—xxiv. 

2. Israel’s Sin with the Daughters of Moab. The Zeal of 
Phinehas. Chapter xxv. 

3. The Second Numbering of the People. Chapter xxvi. 

4. The Daughters of Zelophehad. The Death of Moses 
and his Successor Announced. Chapter xxvii. 

5. Order of the Offerings and the Set Times. Chapters 
XXVilI-Xxix, 

6. Concerning Vows. Chapter xxx. 

7. The War against the Midianites. Chapter xxxi. 

8. The Tribes of Reuben, Gad, Half-Manasseh and 
their portion. Chapter xxxil. 

9. The Encampments in the Wilderness. Chapter xxxiil: 
1-49. 

10. Instructions Concerning the Conquest and the 
Boundaries of the Land. Chapters xxxiii:50—-xxxiv. 

11. The Cities of Refuge. Chapter xxxv. 

12, The Security of the Inheritance. Chapter xxxvi. 


NUMBERS. 295 


Analysis and Annotations. 


I. THE PREPARATION FOR THE JOURNEY. 
Chapter i-x:10. 
1. The People Numbered. 


CHAPTER I. 


The Command to Number. 1-4. 

The Appointed Helpers for the Work. 65-16. 

The Congregation Assembled. 17-19. 

The Twelve Tribes Numbered. 20-46. 

The Levites Separated unto the Tabernacle Service. 47-54. 


SAE Ee 


It was exactly one month after the erection of the taber- 
nacle that the Lord gave the commandment to Moses to 
number the people. This is seen by comparing the first 
verse of Numbers with Exodus xl:17. It must not be over- 
looked that there was a previous numbering of the people 
in connection with the atonement money. Then all who 
were twenty years and above, the same as in this census, 
were numbered. This took place nine months before, and 
the number of men twenty years and over was 603,550. 
The same number is given in this first chapter. See Exodus 
XXXVill :25-26 and Numb. 1:46. 

The numbering was “after their families by the house of 
their fathers.”” And those to be numbered were “all from 
twenty years old and upward, all that are able to go forth 
to war in Israel.”” They had to declare their pedigrees after 
their families, and only those who could do that had a place 
in this mustering and could be warriors. This showing of 
their pedigree was necessary on account of the mixed multi- 
tude which had joined themselves to the people of God. 
“And a mixed multitude went up also with them” (Exod. 
xii:38). This mixed multitude that was among them fell 
a lusting (Numb. xi:4). Therefore only those who could 
show by their pedigree their rightful place among the people 


(296 NUMBERS 


of God were mustered and could go to war. Our pedigree> 
which gives us a place among the people of God, is the new 
birth, by which webecome children of God. And our calling is 
to a spiritual warfare, not with flesh and blood, but against 
the devil and his wiles and the wicked spirits (Ephes. vi:11-— 
12). 

The significance of the statement “all that are able to go 
forth to war in Israel” must not be overlooked. God 
wanted His people to go forward and reach in a few days 
the land of promise, enter in and conquer that land. How 
this plan was frustrated by their unbelief, and the men of 
twenty years and over died in the wilderness, without seeing 
the land is the sad history of this book. 

Moses and Aaron were called to be the leaders in numbering 
the people by their armies. As we saw in Exodus, both 
Moses and Aaron are typical of Christ. He knoweth His 
people and His watchful eye rests upon each. With Moses 
and Aaron were associated the princes of the tribes men- 
tioned in verses 5-16. The names of these princes are of deep 
interest when we translate them into English. The prince 
of Reuben is Elizur—“‘My God is a rock.” The Prince of 
Simeon, Shelumiel—“‘At peace with God.” The Prince of 
Judah, Nahshon—“A diviner.” Then comes Nathaniel— 
“the gift of God.” The Prince of Issachar, Zebulun, is 
represented by Eliab, “My God is Father.” Joseph has his 
double portion and Ephraim has Elishama—‘““My God hath 
heard.’ Manasseh’s Prince is Gamaliel—““My God is a 
rewarder.” Benjamin has Abidan—“My father is judge.” 
The Prince of Dan is Ahiezer—“Brother of help.” Asher 
has Pagiel—“Event of God.” Gad’s Prince is Eliasaph— 
“God addeth,” and Naphtali is represented by Ahira— 
“Brother is evil.” Nearly all these names are an encourage- 
ment to faith. These helpers in forming the mighty army 
speak by their names of the victory and blessing in store for 
His people if they go forward in faith.* 

The different tribes, except Levi, were then numbered. 


*The deeper lessons connected with it are pointed out in an excel- 
lent manner in the Numerical Bible. 


NUMBERS. 297 


We give a table which gives the result of this numbering 
and also the second numbering thirty-eight years later. 
The comparison is interesting: 

First Second 


Numbering Numbering 
Ch. I. Ch. XXVI. 


LES UAYS near se RN CENT hee eR i ete 46,500 43,730 2,770 decr. 
SIMEON elsetoh ticle stnates dex nso oral eloroes 59,300 22,200 37,100 decr. 
Gadaeee ween Re te os 45,650 40,500 5,150 deer. 
Judah emoere  rae ts se Nee 74,600 76,500 1,900 incr. 
Nssecharee tial. ett eee 54,400 64,300 9,900 incr 
Aebulumnlers vases pet iecteecner eves 57,400 60,500 3,100 incr. 
Manasseli....,3.cse ¢nsxar nerd eiininares 32,200 52,700 20,500 incr. 
BPOrairn act sterusenems eh ete rare acura a 40,500 32,500 8,000 deer. 
IBEN3AMIN ws ocise he cin oe eee s 35,400 45,600 10,200 incr. 
DaTiettatee ae ek eet. ole cee ree 62,700 64,400 1,700 incr. 
TaNkcl No) ae tcc RAED Or OSE Cae RG 41,500 53,400 11,900 iner. 
INapitalisenncitaaceininnen ats crlacheue 53,400 45,400 8,000 deer. 

robe iene ops mr eramas, che, a suaustasonrerets 603,550 601,730 1,820 deer. 


The tribe of Levi is not included. The end of this chapter 
gives the reason. They were not to be among the warriors, 
but appointed over the tabernacle of testimony, over all 
the vessels, and what belonged to it. They were to bear it 
and their place was round about the tabernacle. Their 
service, divinely appointed and the beautiful lessons con- 
nected with it, we shall follow more fully in our annotations 
of the third and fourth chapters. 


2. The Camp Put in Order. 


CHAPTER IL. 


The Command. 1-2. 

The East-side: Judah, Isaachar and Zebulon. 3-9. 

The South-side: Reuben, Simeon and Gad. 10-16. 

The Position of the Levites. 17. 

The West-side: Ephraim, Manasseh and Benjamin. 18-24 
The North-side: Dan, Asher and Naphtali. 25-34. 


OP ww 


The camp is now divinely arranged and put in order. 
Nothing was left to themselves. Jehovah spoke and gave 
the instructions, how every man of the children of Israel 


298 NUMBERS. 


was to pitch by his own standard, with the ensign of their 
father’s house over against, round about the tabernacle. 
The tabernacle where Jehovah dwelt was in the midst. 
Around this center the tribes were grouped in four camps, 
an east side, a south side, west side and north side, three 
tribes on each side. Rabbinical tradition adds many inter- 
esting details which may be true. According to this tradi- 
tion each had its own standard with the crests of its 
ancestors. On the east, above the tent of Nahshon, there 
shone a standard of green, because it was on an emerald 
(the green stone) that the name of Judah was engraved 
upon the breastplate of the high priest. Upon this standard 
was a lion, according to the words of Jacob, “Judah is a 
lion’s whelp.” ‘Towards the south, above the tent of Elizur, 
the son of Reuben, there floated a red standard, the color 
of the Sardius, the stone upon which Reuben’s name was 
written. Upon his standard was a human head, because 
Reuben was the head of the family. And Reuben means, 
as we saw in Exodus, “Behold a son,” typical of Him who 
became the Son of man. On the west, above the tent of 
Elishama, the son of Ephraim, there was a golden flag on 
which was the head of a calf, because it was through the 
vision of the calves or oxen that Joseph had predicted and 
provided for the famine in Egypt; and hence Moses, when 
blessing the tribe of Joseph (Deut. xxxiii:17) said, “his 
glory is that of the first-born of a bull.”” Towards the north, 
above the tent of Ahiezer, the son of Dan, there floated a 
motley standard of red and white, like the Jasper, in which 
the name of Dan was engraven upon the breastplate. In 
his standard was an eagle, the great foe of serpents, because 
Jacob had compared Dan to a serpent; but Ahiezer had 
substituted the eagle, the destroyer of serpents, as he shrank 
from carrying an adder upon his flag. This, we remind our 
readers, is Jewish tradition, and very interesting. 

A little diagram will bring the camp more vividly before 
us. 


NUMBERS. 299 


EAST 
Issachar JUDAH Zebulon 
(Lion) 


Naphtali Simeon 


Moses; Aaron; the Priests 


SORTH DAN Levites Levites REUBEN  sovuTH 


(Eagle) Merarites eee Kohathites (Face of Man) 


Levites 


Gershonites 


Asher Gad 
Benjamin EPHRAIM  Manasseh 


(Head of a Calf) 


WEST 


The Lord, we repeat, arranged the camp, with Judah 
facing towards the sunrise; this indicates the promised goal 
and also reminds us of the rising of the Sun of Righteousness, 
the coming of the Lord, when the wanderings of His people 
will end. And Jehovah was in the midst of His people to 
guide and protect them, to supply their needs. He is still 
the same. His New Testament people are also put in order 
by Him, and He is in the midst. However, there are not 
different standards around which His people gather, but there 
is only One, which is Christ. We do not think it profitable 
to enter into some of the rationalistic objections made in 
connection with this camp and its enormous number of 
occupants. They say, among other things, that such a 
mass of people could not possibly have lived for any length 
of time in the peninsula of Sinai, inasmuch as the natural 
produce of the desert could not have sustained them. But 
they forget that the book of Numbers does not say they lived 
upon what the desert yielded, but that they were miracu- 
lously sustained. These objections, whether they come from 
a vile French infidel or a cultured, higher critic, are the 
offspring of an unbelieving heart. 


300 NUMBERS 


3. The Levites and their Ministrations. 


CHAPTER Ml. 


The Generations of the Priests. 1-4. 
The Tribe of Levi and their Ministry. 5-10. 
The Levites substituted for all the First-born. 11-13. 
The Numbering of the Levites Ordered. 14-20. 
Gershon. 21-26. 
Kohath. 27-32. 
Merari. 33-37. 
Moses, Aaron and Aaron’s Sons. 38. 
The Numbering Completed. 39. 
10. The Separation of the Levites in Place of the First-Born. 
40-51. 


SED EMAC Sit dae 5) ee 


The supremacy of the tribe of Levi shows the sovereignty 
of God. Divine Grace is fully revealed in the selection of 
this tribe. This tribe could not be chosen on account of a 
meritorious character We read in Jacob’s prophecy words 
concerning Simeon and Lev: which reveal their sin. “O my 
soul, come thou not in their secret; unto their assembly, 
mine honor, be not thou united, for in their anger they slew 
a man, and in their self-will they digged down a wall. Cursed 
be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was 
cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in 
Israel” (Genesis xlix:6—-7). Yet out of this tribe Jehovah 
took Moses for the leader of His people, Aaron and his sons 
for priests, and the whole tribe instead of all the first-born 
for the special ministry. This is a most blessed illustration 
of sovereign grace. ‘They were brought into this wonderful 
place of blessing and privilege by Grace. In the eighth chap- 
ter we read of the cleansing of the Levites (chapter viii:5—7). 

The difference between the ministry of the Priests and the 
Levites must be noted. The book of Leviticus acquainted 
us with the work of Aaron and his sons, but it had nothing 
to say about the ministry entrusted to the Levites. The 
Priests had given to them the ministry of the Sanctuary, 
where they acted as worshippers and intercessors. The work 
of the Levites as given in this chapter, and that which follows, 
was of a more outward nature. They had to guard the 
tabernacle, to attend to its erection and taking down, to 


NUMBERS. 301 


bear the different parts, all of which was ordered in all its 
details by Jehovah. 

Levi means “joined.”” The Grace of God had joined them 
to the Lord and His ministry. Christian believers are joined 
to the Lord and are both Priests and Levites, possessing 
priesthood and ministry. Our priesthood consists in the 
ministry of the sanctuary, in worship and _ intercession. 
Our Levite ministry is many sided. It is given to us from 
the Lord to be exercised towards men. We bring spiritual 
sacrifices, the fruit of our lips, the sacrifice of praise unto 
God. The whole life of a Christian is to have the Levite 
character of ministry. ‘“I’o me to live is Christ” is our 
service as the Levite lived for the tabernacle and its ser- 
vice. All Christian believers are priests and all have a 
ministry. 

The generations of Aaron and Moses are mentioned first 
in this chapter. While elsewhere we read of Moses and 
Aaron, Aaron’s name here stands first. His name is put 
first because he typifies Christ as Priest, upon whose inter- 
cession all depends. The Levites were then brought to 
Aaron to minister unto him and keep his charge. Jehovah 
claims them for His own instead of all the first-born. ‘“There- 
fore the Levites shall be mine.” “Mine shall they be, I am 
Jehovah.” The first-born were sanctified unto the Lord 
because of deliverance. They knew therefore that they 
were sanctified unto Jehovah and owned by Him. And this 
is our blessed knowledge in Christ. We are delivered, 
sanctified, belong to Him and to keep His charge, rendering 
the service into which He has called us. May our hearts 
be led into the enjoyment of all this. 

The difference between the numbering of the tribe of 
Levi and the other tribes must be noted. In the previous 
chapter those were numbered who were twenty years and 
over, but the Levites were numbered “every male from 
a month old and upward.” This difference was because 
they were in place of the first-born, which were at the tender 
age of weakness and helplessness either redeemed or given up 
(Chapter xviii:16). 


302 NUMBERS. 


The sons of Levi made prominent as the heads of eight 
families, are, Gershon, Kohath and Merari. 

Gershon (exile) with his sons, Libni and Shimei, were 
7,500 souls. Their place was on the west-side of the Taber- 
nacle, over against Ephraim. (See Diagram in the previous 
chapter). They had charge of the tabernacle, the tent, 
the coverings and the hangings of the door of the taber- 
nacle. 

Kohath (assembly) with the Amramites, Izeharites, 
Hebronites and Uzzielites, were 8,600 souls. Their place 
was on the south-side and they had charge of the ark, the 
table, the candlestick, the altars, the hanging and all the 
service thereof. 

Merari (bitter) with the family of Mahlites and Mushites 
were 6,200 souls and their place was on the north-side, over 
against Dan. Their service consisted in handling the 
boards of the tabernacle, pillars, sockets, pins and cords. 
Each had his specific work given. There could be no 
misunderstanding about it. How strange it would have 
been if these 22,000 Levites had formed committees and 
sub-committees to divide the work and direct in it! All 
this would have brought in disorder. All they needed 
to do was to do the work into which the Lord had called 
them. All the instructions were given; obedience to these 
instructions, and faithfulness in the discharge of it were the 
essential things. The same is true in connection with the 
church. Every member in the body of Christ has a service 
to render. Each member is put into place by the Lord 
Himself and He gives to each the service, as He gave to 
these sons of Levi and their families their specific work in 
and around the tabernacle. ‘Now there are diversities 
of gifts, but the same Spirit. And there are differences 
of ministries, but the same Lord. And there are diversities 
of operations, but it is the same God, that worketh all 
things in all” (1 Cor. xii:4-6). How little this truth is 
recognized! Much of what is called ‘Christian service” 
is service in self-will and therefore lacks power and blessing. 


As these Levites knew their work, because the Lord kad 


NUMBERS. 303 


spoken and called them into it, so every member of the 
body of Christ is to know his calling and his service. 

“We, as Christians, are very apt to jostle one another: 
indeed, we are sure to do so if we do not each one pursue his 
own divinely appointed line of work. We say “divinely 
appointed,” and would press the word; we have no right 
to choose our own work. If the Lord has made one man 
an evangelist, another a teacher, another a pastor, and 
another an exhorter, how is the work to go on? Surely, 
it is not by the evangelist trying to teach, and the teacher 
to exhort, or one who is not fitted for either trying to do 
both. No; it is by each one exercising his own divinely 
imparted gift. No doubt, it may please the Lord to endow 
one individual with a variety of gifts; but this does not, 
in the smallest degree, touch the principle on which we 
are dwelling, which is simply this, every one of us is re- 
sponsible to know his own special line and pursue it. If 
this be lost sight of, we shall get into hopeless confusion. 
God has His quarry-men, His stone-squarers, and His 
masons. The work progresses by each man attending 
diligently to his own work. If all were quarry-men, where 
were the stone-squarers? if all were stone-squarers, where 
were the masons? ‘The greatest possible damage is done to 
the cause of Christ, and to God’s work in the world, by 
one man aiming at another’s line of things, or seeking to 
imitate another’s gift. It is a grievous mistake, against 
which we would solemnly warn the reader. Nothing can be 
more senseless. God never repeats Himself. There are 
not two faces alike, not two leaves in the forest alike, not 
two blades of grass alike. Why, then, should any one 
aim at another’s line of work, or affect to possess another’s 
gift? Let each one be satisfied to be just what his Master 


has made him. This is the secret of real peace and 


progress.””* 


Worship holds the first and highest place. This is 
for us His people most clearly stated in the New Testament. 
Devotion to the Lord Jesus Christ in our life is the highest 


*C, K. McIntosh on Numbers. 


304 NUMBERS. 


form of service and all other service must flow, and will 
flow, from faithfulness to the Person of our Lord. 

Gershon and his sons had charge of the coverings and 
the fine linen. Gershon means exile, a stranger. The fine 
linen is typical of righteousness. The coverings, hangings 
which divided off and separated the different parts of the 
tabernacle, must have the meaning of separation. His 
service points us to the fact that we are separated ones and 
strangers in the world. This separation must be witnessed 
to by practical righteousness. 

ferari had charge with his sons of the boards, the sockets, 
pins and cords. These held the building together. We 
stated in the annotations of Exodus (Chapter xxvi) that 
Christ and His people are typified in the boards of shittim 
wood, resting in the sockets of silver. The framework of 
the tabernacle, with the bars of shittim wood uniting the 
boards, is a type of that building of which we read in Ephe- 
sians, “a building fitly framed together,” the church. The 
work of Merari suggests the thought of union. 

It is interesting to compare this wilderness service as 
outlined above with the exhortation in Ephes. iv:1-3. 
Knowing God’s calling, in possession of God’s highest and 
best, as revealed in that Epistle, passing through the wil- 
derness, we are to walk worthy of that calling. 


1. In all lowliness and meekness. Manifesting Christ. 
—Kohath-service. 

2. With longsuffering, etc. Practical righteousness.— 
Gershon-service. 

3. Keeping the Unity of the Spirit. United in the one 
body.—Merari-service. 


And if we walk thus we shall make known the excellencies 
of Him, who hath called us from darkness to His marvellous 
light and exercise in obedience the special gift He has given 
to us as members of His body. 

The numbering then proceeded. The number of those 
fit far service was 8,580, 


NUMBERS. 305 


Kobathitesso2. Casita ead, dees nt j Able men, 2,750 
Unable, 5,850 

PL Uae Neen ete oT Nr Pe Moe ME Vee lee edo oo 8,600 
Gershonites 05.6. coche ee { Able men, 2,630 
(Unable, 4,870 

Otani oes core ee Re, ee Ee 7,500 
Moratiteg® osiaies 6 ony Aa ieee. Ay.i6 } Able men, 3,200 
Unable, 3,000 

ANN A ae Aes eS aPR EE OU AACS Bete ors MO RA ore De ama re 6,200 

Lotal Gamer cpetnn atin cont eeirtce mee. Paves eaten Tee 22,300 


But how many among God’s people are unfit for service, 
being out of conscious fellowship with God and conformed 
to this present evil age! May it please the Spirit of God to 
awaken such to see anew their calling and their blessed 
privileges as priests and Levites unto God. 

But while it is impossible to restore the house, that is the 
professing Church, so sadly divided and broken in pieces, 
it is not impossible for the individual believer to live and 
serve according to the divine ideal. 

In verse 38 we find the place given where Moses, Aaron 
and the priests were to encamp. It was before the taber- 
nacle, that is, on the east side. The number of the Levites 
is given as 22,000. If we add the number of the Gershonites, 
Kohathites and Merarites, '7,500-8,600 and 6,200, we get 
22,300. Here is a difficulty which seems to remain unsolved. 
The total number in verse 39 must be correct, for in verse 46 
we read that the number of the first-born exceeded the total 


number of the Levites by 273. 
CHAPTER IV. 
The Service of the Levites and their Numbering. 


The Children of Kohath; their Service. 1-20. 
The Sons of Gershon; their Service. 21-28. 
The Sons of Merari; their Service. 29-33. 
Their Numbering for Service. 34-49. 


PP n 


This chapter enters more fully into the service of the 


306 NUMBERS. 


Levites. They are mustered for service “from thirty years 
old and upward even unto fifty years old.” As we saw in 
the previous chapter, their service was to carry the holy 
things of Jehovah through the wilderness. The wilderness 
is for us the type of the world through which we pass, and 
our business as Christians is to manifest Christ. We must 
guard the holy things of our faith as jealously as the Levites 
guarded the tabernacle and its sacred contents, and this 
must be done by us with the testimony of our lips and the 
testimony of our lives. The service of the Kohathites, 
Gershonites and Merarites is full of blessed instructions 
for us, at which we can but briefly hint. In the previous 
chapter Gershon stands first, as he is the first-born. Here 
the first-born has to take a secondary place and Kohath is 
put first. The lesson is that the divine appointment 
for service is not the matter of natural relation and endow- 
ment, but of Grace. The sons of Kohath had to carry 
the most holy things. All of them typify Christ in His 
humanity as our Redeemer and Lord. This stands first. It is 
occupation with Christ, and therefore fellowship with God. 


4. The Sanctification of the Camp and the Nazarite. 
CHAPTER V. 


1. Concerning the Leper, the Issue and Defilement of the Dead. 
1-4. 

2. Concerning Restitution. 5-10. 

3. Concerning the Wife suspected of Adultery. 11-31. 


So far we had the outward arrangement of the camp. 
This chapter tells us that the camp had to be holy and 
therefore must be cleansed from that which defiles. Divine 
directions are given concerning the unclean person, the 
restitution of anything unjustly taken and what is to be 
done with a wife suspected of adultery. Leprosy could not 
be tolerated in the camp in the midst whereof Jehovah 
dwelt. The persons who had an issue and had come in 
touch with the dead, as well as the leper, both male and 
female, were to be put without the camp. This command 


NUMBERS. 307 


was at once obeyed. “And the children of Israel did so, 
and put them out without the camp.” The typical meaning 
of leprosy we learned from Leviticus as well as the meaning 
of the issue. Sin is typified thereby as manifested in and 
through one who belongs tothe people of God. While here 
we have the divine command to put the unclean person out 
of the camp, we have the equally divinely given command 
in the New Testament: “Put away from among yourselves 
that wicked person” (1 Cor. v:13). The principle is the same 
whether in the camp of Israel or in the Church of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. To touch the dead also defiled. If it was a 
dead person, the one who touched the same was considered 
unclean for seven days (Num. xix:11); if a man touched a 
dead animal it rendered him unclean till the evening (Levit. 
xi:27, 39, 40). To purify such who had become defiled in 
this manner, the ordinance of the red heifer was given. In 
no other portion of the Law is made so much of this form 
of defilement as in Numbers. This is in keeping with the 
character of the book. Israel passing through the wilderness 
came face to face with death on all sides. Spiritually the 
application is not hard to make. The world through which 
God’s children pass is the enemy of God, alienated from Him 
and lying in the wicked one. Death is stamped upon it 
and the world is under condemnation. By the cross of 
Christ we are crucified to the world and the world is crucified 
unto us. The Word of God therefore exhorts us not to be 
conformed to this world (Rom. xii:2). We are not to love 
the world nor the things in the world (1 John ii:15-17). 
James tells us that whosoever will be a friend of the world 
is the enemy of God (James iv:4). Against defilement with 
the world in its different phases the child of God must con- 
stantly be on his guard. The camp must be holy, because 
Jehovah is in the midst. All what defiles belongs outside. 
The wrong committed in the camp (verses 5-10) must be 
confessed, restitution be made, and, according to the law of 
the trespass-offering, the fifth part must be added to it. 
Unconfessed sin could not be tolerated in the camp where 
Jehovah dwells. And the same principle we find in the New 


308 NUMBERS. 


Testament. “The Grace of God, which has brought in 
unlimited forgiveness, would be rather a calamity if it did 
not enforce confession. Can one conceive a thing more 
dreadful morally than a real weakening of the sense of sin 
in those brought nigh to God? It may seem so where there 
is only a superficial acquaintance with God. Where the 
truth hath been hastily gathered and learned on the surface it 
is quite possible to pervert the Gospel to an enfeebling of 
the immutable principles of God, ignoring His detestation 
of sin, and our own necessary abhorrence of it as born of God. 
Whatever produces such an effect is the deepest wrong to 
Him and the greatest loss to us. This is guarded against 
here.”’* 

In the next paragraph concerning the wife suspected of 
adultery, no positive defilement or sin is in view, only the 
suspicion of it. A careful reading of the passage is suggested. 
The offering of jealousy is described in detail, but the brief 
character of our annotations forbids a closer examination. 
We can only point out that the offering consisted not of 
fine flour as in the meal-offering, but of barley meal, which 
was coarser. No leaven was mixed with it, for that would 
have implied before the test, the guilt of the accused woman. 
Nor was oil and frankincense put on the offering, no joy 
and worship could be connected with this offering of jealousy. 
Then the priest took holy water in an earthen vessel and 
the dust of the tabernacle floor and put it into the water. 
This also has a symbolical meaning. The water stands 
for the Word, and the dust typifies death and the curse. 
It was a most solemn ceremony of a searching nature. 
The innocent one had nothing to fear; the drinking of the 
bitter water that causeth the curse butresulted for her in vin- 
dication. The guilty one was found out by Jehovah and 
the curse rested upon her. This ordinance is also appli- 
cable to Israel as the unfaithful wife of Jehovah. 


*Lectures on the Pentateuch. W. Kelly 


NUMBERS. 309 


CHAPTER VI. 
The Nazarite. 


1. The Vow of a Nazarite. 1-8. 

2. The Defilement of the Nazarite. 9-12. 

3. The Law of the Nazarite. 15-21. 

4, The Blessing of Aaron and his Sons. 22-27, 


The word Nazarite means, one who is separated. The 
vow of the Nazarite meant separation unto Jehovah and sep- 
aration in three things. 1. Separation from wine and 
strong drink, vinegar of wine, vinegar of strong drink, 
liquor of grapes, moist or dried grapes, from all that is made 
of the wine-tree, from the kernels even unto the husks. 2. 
His hair was to grow long and no razor was to come upon 
his head. 3. He was to be separated from the dead. This 
Nazarite vow was only for a certain period of time 
and not permanent. When it ended he shaved his head 
and drank wine. 

This entire chapter concerning the Nazarite is of intense 
interest for it contains many helpful and most blessed 
lessons for us. It is needless to say that no more vows 
like the vow of the Nazarite can be made in the literal 
sense of the word, just as there is no longer a special class 
of priests among God’s people. A Nazarite was a separate 
one, a Saint, and suchare we in Christ Jesus. But while 
the Grace of God has constituted us Saints, the practical 
living out of our Nazariteship remains with us. It must 
be the matter of the willing heart, the heart, which, in 
devotion to the Lord, yields itself to Him. The wine, strong 
drink and all which comes from the vine stands for earthly 
joys, for pleasures, for that which is pleasing to the old 
nature. The wine and strong drink stand typically for 
the intoxicating pleasures which this poor, lost world 
indulges in and which the god of this age so often uses to 
dull the heart and the spirituality of the Saints. But there 
are other things mentioned, which in themselves are harm- 
less, like the moist grapes and dried grapes. These repre 
sent also earthly joys of a harmless character, but which can- 


310 NUMBERS. 


not give to the believer the joy in the Lord which His 
heart craves. Christ is to be our all in all, the Saint does 
not need anything whatever of earthly joys to sustain him. 
Christ is sufficient. Asaph reveals the true Nazarite- 
Spirit, when He said, ““Whom have I in heaven but Thee? 
and there is none on earth that I desire beside Thee”’ (Ps. 
Ixxiii:25). Paul in writing to the Philippians gives the 
expression of a Nazarite: “For me to live is Christ.” 
“And furthermore, I consider all things but loss for the 
sake of the surpassing knowledge of Christ Jesus, my Lord; 
for whom I suffered the loss of all things, and count them 
but dung, that I may win Christ” (Phil. iii:8). 

“Legality this is not. Legality is the spirit of self-right- 
eousness, or of slavish dread, never of love, or desire after 
Christ, or of expectation from Him, such as that of which 
we have been speaking. Carry these ever so far, they can 
never land you in that in the direction of which they do 
not even point, but away from it. He who speaks of him- 
self as doing but one: thing was neither a legalist nor an 
extremist. He was simply a man into whose heart, forever 
filling it, the glory of Christ had shined. 

“Let us not confound this, however, with the spirit of 
asceticism that has peopled monasteries with men fleeing 
vainly from the world, or scattered through the desert the 
abodes of the recluse. Nor let us imagine as involved in it 
any ‘death to nature,’ in which what God has made or 
instituted is branded as if it were unclean. It is striking 
that just in these two epistles in which Christian position 
is most emphasized (Ephesians and Colossians) the duties 
of earthly relationships are most largely dwelt upon. The 
lilies of the field could be seen by Him who as Son of Man was 
here on earth for us arrayed in glory beyond all Solomon’s. 
His hands indeed had made them, and if not a sparrow fell 
to the ground without His Father, He could say, ‘I and My 
Father are one.’ Still as ever is it true that the Lord’s 
works are manifold, and in wisdom has He made them all: 
the earth is full of His riches; yea, and His works are sought 
out of all them that have pleasure therein. 


NUMBERS. 311 


“But the Christian Nazarite is Christ’s: therefore in his 
pleasures, in his business, in his duties, Christ is before 
him, with him, over him. He has fellowship with the 
Father and the Son, and there is nothing for him outside 
this. Here is the principle which makes him of necessity 
a stranger to what they find pleasure in, who find none in 
Him. The world’s ‘vine of wine,’ as a whole, he is separate 
from.”’* 

The long hair of the Nazarite is not difficult to interpret. 
1 Cor. xi:1-15 gives the key. “If a man have long hair, it 
is a shame unto him. But if a woman have long hair, it 
is a glory to her; for her hair is given her for a covering.” 
The long hair of the woman testifies of the authority under 
which she is put. The long hair of the Nazarite therefore 
showed that he had humbled himself, made of himself no 
repudiation. He took the place of dependence and loneli- 
ness. He gave up his rights and became nothing. And 
this is the place of blessing and power. The Christian 
Nazarite in his practical separation to the Lord, loves the 
jow place and delights to follow after Him, who emptied 
Himself and stooped so low. The separation from the 
dead has the same meaning as in the previous chapter. 
May it please God to give the writer and every reader of 
these lines a deeper longing to live as a true Nazarite, 
separated unto the Lord. 

The Nazarite vow ended. Our separation is only as 
long as we are in the wilderness. The time came when 
the Nazarite, having fulfilled his vow, drank wine. A time 
of joy is coming for the Saints of God, when His words shall 
be fulfilled. “I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of 
the wine until that day when I drink it new with you in 
My Father’s Kingdom” (Matt. xxvi:29). Then in His 
presence, delivered completely from sin and an evil world, 
we shall have joy unending, and instead of the place of 
lowliness we shall be exalted and share His throne with 
Him. Oh! for a thousand lives to devote to the Lord Jesus 
Christ! 

*F, W. Grant in Numerical Bible. 


312 NUMBERS. 


The blessing with which this chapter ends gives a precious 
revelation of the triune God. Three times the Name of 
Jehovah was put upon the children of Israel; the Father- 
God, who keeps; Jehovah the Son, who is gracious; Jehovah 
the Holy Spirit, who gives peace. And there are certain 
people who deny the triune God and claim that no such 
doctrine is found in the Bible! How great will be the bless- 
ing, when He comes the second time to bless His people 
and all creation! 


5. The Offerings of the Princes. 
CHAPTER VII. 


The Princes Present their Offerings. 1-3. 

The Command concerning these Offerings and the Levites. 4-11. 
The Twelve Princes and what they Offered. 12-88. 

Moses hears the Voice from the Mercy-Seat. 89. 


eo lS le 


This is the longest chapter in Numbers. The princes 
of Israel appear to bring their free-will offerings in six 
covered wagons drawn each by two oxen. No command 
had been given. With a willing heart they devoted of their 
possessions to the service’ of the sanctuary. The Lord 
accepting the offerings gave directions that the Gershonites 
and Merarites were to receive the wagons and the oxen for 
their service. 'Thesons of Gershon received two wagons and 
four oxen and the sons of Merari four wagons and eight oxen. 
The gift was according to the service into which Jehovah had 
called them. The Merarites had to take care of the heavy 
boards and the Lord provided the means to carry the burden 
and render the service. For all service into which He calls 
His people, He also provides the strength and the means 
for the service. The sons of Kohath received nothing. 
They needed no wagons and oxen; their service was to carry 
the precious things upon their shoulders. 

The critics of the Word of God have found fault with the 
lengthy statements and repetitions concerning the twelve 
princes and their offerings. If these critics had penned 
this chapter, they would have given these offerings in a verse 


NUMBERS. 313 


or two. But what unbelief belittles and rejects, is precious 
to faith. The details of the offerings and repetitions are 
written by the Holy Spirit, that we may know that Jehovah 
takes notice of the devotion and sacrifice of His people. 
Hie keeps a record of it all. The same eye, which followed 
the princes as they approached the tabernacle with their 
wagons, saw the two mites, which the poor widow deposited 
into the treasury; the same eye sees us. He will not forget 
the least service rendered unto Him. 

All the twelve are called princes, except Nahshon of Judah. 
He, as the leader, the representative of Judah, must be the 
type of the Lord Jesus Christ, and He is more than a prince. 
We give a bird’s eye view of the persons named and their 
gifts. 


1. Judah: Nahshon, v. 12. 12 Silver Chargers, each 130 shekels. 
2. Issachar: Nethantel, v. 18. 12 Silver Bowls, 0 ne 
8. Zebulun: Eliab, v. 24. 12 Gold Spoons, Sere l'O: oe 
4. Reuben: Elizur, v. 30. Total Shekels of Silver, 2400 
5. Simeon: Shelumiel v. 36. Re of Gold, 120 
6. Gad: Eliasaph, v. 42. Of beasts for sacrifice: 
7. Ephraim: Elishama, v. 48. Brulllo@lcs-f ayant evsis eo can eae 12 
8. Manasseh: Gamaliel, v. 54. EN ania Siteuaia csntae cere eee utrey Caos 12 
9. Benjamin: Abidan, v. 60. abs. ae eer tea coe 12 
10. Dan: Ahiezer, v. 66. (GOAESN ae 5 Aaet rei eta ts ee 24 
11. Asher: Pagiel, v. 72. amish ie watt Quake ht 60 
12. Naphtali: Ahira, v. 78. He=G oats teres. seatieass ahem ere 60 
A Bhrall oc earache eau, even trae ob 60 
LOtalee ere et, er ea 


Jehovah expressed His approval and His joy, after the 
offerings had been presented, by speaking to Moses in 
an audible voice, from between the Cherubim. The prom- 
ise given in Exodus xxv:21, 22 was fulfilled. 


314 NUMBERS. 


6. The Consecration of the Levites. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


1. The Lighting of the Candlestick. 1-4. 
2. The Consecration of the Levites. 5-22. 
8. The Charge to the Levites Repeated. 23-26. 


The candlestick is the type of Christ as in the sanctuary, 
that is, Christ in Glory. The lighting of the seven lamps 
introduced in the beginning of the wilderness book is of 
blessed meaning. The seven lamps were to illuminate 
the candlestick of beaten gold, throw their light upon the 
candlestick so that the gold and beautiful workmanship 
might be seen. The oil in the seven lamps represents the 
Holy Spirit. Spiritually applied we have the picture here 
of the Spirit of God shedding light upon Christ. For this 
He is given to His people, to glorify Christ. And this is the 
great need of the people of God in their journey through 
the wilderness. The eyes of the pilgrim and stranger, the 
passenger passing through the wilderness, must be fixed 
upon Christ in glory. 

The consecration of the Levites consisted in sprinkling 
with water, shaving the whole body, washing of their clothes. 
They had to stand before the tabernacle of the congregation 
and the whole assembly of the children of Israel was gathered 
together. The children of Israel had to put their hands 
upon the Levites. The whole congregation became thus 
identified with the service of the Levites. The Levites 
represented the entire congregation of Israel and served in 
their behalf. The sprinkling with water in their consecra- 
tion stands typically for the purification from sins. This 
they could not do for themselves, another had to do it. But 
the sharp razor they were able to take to remove from their 
bodies all the hair, which stands for that which belongs to 
the flesh, the old nature. They had also to wash their clothes, 
which typically signifies the water (the Word) applied to 
our habits and to our ways. The lessons are many. He 
who would be a true Levite in service must constantly use 
the sharp knife of self-judgment to remove all what is of self. 


NUMBERS. 315° 


Their period of service was fixed. It was uniform, from 
25 to 50 years. It was a gracious provision that at 50 the 
Levite was permitted to retire from the harder work. There 
is no clash here with the statement of chapter iv. From 
25 to 30 they could do the lighter work of the tabernacle, 
even as the Levites over 50 years were exempt from the 
harder tasks. The Lord still fixes the period in which His 
servants are to serve Him, as He also looks out for their 
comfort (John xxi:12, 18-19). 


%. Passover. Jehovah with His People. 
CHAPTER IX. 


The Command to Keep the Passover. 1-3. 
The Passover Kept. 4-5. 

Provision in Case of Defilement. 6-14. 
Jehovah with His People. 15-23. 


Bw 


Jehovah next commands His people to keep the feast of 
redemption, Passover. And they obeyed at once. The 
first Passover was held in Egypt, the second in the wilderness 
at Sinai, with their faces turned towards the land of promise, 
and it was next celebrated in the land of Canaan. This 
shows how essential the blood is for everything The blood 
delivers out of Egypt, it keeps in the wilderness and brings 
into the land of promise. Here in the wilderness they looked 
back to redemption as it had been accomplished in Egypt, 
the sprinkled blood of the paschal lamb had delivered them, 
and they looked forward to the land towards which they 
journeyed. Jehovah, who had delivered them out of Egypt 
by blood, carried His people through the wilderness, supply- 
ing all their wants, and brought them in virtue of that re- 
demption blood, the ever blessed type of the precious 
blood of the Lamb, into the land of Canaan. We have the 
Lord’s table where we enjoy the feast of redemption, feeding 
on Himself and His great love. There we look back to the 
Cross where He died, and praise Him for our deliverance. 
There we look forward to the blessed goal ‘“‘till He comes.” 


316 NUMBERS. 


And we know that while on the way all our need shall be 
supplied, according to His riches in glory in Christ Jesus. 

A gracious provision was made for the men who were defiled 
by the dead or were on a journey afar. They could keep 
the Passover a month later, in the second month on the 
fourteenth day. The men who were defiled made a con- 
fession of it. And Moses not knowing what to do about 
their case turned to the Lord for instruction, which was 
immediately given. The Grace of God met this need in a 
blessed way. There was time given for cleansing and for 
return from the journey and then a month later they could 
keep the Passover. None was to be shut out from the feast 
of redemption which God in His Grace had provided for 
His people. Confession and self-judgment are needed in 
keeping the Lord’s Supper. If the wanderer but returns he 
finds a welcome at the table He has spread for His people. 
What Grace the Lord manifests towards His people! But 
how little Grace those who are the objects of His Love and 
Grace manifest towards each other! If one, however, did 
neglect the Passover wilfully, he was to be cut off from 
among his people. Such neglect showed that he had no 
heart for Jehovah and His redemption. 

And the cloud was with His people. In that cloud Jehovah 
was present, He was with His people. They tarried and 
journeyed according to the command of the Lord. The 
cloud by day and the pillar of fire by night. “So it was 
alway.” He did not leave His dwelling place in the midst 
of the people. All their movements were ordered by the 
cloud, that is, by the Lord Himself. 

That mighty camp of over 600,000 men of twenty years 
and over, the 22,000 Levites and the hundreds of thousands 
of women and children, were dependent on the cloud. They 
could make no plans of their own. They did not know 
where they would go the next day. When they camped 
they did not know for how long it would be; when they 
marched they were ignorant how long it would last. Their 
eyes had to be fixed every morning, every night and through- 
out the day upon the cloud. They had to look up. Daily 


NUMBERS. 317 


they were dependent upon Jehovah and upon the cloud for 
guidance. 

And does He do anything less for His people living in the 
present age? Is the promise of guidance confined to Israel? 
Is it still His promise to His trusting child, “I will guide thee 
with mine eye”? Every Christian knows that he is under 
His care and under His guidance. If He guided Israel thus, 
how much more He will guide us who are, through Grace, 
members of His body, one Spirit with the Lord! How often 
we frustrate the manifestations of His power and His love 
by choosing our own path. 

“Thus it was with Israel, and thus it should be with us. 
We are passing through a trackless desert—a moral wilder- 
ness. There is absolutely no way. We should not know 
how to walk, or where to go, were it not for that one most 
precious, most deep, most comprehensive sentence which 
fell from the lips of our blessed Lord, ‘I am the way.’ Here 
is divine, infallible guidance. We are to follow Him. ‘I am 
the light of the world: he that followeth Me shall not walk 
in darkness, but shall have the light of life’ (John viii). This 
is living guidance. It is not acting according to the letter 
of certain rules and regulations; it is following a living Christ 
—walking as He walked, doing as He did, imitating His 
example in all things. This is Christian movement— 
Christian action. It is keeping the eye fixed upon Jesus, 
and having the features, traits and lineaments of His char- 
acter imprinted on our new nature, and reflected back or 
reproduced in our daily life and ways. 

‘Now this will assuredly involve the surrender of our own 
will, our own plans, our own management, altogether. We 
must follow the cloud: we must wait ever, wait only upon 
God. We cannot say, We shall go here or there, do this or 
that, to-morrow, or next week. All our movements must 
be placed under the regulating power of that one command- 
ing sentence (often, alas! lightly penned and uttered by us), 
‘If the Lord will.” * 


*C. H. McIntosh. 


318 NUMBERS. 


8. The Trumpets of Silver. 


CHAPTER X:1-10. 


1. The Silver Trumpets. 1-2. 
2. How they were to be Used. 3-10. 


The silver trumpets were also given for guidance. They 
made known the mind of the Lord in an audible way. The 
cloud was seen. It stands for guidance by the eye. The 
silver trumpets were heard. When Israel was gathered 
together the trumpets were blown. “When ye blow an 
alarm, then the camps that lie on the east side shall go 
forward; when ye blow an alarm the second time then the 
camps that lie on the south side shall take their journey.” 
They were used in time of war and the promise of victory 
and deliverance is connected with it. And in the days of 
gladness, in solemn days, in the beginning of the months, 
at the burnt offerings and peace offerings these trumpets 
were to be blown. And in the future there will be a use for 
the trumpet in connection with the gathering of Israel 
(Feast of Trumpets). Read Isaiah xxvii:12-13; Joel ii:1. 
Thus all was ordered for them by the Lord. The sound of 
the trumpets was to them the voice of God giving direction 
and a comforting assurance at'the same time. They typify 
the Word of God. It must not be overlooked that the sons 
of Aaron, the priests, had to blow the trumpet. They were 
in holy communion with the Lord and and made known His 
will to the people. As Israel was dependent on the sound 
of the trumpets, so are we dependent as His people on the 
testimony of His Word. His will is ascertained in priestly 
intimacy with Himself. 

This ends the first part of this interesting book. It 
shows how Jehovah made all preparations and provisions 
for the wilderness journey of His people. He had them num- 
bered, the camp was arranged and put in order, the service 
of the Levites appointed. The offerings were brought, the 
Levites consecrated, the Passover celebrated and the guid- 
ance by the cloud and silver trumpets given. All was ready 
for the journey. 


NUMBERS. 319 


II. THE JOURNEY STARTED. ISRAEL’S UNBELIEF, 
FAILURE AND PUNISHMENT. Chapters x:11-xxi. 


1. The Departure and the First Failure. 
CHAPTER X:11-36. 


The Cloud Moves. 11-13. 

The Standard of the Camp Judah. 14-17. 
The Standard of the Camp of Reuben. 18-21. 
The Standard of the Camp of Ephraim. 22-24. 
The Standard of the Camp of Dan. 25-28. 
The First Failure. 29-32. 

The Cloud Leading. 33-36. 


BY ONE ee al 


It was on the twentieth day of the second month, in the 
second year, that the cloud was taken up from off the taberna- 
cle and the signal was given for the camp to break up. The 
wilderness journey begins and we shall soon be face to face 
with the sad story of Israel’s failure, a failure which is re- 
peated in the history of Christendom. What a magnificent 
spectacle it must have been when the camp of Israel moved 
for the first time in its divinely arranged order! No pen 
can describe the scene. The cloud moved and advanced 
towards the wilderness of Paran. Judah with his flowing 
standard led by Nahshon comes first. Then the tabernacle 
was taken down and the sons of Gershon and Merari set for- 
ward carrying the different parts of the tabernacle. In the 
second chapter instruction was given that the tabernacle 
was to set forward with the camp of the Levites in the midst 
of the camp. Here the order is changed. We shall find later 
the reason for this. Then the other camps followed, all in 
perfect order with Dan the rear guard of all the camps. 
Was it possible that one not an eye-witness could have given 
such a remarkable and minute description of all this? Only 
the person who was actually there and saw it with his own 
eyes could have written this account. No compiler living 
a few hundred years later could have produced such a work. 

How beautiful the order in the camp! What a contrast 


320 NUMBERS. 


with the disorder and confusion which followed so soon! 
And this has all been repeated in Christendom. 

The incident between Moses and Hobab is significant. 
The first failure is recorded and it is on the side of Moses. 
He turned to his father-in-law, a man who knew the wilder- 
ness well, and said, “Leave us not, I pray thee; forasmuch 
as thou knowest how we are to encamp in the wilderness, 
and thou mayest be to us instead of eyes.’’ Criticism has 
pointed this out as one of the marks of imperfection in this 
book and calls it a contradiction. It is a contradiction, 
but not in the sense as infidelity takes it. It gives a perfect 
picture of what the human heart is, and therefore is a mark 
of the perfection of this record. Jehovah had offered 
Himself as the leader of His people. He was to be eyes for 
them. And Moses as the human leader of the host of Israel, 
knowing Jehovah and His promise, turns to a poor Midianite 
and expects guidance and directions of him! How true it is 
what one has said, “‘We find it hard to lean upon an unseen 
arm. A Hobab that we can see inspires us with more con- 
fidence than the living God whom we cannot see. We move 
on with comfort and satisfaction when we possess the counte- 
nance and help of some poor fellow-mortal, but we hesitate, 
falter and quail when called to move on in naked faith in 
God.” Every Christian believer knows this tendency of 
the heart. Every failure begins with leaning on the arm 
of flesh and leaving out the Lord. And now we understand 
why the tabernacle was taken to the front and out of the 
place in the middle of the camps. Jehovah anticipated 
this failure and graciously, not in judgment, He acts towards 
His people. “The ark of the covenant of the Lord went 
before them in the three days journey to search out a resting 
place for them.” They wanted to find a resting place 
through Hobab’s guiding eye for the tabernacle and the 
camp, and now Jehovah in unspeakable condescension and 
marvelious patience proceeds to search out a resting place 
for His people. Thus while we fail, He never fails His 
people. “Oh! for faith to trust Him more,” 


NUMBERS. 32r 


2. At Taberah and Kibroth-Hattaavah. 
CHAPTER XI. 


The First Complaint and the Punishment. 1. 

The First Prayer and the Answer. 2-3. 

The Manna Rejected. 4-9. 

Moses’ Complaint and Request. 10-15. 

The Institution of the Seventy Elders. 16-30. 

The Quails Given and the Wrath of Jehovah. 31-35. 


Pm ke 


They were now facing the land which was only a short 
distance away. The ark had sought out a resting place 
for them. Jehovah had graciously made ll provision for 
their need and comfort. If enemies came victory was on 
their side, for with the setting forward of the ark Moses 
said, “‘Arise Jehovah and let thine enemies be scattered; 
and let them that hate thee flee before thee.” No hard- 
ships whatever they had encountered. What else was neces- 
sary but to trust Jehovah, praise His Name and possess the 
land which He had promised to them. Instead of acting 
thus they complained. It is the first complaint after the 
camp had been set in order. Their murmuring must have 
been on account of the journey, which after the long repose 
at Sinai seemed hard to them. It shows what man is with 
an evil, stubborn heart. Failure is stamped on man’s 
history everywhere. It can be traced throughout the Word 
of God. Every age has this mark. Judgment fell as the 
result of this murmuring upon those in the uttermost parts 
of the camp. Most likely those who complained fell behind 
and expressed a desire not to go forward. Among these 
the fire burned; no record, however, is given of this first 
judgment. It must have been tempered with mercy, 
And the people did not turn to Jehovah in this hour of pun- 
ishment, but cried to Moses. When he prayed the fire was 
quenched and the name of the place was called Taberah, 
which means “burning.” 

Alas! they did not profit by the chastening. The second 
murmuring is more pronounced and more definite. The 
mixed multitude were a large number who had joined the 


322 NUMBERS. 


exodus. They did not know the reality of redemption as 
Israel did, because they were Egyptians, most likely the so- 
called “Fellahs.” This multitude fell a lusting and infected 
the children of Israel. They wept and spoke lightly of the 
bread from heaven. Such a mixed multitude without the 
knowledge of redemption is found in the professing church. 
They have crept in unawares and have been and still are a 
fearful detriment to the people of God. No unregenerated 
person has a place in the church of God. They cannot eat 
and enjoy the manna God has given, but constantly lust 
after the food of Egypt.* In connection with the despised 
manna we find a description of that God-given food. It is, 
as we learned from Exodus, the type of Christ, the food 
God has given to His people. And how often that food is 
neglected and Egypt’s food preferred to the Word of God! 

Moses’ complaint follows. He seems discouraged and 
downcast as he looks over the vast camp and sees everybody 
weeping. It was failure in Moses also, who did not fully 
trust Jehovah that He could take care of His people and 
endow him, the leader of His people, with His own strength. 
The Lord met His weak and discouraged servant and told 
him to call the elders, seventy of them, and the Spirit, who 
was upon Moses, was to be put upon them. They were 
to share the burden with him. But while this delivered him 
from some of the care it also lost him dignity. Again Moses 
addressed Jehovah and expressed doubt about the feeding 
of the six hundred thousand footmen. “Shall the flocks and 
the herds be slain for them to suffice them? or shall all the 
fish in the sea be gathered together for them to suffice them?” 
And the Lord rebuked him. The elders who received the Spirit 
prophesied and did not cease. What they prophesied is not re- 
vealed in the record. They uttered the words of God, exhort- 
ing the people in their increasing departure from Jehovah. 
Prophecy is always put into the foreground in the days of 
failure and apostasy. Here we also learn that prophecy 
is a gift. While Moses failed, Joshua also made a failure in 


*Compare Numb. xi:4 with Deut. viii:8. Egypt’s food consisted in 
six things. Seven things are menticned as food in the land. 


NUMBERS. 323! 


being envious because Eldad and Medad prophesied in 
the camp. He was jealous not for Jehovah, but for Moses. 
“And Moses said unto him, enviest thou for my sake? would 
God that all the Lord’s people were prophets, and that the 
Lord would put His Spirit upon them.”” This wish of Moses’ 
is realized in the church, for all His believing people now 
have the gift of the Spirit. And the remnant of God’s 
earthly people will yet be prophets upon whom the Spirit 
of God is poured out. This will be accomplished in the future 
when the Lord has come. 

The end of the chapter shows Jehovah’s bountiful pro- 
vision in sending the flesh they had desired. But the wrath 
of the Lord was kindled against them, and while they were 
eating a great plague broke out. There was no repentance. 
Greedily they fell upon what God had provided. It was 
only to satisfy their lust; the giver they did not see behind 
the gift. The rebellious, stubborn heart, unrepenting, was 
there, making use for their own destruction what the Lord 
had given. Hence the severe judgment. The quails 
typify Christ. Professing Christendom speaks of Christ, 
but there is no repentance, no self-judgment, only the form 
of godliness, but the power is denied. The judgment of God 
must rest upon such. Kibroth-Hattaavah means “graves 
of lust.” 


3. The Rebellion of Miriam and Aaron. 
CHAPTER XII. 


Miriam and Aaron speak against Moses. 1-8. 
The Interference of the Lord. 4-9. 

Miriam Leprous. 10. 

Aaron’s Confession and Intercession. 11-12. 
Moses’ Prayer and Miriam’s Restoration. 13-16. 


eh haat fe 


Open rebellion against Moses by his own brother and sister 
isthe next step inthe story of failure. Envy was at the bottom 
of it. The words Miriam and Aaron spoke reveal that they 
aimed at Moses’ position. Miriam was a prophetess (Ex. 
xv:20). Aaron had the dignity of the priesthood. Pride, 
the crime of the devil (1 Tim. iii:6), lead them to speak against 


324 NUMBERS. 


their own brother. Miriam was the leader in this rebellion, 
for her name stands first and the judgment falls upon her. 
She may have been moved to jealousy by the elders having 
received the Spirit and exercising the gift of prophecy 
among the people. And Aaron reveals the weakness of the 
flesh. It is the second time he failed in this manner. He 
could not resist the clamoring of the people when they 
demanded the golden calf and here he cannot resist his sister, 
who became the willing instrument of Satan, like the first 
woman (1 Tim. ii:14). Moses had a Cushite woman for 
wife. This typifies the great truth of the union of Christ 
and the church, that Gentiles were to be joint-heirs and 
joint-members of the same body.* But it seems that the 
Cushite wife of Moses was only a subterfuge and an attempt 
to reflect upon the moral character of the man of God, whose 
position they envied. 

“And the Lord heard it.” Magnificent words these! 
and the Lord also said, ““Wherefore then were ye not afraid 
to speak against my servant Moses?” It is a serious thing 
to speak against any servant of God. The Lord will always 
guard those who serve Him and vindicate their character. 
Moses did not take the case in his own hands. He did not 
answer back. His gracious character stands out in majestic 
greatness. How hard it is for a man who holds a high and 
honored position to bear any attack in silence and not to 
open his mouth! Moses kept silent, for he was very meek 
above all the men which were upon the face of the earth. In 
this he is a blessed type of Him who was meek and lowly; 
who reviled not when He was reviled, who opened not His 
mouth. 

But did Moses really write the third verse? And if he did, 
does this not prove that he spoke well of himself? Some 
claim that this is an addition to the text. “The self-praise 

*If this thought is followed out in its dispensational meaning, it 
becomes very interesting. The natural relations objected to this union, 
as the Jews were moved with jealousy when the Gospel was preached 
to the Gentiles and the Gentiles believed. The book of Acts bears 


abundant testimony to this fact. We must leave it to our readers to 
study this type more fully. 


NUMBERS. $25 


on the part of Moses which many have discovered in this 
description of his character, and on account of which some 
even of the earlier expositors regarded this verse as a later 
gloss, whilst more receut critics have used it as an argument 
against the Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch, is not an 
expression of vain self-display, or a glorification of his own 
gifts and excellences which he prided himself upon possessing 
above all others. It is simply a statement which was indis- 
pensable to a full and correct interpretation of all the cir- 
cumstances and which was made quite objectively with 
reference to the character which Moses had not given to 
himself, but had acquired through the Grace of God.*” This 
fully meets the difficulty. 

And Jehovah speaks well of His servant Moses. He is 
declared faithful. With him He speaks and the similitude 
of Jehovah he is to behold. Compare with Hebrews iii:5-6. 
A greater than Moses is here! Christ is faithful as Son over 
God’s house. Aaron confesses his sin and Miriam’s sin. 
She is leprous and excluded from the congregation of Israel, 
where she tried to be the leader, but graciously restored at 
the appointed time as the result of the prayer of Moses. 
And may we not read here Israel’s story, leprous now, but 
some day healed and restored? 


4. At Kadesh-Barnea. Israel’s Unbelief. 
CHAPTER XIII. 


The Command to Search Out the Land. 1-3. 
The Names of the Spies. 4-16. 

Directions Given. 17-20. 

Their Explorations. 21-25. 

The Report they Brought. 26-33. 


Sep MER COR LO art 


The crisis is reached with this chapter. The events of the 
preceding chapters are the prelude to the complete failure 
and disaster. To understand the situation we must consult 
Deut. i:21-24. Moses spoke in faith when he said, “Behold, 
the Lord thy God hath set the land before thee; go up and 


*Keil and Delitzsch on the Pentateuch. 


326 NUMBERS. 


possess it, as the Lord God of thy fathers hath said unto 
thee; fear not, neither be discouraged.”’ And the people’s 
answer was that men be sent to search out the land. It was 
unbelief once more. They wanted to see first before they 
acted upon the Word of God. The saying also pleased 
Moses. No doubt he asked the Lord and received an 
answer from Him, which is recorded in the opening verses 
of this chapter. 

Leading men are selected to act as spies. Reuben here 
stands first, Simeon follows, Levi is left out, for the Levites 
were not to have an inheritance in the land, Judah (Praise) 
is the third. Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, who represents he 
tribe of Judah is here mentioned for the first time. Caleb 
means “‘brave”—‘‘whole hearted.” Joshua’s name is given 
also as “‘Oshea.” Oshea means “saviour,” and Joshua is 
“Jehovah is Saviour.” The name of Joshua is found some 
250 times in the Bible. He is the type of the Lord Jesus 
Christ. The name “Jesus” is the Greek equivalent. Caleb 
and Joshua were the only two in the whole company who 
trusted in Jehovah. And Jehovah rewarded them for their 
faith. Another interesting name is “Sethur” (verse 13). 
His name means “‘mysterious.” The four letters of the name 
of Sethur give the number 666. He may have been the 
leader of the opposition, as Anti-christ has this number 
(Rev. xiii). 

They found the land exactly as it had been described. 
“We came unto the land whither thou sentest us, and surely 
it floweth with milk and honey; and this is the fruit of it.” 
They brought a great cluster of grapes, pomegranates and 
figs. These tell us of spiritual food and service, which is 
for those who possess the land, our heavenly portion in 
Christ. They could not deny that Jehovah’s promise was 
true. They carried the evidences of it upon their shoulders 
while they carried unbelief in their hearts. They looked 
at the children of Anak, the giants, which dwelJed in the land 
and not to Jehovah, who had delivered them from the 
Egyptians. If they had reckoned with the Lord and trusted 
Him, not they, but the giants would have appeared to them 


PROPERTY OF 
NORTHEASTERN BIBLE INSTITUT 


NUMBERSSEX FEULS, NEW JER 


as grasshoppers. Caleb said in faith, “Let us go up at once 
and possess it.” Their unbelieving hearts refused and 
declared, “We are not able to go up.” They brought an 
evil report of the land. The Hebrew for “bringing up an 
evil report” is in Prov. x:18 translated “uttering a slander.” 
Unbelief slanders God; it is an insult to the Lord. 

And all this has many lessons for us. The church is called 
to possess a heavenly portion. This is typified by Canaan. 
Christendom has made a worse failure than Israel by not 
entering into the inheritance and by turning back to the 
world. And besides this, there are the lessons connected 
with our individual experience. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


The Rebellion of the People. Moses’ Intercession. The Divine Sen- 
tence. 
The Rebellion. 1-10. 


ms 


@. The Intercession of Moses. 11-25. 
3. The Divine Sentence. 26-39. 
4. The Presumption of the People and the Defeat. 40-45. 


The words of unbelief of the ten spies yielded an awful 
harvest among the people. The camp was transformed 
into a camp of despair, weeping and crying during the night. 
Outspoken rebellion against Moses and Aaron was heard 
on all sides. Worse than that took place, they accused 
Jehovah of deception. Such is unbelief! They are ready to 
select a captain and march back to Egypt. Moses, Aaron, 
Joshua and Caleb stand alone among the hundreds of 
thousands of murmuring, rebellious Israelites and the mixed 
multitude. They fell on their faces, no doubt in the attitude 
of prayer and worship, to tell the Lord. They tried to stem 
the swelling tide of rebellion. Read the supplementary 
words in Deut. i:29-31. ‘Jehovah is with us!” This was 
the word of cheer and comfort. Their answer was the stones 
with which they were ready to stone the servants of the Lord. 
Unbelief had robbed them of all reason, blinded their eyes 
and rushed them into despair and prompted them to become 


murderers. 


RARY 


328 NUMBERS. 


Beautiful is the scene of Moses’ intercession. He stands 
out as a striking type of our great Mediator, the Lord Jesus 
Christ. Jehovah’s offer to Moses to make a new start after 
destroying the rebels and to make Moses a greater nation, 
even than Israel, is rejected. He does not want glory for 
himself, but he is jealous for Jehovah’s name and glory. 
And in the intercession he reminds Jehovah of His own 
words He had spoken to him when on the mountain (Exod. 
xxxiv:5-9). And upon this magnificent intercession Jehovah 
said, “I have pardoned according to thy word.” Another, 
our ever blessed Lord, has secured forgiveness for His sinning 
people. Grace now reigns through righteousness. Con- 
nected with this forgiveness is the divine declaration that 
the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord. The 
Grace which has secured pardon will yet establish glory on 
this earth. In spite of Israel’s failure and the failure of man 
in this dispensation of Grace, glory must ultimately cover 
this earth. This will be in the day when our Lord is revealed 
in all His glory. The measure of Israel’s sin is full. They 
had tempted the Lord ten times (Exod. xiv:11-12; xv :23-24; 
XV1:2; xvi:20; xvi:27; xvii:1—-3; xxxii; Numb. xi:1; xi:4; xiv:2). 
The divine sentence is pronounced. ‘‘Your carcasses shall 
fall in this wilderness, and all that were numbered among 
you, according to your whole number, from twenty years 
old and upward, who have murmured against me.” Only 
Caleb and Joshua are an exception. Up to now they had 
been pilgrims, but now they became wanderers (verse 33). 
The ten spies were carried away by the plague. Their 
unbelief resulted in the disaster which came upon all the 
people and they were the first witnesses of the divine dis- 
pleasure. “They could not enter in because of unbelief” 
(Heb. iii:19). And Christendom in its failure to lay hold 
in faith of the heavenly calling and heavenly possession, 
has lost its pilgrim character and has become the wanderer, 
minding earthly things. 

Another failure follows. The divine sentence pronounced 
upon them resulted in mourning and a lip-confession, “we 
have sinned.” True repentance and self-judgment there 


NUMBERS. 329 


was not. They tried to make their error good in their own 
strength and they attempted to go up without the ark and 
without Moses. “Whereas at first they had refused to 
enter upon the conflict with the Canaanites through their 
unbelief in the might of the promise of God, now, through 
unbelief in the severity of the judgment of God, they re- 
solved to engage in the conflict by their own power, and with- 
out the help of God, and to cancel the old sin of unbelieving 
despair through the new sin of presumptuous confidence.” * 
And Christendom, stripped of its power, tries to meet the 
giants of sin and wickedness in the same way, only to suffer 
defeat in all their attempts. 


5. Various Laws. The Sabbath-Breaker. The Tassels ou 
the Garments. 


CHAPTER ‘XV. 


Concerning Offerings in the Land. 1-16. 

The Second Communication Concerning Offerings. 17-81. 
The Sabbath-Breaker. 32-36. 

The Tassels on the Garments. 37-41. 


be Soago 2 


The historical account is here interrupted. What the 
critics have to say about this chapter speaking of it as an 
evidence of the patchwork of different persons, we care not 
to follow. Our space is too valuable for that. The chapter 
is beautifully in order at this point. God gave two com- 
munications to Moses (verses 1 and 17). In the foreground 
of these communications stand the comforting assurance, 
“When ye come into the land.” Jehovah assured them 
that in spite of all their failure He would give them the 
land and that He would bring them there. While the great 
mass died in the wilderness they received nevertheless the 
assurance that the rest would reach that land. And then 
they would bring the sacrifices and offerings. God’s faith- 
fulness stands here in contrast with man’s failure. We 
cannot enter into the details of this chapter. The offer- 


*Dr. F. Delitzsch. _ 


330 NUMBERS. 


ings speak of Christ as they always do. The stranger is 
also mentioned (verses 14-16). There was to be one law 
and one custom for Israel and for the stranger among them. 
The stranger is placed upon the same level with the Jew. 
While in Exod. xii:48 the circumcision of the stranger who 
would keep passover is commanded, nothing is said here of 
this rite as touching the stranger. And this is not without 
meaning. 

“Israel had forfeited everything. The rebellious genera- 
tion was to be set aside and cut off; but God’s eternal purpose 
of grace must stand, and all His promises be fulfilled. All 
\srael shall be saved; they shall possess the land; they shall 
offer pure offerings, pay their vows, and taste the joy of the 
kingdom. On what ground? On the ground of sovereign 
mercy. Well, it is on the self-same ground that “the stran- 
ger” shall be brought in; and not only brought in, but ‘“‘as 
ye are, so shall the stranger be before the Lord.” * 

All will find its final great fulfillment in the day when 
wandering Israel is restored to the land. And that day 
seems no longer far off. God will keep His promises, for 
His gifts and calling are without repentance. The annota- 
tions in Leviticus will help in understanding verses 22-31. 
‘Vhe burnt-offering and the sin-offering typify the atoning 
death of our Lord. The presumptuous sin mentioned in 
verses 30-31 is illustrated by the case of the Sabbath-Breaker. 
And there is a deeper lesson connected with it. Rest is 
procured through the finished work of Christ. The sinner 
who refuses this offered rest and passes it by, substituting for 
it his own works, acts presumptuously and will be cut off. 
He has despised the word and the work of Jehovah. It is 
the “anathema” of the Epistle to the Galatians. 

The tassels of blue (the heavenly color)+ were to remind 
them of the commandments so that they would do them 
and not go after strange things. It was a help to a separated, 
a holy life. May we be constantly reminded by the Word of 


“*C, H. McIntosh. 


tlicbrew Tsitsith; the orthodox Jews still wear them in literal ful- 
fillm: at of the command. 


NUMBERS. 331 


God of an holy and heavenly calling and be delivered from 
worldliness. 


6. The Rebellion of Korah. 
CHAPTER XVI. 


The Rebellion of Korah. 1-19. 

The Punishment. 20-35. 

Eleazar and His Work. 36-40. 

The Murmuring of the Whole Congregation. 41-43. 
The Staying of the Plague. 44-50. 


SU Ce NOs 


The history is now resumed and we have the worst episode 
of Israel’s history in the wilderness before us. We have seen 
and followed the steps downward and toward this fearful 
rebeliion and the terrible punishment which followed. It 
started with unbelief. This tragedy is mentioned in 
the New Testament. In the Epistle of Jude we read, 
“Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain, 
and ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and 
perished in the gainsayings of Korah.” This little Epistle 
gives a prophetic picture of the apostasy of the professing 
people of God during our age. This apostasy began in the 
days of Jude and is now fully developed in the end of the age. 
Unbelief is given in Jude’s Epistle as the starting point of 
the departure from God (verse 5), and Israel’s unbenef is 
used as the picture of the unbelief of Christendom. Besides 
Cain (the one who rejects the sacrifice) Balaam and Korah 
are mentioned as types of the apostasy. The consummation 
of the apostasy is opposition to Christ, His blessed office- 
work and glory. And this seems to have been reached in 
our day. The opposition will continue and become more 
outspoken, more widespread, till the judgment by fire in the 
day of the Lord falls upon the apostates. 

The leader of the rebellion was Korah, a Kohathite. It 
will be remembered that the Kohathites had the choicest 
service among the Levites; they carried the very best upon 
their shoulders, the sacred things of worship. The departure 
from God and rebellion against His Word often hegins 

with those who claim the office of teachers and preachers, 


332 NUMBERS. 


Such is the case in our times. Korah’s name means “hail; 
ice.’ May not this indicate the coldness of his heart? 
Even so the apostate teachers of the last days, mere hirelings 
like Balaam, are only natural men, not having the Spirit 
(Jude 19). Their mouths may speak great swelling words, 
their hearts have never tasted the love of Christ; they know 
Him not, or they would not betray Him. 

The sons of Reuben, Dathan and Abiram, and On, besides 
two hundred and fifty, joined the revolt. Their attempt 
was a complete overthrow of the constitution which had been 
given to Israel and the establishment of another order and 
other leaders. They themselves sought recognition and 
Korah aimed at the priesthood of Aaron and would have it 
himself. Verses 8-10 indicate this. KKorah and his asso- 
ciates aimed at God’s appointed highpriest. And Moses 
put this serious matter in the hands of the Lord. 

Not Moses and Aaron could deal with this rebellion. The 
glory of the Lord appeared. Divine judgment falls upon 
them. Dathan and Abiram, their wives, their sons and 
their little ones, besides the ringleader Korah, are swallowed 
up by the earth and went down alive into the pit.* The 
two hundred and fifty who had taken presumptuously 
censers with incense, thereby defying the priesthood, are’ 
consumed by fire. It must be noted that the sons of Korah 
did not perish. A careful reading of verses 27-33 will bring 
out this fact and chapter xxvi:11 settles it beyond a doubt, 
“notwithstanding the children of Korah died not.’ Sover- 
eign grace saved the sons of Korah from the awful fate of 
the father. They were saved from the pit. Mercy was 
remembered in wrath. What grace bestowed upon them 
may be learned by consulting the following passages: 1 Chron- 
icles vi:54—67; ix:19-32; xxvi:1-20; 2 Chron. xxiii:3, 4, 19; 
xxxi:14-18. They had the cities of refuge, were keepers 
of the gates of the tabernacle; were over the chambers and 
treasuries of the house of the Lord; the instruments of the 
sanctuary, the wine, oil, etc., were in their charge; they were 


*It is also foreshadowing the judgment to come upon the apostates 
when the Lord appears the second time. See Rev. xix:20. 


NUMBERS. 9333 


mighty men ot valor; strong men; they were the royal guards. 
And more than that, the Holy Spirit inspired them to write 
some of the beautiful Psalms. Read Psalm lxxxiv, “How 
amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts.” What 
meaning this Psalm has when studied in the light of the story 
of Korah! They were faithful, devoted in their service 
because they knew that they had been saved from the pit. 
And we have the same deliverance and knowledge of it. 
Should we be less faithful and devoted? 

Interesting is Eleazar’s priesthood and ministry. As the 
third son of Aaron and in his ministry here he typifies the 
priesthood of Christ. The censers are kept as a memorial 
and as a warning. This ministry of Eleazar and Aaron 
staying the plague with the censer of incense, when the whole 
congregation revolted, is a confirmation of the divinely 
appointed priesthood and its efficacy. The preservation 
of the sinning, murmuring people depended upon the exercise 
of the priesthood. Blessed be God for Him who has made 
atonement, and whose priesthood in the presence of God 


keeps His people.* 
7. The Priesthood of Aaron Confirmed. 
CHAPTER XVII. 


1. The Divine Command. 1-5. 
2. The Rods Before Jehovah. 6-7. 
8. The Blossoming Rod of Aaron. 8-13. 


Little comment is needed on this chapter. The blossoming 
and fruit bearing rod of Aaron is another confirmation of 


*What Higher Criticism has made of this may be learned by the 
following statement: 

“From the plain account of the text it appears that Aaron separated 
the men and women suffering with the plague from those not yet at- 
tacked, and then he piled the censer with incense and swung it between 
the hosts, so that not a germ in the air could pass over from the plague- 
stricken to those not yet attacked by the disease. 

“The disinfecting of the air and separating of the sick from the well 
was dictated by Moses, who had learned in Egypt all the science of his 
day, and the Egyptian priests were master of many secrets which we 
have to learn over again.” How absurd! 


334 NUMBERS. 


the priesthood. Standing among the dying, “making an 
atonement,” he is a type of Christ in His atoning work. 
The blossoming rod is the beautiful figure of resurrection. 
The rods were absolutely dead, not a sign of life was there. 
And Aaron’s rod received life during that night and life was 
there in its abundance, buds, blossoms and almonds. Christ 
risen from the dead, the firstfruits of them that slept, is here 
blessedly foreshadowed. It was life from the dead and finds 
its application too in connection with the sinner who is dead 
in trespasses and sins, while it also foreshadows the spiritual 
resurrection of Israel. ‘The murmurings of the children of 
Israel were taken away by the rod of Aaron preserved before 
the testimony or else they would have died. The blossom- 
ing rod preserved was a provision for the wilderness journey. 
In Hebrews we read, “‘Wherein was the golden pot of manna, 
and Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant” 
(Heb. ix:4). The manna God’s people need constantly 
in the wilderness as well as the ministry of Him who ever 
liveth and intercedeth for us. In 1 Kings viii:9 we read, 
“There was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone.” 
They were then in the land. When we reach our eternal 
home the manna and the intercession of a merciful high 
priest are no longer needed.- 

The rebellion of Korah yielded after all something. It 
added two things to the tabernacle, the plates from the 
censers for the covering of the altar and Aaron’s blossoming 
rod. 


8. Priesthood and Iniquity. The Recompense of the 
Priesthood. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


1. The Iniquity Borne by the Priesthood. 1-7. 
%. The Recompense of the Priests. 8-19. 
3. The Inheritance of the Priests. 20-32. 


“Aaron, thou and thy sons and thy father’s house with 
thee shall bear the iniquity of the sanctuary, and thou and 
thy sons with thee shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood.” 


NUMBERS. 335 


This is evidently in answer to the question, “Shall we be 
consumed with dying?” (xvii:13). The ministry of the priests 
and the Levites keeping the charge of the tabernacle and 
the charge of the altar “that there be no wrath any more 
upon the children of Israel’? (verse 5). The priesthood 
which had been the object of rebellion was to be their secur- 
ity. If it had not been for the priestly service they would 
have all been consumed by the wrath of God. Christ is 
again here in view, He who ever liveth and intercedeth 
for His own people; Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the 
propitiation for our sins. He bore the iniquity and the 
wrath Himself. 

The recompense of the priests is fully described in the 
second section of this chapter. In conclusion of it we read, 
“It is a covenant of salt forever before the Lord unto thee 
and to thy seed with thee.” It is an indissoluble and in- 
violable covenant. ‘The recompense of the priest and his 
house must be applied to the reward which Christ has, 
the joy which is His and His people, His house, sharing it 
with Him. The two sections harmonize beautifully. Aaron 
had no inheritance in the land. His inheritance is the 
Lord. “I am thy part and thine inheritance among the 
children of Israel.”’ The Levites had no inheritance in 
the land, but received tithes. Aaron’s was the better por- 
tion, and such is ours in Christ. 


9, The Red Heifer; the Water of Purification. 
CHAPTER XIX. 


1. The Provision Appointed. The Red Heifer and the Ashes. 1-10. 
2. The Use of the Water of Purification. 11-22. 


This is a most interesting chapter. The ordinance of 
the red heifer and the water of purification is nowhere 
mentioned in Leviticus. The day of atonement, so promi- 
nent in Leviticus, is not referred to in Numbers at all. The 
provision of the water of purification is characteristic of 
the wilderness book. The people were dying by the thous- 
ands, and means had to be provided for the cleansing of 


336 i NUMBERS.” 


those who became defiled by contact with the dead. The 
ashes of the red heifer used in the way as described in this 
chapter were for the cleansing of the defiled. Without 
following the details of this new ordinance in the wilderness 
we point out briefly its typical meaning. That the red 
heifer is a type of Christ no one can fail to see. “For if 
the blood of bulls and goats and the ashes of an heifer sprink- 
ling the unclean sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh, 
how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the 
eternal Spirit offered Himself without spot to God, purge 
your conscience from dead works to serve the living God?” 
(Heb. ix:13-14). This fully warrants the typical application. 
The red heifer was to be without spot, wherein is no blemish 
is the type of Christ, without spot and blemish. It had to 
be an heifer upon which never came a yoke. A yoke is put 
on an animal to restrain the wild nature, to bring it to sub- 
jection. Our blessed Lord needed no yoke, for He came 
willingly. “Lo, I come to do thy will.” Nowhere is the 
color of a sacrificial animal mentioned but here. Red is the 
color of blood. It is the type of His obedience unto death. 
The heifer was slain without the camp. So Christ suffered 
without the camp (Heb. xiii:12)._ The sprinkling of the blood 
seven times toward the tabernacle is the type of the blood 
of atonement. Everything of the red heifer was consumed 
by fire and into the fire was cast cedar wood, hyssop and 
scarlet. These things typify the world. (See cleansing 
of the leper in Ley. xiv.) The world and all its glory is 
judged in the judgment of the cross.* 

The ashes of the red heifer were gathered up by a clean 
man and put outside of the camp in a clean place. Water 
was used with the ashes and was sprinkled upon the defiled 
persons, upon the tent and all the vessels. This was the 
mode of their purification. It is all so full and rich that it 

*Here is the essential difference between this and all other offerings: 
it is an offering once offered which (ideally, at least) never needs to be 
renewed. In all other cases, if any man sinned, fresh blood had to be 
shed, a fresh sacrifice to be made; but in this, the virtue remained of 


what had already been offered: the ashes were the memorial of an 
already accepted work.—F. W. Grant. 


NUMBERS. 337 


would take many pages to explain all the blessed lessons 
connected with it. We need constant cleansing because 
we pass through the wilderness, the world, and death is 
stamped upon everything. The death of Christ has made 
provision for our cleansing, as it has provided for the removal 
of our guilt. The living water is the type of the Holy Spirit. 
Defilement with the world interrupts communion with God. 
The death of Christ and the work of the Holy Spirit through 
the Word cleanse us from that defilement. See 1 John i. 

“If we walk in the light, as He is in the light, we have fel- 
lowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ His 
Son cleanseth us from all sin” (1 John i). But if we fail to 
walk in the light—if we forget, and, in our forgetfulness, 
touch the unclean thing, how is our communion to be re- 
stored? Only by the removal of the defilement. And 
how is this to be effected? By the application to our hearts 
and consciences of the precious truth of the death of Christ. 
The Holy Ghost produces self-judgment, and brings to 
our remembrance the truth that Christ suffered death 
for that defilement which we so lightly and indifferently 
contract. It is not a fresh sprinkling of the blood of Christ— 
a thing unknown in Scripture—but the remembrance of His 
death brought home, in fresh power, to the contrite heart, 
by the ministry of the Holy Ghost.” 


10. At Kadesh in the Fortieth Year. Murmuring and 
Conquest. Chapters xx—xxi. 


CHAPTER XX. 


The Death of Miriam. 1. 

The Murmuring of the People. 2-5. 
The Divine Instruction. 6-8. 
Moses’ and Aaron’s Failure. 9-13. 
Edom’s Refusal. 14-22. 

The Death of Aaron. 23-29. 


PO 90 Oo 


Between the nineteenth and twentieth chapter lies the 
unrecorded period of almost 38 years, the wandering of the 
children of Israel in the wilderness. In chapter xxxiii we 
find their different camps mentioned. In verse 38 of that 


338 NUMBERS. 


chapter we read, “And Aaron the priest went up into the 
mount Hor at the commandment of the Lord, and died there, 
in the fortieth year after the children of Israel were come out 
of the land of Egypt, in the first day of the fifth month.” 
The death of Aaron is recorded in the twentieth chapter. 
It was therefore about 37 years and six months when the 
spies had been sent out and their arrival in the desert of Zin. 
The critics have made this unrecorded period the occasion 
of attack upon the Mosaic authorship of this book. They 
suppose that the last historian who wrote on the Pentateuch 
left out a great deal of the history of the forty years wander- 
ings. There was nothing to record but the scenes of death 
and sorrow; the entire theocratic covenant was suspended, 
and therefore theocratic history has no occurrence to record. 
It is even so now during the present age, during which Israel 
is set aside and wanders among the nations of the world. 


During all these years of wandering in the wilderness 
circumcision was not carried out (Joshua v:2-5). What 
else happened during this unrecorded period in the wilderness 
may be learned from a number of passages. ‘““But the house 
of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness; they walked 
not in my statutes, and they despised my judgments, which 
if a man do, he shall live in them; and my sabbaths they 
greatly polluted. Then I said, I would pour out my fury 
upon them in the wilderness to consume them” (Ez. xx: 
13, etc.). “Have ye not offered unto me sacrifices and 
offerings in the wilderness forty years, O house of Israel? 
But ye have borne the tabernacle of your Moloch and Chiun 
your images, the star of your god, which ye made to your- 
selves” (Amos v:25, 26). “Then God turned, and gave them 
up to worship the host of heaven, as it is written in the book 
of the prophets, O ye house of Israel, have ye offered to me 
slain beasts and sacrifices by the space of forty years in the 
wilderness? Yea, ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, 
and the star of your god Remphan* figures which you made 
to worship them” (Acts vii:42, 43). They continued in 
stubbornness and rebellion and became idolators. But oh! 

*Worship of Saturn. 


NUMBERS. 339 


the mercy of God! He continued to feed them and gave 
them water. “These forty years the Lord thy God hath 
been with thee, thou hast lacked nothing” (Deut. ii:7). 
“And I have led you forty years in the wilderness; your 
clothes are not waxen old upon you, and thy shoe is not waxen 
old upon thy foot” (Deut. xxix:5). What marvellous com- 
passion! And thus He still deals in mercy with His wayward 
wandering people.” 

This chapter, which brings us to the last year of their jour- 
ney, begins with death and ends with death. In the middle 
we find the record of the failure of Moses and Aaron. 


Miriam is the first to die, and her brother Aaron followed 
her four months later. Hundreds of thousands had passed 
away; their carcasses fell in the wilderness. And the new 
generation which has come up also murmured like their 
fathers and their brethren. Such is the heart of man! 
“Would God that we had died when our brethren died 
before the Lord!’ The Lord commanded Moses to take the 
rod and speak to the rock, and He promised that the rock 
should give water. No word of displeasure came from the 
lips of the gracious Lord, who had compassion with His 
people. Moses took the rod from before the Lord He as had 
commanded him. But he also had his rod in his hand 
with which he had smitten the rock, according to the Lord’s 
command in Exodus xvii:5-6. But the words Moses spoke 
were far from being gracious. “Hear now ye rebels; must 
we fetch you water out of this rock?” God had not called 
His people rebels. And Moses’ words are far from meek. 
He makes it appear as if he could supply the water. “They 
angered Him also at the waters of strife, so that it went 
ill with Moses for their sakes. Because they provoked his 
spirit so that he spake unadvisedly with his lips” (Ps. evi: 
32-33). And greater still was his failure when he took his 
rod and not the blossoming rod of Aaron and smote the rock 
twice. The first smiting of the rock in Exodus xvii with 


*The ninetieth Psalm, standing at the beginning of the fourth section 
of the Book of Psalms (Numbers) was written by Moses, no doubt, 
when he saw them dying. 


340 NUMBERS. 


Moses’ rod, the rod of judgment is the type of the death 
of Christ. This should not be repeated; one smiting was 
enough just as the death of Christ once for all has opened 
the floodgates of divine grace. Aaron’s rod, the type of 
Christ in resurrection, was sufficient, and but the word 
spoken would bring forth the water. But the anger of Moses 
marred this scene. He completely lost sight of the gracious 
Lord and misrepresented Him by his action. “Moses failed, 
departed from the rich grace of God, fell back on judgment, 
and judgment accordingly dealt with him.” It was a 
grievous sin, and on account of it he was not fit to lead 
Israel into the land. And Aaron, equally weak in faith, 
shares Moses’ fate. Edom then bars the way for the hosts 
of Israel and would not let them pass through their land. 
And Aaron dies on Mount Hor, after Moses had, in obe- 
dience to the Lord, removed his priestly garments and put 
them upon Eleazar. 


CHAPTER XXI. 
Murmuring and Conquest. 


Opposition of King Arad. 1-3. 
Murmuring and the Fiery Serpents. 4-7. 
The Serpent of Brass. 4-9. 

Journeying and Singing Again. 10-20. 
Sihon and Og. 21-35. 


tA Ge GI Ee 


The first victory is here recorded. The Lord delivered 
Canaanites into the hands of Israel, and according to their 
vow they utterly destroyed them and their cities. 

But in spite of this victory the people became again dis- 
couraged because of the way, and they spoke against God 
and against Moses. “Our soul loatheth this light bread.” 
Here we may trace our own individual experience. As one 
has said, “A time of victory has to be watched, lest it be a 
precursor of danger. A time of defeat on the other hand 
constantly prepares one for a fresh and greater blessing 
from God, so rich is His Grace.” 

The punishment by the fiery serpents follows. Jehovah 


NUMBERS. 341 


provided a remedy in the serpent of brass,* which was put 
onapole. “And it came to pass that if a serpent had bitten 
any man when he beheld the serpent of brass, he lived.” 
Our Lord has given us the meaning of this remedy. ‘As 
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the 
Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth in Him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life’? (John iii:14, 15). 
The type is so simple and clear that we refrain from en- 
larging on it. Dr. Martin Luther in one of his sermons 
on John iii made the following statements: ‘In the first 
place, the serpent which Moses was to make was to be of 
brass or copper, that is to say, of a reddish color (although 
without poison ) like the persons who werered and burning with 
heat because of the bite of the fiery serpents. In the second 
place, the brazen serpent was to be set up upon a pole for 
asign. And in the third place, those who desired to recover 
from the fiery serpent’s bite and live, were to look at the 
brazen serpent upon the pole, otherwise they could not 
recover or live.” In these three points we find the typical 
character of the brazen serpent. “God sending His own 
Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned 
sin the flesh” (Rom. vili:3). “He hath made Him to be sin 
for us who knew no sin” (2 Cor. v:21). This took place 
when Christ was lifted up, when He hung on the cross. 
And now ‘“‘there is life in a look at the Crucified One.” 
By His sacrificial death, life, even eternal life is the pres- 
ent and eternal possession of the sinner who believes on the 


Son of God. 


And now we see them journeying on, healed and vic- 


*“Tt is less easy to arrive at the interpretation of the serpent that was 
lifted up, in its purely symbolical character, that is, to ascertain the 
aspect which it presents, when regarded from an Old Testament point 
of view. The Serpent appears to have been almost universally received 
by antiquity as a symbol of healing, or the healing art; this symbolization 
probably originated when it was ascertained that some of the most 
efficacious remedies of nature are precisely the most dangerous poisons. 
When we, accordingly, regard the serpent, in the present instance, as a 
symbol of healing, we obtain from such a view a bond of union between 
the symbol and the type; we are, also, enabled by this view to explain 
the fact that idolatrous worship was rendered to the brazen serpent 
till the reign of Hezekiah, who destroyed it” (2 Kings, xviii:4).— Kurtz. 


342 NUMBERS. 


torious. Nine places are mentioned. The last is Pisgah, 
from which they get a vision of the land and can look back 
over the desert sands which are now forever behind them. 
Two songs are recorded. Israel begins now to sing again. 
There were no songs in the wilderness, nothing but mur- 
murings. The first time they sang was at the Red Sea, 
and now as they are nearing the land they break out once 
more in song. ‘The first song is a battle-song, which speaks 
of victory; the second song is on account of the water from 
the digged wells. Spiritually considered, the victory and 
the abundant water may well be brought in connection 
with Him who is typified in the brazen serpent. There 
is not alone life by faith in Him, but God gives us freely 
with Him all things. There is victory, there is the abundance 
of water, the gift of the Holy Spirit. The princes digged 
the well. But how? It was not a laborious task. They 
did it with their staves. It is the sweet picture of Grace 
supplying the need. It seems as if the brazen serpent 
incident is a marked turning point. And in a future day 
the remnant of Israel shall look upon Him whom they have 
pierced (Zech. xii:10). “Behold He cometh with clouds; 
and every eye shall see Him, and they also which pierced 
Him.” Then Israel will be healed, have victory and sing 
a new song. Read the song prophetically given in Isaiah 
xii, “Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells 
of salvation.” * And then a still greater victory is won. 
Israel conquers Sihon, king of the Amorites, and Og the 
giant-king of Bashan. Both typify the powers of dark- 
ness in the world in their resistance to God’s people. But 
victory is on our side because God is for us and with us. 
*Numerous critical points in the text we have to pass by. We men- 
tion but one in connection with the book of the wars of Jehovah. This 
book has been declared to be of different origin. The critics have made 
much of it by the fragmentary character of verses 14-16. Some state 
“that it is a work dating from the time of Jehoshaphat, containing the 
early history of Israel.’’ All these statements are mere theories and 
invention. The book of the wars of Jehovah was undoubtedly a col- 
lection of odes of the time of Moses himself in celebration of the won- 


derful and glorious acts of the Lord. These critical points and ques- 
tions raised are of no importance whatever. 


NUMBERS, 343 


Ill. EVENTS IN THE PLAIN OF MOAB. FACING 
THE LAND. 


Chapters xxii-xxxvi. 


1. Balak and Balaam. Balaam’s Parables. Chapters xxii- 
XXIV. 


CHAPTER XXII. 


1. Balak’s Message to Balaam. 1-20. 
2. The Journey of Balaam. 21-35. 
3. Balaam with Balak. 36-41. 


The last section of the wilderness book begins with the 
story of Balak and Balaam. An enemy, the Gentile Balaam, 
has to speak the words of prophecy, predicting wonderful 
blessing and glory for the hosts of Israel. The advancing 
Israelites inspired terror and Balak (Waster), the king of 
Moab, not willing to meet Israel in open battle, sent for 
Balaam (devourer of the people) to put his powerful magic 
spell upon Israel and curse them.* 

Balak sent gifts to Balaam, but he declined the invitation 
as the result of divine instructions. He could not resist 
the second deputation, which was more imposing than the 
first. God gave him permission on the condition that he 


*“Balaam, originally a heathen magician of an ordinary class, was, 
very probably (like Jethro, Exodus, ch. 18) and Rahab (Joshua, ch. ii), 
conducted to the acknowledgment of Jehovah by the overpowering 
influence of the wonderful deeds of God in Egypt and in the wilderness, 
which made a deep impression on all the surrounding nations (Exodus 
xv:14; Joshua v:1). He resolved to serve Jehovah and to perform 
his enchantments henceforth in the name of Jehovah. (Analogous 
instances in the New Testament occur in Matt. xii:27; Acts xix:13; 
and, particularly, in Acts, ch. viii, which relates the case of Simon the 
sorcerer, the Balaam of the New Testament). Such a combination of 
heathenish magic with the service of Jehovah, could not be permanent, 
and the experience of Balaam would necessarily ‘soon compel him to 
abandon the one orthe other. When the message of Balak reached him, 
the period of decision arrived—the test was applied, and Balaam was 


found wanting.” 


344 NUMBERS. 


was to say nothing but what God would tell him. How 
God’s anger (not Jehovah, the covenant name) was kindled 
against him and the ass saw the angel of Jehovah, how the 
Lord opened the mouth of the ass and all the other details 
the reader will find in the text, so that a repetition here is 
not needed. Infidelity and higher criticism scoff at the 
incident of the speaking ass. One of their arguments is 
that the story of the speaking ass is disproven by the fact 
that Balaam carried on a conversation with the beast without 
expressing any astonishment at all at the occurrence. This 
is admirably answered by Augustinus: “Balaam was so 
carried away by his cupidity that he was not terrified by 
this miracle, and replied just as if he had been speaking to 
a man, when God, although He did not change the nature 
of the ass into that of a rational being, made it give utter- 
ance to whatever He pleased for the purpose of restraining 
his madness.”” That the ass saw the angel of the Lord first, 
before Balaam saw him, does not present any difficulty at all.* 
“Jehovah opened the mouth of the ass.” An Omnipotent 
God can do this; why then should it be thought impossible? 
It is unbelief which makes objection to a miracle of this 
kind. Hf the occurrence did not happen, and must be 
classed as they claim, with legends, what becomes of the 
inspiration of the New Testament? The Holy Spirit through 
Peter confirms the miracle (2 Peter ii:15-16). 

Balaam is used in the Epistle of Jude and in the correspond- 
ing testimony in the second Epistle of Peter (chapter ii) 
as well as in the message to Pergamos, as a type of the 
apostates in Christendom. “They ran greedily after the 
error of Balaam for reward” (Jude 11). “Following the 
way of Balaam, the son of Beor, who loved the wages of 
unrighteousness” (2 Peter ii:15). They make merchandise 
of the things of God. They deny the Master, who bought 
them, and exercise a religious office for “filthy lucre’s sake.” 


*Naturalists tell us that irrational animals have a much keener 
instinctive presentiment of many natural phenomena, such as earth- 
quakes and storms, than man. The horses, for instance, sometimes 
will see dangers when the rider is entirely ignorant of what is ahead. 


NUMBERS. 


We shall find additional information on this matter in the 
twenty-fifth chapter. 


The Parables of Balaam. 
CHAPTERS XXIII-XXIV. 


The First Parable. 1-10. 

Balak’s Surprise and Balaam’s Answer. 11-12. 
At Zophim. 13-17. 

The Second Parable. 18-24. 

Balak’s Request and Balaam’s Reply. 25-30 
Balaam’s Third Parable. xxiv:1-9. 

Balak’s Anger and Balaam’s Firmness. 10-14. 
Balaam’s Fourth Parable. 15-24. 

Balaam and Balak Separate. 25. 


BOBS Ee SS Si oe 


The parables of Balaam compose the first great prophetic 
utterance of the Bible. They are remarkable in every way. 
The language is sublime. The unwilling prophet is forced 
to say what Jehovah put into his mouth. Here is a hint 
on inspiration. The thoughts and revelations of Jehovah 
are put into Balaam’s lips by the Spirit of God, so that 
he had to utter them. How did Moses find out what was 
said by Balaam? Balak would surely not report the say- 
ings to Moses; Balaam did not tell Moses. What trans- 
pired at the different stations where Balak and Balaam 
were, was not known to Israel. The Holy Spirit gave the 
correct report of all that took place and all what was said 
to Moses. 

These parables are of such importance and interest that 
we give a complete exposition and point out the prophetic 
meaning. The reader will find this exposition and a metrical 
version of these parables at the close of this Bible Study pam- 
phlet.* 

But what was said of Israel is also true, spiritually, of 
the church. We wish all our readers would follow this 
thought. Israel was a separated people; so is the church. 
God keeps His covenant with Israel and does not go back 
on His Word; the same is true of His spiritual people. He 


*See Appendix. 


346 NUMBERS. 


does not behold iniquity or perverseness in His redeemed 
people; this speaks of justification. God is with His people 
to bless them and give them complete victory over all 
their enemies. These are but brief hints. 


2. Israel’s Sin with the Daughters of Moab. Phinehas. 


CHAPTER XXV. 
1. The Transgression and the Anger of Jehovah. 1-5. 
2. Phinehas’ Action. 6-9. 
3. Phinehas and His Reward. 10-15. 
4. The Midianites to be Smitten. 16-18. 


The sin of Israel was the result of Balaam’s work. He 
could not turn Jehovah from Israel (no enemy can), but he 
could turn Israel from God. While we do not read here 
that the fornication and idolatry into which Israel fell was 
Balaam’s work, elsewhere this information is given. See 
Numbers xxxi:16 and Rev. ii:14. The stumbling block, 
which this instrument of Satan put into the way of Israel, 
by which they committed fornication and idolatry, were 
the daughters of Moab. Pergamos in the second chapter 
of Revelation is prophetically that period of the church 
which began with Constantine the Great. Then the church 
left the ground of separation and was wedded to the world. 
Spiritual fornication was committed and idolatry followed 
in its train. This was Satan’s work as much as Balaam’s 
act was. And to-day we see Christendom in the sad condi- 
tion of Israel at Shittim. Separation is given up com- 
pletely. Judgment will be visited ere long upon apostate, 
adulterous Christendom as it fell upon Israel. In the 
plague 24,000 died. In 1 Cor. x:8, we read, ‘‘Neither let 
us commit fornication as some of them committed, and fell 
in one day three and twenty thousand.” ‘The record in 
Numbers speaks of a previous punishment when the heads 
of the transgressors were hung up before the Lord against 
the sun. Traditions among the Jews states that the number 
of those who were thus punished was a thousand, so that 
only 23,000 perished in the plague. In verse 9 this thousand 
is reckoned in, while in Corinthians they are left out. 


NUMBERS. 347 


Then followed an outrageous act of defiance (verse 6). 
The name of the Midianitish woman was Cozbi (my lie). 
By the zeal of Phinehas the people were saved from further 
judgment and Jehovah was glorified. He was zealous for 
His God and made an atonement for the children of Israel. 
He received for reward an everlasting priesthood. Itis 


another type of Christ in His righteousness and holy zeal 
for God. 


3. The Second Numbering. 
CHAPTER XXVI. 


The Command to Number. 1-4. 
The Census Taken. 5-50. 

The Total Number. 51. 

Their Inheritance. 52—56. 

The Levites. 57-62. 

The New Generation. 63-65. 


Go Ge Re 


The reader will find the comparison of these two number- 
ings in the annotations of the first chapter. The increase 
and decrease of the different tribes may be learned by con- 
sulting that table. The many names in their meaning 
teach many lessons of interest. At the close of the chapter 
we have the fact stated that the penal sentence which God 
had pronounced upon the people who came out of Egypt 
(Numb. xiv:29; 38) had been executed. God kept His 
Word, as He always will.* 


*“Of the vast total of upwards of 600,000 then enumerated, Caleb 
and Joshua alone had their names registered in the present census. 
This, however, is to be understood with a qualification. It is evident 
from Josh. xiv:1; xxii:13, that both Eleazar and Phinehas did actually 
enter into the promised land. How is this consistent with the statement 
here made? We reply that the sentence of exclusion applied to the 
other tribes which were enumerated on two former occasions, and in 
which the Levites were not embraced. We do not read that they had 
any share in the transaction which brought the divine denunciation 
upon the mass of the people. This tribe did not, like the others, send 
a spy into Canaan, nor does it appear that it concurred in the general 
murmuring which the report of the spies occasioned.” 


348 NUMBERS. 


4. The Daughters of Zelophehad. The Death of Moses 
and His Successor Announced. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


1. The Daughters of Zelophehad. 1-11. 
2. Moses’ Death Announced and His Request. 12-17. 
3. Joshua Appointed. 18-23. 


The question of the daughters of Zelophehad was con- 
cerning their inheritance. Their father had died in the 
wilderness and there were no sons. They expected and 
claimed a possession among the brethren of their father. 
They fully counted on the Lord and His goodness, though 
their case was not met by the previous instructions. “It 
is impossible for God to be like a poor man, who says, ‘You 
expect more good than I am prepared to bestow.’ God 
could not make such an answer. He always gives more. 
Whatever may be the petition of faith, the answer of grace 
never fails to go beyond it.” The answer given to Moses 
was that they were surely to receive their inheritance. 

Moses’ departure is announced by Jehovah. He cannot 
go over Jordan on account of his sin. But the Lord grac- 
iously permits him to go upon the mountain and view the 
land of promise in all its glory. Beautiful is Moses’ answer 
to Jehovah. He does not speak of himself, nor does he think 
of his own interest. The people of God and their need 
are upon his heart. If they are taken care of he is satisfied 
and content with his own lot. What a blessed spirit of 
unselfishness he manifested! Joshua is the appointed 
successor, who is to lead the people into the land as Moses 
had led them out of Egypt. Moses and Joshua are both 
the types of Christ. Verse 21 is the key to understand 
the typical significance. ‘‘And he (Joshua) shall stand before 
Eleazar, the priest, who shall ask counsel for him.” Aaron’s 
priesthood, as we learned in Exodus and Leviticus, is the 
type of Christ in His sacrificial work on the cross. Eleazar, 
his successor, typifies the resurrection-heavenly priesthood 
of Christ. Moses is in different ways the type of Christ, 
as we have seen in his official and personal character; Joshua 


NUMBERS. 349 


is the type of Christ in Spirit, who acts in His people by the 
Holy Spirit. Therefore Joshua has to stand before Eleazar 
the priest. He had, so to speak, to depend upon Eleazar, 
as the work of the Holy Spirit in the believer is dependent 
on the priesthood of Christ in glory. 


5. The Offerings and the Set Times. Chapter xxviii-xxix. 
CHAPTER XXVIII. 


a 

1. The Daily Offerings. 1-8. of 
2. The Sabbatic Offerings. 9-10. s 
3. The Monthly Offerings. 11-15. bisnfan 
4. The Passover. 16-25. 5 4) 
5. The Firstfruits. 26-31. E & 

CHAPTER XXIX. Pe 
1. The Blowing of Trumpets. 1-6. £ 
2. The Day of Atonement. 7-11. & 
8. The Feast of Tabernacles. 12-16. 
4. The Second Day Offering. 17-19. £ 
5. The Third Day Offering. 20-22. 
6. The Fourth Day Offering. 23-25. 
7. The Fifth Day Offering. 26-28. 
8. The Sixth Day Offering. 29-31. 
9. The Seventh Day Offering. 382-34. 
10. The Eighth Day Offering. 35-40. 


These two chapters go together. They tell of Jehovah’s 
portion which he is to receive in the worship of His people. 
The second verse reveals this. ‘Command the children 
of Israel and say unto them, My offering and My bread 
for My sacrifices, made by fire, for a sweet savour unto 
Me, shall ye observe to offer unto Me in their due seasons.” 
Needless to say that all speaks of Christ. He is seen in 
all the offerings, in the lambs, the young bullocks, the ram, 
the meal-offerings and all the others, In Christ God has 
found His delight. In Leviticus we saw that aspect of the 
different offerings by which God has met our need in Christ 
and His blessed work; but here Jehovah speaks of these 
offerings as being “My bread.” The heart of God feeds, 
humanly speaking, upon Christ. The sweet savour- 


350 NUMBERS. 


offerings are the prominent feature of these two chapters. 
‘The sin-offerings take a secondary place. As we learned 
in Leviticus, the offerings which are a sweet odor in the pres- 
ence of God are those which typify the matchless worth 
and blessed devotion of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

Leviticus xxiii must be studied with these two chapters. 
The reader should turn to that chapter and see the meaning 
of the different feasts as given in the annotations. We 
call attention to the enlarged command concerning the feast 
of tabernacles. Ten verses are given in Leviticus xxiii to 
the feast of tabernacles, but in Numbers xxix not less than 
twenty-seven are devoted to this feast. The seven days of 
the entire feast are mentioned with the different sacrifices, 
which were to be brought. They were to be brought in 
the following order and numbers: 


BirsteDaye ares aes cinlves 13 Bullocks—2 Rams—14 Lambs—1 Goat 
Second§Dayo5.o. 5.0 cas 12 or 14 ‘s bas Ah 
Third Mays sears se sites Le Hewat 14 es b ses 
HourtheDay acerca cece 1@e alls 14 e 1 nats 
Bifths Daya... cise aes foe 14 ss 1s 
Sixth Daye ics sn wee ae @ “ 1 ita Pale ae 
Seventh: Day.-r .. «eee oe Wir 3 35 (ei 14 a De 


In all there are 70 bullocks, 14 rams, 98 lambs and 7 goats. 
And besides these there were the daily burnt-offerings and 
meal-offerings. Why this detail in Numbers? And why 
should the feast of tabernacles begin on the first day with 
13 bullocks and there be a gradual decline? As we learned 
in Leviticus, the feast of tabernacles the last of the feasts, 
foreshadows the millennium. The character of the millen- 
nium will therefore help us to understand some, at least, of 
the typical meaning of these offerings. The large number 
of offerings, especially the double seven in the lambs, which 
are Offered, stand for the praise which Jehovah will receive 
during the age to come. But it is not perfect praise. The 
number thirteen on the first day is an incomplete number. 
It lacks one to make it perfect. And then we see that 
the number decreases from thirteen down to seven on the 
seventh day of the feast. The millennium, as we know from 


NUMBERS. 351 


Revelation (chapter xx), ends in failure. There will be most 
likely a decline in devotion to God and full obedience to 
His will. A look at the above table shows that there is 
something which mars. The goats, only one each day, 
are for sin-offering, for sin will be possible during the millen- 
nium, however, it will be very exceptional. The twice 
fourteen lambs mean fulness of redemption which will be 
enjoyed unhindered in the coming age. The eighth day has 
the same offerings as the day of atonement. The eighth 
day in Scripture marks a new beginning; it is the day of 
the new creation. Following the feast, the eighth day 
stands for eternity. The precious work of Christ will 
never be forgotten in the ages to come. 


6. Concerning Vows. 
CHAPTER XXX. 


1. The Vow of a Man. 1-2. 

g. The Vows of Women. 3-16. 

The entire chapter treats of vows. It also has a deeper 
meaning. There is a sharp contrast between the vow of 
a man and the vows of virgins, widows or wives. The vows 
of women could be set aside under certain conditions. The 
husband or the father could disallow the vow. But if they 
kept their peace or if she was a widow or divorced, she had 
to keep the vow. It was different with the man; he was not 
to break his word, but do according to all that proceeds out 
of his mouth. 

The man who keeps his word, who does all that he vowed, 
typifies the Lord Jesus Christ. He has completely done the 
work He voluntarily bound Himself to do. The woman 
represents the nation Israel. They made a vow at Sinai 
which they could never keep. “Alas, when the gracious 
proffer of redemption came, though they had been even 
then long under the penalty of it, they refused redemption, 
held stubbornly to their broken contract, and remain under 
it to-day, the enduring lesson, published in every land, of 
what the law is for those who seek righteousness by it.” * 

*Numeriéal Bible. 


352 NUMBERS. 


Some day the vow under which Israel has put herself will 
be disallowed, then Israel is received back into favor. “And 
the Lord shall forgive her’’ (verse 8). ' 


7. The War Against the Midianites. 


CHAPTER XXXI. 


The Command to Fight Midian. 1-6. 
The War. 7-12. 

The Cleansing. 13-24. 

The Spoil Taken. 25-47. 

The Oblation of the Officers. 48-54. 


War is commanded next by the Lord. The Lord said 
to Moses, ‘“Avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites; 
afterward shalt thou be gathered to thy people.” This is, 
therefore, the last thing in the official life of Moses. This 
war against Midian had been commanded before (xxv:16- 
18), the execution had been delayed. It was now to be car- 
ried out and the Midianites were to suffer for the wicked 
thing they had done to Israel by seducing them to the 
idolatrous worship of Baal Peon. Phinehas, the high priest, 
accompanied the army of 12,000 men. They were victorious 
and slew the kings of Midian; Balaam also was slain (verse 8). 
His wish, “let me die the death of the righteous,” was not 
granted unto him, for he remained in his wickedness. 

This war of revenge has a significant meaning. The key 
ts found in the third verse, which, literally translated, reads: 
“Arm some of yourselves unto the war, and let them go 
against Midian, to execute the vengeance of Jehovah upon 
Midian.” ‘There is another day of vengeance coming which 
will fall heavily upon the Gentile world. The Lord will 
avenge His people Israel and judge the nations for the sin 
they committed against them. Of this the prophetic Word 
speaks often. That day is closely linked with Israel’s 
restoration to the land. Then the true King-Priest will 
appear, like Phinehas, who was with the army of Israel 
(Isaiah Ixiii:1-6; 2 Thess. i:7-9). 

Purification took place and the spoil was divided. This 
table may be studied in connection with verses 25-47. 


Te CORO ere 


NUMBERS. 353 


Sheep, 675,000.{ THe soldiers, 337,500; therefrom to the Lord... 675. 
The people, 337,500; therefrom to the Levites. 6,750. 


Beeves, 72,000. The soldiers, 36,000; therefrom to the Lord... 72. 
The people, 36,000; therefrom to the Levites. 720. 
Asses, 61,000. The soldiers, 30,500; therefrom to the Lord... 61. 
The people, 30,500; therefrom to the Levites. 610. 
The soldiers, 16,000; therefrom to the Lord... 32. 


Persons, 32,000. 

The people, 16,000; therefrom to the Levites. 320. 

When the officers returned they discovered to their great 

joy that they had not lost a single man. God’s power had 

been with them and kept them in a miraculous way. They 

brought a magnificent oblation. The gold they offered was 
brought into the tabernacle for a memorial. 


8. The Tribes of Reuben, Gad, Half-Manasseh and their 
Portion. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


The Petition of Reuben and Gad. 1-5. 
The Rebuke by Moses. 6-15. 

Their Answer. 16-19. 

Moses’ Reply. 20-24. 

The Final Agreement. 25-41. 


Se Gat ie 


Failure is now again manifested. Reuben and Gad 
looked upon the beautiful territory which had been taken 
from the two Amorite kings, Sihon and Og. As Reuben 
and Gad were especially rich in cattle and the territory 
was one of great fertility, they were anxious to possess the 
land. The half-tribe Manasseh evidently made the same 
request and joined Reuben and Gad (verse 33). A lengthy 
controversy followed between Moses and these tribes. 
Moses saw at once the evil which was connected with such 
a request. They despised the land of promise. God had 
commanded them to possess that land. By their request 
they showed readiness to disobey God. Furthermore by 
desiring the land of Jazer and Gilead they would become 
separated from their brethren; they would let them go to 
fight alone in the land. The whole request manifested 
selfishness, 


354 . NUMBERS. 


Compare them with Lot and his selfish choice (Gen. xiii). 
He lifted up his eyes and beheld all the plain of Jordan, 
that it was well watered, even as the garden of the Lord, 
He then chose the plain of Jordan. How he suffered for it 
we know well from the divine record. Reuben and Gad 
also looked upon the good land and with the same selfish- 
ness as Lot requested the land. Consult 1 Chron. v:25, 26 
and 2 Kings xv:29, to find out how their descendants had 
to pay for the selfishness of their ancestors. They went 
a whoring after the gods of the people of the land and were 
first carried away into captivity. 

We see in their behaviour the picture of the Christian 
who is worldly-minded, who walks according to the flesh. 
He does not enter into the promised land and prefers earthly 
thing to spiritual things. The story of Christendom is also 
written here. 


9. The Encampments in the Wilderness. 
CHAPTER XXXIII:1-29. 


1. The First Stage. From Egypt to Sinai. 1-15. 

2. The Second Stage. From Sinai to Kadesh. 16-17. 

3. The Third Stage. From Rithmah to Kadesh. 18-36. The 38 
Years Wandering. 

4. The Fourth Stage. Irom Kadesh to the Plain of Moab. The 
Fortieth Year. 37-49. 


The chapter shows most blessedly how the eye of God 
follows the journeys and wanderings of His people and how 
He keeps record of them. Nothing escapes His watchful 
eye. And He leads His people in spite of their failures to 
the promised goal. Notice the long list of encampments 
of their wanderings with no history. Many lessons must 
be written here which God’s people have not been able to 
understand. The Hebrew names given in this long list 
of stations shed much light on what may have taken place. 


NUMBERS. 395 


10. Instructions Concerning the Conquest and the Bound- 
aries of the Land. 


CHAPTERS XXXIII:50-XXXIV. 


1. Command to Drive Out the Inhabitants of the Land. xxxiii. 


50-56. 
2. The Division of the Land. xxxiv:1-15. 
3. The Names of the Men Who Shall Divide the Land. 13-99. 


The extermination of the Canaanites is first of all de- 
manded. Everything of idolatry was to be destroyed. 
The land was to belong to a holy people who belong to 
Jehovah, therefore the Canaanite with his abominations 
had to be driven out of the land. “If ye will not drive 
out the inhabitants of the land from before you, those that 
ye let remain of them shall be pricks in your eyes and thorns 
in you sides and shall vex you in the land wherein ye dwell. 
Moreover, it shall come to pass, that I shall do unto you 
as I thought to do unto them’’(xxxiii:55-56). The same warn- 
ing was repeated by Joshua in hislast address (Josh. :xxiii:13). 
They did not drive them out as they were commanded, and 
they had to suffer in consequence of their disobedience. 

The land of Canaan does not typify heaven, but our 
heavenly portion in Christ. In the annotations of the book 
of Joshua we hope to follow this more fully. The enemies 
in the land typify the wicked spirits, Satan and his powers. 
With these is our warfare, and we are commanded, like 
Israel, to conquer them. The boundaries of the land are 
given, and we find at the close of the chapter the names 
of the men who were to divide the inheritance unto 
the children of Israel. Notice the difference which is in 
the boundaries here as compared with Genesis xv:18. The 
promise given to Abraham and to his seed was under the 
covenant of grace, but Israel entered into the land under 
the law-covenant. If they had kept the law-covenant 
and had been obedient to Jehovah, they would have received 
the whole land. This they could not do. The original prom- 
ise made to Abraham and his seed will be fulfilled in the 
future when the Lord will bring Israel back to possess the 


356 NUMBERS. 


land. This will be in the millennium. The land will then 
be divided in a new way, revealed in the closing two chapters 


of Ezekiel. 


11. The Cities of Refuge. 
CHAPTER XXXV. 


1. The Provision for the Levites; Forty-eight Cities. 1-8. 
2. The Cities of Refuge. 9-34. 


The cities of the Levites were scattered through the land. 
Genesis xlix:7 is therefore fulfilled. The provision of cities 
for refuge is full of interest. The careful study of the pur- 
pose of these cities is recommended. Note especially that 
they were provided to give shelter for those who had killed 
a person unawares. The avenger of blood (Hebrew: Goél, 
which means to redeem) pursued the person and the city of 
refuge gave shelter. The death of the high priest resulted 
in liberty for all who were in the cities of refuge. It was the 
signal that they could return to their possessions (verse 28). 

Israel’s history may be easily read in this chapter in con- 
nection with the cities of refuge. The innocent blood shed 
is the blood of Christ. Blood guiltiness is upon the nation. 
They did it ignorantly, even as He prayed on Calvary’s 
cross, “Father, forgive them for they know not what they 
do.” They are on account of this blood guiltiness kept 
out of their inheritance, and yet they have had their city of 
refuge and have been preserved till the time comes when 
they are set free and return to the possession in the land. 
And that will be when the Priesthood of Christ as now 
exercised by Him in glory ends, when He comes forth as 
the King-Priest to exercise the Melchisedek priesthood. 
The names of the cities are not given in the book of Numbers. 
They were: Bezer, Ramoth, Golan, Kedesh, Shechem and 
Hebron (Deut. iv:41-43; Josh. xx:7). The cities are also 
types of Christ because they gave shelter. He is our refuge 
and our hiding place. 


NUMBERS. 357 


12. The Security of the Inheritance. 
CHAPTER XXXVI. 


1. The Applicants and their Statement. 1-4. 
2. The Response of Moses. 5-12. 
3. The Epilogue. 13. 


The chapter explains itself. But what is the lesson? It 
is evident that the inheritance given by the Lord must 
remain with those to whom it is given. And this brought 
security and comfort to the daughters of Zelophehad. It 
brings security and comfort to our hearts when we consider 
that our inheritance in Christ can never be taken from us. 
It belongs to us and we belong to the inheritance. The same 
is true of Israel with its earthly inheritance, the promised 
land. 

Thus ends the wilderness book, a marvellous book, like 
every other portion of God’s holy Word. May we remember 
in the study of this book, as stated in the introduction, that 
“all these things happened unto them for ensamples; and they 
are written for our admonition upon whom the ends of the 
world are come” (1 Cor. x:11). May we pass the time of 
our sojourning here with fear, realizing our separation unto 
God, the priestly and Levite service which belongs to us 
till we reach our eternal inheritance. 


THE END. 


358 _ NUMBERS. 


Appendix. 


THE PROPHECIES OF BALAAM. 
Numbers XXIII and XXIV. 
By A. C. G. 


The healing of Israel by the believing look on the Brazen Serpent 
stands at the end of their murmurings in the wilderness. Israel was vic- 
torious once more, and songs of praise and victory are heard in the 
camp. And now, after the sad history of their disobedience is almost 
ended, a prophet pronounces remarkable blessings over the wonderful 
nation, the nation so miraculously saved from Egypt, guided and kept 
and healed. This voice of prophecy comes from the lips of a Gentile, 
and a Gentile king hears the message first, in which, besides Israel, 
the King of Moab and all his Gentile successors are so eminently 
concerned. 

Balak (Waster) saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites. He 
knew that that people had come out of Egypt. He was sore afraid; 
the fate of the Egyptians and Amorites seemed to foretell his own; his 
heart, therefore is filled with fear and hatred, and he desired to oppose and 
curse Israel. He allied himself with the elders of Midian. It is nothing less 
than the history of Anti-Semitism in a nutshell. Gentile nations, 
Christian in name, still hate and fear the people whom no Pharaoh 
and no soothsayer could overcome, a people disobedient, judged and 
suffering, still always conquering. Like Balak, opposing Gentile 
nations and kingdoms will yet rise in fear and hatred against Israel 
before Israel’s coming King will sweep them aside, and what Balak 
heard from the prophet’s lips in his day—the complete destruction of 
the world-powers by the appearing of the Glorious King of Jeshurum— 
will be the fate of these nations. Balak sends for Balaam, a prophet 
and a soothsayer. Who was Balaam? His name is a terrible one, 
the Devourer of People; his father, Beor, the Consumer; his native 
place, Pethor, meaning “interpretation.” He must have known 
Jehovah to some extent, for he asked of Him and God answered his 
request. At the same time he was known for his skill in cursing nations 
and for his readiness for gold and silver to destroy them by his power- 
ful spells. He may have practiced his soothsaying for many years, 
becoming rich by it, when, probably, one day he heard of Jehovah, 
who had done such great things for and among the wandering nation. 
Most likely for selfish reasons he sought God, like Simon, the sorcerer, 
who offered the apostles money for the power to heal the sick; thus 
Balaam may have desired the acquaintance of God, seeking revelations 
from Him for the sake of gain, and Jehovah revealed Himself to him. 
It is very significant that Balaam is mentioned in that important pro- 


NUMBERS. 359 


phetic Epistle of Jude, where he stands as a type of the great apostasy 
at the end of this age. Balak, the representative of the anti-Semitic 
world-powers, and Balaam, the half-hearted prophet, a type of 
apostate Christendom, forming an alliance against Israel. 

The parables which Balaam is obliged to give by the power of God, 
are divided into four parts. He utters them from three points, all 
mountain-tops. The first from the high places of Baal, the second 
from the summit of Pisgah, and the last from Peor. From these 
mountain-tops Balak and Balaam had a good view of the camp of 
Israel. Each one of the three points is nearer to the camp and a more 
complete view obtainable from them. It seems Balak tried to diminish 
the number of Israel and their strength in the eyes of Balaam, for he 
took him first to a place from which he saw only a part, the utmost 
part, the fourth part of the people. Seeing that his scheme failed, Balak 
took Balaam to Pisgah; from there the view was more complete, and 
then at last to Peor, from which point he saw the twelve tribes of 
Israel with their flagsin camp. Upon each mountain Balaam had seven 
altars erected, and two sacrifices, a bullock and a ram, are brought upon 
each altar. The whole proceedings were evidently calculated to make 
all as impressive and solemn as possible. On the heights of Baal, 
Balaam says to Balak: “I will go, may be Jehovah will come to meet 
me, and whatever He may say to me I will declare to thee.”” He went 
to a bare height and God met him there and puta word in his mouth. 
Next is Pisgah; here Balaam tells Balak to stand by the burnt offering, 
“while,” he says, “I go to meet,” in the authorized version it says 
“the Lord,” but that does not appear in the original. In Hebrew it 
reads, ‘‘I will go to meet—yonder.”’ He tried to impress Balak once 
more with his mysterious power, and in proceeding to Mount Peor, 
Balak, utterly disheartened by the continued blessing of Israel from 
Balaam’s lips, demands that he is neither to curse nor to bless. Balaam, 
however, knows that it pleased the Lord to bless Israel; he no longer 
goes out to meet with enchantments; he drops the mask, and now the 
Spirit of God comes upon him. Balak’s anger is kindled after this 
third parable, and while he smites his hands together the prophet opens 
his mouth once more and utters the sublimest of all his prophecies, 
after which he went to his place soon after to meet with his terrible fate. 


I. 


And now we will read the parables themselves and study their 
wonderful meaning. The first from the heights of Baal: 


“From Aram Balak hath fetched me, 
The King of Moab—from the mountains of the East. 
Come, curse me Jacob, 
Come and denounce Isiael! 


360 _ NUMBERS. 


How shall I curse? God hath not cursed, 

How shall I denounce? The Lord hath not denounced, 
For from the top of the rocks I see Him 

And from the hills I behold Him. 

Behold a nation that dwelleth alone, 

Not to be reckoned among the nations. 

Who counted the dust of Jacob? 

By number the fourth part of Israel. 

Let me die the death of Jeshurum, 

And let my last end be like his.” 


This first inspired utterance of Balaam speaks of the general character 
of Israel as the chosen people of God. It is, so to speak, the foundation, 
the key-note for all he is about to say by divine inspiration to Balak. 
We may divide this first parable into four parts. 

1. After stating the fact of Balak’s call and his wish that he should 
curse Jacob and denounce Israel, he states the impossibility to curse 
and to denounce—for God hath not cursed him, He hath not denounced 
him. In the original the name El, God, stands in connection with 
Jacob, and Jehovah, the covenant-keeping God, with Israel. When 
Balak’s deputation came to Balaam, God had said to him, “Thou 
shalt not curse the people, for they are blessed.”” And now what 
God told him there in the secret place he is to speak here in public. 
It is the truth which we find all through the Word of God, Israel’s 
blessed calling, the seed of Abraham blest and to be a blessing. How 
many have tried to curse Jacob and to denounce Israel? They have 
never succeeded, for Isaiah’s vision has been fulfilled in all generations, 
“No weapon that is found against thee shall prosper, and every tongue 
that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn.” No 
magic, no voice, no power, no tongue can counteract the decree of God. 
Jacob and his seed is blest of God. Oh that men would understand it, 
but alas, they are wise in their own conceits, and boasting against the 
broken off branches they think of Jacob as accursed and denounce 
Israel, and thus dishonor God and make Him a liar. 

%. With his hands before his eyes, Balak gazes upon the fourth 
part of the Israelitish camp from the tops of the rocks and from the 
hill and sees a second general characteristic of the people, namely, that 
Israel is to be a separated people. Israel is Ho-Am, the nation, and 
as such different from the nations and not to be reckoned among them. 

Here then we have the destiny of Israel, a destiny the same for all 
times—a peculiar people, separated from all other nations. As far as 
Old Testament times are concerned, this decree of God can hardly be 
denied; but many Christians have stated and believe that in these 
New Testament times Israel has ceased to be a peculiar people, and 
that there is no difference between them and the other nations. Ex- 
perience, however, teaches differently. Truly the seed of Abraham is 


NUMBERS. 361 


to-day mingling with the nations, scattered in fact among all the 
nations, and there the sons of Jacob have not lost their peculiar charac- 
teristics. Assimilation has been attempted, and quite often by 
themselves, but rarely if ever has it been successful. God has kept 
Israel as His own separated people as truly as He has separated and 
keeps unto Himself by His Holy Spirit a spiritual, heavenly people, 
the church. All movements endeavoring to rob Israel of its peculiarity 
and separation have failed, and thus Israel remains a stranger in a 
strange land. What a tremendous testimony the Zionistic movement 
is in this direction! It is a movement to establish a Jewish state for 
the Jewish people in the Jewish land, and in itself a confession that 
assimilation with other nations is impossible. In speaking the Word of 
our God to the scattered Jews, God’s future purpose in Israel as a 
nation must not be overlooked. 

8. In the third place, we have the wonderful increase. ‘‘Who has 
counted the dust of Jacob?’ The promise to Jacob when he went out 
from Beer-Sheba was, “‘Thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth.” 
It stands for the earthly promises and earthly blessings which are 
Jacob’s. What a sight it must have been for Balaam and Balak, stand- 
ing beside their smoking altars, and down, way down in the desert, 
tent after tent is to be seen; but still it is only the fourth part, and 
appears like the dust of the earth—a people having passed through so 
much affliction and punishment, yet in spite of it all, strong and numer- 
ous as ever. In looking over the past, a still grander picture presents 
itself to us. Israel has wandered through a greater desert and through 
greater afflictions and punishments than ever before; they have been 
a people scattered and peeled, yet how wonderfully God has kept them, 
and more than ever they are like dust, down-trodden yet ever increasing, 
and multiplying, to the astonishment cf their enemies. Who counted 
the dust of Jacob? The question is often asked, How many Jews are 
living to-day in the world? We tried to give a conservative estimate, 
still some tell us it is too low and others too high. The fact is no one 
seems to be able to get a correct number of the Jews living. Surely 
they are increasing rapidly all over the earth, and it is more true than 
ever before, ‘‘Who counted the dust of Jacob?” 

4. Balaam’s exclamation forms a fitting conclusion to his first 
parable. ‘‘Let me die the death of Jeshurum and let my end be like 
his.” We do not think that Balaam had so much the physical death 
of Israel in view, as their hope and glorious end, the glorious end of 
ages when the God of Jeshurum will reveal Himself once more for the 
salvation of His people and brings vengeance upon their enemies. Of 
that glorious end which is Israel’s, that glorious morning after a 
night of storm and disaster, he has here the first glimpse, and in his next 
parable the Holy Spirit puts it before him and before Balak in detail. 
It remains only to be said that the contents of this first parable are 
in part a repetition of God’s promises to Abraham, but now the promise 


302 NUMBERS. 


is not given to a member of Abraham’s family, but put into the mouth 
of a Gentile to transmit it to the Gentile king. 


I. 


Next they are on top of Mount Pisgah, on the fields of Zophim. 
Balaam, after having been away from Balak hastens back, and filled 
with a greater degree of inspiration, it seems, he bursts forth: 


“Rise up Balak and hear! 
Listen to me, son of Zippor! 
God is not a man to lie; 
Nor son of Adam to repent. 
Hath He said and will He not do it? 
Or spoken and shall not make it stand? 
Behold I have command to bless: 
Yea, he hath blessed and I cannot change it. 
He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob: 
Nor has he seen travail in Israel: 
Jehovah, his God is with him, 
The shout of a king is in his midst. 
God bringeth them out of Egypt: 
He hath strength like that of the wild ox: 
No enchantment there is against Jacob, 
There is no divination against Israel. 
In its time shall it be said of Jacob and of Israel. 
What hath God wrought? _ 
Behold the people rise up as a lioness! 
And as a lion does he raise himself up! 
He shall not lie down till he eat of the prey, 
And drink the blood of the slain.” 


What an awful rebuke this was to unbelieving Balak. He surely 
had expected a change in the mind of that God whose aid and help 
Balaam was to invoke. Maybe, he thought that God would once 
more, after a second request, allow Balaam, as at the time when Balak’s 
princes came to him, to speak a more favorable word; instead of that 
with an awful commanding voice—for thus it must have been—Balaam 
shouts to Balak to rise and listen. He hears now that God’s promises to 
Israel are unchangeable, they can never be reversed. The same 
truth we have not alone from Balaam’s lips, but likewise from the 
lips of Paul, the servant of the Lord, who after giving his wonderful 
prophetic testimony concerning his own beloved Jewish nation, cries 
out in exaltation, ““The gifts and calling of God are without repentance.” 
God is ever the covenant-keeping God, and every word which has come 
from His loving heart through the prophets to His people Israel He 
will yet fulfill. Balak, in his unbelief_and his ignorance, as well as his 


NUMBERS. 363 


hatred against Israel, is, alas, a sad type of Christendom, apostate, 
disbelieving the promises of the God of Abraham, ignorant of His 
purposes concerning Israel, and, therefore, despising and cursing those 
whom they should honor and love. Again, in this parable, we notice 
four principal thoughts, which now bring us a step nearer to Israel, 
Israel’s calling and Isracl’s future, just as Balaam and Balak were on 
Pisgah’s mountain-top nearer to the camp than on the heights of Baal. 

1. He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob nor seen travail (or perverse- 
ness) in Israel. It seems to us a very significant fact that in all of 
Balaam’s parables sin and guilt is never mentioned. However, it 
does not say here that Israel is without iniquity or evil travail, but 
the statement is that God hath not beheld iniquity and not seen per- 
verseness in Israel. Truly Israel had sinned against God during their 
travels in the wilderness. Israel was likewise punished for it, but their 
apostasy was never hopeless. In all their iniquity and perverseness 
they are still His beloved children, and the promise is theirs very defi- 
nitely, that the seed of Israel can only be cast away for all that they 
have done if the heavens above can be measured and the foundations 
of the earth searched out beneath. (Jeremiah xxxi:36, 37). That, of 
course, means that it will never come to pass. But more than that, 
to Israel belongs the promise of forgiveness, when, indeed, the eyes 
of God will not behold iniquity in Jacob nor will He see perverseness in 
Israel. In Micah, the last chapter and last three verses, is one of 
these sweet national promises to Israel, ““Who is a God like unto thee, 
that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant 
of his heritage? He retaineth not his anger forever, because he de- 
lighteth in mercy. He will turn again and have compassion upon us; 
he will tread our iniquities under foot, and thou wilt cast all their sins 
into the depths of the sea. Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob, and 
the mercy to Abraham, which thou hast sworn unto our fathers from 
the days of old.” God looking upon Israel and no iniquity, God 
beholds His people and no perverseness; their sins forgiven and remem- 
bered no more. 

2. In the second place notice the statement of Balaam, “Jehovah 
his God is with him, and the shout of a king in his midst.’”’ This was 
true in part when Balaam looked upon the camp of Israel. I wonder 
if Balaam’s prophetic eye did pierce that eloud of glory, which in all its 
splendor was resting in the midst of Israel? Maybe he saw in that 
cloud, what the prophet Ezekiel saw in his vision, a throne, and upon the 
throne one like the Son of Man surrounded by the sign of the first 
covenant, a rainbow. There was no king in the midst of Israel at 
that time; Jehovah was king. Prophetically all points to the time when 
Israel’s travail and iniquity will have an end, and He whose name is 
ever Emanuel will be the King in the midst of His redeemed people. 

3. In the next place we notice that Balaam speaks of that deed 
of salvation, the redemption of Israel from the house of Egypt, which 


364 NUMBERS. 


stands in the Old Testament as a type not only of our redemption in 
the blood of the Son of God, but likewise as the type of that future 
deed of God when He will gather His outcast children from the four 
corners of the earth. (See Jeremiah xvi:14-15). It is important that 
in the next parable Balaam repeats the same words only in another 
connection. Connected with the fact in this parable that God brought 
Israel out of Egypt stands the statement that there is no enchantment 
against Jacob and no divination against Israel. Egypt could hold 
Israel for centuries, but Egypt’s wickedness ripened, and when the hour 
had come there was no power inthe air nor upon the earth which could 
prevent the carrying out of the judgments of God upon Egypt, and the 
mercies upon Israel. No enchantment and no divination will ever 
frustrate God’s plan in the future. 

4. And then in the fourth place: In its time shall it be said of Jacob 
and of Israel, “What hath God wrought?” Just a glimpse is given here 
of that time of conquest in Israel and through Israel, when the people 
shall rise up as a lioness, when he shall not lie down till he has eaten the 
prey and drunk the blood of the slain; which not only Balaam in his 
next parables has to make plainer because the vision now hastens 
towards the end, but likewise which all the prophets from beginning to 
end have revealed. We shall see more of this in the third parable of 
Balaam. 

From the top of Peor, Balaam now beholds Israel abiding in their 
tents according to their tribes. The Spirit of the Lord comes upon him. 
It is no longer meeting with the Lord and receiving it from Him, but 
the Spirit is upon him and through the Spirit he receives a higher 
revelation. He is now fully presuaded that Israel is to be blessed and 
he yields himself without resistance to God. 


“The oracle of Balaam, son of Beor, 
Even the oracle of the man with eyes that had been shut: 
His oracle who heard the words of God, 
Who seeth with the vision of the Almighty; 
Falling, but his eyes uncovered :— 
How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob! 
Thy tabernacles, O Israel! 
As valleys are they spread forth: 
As gardens by the river’s side; 
As aloe trees that Jehovah planted; 
As cedars beside the waters! 
Water poureth from his buckets, 
And his seed is in many waters; 
And his king shall be higher than Agag, 
And his kingdom shall be exalted. 
God bringeth him out of Egypt; 
He hath strength like that of the wild ox 


NUMBERS. 365 


@e shall eat up the nations, his adversaries, — 
Wea, he shall break their bones, 

And smite them through with his arrows,— 
He couched, he lay down as a lion; 

And as a lioness,—who will rouse him? 
Blessed is he that blesseth thee, 

And cursed is he that curseth thee!” 


Balaam, forced to speak, is now made to proclaim the victory of 
the nation of destiny and what God will do among them. 

1. We notice first a description of Israel: ‘‘Goodly tents, beautiful 
tabernacles spread forth as valleys, gardens by the river side, aloe trees 
and cedars beside the waters, waters poured from his buckets, seed in 
many waters.” Every Sabbath day and at every feast commanded by 
God, in entering the synagogue, this beautiful description of Israel’s 
happiness is chanted by the orthodox Jews. Still it has not yet been 
realized, and whatever spiritual lessons for the church we may derive 
from it, we do not care to follow them at this time. Israel still living 
in miserable huts, no tabernacles among them, far from being like 
gardens by the riverside, and aloe trees and cedars beside the waters. 
Truly his seed in many waters, but not in honor and peace, but dishonor 
and unrest. The prophetic eye, however, sees it all accomplished, and 
Balaam’s vision leaps over centuries and centuries to the time of the 
end when Israel’s unbelief has ended and once more the tribes are 
gathering to take possession of the land, their glorious inheritance. 
When that great Sabbath day commences, that day of the Lord, Israel’s 
hope will be realized, and what the pious orthodox Jew to-day sees in 
faith and often repeats with tears in his eyes, will then be a blessed 
reality. How goodly are thy tents O Jacob, thy tabernacles O Israel. 
In the highly poetical strain we realize the type of the living Spirits, the 
water poured from His buckets. 

2. In two lines Balaam speaks of the king and kingdom which is 
to be exalted. Agag was the title of the king of the Amalekites, the 
national enemy of Israel. Haman was an Agagite; he came from 
Amalek, a fitting type of the Antichrist, and here Balaam sees a king 
coming, who is higher than Agag, than all the powers which are anti- 
Semitic, and that king will have a kingdom which will be exalted. It 
is hardly necessary to enlarge upon this. 

3. We notice now for the second time the repetition, “God bringeth 
him out of Egypt,” but after the phrase, he hath strength like that of a 
wild ox, he changes his words. In the second parable we saw that he 
continues saying, “there is no enchantment against Jacob and no 
divination against Israel,” while in this he says after stating, “God 
bringeth him out of Egypt, he shall eat up the nations, his adversaries, 
yea, he shall break their bones and smite them through with his arrows.” 
It seems in the second parable Egypt of the past is meant, and in 


36 NUMBERS. 


this parable, it is Egypt of the future, as already quoted from Jeremiah, 
the regathering of the people through the high and wonderful hand of 
the Lord. Connected with that second Egypt, that great and wonder- 
ful deed of Jehovah’s, when the whole nation will be redeemed and 
spirit-filled in that day; connected with that is the judgment of the 
nations, which are the adversaries of Israel. There is a wonderful 
similarity between the story in Exodus and the future history of Israel, 
and the nations still unwritten on the pages of history and only visible 
by eyes of faith in the word of our God, who will speak again and not 
keep silence. The words, “‘he couched, he lay down as a lion and as a 
lioness will rouse him,” is a quotation from Jacob’s prophecy of Judah, 
but here applied to the entire nation, which will become through the 
lion of the tribe of Judah the lioness who will lie down and spring upon 
its prey and drink the blood of the slain. The last stanza of the first 
part of the third parable is again a repetition of God’s promise to 
Abraham now seen in its fulfillment; both declare from an enemy’s 
mouth how surely, how fully every utterance of God shall come to pass. 

However, the prophecy in these parables is still incomplete, something 
is lacking which must be said. Step by step the Lord and the Spirit 
led Balaam up to the consummation, and while Balak’s anger is kindled 
and like a raving maniac he stamps with his feet and smites his handa 
together, crying to Balaam, “I called thee to curse mine enemies and 
lo, thou hast altogether blessed them these three times, flee to thy 
place,” and while Balak denied him the honor he had promised, Balaam 
in a divine defiance, the fire of God burning forth from his eyes, turns 
once more to Balak and says, “Behold I am going to my people; come, 
I will admonish thee what this people shall do unto thy people in the last 
days.” Then— 


“The oracle of Balaam, son of Beor, 
Even the oracle of the man with eyes that had been shut! 
The oracle of one that heareth the sayings of God 
And who knoweth the knowledge of the Most High; 
Seeing with the vision of the Almighty; 
Falling, but his eyes uncovered: 
I see him, but not now; 
I behold him, but not nigh: 
There hath come a star out of Jacob, 
And a sceptre hath risen out of Israel, 
And hath smitten through the sides of Moab, 
And dashed against each other all the sons of tumult. 
And Edom is a possession— 
Seir also a possession—his enemies; 
And Israel doeth valiantly. 
Yea, out of Jacob one hath dominion, 
And destroyeth what is left from the city.” 


NUMBERS. 367 


And he looked apon Amalek and took up his parable, saying— 


“Amalek first of the nations! 
And his latter end, destruction!” 


And he looked at Kenites and took up his parable, saying— 


“Firm is thy dwelling place, 
And thy nest fixed in the rock! 
But the Kenite shall be ruined, 
Until Asshur carry thee captive away.” 


And he took up his parable, saying— 


“Who shall live when God appointeth this? 
And ships shall come from the coasts of Kittim, 
And shall afflict Asshur, and afflict Eber, 
And he also . . . to destruction.” 


And Balaam rose up and went and returned to his place and Balak 
also went his way. 

This is the most remarkable parable of Balaam, and surely it is the 
very breath of God. He boasts himself of knowing the knowledge of 
the Most High, seeing with the vision of the Almighty. After this 
introduction he speaks again that he sees Him and beholds Him. 
However, not now and not nigh. We recollect that in the first parable 
he said likewise from the top of the rocks, “‘I see him and from the hills 
I behold him.” There it was the nation, here it is a person; namely, 
the King of Israel whose shout he had heard before among the wonder- 
ful people. The description of this coming King is glorious. First 
he sees him as a star coming out of Jacob, and then he calls him a 
sceptre risen out of Israel, smiting through the sides of Moab and 
turning against each other all the sons of tumult. In consequence of 
this Edom becomes his possession, likewise Seir; all his enemies are 
conquered and Israel stands with the King and does valiantly. It is a 
very pronounced Messianic prophecy relating to the time when the 
kingdom is to be restored to Israel. Many teachers of God’s Word 
have made a mistake in applying this prophecy to the time of the first 
coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. The Jews recognize the prophecy 
as relating to the King Messiah. One of their false Messiahs was 
known by the name Bar-Chochva, the son of a star. We also notice 
that after he has taken Edom and Seir for his possession, Balaam says, 
“Yea, out of Jacob one hath dominion and destroyeth what is left from 
the city.” In these words reference is made to his reign and rule in the 
coming age. The vital point of this last parable of Balaam is the 
prophecy concerning the fate of the Gentile powers. We have first 
Moab, who is smitten through the sides; the sons of tumult are con- 
nected with Moab and who are dashed against each other; Edom and 


368 NUMBERS. 


Seir, Amalek, Asshur, Eber, and the ships coming from the coast of 
Kittim. All these nations having passed away stand nevertheless in a 
very pronounced relation to the great day of the wrath of the Lord, when 
He whose right it is will appear once more. In fact they seem to come 
again to the front in the latter day. We will quote here a remarkable 
passage from the prophet Jeremiah, which relates to Moab. Jeremiah 
xlviii:47, “Yet will I bring again the captivity of Moab in the latter 
days, saith the Lord.” In chapter xlix:6, we read, “And afterward I 
will bring again the captivity of the children of Ammon, saith the 
Lord.”’ And in the 39th verse, “But it shall come to pass in the latter 
days that I will bring again the captivity of Elam, saith the Lord.” 
All these nations have been judged in the past, and their descendants are 
hard to find, yet God knows and in His own way and in His own time He 
will have every one of His words fulfilled. 

What else do we see in this last parable of Balaam than the judg- 
ment of the world-powers? Later Nebuchadnezzar, another Gentile 
ruler like Balak, had a dream, and he saw the great image, the wonder- 
ful picture of the four kingdoms of the world; and Daniel, a true prophet 
of Jehovah, not like Balaam, interpreted the dream for Nebuchadnezzar, 
but what Nebuchadnezzar dreamed and Daniel saw in his vision 
Balaam here sees in his last vision from the top of Peor. Wonderful 
description of the time when the stone cut out without hands smashes 
the proud image and reduces it to dust! Wonderful vision later seen 
by Zechariah, the four carpenters who are being raised up to conquer 
the four horns who have scattered Israel, Judah and Jerusalem (Zecha- 
riah i). There is no doubt that Asshur stands for the first of the 
Gentile empires, that is Babylon, and Eber probably for the other, the 
Medo-Persian, while Kittim, the Isles of the West, stand for the Greek 
and Roman rule 


DEUTERONOMY 


CONTENTS 


Introduction...........6+ 
Division of Deuteronomy 


ee eee eeesesereseseeere 


eee eee sere ees eereeeetes 


Analysis and Annotations.......... ASGOGGREUORE 


The Book of Deuteronomy. 


Introduction. 


The fifth book written by Moses is called Deuteronomy 
en account of an erroneous Greek translation of Chapter 
xvii:18. The words “a copy of this law” were translated 
by mistake “a second law.”” Deuteronomy means “second 
law.”’ The Hebrews call it “Haddeborim,’” which means 
“the Words.” 

This book does not contain a second Law, as suggested 
by the word Deuteronomy; nor is the book a mere repe- 
tition of the Law previously given in Exodus, Leviticus 
and Numbers. The analysis and annotations as given in 
this work show that such is not the case. Dr. Martin Luther 
remarks on this book: “Deuteronomy is a compendium 
and summary of the whole Law and wisdom of the people 
of Israel, wherein those things which relate to the priests 
and Levites are omitted, and only such things included 
as the people generally are required to know.” This is a 
correct view. It is ‘“‘a hortatory description, explanation, 
and enforcement of the most essential contents of the 
covenant revelation and covenant laws, with emphatic 
prominence given to the spiritual principle of the law and 
its fulfilment; and with a further development of the eccle- 
siastical, judicial, political and civil organization which 
was intended as a permanent foundation for the life and 
well-being of the people in the land of Canaan. There 
is not the slightest trace, throughout the whole book, of 
any intention whatever to give a new or second Law.” 

The Book of Deuteronomy is the book which demands 
obedience. Obedience is the keynote of almost every chapter. 
It is the great lesson of the book. Obedience in the spirit of 
love, flowing from a blessed and enjoyed relationship with 


372 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


Jehovah, is the demand made of His people. Over and 
over again in this final portion of the Pentateuch the people 
Israel are reminded of the great goodness and faithfulness 
of Jehovah. How He redeemed them out of the house of 
bondage, carried them through the wilderness, guided 
them, gave them food, sustained them is repeatedly stated. 
And He, who chose Israel and dealt thus with them has a 
perfect claim on their love; that love is to be expressed by 
obedience. ‘There are some misguided believers who pass 
by this magnificent book as if there were no lessons to be 
learned here. To do this is a very serious mistake. No 
book in the Bible must be ignored. Each bears its own 
peculiar character and message. We do well to look under 
the guidance of the Holy Spirit for the spiritual lessons 
which are written for us here. Is the principle of the book of 
Deuteronomy, obedience to Jehovah and His Word in the 
spirit of love and godly fear, abandoned in the New Testa- 
ment? We answer, it is as prominent there as it is in this 
fifth book of Moses. New Testament believers, forming 
the body of Christ, are brought into the highest possible 
relationship with the Lord. ‘They possess a position which 
Israel never possessed and of which even their greatest 
prophets were ignorant. Christian believers are one with 
the Lord Jesus Christ. Everywhere in the Gospels and 
in the Epistles this relationship into which the grace of 
God has brought believers forms the basis of exhortation 
to love the Lord and to obey His Word; to live unto Him. 
“He that hath My commandments, and keepeth them, he 
it is that loveth Me; and he that loveth Me shall be loved 
of My Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself 
tohim. . . . Ifaman love Me he will keep My words, 
and My Father will love Him, and we will come unto Him, 
and make our abode with Him. He that loveth Me not, 
keepeth not My sayings, and the Word which ye hear is 
not mine, but the Father’s, who sent Me” (John xiv:21, 
23, 24). “If ye keep My commandments, ye shall abide 
in My love; even as I have kept My Father’s commandments 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 373 


and abide in His love” (John xv:10). May God’s people 
everywhere be reminded, in the days of laxity and worldliness, 
that the Lord who has redeemed us and has washed us from 
our sins in His own blood, claims our love and obedience. 
This fact makes the book of Deuteronomy, if carefully 
studied in a spiritual way, of great importance to every 
child of God. If read it is bound to produce a response 
from every heart indwelt by His Spirit and a closer walk with 
God and more childlike obedience will be the result. It 
is deeply interesting at the same time to study this old book. 
This book, three thousand years old, having power to touch 
the heart and the life of all who receive its message, is an 
evidence in itself of its divine origin. Well has it been 
said: ‘Take any human writing of the same date as the 
book of Deuteronomy; if you should lay your hand on some 
volume written three thousand years ago, what would you 
find? A curious relic of antiquity—something to be placed 
in the British Museum, side by side with an Egyptian 
mummy, having no application whatever to us or to our 
time—a musty document—a piece of obsolete writing, 
practically useless to us, referring only to a state of society 
and to a condition of things long since passed away and 
buried in oblivion.” 


Higher Criticism and Deuteronomy. 


On account of the sublime character of this book, Deu- 
teronomy has been the object of the special attacks by the 
critics. These boasting “scholars” have left nothing un- 
attacked, but have defiled with their foolish theories and 
inventions the perfect Word of God. Throughout our 
studies in the preceding books, we have touched repeatedly 
upon their arguments and repudiated their claims. It is 
quite impossible to follow here the history and development 
of the criticism of Deuteronomy. There is a reason, which 
we hope to state later, why this book has been the special 
object of these Satanic attacks, to rob it of its authority. 
And we wish to add, that nowhere else in their criticism 


374 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


are the critics so at sea and often contradicting each other, 
as in their attacks upon Deuteronomy. All deny, of course, 
the Mosaic authorship. The dates are placed many cen- 
turies after Moses. To show how these “learned” gentle- 
men agree, we give a few names of professors and others 
and what they say about the date of the book. Oettli and 
others assume that it was composed during the earlier, 
but post-Solomonic, time of the Kings. Vatinger and 
Koenig claim it was written under Hezekiah. Ewald, 
Riehm, Smith, Kautsch, etc., teach it was composed under 
Manasseh’s reign. De Wette, Bleck, Welshausen, Reuss, 
Dillman, etc., believe it was written when Josiah was King. 
Gesenius and a host of modern critics put the composition, 
of Deuteronomy during or even after the Babylonian cap- 
tivity. Here is harmony! 

If Deuteronomy was not written by Moses immediately 
before his death, then the book has no claim whatever upon 
our confidence. It must be rejected as a colossal fraud. 
And if this book was not written by Moses and therefore 
must be classed as a forgery, then the testimony of the Lord 
Jesus Christ concerning this: book would have to be dis- 
missed as untrustworthy; that would rob Him of His infalli- 
bility. Furthermore the entire New Testament teaching 
would be affected by it, for the New Testmaent writers 
in their inspired testimony make constant use of the book 
of Deuteronomy. 


Higher Criticism is Infidelity. 


Higher Criticism is infidelity and that of the most dan- 
gerous kind, because it comes in the garb of an angel of light 
and often claims to be a friend and a helper, to lead people 
into the truth. All the prominent infidels (and most of 
them, if not all immoral men) ridiculed the idea that Moses 
wrote Deuteronomy. 

We quote from that well-known infidel, who lived about a 
hundred years ago, Thomas Paine: 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. $75 


“In Deuteronomy the style and manner of writing marks 
more evidently than the former books that Moses is not the 
writer.” “Though it is impossible for us to know identically 
who the writer of Deuteronomy was, it is not difficult to 
discover him professionally, that he was some Jewish priest 
who lived, as I shall show in the course of this work, at least 
850 years after Moses.” 


Recently an official of high standing in the Methodist 
Episcopal Church wrote a book in which he followed closely 
in the tracks of German infidel critics. He made the fol- 
lowing assertions: | 

“It is clear, say our modern authorities, that he (Moses) 
could not have been the author of this book (Deuteronomy). 
For reasons equally convincing, it is evident that the book 
must be the product of a period or periods far later than that 
of Moses.” ‘The date of its origin is probably not far from 
the middle of the sixth century B. C.” 


Is there any difference between the statements of the 
infidel Thomas Paine and the Methodist preacher of promi- 
nent standing? Both speak the same language. Doubly 
sad it is, when the men, who adopt this destructive criticism, 
are destitute of any scholarship whatever. They are but 
weak echo-men of others. 


Our Lord and Deuteronomy. 


Our Lord Jesus Christ put special honor upon this book. 
It is this book which He quoted exclusively when Satan 
came to Him with his vile temptations. Three times He 
took His answers from that one book, quoting chapter 
vi:13, 16; viii:3; x:20. This certainly is highly significant. 
He, who knew the Word so well, might have gone to any 
other portion and used it with equal effect. But He chose to 
take refuge behind this book and draw the weapon from it to 
defeat Satan, who now tries, by his instruments, to destroy 
the trustworthiness of the book in which the Lord Jesus 
Christ so firmly believed as the very Word of God. And 


376 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


our Lord no doubt foresaw all this modern day infidel 
criticism. Did He know anything of the authorship of 
Deuteronomy? Would He have quoted from this book 
if it had been a forgery? If these words are not truly the 
Word of God, though claiming to be that, then they are 
falsehoods. How could Satan have been defeated by false- 
hoods? Alas! these critics go so far in their blasphemy, 
that they charge Christ with ignorance, or that He acquiesced 
in a popular error of His times! The testimony our Lord 
has given to this book is sufficient to establish its divinity 
as well as the Mosaic authorship. 

But there is another reason why He selected Deuteronomy 
in answering the Devil. As we have seen Deuteronomy 
tells of obedience. Hence the One who had come to be 
obedient, yea obedient unto death, the death of the cross, 
went to that book, which speaks of obedience, to show how 
He submitted to the will of His Father and to defeat Satan 
thereby. Our Lord therefore bore witness also to the 
very character of the book itself. 


In the New Testament. 


Equally striking it is that the Lord in many other in- 
stances made use of Deuteronomy. And the Holy Spirit 
in almost every portion of the New Testament connects 
His testimony with this great book. We earnestly request 
our readers to study the following passages and turn to 
these references. This not only shows how Deuteronomy 
is made use of in the New Testament, but it will help in 
understanding the book. Deut. 1:16, 17; xvi:19 and John 
vii:24; James ii:1l. Deut. iv:2; xii:32 and Matt. v:18; Rev. 
xxii:18-19. Deut. w:7 and James iv:8. Deut. iv:29-31; 
xrxi:6 and Hebrews xi:6; xiii:5. Deut. v:5 and Gal. iii:19. 
Deut. vti:8 and 1 John iv:10. Deut. ix:7, 24; 2:16 and 
Acts vii:51. Deut. ix:15, 19 and Hebr. xii:18. Deut. x:17 
and Acts x:34 and 1 Tim. vi:15. Deut. xiii:14 and 2 Cor. 
vi:l5. Deut. iv:2; xavi:19; raviti:9 and 1 Peter ii:9. Deut. 
zv:11 and Matt. xxvi:11; John xii:8. Deut. zvi:20 and 1 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. sv7 


Tim. vi:ll. Deut. 2vii:6; axzj15 and Matt. xviii:16; John 
vili:17; 2 Cor. xiii:1; Hebr. x:28. Deut. xviii:15 and Acts 
11:22; vii:37; John 1:21; vi:14; Matt. xvii:5. Deut. rviii:16 
and Heb. xii:19. Deut. xviii:19 and Luke x:16; John 
xii:48; Acts 1:23. Deut. xviii:18 and John xii:49. Deut. 
2iz:19; axvii:7 and 1 Cor. v:13. Deut. xix:21 and Matt. 
v:38. Deut. vx1:6 and Matt. xxvii:24. Deut. xxi:23 and 
Gal. iii:13. Deut. xxit:22 and John viii:4. Deut. xxiii:25 
and Matt. xii:l. Deut. xriv:1 and Matt. v:31; xix:3. Deut. 
xvariv:14 and James v:4. Deut. xxv:3 and 2 Cor. xi:24. Deut. 
xxv:4 and 1 Cor. ix:9; 1 Tim. v:18. Deut. xxv:5 and Matt. 
xxil:24. Deut. xarvii:26 and Gal. iii:10. Deut. rxix:3 and 
Rom. xi:8. Deut. xxix:18 and Heb. xii:15. Deut. rxxr:6 
and Rom. ii:29. Deut. xrxv:11 and Romans x:6-8. Deut. 
xrxi:26 and Rom. iii:19. Deut. rxarii:21 and Rom. x:19. 
Deut. xxx11:35 and Rom. xii:19; Heb. x:30. Deut. xarxii:43 
and Rom. xv:10. 

And if Deuteronomy were not true, not the Word of 
God, what then? Every part of the New Testament would 
collapse. 


Interesting Prophecy. 


But Deuteronomy is also a book of prophecy. Moses 
is called in it a prophet. He exercises His office in this 
final book he wrote. From Pisgah he beheld the land in 
all its beauty. But before he had that vision, he had 
seen the future of the people, who had been his charge 
during the weary years through the desert sands. How 
wonderful it is that he, their appointed leader, who knew 
the people so well, uttered prophecies, which cover the 
past, present and future history of Israel. How minutely 
curses, which were to come upon the people, are predicted 
in this book! How minutely they were fulfilled and are 
still in course of fulfillment. 

His great song (chapter xxxii) is wholly prophetic. It is, 
if rightly understood, a key to the entire prophetic Word. 


378 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


What is yet to come upon the nation, both in judgment 
and in blessing, was beheld by Moses. 

His last message was the blessing. The man, the faith- 
ful servant of Jehovah, to whom was given the ministry 
of the Law (which can do nothing but curse), ends his earthly 
testimony by uttering a blessing. That blessing will yet 
come upon the sons of Jacob and all nations will rejoice in 
coming days, when His people is brought back and all His 
promises are fulfilled. May it please God to make the 
study of this book a great blessing to all His people. 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 379 


The Division of Deuteronomy. 


I. THE FIRST DISCOURSE OF MOSES. RETROSPECT. 
Chapter i-iv:43. 
1. Introduction. Chapter i:1-5. 
2. From Horeb to Kadesh. Chapter i:6—46. 
3. After the Forty Years. Conflict and Conquest, 


4. Hearken, O Israel! Chapter iv:1-40. 
5. The Three Cities of Refuge. Chapter iv:41-43. 


Il. THE EXPOSITION OF THE LAW; AND THE 
STATUTES; EXHORTATIONS AND WARNINGS; 
BLESSING AND CURSE. Chapter iv:41-xxx:20. 


1. The Proclamation of the Decalogue. Chapter iv:44- 


v:33. 
2. The First Commandment and What It Involves. 


Chapter vi. 

3. The Possession of the Land and Their Separation. 
Chapter vii. 

4. Thou Shalt Remember! Provision and Warning. 


Chapter viii. 
5. Warning Against Self-Righteousness. Their Pre- 


vious Failures. Chapter ix—x:11. 

6. Jehovah’s Love and His Requirements of His People. 
Chapter x:12-22. 

7. Israel’s Responsibility; The Blessing and the Curse. 
Chapter xi. 

8. The Place of Worship. Chapter xii. 

9. Warning Against False Prophets and Their Punish- 
ment. Chapter xiii. 

10. The Children of God. Their Separation. Chapter 


11. The Year of Release and Liberation of Hebrew 
Slaves. Chapter xv:1-18. 


380 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


12. The Firstlings and the Three Feasts. Chapter 
xv :19-xvi:17. 

13. Justice and the Choice of a King. Chapter xvi:18- 
xvii :20. 

14. The Rights of the Priests and Levites. The True 
and the False Prophet. Chapter xviii. 

15. Laws for Israel in the Land. Chapter xix. 

16. Concerning Future Wars. Chapter xx. 

17. The Expiation of an Uncertain Murder. Various 
Instructions. Chapter xxi. 

18. Against Inhumanity and Different Violations. False 
Testimony and Sins of Adultery. Chapter xxii. 

19. The Congregation of Jehovah; Its Constitution 
and Holiness. Chapter xxiii. 

20. Concerning Divorce. Laws of Mercy. Chapter 
XXIV. 

21. Various Laws and Responsibilities. Chapter xxv. 

22. First Fruits and Prayer. Chapter xxvi. 

23. The Memorial of the Law at Mount Ebal. Gerizim 
and Ebal. Chapter xxvii. 

24. The Blessing and the Curse. Chapter xxviii. 

25. The Repetition of the Covenant and the Restated 
Curse. Chapter xxix. 

26. The Dispersion and the Return. The Final Appeal. 
Chapter xxx. 


Ill. THE FINAL WORDS OF MOSES. THE VISION 
OF THE FUTURE. Chapter xxxi-xxxiv. 


1. Moses’ Final Charge. The Written Law Delivered. 
Jehovah’s Word to Moses. Chapter xxxi. 

2. The Song of Moses. Chapter xxxii:1-43. 

3. The Blessing of Moses. Chapter xxxii:43-xxxiii:29. 

4. The Death of Moses. Chapter xxxiv. 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY, nas 


Analysis and Annotations, 
I. The First Discourse of Moses. 
Retrospect. 


Chapter i-iv:40. 
I. The Introduction. 
CHAPTER I:1-5. 


The people were still on this side of Jordan in the wilder- 
ness. The second verse, containing a parentheucal state- 
ment, gives the story of their’ unbelief, as recorded in the 
Book of Numbers. ‘“‘There are eleven days’ journey from 
Horeb by the way of Mount Seir unto Kadesh-barnea.” 
They “might have reached the place they occupied now, 
facing Jordan and the land, in eleven days. It took them 
almost forty years. Unbelief had kept them back. It was to- 
wards the end of the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, 
that Moses began his wonderful addresses. In the first month 
of that memorable year Miriam had died (Numb. xx:i). 
His brother Aaron had died in the fifth month (Numb. 
xxxili:38). Moses was soon to follow him at the close of 
the fortieth year, at the ripe age of one hundred and twenty. 
Forty years were spent by Moses in the palaces of Egypt; 
forty years he was a shepherd in the land of Midian and 
forty years he was the leader of God’s people through the 
wilderness. Before he went to the top of Pisgah to behold 
the land and to die, he pours out his heart in the presence 
of all Israel. His words were “according unto all that 
the Lord had given him.” All he had received from the Lord, 
he passed on faithfully to the Lord’s people. ‘Moses verily 
was faithful in all God’s house, as a servant, for a testimony 
of those things, which were to be spoken afterward” (Heb. 


382 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


ili:5). Once more, therefore, he placed the words of the Lord 
before their hearts. This is the blessed object of ministry, 
to make known what God has revealed. True ministry 
is to deliver the message received. “For I delivered unto 
you first of all that which I also received” (1 Cor. xv:3). 
Moses declared the Law unto them (verse 5). The Hebrew 


word “declare” means “to make plain.” It is used in 
Habakkuk ii:2. 


2. From Horeb to Kadesh. 


CHAPTER 1:6-46, 


The Command to go in and to possess the Land. 6-8. 
The Appointment of Judges reviewed. 9-18. 

The Failure to possess the Land. 19-33. 

The Judgment of God. 34-46. 


oe G2 LOG 


In the beginning of our annotations we must guard once 
more against the misleading conception, that the book of 
Deuteronomy is nothing but a rehearsal of previous history. 
On account of this wrong estimate, the book has not received 
the close study it deserves and God’s people have missed 
the blessing, which results from such a study. It is true, 
Deuteronomy contains much that is retrospective, but it 
is far from being mere repetition. Spiritual lessons are 
found here, which are very much needed at the present 
time. 

God had spoken at Horeb, “Ye have dwelt long enough 
in this mount.” This communication is not found in the 
book of Numbers, though the opening chapters of that 
book presuppose such a command. Not a word is said 
here of the cloud and the trumpets, the twofold means by 
which Jehovah guided and directed His people. We there- 
fore learn, that the Lord also spoke in direct words to them. 
He had watched their dwelling at Horeb; the purpose He 
had with them at that mountain was accomplished and 
now they had been instructed to move. It reveals the loving 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY =o) 


interest the Lord took in His people and in their move- 
ments. And He is still the same, who controls the tarrying 
and the journeying of His people. Every word in verses 
7 and 8 reveals the divine purpose to lead His people at 
once into the land, which He had sworn unto Abraham, 
Isaac and J Jacob (Genesis. XXL 16) sa, he land was set before 
them; all they needed was to go forward in faith and possess 
it. They failed miserably. 

The nation had greatly multiplied and Moses was not able 
to bear them alone (Exodus xviii:17, 18; Num. xi:14). 
To guard against any misunderstanding of his word: “I 
am not able to bear you myself;’’ Moses added the gracious 
wish “‘the Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand 
times so many more as ye are and bless you, as He hath 
promised you!” These beautiful words still breathe the 
warmth of the loving heart of Moses and they are also 
expressing his faith in the promise of Jehovah. Provision 
was made for the relief of Moses. There is no discrepancy 
here with the statements in Exodus and Numbers on this 
matter. Moses in his address does not give a repetition of 
the historical-chronological facts, and circumstances, but 
simply mentions them incidentally as leading up to the 
main object of his address. It was failure on his part, 
when he complained of his burden. ‘We learned this in our 
annotations of Numbers xi. May we think here of the 
great burden-bearer, our Lord, who never fails His people 
and who never complains. We can cast our burdens and 
cares upon Him and shall ever find that He careth for us. 

The sending out of the spies is next mentioned. Here we 
find the hidden things uncovered and the motives are 
given, which prompted the people to ask for the spies. 
They asked for the spies themselves. So we learn that 
the wish did not come from the Lord, nor from Moses. 
When Jehovah saw the desire of their hearts and heard 
their request, He commanded the sending out of the spies. 
He knew in what it would result. Moses was ignorant 
of that, therefore, the saying pleased him well. If the 


384 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


people had faith in God they would have been obedient 
at once and gone up to possess the land. The story of 
their tinbelief and rebellion follows. Fearful was the 
accusation, which came from their lips. “Because the 
Lord hated us, He hath brought us forth out of the land 
of Egypt to deliver us into the hands of the Amorites, to 
destroy us.” What ingratitude and blindness!. The Lord,” 
who had so graciously delivered them out of Egypt, who 
had overthrown the hosts of Egypt, who had given them 
the bread from heaven and water out of the rock, Him 
they accused of hatred. 

The words of Moses to inspire the murmuring people ~ 
with new courage (verses 29-31) do not appear in the book 
of Numbers. Deuteronomy is clearly not a mere rehearsal 
of what took place. Moses honored the Lord by the words 
he spoke. He did not share the unbelief of the people. 
The concluding paragraph of the first chapter shows the 
judgment, which fell upon that unbelieving generation. 
The opening words of Moses in this book are of a solemn 
character. Unbelief and disobedience had brought judg- 
ment upon the people. God’s demands here and throughout 
this book are faith and obedience as the expression of faith. 
Confidence in Him and obedience, unswerving obedience 
He asks of us; He can never dispense with these. We 
find these demands of Jehovah everywhere. Obedience 
is the way to blessing and the enjoyment of what 
Jehovah is, while disobedience plunges into darkness 
and despair. And how significant are the burning exhor- 
tations to obedience from the lips of the servant of God, 
whose failure by being disobedient and _ self-willed had 
deprived him from entering into the land! 


3. After the Forty Years. From Conflict to eonaueets 
CHAPTER II, 


1. From Kadesh to the Land of the Amorites. 1-3. 
2. The Command to Possess. 24-25. 
8. The Conquest of Sihon. 26-37, 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 385 


The many days in the first verse are the thirty-eight 
years. We must notice the little word ‘“‘we.” “We turned 
and took our journey into the wilderness.’ Moses, Aaron, 
his sons, Joshua, Caleb and the faithful Levites turned 
back with the unfaithful, murmuring Israelites. Moses and 
all who had not shared in the unbelief of the people sub- 
mitted to the sovereign will of the Lord. How strange it 
would have been if they had complained in sharing in the 
judgment of the mass of the people. This is true obedience 
and humility. “God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace 
to the humble; submit yourselves, therefore, to God” 
(James iv:6—7). The faithful ones shared the trials, the 
sorrows, the hardships of the murmuring multitudes. And 
Jehovah was with them and in gracious tenderness. , Can 
there be anything more beautiful than the testimony of 
Moses he gives in verse 7! “For the Lord thy God hath 
blessed thee in all the works of thy hand; He knoweth 
thy walking through this great wilderness: these forty 
years the Lord thy God has been with thee; thou hast 
lacked nothing.” Well may we ponder over it. The 
people, who had accused Him, insulted Him, disbelieved 
His word, this people He carried through the great wilder- 
ness so that they lacked nothing. May we take courage. 
Our failures, our short-comings, our unbelief do not arrest 
the gracious tenderness of His loving heart. 

Intensely interesting is the divine injunction not to 
molest Edom, Moab and Ammon. The great principle 
which goes through Deuteronomy is very outstanding in 
this command of Jehovah. He guided them, gave His 
instructions and they were to depend on Him and be obe- 
dient to His will. They might have coveted to possess 
the plains of Moab or Mount Seir and the lands of Ammon. 
The Lord forbade them to do so. Disobedience would 
have been disastrous. Though Edom had harrassed Israel 
greatly and displayed an arrogant pride, yet Jehovah 
would not give Edom’s possession to Israel. He remem- 
bered His word “I have given Mount Seir unto Esau for 


386 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


a possession” (Gen. xxxii:3; xxxvi:6-8; Josh. xxiv:4). They 
were, therefore, not to seek what the Lord had not given 
to them. And this is obedience and a lesson of faith. What 
happy contentment there would be among God’s people, if 
this rule were followed. 

The same command not to distress the Moabites and 
Ammonites (blood relations to Israel) is given. The races 
of Giants are mentioned, which occupied the territories of 
Moab, Ammon and Edom. They had different names 
as stated in the text. Emim means “the terrible ones;” 
Zamzumim has the meaning “to murmur and meditate.” 
This may have some reference to demon possession as seen 
in some of the present day mediums of spiritism. They 
were powerful and extremely vicious beings, given up to 
the control and service of Satan. 

Then Jehovah called to action. “Rise up,* take your 
journey, and pass over the river Arnon, behold I have 
given into thine hand Sihon the Amorite, King of Heshbon, 
and his land, begin to possess it and contend with him 
in battle.” Obedience is again the demand. While the 
statement in verse 25 “I begin to put the dread of thee 
and the fear of thee upon the nations that are under the 
whole heaven” has been taken as hyperbolical, it also has 
a prophetic meaning. The Gentiles fear the Jews and 
the nations stand in dread of them. Some day the Jewish 
race will be the head of the nations of the world. Sihon’s 
measure of wickedness and cruelty was full. His spirit 
was hardened like Pharaoh’s and Israel completely over- 
threw him and his kingdom. ‘The Lord our God delivered 
all unto us” (verse 36). Read Psalm exxxvi:19-26. It 
was His mercy. And His mercy endureth forever and is 
blessedly on our side. May we walk in obedience and find 
His mercy acting in our behalf. 


*In verse 13, “Now rise up, said I’’—the words in italics “said I” 
must be omitted. Not Moses, but Jehovah gave the command. 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 387 


CHAPTER III. 


1. The Conquest of Og. 1-11. 
2. The Land Possessed. 12-20. 
3. Joshua in the Place of Moses. 21-29. 


In obedience to the Word of the Lord, they went to battle 
against Og, the King of Bashan. Obedience to the Lord 
and its results and blessing are the marks of the second and 
third chapters of Deuteronomy, while the first chapter 
shows disobedience and its fruit. 

The Kingdom of Og in Bashan was a powerful kingdom. 
The_cities had high walls with gates and bars. Their 
number was sixty. Archaeological research has proven 
the existence of strong and fortified cities in that territory, 
the ruins of which may still be seen. The oldest dwellings 
‘and ruined towers of Hauran (Bashan) are described by 
C. Von Raumer in the following words: “Simple, built 
of heavy blocks of basalt, roughly hewn, and as hard as iron, 
with very thick walls, very strong stone gates and doors, 
many of which were about eighteen inches thick, and were 
formerly fastened with immense bolts, of which traces 
still remain; such houses as these may have been the work of 
the old giant tribe of Rephaim, whose King, Og, was defeated 
by the Israelites 3,000 years ago.” King Og was a giant, 
belonging to the remnant of the giant tribe of Rephaim. 
His iron bedstead is mentioned by Moses. There is noth- 
ing exaggerated about. it. The bed was about twelve 
feet long and six feet broad, which does not mean that 
Og was as tall as that. Moses must have mentioned the 
bedstead of the slain giant, to remind the people of the 
great victory which the Lord had given them and to in- 
spire them with confidence in the possession of the land. 
The Lord, who overthrew Og would certainly not fail them 
when they entered the land and met the enemies there. 

They utterly destroyed men, women and children of 
every city. Many an infidel has sneered at this statement 
and blasphemed God, charging Him with cruelty and 
injustice for allowing such an extermination of human 


388 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


beings. God is righteous. These people were steeped 
in all kinds of vices and wickedness, similar to the depravity 
and vilest corruption of the Canaanites. God had to 
deal in judgment with them. He could not permit them to 
exist, and as the sovereign God He dealt with them in 
-His righteous government. 

“Now, the question is, Are we competent to understand 
these ways of God in government? Is it any part of our 
business to sit in judgment upon them? Are we capable 
of unraveling the profound and awful mysteries of divine 
providence? Can we—are we called upon to—account 
for the tremendous fact of helpless babes involved in the 
judgment of their guilty parents? IJmpious infidelity may 
sneer at these things; morbid sentimentality may stumble 
over them; but the true believer, the pious Christian, the 
reverent student of holy Scripture, will meet them all 
with this one simple but safe and solid question, “Shall 
not the Judge of all the earth do right?” 

This, we may rest assured, reader, is the only true way 
in which to meet such questions. If man is to sit in judg- 
ment upon the actings of God in government—if he can 
take upon himself to decide as to what is and what is not 
worthy of God to do, then, verily, we have lost the true 
sense of God altogether. And this is just what the devil 
is aiming at. He wants to lead the heart away from God; 
and to this end, he leads men to reason and question and 
speculate in a region which lies as far beyond their ken 
as heaven is above the earth. Can we comprehend God? 
If we could, we should ourselves be God.*” 

This is a good answer to the infidel scoffer and should 
satisfy every Christian as well. The time is coming when 
the Lord will deal again in righteousness with this earth 
and then the slain of the Lord will be many. 

The goodness and faithfulness of the Lord is thus un- 
folded by Moses in his address; it was meant for an en- 


*C. H. McIntosh. 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 389 


couragement to their faith and obedience. Next he speaks 
to them of the land, which the tribe of Reuben, Gad and 
half Manasseh received. We learned in our study of the 
book of Numbers that it was in self-will that they made 
the request. They were disobedient. Their failure is 
here completely overlooked by Moses. How beautifully 
this illustrates the grace of God! 

He also reminded them of Joshua’s call to be his suc- 
cessor; it took place at that time, after the conquest of 
the land on the East of the Jordan. He had seen what 
the Lord had done and that was an assurance of what 
the Lord would do in the future. All is worded so as to 
encourage confidence in the Lord and obedience to His 
command. And is it not even so throughout His entire 
Word? Everything in His Word urges us on to trust © 
in Him with fullest confidence. Happy are we if we do so 
and manifest that confidence by a loving obedience. 

Then we find a prayer of Moses, which is unmentioned 
in Numbers. It is a beautiful prayer. He pleaded with 
the Lord to let him go over to see the good land. It could 
not be, on account of his sin at the waters of Meribah. 
Meekly he tells out the story of failure in the presence of the 
people and gives the Lord’s answer to him. Divine govern- 
ment had to shut him out from the land, but grace took 
him to the top of Pisgah to see, in company with the Lord, 
the land of promise. 


3. Hearken, O Israel! 
CHAPTER IV:1-40. 


Obedience Demanded. 1-8. 

The Covenant to be Observed. 9-14. 

Take Heed unto yourselves lest ye Forget. 15-24. 
The Warning. 25-31. 

Israel, the Chosen Nation. 32-40. 


a) tea aR 


“Now therefore hearken, O Israel’? marks the beginning 
of the exhortation to keep the law of the Lord. First 


390 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


he had shown the goodness and faithfulness of the Lord 
and upon that Moses admonishes them to be true to Jeho- 
vah and to the covenant. The same order is followed in our 
great New Testament Epistles. What the Lord has done 
for us, His grace and faithfulness, always occupies the 
first place; this is followed by our responsibilities to walk 
worthy of the Lord. The first great discourse of Moses 
in its two main features, the retrospect of what Jehovah 
had done and Israel’s obligation to keep the law to enjoy 
the blessings of the covenant, is the key to the entire book. 

They were to hearken and to do. Hearing and doing 
stand in the foreground of this section. The result of 
obedience is life and possession of the land. “That ye 
may live” does not mean the possession of eternal life, 
but a long earthly life in the promised land. | See chap- 
ters v:33; vi:2; vilizl; xi:21; xvi:20; xxv: 15; xxx :6, 16; 
xxxil:47. Nothing was to be added to the law and noth-_ 
ing to be taken from it. Alas! “this warning has not been 
heeded. The elders with their traditions’ and command- 
ments of men, added to the law and put the word of man 
above the Word of God, while later the Sadducees took 
away from the law and reduced the Word of God to the 
level of the word of man. The same is done to-day in 
ritualistic and rationalistic Christendom. 

His voice had spoken to them; they had heard His words. 
They were privileged above all other nations. ‘For what 
nation is there so great, who hath God so nigh unto them, 
as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon Him 
for? And what nation is there so great, that hath statutes, 
and judgments so righteous as all this law, which I set 
before you this day?” Therefore, they had great responsi- 
bility. Three times Moses told them to take heed (verses 
9, 15 and 23). He warned them to beware of idolatry. 
They were to serve only Jehovah for He had brought them 
forth out of the iron furnace, to be unto Him a people of 
inheritance. He had delivered them and made them His 
own people, therefore, they were to obey Him. Solemnly 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 391 


Moses said, “I call heaven and earth to witness against 
you this day,* that ye shall soon utterly perish from off 
the land whereunto you go over Jordan to possess it; ye shall 
not prolong your days upon it, but shall utterly be des- 
troyed.” Moses in speaking these words had the first 
prophetic glimpse of their coming history of idolatry, fol- 
lowed by national ruin. This vision widens and he beheld 
them scattered among the nations. Verses 30 and 31 
refer not only to past history, but they are yet to find a 
fulfilment in the latter days. It is the first prophetic note 
we hear in Deuteronomy from the lips of Moses. More 
fully he speaks of it towards the end of his farewell mes- 
sage to the people he loved so well. 

Especially beautiful are the closing verses of this section. 
(Verses 33-40). What a display of what Jehovah had done 
for them, how He had revealed Himself and His power 
in their behalf! Therefore, He was entitled to a whole- 

“hearted obedience from His people. “Know therefore 
this day, and consider it in thine heart, that the Lord He is 
God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath; there 
is none else.”” And what greater works He has made unto 
us His people, that great salvation in His blessed Son, our 
Lord! He has the right to claim our full obedience. May 
we consider constantly, who He is and what He has done 
for us and we shall yield to Him the obedience He looks 
for in His people. 


*It has been stated Luke xxiii:43 is this Old Testament idiom in the 
New Testament, as if our Lord meant to say: “Verily I say unto thee 
to-day, thou shalt be with me in Paradise.” However, this is positively 
wrong. It is the argument advanced by the teachers of soul-sleep. 
The same hint is made in the ‘Companion Bible.” The comma does 
not belong after “‘to-day”’ but after “thee” as we have it in the English 
Bible. 


392 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY 


4, The Three Cities of Refuge. 


CHAPTER IV:41-43. 


1. The Cities Set Apart. 41-42. 
2. The Cities Named. 43. 


The first address being ended, an action of Moses takes ~ 
place. To detect here the hand of an editor, who added 
these verses, as Critics claim, cannot be sustained. The 
cities of refuge were mentioned in Numbers. Here the 
three on this side of Jordan are given. Then there were 
three more on the other side of which we read in chapter 
xix and in the book of Joshua. As stated in our anno- 
tations in Numbers, the cities of refuge are typical of Christ, 
who is our shelter from the avenger. Scattered through 
the land for the gracious purpose of sheltering the slayer, 
they also bear a prophetic testimony. They speak of 
Israel’s hope. 

“These cities of refuge, set at intervals through the land 
of Israel, are a garrison for it from God, which even still, 
in ruin, as the land is, watch over it, as ministers of un- 
changing grace, and prophets of now near-coming glory. 
This people of God, separated to Him in the wonderful 
way attested by their annals,—what, after all, has been 
their condition for many and long centuries of subjection 
to hostile races? They have been strangers and wanderers,, 
Cain-like, and indestructible as Cain,—a nation surviving 
even in death, but as if to perpetuate only the memory of 
the doom under which they lie,—the doom of an awful 
fratricide. Such is, in fact, their condition,—a condition 
hopeless to most yet, though it may be now with a streak 
of gray dawn widening upon it. But these cities of refuge 
have all the time been watch-towers set to face eastward, 
ramparts round prostrate Zion, upon which the watchmen 
hold not their peace, and give Him no rest, till He establish 
it again,—yea, till He make it a praise upon earth (Isa. 
]xii:6, 7). 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 393 


“They are His pledge, in view of what has in fact come to 
pass, that what He has foreseen cannot thwart His pur- 
poses, nor their sin His long-foreshown grace. Preach 
they may in sackcloth, but it is good tidings that they 
preach, of a place of security even for homicides,—for 
those for whom His plea shall yet avail, “They know not 
what they do.*’’* 

The meaning of the three names are of equal interest. 
“Bozer’’ means “defence,” a fortified place. Such Christ 
is for all who trust in Him. In Him we have our shelter 
and blessing as well. “Ramoth” means “heights.” Our 
Lord occupies the exalted, the pre-eminent place and shelter. 
in Him, we share His_place as we read in the second chap- 
ter of ‘Ephesians. “Golan” means “joy” or “their rejoic- 
ing.” Even so we have in Him, who is our refuge, our 
joy and He has His joy in us. 


*, W, Grant on Deuteronomy. 


394 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 
II. The Exposition of the Law3 


Exhortations and Warnings; 
Blessing and Curse, 


Chapter iv :41-xxx:20. 


1. The Proclamation of the Decalogue 
CHAPTER IV:44-V:33. 


1. The Introductory Words. IV:44—-49. 

?. The Law Proclaimed. V:1-21. 

3.. Moses, the Mediator. 22-33, 

First a general announcement is given of the discourse 
on the law. The fact is emphasized, that it was set 
before them after they came forth out of Egypt. Then 
the victories over Sihon and Og are mentioned once more 
and that they now possessed their land. Why this 
repetition? It was to remind them of the goodness and 
faithfulness of Jehovah, whose law they were about to 
hear expounded. It was to be a helpful encouragement 
_to them and stimulate their obedience, while it also 
was the pledge of greater victories and blessings to come. 
Jehovah would keep. His promise. | 

All Israel is gathered about Moses. The aged servant, 
so soon to leave their midst, now solemnly begins to utter 
the main discourse, which composes this book. The first 
verse of the fifth chapter contains the four words, which are 
found so often in this book of moral responsibility and 
practical obedience. These words are “Hear” (over thirty 
times); “Learn” (seven times); “Keep” (thirty-nine ‘times) ; 
“Do” (almost_ one hundred times). These are therefore 
characteristic words of this great book. They were to hear, 
and hearing to learn, and learning to keep, and keeping 
to do. And this is still Jehovah’s demand of us His people. 
All who have a spiritual nature love to have it so. What 
is more delightful and blessed, than to hear Him speak, 
to learn of Him, to keep His Word and to do, what He tells us! 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 395° 


Jehovah had made a covenant with them, not with their 
fathers, the patriarchs. The law covenant was made 
430 years after Abraham. Moses then speaks in their 
hearing the words of the decalogue. The words differ 
somewhat from the twentieth chapter in Exodus, showing 
again that Deuteronomy is not a mechanical repetition 
of previous history. Higher criticism with its confused 
and confusing theories has made the best of this difference. 
Upon this difference critics claim that Moses could not 
have been the author of both. Says a critic: “Indeed 
he could not have written either in its present form, because 
that in Exodus is Jehovistic, and older than the record 
in Deuteronomy.”* Such an assertion simply shows the 
blindness of these men of supposed learning and scholarship. 
Anyone can see that the records in Exodus and Deute- 
ronomy differ. We do not need scholarship for that. The 
mysterious person, whom the critics call “Deuteronomist”’ 
certainly possessed the record in Exodus and could have 
easily copied the exact words. But why is there a dif- 
ference? Exodus gives the history; Deuteronomy does 
not repeat that history, but in restating the decalogue, 
Moses makes such comments which are in perfect keeping 
with the object of Deuteronomy. If Deuteronomy claimed 
to be a literal repetition of the history recorded in Exodus 
and Numbers, then one might speak of discrepancy. ¢ 


*Dr. Davidson. . 

{‘‘Deuteronomy proves that we have here a grave and instructive 
reference to the commandments formally given in the second book of 
Moses. Such moral motives as are added are therefore as appro- 
priate in Deuteronomy as they could not, ought not to, be in Exodus. 
The remembrance of their own estate as slaves in Egypt till delivered 
by Jehovah is most suitable in verse 15; but it is certain that this is 
an appeal to their hearts, not the ground stated by God in promulgating 
the fourth commandment. All is perfect in its own place, and the 
imputation of self-contradiction as baseless as it is malicious and 
irreverent. But one must only expect this from men whose aim is to 
reduce the inspired writers to their own level, and who think that 
piety can co-exist with fraud, yea, with fraudulent falsehood about 


God.” 


99v THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


Moses left out purposely certain statements he uttered 
when the law was given through him in Exodus; and he 
added by way--of comment other words in fullest keeping 
with the moral purpose of his message to the people. This 
is most evident in connection with the commandment to 
keep the Sabbath-day holy. In Exodus xx we find the 
words “for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, 
the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day; 
wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath-day and hallowed 
it.” This reference to creation is omitted now by Moses, 
but he adds another spiritual motive to keep that day. 
“And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of 
Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence 
through a mighty hand and by a stretched out arm; there- 
fore, the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the Sab- 
bath-day” (verse 15). We see at once that the characteristic 
of Deuteronomy is maintained. The people are reminded 
of the faithfulness and goodness of Jehovah, His gracious 
‘dealing with them, and that is made the ground of their 
responsibility to obey His Word. See in connection with 
the Sabbath Exodus xxxi:12-17. It was a sign between 
Jehovah and Israel. We refer the reader to our remarks 
on the Sabbath in the analysis of Exodus. 

Moses then confirms the record in Exodus. “And He 
wrote them in two tables of stone, and delivered them 
unto me.” ‘They possessed them. Moses was also ap- 
pointed as mediator, the type of Him, who is mediator 
between God and man, our Lord Jesus Christ. And He 
has done more than Moses did; He made atonement. The 
people had recognized their sinful distance from God as 
well as their merited condemnation (that which is the 
purpose of the law), and therefore had asked for the media- 
tor. Note verse 29: Jehovah speaks, the One who searches 
the heart and knows what is in man. Absolute obedience 
is again demanded in the closing verses of this chapter. 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 397 


2. The First Commandment and What It Involves, 
CHAPTER VI. 


3}. Hear, therefore, O Israel! 1-3. 
2. The First Commandment. 4-5. 
8. The Remembrance of these Words and Practical Obedience. 6-25. 


“Hear, O Israel! The Lord our God is one Lord.” Much 
has been made of this verse by orthodox Jews, who rever- 
ence it greatly. They call it the “Shema” after the first 
word “Hear.” It is often used by Jews and Unitarians 
to deny the three persons of the Godhead. The Hebrew 
word “‘echod’’ (one) however, excludes forever such a denial, 
for it means a compound unity. The Hebrew has another 
word which exprésses exactly what Jews and. Unitarians, 
- who reject the three persons in the Godhead, believe. It 
is the word “yochid”; this has the meaning of a single one. 

“Jehovah, our Elohim is one Jehovah,” thus the name of 
God is used in this verse. The verse states that to Him 
alone the name of Jehovah (the Self-existing One) right- 
fully belongs, He is the one who is absolutely God. It is. 
the testimony against the Polytheism (many and different’ 
“gods’”’) of the Gentiles, which surrounded Israel on all 
sides. And therefore, because He is the one God, and | 
none beside Him, He must be loved with all the heart, 
with all the soul, with all the might. The heart with all 
its affections and energies must belong to Him. To believe 
on Him and to know Him must ever result in giving Him the 
heart. Spirit, soul and body must be devoted to Him. 
This is the first and the great commandment (Matthew 
xxii:38; Mark xii:29-30). And we know this Jehovah as 
our Redeemer, who came and died in our stead. The New 
Testament fully reveals the claims He has on those, for 
whose redemption He paid the price with His own blood. 
“We love Him, because He first loved us” (1 John iv:19). 
“And this commandment have we from Him, that he who 
loveth God loveth his brother also” (verse 21). ‘““This is 
the love of God, that. we keep.His.commandments” (1 John 


398 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


v:3). “For ye are bought with a price; therefore, glorify 
God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God’s” 
(1 Cor. vi:20). 

Verses 6-9 are literally carried out by orthodox Jews. 
They write these words on parchment and put them in littl« 
boxes, which they bind with strips of leather to their fore- 
heads and upon the hand. These are the phylacteries 
They also put them in tin-boxes and nail them on the doors 
of their houses.. All His words are worthy to be constantly 

_remembered...The Word must be hid in the heart. It 
is to be in the family. It is never to be forgotten, whether 
we sit in the house, or walk, or rest, or rise up. Such a | 
true spiritual remembrance of His Words will increase 
and constantly produce devotion and obedience to the Lord. 
How solemn the warning not to forget Jehovah in the days 
of blessing and prosperity! (verses 10-15). How often 
they did forget Jehovah in the days of peace and earthly 
blessing. 

Verse 16 is of deep interest. “Ye shall not tempt th< 
Lord your God, as ye tempted Him in Massah.” The 
tempting of the Lord at Massah was questioning His pres- 
ence among them (Exodus xvii:7). Qur Lord made use 
of this word when the devil demanded that He should 
cast Himself from the pinnacle of the Temple. Satan 
then quoted Scripture in His presence. The enemy knows 
how to do that; but he either leaves something out from 
the Word or he adds something to it. In quoting from 
Psalm xci, he omitted seven words, “‘to keep thee in all thy 
ways.” Satan knew the obedience of Christ and he tried 
to make our Lord act in obedience to the Word by testing 
God’s Word. But such was not God’s way; ‘it. was not ac- 
cording to His command to cast Himself from the pin- 
nacle of the temple. If He had done it, it would have been 
an act of self-will and therefore disobedience. And that 
is why Satan left out those seven words. But what did 
our Lord do? He did not call Satan to task for mutilating 
the Scriptures, but quoted another Scripture to show His 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


unswerving obedience. “Again it is written, Thou shalt 
not tempt the Lord thy God.” He would not tempt God. 
He quoted the book of Deuteronomy, because it is the 
book of obedience, and He had come not to do His own will, 
. but the will of Him who sent Him. He also quoted the 
words in viii:3 and x:20. How this fact confirms the in- 
spiration and genuineness of Deuteronomy, we have already 
mentioned in our introduction. 


3. The Possession of the Land and Their Separation. 
CHAPTER VII. 


1. The Command to destroy the Canaanites. 1-4. 
2. The Command to destroy their Idolatry. 65-11. 
8. The Promise of Blessing and Help. 12-26. 


Seven nations are mentioned as occupying the land, which 
God gave to Israel. These nations were steeped in the most 
awful licentiousness and practised the vilest abominations. 
There are different reasons to believe that Satan possessed 
them in a peculiar manner. God had tolerated these 
nations for many centuries. He waited in His mercy 
before the sword of justice was unsheathed. The measure 
of their wickedness was now full, the time for judgment 
had come. The Lord called Israel to be the executioner of 
that awful judgment. And whenever they carried out 
the divine judgment, not sparing any one, they had an 
object lesson of the holiness and righteousness of God. 
Their sons and daughters were not to marry any members 
of these doomed nations. That would result in apostasy 
from Him and in idolatry. All their altars, their-images-and. 
their groves. they were to destroy. They were a hoiy 
people. But the Lord did not choose them because they 
were more in number than other nations. Jehovah loved 
them. Solemnly they are once more told that the Jehovah 
who hath set His love on them is a faithful, a covenant 
keeping God. He keeps His covenant and mercy with 


400 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


them that love Him and keep His commandments. But 
He also repays them that hate Him. Promises of blessings 
follow. If they are obedient, if they hear, keep and do 
(verse 12) the Lord would bless them. It is refreshing to 
read all these gracious promises. May they encourage 
us to trest in Him and walk in obedience. In Christ even 
greater blessings than these are put on our side. We know 
from subsequent history, how completely Israel failed to 
carry out all these instructions. They practised the vile 
abominations of the nations they were commanded to 
destroy. God had to deai with them in judgment. In- 
stead of the blessings enumerated in verses 12-24, the 
curse was visited upon them. God’s gifts and calling 
are without repentance; in a future day the remnant of 
Israel will inherit these things through the Grace of God. 


4, Thou Shalt Remember! Provision and Warning. 
CHAPTER VIII. 


1. Remember the forty years and Jehovah’s Care. 1-6. 
2. The gracious Provision in the Land. 7-10. 
3. Warning against forgetting Jehovah. 11-20. 


Admonition to obedience begins this chapter. Dis- 
obedience and what will result from it closes it. Between 
the first and last verses we find extremely precious words. 
They are called upon to remember the experiences of the 
wilderness. It was Jehovah, who led them and watched 
over them. The wilderness experience was made a bless- 
ing tothem. It taught them the blessed lessons of humility 
and brought out all that was in their hearts. And this 
corresponds to our own experiences. Jehovah’s care over 
them had been manifested. They had to learn in the 
wilderness the lessons of dependence upon God. He sup- 
plied their need. They were fed with manna. Their 
raiment waxed not old. Their feet did not even swell 
(Chapter xxix:5; Neh. ix:20-21). “As a man chasteneth 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 401 


a son, so the Lord thy God chasteneth thee.” And thus 
He still deals with His people, whom He loves and whom 
He has redeemed in His Son, the people He is leading home _ 
to Himself through the wilderness. Oh, that we may 
trust Him fully and yield ourselves to Him in obedience! 

“How wonderful to think of God’s patient grace and 
painstaking love with His people in the wilderness! What 
precious instruction for us! With what intense interest 
and spiritual délight we can hang over the record of the 
divine dealings with Israel in all their desert-wanderings! 
How much we can learn from the marvelous history! We, 
too, have to be humbled and proved, and made to know 
what is in our hearts. It is very profitable and morally 
wholesome.” 

Verse 3 was quoted by our Lord, when Satan asked 
Him to turn stones into bread. His perfect obedience to 
God was again revealed, when our Lord defeated Satan 
by quoting this verse. 

He also gives them a glimpse of the Bod land. There 
would be abundance of water, no scarcity of food, wheat, 
barley, vines, fig trees, pomegranates, oil and honey. Then 
there were the hidden treasures in the mountains. These 
things speak typically of our blessings, the spiritual bless- 
ings, with which we are blessed in Christ Jesus, to which 
we are fully entitled, but which we can only enjoy if we 
walk in faith and obedience to His Word. Another solemn 
warning is given to them by their loving leader. The 
warning is against highmindedness and forgetting the Lord, 
who has done all these things. The warning was not heeded 
and what Moses testified against them overtook them in 
their national history. May we also remember here the 
warning God has given to Gentile Christendom, not to be 
highminded, but to fear (Romans x1:17-24), 


402 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


5. Warning Against Self-Righteousness. Their Previous 
Failures. 


CHAPTER IX-X:11. 


The Warning. 1-6. 

The Failures of the Past. 7-24. 

The Intercession of Moses. 25-29. 

The Results of the Intercession. X:1-11. \ 


Bat GD 


This chapter and the first eleven verses of the tenth is 
aimed against the spirit of self-righteousness. First there 
is the warning. . This is followed by their shameful history 
of the past, which showed that a boast of being righteous, 
or having any righteousness had to be positively excluded in 
their case. They had been rebels and they owed their 
existence wholly to the mercy of God and that was secured 
by the intercession of Moses. They were, therefore, to 
understand that the good land was not given to them for 
. their righteousness; they were a stiffnecked people. How 
humbling the recital of their failures, their rebellion and 
murmuring against Jehovah, must have been! And Moses 
added to it, whith must have cut them to the very heart. 
“Ye have been rebellious against the Lord from the day 
that I knew you” (verse 24). Mercy alone had saved 
them and had effected their restoration. How easy it 
is for our poor hearts, not different from theirs, to forget 
all we were and that we owe all we are to the Grace of God. 
Self-righteousness is an abomination in God’s sight. True 
faith and obedience means a true humility. 

The chronological order is not followed by Moses in 
the first part of the tenth chapter. That is known by 
the historical account. Verses 6 and 7 are a parenthesis. 
The beginning of verse 8 “At that time” does therefore not 
stand in connection with the death of Aaron, but it refers 
to the time when the broken covenant was restored. Higher 
critics have made much of this as a glaring contradiction. 
There is no such contradiction here and the apparent difti- 
culty is easily solved by understanding the parenthetical 


PROPERTY OF 
NORTHEASTERN BIBLE INSTITUTE CBRAR) 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY, NEW Jersey 


character of verses 6 and 7. But why should such an 
historical statement be here introduced by Moses by way 
of a parenthesis? The answer is not difficult to find. Moses 
describes the gracious results of the intercession. Not 
only was the covenant restored, but also the institution 
and maintenance of the priesthood. Moses reminds the 
people of this gracious gift on the part of their God, by 
recalling to their memory the time when Aaron died and 
his son Eleazar was invested with the high priesthood in 
his stead, 


6. Jehovah’s Love and His Requirements of His People. 
CHAPTER X:12-22. 


1. Jehovah’s Delight and Love. 12-16. 

2. Admonition to fear and serve Jehovah. 16-22. 

This section is especially precious. Jehovah speaks 
through Moses and reminds His people of Himself and His 
Love and what He requires of them. “Behold the heaven 
and the heaven of heavens is Jehovah’s thy God, the earth 
also, with all that therein is.” What a marvellous call to 
fear and serve such a Lord!. What He required. of them was 
a loving obedience, to fear Him, te walk in all His, ways, 
to love Him and to serve Him. They were to be followers 
of Jehovah their God. He is God of gods, Lord of lords, 
great, mighty, terrible. His goodness again is revealed 
by Moses as an incentive to love and to obey Him. He 
cares for the fatherless and loveth the stranger; for this 
reason they were to love the stranger. Yet far greater 
is our knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, who loveth us 
and hath washed us from our sins in His own blood and 
made us priests and Kings unto God His Father. And 
this carries with it a higher obligation to serve Him, to love 
Him and to walk in obedience, than Israel’s obligation. 

“Well then, let us ever bear in mind—yea, let us have it 
deep, deep down in our hearts, that according to our privi- 
leges are our obligations. Let us not refuse the wholesome 


404 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY 


word ‘obligation,’ as though it had a legal ring about it. 
Far from it! it would be utterly impossible to conceive any 
thing further removed from all thought of legality than the 
obligations which flow out of the Christian’s position. It 
is a very serious mistake to be continually maising the cry of 
‘Legal! legal!’ whenever the holy responsibilities of our 
position are pressed upon us.’’* 


7. Israel’s Responsibility. The Blessing and the Curse. 
CHAPTER XI. 


1. Therefore thou shalt love the Lord thy God. 1-9. 

2. If ye hearken unto my Commandments. 10-21 

8. The Blessing and the Curse. 22-32. 

The great characteristic teaching of this book, obedience 
springing from love to Jehovah, is still further developed 
in this chapter. It begins with a “therefore.” The last 
verse of the previous chapter shows that Jehovah had 
kept the promise made to the fathers of the nation. Then 
once more the mighty acts of Jehovah are reviewed. His 
miracles and acts done in Egypt; what He did at the Red 
Sea and what He did unto them in the wilderness—therefore 
thou shalt love the Lord thy God. They were also to love 
Him and keep His words in view of the land they were abouv 
to possess. What He had done and what He was going 
to do for them, called for the leve and obedience of His 
people. May we heed the same call. The result of obe- 
dience in loving and serving the Lord would be the first 
and the latter rain, fruitful fields and abundant harvests. 
Jehovah would also drive out the enemies and give them 
the land. Blessing and Curse are solemnly set before the 
people by their leader. Of the mount of blessing, Gerizim, 
and the mount of curse, Ebal, we shall hear more fully 
later (Chapter xxvii). 

*C. H. McIntosh. 

+The foolish theory that “latter rain” means a spiritual revival and is 


a special “outpouring of the Holy Spirit’ has no foundation at all in 
the Word of God. Such “‘spiritualizing”’ leads and has led into confusion. 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 405 


8. The Place of Worship. 


CHAPTER XIl. 


1. The overthrow of false Worship. 1-4. 

2. The true place of Worship. 5-14. 

3. Concerning Eating and the Blood. 15-28. 

4. Warning against the abominations of Idolatry. 29-32. 


The law, and love as the fulfilment of that law,was the main a 

subject of the words of Moses up to the close of the eleventh 

_chapter. The chapters which follow also contain exposi- 
tions of the different statutes, as well as exhortations to 
obedience and warnings against departure from Jehovah. 
How significant that worship occupies the prominent place! 
A false worship must be completely extirpated, for it would 
lead their hearts away from the one Jehovah. All images and 
pillars were to be destroyed. True worship is ever linked 
with obedience to and love for Jehovah. False worship is 
apostasy. 

The one place is mentioned repeatedly, the place, which 
Jehovah has appointed for worship (verses 5, 11, 14, 18, 21 
and 26). What disobedience if they left that one place 
and turned somewhere else to worship! ‘The subsequent 
history of God’s ancient people teaches the awful results of 
such a course. We have in the New Testament also command- 
ments to worship. Our worship is in Spirit and in truth. 
It is not connected with an earthly place, an earthly altar; but 
we worship in the power of the Spirit in Heaven itself, where 
our forerunner is. But Christendom has a false worship 
which apes after the ritualistic Jewish worship. In that 
worship we find also images, holy places, etc., and that is 
in the sight of God as great an abomination as the Canaanite 
worship, which Israel found in the promised land. 

We do not touch here again upon the eating of flesh, 
the sanctity of the blood, etc. All this we have had in 
Leviticus to which we refer the reader. Nor do we enter 
into the alleged contradictions, which the modern day 
infidels, in the Camp of Christendom, claim to exist here. 


406 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


It is but blindness (we fear often wilful blindness), which can 
bring such criticism and accusations against the Word of 


God. 


9. Warnings against false Prophets and their Punishment. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


1. The first case: The False Prophet and Dreamer. 1-5. 

2. Thesecond case: Temptation to Idolatry from Blood-Relations. 
6-11. 

3. The third case: The Apostasy of a City. 12-18. 


Three cases are mentioned. The false prophet or a 
dreamer of dreams, who confirms his claims by a sign or 
a miracle, yet whose aim is to seduce to idolatry, is to be 
put to death. False teaching, which leads from God, is 
an abomination. It results finally in the most awful moral _ 
corruption. A false prophet may do signs and wonders 
to prove thereby that what he teaches is truth. Signs 
and miracles are therefore no evidence of the truth. Spirit- 
ualism and Christian Science claim to be the truth and 
they often refer to the evidences of supernatural manifes- 
tation and miraculous healings which take place in their 
cults. Satan can work signs and miracles. He does so in 
these delusive systems of the last days and God permits it 
to prove thereby His people. In the light of Matthew 
xxiv :23-25, 2 Thessal. 11:8-12 and Rev. xiii:13-14 the first 
five verses of the chapter we study are of great interest. 
The false prophet to come, the personal and final Anti- 
christ will do lying wonders and the many who received 
not the love of the truth will be permitted to believe the 
lie. One does well to be on the guard whenever teachers 
claim some special power or signs. The second warning 
is against a more subtle snare, when the deception worketh 
secretly, emanating from a blood relation. If it is ,the 
dearest one, no pity is to be shown to him. The third case 
is that, when a whole city has departed from the Lord_and 
serves other gods and practices the abominations of idolatry. 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 407 


It was to be completely destroyed and the city burned with 
fire. Such will be some day the awful fate of apostate 
Christendom, having rejected God’s Son and the Gospel 


10. The Children of God: their Separation. 
CHAPTER XIV. 


1. The Declaration of Relationship. A Holy People. 1-2. 
%. Their Food as a Separated People. 3-21. 
3. Concerning Tithes. 


Ye are the children of the Lord your God. Because 
God had chosen them to be a peculiar people unto Himself, 
above all the other nations, they were to be an holy people. 
To them belongeth still “the adoption” (Rom. ix:4). God 
called Israel His firstborn son and that nation holds that 
place, in the divine purpose, among the nations. Sonship 
in the New Testament, bestowed upon the individual 
believer, who is possessed by the Spirit of Sonship (the 
Holy Spirit) and who is an heir of God and joint-heir with 
Christ, is infinitely higher, than Israel’s national and earthly 
calling. Therefore our responsibility is so much greater. 
The children of the Lord were not to participate in the 
sinful customs of the heathen, who have no hope. No 
disfigurement as mentioned in the first verse was permitted. 
The Lord whom they served is a Lord of life; they belonged 
wholly to Him; they were not their own. To sorrow like 
those who have no hope is also forbidden in the New Testa- 
ment (1 Thess. iv:13). Then follows once more the reminder 
concerning the clean and the unclean. See Leviticus xi.* 
The laws concerning the food Israel was to eat and to ab- 
stain from were given in Leviticus to Moses and Aaron; 
in Deuteronomy the whole congregation hears these instruc- 
tions. A number of animals are also mentioned in Deuter- 
onomy, which we do not find in Leviticus. Thus their 
separation is once more emphasized. They belonged to 


*See Leviticus and read annotations on Chapter XI in Study Pamph- 
let No. 5. 


408 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


a holy Lord and were to be an holy people. We have for 
our food the living Bread, which came down from heaven. 
And as we feed on Christ, abiding in Him, we become also 
like Him. It has been well said “for a Christian to partici- 
pate in the vanities and follies of a sinful world would be to 
use a typical phrase, like an Israelite eating that which 
had died by itself.” How sad the condition of the great 
majority of those who profess Christianity, who run after 
this present evil age and are conformed to it! 

The tithe mentioned in verses 22-29 is peculiar to Deuter- 
onomy and forms one of the supplementary laws. Israel 
and the land, they were to possess, belong to Jehovah. The 
tithe gave expression to the fact of the proprietorship of 
the Lord. And when they came before Jehovah to eat 
before Him in the spot where He had placed His Name, 
they owned in His presence all His goodness and mercies: 
and rejoiced in the Lord.* Verses 28 and 29 are more fully 
developed in Chapter xxvi:12-19. Annotations are given 

-there on the happy scene when, at the end of every 
third year, the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless“and the 
widow were to eat and be satisfied. 


> 


11. The Year of Release and Liberation of Hebrew Slaves. 


CHAPTER XV:1-18. 


1. The Year of Release. 1-11. 
2. The Liberation of the Hebrew Slaves. 12-18. 


The poor and those who have no possession were to be 
remembered in kindness and have a share in the blessings. 
Linked with this law are the laws not to force and oppress 


*There is a gathering place for His people in the New Testament. 
“‘Where two or three are gathered together in My Name there am I 
in the midst of them.” And when we remember His love at His table, 
we rejoice in Him and He rejoices in us. But the gathering of Israel 
in connection with the tithe also looks forward to the coming days 
when there will be a gathering place for Israel and the nations. See 
Isaiah ii:1-4; xi:10; Zech. xiv:16-17. 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 409 


the poor, the year of release and the liberation of the slaves. 
The great sabbatic year, the seventh, brought the release. 
See Exodus xxili:10 and Leviticus xxv:2-7. Here we have 
an enlarged exposition of the previously given law. 
The debtor was not to be pressed then for what he owed and 
nothing to be exacted from him. While the land rested all 
debts and obligations had also to rest. It does therefore 
not mean a complete remission of all debts forever. And 
linked with’ this merciful institution is the promise of bless- 
ing. Obedience to these gracious laws would bring to 
them great blessing. Especially interesting is verse 6. 
“For the Lord thy God blesseth thee, as He promised thee; 
and thou shalt lend unto many nations, but thou shalt not 
borrow; and thou shalt reign over many nations, but they 
shall not reign over thee.”? Even to-day in their blindness 
and dispersion this promise is being fulfilled. Who does 
not know that the Jews are the money lenders of the nations? 
Kings and princes have borrowed from this wonderful 
people. Some day when the time of their fulness and bless- 
ing comes, this promise will be fully accomplished and Israel 
will reign over the nations, be the head and no longer the tail. - 

The poor were also to be treated in great, kindness. What © 
grace and love breathes in verses 7-11! Twice we read 
“thou shalt open thine hand wide.” “Thou shalt open 
thine hand wide unto him, and shalt surely lend him suffi- 
- cient.”—‘‘For the poor shall never cease out of the land, 
therefore, I command thee, saying, Thou shalt open thine 
hand wide unto thy brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy, 
in thy land.” Throughout the Word of God the poor are 
mentioned to be remembered in kindness and some most 
blessed promises are given to those who obey these gracious 
words. See Proverbs xiv:21; xix:17; xxii:9; xxviii:8, 27; 
Psl. xli:1. Oppression of the poor is a sin, which God 
specially marks. See Isaiah iii:14, 15; x:2; Ezek. xvili:l1- _ 
13; Amos ii:6; iv:1; v:11; James ii:6. When the Lord comes 
He will remember the poor and deliver them. See Ps. 
Ixxii:2, 4, 12, 13; exiii:7; cxxxii:15; Isaiah xi:4. 


‘410 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


The teaching of some, who say that we are not under the 
law but under grace, and therefore do not need to pay any 
attention whatever to these gracious words, which Jehovah 
bound upon the hearts of Israel, is fatally wrong. “Under 
grace’ is often used to cover a selfish life. The grace, which 
has saved us, which pledges our eternal security in Christ, 
demands of us that we be followers of God. This is learned 
from the exhortations of the New Testament. “As we 
have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, 
especially unto them who are of the household of faith” 
(Gal. vi:10). “But to do good and communicate forget 
not; for which sacrifices God is well pleased” (Heb. xiii:16). 
“The Lord loveth a cheerful giver” because “He ‘giveth 
to all and upbraideth not.”—“It is more blessed to give 
than to receive.”* 

The liberation of the slave is also stated in Exodus xxi, 
to which we refer the reader. The Hebrew woman is 
mentioned here. In Exodus xxi only the male slave is 
spoken of. But why is it given here again? Is it a mere 
repetition? It is not. The Lord gives through Moses the 
mode in which this law is to be kept. His loving kindness 
shines out once more in the gracious addition made here. 
“And when thou sendest him out free, thou shalt not let him 
go away empty.” ‘This verse and verses 14-15 are not 
found in Exodus xxi. How blessedly He cared for the poor 
slaves. They were set free, laden down with the riches of 
the flock, the floor and the winepress. Other lessons con- 
nected with this we must leave untouched. 


*The charity among the Jews to the poor and afflicted is well known 
and often puts true believers to shame. On the other hand nowhere 
is the oppression of the poor so marked as among the Jews. 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 411 


12. The Firstlings and the Three Feasts. 
CHAPTER XV:19-XVI:17 


Concerning the Firstlings. xv:19-23. 
Passover. xvi:1-8. 

Feast of Weeks. 9-12. 

Feast of Tabernacles. 13-17. 


GS 


What is said in the closing verses of chapter xv is supple- 
mentary to the law given concerning the first-born in Exodus 
xili:2, 12 and Numbers xviii. They were not to be worked 
or sheared. “Before the Lord thy God shalt thou eat 
it, year after year, in the place which the Lord shall choose, 
thou and thy household.” Nothing which had a blemish, 
was lame or blind could be sacrificed. The spotless Lamb 
of God is here in view once more and the type is given 
how we are to feed on Him in the presence of God, in the 
sanctuary. 

The feasts were mentioned in Exodus xii; Levit. xxiii; 
Numb. xxviii-xxix. Here only the Passover, the Feast 
of Weeks and the feast of Tabernacles are given. The 
critics claim that there is contradiction between this chapter 
and the laws concerning the feasts in the previous books 
of the Pentateuch. Such contradiction, however, does 
not exist. That only these three feasts are mentioned here 
is in full harmony with the character and message of 
Deuteronomy. 

Obedience, as we have repeatedly learned from the study 
of past chapters, is the demand of Jehovah from His 


people. The three _prominent..feasts were absolutely’ 


obligatory. Three times in a year all the males were com- 
manded to appear before the Lord to keep these three 
feasts....No such demand was made in keeping the feast 
of trumpets and the day of atonement. Because these 
three feasts were to be obeyed, they are mentioned in Deu- 
teronomy. The objections of the critics spring (as all 
other objections and criticisms) from the lack of spiritual 
discernment. The contradiction they see is only another 


412) THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


evidence of the perfection of His Word. ‘The place, which 
Jehovah thy God will choose” occurs six times in this chap- 
ter. ‘This was not mentioned in Exodus, Leviticus or Num- 
bers. This again is characteristic of the book. Over 
twenty-five times mention is made of the place which 
Jehovah will choose, the gathering place of His people 
in His presence, and this demands obedience. What these 
feasts mean typically and dispensationally may be learned 
by consulting the annotations of Leviticus xxiii. The fact 
is also to be remembered that they came out of Egypt 
(verses 3 and 12). They are commanded to rejoice on the 
feast of Weeks (Pentecost) and on the feast of Tabernacles 
(typical of the time of joy and blessing in the coming age); 
but the statement “thou shalt rejoice” is omitted in con- 
nection with Passover. Redemption is typified in that 
feast. This calls forth gratitude and praise to God. The 
solemnity of the death of the Lamb of God and the judg- 
ment our Lord had to pass through, must be the reason 
why the command to rejoice is absent. . 


13. Justice and the Choice of a King. 
CHAPTER XVI:18-XVII:20. 


1. Appointment of Judges and their Instructions. xvi:18—xvii:7. 
g. The Higher Court at the Place He Chooses. 8-13. 
8. The Choice and Right of the King. 14-20. 


This chapter leads us upon new ground. The obliga- 
tions of the religious life of Israel were stated in the first part 
of chapter xvi and now the government of the people in 
the land is commanded. “Just as in its religious worship the 
Jsraelitish nation was to show itself to be the holy nation 
of Jehovah, so was it in its political relations also. This 
thought forms the link between the laws already given 
and those which follow. Civil order, that indispensable 
condition of the stability and prosperity of nations and 
states, rests upon a conscientious maintainence of right, by 


. THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 413 


means of a well-ordered. judicial constitution and an im- 
partial administration of justice.* Judges and _ officials 
were to be appointed and a higher judicial court for more 
difficult cases to be established, the latter at the place of the 
sanctuary. Idolatry is prominently mentioned again 
_ because it is the most serious matter, both individually 
and nationally, to forsake the one Jehovah. Apostasy 
from Jehovah and His covenant is wickedness. Chapter 
Xvi:21-22 also has reference to idolatry. The idolatrous 
altars and images were set up under, or, beside green trees. 
See 1 Kings xiv:23; 2 Kings xvii:10; Jerem. xvii:2. Then 
there is provision made for the choice of a king. The 
Lord foresaw Samuel’s time, when the people would reject 
Him as their King and desire to be like other nations; and 
foreseeing their failure He made provision for this emergency. 

“And yet the wisdom and grace of God are only the more, 
not the less, conspicuous in this provision. True, of Saul 
it was said, “I gave thee a king in Mine anger, and took 
him away in My wrath” (Hos. xiii:11). But this only 
brings out God’s real choice—David, “‘the beloved,” type 
of One who is indeed that, and in whom a King is found 
who reigns forever. He is the One of whom the king that 
Deuteronomy announces is the shadow. Brought forth 
when priesthood has failed in Eli, and prophet in Samuel, 
the true king is God’s resource for Israel and the earth. 
For neither priesthood nor prophecy alone will set right the 
earth, or bring in the time when it shall be filled with the 
glory of the Lord. He must come to whom the throne 
belongs, and who shall bring back judgment to righteous- 
ness; He in whom Prophet, Priest, and King are one,— 
a threefold cord that never shall be broken.” 

A comparison of verse 16 and 17 with 1 Kings ix-xi is 
most interesting. What failure man is in himself! And 
Solomon was the wisest and most influential of all the 
Kings. This fact that Solomon did the very opposite 


*¥. Delitzsch. 
TNumerical Bible. 


414 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


from what the King should do has led the critics to say that 
this passage was written after Solomon. As if God did 
not know all this beforehand! But there is not allusion 
to Solomon’s Kingdom at all in the words Moses spoke. 


14. The Rights of the Priests and the Levites; the True 
and the False Prophet. 


CHAPTER XVIII 


1. The Rights of the Priests and Levites. 1-8. 
%. Forbidden Things. 9-14. 
3. The True and the False Prophet. 15-22. 


The Priests, the Levites, were the servants of Jehovah 
and had no inheritance with Israel, but Jehovah Himself 
was their.inheritance. How the people were to minister 
unto them is now commanded by Moses. They were both 
dependent on the Lord and closely identified with Him. 
And this is true of us, who are in Christ constituted Priests 
and called to the Levite service. i 

Of great interest are verses 9-14. The nations, who pos- 
sessed the land practised evil things, through which Satan 
manifested his awful power to lead astray and to corrupt. 
His people were to beware of these things. We, too, are 
warned not to intrude into those things which we have 
not seen (Col. ii:18). Moses puts together the words 
which the language contained for the different modes of 
finding out the future and discovering the will of God, ~ 
Passing a son or daughter through the fire, the awful Moloch 
service, is forbidden once more (Levit. xvili:21). Then 
follow all the abominable things. There are seven of them 
mentioned, which come under the term “divination.” 
1. Observer of times, predicting good or bad things by 
observation of the heavens and circumstances. 2. En- 
chanter. The Hebrew word is “menachesh” connected 
with “‘nachash” the Hebrew word for serpent. It means 
one who murmurs enchantments. 3. Witch. 4. Charmer. 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 415 


5. A consulter with familiar spirits. 6. A wizard, who has 
access to an unlawful wisdom. 7. The necromancer, who 
asks the dead. These abominations existed then and they 
exist to-day. Clairvoyancy, palmistry, astrology, sooth- 
saying, fortune-telling, spiritualistic seances, theosophy, 
the formulas and treatments of “Christian Science” are a 
few of the modern names of this ancient demonism. It 
is awful to see their growth as the end draws near. What 
is claimed to be “psychical research,” studying “occult phe- 
nomena,” is nothing less than stepping upon the same terri- 
tory of evil. And Satan uses these wicked things, his 
familiar spirits, and asking the dead to prepare the way for 
the great delusion of the end, with its signs and lying wonders. 
Spiritualism with its demon-possessed mediums, psychical 
research, "Theosophy, Christian Science, are Satan-cults. 
They are an abomination to Jehovah and His righteous 
judgment will soon fall upon them. We add here the solemn 
warning of another. 

“I take this opportunity of solemnly warning every soul 
—more particularly the young—from levity in hankering 
after that which they do not understand, and very especially 
in the way of giving up their will to any one but the Lord 
Jesus. This is the essential point of danger. I do not*~ 
raise the smallest doubt that there are powers in the natural 
world which lie quite beyond the explanation of men. It 
is not my wish therefore to excite a kind of hue and cry 
against that which may not be yet explained. Let us 
avoid the presumption of supposing that we can account 
for everything. But in our ignorance (which the wisest 
most feel and own) this wisdom at least ought to belong 
to the least of God’s children, that they know in whom they 
believe, that they have His word and His Spirit, and can 
count 9n infinite love and power as well as wisdom on their 
beta They can well afford therefore to leave what is 
beyond™themselves or any others in the hands of God their 
Father. They with sorrow see others rush in who have 
nothing higher, who have no God to count on or look to. 


416 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


But above all beware. Whenever any one asks you 
te give up your mind or will to another—were it but for 
a moment—there is the evident hand of the devil in it. 
This is no question of physical powers, or of what is natur- 
ally inexplicable. What is behind giving up yourself, 
your will, to any one but God, is plain enough in its character 
and consequences; it is too easy to understand it. The 
divine axiom is that the Lord and He alone has a right to you. 
Consequently such a demand proves that Satan is taking 
advantage,it may be of what is natural,but certainly of you.””* 

The Prophet promised in verse 15 is the Lord Jesus 
Christ. Acts iii:22-23 refers us to this prophecy. Acts 
vii:37 also confirms the fulfilment of Moses’ prediction 
in the person of Christ. 


15. Laws for Israel in the Land. 
CHAPTER XIX. 


1. Concerning the Cities of Refuge. 1-13. 

%. Removing a Landmark. 14. 

8. The Punishment of a false Witness. 15-21. 

Here again we have not a repetition of the previous 
law concerning the cities of refuge (Numb. xxxv:9-34), 
kut an earnest. admonition to.be-obedient to those laws. 
The three cities on the East of Jordan were named in Chap- 
ter_iv. Here the other three in the midst of the land are 
in view. They were to be in a place of easy access with a 
prepared way leading to them. Grace and judgment are 
illustrated in the case of the slayer, who killed his neigh- 
bor ignorantly and he who killed his neighbor purposely. 
When the slayer reached the city he found a shelter there 
and lived, for he had done it ignorantly. Grace gave him 
shelter and he knew he was safe. For the wilful murderer 
there was no mercy, but judgment. ‘Thine eyes shall not 


pity him.” Obedience was demanded in all these utterances 
of Moses, 


*W. Kelly. 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY 417 


16. Concerning Future Wars. 
CHAPTER XX. 


1. Words of Encouragement. 1-4. 
2. The fearful and faint-hearted. 5-9 
3. Concerning Sieges. 10-20. 


In the appointed warfare there was no need to fear the 
enemies. The priest was commissioned to speak words 
of encouragement not to fear, nor to tremble, nor to be 
terrified by the horses and chariots. The divine assurance 
was threefold: Jehovah goeth with you, to fight for you, 
to save you. This presupposes their obedience. If they 
were obedient, they had nothing to fear. Victory was on 
their side. And we too need to fear nothing in our warfare 
with the wicked spirits (Ephes. vi.). The Lord is on our 
side and if we resist the devil he will flee from us. 

But if Israel was disobedient and departed from the Lord, 
He fought against them and their enemies overcame them. | 
See also Zech. xiv:3 about the time when Jehovah will 
overcome the nations who gather against Jerusalem at the 
close of the age. The faint-hearted and the fearful as well 
as those who might hanker after their possessions and become 
homesick were not to go into the battlefield. They were 
unfit for warfare, because they did not wholly trust in 
Jehovah. There was.a most merciful arrangement, which 
consisted in an offer of peace to a besieged city. (The cities 
of the Canaanitish nations are not included.) Peace was the 
first thing proclaimed. If the offer was accepted the lives 
of the inhabitants were saved. If not and the people resisted 
the proclamation of peace and therefore showed the wicked- 
ness of their hearts, resisting God, the city was besieged. 
All the males were to be smitten with the sword, but the 
women and little ones were saved. It was different with 
the wicked inhabitants of the land. ‘Their utter destruction 
was demanded. The reason for this is again stated in 
verse 18. The fruit-trees during a siege were not to be 
cut down, for they sustained. life. 


418 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


17. The Expiation of an uncertain Murder; various In- 


structions. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


The Expiation of an unknown Murder. 1-9. 

Concerning a wife, who had been a Prisoner of War. 10-14. 
The Right of the Firstborn. 15-17. 

The Punishment of a Rebellious Son. 18-21. 

The Burial of One who hanged on a Tree. 22-23. 


SANG Se) te) ee 


The expiation of an unknown murder seems to find an 
interesting application in the case of the nation itself. 
Bloodguiltiness is upon them for they cried “His blood be 
upon us and upon our children.” And the nation has 
sufféred-as-the résult of it. But there is a full expiation 
coming through Him who prayed for them on the cross, 
“Father, forgive them for they know not what they do.” 
He died for them as the heifer (the type of Christ) died in the 
rough valley (the type of His deep humiliation) for the 
unknown murder. Then the prayer in verse 8 willbe 
graciously answered, when Israel turns to the Lord in the 
day of His manifestation. “Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy 
people Israel, whom thou hast redeemed, and lay not inno- 
cent blood unto thy people of Israel’s charge. And the 
blood shall be forgiven them.” 

The woman captive desired by an Israelite for wife 
could not be one of the Canaanitish races for they were to be 
all slain; but other Gentiles are meant. She was to be 
mercifully protected. Polygamy is taken in consideration 
in verses 15-17 and a law is given in view of it to guard 
- against an abuse in favormof-a-~béloved wife. The son of 
the hated wife, if he is the firstborn, cannot be defrauded 
of his birthright; he must receive the double portion. If 
we look deeper we shall find here too the dispensational 
lesson concerning Israel’s relation to Jehovah. Israel 
has been the unfaithful wife, but she will be reinstated in 
due time and receive the blessing promised unto her. 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 419 


The stubborn and rebellious son, who is to be stoned 
to death, is but another type of the finally disobedient in 
Israel. While in the future the penitent and _ believing 
remnant of Israel will be reinstated in Jehovah’s favor and 
inherit the glorious things promised to them, the apostate 
part of that nation, going on in self-will and rebellion, will 
be cut off in judgment. The prophetic Word predicts 
such a stubborn and rebellious condition among the great 
mass of that people before the Lord comes. But the same 
judgment also falls upon the rebellious, disobedient among the 
Gentiles, those who profess to be children of God, but their 
disobedience shows that they are not. 

The close of this remarkable chapter plainly refers 
to our blessed Lord and His work on the Cross. Galatians 
tii:13 quotes verse 23 and applies it to the Lord Jesus. 


18. Against Inhumanity and different Violations; False 
Testimony and Sins of Adultery. 


CHAPTER XXII. 


1. Laws against Inhumanity. 1-12. 
g. Concerning False Testimony. 13-21. 
8. Sins of Adultery. 22-30. 


Laws on the second table are now more fully expounded by 
Moses. The love to the neighbor is to be expressed by guard- 
ing and preserving that which is his property. The strayed 
and fallen animal belonging to another had to be helped. To 
leave them in that condition would have been a violation 
of the law “love thy neighbor as thyself” as well as an act 
of inhumanity. Another interesting law is the one which 
forbids woman to wear man’s garments (verse 5). “The 
immediate design of this prohibition was not to prevent 
licentiousness, or to oppose idolatrous practices; but to 
maintain the sanctity of that distinction of the sexes, which 
was established by the creation of man and woman, and in 
relation to which Israel was not to sin. Every violation 


420 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


or wiping out of this distinction—such even as the emanci- 
pation of women—was unnatural, and therefore “an abomi- 
nation in the sight of God.” Yet to-day we find a universal 
movement in the world for the complete emancipation oF 
women, which ignores and even defies the place which the 
Creator and the Redeemer has given to woman. 

The law concerning the bird’s nest manifests the Creator’s 
care and His people are to recognize it. The keeping ot 
this law has the same promise as the commandment relating 
to obedience to parents. Diverse seeds were forbidden. 
Spiritually we find a lesson here. There are two Seeds, 
the good and the bad. The good seed stands for the truth. 
It must not be mixed with error. The truth must be kept 
unmixed. The opposite is done to-day as never before in 
the history of Christendom. They weré not to plow with 
an ass and an ox together. They were not to wear a mixed 
garment. And we are exhorted not to be unequally yoked 
with unbélievers, but be separated in our habits, in life and 
walk, unto the Lord. The concluding part of the chapter 
reveals the heart of man in its deceitfulness and corruption 


19. The Congregation of Jehovah; Its Constitution and 
Holiness. 


CHAPTER XXII. 


The Constitution of the Congregation of Jehovah. 1-8. 
The Cleanness of the Camp in time of War. 9-14. 
Concerning the escaped Slave and the Harlot. 15-18. 
Usury Forbidden. 19-20. 

Concerning Vows. 21-23. 

The Neighbor’s Vineyard and Field. 24-25. 


Gd Sab bes Se 


The Congregation of Israel is called in this chapter “the 
Congregation of Jehovah.” And because it was the Con- 
gregation of Jehovah, all that is unclean and which defiles 
had to be kept out of it. The same principle applies to™ 
the New Testament assembly, which is called the Church 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 42) 


of God. Only those who are born again and _ therefore 
clean have a right to belong to the church.* 

Cleanness and purity had to be preserved in Israel’s 
camp. They were constantly to remember “Jehovah thy 
God walketh in the midst of thy camp . . . therefore shall 
thy camp be holy; that He see no unclean thing in thee, 
and turn not away from ‘thee.” All uncleanness and un- 
cleanliness of the body was considered for this reason an 
evil thing. The Lord gave even such instructions as these, 
because He wanted His people to be clean and separated 
unto Himself. And how it behooves us to take heed to all 
these things. Jehovah is not alone with us, in the midst 
of His people, but God the Holy Spirit has made our bodies 
His temples. “What! Know ye not that your body is 
a temple of the Holy Spirit, who is in you, whom ye have 
from God, and ye are not your own? For ye were bought 
with a price, therefore glorify God in your body” (1 Cor. 
vi:19—20). 


*The following interesting typical meaning of verses 1-8 is taken 
from the Numerical Bible: 

“First, then, we have the assembly in its refusal of all discordant 
elements; and here the exclusion of the unsexed male is based on the 
need of maintaining the integrity of the creature. Mutilation was a 
reproach to God; and thus the whole spirit of asceticism is condemned 
and excluded both for Israel and for us to-day. The word for “bastard,” 
—one born of corruption’’—only occurs once beside in Zech. ix:6, is 
explained by the Rabbins, and received by commentators in general 
as meaning “one born of incest or adultery.” Typically, one corruptly 
born is not the mere child of nature; but rather one corruptly introduced 
among the people of God. “Baptismal regeneration,” as the ritualist 
holds it, is such a birth; and the Moabite and the Ammonite following 
here emphasizes this thought, though it be true that they are not 
distinctly reprobated for their birth, but for their enmity to the trae 
people of God, and their employment of Balaam to curse. But even 
thus does the false professor, like an Ammonite or a Moabite, show 
his birth to-day. The Edomite is the simple natural man, and for 
him there is more hope, and the Egyptian is classed with him, though 
only in the third generation (dead and risen with Christ) could they 
enter the congregation of the Lord.” 


a 


422 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


And how beautiful it is that the poor, escaped slave 

found in the congregation of Jehovah a refuge! He was not 
to be oppressed. But the Israelites, who practised the 
abominable things of the flesh under a religious garb (verse 
17) were an abomination unto the Lord. 
- Verses 24 and 25 prove that Jehovah is the owner of | 
the land and He invited the hungry one to satisfy his hunger, 
to be His guest, so to speak. But the right of the tenant 
of the land was also respected. See on plucking the ears 
of corn (Matthew xii:1; Luke vi:1). 


20. Concerning Divorce. Laws of Mercy. 
CHAPTER XXIV. 


1. Concerning Divorce. 1-5. 

2. Concerning Pledge and Slavery. 6-7. 

8. Concerning Leprosy. 8-9. 

4. Concerning the Oppression of the Poor. 10-16. 

5. Concerning Injustice. 16-18. 

6. The Stranger, the Fatherless and the Widow remembered. 
19-22. : 


Matthew xix:1-9 must be studied with the words of 
Moses on divorce. The Pharisees asked the Lord “why 
then did Moses then command to give a writing of divorce- 
ment, and to put her away?” But they erred when they 
called Moses’ word a commandment. It was only some- 
thing which Moses allowed. Adultery according to the 
law was punishable with death. “He saith unto them, 
“Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts, suffered 
you to put away your wives; but from the beginning it 
was not so. And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put 
away his wife except it be for fornication, and shall marry 
another, committeth adultery; and whosoever marrieth 
her that is put away doth commit adultery.” 

No part of the handmill, the millstone, was to be taken 
as a pledge; for that would have deprived the person of 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 423 


the necessary instrument in the preparation of food. Man- 
stealing was forbidden under penalty of death (Ex. xxi:16). 

Merciful are the laws found in verses 10-15. If these 
laws were obeyed how many questions would be solved 
and how much injustice would be abolished. See also 
James v:4. Mercy was to be shown. to.the.poor in remem-_ 
. brance of their former condition in Egypt. 


21. Various Laws and Responsibilities. 
CHAPTER XXV. 


Corporal Punishment. 1-3. 

‘Thou shalt not muzzle the Ox. 4. 

The Brother-in-law’s Marriage. 5-10. 

Concerning a Sinful Freedom. 11-12. 

Concerning divers Weights and Measures. 13-16. 
Concerning the Conquest of Amalek. 17-19. 


SSN Le Co 


Corporal Punishment is mentioned in the first para- 
graph of this chapter. But this also was tempered with 
mercy. Not more than forty stripes were to be administered 
in the presence of the judge. The rabbinical instructions 
put the limit at thirty-nine—“forty save one.” Five times 
our blessed Apostle Paul was punished in this manner, 
for we read, “Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes, 
save one” (2 Cor. xi:24). 

In comparison with the cruel beatings and tortures so 
universally found among the Gentile races the law con- 
cerning corporal punishment appears very merciful. The 
chastisement was not to be severer than it could be endured. - 
It speaks typically also of the chastisement His people 
have to undergo. 

The ox was not to be muzzled when he treadeth out the 
corn. -: 

“Who goeth a warfare any time at his own charges? who 
planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof? 
or who feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the 
flock? Say I these things as a man? or saith not the law 


'24 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


the same also? For it is written in the law of Moses, Thou 
shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the 
corn. Doth God take care for oxen? Or saith he 7% alto- 
gether for our sakes? For our sakes, no doubt, this is 
written: that he that ploweth should plow in hope; and 
that he that thresheth in hope should be partaker of his 
hope” (1 Cor. ix:7-10). 

“For the Scripture saith, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox 
that treadeth out the corn. And, the laborer is worthy 
of his reward” (1 Tim. v:18). These are most blessed 
comments on this verse, which otherwise would be rather 
obscure. The toiling ox is the type of the servant and 
his ministry. And this has its rewards. 

- The commandment given by Moses, that a surviving 
brother is to marry his brother’s widow is seen in its work- 
ing in the story of Ruth and the Kinsman—Redeemer. 
The law itself was founded upon an old traditional custom, 
which we find already in Genesis xxxvili:8-1l. Moses 
here recognized this custom and adds to it a ceremony in 
case a man refused to marry his brother’s widow, which 
shows that the custom was not to be considered compulsory.* 

And Amalek was to be remembered, Amalek, who feared 
not God. When Israel had rest in the land and all the 
other enemies were conquered, then the remembrance o: 
Amalek was to be completely blotted out. As we saw from 
-our annotations in Exodus Amalek typifies the flesh, while 
Egypt is the type of the world. The complete perishing of 
Amalek is seen in Balaam’s parables. When the sceptre rises 
out of Israel (the second coming of Christ), when He comes 
that shall have dominion, then Amalek shall perish for- 


*“The taking off of the shoe was an ancient custom also, adopted, 
according to Ruth iv:7, in cases of redemption and exchange, for the 
purpose of confirming commercial transactions. The usage arose 
from the fact, that when any one took possession of landed property, 
he did so by treading upon the soil, and asserting his right of possession 
by standing upon it in his shoes. In this way the taking off of the shoe 
and handing it to another became a symbol of the renunciation of a 
man’s position and property.” 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 425 


ever (Numb. xxiv:20). When we are indeed in the land 
and possess our inheritance, when all our enemies are gone, 
then the remembrance of Amalek, the old flesh, will be 
blotted out forever. 


~ 22. Firstfruits and Prayer. / 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


1. The Basket of First-fruits. Confession and Rejoicing. 1-11. 
2. Obedience yielded and Prayer. 12-15. 
3. Jehovah acknowledges His People. 16-19. 


The possession of the land is anticipated and a most 
beautiful ceremony is appointed for confession and worship 
in the place the Lord chose to place His Name there. The 
first of all the fruit of the land was to be gathered and put 
in a basket. This basket was presented unto the priest 
with the following words: “I profess this day unto the 
Lord thy God, that I am come unto the country which the 
Lord sware unto our fathers for to give us.” The priest 
then set it down before the altar. It was an acknowledg- 
ment of His Grace and His faithfulness in keeping His 
promise and bringing them into the land. The Lord had 
brought them in and the basket of fruits witnessed to the 
fact that they possessed the good things promised unto 
them. They could truly say, the Lord kept His Word, 
He promised us this land and now we are in it; it is‘ours. 
And we know, as saved by Grace and in Christ, that we 
are blessed with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies. 
We too are brought in and have the right of access into 
His presence. And this blessed consciousness that we are 
redeemed and belong to Christ is essential to true worship 
in Spirit and in truth. y 

Most beautiful is the confession Moses gave to Israel, 
to be used when the basket of firstfruits was set before 
Jehovah. “A Syrian ready to perish was my father.” 
Lovely words! They brought to remembrance what they 


426 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


were and the grace which Jehovah manifested, when that 
Syrian ready to perish was called out. And this is but a’ ; 
picture of what we are by nature, “ready to perish.” Then 
comes the story of Egypt and their deliverance out of the 
house of bondage. Even so we are delivered. They were 
to rejoice in every good thing the Lord had given unto 
them; and we rejoice in the Lord and all His goodness to us. 
And this joy was practically expressed in giving to the 
Levite, the stranger, the fatherless, the widow; they ate 
and were filled. Thus they could tell Jehovah, “I have not 
transgressed thy commandments, neither have I forgotten 
them.”’ While we rejoice in the Lord, know that we are 
saved and worship in the Spirit, may we also remember 
that it is written, “But to do good and to communicate 
forget not; for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.” 
How often we forget this! Yet it must ever be an outflow 
from true worship. 


23. The Memorial of the Law at Mount Ebal; Gerizim 
and Ebal. 


CHAPTER XXVII 


1. The Memorial to be set up in the Land. 1-8. 
%. Gerizim and Ebal. 9-26. 


Little comment is needed on this chapter. The memorial 
stones were to be set up on Mount Ebal. Upon that moun- 
tain the curses of the law were to be uttered. The blessings 
were to be pronounced upon Mount Gerizim. However, 
on Gerizim were no stones with the law written upon it. How 
strikingly this illustrates the true ministration of the law! 
It cannot give blessing, but it must curse man. “For as 
many as are of the works of the law are under the curse; 
for it is written, Cursed is every one that continueth not 
in all things which are written in the book of the law to 
do them” (Gal. iii:10). Then the tribes are divided to stand 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


upon Gerizim to bless and upon Ebal to curse. But where 
are there words of blessing in connection with Gerizim? 
Not one. The law cannot give blessing. But the word 
“cursed” we find twelve times in this chapter. What a 
confirmation that the law holds out no blessing for man, 
but can do nothing but curse. But, blessed be God! upon. 
Mount Ebal there stood not alone the great stones wi 
plaster, with the words of the law upon them, but there was 
also an altar unto Jehovah, for burnt-offerings and for 
peace-offerings, for rejoicing before the Lord. And _ this _ 
speaks of Christ, who has redeemed us from the curse of 
_the law. 


24. The Blessing and the Curse. 
CHAPTER XXVIII. 


1. The Blessing Promised. 1-14. 

g. The Curse announced. 15-68. 

This is one of the most solemn chapters in the Penta- 

teuch. Orthodox Hebrews read in their synagogues each 
year through the entire five books of Moses. When they 
read this chapter, the Rabbi reads in a subdued voice. 
And well may they read it softly and ponder over it, for 
here is prewritten the sad and sorrowful history of that 
wonderful nation. Here thousands of years ago the Spirit 
of God through Moses outlined the history of the scattered 
nation, all their suffering and tribulations, as it has been 
for well nigh two millenniums and as it is still. Here are 
arguments for the divine, the supernatural origin of this 
book which no infidel has ever been able to answer; nor 
will there ever be found an answer. 
' It would take a great many pages to follow the different 
predictions and show their literal fulfilment in the nation, 
which turned away from Jehovah and disobeyed His Word. 
What a warning this chapter is to Gentile Christendom! 
“If God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest 
He also spare not thee” (Rom. xi:21). 


4 {— S 


425 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


Apart from such general predictions as found in verse 
64-66 and fulfilled, as everybody knows, in the dispersion 
of Israel, there are others, which are more minute. The 
Roman. power, which was used to break the Jews, is clearly 
predicted by Moses, and that in a time when no such power 
existed. Read verse 49-50. “The Lord shall bring a 
nation against thee from far, from the end of the earth, as 
swift as the eagle flieth, a nation, whose language thou 
shalt not understand.” The eagle was the standard of the 
Roman armies; the Jews understood many oriental lan- 
guages, but were ignorant of Latin. ‘Which shall not 
regard the person of the old, nor show favor to the young.” 
Rome killed the old people and the children. “And he 
shall besiege thee in all thy gates, until thy high and fenced 
walls come down, wherein thou trustedst, throughout all 
thy land” (verse 52). Fulfilled’ in the siege and overthrow 
of Jerusalem by the Roman legions. ‘The tender .and 
delicate woman among you, which would not adventure 
to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness 
and tenderness, shall eat their children,, for want of all 
. things in-the siege and straitness wherewith thine enemy 
shall distress thee in thy gates” (54-57). Fulfilled in the 
dreadful sieges of Jerusalem, perhaps the most terrible 
events in the history of blood and tears of this poor earth. 
Every verse beginning with the fifteenth to the end of this 
chapter has found its oft repeated fulfilment. It does not 
surprise us that the enemy hates this book, which bears) 
such. a testimony, and would have it classed with legends. 
25. The Repetition of the Covenant and the Repetition of 

the Curse. | 
CHAPTER XXIX. 

1. The Repetition of the Covenant. 1-15. 
%. The Repetition of the Curse. 16-29. 


The words of the covenant are once more brought to their 
remembrance. Once more all the goodness of the Lord 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 429 


towards them is unfolded by Moses, how the Lord had 
dealt with Egypt and how their eyes had seen the signs and 
great miracles.* Again the forty years are mentioned, 
during which their clothes and their shoes did not get old. 
God took care of them and provided for their needs in the 
wilderness. Bread from heaven was their portion and 
therefore they had no need of stimulants, such as wine and 
strong drink (verse 6). But in the midst of these words, 
calling to remembrance the goodness and faithfulness of | 
the Lord, we find:a solemn statement : “Yet the Lord hath 
not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears 
to hear, unto this day” (verse 4). In all the manifesta- 
tions they had remained without understanding and their 
heart was not touched and broken down. Therefore tnese 
gracious dealings are here repeated, that they might receive 
understanding and love and obey the Lord with all their 
heart. But they were a stiffnecked people; their heart of 
stone. How fully Israel’s history illustrates the words of our 
Lord, “‘that which is born of the flesh is flesh!’ Later, when 
Israel went deeper and deeper into apostasy, Isaiah received 
the message, “Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see 
ye indeed and perceive not. Make the heart of this people 
fat and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest 
they see with their eyes and hear with their ears and under- 
stand with their heart, and convert and be healed”’ (Is. vi 4 
9-10). Judicial blindness came upon them when they 
rejected the Lord of Glory (Matt. xii:14-15; John xii:40; 
Acts xxviii:26-27). See also Stephen’s testimony given 
in the power of the Holy Spirit (Acts vii:51-52). Buta day . 
is coming when there will be for that nation a New Testa- 
ment (Jer. xxxi:31-34; Heb. viii:7-11). Then Ezekiel 
XXXvi:24-31 will be fulfilled. A careful reading of these 
passages will be helpful. 

Here the Lord reminded them of what He had done for 
them to show them the claim He has on their obedience. 


*Verses 5 and 6 are the direct words of Jehovah, ending with the 
declaration, “I am the Lord, your God.” 


430 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


“Keep therefore the words of this covenant, and do them, 
that ye may prosper in all ye do” 
’ After an earnest appeal to enter into the covenant, in- 
cluding the little ones, the stranger, the hewer of the wood - 
and the water-carrier (Josh. ix:21, 27), we find the curse 
mentioned once more as the result of departure from the 
____ Lord. Especially interesting are verses 22-24. Such evil 
is to come upon them and upon the land, that “the stranger 
that shall come from a far land, shall say, when they see 
the plagues of that land, and the sickness which the Lord 
has laid upon it . . . even all nations shall say, Wherefore 
hath the Lord done thus unto this land? What meaneth 
the heat of this great anger?” Strangers from far lands, 
tourists and pilgrims, have visited Palestine in fulfilment 
of this prediction and in view of the deplorable condition 
of that land have often asked these questions and known 
their answer. ‘Then men.shall say, Because they have for- 
saken the covenant of the Lord God of their fathers, which 
He made with them, when He brought them forth out of 
the land of Egypt.” 


' 26, The Dispersion and the Return. The Final Appeal. 
CHAPTER XXX. 


1, The Message of Hope. 1-10. 
%. The Final Appeal. 11-20. 


These things, which Moses spoke into the ears of the 
people were to come to pass. And they have been fulfilled. 
The people Israel are scattered among all the nations, and 
yet they have not been assimilated by the nations. They 
are kept as a separate people. Connected with the pre- 
diction of their dispersion is the message of Hope, the 
prophecy relating to their return. The Lord promises, that 
if they return unto Him and obey His voice, that He will 
return unto them. “Then the Lord thy God will turn thy 
captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and will return 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 434 


and gather thee from all the nations, whither the Lord thy 
God hath scattered thee’ (verse 3). That will come to 
pass when this present age closes. Then when the greatest 
trouble, the time of Jacob’s trouble is upon them (Matt. 
xxiv.) they will return. The Lord Himself will return, as 
announced in the above verse, and gather them from all 
the nations. He will bring them back into their land; 
they will possess it once more. Spiritual blessings will also 
come upon them and upon their children. Earthly bless- 
ings will be multiplied unto them and the Lord will rejoice 
over them, because they are a converted, an obedient people. 
God’s gifts and calling, which are.without repentance, 
will then be fully accomplished in that nation. “Behold 
I will gather them out of all countries, whither I have 
driven them in mine anger, and in my fury, and in great 
wrath; and I will bring them again unto this place, and I 
will cause them to dwell safely. And they shall be my 
people and I will be their God” (Jerem. xxxii:37-38). “For 
I will take you from among the nations, and gather you 
out of all countries, and will bring you into your own land” 
(Ezek. xxxvi:24). Many more passages might be added 
from other portions of the prophetic Word. Moses, the 
Prophet speaks of that, which all the other prophets after 
him have restated, confirmed and enlarged. Israel’s present 
condition, dispersed among the nations of the earth, is not 
permanent. God will bring them back and keep all the 
promises of blessing. How wonderful are some of the 
visions of glory relating to the time, when this will be ac- 
complished. Read Isaiah xxiv; Ix; 1xi; Ixii, etc.; these 
magnificient promises of. blessing are not for a spiritual 
Israel, as people sometimes term the church, but for the 
literal Israel.* Some say, the return predicted by Moses 
and the other prophets was fulfilled when a remnant of 
Jews came back from Babylon. This is incorrect for neither 
were the people scattered among all the nations, nor did 


«Study Pamphlet on Isaiah gives helpful hints on the chapters we 


quote, 


Se 


tu ~ THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


the small remnant, which came back from the Babylonian 
cap tv, “enjoy the.glories and blessings predicted in*the- 
prophtetié Word. Another return will take place, when 
their once rejected King comes back. The Old Testament 
is practically a sealed book to every person who does 
not believe in a literal restoration of Israel to their land. 

The final appeal of Moses as given in the second part 
of this chapter, has for its leading note “obedience,” the 
characteristic word of this entire book. Notice in the last 
verse the significant statement, that the Lord, who is to be 
loved and whose voice is to be obeyed, is their life. ‘For 
He is thy life.” 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 433 


MII, The Final Words of Moses, The 
Vision of the Future. 


Chapter xxxi-xxxiv. 


1. Moses’ Final Charge. The Written Law Delivered. 
Jehovah’s Word to Moses. 


CHAPTER XXXI. 


1. The final charge of Moses. 1-8. 

2. The written Law delivered. 9-13. 

3. Jehovah’s Word to Moses. Moses and Joshua. 14-23. 
4. A Prophecy. 24-30. 


The final words of Moses to the people are full of tender- 
ness and affection. There he stood, an hundred and 
twenty years old, a witness to the grace of His God. His 
eye was still the eye of youth, for it knew no dimness. And 
his frame was not bowed down by old age; there was no 
sign of feebleness about him (xxxiv:7). The words “I can 
no more go out and come in” are not in clash with the state- 
ment about his physical condition. He knew that he had 
to die because the Lord had told him so. He encouraged 
the people to trust in the Lord and assured them that tha 
Lord would give them victory. “He it is who doth go with 
thee; He will not fail thee nor forsake thee.” Precious 
words these! And the same Jehovah is on our side, never 
to leave nor forsake His people. May we walk in the 
obedience of faith and find that His promise is true. Then 
followed an impressive scene. Joshua is called and in the 
sight of all Israel Moses addressed him. Joshua. would-~ 
bring them into the land. The same words given to Moses 
by the Lord to address to Joshua were spoken again to 
Joshua by the Lord Himself (Josh. i). 

The law, which Moses had written was next delivered 
unto the Levites. “Moses wrote this law.” Could there 


434 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY 


be a more emphatic statement than this! And this decla- 
ration that Moses wrote this law is confirmed by our Lord, 
the same Lord who spoke to Moses and whose words and 
laws Moses committed to writing. Tie denial. of the 
Mosaic authorship includes-the denial of the infallibility 
of the Son of God. It is infidelity. “The infidels of the past 
ridiculed the teaching that Moses wrote the five books of 
the law. The infidels of Christendom do now the same. 
And this law was to be read before all Israel at the feast 
of tabernacles. They were to be dependent upon the 
Word of God and Jearn, fear and obey by reading and 
hearing it. Our dependence is the same. Apart from 
believing and obeying the Word, spiritual life, walking 
in the Spirit, in fellowship with God, is impossible. 

Then the Lord appeared in the tabernacle in a pillar of 
cloud, when Moses and Joshua presented themselves in 
the tabernacle of the congregation. The omniscient One, 
who knows everything from the beginning, announced 
the failure and apostasy of the nation, with whom He had 
dealt in such marvellous kindness, and who had been the 
witnesses of His power and glory. They would break the 
covenant and apostatize. He would forsake them also, 
because they turned away from Him to go a whoring after 
- other gods. He would hide His face. All the predicted 
and threatened evils and troubles would come upon them. 
And their past, as well as present history, proves the solemn 
truth of these divine words. And there is one more chap- 
ter of their shameful history to be written. “The great 
tribulation” is ‘still future. It will sweep over them in 
the days when the apostate nation will accept the false 
Messiah, the Anti-Christ, he who comes in his own name. 

And Jehovah was to give Mose song, 
to teach Israel. The song is found in the chapter which 
follows. It has for its foundation the words of the Lord 
in verses 16-21. \And Moses was obedient and wrote the 
same day and taught it to the children of Israel. It was 
a witness against them. It is so to-day. How striking 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 435 


that they should read this great final book of the law, read 
their own curses, their own history, past present and future, 
and still abide in unbelief! 

~ The parallel with the church is easy to recognize. Apos- 
tasy and failure was predicted for the latter days of the 
church on earth; that prediction was made in the very 
beginning of the church. How abundantly it has fourd 
its fulfillment! Compare Moses’ words in verse 29 with 
the words of Paul, the Apostle to the Gentiles, in Acts 
xx :29-30. 


2. The Song of Moses. 


CHAPTER XXXII:1-43. 


The Introduction and the Theme. 1-4. 
The Foolish People. 6-6. 

How Jehovah Loved Them. ‘14. 

Their Apostasy. 15-18. 

The Results of the Apostasy. 19-33. 
Jehovah’s final dealing with Israel. 34-42. 
The glorious Consummation. 43. 


Su eo hale Boh ie 


The song of Moses is a great prophecy. The first great 
prophetic utterance is found in the parables of Balaam. 
The second prophetic discourse is this song. The song of 
Moses embraces the entire history of Israel, past, present 
and future. It bears in a most remarkable way every mark 
of being a prophetic testimony from the inspired leader 
of God’s people. The men, who deny this and who boast 
of literary ability, must be wilfully blind. The Critics 
‘have denied to a man, that Moses wrote a single word of 
this song. But they have not informed us who wrote 
this wonderful ode. ‘The assertion that the entire ode 
moves within the epoch of the Kings, who lived many 
centuries after the time of Moses, rests upon a total mis- 
apprehension of the nature of prophecy,’”* 


*Keil, 


436 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


Moses began his song by calling heaven and earth to 
hear the words of his mouth. What he was about to say 
concerned indeed heaven and earth. Isaiah too began 
his book with the same call (Isa. i:2). The name of Jeho- 
vah is exalted. He is the Rock and His work is perfect. 
He is a God of truth, just and right. But His people, what 
are they? Their character is described in verses 5 and 
6. How He uncovers the true nature of the people, who 
had acknowledged Him as Jehovah! Corrupt, perverse, 
crooked, foolish, unwise, are the terms used to describe their 
character. The failure they would be, their apostasy ana 
the necessity of disciplinary dealings of Jehovah with 
them, are thus mentioned in the first stanzas of this 
song. 

The third section, verses 7-14, reveals the goodness and 
the love of the Lord for them. The eighth verse has a 
deep meaning. “When the Most High divided to the 
nations their inheritance, when He separated the sons of 
Adam, He set the bounds of the people according to the 
number of the children of Israel.” This verse carries us 
backward. The boundaries of the nations were made by 
God with a direct reference to the children of Israel. The 
name of God used here, “the Most High,” is the millennial 
title, which He wiil have when His blessed Son our Lord 
receives His Kingdom. (See Genesis xiv:19). When that 
time of blessing comes and Israel converted is no longer 
the tail but the head of the nations, this divine division 
will then be fully made known. And how they are reminded 
again what Jehovah did for them! “He found him, He 
led him, instructed and kept him.” Verses 9-14 are wonder- 
ful words. And they apply to us spiritually as they 
described Jehovah’s goodness to Israel. 

But how great is the contrast when we reach the fourth 
section of this prophetic song: (Verses 15-18). The first 
step in their apostasy is the forsaking of God and the wor- 
shipping of false gods. The next step is, they “lightly 
esteemed the rock of His salvation.” No doubt this latter 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOM Y. 437 


statement refers to the rejection of the son of God, when He 
appeared in the midst of His people. 

The awful consequences of this rejection are seen pro- 
phetically. Here again we have history prewritten. But 
these predictions were so minutely fulfilled, the unbelieving 
‘heart of man refuses to accept these words as being the 
words of Moses. .Here again we have a strikinz evidence 
of inspiration. God foretells through Moses the future of 
an apostate people. Compare verse 21 with Romans 
x:19 and xi:10-11. The call of the Gentiles is anticipated 
in Moses’ song; salvation came to us Gentiles by their 
fall. It seems almost as if they are going to perish com- 
pletely as a nation. But the song changes suddenly. Jeho- 
vah will yet arise in their behalf. It will be in a time when 
their power is gone, when they are helpless and their ene- 
mies press down upon them as never before in their long, 
dark night of sufiering and tears. That will happen in 
the end of this present age, during the predicted time of 
great trouble, which is to come upon them. Compare 
verse 39 with Hosea v:15-vi:3. The judgment, which 
is announced by Moses in verses 40-42 is the judgment 
which will fall upon Gentile nations in the day when the 
Lord appears in His glory. To follow this throughout 
the entire prophetic Word is as helpful as it is interesting.* 

The last verse of this song (verse 43) shows the glorious 
consummation. After the storm of judgment and indig- 
nation, peace will come to this earth. The nations will 
learn war no more; they will learn righteousness. ‘Then the 
world will be converted. The Lord will be merciful unto 
His land and to His people. The blessings and glories 
promised to Israel have come. Therefore the nations 
will rejoice with His people. The song of Moses is the 
key to all prophecy 


*We have done so in “Harmony of the Prophetic Word,” which we 
recommend to our friends, if they desire to study this song more closely, 


438 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 


3. The Blessing of Moses. 
CHAPTER XXXII:44—XXXIII:29. 


Introduction. xxxii:44-52. 

Jehovah’s Manifestation. xxxiii:1-5. 

The Blessing of Reuben, Judah and Levi. 6-11. 

The Blessing of Benjamin and Joseph. 12-17. 

The Blessing of Zebulon and Issachar. 18-19. 

The Blessing of Gad, Dan, Naphtali and Asher. 20-25. 
Happy art thou, O Israel! 26-29. 


Ral SoG? Roe) ie 


Moses and Joshua (same as Hoshea) spoke the song in 
the ears of the people. They had to learn it. He exhorts 
them once more to set their hearts to do all these words. 
“Tt is not a vain thing for you; because it is your life.” 
But they could not keep the law and therefore could not 
obtain life and the blessing promised to them. The law 
cannot bestow life and blessing. It can only curse. But 
Grace gives life. To illustrate this very fact, that the 
law is 1or condemnation, the death of Moses is once more 
announced by Jehovah, as well as his sin at Meribah- 
Kadesh. He could see the land from afar, but could not 
enter in. The great man through whom the law was given, 
the humble Moses, the self-sacrificing, faithful servant of 
Jehovah, on account of the one transgression, was excluded 
from the possession of the land. 

In the foreground of Moses’ prophetic blessing of the 
tribes stands a description of the manifestation of Jehovah 
in His Glory. This Theophany is more than a description 
of how Jehovah came from Sinai. It is a prophetic picture 
of how He will come again. Compare this with Habakkuk 
ill. The blessing of the tribes is different from the bless- 
ing which Jacob put upon his sons when they gathered 
about him (Genesis xlix). Jacob foresaw the entire his- 
tory of His offspring.* The blessing of Moses describes 


*The reader is referred to the Bible Study pamphlet on Genesis, 
where the different periods of the nation are given as indicated in 
Jacob’s prophecy. 


r 


THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. (439) 


the blessing, which the people Israel will enjoy, when the 
Lord ‘has been manifested. For this reason it is correct 
to say: (a fact seldom mentioned by exposition), the bless- 
ing of Moses is an inspired expansion of the last verse of 
his song. That verse (xxxii:43) speaks of His people re- 
joicing and the Gentiles rejoicing with them. 

What Israel will possess and enjoy during the millennium 
are the contents of these last utterances of Moses. As 
a closer exposition of these blessings is beyond the scope 
of these annotations, we confine ourselves to a few hints 
which will show the way to a deeper study of this remarkable 
closing section of Deuteronomy. Reuben’s, Judah’s and 
Levi’s blessings reveal the salvation of the Lord Israel 
will enjoy in that coming age of blessing. Benjamin’s 
and Joseph’s blessings picture most beautifully the things 
which the sacred nation will enjoy during the millennium. 
This section is a most precious one. Zebulun’s and Is- 
sachar’s blessings make known the fact, that the nation will 
enjoy the abundance of the seas (the Gentiles). The correct 
translation of verse 19 is “‘they shall call the peoples(Gentiles) 
to the mountain.” The mountain is Mount Zion and the 
Lord’s house, which will be a house of prayer for all nations. 
The nations will go there to worship (Isa.ii:1-4). We have 
therefore a prophetic description of the blessings which 
Gentiles receive through a saved Israel. The blessings of 
Gad, Dan, Naphtali and Asher, speak of the full blessing 
and supremacy the converted and restored nation will enjoy. 

Simeon is left out. We shall not give the different explana- 
tions, which are offered, nor burden our pages with the 
unworthy theories of higher criticism.* 
> *Reuben (Behold a Son!); Simeon (Hearing); Levi (Joined); Judah 
(Praise). This is the order of the sons of Jacob according to their 
birth. It tells out the Gospel. In the blessing of Moses the order is: 
Reuben (Behold a Son!); Judah (Praise); Levi (Joined). Simeon 
(Hearing) is left out. When the Lord comes Israel will behold Him 
as the Son and will break out in praise and worship and become joined 
to Him. No “hearing” is needed then. We pass this on to our readers 
for consideration. We have nowhere seen this application. 


440 THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY 


We quote the beautiful ending of this chapter in a revised 
metrical version: 


“There is none like the God of Jeshurun, ¢ 
Who rideth on the heavens for thy help, 

And in His majesty, upon clouds. 

The eternal God is thy home 

And underneath, the everlasting arms. 

And he shall drive out the enemy from before thee, 
And shall say: Destroy! 

Then Israel shall dwell in safety alone, 

The fountain of Jacob, 

In a land of corn and new wine, 

His heavens also shall drop down dew. 
Happy thou, O Israel! 

Who is like thee, people saved by Jehovah, 
The shield of thy help, 

And the sword of thy excellency! 

Surely thine enemies shall crouch before thee, 
And thou shalt tread upon their high places.” 


And the same Jehovah is our Lord. May we know 
Him more fully as our home, with the everlasting arms 
underneath and taste the happiness of our salvation, till 
we shall see Him face to face. 


4. The Death of Moses. 
CHAPTER XXXIV. 


1. The Death and Burial of Moses. 1-7. 
2. The Mourning of the People. 8. 
8. The Conclusion of the Book. 9-12. 


This chapter was not written by Moses, but is an addition 
by another chosen instrument. 

The home-going of this great Man of God is beyond 
description. What a scene it must have been when he 


{Jeshurun means “upright.” 


_ THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY. 441 


ascended Nebo to the top of Pisgah! And the Lord met 
him there and showed him the land and said: “This is the 
land, which I sware unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto 
Jacob, saying, I will give it unto thy seed. I have caused 
thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not go over 
thither.” What vision it must have been! What peace 
and joy must have filled the heart of the servant of God! 
Then he died. Jewish tradition has woven many stories 
around this event. One, however, is so beautiful that we 
must mention it. “At God’s command Moses crossed his 
hands over his breast and closed his eyes; and God took 
away his soul with a kiss. Then heaven and earth and the 
starry world began to weep for Moses.” 

And the Lord buried Moses. How and where is unre- 
vealed:>Jude~informs us that Michael, the archangel, 
contended with the devil about the body of Moses. No 
doubt Satan tried to bring the buried body to light and to 
seduce Israel to worship the body of their departed leader. 
What honor Jehovah put after all upon His servant! He 
is the only one who was buried by the Lord, and he appeared 
on the Mount of Transfiguration with the Lord. And the 
beautiful testimony concerning him by the Spirit of God 
at the end of this book! ‘“‘And there arose not a prophet 
since in Israel whom the Lord knew face to face.” 

May it please God to bless this book and its many lessons 
to our hearts. May He grant unto us grace to live and 
walk dependent upon and obedient to His Word. 


The End 


4 
~ = 
aan 
= — 
——— 
1 
— 
—— 
= 
( 
= 
el 
-_— 
— 
- 
ae 
* 
——— 


Euseye 


22049 | ) & 63-551 


’Gllga 
Mi Gaebelein, Arno C 
The annotated Bible 


THE MASTER'S COLLEGE 


MEL! tipeor 
OWELL LIBRAR 


U 


i 
md 


SANTA CLARITA, CA 91321 


worry 


G 


Pro 


63-551 


INSTITUTE Lisi ay 
EW JERSEY 


7 


