School of Theology at Claremont


iil





Gp)


The Library


of the
School of Theology
at Claremont


1325 North College Avenue
Claremont, CA 91711








THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


BOOK OF DANIEL


THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


OLD TESTAMENT


ON AN ORIGINAL PLAN


WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES,
INDEXES, ETC., ETC.


By VARIOUS AUTHORS





In Tweniy-One Volumes





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


S419 |
A HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE BOOK OF


DANIEL


WITH COPIOUS NOTES AND INDEXES


BY


T. ROBINSON, D.D.


Author of a Suggestive Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans. Homiletical
Commentaries on Job and the Song of Solomon; ‘‘The Evangelists
and the Mishna,’’ etc.





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


Printed in the United States





PREFACE


oe


Tus writer having been asked by the projector of the Preacher's
Commentary on the Old Testament to undertake the Book of Daniel
in addition to those of Job and the Song of Solomon, he felt it his
duty to comply with the proposal. In prayerful dependence on divine
aid, he has done his best upon this portion of Holy Scripture, which,
however interesting, is also confessedly difficult. He trusts his labour
has not been entirely in vain in endeavouring to provide a companion,
however imperfect, to that remarkable book, which may aid those
engaged in teaching divine trath, as weli as Christian readers in
general. He has adopted much the same plan of treatment as he had
done with the two books already mentioned. He has, however, divided
the present Commentary into Sections, and has pisaced the notes at
the end of each, instead of at the end of the entire book. The aids of
which he has especially availed himself, as the reader will observe,
are, besides several minor treatises—Hengstenberg on the Genuine-
ness and Authenticity of Daniel, Keil’s Commentary on Daniel,
Auberlen on Daniel and the Revelation, Calvin’s Commentary on
Daniel, Bishop Newton’s Dissertations on the Prophecies, Birks on
the Two Earlier and Two Later Visions of Daniel, Dr. Pusey’s Lectures,
Willet’s Hexaplar Commentary on the same book, and Pole’s Synopsis.
The views of others are for the most part given in the Notes at the
end of each section, while the writer’s own are found in the Homi-
letical portion of the Commentary. Deeply conscious of its many
defects, he commits his work to the blessing of Him who has fee ip


" PREFAOL.


eee


reference to another book of Holy Writ, which is to the New Testa-
ment what that of Daniel is to the Old, “‘ Blessed is he that readeth,
and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things
which are written therein; for the time is at hand” (Rev. i, 3)





HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY


BOOK OF DANIEL.
INTRODUCTION.


L The excellence and importance of the book. Its excellence manifold.
Exhibits examples of moral excellence, mainly conspicuous in Daniel himself,
of the highest order and of the most attractive character. Affords illustrations
of God's care over His people, and His readiness to answer their prayers, that
make the book a favourite even with children. The story of the three youths
in the fiery furnace, Daniel in the lions’ den, and the handwriting on the wall
of Belshazzar’s palace, have with children all the interest of nursery tales,
along with the lifelong lessons of heavenly wisdom ™. Above all, it contains
predictions of events from Daniel’s own time to the end of the world, many of
which have already received, and are now receiving, their fulfilment. Conspi-
cuous among these is the prophecy regarding the advent, work, and death of
the Messiah, with their blessed results for mankind ; which, receiving as it did
its exact fulfilment in Jesus of Nazareth, has afforded one of the most con-
vincing proofs of His Messiahship. Hence Sir Isaac Newton’s remark, that
Christianity itself might be said to be founded on the prophecies of Daniel.
The excellence of the book is such that, according to Bishop Watson, “to read
it with attention and intelligence, and with an unbiassed mind to follow the
advice of our Saviour, ‘Let him that readeth understand,’ might be sufficient
to convert an unbeliever from deism to Christianity.” Hengstenberg charac-
terises the Book of Daniel as one of the most important books of the Old
Testament. Another German writer observes that Daniel is the most im-
portant witness among all the prophets to the credibility of the prophets in
general, and of divine revelation and the Christian religion in particular, J.
D. Michaelis remarks that Daniel, on account of its minute and circumstantially
fulfilled prophecies, is one of the strongest proofs of the divinity of revealed
religion.

IL. Its nature and character. Partly historical™; partly and mainly
prophetical ®, The historical part mainly in the first six chapters; the pro-
phetical occupies the rest of the book, with a portion of the second chapter,
The prophecies themselves partake of the historical character @, The book
written partly in Hebrew and partly in Chaldaie. The Hebrew portion, fee iy


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





ii 1-3, viii-xii.; the Chaldaic the rest of the book. The reason found
in the nature of the contents, and the people for whom each series was more
especially intended, The transition from the one language to the other a
confirmation of the genuineness and authenticity of the book, as being natural
and easy to one in the circumstances of Daniel. The Hebrew not the purest,
being placed by scholars, as Gesenius, on a level with that of Esther, Eccle-
siastes, Chronicles, and Jonah; thus corresponding with the period and
place in which the book purports to have been written, the author’s situa-
tion and circumstances in Babylon obliging him to make almost constant use
of the Chaldaic language; another evidence of the genuineness and authenticity
of the book, The style of the prophetic portions rather prosaic than poetic,
as in most other prophecies of the Old Testament ™, The prophecies given
variously as the interpretation of dreams and visions, vouchsafed partly to
Nebuchadnezzar, partly to Daniel himself; and as divine communications made
to the prophet by an angel commissioned for the purpose. The histories
selected, as Dr. Pusey remarks, with one object, namely, to show the way in
which the true God was pleased to glorify Himself amid the captivity of His
people in a heathen empire. The character of the book more a history of the
future than anything else, and thus an evidence of its divine origin. This, too,
only in keeping with God’s previous dealings with Israel and the world.

IIL Its authorship, The book purports to be the work of a Jewish captive
of princely birth, brought, among others, from Jerusalem to Babylon by Ne-
buchadnezzar, apparently in the reign of King Jehoiakim; elevated in the
providence of God, through the remarkable illumination and grace bestowed
upon him, to some of the highest offices in Babylon; and spared to see the
restoration of his captive countrymen to liberty under Cyrus, king of Persia ®,
This authorship disputed by some. The first, and for seventeen centuries the
only one, to dispute it, was Porphyry, a heathen philosopher in the third
century, who grounded his objection on the exact correspondence of the pro-
phecies with actual history down to the times of Antiochus Epiphanes, the rest
remaining, in his view, unfulfilled. In modern times, the genuineness of the
book has been denied by the German Rationalists, and in our own country by
Collins in the last century, as well as by Dr. Davidson and some others, in-
cluding writers in the “Essays and Reviews,” in the present one™, The genuine-
ness of the latter chapters has also been doubted by Dr. Arnold, as not har
monising with his canon of interpretation, namely, that sacred prophecy is not
an anticipation of history ; and that while history deals with particular nations,
times, places, and persons, prophecy only deals with general principles, good
and evil, truth and falsehood, God and His enemy,—a rule that, along with
Daniel, would set aside a large portion of the Bible, The book must either as
a whole be genuine, and written by the person whom it purports to have been
its author, or a forgery composed by some Jew in the time of the Maccabees,
three or four hundred years later, who wished to pass off his book as the work
of the illustrious captive of Babylon. In the words of Dr, Pusey, “It is either
divine or an imposture, To write any book under the name of another, and
to give it out to be his, is, in any case, a forgery, dishonourable in itself and
destructive of all trustworthiness, But the case as to the Book of Daniel, if it

2


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


were not his, would go far beyond even this, The writer, were he not Daniel,
must have lied on a most frightful scale, ascribing to God words which were
never uttered, and miracles which are assumed never to have been wrought
In a word, the whole book would be one lie in the name of God.” The genuine-
ness of the book is ably defended by Dr. Pusey, as it had previously been by
Hengstenberg 9, According to Keil, the testimony given by the book itself
regarding its origin and authorship is confirmed—(1.) By the historic tradition
of both Jews and Christians, who with one accord ascribe it to the ancient
prophet whose name it bears", (2.) By the certain traces of the existence
of the book before the times of the Maccabees |, (3.) By the character of
the language, corresp nding as it does to the period of the Babylonish capti-
vity 99, (4.) By the exact acquaintance with the historical relations, manners,
and customs of Daniel’s time", (5.) By the peculiarity “f its prophecies,
agreeing, as it does, to the times of the Babylonian exile and Daniel’s own
peculiar situation. The objections are easily refuted, those made by one objec-
tor being frequently given up by another as invalid, The divine authority of
the book, and consequently its genuineness, decidedly maintained by our Lord
when He quoted words from it as “spoken by Daniel the prophet ;” this divine
testimony alone settling the question of authorship. Similar testimony borne
by the Apostles, as well as by the whole Jewish Synagogue and the whole
orthodox Christian Church ; the facts that seem to speak to the contrary, as
Hengstenberg remarks, only appearing to do so,

IV. Unity of the book. That the book is the work of a single author a
thing now universally conceded 9, The historical tradition confirmed by the
internal connection and interdependence of the parts, as well as by the same
peculiarities of style being found in both the first and second parts, notwith-
standing the difference of language. Formerly some ascribed the book to
several authors ; others, as Dr. Arnold, allowed the first part to Daniel but not
the second ; while some, as J. D. Michaelis, made Daniel the author of only the
two first and the last six chapters, Others, as Spinoza and Sir Isaac Newton,
ascribed only the last six to Daniel; the latter, however, observing that to
reject Daniel’s prophecies would be to undermine the Christian religion, which
is all but founded on his prophecies respecting Christ. Hengstenberg observes
that Bleek deserved credit for exposing in detail the futility of Eichhorn’s and
Bertholdt’s hypothesis of a plurality of authors, and showing the unity of the
book. Auberlen remarks that the unity of the book is now acknowledged by
all, even by those who impugn its canonicity ; and Dr. Pusey observes that no
one doubts now that the Book of Daniel is one whole; even De Wette re-
garding the uniformity of the language and style, both in the Chaldee and
Hebrew portions of the book, among the strongest proofs of its unity, and
admitting that the similarity of style binds together both portions, not only in
themselves but with each other. Some, however, as Mr, Bosanquet (“ Messiah
the Prince”), think that certain passages seem to betray the hand of a compiler
even as late as the time of the Maccabees 9,

V. Its canonicity. Daniel formed part of canonical Scripture in the time

-of Christ, and from the time of the completion of the Old Testament canon.
Its place in the Jewish Scriptures was in the third or last division, ae the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





Hagiographa or Sacred Writings, as distinguished from the Law and the Pro-
phets, the other two, This has been thought to depreciate Daniel’s character
as a prophet and the canonical value of his book. Hengstenberg, however,
accounts for the place assigned to the book by remarking that while Daniel
actually possessed the highest prophetical gift, and is accordingly called a
prophet both by our Lord and Josephus, his writings stand in the third class,
rather than in the second among the prophets, from the latter being exclusively
destined for those penned by persons who were prophets according to office,
and laboured as such among their people, which was not the case with Daniel.
Keil observes that the place of the book among the Hagiographa corresponds
to the place Daniel occupied in the kingdom of God under the Old Testament.
In the Hagiographa its place was before the older Book of Ezra, While
the earlier Talmudists or scribes place the book with the Psalms and the
Proverbs, the later ones range it with Zechariah and Haggai among the pro-
phets; and when Aquila and Theodotion translated their versions, Daniel
was admitted to the prophetic rank. Origen in the third century placed him
among the prophets and before Ezekiel, following the example of J osephus in
his first book against Apion 9,

VL Objects and uses of the book. These, in regard to the first or his-
torical part, are—to show the watchful care of God over His people, and so to
strengthen their faith in Him in all circumstances and situations; to exhibit
God as the hearer and answerer of prayer, and the privilege as well as duty of
abounding in that exercise ; to show the reality, excellence, and value of true
religion, and to encourage its faithful practice; to display the power of
Jehovah, as well as His providence in determining the destinies of the
kingdoms of the world; to teach the folly and effects of pride, and to encourage
humility and dependence upon God; to show that the persecutors and op-
pressors of God’s people will not go unpunished, while those who serve and
trust in Him will in one way or another be certainly delivered. In regard to
the second or prophetical portion, the objects and uses are,—to vindicate
Jehovah’s honour as the omniscient and therefore omnipotent God; to sustain
the Church in periods of depression and suffering with the prospect of better
times to come; to comfort believers with the assurance that God rules in the
world, and will conduct all to a happy and joyful issue; to encourage fidelity
to God and His truth, as well as diligence in seeking the conversion of others ;
to keep alive the expectation of the promised Saviour, and to enable believers
to recognise Him when He appeared ; to confirm our faith in Christ and in the
Word of God by the manifest fulfilment of the predictions recorded. “The
main purpose of the book,” says Hengstenberg, “is to point out how God’s pro-
vidence reigns over His Church; how, although He may for a time give them
up to be deservedly chastised by their enemies, yet, when the suffering has
attained its purpose, He delivers all the more gloriously; how all worldly
power perishes when it enters into an unequal encounter with the Almighty
God of Israel; how at length, after the destruction of the great kingdoms of
the world, the everlasting kingdom of God and Christ shall spread over the
whole earth.” Powerful incitements contained in the main doctrine of the
book, to a faithful devotedness to God, s willing pursuit of His commands, and

4


oS ES ae


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





to steadfastness in sufferings and persecutions. Such incitements found as well
in the historical examples of fidelity to God set forth in the first part of the book,
as in the positive announcements made towards its conclusion, especially that
tegarding the resurrection. How much the prophecies of Daniel had this effect
among the Jews during the severe persecutions under Antiochus Epiphanes,
appears from the affecting narrative related in the first Book of Maccabees,
regarding the mother and her seven sons, who, from the assured hope of the
resurrection to eternal life, here for the first time plainly and expressly taught
in the Old Testament, willingly endured one after another a most cruel death
rather than commit an idolatrous act. The deliverance of Daniel and his
three companions, on their proving steadfast in their obedience to God, was,
according to the same undisputed authority, used by Mattathias as an argument
to confirm his five sons, the Maccabees, in their faithful adherence to the
service of Jehovah, whatever it might cost them ®,


NOTES.


Q@) *¢ We, most of whose minds must have
been arrested in our childhood or boyhood by
these impressive fascinating histories ; we, to
whom, as to the whole Church from the first,
and the Jewish Church before us, they have
been, all our lives long, instructive, know that
the works and words of God do ‘not pasa
away.’ ”"— Pusey.


() ** The Book of Daniel has nothing of
the nature of secular history ; it records only
certain events whereby God acted upon the
heathen monarchs, in whose keeping His
people, the depositaries of His revelation to
man for the time, were; and these events
were mostly supernatural.” —Jbid.


@) “Prophecy stands side by side with
God’s actions along the whole course of the
history of the Old Covenant, interpreting
those actions to the Beem: and making known
the counsel of the rd in guiding and
governing their affairs, As soon and as often
as Israel comes into conflict with the heathen
nations, the prophets appear and proclaim the
word of God, not only in regard to the present
time, but they also make known the final vic-
ed of His kingdom over all the kingdoms
and powers of this earth.”— Kel.


(© “* Daniel views chiefly the future history
of the world, passing through that develop-
ment which must precede the advent of the
kingdom of God. This accounts for that
special character of prophecy peculiar to him
alice: If prophecy is anywhere a history of
the future, it is here.” —Auberlen,


®) “Daniel, after having related in He-
brew the early history of himself and his com-
panions, passes naturally into Chaldaic in the
answer which the Magi made to the king
when he required them to tell him his forgot-
ten dream. But the Chaldaiec does not cease


with that portion of the book which is con-
nected with the history or the public events of
the empire. The first of Daniel’s visions is
also in Chaldaic, This is not what we should
have expected. Perhaps it has at some time
puzzled some of us, its reason not being
obvious. The connection is in the subject.
The vision of the seventh chapter is a supple-
ment to the revelation in Nebuchadnezzar’s
dream, It, too, relates to the four great eme
pires of the world. It expands that first
disclosure to Nebuchadneggar, fills it up, con-
tinues it, The prophecies which follow relate
more especially to Israel. Those events, then,
or prophecies, which belonged to the revelation
of God to the heathen, were written in the
language of the then great heathen empire,
They were for the world, and were written in
the language common to the people of God
and to the world—a language understood
through all that then populous tract from
the Persian Gulf to Damascus, the seat, in
early times, of so many Christian Churches,
The prophecies whieh bore especially upon
Israel or the time of our Lord’s first coming,
were written in the language of the ancient
prophets.”—Pusey. ‘‘The language thus
marks two divisions of the book, the first part
being in the language of the worldly power
under which the writer lived, that part repre-
senting the development of the powers of the
world, viewed from a world-historical stand-
point ; while the second, showing the develop-
ment of the same powers in their relation to
Israel, is written in the language of the people
of God ; thus signifying that in the one place
it was the history of the powers of the world,
in the other the history awaiting the people
of God, which formed the centre of his pro-

hecy, —an evidence of the genuineness of the
Rook: An interpolator would certainly have
written the whole book in Hebrew, the holy
language of the ancient prophets; and if any
part in Aramaic, the second rather than the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.
ee


first, which had more immediate reference to
his own time, and was intended more to influ-
ence his own generation.”— A uberlen.


(*) The use of the two languages and the
mode in which the prophet writes in both,
corresponds perfectly with his real date ; they
are, severally and together, utterly inexplicable
according to the theory which would make the
book a product of Maccabwan times. The
language, then, is one mark of genuineness
set by God on the book. Rationalism must
rebel, as it has rebelled; but it dare not now,
with any moderate honesty, abuse philology
to cover its rebellion.” — Pusey.


7) “The ground form of prophecy is
generally lofty and impassioned discourse :
the prophecy of Daniel ig couched in dreams
and visions. . . . It is only in Zechariah, who
lived later, that the same form of revelation
appears, based on the precedent of Daniel.
The Revelation of St, John alone offers a per-
fect parallel to our prophet, and for this
reason the Book of Daniel may be aptly
styled the Old Testament Apocalypse,”—
Auberlen.


(®) “ Daniel was thus providentially fitted as


the medium of communication. for the pro-'


phecies he was to deliver. From tender youth
to extreme old age, for more than seventy
years, the prophet lived at the Babylonian and
Medo-Persian court (i. 1, 6,21; x. 1). But
more than this, he took part in the govern-
ment of the State, in which he occupied a high
official position (ii, 48 ; v. 29 ; vi. 29 ; viii. 27),
He was thus enabled to gain an insight and
knowledge of the organisation of political
affairs in the kingdoms of the world, and fitted
to be the recipient of what perhaps I may be
tg ae to call his political revelations,
ut he has likewise obtained the spiritual
point of view, The experience which Daniel
made through the deep humiliation of Nebu-
chadnezzar, through Belshazgar’s downfall,
the rapid efflorescence, decay, and vanishing
of the Babylonian monarchy, the miraculous
deliverance of himself and hie friends
(ch. iii., vi.), all these events made in him a
profound impression that the powers of the
world are transitory and the glory of the
kingdom of God eternal, The circumstance,
too, that he was instructed three years in the
wisdom of the Chaldees tended at all events
to develop the high prophetical gifts which he
possessed by nature, and to familiarise his
mind with those mysterious regions.” — Ibid.


() “Daniel presents peculiar difficulties to
the investigation of its historical meaning,
difficulties for which modern critica have pro-
vided a very simple solution by denying the
genuineness of the book, According to the
prevalent view among the objectors to its
genuineness, it was written under Antiochus
Epiphanes during the years 170-164 3.0.; its
ataon reach down only te this king; and


it is a record of events which were already
past.”—Auberlen, ‘“ After the impulse given
to criticism by Spinoza and Hobbes, the
genuineness of Daniel was impugned by
English Deism and German Rationalism... .
J. D. Michaelis, Eichhorn, and others, attacked
especially the narratives of miraculous events
(ch. iii, and vi.) afterwards the well-known
naturalist Corrodi attacked the whole book.
It is only in our century that this view of the
subject has acquired a solid and important
literature.”—Jbid. The great argument
against the book lies with most ‘‘in the dog-
matic doubt of the reality of miracles and
predictions. Nothing is gained by a mere
answer to objections so long as the original
prejudice, ‘there cannot be supernatural pro-
phecy,’ remains, For us who believe with all
our heart in the reality of miracles and pro-
phecies, these arguments are not only devoid
of all weight, but we can only feel indebted to
the candour of criticism in thus laying bare
the secret motives of its procedure,”—

The historical argument from the occurrence
of Greek names for musical instruments
(iii. 5, 7) may be regarded as now given up;
De Wette granting that “it is possible that
such instruments and their names were known
at the time to the Babylonians ;” a possibility,
says Auberlen, ‘which Hitzig is unable to
impugn.” ‘*The other arguments have
either no conclusive force, as that from the
silence of the Son of Sirach, or proceed pal-
pably on suppositions, the correctness of
which remains to be demonstrated.”—JBid.


@ The objections which Hengstenberg
and Pusey set themselves especially to refute,
are those grounded on the alleged Greek
words ; impure Hebrew; silence of the Son of
Sirach ; position in the canon; depreciatory
statements of the Jews; aimless profusion of
miracles ; historical errors ; irreconcilable con-
tradictions ; improbable and suspicious ac-
counts; later ideas and usages; unusual
definiteness of the prophecies, that definiteness
ceasing with Antiochus Epiphanes; absence
of all higher moral tendency ; marks of Jew.
ish national pride. The objection from the
presence of some Aryan words, advanced by
Dr. Williams, is characterised by Dr, Pusey as
an attempt to turn against the Book of Daniel
an unanswerable argument for its genuineness,
namely, that the knowledge of Aryan names
was natural to one living in the proximity of
Aryan nations at Babylon, but “unaccountable
in a Jew supposed to live nearly four centuries
afterwards in Palestine, when the Persian
pews had passed away for a century and a

alf.” Hengstenberg mentions among the
arguments for the genuineness of the book,
its reception into the canon; the general
acknowledgment of its canonicity ; the testi.
mony of Christ and His apostles; the entire
peculiarity of style and mode of representation
adopted in the book ; several things at vari-
ance with the spirit of the Maccabwan times;
the exact agreement of the historical part with


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,
eee


the prophecies, Dr. Pusey adduces as another
argument, the threefold mention of Daniel
by Ezekiel as pre-eminently distinguished for
wisdom, righteousness, and power in prayer.
**Scripture is in harmony with itself, Ezekiel
is the first witness to the Book of Daniel. The
Book of Daniel explains the allusions of Eze-
kiel. No other explanation can be given of
Ezekiel’s words. Ezekiel manifestly refers to
one well known to those to whom he spoke,
one as well known as the great patriarchs
Nosh and Job. Such was Daniel, under whose
shadow they of the captivity lived. But apart
from him, where is this man, renowned for
his wisdom, holy as the holiest, whose memory
had survived from the foundation of the
world }”


©) “Until the seventeenth century, or,
more strictly speaking, late in the eighteenth,
Daniel enjoyed the unanimous recognition of
its genuineness by the Christian Church as
well as by the Jewish synagogue. The soli-
tary objector in all the preceding centuries ig
Porphyry the Neoplatonist, whose attack on
the genuineness of Daniel forms only a part
of his attack on revelation and Christianity
in general. Porphyry gives accurate, and
especially with regard to the 11th chapter,
important historical references, showing how
universally the prophecies of Daniel, up to
Antiochus Epiphanes, had been fulfilled ; and,
as a heathen, concludes from thence that the

rediction must have taken place after the
filflment, and that the book was written in
Judga so late as the time of Epiphanes. He
was opposed fides Church Fathers, Methodius,
Apollinarius, Eusebius of Ceosarsa, and others,
Jerome says, ‘None of the prophets spoke so
plainly of Christ ;’ and Augustine, that ‘in
the Old Testament none wrote so largely of
the reward of the kingdom of heaven.’ ”—
Auberlen,


@2) *‘ Zechariah, Ezra, and Nehemiah, but
especially the Apocalypse, refer to the Book
of Daniel. Distinct allusions to it are found
in the New Testament, as 2 Thess. ii. 4; Heb.
xi. 33, 34; Luke i. 19, compared with Dan,

iii. 16, ix. 21; Matt, xxvi. 64, where Jesus
obviously alludes to Dan. vii. 13; and Matt,
xxiv. 15, where the Saviour speaks of Daniel
as a divinely inspired man who prophesied
events, even then future.’—Auberlen, Dr.
Pusey remarks that the third book of the
Sybilline Oracles, written by a Jew about
170 B0., quotes the prophecy of the ten horns,
and the horn which should spring up at their
side. The first Book of Maccabees, whose
accuracy is acknowledged on all hands, written
probably early in the life of John Hyrcanus,
about B.0. 125, gives the dying words of Matta-
thias to his sons, in which he mentions for
their imitation the case of Daniel and his three
companions as examples of fidelity to God.
The Greek translation of the Septuagint,
which beara marks of the time of Antiochus
Epiphanes, is admitted by the opponents of


the genuineness of Daniel to have been made
a considerable time after the publication of
the book. So at one time De Wette. Laugerke
allows an interval of sixty or seventy years.
The Book of Enoch, which makes unmistak-
able reference to that of Daniel, dates at the
latest from the time of John Hyrcanus, and
leaves no room for such a development of the
doctrine of a resurrection, of the Messiah, and
of angels, as it containa, after B.o. 163.


@3) Havernick treats of the linguistic
character of the book as a decisive proof of
its authenticity. The Hebrew language had
ceased to be spoken by the Jews long before
the reigns of the Seleucids, or kings of Syria,
and the Aramman had become the vernacular;
while there was yet still a difference between
the Aramman of Daniel and the late Chaldee
paraphrasts of the Old Testament. Oriental
scholars have pronouneed this testimony to be
decisive. Yet one of the arguments employed
by Collins against the book was that the
Chaldee of Daniel is near the style of the old
Chaldee paraphrast, composed some centuries
after Daniel’s time; to which Bishop Newton
replies that, by the same argument, Homer
cannot be so ancient an author as he ia gene-
rally reported, the Greek language continuing
much the same many hundred years after his
time, while, besides, the style of Daniel differs
more from that of the old Chaldee paraphrasts
than Homer does from the latest of the Greek
classics, The impurity of the Hebrew of
Daniel has also been made an argument against
the genuineness by German Rationalists. Ber-
tholdt says: “The language of the last five
chapters sinks in point of style below the
Hebrew of the very latest in the Old Testa
ment canon.” It has, however, been entirely
given up bv Bleek, another Rationalist,
According to Gesenius, Ezekiel, who was com
temporary with Daniel, has, of all the Old
Testament writera, the mos¢ grammatical irres
gularities and incorrectnesses, But, as Heng.
stenberg remarks, if the language of Daniel
were really more corrupt than it is proved te
be, yet this could be satisfactorily explained
from the position in which Daniel stood, havi
been early carried away to Babylon, inves'
with office under the Babylonian government,
and obliged to make almost constant use of
the Chaldee language.


[4 Instances of this exact acquaintance
will be pointed out in the course of the Com-
mentary. The opposite of such acquaintance
has been alleged ag an argument againat the
genuineness of the book. The following are
instances of alleged ignorance, which increased
knowledge has only proved to be instances of
exact acquaintance, Daniel has been said to
give the last king of Babylon a false name in
calling him Belshagwar, and to follow a false
legend in regard to his fate; whereas it is now
admitted that the name of Belshazzar occurson
Babylonian cylinders as that of the eldest son
of Nabunahit (the Nabonidus of oie and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





the Labynetus of Herodotus), associated with
his father in the government, and slain at
Babylon. Again, Daniel is said by the objec-
tora, in the reign of Belshazzar to see himself
in vision at Susa or Shushan, as a residence of
the Persian kings, while it only became such
in the time of Cyrus. But the cuneiform
inscriptions mention Shushan as one of the
two capitals of Elam, even during the Assyrian
empire, in the reign of Asshur-banipal, son of
Esarhaddon, who took it twice, and the second
time incorporated it, along with part of Susi-
ana, with Babylonia as a satrapy under his
brother. <A third similar instance alleged is,
that Daniel speaks of satraps and government
by satraps, which, say the objectors, is not to
be imagined under the Babylonians, nor even
under the Medes and Persians, at the time of
the capture of Babylon, But, as Dr. Pusey
remarks, the office, that of viceroy or lieu-
tenant, and apparently the name also, accord-
ing to Oppert, appears in the cuneiform in-
scriptions; Sargon and others speaking’ of
placing Assyrian lieutenant-governors (perhaps
with the very title satraps) or native kings
ag viceroys over conquered provinces. Keil,
quoting Kranfeld, observes in regard to the
objections made against the historical contents
of the book, that ‘‘ they emanate from a criti-
cism which is astonishingly consistent in
looking at the surface of certain facts, and
then pronouncing objection after objectio
without showing the least disposition tow
other than a wholly external violent solution
of th, oxisting difficulties.”


08 ** According to the testimony of the
book i‘self, it was the work of this same pro-
phet. Daniel repeatedly introduces himself
as the author (vii. 1, &c. ; viii. 1 ; ix.2;x.13
xii, 4). It is true this is done only in the
second or prophetical part of the book, 4.¢., the
last six chapters, but the unity of the book
is now generally admitted; and it is known
that in the historical books of Scripture the
authors, as a rule, are not mentioned ; while
in the prophetical books of the Old Testament,
as also in the Epistles and Apocalypse of the
New, they generally are.” —Auberien.

(6) Mr, Bosanquet thinks there is no suf-
ficient reason for believing that either Daniel
or Ezra had, during their lives, finally closed
and determined the contents of the books
which bear their names, in the fragmentary
form in which they have come down to us3
and that Daniel bears marks of the hand of
a compiler or commentator, whose comments,
ma‘e at first on marginal columns, were after-
warda admitted into the text, In this suppo-
sition, however, he seems to be singular;
althouyh Delitzsch thinks that Daniel did not
exist iia its present form till the time of the
Maccah\ aa,


07) Dr, Williams (** Essays and Reviews ”)
thinks that the original place of the book
amongst the later class of the Jewish canon,
and the absence of any mention of it by the
Son of Sirach, confirm the Rationalistie view
of ita origin, ée¢, in the days of Antiochus
Epiphanes. Mr. Bosanquet, who is entirely
opposed to this view, yet thinks there is not
sufficient reason to believe that either Daniel
or Ezra was accepted by the Jewish Church
from the time of Ezra, as of the same weight
and authority as the books of the prophets
Jeremiah aad. Ezekiel, who immediately pre-
ceded Daniel. He thinks the Revelations of
Daniel were probably looked upon by the Jews
for many years after the reception of them at
Jerusalem, much in the same manner as the
Revelations of St. Jehn were looked upon in
the early Christian Church, Eusebius, in the
fourth century, remarking, after enumerating
the canonical books of the New Testament,
and naming the first Epistle of Peter as

re, “then is to be placed, if you
think good, the Revelation of St. John.”
Professor R. Smith (*‘Old Testament in the
Jewish Church ”) thinks that the absence of
any mention of the Book of Daniel by the Son
of Sirach in Ecclesiasticus, and the apocry-
phal additions to the book found in the Greek
version, point to its late admission into the
canon ; and that the only explanation of its
not being placed at firat among the later pro-
phets, must either be the lateness of its origin,
or of its recognition as authoritative Scrip-
ture. Another explanation, however, as we
be seen, is given by Hengstenberg and
others.


© Calvin thus writes of the object of the
visions of Daniel. ‘‘ It was a heavy trial when
the Jews had to suffer an exile of sevent
years ; but after their return to their own nd,
God delayed their final deliverance seventy

rophetic weeks, instead of seventy years,

he delay was multiplied sevenfold. Surely
then their hearts might fail them a thousand
times, and might even be nigh unto apos-
tacy. For the promises of salvation given by
the prophets were so glorious, that the Jews
looked for the commencement of the state of
perfect blessedness and salvation as soon ag
they should be delivered from the Babylonish
captivity. Far from this, however, numerous
calamities came upon them; and that, not
only during a short time, but for more than
400 years, while the captivity itself lasted but
seventy ; so that their redemption might still
look like a mockery, It can scarcely be
doubted, therefore, that Satan tempted many
souls to apostacy, by making them believe as
if God had been mocking them by bring.
neo out of Chaldsa into their own


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OHAP, &
rrr


HOMILETICS.


Sror. L—Tax Capriviry (Dan. i. 1, 2).


This remarkable book opens with the scene of Israel’s deepest degradation and
misery. Threatened judgments had at length come, Warnings had been addressed
in vain, Divine expostulations had been unheeded, The kingdom of Judah, like
that of Israel, had forsaken its God and King, and must now, like it, be forsaken
by Him. Idolatry and wickedness can no longer be tolerated in the chosen people,
Manasseh’s sin in filling Jerusalem with innocent blood had, on his repentance,
been mercifully*forgiven as regarded himself, but not as regarded his children and
subjects, who still continued impenitent. The blow began to fall on Jehoiakim
and the people of his reign (2 Kings xxiv. 1-4). It was, as the text states, “in
the third year of his reign”, after he had been some time tributary to Pharaoh
Necho, king of Egypt, that Nebuchadnezzar”), king of Babylon, “came up,”
or rather “set out,” as in Jon, i. 3, on his expedition against Jerusalem, as the
chosen instrument of Jehovah’s vengeance, The blow, however, even then did not
immediately descend. It was the next or fourth year of Jehoiakim’s reign before
Nebuchadnezzar, who first encountered the king of Egypt at Carchemish on the
Euphrates, arrived at Jerusalem (Jer. xlvi. 2). Divine forbearance was still
exercised. Jerusalem was taken, and Jehoiakim was “ bound in fetters” to be
carried away to Babylon, but was again released and allowed still to reign as a
tributary prince, Many captives®, some of them of noble and even of royal
birth, were taken to Babylon, here called by its ancient name, “Shinar” “), as well
as a portion of the sacred “vessels of the Temple,” which Nebuchadnezzar placed
“in the house of his god”) as the trophies of his conquests and the expression
of his gratitude to Bel. The king, however, still remained impenitent. To all
his other sins he added that which apparently sealed his doom, The book or roll,
containing a divine message, which Jeremiah shortly afterwards sent by Baruch
to be read in the Temple-court to the people (Jer. xxxvi. 1-25), he defiantly cut
in pieces with a penknife, and threw the fragments in the fire. Some six years
afterwards, after vain attempts to free himself from the yoke of Babylon, bands of
Chaldeans and others were sent against him by Nebuchadnezzar. The threatened
punishment then fell on the infatuated monarch, He was put to death in his
capital, and, according to the word of the prophet, his dead body was igno-
miniously cast outside the gates of the city, and “buried with the burial of an
ass” (2 Kings xxiv. 7; Jer. xx. 18, 19), Observe—

1. The certain fulfilment of divine threatenings. God’s word, whether of
mercy or judgment, will not return to Him void. “Hath He spoken it, and
will He not do it?” The promise and the threatening sure, sooner or later, to
be fulfilled, unless prevented in the one case by unbelief, or in the other by
repentance. Jehoiakim may cut the hated roll in pieces and cast it into the fire,
but the threatened judgment is only brought so much nearer its fulfilment.
The burned Bible only adda fuel to the fire.

2. The consequence of unrepented sin, Divine wrath against impenitence slow
but sure, Justice travels with leaden feet, leaving time for repentance, Mercy
rejoices over judgment; but, mercy despised, judgment strikes the blow.
“Though sentence against an evil work be not executed speedily,” yet the
judgment of the impenitent “lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth
not.” The sun rose on Sodom gladsome and joyous as usual, but set on it a heap
of ashes. The path of disobedience, whatever it may promise of pleasure or of
profit, is found, sooner or later, to be planted with thorns. In continuing to do
what is forbidden or to neglect what is commanded, whether to avoid a paaaed


CHAP. 1, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





or to gain an end, we one day discover that we have but “sown the wind, and
reaped the whirlwind.”

3. The terrible effects of the divine displeasure, The desolated land, the sacked
city, and the burned Temple of the Jews only additional illustrations. ‘The
wrath of a king is as the roaring of a lion.” What then the wrath of a God who
is holy, righteous, and omnipotent? Slow in coming, fearful when it falls. ‘ Who
can stand when once Thou art angry?” “A fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God.” To hide one from the wrath of the rejected Lamb, rocks and
mountains will be appealed to in vain. Men’s highest wisdom and interest to
prepare for the Dies Ira, “the great day of His wrath,” before itcome. ‘If once
His anger be kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in Him.”
The “blood shed for the remission of sins” the only refuge in that day ; the only
refuge now,

4. The awful evil of sin. It was sin that brought destruction upon Jerusalem
and its king. “An evil thing and a bitter” to forsake the living God and to
tranfple upon His laws. Only “fools make a mock at sin.” Sin the abominable
thing that God hates. Kindles a fire in His anger that “ burns to the lowest hell ”
(Deut. xxxii. 22). ‘Brought death into the world and all our woe.” Banished
man from Paradise and buried the world in a deluge of water. Covers the earth
at present with every form of sorrow and suffering, and will one day overwhelm it
in a deluge of fire, Makes men and women partakers of the devil’s character
now, and of his condemnation hereafter.

5. The realtty of God's government of the world. Nations and kings raised up
or overthrown at His will. His to plant and to pluck up, to build and to throw
down. The hearts of rulers in His hand to turn them whithersoever He will,
The Lord “gave” Jehoiakim into Nebuchadnezzar’s hand. The king of Babylon
but Jehovah’s executioner, “the axe in the hand of him that heweth therewith.”
“Against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge: howbeit he meaneth
not so, neither doth his heart think so” (Isa. x. 6,7, 15), Attila, taught by
the light of nature, called himself the Scourge of God. Who did not recognise the
same in the first Napoleon? God Himself the author of the calamities that befall
a sinful people, whoever or whatever the instrument. “Is there evil in a city and
the Lord hath not done it?” ‘I make peace and create evil” (Amos iii, 6:
Isa. xlv. 7). An all-controlling and superintending agency where man sees
only the operation of human passions, A great truth uttered by England’s
favourite author, “There’s a divinity that shapes our ends, Rough hew them as we
will.”

6. Desecration of sacred things often a divine chastisement. The only calamity
here recorded in connection with Nebuchadnezzar’s siege of Jerusalem, the removal
of the sacred vessels of the Temple to Babylon, to be placed among the treasures of
Bel, the abomination of Chaldean idolatry. The acme of Israel’s distress in the
days of Eli that the Ark was seized and carried off by the Philistines. Fallen
Churches in the East chastised when their sanctuaries were seized by the Saracens,
and appropriated to a religion that robbed the Saviour of His divinity and placed
Mahomet above Him as a prophet. The Church that shed the blood of the Hugue-
nots like water saw its communion vessels seized and melted down to be coined
into money for the payment of revolutionary armies, its bells converted into
cannon, and the ancient cathedral of Notre Dame at Paris desecrated by the worship
of the Goddess of Reason in the person of a prostitute, Such desecration often the
chastisement of abused privileges and rejected truth, The warning addressed to
Oriental Churches still applicable to those of the West, “ Repent, or else I will come
to thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of its place, except thou repent”
(Rev. ii. 5). Matthew Henry remarks; “See the righteousness of God; His
people had brought the images of other gods into His Temple, and now He suffers
the bear of the Temple to be carried into the treasuries of those other goda When

1


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; DANIEL, OHAP. L
ne re


men profane the vessels of the sanctuary with their sins, it is just with God te
prc ane them by His judgments.”

7. The externals of religion no defence to a sinful, hypocritical nation, The
Ark of God carried into the battle unable to save backslidden Israel from the

_ hands of the Philistines, Christian sanctuaries unable to protect those who had

' already perverted the religion of Christ to one of formality, worldliness, and super-
stition, Hypocrisy and sin only make a Church or people a carcase where the eagles
of divine vengeance will be gathered together, “Take away her battlements, for
they are not the Lord’s.” “Israel fondly trusted to the Temple to defend them,
though they went on in their iniquity ; and now, to show them the vanity of that
confidence, the Temple is first plundered.”—Henry.

8. Nebuchadnezzar, even in his profanity, an example of the recognition of, and
gratitude to, a Supreme Being for favours received and success obtained. The
vessels of the Temple placed in the house of his god rather than in his own, in
recognition of the aid by which, as he supposed, those trophies were won. Belief
in and recognition of a Supreme Being, among the first and plainest teachings of
nature, The heathen, who knew not the true God, accustomed to impute their
success to the favour of the deities they acknowledged (Hab. i, 11). After the
plague in Athens, Bo. 434, the Athenians dedicated a statue to Apollo as the
Averter of evil. After the battle of Salamis, the Greeks dedicated the throne of

~ Xerxes as a thankoffering to Minerva, The Parthenon itself, where it was kept,
was built in gratitude to the same imaginary deity, by whose assistance they
believed their heroes had fought and conquered, The small community of the
village of Phigaleia in Arcadia erected the beautiful Temple of Bassw in gratitude
to Apollo for deliverance from a pestilence.. Pythagoras sacrificed an ox to the
Muses on a new discovery made in geometry, The sin was, that in the blindness
and depravity of the natural heart, the heathen substituted false gods for the true
one, But may not the gratitude of the heathen to their false deities condemn
many @ professed worshipper of the true God ?


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—” «Jn tion to Lower Asia in the seventh year


the third year,” &c. No contradiction
between this and Jer. xlvi. 2, which
says that Nebuchadnezzar smote the
army of Pharaoh Necho at Carchemish
_ inthe fourth year of Jehoiakim. Heng-
stenberg and Keil both prefer to render
the word 83 (ba), not “came,” but “set
out or marched,” the word, as the latter
observes, being frequently used of mili-
tary expeditions. Objectors to the
genuineness of the book have put this
down among Daniel’s alleged historical
errors, According to Jer. xxv. 1, say
they, Nebuchadnezzar did not mount
the throne of Babylon till the fourth
year of the reign of Jehoiakim; and
according to Jer. xlvi. 1, the conquest
of the Egyptians at Carchemish did not
occur till the same year; and the sub-
jugation of Jerusalem could only take
place as a consequence of that conquest,
Henee, it is said, the deportation here
spoken of, if it really took place, could
only do so in Nebuchadnezzar’s expedi-


of his reign, and the eleventh of Jehoi-
akim’s, Hengstenberg and others have
met this objection by stating that Be-
rosus, in his Chaldean history, informs
us that Nebuchadnezzar the father, also
called Nabopolassar, on hearing that |
the governor whom he had appointed
in Syria and Phoenicia had revolted to
the Egyptians, being too weak to go
himself, sent his son Nebuchadnezzar
with an army, who defeated the
Egyptians at Carchemish, and brought
Syria and Phosnicia again under the
Babylonian dominion, the campaign
being brought to a close by the tidings
of Nabopolassar’s death. The beginning
of this expedition must fall, at least, in
the end of the third year of Jehoiakim.
Nebuchadnezzar soon succeeded in tak-
ing Carchemish, and marched into
Judwa, whose king, Jehoiakim, was an
ally and tributary of the king of Egypt,
towards the close of his fourth year. It
is thus historically certain that before
ll


Gwar. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





the invasion in the eleventh year of
Jehoiakim, Judswa was once conquered
by the Babylonians, Indeed history
tells of no other expedition of Nebu-
chadnezzar than that before us, the rest
of his life, according to Berosus, being
taken up with fortifying and embellish-
ing the city, and in other internal
arrangements, As to the title of
“king” here given to Nebuchadnezzar,
the same historian relates that Nabopo-
lassar, being aged and infirm, conferred
on his son, Nebuchadnezzar, who had
attained the age of manhood, some share
of the government. In reference to Jer.
xxv. 1, Hengstenberg thinks that it is
the first year of Nebuchadnezzar’s co-
regency, and not that of his sole reign,
that is likely to be intended; while in
Dan, ii. 1, on the contrary, it is the
second year of his sole monarchy, this
reckoning being as natural to an author
living in Babylon as the other would be
to one living in Judea,

& “ Nebuchadnezzar.” According to
the canon of Ptolemy, the son of Nabo-
polassar, whom some call the elder Nebu-
chadnezzar. According to Josephus, the
father reigned twenty-three years, and
the son forty-three. Ptolemy states that
it was in the nineteenth year of Na-
bopolassar’s reign that the Babylonish
captivity began. His son, to distin-
guish him from the father, is sometimes
ealled Nebuchadnezzar the Great. Keil
observes that as Nabopolassar came into
no contact at all with Judwa, the Jews
knew scarcely anything of his reign and
death ; and the year of Nebuchadnezzar’s
appearance at Jerusalem would be re-
garded in a general way, both by Jere-
miah and his contemporaries, as the
first year of his reign; and the com-
mander of the Chaldean army would
be viewed as the king of Babylon, no
matter whether on account of his being
co-regent with his aged and infirm
father, or merely as he was clothed
with royal power as the chief com-
mander of the army. In this sense
Keil thinks Daniel now names him king,
who was only afterwards such, and not
yet in actual possession of the throne,

 Berosus relates that when Ne-
buchadnezzar heard of the death of his

12


father, he set in order the affairs of
Egypt and the neighbouring countries,
and having commissioned some of his
friends to transport to Babylon the
prisoners of the Jews, Syrians, Phoeni-
cians, and the nations in Egypt,
together with the heaviest part of the
army, himself with a few attendants
went across the desert to Babylon. Mr,
Bosanquet thinks that the year in the
text could not be the third of Jehoi-
akim’s reign, a8, among other reasons,
the author of the last chapter of Jere-
miah, when enumerating the several
occasions when captives were carried off
in the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, makes
no mention of this in the third year of
Jehoiakim, nor of any before the seventh
year of Nebuchadnezzar, when Jehoi-
akim fell into this king’s hands and
ceased to reign (Jer. lii. 28-30) ; also,
as the author of Second Chronicles,
writing after the seventy years of cap-
tivity were ended, makes no reference
either to this supposed important siege,
or to this commencement of the cap-
tivity, simply relating that Jehoiakim
reigned eleven years in Jerusalem, and
that “against him came up Nebuchad-
negzar,” &c. (2 Chron. xxxvi. 6, 7);
finally, as Ezekiel appears to know of
no other commencement of the cap-
tivity at Babylon than that which began
in that eighth year of Nebuchadnezzar,
He quotes the Rabbinical book Seder
Olam Rabba as stating that Daniel is
to be understood as speaking of the
third year after the rebellion of Jehoi-
akim, and, speaking in reference to the
year of Nebuchadnezzar’s dream, says
that Scripture reckons the years from
the destruction of the Temple. He
refers also to Josephus, who reckons
that Daniel was carried to Babylon as
late as the time of Zedekiah, and to
Hippolytus, Clement of Alexandria, and
others, who considered that it took
place at the time when Jehoiachin or
Jechoniah was taken prisoner to Baby-
lon, He thinks the “desolations of
Jerusalem” (Dan, ix. 2) are clearly
marked in 2 Chron. xxxvi. 19-21 as
beginning with the burning of Jeru-
salem,


«) “ Shinar.” The name of the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


OMAP, I.


—_—_—_—_—_—_— eee


country indigenous to Babylonia it-
self, of which we find traces not only
in classical writers, but in modern
travellers) Bertholdt is led by it,
according to his hypothesis of a plu-
rality of authors, to maintain the com-
position of this first chapter in an
earlier age and in Babylonia. The
name found in historical prose only
in the Book of Genesis, In later times
it became quite antiquated among the
Hebrews. Occurs again only in pro-
phetic poetry,—twice in Isaiah and
Zechariah. Here, however, it is found
in simple prose, as the common geogra-
phical appellation of Babylonia, As-
suming Daniel to be the author of the
book, this is easily explained.—Heng-
stenberg. Dr. Rule observes that Baby-
lonia is named Shinar in the cuneiform
inscriptions,

©) His god.” This was Bel, the
tutelar god of the city of Babylon.
According to Gesenius, the planet
Jupiter intended by the idol. The
name identical with Baal or Beel, de-
noting lord, possessor, or husband,
corresponding to the sun or generative
power in nature. Baal or Bel wor-
shipped by the Carthaginians, Baby-
lonians, Assyrians, and others, Supposed
by some to be the same with Moloch, to
whom the Ammonites made their cruel
and bloody sacrifices, and to whom Israel
was seduced to offer their children, caus-
ing them to pass “through the fire,”
Bel’s worship prevailed through all
ancient Scandinavia, and is supposed
to have been general throughout the
British Islands. To this day there are
various superstitious observances in Ire-
land, Scotland, and Wales very closely
resembling the ancient worship of Bel.
A town in Perthshire is called Z'lliebel-
tane, that is, the Hill of the Fire of
Bel. In Ireland, Beltein, denoting the
Fire of Bel, is one of the festival days,
on which fires are made early on the
tops of the hills, and all the cattle are
made to pass through them, in order, it
is said, to be freed from contagion and
disease for that year.— Dr. Hadie. Dr.
Rule observes that the cuneiform in-
scriptions show the name of Nebuchad-
nezsar’s deity to have been Merodach


or Bel-Merodach. Berosus says Bel was
Jupiter Belus, the son of Saturn, who
had a temple there, with the stupendous
tower in the midst of it, which, accord-
ing to Pliny, continued till the reign of
Vespasian. Dr. Cox remarks that this
treasure-house was probably the edifice
to which Herodotus refers, where a large
golden statue of Jupiter was erected, and
that historians compute the riches of
this temple at upwards of twenty mil-
lions sterling, It is remarkable, says
Hengstenberg, that Berosus, a Chal-
dean historian, states that with the
spoils of this very war he magnificently
adorned the temple of Belus and other
sacred edifices, Dr. Rule quotes from
the Standard Inscription Nebuchad-
nezzar’s boast of having repaired the
temple, which he made his treasury,
“T set up long beams to support it:
with pillars and beams plated with
copper and strengthened with iron: I
built up its gates: I stored up inside
silver and gold, and precious stones
whose names were almost unknown;
and placed there the treasure-house of
my kingdom,”

(6) Nebuchadnezzar made three in-
cursions into Judea, The first, in the
time of Jehoiakin (606 B.0.), reduced
the Theocracy to a tributary of the
Babylonian world-power. Daniel was
among the captives brought at that
very time to Babylon. At the second
inroad (598 B.o.), King Jehoiachin and
the prophet Ezekiel were led into cap-
tivity. In the third (588 B.c.), Nebu-
chadnezzar destroyed at last the Holy
City, brought the last Jewish king in
fetters to Babylon ; and thus the king-
dom came to itsend. Thus anew stage
in the history of the development of the
Theocracy begins with the Babylonish
captivity, which may be reckoned from
the first invasion of Nebuchadnezzar ;
for the independent existence of the
Theocracy then terminated—a stage
which may be designated as the rule
of the powers of the world, This cap-
tivity, as well as its termination, was
itself a fulfilment of prophecy. Micah
(ch. iii, 12; iv. 10) foretold the de-
struction of Jerusalem and of the Temple,
asalso the returnfrom Babylon. Isaiah

13


OHAP. L


(ch, xl.—Ixvi.) announced the deliver-
ance of Israel out of Babylon, and the
building up of the rains of Jerusalem
and Judah, with the final glory of Zion,
through the creation of newheavens and a
new earth; giving the very name ofthe Per-
sian monarch tarough whom the return
should be effected. Jeremiah (ch. xxv.
29-31) proclaimed the captivity under
Nebuchadnezzar, but predicted the very
period of its continuance (seventy years),
after which Judah and Israel should re-
turn to the land of their fathers, The
captivity of Babylon, however, was to
be succeeded in the space of 600 years
by another and a much longer one—a
captivity which still continues, called
by the Jews the Great Captivity,
commencing with the destruction of
their city and Temple by the Romans,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


The reason of this second one acknow-
ledged by the Jews themselves to be their
national guilt, This time, however, that
guilt consisted not in idolatry according
to the ordinary meaning of the word—
idolatry in its gross form, but the re-
jection of their j»romised King and
Saviour, which was also rejection of
their God who sext Him. ‘“ Not this
man,” they cried out, ‘“‘but Barabbas :”
“ We have no king but Cesar ;” as be-
fore they said, ‘‘ Not Jehovah, but the
gods of the heathen” (Jer. xliv. 17-19).
Even still, however, the Lord has not cast
off His people whom He foreknew. Israel
shali yet lookon Him whom they pierced,
and mourn because of Him, All Israel
shall yet be saved, and the receiving of
them be life from the dead to the world
at large.—Auberlen,


HOMILETICS.
Sror, I.—Tse Four Caprive Yourus (Chap. i. 3-7).


Among the youths of noble or princely birth taken from Jerusalem to Babylon
by Nebuchadnezzar as trophies of his conquest, and perhaps as hostages for the
good behaviour of those who were left behind, were Daniel and his three com-
panions, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah. These, according to a custom prevalent
in Babylon, similar to that of the Ottoman court which in more modern times
originated the institution of the Janissaries®, were, at the king’s command, im-
mediately placed under the charge of an officer called Ashpenaz ®!, the chief of
the eunuchs™, To this often influential class these captive youths were hence-
forth to belong, having been selected for their handsome appearance, intelligence,
and good address, In token of their entire subjection to their Babylonian
master, their names, according to a common usage, were changed for others
intended apparently to obliterate all traces of their race and nation, and still more
of their religion, and to mark them, if it could not also make them, worshippers
of the gods of their new sovereign, as well as his property and slaves, Designed
for high stations at court and about the king’s person, they were for three years to
be dieted in a way judged most fitted to promote their health and more especially
their good appearance ; while they were carefully instructed in the learning ™ and
language of the Chaldwans®, ‘These captive youths, and Daniel more especially,
were to be God’s chosen instruments in effecting, by their influence at court, the
predicted restoration of their exiled countrymen at the appointed period, Observe
from the passage—

1. The literal fulfilment of God’s word, The good King Hezekiah’s foolish
vanity entailed a chastisement which, according to the word of the prophet, was to
fall upon his descendants. Some of them were to become eunuchs in Babylon (Isa,
xxxix. 7; 2 Kings xx. 18). Probably Daniel and his three companions were thus
made examples, that no word of God, whether in promise or threatening, falls to the
ground. ‘Heaven and earth may pass away, but my word shall not pass away.”

2. The inscrutable providence of God. It is one of the mysteries of that provi-
dence that the innocent suffer with and through the guilty. Both rulers and
people i Israel had deeply revolted from Jehovah. But it might be asked of


‘ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL. PEM ake t





those four godly youths, “What had they done?” When the scourge slayeth
suddenly, it mocketh at the trial of the innocent.” Yet God is still infinitely wise
and just and good. A gracious end in view, though hidden at the time. Children
often made to feel the effects of a parent’s sin, while these effects may be graciously
overruled for their eternal good. The captivity of these youths made to turn to
their own benefit and that of others. Apparent evil often a real good. “Ye
thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this
day, to save much people alive” (Gen. 1. 20).

3. The sovereignty of divine grace. Nothing is said of the parents of these
youths, The royal seed had become a reprobate one. Both the sons of Josiah
who succeeded him on the throne were wicked. The princes of Jerusalem imitated
them in their sin. Grace makes exceptions, Perhaps these youths were judiciously
taken away from the evil example of the rest. Safer perhaps at the time to live
in Babylon than in Jerusalem. One might hope from the character of these four
youths that they had been taught the fear of God at home. But graceless parents
may have gracious children. Grace steps in and makes men to differ, The wind
bloweth where it listeth. Saints found in Cesar’s household, and a godly Obadiah
in Ahab’s court,

4. Mercy remembered in the midst of judgment. Preparations for the purposed
and promised deliverance of Israel made from the very commencement of their
captivity. One of the very first captives to be made God’s chosen instrument in
bringing it about, The edict of Cyrus, at the end of the predicted seventy years,
the result of Daniel’s influence at the Babylonian and Persian courts, The same
influence doubtless effectual in mitigating the sufferings of his fellow-exiles™,
A silver lining often in the darkest cloud. God’s bow of mercy set in the cloud of
man’s deepest misery. Mercy and judgment the alto and bass in the believer’s song.

5. God’s instruments prepared for their work. Daniel and his three companions
prepared beforehand for the part they were to perform in the relief and deliverance
of their countrymen, Gifted by nature and endowed by grace, they received an
education at the Babylonian court that fitted them for the post they were to
occupy about the king’s person and in the government of the country. Capacity
for learning, united with conscientious application and the divine blessing given
in answer to prayer, made the youthful exiles ten times more able to answer
the king’s questions than all the wise men in the realm, and so prepared the way
for their future elevation. ‘The influence of that education in reference to the
exercise of Daniel’s prophetical gift also not to be entirely overlooked,

6. Grace superior to circumstances. Captivity in a heathen land, residence in
an idolatrous and luxurious court, a three years’ course of study pervaded with
idolatry and superstition, the constant presence of the followers of a false religion
and a low morality, all combined are unable to crush out the piety of these young
men. Circumstances changed their names but not their nature, With names
imposed upon them that seemed to designate them the worshippers of idols, they
were enabled by grace to remain the faithful servants of the true God. The
religion produced by the Holy Spirit in the soul is fast colours—not painted, but
engrained. or

7. The value of gracious principles in early life. Only the presence of divine
grace in the soul able to withstand the temptations of the world and to conquer
in the battle of life. “ Evil communications corrupt good manners” only when
those manners are not the fruit of a divine principle implanted in the soul.
“This is the victory that overcometh the world, even your faith.” ' Only an
apparently renewed Demas will forsake the truth, “having loved this present
world.” Renewed by the Spirit and grafted into Christ, we are “kept by the
power of God through faith unto salvation,” and made ‘‘ more than conquerors
through Him that loved us.” Probably these youths taught like Timothy to know
the Holy Scriptures from early childhood. Daniel may have had a Spee for


q@aY. L.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIBL.


his mother, though her name is not recorded. His early youth spent in the reign
of good Josiah, who apparently died only four years before he was taken captive to


Babylon,


Few men have become at once great and good who have not been


able to connect their religion with a mother’s prayers and the instruction


received at a mother’s knee.


One thing concerning these four youths is certain,


that in early life they had been taught to say in truth, “Thy word have I hid
in my heart, that I might not sin against Thee.”


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—” “Cer.
tain of the children of Israel and of the
king’s seed, and of the princes.” When
Darius Hystaspes succeeded Cyrus, he
obtained from Babylonia and the rest
of Assyria a thousand talents of silver
and five hundred boy-eunuchs, Keil
observes that O°0A98 (partemim) is the
Zend “prathema” (Sanse. “prathama”),
denoting persons of distinction—mag-
nates, princes,

2) The Janissaries were originally
Christian youths who had been taken
captive by the Turks and brought to the
Ottoman court, after which they were
placed under the care of the chief of the
white eunuchs, under whom they were
trained and educated, taught some trade,
and brought up in the religion of their
masters. Those most gifted were em-
ployed about the ruler’s person, and in
due time advanced to high and suitable
offices in the state, to military com-
mands, and to the government of pro-
vinces, Their Christian names were
changed for such as their Moslem mas-
ters delighted in.—Xitto, also Ranke’s
“ Ottoman Empire.”

8) * Ashpenaz.” Keil observes that
the name has not yet received any satis-
factory or generally adopted explanation.
He thinks the person so named was
the chief marshal of Nebuchadnezzar’s
court. Dr. Rule thinks he might be
called master of the household, Junius
observes that the word in the Chaldaic
denotes the master of the chiders
(objurgantium), or, as Willet translates
it, the master of the comptrollers, te.,
the chief comptroller and governor of
the king’s house.

) “ Bunuchs.” Dr, Rule remarks
that the name D'D p (sarisim) may
simply indicate members of the king’s
household; the name being applied to
officers in or about the palace, whether
peed physically eunuchs or not.


3) << Well-favoured.” The Assyrian
and Babylonian kings, wishing to add
to the lustre and magnificence of their
court, admitted into their palace none
but young persons of high birth, dis-
tinguished for the gracefulness of their
person and the beauty of their counten-
ance.—Gaussen,

(6) “Gave names.” Daniel, which in
Hebrew denotes, “God is my Judge,”
was changed, according to the name
of Nebuchadnezzar’s god (ch. iv. 8), into
Belteshazzar, or “ Bel’s treasurer,” or
the ‘‘ Depositary of Bel’s secret things ;”
but according to Gesenius and Nork,
the “ Prince of BeL” Azariah, or “ The
Help of the Lord,” was changed into
Abednego, the “servant of Nego,” or
the Brightness, #.¢., of the Sun or Fire,
or perhaps one of the planets —also
objects of Babylonian worship. The
other two names given for Mishael and
Hananiah believed to have also an
idolatrous meaning, although not so
obvious, Shadrach, according to some,
is “The Inspiration of Rach” or the Sun;
and Meshach, a “devotee of Shach” or
Venus, the festival goddess. Kitto
observes that the practice of changing
the names of slaves is as ancient as the
time of Joseph, whose name was changed
by his Egyptian master to Zaphnath-
Paaneah, or the Revealer of Secreta,
In modern times the practice prevailed
in the case of Negro slaves,

) “ Might teach the learning of the
Chaldeans.” According to Pliny and
Strabo, the priest-caste among the Baby-
lonians had educational establishments
in certain cities; for instance, in Babylon
itself, Borsippa in Babylonia, and Hip-
parene in Mesopotamia,—Hengstenberg.
According to Plato and Xenophon, the
education of royal officers in Persia did
not begin until they had passed fourteen
years of age, and youths did not enter
into the king’s service until they had


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL


OmAP, L





completed their sixteenth or seventeenth
year.—Rule. An objection has been
made to the genuineness of the Book of
Daniel on the ground that it is improb-
able that Daniel, with his strict prin-
ciples, should be willing to be taught
the principles of the magi. But Moses
also was “learned in all the wisdom of
the Egyptians” (Acts vii. 22). As
Moses acquired the secular knowledge of
the Egyptians without their debasing
superstitions, so might Daniel that of
the Babylonians, Nor was that learning
all superstitious. Their philosophers
were chiefly engaged about astronomy ;
and the Greeks thought that the birth-
place of philosophy in general was among
the magi of Persia and the Chaldees of
Babylonia or Assyria. But the futility
of the objection is at once obvious ; at
Babylon the king’s will was law, and
especially with his slaves, The passage
is rather a confirmation of the genuine-
ness of the book, as affording an example
of agreement with the customs and usages
of the time and country.

®) “The language of the Chaldeans.”
Michaelis, Winer, and others have
supposed that by the “language of
the Chaldeans” we are to understand
that of the Chaldeans proper, and not
the Eastern Aramgan branch, which is
usually called the Chaldaic, and which
in chap. ii, 4, as in Ezra iv. 7 and
Isa, xxxviii., is called the Aramaic or
Syriac. Hengstenberg thinks it to
be the court language, spoken by the
monarch himself and his attendants,
which appears from chap, ii. 4 not to
be the Aramaic, as that is said to be
the language in which the Babylonian
sages answered the king. The exact
knowledge of the languages prevalent
in Babylon in the time of Daniel, as
shown by the book, no contemptible
proof of its genuineness, Keil thinks
the “language of the Chaldeans” in
the text to be that of the Babylonish
priests and learned men or magi, called
also Chaldeans in a more restricted
sense, the same being afterwards applied
to the whole body of the wise men of
Babylon (ch. ii, 2). He adds: “If
for the present no certain answer can
be given to the question as to the origin





of the Chaldeans and the nature of their
language and writing, yet this much
may be accepted as certain, that the
language and writing of the Chaldees
(D'IY2, casdim) was not Semitic or
Aramaic, but that the Chaldeans had
in remote times migrated into Babylonia,
and there had obtained dominion over
the Semitic inhabitants of the land;
and that from among this dominant
race the Chaldees, the priestly and the
learned class of the Chaldees, arose.
This class in Babylon is much older than
the Chaldean monarchy founded by
Nebuchadnezzar.” This instruction in
the wisdom of the Chaldeans, Auberlen
thinks, “tended, at all events, to de-
velop the high prophetical gifts which
Daniel possessed by nature ;” and that
‘a similar school was thus provided for
Daniel to that which his Egyptian edu-
cation was to Moses, or which study of
philosophy is for the theologian of our
own day.” Dr. Rule observes that
“seven or eight centuries later than
Daniel, the learning of the Chaldeans
or Babylonians was described as com-
prising astronomy, astrology, divination,
augury, incantations, and the science of
dreams and prodigies, Although idol-
worshippers, Justin Martyr, in his Ex-
hortation to the Greeks, affirms that the
Babylonians differed widely from the
Greeks and from all other idolaters of
the world, inasmuch as they acknow-
ledged a supreme and self- existent
God.”

( «The Lord in His great mercy
had prepared for His people an influ-
ence in Babylon that must have miti-
gated the severity of bondage when the
ten thousand captives [with Jehoiachin]
were added to all that went before.
The king and the princes indeed were
prisoners of war; but young men of
royal blood are at the head of the
government, naturalised, and in rank
next the imperial throne, but known as
worshippers of the God of heaven, and
as confessors of that God in opposition
to the gods of the country, in full
enjoyment of religious liberty and pro-
tected in the exercise of their sacred
right by a decree in honour of Daniel’s
God.” —Rule,


17


OmAP. 1. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,








HOMILETICS.


Secor. IIL—Tue Resotution (Chap, i, 8-10).


The religion of Daniel and his three companions was soon to be put to the
test. They were to be fed from the royal table; but the Jews were forbidden
by the law of Moses to eat certain kinds of food, as well as food prepared in a
certain way. Some animals were to be avoided as unclean, and none were to be
eaten with the blood in them. Besides, what the heathen used of animal food had
been already offered in sacrifice to their idols, while a portion both of the meat
and drink on their table was presented as an offering and acknowledgment to the
same false deities, Daniel saw that to partake of the royal provision ® was thus
to pollute himself by participation with idolatry and to transgress the law of God™.
His purpose was at once taken. Be the consequences what they might, he would
neither defile himself nor apostatise from his God. Persuaded that man does
not ‘live by bread alone, but by every word of God,” he would request the
superintendent to substitute pulse and water for the royal viands, He deter-
mined, says Matthew Henry, to let it be known from the first day of his residence
in Babylon, that though but a young Jewish slave, he was the servant of the living
God. If he could not preserve his dignity as a prince, he would preserve his
purity as a child of the covenant. It was no small risk, The wrath of Nebu-
chadnezzar, as of all Oriental despots, was as the roaring of a lion. That wrath
might well be apprehended for what must appear to him, if known, an act of dis-
obedience, and even of contempt. Unless prevented by some remarkable inter-
position, the act may cost Daniel and his three friends their life. Daniel had
indeed already gained the favour and affection of the chief or superintendent of
the eunuchs, but for him to change the diet, or even allow or connive at such a
change, must endanger his life also—with Daniel a considerable aggravation of
the difficulty. Still he must obey the dictates of his conscience and do what he
believes to be the will of God, Prayer was no doubt his refuge. The God of
Abraham would open up a way of deliverance, ‘On the Mount the Lord will be
seen.” Man’s extremity is God’s opportunity. Isaac was saved at the last hour,
The Lord will provide. Jehovah-Jireh still lives. To the chief officer, therefore,
Daniel communicates his difficulty and his purpose. The worthy heathen ex-
pressed his distress, and his fear for the consequences, even to himself, Daniel
only requests a trial, Ashpenaz can do nothing but commend him to the good
graces of the subordinate whose duty it was to attend immediately upon the young
men, and whose responsibility was less than his own. Observe—

1, Religious principle sure to be tested. The gold must be submitted to the
fire to prove its reality and purge it from dross. The trial of faith a rule in God’s
government and the universal experience of His people. That trial may bea
“fiery” one (1 Peter iv. 12), May throw into heaviness for a season; but has
for its issue “ praise and honour and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ”
(1 Peter i. 7). Believers to be, like Apelles, “approved in Christ.” Difficult
situations, involving danger, trouble, or loss, the ordinary means of the trial. The
favour of God and conscious obedience to His will on the one hand, with suffering
and worldly loss, or God’s displeasure and a wounded conscience on the other, with
the short-lived favour of the world; which shall it be? Moses must choose
between the treasures of Egypt and the reproach of Christ ; worldly greatness with
idolaters, or “affliction with the people of God.”

2, Trial a needful preparation for future service, Daniel and his companions
destined to important service in Babylon. God was to be glorified in them as His
faithful witnesses, The deliverance of their captive countrymen to be ultimately


bomen their influence, Hence the necessity of discipline and trial. The


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL. OHAP,





instrument to be prepared and polished. The faith and obedience of these four
godly youths to be afterwards severely tested. The trial to commence now, even at
the beginning. Smaller trials must prepare for greater ones, The faith that is to face
and triumph over the fiery furnace and the lions’ den to be made strong by exercise,

3. Self-denial necessary to true religion, Daniel and his friends must choose
between the dainties of the king’s table and the diet of the humblest slave, A
considerable difference to the flesh between the king’s savoury dishes and delicious
wines, and mere boiled beans and water. But the choice was soon decided on.
Grace enabled Daniel, “instead of yielding to the temptations of luxury, volun-
tarily to subject himself to the humblest fare, that appetite might not betray him
into sin.” Like his ancestor Moses, he “chose rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.” The Master's
rule, “If any man will be my disciple, let him deny himself, take up his cross
daily, and follow me.” The part of good soldiers of Jesus Christ to “endure.
hardness,” Such endurance and self-denial the means of strengthening character
and fitting for service in the world The pulse itself probably made, even
physically, a means towards Daniel’s elevation. Protogenes, the celebrated
painter, said to have lived on lupins during the seven years he was engaged on his
famous picture, “that his judgment might not be clouded by luxurious diet.”
Calvin even thinks that Daniel might have desired pulse and water, on account
of the injurious effects of good living. Auberlen remarks that “he who is to
receive or interpret divine revelations, must not feed on the dainties nor drink
from the intoxicating cup of this world.”

4. Abstinence from what is tn itself lawful sometimes a sacred duty. The
royal provisions in themselves good, but in the circumstances not to be partaken
of by Daniel and his friends without sin and moral defilement. So even in his old
age, Daniel for a special religious purpose abstained for a time both from flesh and
wine (ch. x. 3). ‘Every creature of God is good, and to be received with thanks-
giving of them that know and believe the truth.” But there are times when, for
the sake of others, if not for our own, it may be our duty to abstain from the use
of some. Christian wisdom and an enlightened conscience needed to direct us in
regard to such abstinence. The same Apostle who counselled Timothy to “use a
little wine” for his stomach’s sake and his frequent infirmities, asserts that “it is
good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor anything whereby thy brother
stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak ;” and declares for himself, “If meat
make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I
make my brother to offend” (Rom. xiv. 21; 1 Cor. viii. 13), The character of
the wines and other intoxicating drinks used in this country, the prevalence of the
drinking customs, the continued evidence before our eyes of the terrible effects of
the use of these drinks, both physically, socially, and morally, slaying as they do
their tens of thousands, and drawing in their train both misery, poverty, disease,
and crime—these facts are believed by many to make it the duty of Christian men
and women in general, in the exercise of that charity that “pleaseth not itself”
and “seeketh not her own,” to abstain entirely from the use of these beverages for at
least the sake of those who must, one way or other, be influenced by our example.

5. Grace made sufficient for all situations, Grace needed most in times of
difficulty and trial. That grace now afforded to Daniel and his friends in their
perplexity. To Paul’s thrice-repeated prayer that the “thorn in the flesh” might
depart from him, the only answer vouchsafed was, “ My grace is sufficient for
thee ; my strength is made perfect in weakness,” Believing this, Paul gloried in
his infirmities and necessities, Neither tribulation, nor persecution, nor famine,
nor nakedness, nor peril, nor sword, able to separate the genuine believer “from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.” “ae

6. The value of courage and resolution in the matter of religion. These needful
to serve God and keep a good conscience in the world. Constantly Acer in the


Omar. L HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.

Pape ene Eid ae sk Se ee GE a a.
history of the Church, both in Old and New Testament times, To be faithful to
God and faithful to the end, one must, like Daniel, “ purpose in his heart,” and
through grace adhere to it. Joshua exhorted more than once before encountering
the Canaanites, and marching in to take possession of the land, to “be strong and
of a good courage, and not be afraid.” Impossible at once to be a faithful Christian
and a coward, The “fearful and unbelieving” among those who are excluded from
the New Jerusalem (Rev. xxi. 8). ‘‘ We have received, not the spirit of fear, but
of love, and of power, and of a sound mind.” He that timidly will save his life
shall lose it. The feet to be shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace, in
order to tread on briars and scorpions, “and all the power of the enemy.” The
promise, “ ‘Thy shoes shall be iron and brass.” In a world up in rebellion against
God, His servants need to be “made as an iron pillar and a brazen wall,” The
exhortation to Ezekiel always needed, “Be not afraid of their faces,” Reuben
“unstable as water,” therefore “unable to excel.” Fear makes men deserters 3 but
“if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.” He that putteth
his hand to the plough and looketh back is not fit for the kingdom of God,—
neither for the enjoyment of it himself or the extension of it to others. A Chris
tian needs to be a hero, and grace makes him one, Faith the foundation of true
courage. Through faith, “out of weakness men were made strong, waxed valiant
in fight, and turned to flight the armies of the aliens.” The faith that is “ of the
operation of God” makes men heroes, and in religion @ man must either be
that or nothing.

7. Fidelity to God the best way to favour with men. * When s man’s doings please
the Lord, He maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him.” Psalm evi. 46
verified in Daniel and his companions: “He made them to be pitied of them that
carried them captives.” True religion commends itself even to worldly men,
Grace a winning thing. Includes “ whatsoever things are comely and of good
report.” Favour with men not to be bought at the expense of religious principle,
and need not be. Daniel found favour with the chief of the eunuchs and yet kept
his religion, and indeed by keeping it. Daniel made God’s love and favour the
Jirst and chief thing, and God gave him in addition the love and favour of men.
“The hearts of kings are in the hand of the Lord, and He turneth them as the
rills of water.” True religion consists in love, and love naturally begets love,
Jesus, the embodiment of that religion, “ grew in favour with God and men.” The
experience of Daniel in Babylon that of J oseph in Egypt. The chief of the
eunuchs, like the keeper of the prison, won by the becoming behaviour and sweet-
ness of disposition in a youthful Hebrew slave. The youth who pleases God likely
to find acceptance with men.

8. The importance of faithfulness in little things, An apparently small matter,
the kind of food Daniel should eat or not eat ; but God’s law made even that a
matter of conscience. Fidelity to God and His worship involved in it. Daniel
was faithful to his conscience, and desired to be excused from eating what he could
not partake of without sin. Thus prepared for proving faithful in greater things
—faithful to all his duties and trusts under the king, and faithful to God at the
peril # the lions’ den, He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also
in much,

9. The necessity of decizion in the matter of religion, A distinct and settled
purpose often our safety and preservation in the world. Daniel’s purity in Babylon
due to his “purposing in his beart.” A firm purpose in God’s strength to do
right, the girdle that binds the spiritual armour together, “I have said that I
will keep Thy word.” ‘One shali say, Iam the Lord’s.” “TI have sworn, and I
will perform it, that I will keep Thy righteous judgments.” Jesus Himself an
example of such decision, He “ steadfastly set His face to go up to Jerusalem,”
Temptations to turn aside are to be resolutely answered as He answered Peter, “ Get


thee spl me, Satan ; for thou savourest not the things that are of God, but the





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL. OHAP, £.


_—_—— oo ——s—S—eseseses


things that are of men.” “ When people are in Babylon they have need to take
special care that they partake not in Babylon’s sins.”— Henry. Safety often in a
decided “ No.”


Danie, a NorasLe Exampie or REsoLurion.
“ Daniel purposed in his heart”—(ver. 8).


Resolution both an act and a habit, As a habit, it marks the character of the

man who makes a resolution and acts upon it. The habit formed by frequent acts
_ of resolving and acting accordingly. As a habit, resolution a most important part
of character. Gives a man moral strength, energy, backbone, Constitutes force
of character. Makes a man strong, Forms the hero, the scholar, the statesman,
the artist. Makes the successful merchant, the man of science, the philanthropist,
and the benefactor of his kind. “TI will be a hero,” the turning-point in Nelson’s
history. Reynolds resolves at Rome to study the works of the old masters till he
has understood their excellence, and becomes a master himself, Paley at college
resolves to shake off his habitual indolence and rise at four o’clock to his studies,
and produces works that cannot die, Daniel’s resolution in regard to his diet one
of the means of strengthening his character and fitting him for future greatness,
Each resolution carried out in spite of difficulty or natural reluctance makes a man
stronger. An irresolute man a weak man. The part of weakness either to make
no resolution, or to make it and fail to keep it. “Resolves and re-resolves, and
dies a fool.” Broken resolutions leave a man weaker. One resolution kept
prepares for keeping the next. A resolution manfully carried out often the turning-
point in a man’s life and the determination of a man’s character, Resolution as
an act should be—

1. Made deliberately. Rash resolutions often both foolish and dangerous
Resolutely to carry out such, worse than the making of them, Resolution not to
degenerate into obstinacy and wilfulness, as in Herod the Tetrarch, and Pharaoh at
the Red Sea. Daniel thought before purposing in his heart. ‘Ponder the path
of thy feet.”

2. Directed to what ts right. Aresolution should be to pursue a right course—
to act right, speak right, feel right. Daniel resolved to do what he saw and
believed to be his duty. Resolution noble when it is to serve God, do good, and
sin not; to be truthful, honest, industrious, kind, obliging ; to avoid temptation
as far as possible, and to resist it when it comes; to say “No” to every evil
suggestion, If still with our back to God, our resolution to be that of the prodigal,
—“T will arise and go to my Father.” The diseased woman’s resolution to press
through the crowd and touch the hem of Christ’s garment brought health to her
body and life to her soul, The Syrophenician mother pressed on with her suit till
she obtained a favourable answer, notwithstanding discouragements and repulses,
and she succeeded. So Esther resolved, at the risk of her own life, to plead with
the king for the lives of her countrymen: “If I perish, I perish,” :

3. Made in dependence on divine assistance. To make a right resolution needs
divine aid; much more to keep it. The spirit willing when the flesh is weak,
To will may be present, but how to perform that which is good we find not, and
needs divine strength. Resolution to be linked with prayer. Strength given to
them that ask for it. Daniel a man of prayer as well as purpose; the latter
because the former. Peter resolved to follow his Master even unto death, but,
trusting in himself, he denies Him at the challenge of a servant-girl. Neglect of
the Saviour’s caution, “ Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation,” likely
to be followed with a fall. ‘He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool”
David’s prayer, “ Hold Thou me up and I shall be safe.”


21


Gaur. LB


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





EXEGETICAL NOTES.—” “4A
daily provision of the king’s meat.”
Among the Persians, a number of
persons, all the lower attendants of the
court, received their support from the
king’s table. This custom derived by
the Persians from the Babylonians, or
at least held in common with them.
According to Jer. lii, 33, 34, King
Jehoiachin, by the command of Evil-
Merodach, received his daily sustenance
from the royal table. — Hengstenberg.
Dr. Rule observes that crowds of
Israelites no doubt ate “unclean things
in Assyria” (Hos, ix. 3), defiling them-
selves in like manner; but a few noble
souls lived above compromise, At this
same time, Ezekiel, also a captive in the
same land, witnessing the shame of those
who “ate their defiled bread among the
Gentiles” whither they were driven,
could say, “O Lord God, behold, my
soul hath not been polluted; for from
my youth up, even till now, have I not
eaten of that which dieth of itself, or is
torn in pieces, neither came there abomin-
able flesh into my mouth” (Ezek. iv. 13,
14). Their “barley-cakes” the prophet
was commanded to treat with loathsome
contempt. Good Queen Esther, too, is
described in an apocryphal writing as
appealing to God that she had not
“eaten at Haman’s table, nor had
pleasure in the king’s feast, nor had
drunk the wine of the drink-offering.”

“The portion of the king’s meat,”
Heb, 7290 230@ (pathbag hammelek).
Dr. Rule observes that what this might
mean the old versions could not explain,
and our English translators could only
gather from the context. Some of the
Rabbis understand it to be bread. He
remarks, what Dr. Pusey has also told
us in the Appendix to his Lectures on
Daniel, that Professor Max Miiller, in
his explanation of words in the Book of
Daniel supposed to be Aryan, says that
this word is Aryan, and is equivalent to
the Sanscrit pratibaga, “a share of
small articles, as fruit, flowers, &c., paid
daily to the raja for household expendi-
ture.” The Professor quotes a passage
from Athenswus, where a Greek word
is supposed to represent the word in
Daniel, ee potibasis, said to be put


for rorBayic, and to denote “ barley
bread and wheaten toast, and a crown
of cypress, and mixed wine in a gold cup,
out of which the king himself drinks.”
Dr. Rule, after quoting a passage from
Herodotus, which shows that the Assy-
rians at their sacrifices ‘“ poured liba-
tions and offered consecrated barley-cake
with the sound of the flute and crowned
with chaplets,” remarks that ‘‘if the
pathbag of Daniel and the potibazis of
Athenseus be the same, if the king of
Babylon drank of the consecrated wine,
tasted the consecrated barley-cake, and
put on the chaplet of cypress, amid the
noise of music and hymns to his god;
if the like consecrated food was sent
to members of the royal household,
to partake of it would be nothing
less than a@ formal participation of
idolatry.”

) “Would not defile himself.” Keil
observes that Daniel’s resolution arose
from fidelity to the law, and from stead-
fastness to the faith that man lives * not
by bread alone, but by every word of
God” (Deut. viii. 3); and from the
assurance that God would bless the
humbler provision which he asks for
himself and his companions. These
ordinances in relation to food are part
of the Levitical law, Exod. xxii. $1,
Deut. xiv. 2, 21, where the principle of
avoiding food inconsistent with holiness,
only touched upon in Exodus, is ex-
panded.

() “ He requested of the prince of the
eunuchs that he might not defile him-
self.” Dr. Cox remarks that, in the
conduct of Daniel on this occasion, his
moral triumph wascomplete and glorious ;
appearing perfectly conscientious and
entirely decided while exhibiting a
graceful modesty connected with his
moral heroism, together with great
judgment and wisdom, and a spirit of
self-denial and temperance of the most
exemplary kind, Dr. Rule observes
that it was far more than a purpose on
the part of Daniel. It was a resolve,
Literally “he laid it on his heart,”
a DY") (vat-yashem D. ‘al libbo),
made it a matter of conscience, not
contemplating any possible contingen
that might shake his constancy. wo,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, omar. &





HOMILETICS.
Sror. [V.—Tux Tran (Chap, i. 11-21).


God works by means, and in doing so deals with men’s minds as weil as
their bodies. Daniel was delivered out of his difficulty in regard to the food
by a suggestion made upon his own mind, and favourably regarded by the person
with whom he had to do, This suggestion was the proposal of a trial for ten
days with pulse ™ instead of the king’s meat, and water instead of wine. Melzar®,
the subordinate officer, who could agree to the proposal with less risk to his
head than his chief, and who was, no doubt, in the meantime, to reap the material
advantage of it, consented to the proposed trial, The trial was made, and proved,
by the divine blessing on the humbler fare, eminently successful. At the end of
the period, no doubt could exist that the four Jewish youths were not only no
worse in their looks for their pulse diet, but actually appeared fairer and plumper
than those who had subsisted on the royal dainties®, Nor was this all; for at
the end of the three years’ study and preparation prescribed for them by the king,
they were found, on examination, to have made much greater proficiency than the
rest, and, indeed, to possess a wisdom and understanding greatly superior to any
of the magicians “ and astrologers ©) within the realm, The result was, in the
providence of God, an influential appointment to each of the young men about the
king’s person as his attendants and councillors ®; God, as Calvin observes,
aiming at exalting Himself in and through the person of His servants. They
“stood before the king,” an expression that finds its parallel in such passages as
Luke i. 19; Matt, xviii, 10; 1 Sam. xvi. 21; 1 Kings xii. 6, 8. The purpose of
Divine Providence in thus elevating Daniel is indicated in the closing words of the
chapter, “ Daniel continued even unto the first year of King Cyrus”. Daniel
was to acquire an influence which should operate on Cyrus to do what was already
written of him in the Scripture of truth,—release the Jewish captives and restore
the Holy City with its Temple and worship” (Isa, xliv. 28; xlv. 1-4). We
observe from the passage—

1. Faith 1x God and fidelity To God sure to be rewarded. “They trusted and
were not confounded.” ‘They shall not be ashamed that wait for me.” “Them
that honour me I will honour.” God is a good paymaster, says Kitto; give
what we may to Him of faith, or work, or trust, or love, or geal, He gives back
again with large interest. Trust in man or self may disappoint; trust in God
never. “Better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in princes.” “ Even
the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall; but
they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength” (Isa, xl. 30, 31).
The trust reposed in God by these four youths, honoured by the blessing received
from God on all their undertakings and pursuits, ‘

2. Health and vigour often the result of God's blessing on the humblest fare.
Pulse and water, says Matthew Henry, shall be the most nourishing food, if God
speak the word. The coarsest food with the divine blessing more conducive to
health and good liking than the choicest diet without it, A natural connection
with godliness and good looks not to be forgotten. Godliness promotes temper-
ance, temperance health, and health a good complexion. Peace with God brings

e of conscience, serenity of mind, and sweetness of temper ; and these the
most certain means of bringing sweetness of countenance. One of the promises
made to godliness, or godlikeness which is Jove—‘‘The Lord shall make fat thy
bones” (Isa, Iviii, 11), ‘A merry heart doeth good like a medicine.” A truly
and abidingly merry heart the result of peace with God, trust im God, and
obedience to God. te oite

3. The divine blessing the best help to successful study. A sound eben


ouaP, I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANTIBE,





mind as well as a sound and healthful body acknowledged even by the heathen
to be given by the deity, and to be sought in prayer. One of the favourite gods
of the Hindoos is one that is worshipped as the giver of wisdom and helper in
study. That study likely to be barren enough that lacks the divine blessing,
Daniel's three years’ study with that blessing better than others’ ten without it
That blessing given in answer to prayer. Hence, bene orasse est bene studuisse,—
to have prayed well is to have studied well. He studies to best purpose who has
a closet for prayer as well as a study for his books, and who is much in the ona
as well as in the other. Godliness one of the best teachers. ‘I understand more
than the ancients, because I keep Thy precepts,”—a sentiment of which Daniel
himself may have been the author. The most prayerful and conscientious usually
the most proficient student. Hence the knowledge even of difficult languages so
readily acquired by missionaries to the heathen, enabling them not only to preach
the gospel, but to translate the Scriptures in the vernacular language. The late
William C. Burn enabled to converse and preach in Chinese in a wonderfully short
time after his arrival in the country. ‘We count it reasonable,” says Kitto, “to
look to the Lord for our daily bread, and to apply to Him for aid and guidance in
the trials and emergencies of life. But how few are they who seek for the same
aid from Him, and feel the same dependence upon Him, in matters of the intellect,
—in learning, in study, in thought! It is very reasonable and becoming,—it is
very necessary,—that when we go forth to the toil and business of the day, or
when our affairs present perplexing difficulties, we should cast ourselves upon the
Lord’s protection, and look to Him for counsel and guidance. But is it,—can it be,
—less needful that, when we sit down to write, to study, to think, we should lift
up our hearts trustingly to Him?” Kitto himself an eminent example of the truth
he teaches,

4. True piety the frequent path to worldly promotion, ‘Length of days is in
her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honour.” Daniel in Babylon and
Joseph in Egypt distinguished examples, Worldly honour and advancement in
God’s hand. “Promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor
from the south: but God is judge ; He putteth down one and setteth up another ee
(Ps, Ixxv. 6, 7). God promotes His servants in the world as He sees to be
most for His own glory and the good of themselves and others. Such promotion
often a natural consequence of true piety. Godliness, even on natural grounds,
“profitable unto all things.” Makes a man more faithful, conscientious, truthful
honest, unselfish; hence more trustworthy and reliable True piety connected.
with the exercise of thought; hence tends to make a man intelligent and prudent,
even though poorly educated. Makes him acquainted with the best and most
elevating book, the Bible; and gives him the best and most efficient teacher. the
Holy Spirit. Hence a man with true godliness, though less gifted by nature and
providence, more likely to acquire advancement in the world than a man more
highly gifted without it.

_—=O God’s purposes and. promises sure of fulfilment. Means for accomplishing
divine purposes never wanting, Daniel’s good appearance, proficiency in study.
and superior intelligence, with their result, his elevation at court, part of the
means for accomplishing the divine purpose and promise in regard to Israel’s
restoration, The same true of Daniel’s longevity. His life extended to about
ninety years, in order to accomplish the purpose for which God had raised him up
and sent him an exile to Babylon, His influence with Cyrus to be the principal
means of leading that monarch, in the very first year of his reign, to liberate the
Jewish captives, then under his dominion, An easy thing with God to make siaves
ae eta J rR Ms Egypt and Daniel in Babylon, his honoured instruments

accomplishing His designs in reference to His people, His ki
world. ‘T will work, pa EN shall let it?” Peer agesint te ae ee

6. epee? tseue given to a believer owt of all his troubles, Believers have


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL.


OHAP. Z,





troubles promised to them, but with the troubles a joyous deliverance out of
them. The angel “that redeemed Jacob from all evil” still lives, and does the
same for all Jacob’s faithful children. With the godly, the end better than the


beginning.


* Always better on before,”


Their latter end peace, whatever their


previous experience. Those who mourn with Zion in her sorrows sometimes spared


to rejoice with her in her joys.


Daniel, after all his sorrow for his people, spared


to see the promise made by Jeremiah fulfilled,—to see, at least in its beginning,
“the good of Jerusalem and peace upon Israel.” ‘Weeping may endure for a


night ; joy cometh in the morning,”


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—® “Pujse,”
BYU 1D (min hazzero'im), “out of
the vegetables.” Dr. Rule observes
that according to Buxtorf, Daniel and
his companions would thus be allowed
free use of grain, pulse, and spices, not
necessarily excluding vegetable oils for
the preparation of such food as they had
been accustomed to at home, like their
ancestors before entering the land of
promise, and many of them afterwards
(1 Sam. xvii, 17, 18), living as do
multitudes in the Levant at this day.
He thinks it cannot be inferred that
they suffered any severe privation. They
were content to live moderately and
humbly.

() «Melzar.” Hengstenberg thinks
that Melzar was perhaps the official
name of the sub-overseer of the royal
attendants. Melzar, or “the Melzar,”
observes Dr. Rule, whatever that may
mean, being in a subordinate station,
and therefore not directly responsible,
like his chief, consented to make a brief
trial by way of private experiment.

® “Fairer and fatter in flesh.” Dr.
Pusey remarks that even now God pro-
tects religious abstinence, and quotes the
words of Chardin: “I have remarked
that the countenance of the Keshicks
(Keshishim or monks) are in fact more
rosy and smooth than those of others ;
and that those who fast much, I mean
the Armenians and Greeks, are notwith-
standing very beautiful, sparkling with
health, and with a clear and lively
eomplexion.”

4) « Magicians,” D'OOIND (ha-khar-
tummim), from O2D (kheret), a writing
or graving instrument, a pen or style.
Persons skilled in writing, especially
hieroglyphicsa. — Nork and Gesenius.
According to Hengstenberg, persons
skilled in mystic writing. The exist-


ence of such among the Babylonians
confirmed by the fact that they are found
among the Egyptians, whose religious
system stands in the closest historical
relation to the Babylonian. The exist-
ence of a mystic writing in Babylon
supposed in the narration in chap. v.,
where the king thinks of calling for the
wise men to interpret the writing on the
wall, According to Gesenius, they were
persons among the ancient Egyptians
who studied the interpretation of dreams
and wrought miracles by magic (Gen.
xli. 8, 24; Exod. vii. 11, 22, &c.); the
name also applied to the Chaldean wise
men similarly versed in the interpreta-
tion of dreams; sacred scribes, or per-
sons skilled in interpreting sacred writ-
ing, especially hieroglyphics.

) “« Astrologers,” O'DWSN (ha-ash-
shaphim), Nork derives the name
from Y= FPN (ashaph=asaph), to
“‘ gather together,” and understands by
it such persons as professed to foretell
events by a contemplation of the stars
in their situation relative to each other.
According to Gesenius, they were en-
chanters or magicians, from WS, (ash-
aph), a root of uncertain meaning; but
in Syriac, “to enchant.” Rendered by
the Sept. and Theodotion, waye (magic).
So the Vulgate. The Venetian Bible
has “astronomers.” So Abulwaled and
Kimchi. Aben Ezra understands
“ physicians.” Hengstenberg thinks of
“exorcists;” not “ natural philoso-
phers,” as Bertholdt and Miinter sup-
pose. According to Diodorus Siculus,
the Babylonian wise men sought to avert
misfortune by lustrations, sacrifices, and
witchcraft. Isaiah (ch, xlvii. 9, 12)
derides Babylon by saying that all the
incantations of their wise men availed
not to avert the threatened ruin from her.
According to Claudian, a rain was as

25


OMAP, It,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





cribed to the incantations of the Chal-
deans, by which the army of Antoninus
was delivered from the threatened de-
struction, Dr. A. Clarke thinks the
name may be derived from ¥B) (na-
phash), ‘to breathe,” these men laying
claim to inspiration ; but supposes them
to have been the philosophers and as-
tronomers among the Babylonians. See
further under chap, ii, 2,

0) “ Therefore stood they before the
king.” Dr. Cox remarks that the king’s
preference of the four young Jews was
all the more remarkable from the fact
that the Chaldeans boasted of their
literature and science, and deemed all
other nations to be barbarians; their
superiority, which thus so greatly at-
tracted the royal favour, being certainly
from the Lord, who exalts and depresses
according to His own good pleasure, and
to subserve the purposes of His univer-
sal government, Keil observes that
Daniel needed to be deeply versed in
the Chaldean wisdom, as formerly Moses
was in the wisdom of Egypt (Acts vii.
22), 80 as to be able to put to shame
the wisdom of this world by the “hidden
wisdom” of God. Gaussen notices
that four benefits were bestowed by God
on these faithful youths as a recompense
for their fidelity : knowledge, skill in all
learning, wisdom in the conduct of
themselves, and, in the case of Daniel
at least, something supernatural, pro-
phetic gifts, a miraculous knowledge of
the secrets of the Lord. Matthew
Henry quaintly remarks that the king
was soon aware that a little of their
divinity was preferable to a great deal of
the divinations he had been used to,


| « And Daniel continued even unto
the first year of King Cyrus.” Heng-
stenberg remarks that the author con-
siders it superfluous to describe more
precisely the event which distinguished
the “first year of Cyrus;” he takes it
for granted that all his readers would
of themselves remember it. He must,
therefore, have written as a cotemporary
for cotemporaries ; a confirmation of the
genuineness of the book. The year
referred to, 536 Bo., exactly seventy
years after the first captives were taken
from Jerusalem to Babylon, of whom
Daniel was one, being then probably
fourteen or sixteen years of age.

‘® That the authority of Daniel had
a very great share in bringing about the
liberation of the Jews is generally ad-
mitted. Bertholdt, who opposes the
genuineness of the book, says that Daniel
without doubt very much contributed
to obtain the permission from Cyrus for
the exiled Jews to return to their father-
land, and to build Jerusalem and the
Temple anew. Kleinert expresses the
opinion that the immediate occasion of
the edict of Cyrus was the reading of
the prophecies of Isaiah concerning the
liberation to be granted to the Jews by
@ person of his name. But this sup.
poses another more remote cause—the
influence of Daniel. Daniel influenced
Cyrus to take the step partly by his
great credit with the monarch, resulting
from all the preceding miraculous events,
even those which had occurred under
the reign of the Chaldeans, partly by
his laying before him the prophecies of
Isaiah concerning him, which he attested
with his own authority.— Hengstenderg,


HOMILETICS.
Szor, V.—Tue ANswERED Prayer (Chap, ii, 1-19),


We come to the first of the visions given to Daniel, The occasion of it was &
dream of Nebuchadnezzar, of which it was required to give both the description


and the interpretation.


The vision thus in harmony


with Daniel’s situation in


Babylon, where pretensions to such wisdom and ability prevailed ; a confirmation
of the genuineness of the book. One object of the vision to elevate Daniel still
higher in the king’s esteem and in the State, and so still further to prepare the way
for Iarael’s liberation at the appointed time, Another and more direct object to
comfort the people of God, then and in all future time, with the assurance that God


rules in the kingdoms of men, and that w
26


hen the great monarchies of the world


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OnAP, If,





have run their allotted course, the kingdom of Messiah shall overthrow them all,
and bless the earth with a lasting reign of righteousness and peace,

The vision was given in answer to prayer. The time of it was “the second
year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar,” that is, as sole monarch, after having reigned
two previous years conjointly with his father, Nabopolassar™. The king, having
had his thoughts seriously exercised about the future (ver. 29), ® had a dream ®
which greatly disturbed him (ver. 1); and as the wise men about him pretended
to interpret dreams, he summoned the various classes of them “,—magicians ),
astrologers, sorcerers, and Chaldeans™, and required them to give both the
dream and its meaning, LEither in realty, as is generally supposed, the dream
having left only a confused impression, or, as others perhaps more correctly think,
in pretence, in order to put to the proof the pretended skill of his wise men, he
declared that the dream had passed from his recollection , and they must give
not only the interpretation, but the dream itself. In accordance with the character
of Oriental despotism, the penalty of failure was to be death in most terrible and
cruel form—to be “hewed in pieces” ®, with the utter demolition of their dwell-
ings®, On the wise men disclaiming, in the Syriac or Chaldaic tongue ™, the
entire inability of themselves or any mere man whatever, to gratify the king’s
desire—a thing competent only to the gods, “‘ whose dwelling is not with flesh ”—
Nebuchadnezzar, probably enraged at discovering, as he thought, the falsehood of
their pretensions, but ostensibly at their wish only to gain time for the safety of
their own persons ®, commanded the chief executioner) at once to inflict the
penalty. Daniel and his three companions, being supposed to be included among
the wise men, though apparently not among those who were summoned into the
king’s presence, were sought out for execution wit. the rest. One refuge they
knew, which the others had not, The God they wo shipped was, as they had
already experienced, a God that hears and answers prayer. At Daniel’s suggestion,
they unite immediately in a concert of prayer for the preservation of their own
lives and those of the wise men of Babylon, and, to that end, for ability from on
high to describe and interpret the king’s dream. The prayer was craciously and
speedily answered,

From the whole section observe—

1. Men’s minds capable of being acted upon by God. Dreams themselves often
from God, as well as the apprehension of their meaning, The power of recollection,
as well as the want of it, also from Him. By divine revelation, mediately or
immediately given, Daniel is enabled not only to interpret the king’s dream, but to
describe the dream itself, without the slightest clue to it. The office of the Spirit
to “bring all things to remembrance,” as well as to “show things to come.” The
faculties of our minds as well as the members of our bodies under the influence and
control of Him who made both, and that both while asleep and awake. “ I awoke,
and my sleep was sweet unto me.” “Thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest
me through visions,”

2. The misery of ungodly men, Nebuchadnezzar troubled and unhappy in the
midst of all his power and grandeur, A dream by night or a thought by day,
laying hold of the mind, able to poison all earthly enjoyments, The sword of
Damocles suspended over the ungodly in the midst of their mirth, Armed guards
around a king’s chamber unable to keep trouble from his spirit. Sleep, the gift of
God to His beloved (Ps. exxvii. 2), often far from the pillow of the ungodly, An
evil conscience a sufficient tormentor. A vague terror the usual accompaniment of
unpardoned sin, Apprehended anger on the part of God enough to rob a man of
peace by day and sleep by night, The mere man of the world “ generally impatient
ander suffering ; apprehensive of danger at every change both of body and mind :
alarmed at every circumstance which to him appears to portend either adversity or
dissolution.” — Wood. :

3. The evils of despotism and absolute power. Like Cowie , despot


emaP. I HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL,


Sn EEE


reasonable and arbitrary, cruel and oppressive, hasty and impetuous, Ie
peep arith while his atta “like the roaring of a lion.” The capricious
disposer of his subjects’ lives and property. The will of an absolute monarch, who
in his wrath rather resembles a madman or a wild beast, takes the place of law,
justice, and reason, Sad condition of a people when the will of one man is law.
Usually the character of Oriental monarchies. The beheaded Baptist and the
slaughtered infants of Bethlehem melancholy examples, The tendency of absolute
power to make good min bad and bad men much worse. Such power only safe in
the hands of Him who is King of Righteousness and Prince of Peace. The happi-
ness of a free and constitutional State, as well as the duty of gratitude to God for
the privilege of living under such, best seen in contrast with the misery of being
under a despotis one. Adam Clarke exclaims on the passage: “ Happy England !
Know and value thy excellent privileges!”
*¢ Thee therefore still, blameworthy as thou art

Thee I account still happy, and the chief

Among the nations, seeing thou art free,

My native nook of earth,”
Plutarch relates that when Dionysius the Second took his departure from Syra-
cuse, the whole city went out to behold the joyful sight, and that their hearts
were so full of the happy event that they were angry with those that were absent
and could not witness with what joy the sun rose that day on Syracuse, now at
last delivered from the chains of slavery.

4, The fearful effects of sin. Sin makes men, who were created in the image of
God, to resemble demons. Degraded Nebuchadnezzar into the likeness of a beast
long before he was driven into the fields to eat grass, “When passion is on the
throne, reason is under foot.” Both God and the devil stamp their image on their
respective servants, Men must resemble the being they worship. We must either
be like the God who is love, or him who was “a murderer from the beginning.”
Causeless and unholy anger is murder in the germ. Anger may enter for a moment
into the breast of a wise man, but “resteth only in the bosom of fools.” The
maxim of Periander, the wise man of Corinth, was—‘ Be master of thine anger.”
The Holy Spirit says, “Let not the sun go down upon your wrath,” Anger, Dr.
Cox observes, is—(1) undignifying ; (2) unreasonable ; (3) destructive of that just
and useful influence to which we should aspire, and for which every one is naturally
capacitated by his position in society ; (4) usually makes a rapid progress; (5) is
productive of great unhappiness ; (6) is a most guilty passion. It is remarked by
Robert Hall: “Vindictive passions surround the soul with a sort of turbulent
atmosphere, than which nothing can be conceived more opposite to the calm and
holy light in which the blessed Spirit loves to dwell.”

5. The helplessness of heathenism and of men without God. Babylon’s wise men,
with all their learning and science, unable either to find direction in their difficulty
or deliverance from their danger. Like the mariners in the storm, they are ‘‘at
their wit’s end.” They believed the gods could tell the king his dream, but they
had no access to them, Their “dwelling is not with flesh.” Their gods do not
dwell with them, and they confess that they have no converse with them, Thus
heathenism, by its own confession, is powerless, Sorry gods, indeed, that cannot
approach men, nor be approached by them! Even the great Bel of Babylon un-
able to help his royal and devoted worshipper. Contrast with this the God of the
Bible, “a very present help in trouble,” and “near to all who call upon Him in
truth.” Blessed are the people who know the “ mystery of godliness, God manifest
in the flesh ;” and that, having been “made flesh” Himself, He can and does dwell
with men on the earth, Matthew Henry notices the righteousness of God in
causing men who imposed on others by pretending to do what they could not, to
be threatened with death for not doing what they did not even pretend to do.

6. a happy privilege of prayer. Acceas to tbe throne of grace both the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIBL, OMAP, IZ
rc


comfort and deliverance of Daniel and his three friends. A noble sight for angels
to look down upon, those four young men on their knees, asking believingly, as
children of a father, the gracious interposition of the God of heaven on behalf of
themselves and others, They knew that for the God of their fathers nothing was
too dark to know, nothing too hard to do, nothing too great to grant to His praying
children, Nothing really good excluded from the subjects of prayer. ‘In every-
thing, by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made
known unto God” (Phil. iv. 6). Even under the law, Moses could appeal to Israel,
‘* What nation is there so great, who hath God so nigh unto them as the Lord our
God is in all things that we call upon Him for?” How much nearer under the
Gospel! “ Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, I will do it.” ‘‘What-
soever things ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall
have them.” “If we ask according to His will, we know that He heareth us; and
if we know that He heareth us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the
petitions we desire of Him” (1 John iii. 22; v. 14, 15). The Spirit of God given
to help us in prayer, and to teach us to pray for what is according to the divine
will (Rom. viii. 26). Hence—

7. The happiness of the godly. Daniel, though exposed to the same danger as
the wise men, is calm and collected, He knew in whom he believed. An
example of the text, “He shall not be afraid of evil tidings; his heart is fixed,
trusting in the Lord.” He knew the God of his fathers to be the God “that
heareth prayer.” The glory of the gospel that it brings the apostolic exhortation
into realised experience and actual practice: “ Be careful (or anxious) for nothing :
but in everything by prayer and supplication, let your requests be made known unto
God ; and the peace of God, that passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts
and minds through Christ Jesus.” Such a religion needed by men in the battle of
life ; and the last-quoted words show how it is to be found,— through Christ
Jesus.” Daniel an example of it in the Old Testament; millions such in the New,
Tried by men and things as others are, yet kept in a peace to which the world is a
stranger,—a peace found in the knowledge and possession of Christ Jesus, ‘The
Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge.”

8. The special importance of united prayer. Daniel invites his three friends to
unite with himself in prayer for the divine interposition, ‘Two are better than
one,” no less in prayer than in labour, “If two of you,” said the Master, “ shall
agree as touching anything that they shall ask, it shall be done for them” (Matt,
xviii. 19). So Esther asked her Jewish maids to join their prayers with hers in a
time of great emergency. The promised baptism of the Holy Ghost bestowed on
the disciples when engaged, as they had been for ten days, in united prayer. Peter’s
deliverance from prison in answer to the united prayer made by the Church for
that object. Those the most valuable friends who are able to join us in our suit at
a throne of grace, Dr. Cox remarks on the passage: “ While the individual sup-
plication of the ‘righteous man availeth much,’ union in prayer is adapted to
increase its fervency, and, through grace, to promote its success; and while it is
adapted to our social nature and suited to our circumstances of common necessity,
it has the express assurance of a divine blessing.” Maar

9. A praying man a national benefit. Here are four men, captives in a strange
land and occupying the position of slaves, made the means, by their intercession
with God, not only of saving the lives’ of a numerous class of citizens, and of
bringing peace and comfort to the troubled mind of the sovereign, but of bringing
that heathen king to confess the worthlessness of his idols, and for a time at least
to favour the worship of the true God among his subjects. How many national
blessings have been bestowed and nationai calamities averted by the believing
prayers of godly men, eternity alone will disclose, A poet reminds us how much
the world—


emaP. 1. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





** Receives advantage from his noiseless hours,
Of which she little dreams, Perhaps she owes
Her sunshine and her rain, her blooming spring
And plenteous harvest, to the prayers he makes,
When, Isaac-like, the solitary saint
Walks forth to meditate at eventide,
And thinks on her who thinks not on herself.”


10, The special privilege of a godly ancestry. Daniel's privilege that he could
address his prayers to God as “the God of his fathers,” and then thank and
praise Him as such, connecting with that relationship the gracious answer he had
received. The title reminds us, as Dr. Cox observes, “that the recollections of
piety are the most solemn and endearing that earth can afford. Some are privileged
to look back upon an extended succession of holy ancestry, and to recount the
names of those who are endeared by relationship as well as distinguished for their
faith, who now form a part of the celestial society. Their sun is set, but their
example continues to shed its holy twilight around the horizon of life, and cheer
them on their pilgrimage.” The recollection of such an ancestry at once a stimulus
to prayer and a help to faith.


Dante, aN Exampie or THE Erricacy oF PRayYER,
“ Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel ina night vision” (ver. 19).


Daniel obtained what he asked of God. Important to inquire, How may wef
Reason and Scripture teach us that various things are necessary to efficacious
prayer. Prayer, to be efficacious, must obviously possess the following conditions,
It must be—

1. Offered in faith. This constantly required. “Let him ask in faith, nothing
wavering: for he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and
tossed. For let not that man think that he shall receive anything of the Lord”
(James i. 6,7). “He that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that
He is the rewarder of them that diligently seek Him” (Heb, xi. 6). The ability
to grant on the part of the Giver, as well as His faithfulness if He has promised,
must be cordially believed. ‘Believe ye that I am able to do this?” (Matt. ix.
28). We must be able to say, “Thine is the power;” and to believe “He is
faithful that promised.” Daniel prayed in confidence that God was the “ Hearer
of prayer.” “The prayer of faith shall save the sick ” (James v, 15). “ As thou
hast believed, so be it done unto thee,”

2. Harnest, Prayer offered without earnestness only begs a refusal. Daniel
prayed as in a matter of life and death. It is the “fervent” prayer that availeth
much. “Elijah prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not ” (James
v.17). “TI will not let Thee go except Thou blese me” (Gen. xxxii, 26). “ They
constrained Him.”

3. Importunate and persevering. This the evidence at once of faith and earnest.
ness, Answers to prayer not always, nor often, granted immediately. Prayer to
be continued till the answer come, Thus prayed Daniel and his three friends,
The disciples in the upper room “ continued in prayer and supplication ” till they
received the promised baptism of fire. The Church prayed for Peter's release till
it was granted. To this end Christ spake a parable that “men ought always to
pray and not to faint,” or give up because the answer is delayed. “Shall not
God avenge His own elect who cry day and night unto Him continually, though
He bear long with him?” Jesus Himself continued whole nights in prayer to
God. Elijah returned to his knees “seven times” before the “little cloud”
appeared,

4, From aright motive and for a right end. “ Ye ask, and receive not, because
ye ask eres that ye may consume it upon your lusts” (James iv. 3). God’s glory


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, CHAP, SI.





and the good of others as well as ourselves to be our true motive. “ Thine is the
glory.” “Hallowed be Thy name,” the first petition taught in the Lord’s Prayer.
Daniel prayed that men’s lives might be saved and God’s name glorified. Prayer
offered to gratify lust, pride, ambition, covetousness, either unanswered or answered
without a blessing, “ He gave them their request, but sent leanness into their soul :
(Ps. evi. 15).

5. Offered with uprightness of heart and life, ‘‘ Whatever we ask we receive of
Him, because we keep His commandments” (1 John iii, 22), The fervent prayer
of the “righteous man” that which availeth much, The language of the man born
blind that both of Nature and Scripture: “ God heareth not sinners ; but if any
man be a worshipper of God and doeth His will, him He heareth” (John ix. 31).
“If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me.” “The prayer of
the wicked is abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of the righteous is His
delight.” The sinner, however, also heard, if he come confessing himself such and
feeling his sin a burden. “God be merciful to me a sinner,” a prayer when offered
sincerely never returned unanswered. Paul’s prayers heard and answered as those
of a sinner before they were so as those of a saint, The prayers of a sinner, groan-
ing under his sin, and pleading for pardon and a clean heart, make sweet music in
heaven. “Behold, he prayeth.”

6. With submission to God’s will and desire only for what is according toit, “Thy
will be done,” the third petition in the Lord’s Prayer. The great Teacher Himself
anexample. “If it be possible, let this cup pass from me ; nevertheless, not my
will, but Thine be done.” Prayer without submission to God’s will, only the
language of rebellion. Prayer for what is not according to God’s will better left
unanswered. ‘If we ask anything according to His will, He heareth us” (1 John
v. 14). The work of the Spirit to teach us to pray for what is according to the
will of God (Rom. viii, 26, 27). Prayer thus offered never unanswered. Con-
nected with this is—

1, With entire self-surrender. For the submission of the will to God the sur-
render of our whole self necessary ; without such surrender our prayer still that
of rebellion. The language of our heart either, “ O Lord, I am Thy servant,” or,
“Our lips are our own ; who is lord over us?” Prayer only safely and profitably
answered where there is entire self-surrender. Such surrender secures either the
blessing asked or something better.


8. In the name and for the sake of Jesus Christ.
of his (chap. ix.), renounces all merit an


acceptance, and pleads only to


Daniel, in a recorded prayer


d righteousness of his own as a ground of
be heard “for the Lord’s, that is, Messiah or


Christ’s, sake.”  Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name” (on my account


or for my sake), “I will do it.”


David taught to use the same prevailing plea—
“Look upon the face of Thine Anointed” (Ps. Ixxxiv. 9).
blessing so asked, because He cannot refuse His Son.


God can refuse no
To plead the name and


merits of Christ, however, implies a cordial acceptance of and trust in Him as a


Saviour.


The consequence of such acceptance and trust is a personal union with


Him, and the consequent indwelling of the Spirit as a “Spirit of adoption,


whereby we cry, Abba, Father.”


With that Spirit we not merely say, “Our


Father,” but “My Father,” and “ pray in the Holy Ghost.”


EXEGETICAL NOTES—” “In
the second year,” &e. The dream oc-
curring at this early period in Nebu-
chadnezzar’s reign, observes Hengsten-
berg, agrees with the fame of Daniel’s
wisdom and prevalency in prayer as 1n-
dicated by Ezekiel, The first mention
made of Daniel by that prophet was


probably in the sixth year of the reign
of Zedekiah (Ezek. viii. 1), conse
quently thirteen or fourteen years after
the carrying away of Daniel into Baby-
lon, The second mention of him five
years later. The repeated mention of
such a person quite natural in the cir
cumstances, Yet this mention of Daniel


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIBL,


ET


by Ezekiel has been made the ground of
an opinion, advanced by Ewald and
espoused by Bunsen, that Daniel was
led captive in the first Assyrian invasion,
and that he lived and prophesied, not in
Babylon, but in Nineveh! Kliefoth,
quoted by Keil, observes that in ch. i, 1
Daniel reckons Nebuchadnezzar’s years
“‘ according to the years of the Israelitish
kings, and sees in him already the king ;
on the contrary, in chap. ii, he treats
of the nations of the world-power, and
reckons here accurately the year of
Nebuchadnezzar, the bearer of the world-
power, from the day in which, having
actually obtained the possession of that
power, he became king of Babylon.”
Keil himself remarks: “If we observe
that Nebuchadnezzar dreamed his dream
in the second year of his reign, and that
he entered on his reign some time after
the destruction of Jerusalem and the
captivity of Jehoiakim, then we can
understand how the three years ap-
pointed for the education of Daniel and
his companions came to an end in the
second year of his reign; for if Nebu-
chadnezzar began to reign in the fifth
year of Jehoiakim, then in the seventh
year of that king three years had passed
since the destruction of Jerusalem, which
took place in the fourth year of his
reign, A whole year or more of their
period of education had passed before
Nebuchadnezzar mounted the throne.”
It is, however, perhaps scarcely correct
to speak of what took place in Jehoia-
kim’s fourth year as the destruction of
Jerusalem, which did not happen till
some years afterwards,

) “ What should come to pass here-
after.” Dr. Pusey notices it as “a
striking picture of the young conqueror,
that, not contented with the vista of
future greatness before him, he was
looking on beyond our little span of
life, which in youth so fills the mind,
to a future when his own earthly life
should be closed.”

® « Nebuchadnezear dreamed dreams.”
Mr. Wood, in his Lectures on Daniel,
observes, that ‘ Nebuchadnezzar’s dream
was an event in the Chaldean history
which bore upon it the stamp and im-
preas ae interposition. It in-


volved in its interpretation the future
revolutions of the world, and had re-
ference to that most important revolu-
tion, the introduction of the religion of
Christ, which was to cover the earth,”

(4) “ The king commanded to call the
magicians,” d&e. On all occasions in the
book, says Hengstenberg, not par-
ticular wise men are consulted, but the
whole body of them, probably, as here,
in the persons of their representatives,
or of a selection made from them. Such
in accordance with the information of
Diodorus, that the observations of the
Babylonian wise men were always in-
stituted in company and by a college.
The division of the wise men here in-
dicated is not to be conceived of as if
every individual always confined him-
self to the cultivation of only one par-
ticular branch of Babylonian wisdom ;
the division only amounting to this, that
by rule each should particularly excel
in only some one department The
different branches, too, were so nearly
identified, that it would be difficult
previously to determine whether any one
of them would not, in any given in-
stance, come into operation, :

) “ Magicians.” See note under
chap. i. 20. Dr. Rule observes that the
Hebrew name is generally considered
equivalent with the Greek drgoygaumcrsig
or sacred scribes, not magicians. The
Assyrians had a sacred writing, not like
the pictorial hieroglyphic of Egypt, but
a literal hieroglyphic or ideograph. The
characters were arrow-headed or wedge-
like (cuneiform), as in ordinary inscrip-
tions on the Assyrian sculptures and
Babylonian cylinders, The style was
enigmatic, or at least obscure, by brevity
or abruptness or abbreviation,

() * Sorcerers,” O'PWID (mechash-
shephim), from a Syriac root meaning to
“supplicate ” or “ perform sacred rites ;”
enchanters, magicians, Exod, vii. 11;
Deut, xviii. 10; Mal. iii, 5.—Gesenius,
Sept., Paguaxd¢, one who uses drugs or
incantations. Vulg., “maleficus.” Aben
Ezra, one who uses horoscopes, Gesenius
understands a magician, or one who pre-
tended to cause eclipses by incantations,

| “ Chaldeans.” He rerepresented
as @ class of themselves, A thing in


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DANIEL.


OMAP, Ii,


—OoOoOOOO Ss


itself most probable. The priest-caste
not likely first introduced into Babylonia
by the Chaldeans. No civilised people
of antiquity without an order of priests.
Isaiah, in whose time the Chaldeans had
not yet become masters of Babylon,
describes that city as the prime seat of
the arts of divination. These possessed
& priest-caste before their invasion of
Babylonia. The name of the people
was at Babylon the name of the
whole caste, and occurs as such in the
oldest writers, The name given from
this distinction between the Chaldean
and Babylonian priesthoods, Curtius
speaks of the Persian magi, the Chal-
deans, and the Babylonians as so many
different kinds of wise men in Babylon.
The distinction here no small attesta-
tion to the trustworthiness, and so to
the genuineness, of the book.—Heng-
stenberg. Dr. A. Clarke observes that
the ‘‘ Chaldeans” might be a college
of learned men, where all arts and
sciences were professed and taught;
that they were the most ancient philoso-
phers of the world ; and that they might
have been originally inhabitants of
Babylon, and still have preserved to
themselves exclusively the name of
Chaldeans. Keil views them as the
most distinguished class among the
Babylonian wise men.

®) “The thing ts gone from me,”
The passage otherwise rendered by
Michaelis, Gesenius, and others—“ the
word, or decree, has gone forth from
me;” or, according to Winer, Heng-
stenberg, and others, “the thing has
been determined by me,” or “the word
stands firm,” like chap. vi. 12, “ the thing
is true.” Others translate, “‘ let the word
from me be known,” “ be it known unto

ou.”

) “Cut in pieces.” This punish-
ment, observes Keil, common among
the Babylonians (chap. iii. 39 ; Ezekiel
xvi. 40). ‘A Chaldean death-punish-
ment,” says Hengstenberg, “and in
accordance with the cruel character of
the people.” The king’s treatment of
the magicians, he observes, was bar-
barous, but nothing more than, judging
even by our sparing historical informa-


tion, we might expect of him (2 Kings


xxv. 7, 18, 21; Jer. xxxix, 5, &c.; lit
9-11, 24-27). A mistake to expect an
Oriental despot to use our standard in
the estimate of human life, An example
of the author’s acquaintance with the
usages of the time and country, and so a
confirmation of the genuineness of the
book. The Persians had quite a different
mode of inflicting capital punishment.
10 “ Your houses shall be made a dung-
hill.” The houses of Babylon were built
of earth burnt or simply dried in the sun.
When a building was totally demolished
or converted into a confused heap of
rubbish, the entire mass of earth, in
rainy weather, gradually decomposed,
and the place of such a house became
like a dunghill, Bertholdt admits that
the accurate acquaintance here shown
with the mode of building practised in
Babylon shows the piece to have been
written in that country.—Hengstenberg.
au “Tn Syriack.” Therefore, in it
opinion of Hengstenberg, not the lan-
guage of the king and court. The
language here meant is the Eastern
Aramaic or common Chaldaic ; that in
which the following part of the book is
written as far as the end of chap. vii.
Originally the language of Abraham in
his own country, but changed by his
descendants in Palestine for that com-
monly called Hebrew, the language
of Canaan (Isa, xix, 18), which was
given to them for their possession,
This language of Canaan naturally
closely allied to the Phosnician, whose
characters, resembling the Samaritan,
continued to be used by the Hebrews
till changed after the captivity for those
of the Chaldaic. Dr. Rule observes
that the language of Aram (or Syria),
now less properly called Chaldee in one
dialect and Syriac in another, while yet
the two dialects hardly differ, is very
different from the old Chaldee, or lan-
guage of Akkad, the classic tongue of
Assyria used by the race of Akkadians,
who had inhabited Babylonia from the
earliest times, These Chaldees would
converse, he thinks, with each other in
their ancient language; but that speech
the soldier-king would not have under-
stood, and therefore they are under the
necessity of speaking to him in his
33


GHaP. 117


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





mother tongue. A different view from
that taken by Hengstenberg.

a2) “Ve would gain the time.” Either
till the king could recollect the dream
himself, or should become indifferent
about the matter, or till they could in-
vent something in the place of it, or get
time to escape with life and property.—
A, Clark.

13) “Captain of the king’s guard.”
Margin: ‘Chief of the executioners or
slaughtermen.” ‘The chief of the royal
bodyguard, who also executed the capital
punishments. In Jer. xxxix. 13 he
bears a different name from that in this
passage—an evidence of the genuineness
of the book ; as a spurious Daniel, if he


had derived the corresponding statements
from Jeremiah, would have surely trans-
ferred also the name, in order to give an
appearance of trustworthiness,”—Heng-
stenberg. According to Keil, this man
was regarded as the highest officer of the
king (Jer. xxxix. 9,11; xi.1, &.); his
business being to see to the execution of
the king’s commands (1 Kings ii. 25 ;
2 Kings vi. 8). Dr. Rule remarks that
this was also the Egyptian title 1200
years before Nebuchadnezzar, and the
repetition of both the office and the name
may be noted as one of many affinities
between Egypt and Babylon in customs,
language, and tradition,


HOMILETICS.
Szor. VL—Tux Tuanxservine (Chap, ii, 19-28),


The part of faith not only to pray but to look out for an answer, Daniel
prayed in the firm expectation that, if for God’s glory, an answer would be granted,
When the answer was given in the vision vouchsafed to him, he was in no doubt
about its being such, The vision carried with it the proof of its divine origin,
Revelations from God bear their evidence in their own bosom. No need for Daniel
to wait till the king identifies his dream. Daniel therefore at once gives thanks
and blesses the God of heaven. The text exhibits him at seventeen or eighteen
years of age as a beautiful example of elevated piety and devotion, worthy of the
mention made of him by the prophet Ezekiel some years afterwarda,

In Daniel’s thanksgiving we have—

L The Object of it, This is God, viewed under two aspects,

1. “ The God of heaven” (ver. 19). All blessings received to be traced imme.
diately to God. The title indicates (1.) His unity. The one God in contrast with
the “ goda many” of the heathen. The only God known in heaven, though mys-
teriously subsisting in a “Irinity of persons, (2.) His supremacy. Heavenly
powers and heavenly bodies worshipped by the heathen. Israel’s God the God of
them all. All in heaven as well as on earth subject to Him as His creatures,
Daniel’s God not the sun nor the firmament, but He that made both, (3.) His
majesty. Heaven His throne, the earth His footstool. Nations and their sovereigns
as nothing before Him, This not to be forgotten in our approaches to Him.
Prayer to be addressed to Him as “Our Father, who art in heaven,” (4.) His
holiness, Heaven conceived of as the place of purity, untainted by sin. The abode
only of pure and holy beings. That holy heaven the place of God’s throne and
special residence, (5.) The source and centre of happiness. Heaven the place of
eon: tee God that makes it such. The “God of heaven” makes heaven
what it is. eaven without God no heaven Ee
a eens en to holy creatures: “ Whom have I

2. “ The God of his fathers” (ver, 23). The God known, served, and trusted in
by his fathers, from Abraham downwards. A special mercy when the “God of
heaven ” is also the God of our fathers, Daniel recognises the privilege of having
godly, praying ancestors, Answers to prayer and blessings in general to be then
viewed in connection with such ancestry. , The prayers of godly parents often
puree in the blessings bestowed upon their children after them. Children often


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL. Omar, I,





blessed for the sake of godly forefathers, The prayers of the righteous their
children’s best inheritance. A special reason as well as encouragement to pray to
Him who has been the God of our fathers, “Our fathers trusted in Thee and
were delivered,” a scriptural and powerful plea in prayer. The God of our fathers
likely to be our God too. The promise that comforted Jacob’s sorrowful heart on
his way to Padanaram (Gen. xxviii. 13-15), What God was to our fathers He will
be to us, if we take Him and trust Him as our God. “Iam the Lord; I change
not.” The text a powerful argument with parents to make God in Christ their
oe so as to hand down the blessing to their children and children’s children after
them.

II. The Subject of the thanksgiving. The special subject is the answer to
prayer vouchsafed. ‘ Who hast given me wisdom,” &c. (ver, 23). The very
thing that Daniel and his friends had asked had been granted—wisdom and power
to interpret the king’s dream, and so to save the lives of others as well as them-
selves, as well as to relieve the king’s agitation. The thing granted in answer to
prayer often the very thing asked. Examples, Eliezer, Hannah, Elijah, Nehe-
miah. Faith receives either the very thing asked or something better. With thanks
for the special blessing vouchsafed, Daniel connects blessing and praise.

1. For what God is, (1.) Wise. “Wisdom and might are His” (ver. 20).
Divine wisdom seen in the manner in which all things have been created and in
which all things are governed; in the plan of the universe and the means for
carrying that plan out. Especially seen in the redemption of fallen mankind by
the incarnation and mediatorial work of His own Son. God the only wise. His
wisdom contrasted with the pretended wisdom of the wise men of Babylon, That
wisdom revealed in part in the king’s dream, (2.) Mighty. ‘“ Might” as well as
wisdom His. Has power to execute what His wisdom plans. Power as well as
wisdom necessary to the government as well as the creation of the universe, and of
every, even the smallest portion of it, One object of the king’s dream to exhibit
the power of God, in opposition to the gods of the heathen and the rulers of the
world. Constant reference to this contrast in the descriptions of Jehovah in this
book, “It is He, not as the Chaldean kings in their pride fondly imagined, human
power, that bestows kingdoms, sets up kings and casts them down, and that changes
times.” The author of those great changes in the kingdoms of the world which
Daniel announced in the interpretation of the king’s dream. (3.) Ommntscvent.
“Knoweth what is in darkness,” dc, (ver. 22). Able to “reveal the deep and
secret things,” which the wise men of Babylon, with all their pretension, were
amable to do, or their goda to do for them. All things naked and open before
Him. No darkness or shadow of death where men may hide themselves from
His sight. Hell and the invisible world without a covering before Him. The
future as the present within His ken. Sees the end from the beginning. ‘ Known
unto Him all His works from the beginning of the world.” All history, including
the lives and doings of the humblest of His creatures, only the development of His
plan formed before the foundation of the world. No mysteries with God. The
web of the universe, with its endlessly varied pattern, all before His all-seeing and
all-contriving mind from the beginning, and that without any prejudice to the free
agency of His intelligent creatures,


Dante, ExuisiTeD IN THE TEXT A8 AN EXAMPLE OF THANKSGIVING.
“Then Daniel blessed the God of heaven” (ver. 19).


Mercies in general, and answers to prayer in particular, call for due ac-
knowledgment, Favours demand returns. A thankless heart a graceless one,
“Neither were they thankful,” among the marks of man’s apostasy from God.
Of the ten cleansed lepers, only one “returned to give glory to God.” x much


CMAP. IL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


aaa REneeeeere ee


prayer in the world, still less of thanksgiving. A gracious soul not only prays but
}taises, especially when prayer has been heard and answered. Thanksgiving for
answers to prayer doubles the blessing. ‘ More blessed to give than to receive,”
Thanksgiving both God’s right and man’s happiness, The want of it a wrong
both against God and ourselves, To give thanks not only right and “comely,”
but “pleasant,”—pleasant both to God and man. The ungodly man prays at
times in a way; the godly both prays and gives thanks. Prayer made in hell,
though in vain; thanksgiving and praise the employment of heaven,

Daniel’s thanksgiving was—(1.) Prompt, Followed immediately on the bestow-
ment of the blessing. Zhen Daniel blessed the God of heaven.” Thanks
delayed lose half their value. He gives twice who gives quickly. Christ gave
thanks even before the answer to His prayer was actually given, though anticipated
(John xi. 41). (2.) Hearty. Indicated by the language and enlargement on the
subject. Heartless thanks not real ones, The thankful leper fell down on his
face on giving thanks to Jesus, a thing more like a person asking for a favour than
giving thanks for one. Daniel as hearty in his thanks as he had been in his
prayers, “I thank thee, O God of my fathers.” So the Psalmist : “I will praise
thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart; for great has been Thy mercy toward
me” (Ps, Ixxxvi. 12, 13), (3.) Full. Daniel copious in his thanksgiving, as in
his prayer (ch. ix.) Anxious to omit nothing in describing the blessing
received. When God is not stinted in His gifts, we should not be stinted in
our thanksgiving,





HOMILETICS.
Szor. VII.—Tur Tzstmony (Chap. ii, 24-80),


Daniel’s thanksgiving to God immediatel followed by his testimo
Life being at stake, the business required Kaitel Daniel sar & chance al pre
to the captain of the guard, informing him he was able to meet the king’s wish,
and desiring to be admitted to his presence, In answering the king’s question
“ Art thou able,” &e, (ver. 26), Daniel verifies the words of the Psalmist, :
haps his own,—“TI will speak of thy testimonies before kings, and I will not be
eS " (Ps. cxix. 46). His testimony includes reference to—-

- The wise men and soothsayers ™ of Babylon and, by implicati

they worshipped. Daniel deciares what they had already oor nie has Ga
inability to show the king’s dream (ver, 27). The gods they served were equally
unable to help them. Were they worthy of the name of gods and of the worshi
of men, they must know the secret of the king’s dream, and both for the sake of
the king, their priests, and themselves, be willing to communicate it to their
asters ngex in danger of their lives. The pretensions of these priests were
vain. ey wi i i
anaes ) ere either deceived themselves or sought to deceive others, or

2. The true God. “But there is a God in heaven,” i
neither ashamed nor afraid to confess God before kings, a, Mees “ea ep
His superiority to all the gods of Babylon, but His exclusive claim to deity, The
wise men spoke of “the gods whose dwelling is not with flesh ;” Daniel declatal
there is but one The “ gods many” of the heathen he tacitly intimates were
mere figments, shadows, and worthless dumb idols, neither able to help their
worshippers nor themselves, He declares, further, the spirituali ‘


God who is able to reveal the king’s dream is the God of hea the invisibi
Being whose throne and abode is in heaven, and who fills it with His” balenst
The proet of His sole and exclusive claim to Godhead about to be given,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL. CHAP, &


ead





Elijah’s challenge : ‘The God that answereth by fire, he is the God.”
The God that revealeth the king’s dream, he and he only is the God.

3. Daniel himself. “ As for me,” &c. (ver. 30), Daniel disclaims any superior
wisdom or merit in himself as the ground of his ability to show the king’s dream,
Ascribes the revelation entirely to God and His good pleasure. God wished to
reveal to the king what should hereafter happen to His kingdom and to the world.
True excellence always lowly. Apparent room and a strong temptation in the
circumstances for Daniel to glory. Daniel’s lowliness of mind the very ground of
the distinction given him. God “giveth grace to the lowly ; the proud He
knoweth afar off.” Daniel, though young, taught the lesson so difficult to fallen
humanity. “He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord.” No glory due to the
best of creatures. ‘Who maketh thee to differ} Or what hast thou that thou
hast not received?” Quite natural that Ezekiel should refer to Daniel as an
example of piety as well as wisdom.


Daniel’s,—


DanieL A Nosie Exampte or Fatrarunt WItNEss-BEaARING,


The high vocation of God’s servants and people to bear witness for Him in the
world, “Ye are my witnesses” (Isa, xliii. 10), This repeated by Christ to His
disciples: ‘Ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem,” &. (Acts i. 8).
This witness to be borne before all classes as occasion may offer and require, “ Ye
shall be brought before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony ” (Mark xiii.
9). To bear testimony to and for Christ in the world often the cross given a dis-
ciple to carry. Sometimes hard enough to do so before friends and neighbours, in
the workshop, the market, or the drawing-room. The sneer of the unbelieving its
frequent consequence. Sometimes something more than a sneer. ‘“ Martyr” literally
a “ witness,” or a witness-bearer. <A cruel death in days past the frequent result of
faithful witness-bearing. Hence courage necessary to make a consistent Christian.
Such courage the offspring of the faith that makes a believer. “This is the victory
that overcometh the world, even our faith” (1 John v. 4). “ Virtue” or courage to
be added to “faith” (2 Peter i. 5). Hence faith’s noble roll of witness-bearers
(Heb. xi.) The “cloud of witnesses ” not mere spectators but witness-bearers,
who on earth bore faithful testimony for God and His truth, Christ Himself the great
witness-bearer,— who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession.” The
world to be won to Christ and to God by faithful witness-bearing, The testimony
to be borne as well by our life as our lips. Future glory the reward of faithful
witness-bearing, ‘“ Whoso shall confess me before men, him will I confess also
before my Father which is in heaven” (Matt. x. 32).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—® “Sooth-
sayers.” An old English word literally
denoting “truth-tellers,” strangely ap-
plied to those who, as a matter of fact,
were generally the reverse. Isaiah (ch.
xliv, 25) and Jeremiah (ch. i, 36) both
refer to the same class under the express
term “liars,” O°%3 (baddim). The term
in the text, 1113 (gozrin), denotes, ac-
cording to Hengstenberg, ‘‘definers of
fate.” This name is supposed by some
to be derived from 4 (gezar) to
“divide,” “ cut off ;” the knowledge of
fate being supposed to be gained from
the observation of the stars, which
were for that purpose divided into cer-


tain fields, Dr. Rule gives a different
derivation, and observes: “If the word
may be explained according to its literal
meaning, they delivered the conclusion
in doubtful questions, arrived at after
the usual methods of divination had
been employed without result. They
were the deciders,”

@® Their fortune-telling, however,: it
appears, did sometimes happen to prove
true. Plutarch relates of Otho, before
he became emperor, that the Chaldeans
and other diviners whom he had always
about him, would not suffer him entirely
to give up his hopes or abandon his de
sign of assuming the purple. In par

87


CHAP, II, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.
cS re ee
ticular, he relied on Ptolemy, because he throne; for as the former part of the
had formerly predicted that he should prophecy had proved true, he thought


not fall by the hand of Nero, but should he had no reason to despair of the
survive him and ascend the imperial latter,


HOMILETICS.
Szor. VIII.—Tuz Dream (Chap, ii. 31-35).


With the confidence of a man inspired and commissioned by the Most High,
Daniel proceeds to declare the king’s dream. The dream one of no ordinary char-
acter, Exhibited the fate, not only of the empire of Babylon, but of those which
should succeed it. Foreshowed their destruction and the means by which it should
be effected. A little mysterious stone, with which the history of the world was
bound up, was to accomplish the whole. The dream further unfolded what
should ensue after the destruction of those empires, That stone should itself
become an empire, and as such should fill the whole earth, A fifth monarchy,
totally unlike its predecessors, should take their place, and last for ever,
Thus the history of the world to the end of time was summarily comprehended
in that dream, It is accordingly receiving its fulfilment at the present moment
Most of it has already been accomplished. The image has long ago been
smitten, though not entirely destroyed. A little while and the whole shall be
fulfilled. The stone is enlarging and will soon fill the earth. The time not
distant when the predicted cry shall be heard in heaven, “The kingdoms of this
world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of His Christ” (Rev. xi. 15).
A vague impression both of the import and importance of the dream made on the
king’s mind in his sleep, probably the occasion of his perturbation when he awoke,
The dream in itself fitted to alarm. A gigantic, dazzling, and terrible image stood
before his eyes; then smitten on its feet by an insignificant-looking stone,
mysteriously cut out of a mountain without hands ; then broken in pieces till it
disappeared “like the chaff of the summer threshing-floor.” The dream all the
more likely to alarm in a country where dreams were believed to have frequently
an important meaning, and to foreshow future events, the interpretation of which
formed one considerable branch of Chaldee learning. Natural for the king to feel
that his dream had a meaning and a mission—a feeling which it was part of the
divine purpose to produce, and to which his previous thoughts about the future
had doubtless contributed (ver. 29). No wonder the king was deeply concerned
to discover what that meaning was, The dream consisted of four parts—

L The Image, Images of animal forms familiar to the heathen world,
especially in Babylon at that time®, The figure here a human one. Ina cor.
responding vision afforded to Daniel himself (chap. vii.), the figures those of wild
beasts, The kingdoms of the world symbolised in both cases, but as naturally
presenting different aspects to a worldly ruler and a servant of God®, The image
in the king’s dream not unlikely the original idea of that which he afterwards
erected on the plainsof Dura (chap, iii). An image the appropriate symbol of the
world which men worship. The image in the king’s dream possessed of five leading
features, It was—

1. Gigantic in its dimensions, “A great image,” That afterwards erected by
the king sixty cubits or about thirty yards in height, probably, however, includ-
ing the pedestal. Figures of monstrous proportions familiar to the eye in Chaldea
as in Egypt®, A gigantic human figure an appropriate symbol of the world,
with its great and universal monarchies succeeding each other, Yet how little
that world when compared with the value of a man’s own soul, or the grandeur of
eternity! An image indeed, and “ vain show.”


2. Seta $m ts composition, The head of gold, the breast and arms of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL, CHAP, Ii,


et


silver, the belly and thighs of brass, the legs of iron, terminating in feet and
toes partly of iron and partly of clay. The great empires to have a diversity of
character, distinguishing them from each other, while that character was uniform
in each, except in the last, in which a diversity was to take place in the latter
part of its existence, Some were to be conspicuous for splendour, riches, and
show; others to be remarkable for strength, power, and destructiveness. The
first the most splendid, the last the most powerful, though degenerating into a
mixture of weakness and strength. The golden head contrasted with the feet of
iron and clay. ,

3. Terrible in its aspect. An object of terror notwithstanding its brillianey.
The form no further indicated than that it was that of aman. Dr. Rule observes
that it would not be “sculptured in relief, but in the full round, and not connected
with any other object. It was in form terrible and majestic, and we may also be
almost certain that it was in a sitting posture, like the statues of Shalmanezer in
the British Museum,”

4. Resplendent in tts appearance. Its “brightness was excellent,” The metals
composing it, for the most part, such as to dazzle the eyes of the beholder. So the
tempter showed to the Saviour “all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of
them.” This world and its kingdoms something dazzling to the carnal eye. Its
contents “ the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life” (1 John
ii. 16). Hence its witchery and its worship.

5. Symbolical in tts character. This the king’s own conviction. Hence his
desire for the interpretation of his dream, Dreams in ancient times often partak-
ing, or believed to partake, of this character. Hence the class of wise men in
Babylon whose business it was to interpret them, The dreams interpreted by
Joseph in Egypt of this class, as well as his own in his father’s house, Not
uncommon also to represent kingdoms and countries under the figure of a human
being , The great object to decipher the symbols. So in the Book of Revela-
tions, “‘ Here is wisdom, Let him that hath understanding count the number of
the beast: for it is the number of a man” (Rev. xiii. 18),

IL The Stone. Probably to Nebuchadnezzar the most remarkable object in
his dream. To him the most alarming; to us the most comforting. That for
which the whole dream was given. The stone that on which the happiness of the
world and of the universe depends. Six features noticeable in the stone, It was—

1, Mysterious in tts origin. “Cut out of a mountain” or rock “ without
hands.” No human power or instrument visible in its extraction. Its existence
supernatural, and the result of an invisible superhuman agency, The very
existence of Christianity a miracle.

2. Small in its beginning. Smites the image not on the head, nor on the body,
but on the feet. From a small beginning it was to grow into a mountain. (God’s
great works generally small in their commencement, The grain of mustard-seed,

3. Humble in tts appearance. A rough stone taken out of a quarry, mean and
unattractive to look at. Striking contrast in its appearance with that of a
dazzling image of gold, silver, brass, and iron. Things not to be judged according
to outward appearance.

4. Wonderful in its growth, Stones not naturally things that grow. The
peculiarity of this stone that it expanded in its dimensions till it became “a great
mountain,” filling the whole earth, Progress and ultimate greatness its leading
features.

5 Mighty in its effects. Small as at first it was, yet even then mighty enough
to break, initially at least, the gigantic image in pieces, This amazing power of
the stone doubtless the great disturbing element in the king’s dream, The stone
given us to rest our hopes for eternity upon, powerful enough to grind the world
to powder. :

6. Lasting in tts duration. Wo end is ascribed to the stone, aor oie it


OHAP. Ti, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIBL,





symbolised to “stand for ever” (ver. 44). Contrasted with the image. That,
notwithstanding its dazzling glory and apparent strength, is broken in pieces,
carried away by the wind, and vanishes like the chaff of the summer threshing-
floor. This, notwithstanding its small beginning and humble appearance, not
only outlives the image, but lasts for ever. :

TIL The Action of the Stone upon the Image. The stone smote the image on
its feet and “brake them to pieces” (ver. 34). This probably to the king the
most alarming part of his dream. Observe in it—

1. The part smitten. ‘Smote the image on its feet.” The blow to be given
during the last of the empires symbolised by the image, and that in the period of
its mixture and decay, the iron legs having been succeeded by feet of iron and clay.
From the corresponding image of the four beasts, the stroke might appear to fall
rather on the toes, into which the feet are divided (chap. vii. 7-26).

2. The completeness of the destruction. The image was “broken to pieces
together, and became like the chaff of the summer threshing-floor ; and the wind
carried them away, that no place was found for them” (ver. 35). The effect like
that of the corner-stone on its rejecters, “It shall grind him to powder” (Matt
xxi, 44), The same effect indicated by the angel in the Revelation taking up a
great stone like a millstone and casting it into the sea, saying, “Thus with violence
shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all”
fee xviii, 21), So in the corresponding image of the four beasts, “ The beast

the fourth one, corresponding with the legs and feet of the image) was slain, and
his body destroyed and given to the burning flame” (chap, vii, 11).

IV. The Growth of the Stone, “The stone that smote the image became a
great mountain and filled the whole earth” (ver, 35). This perhaps the most
conspicuous and wonderful part of the dream, with which it closes, leaving nothing
to be seen by the king but the mysterious mountain-stone now filling all the earth.
This the grand development of the dream, and that for which all the rest was
intended. This glorious result the hope of the Church and the expectation of a
groaning creation (Rom. viii, 21, 22). The finishing of the mystery of providence
and redemption, Observe—

1, The character of the growth. Growth either slow and gradual or sudden and
rapid. Here not said which, Probably both. Slow and gradual for a time, and
then towards the end sudden and rapid, when the stone assumes its mountain
proportions. So in the vision of the beasts, it is after the destruction of the fourth
beast that the Son of Man appears to be brought before the Ancient of Days, and
to have given to Him “dominion and glory and a kingdom, that all people, nations,
and languages should serve Him” (chap. vii, 13, 14), The growth into a mountain
apparently following upon the destruction of the image, though commencing with
the first smiting of it. So in the Revelation with reference to the same event,
when the seventh angel sounded, announcing the third and last woe, great voices
were heard in heaven, saying, “The kingdoms of this world are become the king-
doms of the Lord and of His Christ, and He shall reign for ever and ever”
(Rev. xi. 15),

2, The completeness of the growth. “It became a mountain and filled the
whole earth.” No stop to its growth till then, The growth from its commence.
ment not however necessarily uniform, Its earlier period slow, interrupted, and
uneven. Often greatly hindered by the image itself. One among the ten toes, or
the Little Horn in the head of the fourth beast, its great antagonist. This and
the beast itself, or the great image having been destroyed, the growth of the stone
rapid and onward till it fills the earth. The growth of the stone as complete as the
destruction of the image. “The earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord,
as the waters cover the sea.” “The glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all
fiesh shall see it together” (Hab. ii. 14; Isa xb 5).


40


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


OmaP. 1





EXEGETICAL NOTES.—® “4 great
image.” The predominance of symbolism
characteristic of the Chaldeans, espe-
cially a preference for symbolising by
means of animal forms, ‘If Daniel sees
a vision (or the king has a dream) in
which animal forms denote kingdoms,
symbolic shapes of that kind must have
been no strangers to the waking world ;
for we dream only of forms which we
see when awake, and in our dreams give
them new and various combinations.”—
Herder, quoted by Hengstenberg.

@) “* Whose brightness was excellent.”
“To Nebuchadnezzar, who aspired only
after human power and glory, the various
empires that were in their order to suc-
ceed his own and tyrannise over the
world, were represented by a splendid
image. But in the prophetic vision of
the man of God, they appeared in other
colours and assumed a very different
form, And under the appropriate sym-
bol of wild beasts, varying in fierceness
and cruelty, and distinguished by mon-
strous peculiarities, the successive empires
of Babylon, Persia, Macedon, and Rome,
the future promoters of idolatry and op-
pressorsof man, wereaptly characterised.”
—Kitio.

(8) “ The form thereof was terrible.”
It was also characteristic of the Chal-
deans to affect the gigantic and grotesque.
This taste found throughout the book.
“Great, high, and dreadful to behold
is the figure which appears to Nebuchad-
nezzar ; just as huge as the figure which
he in reality set up.”—Hengstenberg,
who also remarks that this mode of
representation points to a Babylonian
origin of the book, and is only to be
explained on that supposition.

(4) “This images head was of fine
gold.” “Thou art that head of gold.”
Dr. Bule observes: “ Nebuchadnezzar


and Babylon are addressed as one; the
“ oppressor” and “the golden city” are


identified (Isa, xiv. 4). The epithet


‘ golden ” is descriptive, for it is histori-
cally certain that Babylon was 72D}
(madhhebahh), “an exactress of gold,”
as it is rendered in the margin of our
Bibles, beyond any other ruling city in
the world.” It is noticeable that Achan’s
wedge of gold is coupled with the Baby
lonish garment (Josh. vii. 21).

(5) Hengstenberg remarks that ‘the
division of the wise men into distinct
classes amounted merely to this, that by
rule each should particularly excel in
only some one department, as, according
to chap. i, 17, Daniel excelled in inter-
preting dreams ; and hence when any-
thing belonging particularly to that de-
partment occurred, he was specially asked
for or associated with the number des-
tined for this branch,” ’ It is distinctly
mentioned, however, as God’s special
gift to Daniel, that he “ had understand-
ing in all visions and dreams,” Daniel
did not appear with those summoned
by the king, the gift not having yet
manifested itself in him, and indeed
his three years’ course of study being
barely completed.

() “The human figure,” observes
Adam Clark, “has been used both by
historians and geographers to represent
the rise, progress, establishment, and
decay of empires, as well as the situation
and importance of the different parts of
the government.” Florus, in the Prow-
mium to his Roman History, represents
the Romans under the form of a human
being in its different stages from infancy
to old age, The representation by the
ancient poets of the four ages of the
world, as those of golden, silver, brass,
and iron, is well known,


HOMILETICS.
Secor. [X.—Tax INTERPRETATION oF THE Dream (Chap. ii. 36-45).


In the interpretation of the king’s dre
Some of these prophecies were communica


am we come to the prophecies of Daniel.
tions from God to Daniel alone, without


any other medium ; others, like the present, through Daniel as the interpreter of


what was already given to another in the shape of a dream,


“ This vision,” says


E. Irving, “was revealed, not to the prophet, but to the king, in order to pat ite
&


OmaP. Il, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





secular and subsidiary nature, but interpreted by the prophet to show that it was,
if not immediately, yet indirectly, connected with the Church.” The prophecies of
Daniel have a character peculiar to themselves, as marked by order and distinct-
ness, and as having in them notes of time at which the events predicted should
take place, These prophecies especially, like those of St. John, are, as Mr. Birks
observes, continuous, beginning with some chief event near to the date when they
were given, They are, therefore, said, like those of the Revelation, to be of the
historical kind, as distinguished from the discursive, the character of the other
prophetical books in general@), They constitute an important portion of that
“sure word of prophecy, whereto we do well to take heed, as to a light shining in
a dark place” (2 Peter i. 19). Very specially given, that “ through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures we might have hope” (Rom. xv. 4). A great part of the
prophecies of Daniel have already been accomplished, and that with such remark-
able exactness as to have given occasion to objectors to deny the genuineness of
the book, as being, in their view, instead of prophecies, mere narrations of events
already past. The past and present fulfilment of one large portion of them leaves
no room for doubt as to the similar fulfilment of the rest. The prophecy before us
we find repeated, with important additions, in a vision given to Daniel himself,
and useful in assisting to understand the present one, That vision, given for the
sake of the additions, is that of the four beasts, contained in chap. vii. In this
and the other prophecies of Daniel, it is not the history of all nations that we find
mapped out, but that of those only which have had to do with the people of God;
that, namely, of the great universal empires of Babylon, Persia, Greece, and Rome,
with the ten Gothic or German nations, into which the last of these came to be
divided, comprehending what is called the prophetic earth, or the world as known
by the ancients,


Parr First: Tae Image (vers. 37—48),


Daniel interprets the four parts of the image, distinguished by the different
materials of which they were composed, as representing the four great successive
monarchies of the world, commencing with that of Babylon, of which Nebuchad-
nezzar was the head, and thus subsisting in the prophet’s own time, These
monarchies are styled indiscriminately “kingdoms” and “ kings,” or ruling
dynasties), These are readily and almost universally understood to be the
empires of Babylon, Persia, Greece, and Rome (), all well known to have pos-
sessed, in a popular sense, the character of universality, and to have succeeded each
other, the last of the four having also, according to the symbol, been divided in
its later period into ten kingdoms. The Jirst of these Daniel himself expressly
declares to be that of which Nebuchadnezzar was the head ser 38). According
to Daniel’s interpretation of the writing on the wall of Belshazzar’s palace, the
empire of Babylon was, at the death of that monarch, given to the Medes and
Persians (chap. v, 26-31). The Persian, or, as it is sometimes called, the Medo-
Persian, was thus the second of the four. In the subsequent vision of the ram and
the he-goat contending for the mastery, the latter, which gained the ascendancy, is
said by Gabriel to be “ the kings of Grecia,” and the former, which was cast down
by the other to the ground, to be the “ kings of Media and Persia” (chap. viii. 3-21),
The Greek empire was therefore the third, This, which was founded by Alexander
the Great, king of Macedon, and therefore sometimes called the Macedonian empire,
was, after being, at the death of its founder, divided among his four principal generals,
Antigonus, Lysimachus, Seleucus and Ptolemy, terminated by the Romans, who
incorporated the whole into their gigantic empire, which therefore formed the
fourth, and which, in its divided form, continues to this day, The different
materials composing the image and representing the four successive empires,
nea Sort from gold to iron and clay, have been viewed as not inaptly exhibiting


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL. OMAP, I, >





humanity in its various stages, from its highest excellence to its lowest decay ; and
as not obscurely indicating a downward course, entirely opposed to the theory of
human progress and perfectibility ©), We now view the constituent parts of the
image.

1, The head, or the Babylonian Empire. This empire, from its riches, re-
presented by gold. Babylon itself called the “golden city,” or, as the margin, the
*exactress of gold” (Isa. xiv. 4). The cruel oppressor of God’s ancient people
(Ps. exxxvii. 8). The mother of idolatry (Jer. li. 7). Notorious for its practice of
sorcery and divination, . Doomed to destruction for its sins (Jer. li. 35; Ps.
exxxvii. 8), Nebuchadnezzar exhibited in the history as an example of cruelty.
Hence Babylon made a type of Rome, “ drunk with the blood of the saints and of
the martyrs of Jesus” (Rev. xvii, 5, 6). The Babylonian empire, commencing
with Nebuchadnezgar’s sole reign about 606-5 B.c., the year also of the commence-
ment of Judah’s captivity, terminated with Belshazzar’s death, about sixty-eight
years afterwards (chap. v. 30, 31). The empire said to be universal (ver. 37, 38).
The words, however, of prophetic Scripture not to be strained to their strictest and
literal meaning. In point of fact, the kingdom of Nebuchadnezzar never extended
to Europe, nor perhaps into Africa beyond the boundaries of Egypt. Virtually,
however, it was universal. Raised up by God in His providence for His own
purpose. “God hath given thee a kingdom” (ver. 37)(), Hence Nebuchad-
nezzar spoken of by God as His “servant” (Jer. xxvii. 6), The purpose designed
to be served by Him the chastisement of Israel and other nations, and the glory
of Jehovah’s own name, The termination of that empire as truly of God as its
establishment. ‘God hath remembered thy kingdom and finished it” (chap. v.
26). Babylon destroyed as foretold by Isaiah two centuries before the event
(Isa. xlv. 1-3). Greek historians relate that Cyrus took Babylon by first draw-
ing off the waters of the Euphrates, and then entering the city from the bed of the
river through the brazen gates which opened upon it, but which on the night of a
great festival had been left unshut “,

2. The breast and arms, or the Medo- Persian Empire. In the night in
which Belshazzar was slain, “ Darius, the Mede, took the kingdom” (chap. v. 30,
31). The capture of Babylon, however, rather the work of the Persians. Media
at first the stronger power, but under Cyrus, who took the city, became the in-
ferior part of the combined monarchy. Both Medes and Persians, however, a8
indicated by the two horns of the ram in another vision, shared in the sovereign
power till united under Cyrus, who was related to both, and from whom the
empire has been generally called the Persian (®. Represented by silver, as inferior
to the first empire ), The conquests of Cyrus neither so extensive nor so numerous
as those of Nebuchadnezzar. The grandeur of the latter and of his great metropolis
never equalled by that of the Persian kings and their new capital, Susa or Shushan,
The Persian monarchy more extensive in size, as indicated by the symbol, but
inferior in ¢mperial majesty. The two arms of the image symbolical of the two
powers that first constituted the empire (19), The monarchy, from its first establish-
ment by Cyrus to the death of the last king, Darius Codomannus, lasted little
more than two hundred years“), The two years assigned to Darius the Mede,
generally supposed to be the same with Cyaxares, completed the seventy years of
Israel’s captivity in Babylon, It was under this second empire, on the accession
of Cyrus, who succeeded his uncle Darius, that the Jews obtained permission to
return to their own land, Judwa, however, still remaining tributary to the empire,
Under the same empire lived Ezra and Nehemiah, Mordecai and Esther, as well
as the prophets Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi; while under it Daniel himself
spent the last years of his life. It was under the reign of Artaxerxes L, surnamed
Longimanus, in the year B.o. 458, that the commission was given to Ezra to repair
to Jerusalem and restore the Temple-worship, about eighty years after the edict of


43


OHAP, II, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DANIEL,








3. The belly and thighs, or the Grecian Empire. The Persians were, after
many encounters, ultimately subdued by the Greeks under Alexander the Great,
king of Macedon, who thus established the Grecian, or, as it is from him sometimes
called, the Macedonian empire, The symbolical metal of this, the third great
monarchy, was brass, corresponding to the Homeric title, the “ brazen-mailed
Greeks” (9), Brass also a frequent symbol of eloquence, for which the Greeks
were distinguished. This third empire said, according to Scripture usage, to “ bear
rule over all the earth.” In the vision of the four beasts it is represented by
leopard with four wings and four heads, while “dominion” is said to be “ given to
it.” Alexander, after his extensive conquests, commanded that he should be called
“king of all the world,” and is said to have wept because there were no more
worlds to conquer. After colonising Asia with Grecian cities (8), he died in
Babylon at the age of thirty-two, in consequence of a debauch (4), The Greek
or Macedonian empire was continued under his successors, who, however, were not
the members of his own family, but his favourite generals, These, as already
remarked, were four, being represented in the corresponding vision by the four
heads of the leopard, and in another by the four “notable horns” of the he-goat
(chap. vii, 6; viii, 8). In the fourfold division of the empire after the battle of
Ipsus, the two principal portions, those of Syria and Egypt, fell to Seleucus and
Ptolemy Lagus, hence called respectively the Seleucids and the Lagidw, and
probably represented by the two thighs of the image, it being with these alone that
the Jewish Church and nation had to do (5), The third empire was the period of
the Jews’ greatest suffering, and at the same time their greatest national renown,
It included the persecutions of Antiochus Epiphanes, one of the kings of Syria, and
the heroic struggles of the Maccabees,

4. The legs and feet, or the Roman Empire. The Greeks in their turn were
subdued by the Romans, who established the fourth and last of the world’s
universal monarchies (), The legs were of tron, while, in the feet, the iron was
mingled with clay. The fourth empire represented as stronger than any of its pre-
decessors, and as breaking them in pieces, “as iron breaketh in pieces and subdueth all
things” (ver. 40). In the corresponding vision, it is represented by a beast without
a name, “dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly,” having great iron teeth,
“devouring and breaking in pieces, and stamping the residue with its feet” (chap.
vil, 7), The Romans subdued and broke in pieces the empire of Alexander and
his successors, as it did the whole known world, They made Syria a Roman
province in the year 65 BO,, as they did Egypt thirty years later. “The arms of
the republic,” says the infidel historian of the Roman empire, “sometimes van-
quished in battle, always victorious in war, advanced with rapid steps to the
Euphrates, the Danube, the Rhine, and the ocean; and the images of gold, or
silver, or brass, that might serve to represent the nations and their kings, were
successively broken by the iron monarchy of Rome.” The Roman empire fitly
represented by tron as well from its immense strength as from the sternness,
hardness, and valour of its people, and the vigour, perseverance, and oppressive
consequences of its military achievements. It was an iron crown which was worn
by its emperor, and an iron yoke to which it subjected the nations, The Romans
pre-eminently “men of the sword.” With the god of war for their legendary
parent, their national fierceness was represented by the she-wolf that nourished
their founder, The iron feet, however, mixed with clay, aptly indicated that, in
the later period of ita existence, the empire should degenerate and be weakened by
an admixture of foreign nations, The kingdom was to be “ divided,—partly strong
and partly broken” or brittle, The people were to “mingle themselves with the
seed of men,” or with inferior races ; but not so as to “cleave one to another, even
as iron is not mixed with clay” (ver, 40-43). It is well known that the Roman
empire, in its later period, was weakened by the irruptions of barbarous nations


from el orth, who gradually became mingled with the native inhabitants @7),


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL. OmAP, IL





Their mingling themselves with “‘ the seed of men” without cleaving to each other,
is believed to point to the marriage alliances formed by the Romans with the
barbarians, which were yet followed by no cordial union (8); “reasons of state,”
as Bishop Newton observes, being “ stronger than the ties of blood, and interest
generally availing more than affinity.” This fourth empire had the farther marked
peculiarity that in its later period of weakness and decay, and in connection with
this very admixture of foreign elements represented by the clay, it was to be
divided into ten separate kingdoms, indicated by the ten toes of the image, The
same remarkable circumstance symbolised, in Daniel’s corresponding vision, by the
ten horns of the fourth beast, expressly said to be ten kings or kingdoms (Dan. vii
24). And it is a singular confirmation of the correctness of the application, that the
number of inferior kingdoms formed out of the weakened and dismembered Roman
empire, in consequence of the irruptions from the North, has been generally regarded
as, with more or less exactness, ten @%), The number of these Gothic or German
kingdoms appears to have been exactly ten at the earliest period of their formation,
but to have afterwards varied, in consequence of the frequent though temporary
alliances predicted in the prophecy ; the number, however, never departing far from
the original ten. The tenfold character of the kingdoms, it has been observed,
“ dominant through the whole period of their existence, probably to appear at the
beginning and close of their history, though not always strictly maintained through-
out” (2), The two legs of the image may be regarded as foreshadowing the
division of the empire into that of the East and West, previous to the formation of
the ten kingdoms. To the fourth or Roman empire also were the Jews made
subject. It was soon after the battle of Pydna that they first came in contact with
that power which, in the providence of God, was to be the instrument of a sorer
chastisement and a longer captivity than that by Nebuchadnezzar. Their subjugation
itself the consequence of trust in an arm of flesh. Leaning on Rome as they had
done on Egypt, they were pierced by the broken reed. The league with Rome,
sued for and obtained by Judas and Jason, the Maccabean leaders, against their
Grecian masters, proved the step to their subjection to the new world-power. It
was after Judwa had become a province of the Roman empire that the Redeemer
of the world was born. The predicted manner of His vicarious death and crucifixion
the consequence of that subjugation, exhibiting, as it did, Christ “ made a curse for
us” (Matt. xxvii. 26; Gal. iii, 13). It was the representative of this empire in
Judea that wrote the title over the cross, TH1s 18 JEsu8 THE KING oF THE JEWS
(Matt. xxvii. 37). That same “King of the Jews” to be the Founder of a divine
monarchy that shall “fill the whole earth.”

From this part of the interpretation of the dream we may notice—

1. The foreknowledge and omniscience of God. Here is a prophetic outline of
the history of the civilised world for upwards of a thousand years ; the four great
world-monarchies, commencing with Nebuchadnezzar who had recently ascended
the throne; their respective characters; the decay of the fourth from foreign
mixture, with its division into ten separate kingdoms, History shows the prophecy
to have been fulfilled as truly since the death of Antiochus Epiphanes as before it.
“Known unto God are all His works from the beginning of the world.” It is
natural that He who created the world should have had a plan, not only for its
creation but its future history, All history but the fulfilment of that plan. Why
should He not be able to communicate to His servants portions of that plan for His
own glory and the comfort and guidance of His people# ‘The great God hath
made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter” (ver, 45). These
future events, with all their connections, however unlikely to human foresight to
occur (21), all open from the beginning to His omniscient eye, as simply His “ works”
of providence. ; ]

2. The overruling providence of God. History the execution by divine power
of a plan which divine wisdom devised. Such execution is providence. Daniel, in


our. Tt. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


ee Una a INES EEE cenemmmmnntl


his thanksgiving, extolled Jehovah as the God of “wisdom and might,” who
“ changeth the times, and who removeth kings and setteth up kings.” He accord-
ingly reminds Nebuchadnezzar that it was He who gave the nations into his hand,
He did the same thing with his successors, Plutarch wrote @ book about the
Fortune of Alexander; but that fortune was only the providence of God regarding
that monarch, employing him as His free and responsible instrument, as He had
done Cyrus and Nebuchadnezsar before him. “The Lord of hosts mustereth the
hosts of the battle,” and giveth the victory to whomsoever He will. The provi-
dence of God, rather than the boatman, that which carried Caesar and all his fortunes,
That same providence carries the humblest believer and all that concerns him,

3. The evidence of the truth of revelation, Prophecy no mere guess or clever
calculation, whether sage or scientific, Asa simple declaration of future events,
impenetrable to human foresight, it necessarily partakes of the nature of miracle.
Its fulfilment, therefore, the credential of a divine message, Supernatural pre-
dictions must either be from above or from beneath. With holiness as their char
acter and their object, they cannot be the latter. Necessarily therefore from above,
and as such the testimonial of a messenger sent from God. Appealed to as such
by Jesus Himself. ‘ These things have I spoken unto you before they come to
pass, that when they are come to pass ye may believe that [am He.” The character
of the Book of Daniel as inspired Scripture, only attempted to be set aside by the
assertion that its prophecies were merely narratives of the past. But these
prophecies extended not only up to the times of the Maccabees, but far beyond
them, and are receiving their fulfilment at the present day. The simple prediction
of four, and only four, universal monarchies, is such, and in itself the evidence of a
divinely inspired author.

4. The transient nature of human greatness and glory. These reached their
height in the empires of Babylon and Persia, Greece and Rome, Yet the three
first and much of the fourth have passed away, leaving only vestiges behind,
sufficient to testify their existence, The earth-mounds of Babylon, the petty
town of Athens with its fragment-strewn Acropolis, and the wretched remains of
the palace of the Cesars, all echo the cry of the prophet in our ears, * All flesh is
grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field: the grass
withereth, and the flower fadeth, because the Spirit of the Lord bloweth upon it:
surely the people is grass” (Isa, xl, 6, 7). The contrast that follows is striking:
“but the Word of our God shall stand for ever.” History and science, observa-
tion and experience, constantly verify the declaration, Happy those who, relying
on the truths and promises of that Word, secure to themselves, in the possession
of that Saviour whom it reveals, a greatness and a glory that shall not pass away.


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—@) “ The


is done as it were by four main streams,
prophecies of Scripture are of two kinds ;


all commencing from the period at which


the one, Prophecy properly so called, or
the showing forth of the purposes of God
respecting the world and the Church;
the other, Prophetic History, or the same
purposes digested in a narrative of
coming events, drawn up with reference
to time and place.” The latter kind, of
which are the Books of Daniel and the
Revelation, “are nothing else than
histories of the future, expressed for the
most part in @ natural or emblematic,
not an artificial language, that it might
be more expressive and universally in-
telligible. In the Book of Daniel this
46


the prophet lived, and running down to
the time of the end. In the first of
these, are used the emblems of the four
metals combined into an image, to de-
note a fourfold succession of empires,
which should arise one out of the other;
until at length a fifth, described by a
stone cut out without hands, should
destroy them all and fill the earth, and
endure for evermore, In the second,
under the emblem of four beasts, are
described the same four empires, not
with a view of repeating the former
vision, but to connect this new vision


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL.





with the same points of time, in order
to give date and place to the description
of a certain blasphemous power, which
was to do strange things against the
Most High in the time and territory of
the last of the four great empires de-
scribed in the former vision. The third
of these four chief streams of prophetic

_ history connecteth itself with the former
at the struggle of the third kingdom with
the second, in order that it may trace,
within the territory of the third, the
rise of another blasphemous power,
which was also to prevail against the
saints of God till the time of the end.
Now the fourth (for we purposely omit
the prophecy of the seventy weeks) is
not symbolical, being the history of
men, not of things, and also connects
itself with the time of Daniel by the
mention of certain kings immediately
thereafter; which end of connection
having been secured, it makes large
leaps in order to reach the description
of a third blasphemous and ungodly
power, which was to arise in the form
of an individual man, not of an institu-
tion, close to the time of the end.”—
E. Jrving.

(2) “ After thee shall arise another
kingdom” (ver. 39). ‘The exposition
of kings as ruling dynasties in the
symbolic prophecies is confirmed alike
by reason and Scripture usage.” —Birks.
Gaussen remarks that in the image we
may see a change of metal, indicating
not properly a new empire, but a new
people, a new language, a new dynasty,
which rises up to rule over the world,
and to hold under its sway the people
of God; the time of the image being
the “times of the Gentiles” (Luke xxi.
24), that is, the period during which
the Gentiles are to rule over Jerusalem
and to trample it underfoot, beginning
with the Babylonians under Nebuchad-
nezzar and his successors, and continuing
under the Persians, until finally the
Latins take the place of the Greeks in
governing the world and oppressing the
people of God.

(8) Calvin says: “ My assertion is
perfectly correct, that interpreters of any
judgment and candour all explain the
passage of the Babylonian. Persian,


CHAP.





Macedonian, and Roman monarchies,”
‘‘The rival interpretation which has pre-
vailed the most is that of which Porphyry
is the earliest known advocate, and which
has been embraced since by Junius,
Hayn, Lightfoot, Grotius, L’Empereur,
Venema, and a few other writers down
to our own day. Its main feature is to
make the successors of Alexander, the
fourth empire, distinct from that of
Alexander himself, and thus to terminate
the vision before the first Advent. This
view has now scarcely an advocate. An
opposite deviation from the general view
has been adopted by a few writers in
the last fifteen or twenty years. Their
scheme, so far as it has any consistency,
is the following. The empire of Persia
is only the continuation of the first
empire of Babylon; the second, of the
Grecian ; and the third is the Roman ;
the fourth is still future.” —Birks, written
in 1845. Dr. Pusey says: “It is as-
sumed in Rationalist interpretation that
the fourth empire is no empire later
than the Macedonian, to which Antiochus
Epiphanes belonged. For else there
would be prophecy: there is to be no
allusion to the Roman empire; for in
the time of Antiochus human foresight
could not yet discern that it would
become an empire of the world, But if
the Grecian empire is to be the fourth,
which are the other three? . . . Agreed
as this school is as to the result, they
have been nothing less than agreed as
to the process whereby it is to be arrived
at. Every possible combination has been
tried.” All ancient authors speak of the
kingdom of Alexander and his successors
as one and the same kingdom, Josephus
says : “ Alexander being dead, the empire
was divided among his successors.” ‘‘He
doth not say,” observes Bishop Newton,
“‘ that so many new empires were erected.
Even Grotius himself acknowledged that
even now the Hebrews call those king-
doms by one name, the kingdom of the
Grecians.”

() “The Roman empire to be the
fourth kingdom of Daniel, was believed
by the Church of Israel both before and
in our Saviour’s time ; received by the
disciples of the apostles and the whole
Christian Church for the first four hun-

AT


Ou AP, II,


HOMILETIC .JIMMENTARY: DANIEL,


SSSR SD


dred years, without any known contra-
diction, And I confess, having so good
ground in Scripture, it is with me tan-
tum non articulus fidet, little less than
an article of faith. Ephraim Syrus, in
the fourth century, interpreted the
fourth kingdom of the Greek, dividing
that of the Medo-Persian into two, those
of the Medes and of the Persians as the
second and third,—the only exception
to Mede’s assertion. Jerome, in the be-
ginning of the fifth century, speaks of
it as what all ecclesiastical writers had
“handed down,” that the ten kingdoms
were to rise out of the division of the
Roman empire. Cyril of Jerusalem, a
century later, says “that this (the
fourth kingdom) is that of the Romans
has been the tradition of the Church’s
interpreters.” Irengsus, in the second
century, speaks of the division of the
empire as a thing still future. Hippo-
lytus, at the beginning of the third,
says, “Who then are these but the
Romans’ which same is the iron, the
kingdom which now standeth. For its
legs, saith he, are of iron, After this,
then, what remaineth, beloved, save the
toes of the feet of the image, wherein part
shall be of iron and part of clay, being
mixed one with another ?””—Newton.

() “The world,” says Calvin, “ grows
worse as it grows older ; for the Persians
and Medes, who seized upon the whole
East under the auspices of Cyrus, were
worse than the Assyrians and Chaldeans,
So profane poets invented fables about
the four ages, a golden, silver, brazen,
and iron one.” Dr, Coxe observes that
the human figure has been often intro-
duced by historians and poets to repre-
sent cities, peoples, the progress or
decline of empires, or the relative im-
portance of different parts of a govern-
ment,

() “God hath given thee a kingdom”
(ver. 37). Dr. Rule observes that “ this
great king could not have forgotten that
his father was only a Satrap at first, a
successful rebel, who perfidiously allied
himself with his master’s enemies, and
by that means overthrew Nineveh and
set up as king at Babylon. By a sud-
denly acquired sovereignty over all the
servant-kings, he became king of kings;


and thus Nebuchadnezzar, as son of
Nabopolassar, was the first Babylonian
king of kings by inheritance.” Gaussen
says: “ Nebuchadnezzar was sees
sor of the kings of Assyria, most
ancient and tha tacblead of monarchies,
Since Nebuchadnezgar’s father it had
become the empire of Babylon; the
Chaldeans formed but one kingdom
with the Assyrians. The young King
Nebuchadnezzar had met with the most
extraordinary successes from the very
commencement of his reign ; everything
had given way to him. He had been
led from his victories and his brilliant
achievements to regard himself as the
creator of his own magnificent fortune,
and to look upon himself as a kind of
demigod.”

@) Herodotus relates that Cyrus,
wearied with the length of the siege,
devised the plan of diverting the course
of the river; and that when this was
done, those who had been assigned to
that post entered by the bed of the
river, which had ebbed to the height
only of the thighs, and came upon the
Babylonians unexpectedly while cele-
brating a feast with dancing and revelry ;
those living in the middle of the city not
knowing when it was taken on account
of its great extent.

(8) Cyrus was the son of Cambyses,
the brother of Darius, who was the son of
Astyages and the uncle of Cyrus, and
believed to be the second Cyaxares of
the Greek historians. Cyrus at first
fought under his uncle; and on the
taking of Babylon he desired him to
take the kingdom. On the death of his
father and of his uncle, in the year 536
B.0., he became sovereign of the Medes
and Persians,

°) “Inferior to thee.” Castalio ren-
ders the words, “ worse than those.” The
inferiority might have a probable refer-
ence also to the character of the monarchs,
the Persian kings being, according to
Prideaux, the worst race of men that
ever governed an empire. Calvin says,
“Cyrus was, it is true, a prudent prince,
but yet sanguinary. Ambition and ava.
rice carried him fiercely forwards, and he
wandered in every direction like a wild
beast, forgetful of all humanity.”


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; DANIEL.


Q°% Josephus says that the two hands
and shoulders of the image signify that
the empire of the Babylonians should be
dissolved by two kings,

Q@) According to the Canon of Ptolemy,
the successors of Darius the Mede were:
Cyrus, Cambyses, Darius (Hystaspis),
Xerxes, Artaxerxes, Darius IL, Arta-
xerxes II,, Ochus, Arostes, Darius IIL

(12) “ Another third kingdom of brass.”
Josephus explains the symbol by saying
that another, coming from the west,
completely covered with brass, should
destroy the empire of the Medes and
Persians.

(18) “ Which shall bear rule over all
the earth.” Plutarch says that Alexander
founded above seventy cities among the
barbarous people, and sowed Asia with
Greek troops. Dr. Pusey remarks that,
apart from garrisons, towards seventy
cities founded by him or by his generals
at his command, have been traced in
Asia Minor, Syria, Egypt, Mesopotamia,
Media, Hyrcania, Parthia, Bactria, Sog-
diana, India on the Hydaspes, the
Acesines, and the Indus, and in other
countries ; in modern terms, in the whole
of Turkey in Asia, Egypt, all habitable
Persia, north, east, and south beyond
it, in Beloochistan, the Deccan, Cabool,
Afghanistan, the Punjab ; and yet north-
ward in Khorassan and Khondooz, to
Bokhara and Turkestan. In all this
Alexander was imitated by his generals
who succeeded him.

Q4) “‘ Death,” says Gaussen, “in a
moment silences that commanding voice
which made the earth to tremble; and
he for whom, the evening before, the
world seemed too small, is enclosed in a
tomb of porphyry, lately found in Egypt,
and now in the British Museum.”

(5) “ Five years after Alexander's
death, his wife, his brothers, his sisters,
and his children, had all perished ; and
his generals, plunged in blood, were now
disputing for his vast empire. At length,
after thirty years of war, they ‘divided
it toward the four winds of heaven,’ into
four kingdoms, two of which (the only
ones that had to do with the people of
God) soon became more powerful than
the others. These were, north of Jeru-
salem, the Grecian kingdom of the


Seleucide@ in Syria; and south of Jeru-
salem, the Grecian kingdom of the
Piolemies inEgypt. Seleucusand Ptolemy
were two of Alexander's generals; and
their descendants, who in Daniel are
called the kings of the North and the
kings of the South, reigned until the
arrival of the Romans, and ruled in turn
over the people of God.”—Gaussen,

Qs) “ His legs of tron” (ver. 33).
“ The fourth kingdom shall be strong as
iron” (ver. 40). Josephus says that
the two legs might denote the two
Roman consuls. “ After the battle of
Pydna, the Roman conqueror divided
Macedon into four parts, and soon after
reduced it into the form of a province ;
and not long after the fall of Macedon,
Carthage was finally destroyed.” Birks,
Gaussen observes that we may date the
destruction of the thighs of brass and
the commencement of the legs of iron
from the year 65 Bo, when Pompey
overthrew the kingdom of Syria, and so
broke the first thigh; or from the year
30 B.c., when Augustus Caesar destroyed
the second thigh, the Grecian kingdom
of Ptolemy in Egypt, and became the
first emperor of Rome, with his autho
rity fully established in Jerusalem.

(17) “ His feet part of tron and part
of clay” (ver. 33). “ The kingdom shall
be divided, partly strong and partly
broken (marg. brittle)” (vers. 41, 42).
Jerome, who lived to see the incursions
of the Northern barbarians, says in his
Commentary: “The fourth kingdom,
which plainly belongs to the Romans, is
the iron which ‘ breaketh and subdueth
all things ;’ but ‘his feet and toes are
part of iron and part of clay,’ which is
most manifestly proved at this time.
For as in the beginning nothing was
stronger and harder than the Roman
empire, so in the end of things nothing
is weaker; since both in civil wars and
against divers nations we need the assist-
ance of other barbarous nations,” ‘“ From
the reign of Valens,” says Gibbon, “ may


justly be dated the disastrous period of


the fall of the Roman empire, Especially

from that time began the infusion of the

foreign element, tending to weaken the

strength and cohesion of the empire;

the mixture being partly in barbarian
49


OMAP. I.





levies, foreign mercenaries, and conquests
made by the Northern invaders. In 412,
the Visigoths had Aquitaine given them
by the Emperor to retire to. The Bur-
gundians had a region on the Rhine,
which they had invaded, granted them
foraninheritance, Pharamond, the prince
of the Salian Franks in Germany, had
seats granted to his people in the empire
near the same river.” ‘“ And now,” says
Sir Isaac Newton, “the barbarians were
all quieted and settled in several king-
doms within the empire, not only by
conquest, but by the grants of the
Emperor Honorius.”—Quoted by Birks.
“About four hundred years after Christ,”
says M. Gaussen, “almost at the same
moment, ten Gothic nations, speaking
the same language (a kind of German),
warlike and cruel, and countless as the
sand, were seen pouring from the remote
regions of the North towards the fron-
tiers of the fourth kingdom: they crossed
the Danube and the Rhine, seized upon
the Roman empire, and established them-
selves in its capital, a.p, 476. But soon
they too adopted the customs, the re-
ligion, the worship, the very language
of the Romans; so that they continued
the fourth empire under another form.
Their Church was called the Latin
Church, their religion the Romish re-
ligion, their empire the Latin empire,
their sacred language the Latin language,
and their history for ages the history of
the Latin Church and empire.”

(18) “ Shall mingle themselves with the
seed of men, but they shall not cleave one
to another” (ver. 43). Dr. Keith ob-
serves : “ The sovereigns of the different
kingdoms into which the Roman empire
was divided after being broken down
have been perpetually contracting matri-
monial alliances with each other; but
notwithstanding this seeming bond of
union, they have not united or adhered
together.” Mr, Birks, in his book on
the “ First Two Visions of Daniel,”
adduces a great number of instances in
which this was the case. M. Gaussen,
however, regards the mixture of the
iron and the clay as rather pointing to
the union between the Church and the
State, occasioned by the establishment
of Christianity as the religion of the

60


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


empire, as well as that of the ten Gothie
kingdoms, He remarks that at the
time of the conversion of Constantine to
Christianity, a great change was intro-
duced into the government and internal
constitution of the empire, Constantine
exempted the ministers of the Christian
religion from the payment of taxes,
loaded them with riches and honours,
and gave them palaces in the principal
cities of his states. He established
among them an ecclesiastical govern-
ment, recognised in the empire and
sanctioned by the laws, with its superior
and inferior heads, After Constantine,
almost all the emperors continued oF
added to his work. The clergy became
& power that soon equalled that of the
prince, The pastors of the cities governed
those of the country. The priests of the
large towns aspired to rule over those of
the smaller ones, After some time they
even aimed at being independent of the
princes who had recognised them; and
subsequently pushing their haughty pre-
tensions still further, they set themselves
above kings, and claimed the right of
creating or deposing them at pleasure.
The Bishop of Rome proclaimed himself
the bishop of bishops, took the title of
Pontifex Maximus, a title completely
pagan, and which the Roman emperors
had hitherto borne for the celebration of
idolatrous rites The mixture was to
be an internal, not an external division
like that of the toes, but taking place in
the very essence of the constitution, and
existing both in the feet and in the toes,
exactly as we see in all the states of the
Western empire—Italy, Austria, France,
Spain, &c.; this change taking place
eighty years after the arrival of the
Gothic nations. Dr, Rule also suggesta
whether the weakening mixture spoken
of as the “seed of men,” or, according
to the Vulgate and Jerome, the “seed of
man,” was not the uniting of a degene-
rate Christianity, a Christianity in name
rather than in substance,—a system
human in origin, in spirit, and in ad-
ministration,—with all the governments
of Europe until three or four centuries
ago, and still with some of them, though
continually in conflict with one or
another, According to Keil, the figure


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL,


OmAaP, Tl,





is derived from the sowing of a field
with mixed seed, and denotes all the
means employed by the rulers to com-
bine the different nationalities, among
which marriage is only spoken of as the
most important. Dr. Cox remarks that
the Roman and Northern nations were so
dissimilar in their habits and character
that they never could form one uniform
people. Hoffmann, quoted by Pusey, says
in reference to the marriage alliances:
“This was characteristic from the relation
of the immigrating nations to Rome;
they did not found a new kingdom, but
eontinued the Roman, And so it con-
tinues until the end of all earthly power,
until its final ramification into ten
kingdoms.”

(19) « The toes and the feet were part of
tron and part of clay.” Machiavelli, a
Roman historian, specifies by name the
ten Gothic kingdoms into which, like the
ten toes of the feet, the Roman empire
was divided; the Herulo-Thuringi, the
Ostrogoths, the Lombards, the Franks,
the Burgundians, the Visigoths, the
Sueves and Alans, the Vandals, the
Huns, and the Saxons, Jerome, speak-
ing of his own day, in the beginning of
the fifth century, says: “Innumerable
and most savage nations have taken
possession of the whole of Gaul. The
Quadians, the Vandals, the Sarmatians,
the Alani, the Gepidw, the Heruli, the
Saxons, the Burgundians, the Alemanni,
and the Pannonians, have ravaged the
whole country between the Alps and the
Pyrenees, the ocean, and the Rhine ;”
thus, as Archdeacon Harrison remarks,
enumerating exactly ten nations. “The
most usual list, however,” observes Mr.
Birks in 1845, “ of living commentators,
is that which omits the Huns and intro-
duces the Alans as a distinct power.”
Gaussen omits both Huns and Saxons ;
the former, as not settling in the Roman
empire, though they devastated it under
Alaric, and were neither of the same
language nor of the same race as the
other kingdoms; the latter, because
England did not form a part of the
prophetic earth ; neither that country,
nor Holland, nor Lower Germany having
made a part of the Roman State at the
accession of Augustus Cesar. Keil,


Dr. Todd, and some others, think that
the ten kingdoms belong to the future.
On the other hand, Professor Lee thinks
that the feet must necessarily symbolise
heathen Rome in its last times, and that
the kings represented by the toes may
be supposed, in a mystical sense, as the
digit ten, a round number, and signify-
ing a whole series,

(20) “ Asia had been for ages the seat
of power, the mightiest and most popu-
lous region of the globe. Europe was
buried in darkness, and its western tribes
were like outcasts from the family of
nations, Greece itself had scarce risen
into notice, and presented only a con-
fused multitude of feeble and jarring
tribes, That an empire was thus born
among the barbarians of Latium which
would extend its power over Judea,
Syria, and Babylon itself, was an event
which no human wisdom could possibly
divine. That this empire, like iron,
should be endued with a political firm.
ness beyond the mightiest monarchies
of the East, was a prediction no less
surprising, and would nowhere seem
less credible than amidst the proud
courtiers of Babylon, Two centuries
later, in his various accounts of every
region of the earth and of innumerable
towns and rivers, Herodotus never once
mentions the Tiber or the city of Rome.
Yet here, amidst the splendour of Baby-
lon, the prophet announces the rise and
dominion of this fourth and greater
empire.”—Birks, Speaking of the same
unlikelihood in regard to Rome, Dr.
Pusey remarks that we have two Jewish
documents, the one probably a little after
the death of Antiochus Epiphanes, the
other not later than the death of John
Hyrcanus, 8c. 105, which show two
very different aspects of the Jewish
mind towards the Roman commonwealth,
the one in Alexandria, the other in
Palestine; yet in neither is there the
slightest apprehension of Roman great-
ness. The third Sibylline book is now
generally held to be the work of a Jew
in the time of Antiochus Epiphanea
It threatens unhesitatingly that all the
evils which had been done by the
Romans to Asia should be requited with
usury upon them, The first Book of

51


OnAP. It.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





Maccabees, on the other hand, relates
the simple unsuspecting trust which
Judas Maccabseus had in the Romans,
as if they were wholly unambitious, and
conquering only when assailed, ‘The
secret springs of Roman greatness,”
observes Mr, Birks, “had all been
marked and defined in God’s everlasting
counsels, While the empires of the East
were sinking into unsuspected decay,
this mighty power was nursing into
strength amidst the gloomy shades of
the West, which was soon to eclipse
their greatness by a wider extent of
dominion and a more enduring sway... .
The foundations of the republic were
laid in weakness, while Darius and
Xerxes marshalled all Asia ander their
haughty banners, and precipitated their
countless hosts on the States of Greece.
While Miltiades, Themistocles, Cimon,
and Pericles broke the strength of
Persia, and with a band of poets and
sages carried the glory of Athens to its
height, Rome was convulsed with the
factions of the senate and people, gasp-
ing under the tyranny of the Decemvirs,
struggling for existence with the Aiqui,
Volsci, and Veientians, and scarcely
heard of beyond their narrow sphere of
barbarian hostility.”

(21) M. Gaussen calls attention to the
fact that Sir Isaac Newton, while pur-
suing the study of the prophecies, saw,
in counting back the years with the
greatest exactness, that the epochs fixed
by Daniel for the several events, proved


perfectly correct. He saw also that the
heathen astronomer Ptolemy, who lived
140 years after Christ, had, in order
to mark the years of his eclipses,
divided the ages of antiquity exactly
in the same manner as the prophet
had done 745 years before him;
seeing the four great monarchies in
the past, as Daniel had seen them in
the distant future. He saw also that
Ptolemy considered these four mon-
archies as a succession of reigns, as
Daniel views them under the figure
of a single statue, and as forming, in a
manner, only one kingdom. So that the
Babylonian was the commencement of
the Roman, while the Roman was merely
Babylon in its development and its
plenitude. The same author observes
that Le Sage or Las Casas, the friend
and companion of Napoleon Buonaparte
at St. Helena, drew out a chart of the
history of the world, in which, uncon-
sciously, he exactly followed Daniel—
dividing the history into four parts, and
employing four colours to designate the
empires of Babylon, Persia, Greece, and
Rome ; dividing, further, the Greek or
Macedonian empire into four kingdoms,
noticing two of these as much more
powerful than the others, viz, the
Syrian and the Egyptian; and lastly,
dividing the Roman empire in reference
to the Northern invasions, as is usually
done, including both Huns and Anglo-
Saxons,


HOMILETICS.
Sror. X.—Tux INTERPRETATION OF THE Dream— Continued,


Part Srconp: Tux Srons (vers. 44, 45).


The stone no less remarkable than the image. The most glorious part of the
vision, and to Christians the most interesting. May be considered under three
heads: the Stone itself, its Action on the Image, and its Growth and ultimate


Greatness.


I. The Stone itself. While totally unlike all the parts of the image betokening


empire, the stone itself was to become


a kingdom, or rather the kingdom that


was to take the place of all the rest. To be viewed as symbolising both Christ


and His kingdom (),


I The two in a sense identified, Nebuchadnezzar thus
viewed a8 one with his empire: “Thou art this head of gold.”


The kingdom is


Christ reigning by His power and graca Yet Christ and the kingdom to be viewed
oer The kingdom said to be something given to Him (chap. vii. 14).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, CHAP. I,








1. Christ Himself, The “stone of Israel” one of the Old Testament names of
the Messiah. The stone laid for a foundation for sinners to build their hopes
upon (Isa, xxviii. 16). The corner-stone of the spiritual temple (Ps. cxviii. 22;
Eph. ii. 20; 1 Peter ii. 4, 7). A crushing atone of stumbling to those who reject
Him, but a sure and precious foundation to all who accept and trust in Him
(Matt. xxi. 42, 44). Like the stone “cut out of the mountains without hands”
(ver. 45), Christ’s birth supernatural. Born of a virgin and conceived by the
power of the Holy Ghost. Humble in circumstances and mean in outward ap-
pearance. A “root out of a dry ground, without form or comeliness ” (Isa. liii, 2),
His resurrection, or official birth as the Messiah, equally of God (Ps. ii. 7; Acts
xiii, 33). As a stone, he, as God’s appointed King of Zion, breaks opposing
nations as a potter’s vessel (Ps, ii. 9). In the corresponding vision of the Four
Beasts, he who takes the kingdom is “one like the Son of Man, coming with the
clouds of heaven” (chap. vii. 13). Applied by Jesus to Himself at the judgment-
seat of Caiaphas (Matt. xxvi. 64). Christ, however, to be viewed as including
His people. Christ and believers one (John xv. 5; Eph. v. 30), The head and
the members one Christ (1 Cor. xii. 12; Rev. xi. 15). Like the head, the mem-
bers made such by a supernatural and divine birth (John i. 12, 13). Believers
associated with Christ in His government and judgment of the world (1 Cor. vi. 2 ;
Rev. v. 10, xx. 6, xxii. 5, xix. 14, 15). Employed as His instruments both of
mercy and judgment (2 Cor. x. 4, 5; Ps, cxlix. 6-9; Jer. li, 20-24).

2. The kingdom of Christ. Under this aspect the stone ultimately expanded
into “‘a great mountain, filling the whole earth” (ver. 35), This kingdom
identified with the visible Church of the New Testament. Called the kingdom of
*heaven,” from its origin and character ; the kingdom of “God,” from its Author
and end; and the kingdom of * Christ,” from its Ruler and King. Announced
by John the Baptist and by Christ Himself as then nigh at hand (Matt. iii, 2, iv.
17)@. The subject of much of Christ’s teaching both before and after His resur-
rection (Matt, iv. 23; Acts i. 3). Preached by the apostles as in a sense already
come (Acts xxviii. 31 ; 1 Cor. iv. 31 ; Rev.i. 9). The kingdom, however, then as
still, hidden or in mystery (Col. iii. 3, 4; 1 John iii. 2; 1 Peter ii 13; Rom. viii.
18-25). The kingdom connected with the “ patience ” or “ patient waiting for”
of Christ (Rev. i. 9; 2 Thess, iii. 5). Now the kingdom of grace, hereafter the.
kingdom of glory; now the kingdom of the cross, hereafter the kingdom of the
crown. The “kingdom” of Christ, in its manifestation, connected with His second
“appearing ” (2 Tim, iv. 1), A kingdom, though heavenly in its nature, yet, like
the preceding ones, to be set up on earth, and to be everlasting, having no successor
(ver. 44). Was to be set up in “the days of those kings” or kingdoms, namely,
in the fourth or last of them (ver. 44). Jesus born under Augustus, the first
Roman emperor; and the foundation of the kingdom laid on the day of Pentecost
under Tiberius, his successor.

IL The Action of the Stone upon the Image. It “smote the image upon his
feet, and brake them in pieces” (ver. 34). “It shall break in pieces and consume
all these kingdoms” (ver. 44). ‘Upon his feet;” therefore in the time of the
fourth or Roman empire, and in the latter part of that empire, when it had already
degenerated, and the iron had already or was soon to become mixed with clay,
though prior to its tenfold division. It was in the reign of the first empire, when
Rome, having reached its highest pitch of glory, began to enter on its gradual
decline, that Jesus was born, the stone “cut out of the mountain ;” and it
was in that of His immediate successors that the smiting commenced (), Morally
and secretly, that smiting might be said to commence when the idolatry and poly-
theism of the Roman empire was undermined by the preaching of Christ’s gospel
and the new religion which it introduced into the world @), In the days of Nero,
the fifth Roman emperor, the Apostle of the Gentiles could write, “Thanks be
unto God, who always causeth us to triumph in Christ.” ‘‘For the weapons of
our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down Bs strong:


OmaP. i, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,








holds, casting down imaginations and every high thing that exalteth itself against
the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience
of Christ” (2 Cor. ii, 14, x. 4, 5). The Roman empire may be said to have been
shaken by the gospel in the first three centuries, and the great image smitten by it
to its future destruction. “These that have turned the world upside down.” That
destruction, however, was still distant, The judicial smiting of the stone was not
to take place till long after. ‘‘ This gospel of the kingdom must firat be preached
among all nations for a witness, and then shall the end come.” This judicial
destruction prominent in the vision. In the corresponding vision of the prophet
himself, after judgment is given upon the “little horn” of the fourth beast, that
beast is slain, and its “body destroyed and given to the burning flame” (chap. vii.
11). The judicial smiting probably in various stages, according to the three forms
which that fourth beast or Roman empire should assume as Pagan, Papal, and
Infidel (®) ; the final stage being symbolically exhibited in the Apocalypse by the
great battle of Armageddon, in connection with the pouring out of the seventh and
last “vial of the wrath of God” (Rev. xvi. 13-16, xix. 11-21) ©,
IIL. Its Growth and ultimate Greatness. The stone, after smiting the image,
“ became a great mountain and filled the whole earth” (ver. 35), The interpretation :
“The God of heaven shall set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed, and the
kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume
all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever” (ver. 44), In the corresponding
vision it is said that to the Son of Man was given “dominion and glory and a
kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages should serve Him” (chap. vii. 13,
14), This growth and greatness of the stone the glorious part of the king’s dream ;
that to which all the previous works of the Almighty, both in creation and provi-
dence, pointed ; the end, as it is the reward, of the mediatorial undertaking of the
Son of God (Phil ii, 6-11; Isa, liii, 11); the hope, comfort, and joy of the
Church ; the deliverance and blessedness of creation ; the joyous burden of all the
' prophets, who testified beforehand “the sufferings of Christ and the glory that
should follow” (1 Peter i, 11). In the full enlargement, universal prevalence,
and glorious manifestation of that kingdom, which is “ righteousness and peace and
joy in the Holy Ghost,” we see Satan’s head bruised, and paradise restored to a sin-
blighted and curse-stricken world ; men blessed in Christ and all nations calling
Him blessed ; earth filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord; a pure
language turned upon the people, “so that they shall call upon the name of the Lord,
to serve Him with one consent ;” Israel saved, and the receiving back of Israel
life from the dead to the world at large; the Father’s house filled with the sound
of music and dancing at the return of the long-lost prodigal son; the whole
creation “ delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the
children of God” (Rom. viii. 21, 22). The prospect of this blessed consumma-
tion and glorious triumph of the kingdom of Christ in the earth, that which has
gladdened, animated, and sustained the servants of God while battling with the


power of evil in the world, and, as Christ’s witnesses, seeking to carry His gospel to
the ends of the earth.


“The time of rest, the promised Sabbath, comes,
Six thousand years of sorrow have well nigh
Fulfilled their tardy and disastrous course
Over a sinful world ; and what remains
Of this tempestuous state of human things,

Is merely as the working of the sea

Before a calm, that rocks itself to reat,

For He whose ear the winds are, and the clouds
The dust that waits upon His sultry march,
When sin hath moved Him and His wrath is ho
Shall visit earth in mercy ; shall descend

yee bry in His chariot, paved with love;

And what His storms have blasted and defaced

PP For man’s revolt, shall with s amile repair.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL. OHAP. II.


From the prophecy of the Stone we may observe—

1, The glorious future opened up for the world, A kingdom to be established
and to fill the earth, that exceeds all preceding it in excellence, purity, and
happiness, as well as in duration and extent, With heaven for its origin and the
Son of God for its King, it will combine in it all the elements of true grandeur in
its constitution, while it embraces in its influence unnumbered nations and count-
less myriads of souls, ‘To be a subject of this kingdom,” observes Dr. Cox,
“to share in its blessings, to be eternally associated with its people and their
King, must be to be elevated to the height of all glory, to the very summit of our
intelligent, sanctified, and immortal nature.” But this kingdom is to fill the
earth and to embrace in it all nations, thus restoring it to its original para-
dicaical condition

2. The certainty of the Word of God and the truth of Christianity. The pre-
diction regarding the stone as well as of the four great monarchies already in
great part fulfilled. A King and a kingdom corresponding to the description in
the vision have already appeared. Nearly eighteen centuries ago that divine but
apparently humble stone-kingdom smote the glorious world-image. Idolatry and
polytheism disappeared from the Roman empire, and the world was “ turned
upside down.” Christianity, with its humble and despised beginning, has, con-
trary to all human likelihood and expectation, already spread itself, in one form
or other, in a greater or less degree, over most of the known world, Islands and
groups of islands unknown to the ancients have accepted its blessings and
adopted its name. Within the first thirty years after the death of its Founder, one
of its chief promoters could testify that the gospel was preached, and brought
forth fruit “in all the world” (Col. i 6); and within the last eighty years, that
same gospel of the kingdom has been published in at least 226 languages and
dialects, in the form of translations of the Bible, or the more important parts of
it, in scarcely fifty of which it had been printed before; every such translation
representing, in a greater or less degree, the subjects of the heavenly kingdom,
The “King of the Jews” is acknowledged already as King in almost all the
nations, tribes, and languages of the earth ®, The past and present fulfilment of
the prophecy a proof of its divine origin, and a pledge of the future accomplish-
ment of the rest. ‘Heaven and earth may pass away, but my word shall not
pass away.” The stone has already broken the image in pieces and grown into a
mountain, filling at least a considerable portion of the earth, and in the way of
soon filling the whole. “ Therefore let all the house of Israel,” and all the
nations of the world, with their rulers and statesmen and philosophers, ‘know
assuredly that God hath made that same Jesus who was crucified both Lord and
Christ” (Acts ii. 36).

3. The characteristics of Christ's kingdom. (1.) Divine in its origin—a “stone
cut out of the mountain without hand” (Isa. vii. 14; John i, 12, 13). (2)
Humble in its beginning—a “stone,” small, rough, mean, insignificant in its appear-
ance (Isa. liii, 2; Phil, ii, 8). (3) Victorious over all opposition—*“ breaking to
pieces” the opposing kingdoms of the world and “ subduing” all to itself (2 Cor.
x, 4,5; Acts v. 39). (4.) Onward in its progress—growing from a little stone
into a “great mountain” (Acts vi. 7, xii, 24, xix. 20; Isa, ix. 7). (5.) Une
versal in its ultimate extent—destined to ‘‘fill the whole earth” (Ps, ii. 8, Ixxii.
11, 17; Phil. ii, 9,10). (6.) Everlasting in its duration—never to be “ destroyed,”
or to be “left to another people,” or succeeded by another kingdom, but to “stand
for ever” (Ps. lii. 17 ; Rev. xi. 15; Isa, ix. 7).

4, The encouragement given to seck the extension of Christ's cause and kingdom
in the world, and the duty of doing 80. That kingdom and cause, however humble,
weak, and small in any particular place, destined to be victorious over all opposi-
tion. The little one to become a thousand, and the small one a strong nation.
The stone to become a mountain filling all the earth, whatever may pe its


omaP. It, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIBL.





progress. This consummation not only purposed and predicted, but provided for
The result guaranteed by Omnipotence, “Not by might nor by power (of man),
but by my Spirit, saith the Lord.” All power is given unto me in heaven and in
earth ; go ye therefore and teach all nations, &. ; and lo, I am with you alway,
even to the end of the world,” Means to be employed by human instruments, but
these means and instruments to be made effectual by a divine power accompanying
them. ‘ Ye shall receive power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and
ye shall be witnesses unto me in Jerusalem,” &, ‘The weapons of our war-
fare are not carnal, but mighty through God.” At the presence of the Ark,
though accompanied only with the sound of rams’ horns and the human voice, the
walls of Jericho fell, ‘ Who art thou, O great mountain? Before Zerubbabel thou
shalt become a plain.” In submission to and personal interest in that kingdom is
the only safety and happiness of sinful men. Christ and His kingdom the true
Noah’s ark. Inside, peace and safety ; outside, a deluge of wrath. The door
still open and the invitation issued, “Come thou and all thy house into the ark.”
The day of our death or of the Lord’s appearing shuts us either in or out. Either
of these may beat hand. It is for us to enter ourselves, and not to cease earnestly


to persuade others to enter along with us, The time is short, Jesus waits, Tarry


not. Enter now/


EXEGETICAL NOTES,—@® “4
stone cut out without hands,” “ The God
of heaven shall set up a kingdom” (vera,
34,44), ‘The Fathers generally apply
the prophecy to Christ Himself, who
was miraculously born of a virgin with-
out the concurrence of human means,
But it should rather be understood of
the kingdom of Christ, which was formed
out of the Roman empire ; not by number
of hands or strength of armies, but with-
out means and the virtue of second
causes: first set up while the Roman
empire was in its full strength, with legs
of iron,”"—Bishop Newton. Mr. Birks
regards the stone as being also the
Church. ‘Our Lord Himself, by His
miraculous conception and His resur-
rection from the grave, was ‘cut out
without hands,’ with a direct and won-
derful triumph of divine power. His
people, in like manner, are ‘born again,
not of corruptible seed, but of incor-
ruptible, by the word of God, that liveth
and abideth for ever.’ In the day of the
resurrection their separation will be com-
plete ; and being then united to their
Lord, they will form one mystical body,
and will along with Him execute the
predicted judgments.” Dr. A. Clarke
remarks: “ This stone refers chiefly to
the Church, which is represented as a
foundation-stone ;” and adds: “ As the
stone represents Christ and His govern-
ing nee it is here said to be a ‘king-

6


dom,’ s.¢., a state of prevailing rule and
government.” Mede distinguishes be
tween the “kingdom of the stone” and
the “kingdom of the mountain ;” the
first, when it was cut out without
hands ; the second, when it became itself
a mountain. The Jews acknowledge the
stone to be the Messiah, “The ninth
king is King Messiah, who reigns from
the one end of the world to the other;
as it is said, ‘And the stone became a
great mountain.’”"—Pirke R. Elieser.
Willet regards the prophecy as referring,
in the first instance, to Christ’s firat ad-
vent, but, by way of analogy, to His
second coming, when He shall make a
perfect conquest of all earthly kingdoms
and powers. Calvin applies the pro-
phecy both to Christ and His kingdom
arriving at the close of the fourth mo-
narchy ; the stone indicating the humble
and abject beginning of Christ, yet
divinely sent, and His kingdom sepa-
rated from all earthly ones, being divine
and heavenly, Gaussen understands it
of some “feeble and insignificant por-
tion of the Christian Church,” which
shall become the occasion of the over-
throw of the image, and of the enemy of
the Redeemer’s kingdom, without the
will of men being directly employed in
it, or having any ground of glorying
therein, all being obliged to acknowledge
in it the finger of God and the power of
His grace alone


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


OHAP, IZ,


SS


@ “The ‘kingdom of God’ is a phrase
which is constantly employed in Scrip-
ture to denote that state of things which
is placed under the avowed administra-
tion of the Messiah, and which conse-
quently could not precede His personal
appearance. But during His residence
on earth, until His resurrection, this
kingdom is uniformly represented as
future, though near at hand.”—Robert
Hail.

@ “In the days of these kings.”
Augustus, the first Roman emperor, in
whose reign Jesus Christ was born, had
completed the thirty-fourth year of his
age when he returned to Rome after the
overthrow of Antony. ‘From that
period to the end of a lengthened life he
remained in the possession of the greatest
power, and at the head of the most
extensive territory that had yet fallen
to the lot of man.” Its now incipient
weakness and decay may be marked in
the following farther quotations from
Roman history :—“ The military opera-
tions in which Augustus himself took
part were not important. The Arabian
campaign was disastrous, The war of
the Danubeand the Rhine, from a struggle
in defence of the frontier, became an
aggressive movement against the tribes
beyond those rivers, but no permanent
impression was made upon them. While
Tiberius effected the reduction of Pan-
nonia, the district between the Danube
and the great tributaries the Drave and
the Save, establishing a line of forts along
the river to guard against the future
tneursions of the Northmen, Drusus con-
ducted an extensive plan of aggression
against the Germanic nations in general.
He led his troops to the Weser ; but the
difficuities of the country, want of pro-
visions, and more than all, the firm
opposition of the natives, compelled him
to return to the Rhine, leaving two forts
with garrisons on the east bank as a
show of conquest. Tiberius took the
command on the Rhine upon the death
of his brother (Drusus), and constituted
the country from thence to the Weser a
Roman province, in a.p, 5; but was
eventually succeeded by Publius Quin-
tilius Varus, who lost all the advantages
gained, in the autumn of ap 9. The


army, consisting of above 24,000 men,
after an attack of three days, was cut
to pieces. The general fell upon his
sword, and all the forts and posts on the
right bank of the Rhine were taken.
Rome was filled with consternation at
the news of this defeat. Augustus,
then an old man, was cowed by the
stroke, and for a time could only ex-
claim, ‘ Varus, Varus, give me back my
legions.’ Tiberius was forwarded with
reinforcements, but did not deem it
advisable to re-occupy the country be-
yond the Rhine, which reverted to the
Germans.” Tiberius, the successor of
Augustus, “was favourably known for
military capacity ; but the dark features
of his character were gradually de-
veloped by the possession of power,
which allowed him to riot in sensual
indulgences without restraint or disguise.
Two formidable insurrections of the
troops greeted his accession, Three
legions, stationed on the frontier to-
wards the Danube, revolted. The in-
subordination of the grand Roman
army stationed on the Rhine presented
more serious difficulties, The soldiers
demanded to have their time of military
service shortened. The reign of Tiberius,
extending over an interval of twenty-
three years, is barren of political events
of importance in a general history, ex-
cepting the brief career of Germanicus |
beyond the Rhine, But just when
Germany between the Rhine and the
Elbe was on the verge of subjection, Ger-
manicus was recalled by the Emperor,
who was jealous of his fame, and the
country reverted to the native tribes.”
The reign of Caligula, who succeeded
Tiberius, and whom despotic power so
bereft of hia senses that he raised his
horse to the consulship, and built him a
marble stable and an ivory manger, may
be passed without notice. Claudius, his
successor, now upwards of fifty years of
age, was naturally an imbecile. ‘‘ His
society had been chiefly that of women
and slaves. Female influence of the
worst possible description predominated
through his reign. One of the few ea-
tensions of territory under the emperors
was made in the reign of Claudius, a
departure from the policy exemplified
BT


OHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


a i


by Augustus and bequeathed as a
legacy to his successors,—that of re-
stricting the empire to the limits pro-
vided by Nature. South Britain was
now constituted a Roman province, but
the Silures (in Wales) kept the field
with unbroken spirit.” It was during
the reign of Claudius, who died in a.p.
54, that Christianity was extensively
planted in Lesser Asia and in Greece by
the labours of Paul, as related in the
Acts of the Apostles; eventually abol-
ishing the polytheism of the civilised
world, and thus tending to break the
great image in pieces,

(*) “Smote the image upon his feet.”
The smiting, says Mr. Birks, is “ referred
by some early writers to the triumphs of
the gospel after the first Advent, But
Theodoret and others, with more justice,
have referred #% to His second coming,
They saw that the stone was to smite the
image on the toes of iron and clay, and
that the event must therefore follow the
division of the Roman empire This
opinion has, from the same reason, been
received by the best expositors in modern
times.” But the stone is not said to
smite the image on its toes, but on its
feet, and therefore, it may be supposed,
before the division of the empire. Dr.
Coxe remarks: “That the prediction of
the stone does not refer exclusively to
the uttermost periods of the world, ap-
pears evident from the distinctiveness of
the intimation that it will strike the
image upon its feet, not upon the toes:
the latter are mentioned after the former,
as, according to the general construction
of the statue, subsequent in time. Conse-
quently the empire of Rome was to be
smitten when in its strength, or before
the division into several kingdoms, This
interpretation is verified by the fact that
Christ was born in the reign of Augustus,
and the apostolic labours extended to
the period of the commencing decline of
Roman power,” “The fallen empire of
Rome was forcibly struck when the
Apostles fulfilled their Lord’s commis-
sion in going forth to preach the gospel
to every creature, and fell to pieces
when Constantine, in a.p, 331, issued an
edict commanding the destruction of all
heathen temples.” “We may hear,”

58


says Gibbon, “without suspicion oF
scandal, that the introduction, or at least
the abuse, of Christianity, had some
influence on the decline and fall of the
Roman empire.” “Christianity,” he
says again, “erected the triumphant
banner of the cross on the ruins of the
Capitol. Nor was the influence of
Christianity confined to the period or
the limits of the Roman empire. After
@ revolution of thirteen or fourteen cen-
turies, that religion is still professed by
the nations of Europe, the most dis-
tinguished portion of human kind in
arts and learning, as well as in arma
By the industry and zeal of the Euro
peans it has been widely diffused to the
most distant shores of Asia and Africa ;
and by means of their colonies has been
firmly established from Canada to Chili,
in a world unknown to the ancients,”
Keil observes: “The stone which breaks
the image becomes, from the first time
after it has struck the image, ‘a great
mountain which fills the whole earth (ver.
35); and the kingdom of God is erected
by the God of heaven, according to verse
44, not for the first time after the destrue
tion of all the world-kingdoms, but in
the days of the fourth world-monarchy,
and thus during its continuance,”
“Daniel indicates its beginning in a
simple form, although he does not at
large represent its gradual development
in the war against the world-power. . . .
The last judgment forms only the final
completion of the judgment commencing
at the first coming of Christ tothe
earth, which continues from that time
onward through the centuries of the
spread of the kingdom of heaven upon
earth in the form of the Christian Church,
till the visible return of Christ in His
glory in the clouds of heaven to the final
Judgment of the living and the dead.”
Auberlen, however, thinks that “the
chief point which it is necessary to
recognise distinctly and express simply
is, that the commencement of the king-
dom, spoken of in the second and seventh
chapters of Daniel, is nothing else but
the second coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ.” With this he connects “the
re-establishment of the kingdom of
Israel.” Calvin says the sense here is


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


OHAP, IL





proper and literal. According to Gro-
tius, Christ was to put an end to all
earthly empires. Bishop Chandler
says: “The kingdom of this ‘stone’
shall bruise the Jews that stumbled at
Christ’s first coming ; but the kingdom
of the ‘mountain,’ when manifested,
shall bruise the feet of the monarchical
statue to dust, and leave no remains of
the fourth monarchy in its last and
degenerate state,”

) “ Broken to pieces together” (vers,
35, 44). “‘In this destruction of the
image,” says M. Gaussen, “ there shall
be nothing but dust, nothing but the
most frightful anarchy. This complete
and universal breaking up of all exist-
ing governments shall begin in the toes
and extend to the rest of the image.
Disorder, terror, ruin shall overspread
the whole earth; unheard-of anarchy,
indescribable distress, shall seize upon
all nations, which shall seem as in the
agonies of dissolution.”

(6) “We have,” says E. Irving, “ in
the first four seals (in the Book of the
Revelation), the four successive em-
perors in whose times and by whose
chief instrumentality Paganism, the first
enemy of the Church, was brought to
its end, and Rome, its seat, laid low,
as heretofore were Babylon and Jerusa-
lem.” The emperors referred to were
Constantine the Great, Theodosius the
Great, Honorius, and Justinian; the
last of whom was likened by Procopius,
a contemporary, to “a demon sent by
God to destroy men.” “The fifteenth
and sixteenth chapters,” adds Mr, Irving,
«may be eonsidered as belonging to the
pook with the seven seals, being the
seventh seal thereof; or, in general, as
the act of judgment upon the nations ;
or as the period of Christ’s iron reign ;
or as the period of the stone’s smiting
the image to powder—the sevenfold act
of judgment upon the Papal nations,
beginning from the year 1792, at which
the Papal period closed.”

@ “From this magnificent, most
particular, and diversified symbol of
the battle of Armageddon,—whereof
every part hath an allusion to some
previous prophecy of the Apocalypse
or of the other Scriptures, so that it


is, as it were, the end and accomplish-
ment of a hundred predictions,—we
have these certainties: that therein
shall the spirit of Papal superstition
perish, with all those superstitions and
tyrannical forms of civil power and
government which grew out of it; that
therein shall perish the spirit of infidelity
and the forms of destructiveness which
are implied thereby; that therein also
shall other forms of darkness and cruelty
which inspired the heathen world like
wise perish ; that is, their strength and
power shall perish therein, and the
whole earth which they possessed and
overruled shall become the reward and
trophy of ‘Him that sitteth upon the
horse’ and His holy army.”—Zrving.

(8) Even a heathen poet, probably
kindling his torch at the fire of inspired
prophecy, through the medium of one
of the Sibylline books, could sing in his
most elevated strains the happy period
awaiting the world in connection with
Messiah’s kingdom. Virgil’s Eclogue to
Pollio is well known: “Jam redit et
virgo,” &c, ‘Heathen legend,” it has
been said, “often seems a vague reflex
of Holy Writ, and thus the golden age
itself, ere justice left mankind, suggests
the state before the Fall; and some
broken and clouded rays of a truth once
whole and pure, may perhaps be gleaned
from this Eclogue as a witness to ‘the
desire of all nations.’” The author of
one, at least, of the Sibylline books,
however, is believed to have been a Jew.
Pope, in the advertisement to his imita-
tion of the Eclogue to Pollio, says: “In
reading several passages of the prophet
Isaiah which foretell the coming of
Christ and the felicities attending it,
I could not but observe a remarkable
parity between many of the thoughts
and those in the Pollio of Virgil. This
will not seem surprising when we reflect
that the Eclogue was taken from a
Sibylline prophecy on the same subject.”

(®) “Tt is owned,” says Dr, Pusey,
“by those who set these prophecies at
the very latest, that nearly two centuries
before our Lord’s ministry began, it was
foreseen that the kingdom of God should
be established without human aid, to
replace all other Kingdoms, and to be

59


OHAP. Il, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


ea aT i eee ei


replaced by none; to stand for ever, since the world has been ; embracing all
and to fill the earth, Above eighteen times and climes, and still expanding ;
centuries have verified the prediction of unharmed by that destroyer of all thin
the permanency of that kingdom,founded human, Time 3 Strong amid the decay of
as it was by no human means, endowed empires; the freshness and elasticity of
with inextinguishable life, ever conquer- youth written on the brow which has
ing and to conquer in the four quarters outlived eighteen centuries,”

of the world; a kingdom one and alone


HOMILETICS.
Szor, XL—Danixu’s Evevation (Chap, ii, 4649),


The king was convinced that Daniel had given a true description and interpre.
tation of hisdream. The truth also which the youthful prophet declared concern-
ing the true God, approved itself to his understanding and conscience, and for @
time at least was powerfully felt. Under the power of his convictions he confesses
himself a believer in Daniel’s God (ver. 47)@), This all the more remarkable as
the interpretation of his dream seemed opposed to all his worldly projects and
ambitious aims, Daniel’s faithfulness in confessing God and His truth before the
king is rewarded by his hearing the same confession from the king himself,
The result as important to Daniel’s future position and influence, as it was to the
interest of God’s truth, honour, and kingdom in Babylon and in the world. The
more immediate results were—

I. Daniel received the highest honour (ver. 46). The prostration of the king
and oblation presented to Daniel according to Oriental custom. Uncertain
whether civil or religious obeisance intended—probably only the former; indicates,
however, the proneness of fallen man to idolatry, Nebuchadnezzar ready to
worship Daniel as a god, probably from seeing so much of God in him@), §o the
Lycaonians and Melitians in regard to Paul (Acts xiv. 11, 15, xxviii. 6). Nothing
said as to what Daniel did on the occasion. Perhaps he did what Peter did in
regard to Cornelius in similar circumstances—“ Stand up, for I also am a man”
(Acts x. 25, 26); or what the angel did in regard to John when offering similar
obeisance—“ See thou do it not 3 for I am of thy brethren the prophets: worship
God” (Rev, xxii. 8, 9). Those who cordially accept God’s message not slow to
honour the messenger, Daniel had honoured God by his faithful testimony
before the king ; God now honours Daniel by the king’s grateful tribute to himself ;
“Them that honour me I will honour.”

IL Daniel elevated to a lofty position in the State (ver. 48), Made gover-
nor of the province of Babylon, and president of the Magian College), The king
made Daniel “a great man ;” but not so great as God had already made him, both
by His grace and gifts, This official elevation of Daniel a wonderful move-
ment in providence on behalf of the Jewish exiles, In accordance with God’s
gracious promise regarding them: “TI will be to them as a little sanctuary in the
countries where they shall come ” (Ezek, xi 16). An important step to their
ultimate deliverance, An enlargement also of Daniel’s sphere of usefulness,
Found faithful in that which is least, he is now to be entrusted with much,
“To him that hath, more shall be given.” His position as president of the
“wise men” a precious opportunity for communicating to them a purer
doctrine than their own. The light thus graciously made to shine in the
darkness, whether or not the darkness comprehended it. Danie}’s place in the
king’s gate (*), perhaps as one of his councillors, such as to give him ready access
to the king’s person and influence in the king’s councils, Like Joseph, taken as
a slave from prison to the right hand of Pharaoh as ruler of Egypt, Daniel is on a
eimilar << taken as a captive exile, and placed next tc Nebuchadnezzar over


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL, CHAP. IL





oe prornre 2 in Ly eh that humbleth himself shall be exalted.” The
elevation of Daniel as well as Joseph the foreshadowi i i
one (Phil. i, 7-40). Pp owing of a still more important

Til. Daniel’s Elevation shared in by his Three Friends(ver.49). At his request
they are invested with a charge over the affairs of the province of which he himself
was made ruler, Sharers in his prayers, they are made sharers in his promotion.
Unlike the chief butler in Egypt, Daniel in his elevation forgat not former frienda
So Jesus associates His faithful followers with Himself in His future kingdom,
Ye are they that have continued with me in my temptations, and I appoint unto
you a kingdom, even as my Father hath appointed unto me” (Luke xxii. 29),
‘Thou hast made us unto our God kings and priests, and we shall reign upon the
earth.” ‘They lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years” (Rev. v. 10, xx.
4,6). We may notice from the passage—

Ji. Prayer often the path to promotion, The elevation of Daniel and his three
friends the result of their united prayer for divine illumination. Earnest and
believing prayer sooner or later turned into thankful praise. ‘They that sow in
tears shall reap in joy.” ‘Promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the
west, nor from the south; but God is the judge: He putteth down one and setteth
up another” (Ps, Ixxv. 6, 7). That God also the hearer of prayer (Ps. xv. 2).

2. Believers trials only temporary. Daniel and his three friends involved in
the trouble and dangers of the wise men in Babylon. Their sorrow soon turned
into joy. ‘To the upright there ariseth light in the darkness” (Ps, xxx. 5,
exii. 4), “Ye fearful saints, fresh courage take,” &c.

3. The troubles of God's people overruled for good to themselves and others.
“ Daniel’s captivity and the trouble in which the king’s dream involved him, over-
ruled to his being made ruler over Babylon, and a blessing to his people. Joseph
a similar example.” ‘Ye thought evil against me, but God meant it for good”
(Gen. 1 20). The comfort of God’s people in affliction and trouble, that “all
things work together for good to them that love God, that are the called according
to His purpose” (Rom. viii. 28), The loss of earthly things, as in the case of Saul


and his father’s asses, often the gaining of a kingdom.


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—®) “ Your
God is a God of gods” (ver. 47). “God
must, by great revelations, lay open His
omnipotence and omniscience, and show
He is infinitely exalted above the gods
and wise men of this world, and above
all the world-powers, The wise men of
the Chaldean world-power, that is, the
so-called magi, maintained that they
were the possessors of great wisdom, and
such they were indeed celebrated to be,
and that they obtained their wisdom from
their gods. The Lord must, through
great revelations of His omniscience,
show that He alone, of all the possessors
of knowledge, is the Omniscient, while
their knowledge and the knowledge of
their gods is nothing. He must lay
open to the world-power the whole
future, that He may show to it that He
knows it all, even to the very minutest
events, that all lies like a map before
His eyes, and that to Him it is history.


For He who fully knows the whole
future must also be the same who forms
the whole development of the world,
Omnipotence cannot be separated from
omniscience.”—Caspart, quoted by Keil,

(3) “ Fell upon his face and wor-
shipped Daniel” (ver. 46). Dr. Rule
thinks that the king believed some god
or genius to be present with the inter-
preter of his dream ; and in its honour,
or in honour of the God of heaven Him-
self, without intending to worship His
servant, he might have caused the
“ sweet odours” to be poured out before


him.

(8) “ Chief of the governors over all the
wise men” (ver, 49). ‘Wise men”
(pm'>n, khakkimin), here the general
name of the members of the Babylonian
or Chaldean priest-caste. So in Isa
xliv. 25; Jer. 1. 35. The presidents
of the particuiar classes called here
12D (signin), and the grand president

61


Omar. I,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


SS SCavnurroeespeescora a a a ee a Yh ES eek eee


of the entire establishment, }°23D 3) (rab
signin). So Daniel is called here. He
appears as at the same time invested
with important secular power. So Dio-
dorus Siculus speaks of Belesys, who
wrested Babylon from the Assyrians,
as at once chief president of the priest-
caste and governor of Babylon. And
according to Jer. xxxix. 3, 13, the same
chief president, called there 4% 2) (rab
mag), or chief magus, belonged to the
magnates of the kingdom, and was a
member of the Council of State, and as
such even took the field.—Hengstenberg.
According to Kiel, 130 (signin) is the
pural of an Aryan word incorporated
into the Hebrew, and denoting “ vice-
gerent ” or “ prefect.” Hengstenberg re-
marks that the writer’s exact acquaint-
ance with the Babylonian customs and
institutions, as shown in this and other
instances, affords no small confirmation
of the genuineness of the book. A Jew
living in the time of the Maccabees not
likely to possess such knowledge,

() “ Daniel sat in the gate of the


king” (ver. 49). Gates and gateways
of Eastern cities anciently held an im-
portant place. Among other purposes,
they served as places of public delibera-
tion, administration of justice, and royal
audiences (Deut. xvi. 18, xxi, 19, xxv.
7 ; Josh, xx. 4; Judges ix, 35; Ruth iv,
1-11; 1 Kings xxii. 10). The gate of
a royal residence seems to have been
used for similar purposes. Thus Mor-
decai, like Daniel, sat in the king’s gate
as one of the king’s councillors. An
existing trace of this use remains in the
name given to the Turkish court, the
“Porte,” simply signifying the gate,
that part of the palace where the court
was originally held, Keil on the pas-
sage says, “ Near the gate,” that is, at
the court of the king, the gate or door
named for the building (Esth. ii, 19, 21).
According to Gesenius, Daniel was made
prefect of the palace. Junius and others
think that his place was in the king’s
gate, as having the power committed ta
him of admitting people into the king’s
presence,


HOMILETICS.
Szor. XIL—Tsz Gotpxn Image (Chap, iii. 1-7).


Sudden conversions not always lasting ones,


Mere impulses often evanescent,


Men’s goodness sometimes “as the early cloud or as the morning dew that passeth


away.” The stony-ground hearers
only for a while.”


moved, both to good and evil,


“with joy anon receive the word, but dure
Some more liable than others to be suddenly moved—impulsive
characters, Nebuchadnezzar apparently such,


Liable to be suddenly and strongly


On hearing Daniel’s description and interpretation


of his dream, he felt convinced that Daniel’s God was the true one. Under the
influence of this conviction, he had raised Daniel, and at his request his three
friends, to the highest offices in the state, He appeared a converted man, and in


a certain sense perhaps was one,


But there are different kinds of conversion,


There are those which reach the centre of the soul, and those which only touch the


circumference,


Much may be changed before the heart is so,


The suburbs of a


city may be taken when the city itself is not. Even the city may be taken while
the citadel remains in the hands of the besieged. Saul, the future king of Israel,
had another heart given him, but not a new heart, We may have new notions


without a new nature,


conversion only of this character,


Providences, appeals,
the one; only divine almighty power can impart the other,
washed externally, wallows again in the mire,


human appliances may produce
The sow, only
As yet, at least, N ebuchadnezzar’s


Time had effaced his impressions ; and Daniel’s


frequent and necessary absence from court might leave him open to unfavourable
influences, Thus in an evil hour, whether from a feeling of pride in desiring to
erect a symbol of his own greatness ©), or a wish to introduce a new deity for his
own future glory, or a sudden fit of superstitious devotion to his god Bel-Mero-
dach (2), or the idea of employing religion for a political purpose in the consolida-


62


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OHAP. I,





tion of his extensive but heterogeneous empire @), or, finally, which is perhaps the
most likely, from the wily suggestion of envious courtiers, as in the case of Darius
and the lions’ den, Nebuchadnezzar, notwithstanding his former confession of
the true God, resolves to erect in the plains of Dura (4) a colossal image of gold,
and to command all his subjects, at a given signal, to fall down and worship it.
We may notice—

I. The Image and its Erection. The image, doubtless erected on a pedestal,
one of gigantic size ©), and constructed of, or overlaid with, the most precious
metal (6), What the king of Babylon did must be vast and colossal. Such was
the city itself which he had built, or rather rebuilt, with its mountain of hanging
gardens, Nebuchadnezzar’s empire colossal, and everything must be in keeping
with it. A man’s ambitious aims often grow with his success, Nebuchadnezzar’s
ideas now like those of his predecessors on the same plain of Shinar: “ Let us
build us a tower whose top shall reach into heaven.” Possibly the conception from
the image seen in his dream. That dream, that should have humbled his pride
and taught him the vanity of all earthly greatness and glory, perhaps made now
the occasion of rebellion against the God who graciously sent it, Man’s fallen
nature perverts mercies into mischiefs, Sin often makes what was designed for
our benefit to become our bane. God's gifts frequently made objects of idolatry to
the dishonour of the Giver. The brazen serpent, which was given as the means of
healing to one generation, made the object of idolatrous worship by another.
Before the image is worshipped, however, it must be solemnly dedicated to the
deity to honour whom it was erected and whom it was intended to represent.
This was done in the presence of all the grandees of the realm ().

IL The command to worship it. The image erected not for the people to
admire but to worship. The people not left to worship it at their option, but
commanded by royal authority to do so, and that with the penalty of death on
refusing. As the king’s god, it must be worshipped by the people also, and that
as a matter of obedience and loyalty to himself, Natural for fallen man to stretch
his power and authority to the utmost limits. Rulers, not content with obedience
in things civil and secular, must also prescribe in sacred ones; not satisfied with
the things that are Csar’s, they must have also the things that are God’s. Perhaps
they think to render themselves and their kingdom more acceptable to God by
compelling others to worship Him in the way they themselves think best ; forgetting
that religion is a matter between each man and God, and that conscience is a
domain which even kings may not enter. Persuasion and example in matters of
religion, a prince’s privilege ; authority the prerogative of God. To command here,
without @ command from God, both a mischief and a mistake. Hence persecuting
edicts, Inquisitions, and Star-chambers, To all such Nebuchadnezzar ©) now led
the way. The command was, within one short hour after the sound of the music (®)
to worship the image or die the death. The penalty, doubtless, annexed with
special reference to the Jewish exiles: the idolatrous Chaldeans needed no such
enforcement. The death a very terrible one—cast into a fiery furnace Qo), The
penalty the flames, That furnace the prototype of the auto da fés, and the fires
of Smithfield in later days. Superstition and cruelty twin sisters. The Babylon
of the Old Testament followed by the Babylon of the New, Both of them the
“ mother of harlots” and the persecutor of the saints. The saints burned by the
former under the title of rebels; by the latter, under that of heretics. The Papal
Bull, De Comburendo, ‘concerning the burning of heretics,’ a subsequent edition of
the present edict of Nebuchadnezzar.

IIL The obedience to the command. The edict not only issued, but obeyed.
No sooner were the first strains of the music heard, than, according to the pro-
clamation of the herald 2), the blinded multitude fall prostrate before the image,
The music probably intended also tor greater honour to the god and greater attrac-
tion to the service. Perhaps to stimulate and intensify the devotion of Pe people,


qmaP, i. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





The power of music recognised in the church 2s well as on the battlefield. The
fairest gifts often perverted to the foulest purposes, Superstition and idolatry
greatly indebted to the strains of music. The people bow down to the royal idol
with abundant goodwill. In the East especially, people follow a superior like a
flock of sheep. One also must follow another. Each must be like his neighbour,
If not the true God, it matters little what men worship, ‘Gods many and lords
many.’ Babylon the land of graven images, Its people mad upon their idols,
Rome acknowledged the gods of all nations. Christianity was opposed and perse-
cuted, because it was opposed to all other religions, as the only true one, The carnal
mind enmity against God, not against gods, or a god of our own imagining. Idolatry
the depth of human degradation. The prostrate thousands on the plains of Dura
a sight that might make angels weep. ‘There is nothing,” says Matthew Henry,
‘go bad which the careless world will not be drawn to by a concert of music, or
driven to by a fiery furnace.”

We may observe as lessons from the passage—

1. The danger of losing good impressions and turning asiae from a good pro-
fession. Too many copies of Nebuchadnezzar to be found in the Christian Church.
“Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this present world.” Constant need of
David's prayer : ‘“‘ Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe.”

2. Impressions, however good and deep, not to be mistaken for conversions,
Present feelings neither to be slighted nor trusted to, A true conversion will in
time produce its own evidence, ‘“ Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance.” “ By
their fruits ye shall know them.”

3. Mere human authority neither to be exercised nor yielded to in matters of
religion. ‘Render to Cmsar the things that are Cwsar’s, and to God the things
that are God’s.” “We ought to obey God rather than men” (Acts v. 29). So
Acts iv. 19. The case of a parent in regard to his children who are under the
years of discretion, an apparent exception to the above rule. But even here the
authority is to be exercised only in commanding what God has already enjoined.
“T know him, that he will command his children and his household after him, and
they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment” (Gen. xviii. 19).

4. Care to be taken not to follow the multitude to do evil. That a practice is
popular, no proof that it is right, Neither the rectitude of a course, nor the truth
of an opinion, to be decided by the law of the greater number, “The customs of
the people are vain.” “ Wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to
destruction, and many there be that go in thereat,”


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Q) “ The
image which Nebuchadneszar the king
had set up” (ver. 2). Dr. Rule observes
that about three centuries and a half
before the event narrated in the passage
before us, an Assyrian king, named
Asshur-akh-bal, as he relates in his own
annals, erected a similar image in one
of the cities which he had conquered.
The king says; “I made an image of
my majesty ; the laws and emblems of
my true religion I wrote upon it, and
in the city of Isuri I set it up.” Dr.
Rule thinks that the object exposed by
Nebuchadnezzar for public reverence
was no doubt intended to be an image
of his majesty.

@®) acy falleth not down and

4


worshippeth” (ver. 6). Dr. Smith re
marks that Nebuchadnezzar’s first care,
after obtaining quiet possession of his
kingdom after the first Syrian expedi-
tion, was to rebuild the temple of Bel
Bel-Merodach) out of the spoils of the
yrian war, Dr, Taylor thinks Bel-
Merodach the idol intended by the
image. “ He who pays homage to
Merodach,” one of Nebuchadnezzar’s
titles, ‘ We commonly observe, as
peculiar to Nebuchadnezzar, a disposi-
tion to rest his fame on his great works
rather than in his military achieve-
ments; and a strong religious spirit,
manifesting itself especially in a direo.
tion which is almost exclusive to one
particular god, though his own tutelary


OMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


OHAP, IIL





deity and that of his father was Nebo
(Mercury), yet his worship, his ascrip-
tions of praise, his thanksgivings, have
in almost every case for their object
the god Merodach. Under his protec-
tion he placed his son Evil-Merodach.
Merodach is his ‘lord,’ his ‘ great lord,’
the ‘joy of his heart,’ the ‘great lord
who has appointed him to the empire of
the world, and has confided to his care
the far-spread people of the earth.’ He
was to him ‘the supreme chief of the
gods,’ ”—- Rawlinson, quoted by Dr.
Taylor. Dr. Taylor remarks that, accord-
ing to Prideaux, the festival took
place after Nebuchadnezzar’s return from
the destruction of Jerusalem, with the
blinded King Zedekiah among his cap-
tives; and that it is by no means im-
probable that he meant on that special
occasion to exalt his god above the
Jehovah of the Hebrews.

(8) The erection of the statue is
believed by Dr. Taylor and others to
have had also a political design, the
king’s religious fervour, as in the case
of multitudes since his day, being sabor-
dinated to imperial policy, and unity of
worship sought only that it might con-
tribute to the political unity of the
empire.

) “The plain of Dura.” According
to Dr. Smith and others, not Dur on the
left bank of the Tigris, and a hundred
and twenty miles from Babylon, but
more probably in the vicinity of the
mound of Dowair or Duair, to the
south-east of Babylon, where Oppert
discovered the pedestal of a colossal
statue,—a singular attestation of the
authenticity of the narrative. The older
commentators, as Junius, Polanus, and
Willet, thought of the Deera in Susiana,
mentioned by Ptolemy. Hengstenberg
observes that the name is found nowhere
else, neither in the Scriptures nor in
profane writers, and that the author
omits to afford any more precise geo-
graphical definition, assuming the place
to be known to his readers; a corro-
borative evidence of the genuineness of
the book

(6) Whose height was threescore
cubits.” The immense image, says M.
Gaussen, about a hundred feet high,


though not higher than the bronze statue

of Carlo Borromeo in the vicinity of the

Lago Maggiore, which is sixty-four feet

in height, and rests on a pedestal thirty-

six feet high. The Colossus at Rhodes,

dedicated to the sun, was seventy cubits
igh.

() “ An image of gold.” Dr. Taylos
remarks that the same terms being else
where employed to denote that which
was simply overlaid with gold, we may
conclude that the image was formed of
wood covered with a thin layer of gold;
even thus, however, sufficiently costly,
Matthew Henry’s remark on the passage
has too much truth in it: “The wor.
shippers of false gods are not wont to
stick at charges in setting up gods and
worshipping them. ‘They lavish gold
out of the bag’ for that purpose (Isa.
xlvi. 6), which shames our niggardliness
in the worship of the true God.”

© “The king sent to gather together
the princes, the governors,” dc. Of the
officers of the court and state, we have
(1.) The “ princes” (NIBVIYVAN, akhash
darpenaiya), according to Keil ana
Hengstenberg, from kshetra, a kingdom
or province, and ban, an overseer or
guardian; “princes.” Gesenius, how-
ever, regards the word as the Hebrew
form of the Zend or Pehlevic kshatrap
(a satrap), and understands “ presidents
of the greater provinces ;” officers among
the ancient Persians invested with civil
and military power ; deputies and lieu-
tenants of the king, whose splendour
they imitated. Wintle, like the Sept.
and Vulgate, renders the word “satraps,”
(2.) The “ governors” (8/23, signazya,
a word of Persian origin), according to
Hengstenberg, “chief magistrates of
Babylon; the rulers of provinces ;” Sept,
“ generals or commanders.” Wintle ren-
ders the word “senators,” Dr. Rule
regards them as governors over districts,
officers of the civil order. Rendered
‘“‘ governors” in chap, ii, 48, and applied
to those who presided over colleges of
the Magi. (3.) The “ captains ” (RNJOB
pakhavatha), superintendents of single
parts of a province in the Assyrian em-
pire, or of a smaller province than a
satrapy. The word probably of Persian
origin, According to Benfey, from the

65


OHaP, I,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL.





Sanscrit paksha, a companion or friend,
and so a prefect of a province, as the
associate of the king; a pasha.—Hengsten-
berg. Dr. Rule thinks them to have been
of the military order, dukes or generals,
(4.) The “judges” (STATIN, adargoz
raiya), from V8 (adar), dignity, and
P'S (gozrin), judges; the chief judges. —
Gesenius. So Wintle. Dr. Rule makes
them viceroys over the provinces. (5.)
The “ treasurers ” (8373']3, gedobhraiya),
like 134 (gizbar) in Ezra i. 8 and else-
where, the sibilant? being changed into
1; from the original Semitic t23 (ganaz),
contracted into 13 (gaz), the Aramaic
form, and the Persian termination var,
serving for the formation of possessives,
The officers who had charge of the royal
exchequer, like the eunuch of Ethiopia in
Acts viiii—Gesenius. According to Dr.
Rule, they belonged to the fiscal order
of officers and were collectors of the
revenue, (6.) The “councillors” (8"13N3
dethobratya), promulgators of the law,
from NI (dath), law, and the Persian
termination var; lawyers, judges.——
Hengstenberg. So Rule, officers of the
legal class; doctors or lawyers. (7.)
The ‘‘sheriffs” (SYMDA, tiphtaye), per-
haps from the Arabic fata, to give a
legal opinion or judgment; whence
muftt; counsellors, perhaps lawyers
or pleaders,—Hengstenberg. The Vul-
gate has “prefects.” Dr. Rule thinks
them officers in the executive department,
being responsible for the execution of
justice. The exact knowlege displayed
by the writer of the entire political con-
stitution of the Chaldees, a corroborative
evidence of the genuineness of the book.
Bertholdt admits that the statements in
this chapter respecting the Chaldean
political constitution are so, copious that
it must necessarily have been written in
Upper Asia, Gesenius also admits the
authenticity of the statements ; remark-
ing that “since the constitution of the
Assyrian, Babylonian, and Persian em-
pires had certainly great similarity;
since, too, the descriptions of the Persian
court occurring in the Book of Esther
always differ essentially from those of
the Book of Daniel; and finally, since
the incidental but eotemporary notices
of Jeremiah agree in many points; these
66


statements, which besides have the an»
logy of the whole East in their favour,
are not to be rashly rejected.” Impos-
sible to explain this knowledge in @
Maccabean Jew. With the occupation
of the Greeks everything took another
form, and most certainly the adminis-
tration of the court and of the highest
offices of the state.— Hengstenberg.

®) “The same hour.” Dr. Rule re-
marks, that if, as Sir H. Rawlinson
calculates, there were sixty divisions of
the day and night in Babylon, and not
twenty-four, as afterwards in Greece, the
vengeance would be swift indeed—only
twenty-four minutes. “Who can say
that the shadow of the pillar (image)
itself would not serve to measure the
brief space between the sentence and
the execution 1”

(°) “All kinds of music,” SIP} (zemara),
music in general, though among the
modern Egyptiansthe name ofa pipe. The
Greek names of some of the instruments
mentioned are alleged as an objection to
the genuineness of the book. One of the
objectors to certain parts of it, however,
J. D. Michaelis, remarks in reference to
his own arguments on this head, that
“the more closely they were examined,
the more completely most of them
disappeared.” Hengstenberg remarks,
“The dispute is at most about the names
of three musical instruments; and who
can deny that these might, by even the
slightest intercourse of the Greeks with
the Babylonians, have found their way
to the latter?” Dr. Pusey, who ably
follows up Hengstenberg on this subject,
observes: “It were rather a marvel if
the golden music-loving city had not
gathered to itself foreign musical instru-
ments ; or if, in a religious inauguration
at Babylon, all the variety of music
which it could command had not been
united to grace the festival and bear
along the minds and imaginations of the
people.” Dr, Pusey properly insists on
the well-known fact that “the name
follows the thing;” but Pareau, quoted
by Hengstenberg, observes that the simi-
larity in the names of musical instru-
ments is of such a kind that the Greek
appellatives are rather to be considered
as having am Eastern origin. The


HOMILETI CO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


struments mentioned are—(1.) The
“cornet,” NJ}2 (karna), the Hebrew
We (keren), a horn. (2.) “Flute,”
ROYPNWD (mashrokitha), the Chaldaic for
a flute or pipe. The Septuagint and
Theodotion: svg; Gr. Ven: abrdg.
(3.) “Harp,” DVN (kathros or kithros),
which Gesenius says was received into
the Semitic language from abroad, being
the Greek xidagig or xibépa, a “harp,”
as both the Septuagint, Theodotion, and
the Vulgate translate it. Hengstenberg
admits that it certainly appears to be


the same word as the Greek xidagss, but


asks, since most of the names of Greek
musical instruments were of foreign
origin, why should just this one be
‘originally Greek?  (4.) ‘‘Sackbut,”
8320 (sabbecha), according to Hesychius,
an instrument like a harp, but with only
four strings. Athenseus says that the
sambuca, called the Pheenician lyre, was
an invention of the Syrians, Its foreign
or non-Greek origin is maintained by
Gesenius, and generally admitted. (5.)
“Psaltery,” JID (pesanteriu), ac-
cording to Gesenius and others, the
Greek ~paAarngioy, received into the Chal-
daic language ; which, however, is ques-
tioned by Hengstenberg. (6.) Dulcimer,”
%9BD1D (sumponia), retained untrans-
lated by the Septuagint, Theodotion,
the Vulgate, and the Greek Venetian ;
according to Gesenius, a bagpipe with
two pipes inserted into a bag, which he
says, on the authority of Polybius in
Athenzus, was, at the time of Antiochus
Epiphanes, used by Greeks living in
Syria under that name. Symphonia,
though with the old Romans used to
indicate “music,” or the concert of
various instruments, was used also by
the later Latins to denote a musical
instrument, but rather a drum than a
pipe. Saadias, on the passage, explains
it as a pastoral instrument of the nature
of a bagpipe, as a similar instrument
used in Italy is still called sampogna,
Hengstenberg questions the Greek deriva-
tion of the word, and the name of such an
instrument in the vlder Greek language.


(10) “ Be cast into the midst of a
burning fiery furnace.” The punishment
of death by burning in ovens was en-
tirely Babylonian, while that practised
by the Medes and Persians was the
casting into a lions’ den, The descrip-
tion here given of the former mode of
punishment admitted to be a proof that
the writer had seen such an oven, and
had been present at an execution of the
kind; while the accuracy of his know-
ledge is also shown by the fact that in
the sixth chapter he attributes to the
Medo-Persians, not this mode of punish-
ing, but that peculiar to themselves
—an incidental corroboration of the
genuineness and authenticity of the
history. —Hengstenberg.

GQ)” “An herald,” 2 (c’ros), a
erier, from 9) (c’raz), a Chaldaic word
meaning “to cry,” as a herald; used in
the Targums and Talmud, and also in
the Samaritan, The same word is
found extensively in the Indo-Germanic
tongues, the Sanscrit, Zend, and Persian ;
being the Greek xngicow, to proclaim as
a herald, and ace to cry; the middle
Latin criso; the German krieschen,; and
the English ery. Gesenius thinks the
word is of Persian origin, though Heng-
stenberg believes it to be originally
Semitic, and ita relation to the Greek
only accidental, or from onomatopoeia,
He remarks that it is almost unanimously
agreed by modern linguists that the
names of Babylonian gods, kings, and
other persons, which occur in the Bible
and in profane writers, find their ex-
planation in the Persian, the Chaldaic,
and Assyrian languages; belonging, ac-
cording to Gesenius and others, to the
Medo-Persian stock; and according to
others, as Rosenmiiller, to the Assyrian
language, a dialect of the Medo-Persian,
and so naturalised in Babylon, though
the Assyrian predominated. Words of
Persian origin also found in Jeremiah, and
apparently even in Isaiah and Nahum,
No argument therefore against the genu-
ineness of the book.


@wAP, III. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


a


HOMILETICS.
Sror. XIII.—Tux Fiery Furnace (Chap, iii, 8-27).


God has never left Himself without a witness, An Enoch and a Noah found
on the eve of the Flood ; an Abraham in Chaldea, and a Lot in Sodom. While the
multitude were falling prostrate before the golden image, Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego were in their closet on their knees, Where was Daniel? Probably
now, as often, at some distance from the court, Wherever he is, he is worshipping
the God of heaven. If at hand, like his three friends, fearless of the consequences,
he refuses to obey the summons to the plain of Dura, but for this time left un-
molested by his enemies, for reasons which we can only conjecture. Now not
Daniel, but his three friends, are to be made illustrious through all time for their
faith in and fidelity to the true God. Daniel, in noble self-forgetfulneas, is content
to leave them the honour of the deed, without being careful to give the grounds of
his non-participation in it; an incidental confirmation of the genuineness of the
history. We may notice in the narrative—

I The accusation (vers. 8-12). The accusation probably the offspring alike
of envy and religious zeal. The accusers the Chaldeans, the priests and religious
teachers of the country. ‘The charge, as in Daniel’s own case (chap. vi.), probably
the thing the accusers desired, expected, and waited for, ‘ Who can stand before
envy?” The accusation bewrays itself. “There are certain Jews, whom thou hast
set over the affairs of the province of Babylon.” The language indicative of the
spirit which prompted the accusation, Three faithful Jews so exalted, a likely
butt for the shafts of envious idolatrous natives, Nothing to be found against
these men except, as in the case of Daniel, “concerning the law of their God.”
Tn a world “lying in the wicked one,” fidelity to God hardly able to escape the
malice of men. In a corrupt time, “he that departeth from evil maketh himself
a prey.” False or hostile accusation for the truth’s sake, according to the Sermon
on the Mount, to. be rather rejoiced in by the servants of God. The footprints of
the prophets and of the Master Himself, The servant not greater than his lord.

IL The answer (vers, 13-18). The charge, true in itself, though made with
evil intention, answered with meekness, firmness, and faith, The answer calm,
dignified, and courageous, “ON ebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee
in this matter”@), The naming of the king, as one has remarked, not disrespect-
ful, but expressive of the deep earnestness of the speaker, and the desire to impress
the mind of the hearer. The purpose declared, whatever may be the consequence,
“If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
furnace, and will deliver us out of thine hand, O king. But if not, be it known
unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image
which thou hast set up.” The fiery furnace with the favour of God and a good
conscience to be preferred to the comforts of a palace without them. The choice
was wise and according to reason. To a Jew or a Ohristian enlightened by a
divine revelation compliance was sin, though to heathens and polytheists it
might be a matter of indifference. The three exiles knew their duty, and they
knew in whom they believed. The God they served was able, if He pleased, to
deliver them from the furnace or preserve them in it, as, according to tradition, He
had done their father Abraham before them in that very land. He who had
answered prayer at the time of the king’s distress could answer prayer now. It
not His pleasure, no matter. While the fire consumed their body in the furnace,
their spirit should be with God in paradise. Better a thousand times over to die
with His favour than live without it, Better a fiery furnace for the body than
the fire of hell and a guilty conscience for the soul. Pleas for compliance, sug-
gested ah the flesh and the tempter, would not be wanting. It was only an act


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OHAP, I,





of the body, in which the mind, the principal thing, would not participate. It
was from compulsion, not from choice. The king commanded it, and rulers are to
be obeyed. It would be ungrateful to the king, from whom they had experienced
go much kindness. ‘To die now would terminate their usefulness, It would only
be what many, perhaps all, of their countrymen would be found doing, To all
these, and perhaps other arguments, these noble confessors had but one answer,
No. “It is written, Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor worship them.”
Those, says Henry, who make their duty their main care, need not be careful con-
cerning the event.

IIL The consequence (vers. 19-23). Arbitrary power brooks no opposition.
The soft answer did not turn away wrath, while the firmness of faith and fidelity
to God seem only to have inflamed it. Pride and passion shut both ears and
eyes to reason. These Jewish captives’ past faithfulness and the king’s own
former declarations alike forgotten. The decree goes forth with added cruelty.
The victims are bound for the furnace. Asif to defy the God of the Jews and make
escape impossible, the furnace is heated seven times more than usual (@), while the
strongest men in the army are employed to bind the three youths, So the Jews
themselves thought afterwards to prevent the resurrection of Jesus by “ sealing
the stone and setting a watch.” So great was the heat of the furnace and the
haste of the king, that the death designed for the accused at once overtook their
executioners, possibly glad, as Matthew Henry suggests, to do their cruel work.
“ The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead.”
Bound in their ordinary clothes (), the martyrs descend into the fiery furnace. But
Abraham’s God will again vindicate His honour in Babylon. There are times
when He may see it needful, for His own glory and for the welfare of His creatures,
to arrest the processes of nature and to suspend for a time the laws which He Him-
self imposed on material things. The fire is made for a season to lose its power to
consume or to give pain, The bonds which bound the victims were indeed con-
sumed by the flames, but neither their persons nor their clothes were affected by
the fire. The hair of their head was not singed, neither did the smell of fire pass
onthem, Whether in vision or otherwise“), a strange spectacle presented itself to
the king. “Did we not cast three men bound into the fire?” he suddenly ex-
claims to those about him; “lo! I see four men loose, walking in the midst of
the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like the Son of
God”®, The light of nature guided a heathen poet to speak of a crisis worthy
of divine interposition ®, It is with the Almighty Himself to judge as to what is
such. Here is a city standing at the head of the civilised world. The land is one
of graven images. The worshippers of the only true God are captive in it, while
Bel, the great idol, is apparently triumphant. ‘Three faithful servants of Jehovah
and witnesses to His truth have been cast into a burning furnace for their protesting
fidelity, declaring at the same time that their God, if He pleased, was able to deliver
them. Shall God vindicate His honour, and support the much-tried faith of His
people? Or shall the heathen still tauntingly ask where is their God 4()

IV. The result (vers. 26-30). The king’s former impressions and convictions
are revived and strengthened. A stronger declaration than before is made in
favour of the true God. A decree is issued on behalf of His servants forbidding,
in the style indeed of Oriental despotism, a single word to be uttered against Him ©
on pain of death, The three (9) confessors are restored to their office with in-
creased honour. No wonder; those most likely to be faithful to their king that
are faithful to their God. ‘The effect of the whole probably a considerable further-
ance of the cause of true religion in the land, the strengthening of the hands and
encouraging of the hearts of God’s servants, and an important step towards the final
release of the Jewish captives. ‘Surely the wrath of man shall praise Thee, and
the remainder of wrath shalt Thou restrain” (Ps. lxxvi, 10). From the whole we
may observe :— ¢


Omar. Ti%, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


1, Persecution the frequent lot of God’s faithful people, ** All that will live
godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution ” (2 Tim, iii, 12). In a world of
which God’s enemy is the prince, His faithful servants not likely to be long with-
out trouble. As surely as a knife cuts and fire burns, so surely will he who by
his life and lips reproves the ways of the world incur its hatred and persecution,
“ The world cannot hate you; but me it hateth, because I testify of it that the
works thereof are evil” (John vii. 7).

2. The power and preciousness of faith. The noble act and glorious deliverance
of these three Jewish captives ascribed to this divine principle. By faith they
quenched the violence of fire.” “This is the victory that overcometh the world,
even your faith” (1 John v, 4), Faith able to triumph over every difficulty and
every trial. The same principle that enabled Moses to choose rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God than enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, raised
these exiles above the fear of a fiery furnace, Its natural effect to make men
heroes, Its property to give “ substance ” and reality to “things hoped for,” and
“evidence” or conviction in regard to “ things unseen.” Looks not at the things
that are seen and temporal, but at those which are unseen and eternal. Believes
that God not only can, but that according to His promise He will, in one way or
other, deliver. To faith deliverance is certain, whether in this world or the next,
Looking into the glorious future, it thinks it matters little which, Eyeing Him
who said, “ Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world,” it sings, even at the stake,
“O death, where is thy sting?” “Deny Christ,” said the Roman governor to
Polycarp, “or thou shalt be thrown to the wild beasts.” Call for them,” said
the venerable bishop ; “ we have no mind to change from better to worse.” “But
if thou thinkest go lightly of wild beasts, I shall have a fire that will tame thee.”
“ You threaten me,” replied Polycarp, “ with a fire that will burn for an hour and
then be extinguished, but remember not the fire of eternal damnation reserved for
the punishment of the ungodly, But why do you delay? Execute whatever you
please.” “The emperor commands thee to do sacrifice,” said the proconsul to
Cyprian ; “ therefore consult for thy welfare.” “Tama Christian,” was the heroic
reply ; “ and I cannot sacrifice to your gods ; do therefore what you are commanded :
as for me, in so just a cause, there needs no consultation.”

3. A faithful adherence to God's prescribed worship one of our first duties. The
first commandment, “Thou shalt have no other gods before me ;” the second,
“Thou shalt not make to thyself any graven image ; thou shalt not bow down to
them nor worship them.” God jealous both of His worship and the manner of it.
“I, the Lord thy God, am a jealous God.” Will-worship among the things con-
demned in His Word. “In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men” (Col. ii, 23 ; Matt. xv, 9). God’s glory to be esteemed
“of more consequence than a thousand lives, and the gratification of a thousand
senses,”

4. Christ ever present with His suffering servants. The Son of God a fourth in
the fiery furnace, “Fear not, for I am with thee.” He that has power over fire
present with His people in every fiery trial which is to try them. “ When thou
passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the floods, they shall
not overflow thee: when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burn
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee ” (Isa. xliii, 2). Faith, laying hold of the
Word, sings with the Psalmist, “ Yea, though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death, I will fear no evil ; for Thou art with me ” (Ps, xxiii. 4).

5. Believers gainers rather than losers by their sufferings, The three confessors
in Babylon lost nothing in the furnace but the bonds that bound them, Believers
loge nothing by their sufferings but the bonds of corruption and sin. “When He
hath tried me, I shail come forth as gold.” “This is all the fruit, to take away
their sin.” Trouble often the method which God takes to consume our bonds and
to purify our souls,

70


HOMILETICO COMMENTARY: DANIEL. oHar. UL


| BR A I RR A SD


“ T asked the Lord that I might grow
In faith and leve and every grace;

_ Might more of His salvation know,
And seek more earnestly His face,


’T was thus He taught me thus to pray
And He, I think, has answered prayer 3
But it was done in such a way

As almost drove me to despair.”


6. God glorified by the trials of His people. The fiery furnace a platform for
the display of God’s glory in Babylon. His name raised higher by the deliverance
of the three martyrs than by the interpretation of the king’s dream. The trial of
believers, whatever it may be here, “found unto praise and honour and glory at
the appearing of Jesus Christ.” The high privilege of Paul and of all suffering
believers, to “fill up in their flesh that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ
for His body’s sake, which is the Church” (Col. i, 24). Their patient suffering
made to glorify God as truly as their active service. The blood of the martyrs the
seed of the Church.

7. Something to be imitated in the conduct of Nebuchadnezzar. A prompt,
humble, and decided submission yielded to the truth as revealed in God’s deliver-
ance of His servants. The effect and fruit of it the immediate employment of his
influence in honouring God and advancing His cause, The threatened penalty to
be condemned, as only corresponding to the character and customs of the time and
country, and the ideas of an Oriental despot. Otherwise the edict an example to
all in authority, whether as magistrates, parents, or masters, to employ their
influence in restraining open ungodliness and forbidding profanity on the part of
those who are under them.

8. Miracles precious as God’s testimony both to His power and to His presence
with His people, One of the objections made against the genuineness of the book
of Daniel is its alleged “aimless profusion of miracles.” But, as Hengstenberg
remarks, the object in each miracle occurring in the first six chapters is distinctly
stated—the manifestation of the omnipotence of the God of Israel before the
heathen kings and nations, the circumstances of the chosen people at the time being
such as to render it desirable that the weakness of their faith should be assisted
even by sensible means of support. Objectless, says Dr. Pusey, they can only
seem to those to whom all revelation from God seems to be objectless, ‘On the
one side was the world-monarchy, irresistible, conquering, as the heathen thought,
the God of the vanquished. On the other, a handful of the worshippers of the
one only God, captives, scattered, with no visible centre or unity, without organisa-
tion or power to resist save their indomitable faith, inwardly upheld by God, out-
wardly strengthened by the very calamities which almost ended their national
existence; for they were the fulfilment of His Word in whom they believed.
Thrice during the seventy years human power put itself forth against the faith;
twice in edicts which, if obeyed, would have extinguished the true faith on earth ;
once in direct insult to God. Faith, as we know, ‘quenched the violence of fire,
stopped the mouth of lions.’ In all cases the assault was signally rolled back ;
the faith was triumphant in the face of all the representatives of the power and
intelligence of the empire ; in all, the truth of the one God was proclaimed by
those who had assailed it. Unbelief, while it remains such, must deny all true
miracles and all superhuman prophecy. But, if honest, it dare not designate as
objectless miracles which decided the cause of truth in such battlefields.”


EXEGETICAL NOTES. —@)“ Jn message, edict, and in general a word
this matter” (ver. 16). 03ND (pithgam), or matter.—Keil. Calvin paraphrases
from the Zend paits or Sanscrit pratt, the answer of the captives thus: “Thou
= apie, to, and gam, to go; hence a hast erected this statue, but vee autho


OHAP, Ii.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


rn


rity is of no moment to us, since we
know it to be a fictitious deity, whose
image thou wishest us to worship, The
God whom we worship has revealed
Himself to us; we know Him to be the
maker of heaven and earth, to have
redeemed our fathers from Egypt, and
to intend our chastisement by driving
us into exile, Since, then, we have a
firm foundation for our faith, we reckon
thy gods and thy sway valueless.”

(2) “ To heat the furnace one seven times
more” (ver. 19). An apocryphal addition
at this place, attributed to Theodotion,
the Greek translator, who flourished in
the second century of the Christian era,
contains a statement that the king’s
servants were made to keep up the fire
by flinging into the furnace naphtha, tow,
pitch, and brands, such as were used
in sieges for burning down cities ; and
that the flames rose forty-nine cubits
high.— Rule,

(8) “In their coats, their hosen, and
their hats, and their other garments”
(ver. 21), According to Herodotus, the
garments worn by the Babylonians were
the tunic (x:dav), an under-garment of
linen or cotton, reaching down to the
feet; on this was another tunic of
woollen; and over this again a white
mantle (yAavidov). This threefold cloth-
ing, though not such as we might expect
in a warm climate, found on Babylonian
cylinders, In the present passage, in
the dress of the three Jews, we meet
with it complete, though not according
to our own and ordinary translations,
We have (1.) 117379 (sarbalehon), “their
coats,” marg. “ their mantles,” which the
Sept., Aquila, Theodotion, the Syriac, and
the Vulgate leave untranslated,and which
Symmachus renders by a word denoting
drawers or breeches reaching down to
the feet, such as were worn by the
Persians and Scythians, It is rather
intended to denote a mantle or cloak,
which Luther adopted, and which is
favoured by Gesenius, Hengstenber,
gives “upper garment.” (2.) }inWnyp
(petishehon), “their hosen,” but which
Gesenius, after the Syriac and Hebrew
interpreters, renders “tunic,” Theodotion
and the Vulgate renderit “tiara” or turban,
(3.) 1°NP372 (carbelathehon), “ their

72


hats,” but which the Sept. renders by
wepixvnuio, & garment for the legs or
feet, and the Vulgate by calceamentis,
“shoes.” Keil renders it “mantles” and
thinks that the other articles of clothing,
coverings for the feet and the head, are
to be understood under the word fry?
(lebhushehon) “ garments,”

“Was astonied” (ver. 24), PA (tevah),
like the Heb, DPIAWA (hishtomem), chap.
viii. 27, or simply OPI (shomem), Ezra ix.
3. Between the 23d and 24th verses, the
apocryphal “Song of the Three Chil-
dren,” as it is called, has been inserted
by Jerome and others, The Septuagint,
followed by the Arabic, inserts the
clause, “heard them singing praise *
(byvoivrwy), thus accounting for the king’s
astonishment, To connect the two
verses, Houbigant adds the words found
in the Vulgate, “But an angel of the
Lord went down with Azariah and his
companions into the furnace, and drove
out the flame of fire from the furnace,
and they walked in the midst of the
furnace.” Added to show the reason of
the king’s astonishment, and to account
for the appearance of a fourth person in
the furnace.—A. Clark.

© “Is like the Son of God,” tady 3
(bar elahin), which some prefer to trans
late, “a son of the gods,” as more likely
to be found on the lips of a polytheist,
The expression, according to Gesenius,
is equivalent to “one of the immortal
gods,” as, according to the Syriac idiom,
“Son of man” means simply a man ora
mortal, Keil thinks that Nebuchadnezzar
speaks in the spirit and meaning of the
Babylonian doctrine of the gods, accord-
ing to the representations peculiar to all
Oriental religions, the inferior divinities
being regarded by them as begotten by
the superior ones, Mylitta, a female
deity, being associated with their higher
god, Bel. According to Hengstenberg,
the designation cannot be explained by
these theogonic ideas, Willet, after
Rupertus, thinks that Nebuchadnezzar
thought only of some divine presence,
whether god or angel, but that in reality
it was Christ, the Son of God, who
appeared at this time in human shape.
Calvin thinks it was a single angel that
was sent to these three men. Though


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL.


GmAP, IV.


.


rt


the words were probably only intended
by the king “to describe the dignified
and exalted deportment of Him whom
he thus characterised,” yet they declared,
unknown to himself, a precious truth,—
the presence of Him who is the Son of
God with His suffering servants, In ver,
28, the king calls him God’s “angel,”
which He no doubt was—the “angel of
the Lord,” otherwise called the ‘“ Mes-
senger of the Covenant,” the Son of God,
who in the fulness of time was “ made
flesh and dwelt among us.”
)*Nec deus intersit, nodus nisi vindice
ignus
Inciderit.”—Horacr, De Arte Poetica.

“Tt is explicitly affirmed by Mr. J.8.
Mill (System of Logic) that on this
view of the constancy of nature,—on
the hypothesis that the governing power
of the universe is an infinitely wise and
Almighty God,—a miracle is no infrac-
tion of nature’s harmony and concord,
and, of course, not beyond reach of
proof, . . . Lord Bacon declared that,
in regard of redemption, ‘to which all
God’s signs and miracles do refer,’ the
Almighty could indeed ‘ break the law of
nature by miracles,’ The Saviour is called
by the father of modern philosphy ‘the
Lord of nature in His miracles.’ ...
Miracles are thus shown to be in harmony
with a higher constancy than that of phy-
sical nature—a constancy of eternal pur-
pose and everlasting wisdom, a course of
mercy in the moral government of the


world, a constancy of creative power,
varying at pleasure its modes and its
habitudes,"—-P, Bayne, “Christ’s Tes.
tumony to Christianity.”

( Keil remarks: “Since all the
heathen estimated the power of the
gods according to the power of the
people who honoured them, the God of
the Jews whom they had subjugated by
their arms would actually appear to the
Chaldeans and their king as an inferior
and feeble God, as He had already
appeared to the Assyrians (Isa, x. 8-11,
xxxvi. 11-20),”

(® “Speak anything amiss,” marg.
“error,” NPY (shalah), “that which ts
erroneous or unjust,” from New (shelah),
to err, commit a fault; changed by


the Masorites into now or iby (shalu),
an error or fault, as in chap, vi. 5. Ob-
jection has been made to the difficulties
connected with the carrying out of such
a command. But such difficulties only
confirm the historical character of the
narrative.—Keil.

( “Promoted,” N23 (hatslakh), liter-
ally, as the margin, “ made to prosper.”
The Septuagint adds: “And he ad-
vanced them, and appointed them to
rule over all the Jews that were in his
kingdom.” Dr, Cumming remarks that
this may be the meaning of the verse, as
these three men were more likely to be
set over the Jewa than over the Chal.
deans.


HOMILETICS.
Szor. XIV.—Txx Roya. Tustimony (Chap. iv. 1-8).


In this chapter we have a remarkable testimony from Nebuchadnezzar himself @),
The date usually assigned to it is about ten years after the erection of the golden


image, probably towards the latter end of his life @),
What was not unusual in the absence of a written


brought down from his pride.


The king had still to be


revelation, a dream, was employed for this purpose. See Job xxxiii 14-17. The
dream, with its interpretation and fulfilment in a lengthened and humiliating
affliction, made effectual), As the result, we have the noble testimony in this
chapter. Calvin observes that Daniel has no other object in relating the edict than
to show the fruit of conversion in Nebuchadnezzar. The testimony remarkable in
itself; still more so from the quarter from which it came—a king of kings, the
head of the first great universal monarchy, a king who had been all his life a
heathen and a devoted worshipper of idols, The testimony given in the form of
a royal epistle, proclamation, or edict, addressed to all the subjects of his extensive
empire. The chapter an example of the varied contents of the Bible. an of the


OuAP. Iv. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.








mouth of heathen monarchs, as well as of ‘‘babes and sucklings,” God able te
ordain strength and perfect praise, ‘he proclamation sets forth Jehovah’s great-
ness, truth, and justice ; His supremacy as governor of the universe ; His over-
ruling providence among the nations of the world ; His sovereignty in doing all
according to His own will among angels and men, that will being the most perfect
justice; His remarkable dealings with the king himself; and, finally, a humble
confession of his sinfulness and pride, with the humiliating chastisement which it
had entailed upon him. The testimony addressed to the various peoples under
his rule with a view to their conversion to the only true God, the God of Israel.
The whole breathes a spirit of sincerity and humility, of gratitude to God and
good-will to men. The opening salutation probably more than a mere form. A
deep earnestness and warm admiration indicated in the manner in which he refers
to God’s dealings with himself, ‘How great are His signs, and how mighty are
His wonders!” (vers, 2, 3). The proclamation also contains a high testimony in
favour of Daniel, as an inspired prophet in whom was “the spirit of the holy
gods,” and as a faithful counsellor of the king. The repetition of what Daniel had
said in the interpretation of a former dream, many years before, regarding the
“everlasting kingdom” which God was to set up, indicative of the deep impres-
sion which the prophet’s words had left upon his mind, The three first verses of
the chapter, improperly forming the concluding ones in the Hebrew Bible and
Greek version, serve as the preface or preamble to the edict. Among the lessons of
this part of the testimony, as well as of the testimony in general, are the following :—

1. The power and efficacy of divine grace. The proclamation of the king an
apparent evidence of a change of mind and heart where it might least be expected,
Nebuchadnezzar apparently a case of remarkable though imperfect conversion.
Among the evidences given of an inward change are—pride in a mighty monarch
acknowledged and abandoned ; a formerly idolatrous king now a preacher of the
true God to his subjects ; sin confessed, its chastisement related, and repentance
declared. “ How hardly shall they that have riches enter the kingdom of God!”
Yet here is one who at the time was the richest on the face of the earth, appa-
rently made to enter it as a little child. “The things that are impossible with
men are possible with God.” “Not many mighty, not many noble are called.”
Yet, thanks to sovereign and oranipotent grace, some are. Nothing too difficult
for the grace that, as we may believe, converted Nebuchadnezzar. No situation
too high, as none is too mean, for its operation. ‘Who art thou, O great moun-
tain? Before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain.”

2. Encouragement to pray and labour for the conversion of others. Many a
prayer for the king’s conversion doubtless offered by Daniel and his three friends.
These at length answered apparently in this edict, ‘The testimony of Daniel’s life
and lips at length effectual, His faithfulness to the king (ver. 27) rewarded by
the king’s testimony for God. The influence, though insensible, of a spiritual
and consistent Christian's life, accompanied by earnest persevering prayer, always
powerful, and often efficacious in the most unlikely places and persons. “ Ye are
my witnesses.” Hopeful’s conversion mainly due to the spirit exhibited by
Christian and Faithful in Vanity Fair, The trial of the three faithful Jews in
connection with the fiery furnace now made to bear fruit. ‘In the morning sow
thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thine hand.” The privilege of believers
to be the “salt of the earth,” whether in a palace or a prison,

3, Thanks and praise to be rendered to God in every situation, Thanks espe-
cially due after mercies received and deliverance experienced, God’s gracious
dealings with ourselves to be made know to others for His glory and their good,
“Come, hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare what He hath done for my
soul.” “Many shall see it and fear, and put their trust in the Lord.” “Go home
to thy friends and tell them how great things God hath done for thea” No
eee lofty for making public acknowledgment of God and His mercies,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OMAP, IV.
ey ee


Nebuchadnezzar an example to kings and those in high places. Not ashamed to
confess God before his court, his princes, servants, and subjects, A throne a meet
place to acknowledge Him by whom “kings reign and princes decree justice.”
“ Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess before my Father and
the holy angels.” Confession of God a natural duty. In Nebuchadnezzar the
spontaneous effusion of a grateful and childlike spirit. ‘“ Whoso offereth praise
glorifieth me.” May not this heathen king, recovered from his madness, put many
8 professing Christian to shame 4

4. God’s works to be viewed with admiration and praise.
wonder and astonishment at those works. “How great are His signs! and how
mighty are His wonders!” God’s works, whether in creation or in providence,
wonderful both for their goodness and greatness. He is “ fearful in praises, doing
wonders,” The song of the glorified,—‘*Great and marvellous are thy works,
Lord God Almighty,”—echoed back from earth: “Thou art great, and doest
wondrous things; thou art God alone.” Man’s sin not to regard the operation of
his hands, ‘ He hath made His wonderful works to be remembered” (Ps, cxi. 4).
These wonders visible in Nature, Providence, and Grace. Discoverable in each
individual’s case as well as in Nebuchadnezzar’s, The greatest wonder of all, the
gift, incarnation, and death of the Son of God for man’s redemption, and, as the
effect of it, the restoration of ruined millions to God’s friendship, family, and
likeness. Men turned from the madness and the misery of sin to a life of wisdom,
holiness, and peace, like Nebuchadnezzar’s deliverance, “the doing of the Lord,


The king struck with


and marvellous in our eyes,”


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—Q) “ Ne-
buchudnezzar the king unto all people,”
dc. Adam Clarke says: “This is a
regular decree, and is one of the most
ancient on record, and no doubt was
copied from the state-papers of Babylon.
Daniel has preserved it in the original
language.” Grotius observes: ‘“ Daniel
gives this wonderful history, not in his
own words, but in those of the pub-
lished edict itself, that there might
remain no doubt about its trustwor-
thiness.” Calvin says: ‘ Daniel here
gives the edict under the king’s name
and person, afterwards relates what hap-
pened to the king, and at length returns
to the king’s personal testimony; the
change of the person speaking, however,
not at all obscuring the sense.” This
change of the speaker has been made
an objection to the genuineness of the
book. Hengstenberg remarks in re-
ply: * We cannot by any means allow
that this happens unwarily. With the
exception of ver. 19, where ‘the king’
stands for ‘I,’ which calls for no re-
mark, because the same thing is found
repeatedly in the decrees of the Persian
kings (compare, ¢g., Ezra vii. 14, 15),
the use of the third person commences
just where the narrative of the fulfil-


ment of the divine threat of punishment
begins (ver. 28), and ends where the
description of the sad ailment of Ne-
buchadnezzar comes to a close (ver. 33).
His restoration he describes again in the
first person. This cannot possibly be
accidental ; and if not, then no argu-
ment can be taken from it against the
genuineness, although we cannot asaign
with certainty the reason of the change
It may be conjectured that Daniel dis-
posed this part in a briefer or more
detailed and exact narrative than as it
stood in the edict (so Calvin); and
now, to be chargeable with no false-
hood, used the third person.”

(@) The Septuagint has introduced
the words “in the eighteenth year of
the reign of Nebuchadnezzar,” which
Ewald has adopted, but arbitrarily mak-
ing it “in the twenty-eighth year,” &c,.—


et

(8) Adam Clarke thinks that very
probably Nebuchadnezzar was a true
convert, that he relapsed no more into
idolatry, and that he died in the faith
of the God of Israel. Dr, Cumming
remarks: “This closing epistle ad-
dressed by the King Nebuchadnezzar
to his subjects breathes a quiet and a
beautiful spirit, that indicates to my

75


‘


OmaP, Iv.





mind a change in his heart, a transfor-
mation of his character, a true and an
actual conversion to God.” Among the
older commentators, Willet thinks “ the
more probable and certain opinion is
that Nebuchadnezzar in the end was
saved.” He quotes Josephus, who says
that all his life long after this he ac-
knowledged God and gave praise and
glory to Him ; Augustine, who remarks
that, unlike Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar
was humbled and so saved ; and Theo-
doret, who contrasts the end of Nebu-
chadnezzar with that of Belshazzar, the
one being foreseen to be amended by his
correction, the other to be incorrigible.
So Bullinger, Osiander, and CEcolampa-
dius. Calvin thinks that “though in
this edict Nebuchadnezzar does not de-
scribe what is required of a pious man
long trained in God’s school, yet he
shows how he had benefited under God’s
rod, by attributing to Him the height of
power, and adding the praise of justice
and rectitude, while he confesses himself
guilty.” Matthew Henry says, “Whether
he continued in the same good mind
that here he seems to have been in, we
are not told, nor doth anything appear
to the contrary but that he did ; and if
so great a blasphemer and persecutor
did find mercy, he was not the last.”
Dr. Taylor quotes Scott’s remark that
“the beginning and conclusion of the
chapter lead us at least to hope with
prevailing confidence that Nebuchad-
nezzar was at last made a monument of
the power of divine grace,” yet thinks
that the conversion was still an imper-
fect one, as the king still speaks of the
name of his god and of the spirit of the
holy gods, as if, while acknowledging
the supremacy of Jehovah, he still clung
to the worship of inferior divinities,
Hengstenberg, who seems to be of the
same opinion, remarks, in reply to an
objection made by Eichhorn and others
against the genuineness of the edict,
from the narrator making the king
speak now as an orthodox Jew, and now
again as an idolater: “Just this mode
of representation would be expected in
case the edict were genuine, and cer-
tainly affords a presumption that it is,
It cannot be imagined that Nebuchad-
76


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





nezzar rooted out the inveterate super-
stition so quickly from his mind that
the traces of it should not have appeared
in connection with what he had learned
from the instruction of Daniel. That s
later Jew, bold in his fictions, would not
have been satisfied with such a conver-
sion of Nebuchadnezzar, is clear from
the attempt of very many Jewish and
Christian expositors to make the con-
version as radical and complete as pos-
sible.” Dr, Pusey observes, “Although
Nebuchadnezzar’s two first convictions
of the greatness of the God of the Jews
faded in time, we know of no relapse
after the last. God triumphed at last,
and won Nebuchadnezzar, as He does
so many relapsing Christians.” Dr,
Cox judiciously remarks, “How far
this last return to the sentiments and
expressions of religion was genuine, and
whether we are to regard Nebuchad-
nezzar as finally converted to God, may
be regarded as one of those questions
which, while we are benevolently de-
sirous of giving it the most favourable
construction, must be referred to the
great mass of unfathomable mysteries.
The evidence we have a right to demand
in general of a renewal of character
must be proportioned to the nature of
past delinquencies [and, may we not
add, to the individual’s circumstances],
and it often requires much holy skill to
pilot our judgment between the Scylla
and Charybdis of uncharitableness and
laxity.”

(4) “ How great are His signs,” de.
By “signs,” Dr. Clarke understands
preternatural signs ; and by “ wonders,”
miraculous interpositions; remarking,
“These are very fine sentiments, and
show how deeply Nebuchadnezzar’s
mind was impressed by the majesty of
God.” The expressions “signs” and
“wonders” are also found connected in
Hebrew in Deut. vi. 22, vii. 19, and
frequently in the New Testament
“ Wonders,” from their character ;
“signs,” as serving to mark the pre-
sence and power of a divine agent or
a divine commission, ‘ What sign
showest Thou that we may believe in
Vnoe,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, CHAP. IV,


HOMILETICS.


Sror. XV.—Tae Dream or rue TREE AND ITs INTERPRETATION
(Chap, iv. 4-26).


We come to the occasion of the royal proclamation, This was a dream and its
remarkable fulfilment, the second prophetic dream vouchsafed to the king. The
present one bearing more especially on the king himself, Its results, however,
such as to affect his whole empire, but more particularly the Jews that were in it,
The dream and its fulfilment an important step towards the release of the Jews,
and at the same time towards the spread of the knowledge of the true God, and
the preparation for the advent of the promised Messiah, We notice—

L The dream itself. And here observe—

1, The time and circumstances of it (ver. 4). “I was at rest in mine house.”
“At rest,” after his conflicts and conquests, Probably calculating on ending his
days in peace and prosperity, and enjoying the fruits of all his toils and hardships,
Like the rich fool in the parable, “ Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many
years ; take thine ease ; eat, drink, and be merry ” (Luke xii. 16-21). A godless
rest one soon to be disturbed. A poor rest that which the world can give, Job's
experience: “I said, I shall die in my nest.” Yet, how soon was that nest to be
rifled! “Flourishing in my palace.” Nebuchadnezzar now in the heyday of his
prosperity, “flourishing like a green bay-tree.” Everywhere successful in his
campaigns, and now the established head of the first universal empire, In his
“‘palace,” not in his tent or on the battlefield. <A palace, however, unable to
exclude death from our thoughts or disturbing dreams from our slumbera, A
prince’s palace as liable as a peasant’s cottage to the upbraidings of conscience, and
to the forebodings of death and a judgment to come.

2. The contents of the dream (vers, 10-17). Here we have (1.) An immense,
wide-spreading, fruit-bearing tree, a tree in its appearance and extent probably
something like the banyan of the East, and seen still growing@, A large and
noble tree, such as are common in Oriental countries, a well-known symbol for a
powerful monarch or a prosperous individual, So of Pharaoh and his power
(Ezek. xxxi, 3, xvii. 22). (2.) A command from a superior being to cut tt down ;
that being called a “ watcher and a holy one” @), having all the appearance of an
angel, while “the matter” is said by him to be “ from the decree (8) of the watchers,
and the demand (#) by the word of the holy ones” (ver. 17), as if coming forth from
the celestial council. a The stump to be left in the ground, and made firm by a
band of iron and brass (®), forbidding attempts to uproot it. (4.) An intimation,
by the same voice, that by the tree and its stump was represented a man, (5.)
The command that a man’s heart should be taken from him, and that “a beast’s
heart be given him instead,” indicating the privation of intellect, with the appetites
and desires of a beast of the field. (6.) The continuance of this degradation to be
a period here mystically termed “ seven times ” (6),

3. Its effect upon the king (ver. 5). His disturbance probably from the
apprehension that the dream was of a supernatural character and foreboded evil.
Dreams believed at that period to be often of such a character, Often produc-
tive of powerful emotions, both of pleasure and pain, though more frequently the
latter. Dreams in general “from the multitude of business ;” yet not always so.
The mind in sleep accessible to God and to good or evil spirits. “Thou scarest
me with dreams.” Ifa dream can so disturb, what the reality? A relief often to
find that it was only a dream, Yet dreams graciously employed in the economy
of divine providence (Job xxxiii, 15-18). Sometimes made to contribute both te
the preserving of a life and the saving of a soul,

4. The search for sts interpretation (ver. 6). The king anxious to have bs dream


OHAP. IV. HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : DANIEL,


aR SRRERREERenpienmeneenaee eee El Sea


explained. Henry observes: “ When God gives us general warnings of His judg.
ments, we should be desirous to understand His mind in them.” The interpretation
of dreams an ancient belief. Such belief founded on a reality. The evidence of a
connection between the visible and invisible worlds. The interpretation of dreams
@ study and profession in Babylon. One of the forms of soothsaying, and carried
on for private gain. Generally an imposture,. and failing when most needed,
Joseph’s elevation in Egypt and Daniel’s in Babylon due to the interpretation of
dreams, not as a human art but a divine illumination. Four classes of pretenders
to such knowledge brought before the king(®), All obliged to acknowledge their
inability. Yet possibly, as time-servers, and actuated by personal considerations,
now kept back by fear, the dream being obviously one of a sinister character, with
a bearing upon the king himself, No small amount of courage required to declare
to an Eastern despot the meaning of such a dream even when perceived. Daniel
only sent for asa last resource, Faithful ministers most valued in a time of trouble
or on a dving bed, but often not applied to till then.

IL The interpretation. We notice —

1. The effect of the meaning of the dream on Daniel himself (ver. 19), The
truth made known to Daniel at once. That truth distressing to the prophet
because foreboding disaster to his royal master. His sensibility “ honourable to his
humanity, his loyalty, and his religion.” The dream only such as to distress all
true friends of the king), Faithful ministers deeply affected themselves by the
denunciations they have to deliver to impenitent hearers. Paul the subject of
continual sorrow of heart for his unbelieving countrymen. Tenderness and com-
passion among the most necessary qualifications for a minister of the gospel. The
“ bowels” of the Master needed.

2. The king's appeal (ver. 19). Desires Daniel to declare 'the interpretation,
whatever evil it may forbode to himself. A good sign and a mark of sincerity
when a man desires the truth to be faithfully told, however it may seem to go
against him. Ahab an opposite example. “I hate him 3 for he doth not prophesy
good concerning me, but evil” (1 Kings xxii. 8). Something much more hopeful
in Nebuchadnezzar.

3. The interpretation itself (vers, 20-26). Its details: (1.) The tree is the
king himself. (2.) He was to be deprived of his reason, and thus to be driven
from among men to dwell with the beasts of the field, eating grass like one of
them (1), (3.) This condition of things was to continue for a lengthened period,
only, however, obscurely and enigmatically intimated as “seven times” that should
pass over him ; long enough for his entire aspect to become changed, although only
until the end designed should be accomplished, and he should learn that not man,
but the Most High, “ruleth in the kingdom of men” (ver. 25). (4.) His kingdom
however should, in the meantime, be preserved to him, so that on the return of his
reason he might again possess it, Doleful tidings to the king, yet mixed with
merey. A dark cloud, but with a silver lining to it. So the gospel reveals the
wrath of God against sin, but points the sinner to a refuge from that wrath. “ He
that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life 3 and he that believeth not the Son
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him” (John iii, 36).

4, The exhortation accompanying it (ver. 27). Daniel yearns for the king’s
welfare. Not satisfied with merely declaring the truth, adds faithful counsel and
loving exhortation, An example to ministers. Warm and faithful application of
a discourse a thing never to be omitted. The nail not merely to be made sharp,
but driven in,—“ fastened by the Master of assemblies.” Daniel’s counsel to the
king is—(1.) To give up sin@), No favour with God nor peace to ourselves till
rebellion against God is given up. No peace to the wicked. Sin the great attract-
ing rod to God’s wrath. The king’s character and life here too plainly but faith-
fully indicated. (2.) To practise righteousness. Well-doing in general, and
justice to his subjects in particular), Not enough to cease to do evil; we must

78


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIBL, OMAP. IV,





learn to do well. Duty has two sides, a positive and a negative,—* thou shalt”
as well as “thou shalt not.” Not sufficient to be negatively good, The king’s
character and life again hinted at. Oppression and injustice the usual accompani-
ments of despotism, (3.) To show mercy to the poor. Something more than mere
justice. Kings as well as their subjects to be not only just, but kind and merciful.
In relation to men, justice and mercy the two duties which God requires of us.
“He hath showed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require
of thee but to do justly and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?”
Justice and mercy the reflection of God’s own character. Mercy that in which we
are especially to resemble him. “ Be ye merciful, as your Heavenly Father is
merciful.” To love and do good to our fellow-men only another form of justice.
Love a debt due to each. That debt never fully paid. Every man his neighbour's
debtor. That due to every one which we would wish every one to do to us in
similar circumstances. Nebuchadnezzar’s past life again alluded to, Selfishness
rather than regard to the poor the likely character of a despot. The greatest works
in Egypt and India accomplished through the forced labours of the poor under the
terror of the lash.

5. The encouragement (ver, 27). “If it may be a lengthening of thy tranquil-
lity ;” marg. “a healing of thine error” (8), Hope ever held out to the peni-
tent. “Let the wicked forsake his way,” &c. (Isa. lv. 7). The threatened doom
might not only be delayed, but possibly averted, So in the case of Nineveh.
“ Who knoweth if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him %”
(Joel ii 14). “ God, even when grievously offended, not inexorable.” Hezekiah’s
prayer added fifteen years to his life. So might Nebuchadnezzar’s repentance. Or
if the doom must come, the days might be shortened. The specified time of its
continuance indefinite. ‘ Seven times” might be seven years or seven months (14),
Or a happy future might be made to succeed. A probationary period of twelve
months afforded. Mercy Jehovah’s darling attribute. ‘‘ He delighteth in mercy.”
« Afflicteth not willingly, neither doth grieve the children of men.” ‘“‘ Ready to
forgive.” The father runs to receive with the kiss of forgiveness the returning


prodigal.


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—@) “ The
tree grew and was strong.” ‘The per-
fects M2) (rebhah) and WPA (tegiph)
express not the condition of the tree,
but its increasing greatness and growth.
Ch. B. Michaelis properly remarks, that
Nebuchadnezzar saw the tree gradually
grow and become always the stronger.”
—Keil.

@) A watcher and a holy one.”
“The decree of the watchers” (vers,
13, 17). VY (ir), WY (oor), to watch,
be awake. According to Gesenius, a
name given to angels, as watching over
the world and the affairs of men. The
Sept., Greek Venetian, and the Hebrew
versions have “ angels; ” while Aquila
and Symmachus have tygjyoges, and the
Vulgate “vigil,” a watcher, Bertholdt
compares them with the seven Amshas-
pands of the Persians, who are called
‘‘ watchers of the world.” Keil opposes
the idea that the language is formed in


accordance with this Persian represen-
tation. The term “ watcher” is applied
by the Fathers and in the apocryphal
Book of Enoch to evil angels as well as
good ones. Nork thinks that Daniel
here spoke the astrological language of
the Babylonian Magi. More correct,
however, to say that Nebuchadnezzar
thus spoke, According to Calvin, a cer-
tain angel was doubtless intended, an-
gels being so called either from their
sleepless nature, or from their office as
ministers of God’s wakeful providence,
and as being always awake to their duty,
From ver. 17, Corn. & Lapide thinks the
tutelary angel of Babylon is meant, The
term “holy one” added to indicate a good
angel, the! vaw, “ and,” being redundant,
or rather denoting even, or “that ia,”
So Grotius and others, Hengstenberg
remarks that the whole is made perfectly
clear from the Babylonian religious
ideas, with which of necessity the divine
79


Omar, IV.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIBL,





revelation made to Nebuchadnezzar
would be mixed up in his mind. He
quotes from Diodorus Siculus, who says
that to the star-gods (the five planets)
thirty others are subordinated, whom
they call “gods of counsel,” 20/ BouAaios
(YY, trin), half of whom have the super-
intendence of the regions under the earth,
while the others overlook what is going
on among men and in heaven, Keil
observes : * The ‘ decree of the watchers ’
is a conception not Biblical, but Baby-
lonian-heathen. According to the doc-
trine of Scripture, the angels do not
determine the fate of men, but God
alone does, around whom the angels
stand as ministering spirits to fulfil His
commands and to make known His
counsels to men.” To instruct the king
that his religious conceptions of the gods,
the }'") (rin), “watchers,” or Oe0 Bovr.aior,
were erroneous, was not necessary for
the purpose of the divine message, which
was to lead Nebuchadnezzar to an ac-
knowledgment of the Most High, Daniel
doing this afterwards by explaining that
the decree was from the Most High
Himself.

(8) “ This matter ts by the decree of the
watchers,” S2INB (pithgama), definite
form of 0308 (pithgam), “matter” (ch,
iii, 16, at which see note). Here, a
message, ‘‘ By the decree,” M783 (bigze-
rath), “by or in the decree ;” from 3
(gezar), to “cut, mark off,” hence to
“define, determine ;” whence the term
WA (gosrin), to denote “ astrologers,” as
defining the fortunes of individuals from
the position of the stars at the time of
their birth, or as dividing the sky into
various signs, like the ancient augurs,
“The message consists in or rests on
the decree of the watchers,” M73 (gezerah),
the unchangeable decision, the “ divine
inevitable decree imposed on men and
human things” (Buxtorf); the Fate in
which the Chaldeans believed.— Keil,

) “The demand,” SPS (sheelta), a
request, inquiry, or demand, from ony
(sheal), “to ask.” Keil, however, thinks
that the meaning, lying in the etymon,
request or question, is not here suitable,
but only the derivative meaning, matter,
as the object of the request or inquiry.

80


“The word (or utterance) of the holy
ones (or watchers) is the matter.” Older
interpreters regarded the word as indi-
cating the petition either of angels or
men. Calvin and Junius refer it to
the angels who accused Nebuchadnezzar
before God, and who urged him by their
prayers to humble the proud and exalt
himself alone. Lyranus, whom Gaussen
follows, thinks of the prayers of the
saints in Babylon. They prayed, says
M. Gaussen, for the conversion of the
king, and God answers their prayers by
bringing him for a time into the deepest
humiliation, Polanus and Willet apply
it to the angels, as only desiring that
God’s decree might be accepted, and that
the sentence given in heaven by God
might be executed by men upon earth,
Henry remarks: “The saints on earth
petitioned for it, as well as the angels in
heaven, God’s suffering people crying to
Him for vengeance,”

(5) “A band of tron and brass.” Keil
thinks the idea is not congruous to the
stump of a tree, and that the words refer
certainly to Nebuchadnezzar, though not
to be understood, with Jerome and
others, of the binding of the madman
with chains, but figuratively or spiritually
of the withdrawal of free self-determina-
tion through the fetter of madness (comp.
Ps, evii. 10; Job xxxvi 8). The inter-
pretation, however, refers it to the making
his kingdom secure to him after his
affliction (ver. 26).

(8) “Seven times.” The expression
enigmatical and the meaning uncertain,
though probably denoting seven years,
the usual interpretation. — Josephus,
Junius, Gcolampadius, d&c.  Grotius
thinks seven years intended, according
to the Chaldean mode of speaking, a
year being the most common measure
of time. Bullinger and others regard
the term as indefinite. So Calvin, who,
however, thinks it to indicate a long
period, and probably seven years. Keil
considers the duration of the divine
punishment decreed against Nebuchad-
nezzar, for purposes connected with the
history of redemption, uncertain whether
to be understood as years, months, or
weeks. So Hengstenberg, who remarks ;
“It must not be said that |3} (‘tddan),


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL.


OHAP, IV.





chap, vii. 25, xii. 7, occurs in the sense
of years: it stands in both passages
properly, as here, in the independent
sense of time; the more strict definition
is not in the word, but is only given
afterwards. But even granting that a
definite period was pointed out, we should
not be warranted to assume seven years
any more than seven other portions of
time, however large or small they might
be. Nor is a period of seven years at
all required for the occurrence of what is
related in the narrative,” Some, mene
tioned in Poole’s Synopsis, have sup-
posed that the seven years were changed
into seven months at the prayers of
Daniel ; while some Jewish writers, as
Aben Ezra and Abarbanel, considered
the time to be seven weeks. There is
little doubt, however, that the period
ordinarily understood, viz., seven years,
is the correct one. Dr. Rule remarks
that “times” for years is not unusual,
and the phrase reminds one of the
Gothic and Anglo-Saxon use of winters
for years, as in Luke ii, 42; John
viii, 57. The term “times” is well
known in prophetic Scripture, especially
in the expression “time, times, and half
a time,” occurring both in Daniel and
the Apocalypse, and is always under-
stood of years, whether literal or figura-
tive. Some students of prophecy have
considered the ‘‘seven times” of Nebu-
chadnezzar’s madness as at once sym-
bolical and prophetical, and as related
both to the “seven times” of Israel’s
threatened chastisement (Lev. xxvi. 18,
24, 28), and the “time, times, and half
a time,” which is simply their half.
Mr. Birks, in his “Elements of Pro-
phecy,” remarks: “The king himself
represents the succession of imperial
aovereignty till *he kingdom of Christ
should come; the ‘seven times’ that
passed over hin; .nust therefore represent
the whole period of debasement in the
Gentile kingdom, from the times of
Nebuchadnezzar till their full redemp-
tion.” ‘These ‘seven times’ of the
Gentiles,” says Mr. Bickersteth, “ began
with the sabjection of Israel under
Shalmaneser.” Following Mr. Birks
and Mr. Bickarsteth, Mr. Guinness
(“Approaching ‘fime of the End”) says,


“The vision of the tree is not more
symbolic of Nebuchadnezzar’s seven
years’ insanity, than that incident itself
is typical of certain moral and chrono-
logical features of the succession of
Gentile monarchies, of which Nebuchad-
nezzar was both head and representative.”
These features, he remarks, have been
ignorance of God, idolatry, and cruel
persecution of the saints—Nebuchad-
nezzar’s own previous character, The
incidents in his life too, he thinks,
answer to events in the scale of nations
and centuries with which history makes
us familiar. So the seven years’ bestial
degradation of the monarch during his
insanity answer to the period of Gentile
rule represented by the wild beasts of a
subsequent vision,

(7) The reader of the Iliad will re-
member the words, expressive of the
confident belief of the period, which
Homer puts into the mouth of one of
his heroes—


Kat yap tr’ Svap éx Ards éorly,
—Itiad, A. 68,


66 For even a dream too is from Jove.”


(8) “ Then came in the magicians,” de.
See note under chap. ii. 2, 27.

(°) “The dream be to them that hate
thee,” d&c. That is, may it be fulfilled
to them, or rest upon them. So Keil,
who remarks: “As Daniel at once
understood the interpretation of the
dream, he was for a moment so astonished
that he could not speak for terror at the
thoughts which moved his soul. This
amazement seized him because he wished
well to the king, and yet he must now
announce to him a weighty judgment
from God.” He renders “Y¥ (sha’ah),
an “instant” or moment, instead of an
“ hour.”

(10) “ They shall make thee to eat grass
as oxen.” According to the Syriac or
Chaldaic idiom, for “Thou shalt be
made,” &c., the indefinite plural standing
for the passive, The subject thus re
mains altogether indefinite, so that one
has neither to think of men or angels as
the instruments of the infliction. ‘“ As
to the eating of grass,” says Résch,
quoted by Keil, “there is nothing to
perplex or that needs to be aes


OHAP. Iv.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


a a


It is a circumstance that has occurred
in recent times, as, e.g., in the case of a
woman in the Wiirtemberg asylum for
the insane.” Keil also, in a note, quotes
Friedreich, who observes, that “ some-
times in physical maladies the nails
assume a peculiarly monstrous luxuri-
ance with deformity ;” and that “it is
an actual experience that the hair, the
more it is exposed to the influence of
the rough weather and to the sun’s rays,
the more does it grow in hardness, and
thus becomes like unto the feathers of
an eagle.” See further under next
Section.

(1) “ Break off thy sins.” P25 (peroog),
from P22 (perag), to “ break off, break
in pieces,” hence to “separate, disjoin,
put at adistance.” Theodotion and the
Vulgate improperly render the word by
one which means, to “redeem.” - But,
“though in the Targums, P75 is used
for 983 (gaal), and 78 (padhah), to
loosen, to unbind, of redeeming or ran-
soming of the first-born, an inheritance,
or any other valuable possession, yet
this use of the word by no means accords
with sins as the object, because sins are
not goods which one redeems or ransoms
so as to retain them for his own use,”
—Keil.

(12) “ By righteousness.” Theodotion
and the Vulgate commit a further error
by rendering this word “alms.” The
passage, says Keil, is thus made to teach
the doctrine of salvation by works,—
“Redeem thy sins by alms,” In this
rendering they are followed by many
Church Fathers and Rabbis; the later
Jews holding the doctrine of the merit
of works, while, as Keil observes in a
footnote, the Catholic Church regards
this passage as a locus classicus for the
doctrine of the merit of works, against
which the Apologia Conf. August, first set
forth the right exposition.” The same
expositor remarks: “MPT¥ (tsedhagah,
‘righteousness’) nowhere in the Old
Testament means good-doing or alms.
This meaning the self-righteous Rabbis
first gave to the word in their writings,
Daniel recommends the king to practise
righteousness as the chief virtue of a
ruler, in contrast to the unrighteousness
of the despota, as Hgstb., Hav., Hofm,


82


and Klief. have justly observed.” It
may be noticed here that the term
“righteousness” (dsxasoovm) appears from
the New Testament to have come to be
used by the Jews in the time of the
Saviour, and subsequently by Jewish
Christians and others, in the sense of
alms, In Matt. vi. 1, while our version
has “do not thine alms,” some ancient
Greek copies have “do not thy right-
eousness.” The translators of the Bible,
therefore, placed “righteousness” in the
margin, while the Revisers of the New
Testament have inserted it in the text
as the preferable reading, The first
verse, however, is the only place in the
context where the word is used ; in all
the rest, vers, 2, 3, and 4, the word is
“alms” (éAcmuoovvm), Righteousness is
not to be confounded with alms, Calvin,
however, thinks “righteousness” here
means the same as grace or pity; the
word pity or “mercy” being added by
way of explanation, “righteousness”
embracing all the duties of charity.
“ Righteousness,” indeed, as meaning
almsgiving, may have been adopted
from Psalm cxii. 9, which the apostle
seems to have understood and quoted in
that sense, 2 Cor. ix. 9,

(8) “4 lengthening of thy tran
quillity;” marg. “a healing of thine
error.” The Greek translator improperly
has “perhaps God will be long-suffering
to thee;” and the Vulgate, “ perhaps
He will pardon thy faults,” 8328 (areca),
says Keil, means continuance or length
of time, as ch, vii 12; and N19 (sheleva),
rest, safety, as the Hebrew mov (shal-
vah), here the peaceful prosperity of life ;
hence the proper rendering, “If there
may be a continuance of prosperity of
life,” of which the condition placed
before the king is reformation of life, the
giving up of injustice and cruelty to the
poor, and the practice of righteousness
and mercy. Calvin prefers the render-
ing that stands in the margin: “ As if
he had said, This is the proper and
genuine medicine ;” adding that the more
received sense is, “This medicine may
be suitable to the error.” Calvin and
Polanus thought the calamity might be
alleviated, though the punishment might
beinflicted. Willet observes that Daniel


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OHAP, IV.





sustains the double character of a pro- Keil, knew nothing of a heathen Fatum,
phet and a faithful counsellor; know- but he knew that the judgments of God
ing that if the king humbled himself in were directed against men according to
time, it would not be unprofitable for their conduct, and that punishment
him, he counsels him, “if so it stood threatened could only be averted by
with God’s good pleasure.” Daniel, says repentanee.


HOMILETICS,
Seor. XVI.—Nexsucwapnezzar’s Mapwess (Chap. iv. 28-37).


“Riches are not for ever; and doth the crown endure to all generations!”
History presents us with many and great contrasts occurring in the experience of
individuals, even in the course of a single day. The monarch who in the morning
has swayed the sceptre over millions of his fellow-men, in the evening has been a
solitary exile or a dishonoured corpse. Herod Agrippa, in the height of his pro-
sperity, receives in the morning the idolatrous acclamations of thousands, and in
the evening is the pitiable subject of a loathsome and incurable disease (Acts
xii, 21-23). But perhaps the most remarkable of such contrasts is that pre-
sented in this chapter, The most exalted of earthly monarchs in the morning, is
in the evening eating grass with the beasts of the field, The section before us
contains the fulfilment of the king’s dream and its interpretation, That fulfil-
ment took place in the infliction of a species of madness, of which other instances
are known, though happily of rare occurrence @),

L The time and place of the infliction, The time, twelvemonths after the
dream—a sufficient period allowed for repentance. The opportunity, however, not
improved. Sickbed resolutions often soon forgotten. Mere natural impressions
evanescent. ‘The time of the stroke was during the day, that it might be the more
conspicuous as from the hand of God. The place was Babylon and the king’s own
palace (ver. 29). A palace, however gorgeous and well defended, not impervious to
the stroke of affliction or the shaft of death.

IL The king’s employment at the time. ‘“ He walked in (or upon) the
palace of the kingdom of Babylon” (ver. 29). Perhaps walking on the roof and
enjoying the prospect of the beautiful city on which he looked down, or pro-
menading with his queen and courtiers in the celebrated hanging gardens of the
palace. We have also the thoughts he was indulging and the language to which he
was giving utterance. The king spake and said, “ Is not this great Babylon @), that I
have built () for the house of the kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the
honour of my majesty?” (ver. 30). The king was indulging in self-gratulation
and glorying in the works of his own hands, Babylon was indeed at that time a
glorious city, and Nebuchadnezzar was the person who had enlarged and beautified
it, But, like Herod Agrippa at Cesarea, he gave not God the glory. In raising
Babylon to the pitch of grandeur which it had attained, he had done it only to
himself, He was now worshipping the idol of his own hands, and himself as its
creator. God was not in all his thoughts, To forget God the great sin that
characterises prince and peasant in an unregenerate state. The sin for which the
nations shall in justice be “turned into hell,” as robbing God ef His glory (Ps.
ix. 17, 1. 22).

It. The infliction itself (vers. 31-33). The king was struck with a species
of madness, in which the sufferer imagines himself a beast and acts as such (©),
The stroke was—(1.) Sudden, The words of vainglory were still in his mouth
when there fell a voice from heaven, heard by Nebuchadnezzar if by no
other, “O king Nebuchadnezzar! to thee it is spoken, The kingdom is de-
parted from thee, &. The same hour was the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchad
nezzar” (vers. 31-33). God’s strokes often slow, but sudden when wv't come


OHAP. IV, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,
i ae a gp I
“While they say, Peace and safety ! then sudden destruction cometh upon them,
as travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape” (1 Thess, v,
3). (2.) Terrible. Reason was dethroned. The king suddenly imagines himself a
beast, and begins to exhibit the instincts, cravings, and actions of such. As a
madman, he is obliged to be removed from human society. ‘He was driven
from men and did eat grass as oxen,” He was probably confined in a field, whither
perhaps his changed instinct now led him, and where, as if bound with iron fetters,
he indulges a bovine appetite with the beasts among which he herds, “ Nebuchad-
nezzar,” says Matthew Henry, “would be more than a man, and God justly
makes him less, God puts on a level with the beasts the man that sets up for
a rival with his Maker.” The kingdom, as a matter of course, is for the time
taken from him and administered by his nobles, His nails and the hair of his
head and beard are allowed to grow, until the one looks like birds’ claws, and the
other like eagles’ feathers, Alas, poor king! how changed from the glorious
monarch surveying his city from the luxurious hanging gardens! And yet only a
picture of the much sadder change that takes place with the sinner that is “ driven
away in his wickedness” by death, ‘The rich man died and was buried, and
in hell he lifted up his eyes, being in torment.” (3.) Irremediable. Physicians
might not be wanting, but physicians were in vain, Means might be employed to
remove the madness, but means were utterly powerless. The science and skill of
the wise men could effect nothing, The magicians, sorcerers, and Chaldeans tried
their arts to no purpose. The case was hopeless in respect to any aid from man,
It was not hopeless, indeed, in regard to God ; but till the “seven times” were
fulfilled, and it pleased God to remove the affliction, all the powers of earth and
hell would be ineffectual. That time would mercifully come; but till then, no
created might could break those “ bands of iron and brass” Resemblance and
contrast to the case of the finally impenitent. No remedy to the burning tongue
and still more burning conscience. Whoever enters the doleful regions of the lost
leaves hope behind. As in Nebuchadnezzar’s case, there is hope from God for
the sinner while on earth ; but, at the bourne that separates the visible from the
invisible world, the law is, “ He that is filthy, let him be filthy still” (Rev. xxii.
11; Heb. ix. 27).

IV. Its continuance. ‘Seven times” were to pass over Nebuchadnezzar,
and doubtless did so, ‘At the end of the days,” says the king himself in his
relation of the case, “ I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, and my
understanding returned unto me” (ver. 34). The time, whatever it was—most
probably seven years, as in chap. xi. 13, margin, (see note (®) under the preceding
section)—at length came to an end. What man could not effect, God then in His
mercy did. The removal apparently connected with a humble acknowledgment, per-
haps with an act of penitence and prayer, “TI lifted up mine eyes unto heaven” (7),
Power in a single look that has submission, penitence, and prayer in it, ‘Look
unto me and be ye saved.” “ They looked unto Him and were lightened.” With
such a look to heaven, in a mercifully granted gleam of consciousness, the king's
deliverance came, ‘And mine understanding returned unto me.” The seven dark
and dismal years came to an end,

V. The result (vers, 34-37), The result an obvious change for the better in
Nebuchadnezzar’s spiritual condition. Probably his real conversion to God. The
last thing related of him by the Spirit of God is the humble public confession which
he made, and the noble testimony to the true God which, for the benefit of all
men, he delivered in the edict contained in this chapter. With this mental deliver
ance and spiritual change came also restoration to his royal rank (8), and to more
than his former prosperity. His case strikingly similar to that of Job, whose
captivity the Lord turned after his penitent humiliation and confession (Job xlii
1-10), Calvin observes that Nebuchadnezzar did not raise his eyes to heaven till
God ud him to Himself, and that the dream was a kind of entrance and preparation


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OHAP. IV,





for repentance, ‘“ As seed seems to lie putrid in the earth before it brings forth its
fruit, God sometimes works by gentle processes, and provides for the teaching,
which seemed a long time useless, becoming both efficacious and fruitful.” From
Nebuchadnezzar’s madness we may notice—

1, The danger and intoxicating effect of long-continued prosperity. Israel was
guarded against the sin into which Nebuchadnezzar fell, and which entailed on
him his heavy affliction. ‘‘ Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, &e,
Lest when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast built goodly houses, and dwelt
therein ; and when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is
multiplied, and all that thou hast is multiplied ; then thine heart be lifted up, and
thou forget the Lord thy God, &c. And thou say in thine heart, My power and
the might of mine hand hath gotten me this wealth. But thou shalt remember
the Lord thy God ; for it is He that giveth thee power to get wealth” (Deut. viii.
11-18).

2. he abominable nature of pride in the sight of God. This especially the sin
into which Nebuchadnezzar’s prosperity led him, and of which he makes special
confession, Pride both a rivalry and a robbery of God, a deifying of the creature
and an ignoring and despising of the Creator. The sin of Satan and of unregenerate
men in general. ‘ The wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not seek
after God. God is not in all his thoughts” (Ps. ix. 4).

8. The ability of God to abase and punish the proud. The lesson especially learned
by Nebuchadnezzar from his affliction. Mind and body both under God’s control,
and dependent on Him for their healthful preservation, His sustaining hand with-
drawn, reason is dethroned, and the man of genius and intellect becomes a drivel-
ling idiot. Diseases of every kind are but His servants and do His bidding. To mad-
ness, paralysis, and pain He has but to say “Come, and it cometh” (Matt, viii. 9).

4, The certainty of divine threatenings unless averted by repentance. Months
had passed away since the dream that so much disturbed the king’s peace. The
dream and its interpretation, with the solemn exhortation of the prophet, had in
the midst of his prosperity been forgotten, But God forgets not His threatenings,
Judgment, though delayed, yet slumbers not. The warning unheeded, the hour of
its fulfilment comes.

5. Mercy mingled with judgment in the present world, Gracious hopes held out
to the penitent. The door of repentance kept open. Hope held out even to
Nebuchadnezzar that the threatened punishment might be delayed, and would not
be perpetual, What was faintly held out to him is made bright and clear to us in
the Gospel, The bow in the cloud. In wrath God remembers mercy. The blood
of the Surety shed, Justice can sheath her sword. This gracious state of things,
however, confined to the present life. “It is appointed unto men once to die, and
after death the judgment.”

6. The benefit of sanctified affliction. N ebuchadnezzar’s madness his greatest
mercy. His loss of reason, and with that of everything but life, a greater gain to
him than all his conquests. “Children,” said Themistocles, “ we should have been
undone, had we not been undone.” The best medicines often bitter and bad to
take. “If our charity reach so far as to hope that Nebuchadnezzar did find mercy,
we must admire free grace, by which he lost his wits for a while that he might save
his soul for ever."—. Henry. It would be correct, though a paradox, to say he
never truly had his senses till he lost them. So with multitudes; it was never well
with them till it was ill ue

7. The following are other useful reflections from the passage :—(1.) Sin ts of a
hardening nature, retaining its hold in defiance of warnings and even of repeated
punishments. (2.) The most exalted of human beings ts but an tnsignificant atom in
the hand of Infinite Power, (3.) God as never unmindful either of His threatenings or
of His promises, which leave the impenitent nothing to hope, and the believing
nothing to fear. (4.) The punishments which God inflicts upon the aie here or


QAP. Iv, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,








hereafter have relation to their character and demerits. (5.) As the possession of
reason is the highest distinction of man, so the continuance of our mental sanity, which
might in one moment be deranged, either in sovereignty or in judgment, ought to
inspire our most devout and daily gratitude to Him who is the author of tt.—Coz,

8. The great lesson that Nebuchadnezzar was to learn from his affliction was
Gop’s SUPREMACY AND GOVERNMENT OF THE WORLD, or that “the heavens do
rule” (ver. 26). Two great disputes in the world, the one moral and the other
intellectual. The first, whether God or man shall rule,—whether His will or mine
shall be done, The second, whether an intelligent Supreme Being exercises a
continual rule and providence in the world, or whether all happens according to
blind fate or fixed natural laws; in other words, whether or not “the heavens do
rule.” Objections against this :—(1.) All things appear to happen according to fixed
law, and to follow in a natural sequence of cause and effect, (2.) The good suffer as
well as the bad. (3.) The innocent often suffer with and through the guilty, (4.)
The existence of sin and suffering at all in the world. (5.) Men of the worst
character often the highest and most prosperous, (6.) Infants suffer and die. (7.)
The best and most useful often cut off prematurely in the midst, or even at the very
beginning, of their usefulness, General answer to these objections :—We only know
and see a part of God’s dealing. The web of Providence unfinished, Divine plans
require time for their development. Eternity will solve all mysteries, What we
know not now we shall know hereafter. Here we know only in part or in a
fragmentary manner. Things will probably appear hereafter in a different light
from what they do here, God alone sees the end from the beginning. Apparent
evil often real good. Finite minds unable to judge the divine procedure, The
present state subservient and preparatory to another. Special arguments that “the
heavens do rule :”—(1.) Right conduct, as a rule, brings peace and happiness. (2.)
Evil often overruled for good. (3.) The wicked often signally and unexpectedly
punished. (4.) Sin and wrong-doing, as a rule, followed by suffering. (5.) A sudden
srrest often laid on high-handed wickedness. (6.) Great events often made to turn
upon and spring out of insignificant incidents. (7.) Human life, on the whole, a
state of comparative comfort, and the course of the world one of comparative
regularity, (8.) The laws of Nature beneficent, and such as to make suffering a
consequence of sinning. (9.) The history of nations, but more especially that of the
Jewish people. (10,) The facts of Christianity, with its origin, extension, and
results even at the present day,


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—@ The
madness of Nebuchadnezzar, and so the
genuineness of the whole chapter, denied
by some from the absence of any men-
tion of the occurrence in any other book
of the Old Testament, and in any ancient
heathen author. But mention in the
former is unlikely; and the Greek his-
torians are regarded as entirely worthless
in respect to the older history of Asia;
these writers, even Herodotus himself,
saying nothing about Nebuchadnezzar at
all. The object of the Chaldean histo-
rians, Berosus and Manetho, was to
exalt their own nation, who were, there-
fore, not likely to mention the cireum-
stance, Yet Berosus says that Nebu-
chaduezzar, after completing the threefold
circumvallation around Babylon, “ fell

86


into a feeble state of health and died,
having reigned forty-three years.” Aby-
denus, though in a confused manner,
confirms the Scripture account, and says:
“After thia, as the Chaldeans relate, on
ascending to the roof of his palace, he
became inspired by some god [madness
generally considered by the ancients as
an inspiration], and delivered himself
thus : ‘ Babylonians, I, Nebuchadnezzar,
foretell you a calamity that is to happen,
which neither my ancestor Bel nor Queen
Beltis can persuade the fates to avert,
There shall come a Persian mule fone
having parents of different parwaelee «
having your own gods in alliance wi

him, and he shall impose servitude upon
you with the aid of a Mede, the boast
of the Assyrians, Rather than this,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIBL,


OMAP. IV.


eee


would that some Charybdis or sea had
engulfed him in utter destruction, or
that he had been forced some other way
through the desert, where there are no
cities, and no path trodden by man, but
where wild beasts feed and birds roam,
where he must have wandered among
rocks and precipices; and that I had
found a happier end before becoming
acquainted with such a disaster.’ Hav-
ing thus said, he expired.” Even Bert-
holdt is obliged to confess that “ this
rare legend is in its chief points identical
with our account.”—Hengstenberg. A
still more remarkable confirmation, how-
ever, has been discovered in a portion of
the great Standard Inscription among
the cuneiform monuments of the Baby-
lonian empire brought to light by Raw-
linson. Nebuchadnezzar there appears
to say, after describing the construction
of the most important of his great works:
“ For four years the seat of my kingdom
did not rejoice my heart. In all my
dominions I did not build a high place
of power: the precious treasures of my
kingdom I did not lay up. In Babylon,
buildings for myself and the honour of
my kingdom I did not lay out. In the
worship of Merodach, my lord, the joy
of my heart, in Babylon, the seat of his
sovereignty, and the seat of my empire,
I did not sing his praises; I did not
furnish his altars with victims. Nor did
I clear out the canals.”—Smith’s Dtc-
tionary of the Bible, quoted by Dr.
Taylor.

(2) “ Great Babylon.” The whole city,
we are told, formed a perfect square, each
side of which was 15 miles long, making
a circuit of 60 miles, and an area of 360
square miles. Its walls were perhaps
the most stupendous that ever existed.
Constructed of brick, cemented together
with bitumen, which grows hard by
being exposed to the air, they rose to the
height of 350 feet, and were 87 feet
thick! Twenty-five magnificent streets,
running in parallel lines, 150 feet wide
and 15 miles long, traversed the city
from north to south, being intersected
by 25 others of similar dimensions from
west to east; these streets being termi-
nated by a hundred brazen gates, and
forming by their intersections 626 large


squares with a circumference of 600 feet,
What was most admired, however, was
the temple of the god Bel and the two
royal palaces; these last occupying a
space of nearly three square miles, con-
taining the celebrated hanging gardens,
formed on vaulted terraces 4000 feet
square, rising one above the other to the
height of the walls; the topmost platform
having a spacious basin filled with water
from the Euphrates, forced up by a
powerful hydraulic engine.-—Gaussen.

(8) “Which I have built.” 133 (benah),
“he built,” designates here not the
building or founding of a city; for the .
founding of Babylon took place in the
earliest times after the Flood (Gen. xi.),
being dedicated to the god Belus, or
the mythic Semiramis, in prehistoric
times ; but the building up, the enlarge-
ment, the adorning of the city “for the
house of the kingdom,” or a royal resi-
dence.— Keil,

(4) In the Standard Inscription the
king says of Babylon, “ The city which
is the delight of my eyes, which I have
glorified.” It is known that after Nebu-
chadnezzar had finished his military
career, he set himself to improve his
territory and beautify his capital. Ac-
cording to Herodotus, the city was built
on both sides of the Euphrates, the ex-
tent of the outer wall being about 56
miles, though Ctesias makes it only 42 ;
the area being thus five or six times that
of London, The houses were frequently
three or four storeys high. In each of
the two divisions of the city was a for-
tress or stronghold, the one being the
royal palace, the other the temple of
Bel. The two portions of the city were
united by a bridge, at each extremity of
which was a royal palace, The city was
not only renovated throughout by Nebu-
chadnezzar, but surrounded with several
lines of fortifications, and increased by
the addition of a new quarter. Having
finished its walls and adorned its gates,
he constructed a new palace, in the
grounds of which, in order to gratify the
taste of the queen, he formed the cele-
brated hanging gardens. Rawlinson, in
his Appendix to Herodotus, quoted by
Dr. Rule, says, “The more northern
mound, now called the Mujellibeh, and

87


OHAP, ¥.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





crowned with the building called the
Kasr, is undoubtedly a construction of
Nebuchadnezzar, and may be almost
certainly identified with the new palace,
adjoining his father’s (Nabopolassar’s),
which is ascribed to him. The size of
this mound, about 700 yards each way,
shows the area covered by the palace
mentioned in our text, The buildings
here are of superior material; and the
sculptures and bas-reliefs found in them
give evidence of superior magnificence.
Solid masses of masonry, consisting of
pale yellow bricks of excellent quality,
each one, with very rare exceptions,
stamped with the name and titles of
Nebuchadnezzar, give attestation to the
truth of his recorded exclamation, ‘Is
not this great Babylon which I have
built ?’”

©) In the view of Hengstenberg, the
case was this: There is often in madness
a violent desire after a free, solitary,
wild life. In Nebuchadnezzar’s case,
they humoured this propensity so far
as it was feasible; only they had him
watched that he might fall into no dan-
ger, and bound him with fetters that he
might do himself no mischief. Probably
they took care also that he should haunt
those places only where he would not be
exposed to the gaze of his subjects,
Others, however, as Grotius, understand
the binding with a band of iron and
brass as referring to his kingdom, which
was to be secured to him, rather than to
his person, Probably both are intended,
Keil observes that the malady of Nebu-
chadnezzar was that which is called
tnsanta zoanthropica, or, in the case of
those who think themselves wolves,
lycanthropia,—a malady in which men
regard themselves as beasts, and imitate


their manner of life, Dr. Pusey, who
also considers the king’s madness a case
of lycanthropy, quotes Dr. Brown, Com-
missioner of the Board of Lunacy for
Scotland, who agrees in the same view,
and says that the king probably “re-
tained a perfect consciousness that he
was Nebuchadnezzar during the whole
course of his degradation.”

() “ And I was established in my
kingdom.” The supposed unlikeliness
of this has been made an objection to
the genuineness of the book. But, as
Hengstenberg remarks, “several causes
surely concurred to prevent the nobles
from thinking of a change of rulers
Nebuchadnezzar was the pride of the
nation ; from his successor, Evil-Mero-
dach, only mischief could be looked for;
the highest officers in the realm must
expect under him a deposition from their
rank, as is so frequently the case in the
East on a change of rulers, The general
and the individual interest combined,
therefore, to determine them to reserve
the crown as long as possible for Nebu-


. chadnezzar, in whose name and authority


they were certainly not reluctant to rule
without control.” To these reasons it
may be added that the time during which
the malady should continue was left un-
certain, and might be short; or, if certain,
the regency would only be for a definite
period.

©) “ T lifted up mine eyes unto heaven.”
Thus paraphrased by Grotius: “I prayed
to the God of heaven.” By Junius:
“ Before, I looked prone to the earth;
now [looked up to heaven.” By Calvin:
“ Now I regarded the hand of Him that
smote me, and acknowledged God to be
a just Judge and the Revenger of the
proud.”


HOMILETICS.
Sxor. XVII.—Batsnazzar’s Feast (Chap. v.)


This chapter deservedly a favourite with general readers (1),
excitement, and revelry of the royal feast ; the


The magnificenee,
profligate king, when heated with


wine, calling for the sacred vessels of the Temple, and, with his princes, wives,
and concubines, drinking out of them to the honour of heathen deities ; the
sudden appearance, in the midst of the carousal, of a weird hand, tracing distinct
but unintelligible characters on the wall; the consternation of the whole party, and
the Raat stop put to all the mirth ; the terror of the conscience-stricken monarch,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL. ORaw,
Fe A,


eausing his very knees to smite against each other ; the hasty summoning of the
magicians and soothsayers to decipher the mysterious writing ; the perplexity of
the king and his party when these men declare their inability to read or under-
stand it ; the appearance of the queen-mother €) on the scene, reminding the terror-
stricken king of the aged servant of his father, or rather his grandfather (8), Nebu-
chadnezzar, whom his excesses had driven from his court, but who was doubtless
able to interpret the handwriting ; Daniel’s entrance at the royal summons, with
his venerable mien and hoary locks, now above eighty years of age; his faithful
reproof addressed to the profane and licentious king; the solemn reading and
interpretation of the divine message on the wall, each word falling like a death-
knell on the ear of the guilty monarch ; the bestowment of the promised reward on
Daniel, the golden necklace 4 put on his neck and the proclamation issued that
made him third ruler in the kingdom ©); in the midst of this the startling report
that the Persians were in the city, and immediately thereafter a tumultuous noise
outside, and the entrance of foreign soldiers, brandishing naked blood-stained swords,
into the banquet-hall ; and, finally, the promiscuous slaughter that ensues, in which
the king himself is slain (, and the great Babylonian empire comes to an end.
Seldom, if ever, have so many thrilling events been brought together in so short a
space, The whole scene fitted solemnly to remind us of another, of which it may
be regarded as a type—that hour of doom which is to overtake a godless and
guilty world, when not a mere hand on the wall, but the Son of man Himself shall
appear in the clouds, striking terror into every impenitent heart. We may note—
I. The feast (vers. 1-4). It was—(l.) Large; a thousand guests besides the
king’s wives and concubines (), marking the dissipated character of Belshazzar,
as the kings of Chaldea are said to have rarely invited guests to their table.
(2.) Magnificent ; held in the banquet-hall of the royal palace, the guests being the
highest nobility ( in the land, the king himself reclining apart on his sumptuous
couch (), (3.) Zdolatrous ; celebrated with songs of praise to their gods of gold,
silver, brass, and iron, wood and stone, the feast itself being possibly in honour of
the tutelary deity of the city, as the supposed author of their fancied prosperity,
and the successful competitor of Jehovah, to whom Nebuchadnezzar had shown so
much partiality. (4.) Profane ; the king, not satisfied with praising the gods of his
own country, must insult and defy the God of the Jews by sending for the golden
vessels of the Temple, which, nearly seventy years before, Nebuchadnezzar had
brought from Jerusalem ; and then, with his riotous guests, drinking out of them
to the honour of his gods, as if he would again triumph over Jehovah whom Bel
had conquered, like the Philistines when they placed the ark in the temple of
on. ;
a The handwriting (vers, 5-9). It was—(1.) Sudden, in the midst of the
mirth and revelry of the feast. (2.) Mysterious ; a hand seen tracing characters high
up on the wall, without any one appearing to guide it, (3.) Real; the hand and
the writing visible to every one on the wall over against the great chandelier 9;
hence no effect of excited imagination or of priestly imposture, (4.) Alarming ;
all naturally seized with fear, but more especially the king, for whom it was
intended, and whose eyes it now opened at once to his guilt and danger. (5.) Per-
ing; no solution of its meaning obtainable through the usual channels, in
fulfilment of Isa, xlvii. 12, 13; while there is felt an inward certainty that the
writing must have a meaning. The handwriting on the walla picture of the
many denunciations against impenitent sinners written by the same divine finger
in the Word of God; with this difference, that while that handwriting was obscure
and unintelligible till Daniel interpreted it, the denunciations in the Bible are clear
as written with a sunbeam, and so plain that a child may understand them.
IIL The reproof (vers. 10-24). Daniel, sent for by the king at the queen's
suggestion, before interpreting the writing, addresses to the king a solemn reproof,
That reproof an example of uncompromising faithfulneas, (1.) Reminds ae of an





wap v. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





——


admonitory fact in the history of his great ancestor, Nebuchadnezzar (vers. 20, 21).
(2.) Points him to his own sin in disregarding that solemn monition (ver. 22).
(3 Charges him directly with pride, impious defiance of the God of heaven, sacri-
legious profanity, and honouring with his praise dumb idols, instead of the God
in whose hand his breath was, and whose were all his ways (ver. 24). (4.) After
thus faithfully convicting him of his misdeeds “in the presence of all the wealth,
rank, beauty, and power of his kingdom,” he declares that the writing on the wall
proclaims to him the righteous judgment of God which now overtook him, and of
which it was sent as a solemn precursor, announcing at once his guilt and his
impending doom.

IV. The interpretation (vers. 25-28). Daniel, who had been appointed by
Nebuchadnezzar head of all the Magi in Babylon, and had already been distin-
guished as a prophet of the Most High God, now again is enabled to make good
his title, Sent for in the hour of distress, after having been probably banished
from the court for at least seventeen years as a drivelling fanatic, he proceeds, with
the confidence and calm solemnity of an inspired man, to decipher the writing.
He first reads the mystic words: MzNnz, Menz, Texet, Upnarsin (2), He then
slowly gives the interpretation of each, MznNz—repeated for emphasis, and to indi-
cate the completeness and certainty of the fact—“ numbered, numbered” “ God
hath numbered thy kingdom and finished it,”—the days of thy reign, thy
dynasty, and the empire of which thou hast been the guilty head, are numbered,
and now come to an end, TEKEL, “weighed ;” “Thou art weighed in the balances
and art found wanting,”—the cause of the approaching doom, PgRgs—the sin-
gular form of the verb of which Upiagstn is the plural with the conjunction u (and)
prefixed— divided ;” “Thy kingdom is divided and given to the Medes and
Persians ”—the very words seeming to indicate those to whom the empire was now
to pass (12),

V. The end (vers. 29-31). Daniel’s interpretation soon tragically verified.
The cup of Belshazzar’s iniquity now full, The hour of Babylon’s doom and his
own had struck. The prophecies of Isaiah and Jeremiah were now to receive their
fulfilment. The Medes and Persians already prepared by Jehovah to fulfil His
purposes against Babylon (Isa, xxi, 2). While Daniel was speaking, the Lord was
admitting Cyrus and his Persians into the city by the two-leaved gates of brass
(Isa. xlv. 1, 2), which opened on the river, and had that night been strangely left
unshut (1%), “Que post runs to meet another, and one messenger to meet another,
to show the king of Babylon that his city is taken at one end. I will dry up her
sea. The mighty men of Babylon have forborne to fight ; they have remained in
their holds ; their might hath failed ; they became as women. In their fear I will
make their feasts, and I will make them drunken, that they may rejoice and sleep
a perpetual sleep, and not awake, saith the Lord” (Jer li, 28-39). Belshazzar falls
among the slain in the same night, and Darius the Mede, otherwise called Cyax-
ares (14), takes by courtesy the kingdom which Cyrus his nephew had conquered.

Among the thoughts suggested by the narrative are the following :—

1. The short-lived nature of wnhallowed pleasure. “ As the crackling of thorns
under a pot, so is the laughter of a fool” (Eccles, vii. 6). Belshazzar and his
nobles had given themselves up to pleasure, heedless of warning and danger. Their
godless revelry had reached its height when king and princes are summoned to
their account,

2. The certainty of divine retribution. Belshazzar’s life one of licentiousness
and immorality. Despising the lesson taught by the case of his grandfather, and
trusting in his fortifications, lofty walls, and brazen gates, he expected to sin on
with impunity. But the judgment of hardened offenders “ lingereth not, and their
damnation slumbereth not” (2 Pet. ii. 3).

3. The suddenness with which punishment often overtakes the wicked. Here it
was in on midst of festivity and mirth, The sacred vessels of the Temple were


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL. CHAP, V,





till in their hands, and the God defying praises of Bel on their lips, when judgment
falls upon the profane rioters, ‘The king, his princes, and his people, thought
themselves secure, and laughed at the besiegers, when destruction burst upon the
doomed city. ‘When they shall say, Peace and safety! then sudden destruction
cometh upon them.” “Take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and so that day come upon you
unawares” (1 Thess, v. 2; Luke xxi, 34). |

4. The terror of a guilty conscience. It was Belshagzzar’s guilty conscience that
blanched his cheeks and made his knees smite against each other as he beheld the
writing on the wall, “’Tis conscience that makes cowards of us all” “The
wicked flee when no man pursueth.” A heathen poet could write, “A righteous
man will be found fearless, though the heavens should fall and crush him ” (5),

5. The aggravated guilt of unheeded warnings. Belshazzar’s special guilt that
he lived a life of sin, with the case of Nebuchadnezzar before his eyes. ‘Thou
his son, O Belshazzar, hast not humbled thine heart, though thou knewest all this.”
“He that, being often reproved, hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be cut off, and
that without remedy” (Prov. xxix. 1). Unheeded warnings and neglected calls
both hasten the stroke of judgment and make it heavier when it comes,

6. The sin of not glorifying God. The sin charged upon Belshazzar, as the sum
and essence of his guilt, that the God in whose hand his breath was and whose
were all his ways, he had not glorified. The sin that robs God of His right and
proclaims man a rebel against his Maker. “The Lord hath made all things for
Himself.” All creatures to glorify God according to their several natures and
capacities, because He has created all things, and for His “ pleasure they are and
were created.” The universal sin, “All have sinned, and come short of the glory
of God.” ‘When they knew God, they glorified Him not as God.” The sin espe-
cially marked by God. Herod Agrippa eaten up of worms because he “gave not
God the glory.” Yet few consider it a sin at all.

7. The stupidity of the human heart. Belshazzar’s riotous feast at the very
time when the city and country were in imminent peril. With such an enemy as
Cyrus at his gates and in possession of great part of the country, a fast would
have been more becoming than a feast. Men often most heedless when in greatest
danger. ‘In that day did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping, and to mourn-
ing, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth; and behold joy and gladness,
slaying oxen, and killing sheep, and drinking wine: let us eat and drink, for to-
morrow we die” (Isa, xxii. 12, 13).

8. The destiny of men and nations in the hand of God, The days of Babylon
and Babylon’s king were numbered. So the days of each State and of each indi-
vidual in that State, ‘‘ The number of his months is with Thee.” The hairs of our
head are numbered, much more the days of your life, Yet man, as a free agent
and a rational creature, generally responsible for the preservation of his own life and
the life of others, The effect of sin to shorten the existence both of States and
individuals, ‘The bloody and deceitful man shall not live out half his days,”
On the other hand, prayer added fifteen years to Hezekiah’s life, and repentance
saved Nineveh from an impending and threatened destruction.

9. The beneficial influence of woman. A woman’s presence and voice powerful
amid the terror and consternation of Belshazzar’s banquet-hall, The aged queen
the only one able to give counsel to the terrified and bewildered king. Presence
of mind and perception of what is needed in times of perplexity and peril often
found in woman, ‘“ The adaptation of woman to promote the comfort of life is
a gracious provision of God; and the disposition to soothe anxiety, to alleviate
suffering, to shield or aid in danger, is alike certain to operate and honourable to
display.” —Coz. ; : 4

10. The crime of wantonly profaning sacred things. _This the acme of Bel-
shazgar’s guilt, Men not unfrequently tempted, especially amid seeped and


omar, V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DANI8L


———eeesaa——eeee eee


mirth, to commit this sin. God’s Word and ordinances sometimes profanely made
to contribute to that mirth, “When the facts and the expressions of the Bible,
its sublime, its pure, and its holy truths, are used, as they not unfrequently are, to
point a pun, add edge to a jest or keenness to a sarcasm, to excite a laugh or to
provoke a sneer, you have God’s vessels desecrated to an unhallowed and profane
end, Never try to construct jests from the Bible.”—Cumming.

ll. The danger of indulging in intoxicating drink. It was while drinking
wine (15), perhaps not deeply, that Belshazzar, in his impious madness, called for
the sacred vessels of the Temple to drink still more. The king, wicked and profane
to begin with, made more ao by the excitement of strong drink Herod the
Tetrarch a similar example. Wine given by a beneficent Creator for man’s refiesh-
ment and strength. But the same authority which states that wine “ gladdeneth
man’s heart,” says also, “ Wine is a mocker, and strong drink is raging ; and he
that is deceived thereby is not wise” (Prov. xx. 1), The foulest crimes often, as
at Belshagzar’s feast, the result of strong drink, “ All those sanguinary conspiracies
which issued in such a frightful effusion of Protestant blood in France were con-
cocted at Blois, Bayonne, Paris, and Orleans, amid the festivities of the table, and
in the society of the Salomes and other immoral women who constantly attended
Catherine de Medici, the Herodias of the French.” —Gaussen,

12. The condition of unconverted men in general. That condition exhibited in
the case of Belshazzar, as described in the writing on the wall,—


WEIGHED IN THE Bauanozs AND Founp WanrTING (ver. 27),


1. Weighed in the balances. The figure taken from the practice of weighing
the precious metals to test their purity. The balances those of the sanctuary, of
Him who ia the Judge of quick and dead(6), Held by One who is omniscient,
and whose knowledge no action, word, thought, feeling, wish, or secret motive can
elude ; who “searcheth the heart and trieth the reins ;” who is impartial and no
respecter of persons; and, finally, who is spotlessly just, judging of each act,
word, thought, and feeling according to its real character and circumstances, and
awarding accordingly. His balances just ones, such as He loves and requires of
men, The weights in the balance to weigh these actions, &c., are His own law,
which is just, and holy, and good, and adapted to man’s moral nature ; a law which
he was created capable of fulfilling, and in the obedience of which he finds his
happiness ; a transcript of God’s own character, which is love, and therefore re-
quiring only love—supreme love—to our Maker, the sum and source of all excel-
lence, and the fountain of all blessings to His creatures, with disinterested,
universal, and impartial love to our neighbour; a law that is spiritual, taking
cognisance of the inward thoughts, feelings, and motives, as well as outward acta
and words, and requiring love as the character and mainspring of them all; a law
as broad as man’s moral nature and capabilities, requiring him to glorify God with
his body and his spirit, whether he eat or drink or whatever he does, and to desire
and seek the welfare of his neighbour as his own in respect to his whole being as
an immortal creature, possessing body, soul, and spirit; a law that admits of no
sin or the least disobedience, all such being rebellion against God; a law the
penalty of which, for even the least transgression, is, as it ought to be, death, or the
separation of the sinning and polluted soul from God, who is life and purity itself,
Against such a law, written in men’s consciences and revealed in God’s Word, men
are weighed. “The Lord weigheth the spirita” « By Him actions are weighed.”
Job gets here his desire: “Oh, that I were weighed in an even balance,” Men
weighed now as they are at each moment; every action, word, thought, and feeli
as it passes. The great day of public weighing hereafter, when God shall “ judge


the world in righteousness by that Man whom He has appointed,”—shall “ judge
the secrets of men by Jesus Christ.”
92


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, CHAP, We


eeeeeeeeeSSSSSSSSSSeSeSeeSSFSFeee

3. Found wanting. Universally true ever since man fell.  “ All have sinned
and come short of the glory of God.” A fact universally admitted, even by the
heathen, That man is a sinner as true as that he is mortal, and the latter simply
because he is the former, Man not merely a sinful creature but a Jallen one.
“God made man upright, but he hath sought out many inventions,” Man’s fall
from a state of innocence a universal tradition. His character, when left to him-
self, notoriously not love but selfishness, ‘ Mind number one” man’s rule of
action ; not “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself,” which is the law of God,
Instead of loving God with all our heart, soul, strength, and mind, He is not in
all our thoughts, and we do not desire to have Him there, The language of the
natural heart, “ Depart from us; we desire not the knowledge of Thy ways.” Dis-
like to a just and holy God, disregard of His will, and independence of His autho-
rity, the characteristics of fallen man in respect to his Maker, His nature corrupt,
and no more the transcript of his Creator. Sin the character of his inner and
outer life. His whole life one continued shortcoming. Found wanting at every
moment. The same true of every action, word, thought, and feeling, so far as they
are the product of his own unrenewed nature, Even when the will may be to do
what is right, the performance is wanting, Found wanting in all the relations of
life, as parent and child, master and servant, ruler and ruled. A continuance in
all the requirements of the law, day and night, all life through, in thought, word,
and action, necessary to make him weight. Yet he continues in none, not even for
an hour or a minute of his life. Hence the penalty of death incurred daily and
hourly. “The soul that sinneth it shall die” ‘The wages of sin—all and any
sin—is death.” “Guilty before God,” the charge against every child of man;
“ guilty of death,” his sentence.

3. Our only hope. Hope of acceptance with God from ourselves or any works
of our own impossible, Every such attempt to gain acceptance only a further
shortcoming. No action, word, thought, feeling, put into the scale, but is itself
short weight. No more hope from our neighbour than from ourselves. Each in
the same predicament. Every man must bear his own burden. Yet man’s case
not hopeless. Hope not found in himself but in another. That other is Jesus
Christ, “our hope.” The hope provided by the Creator Himself. “O Israel, thou
hast destroyed thyself; but in me is thy help found.” “He hath laid help on
one that is mighty.” He who was the “hope of Israel” is the hope of a guilty
world. The glad tidings from heaven—“ There is born unto you a Saviour, which
is Christ the Lord.” ‘God so loved the world that He gave His only-begotten Son,
that whosoever believeth in Him might not perish, but have everlasting life,”
‘This is the name by which He shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness,”
God in our nature, the Eternal Word made flesh, He is provided as our surety
and substitute, the just one taking the place of the unjust. God’s “ Righteous
Servant,” fulfilling all righteousness, that, accepting and trusting in Him, His
righteousness might be reckoned to us, and we might be accepted in Him. “He
hath made Him to be sin who knew no ain, that we might be made the righteous-
ness of God in Him” (2 Cor. v. 21). To those who accept of Him, and so are in
him, He is of God made righteousness as well as sanctification and redemption.
Made one with Him, through acceptance of Him and trust in Him, His perfect
obedience is ours, and is thrown into the scale as our own. “As by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, 80 by the obedience of one many are made
righteous.” Christ’s works, not our own, make us full weight ; His, and at the same
time ours by virtue of union with Him. His righteousness, not our own, the garment
for the marriage feast. The sin and ruin of the Jews that they rejected this robe
of righteousness. “They being ignorant of God’s righteousness, and going about ta
establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteous-
ness of God” (Rom. x. 3). Reader, what have you to weigh against God’s law1
Christ’s works or your own? If the former, as evinced by a new heart and life,


OHAP. V,


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





you are accepted ; if the latter, still “found wanting.” Lose no time in accepting
Christ as your righteousness, You may even yet have His works put into the
empty scale as your own. But soon it will be too late. Accept in time, or you


are undone,


EXEGETICAL NOTES. —@® Dr.
A. Clarke is of opinion that this
chapter is out of its proper place, and
should come in after chapters vii. and
viii, Chronologically this is true; but
for other reasons it has been placed
where it is, leaving the whole of the
second part of the book prophetical.
Hengstenberg observes that in this
chapter the objections are less nume-
rous and particularly feeble. An ob-
jection has been made on the ground
that no king of Babylon of the name
of Belshazzar is known in history; and
that the name of the last king was not
Belshazzar, but Nabonnedus, according
to Berosus, or Labynetus, according to
Herodotus, who was not slain in Baby-
lon, but surrendered himself a prisoner
to Cyrus at Borsippa, and was kindly
treated by the conqueror. Strange to
say, as already remarked in the Intro-
duction, a clay cylinder, now in the
British Museum, was in 1854 dis-
covered by Sir H. Rawlinson among
the ruins of Mugheir, the ancient Ur
of the Chaldees, on which is an in-
scription stating that the building in
which it was found was the work of
Nabonidus ; the last of the Babylonian
kings, who repaired it in 555 B.c., and
that Bel-shar-ezer (or Belshazzar) his
eldest son, had been admitted by him
to a share in the government, There
were thus two kings of Babylon at the
time the city was taken; the one, the
father, of whom the historians speak,
and who was then at a distance; the
other, the son, who was in the city at
the time, and who, according to both
Daniel and Xenophon, was slain on the
occasion, According to Josephus and
Berosus, Belshazzar, called by Metas-
thenes and the Septuagint Baltassar,
was the son of Evil-Merodach, and
reigned seventeen years; the two who
reigned between Evil-Merodach, the son
of Nebuchadnegzar, being Neriglessar,
bis brother-in-law, who slew him, and
reigned four years, and Laborosoarchod,

94


his son, who reigned only nine months;
whose names, as only petty kings and
usurpers, would not, Dr. Cumming thinks,
be acknowledged in the chronicles of
Babylon or by the sacred writers. Keil,
with Hoffmann, Hiivernick, and others,
is inclined to regard Belshazzar as the
son and successor of Nebuchadnezzar,
and to identify him with Evil-Merodach,
it being the rule with Eastern kings to
have several names.

(2) “ The queen.” According to Hero-
dotus, this was Nitocris, a prudent
woman; the queen, not of Belshazzar,
but of his grandfather, Nebuchadnezzar,
the former being already at the feast
among his wives and concubines. Ac-
cording to Polyhistor, it was Aniyt,
daughter of Astyages, sister of Darius
the Mede, and aunt of Cyrus. Prideaux
takes her for the mother of Belshazzar
and widow of Nebuchadnezzar. So
Keil. Dr. Rule observes: “ Perhaps she
was the wife of Nabonadius, left in the
city when her husband sallied forth to
meet the enemy, but who had not re
turned. If so, she would well remem-
ber the events of the latter part of the
reign of Nebuchadnezzar,” According
to Josephus, she was the grandmother
of Belshazzar; while Origen, Ephrem
Syrus, and Theodoret, make her his
mother,

@) “Thy father.” It is generally ad-
mitted that I8 (adh) frequently signifies
an ancestor in general, Belshazzar was
probably a son of Evil-Merodach, who
only reigned two years, and so was the
grandson of Nebuchadnezzar,

() “A necklace.” Among the Persians
it is said to have been one of the highest
honours to receive a neck-chain as a
present from the king. An emblem, as
among the ancient Egyptians and our-
selves, of magisterial authority.

(5) “ The third ruler in the kingdom.”
This agrees with what has been noted
as to Belshazzar having been associated
with his father in the government, and
thus made the second ruler; an unde-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





signed coincidence, and a singular con-
firmation of the genuineness of the
account, Jerome and others, however,
understood the third ruler to be equi-
valent to the Greek rgerdrng, the title
given to a member of a triumvirate in
the government of a kingdom or empire.
Dr. Rule observes that the word agrees
with the term used in Ezek, xxiii. 15,
23, to denote Babylonian princes, Deroy
(shalishim), or “ third men ;” the origin
being discovered in the three charioteers
or soldiers who rode in the war-chariots
(1 Kings ix. 22), as seen in the war
scenes on the slabs of the Assyrian
marbles,

() “In that night,” de. For the
account of the taking of the city, as
cup by Herodotus, see page 48, note

The night of that event is regarded
by Gaussen as “a prophetic type of the
last solemn judgment of the Lord; a
night so great and so terrible that the
Holy Spirit frequently refers to it as
the emblem of that night, a thousand
times more terrible, when the Lord
Jesus shall be ‘revealed from heaven
with His mighty angels,’”

@ “ His wives and his concubines.”
The presence of women at feasts was a
custom with the Babylonians, as appears
from Xenophon, The Alexandrian trans-
lator (the Septuagint), following the
custom of his own time, has, strange to
say, everywhere passed over the women
at the feast of Belshazzar; another
corroborative evidence of the genuine-
ness of the account, as showing the
writer’s intimate acquaintance with the
manners and usages of the country.—
Hengstenberg.

(8) “ His lords,” “his princes,” 13393)
(rabhrebhanoht), the reduplication of
33 (rabh), great ; “great men,” “ mag-
nates” of the realm. An objection has
been grounded on the use of this word,
which is found in the Targum, but not
in the older Aramaic writings; an objec-
tion, as Hengstenberg remarks, which
would apply also to the pseudo-Daniel
in the time of the Maccabees, and so
prove too much,

©) © Before the thousand,” 930? (la-
gabhel), “ over against,” So Dr. Pusey,
who gives the paraphrase of Ephrem


omar. ¥.





Syrus, “ Alone he lay over against all
reclined.” A Greek scholiast, quoted by
Dr. Pusey, observes, “ It was their cus
tom that each should have their own
table.” So Athenaus: “ When the Per-
sian king makes a drinking feast, they
(the guests) do not drink the same wine
as he ; they sitting on the ground, he
lying on a couch with golden legs,”

(10) “ Over against the candlestick upon
the plaister of the wall.” Keil says,
“‘The fingers wrote on the plaster of the
wall over against the candlestick which
stood on the table at which the king
sat, and which reflected its light per-
ceptibly on the white wall opposite, so
that the fingers writing could be dis-
tinctly seen. The feast had been pro-
longed into the night ; and the wall of
the chamber was not wainscotted, but
only plastered with lime, as in the
chambers found in the palaces of Nim-
roud and Khorsabad, covered over only
with mortar.” Dr. Rule thinks there
was no ink nor colouring, the visibility
of the writing being only by the effect
of light and shade on the sharp relief
of the characters made on the lime or
cement of the wall, such as is actually
found remaining on those ruins where
the walls are not lined with slabs,

@1) “‘Mene, mene,” &e. ‘ According
to the account, it was only by super-
natural illumination that Daniel was
able to read and explain the writing,
and only because the king believed him
to possess it that he was called in for
the purpose, The characters must there-
fore have been quite uncommon, 80 as
not to be deciphered without divine
illumination.” —Hengstensberg, who also
remarks that the existence of a mystic
writing in Babylon is supposed in the
entire narration. He supposes the
“magicians,” [OLIN (khartummin), of
whom Nebuchadnezzar made Daniel the
master, and who are included in the
wise men of chap. ii. 48, were probably
men skilled in such writing, such per-
sons being found among the Egyptians,
whose religious system stands in the -
closest relation to the Babylonians, Dr.
Cumming remarks that these persons
were not “ magicians,” but philosophers,
who neld converse with Gud’s outer


95


OmaP, V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


———___eee——_—_— Ch er


world, not with evil spirits, like the
sorcerers and diviners of old. He thinks
that the writing was in the pure Hebrew
character, which we call Samaritan, and
that it was simply from the strangeness
of the character that the wise men were
unable to understand it. Some of the
old interpreters, as Polanus, Calvin, and
Willet, ascribe their inability, not so
much to the strange and unknown char-
acters, as to the fact that they were
blinded and astonished by the power of
' God. Dr. Rule thinks that the difficulty
may have arisen from the characters orthe
language, orfrom both ; and that the char-
racters were most probably cuneiform, no
other being used in that age in Assyria
and Babylonia, while there were many
languages or dialects, All the ancient
versions except the Syriac have, instead
of four words, only three, Mene, Tekel,
Phares, exactly as explained in the verses
which follow. The words are differently
rendered, according to the supposed form
of the verbs, whether as perfect, parti-
ciple, or imperative. Some think the
first word is doubled for emphasis;
others, as Calvin, for confirmation, and
to show that the numbering was now
completed, Maldonatus thinks that the
reduplication, according to a Hebraism,
indicates “‘he hath diligently numbered ”
alluding to the seventy years of the
Jewish captivity, or the existence of the
Babylonian empire. Calvin and Polanus,
after R. Saadias, favour the idea of exact-
ness. Dr. Rule observes that x9 (mene),
whether in Chaldee or Hebrew, signifies
to “number, count out, allot,” and is
employed here in the sense it bears in
Isa, Ixv. 12. In connection with the
last word, DB or }*D 1D) (peres or uphar-
sin), Dr. Rule observes that the division
or distribution indicated in the first
word is unfolded in the distinct an-
nouncement of the prophet that the
Medes and Persians, now employing
their united forces in the siege, shall
have the kingdom divided between them;
the Medes, according to Herodotus,
being Aryans, and the Persians of
Aryan descent. Darius the Mede had
precedence in the attack over Cyrus
the Persian because of seniority, and
held the sceptre till his death, when
96


Cyrus took it ; Darius, according to one
account, having called him out of Persia
to assist him in the war by taking the
command of the army. Willet remarks
that wpharsin, the plural, refers to the
Medes and Persians as the instruments,
while peres, the singular, points to God
as the author of the division. He thinks
the writing gives both the thing pre
dicted,—the division of the empire,—
and the parties between whom it was
to be divided, the Medes and Persians,
Darius having Babylon, and Cyrus
Assyria, Calvin, however, properly re-
marks, that the city was truly taken by
the valour and industry of Cyrus, but
that Cyrus admitted his father-in-law to
the great honour of allowing him to
partake of the royal authority, and that
the Medes and Persians are said to have
divided the kingdom, although there
was properly no division of the empire,
Gaussen remarks that each of the words
appears to have a double signification,
one in Hebrew and another in Chaldee,
so that they became equivalent to six
terrible sentences,

@8) Xenophon says this was done by
Gadates and Gobryas, who had gone over
from the Babylonians to Cyrus, Hero-
dotus relates that in Babylon there pre-
vailed such recklessness that no inquiry
was made as to what was doing among
the enemy, and so nothing was perceived
of all those operations by which Cyrus
had been preparing for the conquest of
the city.

Q*) “ Darius the Mede.” Some have
thought that this was Darius Hystaspes,
So Porphyry, Tertullian, and Cyril of
Jerusalem. But, as Willet observes,
Darius Hystaspes reigned third after
Oyrus; and Babylon was taken twice,
the first time by Darins and Cyrus, and
the second by Darius Hystaspes, through
means of Zopyrus. Bertholdt, Bleek,
and others object against the genuineness
of the book, as a historical error, that he
whom Xenophon calls Cyaxares IL is
here called Darius, and assert that the
later author of the book only gave him
the name by a confusion with Darius
Hystaspes ; that of Cyaxares IL, Hero-
dotus and Justin say nothing, while
Herodotus, Ctesias and others, state that


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DAN TEL,


OMAP. V2,


aa


the Median kings close with Astyages,
after whom the Persian kingdom com-
mences with Cyrus. To this Hengsten-
berg replies that clear reasons can be
given to show that the scanty testimonies
to the existence of a Median Darius are
correct, Differences of names occur also
in the Hebrew writings without any one
thinking of charging them with error on
that account, It is also generally allowed
that Darius, like many other names of
kings, is not a proper name, but an appel-
lative or surname, a mere title borne by
different kings, and denoting the Tamer
or Subduer. The Armenian Chronicon of
Eusebius confirms the credibility of Dan-
iel by making mention of a Darius as the
last of the Median kings, Dr. Pusey says,
“Who Darius the Mede was is a matter
not for sacred but for secular Babylon-
ian history, whether the Cyaxares II. of
Xenophon, or Astyages, or neither,” but
some descendant of Cyaxares, The name
Daryawash (Darius) is confessedly an
appellative, and so it is consistent with
his being known in secular history by
some othername. The coin called Darie
is said to have been so named not from
Darius Hystaspes, but from an olderking,
The Darius who expelled Naboned from
Carmania more likely to have been a
contemporary of Cyrus than one fifteen
years later. Aischylus, moreover, makes
Darius Hystaspes recount his origin from
Darius the Mede.

©5) “ Whiles he tasted the wine,”
MIEN DYDA (bit’em khamra). Keil un-
derstands the expression to mean when
the wine was relished by him, as Hitzig
says, “In the wanton madness of one
excited by wine” The Vulgate has


“temulentus,” tipsy. Vatablus and
Calvin: heated and excited by the wine,
Grotius: while drinking, the wine
became more and more pleasant to him,
M. Henry: when he had tasted how
rich and fine the wine was, he, with a
profane jest, thought it a pity not to
have the best vessels to drink it in.
A. Clarke: he relished it, got heated
by it, and when wine got fully in, wit
went wholly out. Belshazzar is usually
represented as addicted to the lowest vices
of self-indulgence. Wintle, however,
thinks that the expression in the text may
simply refer to the libation to the gods
made at the beginning of the feast, and
quotes the words of Virgil, “ Primaque
libato summo tenus attigit ore.”

(6) “ Weighed in the balances.” The
ancient Egyptians represented in a
symbolical manner this weighing of
individuals and their actions, as taking
place after death, on one of the mummy
cases in the British Museum, The soul
is represented as “weighed in the
balances,” and answered for by the
embalmer of the dead. The soul was
believed, by the Egyptians at least, to
repose in the tomb till its gradual in-
crease in virtue and size demanded its
translation to heaven. It is seen, on
the case, after being weighed, larger and
larger still, and at last, when fully grown,
rising up to heaven on the spread wings
of the attendant scarabseus, its cherubic
emblem. The idea, however, of God
as our observer and judge, weighing
men and their actions as moral agents,
was already a Biblical one. See Job
xxxi, 6; Ps, Ixii, 9; 1 Sam. i, 8;
Prov, xvi. 2; Isa, xxvi. 7.


HOMILETICS.
Sor. XVIIL—Tue Puor (Chap. vi. 1-9).


Another of the deeply interesting chapters of Daniel, A former one exhibited
faith “quenching the violence of fire ;” this presents the same faith “ stopping the


mouths of lions.”


The events recorded took place in the reign of a Persian


monarch named Darius, generally understood to be the Darius mentioned in the
conc]nsion of the previous chapter, and the same who is called by a Greek histo-
rian Cyaxares the Younger or Cyaxares II., the son of Astyages and uncle of


Cyrus“), We have—
I Daniel’s elevation (vers. 1-3).


The Medes and Persians were now in pos-


session of Babylon, The first of the four great monarchies had passed away, and


97


OMAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL.





the second, indicated by the silver breast and arms of the great image, had suo
ceeded it, Darius, the first ruler of the new empire, had, probably at the sugges-
tion of Cyrus, divided the kingdom into a hundred and twenty provinces or
satrapies(®), afterwards increased under Xerxes or Ahasuerus to a hundred and
twenty-seven (Esther i 1), Over each of these provinces was a prince or satrap,
and over the whole of the princes were placed three presidents, of whom Daniel
was the chief), Darius having probably only confirmed him in the office to which
he had already been promoted by Belshazzar. Indeed, for the excellent spirit that
the king found to be in him, he even thought to place him over the whole empire
as his viceroy or khedive, giving him all the power over the several departments
of the state “that would have enabled him to enforce obedience and punish
dereliction.”

Darius had seen and heard enough of Daniel to convince him that his own
interest lay in employing him in the most responsible office in the realm.
Wisdom, prudence, disinterestedness, conscientiousness, and fidelity, so combined
in his character as to mark him out as the man on whom above all others the
king could depend. The resemblance in this, as in some other respects, between
Daniel in Persia and Joseph in Egypt, is obvious and striking. “Seest thou a
man diligent in his business? He shall stand before kings, and shall not stand
before mean men?” ‘ Them that honour me I will honour,”

IL The conspiracy (vers. 4, 5). Promotion to honour often the precursor of
trouble. The presidents and princes could not see Daniel, a foreigner, a captive,
a Jew, a man of an entirely different religion from their own, without the worst
feelings of our fallen humanity coming into play. ‘ Wrath is cruel and anger is
outrageous ; but who can stand before envy?” (Prov. xxvii. 4). Daniel, too, was
a man of uprightness and principle, which the presidents and princes were not.
The former, were to receive and examine the revenue accounts of the latter, that
the royal exchequer might not be defrauded. But the presidents might be
corrupt as well as the princes, Will Daniel connive at their peculation? Daniel
was faithful to his sovereign, because faithful to his God. Duty to God secures
the faithful discharge of our duty to man. Daniel made his master’s interest his
own ; and hence kept a strict look-out on both presidents and princes. He aimed,
according to his office, not only at doing his own duty to the king, but at keeping
others at theirs also, Hence his troubles, In a corrupt world, “he that departeth
from evil” too often “maketh himself a prey.” Daniel’s colleagues became his
enemies, Like Joseph’s brethren in Egypt, they hated him, and must have him
out of the way. The question was how? Accusation against his moral or official
conduct they could find none, “Every attempt to find a flaw, to prove a weak-
ness, or to justify a suspicion, either of disloyalty or maladministration, failed.”
The only way to entrap him must be in connection with his religion, in which
they knew him to be as strict and conscientious as he was in his official duties,
A clever and diabolical scheme was concocted that promised complete success,
This was by placing his obedience to God in antagonism with his obedience to the
king.

IIL The decree (vers. 6-9). The scheme was this. Daniel was known to
be a man of prayer, and to repair to his chamber at stated times in the day for
that purpose. Get the king to sign a decree forbidding any one to present a
petition to either God or man for a whole month on pain of being cast in a den of
lions, The king will be flattered by the proposal, and Daniel will be caught,
They will watch him, whether he will observe the decree and save his life, or go to
his knees as usual. In the latter and most likely case, the decree once signed by
the king, the representative of the unchanging deity, being irrevocable, Daniel is a
lost man, and they are rid of their rival. The decree being accordingly drawn up,
was presented to the king for signature, The weak monarch, not perceiving the
ohject of the princes, perhaps flattered with the appearance of their loyalty and

98


_  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, Omar, Vi.


SR RE a


devotion, and pleased at the idea of being thus for a time superior to both gods
and men, readily complied with the proposal and signed the decree,
** Oh, purblind race of miserable men !

How many among us at this very hour

Do forge a lifelong trouble for ourselves

By taking true for false, or false for true |”
But for divine interference, this would now have been realised in Darius, The
presidents and princes, having obtained their desire, returned home triumphant.
Daniel’s doom was sealed. Observe from the passage—

1. Godliness no hindrance to greatness, and prayer no obstacle to promotion,
Daniel in Babylon and Joseph in Egypt notable examples, In many respects
natural. But for prevailing sin in the world, and the influence of him who is its
prince and the enemy of all goodness, godliness would be the surest way to great-
ness, and prayer the certain path to preferment, Godliness and prayer secure the
necessary requisites for positions of trust—wisdom, uprightness, and fidelity. ‘ The
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.” “If any man lack wisdom, let him
ask it of God, and it shall be given him.” Abraham Lincoln, the President of the
United States, was pre-eminently a man of prayer. General Havelock,though bur-
dened with the care of the army during the terrible mutiny in India, managed to
keep sacred for prayer a considerable time in the morning of every day. Sir
Thomas Browne wrote in his journal as an admonition to himself, to be sure to let
no day pass without calling upon God in a solemn manner seven times in the
course of it.

2. The excellence of true religion. “The righteous is more excellent than his
neighbour.” {Seen even by a heathen monarch in the case of Daniel, Hence his
elevation. His enemies unable to find a flaw in him, His steadfastness in religion
the only ground for accusation against him, A godly man firm and fearless in the
discharge of his duty. His religion not put on or off to suit the season. Daniel
_ known to prefer fidelity to life, and death to deviation from duty. The part of a
truly godly man to act not from expediency but from principle, His inquiry, not
what will be most advantageous, but what is right. His concern not to appear,
but to be just and good, His aim to please God in the first place, and man in the
second. True godliness, symmetrical and all-embracing ; extends to principles and
practice, to the temper and the tongue, to private and to public conduct, to our
duty to God and our duty to man in every relation of life. , ;

3. The depth of human depravity. Seen in the conduct of Daniel’s enemies.
Hates the good because they are good, and because their goodness rebukes our evil,
and stands in the way of our sinful courses, Contrives their overthrow, and even
plots their death. Commits murder in the heart, and then, when it can be done
safely, in the act. Practises hypocrisy in order to conceal our wickedness and
make others accomplices of our crimes, Steels the heart against pity, and finds
pleasure in the torture of the innocent. The character and conduct of Daniel’s
enemies shows what man is by nature since the first sin robbed him of his Maker's
image. Left to himself, man exhibits the image of his tempter. It was the testi-
mony of Him who was at once Truth and Love, “ Ye are of your father the devil,
and the lusts of your father ye will do.” The witness true of unrenewed men,
whether Persian princes or pharisaic Jews, History as well as daily observation
and experience prove that the Bible picture of man’s depravity 1s not overdrawn,—
“ Foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice
and envy, hateful and hating one another;” ‘‘full of envy, murder, deceit, malignity
(Titus iii, 3; Rom. i. 29). Verily man needed a Saviour, and, thanks to divine
mercy, a Saviour has been found. ‘Such were some of you; but ye are washed,
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the Spirit of our God” (1 Cor. vi. 11).

4. The certain exposure of the godly to persecution, Moral pine gg shelter





OHAP, VI.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,
— Eee


from the shafts of malice, but rather their natural butt, Socrates and Aristides


examples among the heathen.
and darkness, good and evil,


A natural and necessary antagonism between light
“The world cannot hate you, but me it hateth,
because I testify of it that the deeds thereof are evil.”


“Tf ye were of the world,


the world would love its own; but because ye are not of the world, but I have


chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you.”


The natural conse-


quence, so long as the world is what it is, “ lying in wickedness,” or under the


power of the wicked one,


Its hatred, opposition, and persecution, in one form and


at one time or another, the necessary accompaniment of fidelity to God and con-
formity to Christ. “ Bleased are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you.”


“ Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you,”


“ All they that will live


godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.” To possess Daniel’s character, we
must be prepared, sooner or. later, more or less, to share Daniel’s experience. The


experience of Daniel only that of Daniel’


his Master.”


5. The responstbility of men in power.
ing men, and virtually the author of a c


ruel murder,


8 Lord. “The disciple not greater than


Darius made the tool of wicked design-
Forgetting the claims of


justice, truth, and mercy, and blinded by a foolish ambition, he heedlessly con-
signed to a dreadful death the best and most faithful subject in his realm. Rulers


in a condition either to further or defeat the designs of


the wicked. Princes too


often allow themselves to be the tool of priests in carrying out their persecuting
projects, and so made participators in the death of God's saints. To this source


much of the persecutions of Papal Europe to be ascribed.


Men responsible for the


evil they might prevent, as well as for the good they might accomplish,


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—() « Da-
rius.” Keil observes that Hitzig con-
fesses that the identity of this Darius
of Daniel with the Cyaxares of Xeno-
phon is placed beyond a doubt. How
long his reign in Babylon lasted is not
stated in this book, or learned from any
other direct source ; but it is correctly
supposed that he reigned two years, his
reign giving place to that of Cyrus, by
whom the writing on the wall was fully
accomplished. The character of Darius
fundamentally different from that of
Nebuchadnezzar, the latter being dis-
tinguished by energy and activity, while
Darius was a weak prince, wanting in
energy, and allowing himself to be
guided and governed by his officers of
state. Some, as Mr. Bosanquet, still
think that the Darius, under whom
Daniel lived and wrote his later pro-
phecies, was Darius Hystaspes, who is
mentioned in the prophecies of Haggai
and Zechariah and in the Book of Ezra
(Hag. i. 1; Zech. i. 1 ; Ezra iv, 24, v.
5, vi. 1). Dr. Pusey observes that the
identification of Cyaxares IL with
“Darius the Mede” is only a probable
historical conjecture, with which Daniel
is in no way concerned.

100


(® “ An hundred and twenty princes.”
Keil remarks that when Daniel mentions
so large a number of satrapies, it is no
argument against the credibility of the
narrative, as if, according to Hitzig, the
kingdom was too small for so many
satrapies in the Persian sense, so that
they must be understood rather as
Grecian ones, The division of the king-
dom, however, by Xerxes (Esther i, 1)
into 127 provinces shows that it might
have been previously divided by Darius
the Mede into120. The Median Darius
might be led to appoint one satrap or
prince, £.¢., @ prefect clothed with mili
tary power, over each district, since the
kingdom was but newly conquered, that
he might be able to suppress every at-
tempt at insurrection among the nations
coming under his dominion. Dr, Cox
remarks that Xenophon informs us that
Cyrus devised the plan of government
with regard to conquered nations, which
is here ascribed to Darius; and that
Archbishop Ussher therefore supposes,
with great probability, that it was first
devised by Cyrus, and at his suggestion
pursued by Darius, Dr. Rule observes
that the presidents of the 120 princes,
Viceroys or satraps, received and ad-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





OmaP, Vi.





ministered the revenue, Daniel being
First Lord of the Treasury.

(8) “* Of whom Daniel was first.” M.
Gaussen remarks: “‘ What profound
wisdom, vast capacity, and extensive
knowledge must he have possessed !
But also what decision, integrity, and
equanimity, for the princes of the Medes
and Persians to think of putting at the
head of so powerful an empire a man,
a stranger, a Jew, a captive, a servant
of their enemies, and, moreover, an old
man, now eighty-five years of age at
least |”


(4) “ Save thee, O king.” The Persian
kings were regarded as incarnations of
the deity. Gaussen observes that Ne-
buchadnezzar claimed divine honours,
Alexander the Great pretended to be a
god, and the son o1 a god. The Roman
emperors required themselves and their
images to be worshipped. And in our
own day the Pope lays claim to religious
homage, being at his consecration fumed
with incense and placed on the altar of
God, while the people kiss his feet, and
all the cardinals cry, Ventte adoremus,
“ Come let us adore him |”


HOMILETICS.
Sxor. XIX.—Danret a Man or Prayer (Chap, vi. 10, 11).


Daniel’s enemies had so far gained their object. The royal decree that was to
remove him out of the way was already signed. It only remained to be put into
execution, How was Daniel employed inthe meantime? Just as usual. Fidelity
to God forbade him to yield obedience to the decree ; faith sn God led him as usual
to his closet. With his window open towards Jerusalem, reminding him of the
promises of God to His praying people (1 Kings viii, 40-49), he kneeled down and
prayed with thanksgiving three times a day, “ as he did aforetime.” A fine exhibition
of the man of God here presented. ‘When Daniel knew that the writing was
signed.” “ He knew too that it was aimed at him, and that it was a compound of
malignity and absurdity; but he uttered no reproach, and made no remonstrance
either with his persecutors for their injustice, or against them in appeal to the mis-
guided sovereign. ‘He went into his house.’ And for what purpose? Not to
devise a counterplot ; not to indulge in bitter lamentations over his hard lot, or
secret repinings at the conduct of Providence ; but to pray. This was his habit
‘three times a day,’ and he continues the practice as before. The Holy City with
its Temple was now desolate, but he prayed with his window ‘ open in his cham-
ber toward Jerusalem ;’ the Temple being regarded by the pious Jews as a type of
Christ, while the circumstances of its dedication filled their minds with sentiments
of the profoundest awe and solemnity. ‘He gave thanks before his God ;’ a
devout heart finding reasons for gratitude when others can perceive nothing but
occasions of lamentation.”— Coz.

Daniel as a man of prayer was—

1. Constant. He prayed as he was wont. Prayer had been his habit, and
that habit was not likely to be suspended now when it was most needed, though
its exercise might cost him his life. A truly godly man prays at all seasons, in
the gloom of adversity as well as in the sunshine of prosperity. Daniel had prayed
in the midst of put lic business under Nebuchadnegzar, as one of his councillors of
state ; he had prayed in the quiet retirement of private life under Belshazzar, when
his godliness removed him from the court ; he had prayed again under Darius, as
ruler over a third part of the empire and First Lord of the Treasury. He prays
now in the prospect of a horrible death which he knows his prayers will cost him.
“ Will he always call upon God?” is asked by Job as the test that distinguishes a
true servant of God from a hypocrite. Daniel known in Babylon and at court as
the man that served God “ continually ” (vers. 16, 20).

2. Regular. Daniel, like the Psalmist, had his regular seasons for prayer, three
times a day. “ Evening, morning, and at noon will I pray and ery oN and He

]


OnAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL.


tt es ae pe el ee


shall hear my voice” (Ps, lv, 17). The rule not suspended even now when his
enemies were watching to find him in the act, Prayer with Daniel, as with every
truly godly man, more than his necessary food. Morning saw him on his knees
giving thanks for the mercies of the night, and craving guidance, help, protection,
and blessing during the day. Noon saw him returning to the exercise, seeking
refreshment in communion with his God, and'a mind kept above earthly things,
Evening found him again in his closet, giving thanks for the mercies of the day,
and seeking pardon for shortcomings, a blessing on his labours, and the divine
presence and protection during the night. Daniel prayed without ceasing, carry-
ing ever with him a prayerful spirit, and, like Nehemiah, lifting up his heart
to God repeatedly during the day as occasion suggested. But he felt the need of
meeting with God more freely and fully at stated times. ‘“ Unless we fix certain
| hours in the day for prayer it easily slips from our memory ; and therefore, although
Daniel was constant in pouring forth prayers, yet he enjoined upon himself the
customary rite of prostrating himself before God three times a day.”—Calvin,
How much may be lost by omitting the prayer “at noon |”

3. Believing. “His windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem,”
Expressive of his belief in the promise made by God at the dedication of the
Temple, in regard to those who should in any place pray towards that house (1
Kings viii.) So David lifted up his hands towards God’s “ holy oracle” and
worshipped “ toward His holy Temple ” (Ps. v. 7, xxviii. 2). Thus Daniel prayed,
believing the promise, “He that cometh to God must believe that He is, and
that He is the rewarder of them that diligently seek Him.” Believing prayer
that which is made in God’s own way and in dependence on His promise, The
eye to be now directed in prayer, not to Jerusalem, but to Jesus at God’s right
hand, the true Temple with its ark and mercy-seat. The promise is now, “ What-
soever ye shall ask the Father in my name, He will give it you” (John xv. 16,
xvi. 23). “Seeing that we have a great High Priest that is passed into the
heavens, Jesus, the Son of God, let us come boldly unto the throne of grace, that
we many obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need” (Heb, iv. 14-16).
Our Propitiation or mercy-seat, for whose sake God can be propitious, pardon our
sins, and hear our prayers, is “Jesus Christ the righteous” (1 John ii, 2, 3).
“What things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye
shall have them.” “Let him ask in faith, nothing wavering” (Mark xi. 24;
James i. 6),

4, Fearless, Daniel went to his chamber—the upper chamber, chosen for
quietness and freedom from interruption, like the disciples at Pentecost (Acts i.
13, 14, ii, 1, 2). The window of lattice-work open, as usual on such occasio
toward Jerusalem, This now done by Daniel at the peril of his life, Carnal
prudence might have suggested a different course for the present, This, however,
would have appeared only cowardice and deceit. Daniel acted in the spirit of
Nehemiah, who, when tempted by his enemies to shut himself up in the Temple
to save his life, said, “Should such a man as I flee?” (Neh, vi. 11). So Jesus,
when some of the Pharisees tempted Him to flee for His life—* Get thee out and
depart hence, for Herod will kill thee,”—said, “ Go ye and tell that fox, Behold I cast
out devils, I do cures to-day and to-morrow.” The fear of God raises us above the
fear of man. True faith makes men heroes, “ Fear not them that kill the body,
and after that have no more that they can do; rather fear Him who is able to
destroy both soul and body in hell.” The lions’ den could be but a shorter way
to paradise. The fearlessness of faith not to be confounded with foolhardiness,
One thing to put oneself in the way of danger, and another not to go out of the
way of duty. Prayer to God as usual was Daniel’s duty, though the passage to
his chamber was the passage to the lions’ den, “It was necessary to testify
before men his perseverance in the worship of God; to have altered his habit at all
would ony been a partial abjuration, and proof of perfidious defection. God not

102


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL. OnAP, VI.


only requires faith in the heart and the inward affections, but also the witness and
confession of our piety.” —Calvin.

5. Cheerful. Danie] not only prayed but “gave thanks” to God. Thanks-
giving naturally a cheerful thing. ‘“I will praise the name of the Lord with a
song; I will magnify Him with thanksgiving” (Ps. lxix. 30). Daniel went to his
chamber not only to pray but to give thanks. Went, therefore, with a cheerful,
not a downcast countenance. Realised how much he had to give God thanks for.
That he had been made to know Him, and to know Him as his God and Father, and
the Hearer of prayer; that He had been his help and deliverer hitherto; and that
even now he was honoured to confess Him before men, and perhaps to suffer for
His sake, All these sufficient causes for thankfulness, and therefore for cheerfulness,
Daniel solemn in the prospect of death, but not sad. Stephen’s face, in similar
circumstances, like the face of an angel. Thanksgiving accompanying prayer
makes prayer cheerful and joyous. Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, “I thank
thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth.” Remembrance of God’s mercies gives
brightness, not only to the past, but to the present and the future, ‘“ Because Thou
hast been my help, therefore in the shadow of Thy wings will I rejoice.” With the
Lord for his God and Saviour, why should Daniel not ‘give thanks and rejoice?
“Though the fig-tree shall not blossom, éc., yet will I rejoice in the Lord, and joy
in the God of my salvation.” Prayer, resting on the promise, cannot but be
cheerful ; prayer, accompanied with thanksgiving, must be still more so, Hence
thanksgiving always to accompany prayer. “Pray without ceasing ; in everything
give thanks.” “By prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests
be made known unto God” (1 Thess, v. 17, 18; Phil. iv. 6). Grace enabled
Daniel to give thanks and rejoice in the prospect of a painful death. Faith sings
a joyous pzan where Nature offers only a doleful dirge. “O death, where is thy
sting? O grave, where is thy victory?” So Paul and Silas not only prayed but
sang praises to God in the prison. Daniel gave thanks “to his God.” That God
was “his God” in itself a sufficient ground for thankfulness, whether in life or in
death. ‘The expression indicative of the holy joy with which this aged saint poured
out his heart before God, even now in the prospect of a lion’s den. g

6. Earnest. Daniel not only prayed, but “ made supplication” (ver. 11). Sup-
plication is prayer intensified, a beseeching or pleading for special and needed
mercies ; entreaty. Prayer always to take this form, or to have supplication con-
nected with it. Hence the two generally conjoined. “With prayer and supplica-
tion let your requests be made known unto God.” “Praying always, with all
prayer and supplication.” ‘So Jesus offered up prayers and supplications, with
strong crying and tears” (Heb. v. 7). The Holy Spirit a “Spirit of grace and sup-
plication ;” and makes intercession for us ‘“‘ with groanings that cannot be uttered.”
The more there is of the spirit of prayer and of felt need, the more there will be
of supplication in our prayers, The fervent prayer the effectual one. “ Elias
prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not,” &. So Daniel
employed entreaty in his prayer. That entreaty not necessarily merely for himeelf.
The cause of God, of his brethren, and of his fellow-men, probably more on Daniel’s
heart at that hour than his own, His prayer that of a burdened spirit, but bur-
dened more for others than himself (chap. ix.) Daniel's prayer always with sup-
plication, but probably now more than usual. ‘Shall not God avenge His own
elect, who cry day and night unto Him continually +” For himself he now needed
special strength to endure the fiery trial that was to try him ; grace to be faithful
unto death, and to glorify God in the fire by patience and serenity ; the comfort
of the Divine presence, if called to suffer the threatened penalty, according to the
promise, ‘‘ When thou walkest through the fire thou shalt not be burned, neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee ;” “Fear not, for I am with thee” (Isa. xliii. 2, 5).


103


ona?. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.
;
HOMILETICS.
Sxor. XX.—Tuex Lions’ Den (Chap, vi. 11-17),


No time lost by Daniel’s enemies in getting the king’s decree put into execution,
The wicked “sleep not except they have done mischief, and their sleep is taken
away unless they cause some to fall” (Prov. iv. 16), The Biblical description of
fallen man dark, but not darker than the reality. “Their feet are swift to shed
blood.” The decree probably signed in the morning, and its execution sought
before night. We notice in the narrative—

L The discovery (ver. 11). Daniel’s enemies knew his haunts and habits.
God’s servants a city set on a hill. Their conduct watched by the world, eager to
find a flaw. The princes must find Daniel in the act, For this purpose they
“assembled” by concert near Daniel’s door, that the united testimony of many
Witnesses might leave no doubt on the king’s mind of Daniel’s guilt. They watch
to see the man of God enter his chamber and shut his door behind him. Like his
master, the wicked man “lieth in wait secretly, as a lion in his den: he lieth in
wait to catch the poor; he doth catch the poor when he draweth him into his
net” (Ps, x. 9). And they did catch Daniel. There he is as usual going into his
chamber. They rub their hands, But they must hear his voice in prayer before
they go in upon him. Hush! There he is; he has begun ; now is the time. They
burst into his chamber, and find the man of God on his knees, They “found him
praying and making supplication before his God.” —_»

IL The information (vers, 12-15). So far Daniel’s enemies have got their
desire ; they have made the discovery they wanted. Rejoicing in their success,
they hasten in a rush) to the king with the intelligence. Eager to make sure
of their object, they maliciously enlarge upon and exaggerate the fact. “That
Daniel, which is of the children of the captivity of Judah,”—to whom thou hast
shown such kindness, see how he requites thy generosity, —“ regardeth not thee, O
king, nor the decree that thou hast signed,”—despises both thee and thy authority,
—“ but maketh his petition three times a day.” Here, however, they meet with a
check. The king is taken aback. He had not calculated upon this. A weak-
minded man, he had perhaps forgotten all about Daniel’s religion in the intoxica-
tion of the cunning flattery of the nobles. Or, having no real religion himself, he
probably never thought Daniel or any one else could find much difficulty in com-
plying with the decree which was to honour the king. Men who have no religion
themselves seldom give credit to others for having any either. The king’s eyes,
however, are now opened to his mistake ; he sees, when it is too late, he has
destroyed his best friend and subject. The law of the Medes and Persians cannot
be altered. The princes are urgent, Like the chief priests and rulers in regard
to Jesus when they had caught Him, they urge the execution of the law. Like
Pilate, the king seeks to save the innocent. He labours the whole of the day to
save his favourite minister, but in vain, Darius is not above the laws of the
Medes and Persians. It is against their religion that a decree signed by the
incarnation of the deity should be revoked. Daniel must die, and the king must
order his execution, Such results may want of thought and want of principle
produce, The king can only make a feeble attempt to comfort his faithful
servant with the assurance that, though his earthly master had thoughtlessly and
sinfully brought him into such peril, his Heavenly Master, whom he had served 80
faithfully, would deliver him.

TIL The execution (vers. 16, 17). The lions’ den the mode of punishment
that prevailed among the Medes and Persians @), indicative of the notorious
cruelty of their disposition. The fiery furnace, adopted by the Babylonians, changed
by their Persian successors as worshippers of fire; a testimony to the genuineness


of the Ey A splendid evidence now to be given that Daniel’s God was the
4


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL, CHAP, VI.


a a


living and true God, the ruler of heaven and earth, and the hearer of prayers,
The savage beasts, restrained by an invisible power, refuse to touch His servant,
Daniel remains unhurt in the den, Faith “ stopped the mouth of lions,” as it had
“quenched the violence of fire.” No hurt done to Daniel, “because he believed
in his God” (ver. 23). The occasion appeared to the All-Wise to demand such an
interference, The world had changed masters, and it seemed right to Him to afford
a similar evidence in favour of the truth and of His own supremacy, at the com-
mencement of the second great monarchy, to that which He had given under the
first, Jehovah is to be declared the God of the universe. Nature for the time
apparently changed by the God of Nature, Not one, but a whole den of lions lay
their savage disposition for a time aside, And yet it was only a temporary resto-
ration of the primitive condition, when wild beasts among others came to Adam to
receive their names. A fuller and more lasting restoration among the things
promised, when Christ, the second Adam, shall in the regeneration make all things
new (Isa, xi. 6, 7, Ixv. 25; Acts iii, 21). Isolated cases of similar interposition
not awanting in the Primitive Church, as testimonies to the truth of the Gospel
ie Te power of Christ over the realms of nature (Mark xvi. 18; Acts xxviii.
&e.
9

TV. The sequel (vera, 18-23). Daniel was now in the den, and the door secured,
as in the case of the buried Saviour, by a large stone placed on its mouth. The
king, after sealing the stone for further security with his own signet, had returnec
to his palace; not, however, to sleep. The crown of earthly empire unable to
give peace to its wearer. Darius was in too much trouble at what had taken
place to allow the usual music in his palace that night. His thoughts were about
the faithful friend whom he had left in the den, and himself the thoughtless and
guilty author of the deed. He could not sleep. Perhaps he attempted to pray to
Daniel's God to deliver him, as he had expressed the belief that He would. Anxiety,
and perhaps hope, led him in the morning to repair to the den. He calls, as if
expecting to see him still alive, “O Daniel, servant of the Most High God, is
thy God, whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from the lions }”

“He speaks doubtfully,” says Calvin, ‘as unbelievers do who seem to have
some ground for hope, but no firm or sure foundation in their own minds.” He
seems not to have doubted the disposition of Daniel’s God to deliver him, but
questioned His ability. A cheerful voice from the den assured him of both, “O
king, live for ever ; my God hath sent His angels, and hath shut the lions’ mouths,
that they have not hurt me ; forasmuch as before Him innocency was found in me;
and also before thee, O king, have I done no hurt” (ver. 22). ‘Hath sent His
angels.” Angels invisible beings employed by the Lord of the universe to execute
His will (Ps. ciii. 20, 21). They “excel in strength,” and act in a way beyond
our comprehension, Why might they not be able to shut the lions’ mouths, when
even a human eye can overawe the most savage beast? He (God) “ hath shut the
lions’ mouths,” It was,” says M. Gaussen, “the divine power that, governing
according to its will the savage instinct, in one case opened the lion’s mouth in
the way to Bethel to devour the disobedient prophet, and in another to shut it in
the den in Babylon, that the life of a faithful prophet might be rescued from the
grave.” Observe— t

1. The faithfulness of God to His promises. ‘Because he hath set his love
upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will be with him in trouble ; I will de-
liver him and honour him” (Ps. xci, 14, 15). God has many ways of fulfilling
His promises, and does not tie himself to any. The mode of fulfilment is accord-
ing to infinite wisdom. He was with Daniel in the lions’ den, and fulfilled
His promise by preserving him alive. He was with Stephen when stoned to death,
and fulfilled His promise by taking him to glory.

2. God the hearer of prayer. “ He shall call upon me and I will answer him;”
“Before they call I will answer, and while they are yet speaking I roe hear”


OHAP, Vi, AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





(Ps. xci. 15; Isa. xv. 29), One of the sweetest titles given to and assumed by
Jehovah, “Thou that hearest prayer” (Ps. Ixv. 2). That title continually being
made good in the experience of believers. The knowledge and assurance of it the
ground of their daily peace. “ Let your requests be made known unto God, and
the peace of God, that passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds
through Christ Jesus” (Phil. iv. 6, 7).

3. Believers always safe in God’s hands, Daniel safe in the lions’ den, “He
shall deliver thee in six troubles; yea, in seven there shall no evil touch thee a”
“Yea, though 1 walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil; for Thou art with me” (Job v. 19; Ps, xxiii. 4). Safe in God’s keeping in
the midst of danger, they can sing with Luther the forty-sixth psalm, “God is our
refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.” “The singular protection
of God,” says Calvin, “ preserves us in daily safety amidst the ferocity and madness
of our foes.” God, who shut the mouths of the lions, is able to shut those of all
our enemies ; and if Daniel was safe in the lions’ den, there can be no situation
of danger and duty where we are not, The path of duty is the path of safety.
“ Who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good?” ‘When
@ man’s ways please the Lord, He maketh even his enemies to be at peace with
him” (1 Pet, iii. 13; Prov. xvi. 7). Believers shielded by Omnipotence while
doing their Master’s work ; immortal till that work is done, “Have not I sent
thee }” our sweetest and surest defence,

4. The happiness of faithful believers, Trusting to God’s promised protection
and seeking conscientiously to do His will, believers are the subjects of a peace to
which the world is a stranger; and are kept in peace amid dangers and troubles, while
unbelievers are in anxiety and distress, even when surrounded with all earthly
comforts, Marked contrast between the peace of Daniel in the lions’ den, and the
misery and disquiet of the king in his palace. ‘ Whata night was that when Darius
was sleepless in his palace, and Daniel tranquil, perhaps joyful, in his dungeon !
Who would not pity the miserable monarch, and who would not envy the happy
martyr? ear, restlessness, self-reproach, were the demons that haunted the couch
of earthly greatness ; joy and peace in believing, like spirits of light, beamed on
the ground where helpless piety reposed.”—Coz.


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—@) “They and the courier, “ Nothing mortal,”


came near.” Wi (hargishoo), “ came
tumultuously,” as ver. 6, “rushed for-
ward, pressed in eagerly;” showing
the greatness of the zeal with which
they performed their business,—<Xeil.
Dr. Rule observes that this could
hardly have taken place on the strength
of a conspiracy under the rule of a
Sardanapalus or a Nabonadius; nor
until some all-pervading system of com-
munication had been organised and
brought into operation through the
whole empire Such a system was
first established by the Persians,
notorious for their expedition in con-
veying messages and transporting them-
selves from place to place. Compare
Esther i, The art was so peculiarly
Persian, that for ages the Greek and
Latin languages were indebted to the
Persian for words to describe the post
106


says Herodotus, “ travels so fast as these
Persian messengers, The entire plan is
a Persian invention, and this is the
method of it: Along the whole line of
road there are men (they say) stationed
with horses, in number according to the
number of days which the journey takes,
allowing horses and men sufficient for
each day; and these men will not be
hindered from accomplishing at their
best speed the distances they have to
go, neither by snow, nor heat, nor
by the darkness of the night. The
first rider delivers his despatch to the
second, and the second passes it to the
third; and so it is borne from hand to
hand along the whole route.” The same
mode has continued in that country up
to the present day,

@) “Den of lions.” 833 (gubba),
which the Targums use for the Hebrew


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIBL,


Om@AP. Vi,





AB (bor), a cistern ; but in Jer. xli. 7, 9,
used for a subterranean chamber into
which seventy dead bodies were cast.
Concerning the construction of the Medo-
Persian lions’ den, we have no informa-
tion from other sources. All that we
possess is only a single description of
lions’ dens of quite another land and
another period, but agreeing with Daniel’s
description in its essential features,
According to it, the receptacles for the
lions were underground, so that persons
eoudemned to death were thrown down
into them, while the narrow opening at
the top was closed by a large flat stone
laid upon it above, which, as in graves,





Pusey quotes the following description
of a lions’ den in Fez, where state
prisoners and Jews were often thrown :—
“The lions’ den was a large quadran-
gular hole in the ground, divided by a
partition into two chambers, This wall


. has a door which can be opened or shut


from above, The keepers of the lions
(mostly Jews) throw food into the one
division, and so entice the lions thither ;
then they shut the door from above and
clean the other division. . . . The whole
is under the open sky, and is only en-
circled with a wall over which people
can look down in. The Emperor some-
times has men cast in.”


served for a door.—Hengstenberg. Dr.


HOMILETICS.


Sror, XX1.—Tuz Jupament iv Basyion (Chap. vi. 24-28),


The deliverance of Daniel was a signal display of the power of Jehovah and
His presence with His people. Even the king, who seemed to have some idea that
God might possibly interpose on His servant's behalf, was probably taken by sur-
prise; like the believers in Mary’s house when Peter, released in answer to their
prayer, stood before the door. No sooner was Daniel taken up out of the den
than judgment began on his enemies. “The righteous is delivered out of trouble,
and the wicked cometh in his stead.” Sooner or later “judgment taketh hold of
the wicked.” Conspicuous reward also awaited God’s faithful servant. The whole
scene exhibits one of judgment, and affords a picture of another on a larger scale
yet to come. We notice separately— ;

I. The judgment on Daniel’s enemies (ver. 24). That judgment was not long
in following Daniel’s deliverance. According to the king’s command, they are
immediately taken and cast into the den from which Daniel had been taken.
Digging a pit for their friend, they fall into it themselves. Virtually guilty of
murder, they suffer the murderer’s doom. Though hand joined in hand, they were
not allowed to escape. Their rank and their number no screen from justice,
Showing no mercy themselves, they receive none. Haman must be hung on his
own gallows, The extension of the punishment to the wives and children, who
were innocent, according to the custom of the time and people @, Great crimes
sometimes made, by special command of God, to involve a man’s house and family
as well as himself, even among the early Israelites (Numb. xvi. 27-33 ; Josh. vii,
24, 25), Forbidden, however, by the law of Moses that children should suffer for
the sins of fathers (Deut. xxiv. 16; 2 Kings xiv. 6). Tradition relates, what is
probable enough in itself, that these princes would not believe that any miracle
had been wrought in Daniel’s favour, the lions having been abundantly fed before
he was thrown in. ‘To convince them of the contrary, “the lions brake all their
bones before even they reached the bottom of the den.” Infidelity will believe in
nothing supernatural till it finds itself in the hands of Him who says, “ Consider
this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver”
ere ye royal decree (vers. 25-27). The deliverance of Daniel was followed
by a decree similar to that of Nebuchadnezzar on the return of his reason, The
decree was in honour of the true God, who had delivered Daniel or power


OHAP. VI. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIBL.





of the lions. He is declared to be the living God and steadfast for ever, the Ruler
of a kingdom that shall not be destroyed, and the possessor of an everlasting
dominion; a God that rescueth and delivereth, and who worketh signs and
wonders in heaven and earth. Men were to tremble and fear before Him in every
part of his realm, which at least implied that they were to treat His name, worship,
and religion with reverence and respect. This exaltation of Jehovah one of the
objects of this as well as the other miracles recorded in the book, tending, at
the same time, to the welfare of the people in general, and to that of the Jews in
particular, as well in providing full toleration for their religion durirmgy their dis-
persion, as in preparing the way for their restoration to their own land. The great
object of all God’s dealings in providence that men may fear Him, that fear being
at once their excellence and their happiness, Such the final issue of the judgments
yet to be displayed. ‘‘Who shall not fear Thee, O Lord, and glorify Thy name?
for Thou only art holy ; for all nations shall come and worship before Thee ; for
Thy judgments are made manifest” (Rev. xv. 4). The deliverance of Daniel as a
faithful servant of Jehovah proclaimed in the decree, as a testimony at once to
His power and faithfulness, and an encouragement to all to make Him their trust
in like manner, as the God that delivers and rescues those who serve and trust in
Him, Thus Daniel himself was honoured through all the widely-extended realm
of Persia, ‘Them that honour meI will honour.” So at last in reference to
those who fear the Lord and think upon His name ina God-forgetting age. ‘They
shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels ;
and I will spare them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him. Then shall
ye return and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that
serveth God and him that serveth Him not” (Mal. iii 17, 18).

IIL Daniel’s prosperity and extended life (ver. 28). Externally Daniel
had seen the last of his trials. He lived to see the end of the short reign of
Darius—how much is uncertain—and a portion, at least, of the longer reign of
Cyrus, his successor), During the whole of that last period of his life he prospered.
He continued probably in his high office as chief of the three great presidents of
the empire. At the accession of Cyrus, his influence at court was such that Cyrus,
doubtless as the result of it, issued the decree recorded in the end of 2 Chronicles
and the beginning of Ezra, giving permission to the Jews to return to their own land
and rebuild their Temple at Jerusalem. It is said that the aged minister pointed
the king to the passage in Isaiah, where he is mentioned by name as the conqueror
of Babylon and the chosen deliverer of Jehovah’s covenant people (Isa. xliv. 28,
xlv. 1). The prosperity of Daniel to be noted in connection with the fiery trial
which had tried him and the death which had threatened him, “This Daniel ;*
the same whom his enemies had nearly swallowed up; the same who had been
faithful unto death, and had been only delivered from the mouths of the lions by
a divine interposition, ‘They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.” The happiness
of believers to be able to say with Paul, ‘ Who delivered us from so great a death,
and doth deliver; in whom we trust that He will yet deliver us” (2 Cor. i, .0).
Observe among the lessons of the passage—

1, The certainty of divine judgments, “ Verily there is a God that judgeth in
the earth.” Daniel’s enemies in fancied security after the king had affixed his seal
to the stone over the mouth of the den, The night probably spent in pleasure and
mutual congratulations, So on the slaughter of the Two Witnesses (Rev. xi. 7-1 1).
But “the triumphing of the wicked is short.” The wicked sometimes punished in
this world, that men may know there is a God that judgeth ; only sometimes, that
they may know there is a judgment to come.

2. The godly ultimately delivered out of trouble. Daniel delivered a second time
from imminent death when no human power could rescue him. “In six troubles
He shall deliver thee, and in seven no evil shall befall thee.” Trouble and deliver.
ance the common experience in the way to the kingdom. “Thou knowest what

108


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIBL, OmAP, VI.
SS SESS


persecutions I endured ; but out of them all the Lord delivered me” im, ii
10, 11). Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer : Behold, meer
shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribu-
lation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life”
(Rev. ii. 10). The angel that redeemed Jacob from all evil, the Angel of the
covenant, stands engaged to deliver the Israel of God from every evil work, and
to ar eet them to His heavenly kingdom§(2 Tim. iv. 18).

. Lvents in providence made to promote the glory of God and the ad
of His kingdom. ‘The Lord hath made all ineatie Himself,” The ares) of
the world is but the course of divine providence, and divine providence is only
God’s government of the world He has made, and His conducting it to the end for
which He made it. In that providence He makes the wrath of man to praise Him
while the remainder of wrath He restrains. The decree of Darius a foreshadowing
of the time when the kingdoms of the world shall become “the kingdoms of our
Lord and of His Christ, and He shall reign for ever and ever” (Rev. xi. 15). All
things made to tend to this ultimate consummation. This the Redeemer’s reward
as it is the result of His redeeming work. ‘He shall see of the travail of His
soul and be satisfied.” Adequate power provided for the object. “Thy people
shall be willing in the day of Thy power.” What was done at Pentecost at the
commencement of the Christian dispensation, only an earnest and pledge of what
shall be done at its close. ‘I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh.”

4. The power and preciousness of divine grace. That grace seen in Daniel to
be able to preserve the godly in a course of high-toned morality and religion during
the course of a long life, in the midst of diversified temptations and in the most
unfavourable circumstances, Daniel an example of Ps, xcii. 12-15. “As perse-
verance is the one final touchstone of man, so these scattered notices combine in a
grand outline of one, an alien, a captive, of that misused class (the eunuchs) who
are proverbially the intriguers, favourites, pests of Oriental courts, who revenge on
man their ill treatment at the hand of man; yet himself in uniform integrity.
outliving envy, jealousy, dynasties; surviving in untarnished, uncorrupting great
ness ; the seventy years of the captivity ; honoured during the forty-three years of
Nebuchadnezzar’s reign ; doing the king’s business under the insolent and sensual
boy Belshazzar; owned by the conquering Medo-Persians ; the stay, doubtless, and
human protector of his people during those long years of exile, . . . Such undeviating
integrity beyond the ordinary life of man, a worshipper of the one God in the
most dissolute and degraded of the merchant cities of old, first minister in the first
of the world-monarchies, was in itself a great fulfilment of the purpose of God in
converting the chastisement of His people into the riches of the Gentiles,” — Pusey.


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—® (3) “In the reign of Darius and in


“Them, their children, and their wives.”
Keil observes: By the accusers, we are
not (with Hitzig) to think of the 120
satraps, together with the two chief pre-
sidents, but only of a small number of
the special enemies of Daniel, who had
concerned themselves with the matter.
The condemning to death of the wives
and children along with the men was
in accordance with Persian custom, as
is testified by Herodotus, iii. 119, Amm.
Marcell. xxiii. 6, 81, and also with the
custom of the Macedonians in the case of
treason (Curtius, vi, 2), but was forbidden
in the law of Moses (cf. Deut. xxiv. 16).


the reign of Cyrus the Persian.” miahQ3
(bemalcuth), “in the reign,” the word
denoting both reign and kingdom. From
the repetition of the word before Cyrus,
observes Keil, it does not follow that
Daniel separates the Persian kingdom
from the Median ; for nazoo here does
not mean kingdom, but dominion, te,
reign. The succession of the reign of
Cyrus the Persian to that of Darius the
Median does not show the diversity of
the two kingdoms, but only that the
rulers of the kingdoms were of different
races. From this verse, taken in con


109


OMAP. VII.





nection with the last of the preceding
chapter, it appears that the Chaldean
kingdom, after its overthrow by the
Medes and Persians, did not immediately
pass into the hands of Cyrus; but that
between the last of the Chaldean kings
and the reign of Cyrus, Darius, descended
from a Median family, a son of Ahasu-
erus (ch, xi. 1), held the reins of govern-
ment, This Darius and his reign are not
distinctly noticed by profane historians ;
and hence modern critics have called in
question his existence, and thence de-
rived a supposed argument against the
historical veracity of the whole narrative,
The account given by Xenophon in his
Cyropedia, differing somewhat from that
of Herodotus, shows that this Darius
the Mede is the same person whom he
calls Cyaxares IL According to him,
the Median king Astyages, son of Cy-
axares I, gave his daughter Mandane in
marriage to Cambyses, king of Persia,
who was under the Median supremacy,
of which marriage Cyrus was born.
When Cyrus arrived at man’s estate,
Astyages died and was succeeded by his
son Cyaxares II., the brother of Man-
dane and uncle of Cyrus, When, after
this, Croesus, king of Lydia, concluded a
treaty with the king of the Assyrians
(Babylonians), with a view to the over-
throw of the Medes and Persians, Cyrus
received the command of the Medo-
Persian army; and when, after a vic-
torious battle, Cyaxares was unwilling to
proceed farther, Cyrus carried forward
the war by his permission, and destroyed
the host of Croesus and the Assyrians :
at the report of which Cyaxares fell into
a passion, and in a threatening letter to
Cyrus, ordered the Medes to be recalled,
These declaring their desire to remain
with Cyrus, the latter entered on the
war against Babylon independently of
Cyaxares. Having driven the Baby-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





lonian king back upon his capital, he
sent a message to Cyaxares, desiring
him to come and decide regarding the
vanquished and the continuance of the
war. Cyaxares accordingly came to the
camp, where Cyrus exhibited to him his
power by reviewing his army before him,
treated him kindly, and gave him a large
share of the plunder. After this, the war
against Babylon was carried on in such
a way that Cyaxares, sitting on the
Median throne, presided over the councils
of war, while Cyrus, as general, had the
conduct of it, After conquering Sardis
and taking Croesus prisoner, Cyrus re-
turned to Babylon, and during a noctur-
nal festival of the Babylonians took the
city, upon which the king of Babylon
was slain. After the conquest of Baby-
lon the army regarded Oyrus as king,
and he began to conduct his affairs as if
he were so, He went, however, to
Media to present himself before Cyax-
ares, brought presents to him, and
showed him that there was a house and
palace ready for him in Babylon, where
he might reside when he went thither,
Cyrus now went to Persia and arranged
that his father, Cambyses, should retain
the sovereignty of it so long as he lived,
and that then it should fall tohim. He
then returned to Media and married
the daughter of Cyaxares, receiving with
her the whole of Media as her dowry,
Cyaxares having no son. He next went
to Babylon, and placed satraps over the
subjugated peoples; and so arranged that
he spent the winter in Babylon, the
spring in Susa, and the summer in Eo
batana. “ This account given by Xeno-
phon regarding Cyaxares,” says Keil,
“so fully agrees with the narrative of
Daniel regarding Darius the Mede, that,
as Hitzig confesses, ‘the identity of the
two is beyond a doubt.’”


HOMILETICS.


Sror, XXII.—Tux Vision or THe Four Beasts
(Chap, vii. 1-7),


We now come to the second and
prophetical portion, the narratives it
110


principal part of the Book of Danfel, the
contains being merely introductory to the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, — OBAP, VEL





visiona, The present, as well as the succeeding chapter, chronologically anterior to
the preceding one, this vision having been given in the first year of the reign of
Belshazzar, probably twenty-three before the events narrated in the preceding
chapter ; the editor or arranger of the book, whether Ezra or Daniel himself, having
for convenience placed the narrative before the present and following chapters, in
order to preserve uninterrupted the continuity of the prophecies.

The present chapter, in its matter as well as its position, the central portion of
the book. It is in both respects to the Book of Daniel what the eighth chapter of
the Epistle to the Romans is to that epistle, Next to the fifty-third chapter of
Isaiah, and perhaps the ninth chapter of this same book, we have here the most
precious and prominent portion of the sure word of Messianic prophecy, The
chapter worthy of the most careful prayer and study. Referred to directly or
indirectly by Christ and His apostles perhaps more than other portions of the Old
Testament of similar extent. Appears to have been regarded by the Old Testament
Church, in the centuries preceding the Messiah’s first advent, as pre-eminently the
“word of prophecy.” The same apparently in the New Testament Church till the
Revelation of John was vouchsafed for its guidance, The Saviour’s chosen title
of “the Son of Man,” as well as the declaration of His future coming ‘in the
clouds of heaven,” obviously taken from this chapter. So Paul’s description of the
“ Man of Sin” in his second Epistle to the Thessalonians (chap. ii.) Frequent and
obvious parallels between its images and predictions and those of the Book of
Revelation, more especially those connected with the ten-horned beast (Rev. xiii,
1-7), the Lord’s second Advent, the reign of Christ and His saints, and the final
judgment,

The vision not understood by Daniel, till at his own request it was explained
to him by one of the angels present in it; an indication at once of our duty and
privilege in relation to the study of the word of prophecy. The vision and its
interpretation given for our sakes especially, ‘‘on whom the ends of the world |
have come.” One part of the Holy Spirit’s office to show us things to come,
which have been already “noted in the Scripture of truth ;” while it is our part
to imitate the prophet in “searching what or what manner of time the Spirit that
was in them did signify, when he showed beforehand the sufferings of Christ and
the glory that should follow” (1 Pet, i. 11).

This, as well as the prophecies that follow, delivered in Daniel’s own name,
the reason being because the visions were communicated to him personally.
Daniel not now a narrator of events, but a witness of what had been delivered to
himself, Difference of the person used, no evidence of a difference of authorship.
Authors known to employ both the first and third person in their narratives. The
unity of the two parts of the book indicated by the sameness of the spirit, the style,
and the interdependence of the parts upon each other. The contents of both por-
tions, however, probably written at different times. i

The language employed in this chapter still the Chaldaic(), which, how-
ever, ceases with the close of it, the remaining portion of the book being in Hebrew.
The reason apparently found in the nature and object of the two parts thus
differently written. The Chaldaic probably by this time as much or more the
language of the Jews in Babylon than their own Hebrew, as it continued to be that
of those in Palestine afterwards. This also the language of the Targums, trans-
lations or rather paraphrases of the Old Testament when the Hebrew ceased to be
the spoken language of the Jews.

The vision of the Four Beasts corresponds to that of the Great Image in chap.
fi, This given in a dream to Daniel, as that had been to Nebuchadnezzar, The
interpretation given by an angel at the same time. The whole vision committed
to writing probably soon after its communication to the prophet, being intended to
form a part of Sacred Scripture, as it has done since the canon of the Old Testa-
ment was completed in the days of Ezra and Malachi; thus securing Se and

11


iar. 11, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL,

— ——
giving permanency to the inspiration for the benefit of succeeding ages. Hence the
prophets often commanded to commit their revelations to writing, See Isa, viii. 1;
xxx. 8; Jer. xxx, 2; Hab, ii, 2; Rev. i 11, xxi. 5... Daniel not only “ wrote
the dream,” but “told the sum of the matters” to his friends and countrymen
about him (ver. 1), The prophets in general preachers as well as writers. Their
hearers called their “children” and “ disciples” (Isa, viii. 16-18). Figuratively,
their “ threshing” and the “ corn of their floor” (Isa. xxi. 10). The Sabbath and
the new moon the ordinary days for their public ministration (2 Kings iv. 23).
Daniel, however, rather a prophet by git than by office, and his communications to
others, therefore, probably more private.

The effect of the vision on the prophet himself powerful and disturbing, My
cogitations much troubled me, and my countenance changed in me” (ver. 28). So
the corresponding vision afforded to Nebuchadnezzar “ troubled his spirit ” (chap.
ii, 1), Still stronger language used by Habakkuk, in describing the effect pro
duced upon himself by the disclosure of the future communicated to him (Hab
fii, 16).

ms present vision, in some of its leading features, a repetition of that afforded
fifty years before to Nebuchadnezzar, accompanied, however, with important addi-
tions ; a circumstance tending to give special weight to the vision, and to draw
particular attention to it; while confirmation was thus given to both visions, and
the interpretation of each rendered both more easy and more memorable), The
vision given to Daniel and the Church for the sake of the additions, especially that
relating to the “little horn.” The former part of the vision already clearly accom-
plished ; the latter part manifestly approaching its fulfilment, The vision affords
a compendious history of the world from the time of Daniel to that of Christ’s
millennial kingdom, in so far as that history stands more immediately related to
the Church both of the Old and New Testament. The Saviour’s exhortation in
reference to another portion of Duaniel’s prophecies, eminently applicable to this;
“Let him that readeth understand.” David’s, or perhaps Daniel’s own prayer,
here particularly suitable and necessary : “ Open Thou mine eyes that I may behold
wondrous things out of Thy law” (Ps. cxix. 18).

The subject of the vision is the four great or universal monarchies, here re-
presented under the figure of 80 many wild beasts, as they were in Nebuchadnezzar’s
dream under that of a great and splendid image, with its four parts composed of
different materials ; together with another and everlasting kingdom which should
succeed them all. The four beasts are said in the interpretation to be “ four kings,”
or, as in the Greek version, “ four kingdoms, that should arise out of the earth”
(ver. 17). The same object—the kingdoms of this world—thus presented under
very different aspects to the carnal, worldly-minded monarch, and to the godly,
spiritually-minded prophet, To the carnal, unrenewed man, the world appears as
a dazzling show ; to the spiritual and renewed, a hateful reality of ambition, selfish-
hess, rapacity, cruelty, and oppression, resembling so many wild beasts contending
for the mastery (), These four beasts or kingdoms, however, are only introduced
to show what was God’s purpose in reference to the establishment of His own king-
dom or that ofthe Messiah, which, like the stone in chap. ii, should remove and
succeed them all, and which should last for ever.

It is noticeable that the three beasts here mentioned by name are those which
the Lord threatened by Hosea to send against Israel for their apostasy and sins,
the lion, the leopard, and the bear, while a fourth was added as simply “a wild
beast,” corresponding with the fourth in the vision without a name (Hosea xiii, 7, 8) ;
clearly indicating the relation which these world-kingdoms bear to Israel and the
Church, as, in the hand ané\ according to the pleasure of God, instruments of
chastisement for unfaithfulnes, Similar figures to indicate the powers of the
world not unfrequently employed by the prophets, So Jer. iv. 7,v. 6; Ps. Ixviii, 30,
Men sai ral natural condition, as fallen and without the renewing grace of God,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIBL. OWAP. VIL.





——————


often similarly represented under the figure of savage beasts, (See Ps. x. 9, 10,
Ivii. 4, lviii, 4, 6, lix. 6.) In more senses than one men rendered by sin “like
- the beasts that perish,”

The four beasts in the vision are represented as coming up out of the great sea
when thrown by opposing winds into tempestuous commotion (ver, 23). Such a
sea a picture of the great world of mankind in its alienation from God and conse-
quent dispeace (Isa. xlviii, 22, lvii, 21). The origin of the great monarchies of the
world the conflicting passions and commotions among men. Nimrod “ began (was
the first) to be a mighty one in the earth: he was a mighty hunter before the Lord ”
(Gen. x. 8, 9). The Mediterranean, on which Daniel had often looked when in his
native country, often called “the Great Sea,” as distinguished from the smaller
bodies of water in Palestine. It was on the borders or in the vicinity of that sea
that the four great contending monarchies lay. The “four winds of the heaven,”
by which the great sea was tossed into a tumult, probably intended to represent the
external means and circumstances by which God in His holy providence operates
on the nations and rulers of the world, thereby arousing them into action, while He
wisely overrules and controls their own carnal passions,

It is also worthy to be observed that the number of monarchies represented
both in the vision of the king and the prophet is the same, namely, four; an evidence
itself of the divine origin of the book, when taken in connection with the remarkable
fact that there have never been more than four great universal monarchies in the
world, though some, as Charlemagne and Napoleon Buonaparte, have laboured hard
to establish a fifth, The four, as already seen in connection with Nebuchadnezzar’s
dream, are those of Babylon, Persia, Greece, and Rome“), From this general view
of the vision we may note—

1. The importance of the word of prophecy. The repetition of the prophecy
regarding the four great monarchies and the divine kingdom that was to succeed
them, itself significant. Given first in a dream to Nebuchadnezzar and then in
a vision vouchsafed to Daniel himself, the repeated revelation of the same things,
under different forms, seems a clear intimation how important for the Church this
communication appeared to the Spirit of God, whose it is to “show us things to
come.” What God has thus so carefully given it can neither be safe nor right for
His people to neglect. Especially is this the case with a prophecy which we know
to apply to the times in which we live, and which has been given for our comfort
and guidance in these last days. The words forming the preface to the Book of
Revelation applicable here also, ‘ Blessed are they that read, and they that hear
the prophecy of this book, and that keep the things that are written therein ; for
the time is at hand” (Rev. i. 2).

2. All history within the foreknowledge and under the control of God. This
vision exhibits the great leading events of the world’s history from the time of
Daniel, projected in the word of prophecy as on amap, Hence not only foreknown,
but so overruled as infallibly to come to pass, This without the slightest prejudice
to or interference with the freedom of man’s will, and so without any diminution
of his responsibility. God’s foreknowledge and man’s freedom—Cod’s purposes and
man’s responsibility—solemnly and mysteriously compatible with each other. Both
alike realities, however unable we may be in our present state to reconcile them.
Now we know only in part. The Jews, not knowing their own Scriptures, fulfilled
the same by crucifying their King and Saviour, to their deep and dire condemna-
tion, under which, alas! they still lie. ‘‘ Him, being delivered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have cruci-
fied and slain” (Acts ii, 23). The hands still wicked hands though fulfilling the
secret counsel and foreknowledge of God. The same thing true in regard to the
events of general history and individual life. The providence that appoints the
establishment or overthrow of an empire presides over the fall of a sparrow, fixes
the bounds of our habitation, and numbers the hairs of our head.

H 118





OMAP, VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.








3. The true character of the kingdoms of this world. To Daniel these appear not
asa dazzling image, but as savage and irrational beasts, the symbols of selfishness,
cruelty, rapacity, and strife, obeying the impulses of appetite and passion instead
of the dictates of reason and conscience, History makes good the picture, The
universal admission that sin has reduced men to the level of beasts. Paul’s
description of fallen men apart from divine grace, as given in the first chapter of
the Epistle to the Romans, verified by the testimony of the heathen themselves,
“Full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity” (Rom. i: 29). The divine ver-
dict—‘“ The heart is deceitful above all things and desperately wicked ”—realised
by universal observation and experience. Time given fully to develop man’s need
of a Saviour from sin before that Saviour came. Four thousand years only proved
the divine testimony given at the time of the Flood to be true: “ The imagination
of man’s heart is evil from his youth” (Gen. viii. 21, vi. 5). Man was shown to
be sick unto death—desperately, and, to all human effort, incurably wicked; and the


Healer came.
sins” (Matt. i. 21),


EXEGETICAL NOTES —Q) “This
chapter,” says Brightman, “is written
in the common tongue of the heathenish
kingdom, that the common prophecy
might come abroad unto all, The vision
in the next chapter is in the proper
tongue of the holy people; the prophet
thus intimating that this in the seventh
chapter is more general, that in the
eighth more particular, as also those
which follow to the end of the chapter.”

(2) According to Calvin, the repetition
is given for greater clearness, and in
token of the certainty of the prophecy.
This repetition, Archdeacon Harrison
remarks, is “according to the method of

‘divine prediction, presenting at first a
general sketch and outline, and after-
wards & more complete and finished
picture of events.” Sir Isaac Newton
observes “that the prophecies of Daniel
are all of them related to one another,
as if they were but several parts of one
general prophecy, given at several
times;” and that “every following
prophecy adds something new to the
former,”

(8) “ Four great beasts,” “The image
appeared with a glorious lustre in the
imagination of Nebuchadnezzar, whose
mind was wholly taken up with admira-
tion of worldly pomp and splendour;
whereas the same monarchies were repre-
sented to Daniel under the shape of fierce
wild beasts, as being the great supporters
of idolatry and tyranny in the world.”
—Grotius. Auberlen points out more
fally and profoundly the distinction

114


“ He shall be called Jesus, for He shall save His people from theix


between the two visions, “The out
ward political history had been shown
in general features to the worldly ruler ;
for by his position he was peculiarly
and almost exclusively fitted to receive
a revelation of this kind. But the
prophet obtains more minute disclosures,
especially on the spiritual and religious
character of the powers of the world,
and such as were best adapted to Ass
position and Azs receptivity. This dif-
ference of character easily explains the
difference of images. While in the
second chapter they are taken from
the sphere of the inanimate, which has
only an external side, they are chosen
in the seventh chapter from the sphere
of the animate. Further, as Nebuchad-
nezzar saw things only from without,
the world-power appeared to him in its
glory as a splendid human figure, and
the kingdom, from its humility, as a
stone: at first he beheld the world-
power more glorious than the kingdom
of God. Daniel, on the other hand, to
whom it was given to penetrate farther
into the inner essence of things, saw
that the kingdoms of the world, notwith-
standing their defiant power, are of a
nature animal and lower than human;
that their minds are estranged from and
even opposed to God; that only in the
kingdom of God is the true dignity of
humanity revealed; and accordingly,
the kingdom of God appears to him
from the outset, and in the very seleo
tion of images, superior to the kingdoms
of the world... . The colossal figure


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL,


OHAP. Vil.


—e_—_—_——


that Nebuchadnezzar beheld represents
mankind in its own strength and great-
ness ; but however splendid, it presents
only the outward appearance of a man.
But Daniel, regarding mankind in its
spiritual condition, saw humanity, through
its alienation from God, degraded to the
level of reasonless animals, enslaved by
the dark powers of nature.”

@® “This opinion,” observes Keil,


‘which has been recently maintained
by Hiivernick, Hengstenberg, Hofmann,
Auberlen, Ziindel, Kliefoth, O. P. Cas-
pari, and H. L. Reichel, alone accords,
without any force or arbitrariness, with
the representation of these kingdoms in
both visions, with each separately, as
well as with both together.” Compare
Comm. on chap. ii. 36-45, section ix.
page 41.


HOMILETICS.
Szor, XXIII.—Tue Four Great Empires (Chap. vii. 8-7, 17--24).


“‘These great beasts, which are four,” said the interpreting angel, “are four
kings which shall arise out of the earth” (ver. 17), By the four kings we are to
understand not four separate individuals, but, as the Greek version has it, four
kingdoms or empires, succeeding each other, as in the vision of the Great Image
(chap. ii.) These, as already remarked, are almost universally understood to be
the Babylonian, the Medo-Persian, the Greek or Macedonian, and the Roman. We
now notice these empires separately as here described, leaving the description of the
Little Horn for another section.

L The first or Babylonian Empire. The first of the four beasts which Daniel
beheld rising up out of the earth was a lion with eagle’s wings (ver. 4). This
figure common among the sculptures of Nineveh and the ruins of Persepolis@), A
winged lion a fit symbol of the first or Babylonian Empire @); a lion being expres-
sive of its superiority, and its wings of the rapidity of its conquests) Babylon and
Nebuchadnezzar, as its representative in its best days, described by the prophets as
the instrument of God’s chastisement of His people under the figure of a lion. See
Jer, iv. 7; v. 6; xlix. 19;1.17. In the Great Image the same monarchy is repre-
sented by the head of gold, gold being among metals what the lion is among beasts.
The figure of an eagle, the king of birds, also employed by the prophets to repre-
sent Nebuchadnezzar and his conquests See Jer. xlviii. 40, xlix. 22; Ezek. xxvii.
2; Hab. i.6. The rapidity of those conquests seen in the fact that while, at the
period of his father’s death, the empire comprehended Chaldea, Assyria, Arabia,
Syria, and Palestine, Nebuchadnezzar greatly augmented it after his accession to
the throne, adding to his tributary dominions both Egypt and Tyre. Ancient his-
torians agree in considering him by far the greatest monarch of the East. The
prophet, however, as he gazed upon the symbol, observed a change to pass upon it.
‘“‘T beheld till the wings thereof were plucked, and it was lifted up from the earth
(marg., by which it was lifted up, &c.), and made to stand upon its feet as a man ;
and a man’s heart was given to it” (ver, 4), An arrest was to be laid upon those
conquests, and a state of humiliation and timidity to succeed them. Babylon’s
monarchs were to be no longer lions, but as private men, deprived of power and
strength, Possibly also an allusion is made to the humiliation connected with
Nebuchadnezzar’s madness, and his ultimate deliverance from it. Succeeding
reigns only brought disaster to the Babylonian Empire; and Belshazzar, its last
king, was so far from being “‘lion-hearted,” that he was afraid to engage in open
battle with the Persians, or to accept the challenge of Cyrus to single combat. He
trembled and his knees smote each other at the sight of the writing on the wall,
According to Jeremiah’s prophecy, he and his nobles “ became as women” (Jer. li.
30). The lion of Babylon was to be “ put in fear” that he might “ know himself
to be but a man” (Pa ix. 20) @),

IL The second or Medo-Persian Empire. This is rapresanted ee a bear


CHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, .


OC eke eee,


raising itself upon one side, with three ribs in its mouth (ver. 5). The great uni-
versal monarchy that succeeded the Babylonian, already, in chap. ii., seen to be the
Persian or Medo-Persian, Its symbol, portrayed upon its standard, from the
known character of its princes and people(), one of the most bloodthirsty of
animals. Compare Isa. xiii, 18. The bear at the same time a less courageous as
well as a less noble and magnanimous animal than the lion, though exceedingly
strong and voracious (5), Hence, “ Arise and devour,” é&c. Corresponds to the
breast and arms of the image, which were of silver, as being inferior to the Baby-
lonian Empire, the head of gold. The bear raising itself upon one side (®), apparently
expressive of the fact, that while this second empire was at first under the con-
federate kings of Media and Persia, the former had first the pre-eminence in the
person of Darius, but after his death the Persians under Cyrus rose to the sole
domimen. The two powers of Media and Persia or Elam, as united in the over-
throw of Babylon, pointed to nearly two centuries before by the prophet Isaiah
(Isa. xiii. 17, xxi. 2). These separate powers represented in the Great Image by
the two arms, and their coalescence under Cyrus by the breast. The three ribs
in the bear’s mouth, and the command to “arise and devour much flesh,” indica-
tive of the rapacity and conquests of the Medo-Persian Empire. The three ribs
have been supposed by Sir Isaac Newton and others to indicate Lydia with its
capital Sardis—the country of Croesus, Babylon, and Egypt, which Cyrus added
to his conquests, without their properly belonging, however, to the body of his
empire (’); while others, as Calvin, have considered them to be Media, Assyria,
and Babylonia, The inferiority of the second empire to the first, indicated as well
in the symbol of the image as that of the beasts, apparent under the successors of
Cyrus, who are known to have sadly degenerated, giving attention to pomp and
show rather than to real strength and valour‘$), It lasted also a shorter time,
having only continued 206, or at most 230 years from Darius, its first monarch,
who ascended the throne B.c. 538, till its overthrow by Alexander the Great in
332.

I. The third or Grecian Empire. This represented by a leopard with four
heads and four wings, and corresponding to the belly and thighs of brass in the
Great Image. The Persian empire having gradually decayed under the successors
of Cyrus, it at length entirely succumbed to the power of Greece under Alexander
the Great, The eager and fiery nature of this renowned conqueror symbolised by
the leopard, an animal remarkable for its swiftness and the eagerness with which
it springs upon its prey. Rollin observes that after the siege of Tyre, the
character of Alexander degenerated into debauchery and cruelty. When Gaza,
after a protracted resistance, was at length taken, Alexander manifested the
cruelty of his character by ordering a thousand of its inhabitants to be put to
death, and its governor to be dragged round the walls by ropes passed through his
heels till he died, The spots of the leopard supposed to indicate the variety of
the nations that constituted the Grecian empire, as the four wings plainly
pointed to the rapidity of the Grecian conquests), The four heads the prophetic
symbol of the well-known division of the Grecian Empire into four parts soon
after Alexander's death. After a series of intrigues and murders, with a view to
the succession, in which his mother, his wife Roxana, his brother, and his son, all
perished by a violent death, the empire fell into the hands of the four principal
generals, who divided it between them—Cassander holding Macedon and
Greece ; Lysimachus, Thrace and Asia Minor; Ptolemy, Egypt, Palestine, and
Arabia Petrma; and Seleucus, Syria and the remainder, including Upper Asis
or the Eastern Empire. The two last, especially in relation to the Jewish
people, the most prominent and important, The fourfold division of the Greek
Empire distinctly exhibited in the vision of the Ram and He-goat in chap,
viii, 21, 22,

IV. nae fourth or Roman Empire, The fourth empire is represented by


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OHAP. VIL





a beast without a name, asif no existing animal could be found sufficient for the
symbol @°), It is described “as diverse from all the rest; dreadful and terrible,
and strong exceedingly, having great iron teeth; devouring, breaking in pieces,
and stamping the residue with its feet” (ver. 7). The corresponding part of the
Great Image is the legs and feet, which were of iron, with a mixture of clay in
the feet and toes; like the fourth beast, bruising and breaking to pieces. The
identity of the empire symbolised in both cases obvious from the fact that the
fourth beast is particularly represented as having ten horns, plainly corresponding
with the ten toes of the image. According to the all but unanimous belief of
both Jews and Christians, the empire indicated is that of Rome, which, as is well
known, succeeded that of Greece, The iron in both the symbols indicative of the
sternness of the people, and of the strength, duration, and destructiveness of the
empire. The ten horns which characterised the fourth beast, like the ten toes of
the image, symbolical of ten kingdoms which should be formed out of the empire in
its state of weakness and decay @), Compare what is said in reference to the toes of
the Great Image. It may only farther be noticed here in regard to the ten horns, that
this circumstance connected with the fourth beast appears plainly to identify that
beast with another mentioned in Rev. xii. 1 and xviii. 3, 12, whose ten horns are
also said to be “ ten kings,” but which had “received no kingdom as yet” (Rev.
xvii, 12), that is, at the time the vision was given to the apostle; which makes it
further manifest that the fourth beast or empire could be no other than the Roman.
A new feature, and one of the most remarkable, being that for which more
especially this second vision of the four great empires was given, is the rise of
another or eleventh horn, called the “little horn,” but which in its character, pre-
tensions, and actual doings was the most formidable of all, and with which more
than all the rest the Church of God was to have to do, As this will be considered
in a section by itself, we may only notice the following thoughts as suggested by
the prophecy of the four beasts.

1. The fulfilment of this prophecy an unquestionable fact, and as such, an evidence
of the reality of prophecy in the sense of prediction, and of the divinity of at least
this part of the Old Testament Scripture The fulfilment of prophecy employed by
God Himself as an evidence of His deity (Isa. xli. 22, 23, 26, xlv. 21, xlvi. 9,
10). Declared to be the criterion of a divine messenger, except when the object is
to lead away from God’s worship and revealed truth (Deut, xviii. 21, 22, xiii. 1, 3;
Isa, viii. 20). The fulfilment of the prophecy before us undeniable, notwith-
standing all attempts to set it aside. This and other predictions of Daniel acknow-
ledged even by enemies to be true up to the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, one of
the Syrian kings in the third or Grecian empire, but denied to have been written
before that period, and therefore maintained to be mere history and not prophecy.
But the prophecy as truly fulfilled after that period as before it, and receiving its
fulfilment at the present time. The fourth empire and the predicted facts con-
nected with it more remarkable than any of its three predecessors, and to human
foresight impossible to have been calculated upon, Yet that empire and those
facts a reality which is before our eyes at the present day. An empire of iron-
crushing strength succeeding a third, acknowledged to be that of Greece, and in
its latter period becoming weak by foreign admixture, and divided into ten king-
doms, with one rising up among them or after them of a description totally different
from all the rest. These are simple facts, and found in a prediction delivered
twenty-four centuries ago, With the convinced magicians of Egypt we may well
exclaim, “ This is the finger of God.” “Ihave told you before it come to pass,
that when it is come to pass ye might know that I am He” (John xiii. 29).

2. The certainty of predicted events that have not yet taken place. Past fulfil-
ment only makes the word of prophecy “more sure” or confirmed, that we may
“take heed” to it, as toa “light shining in a dark place” (2 Pet. i. 19). While
much of the present chapter, as well as of other prophecy, has been fulfilled, much

7


OHAP, VIL,


of it still awaits its fulfilment,


 HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


at cnerceniipetpeneseest ga eae ee
The destruction of the fourth beast with its “little





horn” has not yet taken place, nor has its body yet been “given to the burning
flame ;” the Son of Man has not yet come “with the clouds of heaven ;” nor has


the kingdom been “given to the saints of the Most High.”
one part of the vision has been fulfilled, so certainly shall the other,


Yet, as certainly as
Eighteen


centuries ago, Jesus, after He had ascended with the clouds into heaven, said,
“Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to every man as his
work shall be.” As surely as the fourth predicted beast with its iron teeth came
into existence and devoured and brake in pieces, so surely shall it be destroyed
and its body given to the burning flame, and Jesus Christ come again with the
clouds of heaven and take the kingdom, and the kingdom be given to the saints of
the Most High, who shall reign with Christ for ever and ever (ver. 11, 13, 14, 18;


Rev. v. 10, xi. 15).


3. Matter for thanksgiving and rejoicing that the kingdoms of this world are to
be succeeded by one of a very different character, The kingdoms of the world are
those of the four beasts, wherever they may have their place. These kingdoms
naturally characterised by sin and suffering, Such the experience of the world up


to the present time,
but they are not to be for ever.


The history of these kingdoms written in tears and blood ;
Three of the four have, as predicted long ago, come


to their end. The fourth, which in its divided form is now going on, is not to be


everlasting, The everlasting one is yet to come,


Its foundations have already long


ago been laid, but as yet it is far from being the mountain that is to fill the whole
earth. But the time of this consummation hastens apace, The kingdom that is
“righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost” will ere long constitute the
monarchy of the Man Christ Jesus, the King of the Jews, which shall fill the earth


and last for ever,


Men shall yet everywhere be blessed in Christ, and all nations


call Him blessed. The sure word of prophecy gladdens the Church with the hope
of good times coming—glory to God in the highest, with peace on earth, under
the reign of Him who is the Prince of Peace.


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—©) “ Like
a lion, and had eagle’s wings” (ver. 4).
Herder, Miinther, &., have pointed
out the peculiarly Babylonian character
which the animal symbolism in Daniel
bears; and the recent excavations
among the ruins of Babylon and Nine-
veh contain so many confirmations of
the book being written after the cap-
tivity, as they show shapes of animals
by which we are involuntarily reminded
of those occurring here, and which sug-
gest the thought that an acquaintance
with sculptures of this kind may have
proved a psychological preparation for
the visions in the seventh and eighth
chapters.—Hengstenberg, At the en-
trance to a temple at Birs Nimroud,
says Keil, there has been found (Layard,
(Babylon and Nineveh) such a symboli-
cal figure, viz., a winged eagle with the
head of aman. But the representation
of nations and kingdoms by the images
of beasts is much more widely spread,
and affords the prophetic symbolism

118


the necessary analogues and substrata
for the vision. The Assyrian king
Assur-bani-pal, the Sardanapalus of the
Greeks, says in the inscription of one of
his cylinders, in reference to Elam or
Persia: “TI broke the winged lions and
bulls watching over the temple, all there
were, I removed the winged bulls
attending to the gates of the temples of
Elam.”

(2) “The first” (ver. 4). Dr. Rule
observes that as the fourth or Roman
beast was to be the fourth upon earth,
8o the first or Babylonian must not only
be the first of the kingdoms in this pro-
phetical series, but also the first upon
earth: which is historically true. About
two thousand years before Daniel, the
young population of the post-diluvian
world, being then “of one language and
of one speech,” journeyed from the east,
found a plain in the land of Shinar, dwelt
there, began to build a city and a tower,
and on their speech being confounded,
were scattered abroad on the face of the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIBL,
a eeeeeSeeSSeSeSSSSSSSSSSSSsS—aeseseseF





earth, But the city remained with a
sufficient population settled in it, the
first built after the Deluge, and retaining
the name Babel to mark the confusion
of language which there took place.
That city was the first central seat of
power ; and though the royal residence
was for some time in Nineveh, and
Babylonia was included within the em-
pire of Assyria, Babylon recovered its
primeval majesty, and was again the
seat of empire from Nabopolassar to
Belshazzar, and so rightly counted the
first kingdom upon earth. Callisthenes,
a friend of Alexander the Great, and his
companion at Babylon, B.c. 331, sent
thence to Aristotle a series of observa-
tions on eclipses made in that city,
which reached back 1903 years, te,
from 2234 Bo. The face of the sky
had thus been read and recorded on
that spot for near two thousand years,
) “4 man’s heart was given to tt”
(ver. 4). Keil thinks that this, as well
as the preceding expression, “ lifted up,”
when lying prostrate on the ground, to
the right attitude of a human being,
denotes that the beast nature was trans-
formed to that of a man ; and that in this
description of the change that occurred
to the lion there is, without doubt, a
reference to what is said of Nebuchad-
nezzar in chap. iv. Although the words
may not, however, as Hofmann and
others think, refer directly to Nebuchad-
nezzar’s insanity, as here it is not the
king but the kingdom that is the subject,
yet Nebuchadnezzar’s madness was for
his kingdom the plucking off of its
wings. The completeness of the decay
of Babylon under the second empire
appears in the fact related by Strabo,
that when Alexander completed the
conquest of that empire about 331 8.c.,
he found the great temple of Belus in
so ruined a condition, that it would
have required the labour of ten thousand
men for two months to clear away the
rubbish with which it was encumbered.
“A second like to a bear” (ver. 5).
Bishop Newton says: Cambyses, Ochus,
and others of their princes, were indeed
more like bears than men. Instances
of their cruelty abound in almost all the
historians who have written of their


OMAP, VIL


affairs, from Herodotus down to Am-
mianus Marcellinus, who describes them
as proud, cruel, exercising the power of
life and death over slaves and obscure.
plebeians, “They pull off the skin
(says he) from men alive, in pieces ox
altogether.” The cruelty of their modes
of punishment indicative of the cruelty
of their character. Rollin relates that
one of the royal judges, condemned to
death for receiving a bribe, was to have
his skin taken off and fastened on the
seat where he used to sit and give judg-
ment, to be a warning to his son, who
was to occupy it after him, Witness
also the lions’ den.

(©) “ Arise, devour much flesh” (ver. 5).
Next to the lion, the bear is the strongest
among animals; and, on account of its
voracity, it was called by Aristotle 7a
saupayey, “an all-devouring animal,”—
Keil.

(8) “‘Ratsed up itself on one side.” The
margin reads: “raised up one king-
dom,” after R. Nathan, who has, ‘and
it established a dominion,” with which
Kranichfeld agrees. Keil objects to this
as irreconcilable with the line of thought,
and also because 7D (khadh) is not the
indefinite article, but the numeral ; and
the thought that the beast established
one dominion, or a united dominion, is in
the highest degree strange; for the char
acter of a united or compact dominion
belongs to the second world-kingdom no
more than to the first, while it cannot
belong to a beast or kingdom to establish
a kingdom at all, "OY (shetar), or
rather, as in Syriac and the Targuins,
DY = DP (setar), is rendered by the
Sept. and other old translators, as well
as by Saadias, “a side,” According to
Calvin, who translates, “stood on one
side,” the expression refers to the
Persians having previously been with-
out fame or reputation, as well as with-
out wealth. Gesenius thinks it an
image of the kingdom of the Medes
being ordered by God, after having long
lain, as it were, in ambush, to rise and
attack Babylon. Keil, with Hofmann,
Delitzsch, and Kliefoth, regards the
figure as indicating, according to chaps.
li. and viii,, the double-sidedness of this
empire—the one side, the Median, being


GmaP. VIL


| HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


se


at rest after the efforts made for the
erection of the world-kingdom; while
the other, the Persian side, raises itself
up, and then becomes higher than the
first and prepared for new rapine.

() “ Three ribs.” According to
Xenophon, Cyrus, after the conquest
of Babylon and Lydia, undertook an
expedition in which he subdued all
those nations which lie from the en-
trance into Syria as far as the Red
Sea; while his next expedition was
to Egypt, which he also subdued,
Keil, with Hofmann, Ebrard, Ziindel,
and Kliefoth, understanding the bear
as the Medo-Persian, and not merely
the Median kingdom, considers the three
ribs to denote the three kingdoms of
Babylon, Lydia, and Egypt, conquered
by the Medo-Persians,

(8) Xenophon relates that imme-
diately upon the death of Cyrus his
sons fell into dissension ; cities and
nations revolted, and everything tended
to ruin, He adds the reflection, that
the Persians and their allies have evi-
dently less piety towards the gods, less
dutiful regard to their relatives, less
justice and equity in their dealings with
others, and at the same time are more
effeminate and less fitted for war than
they were at their commencement as a
nation.

) “ Four wings of a fowl” (ver. 6).
The victories and triumphs of the
Greeks in the Persian war are well
known to the reader of history: how
in the time of Darius Hystaspes, Bo.
490, an army of 300,000 Persians was
defeated by 11,000 Greeks at Mara-
thon; and how Xerxes, his successor,
lost nearly the whole of his fleet at
Salamis only ten years after, while the
remainder of his troops, left to pro-
secute the war in Greece, were nearly
all cut in pieces in the following year
at the battle of Platea, his fleet being
defeated on the same day at Mycale.
The decisive blow to the power of
Persia, however, was not given till
about a hundred and fifty years after
by Alexander the Great, who, born at
Pella, in Macedonia, B.0. 356, succeeded
his father, Philip, as king of Macedon,
when only twenty years of age, Ap-

120


pointed generalissimo of the Greeks,
he undertook an expedition against the
Persians, while Darius Codomannus,
the last king of Persia, was on the
throne ; defeated with 35,000 men an
army of 100,000 Persians on the banks
of the Granicus, and gained a similar
victory in the following year at Issus
in Cilicia, The fall of all Asia Minor
followed; and soon after that of in-
sular or new Tyre, which Alexander
took, according to the word of pro-
phecy, by connecting the island with
the mainland by means of a causeway
formed out of the materials of old
Tyre. The final blow was given to
Persia at the battle of Arbela, in
Assyria, B.0, 331, when the Persians
were twenty times the number of the
Greeks. ‘When you next address
me,” said Alexander, in reply to an
offer of capitulation by Darius, “call
me not only king, but your king.”
The conquests of the winged leopard
did not, however, stop till, having sub-
dued the Medes, Parthians, Hyrcanians,
Bactrians, and Sogdians, he crossed the
Indus with the intention of penetrating
into India, and was only obliged to
turn back by the unwillingness of
his army to proceed any farther. As
further illustrative of the truth of the
image, it is said that his movements
were so rapid that his enemies were
usually taken by surprise, and that he
was able to pursue them on horseback
for days and nights together, like a
panther after his prey. “Can Alex-
ander, who can do all things, fly also
And has nature on a sudden given
him wings?” asked the confident
defender of a rocky height of the
messenger sent by Alexander. The
height, however, was taken. “ You
see,” said the conquerors, “ Alexander’s
soldiers have wings.”

(0) “4 fourth beast, diverse Jrom all
the others” (vers. 7,19). Thought by
some of the Jews to be the wild boar,
according to Ps, Ixxx, 13. Not named,
says Theodoret, from the changeable
form of its government, kings, generals,
tribunes, &c, According to Jerome,
from its supereminent cruelty. Its
diverseness from the others, Calvin


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,
——eSEFSFSSSSSSFSSSSSSSSSSSSSSShFheseseseFeseF


ascribes to the composite character of
the Roman people, the senatorial,
equestrian, and plebeian ranks, That
the Roman empire is intended the
all but universal opinion. Some Jews,
as Aben Ezra and R. Saadias, wish
to make it the Turkish empire, in-
cluding the Roman in the third, in
order to avoid the conclusion that the
Messiah has already appeared. Pfaff
thinks that both the tyranny of the
Turks and of the Popes is included
under this fourth beast. Calvin thinks
only of the Roman empire up to the
first Advent of Christ, Willet, after
Polychronius, Junius, Polanus, and
others, interprets it of the kingdom of
Syria, in which ten kings succeeded each
other, the last of whom they suppose was
Antiochus Epiphanes, the little horn ;
though typically of the Roman empire
foreshadowed under it, John’s vision of
the beast (Rev. xiii. 1), or the Roman
empire, having reference to this of Daniel.

In like manner Rosenmiiller and some
other Germans endeavoured to make
this beast to be the Greek empire in
Asia after Alexander’s death, But Bleek,
who is one of them, admits, ‘“‘We are
induced by ver. 8, where it is said of
the little horn that it would rise up
between the ten horns, to think of ten
contemporaneous kings, or rather king-
doms, existing along with each other,
which rise out of the fourth kingdom.”
Therefore he will “not deny that the
reference to the successors of Alexander
is rendered obscure by the fact that chap.
viii. speaks of four monarchies which
arise out of that of Alexander after
his death.” In opposition to the view
that the parts of Alexander's kingdom
which became independent kingdoms
might be numbered in different ways,
and the number ten be made out
from the number of the generals who
retained the chief provinces, Ziindel
justly observes: “These kingdoms could
only have significance if this number,
instead of being a selection from the
whole, had been itself the whole. But
this is not the case. For at that time
the kingdom, according to Justin, was
divided into more than thirty parts,”
According to Dr. Todd and the Futurists,





the power indicated is one yet to be
developed, as the precursor of the final
Antichrist. Sir Isaac Newton observes
that the Romans conquered the kingdom
of Macedon, Illyricum, and Epirus in
the eighth year of Antiochus Epiphanes,
B.0. 167 ; that of Pergamos thirty-five
years afterwards ; Syria sixty-four years
later, and Egypt after other thirty-nine
years; and that by these and other con-
quests the fourth beast became greater
and more terrible than any of the three
preceding ones, Dionysius Halicarnas-
sus, after enumerating the earlier empires
of the world, the Assyrian or Babylonian,
the Persian, and the Grecian, says,
“The empire of the Romans pervades
all regions of the earth which are not
inaccessible, but are inhabited by man-
kind ; it reigns also over the whole sea,
and is the first and only one that has
made the east and west its boundaries ;
and that there is no people that does
not recognise Rome as the universal
mistress, or that refuses to submit to its
dominion.” Professor Bush says, “ As
the fourth beast of Daniel lives and acts
through the space of 1260 years (the
‘time, times, and dividing, or half of a
time,’ ver. 25), and as the seven-headed
and ten-horned beast of John prevails
through the same period, I am driven
to the conclusion that they adumbrate
precisely the same thing—that they are
merely different aspects of the same
reality ; and this I have no question is
the Roman empire.” Keil observes,
after an elaborate proof of his premises ;
“Since, then, neither the division of the
Medo-Persian kingdom into the Median
and the Persian is allowable, nor the
identification of the fourth kingdom
(chaps. ii, and vii.) with the Javanic
(the Greek or Macedonian) world-king-
dom in chap. viii, we may regard as
correct the traditional Church view that
the four world-kingdoms are the Chal-
dean (or Babylonian), the Medo-Persian,
the Grecian, and the Roman.”

Q) “And tt had ten horns.” Some
have understood the number ten as
indefinite, indicating, as Augustine
thinks, the whole of the kings in the
Roman empire up to the coming of
Antichrist ; or, as Calvin, the several

121


OHAP, VII.


' HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; DANIEL,





provinces or kingdoms of that empire ;
or as others, the kingdoms into which
the Roman empire was divided and
dissolved on its first partition into the
Eastern and Western empires. Most,
however, consider it to be a certain
number. Some think of the kings who in
the end should divide the empire between
them. Thus Jerome says, ‘ Let us say,
what all ecclesiastical writers have
handed down, that in the consumma-
tion of the world, when the kingdom of
the Romans is about to be destroyed,
there will be ten kings who shall divide
the Roman world among them.”  Ire-
neous had said-in the second century,
“ Daniel, looking to the end of the last
kingdom, that is, the ten kings among
whom shall be divided the empire of
those upon whom the Son of Perdition
shall come, saith that ten horns did
grow upon the beast. And more mani-
festly still hath John, the disciple of
our Lord, signified concerning the last
time and the ten kings which are in it,
among whom shall be divided the king-
dom which now reigns, explaining in
the Apocalypse what were the ten horns
which were seen by Daniel;” thus
showing, as Archdeacon Harrison re-
marks, “how the earliest Christian
expositors identified with the imagery
before us that which reappears in the
visions of the Apocalypse.” Most under-
stand the ten kingdoms into which the


Roman empire was divided in eon:
sequence of the invasion of the Northern
nations, J, D. Michaelis remarks that
“the number of the kingdoms in the
great community of Europe moves, so
to speak, fluctuatingly about this round
number (ten), being sometimes more
and sometimes less.” Hengstenberg
thinks, however, that probably, at the
time of the final fulfilment, the number
ten will be a definite one, Auberlen
observes that the reference in the Revela-
tion to this fourth beast of Daniel
“overthrows the whole modern view
of the fourth beast (being the Greek
kingdom), and of the four beasts in
general ; it overthrows hereby, secondly,
the theory that the prophecies of Daniel
are limited to the time of Antiochus
Epiphanes; and it consequently over-
throws, thirdly, the chief argument
brought forward against the genuineness
of our book.” ‘ Rationalism,” observes
Dr. Pusey, ‘‘ has come round to the same
view.” “TI agree,” says Bleek, “ with
Auberlen, that the ten horns of the
fourth beast cannot be meant of ten
successive Syrian kings (as Bertholdt,
V. Lengerke, Maurer, Hitzig, and De-
litzsch think); nor of ten kings, some
Syrian and some Egyptian (as Kosen-
miiller, &c., and Porphyry of old) ; but
rather of the single portions into which
the kingdom was divided.”


HOMILETICS.
Seor. XXIV.—Tax Lirrtz Horn (Chap. vii. 8, 19-25).


We now come to that part of Daniel’s vision which especially distinguisnes it
from Nebuchadnezzar’s dream. The king only saw the feet of the image divided
into ten toes: Daniel not only sees ten horns proceeding from the head of the fourth
beast, corresponding with these ten toes,but another horn additional to these, which,
though appearing as a “little horn,” engaged the special attention of the prophet,
and constitutes the leading object in the vision. The character of the kingdoms of
the world was to be concentrated in that horn or the power represented by it, and
it was from it that the Church of God was mainly to suffer@, Asa “ horn,” it
was to be a power like the rest ; that term, expressive of the powerful weapon of
many animals, being figuratively employed in the Scripture to denote power or
strength, and so a kingdom or a sovereignty. See Deut. xxxiii. 17 3 Ps. xviii. 2;
Luke i. 69. In relation to the “little horn” we have to notice—

L Its rise. It is said to rise among the other ten horns, and so to be com
temporaneous with them ; and also aj/ter or behind them, and so in the time of ita
Serr: posterior to the rest, as well as gradual in its growth and for a time


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL. OHAP. VIL
poe bee tat sie tat a ed ia aOR oe


unobserved. Before it, three of the ten were “ plucked up by the roots and fell,”
or, as it is interpreted by the angel, it subdued three out of the ten kings or
kingdoms, and so made room for itself by occupying their place (vers. 8, 10, 24),
The other horns obtained their place as kingdoms out of the body of the fourth
beast or Roman empire ; this one was to obtain its place out of that beast only
indirectly, by gaining it out of the others.

IL Its character and description. (1.) A “little” horn; smadl in comparison
with the rest, especially in its commencement, and humble, perhaps, in its profession,
(2.) “ Diverse from the rest ;” its diversity consisting in this, that it had “eyes ”
in it, like the eyes of a “man,” and a “ mouth speaking great things,’—the eyes
and the mouth sufficiently indicating a human being as represented by it (2), and a
power of a peculiar character ; the eyes of a man, not of a god ; lamb-like, though
speaking as a dragon (Rev. xiii 11.) (3.) The mouth uttered “great words
against the Most High ;” hence proud, arrogant, and blasphemous ; while from the

_ eyes was a “look more stout than his fellows,” also indicative of pride and
haughtiness above that of the other powers, and an overbearing demeanour in
respect to them. (4.) He was to “make war with the saints of the Most High,
to wear them out, and prevail against them ;” a persecuting power, and one whose
persecutions should be persevering and successful, against such as adhered to a
holy life and the worship of God according to His Word. (5.) He was to “think
to change times and laws ;” lofty in his pretensions, as superior to laws both human
and divine, and affecting a power which is the prerogative of God (chap. ii 21).
5. The saints were to be “given into his hand ” for a definite period, prophetically
and enigmatically described as a “a time, times, and the dividing of a time ;” his
power over the saints or true worshippers of God to be absolute for a time, but that
time a limited one. “To form a well-grounded judgment regarding the appearance
of this last enemy,” observes Keil, ‘‘ we must compare the description given of him
here with the apocalyptic description of the same enemy under the image of the
beast out of the sea or out of the abyss” (Rev. xiii, 1-8, xvii. 7-13) ; and we may
add, with the desoription of the “ Man of Sin” given by the apostle (2 Thess,
ii, 4, &c.), with an obvious allusion to the passage before us.

IIL Its identification. This power intended to be identified as truly as the
four beasts themselves, The minute and varied description obviously given with
this view. This description, including both its rise and character, ought appa-
rently to leave no room for doubt as to what is intended by it, and no difficulty
in identifying it when the power indicated should appear. The question is, has
such a power already appeared, or are we still to look for it? The latter unlikely,
as the fourth beast, from which it springs, has confessedly appeared two thousand
years ago, and the ten kingdoms, among and behind which it was to rise, have pro-
bably been in existence about fourteen centuries, Has, then, any power appeared
during that period to which the description is at all applicable, and to which it has
been applied? There is a well-known power to which the description has appeared
so applicable, that for more than three hundred years the description has been
actually and unhesitatingly applied to it by almost all who have studied this
passage, with the exception, of course, of those who are in any way connected with
the power itself; although it is probable that the horn may not even yet have
fully developed itself), That power is the Papacy, with the Bishop of Rome as
its head and representative (); for nearly thirteen centuries a temporal power, like
the other horns, though now no longer such ©) ; but so diverse from them as to be
at the same time a spiritual power, while the rest were only secular ones. The
identity has appeared—

1. In the rise of the Papacy. The Little Horn rose among, and at the same
time after or behind, the other ten; while three of these were plucked up and fell
before it, so that their place was occupied by it, or, as interpreted by the angel,
three kingdoms, states, or powers were subdued dy it, It is ate that i





OWaP, VII. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


—_—_—_—_———————


was while the Northern nations were establishing for themselves kingdoms out of
the decaying Roman empire that the Bishops of Rome also became temporal
rulers, and that they did so after occasioning the fall of some of those rulera,
probably those of Lombardy, Ravenna, and Rome, whose territories then became
their own under the name of the States of the Church), A writer on prophecy
remarks: “The Little Horn came up among the ten horns, of which three fell
before it. This determines the appearance of the Little Horn to be not before the
appearance of the ten, of which not one came into being till after the year 487 of
the Christian era, until which time the Roman empire continued under its empe
rors, undivided into any of those ten kingdoms which arose afterwards. At that
time Augustulus, the last Emperor of the West, was forced to resign ; and for three
hundred years the empire remained without even a nominal head.” It is in
remarkable agreement with this fact that Paul speaks of the “ Man of Sin” as
being hindered at that time from revealing himself by something which he does
not name, but which would one day be taken out of the way ; that hindrance being
doubtless the Roman imperial power, which for obvious reasons Paul did not think
it expedient to name. The circumstance of the three horns or states being rooted
up to make way for the temporal power of the Papacy seems openly declared in
the “ triple crown” which the Pope still continues to wear.

2. In the character of the Papacy.

(1.) The horn was a “little” one, The territory of the Papacy has always
been small in comparison with that of the other powers, never exceeding the
extent of an Italian province. The Pope properly and originally a humble minister
’ of Jesus Christ, on a level with the other bishops or presiding ministers of the
Churches, and possessing no territory or temporal jurisdiction whatever ; so “little”
that the apostle does not even salute or mention him in his Epistle to the Church at
Rome. The Epistle of Clement, one of the first Bishops of Rome, if not the very
first, written to the Church of Corinth, breathes the very spirit of humility, a
humility which is affected by his successors, while each calls himself the “servant of
servants” and a successor of ‘‘ the fisherman.”

(2.) It was “diverse from the first” (ver. 24), having the eyes and mouth of a
man. The difference of the Papacy from the other powers, as already noticed,
conspicuous in this, that it was at the same time both a temporal and a spiritual
power, the Pope being both a secular prince and a spiritual teacher, or, as Gibbon
expresses it, “a Christian bishop invested with the prerogatives of a temporal
prince.” The Pope claimed both swords, the civil and the ecclesiastical; a
combination perhaps indicated in the Revelation by the two separate beasts,
the one rising out of the sea and the other out of the earth (Rev. xiii. 1-11), or in
the fact that the latter had two horns like a lamb, while it spake like a dragon
(ver. 11).

(3 va His look was more stout than his fellows” (ver. 20). It is well known
what anathemas were fulminated by the Popes against all who refused to acknow-
ledge their supremacy or submit to their authority ; how kings were deposed and
their kingdoms placed under interdicts which deprived them of religious ordinances,
their subjects released from their allegiance, and their crown given to another. This
“stout look,” and the claim of making and unmaking kings at pleasure, conspicuous
in the person of Gregory VII. (a.p. 1073). “I have received,” said he, “from
God the power of binding and of loosing in heaven and in earth; and by this
power I forbid Henry (the Fourth, Emperor of Germany) the government of the
whole realm of Germany and Italy. I also loose all Christians from the oaths
they have taken to him; and I decree that no man shall obey him as king ” (8),
Among the “stout words” of the Papacy are the following, spoken by the same
Gregory: “The Roman Pontiff alone can be called universal, He alone has a
right to use imperial ornaments, Princes are bound to kiss his feet, and hts feet
only, He has a right to depose emperors. No book can be called canonical

124


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OMAP, VIL
eee


without his authority. His sentence can be annulled by none, but he may annul
the decrees of all.” It is also to be remembered that the popes claim infallibility,

(4.) “Tt had eyes like the eyes of man” (ver. 8), The very title of bishop,
which is simply “ overseer,” as in Acts xx. 28 and I Pet. v. 3, is in perfect agree-
ment with this mark of the horn, The popes, as bishops or overseers, being spiri-
tual teachers, are supposed to be endowed with wisdom and knowledge to qualify
them for their office, of which the eyes of a man are a well-known symbol (°),

(5.) The horn had also “a mouth speaking great things,” even “great words
against the Most High.” The first of these expressions indicates pride and arro-
gance, the latter blasphemy. The Papal bulls leave little room for doubt as to the
applicability of the former to the Papacy. “The tribunals of kings,” say they,
“are subject to the sacerdotal power.” “Since the Holy Roman Church, over
which Christ has willed that we preside, is set for a mirror and example, whatever it
has decreed, whatever it now ordains, must be perpetually and irrefragably observed
by all men.” The words spoken against or (as the word is also rendered) as the
Most High @° are such as tend to set God aside, These have not been wanting
in the lips of the Papacy. ‘The Roman Pontiff,” says Pope Stephen, “ is to judge
all men, and to be judged by no man.” “The Pope is styled God,” says Pope
Nicholas, “ by the pious prince ; and it is manifest that God cannot be judged by
man.” This mark may be truly regarded as made good, as Bishop Newton ob-
serves, by the popes “setting up themselves against all laws human and divine,
arrogating to themselves godlike attributes and titles, and exacting obedience to
their ordinances and decrees.” A bull of Pope Boniface declares that “all the
faithful of Christ are, by necessity of salvation, subject to the Roman Pontiff, who
has both swords, and judges all men, but is judged by none” @1), Again we have
to remember the claim to infallibility by the Pope, that infallibility having been
recently made an article of faith in the Romish Church.

(6.) ** He shall think to change times and laws” (ver. 25)@%, The presence of
this mark in the Papacy already apparent, Everything was to be entirely in
accordance with Papal decree, The observance of saints’ days established ; the
marriage vow, in the case of the clergy, cancelled and marriage itself forbidden @) ;
subjects, as, for example, the English in relation to Henry VIII. and Elizabeth,
released from their allegiance to their sovereigns; the cup in the Lord’s Supper
forbidden to the laity @*) ; and the making and worshipping of images sanctioned (5),
Bishop Newton mentions also as instances of this mark of the Little Horn, the Pope's
“appointing fasts and feasts ; canonising saints ; granting pardons and indulgences
for sins; instituting new modes of worship ; imposing new articles of faith [as
recently the Immaculate Conception]; enjoining new rules of practice ; and
reversing at pleasure the laws both of God and man.” The traditions of the
Fathers and decrees of Councils are made to supersede and set aside the Word of
God. “The holy and inspired fathers and teachers,” says Gregory IIL., “and the
six Councils in Christ, these are our scriptures and our light to salvation.”

7.) He was to “ make war with the sainisand prevatl against t ” and “ wear
them out” (vers, 21, 25). It is well known that one of the most prominent features
of the Papacy in past centuries was the persecution of the saints under the name
of heretics, that is, of those who refused, in matters of doctrine and practice, to
submit to the authority of the Pope instead of the Word of God, and who said,
with Peter and the other apostles, ‘‘ We ought to obey God rather than men” (Acts
v. 29, iv. 19)@9, “If any one,” said Pope Nicolas in a Council at Rome, “shall
presume to dispute the dogmas, commands, interdicts, sanctions, or decrees whole-
somely published by the head of the Apostolic See, let him be accursed.” “ It is
permitted neither to think nor to speak differently from the Roman Church.” Such
were to be handed over to the secular power, to be punished with the loss of goods,
imprisonment, and even death. The burning of heretics, according to the bull
De Comburendo, is too well known in England. The term “ Crusades . ig given


CHAP. Vit, _ HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


re eee eee css i ial SSSI


to those military enterprises undertaken to extirpate the Waldenses and Albigenses ;
aud the same Papal indulgences were promised to those who fell in such under-
takings as were bestowed on those who died in the wars against the infidels @7), The
“wearing out of the saints ””‘may be seen in the decree of Pope Pelagius, that those
guilty of schism or separation from the Roman See were to be “crushed by the
secular power, and restrained not. only by exile, but by proscription of their goods,
and by severe imprisonment.” How far the Papacy “ prevailed” against the saints,
or so-called heretics, appears from the fact that in a Council of the Lateran, held
in May 1514, about three years and a half before the breaking out of the Refor-
mation under Luther, the Hussites were summoned to appear; and when no
appearance was made, the doctor of the Council uttered the remarkable words,
“There is an end to resistance to the Papal rule and religion; there is none to
oppose ; the whole body of Christendom is now subject to its head.”

(8.) The saints were to be “ given into the hand” of the Little Horn for a limited
pertod, here called “a time, times, and the dividing of a time.” This enigmatical
period, found also in chap. xii., as well as in the Book of Revelation, is generally
understood to be equivalent to three years and a half, or, a8 it is expressed in the
Apocalypse, 1260 days, 360 being reckoned to a year, and also forty and two
months (Rev. xii, 14, 16, xi. 2, 3, xiii, 50%, the half of the “seven times”
already mentioned in connection with Nebuchadnezzar’s insanity. The period in
the text for the dominion of the Little Horn over the saints is also that of the
“scattering or crushing of the power of the holy people” (chap. xii. 7); of the
woman’s abode in the wilderness (Rev. xii, 6, 14); of the treading of the holy
city under foot by the Gentiles (Rev. xii. 2); of the prophesying of the two
witnesses in sackcloth (Rev. xii. 3); and of the effective continuance of the beast
out of the sea (Rev. xiii. 5). Probably the same period, and the same experience
of humiliation and suffering on the part of the saints under the same power,
intended under these various symbolical representatious. The three years and a
half, however, might be understood either literally or figuratively ; either as
ordinary years, or, as they are called, prophetical ones, each day being reckoned a
year. The latter is generally understood, though there may be also a fulfilment
of the prophecy on the smaller as well as on the larger scale. It is remarkable
that from the time that the Bishop of Rome became a temporal prince, namely,
in the early part of the seventh century (a.D. 606), till the cessation of his
temporal power in 1870, is just 1264 years, the period in the text on the larger
or year-day scale, with perhaps four years more (9), It is also remarkable that
from the time in which all Christendom was declared to be subject to the Roman
Pontiff, May 1514, to the breaking out of the Reformation under Luther, that
effected the deliverance of so large a portion from his spiritual sway, was just
three years and a half on the shorter or literal day scale. Twelve centuries
ago, more or less, the saints, or those who chose to obey the Word of God
rather than the edicts and decrees of man, seemed to be given into the hand of
the Roman Pontiff. There seems little reason to doubt that happily that period
of subjection has come to an end. The Papacy can no longer persecute the so-
called heretics as before. The Scriptures are openly sold and the Gospel is freely
preached even in Rome itself. The Inquisition is at an end. Dr. Achilli and the
two Madiai were among its last prisoners, the latter having been given up at the
demand of Protestant Europe, The French Revolution in 1792-3, exactly 1260
years after the edict of Justinian seemed formally to give the Church into the
hands of the Roman bishop, was doubtless the commencement of his fall 2); one
of the most marked results of that event being the freedom of religious worship
among the nations of Europe, which during the last ten years may be said to have
been all but complete. This circumstance might seem to leave no doubt as to the
identification of the Little Horn with the Papacy, and to establish the opinion that
bas largely prevailed for centuries (21)

126


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, CmaP. VIL,
a


From the prophecy regarding the Little Horn we may notice—

1. The providence of God as ruling both in the world and in the Church, “He
putteth down one and setteth up another.” Even the Little Horn, which was to
prove such a scourge to the Church and to the world, was entirely under His con-
trol, and employed as His instrument in accomplishing the purposes of His infinite
wisdom. The saints were to be “ given” into His hand, as Judah and its king were
given into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar (chap, i. 2). The same Providence limited
the continuance of the subjection in both cases, What is done wickedly by man
is permitted and controlled wisely and holily by God.

2. The comfort of God’s people to know that their sufferings are meted out, both in
intensity and duration, by a Father’s hand. It was a fiery trial that was to try
the saints when they were to be given into the hand of the Little Horn, who was
to make war upon them, and prevail against them, and wear them out. But it was
to continue only for a time, a long time indeed, as indicated in the expression
“a time, times, and the dividing of a time;” but still it was to come to an end.
“Thou shalt have tribulation ten days,”— not more. ‘In measure when it
shooteth forth, Thou wilt debate with it: He stayeth His rough wind in the day of
His east wind ” (Isa. xxvii. 8). The “time to favour Zion, even the set time,” comes,

3. The preciousness and power of divine grace in sustaining the people of God
under protracted persecutions and afflictions, No small affliction to the saints who
held fast the Word of God to have war made upon them by a mighty and prevail-
ing power, and to be worn out by exile, imprisonment, and loss of goods, year after
year, the same thing being continued century after century. No small amount of
grace needed to sustain them in the conflict, so as to be faithful unto death. But
the promise is sure. ‘‘ My grace is sufficient for thee; my strength is made perfect
in weakness,” “ As thy days, so shall thy strength be.” Though appointed as sheep
to the slaughter, we are made more than conquerors through Him that loved us.
“ They overcame through the blood of the Lamb and the word of their testimony.”

4, The divine, and therefore indestructible, nature of the Church and religion
of Jesus Christ, which has held out under centuries of cruel persecution. To exhibit
this, probably one reason why such a state of things is permitted to take place.
The bush burns, but is not consumed, because the Lord Himself is in it. The
gates and power of hell unable to prevail against the Church of Christ, because
founded on the Rock of Ages. The Church outlives the furnace, because One like
the Son of God—the Son of God Himself—is with it there. “If this counsel or
work be of men, it will come to nought; but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow
it.” Although,” says Sismondi, himself a Roman Catholic, “for two hundred
years the fires were never quenched, still every day saw Catholics abjuring the
faith of their fathers, and embracing the religion which often guided them to the
stake, In vain Gregory IX, in 1231, put to death every heretic whom he found
concealed in Rome.”

5. Cause for joy and thanksgiving that the wearing out of the saints by the
Little Horn ts at or near tts close. There may yet be possibly a period of intense
suffering from that same Little Horn under a changed aspect ; but if so, it will be
but of short continuance; perhaps the “time, times, and dividing of a time,” on
the shorter literal day scale. But we may well rejoice and give thanks that the
long-protracted period of “ wearing out” is acanend. The fires of Smithfield and
the tortures of the Inquisition, we may believe, are over, Even in Rome men
may read the Bible and worship God according to it without being afraid. Let us
thank God for liberty of conscience in Europe,

6. The prediction regarding the Little Horn, with its manifest fulfilment, another
remarkable evidence of divine inspiration. That horn, as rising out of the fourth
beast, and among the other ten, acknowledged not to be Antiochus Epiphanes, and
must therefore be found long after the time when the prophecy was written, The
prediction minute and detailed; and its fulfilment, in a power that ia twelve

2


7 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





centuries has been the most prominent and conspicuous one in Europe, singularly
exact, The fulfilment of such prediction, though perfectly natural, yet partaking
of the nature of a miracle, as being beyond any mere human power to foresee it,
and as such an evidence of the divine origin of the prediction,


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—© “It is
in the fearful shape of the last beast
that the world-power will fully manifest
that 1ts whole nature is opposed to God.
But as the interest which attaches to the
four monarchies is led rapidly over the
first three to centre in the last, so, for
the same reason, in considering the last
we are led to the final shape, . . . The
description introduces these horns merely
to show how an eleventh has sprung up
in their midst, a king in whom the full
haughty hatred and rebellion against
God, His people, and His service, finds
its representative, ... The essential
nature of the kingdoms of the world
appears concentrated in the fourth king-
dom ; the nature of the fourth kingdom,
in like manner, in its last worldly ruler.
Thus it is only at the end that the
peculiar character of the world-power,
“the mystery of iniquity,” is unveiled,
and we recognise in the eleventh horn no
other than he whom Paul calls “the
Man of Sin” and “the Son of Perdition”
(2 Thess. ii.) Here, for the first time
in the development of revelation, the
idea of Antichrist is clearly unfolded ;
because here, for the first time, the en-
tire course of the development of the
godless and God-opposing world is
clearly surveyed down to the very end.”
—Auberlen, So Dr. Pusey, who also
sees in the Little Horn mainly an Anti-
christ yet to come.” ‘Why should there
not be under the fourth empire an
antagonism to the true God, concen-
trated in and directed by one individual,
as it was in and by Antiochus in the
third? Human nature repeats itself.
What man has done, man will do. We
Christians look for an Antichrist yet to
come, Our Lord forewarned of him
and his deceivableness. St. Paul
describes such an one as Daniel speaks
of.” We must not, however, overlook
the Antichrist of the past and the
present, while even as Protestants we
may also acknowledge an Antichrist yet
to come.


128


(3) “Hyes like the eyes of man.”
“Eyes and seeing with eyes are the
symbols of insight, circumspection, and
prudence. The eyes of a man, not
merely to indicate that the horn signified a
man, which was already distinctly enough
shown by the fact of eyes, &c., being
attributed to it, nor yet to distinguish
it from a beast; but in opposition to a
higher celestial being, for whom it might,
from the terribleness of its rule and go-
vernment, be mistaken.”—Xetl. Others
have viewed the expression as indicative
of the assumed blandness that accom-
panied papal arrogance, and the sharp
look-out kept by the popes on their
own and their families’ interests, as well
as those of the Church.

(®) Jerome and the fathers, as well as
De Lyra, Hugo, and Roman Catholic
writers generally, interpret the little
horn of the Antichrist, who should come
in the end of the world, after the Roman
empire is destroyed. Some of the
Reformers, as Melanchthon and Osian-
der, understood it of the Turkish empire.
Calvin thinks that historically this pro-
phecy of the Little Horn was fulfilled
before the coming of the Messiah into
the world, in the person of Julius Caesar,
Augustus, and the other emperors ; but
that it may, by analogy, be applied, as
it was by some, to the Pope or to the
Turks; “and these applications,” he
says, “by way of analogy I mislike
not.” (Ecolampadius understood it of
the Pope in the West, and the Turkish
empire in the East, Bullinger, and the
Reformers in general, applied the pro-
phecy entirely to the Papacy. Junius,
Polanus, and Willet understood it his-
torically of Antiochus Epiphanes, but
typically of Antichrist. Dr. Lee, of
Cambridge, applies it to heathen Rome
and the persecuting emperors from Nero
to Constantine. The Futurists, with
Roman Catholic writers, understand it
of an Antichrist yet to come.

() Dr. Rule observes that the descrip-
tion given of the Little Horn exactly


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: vaNIBu.





answers to the Papacy, and regards the
assumption of absolute sovereignty over
the city and territory of Rome by Pope
Innocent III. as the uprising of it, a
sovereign pontiff over a temporal do-
minion, armed also with military powers,
** Here,” says Muratori, in relating this
event, “expired the last breath of the
Augusti in Rome; and henceforth the
prefects of Rome, the Senate, and the
other magistrates, swore fealty to the
Roman Pontiff only.” Professor Bush
says, “This Little Hornis unquestionably
the ecclesiastical power of the Papacy.
This horn did not come till after the
empire received its deadly wound by
the hands of the Goths.”
(5) That the Bishop of Rome became
a temporal ruler, receiving his place and
rank as such among and soon after the
other rulers of the kingdoms formed
out of the dismembered Roman empire,
every one knows, One of the most
remarkable events of recent years was
the entire cessation of this temporal
sovereignty of the Pope, when in 1870,
after the French Emperor had withdrawn
his troops from,Rome, Victor Emmanuel,
as king of Italy, at the voice of the
people, assumed the entire government
of the country, leaving Pius IX. only
the Vatican and its precincts for his
residence ; the Pope exclaiming against
the act as one of wicked sacrilege and
spoliation, and endeavouring to rouse all
Catholic Europe to aid him in recovering
the lost “ patrimony of St. Peter.” The
Times of the period said, “In the same
year the Papacy has assumed the high-
est spiritual exaltation to which it could
aspire, and lost the temporal sovereignty
which it had held for a thousand years.”
() “ Before whom there were three of
the first horns plucked up by the roots,”
“He shall subdue three kings” (vers, 8, 24).
‘BUT (yehashpil), “ shall overthrow,
deprive of sovereignty."—Kew. Some
have understood the number three as
indefinite. So Calvin and Cécolam-
padius, but understanding it as de-
noting much or many. Most have
viewed it as a definite number. Jerome
and others after him understood the
three horns to be Egypt, Africa, and
Ethiopia, which were to be subdued





OHAF, Viz,





by Antichrist. Melanchthon thought of
Egypt, Syria, and Cilicia, to be taken
by the Turks ; while Osiander and Pfaff
understood them to be Asia, Greece,
and Egypt. Bullinger, applying the
prophecy to the Papacy, regarded the
three horns as the Emperor Leo, or the
Exarchate of Ravenna, taken by Gregory
II.; Childeric, king of France, de-
posed by Pope Zachary ; and the Lom-
bards with the government they obtained
from Leo III, Dr. Rule considers them
to be the Roman Senate and people, with
the so-called patrimony of St. Peter,
gained a.D. 498; Apulia, otherwise called
Naples, and Sicily, obtained in 1266. He
observes that, simultaneously with these
acquisitions, the work of persecution,
foretold in the next verses, rapidly ad-
vanced, According to Mr. Birks, thethree
horns were the kingdom of the Heruli
under Qdoacer, that of the Ostrogoths
under Theodoric, who at the instigation
of the Pope overthrew the former, and
took possession of that part of Italy
forming the Exarchate of Ravenna,
which again, at the Pope’s instance, was
overthrown by Belisarius and Narses,
lieutenants of the Emperor Justinian ;
the third power overthrown being that of
the Lombards under Alboin and Aistulph,
To obtain freedom from the threatened
yoke of the Lombards, and to secure
still farther the possession of a temporal
dominion, the Pope made his appeal to
Pepin, son of Charles Martel, as well as
to Charles (Charlemagne) and Carloman,
the three kings of the Franks. ‘‘ Pepin
and Charlemagne willingly undertook
the task of uprooting the Lombard kings
dom, the last enemy that stood in the way
of the ambitious See.” After the sur-
render of Pavia, “the lastobstacle was now
removed, and the popes rose at length to
temporal dominion, and obtained a firm
and settled place among the powers
and kingdoms of the Western Empire.
‘The Church’s ancient patrimony of
farms and houses,’ says Gibbon, ‘ was
transformed by the bounty of the Car-
lovingians into the temporal dominion
of cities and provinces; and the dona-
tion of the Exarchate was the first-fruits
of the victories of Pepin.’ The ample
province of the Exarchate, granted to
129


CHAP. VIL.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





the Papacy by the usurper Pepin, might
comprise all the provinces of Italy which
had obeyed the Emperor and his vice-
gerent ; but its strict and proper limits
were included in the territory of Ravenna,
Bologna, and Ferrara, and its insepa-
rable dependency was the Pentapolis,”

“The tempter,” says Gavazzi, “came
over the Alps in the Gallic Pepin; he
showed from a pinnacle of earthly power
and aggrandisement the kingdoms of
this world, and pledged himself to secure
their homage, if, falling prostrate before
God’s adversary, ‘Christ’s Vicar’ should
adore him. The sacrilegious bargain
was struck; the ark of the Lord was
placed im the temple of Dagon; the
bishops of Rome, who over and over
again suffered death rather than offer
incense to Pagan idols, fell into the
palpable snare of Satan ; and the hand
that bore on its finger the brightest of
sacerdotal gems in the ‘ring of the
fisherman’ was outstretched, with scan-
dalous avidity, to burn a fatal frankin-
cense on the altar of secular ambition.
A visible change fell on the Papacy.
The gory crown of martyrdom was ex-
changed for the glittering tiara.”

Mr. Mede supposed the three “ up-
rooted” or “ depressed” horns to be, first,
the Greeks, that is, the entire kingdom
of Italy, which in 554 was ended by the
Exarchate or dependent government of
the Greek emperor, which continued for
fifteen years; second, the Lombards,
who possessed the country for about
200 years; and, third, the Franks, who
stretched their authority into the imme-
diate vicinity of Rome.

() The following are extracts from
Clement’s letter, written towards the
end of the first century, to allay some
disturbances in the Church at Corinth
in regard to the pastorate, ‘These
things, beloved, we write not only to
admonish you of your duty, but to ad-
monish ourselves, for we are in the
Baine race and conflict. Wherefore, let
us abandon vain and empty cares, and
advance to the glorious and venerable
rule of our calling. Let us look to
what is beautiful, and pleasing, and
acceptable in the eyes of our Creator,
Let us a our eyes on the blood of

130


Christ, and consider how precious to
God is that blood, which, having been
shed for our salvation, has offered the
grace of repentance to all the world. . . .
Christ belongs to those who conduct
themselves humbly, not those who exalt
themselves over His flock with pride
and arrogance. ... Let us attach our-
selves to those to whom grace has been
given by God. Let us put on concord
with moderation of mind, endued with
the gift of self-control. Temerity, arro-
gance, and audacity belong to those
who are accursed of God ; moderation,
humility, and meekness to those who
are blessed of Him. , . . The apostles,
preaching the Word through regions
and cities, proving their first-fruits in
the Spirit, appointed bishops and dea-
cons of those who believed. The apostles
knew through our Lord Jesus Christ that
contentions would arise about the name
of the episcopate, and on that account,
being endowed with perfect foreknow-
ledge, they appointed persons previously
indicated, and left successions of mini-
sters and officers afterwards described,
that other approved mey might succeed
to their place and discharge their offices,
Lock diligently into the Scriptures,
Take into your hands the epistles of the
blessed Apostle Paul. Consider what
he wrote to you near the very beginning
of his preaching the gospel. Being cer-
tainly divinely inspired, he reminded you
in an epistle concerning himself, Cephas,
and Apollos, that even then there were
seditions and party feelings among you.
. . » Whosoever is sealous, pitiful, and
full of love among you, let him say, ‘If
any sedition, contention, or division,
has arisen through me, I will depart ;
I will go away whithersoever you wish ;
I will do whatever is commanded by
the people; that only the flock of
Christ may live in peace with the elders
(or presbyters) that have been appointed
over them.’”

(*) These were not empty words,
Henry, driven to despair, in a winter of
unusual severity, crossed the Alps with
the determination of seeking the Pope’s
forgiveness and reconciliation. Gregory
was at Canossa, a fortress near Reggio,
The Emperor was admitted without his


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


CHAP. VII.


-_-ee——————


guards into an outer court of the castle,
where he was kept standing for three
successive days, from morning to
evening, in a woollen shirt, and with
bare feet, while Gregory, shut up with
the Countess, refused to admit him into
his presence. On the fourth day he
obtained absolution, but only on con-
dition that he appeared on a certain day
to receive the Pope’s decision as to
whether or not he should be restored to
his kingdom, till which time he was
not to assume the insignia of royalty.
It was this same Pope who endeavoured
to compel William the Conqueror to do
homage for the crown of England, and
who menaced Philip I. of France with
depcsition. The language and bearing
of Adrian IV., jn 1155, to the Emperor
Frederick was of a similar character.
The Pope insisted on the Emperor be-
coming his equerry and holding his
stirrup while he mounted. “To place
your name before ours,” said he to the
Emperor, “is arrogance, is insvlence ;
and to cause bishops to render homage
to you, those whom the Scripture calls
gods, sons of the Most High, is to want
that faith which you have sworn to St.
Peter and to us. Hasten then to amend,
lest that, in taking to yourself what does
not belong to you, you lose the crown
with which we have gratified you.”

) See note @),

(0) “ Against the Most High.” 1¥9
(le-tsadh), ‘at the side of.” Keil ob-
serves that this term properly means
against or at the side of, and is more


expressive than by (al); denoting that
he would use language by which he
would set God aside, and would regard
and give himself out as God. Compare
2 Thess, ii. 4.

@1) It is this Pope of whom Gavazzi,
in the oration already quoted from, says,
“Swelling with the pride and pomp of
Satanic inflation, Boniface VIIL, having
foully dethroned his still living pre-
decessor, Celestine V., burst on the
world with his blasphemous bull,
Onam Sanctam, and laid his monstrous
mandate on mankind, involving the
human race in sacerdotal serfdom. By
vue fell swoop he abrogated the autho-
rity of kings within their dominiona,


of magistrates within the circle of their
attributions, of fathers within the sacred
precincts of their households. Popes
became arbiters of universal sovereiguty,
bishops bearded monarchs, and priests
lorded it over the domestic hearth. . . .
Every human right, claim, property,
franchise, or feeling at variance with the
predominance of the Popedom was,
tpso facto, inimical to Heaven and the
God of eternal justice.”

(2) “7 change times and laws,”
Keil observes that to “change times”


belongs to the all-perfect power of God


(cf. ii. 21), the creator and ordainer of
times (Gen, i, 14); and that there is no
ground for supposing that 30? (zimnin),
“times,” is to be specially understood
of “ festivals or sacred times,” since the
word, like the corresponding Hebrew
one, OID (mo'adhim), does not
throughout signify merely festival times
(cf. Gen. i, 14, xvii. 21, xviii 14, &c.)
The sin is that he does not in his
ordinances regard the fundamental con-
ditions given by God, but so changes
the laws of human life that he puts his
own pleasure in the place of the divine
arrangements, N3 (dath), a law, rite, cus-
tom, or constitution. Calvin, applying
the passage to the Roman emperors, says
they perverted all laws, humanand divine,
Dr. Pusey, on the other hand, trans
lates “essaying to change worship and
law;” and has in a footnote, }"20} (zimnin)
“ set times,” that is, probably, the times
of the set feasts (as we speak of sacred
“ geasons ”), and so the worship of those
times. He observes that in Onkelos
P20} (zimnin) stands for O'YO (mo’adh-
im), Gen, i 14; and Jonathan puts
“WID "307 (zimne mo'ed) for WO (mo'ed),
Zeph, iii, 18. PseudoJonathan uses
the word j©% (zeman) in paraphrasing
TY MYO (mo’adhe Jehvvah), “ the feasts
of the Lord.” Elsewhere {®? is used
of the place of the sacred assembly
(Num. i, 1; Isa, xxxiii. 20), but 7D
of the festival (Lam. i, 4; Hos, ix. 5).
(18) A decretal of Callixtus II. says,
“We entirely interdict priests, deacons,
sub-deacons, aud monks from contrssting
marriages ; we decide also that, according
to the sacred canons, the marriages con-


tracted by persons of this kind be dis
13]


OMAP. VII.


‘HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





solved, and the persons brought to
penance,” This Pope, as well as Pope
Agatho, writes that the decretal epistles
of the Roman Pontiff are to be received
among the Scriptures, though they are
not embodied in the code of canons, just
as the Old and New Testaments are so
received, ‘‘ because a judgment of holy
Pope Innocent seems to be published”
for doing so,

(4) In regard to the use of the cup,
Pope Gregory VII. thus wrote to Wratis-
laus, king of Bohemia, “ What your
people ignorantly require can in no wise
be conceded to them ; and we now forbid
it by the power of God and His holy
Apostle Peter.”

@5) Gregory III. convened an assembly
of 93 bishops in 732, and with their
assent published a general excommunica-
tion against all who were opposed to the
worship of images. The same Pope
wrote to the Emperor Leo, ‘Do you
cease to persecute images and all will be
quiet.”

(16) “« Make war with the saints” (ver.
21). In our own country, in the short
reign of Queen Mary, three hundred per-
sons are said to have been cruelly put to
death for no other reason than because
they refused to acknowledge the supre-
macy of the Pope. This is written within
little more than a stone’s throw of the
monument that commemorates the mar-
tyrdom of Ridley, Latimer, and Cranmer,
and the cross in front of Balliol College,
Oxford, that marks the spot on which
they suffered death. It iscomputed that
in the South of France, between the
twelfth and eighteenth centuries inclu-
sive, about a million of those called
Waldenses and Albigenses suffered death
as heretics, especially by armies sent
against them for that purpose, after
receiving the papal blessing. Nearly a
million suffered on the same account after
the institution of the order of the Jesuits,
In the Netherlands, it was the boast of
the Duke of Alva that 36,000 heretics
had been put to death by the common
executioner within a few years, In
Ireland, 150,000 are said to have been
massacred in one province in virtue of a
papal edict dated May 25, 1643, in which
the Pope granted a full and plenary tn-

132


dulgence and absolute remission of all
their sins “to all the Christians in the
kingdom of Ireland, so long as they should
war against the heretics and other ene-
mies of the Catholic faith.” In the
Massacre of St. Bartholomew's Day,
1572, thirty thousand at least, in Paris
and throughout France, are said to have
been horribly butchered within thirty
days, for which the Pope ordered public
thanks to be given, and a medal to be
struck in commemoration of the event.
This feature of the Little Horn is acknow-
ledged and justified in the Rhemish New
Testament, where it is said in a note at
Rev. xvii. 6, that the blood of the here-
tics is not to be considered as the blood
of the saints, but is ‘no more than the
blood of thieves, mankillers, and other
malefactors, for the shedding of which,
by order of justice, no commonwealth
shall answer.” So Pope Urban IL., en-
couraging the shedding of such blood,
states, “‘ We do not count them mur-
derers who, burning with zeal for their
Catholic mother against the excommuni-
cate, may happen to have slain some of
them.” Sismondi, himself a Roman
Catholic, intimates what was the crime
of those whose blood was thus to be shed:
“Many sects,” he says, “existed in Pro
vence, and this was the necessary conse-
quence of the freedom of inquiry which
was the essence of their doctrine. With
one accord they considered that the
Romish Church had changed the nature
of Christianity, and that she was the
object described in the Apocalypse as the
woman of Babylon.” He adds: “To
maintain unity of faith, the Church had
recourse to the expedient of burning all
those who separated themselves from her.”

QD) “Let the Catholics,” said In-
nocent III, in the Lateran Council,
“who, after taking the sign of the cross,
devote themselves to the extermination
of heretics, enjoy the same indulgence,
and be protected with the same privilege,
which is granted to those who go to the
succour of the Holy Land.”

(18) “ 4 time and times and the divid-
ing of a time” (ver. 26). Some have
understood by this only an indefinite
though lengthened period. So Calvin,
who applied the prophecy to the per


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL.


OHAP. VII.


eae a aT


secutions under Nero and other Roman
emperors, By the “dividing” or half of
a time he understood the shortening of
the period for the elect’s sakes. Bullin-
ger viewed it as a definite time fixed by
God, but known only to Himself. ico-
lampadius understood half a week orthree
days and a half, God thus shortening
the time. Osiander regarded it as three
and a half prophetic years or 1278
solar years, during which the rule of
Mahometanism, commencing in the year
613, should continue. Jerome, and
Roman Catholic writers after him, un-
derstand it of three and a half literal
years, the period for the tyranny of
‘Antichrist before the end of the world.
Similarly other Futurists. Junius and
a few others applied it historically
to the time during which Antiochus
Epiphanes persecuted the Jews, J oseph
Mede was “the well-known reviver of
the year-day theory. Before his time
it was a vague assertion; he first gave
it shape and form, and plausible con-
sistency. Since his day it has been
adopted by many intelligent critics,
among whom are Sir Isaac Newton,
Bishop Newton, Faber, Frere, Keith,
and Birks.”"—Translator's Preface to
Calvin on Daniel. Professor Lee refers
the expression to “ the latter half (mys-
tically speaking) of the seventieth week
of our prophet” (ch. ix.) ; that week of
seven days being equivalent here to
Ezekiel’s period of seven years. Pro-
fessor Bush says, “The grand principle
into which the usage of a day for a year is
to be resolved is that of miniature symbo-
lisation.” Mr. Brooks (Hlements of Pro-
phetic Interpretation) says, “The literal
meaning of a ‘time’ is a year; and the
expression in ver. 25 may signify, mys-
tically, if calculated by lunar time, a
period of 1260 years.” Mr. Bickersteth
(Practical Guide to the Prophecies) says,
“The time, times, and half a time,
the forty and two months and 1260
days, are the same interval ; the time,
times, and half a time of Daniel and
the Revelation are the same period ; a pro-
phetic day is a natural year, as three and
a half times are the half of seven times,
the whole season of Gentile power, and the
same with the ‘latter times’ of St. Paul.”


He thinks the three and a half times
began with Justinian’s Code in 532-5383,
“By this edict (of Justinian),” says Mr.
Irving, “ecclesiastical power oyer the
faith of the West and against the sainta
who dwelt there was given to the Bishop
of Rome, which imperial edicts being
seconded by the imperial arms, brought
to nothing the heretical powers who
might have opposed his entering into
possession. In twenty years from that
date he ordered heretics to be burned
by the temporal powers—the first indica-
tion of that mixture and combination of
powers, civil and ecclesiastical, which is
the proper character of the whole period.
Then, also, mass was introduced. In
sixty years he had made such great
strides towards absolute supremacy, that
in the reign of Gregory the Great, who
resisted the Bishop of Constantinople’s
supremacy, were introduced purgatory,
invocation of saints, expiations by
masses, lustrations of the Blessed Virgin,
and the celibacy of the clergy was
attempted. In seventy years he ob-
tained from the emperor the sole title
of Universal Bishop. In little more
than a century the service was performed
in Latin, and the ignorance of the people
sealed, In two centuries the Pope had
obtained the pride and power to excom-
municate the Emperor of the East for
prohibiting image-worship.” Dr. Cox
thinks that “the computation must be
made from the period when the Little
Horn or ecclesiastical power of the
Church of Rome should arise;” and that
“that application of the prophecy is
most probable which fixes on the time
when, by the decree of Phocas, the
Roman Pontiff was constituted Unt
versal Bishop and supreme head of the
Church.” This was in the year of our
Lord 606. Some students of pro
phecy see in the term “ times,” d&c.,
the half of the period of Nebuchad-
nezzar’s humiliation and insanity, sym-
bolical of the time (2520 years) during
which the covenant people should be
under the dominion of the Gentile
monarchies as the chastisement of their
unfaithfulness, this period having
different crises as stages of commence
ment. Of these, Mr. Guinness (Ap
133


OHAP. VII.


| HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: DANIEL.


a


proaching End of the Age) mentions
four, from the invasion of Pul, king of
Assyria, in 770 B.c., to the final fall of
the throne of David and full captivity
of Judah under Nebuchadnezzar in 602.
These stages of commencement have
corresponding terminations, the first
being in 1760, the period of Voltaire,
and the last in 1918, yet tocome, It
was during the latter half of these
mystical “seven times” that the Little
Horn was to have power over the saints,
the case of Israel being bound up with
that of the Christian Church, which
was to be under captivity by the same
power that was to tyrannise over Israel,
namely, the last of the four beasts. See
/arther the note under chap. xii. 7.

@) The spiritual power of the Papacy
may, of course, have a different period
sor its termination, and outlive the
temporal, which constituted it the Little
Horn. Mr. Bosanquet remarks: “We
see no room left for doubt that these
1260 years mark the duration of the
Papal power, The temporal power
of the Papacy seems to be vanishing
befure our eyes, if indeed it has not
aiready ceased to exist [it has apparently
done 80, namely, in 1870], but how
loug the spiritual power shall be allowed
to singer on in the ancient seat of its
dowinion, is a question to be solved by
tine, Wherever we may be disposed to
fix we date of its commencement, it is
clea: chat the time of expiration cannot
be vory far remote.” Some, however,
date 1rom the eighth century. “From
the time,” says Bishop Newton, “of
Pepin’s grant of Aistulph’s dominions
in 755, the popes, having now become
temporal princes, did no longer date
their epistles and bulls by the year of
the Esaperor’s reign, but by the year of
their own advancement to the Papal
chair. Charles the Great, son and
successor of Pepin, confirmed the grant,
adding other territories, and giving the
Pope to hold under himself the duchy
of Rome, over which he gradually
obtained the absolute authority, being
about the same time declared superior
to all human jurisdiction, while Charles
in return was chosen Emperor of the
West. Lewis the Pious, son and suc-

134


cessor to Charles the Great, confirmed
the donations of his father and grand-
father, including Rome and its duchy,
the popes to hold them in their own
right, principality, and dominion to
the end of the world.” “It should
seem,” adds the Bishop, “that the
‘ time, times,’ d&c., are to be computed
from this full establishment of the power
of the Pope in the eighth century.”
Gibbon speaks of Gregory I., who
wrote so defiantly against the Emperor
Leo about images in the eighth century,
as the founder of the Papal monarchy ;
and Milner says, “From this time I
look on the Pope of Rome as Antichrist,”

(20) One of the efiects of the Revolu-
tion in 1792-3 was the destruction of
the established religion in France, the
chief support of the Papacy. As the
edict of Justinian in 533 might be said
to be the beginning of the Little Horn as
a temporal power, and the giving of the
saints into his hand, though its full
growth was not for some time after, so
the commencement of his fall as such,
and the deliverance of the saints from hig
hand, might be dated from the French
Revolution, though not to be completed
till several years afterwards. The Con-
vention, which met on the 20th Septem-
ber 1792, first decreed the eternal aboli-
tion of monarchy, and on the seventh
day of its sitting, it was proposed by M.
Manuel that, as royalty was abolished,
the order of priests and all religious
establishments should be abolished with
it. This, however, was only done on the
3lst of May in the following year, when
the success of the Jacobin conspirators
completed the destruction of the civil
establishment of religion in France. On
the 17th of June the report of Camille
Jourdan on the freedom of religious
worship was ordered to be printed by
the unanimous vote of the Council of
Five Hundred,

1) It was the belief of the Early
Church that the little horn of Daniel and
the “Man of Sin” spoken of by Paul
(2 Thess, ii.) was the same Antichrist,
who was even expected shortly to appear.
Justin Martyr says, “ He being at hand
who was to speak blasphemous words
against the Most High, whom the pro-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


OHAP, VII.





phet Daniel foretold was to continue for
a time, times, &c.” Tertullian, referring
to 2 Thess, ii, says, “ Who can this be
but the Roman State, the division of
which into ten kingdoms will bring on
Antichrist, and then the Wicked One
shall be revealed$” Cyril, Bishop of
Jerusalem, about the year 360, referring
to the same passage, says, “ Thus the
predicted Antichrist will come when the
times of the Roman empire shall be ful-
filled, and the consummation of the world
shall approach, Ten kings of the Romans
shall rise together, in different places
indeed, but they shall reign at the same
time. Among them the eleventh is Anti-
christ, who by magical and wicked arti-
fices shall seize the Roman power.”
Cyril believed that the apostasy or falling
away which was to precede the appear-
ance of the Man of Sin, or Antichrist,
had already taken place in his day.
“ Formerly,” he says, “the heretics were
manifest, but now the Church is filled
with heretics in disguise. For men have
fallen away from the truth, and have
itching ears. Is it a plausible theory ?
All listen to it gladly. Is it a word of
correction? All turn away from it.
Most have departed from right words,
and rather choose the evil than desire
the good. This therefore is the falling
away, and the Enemy (Antichrist) is soon
to be looked for.”

As yet probably they had no idea that
the Bishop of Rome was to be he; for
his coming was to be a “ mystery of ini-
quity,” and “mystery” was to be the
name of the system of which he was the
head, as the word is said to be actually
found on the Papal mitre. But a few
centuries awoke the suspicion. In the


Middle Ages it was believed by many
that the Antichrist had already appeared
in the person of the Popes. In the
tenth century Arnulph, Bishop of Or-
leans, addressing a Council at Rheims,
said: “O deplorable Rome, who in the


days of our forefathers produced so


many burning and shining lights! thou
hast brought forth in our times only
dismal darkness worthy of the detesta-
tion of posterity. . . . What think you,
reverend fathers, of this man, the Pope,
placed on a lofty throne, shining with
purple and gold? Whom do you ac
count him? If destitute of love and
puffed up with pride of knowledge only,
he is Antichrist sitting in the temple of
God.” It is said in a work published
in 1120, “The great Antichrist is al-
ready come ; in vain is he yet expected ;
already by the permission of God is he
advanced in years,” Roman Catholic
writers, of course, refuse to believe that
the Papacy is “ the Little Horn or Anti-
christ ;” and some few Protestants agree
with them in thinking that that power
is still future; while others, as the Ger-
man Rationalists, would see in it only
Antiochus Epiphanes. In reference to
this last opinion, it is enough to say,
with Auberlen, that the Little Horn is
found among the ten kingdoms of the
fourth beast or Roman Empire, while
Antiochus Epiphanes belonged to the
third or Grecian, which, according to
chap. viii., is well known to have been
divided, not into ten, but into four king-
doms, That the Roman Empire was
broken up into about ten different king-
doms many centuries ayo, and that the
Papacy, as a temporal power, sprung up
among them, are facts not to be disputed.


HOMILETICS.


Szor. XXV.—Tae Jupement or THe BEAST AND THE Littite Horn
(Chap. vii, 9-12, 26).


Hitherto we have not met with much difficulty in the way of interpretation.


Little room has been left either for doubt or hesitation.


The case is somewhat


different now. We approach the region of unfulfilled prophecy, naturally more
difficult of interpretation, and leaving more room for mistake and difference of opi-


nion.


The field is interesting and inviting, but demands caution in its investigation.


The word of prophecy is given for our guidance and comfort, as a ns a in


CHAP, VII. | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIBL,





a dark place. But we need the Spirit to interpret His own Word, “Open Thou
mine eyes that I may behold wondrous things out of Thy law.” “In Thy light we
shall see light.” ‘The Spirit searcheth all things, even the deep things of God,”
and revealeth them unto us, ‘ He knoweth what is in darkness, and the light
dwelleth with Him,” It is His to reveal the “ deep and secret things,” and to show
us, as He has done in His Word, “things to come.” We have before us a passage
of overwhelming grandeur and sublimity ; the description of a scene of awful solem-
nity. The passage exhibits the judgment-seat of God, with myriads of attendant
angels, and the infliction of pronounced doom on a large portion of the human race,
The judgment is not indeed, like that in Rev. xx., the general judgment, terminating
the reign of Christ and His saints on earth, and resembling in some of its features
the present one, It is rather the judgment on the fourth beast, or Roman Empire,
with its ten horns or kingdoms, and more especially the ‘‘ Little Horn,” whose pride,
persecution, and blasphemy are the special occasion of it,

L The occasion of the judgment. This is distinctly said to be “ the voice of
the great words which the horn spake” (ver. 11). So in the interpretation by the
angel it is said, “He shall speak great words against the Most High,” &. ‘But
the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his kingdom” (vers. 25, 26). He
was to wear out the saints of the Most High, who were to be “ given into his hand for
a time, times, and the dividing of a time,” That allotted period was to terminate,
and then the long-delayed judgment was to commence. That monstrous reign of
blasphemy against God and cruelty to His saints was to be allowed no longer,
‘‘ These things thou hast done, and I kept silence: thou thoughtest that I was alto-
gether such an one as thyself. But I will reprove thee, and set them in order be-
fore thine eyes.” “ Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe: come, get you
down, for the press is full, the fats overflow; for the wickedness is great” (Ps. L
21; Joel iii. 13). The occasion of the judgment is the sayings and doings of the
Little Horn,@) whose kingdom is therefore to be taken away ; and the beast, to whom
it belonged, of whose wickedness it was the concentration, and who had given to it
its power, aided and abetted its doings, and so had identified itself with it, is, with
its ten horns, to be slain, and its body “ destroyed and given to the burning flame.”

IL The circumstances of the judgment. “The thrones were cast (rather,
set or planted) down,” &c, (2) (ver. 9). We have—

1. Zhe judge, “The Ancient (or permanent) of days did sit.” The expression
indicative of the Godhead, the I am, the everlasting and unchanging Jehovah, who
was, and is, and is to come. In ver, 13, the Father, or first person in the God-
head, appears to be meant; here probably the Son, or second person, who in
virtue of His becoming the Son of Man has all judgment committed to Him @),
“For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment to the Son,
and hath given Him power to execute judgment also, because He is the Son of
Man.” “God shall judge the world in righteousness by that man whom He hath
ordained.” ‘God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ” “He (Jesus
Christ) shall judge the quick and the dead at His appearing and His kingdom.”
Judgment, however, is the attribute and prerogative of Godhead. “God is J udge
Himself” (Ps, 1. 3-6). No other is capable of being 80. Jesus occupies the
judgment-seat as Supreme Judge because He is God, the Ancient of days. This
character claimed by Jesus Himself. “I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and the end, saith the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the
Almighty” (Rev. i, 8). Hence His appearance at the same time identical with
that here given: ‘His head and His hairs were white like wool, as white as snow,
and His eyes were as a flame of fire.” Stupendous contrast with His appearance
before Pilate’s bar. Now the judge and the prisoner change places.

2. The throne. This was a “fiery flame,” and its “wheels,” on which it
appeared to rest, or rather to move, (+) as “ burning fire ;” emblematic of searching
shar ea. fiery indignation, swift judgment. An object of supreme terrible-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OMAP, Vil,











ness like the representation in Ezek. i. 26-28. The throne corresponding with
the character of the judge. “Our God is a consuming fire.” ‘ His eyes were as a
flame of fire.” ‘Who among us can dwell with the devouring fire?” Expressive
also of the object of the judgment, the infliction of punishment or burning
wrath, Itis “the great day of His wrath,” the “wrath of the Lamb,” “The
nations were angry, and Thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead that they
should be judged ” (Rev. vi. 16, 17; xi. 18). ‘The Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from heaven with His mighty angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them
that know not God,” dc, (2 Thess. i. 7,8). ‘A fire goeth before Him and burneth
up His enemies round about.” It is the time of “judgment and fiery indignation,
that shall devour the adversaries” (Ps. xcvii, 3; Heb. x. 27).

3. The attendants, “Thrones,” Not one throne, but many thrones, The scene
in accordance with earthly tribunals, where the judge has his assessors (6), Apostles,
saints, and martyrs elsewhere represented as sitting on thrones, with judgment
given to them (Rev, xx. 4), The suiuts shall judge the world as assessors with
Christ (1 Cor. vi. 2). ‘‘ When the Son of Man shall sit on the throne of His glory,
ye also shall sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel ” (Matt. xix,
28). Innumerable angels also about the throne as the ministers of His justice,
“Thousand thousands ministered to Him.” Angels employed as the executioners
of His justice, ‘“ He will say to His angels, Gather the tares into bundles to burn
them.” He will come “ with His mighty angels, taking vengeance” “The Son
of Man shall come in His glory, and all the holy angels with Him” (Matt. xxv, 31).
His angels to be employed in gathering “out of His kingdom all things that offend
(all the stumbling-blocks), and them which do iniquity” (Matt. xiii, 41). His
ministers in inflicting judgments on the Little Horn and the apostate nations of
Christendom (Rev. xvi. 1). Hence their appearance here about the throne,

4, The accompaniments, “A fiery stream issued and came forth from before
Him” (ver. 10). A further indication of the character and object of the judgment—
fiery indignation, “It shall be very tempestuous round about Him” (Ps. |. 3).
This probably indicative of and connected with the judgment to be inflicted on the
Beast,—“ his body given to the burning flame ;” the earth, or as much of it as shall
be involved in the judgment, to be “burned up;” the elements to “melt with fervent
heat ;” the earth “reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and perdition of
ungodly men ” (2 Pet. iii, 7, 10),

III. The judgment itself. ‘The books were opened” (ver. 10). The signi-
ficance and object of this indicated in the description given in the Apocalypse of
the general judgment, “The dead were judged out of the things that were written
in the books” (Rev. xx. 12). Reference to earthly courts and their judicial pro-
ceedings, the names of the acccused, with the crimes laid to their charge, being
registered for examination (6), Indicates the strict and impartial character of the
judgment, A constant observation exercised in regard to the doings of the enemies
of God and His people, and a full and accurate account preserved of them. All
the sayings and doings of the Little Horn recorded in the book; all the great and
blasphemous words spoken against the Most High; all the cruelties exercised by
him and the nations that submitted to his authority or were inspired by his
spirit; every blasphemous bull and persecuting edict that ever issued from the
Vatican ; every secret murder committed in the cells of the Inquisition ; every deed
of darkness and of blood perpetrated under the cloak and in the name of Christ’s
religion, all registered in those awful but truth-telling booka, Words as well as
deeds preserved there for judgment. ‘* By thy words thou shalt be justified, and
by thy words thou shalt be condemned.” So Enoch testified before the Flood.
‘“* Behold the Lord cometh to execute judgment upon all, and-to convince all that
are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly
committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken
against Him” (Jude 14, 16). Contrast with these records of BCS eda and


CHAP, VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,








7) re


deeds another book,—the book of life. “A book of remembrance was written
before Him of them that feared the Lord and that thought upon His name ;” of
those who chose, with Moses, “rather to suffer affliction with the people of God
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season,” and rather to go to the stake
or lay down their heads on the block than prove unfaithful to God and His
truth,

IV. The consequences of the judgment, “The beast was slain, and his
body destroyed and given to the burning flame.” “They shall take away his (the
Little Horn’s) dominion, to consume and destroy it unto the end” (vers. 11, 26).
In the vision itself it is the beast or fourth empire on which the judgment is repre-
sented as taking effect ; in the interpretation of the vision it is the Little Horn @,
That horn thus identified with the beast, of which it was properly only a part. The
judgment falls on the beast for the worda of the Little Horn, so entirely were they
one, The horn was only the concentration of the beast. The kingdoms of the beast,
or Roman Empire, are represented in the Book of Revelation as giving their power
to the beast (Rev, xvii. 16, 17), and we know, as a matter of fact, that that power
was long exercised in obedience to the will of the Little Horn and in carrying out
his persecuting edicts, When the Papacy delivered the heretic over to the civil
power, that power was obedient, and put him to death, Thus also armies were
raised for their extirpation. J ustinian, in his celebrated edict, distinctly permitted
the Roman pontiff to “use the powers of the empire against whomsoever he deemed
heretical” The spirit of the Little Horn is the spirit of the kingdoms of the beast,
in so far as their subjects are not renewed by the Spirit of God. It is the
spirit of pride, vainglory, worldliness, and enmity against God, and so of enmity
against His saints. The judgment on the beast expressed either literally or
figuratively, or both), A literal destruction by fire not unlikely. Rome, the
metropolis of the fourth beast, and seat of the Papacy or Little Horn, repeatedly
represented in the Book of Revelation as awaiting this judgment (Rev. xvii. 16, 17;
xviii. 8), That a wide-spread conflagration will form at least one part of the
judgment to be inflicted on the Papal kingdoms and those animated by the same
spirit of unbelief and rebellion against God, seems indicated in such places as
2 Thess, i, 8 and 2 Thess, ii. 8-19. According to Peter, the day of the Lord,
in which this judgment shall be executed, is accompanied with a fire by which
“the earth and the works therein shall be burned up” (2 Peter iii. 10). This
may possibly commence with Rome and Italy, and extend to the other nations,
It is well known that already beneath the sulphurous soil of Italy are subterranean
fires ready to break out at the bidding of their Creator, who keeps them in store for
His own purpose, like the fountains of the great deep, stored and then broken up
for the destruction of the old world, when its wickedness made it ripe for judg-
ment (), Possibly the destruction may be indicated in ver, 12 as extending to
those countries that constituted the three preceding empires, Babylon, Persia, and
Greece, whose dominion was taken away, though “their lives were prolonged for
a season and atime” (9), Of the Little Horn it is simply said that its dominion is
“taken away, to consume and destroy it unto the end.” The Papacy was to cease
to be @ temporal power apparently by slow degrees, So also the Apostle seems to
speak of the destruction of the Man of sin (2 Thess, ii. 8). This destruction
doubtless includes alike the temporal and spiritual power of the Papacy, whatever
form it may assume, The total loss of the temporal power in 1870 may, perhaps,
be viewed as the completion of what began in 1793 in the French Convention,
and was further advanced in 1798, when, in the Campo Vaccino, the ancient
Roman Forum, the Pontifical Government was pronounced, in the midst of a large
concourse of people, to be at an end; while on the following day fourteen cardinals,
in the Pope’s absence, met in the Vatican, and signed the absolute renunciation of
the temporal power(@), This taking away of the temporal dominion of the Little


Horn re to be completed on the 20th of September 1870, when Rome was
138


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL. OMAP, VII.

a ee eee et a ae
declared the capital of Italy, and made the seat of government by Victor
Emmanuel as its chosen king@?), As a spiritual power, however, the Papacy has
still many millions in Europe and elsewhere subject to its sway. This, though it
may continue for some time longer to exercise its baleful influence in the souls of
men, must also ultimately perish.

‘ V. The time of the judgment, As already observed, this is not the general
judgment at the termination of Christ’s reivn on earth, or, as the phrase is
commonly understood, the end of the world. It appears rather to be an invisible
judgment carried on within the veil and revealed by its effects and the execution
of its sentence (§), As occasioned by the “great words” of the Little Horn, and
followed by the taking away of his dominion, it might seem to have already sat,
As, however, the sentence is not yet by any means fully executed, it may be sitting
now. The deeds of the Little Horn may not yet be finished, though the temporal
power of the Papacy has apparently ceased. A new and more terrible form may
possibly yet be assumed before its final and complete destruction shall take place
by the brightness of the Lord’s appearing (2 Thess. ii, 2, 8)@#, The words of
warning addressed by the Saviour have their application at the present time:
“Take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness and the cares of this life, and so that day come upon
you unawares: for as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of
the whole earth. Watch ye, therefore, and pray always, that ye may be counted
worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the
Son of Man.” ‘Behold I come as a thief; blessed is he that watcheth, and
keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked and they see his shame” (Luke xxi.
34-36 ; Rev. xvi. 15).

As suggested by the passage, we may notice—

1. Jt ts our comfort to know that there ts a God that judgeth in the earth, Men
not worn out by tyranny, oppression, and persecution, without an eye being kept
upon their wrongs and the perpetrators of them. Flesh and sense ready at times
to say, ‘‘ My way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over by my
God.” A sore trial for faith when the oppressor and persecutor prosper, and the
cause of truth and righteousness seems well-nigh crushed. But God only appears
to take no notice. Christ is in the ship, and though apparently asleep in the
storm, He will awake at the right time, at the cry of His people, rebuke the
oppressor’s wrath, and change the storm into a calm. Patience is to have he
perfect work, that when we have done and suffered the will of God, we may
inherit the promises. ‘ He that shall come will come, and will not tarry.” The
hour of deliverance shall arrive. The judgment will sit—is now indeed sitting. He
who is “higher than the highest” takes not His eye from the haughty oppressor
and persecutor of His people, and will, when the proper time arrives, “‘ awake to
the judgment which He has commanded.”

2. The infinite majesty of God and the awful consequences of His displeasure,
The Lord is a God of judgment. His eyes, which are as a flame of fire, behold,
and His eyelids try, the children of men. A fiery stream issues and goes forth
from before Him. Who can stand when once He is angry? Our God is a com
suming fire. How terrible to meet Him as an adversary! Yet sin makes Him
our adversary. Prepare, then, to meet thy God. Agree with thine adversary
quickly, whilst thou art in the way with Him. There is one, and only one, way
of doing so. The Jews, to be reconciled to their offended king, made Blastus, his
chamberlain, their friend. God has given His own Son as a sacrifice and Mediator,
that we may make Him our friend, accept of Him, and put our trust in Him, and
so be reconciled. to God. This is God’s own way for meeting Him. Blessed are
all they that put their trust in that provided Mediator. Such can see the fiery stream
that issues from before Him, ready to devour the adversaries, without alarm, They
can go forward to meet it singing, with the Apostle, “ Who shall lay ages to


OMAP, VII, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL,





the charge of God’s elect? It is God that justifieth.” Or, with Count Zinzendorf
in the well-known hymn—
** Jesus, Thy blood and righteousness
My beauty are, my glorious dress.


Midst flaming worlds, in these arrayed,
With joy shall I lift up my head,


Bold shall I stand in that great day ;

For who aught to my charge shall lay?
Fully absolved through these I am,

From sin and guilt, from fear and shame,”


3. The wisdom of preparing for a judgment to come, Whatever may be the
case in regard to the judgment we have been considering, and whatever share we
may or may not have in it, it is certain that we must all appear before the judgment-
seat of Christ, to receive according to the things done in the body, whether good
or bad. ‘It is appointed unto men once to die, and after that the judgment.”
Each must then give account of himself to God. For all these things God will
bring thee into judgment, Are our works those of the flesh or of the Spirit? Are
they wrought in God or out of Him? Am I renewed or still unrenewed? Am I
pardoned and accepted now in the Surety, the Lord our Righteousness? A place
in the New Jerusalem or the Gehenna of fire depends on the question. “ Blessed
are they that do His commandments, that they may have right to enter in through
the gates into the city ;” or, as the Revised Version reads, “ Blessed are they that
wash their robes.” This is the beginning of doing His commandments, “Come
now, let us reason together: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be made as
wool ; though they be red as crimson, they shall be white as snow.” Reader, the
fountain for sin and uncleanness is still open; if not already washed, wash now,
and prepare for the judgment. “The blood of Jesus Christ, God’s Son, cleanseth
us from all sin.” Trust in that blood and be clean,


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—@) “ Be.
cause of the voice of the great words
which the horn spake.” The connection
between the depriving the Papacy of
its temporal dominions in 1870 and its
“great words” or blasphemous preten-
sions was remarkable, “In the same
year,” said the Z'smes of the period, “ the
Papacy has assumed the highest spiritual
exaltation to which it could aspire, and
lost the temporal sovereignty which it
had held for a thousand years,” The
exaltation referred to was the decree of a
General Council in Rome that the Popes
were infallible in matters of doctrine,
The circumstances attending the act
were also remarkable, Arrangements
had been made in the chamber where the
Council sat, that, by means of mirrors
suitably disposed, a glory expressive of
divinity should appear to encircle the
Pope’s head when the decree was passed,
Strange to say, however, as if to rebuke
the blasphemy and proclaim that the
hour of doom had struck, the sun did
not shine out that day ; a violent storm


140


burst over Rome ; the sky was darkened
by tempest, and the voices of the
Council were lost in the roll of thunder,
Within a day or two after, the Franco-
German war was declared, which led to
the immediate withdrawal of the French
troops from Rome, and the consequent
fall of the Pope’s temporal power, which
for several years they had served alone
to support. Jerome, and Roman Ca-
tholic writers after him, understanding
the Little Horn to be the Antichrist that
should appear immediately before the
end of the world, view the judgment in
the text as taking place at that time in
his destruction. So Bullinger, GEcolam-
padius, and Osiander, who regard the
fourth beast as either the Roman or
Turkish Empire; while Willet, under.
standing the fourth beast of the Greek
kingdom of the Seleucidsr, applies the
passage to the first coming of Christ,
but typically also to the final judgment,
the judgment beginning with the first and
ending with the second coming of Christ,
Calvin also refers it to the latter period,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL





CHAP. vit.





@) “The thrones were cast down,”
WH} (remioo), “were set up.” Wintle:
“were pitched.” So the Septuagint,
Vulgate, and all the ancient versions,
as well as Morus, Castalio, Piscator, and
Calvin. The rendering also of Gesenius,
The word used by the Targums in Jer.
i, 15 for “they set.” Keil has “they
were thrown,” te, they were placed in
order quickly or with a’ noise. This
idea of haste or noise, however, does not
seem necessarily included. Dr. Rule
prefers the rendering of the English
version, ‘‘ were cut down,” but under-
stands not the thrones of assessors, but
of the ten kings formerly mentioned,
which is unlikely. Keil, with most
interpreters, understands them as seats
for the assembly sitting in judgment
with God; that assembly, in his view,
consisting neither of the elders of Israel,
as the Rabbins think, nor of glorified
men, as Hengstenberg (on Rev. iv. 4)
supposes ; but of angels, according to
Ps, lxxxix. 8, “who are to be distin-
guished from the thousands and tens
of thousands mentioned in ver. 10 ; for
these do not sit upon thrones, but stand
before God as servants to fulfil His com-
mands and execute His judgments.”
Hengstenberg’s view, however, will pro-
bably appear to most the more correct
one. Lightfoot quotes from De Lyra:
“ He saith ‘thrones,’ because not only
Christ shall judge, but the apostles and
perfect men shall assist.” He adds,
“So the saints shall at the day of judg-
ment sit with Christ, and approve or
applaud His judgment.”

@) “ The Ancient of Days,” \p¥
PHY ('atttig yomin). Professor Bush,
after Cocceius and Michaelis, translates,
‘* permanent or enduring of days,” Keil
has, ‘‘ one advanced in days, very old,”
and says this “is not the Eternal, for
although God is meant, yet Daniel does
not see the everlasting God, but an old
man or a man of grey hairs, in whose
majestic form God makes Himself
visible (cf. Ezek. i. 26), Mr. Irving
understood God the Father, coming
in His unstained holiness to judge the
arch-enemy of His Son and destroyer of
His people, and to prepare the way for
the coming of the Son of Man in the





clouds of heaven.” §So Dr, Rule. C&eo-
lampadius understood it of Christ, the
Lamb “slain from the foundation of
the world.” So Dr. Cumming. Wintle
understands the term P'AY (’attig) ac-
tively—“ he that maketh the days old,”
and applies it to Deity.

© “His wheels as burning fire.”
Grotius remarks that the ancient thrones
and curule chairs had wheels. Those
in the text, being like “ burning fire,”
Dr. Cox observes, “ prognosticate at
once the majesty of the Judge, pierc-
ing, penetrating, awful, and the rapid
progress of those providential visitations
which would bespeak the indignation
of a sin-avenging Deity.” The fire
scattering wheels, says Keil, “ show
the omnipresence of the divine throne
of judgment,—the going of the judg-
ment of God over the whole earth.”
He further observes: “ Fire and
the shining of fire are the constant phe-
nomena of the manifestation of God
in the world. The fire which engirds
his throne with flame pours itself forth
as a stream from God into the world,
consuming all that is sinful and hostile
to Him, and rendering His people and
kingdom glorious,”

©) “ Thrones.” From this represen-
tation of the judgment Rationalists have
raised an objection to the genuineness
of the book, as if it were borrowed from
the circumstances and customs of the
Persian court, while the prophecy pur-
ports to be given in the age of the last
Chaldean king. To this objection Heng-
stenberg replies, that every feature of
the picture can be pointed out in earlier
writings of Scripture, as in Job i. and
ii, ; 1 Kings xxii. 19-22. So in Isaiah
vi, the principal angels are represented
as standing round the throne of God.
Dr. Cox thinks that the sitting of the
judgment, as thus prepared, has a clear
reference to the solemnities and general
construction of the Jewish Sanhedrim or
Great Council. This, however, probably
an institution of later times.

(6) “The books were opened.” Heng-
stenberg derives the figure from the papers
of the judge, in which the names of the
criminals and their deeds are registered.
Keil considers the books those in which

141


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL.





the actions of men are recorded, Jerome,
Willet, and others understand them of
every one’s conscience ; opened by God
to each, says Cicolampadius, to see and
confess His justice, Bede strangely


regarded them as the Scriptures; and-


Calvin in like manner understands by
them the manifestation of the knowledge
of God to the world at the coming of
Christ by the preaching of the Gospel.

() Jerome and expositors in general,
both Roman Catholic and Protestant,
think the destruction of Antichrist
and his members here meant. Calvin
understood the passage of the Roman
Empire when it began to decay after
Trajan ; but says that the slaying of the
fourth beast and the giving of the king-
dom and authority to the people of the
saints does not seem to have been

_accomplished yet, and that all Christian
interpreters agree in treating the pro-
phecy as relating to the final day of
Christ's Advent. Bullinger applies the
destruction of the fourth beast to the
ruin of the Papal kingdoms; while
Osiander and Gicolampadius understand
the decay of the Turkish and Roman em-
pires together, Junius thinks only of An-
tiochus Epiphanes, and Willet of the
whole kingdom of the Seleucids, Irving
thinks that not only the Little Horn or
the Papacy is intended in the destruction,
but all its supporters, “ Yea, the whole
beast of seven heads and ten horns,
which had listened to the great words
which it spake.” Dr. Rule observes
that the prophet’s beholding “until the
beast was slain,” &c., appears to intimate
that the slaughter and the destruction
will be gradual, perhaps very slow,

(8) “Given to the burning flame.” “The
supposition that the burning is only the
figure of destruction, as, for example, in
Isa, ix. 4, is decidedly opposed by the
parallel passages, Isa. Ixvi. 14, which
Daniel had in view, and Rev. xix. 20
and xx. 10, where this prophecy is again
taken up, and the judgment is expressed
by a being cast into a lake of fire with
everlasting torments,”— Keil.

) “The burning flame.” “Thus
much being allowed from Scripture, let
us now return to nature again, to seek
out ory part of the Christian world

42


that from its own constitution is most
subject to burning, by the sulphureous-
ness of its soil and its fiery mountains
and caverna, ‘This we easily find to be
the Roman territory or the country of
Italy, which, by all accounts, ancient
and modern, is a storehouse of fire; as
if it was condemned to that fate by God
and nature, and to be an incendiary, as
it were, to the rest of the world. And
seeing mystical Babylon, the seat of
Antichrist, is the same Rome and its
territory, as it is understood by most
interpreters of former and later ages,
you see both our lines meet in this point,
and that there is fairness on both hands
to conclude that at the glorious appear-
ance of our Saviour the conflagration
will begin at the city of Rome and the
Roman territory. Nature hath saved
us the pains of kindling fire in those
parts of the earth; for since the memory
of man there have always been subter-
raneous fires.” —Burnet’s “Sacred Theory
of the Earth.” Dr. M‘Cosh remarks in
an article in the British and Foreign
Hvangelwal Review for January 1881,
that an old fisherman, more than 1800
years ago, anticipated the doctrine of
modern science that the earth shall be
burned up. The following communica-
tion from Vienna, dated April 12, 1881,
appeared in the newspapers: “A rather
severe shock of earthquake took place
at the naval port of Pola and the sur-
rounding district this morning at a
quarter to ten o’clock. The earthquakes
at Agram and the more terrible calamities
at Cassamicciola (Ischia) and Chio, to-
gether with the increasing reports of
shocks in Switzerland, Italy, and Central
and South-Western Europe generally, are
facts which are attracting much attention
from Continental geologists.”

©) “ The rest of the beasts.” Bishop
Newton observes regarding these: “They
are all still alive, though the dominion
of the first three is taken away. The
nations of Chaldea and Assyria are still
the first beast; those of Media and
Persia are still the second beast ; those
of Macedonia, Greece, Thrace, Asia
Minor, Syria, and Egypt are still the
third beast; and those of Europe on
this side of Greece are still the fourth.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL,


OnA4P, Vit.





Mr. Miles (Lectures on Daniel) remarks :
“They must all perish together; the
three await the execution of marked
vengeance upon the fourth, When the
power of Rome shall be extinguished by
the glorious manifestation of the Re-
deemer, every secular kingdom shall
disappear.” Dr. Cox thinks the mean-
ing to be that although these three mon-
archs were dispossessed of empire, “ yet
their influence and impious principles
still continued to operate, notwithstand-
ing their temporal demolition.” Keil
observes that “the death or disappear-
ance of the first three beasts is not ex-
pressly remarked, but is here first indi-
cated. These had their dominion taken
away one after another, each at its
appointed time, and their end 1s con-
nected with that of the last, as denoting
that in that hour, not merely the fourth
kingdom, but also the first three, the
whole world-power, is brought to an end
by the last judgment; the unfolding of
the world-power in its diverse phases is
exhausted, and the kingdom of God is
raised to everlasting supremacy.” Dr.
Rule, however, says: “The sentence—
‘ And concerning the rest of the beasts,
&c.’—seems most naturally to relate to
them after the destruction of the fourth
empire ; for it continues the description,
It does not appear to be simply an
account of what God had done afore-
time to those former empires, viz., that
when He took away their world-rule,
He left them in being as uations; but
of something which shall be after the
destruction of the fourth. This, however,
will be made clear when the timecomes.”

(1) The history is thus related by M.
De la Bédollitre (Le Domaine de Saint
Pierre): “ The possessions that remained
to the Pope (in 17932) had for their limits
in the north, Venice and the Gulf of
Venice; in the east, the kingdom of
Naples; in the south, the ‘Tuscan Sea;
in the west, the duchies of Tuscany,
Modena, Mirandola, aud Mentone. They
were divided into twelve Legations or
provinces: the Compagna of Rome,
the Sabine country, the patrimony
of St. Peter properly so called, the
duchy of Castro, the province of
Orvieto, the province «f Perouse, the


duchy of Spoleto, the duchy of Ur-
bino, the march of Ancona, Romagna,
Bologna, and Ferrara’. The duchy of
Benvenuto and the principality of Ponte
Corvo were fiefs of the Church. Of the
populations of these countries, some in-
clined to the principles of the Revolu-
tion in 1789, others were animated
with a fanatical hatred against France
and its doctrines.” When, in the month
of March 1796, General Buonaparte took
the command of the army of Italy, his
prompt conquests in the north “ were
easy, for the majority of the population
was favourable to the French. The
reigning Pope, Pius VL, frightened at
the progress of the French army, soli-
cited an armistice. This was granted
him on hard conditions, which, however,
he ratified on the 23d of June 1796.
He gave up to France the Legations
of Bologna and Ferrara, the citadel of
Ancona, which he was to deliver up, and
all the coasts of the Adriatic Gulf from
the mouths of the Po to that citadel, &.
The Pope having broken the armistice,
the French troops immediately invaded
the domain of St. Peter, and took Fa-
enza, Forli, and Ravenna; after which
the Pope, in consternation, wrote to
Buonaparte begging a treaty, which was
concluded at Tollentino on the 19th of
February, the Pope yielding in perpe-
tuity to the French Republic all his
rights over the Legations of Bologna,
Ferrara, and Romagna, on condition that
it should be without any damage to the
Catholic religion, and handing over to
the treasurer of the French army ten
millions of livres in specie, and five mil-
lions in diamonds and other valuables.
In consequence of an emeute in Rome
on the 28th December 1797, in which
the French General Duphot was killed,
Alexander Berthier, general-in-chief of
the French army in Italy, received
orders to take possession of Rome, which
was done without striking a blow. On
the 6th of February 179%, the chiefs of
the revolutionary movemeut pronounced,
in the name of a large concourse of
people assembled in tle Campo Vaccino
(the ancient Forum), the fall of the Pon-
tifical Government, and proclaimed the
Republic, The Pope dwing these eventa
143


OMAP. VII.


kept himself concealed ; but the cardi-
nals, having met in the Vatican, had
signed their absolute renunciation of the
temporal power; and on the 7th of
February fourteen among them attended
ata solemn Te Deum, sung in the Church
of St. Peter, with all the pomp of Ca
tholicism, to celebrate the revolution
which took away the throne from the
head of the Catholic Church,”

@2) The French Catholic paper
L’ Univers, commenting on the debate
on Rome in the French Assembly (July
1871), says: “All our hopes have been
disappointed; in the only nation on
which the Papacy could count the last
support fails it. Humanly speaking,
all is over.” The Roman correspondent
of the Daily News says about the same
time: “The Pope is twitting the more
Ultramontane of the venerable members
of the Sacred College, those who have
been urging him to pursue reactionary
courses, after the following fashion :—
‘You see what it has all come to—just
as I told you, just as I never ceased to
predict. You insisted on my abjuring
my early liberal policy, and now you
see the result. It is by you that such
calamities have been brought on the
Church and on the world.’?” On June
26 the Pope held a consistory, in which
he said, “ We are, my very dear brothers,
in the hands of Divine Providence ; we
have nothing to expect from human
aid, for man has abandoned us. Why
should we dissemble? It is better I
should tell you, that kings and govern-
ments, forgetting their promises, leave
us to our fate. . . . Wecan hope for no
help from any quarter. We have done
all that was in our power, but our efforts
have failed. All is over. Only a
miracle can save us.” The republican
Government of France, the country that
formerly was the great support of the
Papacy, in the latter end of 1880 passed
and executed a decree which not only
banished the Jesuits from the country,
but closed the convents of most of the
religious orders in France, in all twenty-
nine, with about three thousand six
hundred members, in addition to the
two thousand four hundred and sixty
Jesuits who were expelled,

144


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL.





(18) “These passages (Rev. iv. 2, 4;
v. 11; xi. 15-17), and others like them,”
says Archdeacon Harrison, ‘show how,
in the visions of prophecy, the throne of
judgment of the everlasting King is in
some sense ever at hand, ready to be
revealed, and its unseen processes of
judgment ever going on; though at
certain times—and more awfully, we
may believe, as the ‘mystery of ini-
quity ’ in its varied forms unfolds itself
and the end of the world draws near—
the spirit of prophecy, or the hand of
Providence, draws back the veil, and
exhibits the awful scene which Daniel
saw in vision,”

(4) Materials seldom long wanting
for such a development. It was believed
by many that the first Napoleon was
to perform the r6le of the final or infidel
Antichrist. The same thing was antici-
pated by some regarding his nephew,
the late Emperor, who professed to
possess the spirit of his uncle, and to
have a peculiar destiny to fulfil The
anticipations have not been fulfilled in
either case. Such a development, how-
ever, can soon be made to appear if
the word of prophecy and the pur-
pose of God require it, The following
lately appeared in the Weekly Review:
“Whether you talk to Parisians or to
Frenchmen in the provinces about the
political prospects, nine times out of
ten there will be the shrug of the
shoulders and the remark that history
repeats itself ; and the last decades of
the nineteenth century, like the last
decades of the eighteenth, will be a
period of anarchy and revolution. . . .
The Republic itself shows signs of weak-
ness, and moderate men of all parties
are anxious, It is said that the execu-
tion of the decrees against the religious
orders has done some harm to the
Republic, . . . After the way in which
M. Victor Hugo has lauded Voltaire, it
would, perhaps, have been discreet te
have tolerated even the Jesuits for a
time, rather than to have given the
Anti-Republicans the pretext for assert-
ing that the Republic is antagonistic
to religion. But the changes of ministry
is the most menacing feature... . It
is incontestable that M. Gambetta has


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL.





OHAP, VIL.





made and unmade Ministries, He has
power without official responsibility, and
that is always perilous... . Unfortunately
moderate men are becoming distrustful,
and M. Gambetta may be compelled to


if he is to be the chief of a Republic,
If M. Gambetta wins by the sole or
main support of the Reds, his tenure of
the highest position is not likely to be
long or beneficial to France.”


rely upon the extreme section, the Reds,


HOMILETICS,
Srct. XXVI.—Tus Kinepom or Toe Son or Man (Chap. vii, 13, 14),


We come now to what is perhaps the most glorious part of the visions of Daniel,
or even of the prophetic Word in general, We have here the plain and full
announcement of that which constitutes the burden of the prophets from the
beginning—the kingdom of God upon earth, the establishing of which in the place
of the kingdom which God’s adversary had introduced into the world was the
great object of the incarnation of the Son of God. In another part of his pro-
phecies Daniel speaks of “the sufferings of Christ” (chap. ix.); here it is “the
glory that should follow” (1 Pet. i, 11). It is “the mystery of God according to
the good tidings which He declared to His servants the prophets,” which the trumpet
of the seventh angel was to introduce (Rev. x. 7, R.V.) It is “the times of
refreshing from the presence of the Lord,” and of “the restoration of all things,
whereof God spake by the mouth of His holy prophets, which have been since the
world began” (Acts iii, 19, 21, R.V.) It is the consummation which John heard
rapturously celebrated by the great voices in heaven when the seventh angel
sounded, “The kingdom of the world is become the kingdom of our Lord and of
His Christ, and He shall reign for ever and ever” (Rev. xi. 15, R.V.) We have in
these and the following verses the detailed account of the kingdom of the Son of
Man, in its character, extent, and duration, as succeeding to and taking the place
of the kingdoms of this world, including the dominion exercised by the Little Horn
or Papal power. “The coming of Christ in His kingdom and glory,” says Archdeacon —
Harrison, “is in truth that great and final consummation for which the whole
course of God’s moral government hath been ordered from the very beginning of
the world’s history ; and every successi. stage in the fall of earthly power is, in
its degree, a fuller manifestation of the glory with which the Almighty would
invest His incarnate Son, exalted in His human nature as the Son of Man to
supreme dominion.” In the sublime and magnificent passage before us we
have—

L The establishment of the kingdom and the installation of the Son of
Man as its King (ver. 13). ‘‘One like the Son of Man came with the clouds of
heaven and came to the Ancient of Days, and they brought Him before Him: and
there was given Him dominion and glory and a kingdom.” The kingdom is the
donation of the Ancient of Days, here doubtless indicating the Father. “I appoint
unto you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto me ” (Luke xxii, 29),
Christ’s words to His Father at the close of His earthly ministry were, “Thou hast
given Him power over all flesh ;” and to His disciples before His ascension into
heaven He said, “ All power is given unto me in heaven and on earth ” (John xvii,
2; Matt. xxviii. 18). God “hath highly exalted Him, and given Him a name that is
above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow,” &e. (Phil. ii,
10). This donation of the kingdom is represented in Scripture as made to the Son
of Man, or to the Son of God as the Son of Man, in virtue of His having become such
in obedience to the will of God the Father, for the redemption of a lost world, and
as the reward for the completion of that redeeming work given Him by the Father
to do (John xvii. 4,5; v. 37; vi. 38; x. 17, 18; Phil. ii, 7-10 ; Ps. sige Isa,

x


On4?. VIL j HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





liii, 10-12). The text exhibits the solemn installation of the Son of Man or the
Messiah into His kingdom, in the presence of assembled angels who attend Him
as He comes forward to receive the kingdom at the hands of His Father. The
passage has its parallel in Ps. Ixviii. 17, 18, ‘The chariots of God are twenty
thousand, even thousands of angels,” &c. The Son of Man is represented as coming
to the Ancient of Days “with the clouds of heaven”@), This passage recalls
the ascension of Jesus; angels attended Him as He went up to heaven, while a
cloud received Him out of His disciples’ sight (Acts i. 9, 10). To that event also
the psalm just quoted appears to refer, “Thou hast ascended up on high.” The
text might indeed be regarded as descriptive of the time when the Lord Jesus,
having finished the work given Him to do, went up to receive His reward at the
hands of His well-pleased Father, and has by some been referred to that event.
Doubtless such a public, solemn donation and installation in the presence of the
angels of God then took place, “Angels and authorities and powers being then
made subject to Him” (1 Peter iii, 22). The exaltation and the gift of the supreme
name with universal dominion is also represented by the Apostle as past (Phil. ii. 10).
The nobleman in the parable (Christ Himself) was to go into the far country to
receive for Himself a kingdom and then to return (Luke xix. 12). The text,
however, has been applied by Christ Himself not to His going up to heaven, but
to His coming down from heaven, visibly and in glory: “ Hereafter ye shall see
the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of power and coming in the clouds of
heaven” (Matt. xxvi. 64).@) The reference to the words of Daniel is obvious ;
and no less so the reference to His own second and glorious Advent. The text
evidently so understood by the apostles. Hence the words of the Apocalypse,
“ Behold He cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see Him, and they also that
pierced Him” (Rev. i. 7). The prophecy might indeed include both. Both were
connected by the two angel-messengers on the Mount of Olives: “Ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye here gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus, who is taken
from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen Him go up
into heaven” (Acts i 11). He went up with clouds; He will come again with
clouds, He went to receive the promised kin dom ; He will come again to set up
that kingdom in its glorious manifestation ; for the time when He shall come to
“judge the quick and the dead” is “at His appearing and His kingdom” (2 Tim.
iv. 1). It is true that in the text He is said to come not from heaven to earth, but
to the Ancient of Days; but as the passage was obviously understood by the
Saviour and His apostles to point to His glorious return, we have only to suppose
that He comes to His Father previous and preparatory to His descent to earth.
It is also to be observed that the event in the text is posterior to and in consequence
of the great words of the Little Horn, and in connection with the judgment occasioned
by them, and the destruction of the fourth beast which follows it, Here, as in the
vision of the Great Image, the destruction of the world-kingdoms and the setting
up of the kingdom of Messiah are brought together. It was when the stone smote
the image, so that it was broken in pieces, and became as the chaff of the summer
threshing-floor, that it became a mountain and filled the whole earth ; the kingdom
of Messiah taking the place of the kingdoms of this world, according to Rev,
xi. 15. The vision might indeed seem to intimate that the destruction of the
fourth beast and its little horn was effected by the Son of Man Himself, who, for
the execution of this part of His work, is conducted to His Father to receive
the kingdom, in order to set it up in its glorious manifestation(®, Thus the 2d
Psalm represents the Messiah, God’s anointed King over Zion, as receiving this
commission and promise from the Father, “ Ask of me, and I will give Thee the
heathen (the nations of the world) for Thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the earth for Thy possession, Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; Thou
shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel ” (Ps. ii, 8,9). The 110th Psalm
ea as first exalted to His Father's right hand, and then “ smiting





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OMAP, VII,





through kings in the day of His wrath,” and wounding “the heads over many
countries.” Isaiah sees Him coming from Bozrah with garments dyed in the blood
of His enemies (Isa. lxiii 1). In the Apocalypse it is after “the battle of the
great day of God Almighty,” and the destruction of His combined adversaries in
Armageddon, that the thousand years’ reign of righteousness and peace under
Himself and His saints is seen to commence (Rev. xix. 11-21; xx. 4).

IL The reality of the kingdom. It is something given to Him by the Father.
That something is called ‘dominion, and glory, and a kingdom.” As the result of
it, ‘peoples and nations and languages” were to “serve Him.” The gift was as
truly a kingdom as any of those that preceded it ; as that, for example, which God
“gave” to Nebuchadnezzar. It is represented as properly a fifth universal
monarchy, abolishing and taking the place of the fourth, as that did in regard to
its predecessor, As a kingdom or monarchy, it has, like the rest, its Ruler, its
subjects, its laws, its administration, It is a kingdom or monarchy rather than a
republic ; for it has one Head or Ruler, the Lord Jesus Christ, the King of kings
and Lord of lords; and yet it is also true that the kingdom is given to “the
people of the saints of the Most High,” who shall reign along with Him (vers, 18,
22, 27). The difference between this kingdom and those that preceded it is in
its origin, its character, its blessings, its objects, its extent, and its duration.

IIL The Head of the kingdom. This distinctly said to be the Son of Man.
No question as to who this is. The title constantly appropriated by the Lord
Jesus, though not given to Him by His disciples. The title given also to the
Messiah in Ps, Ixxx, 17. His title in virtue of His incarnation, marking Him
truly man while He is as truly God. The Son of Man and Son of God in one
person. The Son of Man par excellence. Pre-eminently the Man. The new
Head and representative of humanity. The second Adam, taking the place of the
first root and father of the race, by whom it fell. The sovereignty over creation
given to man lost in the first Adam and regained in the second (Ps. viii. ; Heb.
ii, 8, 9). Sin and death our inheritance through the first man, righteousness and
life through the second, called the Son of Man (Rom. v. 12,17; 1 Cor. xv. 21, 22).
As Jesus declared Himself before the high priest to be the Son of Man of whom
Daniel spoke in the text, so before Pilate He declared Himself to be a King, and
the King of the Jews, though His kingdom was not then of this world (John xviii.
36, 37). The world’s blessedness is in this, that at length it shall be under the
rule of the Son of Man as its King, the King of righteousness and Prince of
peace, the Son of Man and yet the Mighty God, the Ruler for whom it has
sighed for nearly six thousand years,

IV. The time of the kingdom. This appears to be plainly indicated as
immediately succeeding the destruction of the fourth beast or Roman Empire with
its ten kingdoms and little horn. The kingdom of the Son of Man, although set
up in its commencement in the days of the fourth or last empire (chap. ii. 44), yet
is obviously intended to be the successor, and to take the place of, the four great
monarchies, That Christ began to exereise His regal office immediately after His
ascension, and has been doing so ever since, there can be no doubt, The founda-
tion of His visible kingdom in the world seems to have been laid on the day of
Pentecost, when, after the descent of the Spirit, the apostles declared, “ Therefore
let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God hath made that same Jesus,
whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ” (Acts ii. 33). The kingdom,
however, was perhaps then, and still is, rather in its preparation than in its mani-
festation and glory. The nobleman is receiving the kingdom in the far country.
Thus Paul connects the kingdom that is in its full development and glory
with His appearing when He shall judge both quick and dead (2 Tim, iv. 1).
It is “in the regeneration,” or renewed state of the world, that “the Son of Man
shall sit on the throne of His glory,” and the apostles shall “sit also on thrones,
judging the twelve tribes of Israel” (Matt. xix. 28, RV.) During vi pie of


OuAP, VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIBL,





preparation, the dispensation of the Gospel, those were to be gathered out who,
after overcoming in the fight of faith, shall sit with Christ on His throne, and
receive from Him authority over the nations to rule them, as He also has received
of His Father (Rev. ii, 26, 27; iii, 21), The times of the Gentiles are to be
fulfilled, and Israel is to be brought to receive in penitence their rejected king,
before the times of refreshing can come from the presence of the Lord, and God can
send again Jesus, whom till then the heavens were to receive (Acts iii. 19-21, R.V.)
Then, according to the prophet, shall the Lord of hosts “reign in Mount Zion and
in Jerusalem, and before His ancients gloriously ” (Isa, xxiv. 21-23), In this sense
believers still have to pray, ‘‘Thy kingdom come,” or, in the words that have for
centuries been uttered at the open grave, that the Lord would “shortly accomplish
the number of His elect and hasten His kingdom.”

V. The place of the kingdom. This is obviously the earth, the place of the
preceding monarchies, The kingdom is said to be not tm heaven, but “ under the
whole heaven” (ver. 27), It is peoples, nations, languages, and dominions (marg.,
rulers) that are to serve and obey Him (vers. 14, 27). But these only have their
place and existence as such on earth, The expectation of the saints now in glory
is that they shall reign with Christ on the earth (Rev. v. 10; xx. 4). It is the
kingdoms of the world that are to become “the kingdom of our Lord and of
His Christ” (Rev. xi. 15). The stone, when become a great mountain, was to
fill the whole earth, The earth, made to be inhabited by man, but seized and
held by the great usurper, to be rescued and restored by the second Adam as the
special seat and sphere of His kingdom, The earth not to be annihilated at His
coming, but purified and delivered ‘‘from the bondage of corruption” (Rev. viii,
21). “ We, according to His promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein
dwelleth righteousness ” (2 Pet. iii. 13). God’s sending back Jesus connected with
“times of refreshing” to the earth (Acts iii. 19, R.V.)

VI. The administration of the kingdom. While the Son of Man is the sole
Head of the kingdom, it is said at the same time, more than once, to be “given
to the people of the saints of the Most High” (vers, 14, 22, 27). These intended
to be associated with Christ, and to administer the kingdom under Him  Christ’s
renewed people, as made one with Him, are, as kings and priests, to reign with
Him in His manifested kingdom and glory. “If we suffer with Him, we shall
also reign with Him” (1 Tim. ii, 12). ‘He that overcometh, to him will I give
authority over the nations, and he shall rule them, even as I received of my
Father.” “To him will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also over-
came, and am set down with my Father in His throne” (Rev. ii. 26, 27; iii. 21).
The saints shall judge the world and even angels (1 Cor. vi 2, 8). Of the
execution of future judgment the Psalmist says, “This honour have all the
saints” (Ps, xlix. 9), The words addressed to the faithful servant in the parable
in accordance with the general teaching of the Scripture, “ Have thou authority
over ten cities ” (Luke xix. 17) (),

VIL The character of the kingdom. This gathered, first, from the fact that
Christ is its King and Head, and that the saints of the Most High are associated
with Him in the administration of it; and, secondly, from the fact that all peoples
and nations, with their rulers, shall serve and obey Him (vers 14, 27). The King
is at once King of righteousness and King of peace, holy, harmless, and unde
filed, meek and lowly in heart. Those who reign or administer with and under
Him are saints—saints of the Most High ; holy, as He is holy ; persons who were
once sinners, but by almighty grace have been transformed into the image of
the King. Such a kingdom must render earth a paradise restored, a kingdom
in which love reigns instead of selfishness and hate, righteousness instead of
injustice and wrong, truth instead of falachood and deceit, humility instead
of pride and vainglory, purity instead of licentiousness and lust, “Wisdom


and creck shall be the stability of His times, and the strength of salva


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL CulaP, VIL.





—_—


tion” (Isa, xxxiii. 6). The Canaanite no more in the house of the Lord
God’s house no more made a place of merchandise or a den of thieves, The pro-
fession of religion no more, or with rare exceptions, dissociated from its possession.
“ Holiness to the Lord” inscribed on the horse-bridles. Every pot in Jerusalem
and in Judah holiness to the Lord of hosts, Superstition and formality gone, the
incense of loving praise and the pure offering of renewed hearts everywhere pre-
sented, Social life entirely changed and purified. Christian governments such in
reality, instead of being only so in name. Kings the nursing fathers and their
queens the nursing mothers of the Church, instead of being, as frequently before,
its persecutors and oppressors, Nations will live in peace and loving brotherhood
with each other, Weapons of war will be turned into implements of husbandry,
and the art of it forgotten ©, Converted Israel will not be grudged his place as
the head of the nations,() while Jesus still retains His title, “The King of the
Jews.” Adequate means for the accomplishment of so great and glorious a change
in the world provided in the Spirit that, according to the promise, shall be poured
out, not only on Israel, but upon all flesh (Zech. xii. 10; Joel ii, 28, &e.), of which
the blessed effusion at Pentecost, with its mighty results, was but the first-fruits
(Acts ii. ; Rom. viii. 23; James i. 18). All things that offend or cause to
stumble gathered out of the kingdom, and Satan, the deceiver of the nations,
bound for a thousand years (Matt. xiii. 41; Rev. xx. 2), The work of conversion a

parently to be aided by the judgments that shall have preceded it (Ps. xlvi. 8-10),

VIIL The extent of the kingdom. Repeatedly declared to be universal.
More truly so than any of its predecessors, The earth to be filled with the know-
ledge of the Lord, Men everywhere to be blessed in Christ, and all nations to
call Him blessed. Each individual not necessarily regenerated. Religion universally
professed, and generally, though not universally, experienced. As the kingdom
advances and spreads, the unregenerate man made an exception. ‘The sinner
being an hundred years old shall be accursed” (Isa. xlv. 20). Service everywhere
rendered to Christ externally, though not in all cases sincerely. A forced subjection
rendered where there is not a willing one, The former, however, the exception
(Ps. xviii. 44, 45). Cases of disobedience marked and suitably visited (Zech. xiv.
16-19). Converted Israel apparently the principal human instrumentality em-
ployed in extending the kingdom of Christ among the nations (Isa. Ixvi. 19) ®,
The sphere of their activity apparently those nations who had been left unevange-
lised or living at a distance from Palestine: ‘‘ The isles that are afar off, that have
not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory ;” probably much of Asia, Africa,
and America. Israel to be the third with Egypt and with Assyria: “Even a
blessing in the midst of the earth” (Isa. xix. 23-25).

IX. The duration of it. This repeatedly said to be perpetual, “for ever and
ever.” This kingdom never, like its predecessors, to pass away and be succeeded
by another, Sin not again to turn the earth into a wilderness, The final outbreak
under Satan, released for a little at the expiry of a thousand years, speedily
terminated by fire from heaven (Rev. xx. 7-9). The subsequent state of things
not clearly revealed@), Apparently the general judgment, with the resurrection of
those who had not previously been raised. Perhaps the kingdom then delivered
up to the Father, “that God may be all in all” (1 Cor. xv. 28). Uncertain
whether the last two chapters of the Revelations describe the state of things before
or after the general judgment—tn the millennial kingdom or after it, though
generally understood to be the latter. Certain that no kingdom shall ever succeed
that of Jesus Christ on this earth, The kingdom will only cease on earth if earth
itself is to do so,

X. The certainty of the kingdom. This is as great as the word of the living
God can make it. Its establishment and blessings the constant subject of the
teaching both of Jesus Christ and His apostles. The keynote of the Apocalypse.
The predictions regarding the previous four monarchies exactly oe 3; those


OHAP. VIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





pertaining to the fifth will not be less so. Uncertainty may exist in regard to
some things connected with the kingdom, none in regard to the kingdom itself.
How Christ may come to set it up in its glorious manifestation and power, and at
what time He may do so, and what shall be the concomitants of its establishment ;
how He will exercise His kingly rule, and how long it shall continue, whether a
thousand years literally or otherwise, and what state of things shall follow; these
and many other things connected with the kingdom may be uncertain, but the
kingdom itself, in its more glorious manifestation and universal extension, is among
the certainties of the word of Him who cannot lie, It has been already and still is
in the world, and has for more than eighteen centuries blessed men with its precious
fruits wherever it has been made known, and unbelief has not rejected it. It has
indeed been but as the grain of mustard-seed, and the enemy has sadly mixed the
tares with the wheat. But the mustard-seed shall become a tree, and the tares
shall be rooted up, and the mystery of iniquity, that has so disfigured and changed
the appearance of the kingdom, shall be destroyed ; and the kingdom, which had
been only a hidden one, and without observation, with perhaps only now and then
a prelusive flash bursting forth from behind the cloud, shall be manifested in glory,
and embrace all nations, The Gospel, or glad tidings of this kingdom, must first
be preached for a witness to all nations, and then shall the long-desired end come.
Even so come, Lord Jesus!

1. It is for believers to rejoice tn the prospect revealed in the text. In the anti-
cipation of a universal and endless reign of righteousness and peace to bless this
poor, sin-stricken, and curse-laden earth, we may well rejoice. The prospect of a
kingdom that shall bring glory to God in the highest, on earth peace and goodwill
among men, instead of the wretchedne«s, and crime, and tears, and blood with
which sin has stained and burdened it for six thousand years, may well make glad
the heart of every lover of God and of his kind. In the midst of the groans and
miseries of a world that yet lies under the power of the Evil One, who is a
murderer from the beginning, infallible truth calls us to rejoice in the assurance
that the day is hastening on when He who has been constituted Lord of all, be-
cause He has redeemed them by His precious blood, shall “ make all things new,”
and establish a state of things far exceeding the anticipations of the most sanguine
philanthropists. In the prospect of what it promises in connection with the king-
dom of the Son of Man, inspiration calls upon us greatly to rejoice in sympathy
with a renovated and rejoicing world: “ Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth
be glad ; let the sea roar and the fulness thereof, Let the fields be joyful, and all
that is therein; then shall all the trees of the wood rejoice before the Lord. For
He cometh, for He cometh to judge [to deliver and govern] the earth. He shall

. judge the world with righteousness, and the people with His truth” (Ps. xevi.
11-13; see also Pa, xcvii. 1; xcviii. 4-9), In the midst of prevailing darkness
and confusion, and scepticism and sin, it belongs to believers to rejoice that, not
merely for themselves, but for the world, it is “ better on before,”

2. It is for us to make sure our place in that kingdom now. It is our privilege
to be among the subjects of the Son of Man now, by accepting Him cordially as
our King and our Saviour from sin, He has His kingdom now, into which He
brings every penitent believing soul, or rather which He brings into such a soul
He has His kingdom of grace now, preparatory to the kingdom of glory hereafter,
To be His loyal and loving subject now, secures that we shall be among His
glorified subjects in the day of His appearing. It is ours to make this sure,
through His Spirit’s grace, by accepting Him as our King and Saviour, and giving
ourselves up entirely to Him to save and rule us. “To as many as received Him,
to them gave He power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on
His name” (John i. 12).

3. It is our privilege and duty to speed that kingdom by our prayers, and to
peer er as well as ourselves for a place im tt, It is the King Himself who


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIBL. CHAP, Vil,





has taught us to pray, “Thy kingdom come!” Offered with the heart, and not
merely, as too often, with the lips, it will not be in vain. In answer to the prayer
of His elect, who cry day and night to Him continually, He will hasten His
kingdom. He will appear in His glory and build again Zion, “ because He shall
regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer” (Ps. cii. 13-16),
A prayer to the same effect left us in the last words of the Bible, ‘“ Even so, come,
Lord Jesus.” The Spirit exhorts us by Peter, not merely to “hasten unto,” but
to “hasten” the coming of the day of God (2 Peter iii. 12, margin). But it is
ours also to seek to gather others into the kingdom, that so the number of His
elect may be accomplished, and the kingdom in its glory be hastened. Peter urged
the Jews to repent and be converted in order that the times of refreshing might
come, and God might send again Jesus (Acts iii. 19, R.V.) The Bride, whom He
is to receive and bring with Him, is to be gathered out and prepared for His
coming. For this the Gospel is to be preached to all nations, and the Bride,
already gathered out, is to say to all others, “Come.” This loving and loved work
of Jesus when on earth He has left for His saved people to do in His name and
stead: “Ye shall be witnesses unto me unto the uttermost ends of the earth”
(Acts i, 6-8). The kingdom of grace, or rather Jesus Himself, like Noah’s Ark,
stands open as the only place of safety for sinners, and His people are with loving


persuasion to “‘ compel them to come in.”


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—@) “ With
the clouds of heaven.” Keil observes:
“ Literally, ‘with’ the clouds, i.e, in
connection with them, tz or on them, as
the case may be; surrounded by clouds,”
He refers to Rev. i. 7; Mark xiii. 26;
Matt. xxiv. 30, xxvi. 64 ; and adds: “ If
He who appears as a Son of Man with
the clouds of heaven, comes before the
Ancient of Days, executing the judg-
ment on the earth, it is manifest that
He could only come from heaven to
earth, . . . The clouds are the veil or
the ‘chariot’ on which God comes from
heaven to execute judgment against His
enemies. Cf. Ps. xviii. 10, xcvii. 2-4,
civ. 3; Isa, xix. 1; Nah. i. 3. This
passage forms the foundation for the
declaration of Christ regarding His fu-
ture coming, which is described, after
Dan. vii. 13, as a coming of the Son of
Man with, in, or on the clouds of hea-
ven, Matt. xxiv. 30; Rev. i. 7, xiv. 14.”
Dr. Pusey observes: “‘ Even before our
Lord came, the description was recog-
nised as relating to the Messiah, The
passage was cited in the Book of Enoch
when affirming the pre-existence of the
Messiah before the creation of the world.
‘ Anani,’ He of the clouds, continued to
be a name of the Messiah ; and the Jews,
unable to distinguish beforehand His
first and second coming, reconciled the
accounts of His humiliation and His


glory by the well-known solution: ‘ It
is written of King Messiah, And see,
with the clouds of heaven one like a Son
of Man came; And it is written, Meek
and sitting upon an ass.’” “Most
Christian writers,” says Willet, “ under-
stand it of the second coming of Christ
to judgment.” Willet himself applied
it to the first coming of Christ, yet so
that His kingdom should be finished at
His second Advent.

(3) ‘¢ Passages,” says Auberlen, “ like
Matt. xxiv. 27-31; Acts i. 11; Rev. i
7, leave scarcely a doubt that this ap-
pearance of the Lord will be visible.
Moreover, the great and visible changes,
of which there can be no doubt, which
are thereby produced in the whole form
of the world, render it probable ; while
the fundamental importance of this com-
ing of the Lord consists, according to
the declaration of St. Paul (Col. iii, 3, 4),
in this, that Christ and His Church
shall become manifest and visible, even
as before they are invisible in God. The
Advent of Christ has a twofold object—
to judge the world-power, and to bring
to the Church redemption, transfigura-
tion, and power over the world.” Ju-
nius understood the passage of Christ’s
ascension to the Father, and His coming
into the world in His deity to finish the
work of redemption; His “coming in
the clouds” being the figure of His

151


OHAP. VIL





_— -_—


divine majesty. Dr. Cox says: “ His
‘coming in the clouds’ implies the dig-
nity and splendour of the manifestation,
but can no more be deemed literal than
the garment and the hair and the wheels
of the Ancient of Days.” Professor
Bush, who refers the passage to the
ascension, understands by clouds “a
multitude of heavenly attendants.” But
why depart from the natural and literal
meaning without any necessity, when it
yields a sufficiently good sense? New-
come remarks that any signal interposi-
tion on behalf of His Church or in the
destruction of His enemies may be
metaphorically called a “ coming” ora
parousia of Christ ; which may be quite
true, without setting aside the literal
meaning of the texts, which speak of His
second appearing. Dr. Pusey remarks
that among the “ later ideas” alleged by
Opponents as an argument against the
Book of Daniel, is the doctrine of the
Messiah, which, it is said, appears
already much more developed than in
Ezekiel; Messiah here appearing as a
superhuman being, while no traces of
His divine nature occur elsewhere in the
prophets, This is simply untrue. See
Ps, cx. 1, applied by our Lord to show
His divinity. So also Heb. i, 8. No-
thing strange had it been otherwise.
Daniel, living nearly to the close of the
former revelation, might receive doctrine,
especially as to the Messiah, not revealed
before.

(8) “ There was given him dominion,
and glory, and a kingdom” (ver. 14).
* The kingdom of God,” says Auberlen,
“has different periods; it is come in
Christ (Matt. xii, 28); it spreads in the
world by internal, spiritual, hidden pro-
cesses (Matt. xiii, 33); but, as a king-
dom, in the strict sense of the word, in
royal glory, it shall only come with the
parousia (coming or presence) of Christ
(Luke ix. 11,12, 15); even as we are,
according to Christ’s command, to pray
even now day after day, Thy kingdom
come.” Keil regards the commencement
of the kingdom as at the first coming of
Christ, and its continuance in the form
of the Christian Church, terminating
with His second visible appearing in the
clouds _ heaven to final judgment.

52


HOMILETICO COMMENTARY: DANII.


( For further consideration of the
administration of the kingdom by the
saints, see next section, “Of the
saints’ participation in the glory and
reign of Christ,” says Auberlen, “the
New Testament throughout speaks often
and fully. See Rom, viii, 17; 2 Tim
ii, 12; 1 Cor. iv. 8; Rom, v. 17; Luke
xii, 32, xxii, 29. ... After having
gathered His Church, and after having
taken His Bride to Himself, Christ
returns with her to heaven. Earth is
not as yet transfigured, and can con-
sequently not be the locality meet for
the transfigured Church. But from
heaven the saints now rule the earth;
whence we may conclude that one of the
glories of the millennium shall consist
in the much freer and more vivid com-
munion of the heavenly and earthly
Churches in particular, and the lower
and higher world in general, There
now commences a manifestation of God
through the perfected Church ; a mani-
festation of God to humanity then on
earth, through the instrumentality of
the perfected Church. By which mani-
festation the social life of humanity is
influenced into obedience to the divine
power, which is shown and realised ip
the perfect Church, by which the God-
opposed element is prevented from exert
ing its power in the way of forming
communions or combinations.” Hof-
mann, quoted by Auberlen, says :
“Thus not only does the evil spiritual
influence which the prince of this world
exerted in humanity cease, but in place
of it the transfigured (glorified) Church
of God obtains a most blessed dominion
over the world; and they know no
higher joy than to lead their brethren
to the same salvation and glory in which
they themselves partake,”

©) Dr. Rule remarks that the Zenda
vesta, written, as is believed, by Zoro
aster in the reign of Darius Hystaspes,
the same reign in which the Temple was
rebuilt, contains a prediction that in the
last days a Man would sppear and adorn
the world with religion and justice ; that
He would revive justice among the inha-
bitants of the world, suppress wrongs,
and restore ancient customs which had
fallen into decay. He foretold, or pre-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


OmAP, VIL


eects


tended to foretell, that kings would
follow and serve Him; that he would
establish true religion, and that in his
time peace and tranquillity would prevail,
dissensions be forgotten, and trouble pass
away. An expectation of the advent of
such a deliverer might well have been
raised by the prophecies of Daniel, and
have brought the Persian Magi from the
East to worship the new-born King of
the Jews.

(©) “The Jews were to be distinguished
by their covenant as the first in the
kingdom and the organs for divine
communications to mankind. From the
earlier to the later parables of our Lord
we see the ideality of the kingdom
undergo a remarkable change, At first
the kingdom of heaven was to embrace
all men; was to last from that time
forth ; was to be successful. Afterwards
men refused to receive it; it was shut
up; to be delayed till the Bridegroom
came, or the Nobleman returned from
the distant country, or the Son of Man
appeared in glory... . These considera-
tions leave us no room to doubt that the
original idea in Christ’s preaching was
that the kingdom was a theocratic one ;
the Jews were still to be the covenant
people, receptacles of the successive
communications of Deity ; and through
their means the other idea of the
kingdom, namely, its spiritual one, was
to come forth. . . . We are now living
in the frustrated state of Christianity.
We do not see the bright visions of the
prophets because of the infidelity of the
Jews, Nor will these visions ever be
fulfilled until they turn to the Lord,
and become again a theocratic com-
munity. ... The last words of our
Lord in public were a lamentation over
Jerusalem for having refused to receive
Him, and a warning that in consequence
their house should be left to them deso-
late, accompanied by a prediction that
He would not come again till they (the
Jews) should say, ‘Blessed is He that
cometh in the name of the Lord ;’ that
is, He announces two events: first, the
destruction of Jerusalem, because the
Jews had rejected Him ; and, secondly,
His coming again when they should be
ready toacknowledge Him.”—Johnstone’s


Israel after the flesh, ‘The Israelitish
priest-kings are upon earth in the
millennium what the transfigured (glo-
rified) priest-kings are in heaven. Then
there shall be a blessed chain of giving
and receiving,—God, Christ, the trans-
figured Bride or the Church, Israel, the
world of nations. . . . Israel, brought
back to his own land, will now be the
people of God in a much higher and
more internal sense than he was before ;
for now the power of sin is checked,
the knowledge of the Lord fills the
whole land, and the Lord dwells again
among His people at Jerusalem. Then
a new time of revelation will begin;
the Spirit of God will be poured out
abundantly, and a fulness of the gifts of
grace (charismata) be bestowed, even as
the Apostolic Church possessed it typi-
cally, ... And with this sacred and
glorious character of divine service shall
be combined a corresponding govern-
ment of the world,—a fulness of bless-
ings and undisturbed festal joy. When
Israel glorifies God and is again glorified
by his God, a deep and powerful im-
pression cannot fail to be made upon
the Gentiles. Now it is no longer
necessary to go after and seek the
Gentiles laboriously ; on the contrary,
they come willingly of themselves,
attracted by the rich gifts of God’s
mercy and the fulness of divine mani-
festation which they behold, It is their
delight now to serve their God and to
offer to Him their noblest and best
offerings, Now, in the millennium,
Jews and Gentiles are united, and all
humanity, united under the First-born
Brother, walks in the light of God ; and
then the true and just life of humanity
is at last realised (Rom, xi. 30-32).”
—Auberlen,

@ Dr. Rule remarks that the estab-
lishment of the eternal kingdom lies in
remote futurity, and that it is not pro-
mised until the Antichristian apostasy
should be annihilated, and Antichris-
tian kingdoms too, This, however,
may not require so remote a futurity.
“A short work will the Lord make
upon the earth.” Dr. Rule thinks that
“between that extinction of the Papacy
and the universal prevalence of Chris

153


OMAP, VII,





tianity there is an interval marked,
yet not measured; and then there will
probably be some signal methods or-
dained for bringing round the glorious
consummation,”

(8) “The majority of humanity then
living and remaining after the Parousia
(or coming of Christ) belong neither to
the one class nor to the other (neither to
apostate Christendom nor to the faithful
congregation caught up with Christ to
heaven). They consist of Jews and
heathens. . . . Besides the Harlot and
the Beast, their exist on earth Judaism
and heathenism in their old shape, with-
out reference to Christianity; and in
this form they are comparatively inno-
cent, because they have not yet come
into close contact with the Gospel of
mercy, and are therefore not guilty of
rejecting and stamping it under foot... .
Hence Judaism and heathenism, in the
strict sense, that is, Israel and the hea-
then, living at the time of the Parousia,
are the comparatively healthy elements
which form the new soil of a new de-
velopment. And this is part of the
humiliation of the modern civilised
nations, that nations which they despise
most, Jews and uncivilised barbarians
(perhaps chiefly the negroes of Africa,
the Hamites, who, on account of the
curse of Noah, have been so backward
and neglected, Cush, Seba, dc.—Ps,
Ixviii. 31; xxii. 10), shall succeed them,
and surpass them as centres of the
world’s history... . At the beginning of
the millennial kingdom humanity will
be in a condition similar to that in
which it was at the commencement of the
Church-historical time, after the ascen-
sion of the Saviour, Again, Israel and
the heathen shall be the representatives
of history; and distinguished from
them, we see the Christian congrega-
tion wishing to christianise them. But
everything now is on a higher degree
of development, Not only has the
preaching of the Gospel of the kingdom
among Jews and heathens before the
second Advent of the Lord prepared
the dawn of light (Matt. xxiv, 14), so
that the nations can understand some
thing of the wonderful events attending
the ry of the Lord ; but the events

4


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL.


a


themselves, the coming of Christ in
glory, the destruction of the Antichris-
tian power, the transfiguration of the
Church of believers, the binding of
Satan, and the ceasing of Satanic
influences, must necessarily produce an
unspeakably deep impression on the
nations. Now the veil of Moses is
taken from Israel, and the face of the
covering, which was cast upon all
people, is broken (2 Cor, iii, 14-16;
Isa, xxv. 7).”—Auberlen,

°) Some think no definite period
is intended by the thousand years.
Strange to say, some, as Willet, make it to
begin after the ten heathen persecutions
and with the time of Constantine, and
to end with that of Wickliffe and John
Huss; the resurrection being the re
newing of the soul and its rising from
dead works by the preaching of the
Gospel. Some again, as the translators
of the Geneva Bible, make it to com
mence with the nativity of Christ and
terminate with the time of Pope Syl-
vester ; while others, as Junius, place
its commencement thirty-six years after
Christ, and its termination in the time
of Hildebrand or Gregory VIL One
may wonder how at such a time Satan
could be said to be bound go as not to
deceive the nations any more,

(10) “ After the millennial kingdom,”
says Auberlen, “after the universal
judgment, when heaven and earth are
renewed, and the New Jerusalem de
scends from heaven, then all limitation
shall disappear and cease. . . . Not
even the millennial kingdom is the final
end of the development of God’s king-
dom. For even during the millennium
there is a separation between heaven and
earth,—between humanity transfigured
and humanity still living in the flesh,
Hence it is possible that the apostasy
should take place at the end of the
millennium. The kingdom is more
glorious than the Church, but it is not
yet the new world, It is a time of
refreshing after the times of warfare,
but not yet the time of perfection in the
strict sense of the word. ... As the
life of the God-man, so likewise the
first period of the existence of divine
life is one of inward, spiritual, hidden


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL


humility during the Church-historic
time, in which nature and history pur-
sue essentially their wonted unspiritual
course. After this period the life of
Christ becomes manifest and visible
(Col. iii. 3, 4) ; it penetrates powerfully








OHAP. VI.





fundamental elements—state, art, civili-
sation, &c.; this is the millennial king-
dom, And, finally, this life becomes
also the power which transfigures the
world universally,—in the time of the
new heavens and the new earth.”


the whole world of history in all its


HOMILETICS.


Szor, XXVII.—Tue Kinepom or tue Samrs or tHE Most Higu
(Chap. vii. 18, 22, 27).


‘The saints shall take the kingdom.” A striking feature in the kingdom
predicted in this vision of Daniel is that, while it is distinctly said to be given to
the Son of Man, it is just as distinctly said, and that twice over, to be given to
the saints, or to the people of the saints of the Most High, and that the saints
take the kingdom. Although this circumstance has been slightly referred to
under the preceding section, in connection with the administration of the king-
dom of the Son of Man, yet from the prominence given to it and its threefold
repetition in the vision it demands a separate consideration. We notice—the
saints to whom the kingdom is given; the kingdom itself ; the sense in which it
is given to the saints; the suitableness of the appuintment; and the beneficial
results.

I The saints “), Saints denote holy or sanctified persons. The term is appli-
cable both to angels and men. Here it is the latter. ‘ Holy” means separated
from sin, and separated to God and His service, The former may be called the
moral, the latter the official meaning of the term. Whatever is set apart to God
and His service or use may be called holy in the official sense. Men thus set apart
are or ought to be holy also in the moral sense, holy in heart and life, or separate
from sin. This is the sense in the text; hence they are called “saints of the Most
High,” such as are both separated to His service, belonging to Him as His own,
made saints by Himself, and approved by Him as such, This far removed from
the profane caricature of Papal canonisation. Men are made saints by the mighty
power of divine grace, renewing them in the spirit of their mind, making them
spiritually alive from being dead in trespasses and sins, and rendering them “new
creatures,” or a new creation in Christ Jesus, This is especially the work assigned
to the Holy Ghost, and such are said to be “born of the Spirit.” Baptism with
water is the sign, but not the instrument of it. Cornelius, and thousands more,
were born again of the Spirit before they were baptized; while Simon the sor-
cerer, like millions more, though baptized with water, was never born again
at all, The instrument in the new birth, in the case of any beyond infancy, is the
Word of truth, “Being born again,” says Peter, “not of corruptible seed but of
incorruptible, by the Word of God, that liveth and abideth for ever.” ‘Of His
own will,” says James, “ begat He us by the Word of truth.” It is by the same
instrument that the work of holiness or sanctification is carried on in the saints
afterwards. ‘‘Sanctify them through Thy truth ; Thy Word is truth.” “Now ye
are clean through the Word that I have spoken unto you.” “That He might
sanctify and cleanse it (the Church) with the washing of water by the Word”
(John xvii. 17; xv, 3; Eph. v. 26), This renewing and sanctifying of the soul
by the Holy Ghost is effected in union with Christ, as members of His body and
branches in Him as the true Vine,—* sanctified in Christ Jesus.” The work is
carried on here in the body of flesh, but is only perfected when the body is either
put off at death or changed at the Lord’s coming. Hence “the apirits of just mem

155


may. VIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIBL.





made perfect.” Men may be truly saints here, but only perfected saints hereafter.
This saintship or sanctified condition is peculiar to no nation or clasa, There is,
however, also a federal or covenant holiness which may belong to @ nation or class,
and which, like official holiness, may exist without holiness in heart and life.
Thus the Jews were a holy, because a covenant people, chosen by the Lord as a
people for Himself, Thus baptized Christians and the children of such are federally
holy, as taken outwardly into the Christian covenant, and professedly given up to
God in baptism, though, alas! too often, like the Jews, far away from moral and
personal holiness, The saints of the Most High are not merely federally and
officially, but morally and personally holy ; holy as God is holy, and pure as God
is pure, partakers of the divine character, and possessing the same holiness in kind
though not in degree. In the Old Testament such were chiefly found. among the
Jews, to whom pertained the adoption and the giving of the law, as well as the
covenants and the promises, In the New Testament they are found both among
Jews and Gentiles of every nation, people, and tongue. It is of such that the
kingdom of the Son of Man, identical with the kingdom given to the saints, con-
sists. Hence the commission: “Go ye and teach (disciple) all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.” While
He is King of the Jews, He is also “ Lord of all.” There appears, therefore, no
reason for limiting the term in the text, especially as the vision has obviously its
fulfilment, not in Old, but in New Testament times, A more difficult question
perhaps might be, Are they the glorified saints, or saints still in the body, or
both?@) If the giving of the kingdom to the saints is to be understood in the
sense of reward, as in that sense it is given to the Son of Man, then it would seem
that the saints here indicated are those who, like Paul, have fought the good fight,
have finished their course, and have kept the faith, and so have now received the
crown of righteousness from the hand of the righteous Judge at His appearing.
On this supposition they are those who have overcome, and so have received
power from Christ ‘over the nations to rule them,” and have been made te
sit down with Him on His throne, It would be the fulfilment of the promise,
“Ye are they that have continued with me in my temptations, and I appoint unto
you a kingdom, even as my Father hath appointed unto me” (Luke xxii. 28, 29)
Other parallel passages would be Rev. v. 9, 10; xvii. 18; xx. 4. In this case,
the saints would be those who should be raised from the dead at the Lord’s appear-
ing, according to 1 Cor. xv. 23, and 1 Thess, iv. 16, together with those who should
be alive at His coming (1 Cor. xv. 51, 52; 1 Thess. iv. 17). However, even in
respect to the saints then still in the body, and constituting the renewed subjects
of the millennial kingdom in general, with converted Israel in particular, it would
still be true that the saints take the kingdom, all civil government being then
exercised by the holy persons in subordination to Christ and His glorified Bride,
IL The kingdom itself. This appears to be the same as that of which the
interpreting angel had already spoken as the kingdom given by the Ancient of
Days to the Son of Man—the kingdom of which Christ is the Head and King, and
which was to take the place of the kingdoms of this world, or of the four monarchies,
which shall have disappeared as the chaff of the summer threshing-floor (chap. ii.)
The same dominion, rule, and kingdom that is given to Christ is given to the
saints as Christ’s members, who are to reign and be glorified with Him, and to sit
with Him on His throne; to whom He Himself was to give authority over the
nations, to rule them along with Him, and whom He was to appoint a kingdom as
His Father had appointed to Himself, The kingdom is given by the Ancient of
Days to Christ, and by Christ is given to His Church or Bride, to possess it along
with Him, and be associated with Him in its government. The kingdom is
heavenly in its origin and character, but has its place not tn heaven but on earth,
over and among the nations and peoples inhabiting it, While having its earthly


visible vr material side, like its predecessors, it will be spiritual and holy in ite


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL, OMAP, VIL
eee A ee


character, consisting not in meats and drinks,.but in righteousness and peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost; the kingdom that has been so long prayed for, when God’s
will shall be done on earth as it is in heaven, From heaven, wherever that may
be, the saints will rule the earth with Christ, while the saints on earth shall rule
subordinately with them. The “kingdom of the world” shall become “the
mh of our Lord and of His Christ,” or His anointed members (Rev. xi. 15,

Ii. The sense in which the saints shall take the kingdom. This appears
to be the same as that in which Christ Himself takes it. The angel indicates no
difference ; only that Christ receives it directly from the Ancient of Days, which
the saints are not said to do, they receiving it mediately from or virtually in Christ,
whose members and whose Bride they are, forming with Him one body and one
Christ (Rev. xi. 15; 1 Cor. xii, 12). Christ the Head receives the kingdom from
the Father as His reward for the accomplishment of His mediatorial work given
Him by the Father to do as His Righteous Servant (Phil, ii, 6-10). His members
receive it also as a reward from Christ, whose servants they were, and to whom
they were enabled to be faithful even unto death, “If any man will serve me,
let him follow me; and where I am there shall also my servant be, If any man
serve me, him will my Father honour.” “ Be thou faithful unto death, and I will
give thee a crown of life.” ‘He that overcometh, and keepeth my words unto
the end, to him will I give power over the nations,” ‘Ye are they which have
continued with me in my temptations; and I appoint unto you a kingdom, even
as my Father hath appointed me” (John xii, 26; Rev. ii, 10; iii, 21; Luke xxii.
28, 29). The saints take the kingdom as heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ,
One with Christ, they share with Him in His glory and reign, as they shared with
Him before in His humiliation and suffering. They possess the kingdom, and
exercise kingly rule and authority with and under Him, as the priest-kings whom
He made such by His grace after redeeming them by His blood (Rev. i. 5, 6; v.
9, 10). With the members as with the Head, it is first humiliation and then
glory: “Out of prison he cometh to reign” (Eccles, iv. 13), They take the
kingdom, not as the kings of the world, as a matter of earthly ambition, or through
carnal relationship, or by skilful management, intrigue, and violence, or as con-
querors with garments rolled in blood. They take it as a gift of grace from their
loving Husband and King, whom it was given them by the same grace lovingly to
tollow and obey even unto death, They take and possess the kingdom, not for the
gratification of personal ambition, or selfish desires, or carnal pleasures, from which,
as saints, they are for ever separated ; but for the glory of Him who created all
things for Himself, and of His Son who redeemed them by His blood, as well as
for the happiness of a regenerated world and wide-extended universe, For the same
high and holy ends will the saints then still in the flesh, and Israel more especially,
exercise in a subordinate capacity the rule which the King Himself in His wisdom
shall assign to them.

IV. The suitableness of the appointment. There is something suitable in
the thrice-repeated declaration that the saints of the Most High, or truly holy
persons, shall take the kingdom. In the preceding empires, and ever since
Nimrod, the “ mighty hunter before the Lord,” began to be “a mighty one on the
earth,” the “ vilest of men” have often been “exalted” to kingly power, and, as a
consequence, the “ wicked have walked on every side” (Ps, xii. 8), For wise and
holy reasons, God, in His mysterious providence, often sets over kingdoms the
“basest of men,” when, as a natural result, the land is filled with misery and —
crime (Dan. iv. 17), Selfish and godless rulers have constituted a part of the
present state of earthly things. Natural, so long as “the whole world lieth in the
evil one” (1 John v. 19, R.V.) Evil rulers a part of the evil entailed by the Fall,
and often the chastisement of the sins of the people. What the world wants and
longs for, but seldom obtains, is wise, upright, disinterested rulers, eee in the


OHAP. VIL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





fear of God and for the best interests of their subjects.. Such is the state of things
predicted in the text. Something suitable and becoming when holy men, separ-
ated from sin and selfishness, bearing the image and character of the God whose
name and nature is love, and who is “righteous in all His ways and holy in all His
works,” shall take, and, by divine gift, possess the kingdom, Such have learned to
rule by being first taught how to obey, and have been trained to reign with Christ
hereafter by suffering with Him here. Such fitted to rule by imbibing the spirit and
walking in the steps of Him who was meek and lowly in heart, and who pleased
not Himself, but went about doing good, “ Blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.” “ Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit
the earth” (Matt. v. 3, 5).

V. Its beneficial results. The happiness of subjects greatly bound up with
the character and government of their rulers. ‘ The king by judgment establisheth
the land.” ‘ When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice; but when
the wicked bear rule, the people mourn” (Prov. xxix. 2, 4). Seen in a measure
in the rule of David, as compared with that of many who succeeded him. Limited
examples also in our own Alfred, and in her who now sits upon his throne. The
best of rulers, however, in the present state of things, able only to produce
partial results, both from their own imperfect spiritual condition and that of their
ministers and coadjutors in the government, their short continuance in power, the
evil state of things already existing, and the hostile influences, visible and invisible,
which oppose them. From these impediments the reign of the saints of the
Most High in the millennial kingdom of the Son of Man will be greatly exempt, so
that their rule will be naturally one of the highest beneficence, and attended with
the happiest results to humanity, The state of things in the world, under a
government in which a King (Messiah) shall reign in righteousness, and princes
(the saints associated with Him) shall rule in judgment, represented by the prophets
under such imagery as the following: ‘‘The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb,
and the leopard shall lie down with the kid, and the calf, and the young lion, and
the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them.” “He shall come down
like rain upon the mown grass; as showers that water the earth. There shall be
a handful of corn in the earth upon the top of the mountains; the fruit thereof
shall shake like Lebanon; and they of the city shall flourish like grass of the
earth” (Isa. xi, 6-9; Ixv, 25; Ps. Ixxii. 6, 16). Without any figure, ‘Then
shall the earth yield her increase, and God, even our own God, shall bless us
God shall bless us, and all the ends of the earth shall fear Him” (Ps. lxvii. 6, 7).
The subject suggests—

1, Cause of rejoicing in the prospect presented by the teat. It was as a ground
of comfort and a matter of rejoicing that it was three times announced to Daniel
that the saints should take and possess the kingdom. It was intimated as good
tidings not only for the saints themselves, who, instead of being given into the
hands of oppressors and persecutors, despised and down-trodden, and often
counted as sheep for the slaughter, should have the rule and government of the
nations committed to them, but for the world who should reap the benefit of such
a state of things. Whether it be the saints that have finished their course of
suffering and service on earth, and now are glorified according to the promise, or
whether it be the saints svill living in the flesh, be it Jews or Gentiles, or both, it
is for every lover of his kind to rejoice that a day is coming when truly holy
persons, and only sucn, shall hold the reins of government, and administer a
righteous and beneficent rule over the nations, in loyal and loving subordination
and obedience to the Prince of Peace, hat saints, renewed and sanctified in
Christ, transformed into His image, and breathing His spirit of meekness, humility,
and iove, and at the same time guided by a wisdom that is from above, pure,
peaceable, and gentle, full of mercy and of good fruits, instead of the wisdom that ia
oh he se a and devilish—that such shall be the only rulers that the earth


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DANIEL, OMAP, Vil.





shall know, and that their rule shall be at the same time the rule of the Son of
Man, with all power in heaven and earth, is surely a consummation devoutly to be
wished, and a prospect greatly to be rejoiced in.

2. The blessed consequence of a faithful adherence to the Saviour, The saints
shall take the kingdom. Believers are made kings and priests already. They are
princes even now, but in disguise. They travel to their inheritance incognito, It
doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we do know that a crown of glory
awaits every faithful follower of Jesus, however poor his condition may be now.
If we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with Him. Suffering with Him now,
we shall be also glorified with Him hereafter. When He who is our life shall be
manifested, we shall also “with Him be manifested in glory” (Col. iii. 4, R.V.)
The humblest follower of Jesus, faithful unto death, shall receive a crown of life,
and shall sit down with Christ in His throne, sharing with Him in His kingly
glory, and in the government of a renewed world. Theyfshall reign with Christ.
“The saints shall judge the world. Know ye not that we shall judge angels?”
(1 Cor. vi. 2, 3). It matters not how the saints shall reign or exercise the kingly
authority that shall be committed to them. What we know not now we shall
know hereafter. Enough that the thing is true. If we suffer with Him, we shall
reign with Him. Let this be vur comfort under the burden and heat of the day,
and let it animate us to use unfaltering perseverance in a cause of faithful self-
denying service, till the Master shall please to call us from the field.

3. The character of the future blessedness of the saints, They shall possess the
kingdom. They shall thus have noble work to do, honourable and dignified service
toemploy them. His servants shall still serve Him, and they shall serve Him in the
highest form of service. They shall find abundant scope for the sanctified faculties
which they shall possess, and have ample field for the exercise of the Christ-like dis-
position which shall animate them, Renewed in the image of the universal Ruler, they
shall have the employment restored to them which was originally bestowed upon man
at his creation, but was lost through the Fall. Their blessedness will not be mere
rest, but rest from trouble, sin, and bondage, with a holy and happy employment which
shall become their position as sons of God and brethren of the King of kings, and
in which they shall with Him still contribute to the glory of the Creator and the
happiness of His creatures. They will thus not only be made to resemble their
Lord and Husband, but be kept in closest sympathy and fellowship with Him,
as sharing in the government that shall be upon His shoulders, What was their
chief happiness on earth will thus be perfected in glory. Their kingly and princely
office they will also be enabled to discharge without fatigue, and without the grief
of being continually opposed and thwarted in their benevolent endeavours by the
wily and watchful enmity of him who was the great adversary of God and man,
but who shall then be under a divine restraint, so as no more to deceive the
nations (Rev. xx. 4).

4, The privilege of believers to be employed now in a way that shall be both an
anticipation of their future blessedness and their preparation for tt. This is that of
seeking, according to our gifts and opportunities, to promote the objects aimed at
by Christ Himself and the saints that shall reign with Him over the earth—the
glory of the Creator and the happiness of men, as experienced in His favour and
service, To promote this twofold object is the work given to believers to do now,
more especially by communicating the knowledge of the Saviour, and persuading
men to be reconciled through Him to God. The Saviour’s parting commission to
His Church, “ Ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in Judea, and
in Samaria, and to the uttermost parts of the earth.” ‘Preach the Gospel to
every creature.” “Shine as lights in the world, holding forth the Word of life.”
“ Others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire.” For this blessed though
now often trying and self-denying service He has promised and bestowed abundant
qualification in the gift of His Holy Spirit: “Ye shall receive hai that


OmAP, VIZ, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIBL,
LL


the Holy Ghost is come upon you” (Acts 4. 7, 8), Such employment here, in
whatever way and in whatever circumstances, a blessed anticipation of and prepara
tion for our future employment when the saints shall take the kingdom. It was
the faithful servant to whom it was said, “Have thou authority over ten cities,”
Nor will the painful trials and deep sorrow which we may be called to experience
in connection with a faithful endeavour to serve Christ and our fellow-men in the
present state, be the least part of our preparation for the higher service that awaits
us when all tears shall be wiped away.

5. Our interest to make sure our place now among the saints who shall possess
the kingdom. Regard to one’s own interest makes this the first object we should
be concerned to secure. The day is hastening when to have neglected this will
appear the height of madness. To throw a fortune, a dukedom, a kingdom away,
will one day soon appear to be reason and sense compared with the throwing
away the opportunity of obtaining a place among those who shall in a few short
years possess a kingdom that shall never pass away. That place is to be secured
simply by a sincere and cordial acceptance of the Saviour whom God in His love
has provided for a lost and guilty world, that Son of Man who came to seek and


to save that which is lost.


“To as many as received Him, to them gave He power


to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on His name.” That Son
of Man who shall come one day in His glory and all His saints with Him, comes
now in His Gospel to each man and woman who hears it, and offers him freely
Himself, and along with Himself a place among His saints who shall hereafter


with Himself possess the kingdom. Reader,


have you cordially accepted Him?


Is He yours? Are you among His redeemed people? If not, accept Him now,
and take no rest till by His grace you are enabled joyfully to say, “ My Lord and


my God !”


EXEGETICAL NOTES —®
“Saints.” According to Keil, these are
neither the Jews, who are accustomed
to call themselves “ saints,” in contrast
with the heathen (as V. Lengerke,
Maurer, Hitzig, &., think), nor the
converted Israel of the millennium (as
Hofmann and others believe); but, as
we argue from Exod, xix, 6; Deut. vii.
6, the true members of the covenant
nation, the New Testament Israel of
God, te. the congregation of the new
covenant, consisting of Israel and the
faithful of all nations, Auberlen, like
Hofmann, understands the Jews still on
earth to be the saints meant in this
vision of Daniel. By ‘the people of
the saints of the Most High,’ to whom
dominion is given, Daniel evidently
could only understand the people of
Israel, as distinguished from the heathen
nations and kingdoms, which were to
rule till then, In this point Roos, Preis-
werk, Hofmann, agree with Hitzig,
Bertholdt, and others, The prophet’s
words refer to the re-establishment of
the kingdom of Israel, concerning which
the aa asked immediately before

60


the ascension.” (Ecolampadius and
others understood the faithful reigning
with Christ in the celestial kingdom,
Willet, however, justly observes that the
kingdom is not said to be in heaven, but
under beaven, and therefore on earth.
Some, as Pellican and Bullinger, thought
the Church of Christ is indicated, com.
mencing while the other monarchies
were still standing, and propagated over
all the world in the time of the fourth
beast or Roman Empire. Willet thinks
the kingdom is the spiritual dominion
of the Church, commencing when the
other monarchies are extinguished ; be-
ginning in this world, but perfected at
the Lord’s second Advent, the saints
reigning in grace here and in glory
hereafter,

(2) “ Among the saints who are called
to reign with Christ,” says Auberlen on
Rev, xx. 4, “the martyrs of ancient and
modern times are mentioned first ; they
become most like to the Lord Jesus in
their suffering and death, and are there-
fore nearest Him in His life and reign,
. . « And the Saviour teaches expressly
that at His second coming as King of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DANIBIL,


OMAP. VIL,


oe eeeeSeSSSSSeeseSeee


the kingdom, He shall place one servant
over ten cities and another over five,
according to the measure of faithfulness
they showed during His absence (Luke
xix. 11), Next to the martyrs are


mentioned all who had not worshipped ©


the beast, be it in more remote times or
in the last days, which are referred to
by the image and the mark upon their
forehead, as will appear from a com-
parison with Rev. xiii, 14-17. Wor-
shippers of the beast are all they that
take the powers of this world as a
reality and serve it, instead of looking
to things invisible and future (2 Cor.
iv. 17). . . . Hence our passage refers
to the whole congregation of believers
who are born of God, to God’s Church
gathered out of Israel and the Gentiles
(Rom, viii, 17). . . . Immediately con-
nected with the resurrection of the dead
is the transfiguration of those who will
be then living on the earth; and the
living thus changed, freed from the
weight of the earthly and corruptible,
and transported into the essential liberty
of spirit, can now, even as the trans-
figured Saviour ascended up on high, be
caught up into the clouds to meet the
returning Lord in the air (1 Thess. iv.
17). The New Testament tells us that
instead of the devil, the transfigured
Church of Christ shall rule the world ;
while the Old Testament informs us that
instead of the heathen beast, the holy
people of Israel shall do so. Both agree
in what is of central importance, that it
is Christ, the Son of Man, who now
rules humanity by His transfigured
Church in heaven and by His people
Israel on earth.” Calvin observes that
in consequence of the intimate union
between Christ and His Church, what
belongs to the Head is transferred to the
body ; that the supreme power is con-
stantly promised by the prophets to
the Church, especially by Jesus Christ,
who often predicts its complete supre-
macy ; and that while the Church reigns


by itself, Christ, its only supreme Head,
ebtains dominion therein,

) “Take the kingdom.” Calvin re-
fers the taking of the kingdom by the
saints to the time when, after the pro-
mulgation of the Gospel, the kingdom
of God and of the saints obtained some
fame and celebrity in the world. In
another place, however, he remarks that
the slaying of the fourth beast and the
giving the kingdom and authority to
the people of the saints does not seem
to have taken place yet; whence all
Christian interpreters agree in treating
this prophecy as relating to the final
day of Christ’s Advent. He himself
thinks the saints began to reign under
the whole heaven when Christ ushered
in His kingdom by the promulgation of
it; and that though Daniel does not
here predict occurrences connected with
the Advent of Christ as Judge of the
world, but with the first preaching of the
Gospel, yet he notwithstanding draws
a magnificent picture of Christ’s reign,
embracing its final completion. The
taking of the kingdom was in like
manner interpreted by the early Fathers
as referring to the general spread of
Christianity after the first Advent of
Christ. So Dr. Lee and Professor
Bush,

() “Not only,” says Auberlen, “does
the evil spiritual influence which the
prince of this world exerted on humanity
in the preceding ages cease, but, in place
of it, the transfigured Church of God
obtain a most blessed dominion over
the world, Christianity will pervade
the world and all relations of life in
spirit and in truth, . . . It is upon this
present earth that it must be shown
and proved that the devil, who pre-
tended to be its rightful lord, was only
& usurper; man, who was created to
‘have dominion over the earth,’ is to
rejoice over Ais world with full, un-
mixed, holy joy. Every legitimate and
true ideal will then become a reality.”


emaP. VIII HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,








HOMILETICS.


Sxot. XXVIII.—Antiocuus Eriruanes, on THE SyRian Lirrtz Horx
(Chap. viii. 1-27),


This chapter presents to us another vision of Daniel vouchsafed to him in the
reign of Belshazzar, but two years later than the preceding one, which is here
mentioned as that which appeared to him ‘at the first,” or at an earlier period.
See chap. ix. 21, note (3). The narrative is given in Hebrew, which is now resumed,
and continues to be the language of the book to its conclusion, there being no
more reference made to Chaldea, and what remains being intended only for God’s
covenant people. This change in the language is a confirmation of the genuineness
of the book.

The vision is represented as given when Daniel was in the province of Elam,
another name for Persia, at the palace or royal residence of Shushan) or Susa,
probably go called from the lilies that abounded in the region. He relates that at
the time he was on the banks of the river Ulai@; but whether in the body, or, as
Calvin and others, with great probability, suppose, in spirit, as Ezekiel was at Jeru-
salem in spirit while in body he was in Chaldea, appears uncertain. ‘he quiet
banks of this Persian stream, now long unknown, might be to Daniel what lonely
Patmos was to the beloved disciple. who so much resembled him, having been
chosen by him as a place of retirement for prayer and communion with God after
his hours of public business in Shushan, “ Arise, and get thee into the plain, and
there will I talk with thee,”

This vision, like the preceding one, is related by Daniel in his own name,
Daniel being now not a mere narrator of events, but a witness to what had been
personally communicated to him, This also, like the other, was interpreted to
Daniel, at his own request, by the Angel Gabriel @), acting under the direction of
One with the appearance of a man, probably, as Calvin thinks, the Son of God
Himself, who was one day to be also the Son of Man“), It is called “ the vision of the
evening and the morning,” generally considered to be a title given to it on account
of the expression in ver, 14, “ Unto two thousand and three hundred days,” literally,
as in the margin, “evening, morning” (),

The vision now given is that of the Ram and the He-goat, representing respec-
tively the Persian and the Grecian empires, It connects itself both with Nebuchad-
nezzar’s great image and Daniel’s four beasts, the ram being the silver breast
and arms of the image and the bear of Daniel’s vision, while the he-goat corre-
sponds with the brazen belly and thighs of the former and the four horned leopards
of the latter. The vision thus brings up before us the second and third of the
four great monarchies,

The special and more immediate object of the vision was to acquaint Daniel,
and through him his brethren the Jews, with calamities which should overtake
them many years after their return to their own land, and the happy issue out of
them at the appointed time. The vision was therefore to be sealed up, marked as
true and certain, and carefully preserved for future use), It is remarkable that,
as in the former vision with reference to the New Testament Church, these troubles
were to arise from @ power called a “little horn,” but in this case proceeding not
from the fourth beast or Roman Empire, but from the third or Grecian one, it
being within its bounds that Judea lay. From the period mentioned for the continu-
ance of this Little Horn and his persecution of the covenant people, two thousand
three hundred days, as also from the manner in which it is again introduced (chap.
xi. 21, &c.), it has been supposed that it is intended to exhibit a twofold aspect, or
to possess a typical character, the first and nearer power being the type of another


more remote ; as it is not uncommon in the prophecies of Scripture for two persons,
14aP


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OHAP. VIII,





things, or events to be predicted together in one and the same prophecy, the two
standing related to each other as type and antitype, and seen together as in a kind
of mental perspective(, By universal consent, the person more immediately
described is one of the kings of Syria, which constituted one of the four kingdoms
formed out of Alexander’s Grecian or Macedonian Empire. His name was Antiochus
Epiphanes, or the Illustrious, the author of one of the bitterest persecutions that
ever the sins of Israel brought upon their race. We have in the vision—

I. The rise of this power. It was to exhibit this that the vision of the ram
and the he-goat was introduced (ver. 3-9). A ram is seen by the prophet, and is
explained by the angel to denote the Medo-Persian Empire (); its two horns, of
which the higher came up last, representing the Medes and Persians, who together
constituted the empire, the former, in the person of Darius the Mede, taking
possession immediately on the fall of Babylon, while the latter, who succeeded in
the person of Cyrus, was the more powerful, This ram is represented as pushing
westward, northward, and southward ©), so that none could stand before him ; Cyrus
having extended his conquests to Babylon, Syria, and Asia Minor on the west, to
Armenia and Scythia in the north, and to Egypt in the south. He is, however,
confronted by a he-goat who comes from the west, with a great horn between his
eyes, and so swift as to appear not to touch the ground, and is interpreted by
Gabriel to denote the king of Grecia@, The goat attacks the ram in great fury,
breaks his two horns, and utterly crushes them under his feet ; verified in history
by the victories obtained over the Persians by the Greeks under Alexander the
Great, the founder of the Greek Empire), and here represented as ‘a notable
horn” @) of the goat. His conquests over Persia were made with such rapidity
as to be included within the space of six years, while his whole course of victory
elsewhere was completed in six more, when he was arrested by death in the thirty-
third year of his age. This horn being thus broken or snapt asunder (13), “ for it,”—
or in its stead,—“ came up four notable horns towards the four winds of heaven ; hs
interpreted by the angel to mean that on the death of the first king, Alexander the
Great, “four kingdoms should stand up out of the nation, but not in his power @4);”
fulfilled in the well-known historical fact that, soon after Alexander’s death, his
vast empire came to be divided among his four principal generals, who ruled with
a power greatly inferior to his own. These, as already indicated under the visions
of the great image and the four beasts, were Antigonus, or, after the battle of
Ipsus, Cassander, who ruled Macedonia and Greece; Lysimachus, who possessed
Thrace and Asia Minor; Ptolemy Lagus, who took Egypt, Palestine, and Arabia
Petra; and Seleucus, who obtained Syria, Babylonia, and the Eastern countries
as far as India; thus “towards the four winds of heaven.” It was out of the last
of these that there “came forth a Little Horn,” making the most conspicuous figure
in the vision; waxing “exceeding great toward the south, and toward the east,
and toward the pleasant land” (ver. 9). This was Antiochus, surnamed Epiphanes” (5),
the son, though not immediate successor, of Antigonus the Great, and the eighth
who had reigned as king of Syria. He greatly extended the dominions of his
father, almost gaining possession of Egypt, and seizing “the pleasant land,” @% or
Palestine, on whose account it is that he is introduced at all. It is especially from
the exact agreement between the prophecy and this person that Porphyry was led
to maintain that it was history and not prophecy at all, and that it had been written
after the events by some one who wished to palm off his composition as that of
Daniel the prophet, For more in regard to him and his rise as the Little Horn,
see the prophecy in chap. xi. 21, de.

I. His character. The notes given of him by Gabriel are :—

1. Pride. ‘ He magnified himself even to (or against) the prince of the host,”
ie., God Himself or the Messiah, called also the Prince of princes: “ He shall
magnify himself in his heart, and shall stand up against the Prince of princes” (ver.
14 25). The author of the secoud Book of Maccabees says, ip like We that


quay, VIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL,





“he thought he might command the waves of the sea and weigh the high mountains
in a balance; so proud was he beyond the condition of men.” The same book
relates that when humbled in his last hours by the hand of God so heavily laid
upon him, conscious of his past pride, he said, “It is meet to be subject unto God H
and a man that is mortal should not proudly think of himself as if he were God.
Pride, and especially pride in relation to God, always a prominent feature in the
description of Antichrist,

2. Fuerceness, ‘‘ A king of fierce countenance” (ver. 23). This feature in his
character sufficiently verified by his doings as related in the first Book of Maccabees.
When he first came against Jerusalem, under the impression that the Jews had
revolted, “removing from Egypt in a furious mind, he took the city by force of
arms, and commanded his men of war not to spare such as they met, and to slay
such as went up upon the houses.” Even with his last sickness upon him, he is
said to have been still filled with pride, and to have breathed out fire in his
against the Jews. This enemy was to be daring and shameless, without fear
either of God or man.

3. Knowledge and penetration. “Understanding dark sentences” (ver. 23).
The exact meaning and application of this clause uncertain@”), Bishop Newton
thinks it denotes that the Little Horn should be “a politic and artful as well as a
formidable power.” The second Book of Maccabees speaks of him as thinking in
his pride to “ make the land navigable and the sea passable on foot,” as if possessed
of extraordinary knowledge or acquaintance with magical powera. He was to be
clever, and possessing no ordinary powers of intellect, Even Satan is transformed
into an angel of light,

4. Policy and craft. “Through his policy he shall cause craft to prosper in his
hand,” and “by peace he shall destroy many” (ver. 25). Much of his success
against the Jews appears as the result of this feature of his character(@®), His
general, Apollonius, coming to Jerusalem with an army and pretending peace,
forbore from his operations until the Sabbath, when, taking advantage of the
Jewish habit of resting on that sacred day, he armed his men, and, rushing on the
unprepared Jews, he slew them all (2 Macc. v.) The enemy to be characterised
by great ability to deceive, Paul speaks of “all deceivableness of unrighteousness,”

III. His doings, “It waxed great even to (or against) the host of heaven ;*”
probably the Jewish people or Church of God ;(*) and it “cast down some of the
host of the stars (individuals among them) to the ground, and stamped upon them,
Yea, he magnified himself even to (or against) the prince of the host (probably
the promised Messiah or God Himself); and by Him the daily sacrifice ”—the
ordinary stated worship of Jehovah at Jerusalem, accompanied with and expressed
by the offering of a lamb every morning and evening—‘‘and the place of His
sanctuary was cast down. And an host() (or a time) was given him against (or
over) the daily sacrifice by reason of transgression, and it cast down the truth ~—
the Jewish worship and religion—* to the ground, and it practised and prospered”
(vers, 9-12). In the interpretation of the vision it is said, “He shall destroy
wonderfully, and shall prosper and practise, and shall destroy the mighty and the
holy people,”—the Jews, called to be to God “a holy nation” (Exod. xix. 6, 24).
The first Book of Maccabees reveals the exact fulfilment of this part of the pro-
phecy, (1) as well as the fact, also predicted, that these outrages did not take place
till the apostasy of a large number of the Jews had ripened them for the judgment :
“The transgressors had come to the full”(%), “The Lord was angry for a while
for the sins of them that dwelt in the city ; therefore His eye was not upon the
place.” The result of Antiochus waxing great toward “the pleasant land” was
that forty thousand of the Jews were slain and an equal number sold into
captivity.

IV. His continuance, “He practised and prospered” (ver. 12). It is not
eaid sil bl but in vers, 13, 14, it is related i the altho “Then I heard


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL, GmAP, Vill,





one saint (or holy one, namely, an angel) speaking, and another saint said unto
that certain saint (marg., “the numberer of secrets” or “the wonderful numberer,”
probably the Son of God, whose name is Wonderful, Isa. ix. 6; Judges xiii, 18),
which spake, How long shall be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice and the
transgression of desolation (marg., “‘ making desolate”), to give both the sanctuary
and the host to be trodden under foot? And He said unto me, Unto two thousand
and three hundred days (marg., ‘‘evening-morning,” or evening and morning), and
then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.” The sanctuary was defiled by Antiochus,
and the daily sacrifice made to cease in the year 168 B.c. In that year, two years
after his first coming up from Egypt against Jerusalem, he sent his chief collector
to put an end to the temple-worship, and thus to lay waste the sanctuary till it
was made “like a wilderness” (1 Macc, i. 39). It was not till about four years
afterwards that he died. The sanctuary, however, had been cleansed in the pre-
ceding year by Mattathias and his sons the Maccabees, after it had been defiled
between three and four years, The time mentioned in the text—“two thousand
and three hundred days”—might, it has been thought, indicate the period from
the first attack of Antiochus on Jerusalem, when he “ entered proudly the sanctuary
and took away the golden altar,” &c., till the cleansing of it between five and six
years afterwards (2), Viewed typically and reckoned on the large year-day pro-
phetic scale, a day being counted a year, according to Numb. xiv. 34, Ezek.
iv. 5, 6, the cleansing would apparently take place, a.p. 2132.

V. His end (ver. 25). ‘He shall be broken without hand.” Neither in battle,
nor by the hand of the assassin, nor any other human instrumentality, but by the
secret operation and mighty power of God, was this oppressor of His people and His
cause to meet with his end. Prophecy was fulfilled in his death as truly as in his
life. History relates that having gone to Elymais, in Persia, in quest of gold to
pay the Roman tribute, he left the place in great heaviness to return to Babylon.
“There came to him,” however, says the author of Ist Maccabees, “one who
brought him tidings into Persia that his armies, which went against the land of
Judea, were put to flight,” and that the people “had pulled down the abomination
which he had set up upon the altar in Jerusalem.” When the king heard this “he
was astonished and sore moved ; whereupon he laid him down upon his bed and
fell sick for grief, because it had not befallen him as he had looked for ; and there
he continued many days, his grief always increasing, and he made account that he
should die.” Then calling his friends together, he is said to have addressed them
in the following terms: “I now remember the evils that I did at Jerusalem, and
that I took all the vessels of gold and silver that were therein, and sent to destroy
the inhabitants of Judea without a cause, I perceive, therefore, that for this cause
these troubles are come upon me, and behold, I perish through great grief in a
strange land” (1 Macc. vi. 4-16). The second Book of Maccabees further relates
that, fleeing from Persepolis, where he had attempted to rob the temple, and com-
ing to Ecbatana, he received the tidings of the defeat of his generals, Nicanor and
Timotheus, in Judea, and that upon this he resolved to hasten his return to Jeru-
salem, threatening to make it a common burying-place of the Jews; but that as
goon as he uttered the words, “he was smitten with an incurable and invisible
plague, being seized with severe pains in his bowels,” aggravated by a sore fall from
his chariot while driving violently in haste for revenge; while, “ along with his
extreme pain, the worms rose up out of his body, his flesh fell away, and the noi-
someness of the smell that issued from him was such that no one could endure to
carry him, and that he himself was unable to bear it.”

From the whole chapter we may notice—

1. The reality of fulfilled prophecy. The proof of the predictions contained in
this chapter being true prophecy and not history, as well as of their actual fulfil-
ment, such as to be sufficient to convince any but those who will not believe either
in prophecy or miracle on any evidence whatever. The fulfilment of the prophecy

165


Omar. VII. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIBL.

earn ak tern ie acs eg
in this section so exact that writers of the Rationalistic school have employed all
their ingenuity to disprove the genuineness of the book and to make it to be a
forgery of later times. Our comfort to know that as God possesses the knowledge
of future events, so He has given to His people a proof of His concern for their
welfare by communicating to them through His servants, centuries beforehand,
events that shall surely come to pass,

2. The interest taken by angelic beings in the affairs of the Church and the world.
This interest exhibited here by two celestial personages, one of whom at least is a
created angel. Their interest in the vision and its interpretation an example worthy
of our imitation, for whose benefit both were given. If an angel inquired with
concern of Him who is the revealer of secrets, “‘ How long shall be the vision?”
well may those do so who have a personal interest in the events foretold.

3. The duty of inquiring into the meaning of the word of prophecy. This taught
by the example of the prophet himself, Daniel, not satisfied with receiving the
vision, earnestly sought its meaning, If the prophets themselves “ inquired dili-
gently what, and what manner of time, the Spirit that was in them did signify,
when He testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should
follow,” how much more ought we to do so for whom they ministered 9 (1 Pet. i
10-12).

4, "fae the Author both of the prophecies and their interpretation. Little doubt
but that here and in chap. ix. He is the person who is introduced as communicating
with Daniel through a created angel. So the New Testament prophecies are called
“the revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave unto Him,” and which “ He sent
and signified by His angel unto His servant John” (Rev. i. 1). So in chap. xxii,
16: “I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in the churches,”
“ The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.” A sufficient reason surely for
studying the prophetic Word, as well as a sweet encouragement to look for divine
help in understanding its meaning, The prophetic office of Jesus never to be
forgotten.

5. The instrumentality of others employed by the Head of the Church in commu-
ntcating knowledge. The interpretation of the vision not given to Daniel directly,
but through the medium of an angel. “Gabriel, make this man to understand the
vision,” So Philip was sent to expound to the eunuch the prophecy he was reading:
‘ How ean I understand except some man should guide me?” (Acts viii. 30, 31).

6. The tendency of the heart to backslide from God. Within four centuries
after the return of the Jews from Babylon, they are found to have departed so far
from God, and to have adopted so much the ways of the heathen, that fresh and
still greater calamities were made to overtake them, almost to their entire extine-
tion as a people. Only too much ground for the warning, “Take heed lest there
be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God.”

7. The danger to true religion from the influence of the world around us, and
the necessity of guarding against tt, The danger to Israel after their return to
their own land was that they were surrounded by the heathen and brought into
close contact with them, “ They were mixed with the heathen and learned their
ways.” The danger from conformity to the world, the rock against which the
Church of God needs constantly to be warned. “ Evil communications corrupt
good manners.” Hence the exhortation, “ Wherefore come out from among them,
and be ye separate, saith the Lord” (2 Cor. vi. 17).

8. God’s patience and long-suffering. Not till “the transgressors had come to
the full” did He employ the scourge of the Syrian oppression for their correction.
Sentence against an evil work not speedily executed. The long-suffering of God
co be accounted salvation. God not willing that any should perish, His good-
ness intended to lead to repentance, Only when that fails goodness is exchanged
for severity,

9. hae mercy of divine chastisement, ‘“ Whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth.”


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL, CHAP, VII,


Better for Israel to have Antiochus let loose upon them than to continue to learn
and practise the ways of the heathen and sink into apostasy. Better smart for
sin in time than suffer for it in eternity, The case of Israel and Antiochus is
given as an example of the use of persecution to discipline the Church of God
and His ministers, and to prepare the way for the Saviour.

10. The wretched depravity of the human heart. In Antiochus Epiphanes, as in
millions more, we have an example of the madness that is in men’s hearts while
they live without God and are strangers to His grace. The tendency of the heart
to increase in depravity as its desires are indulged. No height of pride or depth
of wickedness to which a man may not arrive when left to himself and the enemy
of souls. One prayed to be kept from that most hideous of sights, a human heart.
Better the saying of the heathen philosopher, ‘“‘ Know thyself.”

1]. Oppressors and persecutors still in God’s hand. To Antiochus, as to others,
He says, “ Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further, and here shall thy proud
waves be stayed.” The tyrant and oppressor employed as His scourge as long as
He sees necessary, and then arrested in his madness, either in mercy or in judg-
ment. Saul, breathing out slaughter against God’s saints, is awakened and saved ;
Antiochus perseveres in his cruelty till he is “broken without hand.”

12. Timely help and deliverance provided for God's persecuted people. While
Antiochus is prepared as a scourge for backsliding Israel, Mattathias and his sons
are raised up as means for their deliverance, So with the Jews and Sennacherib.
“The Assyrian came down like a wolf on the fold,” &c. Herod Agrippa stretches
out his hand to vex certain of the Church, and he is smitten with an unseen hand
and eaten up of worms. Queen Mary dies while Bernard Gilpin is on his way to
a martyr’s death. Persecutors seldom allowed to be long livers, and when the
enemy comes in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against
him. Where Satan raises up a Pharaoh, God in His time prepares a Moses,

13. Religious privileges and ordinances not sufficient to keep the Church from
backsliding from God, nor to save it from punishment when tt does so. The abuse
of such privileges among a nation’s greatest sins, and the cause of its sorest
chastisements. The sin which brought Antiochus against the Jews and Mahomet
against the Christians, The ark of God no safety to unfaithful Israel from the
hand of the Philistines. “Take away her battlements, for they are not the Lord’s,”
England’s greatest danger from despised mercies and abused privileges. Britain’s
highest privilege the abundance of her Bibles and the freeness of her Gospel, The
present a time, however, for all the lovers of their country to cry mightily to God
to save her from the sin of a refused Bible and a reiected Saviour,


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—® “ Shu
shan the palace.” Shushan or Susa,
now called Sis or Shoosh by the Arabs,
was the chief city of the province of
Elam, called Elymais by the Greeks,
and, until Darius, is thought to have
been part of the Babylonian dominion.
Keil, however, says we have no accurate
information whether under Belshazzar
Elam was or was not added to Babylon
or the Chaldean empire. At the time
of Darius Susa belonged to the province
of Elam, which had been made a satrapy
by the kings of Persia, with Susa for its
eapital, Dr. Rule observes that the
“palace” of Susa, as is evident from
the ruins, was a different building from


the citadel, the N}'2 (habbirah) of the
text. This was a strongly fortified build-
ing, towering over the city for its terror
or its defence; while the “ palace, ” as
is known by inscriptions, was built by
Darius Hystaspis or Gushtasp, who only
began to reign B.0, 521, perhaps thirty-
two years after this vision, He reads:
‘‘T was in Shushan, the citadel,” as
the city itself is called, either from the
citadel proper, or because of its own
great strength, the palace being de-
scribed in Esther i. 5, 6, &c., and called
‘“‘the house (or palace) of the king,”
situated in a garden, and sumptuously
furnished, as being intended for state
or pleasure, but not like a citadel for
167


HOMILETIC CCMMENTARY: DANIBL





strength. The ruins of Susa are now
only a wilderness, and inhabited by
lions and hyenas, on the eastern banks
of the Shapur, between it and the Diz
ful, both flowing into the Kuran, pro-
bably the same as the Ulai, or, accord-
ing to its Aryan or Persian name, the
Choaspes, Three great mountains of
ruins, from eighty to a hundred feet high,
show the compass of the city, while
smaller heaps point out its remains,

@) By the river of Ulai. Mentioned
on the cylinder of Assurbanipal as the
river of Shushan. “Their wives, like
bows and arrows, filled the vicinity of
Shushan; their corpses I caused the
Ulai to receive.” Jerome, as well as the
Vulgate and Theodotion, translate the
words, ‘at the gate of Ulai,” remarking
that Ulai is the name of a place or of a
gate, and stating that at Shushan there
is no river, but only the gate of that
castle, although some make the word
S23 (cobhal) equivalent to 53% (yoo-
bhal), a flood. There had been such a
river. Calvin observes that the Latin
writers mention a river Huleus, and that
he has no hesitation in understanding
it to be intended here. Pliny says the
river Eulaus divides Susiana from Ely-
mais.

@) “Gabriel.” For remarks on this
angelic messenger see under chap. ix.
21.

*) “That certain saint” (ver. 13),
‘9028 (palmoni) ; according to Keil, “a
certain one, I know not who,” as not
being more particularly definable. Left
untranslated in the Greek. The margin
of E.V. has “ Palmoni ;” but adds, “or
the numberer of secrets, or the wonderful
numberer.” Pfaff, Junius, and Willet:
“a certain one,” like peloni almoni,
“such a one” (Ruth iv. 1); Willet
thinking the Hebrew words better joined
on account of the ambiguous significa-
tion. Polanus wnderstands it to mean
“secret,” from 8D (pele), wonderful,”
and 0°79 (’alam), “to hide.” Q&colam-
padius translates the word “an admir-
able or wonderful one,” from 825 (pele),
“a wonder,” and ‘302X (almoni), “a
certain one.” Calvin also renders it
“wonderful,” and thinks it certainly
points to ‘a person the superior of the


angel who speaks, and that it denotes
Christ Himself. Brightman has “an
excellent one ;” while Wintle adopts the
marginal rendering.

(5.) “ The vision of the evening and
the morning” (ver. 26). “23 37Y (‘erebh
boger), like the wyO%uspov (a night and
day) of the Greeks (2 Cor. xi. 35). Ac-
cording to Keil, who renders the phrase
“evening-morning,” we are to under-
stand whole days, consisting of morning
and evening (twenty-four hours). So
Bertholdt, Havernick, &c., in opposition
to Bleek, Ewald, Delitzsch, and others,
who, understanding the reference to the
morning and evening sacrifice of each
day, make the number, not 2300 whole
days, but 1150. Keil thinks the verbal
import of the expression doubtful ; but
that the choice of so unusual a measure
of time, derived from the two chief parts
of the day, instead of the simple mea
sure of time by days, probably originates
with reference to the morning and even-
ing sacrifice, by which the day was to be
consecrated to the Lord, after Gen. i. 5,
8, 13, &., where the days of the crea-
tion week are named and reckoned ac-
cording to the succession of evening and
morning.

() “Shut up the vision” (ver. 26).
DIND (sethom), from OND (satham), to
stop, to conclude, to hide; but not in
the sense of keeping secret, or because
it would be incomprehensible for the
nearest times; but in the sense of keep-
ing, as in archives, According to Keil
and Kliefoth, the meaning is simply
this: Preserve the revelation, not be-
cause it is not yet to be understood,
also not for the purpose of keeping it
secret, but that it may remain preserved
for future times, So Chrysostom : Keep
and preserve it faithfully. Cardinal
Hugo understands it to mean: Commit
it to memory. De Lyra: Commit it to
writing. Bullinger: Seal it asa thing
most true and certain, Willet: Keep
it from the Chaldees and from carnal
men. According to Junius, it was to
intimate that the vision would be long
in receiving its fulfilment, Calvin un-
derstood it to mean that men were not
to doubt of its fulfilment. Dr. Rule thus
paraphrases: “Let nothing curiously


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


GHAP, VIIL,





tempt thee to break the seal, for that
which God closes no creature has power
to break open, Be not impatient to
promulgate what thou art not able to
explain ; for neither is it necessary to pub-
- lish what God has determined that none
shall understand till the time to under-
stand shall come. Seal it up, therefore,
and let it be kept with care, every letter
of it, that no rude handling obliterate
the finest stroke.”

(7) “It cannot be disputed that here,
in prophetic perspective, the time of the
end is seen together with the period of
the oppression of the people of God
by Antiochus, and the first appearance
of the Messiah with His return in glory
to the final judgment, as the latter is the
ease also in chap, ii. 34, &c., 44, d&e.,
and vii. 13, 26, &. . . . For in the last
vision (chaps. x.—xij.) which Daniel saw,
not only the time of the oppression of An-
tiochus and that of the last enemy are
contemplated together as one, but also
the whole contents of this one vision
are, chap. x. 14, transferred to the ‘ end
of the days,’”—Kerl.

() “4A ram which had two horns.”
“ The kings of Media and Persia” (vers,
8, 20). A ram’s head of gold, says Dr.
Cumming, chosen as the diadem of the
Persian kings, alone sufficient to identify
the symbol, The figure of a ram, the
symbol of Persia, Dr. Rule tells us, has
been found among the ruins of Per-
sepolis, In the Zend book Bundehesh,
the guardian spirit of the Persian king-
dom is represented under the figure of
a ram. Dr. Rule observes that the
Medo-Persian conqueror of Shushan, a
Babylonian stronghold, is here foretold ;
and thinks that it was perhaps as much
the assurance produced in his mind in
this vision as any second revelation in
the night of the banquet, that enabled
the prophet to declare the meaning of
the writing on the wall.

®) “ Pushing westward, and northward,
and southward” (ver. 4). Dr, Cumming
observes that Lydia and Babylon were
subdued by Cyrus, and Egypt by his
son Cambyses. Keil remarks that the
ram is to be conceived of as standing on
the western bank of the river flowing on
the west of Susa, from whence he pushed


down with his horns all beasts before
him, i.¢, subdued all nations and king-
doms to his power in three regions of
the earth ; in the west, Babylon, Syria,
and Asia Minor; in the south, Egypt;
in the north, the Armenian and Scythian
nations, He did not push toward the
east ; not because, as Hivernick thinks,
the conquests of the Persians did not
stretch towards that quarter, for Cyrus
and Darius subdued nations to the east
of Persia even as far as to the Indus ; but
because, for the unfolding of the Medo-
Persian monarchy as a world-power, its
conquests in the east were suburdinate,
and therefore are not mentioned.

(10) “ An he-goat came from the west.”
“ The rough goat ts the king of Grecia”
(vers. 5, 21). Dr. Taylor remarks that
the symbol of a goat often appears in
connection with Macedonia, and was
used as an emblem of that kingdom,
its origin being ascribed to the tradition
that Caremus, the first king of Mace-
don, was led by a flock of guats to the
spot on which he decided for the capital
of his kingdom, Keil observes that the
goat comes from the west, as Macedonia
lay west of Susa or Persia; and its
coming over the earth is more definitely
denoted by the expression, “ he touched
not the ground,” te, as he hastened
over it in his flight,—the remark corre-
sponding with the four wings of the
leopard (chap. vii. 6).

(11) “ The first king.” The author of
the first Book of Maccabees says that
Alexander “reigned in his stead (viz,
that of Darius the Mede), the first over
Greece,” The author of this book,
which is said to have been written
originally in Hebrew, “is thought to
have compiled it partly from the
memoirs collected by Judas Macca
bssus, and partly from those of John
Hyrcanus, whose leadership began at
the period where this book leaves off.”
Archdeacon Harrison remarks, after Mr.
Forster (Mohammedanism Unveiled) that
a clear reference is made by the author
of that book to the prophecy regarding
Antiochus Epiphanes.

@2) “4 notable horn.” DAN VP (ke-
ren khasuth), a ‘‘a horn of sight,” t.¢, a
horn to be looked at and contemplated

169


OW@aP, VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





with admiration, The parallel expres-
sion in ver. 8, “‘ the great horn.” Keil
remarks that NWN (khazuth) has the
meaning of A8W (mareh), in the kert
ANID W'S (ish mareh) of 2 Sam. xxiii.
21, a man of countenance or sight ; ahorn
of sight, consideration, or considerable
greatness. Sept., xégac Osognré, “ He
made many wars, and won many strong-
holds, and slew the kings of the earth,
and went through to the ends of the
earth, and took the spoils of many na-
tions, insomuch that the earth was quiet
before him ; and he ruled over countries,
and nations, and kings, who became tri-
butary to him” (1 Mace. i. 2, de.)

(3) “The great horn was broken.”
Dr. Cumming, applying the words to
Alexander’s government rather than to
himself, observes that the original term
denotes ‘‘ snapt asunder ;” not gradually
wasted away, nor desolated inch by inch
till it disappeared. Alexander’s govern-
ment was terminated with his life. The
expression, however, probably refers to
Alexander’s own death, which came upon
him suddenly in the midst of his car-
ousings in Babylon, the termination of
his empire being the result of that event.
“Here as well as at chap. xi. 4 the re-
ference of the words to the sudden death
of Alexander in the prime of his days,
and when in the very height of his vic-
torious career, cannot be disputed ; and
by the breaking of the horn we can only
understand Alexander’s death, and the
breaking-up of the kingdom founded by
him.”—Keil,

(14) « For it came up four notable ones.”
“ Four kingdoms shall stand up out of
the nation, but not in his power” (vers.
8, 22). MAIN (khazuth), “sight,” the noun
used in ver, 5, here employed as an ad-
verb, conspicuously, “there came forth
four conspicuously in its place.” Ac-
cording to the interpretation of the angel,
however, these four horns, though not-
able and conspicuous, have not the power
of the one great horn, “They represent
in themselves a considerable power, with-
out, however, gaining the power of the
one undivided kingdom.”—Xeil, These
four horns or kingdoms are the dynasties
of the Diadochs, as they are called. Of
these there were indeed five; but after

170


the overthrow of Antigonus at the battle
of Ipsus, 301 B.c., twenty-two years
after the death of Alexander, for the
first time they became in reality four
kings, and divided the empire among
themselves, as stated in the text. All
of them, however, says the historian
Justin, “abstained from the use of the
insignia of their dignity while the sons
of their king survived. So great was
their veneration, that although they had
royal wealth and resources, they cared
not for the name of kings, so long as
there existed a legitimate heir to Alex-
ander,”

(5) “Out of one of them came forth
a little horn” (ver. 9). Literally, “ Out
of one of them came forth one horn
out of littleness,” 2.¢, from small be
ginnings. So Keil, Maurer, and others.
The expression corresponds with MN) ¥
npep (ze’irah silgath), “ came up small,”
in chap. vii. 8. The horn was to grow
to great power from a small beginning,
It was to be one horn, not several,
The one of the four horns from which
the Little Horn grew up has been acknow-
ledged by all interpreters since Josephus
to be the Syrian monarchy, and the horn
itself to be Antiochus Epiphanes. “There
came out of them a wicked root, An-
tiochus, surnamed Epiphanes, aon of
Antiochus the king” (1 Mace, i. 10).
Josephus says, “Our nation suffered
these calamities under Antiochus Epi-
phanes, as Daniel saw and wrote many
years before what things should come
to pass.”

(8) “ The pleasant land” (ver. 9) ‘230
(hatstsebhs), the beauty, delight, or orna-
ment, as in chap, xi. 16, 41, 45, where
it has “land ” or “ mountain” connected
with it. The name given to the land of
Canaan, and perhaps to Jerusalem, its
capital, from its pleasantness and beauty,
but more especially from its being chosen
as the land in which Jehovah was pleased
to manifest Himself; hence, in chap, xi.
45, the addition of the epithet “holy.”
According to Keil, “splendour, glory ;”
the glorious land. So Calvin. The same
word used as the name of the roe, from
its pleasantness and beauty. The expe-
ditions of Antiochus referred to in the
text are thus related in the first Book of


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL,


OnaP. VTL.





Maccabees, “Now when tue kingdom
was established before Antiochus, he
thought to reign over Eyypt [in the
south], that he might have the dominion
of two realms, Wherefore he entered
into Egypt with a great multitude, with
chariots, and elephants, and horsemen,
and a great navy ; and made war against
Ptolemy, king of Egypt, and he tovuk the
spoils thereof. And after that Antiochus
had smitten Egypt, he returned again,
and went up against Israel and Jeru-
salem with a great multitude” (1 Mace.
i. 16-20).

Q7) “ Understanding dark sentences,”
Literally, ‘“‘understanding mysteries ;”
MY (khidhoth); but probably taken
in a bad sense; concealing his purpose
behind ambiguous words, using dissimu-
lation, forming artifices. So Keil, who
thinks the expression is interpreted in
ver. 25 by 197 (mirmah), craft or deceit.
The Sept. and Vulg. have, “ understand-
ing problems or propositions.” Luther
refers the expression to his craftiness ;
while Calvin understands it also of his
cleverness ; not easy to be deceived—
skilled in enigmas, So Martin (French):
Of a penetrating spirit, Grotius inter-
prets it of his knowledge of tricks, strata-
gems, and wiles ; knowing in what way
many of the Jews might be drawn away
from their religion. Junius and Geier
understand it as denoting his sagacity in
investigating and finding out abstruse
matters, Adam Clarke thinks the ex-
pression to mean—learned and skilful
in all things relating to government and
its intrigues, and apparently typical of
Rome, whose legal learning is proverbial
to the present time. R. Saadias under-
stood it of his mastery of the “ dark
sentences” or enigmas of the principal
kings of his time, viz., those of Greece,
Rome, and Persia,

G8) “ Through his policy he eg
cause craft to prosper” (ver. 25). 22¥
(sechel), sagacity ; generally used in a
good sense; here apparently in a bad
one,—cunning, Through his clever-
ness his deceit should be successful.
Great intelligence and cleverness to
characterise both type and antitype.
“ All deceivableness of unrighteousness.”
Satan transformed into an angel of light,


‘waa ‘cast down” by Antiochus,


(19) “ The host of heaven.” Here, as
in Jer. xxxiii, 22, the whole body of
the stars of heaven, interpreted by the
angel in ver, 24 to denote the people
of the saints, or the covenannt people
of God, the stars who were cast to
the ground being therefore individuals
among the people, and not necessarily
the priests or leaders. “He (the
general) fell suddenly upon the city,
and smote it very sore, and destroyed
many people of Israel” (1 Macc. i,
30


(20) * An host was given him against
the daily sacrifice” (ver. 12). &3¥
(tsabha), “a host,” According to Keil,
it denotes only military service, or per-
haps military forces; and the proper
rendering of the passage is, ‘“‘An host
shall be given up, together with the
daily sacrifice, because of transgres-
sion,” viz, the apostasy of Israel from
God. So, in general, C. B, Michaelis,
Havernick, V. Lengerke, Maurer, and
Kliefoth. So also Willet, Bullinger,
Junius, and Polanus; the latter, how-
ever, reading ‘‘against the daily sacri-
fice ;” and understanding by the trans-
gression especially the treachery of the
priests Jason and Menelaus, through
which the city and Temple were be-
trayed (2 Macc. iv.) Calvin under-
stands the word S2¥ (tsabha) in the
sense of “an appointed time,” as in
Job vii. 1; and considers the meaning
to be, that Antiochus could do nothing
unless divinely permitted and _pre-
viously limited; that God would try
the patience of His Church for a certain
definite time, but that Antiochus should
not be able to abolish the worship of
God.—PN (tamidh), “ daily sacrifice ;”
literally, “the continual ;” comprehends
all that is of permanent use in the
service or worship of God. So Keil,
Hengstenberg, Hivernick, d&c,

(1) “Tt cast down the truth to the
ground” (ver. 12). MDS (emeth), “ truth,”
“the truth ;” here objective truth ; the
Word of God, so far as it is embodied
in external worship; the Jewish re
ligion and worship as appointed by God
Himself.. The first Book of Maccabees
(chap. i, 43, &c.) informs us how far this
6“ He
171


GuaP, VII


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





entered proudly into the sanctuary, and
took away the golden altar, and the
candlestick of light, and all the vessels
thereof, and the table of the shew-
bread, and the pouring vessels, and the
bowls, and the censers of gold, and the
veil, the crowns, and the golden orna-
ments that were before the Temple; all
which he pulled off. He took also the
silver and the gold and the precious
vessels, . . . Moreover, King Antiochus
wrote to his whole kingdom that all
should be one people, and every one
should receive his laws: so all the
heathen agreed according to the com-
mandment of the king, Yea, many also
of the Israelites consented to his re-
ligion, and sacrificed unto idols and
profaned the Sabbath. For the king
had sent letters by messengers to Jeru-
salem and to the cities of Judah that
they should follow the strange laws of
the king, and forbid burnt-offerings and
sacrifices and drink-offerings in the
Temple, and that they should profane
the Sabbath-days and festival days, and
pollute the sanctuary and holy people.”
The punishment of non-compliance was
death, which was rigorously inflicted.
(22) “ When the transgressors are come
to the full” (ver. 23). ODON93 (keha-
them), literally, “at the making full,”
or ‘“‘when they have made full,” 1e.,
their transgression, or the measure of
their sins, understood from the concep-
tion of the subject, The transgressors,
D'YWBD (happoshe’im), are the rebellious
among the Jews, who apostatised and
cast off the religion of Jehovah for the
manners of the Greeks, as in ver. 12;
perhaps with special reference to the
leaders in the apostasy. The author of
the first Book of Maccabees thus relates ;
“When on the death of Seleucus, king
of Syria, Antiochus Epiphanes came to
the kingdom, Jason, the brother of
Onias the high priest, laboured under-
hand to obtain that dignity, promising
the king a large sum of money as a
bribe, and at the same time another
large sum if he might have licence to
set him up a place for exercise, and for
the training up of youth in the fashions
of the heathen ; which, when the king
had granted, and he had gotten into his
172


hand the rich, he forthwith brought his
own nation to the Greek fashion, and
putting down the governments which
were according to law, he brought up
new customs against the law. For he
gladly built a place of exercise under
the tower itself, and brought the chief
young men under his subjection. ...
Now such was the height of Greek
fashions and increase of heathenish
manners, through the exceeding pro-
fanity of Jason, that ungodly wretch
and no high priest, that the priests had
no courage to serve any more at the
altar; but, despising the Temple, and
neglecting the sacrifices, they hastened
to be partakers of the unlawful allow-
ance in the place of exercise,. . . not
setting by the honour of their fathers,
but liking the glory of the Grecians best
of all. By reason whereof sore calami-
ties came upon them; for they had them
to be their enemies and avengers whose
customs they followed so eagerly, and to
whom they desired to be like in all
things. For it is no light thing to do
wickedly against the law of God.”

(23) “Unio two thousand and three
hundred days (marg., evening w >rn-
ing): then shall the sanctuary be
cleansed.” Calvin says these days fill
up six years and three and a half
months, while the Jews suffered under
Antiochus about six years, Keil also
understands the period here mentioned
as two thousand three hundred days,
but views it rather as symbolical, the
oppression of Antiochus having con-
tinued not fully seven years. Wintle
thinks the expression “ evening morn-
ing” should induce us to understand
those days in the first instance literally,
rather than of months and years; and
would thus refer them to the tyranny of
Antiochus, without forgetting the refer-
ence to Antichrist, of whom Antiochus
was the type. Dr. Rule, however, re-
marks: “The king of fierce countenance
(ver. 23) was to arise in the latter part
of the kingdom of the successors of
Alexander, which kingdom began about
three hundred and seven years before
Christ. The defilement of the Temple,
BO. 168, took place only one hundred
and two years before the extinction of


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: DANIEL.





the Syrian kingdom, B.o, 66, and there-
fore ‘in the latter time of their king-
dom,’ that is to say, the kingdom of the
four kings ; and must be taken to make
the commencement of the two thousand
three hundred years, which, on that
calculation, will terminate in the year
of our Lord 2132, About that year,


OHAP. VIII,


—_—_—_—_—_—_—_— eee


therefore, if we correctly understand
the prophecy, some state of things is
likely to arise that shall answer to
the cleansing of the sanctuary, the
restoration of the daily sacrifice, the
ending of the transgression of deso-
lation, and the fulfilment of Daniel’s
Vision,”


HOMILETICS.
Sror. XXIX.—Tue Mostem Anticurist (Chap. viii. 9-25).


Although the vision of the Syrian or Grecian Little Horn had plainly its
fulfilment in Antiochus Epiphanes, yet there have appeared reasons for believing
that it looked beyond that monarch to another power, of which it might be
regarded as the type@), This has seemed especially probable from the time during
which the sanctuary was to remain uncleansed and the daily sacrifice to be
abolished. The pollution of the Temple by Antiochus, strictly speaking, continued
only some three years or three years and a half; which latter term would be not
2300, but 1260 days. The probability is that the term “days,” or, as it is here
peculiarly expressed, ‘evening mornings,” as often elsewhere in prophecy, is to be
understood of years; as it obviously is in chap. xii., and as the “weeks” in the
next chapter are well known to be weeks not of days but of years. Another
reason for regarding this Little Horn as typical of another power afterwards to
arise is the fact that the Scripture elsewhere applies the same language to a power
that was only to appear in connection with the fourth beast or Roman Empire, and
that is usually spoken of as the Antichrist ; while the evils predicted as wrought
by Antiochus against the Jews were much less than those inflicted both upon
Jews and Christians (the people of the new covenant) by another power in many
respects resembling him. There appears reason, therefore, to regard the “ Little
Horn” of the third beast or Grecian Empire as typical of that other “ Little Horn”
of the fourth beast or Roman Empire predicted in chap. vii. It is thus that
Antiochus was regarded by the early Christians as a type of Antichrist.

It has, however, been believed by some, on apparently satisfactory grounds,
that besides the Antichrist of the fourth beast or Roman Empire, Antiochus might
typify another power that was to prove as hurtful to the Christian Church as that
tyrant was to the Jewish one, and which was to arise within the bounds of the
same third empire to which Antiochus himself belonged. That power was the
Mohammedan or Turkish, which, with Mahomet for its head and representative,
might be called the Antichrist of the East, as the Papacy, with the Roman Pontiff
as its head, was of the West; and which, like the latter, appears to occupy a con-
siderable place in the Apocalypse of the New Testament, See Rev. ix. 1-19, xvi,
12. The pollution of the sanctuary and the “abomination of desolation standing
in the holy place,” which were to characterise the future Antichrist, as it had done
Antiochus, has marked the conduct no less of the Moslems than of the Romans.
The latter polluted the Temple by planting an idolatrous standard, the Roman
eagle, within its walls after the siege), while a new city, called Alia Capitolina,
was erected on the ruins of Jerusalem, which no Jew was allowed to approach
The doings of the Moslems have been no less marked in respect to the Temple, the
Holy City, and the Jewish people, while they have been especially directed against
the people of the new covenant, the Christian Church in its Eastern branch, with
its sanctuaries and worship ); and it is not a little remarkable that, as D’Aubigné
observes, “ At the beginning of the seventh century, while the et lee ae


omar, VIT!. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY. DANIEL,





’ of the children of the idolatrous North were placing on the supreme throne of
Christendom a pastor on the banks of the Tiber, these events were accomplishing
in the West precisely at the period when the power of Mahomet arose in the East.”
It may be interesting to trace the typical analogy in the various particulars
enumerated in the preceding chapter.

I. The rise of their power. The Saracen power, like Mahomet himself, arose
in Arabia, while that of the Turks had its origin in Parthia, near the Oxus, both
being within the territory of the he-goat or Grecian Empire, and indeed that part
of it from which the Little Horn was to spring, and of which Antiochus was the
ruler, Like the founder of the religion which. bears his name, the Turkish Empire
was “little” in its beginning, commencing with Togrul Beg, a Turcoman shep-
herd, the petty chief of a petty clan. Togrul, by marrying the Caliph’s daughter,
from being, as Dr. Cumming remarks, “a petty and contemptible chief, became
the loyal and all but irresistible propagandist of Mahometan fanaticism.”

II. Its character. Pride obviously belonged to one who claimed to be the
supreme prophet of God, whose teachings and revelations were to supersede those
both of Moses and of Christ, and to a people that believe themselves to be alone
the faithful and the favourites of the Almighty, and despise all others as dogs and
infidels. Serceness is the well-known characteristic both of Saracens and Turks,
a people, according to one of their own chiefs, whose “delight is in war rather
than in peace,” and who, in the language of Gibbon speaking of the Turkish
‘nations, “still breathe the fierceness of the desert,” The singular and somewhat
obscure feature of ‘‘ understanding dark sentences” may not unnaturally be applied
to one who pretended to receive the Koran, with all its mysterious and dark sen-
tences, from the mouth of the Angel Gabriel, a book which has been the study of
many of his followers in relation to the most abstruse theological subjects, while
many others have entered as profoundly into the various branches of mathematical
and scientific knowledge,—Mahomet’s successor, Ali, uniting, as Gibbon remarks,
“the qualifications of a poet, a soldier, and a saint.”

By policy and craft Mahomet is known to have made the progress he did,
acting as a worldly ruler while pretending to be the prophet of God and the organ
of divine communications to mankind. ‘In the exercise of political government,”
says the historian just quoted, ‘‘ Mahomet was compelled to abate the stern rigour
of fanaticism, to comply with the prejudices and passions of his followers, and to
employ even the vices of mankind as the instruments of their salvation. The use
of fraud and perfidy, of cruelty and injustice, was often subservient to the pro-
pagation of the faith.” He is believed to have worn the mask of sanctity and
mortification only the better to extend his imposture in the world; while his craft
appears in pretending new and contradictory communications from Heaven to meet
emergencies and requirements as they arose.

TIL Its doings, Like Antiochus Epiphanes, the Saracens and Turks “ waxed
exceeding great toward the south, and toward the east, and toward the pleasant
land.” They extended their conquests to Egypt, Persia, &c., and to Palestine,
the last being in their possession to the present day. The Caliph Omar, in the
seventh century, obtained possession of Jerusalem, and immediately caused a
magnificent mosque to be erected on the site ot the ancient Temple. On his enter-
ing the city, the Christian patriarch Sophronius, says Gibbon, “bowed before his
new master, and muttered, in the words of Daniel, ‘the abomination of desolation
is in the holy place.’” In place of the worship of the Triune Jehovah through
the one Mediator Jesus Christ and His atoning sacrifice, was substituted the
worship of a Being of whom Mahomet taught that it was unbecoming to say
that He could have a son, and who was to be approached through no Mediator
unless it might be himself, and through no offering except a man’s own meritorious
actions. ‘The daily sacrifice was taken away in its true sense, as it had been by
cagyery es its typical one, The religion of Jesus, with its one sacrifice for sin,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OHaP. VIEL








was banished from the precincts of the Temple area, within which even now a
Christian is scarcely permitted to enter. Nor indeed did this take place till, as in
the case of Antiochus and the Jews, “the transgressors had come to the full ;”
Moslems and Turks being simply the scourge of a degenerate Christianity, which
had changed “ the Gospel of the blessed God” into what was in many respects a lie,
and His worship into a mass of foolish and worthless superstitions), By them
the mystical holy city, the Church of Christ, as well as the literal one, was to be
trodden under foot. Everywhere Christian churches were either demolished or
converted into mosques (), and were permitted to remain as such only on the
payment of a tribute, the memorials of this profane desolation meeting you every-
where in the East at the present day, as well as in Constantinople itself, where the
most splendid mosques, as that of St. Sophia, were originally employed for Chris-
tian worship before the Crescent supplanted the Cross. The well-known option to
the Christian was between renouncing Christianity, tribute, and death, How
Mahomet magnified himself against the Prince of princes, and cast down the truth
to the ground, was made only too obvious by the well-known watchword, “ There
is no God but one, and Mahomet is His prophet ;” and by the law, rescinded only
a few years ago under British influence, that made it death for a Moslem to become
a Christian.

IV. Its end. The Little Horn was to be “broken without hand.” We have
seen the fulfilment of this part of the prophecy in relation to the person of An-
tiochus. In his Moslem antitype, however, we look for it rather in the power than
the person, In the Book of Revelation the Turkish power, which succeeded the
Saracenic and continued the reign of Islam, is presented under the symbol of the
river Euphrates, the quarter from whence it sprung (Rev. ix. 14, 15). That river,
however, was to be “ dried up,” that “the way of the kings of the East might be
prepared” (Rev. xvi. 12). The Turkish power, after serving the purpose for which
in the providence of God it was “prepared” for an appointed time, was to be
gradually dissolved till it wholly disappeared. This decay or ‘drying up” was to
take place, according to apocalyptic symbol, as the effect of the effusion of the
sixth vial, while that of the seventh was to bring the end. The fact that, in the
days in which we live, this decay of the Turkish Empire is rapidly going on, is well
known to every intelligent reader of the newspapers. One of the subjects recently
engaging the attention of Europe was the demand of Greece for the rectification of
its extended frontier, involving the surrender of Turkish territory. More than
half a century ago E. Irving wrote: “Though the destruction of the Mahometan
power is yet future, it is even now beginning to be ‘ broken without hand’ by its
own disorganisation and dismemberment—wasting away of inward consumption,
according to the language of the sixth vial”). From the year 1820, the Turkish
power has been “the sick man,” gradually losing his strength and coming to his
end. Moslems themselves believe that, according to ancient prophecy, the days of
Islam are numbered. Daniel’s period for the antitypical cleansing of the sanctuary
cannot, therefore, be far distant), Nor is it unlikely that, as the Papal and Moslem
Antichrists began their disastrous course almost together, so together, or within a
short period of each other, they will perish,

The effect of the vision upon Daniel himself, noted in the end of the chapter,
“T, Daniel, fainted, and was sick certain days” (ver. 27). The mere circumstances
of the vision might have thus operated on Daniel’s physical system. Communi-
cation with angelic beings in the present state probably too much for the human
frame to endure without considerable derangement. It is likely, however, that the
nature of the communication made had the principal share in producing this effect,
The prospect of so much misery in store for his people after their restoration to
their own land, and that, too, as the consequence of their own multiplied and
matured transgressions, especially their abandonment of Jehovah’s worship, was
too much for the sensitive and beloved prophet. Daniel felt as a ae a

l


OmaP. VIIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


prophet, and a man of God. From this, the concluding part of the chapter, we
may note—

1. Jt ts the part of sin to blunt, but of grace to intensify, natural feelings, The
more that our nature is refined and purified, the more shall we be affected by the
sins and sorrows of others, especially those of our own kindred and country. The
more we are made to resemble the Sinless One, the more readily shall we with
Him mingle our tears with the bereaved and weep over a city that rejects its God
and Saviour. The same grace drew from the tender-hearted prophet the ex-
clamation, “Oh, that my head were waters and mine eyes fountains of tears, that I
might weep day and night for the slain of the daughters of my people ;” and
caused the manly, courageous Apostle to write, “I have great heaviness and con-
tinual sorrow in my heart for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh”
(Jer. ix. 1; Rom. ix. 23),

2. The feelings and affections moved by realised truth according to tts nature,
The effect of truth, cordially received and realised, as in the case of the prophet, is
to produce either joy or sorrow, hope or fear, love or aversion. The depth and
power of the emotion according to the character of the truth and the intensity
with which it is realised. The proper effect of Gospel truth to produce not only
love to the revealed Saviour, but to fill the soul with joy (1 Pet. i. 8). Believed
and realised prediction of divine visitation for sin naturally productive of dee
concern. The mark of the godly to tremble at God’s word (Isa. Ixvi. 2). “ When
Iheard, my belly trembled; my lips quivered at the voice: rottenness entered
into my bones, and I trembled in myself, that I might rest in the day of trouble”
(Hab. iii. 16). It is the nature of sin to harden the heart against divine threaten-
ings (Heb, iii. 7, iv. 7). While Paul reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and
judgment to come, Felix trembled. His: ruin was that he resisted his convie-
tions, silenced his fears, and hardened his heart by a return to his sins,

3. Religious concern no hindrance to daily duty. Daniel’s sickness disabled him
for duty while it lasted, which was only for “ certain days.” So soon as it was
over he “rose up and did the king’s business” (ver. 27), Daniel’s well-balanced
mind knew how to be “ diligent in business” while “fervent in spirit.” One
form, fruit, and evidence of serving God faithfully is the faithful discharge of
relative duties. Daniel was faithful and diligent in serving the king because he
was faithful and diligent in serving God. His diligence and fidelity as well as his
wisdom the source and secret of his influence at the Babylonian and Persian courts,
“‘Seest thou a man diligent in his business? He shall stand before kings, and
shall not stand before mean men,”

4. God's dealings often dark and mysterious. Daniel “was astonished at the
vision” (ver. 27). Events in providence often very different from our anticipation,
Daniel expected a long period of peace and prosperity to his people on their settle
ment in their own land, according to the glowing descriptions of Isaiah and other
prophets ; while Israel, taught by bitter experience, would henceforth walk in the
ways of the Lord. Both of these expectations were contradicted by the vision.
Messiah was not yet to appear. The people were to suffer more than ever, and
their suffering was to be the chastisement of their apostasy and sin. “ His way is
in the sea, and His path on the great waters.” Patience is to have her perfect
work. “Though the vision tarry, wait for it.” One day is with the Lord as a
thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. God is not slack concerning
His promise, as some men count slackness, If He delay to fulfil His promise, it is
because delay is better than despatch. “ My ways are not your ways, neither are
my thoughts your thoughts, saith the Lord.”

5. Knowledge of prophetic truth not in all cases wouchsafed. None understood
the vision” (ver, 27). Daniel was to “shut up the vision” (ver. 27). It was
true, and therefore to be carefully preserved ; but its fulfilment was distant, “ for
many ist As the time of fulfilment drew nigh it would be pondered and better





HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : DANIEL.


=


OMAP, VIIL





anderstood. ‘“ At the end it shall speak, and not lie” (Hab. ii. 3), The time
would come when many should run to and fro, or carefully investigate its meaning,


and the knowledge of it should be increased (chap. xii. 4).


now in these last days,


That time much nearer


“Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words


of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein ; for the time


is at hand” (Rev. i. 3).
EXEGETICAL NOTES.—® Bishop


Newton observes that most of the ancient
fathers and modern divines and commen-
tators agree with Jerome in applying the
prophecy to Antiochus Epiphanes, while
all allow at the same time that Antiochus
was a type of Antichrist, and that in
this great enemy of the truth the pro-
phecy was to obtain its full accomplish-
ment. The Bishop, who regards the
Roman Empire as the antitype, observes:
“ Antiochus did indeed take away the
daily sacrifice, but he did not cast down
the place of the sanctuary—he did not
destroy the Temple, He took away the
sacrifice for a few years, but the Romans
for many ages; and the Romans like-
wise utterly destroyed the Temple, which
Antiochus only spoiled and profaned.”
He adds, that “ Antiochus did not so
mightily destroy the Jews nor prosper
in his heathenish designs against them.
Antiochus slew forty thousand and sold
forty thousand more ; the Romans, after
the city was taken, slew eleven hundred
thousand and sold ninety-seven thou-
sand more. Antiochus meant to root
out the whole people, but his success
was not equal; the Romans put an end
to the government of the Jews and
entirely took away their place and
ration.” Calvin remarks: “It would
please me better to see any one wishing
to adapt this prophecy to the present
use of the Church, and to apply to
Antichrist, by analogy, what is said of
Antiochus. We know that whatever
happened to the Church of old belongs
also to us, because we have fallen upon
the fulness of times.” Jerome had said:
“Most Christians refer this place to
Antichrist, and affirm that what was
transacted in a type under Antiochus
Epiphanes will be fulfilled in truth
under Antichrist.” Luther says: “ All
former teachers have called and in-
terpreted this Antiochus a figure of the
Gnal Antichrist, and they have hit the


s


right mark.” Wieseler remarks that
* Antiochus Epiphanes, in his self-
deifying fanatical haughtiness and bis
enmity against God and divine wor-
ship, is very properly the type of Anti-
christ.” Keil says: “ The circumstance
that the description of the Little Horn
growing up between the ten horns of
the fourth beast, the speaking great and
blasphemous things against the Most
High, and thinking to change times
and laws (chap. vii. 8, 24, &c.), har-
monises in certain features with the
representation of Antiochus Epiphanes,
described by the Little Horn (chap. viii.),
which would destroy the people of the
Holy One, rise up against the Prince of
princes, and be broken without hand of
man, does not at all warrant the iden-
tification of these enemies of God and
His people rising out of different world-
kingdoms, but corresponds perfectly
with this idea that Antiochus in his
war against the people of God was a
type of Antichrist, the great enemy
arising out of the last world-kingdom.”

(2) Josephus relates that after the
city was taken the Romans brought
their ensigns into the Temple and placed
them over against the eastern gate, and
sacrificed to them there. Bishop New-
ton remarks that the Roman army it-
self is fitly called “the abomination,”
and “the abomination of desolation,”
as it was to desolate and lay waste
Jerusalem; and is said to stand in the
holy place when compassing the city ;
Jerusalem itself and a space around it
being accounted holy.

(®) Dr. Cox remarks that in this chap-
ter, according to Faber, whose interpre-
tation appears to be, on good grounds,
now universally [rather, extensively]
adopted, the prophet records the history
of the Mohammedan imposture. He
adds that “the first efforts of the im-
postor were directed against the Jews,
who refused to receive Mohammed's


177


OMAP. VIIK.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





effusions as the revelations of Heaven,
and in consequence suffered the loss of
their possessions and lives.” So that
under the modern Antichrist the Jews
suffered as well as the Christians, Gib-
bon says: “ Mohammed, with the sword
in one hand and the Koran in the other,
erected his throne on the ruins of Chris-
tianity and of Rome. The genius of the
Arabian prophet, the manners of his
nation, and the spirit of his religion,
involved the causes of the decline and
fall of the Eastern empire ; and our eyes
are curiously intent on one of the most
memorable revolutions which have im-
pressed a new and lasting character on
the nations of the globe.” E, Irving
observes that the third of the four chief
streams of prophecy presented in the
Book of Daniel (viz., that in this 8th
chapter), “ connected itself with the for-
mer, at the struggle of the third kingdom
with the second, in order that it may
trace, within the territory of the third,
the rise of another blasphemous power
[the Mohammedan], which was also to
prevail against the saints of God till the
time of the end.” Dr. Keith says:
“The ‘king of fierce countenance’ is
Mohammed, who offered only submis-
sion or the sword, and ‘ understanding
dark sentences’ (wherewith the Koran
pre-eminently abounds); who stood up
and became mighty, not by his own
power, Mohammed possessing no heredi-
tary dominion and rising from nothing,
The ‘holy ones’ are the Christians,
whose churches, ‘the host and the stars,’
he cast to the ground; prospering by
‘policy and craft’ through a faith ac-
commodated to the passions of men;
‘magnifying himself in his heart,’ saying,
‘There is no God but one, and Moham-
med is His prophet ;’ ‘ magnifying him-
self against the Prince of the host’ by
calling himself a greater prophet than
Christ ; and destroying the land he sub-
jugated more ‘by peace’ than others
have done by war.”

(4) “The Christians of the seventh
century,” says Gibbon, “ had insensibly
relapsed into a semblance of Paganism ;
their public and private vows were ad-
dressed to the relics and images that
disgraced the temples of the East: the

178


throne of the Almighty was darkened by
a cloud of martyrs and saints and angels,
the objects of popular veneration ; and
the Collyridian heretics, who flourished
in the fruitful soil of Arabia, invested
the Virgin Mary with the name and
honours of a goddess,”

(5) “When Christian churches,” says
Scott the commentator, “ were converted
into mosques, the * daily sacrifice’ might
be said to be taken away.”

(6) “ Ye Christian dogs!” said Kaled
to the Christians of Damascus, “ ye
know your option—the Koran, the tri-
bute, or the sword.” Gibbon (“ Decline
and Fall,” &., chap. li)

@ Fifty years ago it was written by
Lamartine, “ Turkey is dying rapidly
for want of Turks,” Another, writing
subsequently from Constantinople, says,
“‘ Turkey is in the agony of dissolution.”
A recent death-pang was in the cession
of Dulcigno to Montenegro at the bid-
ding of the powers of Europe ; immedi
ately followed by another, the cession of
more of its territory to Greece,

(8) Dating from the time of Alex-
anders invasion of Asia in 334 Bo.,
according to Bishop Newton and others,
the 2300 years expire in 1966 a.p., or,
if the Septuagint reading be adopted, a
century later. Dr, Cumming prefers to
date this period from the time when
the Persian Empire reached its meridian
glory in the year 480 B.c., just before
the defeat of Xerxes on his invasion of
Greece ; which brings the period to its
close in 1820 a.p., when it is well
known the decay of the Ottoman Empire
began by the revolt of Ali Pasha and
the insurrection of the Greeks. Dr.
Cox observes: “It is some clue to the
commencement of the period to remark
that Daniel does not refer to the origin
of the Persian monarchy, but to some
period afterwards when it is to become
a settled government; because the Medo-
Persian ram does not rise from the sea,
but stands, already grown, upon the
margin of the river, Cyrus and Darius
were conquerors, but it was not till the
seventh year of Artaxerxes that the em-
pire had attained its strength. The
Medo-Persian ram rose in the year
gC. 536. and continued to stand till


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: DANIEL, CHAP. IX,


BO. 330; the date of the vision there- terval would bring its termination to the
fore is between these years.” Todate year a.D. 1897, or, if we read according
the period from the middle.of that in- to the Septuagint, a century later.





HOMILETICS.
Sxor. XXX.—Dantex’s Prayer (Chap. ix. 1-14).


We come to what, in more than one respect, is among the most remarkable
portions of Scripture. The chapter before us contains one of the most precious
predictions concerning the promised Saviour and the work of redemption which
He was to accomplish. It has two peculiarities which place it in advance of
every other : the one, that it gives the name or title by which He was to be known
throughout the dispensation He was to introduce, and which was at the same time
to designate that dispensation, viz., Messiah or the Christ; the other, that the
time of His advent is distinctly and unmistakably marked out.

This remarkable communication was given to the prophet in answer to prayer.
That prayer, itself remarkable, is also recorded in this chapter,—the second cir-
cumstance that distinguishes it as a portion of Holy Scripture@, The prayer is
peculiar, not only from its own intrinsic character, but as being the prayer of a
prophet, a patriot, a statesman, holding the highest office in the second great
universal empire, and an eminent saint of above fourscore, who had walked with
God in Babylon for threescore years and ten. It is to this remarkable prayer we
now turn our attention. We notice—

L The time of the prayer. ‘In the first year of Darius, the son of
Ahasuerus @), of the seed of the Medes, who was made king over the realm of the
Chaldeans” (ver. 1), This was that ‘Darius the Mede” who, on the death of
Belshazzar and the fall of Babylon, “took the kingdom, being about threescore
and two years old” (chap. v. 31). As Darius reigned only two years, and as Cyrus
his successor granted the Jews their liberty to return to their own land in the first
year of his reign, after a captivity of seventy years, at the commencement of which
Daniel was a youth of about fourteen or sixteen years of age, he must now have
been something above eighty years old. Daniel, as we have seen, had been a man
of prayer from his youth, Neither his engagements as a statesman and prime
minister, nor the seductions of a luxurious court, had been able to turn him aside
from his beloved practice The path to the mercy-seat had become to Daniel a
well-beaten one. The throne of grace was now well known to him for a refuge.
He had long experienced the truth of the divine title, “ Thou that hearest
prayer” (Ps. Ixv, 2). He spends his last days in the happy familiar exercise. As
in the case of President Lincoln, prayer had become a confirmed habit. His
constant resource amidst the difficulty and trials of life, it is his solace as he
approaches the solemnities of death. As the burden of state business and the
splendours of a palace, so the infirmities of old age failed to lessen his relish for
the hallowed employment.

IL The occasion of it, This was the reading and study of the Scriptures
which he possessed, and more especially the prophecies of Jeremiah, “I, Daniel,
understood by books(8) the number of the years whereof the word of the Lord
came to Jeremiah the prophet that He would accomplish seventy years () in the
desolations of Jerusalem” (ver. 2). From this prophet Daniel knew that the time
for the termination of the captivity could not be far distant, from whatever period
its commencement was to be dated. His concern was that no sin or unbelief on
the part of his people might cause the promised term to be prolonged, as in the
case of their fathers in the desert. Knowing well their past provocations, he sets
himself to supplicate pardon and grace on their behalf, according to the divine
direction given in the same prophet (Jer. xxix. 10-12). Not even a airs pro


OMAP, IX, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





mise intended to supersede the duty of humiliation and prayer, but rather to
stimulate to the performance of it. God free even in the fulfilment of His
promises. “Ye shall know my breach of promise” (Num, xiv. 33). “ Your
iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins have withhelden good
things from you” (Jer. v. 25). The fulfilment of a promise to be secured by
prayer and prepared for by humiliation, So the disciples at Pentecost (Acts
i. 4, 5, 14; ii. 1).

Il. The Te aeey ea for it. “I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by
prayer and supplication), with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes” (®) (ver. 3).
Daniel’s prayer was to be no ordinary one, and to be engaged in in no ordinary
manner. The prayer was to be for an object of the highest importance, not so
much to himself personally, as to his people, the cause of religion, and the glory
of God. It was to be for the promised removal of evils long threatened and justly
executed on account of the aggravated and long-continued sins of his people, and
which impenitence and unbelief on their part might still retard. The prayer needed
therefore to be not only made with deepest earnestness and fervour, but to be
accompanied with heartfelt humiliation and confession of sin, in the name of his
guilty countrymen as well as his own, All the powers of his soul must therefore
be aroused to intense exercise, while he must be brought under a deep sense of the
sins which he has to confess as the cause of his people’s severe and protracted
calamities. He has recourse, therefore, to what were not only the ordinary out-
ward expressions of self-abasement, humiliation, and sorrow, but natural helps to
the attainment and maintenance of such a state of soul, and suitable accompani-
ments of it. Special prayer demands special preparation. “This kind goeth not
out but by prayer and fasting.” ‘Thou wilt prepare their heart 3 Thou wilt cause
Thine ear to hear.”

IV. The prayer itself. This prayer of Daniel, perhaps beyond any other in
the Bible, contains in it all the elements of devotion. Those in Ezra ix. 6, &e.,
and Nehemiah ix. 5, &c., dictated by the same spirit, probably moulded by this of
Daniel. As its constituent parts we have—

1. Adoration, Expressing—(1.) Reverence. “QO Lord, the great and dreadful
God” (ver. 4). The Lord is great and greatly to be praised, to be held in reverence
of all that are about Him. Great fear due to Him in the meeting of His saints and
in all their approaches to His throne of grace. “ Of all the people will I be sancti-
fied.” Filial confidence not inconsistent with the deepest reverence. The song of
the glorified on the sea of glass: ‘‘ Who shall not fear Thee, O Lord, and glorify
Thy name? for Thou only art holy” (Rev. xv. 4). The tendency of such adoration
to deepen our sense of sin, (2) Faith. ‘Keeping the covenant and mercy to
them that love Him, and to them that keep His commandments” (ver. 4). Faith
in God as merciful, gracious, and ready to forgive, also expressed in ver, 9: “To
the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled
against Him.” “He that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is
the rewarder of them that diligently seek Him” (Heb. xi. 6). Confidence in God’s
mercy to be coupled with reverence and holy fear, “Without faith it is im-
possible to please Him.” Daniel’s faith further expressed in his appropriation of
the Lord as Ais God. Not satisfied with calling Him “ our God,” he twave over
invokes him as “‘my God.” Faith believes, accepts, and appropriates God as our
covenant God in and through Christ, ‘TI will be their God, and they shall be
my people.” “My Lord and my God.” “If we wish our prayers to be heard,”
says Keil, “then God, to whom we pray, must become our God.”

2. Confession. “We have sinned,” é&c. (ver, 5-14). This confession, large
and full, occupying the greatest part of the prayer. Felt by Daniel, in the circum-
stances, to be that which was so much called for, and so necessary to the obtaining
of the object sought. He confesses the sins of the whole people in both its sec-
tions, Tee all classes, including his own, With the sins he acknowledges the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL. omaP. Ix.





sufferings entailed by them, and the justice that inflicted them. ‘Righteousness
belongeth unto Thee, but unto us confusion of face” (vers, 7, 8). Mentions as an
aggravation of their case that while the Lord was visiting them for their sin they
still refused to repent and pray, and hardened themselves against His corrections,
Jn confessing sin we are to remember and confess its peculiar aggravations.

3. Thanksgiving and praise. Daniel makes thankful acknowledgment of God’s
past mercies. “QO Lord God, that hast brought Thy people out of the land of
Egypt,” &e (ver. 15). Thanksgiving to accompany prayer and supplication in
making our requests known unto God (Phil. iv. 7). Thanksgiving for past mercies
a tribute due to their Author and the means of obtaining more. Gratitude both
glorifying to God and a gain to ourselves. ‘In everything give thanks, for this
is the will of God concerning you.” What God has already done, a never-failing
source of thanksgiving.

4, Petition or supplication. ‘ O Lord, according to all Thy righteousness, I
beseech Thee let Thine anger and Thy fury be turned away,” é&c. (vers. 16-19).
Supplication and petition, prayer properly so called. To pray is properly to ask or
make request; supplication is earnest asking. Without this there may be devotion
and communion with God, but scarcely prayer. This part of Daniel’s prayer the
centre and kernel of the whole, His object in the exercise to entreat for forgive-
ness and favour on behalf of his people and country. In this part of the prayer
we observe—(1.) Intense earnestness. ‘“O Lord, I beseech thee. . . . O my God,
incline Thine ear and hear. . . . O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive ; O Lord, hearken
and do; defer not, for Thine own sake, O my God.” An instructive specimen of
earnest pleading. This the “effectual fervent prayer” of the righteous man that
“availeth much.” Jacob wrestling with the angel and refusing to let him go
without bestowing a blessing. (2.) Deep humility. ‘“ We do not present our sup-
plications before Thee for our own righteousnesses, but for Thy great mercies.”
‘To us belongeth confusion of face.” Humility refuses every plea for acceptance
but God’s free mercy. It can indeed plead a righteousness, but not its own. The
Lord Himself is its righteousness, wrought out in the person of the Son and freely
made over to faith, This is the name whereby He shall be called, The Lord our
Righteousness.” ‘I will make mention of Thy righteousness, even of Thine only,”
(3.) The prevailing plea. “For the Lord’s sake” (ver. 17)®, No doubt as to
who this is. “Daniel sets before God the Mediator by whose favour he hopes to
obtain his request.”—Calvin, “The Lord (Jehovah) said unto my Lord (the
Anointed or the Christ, the promised Saviour), Sit Thon on my right hand,” d&e.
(Ps. cx. 1), The same Messiah who forms the subject of the following vision, God’s
anointed King of Israel on His holy hill of Zion (Ps. ii.) Raising Him from the
dead and placing Him on His own right hand, God declared Jesus to be ‘ both
Lord and Christ” (Acts ii. 36). It was through Him that God blessed Israel and
that He now blesses men. Prayer accepted and answered on His account, and there-
fore to be made in His name. Thus David prayed: ‘ Behold, O God, our shield ;
look on the face of Thine Anointed.” ‘ Let Thy hand be upon the Man of Thy right
hand, upon the Son of Man, whom Thou hast made strong for Thyself” (Ps, lxxxiv.
9, Ixxx. 17). This divine and God-given plea made more fully known after His
appearance in the flesh and the acceptance of His offered sacrifice. “If any man
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father.” “ Having a great High Priest who is
passed into the heavens, let us come boldly to the throne of grace.” “ He that
spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, how shall He not with
Him also freely give us all things?” (1 John ii, 2; Heb. iv. 14-16; Rev. viii. 32).
(4.) Large-heartedness and unselfishness. Daniel’s petitions and pleadings more on
behalf of others than himself. Self forgotten in his deep concern for his country
and the cause of God, He pleads for Jerusalem, God’s city and sanctuary that
was desolate, His holy mountain, and His peopie. Personally, Daniel himself was
in comfort, and never expected to see again his native land and beloved ue But


cuaP, IX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.








his people were still captives and Jerusalem was in desolation, The cause of God
and of His Christ was in the dust. Hence his unselfish pleading. Grace enlarges
the heart and makes the cause of others our own. The mark of the spirit of
Jesus to be burdened with the sins and sorrows of others. True patriotism and
benevolence learned at the feet of Him who wept over Jerusalem. “ For Zion's
sake I will not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem’s sake I will not rest, till the
righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp
that burneth.” The sign of a mere nominal Christianity and a heartless religion
when its professors “drink wine in bowls and anoint themselves with the chief
spices, but are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph” (Amos vi. 6). Such was
not Daniel’s, “If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her
cunning” (Ps, exxxvii. 5),

From the whole prayer we may learn—

1. The spirit of prayer characteristic of a child of God. Prayer in a child of
God as natural as a child’s cry to its mother. God has many suffering children,
but no silent ones. ‘We cry, Abba, Father |”

2. God’s Word the study and enjoyment of His people. Daniel not only a man of
prayer but a man of study, “I understood by books,” These books the Scrip-
tures. Other books not neglected, but these his daily food. “It is my medita-
tion all the day.” “ His delight is in the law of the Lord, and in His law he doth
meditate day and night.” (God’s Word the stream that nourishes the roots of god-
liness, the oil that makes the lamp of grace to burn. This inclusive of prophetic
Scripture. Prophecy a large proportion of the Bible, Daniel moved to pray
by the word of prophecy. That word to be taken heed to “as toa light shining
in a dark place,” Daniel, though a prophet, himself a careful reader of the
prophecies of others,

3. The Word read to be turned into prayer. Believing prayer a fruit of the
study of Scripture, Daniel read and then prayed. To read little is often to pray
little ; and reading without praying is of little worth. That is the most profitable
reading of the Scriptures that sends us to our knees. That the most lively, fervent,
and successful prayer that is the child of a precept, a promise, or a prophecy.

4. Prayer to be accompanied with thanksgiving and confession of sin. God's
past mercies and our own past sins never to be forgotten at the throne of grace,
He prays ill who forgets God’s favours and his own faults.

5. Beltevers especially to cultivate intercessory prayer, For this purpose Christ
makes us priests. Our high calling to be God’s remembrancers.  God’s people
watchmen set on Zion’s walls to give Him no rest till He establish and make
Jerusalem a praise in the earth, A wide field anda loud call for earnest intere
cessory prayer. Prayers and intercessions to be made for all men (1 Tim. ii. 1).
“Beek the peace of the city, and pray unto the Lord for it.” “ Pray for the peace
of Jerusalem.” Brethren, pray for us.” “For all saints.” “ Pray one for
another, that ye may be healed.” Abraham’s intercession all but saved Sodom.
Paul’s prayers saved the lives of all that sailed with him (Acts xxvii. 24),


EXEGETICAL NOTES. —@) This
prayer, observes Keil, has been judged
very severely by modern critics, Ac-
cording to Bertholdt, V. Langerke,
Hitzig, Stiihelin, and Ewald, its matter
and its whole design are constructed
according to older patterns; in part,
according to the prayers of Nehemiah
(chap. ix.) and Ezra (chap. ix.) But
we have only to examine the parallel
thoughts and words adduced in order

182


at once to perceive that, without excep-
tion, they all have their roots in the
Pentateuch, and afford not the slightest
proof of the dependence of this chapter
on Nehemiah ix. The whole tone and
language of the prayer also is such that
it seems impossible to conceive of it as
a forgery under the name of Daniel.

(2) “Son of Ahasuerus.” This Aha-
suerus was a brother of Cyrus’s grand-
father, Darius being Cyrus’s uncle,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


OmAP. Ix.


ee a ee es ee


Ahasuerus war a common name among
the kings of Persia, its Greek form
being Artaxerxes, See note at chap. v.
31. The Ahasuerus, however, who is
here mentioned, is called by heathen
writers Astyages, Oriental monarchs
usually having several names, The
first year of the reign of Darius the
Mede over Babylon was probably 538
B.c. Mr. Bosanquet indeed contends
that this Darius was Darius Hystaspis,
and that this vision was given in the
sixty-second year of his age, 592 Ba,
He also thinks of this Ahasuerus as Cy-
axares, of the seed of the Medes, whose
son or grandson he may have been by
birth, adoption, inheritance, ancestral
descent in male or female line, son-in-
law, or simply successor to the throne
of this Median king, He thinks that it
was in the second year of that Darius
that the indignation against Jerusalem
ceased, and the seventy weeks of mercy
began (Zech. i, 12), and that it was
therefore at that period when the present
prophecy was delivered. See note (4).
(8) “ By books,” 0°03 (bassepharim),
in the books,” the sacred books which
he possessed, especially those of the
prophets, and more particularly the
writings of Jeremiah. Neither the pro-
phecies of Haggai, Zechariah, and
Malachi, nor the histories of Ezra,
Nehemiah, Esther, and the two Books
of Chronicles, were yet written. Heng-
stenberg observes that nothing more can
be gathered from this passage than that
Daniel was in possession of certain sacred
writings, embracing the Pentateuch,
Isaiah, Obadiah, Micah, a collection of
Psalms, and the Book of Job, Equally
numerous were the writings which
Zechariah had before him. Hence the
text affords no argument that the Book
of Daniel was first composed at a time
when the rest of the canon was already
made up and regarded as a complete
whole. Keil, with Maurer and Hitzig,
renders the words, “I marked or gave
heed in the Scriptures;” and adds:
“DMD (hassepharim), rd PiBdria, is
not synonymous with D'33NDD (hakke-
thubhim), ai yeapai; but denotes only
writings in the plural, without saying
that these writings formed already a


recognised collection ; so that from this
expression nothing can be concluded
regarding the formation of the Cid
Testament canon.” Dr. Pusey re-
marks that the date at which the Jews
in the time of Josephus believed the
canon of the Scriptures to have been
closed was about four centuries before
the birth of our Lord. Josephus pro-
bably fixed on the reign of Artaxerxes
as being the period of Nehemiah’s great’
work of restoration, although the actual
closing of the canon probably took place
during the second visit to his country,
the probable date of the prophet Malachi,
under the son and successor of Artaxerxes
or Darius Nothus. Dr. Pusey, how-
ever, remarks that what is said here
about the books, t.e., the biblia, the
Scriptures, exactly expresses what we
see from the writings of the prophets
before the Captivity to have been the
fact, that the books of the prophets
were collected together. He adds:
“The canon was almost completed
before the return from the Captivity.
Of the former prophets or historical
books, the Kings at most had yet to be
formally added to it. Of the latter
prophets, there remained perhaps the
formal reception of Ezekiel; the three last
prophets only had not been sent. Of
the Hagiographa, there remained the
collection of some later psalms,—some
in the last Book of the Psalms were not
yet written. Daniel was perhaps then
formally added: the historical books of
Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, the Chronicles,
were as yet unwritten.” Professor R.
Smith thinks we have here the prophetic
literature referred to under the name of
“the books,” which he understands as
equivalent to Scriptures. He remarks
that the first unambiguous evidence as to
the close of the canon is contained in the
list of Josephus, composed towards the
close of the first century ; and that we
can affirm, with practical certainty, that
the twenty-two books of Josephus are
those of our present Hebrew canon,
He thinks, however, that the force of
this evidence is disguised by the con-
troversial purpose of the writer, which
leads him to put his facts in a false
light, viewing the close of the canon as
183


onAP. IX.





distinctly marked by the cessation of
the succession of prophets in the time of
Artaxerxes, while there was clearly no
regular and unbroken series of sacred
annals officially kept up from the time
of Moses onwards. He regards the view
of Josephus as a theory, and one incon-
sistent with the fact that we find no
complete formal catalogue of Scriptures
in earlier writers like the Son of Sirach,
who, enumerating the literary worthies
of his nation, had every motive to give
a complete list, if he had been in a posi-
tion to do so; inconsistent also with the
fact that questions as to the canonicity
of certain books were still undecided
within the lifetime of Josephus himself ;
referring to those of Ecclesiastes and
the Song of Solomon, about whose char-
acter, as inspired Scripture, the Mishna
records some Rabbinical disputes, Mr.
Smith thinks that the clearest evidence
that the notion of canonicity was not
fully established till long after the time
of Artaxerxes is in the Septuagint,
as containing some apocryphal addi-
tions; from which he concludes, that
the canon of the Old Testament was of
gradual formation ; that some books,
now accepted, had long a doubtful
position, while others were for a time
admitted to a measure of reputation,
which made the line of demarcation
between them and the canonical books
uncertain and fluctuating ; the canon
of the Old Testament passing through
much the same kind of history through
which we know the New Testament
canon to have passed ; the position of
several books being, as a matter of fact,
still subject of controversy as Antile-
gomena in the apostolic age, and not
finally determined till after the fall of
the Temple and the Jewish state ; the
Hagiographa not forming before that
date a closed collection with an undis-
puted list of contents, so that the
general testimony of Christ and His
apostles to the Old Testament Scrip-
ture cannot, in his opinion, be used as
certainly including those books...

(4) “ Seventy years in the desolations of
Jerusalem” (ver. 2). There have been
two reckonings of these seventy years:
one, which is generally accepted, from

84


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,








the captivity in the third year of Jehol-
akim, ending with the first year of
Cyrus ; the other, from the captivity of
Zedekiah, ending nineteen years later,
in the second year of Darius Hystaspis
(Zech. i, 12). The later adopted by
Theodoret, Pellican, and CEcolampadius,
The Duke of Manchester thinks there
were two periods of seventy years: the
one, that of the servitude in Babylon;
the other, that of the desolation of
Jerusalem, terminating in the first year
of Darius Nothus. Dr. Pusey observes
that the time of seventy years, counting
from the year when captives were first
taken to Babylon, the first of a long series
of such removals, viz, in the third year
of Jehoiakim, was fulfilled to the exact
year. According to the canon of Ptolemy,
Nebuchadnezzar reigned forty - three
years ; Evil-Merodach, two ; Neriglissar,
four; Nabunahit, who fora time associa-
ted his son Belshazzar in the government,
seventeen ; to which should probably
be added a year or eighteen months pre
ceding that part of the fourth of Jehoia- -
kim with which Nebuchadnezzar’s ac
cession to his father’s throne coincides,
and the two years during which Darius
the Mede was viceroy in Babylon after
Belshazzar’s death. Prideaux thinks
that it was not only exactly after seventy
years that the release from the Cap-
tivity took place, but that it was in the
very month, viz, November, in which,
seventy years before, it had commenced;
the Jews who returned being found for
the first time in Jerusalem in the month
Nisan (our April), after a four months’
march and one month’s preparation for
it,

©) “ Prayer and supplication” (ver.
3). Keil thinks that N?2A (tephillah),
“prayer,” is prayer in general; D'{I9A
(takhanunim), ‘“supplications,” prayer
for mercy and compassion, as-also peti-
tion for something, such as the turning
away of misfortune or evil, Dr. Cox
observes that Daniel’s prayer divides
itself into three parts—the address,
the confession, and the petition. He
remarks that the prayer is remarkable
for the large proportion of it that is
occupied with confession; the reitera-
tion of phrases descriptive of sin, ex-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


OmAP, x.





emplifying the depth of his penitential
sorrow ; the simplicity of the diction ;
the minuteness of the detail; the pro-
found humility indicated ; the vindica-
tion of God and the spirit of self-
reproach ; the high estimation expressed
of the mercy and forgiveness of God.
(8) “ With fasting and sackcloth and
ashes” (ver. 3), Calvin remarks that
Daniel, though naturally alert in prayer
to God, was yet conscious of the want
of sufficiency in himself; and hence he
adds the use of sackcloth and ashes and
fasting. He observes that every one
conscious of his infirmity, ought to
collect all the aids he can command
for the correction of his sluggishness,


and thus to stimulate himself to ardour
in supplicating God.

© Dr. Rule observes that it is evident
from the utterances of both Jeremiah
and Ezekiel, that after the giving of the
promise of a gracious return of the cap-
tives from Babylon, the wickedness of
those left behind in Jerusalem had ex-
ceedingly increased ; that there was not
yet any appearance of the restoration of
the Jews in captivity ; and that all that
was royal, noble, brave, or worthy in that
city had been swept away. See Ezek.
viii,—xi. ; Jer. vii. 30, xxxii, 34. The cap-
tives themselves in general apparently
not much improved by their affliction,
See Ezek, ii.and iii. ; xxxiii, 30-32.


HOMILETICS,


Sxor, XXXIJ.—Prayer AnswERzpD (Chap. ix. 20-23).


The character ascribed to God by the Psalmist founded on absolute truth, and
in accordance with the universal experience of the godly in all ages, “Thou that
hearest prayer.” The promise, ‘Call on me and I will answer thee,” verified in
believers both in the Old and New Testament times. Natural, if God stands to them
in the relation of a father. Natural for a child to ask and a parent to bestow,
The promise, “ Ask, and ye shall receive,” never broken when the conditions are
fulfilled. The constant experience of Daniel through his whole life in Babylon,
Another distinguished instance to be added in his extreme old age. Concerning
this last recorded answer to his prayers, related by himself, we notice—

I. It was prompt and immediate. In his prayer Daniel had said, “ Hearken
and do; defer not.” Deep earnestness with difficulty brooks delay. ‘ Haste thee
to help me; make no tarrying, O my God.” ‘‘Sir, come down ere my child die.”
So Daniel gives special emphasis to the fact that while he was yet speaking the
answer to his prayer came. “ While I was speaking, and praying, and confessing _
my sin, dsc. ; yea, whiles I was speaking in prayer, the man Gabriel,” doo. (ver. 20,
21). So literally does God in His kindness fulfil His promise in regard to His
children’s prayer, “ Before they call I will answer, and while they are yet speaking
[ will hear” (Isa. Ixv. 24), Prayer and its answer not unfrequently simultaneous,
Thus with Abraham’s servant at the well (Gen. xxiv. 12,15). So Daniel is told
by Gabriel@) that at the very beginning of his supplication the command came forth
from God that it should be answered, or the message given which Gabriel was to
carry to him (ver. 23). Nor had Gabriel delayed, although he only reached Daniel
with the message at the time of the evening oblation, or three o’clock in the after-
noon. He had been “caused to fly swiftly,” and comes as one who had accomplished
a lengthened journey (ver. 21)(, Angels not ubiquitous or omnipresent. Their
abode, and the place of the eternal throne before which they stand, apparently
far distant from earth, which is but a speck in the Great Creator’s dominions,
Answers to prayer may require time, The exact time of the answer reaching Daniel,
however, wisely chosen, Daniel’s prayer and confession of sin must have their full

ssion. Delays often only apparent, and never denials,

IL Given through an angelic medium (ver. 21). The angel here called “ the
man Gabriel.’ Reference to Gabriel’s former appearance (chap, viii, 16). Angels
generally represented under a human form. Gabriel’s name rigtaeed ye


CHAP, 1X. HOMILETICG COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


with this fact. Denotes ‘the man of God,” or “ God’s champion ” or hero. Per-
haps, “ God will prevail.” ‘lhe name indicative of strength, in which angels gene-
rally excel] (Ps, ciii. 20), Angels often represented as warriors. The ‘‘ hosts or
armies of Jehovah ;” the “chariots of God.” Gabriel especially employed in
errands tomen. His place to stand in the presence of God to receive His commis
sion (Luke i, 19). Had already appeared to Daniel at the beginning (chap, viii.
16) @), or at an earlier period, The name not found earlier in the Old Testament,
Unknown to us to what extent angels are employed by God in answering our
prayers. All of them ministering spirits sent forth to minister for the heirs of salva-
tion (Heb. i. 14), Ministered even to Jesus, the Elder Brother, in His humiliation as
one of us (Matt. iv. 11; Luke xxii. 43), Their ministry promised to both Head and
members (Ps. xci. 11, 12). Hezekiah prays, and an angel destroys the host of the
Assyrians. Cornelius prays, and an angel directs him to send for Peter. The
Church at Jerusalem prays, and an angel opens the doors of Peter’s prison (Isa.
xxxvii. ; Acts x., xii.) Their agency no less real because invisible. At Elisha’s
prayer his servant’s eyes were opened, and he saw the mountain where his master
lived full of angelic chariots and horsemen (2 Kings vi. 17). God in no want of
agents in answering the prayers of His people.

IIL The answer given in a different way from what Daniel probably
expected. The thing asked by Daniel, that God would visit and restore Jerusalem
and the Jews in mercy. The answer, a divine messenger sent to inform him of
what should afterwards take place. That information included the restoration of
Jerusalem, and a great deal besides, The information both doleful and delightful,
enough to make Daniel weep, and yet greatly to rejoice. Prayer often answered
in a way different from our expectation. Paul prayed for his way to be opened to
visit Rome, God answered his prayer, and sent him there two years afterwards,
but bound with, a prisoner's chain. “By terrible things in righteousness wilt
thou answer us, O God of our salvation” (Ps. lxv. 5).

IV. The answer far beyond the request. Daniel prayed only for the restora-
tion of “the holy mountain of his God” (ver. 20). God answers by the promise
that not only should Jerusalem be restored, but Messiah Himself should at no very
distant period appear—a period expressly declared—with the glorious benefits that
should result from his Advent (vers, 24, 25). Thus God, in His kindness to His
children, often far exceeds their prayers in the answers He sends them. Solomon
asked for wisdom, and God in addition gave him power and riches beyond those of
any other monarch. He is “‘able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask
or think,” and in the riches of His love He often does so.

V. The answer a consequence of Daniel's character. The answer given,
according to Gabriel’s statement, because Daniel was a man “greatly beloved”
(ver. 23)(, Prayer answered from God’s own kindness and love, though not
without regard to the character of the asker. The person accepted before the
prayer is answered. ‘‘The prayer of the wicked is abomination to the Lord, but
the prayer of the righteous is His delight.” “If I regard iniquity in my heart,
the Lord will not hear me.” To receive Daniel’s answer to prayer we must
possess Daniel’s character. Our prayers probably answered in proportion as we
are “greatly beloved.” John, the beloved disciple, desired by Peter to ask the
Lord who it was that should betray Him, The faith that brings answers to our
prayers gives acceptance to our person, Faith, love, humility, and obedience the
graces that make a man “greatly beloved,” and that secure answer to prayer.
““ Whatsoever we ask,” says the beloved disciple, the Daniel of the New Testament,
as John was the Daniel of the Old, “we receive of Him, because we keep His
commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in His sight” “If ye
abide in me,” said the Master, “and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what
ye will, and it shall be done unto you” (1 John iii 22; John xv. 7).

From the whole obserwe—

180


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DANIEL, OHAP. IX,





1. The blessedness of a truly godly life. Fellowship with God a leading ele
ment in such a life, Freedom in asking and readiness in bestowing included in
such fellowship. Asking and receiving the privilege of children, and constantly
realised in family life. Not less so among the children of God and in the “ house-
hold of faith.”

2. The encouragement to persevere tn prayer, Prayer offered according to
God’s Word and for things according to His will sure, sooner or later, and in one
way or other, to be answered. A parent’s ear never shut to his children’s cry, be
the parent otherwise ever.so wicked. ‘And shall not God avenge His own elect,
who cry day and night to Him continually, though He bear long with them? I
tell you that He will avenge them speedily” (Luke xviii. 7, 8). Daniel one
example out of millions.

3. God's love in giving His children much more than they ask. When He
answers prayer, He gives “ heaped up and running over ;” and when He withholds
the thing asked, it is only to give something better. Moses prayed to be taken
over Jordan to Canaan; God instead takes him to the country of which Canaan
was but a shadow. Paul asks for the removal of the thorn in the flesh; Christ
instead gives him an assurance that was to comfort and strengthen him in all the
trials, sufferings, and conflicts of his future life.

4, Precious grace that makes a sinful man to be one “greatly beloved” of God.
Paul’s testimony of himself and athers, including Daniel, in their natural condition
as the fallen children of Adam, apart from divine renewing grace, is, ‘ Foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and
envy, hateful, and hating one another;” “Children of wrath even as others”
(Titus iii. 3; Eph. ii. 3). How rich the love and how mighty the grace that out
of such materials can form such characters as Paul, and John, and Daniel, men
“greatly beloved”! ‘God, who is rich in mercy, for His great love wherewith
He loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with
Christ” (Eph. ii, 4, 5). ‘‘He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth the
beggar from the dunghill, to set them among princes and to make them inherit


the throne of glory” (1 Sam. ii. 8; Ps, cxiii. 7, 8).


EXEGETICAL NOTES,—© “ Gab-
rtel.” Some render the name, “God is
my champion ;” others, “ God will pre-
vail ;” others, as Keil, the “man of
God,” standing here with the adjunct
UR (ha-tsh), “the man,” with the
definite article, as referring back to chap.
viii. 15, where Gabriel appeared as a
man, 134 (gebher), probably the first part
of the name, “a man,” from 133 (gabhar),
to “be strong,” “to prevail ;” hence
expressive of strength, a strong one;
hence also 34 (giblor), a mighty man, &
hero (Isa. ix. 7).

(2) “ Being caused to fly swiftly” (ver.
2). YD AYO (muw’afbi'af). Calvin ob-
serves that some take the expression to
mean “flying swiftly,” implying fatigue
and alacrity, as if from "}Y (’aph), to “fly,”
having its participle connected with it ;
others derive it from "if" (ya’eph), to “be
fatigued,” explaining it metaphorically,
as “flying hastily.” The Sept, renders


it “ borne with speed ” (rdayss Papdmsvos) ;
Theodotion, “flying ;” Vulg., “ flying
swiftly ;” from which, observes Keil,
the Church Fathers concluded that the
angels were winged. So the E.V.,
which is also adopted by Hiivernick, V.
Lengerke, Hitzig, and some Rabbies,
Keil maintains that this translation is
without any foundation in the words,
being probably derived by the old trans
lators from a confounding of "WY (ya’eph)
with *'¥ (ooph); the former meaning
only wearied, to become tired, to weary
one’s self by exertion, in certain cases
by a long journey or course, as in Jer,
ii, 24; but nowhere to run or fly. He
understands *Y" (ye’aph), the noun, from
AY’, and translates the words, “wearied in
weariness,” #.¢., very wearied ; applying
them not to the angel, but to Daniel
himself, as perfectly agreeing with his
condition described in chap. viii. 17 and
27; Daniel now mentioning this circum


OMAP. Ix,


stance, because Gabriel, at his former
coming to him, not only helped to
strengthen him, but also gave him
understanding of the vision, so that his
appearing again at once awakened joyful
hope. He observes that we cannot
speak of an angel who is an unearthly
being as being wearied, although, with
Kranichfeld, one may think of the way
from the dwelling-place of God, removed
far from His sinful people, to this earth
as very long. He thinks also that the
words, from their position, belong to
the relative clause, or specially to *S)°8)
(raitht), I had seen; no reason being
perceivable for placing the adverbial
clause before the verb.

(8) “At the beginning” (ver. 21).
npnng (battekhil'lah), “at the first,” as
in chap. viii, 1; with the general signifi-
eation, as Keil observes, of earlier, and


\


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


synonymous with NWNXIZ (barishonah),
in the beginning, in Gen. xiii. 3, xli. 21,
xliii. 18, 20; Isa. i. 26.

(4) “Greatly beloved” (ver. 23). NIDA
(khamoodhoth), “desires,” equivalent to
DIVO Wy us khamoodhoth), “a man
of desires,” in chap, x. 11, 19 ; meaning
“most desired” or “delighted in,” or,
as in the E.V., “greatly beloved,” from
‘tom (khamadh), to desire or delight in;
from which also the title given by the
prophet to Messiah, the “ Desire of all
nations,” D%3"7) NIG (khemdath kol-
goim), Hag. ii. 7. Keil observes that
the expression in the text does not con-
tain the reason for Gabriel’s coming in
haste, but for the principal thought
of the verse—the going forth of the
commandment or word of God imme-
diately at the commencement of Daniel’s
prayer. :


HOMILETICS.
Sect. XXXIL—Txe Man Greatty Brtovep (Chap. ix. 23). .


This remarkable and precious testimony borne to Daniel by the Angel Gabriel
The same thing done twice over in the next chapter by the same person, if not by
one greater than he; the difference being that in the latter cases it is used as an
epithet to Daniel, “O man greatly beloved,” and “O Daniel, a man greatly
beloved” (chap. x. 11, 19), The expression may be viewed either as the ascription
of a character—worthy to be greatly beloved, or as the declaration of a fact,—
actually so beloved. A “man of desires” (the literal marginal rendering of the
word) is either one worthy of such desires or the actual object of them. The
expression may also be viewed as indicating both what Daniel was in himself, very
lovable or lovely, and what he was in relation to others, actually beloved. In
the latter case, those by whom he was beloved were, in the first instance, the
Divine Being Himself ; then the angels, especially Gabriel, who speaks ; then good
men in general, including the spirits of the just made perfect, who were doubtless
cognisant of Daniel’s character and worth. The testimony, in any case, expressive
of Daniel’s moral excellence, as rendering him both lovely and lovable and actually
beloved. It is remarkable as coming not from a man but from a celestial being,
lovely and lovable himself, as a spotless and unfallen creature, and a correct judge
of what is truly lovely and lovable, and well acquainted with the facts of the case
as an angel of light. The text affords an occasion of gathering up and considering
some of the points of Daniel’s character as brought to our view in the book before
us, and as justifying the testimony borne im the text. Some of these are—

1. His early prety. Piety in youth is especially lovely and attractive. "This
conspicuous in Daniel. Daniel still a youth when, though a captive in a foreign
land and surrounded with temptstions in a heathen and luxurious court, he resolved
te deny himself the luxuries of the king’s table, and to live upon beans and water,
rather than do what he believed was contrary to the law of God. His amiability
and sweetness of disposition were such as to gain for him the favour and attachment
of the officer in the palace, under whose charge he and the other Jewish youths
were placed. Daniel was still only a young man when, in a crisis of great danger


188


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL. CMAs, IZ,








to others as well as himself, he, in childlike confidence, carried the matter to the
Lord, and obtained, through a divine communication vouchsafed to him, deliver-
ance both for himself and the wise men of Babylon, Daniel’s piety in youth the
foundation of his character and greatness as a man,

2. His steadfasiness and perseverance tn well-doing. Daniel’s piety, which
began in youth, was retained to the end of a long life. Beloved while a young
man by the chief of the eunuchs for his amiability and good behaviour, he receives
the angelic testimony, when above fourscore, that he was still “greatly beloved.”
From a youth of fourteen he had lived among idolaters and in a licentious court,
yet his piety remained unshaken. More than once his religion brought him into
danger of his life, but he remained the same. Neither the plots of enemies,
nor the-elevation of earthly greatness, nor the seductions of pleasure, nor the cares
of statesmanship, were able to draw him from the paths of piety and virtue, In
prosperity and adversity, in sunshine and storm, Daniel remained the same faithful
servant of God and of the king, walking with his Maker and seeking the welfare of
his fellow-men.

3. His consistency and symmetry of character. Daniel’s conduct was the same
throughout, always in harmony with itself. Attentive to his duty to God, he was
equally so in his duty to man, Faithful to his God, he is equally faithful to his
king. His morality is no less conspicuous than his religion. He is fervent in
spirit, but no less diligent in business, Regular and earnest in his closet, he is
equally assiduous in his office. Studious in his Bible, as a man of business he is

well acquainted with his books. His enemies can find no fault in him, and no
' ground of accusation with the king, but in the matter of his religion. He is favoured
with revelations from Heaven and the visits of angels ; yet no sooner are his visions
withdrawn and his usual state of health recovered, than he returns to do “the
king’s business,” He is endowed, even while yet young, with a wisdom and under-
standing superior to that of all the wise men of Babylon, yet disclaims all merit
and wisdom of his own as being greater than those of other men, He is tender
and gentle, while bold and uncompromising in professing the truth and reproving
sin. He is distressed as being the bearer of evil tidings to Nebuchadnegzar, yet
fearlessly declares to the hardened Belshazzar both his sin and his doom.

4. His conscientiousness even in the smallest matters. This exhibited in his
carefulness in regard to the law respecting forbidden meats, as also in his observance
of his usual practice in his devotions, although at the risk of his life, when to have
done otherwise would have appeared a want of faith in God and obedience to His
will. He that is faithful in the least is faithful in much.. The smallest duty,
because a duty and the will of God, attended to by Daniel, as well as those of
apparently a much more important character. Love will be obedient and seek to
please in the least as well as in the greatest matters, Such conscientiousness a
feature in the man “ greatly beloved,” and a considerable part of what made him
such,

5. His faith and confidence in God. Seen in early life in his proposal to put the
desired change of diet to the proof, assured that God wowld answer prayer and
honour obedience to his will. The same trust in God as the hearer of prayer
exhibited in the matter of the king’s dream. So afterwards Daniel went calmly
to the lion’s den, believing in his God, and assured that he was safe in His keeping,
whatever might be the result, Daniel enabled to walk in the steps of his father
Abraham, and of that faith which gives glory to God, Nothing more pleasing to
God, or likely to make a man “ greatly beloved” of Him, than a simple, childlike,
and unwavering trust. Jesus was pleased wherever he found faith in Himself.
Daniel’s childlike faith made him, like Abraham, “the friend of God.”

6. His prayerfulness. From youth to old age Daniel characterised as a man
of prayer. His whole life an example of the Apostle’s words, “In everything by
prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made eerie unto


OMAP. Ix HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIBL.





God.” Prayer to God the natural fruit of faith tn God. Prayer the element in
which Daniel lived. Each life presents constant calls to prayer, and constant
opportunities for it. No place where prayer is not needed, and none where it
may not be made, Daniel’s prayers both regular and special. Daniel prayed in
his closet, and prayed by the river-side. Had his stated prayer morning, evening,
and at noon, and yet set himself to pray for a whole day with fasting and sack-
cloth. Prayed for himself, but with at least as much fervency for others. Had
his whole days of prayer and fasting for his brethren, his country, and the cause
of God. His prayerfulness well known to his heathen neighbours, This the
charge brought against him, and that which all but cost him his life. Daniel
prayed with a cruel death before him as its probable consequence, His prayerful-
ness the secret of all his other excellences, the key that unlocked to him the
treasury of all spiritual blessings ; brought and kept him in fellowship with the
source and sum of all excellence, and so made him like Him; made him walk
with God as a man with his friend, so that, like Moses, his face shone with the
reflected glory. Prayer the continual source and supply of strength for every
duty and every trial; not only for doing and suffering, but for doing and suffering
in the right spirit. Makes Christ’s strength our own, and at all times sufficient for
us. Daniel waited on the Lord, and so renewed his strength.

7. His amiableness of disposition and kindness to others. When God brought him
into tender love with Ashpenaz, his superintendent in the palace at Babylon, it was
doubtless by giving Daniel that which gendered such love. Daniel’s amiable spirit
and loving demeanour such as to commend him to his superiors. Love in others to-
wards us begotten by love and lovableness in ourselves. The amiableness of his dis-
position and tenderness of his spirit followed Daniel into mature age. Struck dumb
and unable at once to declare to the king the unhappy import of his dream, he only
does so when urged by his royal master, and then does it in the tenderest and most
loving manner, while yet faithfully seeking the king’s best interests. Daniel seemed
to care for the imperilled lives of the wise men in Babylon more than his own ; and
on his deliverance from the death which his heathen enemies had devised for him,
he makes not the slightest reference to their cruelty and wickedness while declaring
his innocence to the king,

8. His patriotism and concern for his country’s welfare. It was concern for his
country that moved him to that day of solemn prayer and fasting which the chapter
before us relates, and which brought Gabriel down with an answer and the testi-
mony in the text. To an enlightened man the cause of his country will be bound
up with the cause of God and of religion, as it can be well with the former only as
it is so with the latter. This was especially the case with Daniel, whose country
God had made and called His own, and whose city, Jerusalem, was God’s holy
mountain, the city of the great King, who had chosen it for the place of His spe-
cial worship, That country was now in desolation, and Jerusalem with its Temple
was in ruins. God’s worship there had been brought to an end. Sin on the part
of the people had brought the desolating fue that had put a stop to their solemn
feasts. Provoked to anger by their continued rebellion and apostasy, the Lord had
‘caused the solemn feasts and sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, and had despised,
in the indignation of His anger, the king and the priest, The Lord had cast off
His altar ; He had abhorred His sanctuary ; He had given up into the hand of the
enemy the walls of her palaces” (Lam, ii. 6,7). This was the burden that pressed
upon the heart of the beloved prophet, The cause of his people, and with that the
cause of God and of true religion, which was bound up with it, was his deep sor
row, and drove him to incessant prayer as the time of the promised deliverance
drew nigh. He was concerned not only for his country’s peace, but for his people’s
repentance, which must be at the foundation of it, It was this that led him, as a
true patriot, to pour out his heart before God in the fervent prayer and deep humi-
liation here recorded,

190


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL omar, 1X,








9. His unselfishness. This sufficiently apparent from the last particular. In
the remarkable prayer of this chapter, self is entirely forgotten in his concern for
his brethren and his country, The same renunciation and forgetfulness of self
conspicuous on many occasions. He associates with himself his three companions
in the interpretation of the king’s dream, first asking their participation in his
prayers, and then giving the interpretation as if from them all conjuintly—“ We
will tell the king his dream.” He makes no mention of himself in relating the
noble stand which his three companions made in the matter of the golden image,
refraining from saying anything to account for his non-participation in their stead-
fast refusal to worship it, and leaving the entire honour of it to themselves. When
Belshazzar holds out to him the promise of the highest reward he could bestow for
the interpretation of the handwriting on the wall, his answer is, “ Let thy gifts be
to thyself, and give thy rewards unto another; yet I will read the writing to the
king, and make known to him the interpretation” (chap. v. 17). Dr. Pusey well
remarks: “A self-laudatory school has spoken much of the laudation, as they call
it, of Daniel, as being unnatural, on our belief that he was the author of the book.
To me certainly much more striking is his reticence about himself.” At the very
commencement of his remarkable course he distinctly renounces in the king’s
presence all claim to any superior wisdom or merit of his own in the interpretation
of his dream, and ascribes it entirely to God, who wished to acquaint the king
with its meaning. In like manner, ail that he is obliged to relate in regard to his
gifts and attainments, his answers to prayer and divine revelations, he ascribes to
the same source—the free bounty of a gracious prayer-hearing God, who does what
He will with His own. “He giveth wisdom to the wise and knowledge to them
that have understanding. . . . I thank Thee and praise Thee, O Thou God of my
fathers, who hast given me wisdom and might, and hast made known unto me now
what we desired of Thee” (chap. ii. 22, 23).

In leaving the character of this man “greatly beloved,” we may remark with
Dr. Cox: “It is characteristic of Scripture biography to record the censurable
actions of good men as well as their virtues and graces ; the entire omission of the
former, therefore, in the account of Daniel, naturally leads to the conclusion that
he was a person of pre-eminent excellence.” The same writer adds: “ The estima-
tion in which Daniel was held by successive potentates, the public honours he re-
ceived, the eminent rank he held, all fade into nothingness before the testimony
from Heaven, a testimony founded on no external glory, but on a character invul-
nerable to reproaches, and formed of all the elements of pure religion.” Nor
in thinking of Daniel’s character, which entitled him to this high testimony,
should we forget that he was only an Old Testament saint, living in what is
called by the Apostle the “ ministration of the letter that killeth,” instead of
the ministration of the Spirit that succeeded it; tne former, glorious as it
was, “having no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excelleth,” the
glory of the dispensation of the Spirit in which it is our privilege to live (2 Cor.
iii, 6-10). If that inferior dispensation which possessed comparatively so little
of the Spirit that renews and sanctifies, produced a character of such excellence as
to merit this angelic testimony, to what moral excellence ought New Testament
believers not to be able to attain? Daniel beheld God and His sanctifying truth
only with the veil of Moses on his face, and yet attained to so much of his like-
ness. What may, what ought we not to attain to when the veil is done away in
Christ, and when we, beholding with unveiled face, and reflecting, as in a mirror,
the “glory of the Lord,” enjoy the privilege of being “transformed into the same
image from glory unto glory, even as from the Lord the Spirit”! (2 Cor, iii.
14, 18, R.V.) The character of Daniel is portrayed in this book by the Holy Ghost
for our imitation, even in these last days of the ministration of the Spirit ; for
“whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning,” that
the man of God might be “perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every Eee work ”


omar. IX, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,
$$$ $$ $$$ ee


(Rom. xv. 4; 2 Tim. iii, 17), The present dispensation has produced many
Daniels,—its Fletchers, its Paysons, its M‘Cheynes, its Pennyfathers, and multi-
tudes besides, whose record is only on high. It will produce many more. It is
the privilege both of the reader and the writer, by contemplating in the Word not
merely the character of Daniel, but of Daniel’s Lord, to possess Daniel’s character,
by possessing more and more of the character of Him from whom that eminent
saint derived all his excellence ; learning of the Master, who was “ meek and lowly
in heart,” and walking in the spirit and steps of Him who was “holy, harmless,
and undefiled, and separate from sinners,” For this, however, we must become one
with that Master, united to Him as a branch is to the tree by a cordial acceptance
of Him, surrender to Him, and trust in Him, as the provided Saviour for poor
helpless sinnera. Reader, may that be your happiness and mine!





HOMILETICS.
Sror, XXXIII.—Tue Promisep Mxsstan (Chap, ix. 24-27).


We now come to that part of Daniel’s prophecies which perhaps more than any
other distinguishes him as a prophet, and which was communicated to him as
a man “‘ greatly beloved.” It is the prediction regarding the promised Messiah,
more full and explicit, especially in regard to the time of His appearing, than any
that had hitherto been given), The communication was made to the prophet in
connection with the announcement as to what was to befall his people and country,
in whom Daniel felt so deep an interest, and for whom he had prayed so fervently.
The prediction, therefore, was twofold, having relation in the first instance to
Messiah, and in the second to the Jewish people to whom He should come, and
whose King He was to be. Daniel had prayed that God would graciously visit His
people, now captive in Babylon, as well as the Holy City and its Temple, now lying
in ruins. In the promise of the Messiah this prayer was answered. No more
gracious visitation of Israel could be vouchsafed than in the Advent of Him who
was to come as the consolation and glory of His people, and who had been so long
promised and waited for as such (Luke i. 68, 69). The mere return of the exiles
to Judea, and the restoration of their polity and worship, was insignificant in itself
compared with the birth of that Saviour who was to be “a light to lighten the
Gentiles and the glory of His people Israel,” an event of which none less than
angels were to be the immediate heralds (Luke ii. 8-14, 25-38). In the present
section we shall confine our attention to the Messiah Himself, as here promised,
with the time of His appearing, leaving for a succeeding one the blessed results
that should follow His Advent,

I. The Messiah Himself. He is here called by two names, or, perhaps more
strictly, by a name and a title, “ Messiah the Prince” (),

1. “ Messiah.” This Hebrew term, equivalent to the Greek Christ, denotee
“the Anointed.” The promised Deliverer had already been spoken of by the
prophets as God’s Anointed. See 1 Sam, ii. 35, xii, 3, 5; Ps. ii. 2, xviii. 50,
Ixxxiv, 9. Now, however, perhaps for the first time, He is designated by this name
alone, Messiah or the Anointed. God speaks in the Psalms of having anointed
Him, as the King whom He had chosen and appointed to rule over Israel on the
throne of His father David, Solomon’s antitype (Ps. Ixxxix. 19, 20, ii, 6, marg.)
Isaiah speaks of Him as anointed by God with the Holy Spirit, as a prophet to
make known the glad tidings of salvation to fallen men (Isa, Ixi. 12). This in
accordance with the practice of both kings and prophets being installed in their
office with the anointing of oil, the symbol of the Holy Spirit, with whom, as the
true king and prophet, Messiah was to be anointed. As the great High Priest also,
He viol to receive she same anointing, it being appointed under the law that the

92


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : DANIEL, OHAP, IX,





priests should be introduced inta their office by the anointing with oil (Exod. xxx, 30,
xl, 15; Ps, cxxxiii, 2). This symbolical anointing, which was to receive its fulfilment
in the promised Deliverer, hence called the Messiah or Anointed, was actually
fulfilled in Jesus, on whom the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape at His
baptism, and of whom Peter testifies, that He went about doing good, being
anointed by God ‘‘with the Holy Ghost, and with power” (Acts x. 38). The evan-
gelists relate that Jesus went up from the Jordan full of the Holy Ghost, and was
led by the same Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil, The Epistle
to the Hebrews tells us that it was through the eternal Spirit that Jesus, as
the Great High Priest, “offered Himself without spot unto God” (Heb. ix. 14),
Through the Holy Ghost He gave commandments to His apostles after His resur-
rection (Acts i, 2). He was anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows,
God gave not His Spirit by measure unto Him (Ps, xlv. 7; John iii. 34).

2. “The Prince.” @) The Hebrew term here used also applied to the promised
Saviour in Isaiah lv. 4, and there rendered Leader. It may be regarded as
equivalent to king, head, or ruler, Jehovah, in the passage referred to, declares,
in regard to the provided and promised Saviour, “I have given Him for a witness
to the people (His prophetical office); a leader and a commander to the people,”
thus indicating at the same time His office as a king. So we read of Jesus, that
He has been exalted by the Father with His own right hand, “a prince and a
Saviour, to give repentance unto Israel and the forgiveness of sins” (Acts v. 31).
He is “the Prince of the kings of the earth;” equivalent to “ King of kings
and Lord of lords” (Rev. i. 5, xix. 16), The Saviour was especially promised in
the character of a prince or king. “ Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; for
behold, thy King cometh unto thee, meek and having salvation” (Zech, ix. 9),
It was in this character that He was to bruise the serpent’s head, and deprive
him of his usurped dominion. His language to Joshua, “as Captain of the
Lord’s host am I come.” He is the “Captain of our salvation ;” “ travelling in
the greatness of His strength, mighty to save;” the “ King of glory, mighty in
battle ” (Heb, ii, 10; Isa. lxiii. 2; Ps xxiv. 8) His princedom as head of all
principality and power, given to Him by the Father as the reward of His media-
torial work, and at the same time as the means of fully securing the ends of that
undertaking (Phil. ii, 6-11; Eph. i, 20-22; Matt, xxviii, 18; John xvii. 2;
Ps, cx. 1, &c.)

It may here be interesting to inquire how far Messiah had been promised and
made known previously to this communication made to Daniel concerning Him,
and through Daniel to the Church. We may mark seven leading promises, pre-
viously given, revealing so many particulars concerning the Saviour who was to
come :—

(1.) The original promise in Eden, showing that the Saviour of men was to be
a man, and that while He was to be the destroyer of him who had overcome and
sought to ruin man, He was Himself to suffer (Gen. iii. 15), Hence the name He
generally gave Himself, the Son of Man, ;

(2.) The promise made to Abraham, and renewed to Isaac and Jacob, indicating
the nation from which the Saviour was to spring, that of which Abraham was to
be the head, the Jewish people (Gen. xii. 3), Salvation was to be of the Jews.

(3.) The promise made through Jacob on his dying bed, intimating the trade in
the Jewish nation out of which the Messiah was to spring, viz, that of Judah, the
royal tribe, indicating that Messiah was to be a king (Gen. xlix. 10). Jesus
claimed the title of King of the Jews.

(4.) The promise through Moses, showing that the Saviour was to be a prophet
as well as a king (Deut, xviii. 15), It was more especially in this character that
He exercised His three and a half years’ ministry, teaching the people.

(5.) The promise by David, showing the family in which Messiah was to be
born, vig., that of David the son of Jesse ; and that though He was to Pers His

w


OHAP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





father David as king of Israel, He was to be rejected by the leaders of the people,
and to suffer and die; while, as a priest, He offered Himself as a sacrifice to God
for the sins of the world, the very kind of death He was to suffer being indicated
(Acts ii. 30; Ps. lxxxix. 4, cx. 4, exviii, 22, xl. 6-8, xxii. 16). The Son of David,
the name by which the Jews generally designated the promised Messiah,

(6.) The promise by Isaiah, Bc. 714-50, that He was to be miraculously born
of a virgin, intimating also that while truly man He was also to possess @ divine
nature, as Emmanuel, the Mighty God; and showing at the same time more dis-
tinctly than before that He was to be rejected by men, and made by God a sacrifice
for the sins of the people (Isa, vii. 14, ix. 7, lili) Isaiah especially the evangelical
prophet, or prophet of the Gospel.

(7.) The promise given through Micah, nc. 710, shortly after the preceding,
and showing the place where Messiah was to be born, viz., in Bethlehem, a small
village in Judah, and declaring still more explicitly that, notwithstanding the lowly
place of His birth, He was the everlasting God (Micah v. 2). Singularly fulfilled,
while Mary and Joseph were at the time inhabitants of Nazareth.

IL The time of Messiah’s appearing. This is expressly intimated in the text,
though somewhat enigmatically. Seventy weeks are said to be determined upon
Daniel’s people for the accomplishment of those gracious purposes connected with
Messiah’s advent (ver. 24), These prophetic weeks are again divided into three
portions, of seven, sixty-two, and one; each portion having some important event
or transaction connected with it (vers, 25-27). The points requiring consideration
are—

1. The seventy weeks and the event they bring. No room is left for doubt that
these weeks are prophetic weeks or weeks of years, each week being seven years,
and the whole thus making up 490 years, or seventy times seven (4), The events
to take place in the course of them render every other meaning of the expression
out of the question. The event with which these years were to terminate is not so
certain, and is differently understood ©), Not improbably that event is the ceasing
of the Gospel to be preached exclusively to the Jews, when the kingdom of God
was to be given to another people bringing forth the fruits of it. This took place
only a few years after the death of Christ (Acts x.) It is possible that, as some
suppose, they extend to the period when the Jews shall be restored.

2. The three portions of the seventy weeks, The first of these appears to be seven
weeks or forty-nine years, the event connected with it being, apparently, the rebuild-
ing of Jerusalem, when “the street should be built again and the wall, even in
troublous times” (ver. 25). The historical fulfilment particularly related in the
Book of Nehemiah, The second portion of sixty-two weeks or 434 years,
succeeding the former, and with it making up 483 years, would appear to terminate
with the death of Messiah, which should take place either then or soon after.
“After threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off” (ver. 26). The third
portion, or one week of seven years, apparently succeeding the others, and including
the death of Messiah, and the fruits of it among the Jews in connection with the
preaching of the Gospel during the first few years succeeding that event. Some
extend it so as to include the judgments to fall on the Jews for the rejection of the
Gospel, according to the verses that immediately follow

3. The period of their commencement. Where do the seventy weeks begin ?
Here also is some uncertainty and difference of opinion.(®) In the text, it is the
time of “the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem”
' (ver. 25). The uncertainty is as to what that time was, or what was the precise

commandment referred to, There have been four commandments or edicts of the
kings of Persia, to which the words of the angel havv been referred, each a few
years—though only a few—distant from the others. The first is the edict of
Cyrus, B.c. 536, permitting the Jews to return to their own land (Ezra i. 1). The


second, about sixtcen years later, is that of Darius Hystaspis, in the second or
194


\


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OnAP. IE,





third year of his reign, Bo. 520, confirmatory of that of Cyrus (Ezra vi. 1), The
third is that of Artaxerxes Longimanus, in the seventh year of his reign, B.c. 457,
giving commission to Ezra to repair to Jerusalem and put matters right there
(Ezra vii. 7, 11). The fourth and last is that of the same monarch, in the
twentieth year of his reign, B.o. 444, giving permission to Nehemiah to visit Jeru-
salem with the object of setting forward the restoration of the city (Neh. i. 2, ii.
1, &c.) The first and the last two appear to have the most to be said in their
favour, the third being, perhaps, the most probable, Whichever of these periods
or edicts may be the exact one, there can be little doubt that the prophecy was
intended to mean that somewhere about five centuries, more or less, after Daniel
received the vision, Messiah was to appear, Although there is an uncertainty
connected with ancient chronology, it appears that, as a matter of fact, the baptism
of Jesus, which was preparatory to His death, like the setting apart of the passover
lamb (Exod. xii, 3, 6), took place somewhere about 483 years, or 69 prophetic
weeks, from the third of the above edicts, and that in little more than seven years,
or one prophetic week later, the Gospel had begun to be preached among the
Gentiles, It is certain that at the very time when Jesus appeared, the Jews,
guided by ancient prophecy, were in earnest expectation of the advent of their
promised Messiah. When John the Baptist began to exercise his ministry, all
men mused in their hearts whether he were the Christ, From his prison John
sent two of his disciples to Jesus with the inquiry, “Art thou He that should
come, or look we for another?” At the time of the birth of Jesus the godly in
Jerusalem were waiting and looking for Him who was to be the Redeemer and
Consolation of Israel, Even the Samaritans were looking for Him: “I know
that Messias cometh ; when He is come, He will tell us all things” (John iv. 25).
That there existed at that time a widespread report through all the East that a
ruler should appear in Judea and obtain a universal dominion, even Roman his-
torians testify. According to Josephus, it was that very expectation that moved
the Jews to revolt from their Roman masters, It has even been believed by Jewish
Rabbis that the Messiah was born at the time that the temple was destroyed, and
that He lay hid among the lepers in Rome. So fully were the Jews persuaded
that He should appear about that period, that, rejecting Him when He came in the
person of Jesus, they were ready to embrace and welcome every pretender; till,
always disappointed, their Rabbis pronounced a curse upon those who should
attempt to calculate the time of His appearing, which could chiefly, and almost
only, be done from this very prophecy of Daniel, ‘‘ When the fulness of the time
was come,” God did indeed “‘send forth His Son, made of a woman, made under
the law, that He might redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive
the adoption of sons” (Gal. iv. 4, 5).

We may observe from the text—

1. The cause of rejoicing afforded by this prediction. This is one of those
portions of Scripture that cannot be attentively and believingly read without a
thrill of joy. Here is not only a prediction concerning the Saviour who was to
come, with the blessed results of His advent, but of the very time when He was to
appear, though given nearly five centuries before the event, and given in terms so
plain and precise, that in consequence of it the Jews looked for His coming at the
very period indicated ;@° while exactly at that period, Jesus, with every prophetic
mark of the true Messiah found in Him, actually came ; and though rejected, a
thing which was also predicted of the Messiah, by the mass of His countrymen,
and more especially their leaders, was hailed, accepted, and trusted in as the
promised Saviour of the world, by numbers during His life, and by millions more
since then in almost every part of the world, and among the most civilised portions
of the human race. The reading of the text may well awaken those feelings
claiined by another angel for his statement when announcing the actual fulfilment
of the prophecy: “ Behold, I bring you glad tidings of great joy, aoe oh be


omar, Ya. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





unto all people ; for unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a Saviour
which is Christ the Lord.” If any tidings are fitted to evoke feelings of joy,
surely it is these, :

2. The duty of personally accepting that Saviour whose advent was thus gract-
ousiy foretold, and at the predicted pertod actually took place. The text reveals a
Saviour and promises a salvation which meets the requirements of every human
being ; a salvation not only from sin’s consequences, but from sin itself, and one
which in the Gospel is freely tendered to every creature, Millions, accepting the
announcement and cordially embracing the promised Saviour as their own, have
experienced its truth both in life and death, and, made by it new creatures in
Christ Jesus, have rejoiced with exceeding joy. Such an experience is for each to
make his own, and that without delay. ‘To you is the word of this salvation
sent.” ‘Behold, now is the day of salvation.” ‘ How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation?” Has the reader embraced it 4

3. The evidence here afforded of the truth of Christianity and the word of God,
With this prophecy of Daniel before us, and the Gospel narrative in our hands,
and the existence of the Christian Church before our eyes, we need nothing more
to convince us that there is such a thing as divinely inspired prediction, and that
Christianity is of God. Sir Isaac Newton, no mean authority in connection witb
such a subject, was willing to stake the truth of Christianity on this very prophecy
of Daniel. With the prediction of the text and the facts of history before us,
even the most scriptural may well exclaim with the magicians of Egypt, “ This is
the finger of God!” Believers, if only from the evidence afforded by this prophecy
and its fulfilment, may rejoice with Peter in the assurance, that they “have not
followed cunningly devised fables,” Calvin was right when he said, “ How elear
and sure a testimony we have in Daniel’s prophecy, where he counts the years
till the advent of Christ ; so that we may with boldness oppose Satan and all the
scorn of the ungodly, if it be but true that the book of Daniel was in men’s hands


before Christ came.”


That it was so is doubted by none; even the keenest


opposer of the genuineness of the book placing it at least 150 years before that


event,@1)


EXEGETICAL NOTES. —®) This
is the general view regarding the pro-
phecy. Keil observes that the interpre-
tations of the passage may be divided
into three principal classes, 1. That of
most of the Church fathers and the
older orthodox interpreters, who find
prophesied here—the appearance of
Christ in the flesh, His death, and the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans;
the view held also by Hiivernick, Heng-
stenberg, Auberlen, and Dr. Pusey. 2.
That of the majority of the modern
interpreters (that is, mainly, the German
Rationalists), who refer the whole pas-
sage to the time of Antiochus Epiphanes;
a view held also by Hofmann and De-
litzsch, who, however, have united with
what they consider the primary historical
reference of verses 25-27 to Antiochus,
an eschatological reference, according to
which the prophecy will be perfectly
accomplished only in the appearance of

196


Antichrist and the final completion of
the kingdom of God, 3. That of some
of the Church fathers, and several modern
theologians, who interpret the prophecy
eschatologically, as an announcement of
the development of the kingdom of God
from the end of the exile on to the per-
fecting of the kingdom by the second
coming of Christ at the end of the days.
This last view is that of Keil himself,
as well as Kliefoth, the germs of it
appearing in Hippolytus and Apollinaris
of Laodicea, who refer the statement in
ver, 27, regarding the last week, to the
end of the world, viewing the first half
as the time of the return of Elijah, and
the second as that of Antichrist. From
the contents of ver, 24, Keil concludes
that the termination of the seventy weeks
coincides with the end of the present
course of the world, Differently from
most, he thinks the periods are not to
be reckoned chronologically, but to be


.
HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: DANIEL,


OHAP. IX.





viewed symbolically, as a divinely-
appointed period measured by sevens,
the reckoning of their actual duration
being withdrawn beyond the reach of
our human research, but leaving us the
strong consolation of knowing that the
fortunes of God’s people are safe in His
hands.

(2) “ Messiah the Prince” (ver. 25). Ta)
NW) (Mashiakh Naghidh), not, as Ber-
tholdt thinks, an anointed prince; for
Mv) cannot be an adjective to 7°32,
because in Hebrew the adjective is,
with few exceptions, which are inappli-
cable in this case, always placed after
the noun. Nor is D'¥ a participle, as
Steudel makes it, but a noun with T'92
in apposition—an anointed one who is
also a prince. According to Keil, it is
one who is first and specially a priest,
and, in addition, a prince of the people
or a king, it being chiefly priests and
kings who in the Old Testament were
anointed to their office. He remarks
that this could neither be Zerubbabel,
as many old interpreters thought, nor
Ezra, nor Onias IIL, nor Cyrus, as some
Rabbis and Rationalists have supposed.
The Old Testament knows only One who
shall be both priest and king in one per-
son (Pa, cx. 4; Zech, vi. 13), Christ, the
Messias (John iv. 25) ; in whom the two
essential requisites of the theocratic king,
the anointing and the appointment to be
the 7°) or prince of the people of God
(1 Sam, x. 1; 2 Sam. i. 21), are found in
the most perfect manner. Some explain
the want of the article on the ground
that D'YD (Mashiakh) “ Messiah” is
used as a proper name, like Nd¥
(tsemakh) the Branch, in Zech. iii. 8,
vi. 12; the term having certainly been
used as a proper name before it was
applied to Jesus (John i 41, iv. 25).
Keil, who thinks that in this case the
article would have stood before 32
(naghidh) “the prince,” prefers to read
—till one comes who is anointed and at
the same time prince; because He that
is to come is not definitely designated
as the expected Messiah, but must only
be made prominent by what is ascribed
to Him as a personage altogether singular.

(8) “* The prince” (ver. 25). Here the
Messiah, though in the following verse


an earthly prince, probably Titus or the
Roman emperor. Josephus applies the
term even in this verse to Vespasian as
the person intended. Theodoret and
Eusebius thought of John Hyrcanus,
who was both prince and high priest.
Others have applied it to the anointed
governors and elders among the Jews in
general, Some of the Jews applied it to
Herod Agrippa, who was slain shortly
before the destruction of Jerusalem.

(4) “ Seventy weeks” (ver. 24). Seventy
DYaY (shabhu’im), ‘ sevens,” hence,
weeks, Dr, Taylor observes that here
it is not necessary to adopt the year-
day theory, although itself resting on
sufficient grounds. The prophet says,
“seventy weeks,” or ‘seventy sevens,”
which might either be days or years;
and as this allusion appears to be to the
seventy years of the captivity, so years
are naturally to be understood here,
“For the one seventy in exile, there
should be seven seventies of continued
occupation of the holy city.” Auberlen
thinks the seventy weeks, or 490 years,
extend to the year 33 a.p. “ The fixed
chronological point from which to cal-
culate we find in the death of the Mes-
siah, which falls in the middle of the
last week, that is, three and a half years
before the end of the whole period, con-
sequently the year 30 a.p, But it is in
this very year, according to the soundest
chronological investigations, and the
most generally adopted reckoning, in
which Bengel and Wieseler, for example,
coincide, that the Lord Jesus was cruci-
fied.” So Willet, reckoning from the
first year of Cyrus, computes,—the Per-
sian monarchy lasted 130 years; the
Greek or Macedonian, 300 ; the Roman,
to the death of Christ, 60; in all, 490.
He observes that, “ although in the par-
ticular account of time there be some
disagreement, yet herein most Christian
interpreters agree, that all those years
expired either at the birth or passion of
Christ, or in the destruction of Jerusa-
lem; so that whichever account be re-
ceived, two main points are proved,
namely, that Messiah is come, and that
He came not as a temporal prince, but
was put to death.” Calvin, who remarks
that “the diversity of opinions among

197


OWAP, IX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


— ee eeeeeeSeSeeseseseses


interpreters doth not evacuate or extenu-
ate the authority of Scripture,” says that
“‘the Jews agree with us in considering
the prophet to reckon the weeks not by
days but by years, as in Lev. xxv. 8;
only they consider them to have begun
at the destruction of the former temple,
and closed at the overthrow of the second,
when God would disperse them over all
the earth, as a chastisement for their
sin, till at length Messiah should come.”
He paraphrases thus: “ Sorrowful dark-
ness has brooded over you for seventy
years ; but God will now follow up this
period by one of favour of sevenfold
duration, because, by lightening your
cares and moderating your sorrow, He
will not cease to prove Himself propitious
to you, even to the advent of Christ.”
Dr. Pusey also, who observes that the
choice of the form of the prophecy waa
itself prophetical, thinks that the inter-
val which God assigned had an evident
reference to the seventy years of the
captivity ; and that that number had a
bearing on the broken Sabbaths, in pun-
ishment of which Moses foretold that
the land should enjoy her Sabbaths in
the captivity of the people. “ Seventy
years were the term of their captivity ;
seven times seventy years were to be
the main term of their new probation
in the possession of their land and of
their restored city.” Mr. Bosanquet also
thinks these seventy weeks are seventy
Sabbaths of years, “each ending with a
shemittah, or ‘year of release,’ such as
were to be observed under the Levitical
law; the period of seven weeks repre-
senting seven Sabbaths of years, or 49
years, ending with a year of jubilee
(Lev. xxv. 8, 9), and with the dedica-
tion of the wall of Jerusalem.” Profes-
sor Stuart calls them seventy heptades
of years, Daniel having been making
diligent inquiry regarding the seventy
years of the captivity. Professor Lee
understands only an indefinite period.
Hofmann and Kliefoth too, with whom
Keil agrees, remark that DVAY (shabh-
wim) does not necessarily mean year-
weeks, but an intentionally indefinite
designation of a period of time measured
by the number seven, whose chron-
ological duration must be determined
198


on other grounds. Hengstenberg and
Kranichfeld, however, are in favour of
year-weeks (periods of seven years), on
the ground that such an interpretation
is very natural, since they hold so pro-
minent a place in the law of Moses;
and the exile had brought them anew
very distinctly into remembrance, inas-
much as the seventy years’ desolation of
the land was viewed as a punishment
for the interrupted festival of the Sab-
batical year (2 Chron. xxxvi. 21). So
Junius, Pellican, Polanus, &., the last
remarking that the number seven is of
great observance among the Jews, indi-
cating periods of holy rest, and pointing
to the great year of rest in the redemp-
tion of the world by Messiah.

(©) “ Are determined upon thy people,
and upon thy holy city to finish,” &e.
(ver, 24) WENN} (nekhtach), from YOO
(khathach), occurring only here in Heb-
rew, but in Chaldee meaning “ to cut off,
cut up into pieces,” hence “to decide,” or
determine; so Pagn. Mont. Jun.,&c. Not
abbreviated or shortened, as the Vul-
gate, abbreviate, and as Wieseler thinks,
The singular used, either from a singu-
lar noun, as NY (eth) time, being before
the prophet’s mind, as Hengstenberg
thinks, or, as Keil prefers, from the
seventy weeks being conceived of as a
whole or absolute idea; but not from
an inexact manner of writing of the
later authors, as Ewald supposes. The
expression “upon thy people,” &e.,
implies, according to Kliefoth and
Keil, that the people and city of God
should not remain in the state of desola-
tion in which they then were, but should
at some time be again restored, and
should be continued during the time men-
tioned ; Keil understanding these terms
certainly to refer first to Israel after the
Jesh and to the geographical J erusilem,
but also as embracing the New T'esta-
ment Church and the Church of God
on earth, He remarks that the follow-
ing infinitive clauses, ‘to finish,” &ec.,
present the object for which the seventy
weeks are determined, intimating what
shall happen till, or with the expiry ob
the time determined ; it being only to
be concluded from the contents of the
final clauses whether what is mentioned


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





shall take place only at the end of the
period, or shall develop itself gradually
in the course of it, He thinks, from
the contents of these six clauses, that
the termination of the seventy weeks
coincides with the end of the present
course of the world, Sir Isaac Newton
also inclined to apply the last seven
weeks of the period to the time when
Antichrist should be destroyed by the
brightness of the Saviour’s coming,
CEcolampadius understood this last week
to be no definite number of years, but
commencing with the time of Pompey,
continuing to the death of Christ, and
terminating in the reign of Adrian,
ninety-eight years later. Melanchthon
and Junius (first edition) viewed the
second half of that week as commenc-
ing with Christ’s death and continuing
onwards, Polanus and Junius make
that latter half to include the destruction
of Jerusalem, Bullinger, Broughton,
and Willet make the last of the weeks
the seven years previous to Christ’s
death, the first half being a preparatory
season before His baptism, which took
place in the middle of it. Scaliger
divided the last week into two parts,
assigning four years and a half to
Christ’s ministry, and the other two
and a half to the destruction of Jeru-
salem. Apollinaris seems to have ex-
tended the prophecy to the end of the
world, The Duke of Manchester, reck-
oning the whole period of 490 years
from B.c, 424, or anno Nabonassar 325,
the supposed time of the vision, brings
its termination down to a.D. 66.

(8) “* Seven weeks, and threescore and
two weeks” (ver. 25). Keil observes that
most interpreters who understand Christ
as Messiah the Prince, have referred
both of these periods to the first clause,
as being to be reckoned from the going
forth of the commandment. Thus Theo-
dotion and the Vulgate. So Havernick,
Hengstenberg, and Auberlen. Heng-
stenberg says: ‘The separation of the
two periods of time was of great conse-
quence, in order to show that the seven
and the sixty-two weeks are not a mere
arbitrary dividing into two of one whole
period, but that to each of these two
periods its own characteristic mark be


OW4P, IX.


—


longs.” He divides them thus: “ Sixty
weeks must pass away; seven till the
completed restoration of the city, sixty
from that time till the Anointed, the
Prince.” Keil, however, who regards
the periods symbolically and not chro-
nologically, thinks that this interpreta-
tion distorts the language of the text,
and ought to be suffered to fall aside as
untenable, in order that we may do
justice to the words of the prophecy.
He thinks that the seven weeks are
said to terminate with the appearance
of Messiah the Prince, after which the
sixty and two weeks take their com-
mencement, terminating with the cut-
ting off of the Messiah. Willet, after
Calvin, Gicolampadius, and Broughton,
reckoning from the first year of Cyrus,
make the first seven weeks, or forty-
nine years, to terminate with the finish-
ing of the temple in the sixth year of
Darius or Artaxerxes Longimanus,

@) “The street shall be built again
and the wall, even tn troublous times”
(ver. 25). AWA (tashubh), “shall
return,” is thus joined adverbially to
the second verb, 10333) (vensbhnethah),
“and shall be built.” So Havernick,
Hofmann, and Wieseler. Keil, on the
other hand, thinks that the words refer
undoubtedly to the expression in the
former clause of the verse ni33?} awe
(lehashibh velibhnoth), “to restore and
to build;” and that therefore WA
(tashubh) is to be rendered intransi-
tively, ‘shall be restored,” as Ezek.
xvi. 55; 1 Kings xiii. 6, and elsewhere
He thinks, against Rosenmiiller, Gese-
nius, and Hengstenberg, that the sub-
ject to both verbs is not 311) (rekhobh),
“ the street,” but Jerusalem, as is mani-
fest both from the words of the com-
mandment, and from the fact that in
Zech, viii. 5 the noun is construed as
masculine, while here the verb is femi-
nine. He is also of the opinion that
the words Y39) 37) (rekhobh vekharuts),
“the street and the wall,” contain to-
gether one definition, the former, 211)
(rekhobh), the street and wide space be-
fore the gate of the temple, being taken
as the adverbial accusative, “ with wide
spaces ;” and the latter as a participle,
‘and yet cut off or limited,” the sense

199


OHAP. IX,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





being, “Jerusalem shall be built so
that the city takes in a wide space, has
wide free places, but not, however, un-
limited in width, but such that their
compass is measured off, is fixed and
bounded.” So Kliefoth, Theodotion,
and the Vulgate have “the street and
the wall” To the latter word (/7))
Gesenius and others give the meaning
“ditch, wall, aqueduct ;” Ewald, “a
pond ;” Hofmann, “a confined space ;”
Hitzig, “the court.” Havernick, Heng-
stenberg, and others translate it as a
participle, ‘and it is determined.” The
expression “in troublous times,” Pi¥3
DAY (betsog ha’ittim), “in the dif-
ficulty or oppression of the times,”
points to the circumstances under which
the building was to proceed, and which
are fully recorded in the Book of Ne-
hemiah (chaps, iii., iv., vi., ix.) ; but, in
Keil’s opinion, is, according to Pa, li.
20, to be applied also to the spiritual
building of the city of God.

(8) “* After threescore and two weeks
shall Messiah be cut off” (ver. 26).
These weeks apparently the period im-
mediately succeeding the seven weeks
that constitute the first section of these
weeks of years. Keil remarks that
from the "298 (akharé) “ after,” it does
not follow with certainty that the “ cut-
ting off” of the Messiah falls wholly in
the beginning of the seventieth week,
but only that the “cutting off” shall
constitute the first great event of this
week, and that those things that are
mentioned in the remaining part of the
verse shall then follow. Many think
that, according to ver, 27, this great
event will only take place in the midst
of that last week, when, in consequence
of it, the typical sacrifices and oblations
shall be made to cease, the true sacri-
fice being now offered,

(°) “ From the going forth of the
commandment,” &c, (ver. 24). Various
Opinions as to what commandment is
here referred to, Calvin and C&colam-
padius, and, among the moderns, Klei-
nert, Ebrard, Kliefoth, Keil, and others,
regard it as the edict of Cyrus (Ezra i,
1), from which, says Kliefoth, the ter-
mination of the exile is constantly
dated, and from which time the return

200 /


of the Jews, together with the building
up of Jerusalem, began. Keil thinks
that Isaiah xliv. 28 directs us to this
view, as also the words in Ezra vi. 14,
“They builded according to the com-
mandment of the king of Persia.”
Havernick and Hengstenberg, following
some Church fathers, decide in favour
of the second decree of Artaxerxes given
in favour of Nehemiah in the twentieth
year of his reign; Hengstenberg being
of opinion that the words of the angel
do not refer to the beginning of the
building of Jerusalem, but much rather
to the beginning of its complete restora-
tion according to its ancient extent and
glory. Luther and Bengel regard the
“commandment” as the decree of Darius
Hystaspis; while Bullinger, Pfaff, Sir
Isaac Newton, Prideaux, Auberlen, and
others prefer the edict of Artaxerxes
given to Ezra in the seventh year of his
reign, Dr. Rule observes that the first
decree by Cyrus related only to the
temple, not the city; but that the great
and decisive decree for rebuilding Jeru-
salem was issued by Artaxerxes, 457
B.c., in the seventh year of his reign,
and is preserved in full in Ezra vii,
being no doubt to be found in the
archives of the realm. Seven weeks or
forty-nine years from that date come
down to the year 408 Bo., when Nehe-
miah finished his work of restoring the
city. Sixty-two weeks, added to this,
making sixty-nine weeks or 483 y

reach down to a.D, 26, when our Lord
was about thirty years of age, and was
baptised by John; which Dr. Rule con-
siders to be meant by His being “cut
off,” or separated as a victim for sacri-
fice. The remaining week or seven
years was, in his view, occupied with
the Saviour’s ministry till His death;
during which He confirmed the cove-
nant with many by His teaching, This
is also the view of Dr. Pusey, who
remarks that of the four, two only are
principal and leading decrees, that of
Cyrus, and that in the seventh year of
Artaxerxes Longimanus ; that those of
Cyrus and Darius relate to the rebuild-
ing of the temple, those of Artaxerxes
to the condition of Judea and Jerusalem;
and that this rebuilding of the city and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


x


reorganisation of the Jewish polity, be-
gun by Ezra and carried on and per-
fected by Nehemiah, corresponds with
the words in Daniel, “ From the going
forth,” &c, He observes that the time
also corresponds ; that 483 years of the
whole period of seventy weeks or 490
years, the last seven years being parted
off, reckoned from the year 457 B.c.,
were completed in the year 27 «D.,
which, since the nativity was four years
earlier than our era, would coincide
with our Lord’s baptism, when the Holy
Ghost descending upon Him manifested
Him to be the Anointed One, or the
Messiah, He adds: “But the fact of
these several periods being prophesied,
and the last above six hundred years
before, is the body, not the soul, of the
prophecy; it is not that which is the
chief evidence of its divinity.” Hesse
thinks we are not forced to understand
the angel’s words as referring to only
one of these edicts, but that they refer
to the whole period during which such
edicts were given, revoked, and renewed.
Preiswerk thinks that, considering the
uncertainty of ancient chronology, we
ought not to lay much stress on caleu-
lating the exact year, but be content to
point out a mere general coincidence of
the prophecy with the historical time ;
and that if we show that possibly even
a minute coincidence took place, and at
least that no one can prove the contrary,
we shall have done enough to prove the
truth of the ancient prophecy. Sack
thinks it was enough to strengthen
faith and keep alive expectation, to
leave only a general conception of the
time when the Deliverer, Messiah the
Prince, should appear.

(9) Josephus says: “ What gave them
(the Jews) courage to fight was a saying
found in the Holy Scriptures that about
that time (shortly before the destruction
of Jerusalem) one of their nation was
to obtain the government of the world.”
This report was widely spread, Tacitus
says: “Many had the conviction that
it stood written in their ancient priestly
books that just about that very time
the East would rise up im great power,
and men from Judea would obtain the
government of the world.” Suetonius,


OMAP. IX,





another Roman historian of the period,
also says: “The old and commos
opinion was spread through all the Easy
that it was destined by fate that me1
of Judea should obtain at this time
the government of the world.” Jewish
writings bear the same testimony.
** Our Rabbins have delivered to us that
in the week in which the Son of David
comes,” &c. (Talmud, Sanh. 97, 1).
“Seventy weeks after the destruction
of the first temple shall intervene till the
destruction of the second” (Seder Olam,
Yalkut Shimeoni, ii. 79, 4). “Why was
Jonathan ben Uzziel forbidden to inter-
pret the Hagiographa? Because in it is
contained the term of Messiah’s advent”
(Megillah, 3, 1). Rashi says, “ The
term of Messiah is found in the book of
Daniel.” Bishop Hurd observes : ‘ They
(the Jews) were led by these prophecies,
as interpreted by themselves, to expect
that they would be completed at the
time at which we say they were com-
pleted ; and it was not till after the
coming of Christ that they began to
interpret them differently, and to look
out for another completion of them. .. .
The natural and proper sense will be
thought to be that in which we take
them ; for that sense occurred first to
themselves, and was, in truth, their
sense before we adopted it. When I
say their sense, I mean especially in
respect to the time which they had fixed
for the accomplishment of the pro-
phecies concerning the Messiah.” Dr.
Keith remarks: Tacitus, Suetonius,
Josephus, and Philo agree in testifying
the antiquity of the prophecies, and
their acknowledged reference to that
period. Even the Jews to this day own
that the time when their Messiah ought
to have appeared is long since past ; and
they attribute the delay of His coming
to the sinfulness of their nation, And
thus, from the distinct prophecies theme
selves; from the testimony of profane
historians ; and from the concessions
of the Jews, every requisite proof is
afforded that Christ appeared when
all the concurring circumstances of the
time denoted the prophesied period of
His advent,”

@) The views of the German Ra

201


OMAP, IX.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





tionalists, and others of the same school,
are thus expressed by an English writer,
R. W. Mackay (Progress of the Intel-
lect): “ During the severe persecutions
under Antiochus Epiphanes, when the
cause of Hebrew faith, in its struggle
with colossal heathenism, seemed des-
perate; and when, notwithstanding
some bright examples of heroism, the
majority of the higher class was inclined
to submit and to apostatise; an unknown
writer adopted the ancient name of
Daniel, in order to revive the almost
extinct hopes of his countrymen, and to
exemplify the proper bearing of a faith-
ful Hebrew in the presence of a Gentile
tyrant. .. The object of Pseudo-
Daniel is to foreshadow, under a form
adapted to make the deepest impression
on his countrymen, by a prophecy, half-
allusive, half-apocryphal, the approaching
destruction of heathenism through the
advent of Messiah.” The prophecies of
Daniel are supposed by this school to
extend to the death of Antiochus, but no
further, the book being completed shortly
after that event. The great effort is to
make the periods mentioned in this chap-
ter to coincide with the eventsof that time.
The attempt, always failing, is renewed
under another form again and again, with
the same success. Dr. Pusey has count-
ed thirteen various ways in which this
school attempts to reckon the seventy
weeks, Keil observes; ‘The opponents
of the genuineness of the book of Daniel
generally are agreed in this, that the
destruction of this enemy of the Jews,
or the purification of the temple occur-
ring a few years earlier, forms the ter-
minus ad quem (or termination) of the
seventy weeks ; and that their duration
is to be reckoned, from the year 168 or
172 n.0., back either to the destruction


of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, or to
the beginning of the exile Hitsig,
Ewald, Wieseler, and others suppose
that the first seven year-weeks, or forty-
nine years, are uot to be taken into the
reckoning along with the sixty-two
weeks, and that only sixty-two weeks,
or 434 years, are to be counted to the
year 175 (as Ewald), or 172 (as Hitzig
thinks), as the beginning of the last
week, filled up by the assault of An-
tivchus against Judaism. But even this
reckoning brings us to the year 609 or
606 B.c., the commencement of the exile,
or three years further back. To date
the sixty years from that event agrees
too little with the announcement that
“from the going forth of the command-
ment to restore,” d&c. So that of the
most recent representatives of this view,
no one any longer consents to hold the
seventy years of the exile for a time of
the restoring and the building of Jeru-
salem. Thus Hitzig and Ewald openly
declare that the reckoning is not correct,
and that the Pseudo-Daniel has erred,
and assumed ten weeks, or seventy
years, too many, . .. By this change
of the sixty-two weeks into fifty-two,
or 434 years into 364, they reach from
the year 174 to 538 Ba, the year of
the overthrow of Babylon by Cyrus, by
whom the commandment to restore Jeru-
salem was promulgated. To this the
seven weeks (or forty-nine years) are
again added, in order to reach the year
588 or 587 8.c., the year of the destruc.
tion of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar,
from which the year-weeks, shortened
from seventy to sixty, are to be rec
koned.” Keil adds: “This hypothesis
needs no serious refutation; yet this
supposition is made among these oppo
nents a dogmatic axiom,”


HOMILETICS.
Sror. XXXIV.—Tue Ossecrs or Mussian’s Apvent (Chap. ix. 24).


We come to the cream of the prophecy. The angel foretells what were to be
the blessed results of Messiah’s advent, which were to take place within the


seventy weeks determined upon Daniel’s people.


These objects and results are


described in six particulars, or in three pairs, more or less connected. (1)
I Transgression was to be finished or restrained. Ver. 24. “To finish


transgression.” The word rendered “finish” is ambiguous, (2)


202


many preferring


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIED, CHAP. Ix,








the translation given in the margin of our Bibles, to “restrain.” One blessed
result of Messiah’s advent was to be that transgression and sin would be so
restrained that it should no longer rule and prevail, and in multitudes of cases
should for ever cease among men as before. Accordingly the name to be given to
the Messiah, and by which He was to be known among men when He came, was
Jesus, because He should “save His people from their sins.” Deliverance from
sin the primary object of Messiah’s advent. Hence Zachariah’s song: “That He
would grant unto us, that we, being delivered out of the hand of our enemies,
might serve Him without fear, in righteousness and holiness before Him, all the
days of our life” (Luke i, 74, 75). Such deliverance impossible without an
atonement or satisfaction to divine justice for human guilt. Sin must be forgiven
before it can cease to reign. But “without shedding of blood there is no remis-
sion.” Sin shall have no dominion over us, only because we are delivered from
the condemning sentence of the law, and placed on a footing of grace and free
favour through the satisfaction made by Christ’s death. It is the blood of Christ,
who through the Eternal Spirit offered Himself without spot to God, that purges
our conscience “from dead works to serve the living God” (Heb. ix. 14),

IL Sin was to be forgiven. ‘lo make an eid of sin,” or, according to the
margin, to “seal” it up,() as something that was no longer to see the light. This
probably connected with the preceding as its ground or foundation, When sin,
having been atoned for, is sealed up as a thing no longer to be seen, it loses its
power or prevalence, and so is restrained as under bonds and imprisonment,
Deliverance from the guilt of sin, inseparably connected with deliverance from its
power ; the latter deliverance being in consequence of the former, as it is the guilt
or condemnation under which sin brings us that gives it its power. Sin, as an act
of transgression against God’s law, brings death, spiritual as well as temporal, as
its penalty ; but spiritual death is simply the reign of sin in the sou!, “ The soul
that sinneth it shall die.” Forgiveness cancels the sentence, and so delivers
not only from the guilt but from the reigning power of sin. Christ is made
“righteousness” to us, in the forgiveness from sin and the acceptance of our
person; and so is also immediately made to us “sanctification ” for our personal
holiness (1 Cor. i. 30), ‘In the Lord” we have “ righteousness and strength ;”
righteousness, or forgiveness and acceptance, first, and then, or along with it,
strength, in order to overcome sin and serve God (Is. xlv. 24). God first forgives
all the sinner’s “ iniquities,” and then heals all his “ diseases” (Ps. ciii. 3). This
forgiveness is complete and permanent, a true “sealing” up of sin. ‘‘ Their sins
and their iniquities will I remember no more” (Heb. viii. 12). “‘ There is now no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus” (Rom. viii, 1). ‘ He that be-
lieveth is justified from all things ;” “ hath everlasting life ;” and “shall never come
into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life.” ‘Thou wilt cast all their
sins into the depths of the sea” (Acts xiii. 38, 39; John iii. 86, v. 24; Micah
vii. 19). This making an end of or “sealing” up of sin, by its entire and ever-
lasting forgiveness, solely the result of Christ’s death. Constantly exhibited in the
great central ordinance of the Church, the Lord’s Supper: “This cup is the new
covenant in my blood shed for the remission of sins.”

IIL Satisfaction or atonement was to be made for iniquity. “To make
reconciliation for iniquity.” () This the ground of the preceding, as that again was
of its predecessor. Before sin could be restrained or arrested in its power, it must
be forgiven; and before it can be forgiven, it must be atoned for. This the
significance of all the sacrificial blood that had flowed from the beginning ; fot
‘‘ without shedding of blood is no remission.” ‘The sin that is to be forgiven must
be laid and punished somewhere, But “it was impossible that the blood of bulls
and goats could take away sin ”—atone or satisfy for man’s guilt. This could only
point to blood that was able, from the dignity of the person whose blood it was, to
effect this object. This was the Messiah, the Anointed, emphatically oe “ the


omar, Ix. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world.” Hence the evangelical
prophet: “ He was wounded for our transgressions; He was bruised for our
iniquities ; the chastisement of our peace was upon Him; and by His stripes we are
healed. All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his
own way ; and the Lord hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all. It pleased the
Lord to bruise Him ; He hath put Him to grief. Thou shalt make His soul an
offering for sin, He shall bear their-iniquities, He bare the sin of many, and made
intercession for the transgressors ” (Isa. liii. 5, 6, 10-12), Thus exhibited by the
Apostle: “Whom God set forth to be a propitiation, through faith, by His blood,
to show His righteousness, because of the passing over of the sins done aforetime,
in the forbearance of God; for the showing, I say, of His righteousness at the
present season; that He might Himself be just, and the justifier of him that hath
faith in Jesus” (Rom, iii, 25, 26, R. V.)


“Die man or justice must, unless for him
Some other, able and ag willing, pay
The rigid satisfaction, death for death.”"—Paradise Lost.


IV. Everlasting righteousness for man’s acceptance to be procured. “To
bring in everlasting righteousness.” What righteousness is this?(5) Righteousness
in the Bible is either judicial or moral ; acceptance with God, or that conformity to
His law which is the ground of it, In the former sense it includes forgiveness,
which is the removal or cancelling of what would otherwise forbid our acceptance
with God. Such acceptance, however, requires more than forgiveness. Besides
the cancelling of transgressions against God’s law, it requires a perfect obedience
to it, It is properly the righteous man, or the man who is able to present such
a righteousness as the law demands, that is accepted, or regarded and pronounced
righteous. Forgiveness is something negative; righteousness something positive,
Forgiveness cancels disobedience; righteousness presents obedience. To be
accepted requires both. Both provided for in the Messiah ; the one in His atoning
death, the other in His spotless life. As the result of both, the Lord was “well
pleased for His (Messiah’s) righteousness ; He hath magnified the law, and made it
honourable” (Isa, xlii. 21), It is in the righteousness of Messiah, including both
His active and passive obedience, His rendering to the law the obedience it requires,
and the penalty it demands for the transgressions which in becoming man and
man’s Surety He took upon Him, that we sinners are accepted. We are righteous
and accepted in Him who for our sakes became God’s righteous Servant, and is
pre-eminently “the Righteous” and “the Just One.” His name was therefore to
be called “the Lord Our Righteousness.” ‘In Him shall all the seed of Israel be
justified and shall glory. Surely, shall one say, In the Lord have I righteousness
and strength.” In this respect the Messiah was to be the Second Adam, and the
contrast as well as the antitype of the first. “ As through the one man’s disobedience
the many were made sinners, even so through the obedience of the One shall the
many be made righteous” (Rom, vy. 19, R.V.) This righteousness of Messiah was
to be an “everlasting” righteousness, Unlike the obedience of the first Adam, His
obedience was to continue to the end, and to be followed by no disobedience ; and
the result of it was to be everlasting and perpetual acceptance, as of Himself, the
Head, so of all His members who are made to share in His righteousness and be
accepted in Him. They, like the Head, were never to come into condemnation, but
to be “saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation,” and never to be “ashamed
or confounded world without end” (Isa. xlv. 17). This everlasting righteousness
was brought in by Messiah as the product of His whole life, terminating in the one
great act of obedience to His Father’s will and surrender to the law’s demands, His
vicarious atoning death, “He said, It is finished; and He bowed His head, and
gave up the ghost.” Thus brought in, it is made to belong to those for whom it


was provided, on their belief in and acceptance of it as their own,—their entire trust
204


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL, CHAP, I,





and dependence on it alone for acceptance with God, This is faith, the means or
instrument by which we are put in possession of it, and are justified. “Justified
by faith, we have peate with God.” ‘He that believeth is justified from all
things.” “The righteousness of God, through faith in Jesus Christ, unto all them
that believe” (Acts viii. 39; Rom. viii. 1, iii, 22, R.V.)


*¢Oh, how unlike the complex works of man,
Heaven’s easy, artless, unencumber’d plan,§


It stands like the cxrulean arch we see,

Majestic in its own simplicity,

Inscribed above the portal, from afar,

Conspicuous as the brightness of a star,

Legible only by the light they give,-

Stand the soul-quickening words—BELIEVE AND LIVE.”


V. Prophecy was to receive its fulfilment and to cease. “To seal up the
vision and prophecy ;” or, literally, to ‘‘ seal up vision and prophet.” (6) In the birth,
life, death, resurrection, and kingdom of the Messiah, vision and prophecy would
receive their fulfilment ; for what the Spirit of Christ testified beforehand in the
prophets was “ the sufferings of Christ and the glories that should follow them”
(1 Pet. i. 11, R.V.) “ The testimony of Jesus was the spirit of prophecy.” Jesus
could testify before His death with reference to the “ vision and prophecy” of the
Old Testament, “ The things concerning Me have an end.” To this completion of
prophecy His last words might also have reference; ‘‘ It is finished.” He had told
His disciples while yet with them, that “all things must be fulfilled, which were
written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the Psalms” concerning
Him. So after His resurrection, “ beginning at Moses and all the prophets, He
expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning Himself” (Luke
xxiv. 27, 44). As a precious gift indeed for the edification of His Church, and the
extension of His kingdom in the world, as had also been made the subject of Old
Testament prophecy in connection with the “ glories” that should follow Messiah’s
sufferings, the Spirit was poured out upon the believers, both men and women, so
that they were enabled to “ prophesy” (Acts ii. 1-18; 1 Cor. xiv. 1; Eph. iv. 11).
But with the apostles and immediate disciples of Jesus vision and prophecy in rela-
tion to the future were to cease. These having received their fulfilment, either abso-
lutely, or, as in the case of Messiah’s kingdom, incipiently, with the communications
given to the beloved disciple, the last of the apostles, the canon of Scripture was
closed.

VL The new spiritual Temple was to be set up and consecrated. ‘To
anoint the Most Holy ;” or, literally, “to anoint a Holy of holies.” (7) The allusion
to the most holy place in the tabernacle or temple is obvious, The question is, what
is here particularly the thing predicted? The reference is probably to that New
Testament Church, Temple, or House of God which Messiah was to establish, and
of which He was to be the chief corner-stone, That Church or Temple, with
Messiah as at once its foundation and builder, was made the subject of express pro-
phecy. ‘The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head stone
of the corner.” ‘ Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a
precious corner-stone, a sure foundation.” “ Behold the man whose name is the
Brancu, and He shall grow up out of His place, and He shall build the temple of
the Lord” (Ps, xviii. 22; Isa, xxviii. 16 ; Zech. vi, 12), Of this spiritual temple,
identified with Christ as His body, the anointed tabernacle and temple at Jerusalem
wasatype. Speaking of Himself, Christ said, “ Destroy this temple, and in three
days I will raise it up.” And of His Church He said, ‘On this rock will I build
My church.” So the Apostle Paul, addressing believers, says, “ Ye are the temple
of the living God ;” * Ye are God’s building ;” built upon the foundation of the
apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being the chief ree Peter,

2


cmar. Iz, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,








in like manner; “ To whom coming as unto a living stone, ye also as lively stones
are built up aspiritual house” (1 Cor. iii. 17, vi. 19; Eph. ii. 20; 1 Pet. ii. 5). This
New Testament Church was to be set up by Messiah at His advent, and in con-
formity with its type it was to be consecrated by anointing. That Anointing Oil
was the Holy Ghost, the antitype of the holy anointing oil of the Old Testa-
vient. We have seen how Jesus Himself, the chief corner-stone, and who is one
with His Church, was anointed with the Holy Ghost at His baptism. In like
manner was the Church, His members, anointed on the day of Pentecost and onwaris,
in fulfilment of the great promise made by their Head, “ Ye shall be baptised with
the Holy Ghost not many days hence.” It was this anointing that was to fit them
for their great work in the world till He should come again. “ Ye shall receive
power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be witnesses
unto Me, both in Jerusalem, and in Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost
parts of the earth” (Acts i. 5, 8). ‘The effects of the anointing in the now con-
secrated spiritual Temple were immediately apparent. ‘‘ They were all filled with
the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them
utterance, And the same day there were added unto them about three thousand
souls, And they continued steadfastly in the apostles’ doctrine and fellowship,
and in breaking of bread, and in prayers, And alli that believed were together, and
had all things common ; and sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to
all men, as every man had need. And they, continuing daily with one accord in
the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with glad-
ness and singleness of heart, praising God, and having favour with all the peuple.
And the Lord added to the church daily such as should be saved” (Acts ii. 4,
41-47). This anointing with the Holy Ghost to be characteristic of the New
Testament Church. ‘He who hath anointed us is God.” “ Ye have an unction
from the Holy One, and ye know all things, The anointing which ye have
received abideth in you; and ye need not that any man teach you; but as the
same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as
it hath taught you, ye shall abide in Him ” (2 Cor. i, 21 ; 1 John ii. 20, 27). The
privilege as well as duty of the New Testament Church is expressed in the apos-
tolic exhortation, “ Be ye filled with the Spirit.” Its members were to be distin-
guished by the fruits and graces of that Spirit with which, in common with their
Head, they were to be anointed. ‘God hath not given us the Spirit of fear, but
of power, and of love, and of a sound mind.” “If ye be led of the Spirit, ye are
not under the law. But the fruits of the Spirit are love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance ; against such there is no law:
and they that are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts”
(2 Tim. i. 7; Gal. v. 18, 22-24), The name given to the New Testament Church
descriptive of this anointing, ‘The disciples were first called Christians at
Antioch.” But “Christians” are simply “ Christ’s men,” or the members of the
Anointed One, and so anointed themselves, Even the very name of “ Christ,” the
Anointed, appears to be given them in the word (1 Cor. xii 12; Rev. xi, 15).
This quite natural, the Head and members forming one body, The same holy
Anointing Oil which was poured on the head of Aaron ran down to his beard, even
to the skirts of his garment (Ps, cxxxiii. 1, 2),


EXEGETICAL NOTES,—@ The the temple. Keil regards the passage


six statements are divided by Maurer,
Hitzig, Kranichfeld, and others, into
three passages of two members each,
containing (1) the completion of the
measure of sin; (2) the covering of sin
and bringing in righteousness; (3) the
fulfilling of prophecy and consecration of
206


as rather containing two three-membered
sentences; the first three treating of
the taking away of sin, and thus giving
the negative side of the deliverance ; the
three last treating of the bringing in of
righteousness with its consequences, and
thus of the positive deliverance; the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





members in both classes standing in
reciprocal relation to each other.

@) “To finish transgression” (ver.
24). S23? (lechallé), properly to “ re-
strain.” Keil remarks that in this
word a double reading is combined ;
the vowel points not belonging to the
2 Scury or text, which rather has
1122? (lichloh), but, to the Keri; the
Masorites holding 53 to be of the same
meaning with 7173, to be ended, as Theo-
dotion, Aquila, and the Vulgate have
translated it. Rosenmiiller, Gesenius,
Winer, and others, have followed them
in supposing that " has passed into &;
and understand the expression to mean,
the filling up or completing the measure
of sin. Keil objects to this meaning
as not agreeing with the context, and
prefers to retain 8722, to “restrain,” in
the sense of hemming in or hindering
wickedness, so that it can no longer
spread about. Calvin understands the
expression to mean putting an end to
wickedness; Bullinger, that by the
coming of Christ and the preaching of
the Gospel, there should be a general
restraint of sin, according to 1 Cor. vi.
10. Dr. Rule understands the finishing
or ending the transgression which has
lasted through so many ages, in the
stubborn rebellion of the ancient people
against God’s law.

@) “ To make an end of sin,” pnne
(lekhathem), literally, to “seal up.”
Hofmann, Kliefoth, and Keil under-
stand the expression to mean that sins
should be laid under custody, 80 ds no
more to be active or increase; while
Hengstenberg and others think it means
the taking away of sins or removing
them out of God’s sight. Polanus and
Willet also understand the meaning to
be, that sins should be bound up, sealed,
and closed, so as never more to be
opened, read, or declared against us, as
writings are sealed up to be concealed
and buried in oblivion (Col. ii. 14).
Dr. Rule understands it of the putting
away of sin by the atoning sacrifice
of One who should establish a better
covenant (Heb. ix. 26). ‘

(4) “To make reconetliation for
iniquity.” B23? (lechapper), to pardon,
to blot out by means of a sin-offering,


te, to forgive. So Keil. The term
properly denotes, as in Lev. i. 4, &c., to
make atonement by a sacrifice ; hence
gives its name to the mercy-seat N}B3
(capporeth), that which makes atone-
ment or propitiation ; applied to Christ,
and His atoning death,—the “ propitia-
tion through His blood” (Rom. iii, 25).
The verb in its simple form or root, 153
(caphar), to “cover;” applied to the
covering or smearing of the ark with
pitch ; the atoning sacrifice covers the
sin so as not to appear, and covers the
sinner so that no deserved wrath shall
reach him. Sin, when forgiven, said
to be “covered” (Ps, xxxii. 2). Keil
observes that “the three expressions in
the text—‘to finish or shut up trans-
gression,’ &c,—all treat alike of the
setting aside of sin, but in different
ways. The first presents the general
thought, that the falling away shall be
shut up, the progress and the spreading
of the sin shall be prevented. The other
two expressions define more closely how
the source whence arises the apostasy
shall be shut up, the going forth and
the continued operation of the sin pre-
vented. This happens in one way with
unbelievers, and in a different way with
believers, The sins of unbelievers are
sealed, are guarded securely under a
seal, so that they may no more spread
about and increase, nor any longer be
active and operative; but the sins of
believers are forgiven through a recon-
ciliation.”

(5) “ 7'o bring in everlasting righteous-
ness.” Keil and others, taking the word
in its moral sense, understand by
“ righteousness ” that which is practised
by believers,—the internal and external
righteousness of the new heavens and
the new earth, according to 2 Peter iii. ;
called everlasting, as corresponding to
the eternity of the Messianic kingdom
(chap. ii. 44, vii. 18, 27). Vatablus
understands it as Christ Himself; Bul-
linger and others, as Christ’s righteous-
ness imputed to us (James ii. 23).

(8) “To seal up the vision and pro-
phecy,” 8°32) Wi) (Khazon venabht),
“vision and prophet.” Not only the
prophecy, but the prophet or his calling,
must be sealed ; namely, when by the

207


OMAP. IX,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


—_— eee


full realisation of all prophecies, pro-
phecy itself ceases, and no more pro-
phets appear. So Keil, who, however,
thinks that the extinction of prophecy
in consequence of its fulfilment is not,
as Hengstenberg and others believe, “ to
be sought in the time of the manifesta-
tion of Christ in the flesh ; for then only
the prophecy of the Old Covenant
reached its end, and its place is occupied
by the prophecy of the New Testament,
the fulfilling of which is still in the
future, and which will not come to an
end till the kingdom of God is perfected
in glory; namely, at the termination of
the present course of the world’s history,
at the same time with the full conclu-
sive fulfilment of the Old Testament
prophecy” (Acts iii, 21). Willet and
others think that the “vision” and
“prophecy ” intended was that of the Old
Testament, whichreferred to the Messiah
and had its fulfilment in Jesus, “ Ex-
perience shows that long since all pro-
phecies and visions among the Jews are
ceased ; hence they are convinced (or
shown) that the Messiah is come,” Dr.
Rule understands the clause to mean
the fulfilling of the predictions of former
ages, and the confirming of them by
“making the events to correspond with
the prophecies respecting the Messiah,”
It is not, however, to be forgotten that
the Old Testament prophets testified
beforehand not merely “the sufferings
of Christ,” but “the glory that should
follow” (1 Pet. i, 12),

©) “To anoint the most holy,” IP
OWI (Kodhesh Kadhashim), literally,
“a holy of holies ;” a new holy of holies
which, as Keil observes, should be in
the place of the tabernacle and the
temple of Solomon. Those who refer
the fulfilment of the prophecy to the
time nearest the close of the exile, or
to the time of the Maccabees, apply this
clause either, with Wieseler, to the con-
secration of the altar of burnt-offering,
restored by Zerubbabel and Joshua
(Ezra iii, 2, dc.); or, with J. D,
Michaelis, to the consecration of the
temple of Zerubbabel ; or, with Hitzig,
Kranichfeld, and others, to the conse-
cration of the altar of burnt-offering
which bis desecrated by Antiochus

208


Epiphanes (1 Mace. iv. 54). But only
the Mosaic sanctuary of the tabernacle,
with its altars and vessels, were conse-
crated by anointing (Exod. xxx. 22, &e.);
nor is the expression used of a single
article or holy vessel, but to the whole,
The Church fathers understood Christ
Himself to be meant. The old Syriac
translation has introduced into the text
the words, “Till the Messiah, the Most
Holy.” Willet says: “This is Christ,
prefigured and shadowed forth by the
most holy place in the temple.” Calvin
thinks it refers to “the entire restora-
tion of the Church of God, on which
He was to pour forth the fulness of all
His pity at the advent of Christ; the
privileges of the New Church being far
better, more excellent and desirable,
than those of the ancient one.” He,
however, adds: “ But Christ Himself is
properly and deservedly called the Holy
One of holy ones, or the Tabernacle of
God, His body being the temple of
Deity, and being anointed when the
Spirit of God rested on Him with all
His gifts.” Dr. Cox understands by the
expression the Messiah, dedicated to
His work, and made the priest of His
people. Dr, Rule thinks of the conse-
cration to some high office of a person
worthy to be called Taz Most Honry—
the ANomnTED. Hofmann applies it to
the sanctification of the Church by the
Holy Ghost; not, however, to take
place in its predicted conspicuousness
till the time of the end. Keil, from
the want of the article, and the com
stant application of the term to things,
not persons, thinks the reference is to
the anointing of a new sanctuary or
most holy place; and, with Kliefoth,
understands it of the establishment, in
the time of the end, of the new holy of
holies which was shown to John in Pat-
mos, as the tabernacle of God with men,
a new place of the gracious presence of
God, or a new way of His dwelling
among men, opened up by Christ’s work
of redemption, Dr. Pusey thinks the
clause must be spiritual, as all else is
spiritual, “ Holy of holies,” literally,
*‘holinessof holinesses ;” i¢., all-holiness,
he observes, is “a ritual term, used to
express the exceeding holiness which


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


things acquire by being consecrated to
God. It is never used to describe a
place, but is always an attribute of the
thing, and, in one place, of the person
who is spoken of (1 Chron, xxiii, 13).
The destruction of the temple, as having
been previously profaned, is the close of
this prophecy.” Mr. Bosanquet, apply-
ing it to Christ, thinks that the anointing
has reference only to the birth of the
“Prince” of the house of David, and
to His anointing to the kingdom, and
not to either His priesthood or His
ministry ; the holy of holies being lite-
rally the most holy portion of the
sanctuary of the Jewish temple, but
here applied figuratively to the “ Holy
of Holies” of the spiritual Church of
Christ ; #.¢., to the most holy portion of
that spiritual temple of which Jesus
Christ is the chief corner-stone, to the
Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.


Omar. IX.


Hengstenberg, following Hiivernick,
would make the expression applicable
to the Messiah, as it is applied to Aaron
and his sons in 1 Chron, xxiii. 13,
under the idea of a most holy thing
(Luke i. 35). Kliefoth, with whom
Keil agrees, says that the most holy is
not the place of the congregation where
it comes to God and is with God, but
where God is present for the congrega-
tion and manifests Himself to it. This,
he says, apart from the connection, might
refer to the work of redemption per-
fected by the coming of Christ, which
has indeed created in Him a new place
of the gracious presence of God ; but in
the connection of the clause it looks for-
ward to the time when the work of sal-
vation shall be fully carried through, in
the return of the Lord from heaven for
the final judgment,


HOMILETICS.


Seor. XXXV.—A Resectep Saviour (Chap, ix. 26).


The view of Israel’s future, afforded to Daniel by the angel, like the pillar in
the wilderness, presented both a bright side and a dark one. It assured Daniel of
the coming of the long promised Messiah at a definite though still distant period,
together with the blessed and glorious results that should follow His appearing
It revealed, however, at the same time the awful fact that the Messiah when He
came should not only be rejected by the mass of His countrymen, but should be
put to a violent death. It declared, further, that, as the consequence of their wicked
rejection of their King and Saviour, the city and sanctuary that had been rebuilt
should be overthrown by a foreign power, and that war and desolation should be
visited upon the land and the people until the appointed end, @)

The prophecy brings us to the great central truth of the Bible, and that which
constitutes the foundation of a sinner’s hope. The same fact that formed the
greatest wickedness of the Jews, and brought the heaviest judgments upon the land
and nation, is that which brings life and salvation to a guilty world. It is the
violent but vicarious death of the provided Saviour. ‘ MEssIAH SHALL BE OUT OFF.”
To the astonishment of angels who had studied the predictions regarding Him with
deepest interest (1 Pet. i, 12), instead of hailing and embracing their own and the
world’s Deliverer when He came, after having for more than a thousand years been
promised to their nation by a succession of prophets, and foreshadowed by nume-
rous divinely appointed types, they, and especially their priests and elders, reject
Him with scorn, anathematise Him as a blasphemer, and in bitter hatred demand
that He shall be put to an ignominious and cruel death They took Him, and
by wicked hands crucified and slew Him (Acts ii, 23). The prophecy brings
before us—

L The time of the solemn event. “After threescore and two weeks. (3)
As noticed in a former section, these prophetic weeks are doubtless a ees ar

e


CHAP, Ix. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DANIEL.


those mentioned in the preceding verse, as succeeding the first seven from “ the
going forth of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem ;” thus making
sixty-nine such weeks, or 483 years from the issuing of that edict. Although
some uncertainty may exist as to which of the three or four possible edicts may be
expressly referred to, yet it is a fact calling for deepest thankfulness, that exactly
that period, according to accepted chronology, after the most probable of these
edicts, brings us to the time when John the Baptist pointed to Jesus and
exclaimed, “ Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world”
(John i, 29) ; or perhaps to the time when, three years and a half later, the Jews
cried out concerning Him, “ Crucify Him, Crucify Him !”

IL The event itself. ‘Messiah shall be cut off,() but not for Himself ;” or
rather, according to the marginal reading, “and He shall have nothing.” “Shall
be cut off.” So Isaiah says, though using a different word, “He was cut off out
of the land of the living” (Isa. liii. 8), It is the word used for being cut off from
among the people, or from the presence of the Lord (Lev. xx. 18, xxiii. 8). The
angel says not by whom. Other prophets supply the information, ‘He is de
spised and rejected of men ;” and more particularly, ‘* The stone which the builders
rejected, the same is become the head of the corner” (Isa. liii. 3; Ps. exviii, 22).
The historian agrees with the prophet in showing not only that Messiah was cut
off at the time indicated, but that He was rejected by His own people, and more
especially by the “builders,” the priests and elders, who were the appointed and
professed builders of the Church of God. ‘He came to His own, but His own
received Him not.” “All the chief priests and elders took counsel against Jesus
to put Him to death.” “The chief priests and elders persuaded the people that
they should ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus.” ‘Then answered all the people
His blood be upon us and upon our children.” To the Jewish people Pete:
declared, “‘ Him being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of
God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain.” “ Ye denied
the Holy One and the Just, and desired a murderer to be grauted unto you, aud
killed the Prince of life” “I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did alsv
your rulers” (John i, 11; Matt. xxviii 20, 25; Actsiii. 14, 15, 17). In this
rejection and cutting off of the Messiah, indeed, Gentiles were associated with Jews,
“Of a truth against Thy holy child Jesus, whom Thou hast anointed, both Herod
and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, were gathered
together, for to do whatsoever Thy hand and Thy counsel determined before to be
done” (Acts iv. 27, 28). The cutting off was indeed of God, whose love provided
such a Lamb for a burnt-offering, when no other could take away sin; Jews
and Gentiles, His betrayers and murderers, were the no less guilty and responsible
instruments.

Let us turn aside and consider this great sight, Messiah cut off. The pro-
vided and promised Saviour, the mighty God in man’s nature, is rejected and made
to suffer the death of a felon, a blasphemer, and a slave. Wonder, O heavens, at
man’s depravity! But “the thing is of God.” While the act is that of their own
free will, it is. what His hand and His counsel “ have determined before to be done.”
Joseph’s brethren sold him; but it was God that sent him into Egypt, to save
much people alive, Messiah must be cut off, or man must remain in his sins, He
who is to save must suffer—suffer in the room of those whom he saves, Sin must
be atoned for, if it is to be forgiven. Justice must be satisfied, if mércy is to bless.
The woman’s seed must have his heel bruised, if he is to bruise the serpent’s head,
The Son of God in man’s nature must die, if man is to live. The Blessed One
must be cut off, if the accursed are to be restored. It is done, God so loved the
world that He gave His only begotten Son. To save the sinner, it pleased the Lord
to bruise His Son. Wonder, O heavens, at God’s love to man !

Messiah was cut off both by man and for man. By man. But how could such
wickedness exist? The answer is not far to seek. The root of that wickedness is

210


HOMILL1'1C COMMENTARY: DANIEL, CuaP, IX.





in the heart both of writer and reader. He who knows that heart has declared it
to be “deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked.” A sinful blindness
occasioned by the Fall, unbelief regarding the testimony of God, pride, self-
righteousness, love of the world and sin, hatred of a holy God and what is holy—
these are the natural products of man’s wretchedly depraved heart, and these, yielded
to, were sufficient to reject the Son of God and to murder the Saviour that God
sent. And they still do so, The Saviour whom the Jews crucified, the Gentiles
reject, and in rejecting Him trample on His blood. He is still despised and
rejected of men. We still turn away our faces from Him, Though in Himself
the chief among ten thousand, and for sinful ruined man everything that is to be
desired, yet we esteem Him not,

And for man, “not for Himself”) The marginal reading is better, “He
shall have nothing ;” literally, “‘ There shall be nothing for Him.” In His being
cut off, life and everything should be taken from Him, The world would have
nothing whatever to do with Him. Perhaps these two short words pointed to the
ery, “ Away with Him, away with Him!” Or to the fact that, in His last hours,
His very garments were taken from Him and divided among the soldiers that
crucified Him. Or to that other fact, that after His death charity provided Him
a winding-sheet and a grave. Or did they indicate that so absolute was the
cutting off, that while the chief priests and scribes and elders mocked Him, and
they that passed by reviled Him, wagging their heads, and the thieves who were
crucified with Him cast reproaches in His teeth, His very disciples forsook Him
and fled, and only one of them returned to take His stand at the cross? Or did
they point to that still more awful abandonment, involving the soul and centre of
the cutting off, “My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?” This one
thing the words may well suggest: “ Though He was rich, yet for your sakes He
became poor, that ye through His poverty might be rich.” It was for man He
was cut off, stripped of everything, and abandoned by all. There was to be
nothing for Him, but everything for man. For Him the cross, and shame, and
anguish, and death; for man, pardon, peace, holiness, heaven, and God, “For
your sakes.” The ram was taken from the thicket and laid on the altar in Isaac’s
place. This the essence of the Gospel. This the only foundation of our hope, and
the true source of a sinner’s peace. We have a substitute provided by God in the
person of His incarnate Son. This our joy on earth ; this the song of the redeemed
in heaven. ‘Thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by Thy blood.”
“Unto Him that loved us and washed us from our sins in His own blood, be
glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.”

III. The consequences of this rejection of Messiah. These are partly
mentioned in the latter part of the verse: “The people of the Prince that shall
come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with
a flood ;) and unto the end war and desolations are determined.” (©) So Jesus
Himself foretold while He wept over the infatuated and doomed city. “If (Oh
that) thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which
belong unto thy peace! But now they are hid from thine eyes. For the days
shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and com-
pass thee round and keep thee in on every side, and shall lay thee even with the
ground, and thy children within thee; and they shall not leave thee one stone
upon’ another; because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation” (Luke xix.
41-44), History tells how sadly the prediction was fulfilled. Within forty years
after the Jews had crucified their King and Saviour, the Romans under Titus—
“the people of the prince that shall come”—invaded Judea, compelled by the
infatuated Jews who took up arms against them in the belief that their promised
Messiah would come to their help and deliver them from their heathen masters.
After a protracted siege, both Jerusalem and its temple were destroyed, notwith-
standing the orders of the general to spare the beautiful and oie a: fabric.


omar. IX. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL.





War swept over the land like a desolating flood, In the siege alone above a million
perished by the sword, while nearly a hundred thousand were sold into slavery,
Even after that protracted and destructive war was terminated, a desolating curae
seemed to be poured upon the land. War followed war, as one Gentile nation
after another invaded it. Jerusalem, according to the word of its rejected King,
has been literally “trodden uncer foot of the Gentiles.” The Jewish inhabitants
of the country were all but rooted out of it, and scattered over all the earth, “tribes
of the wandering foot and weary breast.” Such in a large degree is what at this
day still meets our view in that once favoured and glorious land, now and for
centuries under the blighting rule, or rather misrule, of the Turks. Desolation and
wretchedness meet you everywhere, with a few thousands of squalid Jews, still in
unbelief and hardness of heart, located in four of the cities, or rather villages, and
subsisting on the alms they receive from their brethren in other lands) The blood
of their crucified King and Saviour has indeed, according to their own imprecation,
been upon them and their children, Hitherto it has been on them as a people
only for a curse ; may the promised period soon arrive when it shall be on them
fox a blessing !

Sueh, to the Jews, were some of the consequences of a rejected Saviour; and
these are but a shadow of those which the eye cannot now perceive. Israel are
now, and for eighteen centuries have been, suffering what they themselves call their
“ great captivity,” because they are reaping the consequence of their great sin, the
rejection and crucifixion of their King and Saviour. “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem !
thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them that are sent to thee; how often
would I have gathered thy children together as a hen doth gather her chickens
under her wings, and ye would not! Behold, your house is left unto you desolate,
For verily I say unto you, Ye shall not see Me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed
is he that cometh in the name of the Lord” (Matt. xxiii. 37-89). May the day
speedily come when, with the veil taken away from their heart, this shall be the
language of penitent Israel !

The section suggests two obvious topics for reflection.

1. The remarkable fulfilment of prophecy as an evidence of the inspiration of the
Scriptures and the truth of Christianity. The verse before us contains three
distinct predictions, each of which has received an obvious fulfilment, (1) The
Messiah when He came was to be rejected and cut off by a violent death ; (2)
this was to take place at a certain definite period, nearly four hundred and ninety
years after a decree from the ruling power to restore and build Jerusalem ; and
(3) as the consequence of that rejection and cutting off of their Messiah, the Jews
were to see the destruction of their city and sanctuary, and the desolation of their
land for a lengthened and indefinite period. The fulfilment of each of these is
obvious, The Jews as a nation rejected Him whom we know, and many among
themselves have acknowledged, to be the Messiah. History leaves no room to
doubt that this took place at the time predicted, the time at which the Jews them-
selves expected their Messiah to appear. And every one knows what happened to
Jerusalem and the temple soon after, and what has been the condition of the
country and the people these eighteen centuries, and still is to this day. Humanly
speaking, such a state of things was in the highest degree unlikely, Such a treat-
ment of the Deliverer promised to their fathers for nearly two thousand years, and
eagerly expected by all the godly among them, was only to be accounted for on the
ground of the desperate depravity of the human heart, and the secret purpose and
plan of the Almighty thus to effect the redemption of the human race. More,
surely, is not needed to convince any reasonable mind that such a prediction was
from God, and that Jesus who was crucified is indeed the Saviour of the world,
whose coming had been promised and foretold from the beginning. The words of
Alfred Cave, in a recent number of the “ British and Foreign Evangelical Review,”
may be ee quoted here. ‘ How is that notable phenomenon of the Hebrew


; HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OHAP, Ix.





religion called Prophecy to be regarded as a datum on which to found the Spence:
rian theory of evolution? The reply afforded by the advocates of a theory of
natural development is—by banishing from prophecy any idea of prediction. The
question arises whether the idea of prediction can be dissociated from the Biblical
idea of prophecy$ This is firm ground. If there is a single instance of predic-
tion in the Old Testament which cannot be adequately described as conjecture,
then any such theory as the Spencerian is declared insufficient in its explanation,
. . . Such facts as the adoration of the Magi, and the fulfilment to the letter of Daniel’s
prophecy of the seventy weeks, which might be augmented a hundredfold, provide
incontestable proofs of the reality of prediction ; and these facts receive a most
impressive recognition from the laboured attempts of rationalistic interpreters to
explain them away.”

2. The guilt involved in the rejection of the provided Saviour. What was it that
consigned to the flames that magnificent temple which the Roman general did his
utmost to spare; that overthrew that strongly fortified city which so long defied
the power of the Roman army, and which Titus declared he could never have taken
had not God Himself wrought with him in the siege ;() and that caused the Jews
to be banished from their own land, and to be scattered over the whole earth,
while that land lies desolate, even to this day? We have only to point to Calvary,
and the cry that preceded it, “Away with Him! away with Him! Crucify Him!
crucify Him!” Nor need we wonder. Had Jesus of Nazareth been a mere man, as
the Jews wished to believe, and as some who are not Jews even still maintain, it
would be, to say the least, unwarranted to connect these unparalleled and long
continued calamities of the Jewish people with Calvary and the crucifixion of
the Nazarene. He suffered death as a blasphemer. But if Jesus was what He
declared Himself to be, the Christ, the Son of the Living God, who shall one day
come with the clouds of heaven, then the whole is clear, What tongue can describe
the guilt of rejecting and crucifying the Son of God when, in His love, assuming
man’s nature, He came to save a dying world? This was the crying guilt of the
Jews. But whatof the Gentiles? Have they not rejected Jesus? Are thousands
and tens of thousands not rejecting Him now? The charge is too true. Even
where a nominal and outward profession of acceptance of the Crucified is made,
the life declares in too many instances that He is still in heart rejected. “Why
call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say?” Where the Gospel
is preached and the offer of the Saviour is made, men must either believe and
accept that offer and so be saved—saved from sin and all its consequences, and have
peace with God, and be made new creatures—or, like the Jews, they must reject
Him, The streets of Britain, the Sabbaths of Protestant England, the land of
Bibles and of Gospel light and liberty, proclaim too loudly that the secret language
of the heart is that which the lips of the Jews dared openly to utter, “ We will not
have this man to reign over us: not this man, but Barabbas, We have no king but
Cesar, Away with Him!” When, for the rejection of their King, the kingdom of
God was taken from the Jews, the Gentiles were to have their time, and they have
it now. Their rejection of the Son of God and Saviour of men is not winked
at, although not now signally punished as in the case of the Jews. Individuals
experience the blessedness of accepting and the misery of rejecting that Saviour,
A day also has been foretold, and cannot now be far distant, when that same Jesus,
who had been preached to the nations, “shall be revealed from heaven with His
mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God and
that obey not the Gospel of His Son Jesus Christ.” Happy those who, having
through grace cordially accepted Jesus as their Saviour and King, are in a con-
dition to say, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen,


EXEGETICAL NOTES —@) Keil, analyses of the whole passage, gives, as
who enters fully into the grammatical his conclusion, that in the seventieth
318


OWAP, IX.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





week Messiah is cut off, and that in
consequence of it destruction falls upon
the city and the sanctuary,

(2) “ After threescore and two weeks.”
That is, says Keil, in the seventieth
week, viewing these sixty-two as follow-
ing the previously mentioned seven, and
added to them, so as to make one entire
period of sixty-nine weeks, These most
interpreters understand as weeks of
years, and consequently as making
483 years, After that period, without
saying how long after, “‘ Messiah was to
be cut off.” Keil thinks that the “after”
does not certainly imply that the cutting
off should wholly fall in the beginning
of the seventieth week, but only that it
should constitute the first great event
of it. This, Mr. Bosanquet thinks,
would make up the third of those equal
cycles of seventy weeks of years in
which the people of Israel may be said
to have fulfilled their previous destinies,
viz., seventy such weeks (or 490 years)
under the Tabernacle ; seventy, includ-
ing the seventy neglected Sabbaths
kept at Babylon, under the jirst Temple ;
and seventy under the second Temple,
even until the laying of the foundation-
stone of the third Temple, not made with
hands, in the time of Jesus Christ.

(3) “ Be cut of.” MID! (yiccareth), in
Keil’s opinion, does not necessarily
point to the death of the Messiah, or
the crucifixion of Christ ; the root de-
noting to “ fell or hew down,” to ‘ cut
to pieces,” and the passive form, here
used, to be rooted up, destroyed, anni-
hilated; and generally, though not
always, indicating a violent kind of
death, being the usual expression for
the death of the ungodly (eg., Ps.
xxxvii. 9; Prov. ii, 22), without particu-
larly designating the manner in which
this is done, He thinks the right in-
terpretation of the word depends on the
Heda of the expression that follows,
YO"}"S} (ve-en Jo), and that it denotes not
the cutting off of existence, but the
annihilation of His place as Messiah
among His people. Dr. Pusey thinks
the word, in the passive form, ‘shall
be cut off,” never means anything but
excision, death inflicted directly by
God, or violent death at the hands of

214


man ; is never used of mere death, nor
of a sudden but natural death ; and is,
after the Pentateuch, used absolutely
and of national inflictions of destruction
of which man is the instrument. He
thinks it equivalent to the word used
by Isaiah in chap, liii, 8. C&colam-
padius thought the word did not refer
to the death of Christ, as it indicates
such a cutting off as to extinguish and
cause to perish, which with Christ was
not the case,

() * But not for himself.” 2-8) (ve-en
lo) is rendered by Bullinger, Willet,
Vitringa, Rosenmiiller, Havernick, and
others, as in our English version, “not for
himself,” identifying 8 (atin) with X? (do)
which Keil and Hengstenberg maintain
cannot be done, notwithstanding the pas-
sages adduced by Gesenius as examples
of the interchange. Keil, viewing the
expression in its undefined universality,
renders the clause, “and it is not to
Him,” namely, the place which He as
Messiah has had, or should have, among
His people and in the sanctuary, but
which, by His being “ cut off,” is lost.
Calvin renders the words, “ He shall
have nothing,” t.e., He shall die a con-
temptible death. Junius: ‘It shall
be nothing to Him,”—death shall have
no power over Him to stay His judg-
meus Roman Catholic expositors
follow Jerome and the Vulgate: “ He
shall have no people or disciples,” as
they were to reject Him. So Grotius
and Auberlen, (Ecolampadius refers
the clause to Jerusalem; “ It shall have
nothing,” neither king nor priest. Vata-
blus has: “There shall be none to help
Him.” Dr. Rule observes that the
clause is most obscure, and apparently
an imperfect reading, and thinks it safer,
in the uncertainty regarding, it to let our
Authorised Version remain unaltered.
Dr, Pusey reads “there shall not be to
Him,” te, as he thinks the context
implies, the city and the sanctuary,—
they shall be His no more; or, as he
says in another place, “ What hitherto
was His,” viz, His people, whose Prince
He heretofore was; the Jews as a nation
having cut themselves off when they
cracified Him.

) “The end thereof shall be with a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


-_—_——





flood.” Keil, with Kranichfeld, Hof-
mann, and Kliefoth, considers the end
to be that of the hostile “ prince,” here
emphatically placed over against his
“coming,” but regards that prince as
not Titus, but the Autichrist who is
yet to appear. Geier, Havernick, Au-
berlen, and others refer it to the city
and sanctuary, more especially to the
latter, as the pronoun is masculine.
Vitringa, C. B. Michaelis, and Heng-
stenberg regard the suffix in \¥P (Kittso)
as neuter, and refer it to the previous
verb “ destroy,” or the idea of destroy-
ing comprehended in it, “ the end of it
(or it shall end) in the flood ;” a warlike
expedition overflowing the land DW32
(bashsheteph) “in or with a flood,” or
rather, on account of the article: “in or
with the flood.” Rosenmiiller and others:
“in an overflowing.” Steudel and
Maurer: “with a certain irresistible
force.” Others: “like an overflowing.”
Keil remarks, however, that the article
shows that a definite and well-known
overflowing is meant, and, with Wieseler,
Hofmann, and others, understands it of
the desolating judgment of God, the
article conveying an allusion to the flood
which overwhelmed Pharaoh and his
host. Dr. Pusey renders the clause:
“The end thereof shall be with that
flood,” the flood of war just spoken of.
The Septuagint has: “They shall be
cut off with a deluge;” and the Vul-
gate: “The end of it shall be ruin.”
Junius understands the meaning to be;
“The calamity shall be sudden, inevi-
table, and general.” Bullinger inter-
prets it of “perfect desolation on the
city.”

(8) “ And to the end of the war, desola-
tions are determined,” As no war has
as yet been mentioned, and the noun
nmonkd (milkhamah) is without the
article, Keil, with Hengstenberg and
many othe: interpreters, regards that
nour as the subject of the clause, “ to


the end is war;” understanding the
end to be, not as Havernick and Auber-
len think, the end of the ctty, nor, as
Wieseler, the end of the prince, but as
the end g-nerally, the end of the period
in progress, the seventy weeks; that is,
war shall continue during the whole of
the last week. The Septuagint and
Vulgate, however, read the clause, * the
end of the war.” So Rosenmiiller, Ewald,
Hofmann, and others. Dr. Pusey makes
“war” along with ‘‘desolations” the
subject of the verb “ are determined,”—
“unto the end, war and desolatenesses
(are) decreed.” For the last clause the
Septuagint has, “determined with deso-
lations ;” while the Vulgate reads as
the English. Hengstenberg regards the
clause as in apposition to war, “a decree
of ruins,” the meaning being that the
war and the decree of ruins will ter-
minate only with the end of the object.
So <Auberlen, ‘‘ decreed desolations.”
Keil renders the passage, “ Till the end
war will be, for desolations are irre-
vocably determined by God,” the deso-
lations including those which the fall of
the prince, who destroys the city and
the sanctuary, shall bring along with it.

(7) Philostratus relates that when the
neighbouring nations wished to crown
Titus on account of his victory over the
Jews, he declared that he was unworthy
of the honour, as he had not himself
been the author of those works, but
had only lent his hand to the Deity,
who was demonstrating His resentment
against the Jews. Josephus, engaged in
the war himself, relates that the robbers
or zealots killed the principal men of
Jerusalem during the siege, appointed to
the priesthood whom they pleased, and
ruled the city themselves, The temple,
he says, could no longer be called God’s
house, nor could it continue ; as it had
become the scene of constant slaughter
and the theatre of civil war.


omar. rx, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





HOMILETICS.
Szor. XXXVI.—Tue Last WrEK AND ITs EMPLOYMENT.
(Chap ix. 27.)


We have seen what was to take place at the end of the first seven of the seventy
weeks, and did take place; also what was to happen after the second period, or
other sixty-two weeks, and actually did so, The street and wall of Jerusalem were
restored, and Messiah was cut off. The prophet seems to be further informed
what was to take place during the remaining one week of the seventy determined
upon his people and the holy city. This is related in the last verse of the chapter,
and is given in three particulars.

L The confirmation of the covenant. “He shall confirm the covenant with
many for one week.”(1) This is generally understood as referring to the ministry
of the Messiah on behalf of His own people, and fulfilled in the personal ministry
of Jesus and that of His apostles after His ascension into heaven. The Lord’s own
ministry was confined to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and His apostles
were commanded, after His resurrection, to preach repentance and the remission
of sins through His name to all nations, “ beginning at Jerusalem.” Their mission
was, “Ye shall be witnesses unto Me both in Jerusalem, and in Judea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth” (Acts i 7). In the Gospel
which they were commissioned to preach, and which Jesus Himself had preached
before them, a covenant—the covenant of grace and peace—is tendered, and is
established with all who believe and accept it. Its terms are: “ Hearken dili-
gently and come unto Me; hear and your soul shall live; and I will make an
everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David” (Isa. lv. 3). It
is the covenant which takes the place both of that which was made with our
first parents in Paradise, and that afterwards made with Israel at Mount Sinai.
In both these cases the tenor of the covenant was, Obey, and live; in this it
is, Hear, or believe, and live, “He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting
life.” ‘To as many as received Him, to them gave He power to become the
sons of God; even to them that believe on His name” (John i, 12, iii. 36). As
distinguished from the covenant made with Israel at Mount Sinai, it is called
the New Covenant; the former, based upon their personal obedience, having
been broken and thus set for ever aside. ‘‘Behold, the days come, saith the Lord,
that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house
of Judah. Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathersin the
day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt;
which My covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them (or, and
I regarded them not), saith the Lord, But this shall be the covenant that I
will make with the house of Israel: After those days, saith the Lord, I will put
My laws in their inward parts,” &c. (Jer. xxxi. 31-33; Heb. viii: 8-12). In
respect to mankind in general, it is the New Covenant as distinguished from and
taking the place of the covenant made originally with man in Eden, which, like
that made with Israel at Sinai, was broken, and its promised blessings forfeited
and lost. “By man (the first man) came death.” “In Adam all die.” “ By one
man’s disobedience many were made sinners.” This New Covenant has also a man
for its head and representative—the Second Adam, the Lord from heaven, with
whom it is made in the name and behalf of His spiritual children whom He
represents in it, With His perfect obedience He purchased its blessings, and with
His blood, shed for the forgiveness of the transgressions committed under the first
covenant, ealled therefore the blood of the everlasting covenant, He sealed it
(Heb. ap 20; Matt. xxvi. 20). By the blood of that covenant, thence called


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIBL. owap, Ti.





Messiah’s covenant, His prisoners, or those for whom He acted, and who accept
of and trust in Him for life and deliverance, are discharged from all condemnation
(Zech, ix. 11). It is in virtue of that blood, or the atoning sacrifice of His death,
that God can and does receive sinners into His favour and family. Those accept-
ing this covenant and its blessings at the hand of Christ, and trusting in Him as
their Surety, are therefore spoken of by God as “ My saints, those that have made
@ covenant with Me by sacrifice” (Ps. 1. 5). Jesus, as He procured the blessings
of this covenant by His obedience and sealed it by His blood, is thus made the
Mediator of it, and has the administration of it committed to Him by Jehovah,
who declares, “ I have given Him for a covenant to the people” (Heb. viii 6; Isa.
lv. 4, xlii. 6). As the Mediator of the covenant and the Covenant itself, He
tendered it to sinners personally when He stood and cried, “If any man thirst, let
him come unto Me and drink.” ‘Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy-
laden, and I will give you rest” (John vii. 37; Matt. xi. 28). He did the same
by the ministry of His apostles and disciples after He was taken up to heaven ;
and now does it through the instrumentality of His servants and people. “The
Spirit and the Bride say, Come” (Rev. xxii. 17). The covenant was thus confirmed
by Messiah with many among the Jews for one week. We have to rejoice and
praise God that when that week was over, or while it still lasted, He confirmed it
with many among the Gentiles, and is graciously doing so to this day. May
multitudes more among the Gentiles know the day of their merciful visitation,
before their time also comes to an end !
IL The termination of the legal sacrifices. ‘In the midst of the week, he
shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease.”(@) This is generally understood
of the abolition of the various sacrifices and oblations prescribed by the law of
Moses, together with the whole of the Levitical worship. Jesus Christ, doubtless,
pointed to this Himself when He said to the woman of Sychar, ‘‘ The hour cometh
when ye shall neither on this mountain (Gerizim), nor yet at Jerusalem, worship
the Father. But the hour cometh and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in truth ; for the Father seeketh such to worship
Him” (John iv, 21, 23). Those sacrifices and offerings, with all that Mosaic
system of ceremonial worship, were intended only for a temporary purpose, to
serve as types and figures till Messiah, the true and only atoning sacrifice, should
come, and introduce a spiritual worship. They were “a shadow of the good things
to come,” and only “imposed until the time of reformation ” (Heb. ix. 10, x. 1).
This cessation of sacrifices, therefore, as it could only take place when the one
Great Sacrifice was offered, which alone could take away sin, 80 it must do so then.
Aceordingly, as a matter of fact, the sacrifices of the temple ceased entirely within
forty years after the death of Jesus; and as if to put a sure and absolute end to
them, the temple itself, where alone they could be offered, ceased to exist. As if
to visibly and unmistakably connect the abolition of the ceremonial temple-
worship with the death of Jesus the true Lamb of God, at the hour in which He
expired on the cross, the veil of the temple which separated the most holy from
the holy place, and through which none but the high priest could pass, and he but
once a year, on the great Day of Atonement, was without hands rent “in twain
from the top to the bottom ;” the Holy Ghost thus signifying that the way into
the holiest of all was now made manifest, and that free access to God was pro-
vided (Matt. xxvii, 51; Heb. ix. 8, x 19, 20). This cessation of the sacrifices
was to take place in the midst of the last week; and if, as appears likely, the
sixty-two or rather sixty-nine previous weeks, or 483 years, expired with the
baptism of Jesus, then this rending of the veil, which was the expression of it,
must have taken place exactly in the middle of that week, or three days and a half
(three years and a half) after ita commencement, that being generally believed to
have been the time that intervened between the Lord’s baptism and death, And


it is remarkable that no attempts to offer sacrifices on Mount Moriah hee been


omaP, IX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


allowed in the providence of God to be made in all these eighteen centuries, or, if
ever defiantly made, to be successful, (®) The only bloody sacrifice that Israel
has since then attempted to offer is the cock, which, of course without the slightest
authority, as the poor expiation for their sins, they kill at home on the Day of
Atonement, which, in a way, they still observe. ()

IIL The continuance and increase of sin and unbelief with their baleful
consequences among the Jews, “ For the overspreading of abominations He shall
make it desolate, even until the consummation, and that determined, siall be
poured upon the desolate.” (5) The sentence is somewhat obscure, but the general
meaning seems not difficult to apprehend. The great sin and abomination of the
Jews was their rejection of their divine King and Saviour, and along with that
their rejection of Him that sent Him. After the crucifixion of Jesus, that abomi-
nation, with others which it brought in its train, seemed not only to continue but
to increase and intensify. There was “the overspreading of abominations.”
Having crucified their King, they added to their sin by bitterly persecuting His
followers ; and not only blaspheming Him themselves, but compelling others to do
the same. The Acts of the Apostles is a record of these abominations, which com-
menced immediately after the disciples began to carry out the commission of their
ascended Master. ‘As they spake unto the people, the priests, and the captain of
the temple, and the Sadducees came upon them, being grieved that they taught
the people, and preached through Jesus the resurrection from the dead; and they
laid hands on them and put them in hold unto the next day, And they called
them, and commanded them not to speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus”
(Acts iv. 1-3, 18). On another occasion soon after : “The high priest rose up, and
all they that were with him (which is the sect of the Sadducees), and were filled
with indignation, and laid their hands on the apostles, and put them in the common
prison, And when they had called the apostles, and beaten them, they commanded
that they should not speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go” (Acts v. 17,
18, 40). Then followed in the same year the martyrdom of Stephen. “ They
gnashed on him with their teeth; then they cried out with a loud voice, and
stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one accord, and cast him out of the
city and stoned him.” One distinguished person among them, who kept the clothes
of those who stoned him, “ made havoc of the church, entering into every house,
and haling men and women, committed them to prison.” Breathing out threat
enings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, and compelling them to
blaspheme, Saul received, at his own desire, a commission from the high priest to
go to Damascus and bring any he might find “of that way” as prisoners to
Jerusalem. Him on his conversion they immediately laid wait to kill The same
spirit of bitter hatred and persecution spread through the provinces, At Antioch
in Pisidia, the Jews “ were filled with envy, and spake against those things which
were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming” (Acts xiii, 45). So the
Jews at Thessalonica, from the same spirit, not only set the whole city in an
uproar against the apustles, but followed them to Berga, and did the same thing
there also. At Corinth they “made insurrection with one accord against Paul,
and brought him to the judgment-seat ” (Acts xviii 12), Paul’s dark testimony
of them in his letter to the Thessalonian Church was, that “ they please not God,
and are contrary to all men; forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they
might be saved; to fill up their sins alway” (1 Thess. ii 15, 16). What they
became before their city was destroyed their own historian has recorded,
Josephus, an eyewitness, declares that never city suffered such things, and never
race of men, not even Sodom, were so wicked ; and states it as his conviction
that God brought all the evils on Jerusalem in consequence of their sins, giving
them over to blindneas-of mind, so that they not only fought against the Romans
but against God. () The appalling and unparalleled calamities which he relates


as overtaking his eountrymen in the siege and in the war, we may regard as the
218


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL. OHAP, 5X,








Se"


beginning of that desolation which was to follow the overspreading of abomi-
nations, until the decreed consummatiun, even now still going on, should be
poured upon the desolate, “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! thou that killest the
prophets and stonest them that are sent unto thee ; how often would I have
gathered thy children together, as a hen doth gather her chickens under her wings ;
but ye would not, Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. For I say unto
you, Ye shall not see Me henceforth till ye shall say, Blessed is He that cometh in
the name of the Lord” (Matt. xxiv. 37-39).

Let us make one reflection.

The verse before us exhibits the terrible consequences of abused privileges. To
the Jews belonged the giving of the law, with its types and shadows of good things
to come ; and the service of God, with its temple, priests, and sacrifices ; and the
promises, including that crowning one, the promise of a Saviour-King; and the
covenants, the old one at Sinai, and the new one promised in connection with the
Messiah, tendered to them first by Christ and then by His apostles, and securing
to them, on their acceptance of it, all the blessings of a present and an eternal
salvation, These privileges, however, were abused. The law given to them they
made their boast of without yielding to it the obedience of a loving heart which it
required ; and rested in its outward and typical observances, instead of embracing
the substance to which they pointed. The promised Saviour, when He came, they
rejected ; and the covenant which held out to them the full forgiveness of their
sins and the renewal of their nature, they refused, preferring to merit their accept-
ance with God by their own wretched works of a mere external righteousness,
The consequence was that while a remnant accepted the offered covenant and
entered into the enjoyment of all its precious blessings, the rest were blinded, and
went on in the hardness and frowardness of their unbelieving hearts, adding sin
to sin, not only refusing to accept Christ themselves, but doing their utmost to
hinder others from doing so, and persecuting even to the death those who accepted
Him themselves and sought to make Him known to others ; till the measure of
their iniquity being full, the threatened judgments of God came upon them to the
uttermost, and from being the most favoured netion in the world they became
outcasts from their own country and wanderers over the face of the earth, as
we see them at this day; a beacon and a warning to the Gentiles, to whom their
privileges were graciously transferred, to beware of similar unbelief and misuse of
Gospel-mercies, lest a like judgment happen to them also. “Be not highminded,
but fear. For if God spared not the natural branches (of the good olive tree), take
heed lest He also spare not thee (who hast been only grafted in among them).
For unbvlief they were broken off, and thou standest by faith” (Rom, xi. 20, 21).
The language that comes to us from that long desolated land, once the glory of ali
lands, and that long desecrated templeless mount, where Jehovah once had His
abode, and that wretched remnant of the scattered nation, once God’s favoured
people, the kings and priests of Jehovah, now unable to find a settled home or
resting-place for the sole of their foot, is, “Behold the goodness and severity
of God: on them that fell, severity ; but toward thee, goodness ; if thou continue
in His goodness : otherwise thou also shalt be cut off.” “ How shall we escape, if
we neglect so great salvation?” “To-day if ye will hear His voice, harden not
your heart. If we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remaineth no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of judg.
ment and fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries” (Heb. ii. 3, iii. 7,
8, x. 26, 27).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—@) “He covenant to many.” So Hofmann,—
shall confirm the covenant with many for understanding it to mean, One week
one week.” Theodotion renders the shall confirm many in their fidelity to
words, ‘‘Qne week shall confirm the the faith, Hiavernick, ue


GmzapP, IX.





and Auberlen understand the Messiah
as confirming the new covenant by His
death. Ewald and the Rationalists only
think of the many covenants which
Antiochus made with the apostate Jews,
Hitzig thinks of the Old Testament
covenant which the one week should
make grievous, 331) (highbir), to the
faithful Jews who should suffer for their
adherence to it, Keil thinks the sub-
ject of the verb is not the Messiah, nor
the one week, “but the prince that shall
come” (the Antichrist), who shall im-

on the many—the great mass
of the Jews, in contrast with the few
who remain faithful—a strong covenant
that they should follow him and give
themselves to him as their God. Calvin
understands the covenant of grace, con-
firmed through the preaching of the
Gospel by Christ and His apostles with
the world at large, the faithful Gentiles
united with the Jews, Willet thinks
the confirmation of the covenant in-
cludes both the preaching of it by
Messiah and the sealing of it with His
blood. Dr. Pusey includes the preaching
of the Baptist. Mr. Bosanquet thinks
the covenant is the two-fold covenant
made with Abraham: (1) that in his
seed, that is, Messiah, all the nations of
the earth should be blessed; (2) that
to Abraham, and his seed after him, all
the land of Canaan should be given as
an everlasting possession (Gen. xxii. 18,
xvii, 7, 8) ;—the “covenant and mercy ”
for which David prayed (Luke i, 17, 18).
He thinks also that the “one week”
has a figurative reference to the Sabbath-
week, a.D, 27-34, or seven years of
covenant from the preaching of the
kingdom of the Messiah, by John the
Baptist to the Jews, until the calling of
the Gentiles; or, literally, to the Sab-
bath-week, a.p. 65-72, or seven years
of covenant, during which the Jews
partially regained possession of the
promised land of Canaan, and resisted
the power of the Romans,

(2) “ And in the midst of the week he
shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to
cease.” § ANID NY (zebhakh wminkhah),
the bloody and unbloody offerings, the
two chief parts of sacrificial service,
representing the whole of worship

220


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





by sacrifice. Keil understands the
abolishing of such service for half a
week by the ungodly prince or Antt-
christ, who is to come in the time of
the end. Mr. Bosanquet thinks that
the prophecy has reference, figuratively,
to the death of Christ in a.p. 32; and
literally, to the actual cessation of the
morning and evening sacrifice and ob-
lation on the 17th of the month Pane-
mus or Tamuz, a.D. 70, as Josephus
relates in his Jewish War, vi. 2.

@) Such an attempt was made by
the Emperor Julian, the Apostate from
Christianity. The workmen engaged
in preparing the foundation of the
intended temple were obliged to desist
from their operations by extraordinary
obstructions which they met with in
their work, in the form, it is said, of
balls of fire that issued from the place
of excavation.

@ It is said the reason why the
Jews take a cock for sacrifice on the
Day of Atonement is because the name
of a cock in their language is also the
name of a man, 133 (gebher) ; by a kind
of fiction, therefore, it is viewed as
taking the place of the offerer, who, as
he kills it with various ceremonies,
declares that he wishes it to be regarded
as his substitute and sin-bearer, and as
by its death making atonement for his
sins, of which death is the legal penalty,
The circumstance indicates the view
that the Jews entertained of the mean-
ing of sacrifice, the only true and natu
ral one, the death of the victim being
regarded as standing for that of the
offerer who by sin has come under the
penalty.

(6) “ For the overspreading of abomé-
nations he shall make tt desolate, even
until the consummation, and that deter
mined, shall be poured upon the deso-
late.” This is variously rendered. For
the first clause the Greek translation
has, “On the temple shall be the abo-
mination of desolations ;” reminding one
of Matt. xxvi, 15. The Vulgate fol-
lows it: “There shall be in the temple
the abomination of desolation.” Simi-
larly the Arabic : “‘ Upon the sanctuary
shall be the abomination of ruin.” Dr,
A. Clarke remarks that a Hebrew MS,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


GaAP, x





of the thirteenth century, instead of
422 (canaph), rendered in our version
“overspreading,” and in the margin
“battlements,” and literally meaning
a wing, has the word 23° (hecal),
temple. Houbigant has also, “In the
temple,” d&c., like the Vulgate. Cico-
lampadius, Bullinger, Osiander, éc.,
understuod the word of the wings or
pinnacles of the temple. Brightman
reads, “ Desolation on the wing of abo-
minations ;” observing that the “ wing”
is a military word signifying a troop or
band of soldiers, such as the wing of
the Jewish rebels when they took up
arms against the Romans; and under-
standing the passage to mean, “ When
rebellion shall be added to abomina-
tion, and the people shall be ranked
into wings, bands or troops—the wing
of abominations being the troops of
thieves and robbers, the zealots in the
temple, though all the people conspired
along with them—they shall make de-
solate by bringing ruin on their own
heads and on the whole country.”
Calvin understands the extremity or
extension of abomination ; and interprets
it of “the profanation which occurred
after the Gospel began to be promul-
gated, and the punishment which was
inflicted on the Jews when they saw
their temple subjected to the grossest
forms of desecration, because unwill-
ing to submit to the only begotten
Son of God as its true glory.”
Gesenius renders the clause, “On the
pinnacle are the abominations of the
desolator.” Hengstenberg prefers the
word “summit,” «.¢., the highest part
of the temple, here called “ abomina-
tion,” being so desecrated by abomina-
tion, as no longer to deserve the name


of the temple of the Lord, but that of
the temple of idols ; the expression in-
dicating its utter ruin: ‘ Over the sum
mit of abomination comes the destroyer.”
Auberlen adopts the word “summit,”
but in a different sense : “On account of
the desolating summit of abominations ;”
adding that it is the acme or summit of
the abominations committed by Israel
which, according to Stier, ‘draws down
the desolation, nay, which is the deso-
lation itself ;” and that the worship
of a people who have murdered the
Lord’s Anointed, and only go on more
obdurately in their self-righteousness
and hardness of heart, is full of abomi-
nations, So Ewald: “On account of
the frightful height of abominations,”
Havernick combines the local idea with
the moral, understanding “the extreme
heights of abominations” of the high-
est place that can be reached where
the abominations would be committed,
namely, the temple, as the highest point
in Jerusalem. Keil objects to the refer-
ence of the passage to the desecration of
the temple before the destruction of
Jerusalem by the Romans, and, with
some others, takes the word 4) (ca-
naph) in its ordinary meaning of wing:
“On the wings of abominations he
comes desolating ;” the abominations
being heathen gods, idol-images, and
other heathen abominations ; idolatry
being the power that lifts upwards the
destroyer and desolator, carries him and
moves with him over the earth, that
destroyer being the future Antichrist,
Dr. Pusey translates: “ And upon the
pinnacle of abominations, a desolator,”
understanding the abominations to be
the moral ground why in God’s provi-
dence he came,


HOMILETICS.
Secor, XXXVII.—ANcEL Minisraqs (Chap. x. 1-21).


In this and the two following chapters we have another of Daniel’s remarkable
visions, It is both the last and the longest recorded, occupying, as it does, nearly


three whole chapters of the book.


It was vouchsafed to Daniel as a man greatly


beloved, which he is here again declared twice over to be, It was given him in
the third year of Cyrus king of Persia, B.a 531, Daniel now approaching the


ninetieth year of his age.


The prophet relates in the present chapter his spiritual


exercises previous to his receiving the vision, which were no doubt made es


CHAP. &. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





to his doing so. Already with thankfulness and joy he had seen his people, accord-
ing to Jehovah’s gracious promise, restored, through the edict of Cyrus, the result of
his own influence and exertions, to their own land, Notwithstanding this, how-
ever, the Jews who had returned to Jerusalem, and who after all formed but a
small proportion of the exiles, were in great humiliation and depression. Their
first attempt had been to rebuild the temple; but in this they were opposed and
hindered by the heathen already in the land. These, who had been settled there by
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, now demanded a share in the erection of the temple.
This the Jews refused, on the ground that they formed no part of the covenant-
people. Irritated by the refusal, these heathen settlers, or Samaritans, as they
were then and afterwards called (Samaria being the part of the country in
which they were located), set themselves to oppose the work in every possible
way, and especially by seeking to prejudice the king of Persia against it, which
they continued to do throughout the reign of Cyrus (Ezra iv. 14). This
opposition to the work, and its consequent interruption, had doubtless reached
the ears of Daniel at the Persian court, where, probably on account of his
advanced age, he had still remained. The tidings pressed heavily on his spirit ;
and deeply sympathising with his brethren, and concerned for the cause of his
God, at the beginuing of the new year, and as the time of the Passover approached,
he set himself, as he had done before (chap. ix. 3), to seek the Lord’s mercy
for his people by prayer and fasting. He relates that in those days, he,
the same Daniel who is also called Belteshazzar,0) was “mourning three full
weeks ;”(2) neither eating any pleasant bread, nor drinking wine, nor anointing
his body,(@) during the whole of that period (vers. 2, 3). The place of retirement
which he had chosen for this exercise of continued prayer and fasting was on the
banks of the Hiddekel or Tigris, where there already existed an oratory or place
of prayer, according to Jewish custom, There, whither he had gone accompanied
by some of his friends, he received the vision which he here relates, The com-
munications, as on a former occasion, are made through an angel, who declares
that what he communicates is what is “noted in the Scripture of truth ;”@
probably God’s unchanging decree, which was now so far made known to him,
It is stated by the angel that the communication “is true,” ©) though the time
appointed for its fulfilment (or the warfare and trouble predicted) “ was long.”
Daniel intimates also that he “understood the thing: I had understanding of
the vision ;” (6) a thing which, in relation to one point at least, as he afterwards
relates, he particularly desired and asked for (chap, xii. 8). The present chapter
is remarkable for the insight which it affords into the angel-world and angel-
ministries, given as a kind of preface to the divine communications which were to
follow. The occasion of this special informaticn being now vouchsafed to the
prophet, was the struggle going on between the Jews and their heathen neighbours
in the country to obtain the influence of the kings of Persia for, or against, the
building of the temple; as also the situation which the Jews were, for centuries
to come, to occupy in relation to the great world-powers to which they were to be
subject, and from which they were so greatly to suffer, It was to be for the
comfort of Daniel and his people to know that the Providence of a covenant
God was watching over them; and that under that Providence angelic agencies
were continually employed in their behalf. These celestial beings appear to
Daniel in the vision ; the first and chief of whom, from a comparison of the
description given of him (vers, 5, 6) with that in Rev. i 13, d&c., would seem to be
identified with the Angel of the covenant, the Lord of angels Himself.) It
appears uncertain whether he, or one of the other two, is the principal speaker in
the vision, though probably one of the latter,() speaking under his direction, as in
chap. viii. 16. From the view here given regarding the ministry and agency of
angels for the benefit of the Church of God in the world, we may observe the
following particulars ;—


222


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIBL, omaR, %








1. The existence of different ranks and orders among those angelic ministers,
The angels introduced in this chapter are “ princes;” while one of them, named
Michael, is called “one of the chief or first princes” (ver. .13);() this same
Michael being also called (chap. xii, 1) the “great prince,” and elsewhere the
archangel or chief of the angels (Jude 9; Rev, xii, 7).(!) As distinguished from
the angels in general, some would appear to be princes, and that of different
ranks. Peter seems to indicate the existence of such a celestial hierarchy, when
he speaks of “angels, authorities, and powers” being subject to Christ; as well
as Paul, who speaks of “principalities and powers in heavenly places” (1 Peter
iii, 22; Eph. ii, 19). Each of those princes apparently the constituted leader of
an angelic host, perhaps one of those legions of which Jesus speaks (Matt, xxvi,
53). The Book of Revelation speaks of Michael and his angels conflicting with
the devil and his angels (Rev. xii, 7). A similar subordination of rank would
seem still to continue to exist among the angels who fell, and who are still spoken
of as “ principalities and powers” (Eph. vi. 12),

2. Their appointment to different spheres or posts of duty. Thus Michael is here
represented as the prince of the people of Israel (ver. 21), and in chap. xii. 1, the
prince “‘that standeth for the children of Daniel’s people ;” his post apparently
teing to defend and protect that favoured nation. On the other side, we read of
the princes of Persia and Grecia, being, in the opinion of many, the subordinate
leaders among the fallen angels, to whom are assigned by their chief these countries
as their respective spheres of operation. (1) So Paul speaks of principalities and
powers, the “rulers of the darkness of this world” (Eph, vi. 12). How far indivi-
duals may be made the special charge of certain angels is perhaps less certain,
Jesus, however, speaks of little children as having “their angels” (Matt. xviii. 10).
The believers in Mary’s house at Jerusalem said of Peter at the door, “ It is his
angel” (Acts xii. 16). The hill on which Elisha’s house stood was seen to be “full
of horses and chariots of fire” round about the prophet (2 Kings vi 17).

3. The deep interest felt by those angelic beings in the welfare of good men anal
the prosperity of God’s cause. Their interest in good men seen in the manner in
which Daniel is addressed as a “ man greatly beloved ;” words “ indicative of tender
compassion and encouragement, as addressed to an aged saint in whom the infirmi-
ties of age, blended with a deep self-abasement, rendered such assurances of regard
especially grateful and appropriate.” The exhortation, “ fear not,” expressive of the
same loving interest and tender consideration, The earnest endeavour to impart
strength to the overpowered and fainting prophet (vers. 18, 19) reminds us of the
same affectionate concern manifested on behalf of the Man of Sorrows Himself
in His agony in the garden (Luke xxii. 43). The whole of the narrative before us
in reference to the exertions of these angelic ministers on behalf of Israel indica
tive of their deep interest in the welfare of that people, and the prosperity of
Jehovah's cause in the world,

4. The variety of their ministrations, Here, as elsewhere, we see them em-
ployed in conveying messages and delivering communications from God to His
servants (ver. 14), So in chap. ix. 21, 22, we see them also engaged in counter.
acting the evil influences brought to bear on rulers and others by the adversaries of
God’s cause and people, From chap. xi. 1, we find that the same celestial personage
who communicates with Daniel had exerted his influence in strengthening and
encouraging Darius in favour of the Jews, when thwarted and opposed in their
work of restoring Jerusalem by the Samaritans, who sought to prejudice the king
against them and their work. Their ministrations as varied as the circumstances,
necessities, and requirements of the servants of God and heirs of salvation for whose
benefit they are employed in ministering.

5. Their union and mutual help among themselves. ‘‘ Michael, one of the chief
princes,” says the principal speaker in the chapter, ‘‘came to help me” (ver. 13).
And again (ver. 21), “There is none that holdeth (marg., ‘ eee ee


2AM E, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





—puts forth strenuous efforts or vigorously co-operates) with me in these things
but Michael your prince.” The angels, though excelling in strength, yet of limited
power. Even among those potent agents, co-operation and mutual aid are necessary
and enjoyed. The same important principle experienced among the celestial as
among terrestrial workers, Union is strength. ‘Two are better than one.” An
example for the Church on earth in their works of good-doing,

6. Difficulties and opposition experienced by these angelic agents tn their bene
wolent work. The angel who came to Daniel with the divine communications was
withstood by the prince of the kingdom of Persia, and that apparently all the
twenty-one days during which Daniel was fasting and praying (ver. 13).@2) After
fulfilling his mission to the prophet, he had to return to fight again with the prince
of Persia, who was still endeavouring to thwart his services on behalf of the Jews
(ver. 20). So in Rev. xii, 7, Michael and his angels are opposed by the devil and
his angels. In Jude, ver. 9, the same archangel is represented as having contended
with the devil about the body of Moses, probably when commissioned by Jehovah
to bury it (Deut. xxxiv. 6). We see and experience the conflict carried on between
the friends and foes of truth and righteousness on earth. It is well to know that
a similar contest is waged by invisible powers above us and among us, Such con-
tests no less real because unseen, The horses and chariots were on the mountain
round about Elisha before the servant’s eyes were opened to see them. It is
certain that Christ’s servants are aided on earth by angelic agents; but it is quite
as certain that they are also hindered and opposed by invisible powers of a different
character (1 Thess, ii, 18; Rom. xvi. 20). Even when opposed by earthly adver-
saries, it is an encouragement to know that we are not alune in such an experience,
Angels, who are “greater in power and might,” have also to contend against
opposition while ministering to us and to the cause of Christ on earth.

From the whole narrative we may learn—

1. How glorious must be the place that forms the abode of those angelic beings to
whom we are here introduced. The visible glory and splendour of “ the man clothed
in linen” (vers. 5, 6), whether a created or uncreated angel, suggests the glory of the
place where such have their residence. A similar appearance is elsewhere ascribed
to those angelic ministers ; for example, Matt. xxviii. 3. How glorious the throne
which is attended by such exalted and resplendent ministers! How glorious the
King! A picture of His glory, under a human form, perhaps presented to us in
this chapter. The queen of Sheba’s burst of amazement and admiration on seeing
the glory of Solomon’s court, likely to be far exceeded by the believer’s experience
as he enters the heavenly glory: “It was a true report that I heard—and behold,
the half was not told me. Happy are thy men, and happy are these thy servants
that stand continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom!” Daniel fainted
at the glorious vision of the man clothed in linen, @8) Believers beholding “the
King in His beauty ” shall be filled “ with joy unspeakable and full of glory.”

2. Ample provision made for the welfare of the Church and for the success of
the Redeemer’s cause, An agency is provided in the wisdom and love of God, and
committed into the hands of the Mediator, which, though invisible, is always in
operation, and is fully adequate to meet all requirements and exigencies. Such
provision made in the ministration of angelic beings, who, though necessarily
limited both in their power and knowledge, yet “excel in strength” as well as
wisdom ; and, while yielding implicit obedience to the will of their Sovereign, are
also deeply and lovingly interested in the happiness of His people and the
prosperity of His cause. Their influence also, as spiritual beings, is capable of
being exercised as well on the mind as on material objects. It is true that in their
ministrations they are resisted by beings of a similar nature, though of an opposite
character and disposition, How effectually, nowever, the ministry of angels is
exercised on behalf of the Church, is shown by numerous examples both in the
Old and New Testaments, one of which is found in this very book (chap. vi. 22).

224


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIED, OHAP. X.


rr


3. The duty of imitating the character and conduct of those angelic ministers,
A petition taught by the Saviour, and constantly on the lips of the professing
Church, is, “ Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.” ‘I'he book of Daniel,
and especially the chapter before us, reveals how it is done there. We see these
celestial beings not only promptly obedient to their Maker’s will, but cordially
interested in whatever that will is, and especially in the work of ministering for
the heirs of salvation about whom they are employed. Their obedience not only
prompt but loving and hearty. What is done in obedience to the divine will is done
“heartily as to the Lord.” Whatever the service on which they are sent, it is
faithfully, zealously, and lovingly executed. Though thwarted and opposed for
days and weeks together by hostile influences and wayward dispositions, they
persevere in their mission till it is accomplished. It is our privilege to be engaged
with them in serving the same Master, and in promoting the same objects. Like
them we shall meet with opposition both from visible and invisible adversaries,
Like them it is for us, through promised and provided grace, to persevere till our
efforts are crowned with success, or we called away by the Master to another field
of service,

4. The reverential spirit with which we ought to receive the communications of
God’s word. Daniel relates that when the angel brought to him the divine
communication with which he was charged, “when he had spoken this word unto
me, I stood trembling ;” and again, “when he had spoken such words unto me,
I set my face toward the ground, and became dumb” (vers. 11, 15). One of the
marks of the truly godly given by God Himself as that with which He is well
pleased, is, that they “tremble at His word” (Isa, Ixvi. 2), So Ezra speaks of the
godly in his day (Ezra ix. 4, x. 3). Striking contrast to the thoughtless indiffer-
ente with which the divine oracles are too often read and heard. The deep
humility, eelf-abasement, and godly fear that Daniel exhibited in relation to the
divine communications which he received, a part of his general character, and that
which doubtless prepared him for receiving those revelations by which he was so
greatly honoured. ‘Them that honour Me, I will honour.”

5. The manifoldness of Scripture teaching. Not only in regard to our own race
has the Holy Ghost been pleased to give us information in His word ; but also in
regard to an order of beings higher than ourselves in the scale of creation, and
whose existence dates further back in the annals of the universe.@4) This infor-
mation, too, the Scriptures afford us, not to gratify curiosity, nor even merely to
augment our knowledge ; but on account of the relation which those angelic beings
kear to ourselves, and the important part assigned to them in connection with the
human race, and more especially to that part of it who, like themselves, are
engaged in the service of God. “ Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth
to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation?” The information thus
afforded us concerning angels calculated to exercise an important influence upon
our spirit and daily walk, cheering us by the assurance of their presence and aid,
and animating us by their holy and loving example (Ps, xxxiv. 7, xci. 11, 12;
Eccles. v. 6 ; 1 Cor. xi. 10).





EXEGETICAL NOTES.—® “ Bel-
terhavzar” (ver 1). Calvin thinks that
Vaniel mentiuns this name as that by
which he was better known among the
nations with whom he would have this pro-
phecy to become famous, Polanus thinks
it is given to show that ne was the same
person who had the former visions, that
so it might be received with greater
eredit and authority,


@ “Three full weeks” (ver. 2),
Literally, “three weeks of days;” an
expression, which while it denotes, ac-
cording to Hebrew idiom, three full
weeks, may also indicate that there are
weeks of another kind than those of
days ; ¢g., the seventy weeks of the
preceding chapter, which are weeks of
years. Dr. Cox mentions as reasons
for Daniel’s present protracted season


225


OHAP. X.





of humiliation and prayer—his personal
transgressions, the opposition experi-
enced in the rebuilding of the city and
temple, the reluctance of many of the
Jews to return to Jerusalem and co-
operate in the work, and the predicted
conduct of his people when Messiah
should appear and be “ cut off.”

(3) “ Anoint myself” (ver. 3). Jerome
says the Persians, instead of bath-
ing, anointed their bodies all over,
which, according to Pliny, was done
both to defend themselves from the
excessive heat, and preserve their bodies
in health. Keil observes that the anoint-
ing with oil was a sign of joy and a
joyous frame of mind, as with guests
at a banquet (Amos vi. 6); and was
now intermitted by Daniel as in a time
of sorrow,

(4) “In the scripture of truth” (ver.
21). Calvin observes that Holy Scrip-
ture often adopts forms of speech ac-
cording to human custom; the “scripture
of truth” being nothing but the eternal
and inviolable decree of God Himself.
Bishop Lowth remarks : ‘ God’s decrees
are spoken of as if they were committed
to writing and registered in a book.”
Mr. Bosanquet thinks it to have been a
book or writing concerning “ the truth ;”
and that what follows is mostly a com-
ment founded upon it, and not to be
mistaken for prophecy,

(5) “ The thing was true” (ver. 1).
Keil observes that in this statement
Hitzig finds an intimation that betrays
the writer's standpoint, namely, the
time when “the thing” was realised,
Daniel not being able to say this before
it happened, But this objection sup-
poses that the author was a lying pro-
phet who spoke from his own heart
(Jer. xxix. 8, 15). But if Daniel had
actually received a word from God, he
could before its fulfilment testify its
truth; that testimony here indicating,
as in chap, viii. 26, that the word now
communicated to the prophet contained
things which it would be difficult for
the human heart to believe. Mr, Bos-
anquet thinks that it was part of the
interpretation made by some unknown
person in or after the time of Antiochus
Epiphanes, and in the course of time

226


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


accidentally transferred from the alter-
nate columns or margin of the sacred
roll into the text. But Rev. xxii 19,
teaches caution in supposing passages
to be interpolations,

(8) “He understood the thing, and
had understanding of the vision” (ver.
1). Rosenwiiller understands }'3 (bin)
imperatively, and 719°2 (binah) as a mere
repetition of the word: “ Consider it,
consider, I say, the thing made known
through the vision.” So Lengerke and
Mr. Bosanquet. Keil thinks that a
summons to give heed or to under-
stand would not be here in place. He
considers 42°32 (binah) a substantive,
and ]*3 (bin) the preterite, and not, as
Havernick, the infinitive: “ Under-
standing was to him by that which was
seen,” T8123 (bammareh), by the vision,
t.e., by the appearance described in ver.
5, &c. Kliefoth refers this last word
to the earlier prophecies of chap. viii.
7, 9. The objection that Daniel says
(chap. xii. 8) that he did not under-
stand the vision, is disposed of, he ob-
serves, on the ground that the non-
understanding had reference to a single
point, viz, the duration of the affliction ;
regarding which, however, disclosures
are given to the prophet in chap. xii.
10, &. Auberlen refers to a distine
tion, also noticed by Keil, between this
and other revelations vouchsafed to the
prophet, viz, that it is communicated
partly by supernatural illumination for
the interpretation of the dream-vision,
partly by visions, and partly by the
appearance of angels ; indicating a note-
worthy progression, in which one reve-
lation always prepares the way, in a
material and formal respect, for that
which follows, aud by which God gra
dually prepared the prophet for the
reception of still more definite disclo
sures,

7) “ A certain man clothed in linen”
(ver. 5). Dr. Rule thinks that it is
Gabriel, distinguished as the Lord’s
chosen messenger, who is described in
vers. 5, 6; and that by a comparison
with Rev, i, 13, &c., we find that the
descriptions, though resembling each
other, are not to be confounded, the
latter having every divine attribute,


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: DANIEL


while the former has none. Brightman
thinks that his priestly garments pro
claim him to be the only priest worthy to
be consulted in all doubtful matters, and
whose lips ‘keep knowledge.” Keil is
led by Rev. i 13, &ec., to regard him
@8 no common angel-prince, but a mani-
festation of Jehovah, t.¢., the Logos or
Word, who afterwards was made flesh ;
his appearance resembling that of the
glory of Jehovah as seen by Ezekiel at
the river Chebar, and indicating how by
his acts he would reveal himself to his
people in the great tribulation. So
CEcolampadius, Willet, and others.

(8) “4 hand touched me” (ver. 10).
Hengstenberg thinks, with many old
interpreters, that the person who speaks
to Daniel and announces the future, is
not the same who is described in vers,
5, 6, as the ‘man clothed in linen.”
Jerome thinks they are the same created
angel. So Pfaff and Bullinger. ico-
lampadius thinks they are the same
person, viz., Christ. So Keil. Heng-
stenberg identifies him with Gabriel.
Dr. Rule thinks that other angels, less
terrible than the one described in vers,
5, 6, ministered_to the prophet (vers.
10, 16, 18). Birks thinks the speaker
in the vision is the angel of the cove-
nant, the Son of God.

) “ Michael” (ver. 13). 28DD=
“who is like God,” expresses the idea
of God’s unparalleled helping power.
Hengstenberg identifies Michael with
the “ Angel of the Lord,” the leader of
the Israelites, and prince of the army of
Jehovah, mentioned in Exod, xxxii. 34 ;
Josh. v. 13 ; Zech. i, 5). Melanchthon,
Broughton, Junius, and others identify
him with Christ. Birks and most in-
terpreters think him a created angel.
Calvin leaves it indifferent, observing
that God does not confine Himself to
any fixed rule.

Q®) “One of the chief princes” (ver. 13).
Keu observes that the title here given
t» Michael points undoubtedly to an
arrangement of orders and degrees
among the angels, From the circum-
stance that the guardian spirit of Persia
(see next note) is called WY (sar), a
prince, it does not follow that


“princes” is not a designation of the








CHAP, &


-e


angels generally, but only, as Hofmann
thinks, of the princes of the peoples
who are the spirits ruling in the social
affairs of nations and kingdoms, The
“chief princes,” he adds, can only be
the princes, or chiefs, of the good angels”
who remain in communion with God
and work for His kingdom. The work
of standing up for Israel (chap. xii. 1)
is committed to Michael as one of them,
As God would not intrust to a subordi-
nate spirit a work demanding special
power and greatness, the title given to
Michael was for Israel’s comfort, as
affirming that they were under very
powerful protection, though little es-
teemed before the world.

Q1) “The prince of Persia—of the
kingdom of Persia—of Grecia” (vers. 13,
20). Jerome, Melanchthon, Osiander,
and others think the “king of Persia”
to be Satan or evil angels. Dr. Rule
thinks that the “ prince of the kingdom
of Persia” was Darius, and that the
“kings of Persia” (ver. 13) were the
kings of subject provinces; while the
princes of Persia and of Grecia (ver. 20)
were the kings of those countries, the
King of Grecia being Alexander the
Great. So Calvin, who thinks of
Cambyses the son of Cyrus, Dr. Cox
thinks that Satan, the prince or god of
this world, either by himself or by one
of his chief agents, employed his machi-
nations to instigate Cambyses and the
court:of Persia to hostilities against the
Jews; while the angelic spirit, to whom
this ministration was intrusted, em-
ployed his efforts to influence the king
and his nobles in their favour. Keil
thinks the “prince of the kingdom
of Persia,” in ver. 20 the ‘prince
of Persia,” is not King Cyrus, nor, as
Havernick and Kranichfeld, with Calvin
and most of the reformers, think, the
kings of Persia collectively ; but the
guardian spirit or the protecting genius
of the Persian kingdom, as the Rabbis
and many Christian interpreters after
Jerome have acknowledged; a spirit
being, yet not the heathen national god
of the Persians, but, according to the
view of Scripture (1 Cor. x. 20, &c.),
the demon (dasjuéwov) of the Persian
kingdom ; «.¢., the Brae spirit-

2


ouaP. xX.


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: DANIEL





power standing behind the national
gods, which we may call the guardian
spirit of this kingdom. According to
Kliefoth, this spirit stood behind the
Persian kings to influence them against
Israel, and to direct against the chosen
people the power lying in Persian
heathendom, so as to support the in-
sinuations of the Samaritans, and whom
the angel, mentioned in ver. 5, came, at
Daniel’s prayer, to dislodge from his
position and deprive of his influence ;
in which, with the aid of Michael, he
so far succeeded that, after a contest
of twenty-one days, he gained the
mastery over him, and stood in his
place beside the kings of Persia, so as
henceforth to influence them in favour
of Israel, By the king of Grecia, Keil
understands the spirit of the Maccabean
world-kingdom, who, while the angel
addressing Daniel returns to Persia to
maintain the position he has gained,
will come and cause a new conflict,
Dr. Pusey, after Gregory, Theodoret,
Lyranus, and others, regards these
“princes” as good angels desiring the
welfare of the peoples committed to
their care, and so contending, though
in submission to the will of God.

(2) “ Withstood me” (ver. 13). Dr.
Cox remarks that contests of this nature
are mentioned in other places of Scrip-
ture, as Zech. iii. 1-3; Jude 9; Rev.
xii, 7,8. ‘The angel lets the prophet
catch a glimpse of the invisible struggles
between the princes of the angels, in
which it is decided who is to exert the
determining influence on the worldly
monarch (the king of Persia)—whether
the god-opposed spirit of this world, or
the good spirit whose aim it is to further
theinterests of God’s kingdom,”—A uber-
len; who adds: “ We are wont to speak
in a spiritualising way of a struggle be-
tween the good and the evil spirit in
man. Holy Scripture teaches us to re-
gard such a struggle as real and sub-
stantial (compare 1 Sam. xvi. 13-15;
1 Kings xxii, 22), The Satanic influ-
ences, of which we have more particular
knowledgethrough the language of Christ
and His apostles, are essentially not dif-
ferent from this. The liberty of human
actions is not hereby taken away ; for


228


the spirits exercise no compelling influ
ence on men’s hearts, and their chief
activity consists probably in the arrange-
ment of outward events,”

(3) “ There remained no strength in
me” (ver. 8). Keil observes that the
effect which the appearance of the man
clothed in linen had upon Daniel, formed
@ pre-intimation and a pledge of what
would happen to his people in the future,
As Daniel was thrown to the ground
and raised up again by a supernatural
hand, so should the people of God be
thrown to the ground by the fearful
judgments that should pass over them,
but should again be raised up by the
all-powerful help of their God and His
angel-prince Michael, and should be
strengthened to endure the tribulation,

(4) This information, given through
Daniel, regarding angels has been made
an argument against the genuineness of
the book as belonging to a later age;
the angels being said to appear quite in
the form in which they were introduced
from the later Parseism into Judea, with
the distinction of higher and lower orders,
and the names given to certain indivi-
duals among them. But, as Dr. Pusey
observes, some distinction among those
heavenly hosts was revealed from the
first (Gen. iii, 24). Also, there was one
known as distinct from and above all the
rest as “‘ the Angel of the Lord,” whether
God the Son, or (as Dr. Pusey thinks)
a created angel, and especially Michael,
in whom God accustomed His creatures
to the thought of beholding Himself in
human form, He thinks the one thing
peculiar in Daniel’s revelations regard-
ing angels ia that, as God set one chief
angel as the deputed guardian of His
people, so He set others over the nations,
assigning to each nation one of those
ministering spirits to succour and defend
them, and to plead their cause with
Himself, the Father of all. He observes
that it is agreed that the common title
Amesha-Cpenta (or Amshaspands), “ the
holy immortals,” does not occur in the
oldest part of the Zendavesta ; and that
the names by which they are severally
distinguished occur there also as names
of quaiities or substances, Dr. Rule
observes: “It is a familiar saying with


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





the Jews that their fathers brought up
the names of angels out of Babylon ;
and, for anything we know to the con-
trary, it may be true that they brought
them thence. But it would be an error
to conelude that the Jews learned the
names of angels from the Babylonians
or from the Persians.” At first sight, he
remarks, it might seem probable that, as
the later Persian religion, unlike the
Assyrian, is distinguished by long lists
of angels, good and bad, Persia might
be the birthplace of angelology ; and it
might be conjectured that the inspired
writers of the New Testament, who
record the names of Gabriel and Michael,
drew them from the same source as the
Persians, or indeed from the Persians


of Daniel, which are now accessible to
us, are not known to disclose any infor-
mation concerning angels’ names. As
fer Zoroaster, his date is not certainly
known; but even if it was he who first
taught the Persians that angels existed,
and if he really flourished in the reign
of Gushtaph or Darius Hystaspis, B.o,
521-486, he was probably born a few
years before the decease of Daniel, but
had not yet been heard of in Daniel’s
time ; and the only probability is that
he would be glad to borrow from the
prophet’s writings anything to serve his
own purpose.” He concludes that angels
were not known of in Babylonia, and
therefore there could not have been
angels’ names, except as the Baby-


themselves. “In the present case, the lonians and others learned them from
Persian documents of or before the age the Hebrews,
HOMILETICS.


Secr, XXXVIII.—Tue Kincs or THE NoRTH AND OF THE SOUTH,
(Chap. xi. 1-20.)


We come to the things which the angel was commissioned to communicate to the
prophet, and through him to the Church, They are spoken of as the things which
should befall his people “in the latter days,” @) being the things noted in “ the
scripture of truth.” The chapter is a continuation of the angel’s discourse, the
first verse being more properly connected with the preceding chapter, as the com-
munication only commences with the second, The prophecy is the most extensive
and minute one which the prophet had hitherto received, including a period
stretching from Daniel’s own time to the resurrection of the dead.) It contains
a further filling up of the outline of the four great empires already given in the
visions of the Great Image and the Four Beasts (chap. ii and vii.), as well as that
of the Third Monarchy and the Little Horn in the vision of the Ram and the He
goat (chap. viii.) The prediction ‘was given,” says Auberlen, “to be a light to
the people of Israel in one of the darkest periods of their chequered history, and,
indeed, in the darkest centuries of their abandonment by God—centuries that have
not yet run their course.” The angelic communication commences with a glance
at the kings of Persia, who were yet to arise, and at the founder of the Third or
Grecian Empire who was to succeed them, The angel then passes to the contend-
ings that took place between the kings of two of the divisions of Alexander’s
partitioned empire, Syria and Egypt, in order to introduce the power who had
already formed a sadly conspicuous object in the visions of Daniel, as the great
antagonist and persecutor of the Jews and of the religion of Jehovah, Antiochus
Epiphanes, one of the kings of Syria. These Syrian kings are spoken of in the
vision as the kings of the North, as distinguished from the kings of Egypt or of
the South, to whom, after Alexander’s death, the Jews were subject, From
Antiochus the vision appears to pass to others of whom he appears as the type.

L The Persians and Alexander the Great (vers. 2-4), Cyrus, the founder of
the Second or Persian Empire, was now, as is atated in the previous ie (chap.

29


cmaP. XI. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL,





x. 1), inthe third year of his reign, after succeeding his uncle, Darius the Mede,
otherwise called Cyaxares IL, who on the fall of Babylon had “taken” or
received the kingdom, which he ruled for two years. To this second empire the
Jews were in subjection, as they had been to the first or Babylonian, Judea being
still only a tributary province. It was through the favour of its monarchs that
the Jews were for two centuries to enjoy peace and prosperity in their own land
and elsewhere, At the head of this empire there were yet to be three kings, who
should be followed by a fourth, far richer than any of his predecessors (ver. 2),
These three kings are known in history as Cambyses, a son of Cyrus; Smerdis,
who pretended to be another son ; and Darius Hystaspis. The fourth is the well-
known Xerxes,(*) thought to be the same with Ahasuerus of the Book of Esther,
whose riches were proverbial, and in whose reign the empire reached its highest
magnificence. “ By his strength, through his riches,” he was to “stir up all against
the realm of Grecia.” He is known as the king who, in his war with Greece,
covered the shores of the Hellespont with his immense host. The disasters that
attended his expedition, and the entire overthrow of the empire under one of his
successors, Darius Codomannus, are well known in history.

After mentioning Xerxes, the angel passes to the power by which the Persian
empire was to be overthrown: “A mighty king shall stand up, which shall rule
with great dominion, and shall do according to his will” (ver. 3). Alexander the
Great, thus referred to, with his rapid and extensive conquests, has been already -
before us in former visions as the founder of the Third or Grecian Empire. When
in the height of his prosperity, however, he was to be cut off and his kingdom to
be “broken, and divided toward the four winds of heaven,” his successors being
none of his own posterity (ver. 4), This also we have seen fulfilled in the untimely
and unexpected death of Alexander, and in the division of his empire, not between
his two sons, Alexander and Hercules, who were both murdered soon after their
father’s death, but among his four generals, Cassander, Lysimachus, Ptolemy, and
Seleucus, See further under chap. vii. 6, and viii. 5-8, 21, 22. Although the
condition of the Jews was considerably affected by Alexander, it is more as a link
in the historical chain that he is here introduced,

IL The kings of Syria and Egypt, or of the North and South (vers. 5-20),
These, the most powerful of Alexander’s successors, are made, with their mutual
contendings, to occupy a considerable part of the prophecy, from the circumstance
that Judea lay between them, and was often the bone of contention to the rival
parties, “ The Jews,” says Luther, “placed thus between the door and the hinges,
were sorely tormented on both sides. Now they fell a prey to Egypt, and anon
to Syria, as the one kingdom or the other got the better ; and they had to pay
dearly for their neighbourhood, as is wont to be in time of war.”

The prophecy regarding these kings commences with the statement that the
king of the South or of Egypt should “be strong, and one of his princes,” that is,
of the princes of Alexander, namely, the king of Syria, who should “be strong
above him, and have dominion,” which should be “a great dominion ” (ver 5), (4
This we find verified in the kings of Egypt and Syria, or, as they are sometimes
called, the Lagidw and the Seleucid, from the names of their respective founders,
Ptolemy Lagus, and Seleucus ; the latter becoming the sovereign of not less than
three-fourths of all the Asiatic dominions conquered by Alexander the Great. It
was under Ptolemy Philadelphus, the second of the kings of Egypt, that, in con-
sequence of the number of Jews residing in that country ©) and speaking Greek,
the Greek or Septuagint version of the Old Testament was made, about the year
273 B.o. Of these kings, the angel says, “in the end of years,” or after several
years, “ they shall join themselves together,” in friendly alliance ; “for the king’s
daughter of the South shall come to the king of the North to make an agreement ;”
an alliance, however, which was to effect nothing ; the angel adding, “but she shall


not he es power of the arm,” or be ably to render any permanent help to her


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL. OMAP, KI,
oo  * =


father in relation to Syria, ‘‘ Neither shall he stand, nor his arm; but she shall be
given up, and they that brought her, and he that begat her (marg., ‘he whom she
brought forth’), and he (or they) that strengthened her in these times” (ver. 6).
Jerome, from various ancient authors, gives the following account in verification
of the prophecy :—After many years, Ptolemy Philadelphus, king of Egypt, wish-
ing to bring this troublesome contention toan end, gave his daughter Berenice in
marriage to Antiochus, king of Syria (surnamed Theos or the god); Antiochus
having two sons, Callinicus and Antiochus, by Laodicea, his first wife, who was
still living. Philadelphus himself took his daughter to Pelusium, carrying with
him as her dowry many thousands of gold and silver, whence he obtained tie
name of the Dowry-bearer. But Antiochus, though at first professing to take Berenice
for his consort in the kingdom, and to retain Laodicea as his concubine, after a
length of time was overcome by the love of his first wife, and took Laodicea and
her children back to the palace, Lavdicea, fearing that Berenice would win back
the heart of her fickle husband, employed her servants to take away his life by
poison, and then delivered up Berenice and the child she had borne to Antiochus
to two princes of Antioch to be murdered, while she made Callinicus, her eldest
son, king in the room of his father. The angel foretells the sequel of this tragedy.
“ But out of a branch of her roots,” sprung from the same parents, “shall one
stand up in his estate (or stead), which shall come with an army, and shall enter
into the fortress (or strong city) of the king of the North, and shall deal against
them, and shall prevail: and shall also carry captives into Evypt their gods, with
their princes, and with their precious vessels of silver and gold ; and he shall con-
tinue more years than the king of the North. So the king of the South shall come
into his kingdom, and shall return into his own land” (vers. 7-9). Jerome
relates: After the murder of Berenice and the death of her father Ptolemy Phila-
delphus, her own brother, Ptolemy Euergetes, came with a great army and entered
into the provinces of Callinicus, then reigning in Syria with his mother Laodicea ;
and after revenging himself upon them, took possession of Syria, Cilicia, the parts
beyond the Euphrates, and almost all Asia, Afterwards, on receiving intelligence
from Egypt that a sedition had arisen, he seized on the kingdom of Callinicus, took
forty thousand talents of silver, precious vessels, and images of gods to the number of
two thousand and five hundred, including those which Cambyses had carried out of
Egypt into Persia, In reference to the clause, “he shall continue more years
than the king of the North,” it has been remarked that the average length of a
reign in Egypt was about twenty-seven years and four months, while that in Syria
was just one-half; and that “the atrocious cruelty of the Syrians, and especially
their oppression of the Jews, is enough to account for the shortness of their lives,
to any one who takes into consideration the retributive providence of God, who
scourges unjust kings by their discontented subjects.”
The angel proceeds, ‘“ But his sons (those of the king of Syria) shall be stirred
up, and shall assemble a multitude of great forces; and one shall certainly come,
and overflow, and pass through: then shall he return, and be stirred up, even to
his fortress. And the king of the South shall be moved to choler, and shall come
forth, and fight with him, even with the king of the North, and he shall set forth a
great multitude, but the multitude shall be given into his hand. And when he
shall take away the multitude, his heart shall be lifted up; and he shall cast down
many ten thousands; but he shall not be strengthened by it. For the king of the
North shall return, and shall set forth a multitude greater than the former, and
shall certainly come after many years with a great army and with much riches
(vers. 10-13), The following are the facts of history that verify this part of the
prophecy :—The two sons of Callinicus, namely, Seleucus Ceraunus and Antiochus,
surnamed the Great, stirred themselves up to recover their father’s dominions,
The former, though surnamed the Thunderer, was equally weak in body and mind,
and after a reign of three years was poisoned by his generals, Sn Salt little


4


CHAP, ZL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL,





more than assemble a large force, which, for want of money, he was unable to
keep together. After his death, his brother Antiochus came with a great army,
retook Seleucia, his fortress, and recovered Syria; and after a time he returned,
overcame the Egyptian general, and had thoughts of invading Egypt itself.
Ptolemy Philopator, having succeeded his father Euergetes, whom he had
murdered, enraged at his losses, roused himself from his sensual indulgences, and
marched with a numerous army as far as Raphia, between Rhinocolura and Gaza,
where he met Antiochus with a still more powerful host. The latter was defeated,
and his numerous armament given into Ptolemy’s hand, ten thousand of his troops
having been slain, and four thousand made prisoners. The weak heart of Ptolemy
was lifted up by his success, and on making a visit to Jerusalem, among other
cities which sent their ambassadors to do him homage, he demanded to be allowed
to enter the interior of the temple. When Simon the high priest remonstrated,
alleging that not even ordinary priests were admitted into the inner sanctuary, the
king haughtily answered that although they were forbidden, he ought not to be so,
and then pressed forward, The Jewish historian relates that in passing through
the inner court for that purpose, he was seized with a panic and fell speechless
to the ground. He was carried out half dead; and soon after his recovery he
departed, full of anger against the Jewish people. The result was that on return-
ing to Alexandria, he commenced a bitter persecution of the numerous Jews
residing there, so that “many ten thousands were cast down” by it; only three
hundred retaining their civil rights at the expense of their religion, while, accord-
ing to Eusebius, forty thousand, or, according to Jerome, half as many more,
preferred death rather than obey the royal decree that commanded them to wor-
ship idols, Ptolemy, giving himself up to his pleasures instead of pursuing his
victory over Antiochus, was “not strengthened by it.” He died about a dozen
years after, and Antiochus, raising au incredibly large army among the upper
provinces of Babylonia and Media, came down upon his son, Ptolemy Epiphanes,
an infant four years old.

The prophecy continues: “And in those times there shall many stand up
against the king of the South: also the robbers of thy people, or “ breakers,”
that is, of the divine law, shall exalt themselves to establish the vision ; but they
shall fall. So the king of the North shall come, and cast up a mount, and take
the most fenced cities; amd the arms of the South shall not withstand, neither
his chosen people, neither shall there be any strength to withstand, But he that
cometh against him shall do according to his own will, and none shall stand before
him; and he shall stand in the glorious land, which by his hand shall be con-
sumed” (vers. 14-16.) (©) History relates that Philip of Macedon entered into a
league with Antiochus to divide Ptolemy’s dominions between them, each taking
the part that lay nearest to him; in consequence of which, as Judea lay nearest
to Antiochus, that country was seized by him and the generals of Ptolemy by
turns, The Jews themselves were divided into factions, part favouring the cause
of Ptolemy, to whom they were already under allegiance, while others gave their
aid to Antiochus, by which they only prepared the way for the fulfilment of the
prophecy regarding the sufferings which the Jews were to endure under one of
his successors, The help, however, which was rendered to Antiochus by the
Syrian faction at Jerusalem, was of little avail. Scopas, the Egyptian general,
recovered Phenicia and Cosle-Syria ; and after subduing the Jews, placed a garrison
{In Jerusalem, This, however, only continued for a time. Antiochus, coming to
Judea, encountered Scopas at the sources of the J ordan, destroyed a great part of
his army, and pursued him to Sidon, where he shut him up, with ten thousand of
his men, till famine obliged him to surrender. Antiochus soon retook Phenicia,
Cosle-Syria, and Palestine, nothing being able to withstand his victorious arms,
He stood “in the glorious land.” The party that revolted from Ptolemy cordially


vig tt into Jerusalem, and even assisted him in besieging the garrison


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL, OmAP. Xt,





which Scopas had left in the citadel, so that his power was established in Judea.
The land, however, was wasted by his troops, as well as in other ways.

The angel proceeds: “ He shall also set his face to enter with (or against) the
strength of his whole kingdom (or, ‘to enter by force into the whole kingdom,’
t.e., of Egypt), and upright ones (or, according to the margin, ‘ equal conditions,’
—an agreement by a marriage alliance) with him: thus shall he do; and he shall
give him the daughter of women, corrupting her; but she shall not stand on his
side, neither be for him, And after this shall he turn his face unto the isles, and
shall take many: buta prince for his own behalf shall cause the reproach offered by
him to cease ; without his own reproach he shall cause it to turn upon him. Then
he shall turn his face toward the fort of his own land: but he shall stumble, and
fall, and not be found” (vers, 17-19). History gives the fulfilment. Antiochus,
having been so far successful against Egypt, formed schemes to seize upon the
whole kingdom, His aim was to accomplish this by means of a marriage alliance,
giving Ptolemy his beautiful daughter Cleopatra in marriage, thinking, through her
affection for himself, to obtain the kingdom of her husband. In this, however, he
was disappointed. The marriage took place, but Cleopatra was too true a wife
for his ambitious schemes, and sided with her husband against her father. An-
tiochus then, collecting a large fleet, turned his face ‘‘to the isles” of the Mediter-
ranean, including the Greek cities of the coast, many of which he took. As these,
however, were in alliance with the Romans, the latter, under the consul Acilius,
uniting with their allies, after gaining repeated victories over Antiochus, compelled
him to return with his army into Asia. After his defeat at Magnesia, he fled to
Sardis, and the next day reached Antioch, “the fort of his own land.” Two years
after he was slain by the Persians while plundering the temple of Jupiter Belus at
Elymais, or, according to another account, by his companions while carousing at a
banquet,

The prophecy regarding the kings of the North and the South, introductory to
the main one relating to Antiochus Epiphanes, closes with the brief notice of
Seleucus Philopator. ‘There shall stand up in his estate (or stead) a raiser of
taxes (Marg., ‘one that causeth an exactor to pass over’),() in the glory of the
kingdom ; but within few days he shall be destroyed, neither in anger, nor in
battle” (ver. 20). This “raiser of taxes” was Seleucus Philopator, who succeeded
his father Antiochus the Great, and did nothing memorable in his twelve years’
reign. Of a sluggish disposition, he was intent on nothing but raising money to

the tax levied upon him by the Romans. He was murdered by his treasurer
or chief collector, Heliodorus, whom he had sent to plunder the Temple at Jeru-
salem.

From this part of the prophecy we may note—

1. The foreknowledge and providence of God. The Apostle only declared what
reason itself may teach us, when he said, ‘Known unto God are all His works
from the beginning of the world.” The architect knows beforehand what he will
do in the erection of the building when he prepares the plan. The weaver knowe
beforehand what he will do with his web when he has fixed upon the pattern,
God’s works embrace those of providjence as well as of creation, “My Father
worketh hitherto,” said Jesus, “and I work.” His almighty power and boundless
wisdom are continually occupied in relation to all that His creating hand has
produced, upholding and governing all His creatures and all their actions, so that
without Him not even a sparrow falls to the ground. “In Him we live and
move,” as well as “have our being.” The details predicted in this section, now
matters of history, were all included within the divine foreknowledge and Provi-
dence, like every other event that takes place. Being foreknown by God, it was
easy to communicate the knowledge of them beforehand, as far as divine wisdom
saw meet, It is our comfort to know that “the Lord reigneth ;” and that not only


matters connected with rulers and empires, but all events, whether great or small,
233


CHaP. XL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


are not only known by God beforehand, but are ordered and controlled in His all-
wise providence, so that the ends He designs shall be accomplished ; making even
the wrath of man to praise Him, while the remainder of that wrath He restrains ;
and causing all things to “ work together for good to them that love God, and
who are called according to His purpose” (Ps. Ixxvi. 10; Rom. viii. 28). This
gracious purpose continually ept in view in all His doings. The thing that is
determined shall be done (ver. 36).

2. The character and condition of human nature apart from divine grace. The
section valuable as confirming the view given of the kingdoms of the world in
Daniel’s vision of the Four Beasts, of which the third is here partially exhibited.
It affords an epitome of secular history extending over three centuries, and @
specimen of that history in all ages of the world, It is especially valuable
inasmuch as the period brought before us in the section is that in which Greek
culture had reached its highest perfection. It exhibits sin and misery as the
characteristics of fallen humanity with all the advantages that worldly art and
science could afford it. It shows the works of the flesh, or of man’s fallen nature
unrenewed by divine grace, to be what the Bible represents them,—“ enmities,
strife, jealousies, wraths, factions, divisions ; unrighteousness, covetousness, envy,
murder, deceit, malignity (Gal. iv. 20; Rom. i. 29), Fifty thousand unoffending
Jews cruelly massacred by a Ptolemy in and around his own metropolis, because
he was refused a profane entrance into the Holy of Holies at Jerusalem! God’s
long-suffering patience and fatherly pity exercised on such a world. The world
was shown to need a Saviour, and a Saviour was provided. Into such a world
Christ came. ‘God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that
whosoever believeth on Him might not perish but have everlasting life.” The
view here given of the kingdoms of the world, such as to awaken the longing for
the setting up and universal extension of the promised kingdom, which is “ righteous-


ness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.”


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—@) “Jn
the latter days” (chap. x. 14). Dr, Cox
remarks that, by this expression in the
preceding chapter, ‘‘our views are natu-
rally conducted through the perspective
of revolving ages; all the events of
which, till the great consummation,
must be contemplated with reference
to the Jewish nation or Daniel’s people,
whose affairs form the centre of the
chief transactions of this lower world.”

(2) * Of all the predictions contained in
the holy Scriptures,” observes Auberlen,
“this is doubtless the most special and
minute, . . . Its special minuteness,
however, is by no means of such a kind
as to lift the veil which, in the wise
counsels of the Almighty, has been
drawn across the future, nor of such a
kind as to unfold the future to the
of a profane curiosity.” Mr, Birks gives
the following summary of it :—“ This
enlarged prophecy of the ‘Scripture of
Truth’ resumes the message of the
earlier visions, and unfolds more clearly
the idol-worship set up by the Little

234


Horn or Wilful King, in the ‘three
times and a half’ of his permitted
power, with the warfare of the Saracens
and Turks, and their dominion in the
East. A further extension of the pre-
dicted times is at length revealed. In
this latest portion of the prophetic
calendar, the Wilful King enters on the
last form of his apostate power ; and
assuming to himself the features of per-
sonal malignity and an open rejection
of Christ, which belong to Antiochus,
his type and predecessor, and the king
of the North, his temporary rival,
gathers at length under his banner all
the apostate nations; and in the height
of his power and pride is broken and
overthrown by the hand of God in the
mountains of Israel,” Keil observes:
“Tt is true that the Church interpreta-
tion, given by Jerome, is so far valid,
in that it interprets the prophecy par-
tially considered under the point of
view of the very special predictions of
historical persons and events, and from
this view concludes that vers, 21-35


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL





treat of Antiochus Epiphanes, and vers,
36—45 of Antichrist ; according to which
there would be in ver. 36 an immediate
passing from Antiochus to the Anti-
christ, or, in chap. xii. 1, a sudden
transition from the death of Antiochus
to the time of the end and the resur-
rection of the dead. But the prophecy
does not at all correspond to this repre-
sentation. The angel of the Lord will
reveal to Daniel, not what shall happen
from the third year of Cyrus to the time
of Antiochus, and further to the resur-
rection of the dead; but, according to
the express declaration of chap. x. 14,
what shall happen to his people, NWN2
DN (beakharith haiyamim), “in the
end of the days,” «¢., in the Messianic
future, because the prophecy relates to
Histime. In the DX}! NAS (akharith
haiyamim), the latter days or end of
the days, there takes place the de-
struction of the world-powers, and the
setting up of the Messianic kingdom at
the end of the present world-son, All
that the angel says respecting the Per-
sian and the Javanic (or Grecian) world-
kingdoms, and the wars of the kings of
the North and the South, has its aim to
the end-time, and serves only briefly to
indicate the chief elements of the de-
velopment of the world-kingdoms, till
the time that brings on the end shall
burst forth; and to show how, after
the overthrow of the Javanic world-
kingdom, neither the kings of the
North nor those of the South shall gain
the possession of the dominion of the
world. Neither by the violence of war,
nor by the covenants which they will
ratify by political marriages, shall they
succeed in establishing a lasting power.
They shall not prosper, because (chap.
xi. 27) the end goes yet “to the time
appuinted” by God, A new attempt of
the king of the North to subjugate the
kingdom of the South will be defeated
by the intervention of the “ships of
Chittim ;” and the anger awakened in
him by this frustration of his plans
shall break forth against the holy cove-
nant, only for the purifying of the
people of God for the time of the end,
because the end goes yet to the ap-
pointed time (ver. 35). At the time of


OHAP. XZ,


the end, his power will greatly increase,
because that which was determined by
God shall prosper till the end of the
indignation (ver. 36) ; but in the time
of the end he shall suddenly fall from the
summit of his power, and come to his
end (ver. 45); but the people of God
shall be saved, and the wise shall shine
in heavenly glory (chap xii. 1-3).”

(8) “The fourth.” The Xerxes of
the Book of Esther, according to Keil,
Havernick, Ebrard, Delitzsch, Auberlen,
and Kliefoth, On the contrary, Hitzig
and some others would make the fourth
king to be the third, to justify their
interpretation of the four wings and
four heads of the leopard (chap. vii. 6)
of the first four kings of the Persian
monarchy,

(4) “ Shall be strong, and one of his
princes” (ver. 5), C. B. Michaelis,
Rosenmiiller, and others understand his
princes as those of the ‘ mighty king”
(ver. 3), or Alexander ; while Keil refers
the pronoun to the king of the South,
the prince being the king of the North.
Bishop Newton, who observes that the
Hebrew text appears here a little con-
fused, and perhaps defective, thinks that
possibly the words SBYD WH (melech
hattsaphon), “ king of the North,” may
have fallen out, The rendering of the
Septuagint is clearer: ‘ And one of these
princes shall be stronger than he.” It
is here where Mr. Bosanquet thinks the
marginal comment began, which ulti-
mately became incorporated with the
text. He thinks the prophet gives no
particulars concerning the four succes-
sors of Alexander, but proceeds at once
to the object of the vision, the king of
the latter days, according to chap. x.
14, after amplifying in vers. 2-4 what
is said in chap. viii. 20-22 concerning
the kingdoms of Persia and Greece, and
thus leading back the mind of the reader
to the words of chap. vii. 17, “at the
time of the end shall be the vision,” te,
the vision of the king of fierce counte-


nance (viii, 23), who shall appear at '


“the last end of the indignation ” (viii.

19), and who “shall stand up in the

latter time of those kingdoms” which

were to be formed on the platform of

Alexander’s empire in the er that is,
23


Pt ae


i
/,


OHAP. Xi,
‘


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





in “the latter days.” He thinks the
interpreter, passing over Ptolemy Soter,
Lysimachus, Cassander, and Seleucus
Nicator, selects, out of more than twenty,
ten kings, beginning with Ptolemy
Philadelphus, and ending with Anti-
ochus Epiphanes and Philometor, who
all lived nearly in his own days, being
the ten kings or horns for whose suc-
cession the kingdom of Alexander was
to be “ plucked up,” according to ver. 4.
In this supposition Mr. B. appears to
stand alone.

(5) “ Robbers of thy people” (ver. 14).
WY "YB (varitse ’ammecha), according
to Dr. Rule, are the separatists who left
Judea for Egypt, and there attached
themselves to Onias, who built a temple
at Heliopolis like that at Jerusalem,
and established a kind of rival wor-
ship. Sir Isaac Newton considers them
to be the Samaritans and such like.
The Septuagint has “ pestilent ones ;”
the Vulgate, “prevaricators.” Bishop
Newton renders the term “ revolters,”
the factious and refractory ones, the
majority of the Jews at that time being
for breaking away from allegiance to
Ptolemy, king of Egypt. Keil under-
stands those violent men who break
through the barriers of the divine law
(Ezek, xviii. 10).

(8) “ Shall be consumed” (ver. 16).
N23 (calah) may also denote, “shall be
perfected,” prosper, and flourish, The
Septuagint has “shall be finished,”
Bishop Newton remarks that Antiochus,
in order to reward and encourage the


Jews in their fidelity and obedience to
him, gave orders that their city should
be repaired, and the temple should be
finished and adorned, Keil regards the
word not as a verb but a substantive,
and reads (as an explanatory clause),
“and destruction is in his hand ;” the
destruction referring to the Holy Land,
in which violent (or rapacious) people
(ver. 14) make common cause with the
heathen king, and so put arms into his
hands to destroy the land. Hiavernick
and others, also regarding mp (calah)
as a noun, render the clause, “and if
(the land) is wholly given into his hand,”

) “A raiser of taxes” (ver. 20). &31
(noghes), according to most, a collector
of tribute, as in 2 Kings xxiii. 85; the
person understood being Heliodorus,
whom Seleucus Philopator sent to Jeru-
salem to seize the temple treasure, Keil
prefers “ taskmaster ;” and understands
the oppressions not only of the Holy
Land, but of his kingdom in general.
He observes here that, from a compart
son of the prophecy with the history,
this much follows, that the prophecy
does not furnish a prediction of the
historical wars of the Seleucid and
the Ptolemies, but an ideal description
of the war of the kings of the North and
the South in its general outlines ; where-
by, it is true, divers special elements of
the prophetical announcement have been
historically fulfilled, but the historical
reality does not correspond with the
contents of the prophecy in anything
like an exhaustive manner,


HOMILETICS.


Sxcrion XXXIX.—AntiocHus EPIPHANES; or, THE Vitx Person,
(Chaps. xi. 21-85.)


The next part of the prophecy is occupied with a person who has been already
the subject of divine revelation as the Little Horn of the Third or Grecian Empire
(chap. viii, 9-12, 23-26). This is Antiochas, surnamed Epiphanes, or the Illus-
trious, The present prediction concerning him is a considerable enlargement of the
former one. The prominence given to this Syrian king arises in the first instance
from his being the great enemy and persecutor of the Jewish people ; and secondly.
from his being made the type of another persecuting power to arise under the N ew
Testament dispensation, and to continue in one form or other to the time of the
end.@) The prophecy regarding him would seem to make way for and to melt
into predictions concerning that other power or powers of which he was to be the


forerunner and type.


236


We have—


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OMAR, Xi,


rr


L His rise. “And in his estate (or stead, viz, that of Seleucus Philopator,
the ‘raiser of taxes,’ ver. 20) shall stand up a vile person, (2) to whom they shall
not give the honour of the kingdom; but he shall come in peaceably, and obtain
the kingdom by flatteries” (ver. 21). The vileness of this Antiochus the Illustrious
appears, from what profane historians relate of him, as conducting himself much
below his dignity, consorting and drinking with people of the lowest rank, frequent-
ing public brothels and places of revelry and dissipation, jesting and dancing
with low and frivolous persons, and such like, His vileness such that his reckless
conduct earned for him the title of Epimanes the Madman, rather than Epipbanes
the Illustrious, even buffoons in the theatre being ashamed of him, The rightful
heir to the throne was not Antiochus, but his nephew Demetrius, the son of the late
king, Philopator, who at the death of his father was on his way to Rome as a
hostage. The right to the Syrian throne, which had immediately been seized by
Heliodorus, the murderer of Philopator, was also disputed by Ptolemy Philometor,
king of Egypt, who claimed it as the son of Cleopatra, sister of the late king and
daughter of Antiochus the Great. Antiochus did not thus receive the honour of
the kingdom as the rightful heir, but coming in peaceably,” softly, and by stealth,
or unexpectedly, () obtained the kingdom “ by flatteries ;” first flattering Eumenes,
king of Pergamus, and his brother Attalus, to gain their assistance 3 then the
Syrians themselves, by a promise of clemency and less taxation ; and, finally, the
Romans, to whom he sent ambassadors to court their favour with a rich present
and the payment of the arrears of tribute, desiring them to make the same alliance
with him which they had made with his father, Antiochus the Great, and promising
constant submission to whatever the senate should require.

IL His success. “And with the arms of a flood shall they (his opposers)
be overflown from before him, and shall be broken ; yea, also the prince of the
covenant (the Jewish high priest), And after the league made with him he shall
work deceitfully : for (rather ‘and ’) he shall come up, and shall become strong,
with a small people. He shall enter peaceably even upon the fattest places (or,
shall enter the quiet and plentiful cities) of the province; and he shall do that
which his fathers have not done, nor his fathers’ fathers; he shall scatter among
them the prey, and spoil, and riches ; and he shall forecast his devices against the
strongholds, even for a time. And he shall stir up his power and his courage
against the king of the South with a great army ; and the king of the South shall
be stirred up to battle with a very great and mighty army ; but he shall not stand,
for they shall forecast devices against him. Yea, they that feed of the portion of
his meat shall destroy him, and his army shall overflow, and many shall fall down
slain. And both these kings’ hearts shall be to do mischief, and they shall speak
lies at one table ; but it shall not prosper: for yet the end shall be at the time
appointed” (vers, 22-57). The following is the historical verification :—The
armies of the opposers of Antiochus were vanquished by the king of Pergamus,
while his own presence disconcerted all their measures, Onias III., the Jewish
high priest, he removed from his office, and appointed his brother Jason in his
stead, in return for a large sum of money which he offered him, This league with
Jason, “the prince of the covenant,”() he broke, and deposed him in favour of
Menelaus, who offered a larger price for the priesthood.) Having come from
Rome, where he had been kept as a hostage, with only a few attendants, he soon
received a great increase of followers, and entered the quiet and plentiful cities of
Judea, now a province of Syria, as it had previously been of Persia, and then of
Egypt. His lavish bestowment of gifts from the spoils he took is referred to in
the first book of the Maccabees, where he fears he should no longer have such gifta
to bestow as he had done before, “ for he had abounded above the kings that were
before him” (1 Mace. iii. 30). His object in this liberality was to secure the
possession of the provinces of Judea, Phenicia, and Cole-Syria, which were claimed
by the king of Egypt. For the same object he put Joppa and the opine towns


OHAP, EL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





a


in astate of defence, “forecasting devices against (or concerning) the strongholds” (or,
as the Septuagint reads it, against Egypt). A few years after he marched against
Egypt with a large army ; and although Ptolemy’s generals made great preparations
to resist him, they were unable to defeat his “fraudulent counsels.” The author
of the second book of Maccabees says, “ When the kingdom was established before
Antiochus, he thought to reign over Egypt, that he might have dominion over two
realms. Wherefore he entered into Egypt with a great multitude, with chariots,
and elephants, and horsemen, and a great army ; and made war against Ptolemy,
king of Egypt; but Ptolemy was afraid of him and fled ; and many were wounded
to death. Thus they got the strong cities in the land of Egypt ; and he took the
spoils thereof.” Porphyry, an apostate Jew, who, after he became a heathen, wrote
a book on Daniel in the latter part of the third century, says that the battle was
fought between Pelusium and Mount Casius, Some of Ptolemy’s servants at the
same time proved unfaithful to him, while the Alexandrians revolted and made
his brother Euergetes, or Physcon, king in his stead. Partly, it is thought, by his
humanity after the victory, he gained not only Pelusium but all Egypt; after which he
entered into an outward friendship with the young king, Philometor, and took upon
him to order the affairs of the kingdom ; Antiochus pretending, as Jerome says,
“to consult for his nephew’s interest and to recover him the crown, although only
plotting his ruin ; while Ptolemy on his part was resolving to take the first oppor
tunity of breaking the league and seeking a reconciliation with his brother. Bishop
Newton thinks the mischief they plotted was against the Jews; but which did
not take effect, as the time appointed by God was not yet.”

Ill. His persecutions. ‘Then shall he return into his own land with great
riches; and his heart shall be against the holy covenant ; (5) and he shall do exploits,
and return to hisown land, At the time appointed he shall return, and come toward
the South; but it shall not be as the former nor as the latter (or, ‘as the former
so the latter,’—the latter shall not be as the former), For the ships of Chittim ©
shall come against him; therefore he shall be grieved and return, and have indig-
nation against the holy covenant, And arms @) shall stand on his part, and they
shall pollute the sanctuary of strength, and shall take away the daily sacrifice, and
they shall place the abomination that maketh desolate, And such as do wickedly
against the covenant shall be corrupt by flatteries: but the people that do know
their God shall be strong and do exploits. And they that understand among the
people shall instruct many; yet they shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by
captivity, and by spoil, many days” (vers. 28-33). History relates that after his
success in Egypt, Antiochus returned to Syria ; but in doing so, as he had heard
while in Egypt that the Jews, from a false report of his death, had revolted, he
resolved in his indignation to go up to Jerusalem and chastise his fickle subjects
there. He there spoiled the temple of its treasures to the value of eighteen
hundred talents, and massacred forty thousand of the people, while he sold as
many for slaves, “ After that Antiochus had smitten Egypt, he returned again,

_. and went up against Israel and Jerusalem with a great multitude; and
entered proudly into the sanctuary, and took away the golden altar, &. And
when he had taken all away, he went unto his own land, having made a great
massacre, and spoken very proudly, Therefore there was great mourning in Israel,
in every place where they were” (1 Mace, i. 20, d&c,) The second book relates:
“‘ Now when this that was done came to the king’s ear, he thought that Judea had
revolted: whereupon removing out of Egypt with a furious mind, he took the city
by force of arms, and commanded his men of war not to spare such as they met,
and to slay such as went up upon the houses. Then there was killing of young
and old, making away of men, women, and children, slaying of virgins and infants,
And there were destroyed within the space of three whole days, fourscore thousand,
whereof forty thousand were slain in the conflict, and no fewer sold than slain. Yet


was he a content with this, but presumed to go into the most holy temple of all


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL CHAP, ZZ,








the world” (2 Mace. v. 11-21). Two years after this, having heard that the two
brothers, Philometor and Euergetes, or Physcon, had become reconciled and come
to an amicable arrangement about the kingdom, Antiochus returned to Egypt,
marching through Coole-Syria, while he despatched a fleet to Cyprus. He had,
however, only got within four miles of Alexandria when he was met by Roman
legates, headed by Popilius, who showed him their written tablets, and demanded
that he should immediately quit Egypt. He was thus very reluctantly obliged
at once to return to Syria. His hatred against the Jews and their religion
now broke forth afresh with greater violence. “ After two years had fully
expired, the king sent his chief collector of tribute into the cities of Judea,
who came into Jerusalem with a great multitude. . . . Then builded they
the city of David with a great and strong wall and with mighty towers,
and made it a stronghold for them; and they put therein a sinful nation,
wicked men, and fortified themselves therein, Thus they shed innocent blood
on every side of the sanctuary, and defiled it, .. . Moreover, King Antiochus
wrote to the whole kingdom that all should be one people, and every one
should have his laws, So all the heathen agreed, according to the command-
ment of the king. Yea, many also of the Israelites consented to his religion, and
sacrificed unto idols, and profaned the Sabbath. For the king had sent letters
by messengers unto Jerusalem and the cities of Judea, that they should follow the
strange laws of the land, and forbid burnt-offerings, and sacrifices, and drink-
offerings in the temple; and that they should profane the Sabbaths and festival
days, and pollute the sanctuary and holy people; set up altars, and groves, and
chapels of idols; and sacrifice swines’ flesh and unclean beasts; that they should
also leave their children uncircumcised, and make their souls abominable with all
manner of uncleanness and abomination; to the end they might forget the law
and change all the ordinances, And whoever would not do according to the
commandment of the king, he said, he should die, In the selfsame manner wrote
he to his whole kingdom, and appointed overseers over all the people, commanding
the cities of Judea to sacrifice, city by city. Then many of the people were
gathered unto them, to wit, every one that forsook the law ; and so they committed
evil in the land. . . . They set up the abomination of desolation upon the altar,
and builded idol-altars throughout the cities of Judea on every side... . And
when they had rent in pieces the books of the law which they found, they
burned them with fire. And wheresoever any was found with the book of the
Testament, or if any consented to the law, the king’s commandment was that they
should put him to death. Thus did they, by their authority, unto the Israelites
every month, to as many as were found in the cities, Now the five and twentieth
day of the month they did sacrifice upon the idol-altar which was upon the altar
of God ” (1 Macc. i. 29-59). There were those however who “knew their God,”
and, strengthened by His grace, “did exploits,” Through faith, they “ out of
weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of
the aliens ” (Heb. xi. 34). ‘ Howbeit,” says the historian, “‘ many in Israel were
fully resolved and confirmed in themselves not to eat any unclean thing, Where-
fore they chose rather to die, that they might not be defiled with meats, and that
they might not profane the holy covenant.” Such was the aged scribe Eleazar,
and the mother with her seven sons, who, after refusing to eat swine’s flesh, were
first “ tormented with scourges and whips,” and then cruelly put to death. “ It is
good,” said the fourth of the seven sons, when mangled and ready to die, “ being
put to death by men, to look for hope from God to be raised up again by Him,”
Such also were the noble Mattathias and, his five sons, the Maccabees, and those
who followed him to the mountains. ‘‘ Whosoever is zealous of the law,” said he,
“and maintaineth the covenant, let him follow me. So he and his sons fled into
the mountains, and left whatever they had in the city. Then many that sought
after justice and judgment, went down into the wilderness to dwell Rok a they,


OMAP, ZL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,
ee ee


and their children, and their wives, and their cattle; because affliction increased
sore upon them” (1 Macc, i, 27-38). There they “lay hid in the caves and
secret places of the wilderness ;” a thousand of them being on one occasion
discovered and put to death. The second book of Maccabees relates that
Nicanor, one of the great officers of Antiochus, ‘undertook to make so much
more money by the captive Jews as should defray the tribute of two thousand
talents which the king was to pay to the Romans, Wherefore immediately he
sent to the cities upon the sea-coast, proclaiming a sale of the captive Jews, and
promising that they should have fourscore and ten bodies for one talent” (2 Mace.
iii, 10, 11). ‘

The a adds: ‘“ Now when they shall fall, they shall be holpen with a little
help ;@) but many shall cleave to them with flatteries: and some of them of
understanding shall fall, to try them, and to purge, and to make them white, even
to the time of the end: because it is yet for a time appointed ” (vers. 34, 35).
In the persecutions of Antiochus, the faithful Jews were “holpen with a little
help” by the noble efforts made by Mattathias and his five sons, On their side,
however, were found those who only clave to them while fortune seemed to smile
upon their cause, and who only weakened their ranks. The result however was,
like all the troubles of the faithful, their own purification ; and it had its appointed
end. After a continuance of somewhere about three years and six months, their
sufferings terminated with the decisive victories which God gave to their arms,
and soon after with the death of their great persecutor, Antiochus himself. His
end is not here predicted unless it should be in the last verse of the chapter, where
it is said, ‘‘ He shall come to his end and none shall help him ;” which, as it seems
to be spoken in relation to another hostile power of which Antiochus was the type
and forerunner, may be intended to predict at the same time the destruction of all
the world-powers that have set themselves in opposition to God’s covenant people,
whether in Old or New Testament times. According to chap. viii. 25, Antiochus
was to be “ broken without hand ;” and the commentary on the passage shows
how remarkably this was fulfilled.

The section suggestive of the following reflections :—

1. The prophecy regarding Antiochus, together with tts exact fulfilment, may serve
as a confirmation of our faith in God's constant superintendence of the world, and His
watchful care over the interests of His Church and people. Everything pertaining
to this furious adversary of His people and cause, all the steps that conducted to
his elevation, as well as his bitter hostility and cruel proceedings after he reached
it, were foreseen and foretold centuries before his appearance. Like Pharaoh, he
was raised up for an important purpose in the all-wise providence of God; and
that purpose being served, he is brought to his predicted end,

2. God’s Church and people never long without suffering. Afflictions, in one
shape or other, their appointed lot in this world. “In the world ye shall have
tribulation.” ‘Through much tribulation we must enter the kingdom.” So long
as the world lies in wickedness (or “in the wicked one”), so long they are in an
enemy’s country, where hostility seldom sleeps, and where they must either con-
form and sin, or say No and suffer. It was against the holy covenant that
Antiochus was filled with such enmity; and that covenant still exists wherever
God has His people, to whom it is all their salvation and all their desire, while it
must still provoke the enmity of the world who are without God. Besides, so
long as God’s people are in the world, so long they will require chastening, and
all the more likely after seasons of quiet and prosperity.

8. Grace ts able to sustain the people of God under the severest trial and hottest
persecution. The furnace may be heated seven times more than usual, but One is
with them who has all power in heaven and in earth, and who is able to make His
grace sufficient for them, so that they shall even glory in tribulation and be made
more Specie in all their persecutions, The lamp which God has kindled


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL. OMAP. XL
eee


is constantly guarded and fed, so that no wind of persecution can extinguish it,
Many professors may fall in times of trial, but true grace is fast colours. Believers
are “kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation.” “ As thy days, so
shall thy strength be,”

4. The godly ultimately delivered out of trouble. The persecution may be hot
and the sufferings severe, but they have their appointed end. The trouble is
weighed and measured. The Refiner sits over the gold in the fire, The ten days’
or ten years’ tribulation comes to an end. The storm may rage and the boat
appear in danger of sinking ; but in the fourth watch of the night the Master will
appear and say, “ Peace, be still;” and there shall be a great calm. Patience is
first to have her perfect work; and in due time “ He that shall come, will come
and will not tarry.” Weeping may endure for a night during the Bridegroom’s


absence; joy cometh in the morning, when all tears shall be wiped away.


EXEGETICAL NOTES,—@) Jerome
says, at ver. 19: “Thus far the order of
history is followed, and between Porphyry
and our interpreters there is no dispute,
The rest that follows, to the end of the
book, he (Porphyry) interprets of An-
tiochus surnamed Epiphanes. . . . And
while much that we shall afterwards
read and expound agrees with the person
of Antiochus, they (the Christian inter-
preters) will have him to be the type of
Antichrist ; and the things which had
their first fulfilment in him, they will
have to be accomplished in Antichrist,
. - . Our people interpret it all of Anti-
christ who is to arise in the last time,”
Chrysostom, however, as Dr. Rule ob-
serves, writing a book against the Jews
about the same time, in which he gives
a brief account of this latter part of
Daniel’s prophecies, applies the whole
exclusively to Antiochus.

(2) “A vile person” (ver. 21). MY3)
(nibhzeh), “one despised ;” that is, says
Keil, such a one as by reason of
birth has no just claim to the throne,
and therefore appears as an intruder ;
also one who finds no recognition: not
bad or unworthy, but supposing un-
worthiness, The honour of the kingdom,
or that which men give to the king, was
denied to the despised one on account
of his character. ;

(8) “ Peaceably” (ver. 21). mows
(deshalvah), “in quietness” or security,
te, says Keil, unexpectedly. “‘ When
they shall say, Peace and safety, then
sudden destruction cometh,”

) “ The prince of the covenant” (ver.
22). MMS 3) (neghtdh berith) Keil
eonsiders analogous to NB ‘2Y3 (ba’ale


berith), “persons in covenant” with
another, and, from the absence of the
article, to be taken in a general sense,
as, according to Kranichfeld, “covenant
princes” in general, Calvin understands
Ptolemy Philopator, who took the part
of his young relative Ptolemy Philometor
against Antiochus. According to others,
the king of Egypt himself is meant by
‘the prince of the covenant.”

(©) “The holy covenant” (ver. 28).
This Dr. Rule understands of the Jewish
religion, the term “covenant” being
often used in Scripture to denote both
the religion of the Israelites and that
of the Christians, the former depending
on the covenant made with Abraham,
the latter on that made with Christ;
Christian faith consisting of trust in
Him who fulfilled the conditions of the
covenant by dying for our sins. Keil
understands the expression, not of the
holy people in covenant with God, but
the divine institution of the old cove-
nant, the Jewish theocracy, of which the
Jews were only members; and approves
of Calvin’s view that Antiochus carried
on war against God, his undertaking
being an outrage against the kingdom of
God which was established in Israel.

(©) “Ships of Chittim” (ver. 30).
DD OMY (tsiyim Chittim), literally
“ships, the Chittim.” The Septuagint
has “the Chittim (or Kitians) going
forth.” The expression derived from
Numbers xxiv. 24. Chittim is Cyprus,
with its chief city Chittion, now Chieti
or Chitti (Gen. x. 4), Ships coming
from Cyprus, observes Keil, are ships
coming from the west, from the islands
and coasts of the Mediterranean.


241


Omar. XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





© “Arms shall stand” (ver. 31).
DV (zerv’im), arms (of the body), a
figurative term for exertion, or the
means of making it. It is disputed,
says Keil, whether these “arms” denote
military forces, troops of the hostile
king, according to Havernick, or his
accomplices of the apostate party of
the Jews, like those in ver. 30, as
Calvin, Hengstenberg, and others think,
Keil himself understands the word to
mean “help,” warlike forces, as in vers,
15, 22. Dr. Cox thinks the term may
be rendered mighty forces or powers,
“standing up” being the phrase already
employed to denote the rise of the
Macedonian and other empires or
potentates. He accordingly believes
that there appears here a sudden tran-
sition to another power, and to other
scenes than those which have been
previously introduced; these “arms”
or powers referring to the military
dominion which spread on the side of
Greece, when Paulus Aimilius subdued
Macedon, and the remaining states came
under the power of Rome; the angel
now informing Daniel of what should
befall the Jews on the dissolution of
their state by the Romans.


(® “ Holpen with a little help” (ver.
34). The “little help” naturally under-
stood of the victories gained by the
Jews under Mattathias and his sons
over the armies of Antiochus. This
‘little help,” says Keil, consists in this,
that by the rising up and the wars of
those that had understanding among
the people the theocracy was preserved,
the destruction of the service of Jehovah
and sf the Church of God, which was
aimed at by the hostile king, was
prevented, and the purifying of the
people of God, the design intended, is
brought about; the attaining of this
end being only a “little help” in
comparison with the complete victory
over the arch enemy in the time of the
end.

(°) “The time of the end” (ver. 35).
Keil understands by the “time of the
end,” which in chap, xii. 4 is the time
of the resurrection of the dead, the end
of the present course of the world, with
which all the opposition against the
people of God ceases, and which comes
out “at the appointed time,” viz., that
which God has determined for the
purifying of His people.


Sxor. XL.—Tuz Romans. (Chap. xi. 31-36.)


In these verses, it is believed by many, a transition is made by the angel from
Antiochus to that power which was to succeed the Grecian as the fourth great
empire of the world, and which we know is brought upon the stage in ver, 30, as
“the ships of Chittim.” Verse 31 may be the place referred to by the Saviour in
connection with the destructicn of Jerusaiem by the Romans, which would be
decisive as to the application of the passage, But it might also be chap. ix. 27, as
read in the Greek version. The section before us may indeed still have its primary
reference to Antiochus, while it may also point to a second enemy of God and His
truth of whom Antiochus was a type. The Old Testament “little horn” of the
Third Empire might be, and possibly was intended to be, a type of the New Testa-
ment “little horn” of the Fourth or Roman Empire, now again to be introduced to
the prophet’s view as the Wilful King. It is certain that much that took place
under the persecution of Antiochus, as detailed in these verses, hod its counterpart
in the calamities afterwards suffered under the Romans; while much that is pre-
dicted of Antiochus was verified in that mysterious power into whose hands the
saints of the New Testament were for a lengthened period to be delivered. ‘‘ All
that has passed,” says Calvin, “is in some sense typical of all that is to come.”
“The saints of the Most High,” says his translator, “ are always the special objects
of Jehovah’s regard ; they ever meet with an oppressor as fierce as Antiochus and
as hateful as the ‘Man of Sin;’ but still, whatever their sufferings under a Guise
or an Alva, they shall ultimately ‘take the kingdom, and possess it for ever.


Strongholds of Mahuazim there always will be, under either the successors of the
242


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OnA?. ZL





Medici or the descendants of Mahomet, . . . It may be safely asserted that every
social and political change from the time of Nebuchadnezzar to those of Constan-
tine have had their historic parallel from the days of Charlemagne to those of
Napoleon, Hence predictions which originally related to the empires of the East
might be naturally transferred to the transactions of Western Christendom.” In
this section we shall trace the passage before us in its application to the Fourth
Empire, or to the Rumans who succeeded the Greeks as rulers of the world.

I. The proceedings of this power against religion ‘‘ And arms shall stand
on his part,”@)—“ some will help by their exertions,”—‘‘and they shall pollute the
sanctuary of strength,”—the temple which had been held inviolable as a place of
refuge, and was strongly fortified—“‘ shall take away the daily sacrifice, and they
shall place the abomination that maketh desolate ” (ver. 31) | We have seen how,
in accordance with this part of the prophecy, Antiochus was aided by apostate
Jews as well as by his own military forces in the mischief he did at Jerusalem,
placing an idol altar on the altar of Jehovah, changing the very name of the temple
to that of Jupiter Olympius, and filling it with the riot and revelry of the Geutiles.
Sir Isaac Newton, in applying the passage to the Romans, observes: “ By various
ways the Roman arms ‘ stood up’ over the Greeks ; and after ninety-five years more,
by making war upon the Jews, they ‘ polluted the sanctuary of strength,’” &. He
remarks that the “ abomination that maketh desolate” was placed there after the
days of the Saviour, according to Matthew xxiv. 15; adding that in the year
of the emperor Adrian, a.p. 132, the Romans “ placed” this abomination by build-
ing a temple to Jupiter Capitolinus where the temple of God in Jerusalem had
stood, and that from the end of the war which ensued upon this in a.p. 137, the
land thenceforward “remained desolate of its inhabitants.” @ Bishop Newton
agrees with his illustrious namesake, thinking no interpretation so rational and
convincing as that which he proposes. Mr. Birks observes that the first pollution
of the “sanctuary of strength” by the Romans took place on the siege and capture
of Jerusalem by Pompey the Great, when, according to Josephus, “no small
enormities were committed about the temple itself, which in former ages had
been inaccessible and seen by none; for Pompey went into it, and not a few of
them that were with him, and saw all that was unlawful for any to see but the
high priest.” The next signal act of Roman profanation, he observes, was under
Crassus ; and the third on the accession of Herod, B.o. 38, when Sosius took the
city by storm. The cessation of the daily sacrifice during the siege of Jerusalem
by Titus is thus referred to by Josephus: “ On that very day, the seventeenth of
Panemus, the sacrifice, called the daily sacrifice, had failed, and had not been
offered to God for want of men to offer it.” It had thus ceased even before the
destruction of the temple, which, of course, would of itself have terminated it.@)

II, Their effects. “And such as do wickedly against the covenant shall he
corrupt by flatteries; but the people that do know their God shall be strong and
do exploits, And they that understand among the people shall instruct many:
yet they shall fall by the sword, and by flame, and by captivity, and by spoil,
many days” (vers. 32, 33). Bishop Newton thinks the former of these verses
might be applied to the times of Antiochus, but not so properly the latter; as it
does not appear that the Maccabees instructed the people, though they led them
to battle and to victory. Neither could it so well be said that the sufferings of
the Jews under Antiochus were for ‘many days,” or years, according to the pro-
phetic import of the expression ; that persecution having lasted only a few years,
‘All these things,” he says, “are much more truly applicable to the Christian
Jews ; for now the daily sacrifice was taken away, the temple was given to desola-
tion, and the Christian Church had succeeded to the place of the Jewish, and the
New Covenant in the room of the Old.” In reference to the clause, “ such as do
wickedly he shall corrupt by flatteries,” he observes : “The Roman magistrates

and officers, it is ‘well known made uso of the most alluring iia’ i well as


CMAP, XI. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIBL,





the most terrible threatenings, to prevail upon the primitive Christians to renounce
their religion, and offer incense to the statues of the emperors and images of the
gods.” He quotes an old commentator, who says: “There are some who think
that the prophet here had respect to the Christians whom the wicked idolaters
endeavoured, from the beginning of the rising Church, to seduce by flatteries ; but
the persecution of tyrants raged chiefly against the apostles and holy teachers.”
Times of persecution will doubtless have much in common; and Christians, suffering
as they did, and so long and often so severely under the Roman emperors and
magistrates, would naturally find much in the description of the times of Antiochus
applicable to their own, The word of prophecy was intended to be a “light shining
in a dark place,” in the New as it had been in the Old Testament dispensation,
“These things happened unto them (the Old Testament Church) for ensamples; and
they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come”
(1 Cor. x. 11). The bishop adds: “It may, too, with the strictest truth and
propriety be said of the primitive Christiaus that, being dispersed everywhere,
and preaching the Gospel in all the parts of the Roman empire, they ‘instructed
many,’ and gained a great number of proselytes to their religion: yet they fell by
the sword, &c., ‘many days ;’ for they were exposed to the malice and fury of ten
general persecutions, and suffered all manner of injuries, afflictions, and tortures,
with little intermission, for the space of three hundred years.”

IIL The relief. “ Now when they shall fall, they shall be holpen with a little
help: but many shall cleave to them with flatteries. And some of them of under-
standing shall fall; to try them, and to purge, and to make them white; even
to the time of the end; because it is yet for a time appointed” (vers. 34, 35).
According to Sir Isaac Newton, the “little help” was that afforded to the Chris-
tians in the time of Constantine the Great; the result of which was that many of
the heathen, on account of the favour shown them by the emperor, and especially
when Christianity was made the religion of the empire, as is well known, joined
the Church without any real change of heart or faith in Jesus as a Saviour. While
the edict of Diocletian, as Dr. Cox observes, was nearly fatal to the Christian
cause, the elevation of Constantine to the imperial throne in the year 306 pro-
duced a period of external prosperity and peace to the Church. Bishop Newton
remarks: “ Here Porphyry hath many followers besides Grotius, supposing that by
the ‘little help’ was meant Mattathias of Modin, who with his five sons rebelled
against the generals of Antiochus, and endeavoured to preserve the worship of the
true God. But Mattathias died of old age; and his son Judas Maccabseus several
times vanquished the generals of Antiochus, and after recovering the holy city,
cleansing the sanctuary and restoring the worship of God, survived Antiochus
some years; while the united dignity of the high priesthood and the sovereignty
descended to his brother Simon’s son, and continued in the family for many
generations: which was much more than being ‘ holpen with a little help ;’ while
the Jews were so far from falling again by persecution, that their religion and
government were established upon a firmer basis than before.” He quotes Jerome,
who says that some of the Jewish doctors understood these things of the Roman
emperors Severus and Antoninus, who greatly loved the Jews; and others, of the
Emperor Julian, who pretended to love them, and promised to sacrifice in their
temple. The bishop, however, thinks the most natural way of interpretation is to
follow the course and series of events; andthus to understand the “little help”
of the entire suppression of the protracted persecutions of the Church by Con-
stantine, when instead of being persecuted it was protected and favoured by the
civil power; called, however, only a ‘‘little help,” first, because while it added
much to the temporal prosperity of the Church, it contributed little to its spiritual
welfare, proving, on the contrary, the means of corrupting its doctrine and relaxing
its discipline, while it caused many to “cleave to them by flatteries,” simply
See was made the religion of the empire; and, further, because


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OMAP, ZI.





this help lasted but a little while, the spirit of persecution soon after reviving, espe-
cially under the Arians’ ‘ And such,” he adds, “more or less has been the face
and condition of the Church ever since.” Calvin remarks on the latter part of
the verse, that “in these days (the latter part of the sixteenth century) the very
counterpart of this prophecy is exhibited before our eyes. The whole Papacy is
called the Church of God, and we the Protestants are but few in number; and
yet what a mixture exists even among us! How many in these days profess
attachment to the Gospel, in whom there is nothing either solid or sincere.”
Mr. Birks, on the passage before us, remarks: ‘The afflictions of the Maccabees
were indeed a brief rehearsal of a longer series of changes, which serve, in the
prophecy, to conduct us into a fresh dispensation, and down to the rise of a more
dangerous and powerful persecutor than Antiochus, to prevail afterwards in the
latter days.” And again, in regard to the words of the prophecy, he observes:
“They answer exactly to the troubles of the Jews under Antiochus; but they
correspond also with no less accuracy, on a wider scale, to the whole course of
Providence towards the Jews and the Christian Church, from the time of the
Maccabees far into the present dispensation.” He thinks that the very place which
these verses occupy may prove of itself that they form a transition from Antiochus
to the time of the end; and that the leading events of that interval, here portrayed
in their natural order, are “the gradual encroachment of the Romans in Judea, till
at length they destroyed the city and temple, and brought on the desolation which
has now for ages brooded over Jerusalem ; the preaching of the apostles ; the spread
of the Gospel through the Roman empire; the pagan persecutions; the triumph
of the faith when the whole empire nominally received it; the corruption of the
visible Church; renewed troubles and persecutions ; and the growth of an apostate
tyranny without example in the history of the world. Some of the followers of
Jesus, like these men of understanding in the days of Antiochus, were to “ fall, to
try them, and to purge, and to make them white.” After the elevation of Chris-
tianity as the religion of the empire, “Christians themselves,” says Dr. Cox,
“became miserably disunited, and the character of the Church of Christ awfully
corrupted. An unholy hierarchy gradually rose to distinction and dominion ; and
‘men of understanding,’ or those who obeyed the dictates of conscience, combining
with sober inquiry unto the truth,—in fact, multitudes of the faithful followers of
the Saviour, became the victims of papal intolerance—a trying indeed, but still a
whitening or purifying process,” This was to be “ to the time of the end,”—the
time when the purposes of God regarding the “scattering ” of Israel on account of
their sin should be accomplished, and the promised period for their restoration,
and the visible and universal establishment of the kingdom of God under the
Messiah, should arrive. ‘ Because it is yet for an appointed time.” The time for
the fulfilment of the prophecy was fixed in the purpose of God. “The vision is
yet for an appointed time; but in the end it shall speak, and not lie; though it
tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not tarry” (Hab. ii. 3),

It is our comfort to know that the promises of God, the troubles of His people,
and the triumphs of His enemies, have all their appointed time. “It is a righteous
thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you
that are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
heaven ” (2 Thess. i, 6-8). In the meantime it is comforting to know that these
troubles and persecutions have for believers a gracious mission and a blessed result.
Their object on the part of Him who permits them, is to prove and to purify them,
The will of God is the sanctification of His people ; and afflictions and persecutions
are but the fire which He employs for their purification, ‘‘ This is all the fruit, to
take away their sin.”


EXEGETICAL NOTES.— ™) opinion, the reference is here to what
‘Arms shall stand" (ver. 31). In Keil’s Antiochus accomplished by ay help of
245


Guar. Xi





apostate Jews. Mr. Birks, who views
this and the following verses as referring
primarily to Antiochus, and typically
to the Romans, says: “ These words
serve to describe very accurately the
character and course of the Romans, from
the days of Antiochus to the conquest
of Judea. ‘Arms’ (brachia) are used
throughout these prophecies to denote
military forces or power. They are said
to ‘stand up’ when they manifest them-
selves in vigorous action. After the de-
feat of Antiochus the Great by the
Romans, and the repulse of Epiphanes
himself by their ambassadors in the ships
from Chittim, which have been already
announced, it is natural that their for-
midable power should be next predicted.
The word rendered ‘on his part’ may,
as in ver, 23, denote simply a succession
in time. And even if it be thought to
require a still closer connection between
Antiochus and the arms here mentioned,
this existed in the case of the Romans
no less really than in that of Apollonius
and his forces who ravaged Jerusalem.
The Romans not only received tribute
from Antiochus, but were virtually his
successors in the kingdom.”

@) “The abomination that. maketh
desolate” (ver. 31). It is to this place,
in the view of many, that the words of
the Saviour in Matt, xxiv. 15 refer,
which must therefore have its fulfilment
in the times of Vespasian and the
Romans. Acvording to others, the re-
ference is to the words in chap. ix. 27.
Mr. Birks inclines to the former view, and
thinks that the phrase in Matt. xxiv.
occurs only in this place in Daniel. But
see under chap, ix. 27. The prophecy
received its fulfilment, Mr. Birksremarks,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


first when the Roman forces under
Cestius assailed the temple; secondly,
when Titus pitched his camp on the
Mount of Olives, and when, after the
temple was set on fire, the Romans, as
Josephus relates, brought ensigns into
the temple and placed them over against
the eastern gate, and there offered sacri-
fice to them; and finally when, in the
time of Adrian, a temple was built and
consecrated to Jupiter Capitolinus, on
the very site of the sanctuary of God.
Hengstenberg, who refers the present
passage to the time of Antiochus rather
than to that of the Romans, translates
the words, “ and shall give the abomina-
tion as one that lays waste ;” observing
that by the “ abomination ” is designated
idolatry in its whole compass and extent,
and that thus the passage entirely coin-
cides with that in chap. ix. 27, both mak-
ing the abomination one that draws after
it the train of devastation, as sin draws
after it punishment; the abominations
being considered as “ the antecedent
sin, which by means of the supervening
destroyer is avenged by the righteous
judgment of God.”

8) “ Shall take away the daily sacri-
fice ” (ver. 31). Hengstenberg trans
lates the words, “they shall take away
that which is constant ;” and observes
that most interpreters erroneously refer
this exclusively to the daily sacrifices ;
the word DA (tamidh), as it stands
here, never occurring of one particular
object, but with the adjuncts, not only
of the daily sacrifice, but also of the fire
of the altar, of the sacrificial lamps, of
the shewbread, &c. Keil regards the
words as denoting the removal of the
stated worship of Jehovah.


HOMILETICS.


Sror, XLI.—Tur Wirrun Kina.


(Chap. xi. 36-39.)


The present part of the prophecy regards a king, power, ar sovereignty,


emphatically spoken of as “ the king.”


Some will have Antiochus Epiphanes still


intended by this king. The great majority of evangelical interpreters, however,

believe that the angel has already passed from that monarch and the empire which

he represented, to that which was to succeed it, namely, that of the Romans, who

are certainly introduced in @ preceding verse as the “ships of Chittim,” and who

neem to be the subject of that part of the prophecy immediately preceding the

present.@) The question is whether tne Fousth or Roman Empire in general is
246


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL, CmAP, BZ
ee ee ee
here described ; or, as in the vision of the Four Beasts we saw that empire repre-
sented by, concentrated in, and identified with, a little horn or special power
springing out of it,—whether we are not also here to consider the same concentra-
tion and representative of that empire, or indeed the same little horn which is
described in chap. vii, The similarity of the description in both places would
seem to leave little room to doubt that the latter is the more correct view ; and
that in this Wilful King before us we see that power which, springing out of the
decayed and dismembered ancient Roman empire, represented it for many centuries,
having, like that empire, Rome as its metropolis and seat of government, its head
being at the same time a spiritual ruler, the sovereign pontiff,—in other words, the
papacy. Bishop Newton, after showing that the prophecy could not with truth be
applied to Antiochus Epiphanes, remarks that the prophet now proceeds to describe
the principal author of the persecutions that should still follow the Church. ‘The -
term “king” or kingdom, he observes, signifies any government, state, or poten-
tate ; and the meaning of ver. 36 he conceives to be, that, after the empire was
become Christian, there should spring up in the Church an Antichristian power
that should act in the most absolute and arbitrary manner, exalt itself above all
laws, divine and human, dispense with the most solemn and sacred obligations,
and in many respects enjoin what God had forbidden, and forbid what God had
commanded. The power, he further remarks, began in the Roman emperors, who
summoned councils, and directed and influenced their determinations almost as
they pleased. After the division of the empire, this power still increased, and
was exerted principally by the Greek emperors in the East, and by the bishops of
Rome in the West. He observes also that this power was to continue till “the
end of the indignation,” or till God should have “accomplished to scatter the
power of the holy people ;’ and that it was an ancient tradition among the Jewish
doctors that the destruction of Rome and the restoration of the Jews would fall
out about the same period. Mr, Birks observes that some have referred the whole
passage (vers, 36-39) to Antiochus, others to an infidel king yet to arise, others to
democratic infidelity in the Roman empire, and others to the popedom or the
Christian Greek emperors ; and that most divines, whether Fathers, Protestants, or
Roman Catholics, believe that the same power or person is designed as in the Little
Horn and the Man of Sin. Mr. Birks himself, like Mede and Bishop Newton,
applies the prophecy to “ the idolatrous apostasy of the Church in the latter days,”
the Wilful King being identical with the Little Horn of chap. vii, We notice—

L The power itself. “The king” (ver. 36), The term might either indicate
@ single individual ruler, as in the case of Alexander (ver. 3), or a series of rulers—
as in the expression “ four kings which shall arise” (chap. vii. 17). From the
lengthened period of his predicted continuance, the term would seem here to have
the latter meaning, and, like the Little Horn in chap. vii., to indicate an arrogant
and blasphemous power that should rise in or out of the Roman empire. This,
with most expositors of prophecy, we can only regard as, in the first instance at
least, the papacy. The expression “the king” seems emphatic ; and it is scarcely
likely that it should be used to designate Antiochus whom the angel had intro-
duced as a “vile person” to whom they should “not give the honour of the
kingdom” (ver. 21). The emphatic term might naturally be chosen to indicate a
new power that should occupy a conspicuous place in the future history of God’s
people. The type, which doubtless Antiochus was, appears now, as Archdeacon
Harrison observes, to be lost sight of in the prophecy, and the antitype to be
almost exclusively in view. According to the view of Christian antiquity, the
prophecy is now occupied for some time at least with the description of that
tyrannical and persecuting power already indicated in the Little Horn of the
Fourth Beast, the description of which so closely corresponds with that of this
Wilful King. The papacy or popedom may well be spoken of as “ the king,”
inasmuch as the popes not only claimed to be sovereigns, but Sine above





omar. XI, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





all others however exalted, combining with a temporal sovereignty a spiritual
jurisdiction which embraced all Christendom. It is justly viewed as the power
to which the Apostle referred in 2 Thess. ii. 8, 4, as that which should arise in
the Church as the result of an apostasy, or mystery of iniquity, which had even
in his time begun to work, and which was only then withheld from fully developing
itself by an existing hindrance which he does not name, and which, on the
removal of that hindrance, would reveal itself, and continue until destroyed by the
Lord’s second appearing.

IL Its character. ‘The king shall do according to his will” (ver. 86). The
leading characteristic of this power was to be absolute and arbitrary conduct, Of
all absolute and arbitrary rulers he should be the chief. Antiochus acted asa
type and shadow of this “king” when he commanded all the peoples under his
sway to receive his laws and follow his religion, It is well known that the popes
claimed, and for a time obtained, an absolute sway over the greatest earthly rulers
in virtue of their assuming the place and authority of the Vicar of Christ, with
power over both worlds, and possessing both the spiritual and the temporal sword,
with a judgment that was infallible, and an authority that could set aside oaths
and the most sacred obligations, The language of the Decretals and Bulls of the
popes, to which the nations of Europe submitted for centuries, is, as Mr. Birks
observes, that emperors ought to obey and not to rule over the pontifis ; that they
owe an oath of fealty and subjection to the pope as their superior and head ; that
what the bishops of Rome decree ought to be observed by all; that it is permitted
neither to speak nor to think differently from the pope ; that he imparts authority
to laws, but is not bound by them ; and that he is made the head of the whole
world. One example may suffice. Hume relates of Pope Paul IV., to whom
Ferdinand, the brother of Charles V., applied for his coronation, that “he
thundered always in the ears of all ambassadors, that he stood in no need of
the assistance of any prince; that he was above all the potentates of the earth;
that he would not accustom monarchs to pretend to a familiarity or equality with
him ; that it belonged to him to alter and regulate kingdoms ; that he was successor of
those who had deposed kings and emperors ; and that rather than submit to anything
below his dignity, he would set fire to the four corners of the world. He went so
far as, at table, in the presence of many persons, and even openly, in a public con-
sistory, to say that he would not admit any kings for his companions; they were
all his subjects, and he would hold them under his feet ; so saying, he stamped on
the ground with his old and infirm limbs: for he was now past fourscore years of
age.” Such was “the king,” the king with emphasis; the king that by his absolute
will and arbitrary power was to rule and afflict the Church and the world for many
centuries.

TIL Its doings. Described in various particulars in vers, 36-39,

1, “He shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every god” (ver. 36).
Here we have especially that which connects this prophecy with 2 Thess, ii., and
identifies this “king” with the man of sin there predicted. (@) For “every god”
the Apostle has all that is called god ; the expression, doubtless, referring to civil
rulers, who are frequently so called in Scripture, and who are known frequently to
have claimed divine honours, How far the Roman pontiffs have claimed this
superiority is obvious from what has been already said, The popes have declared
that their princedom is far more excellent than any human princedom ; that the
sacred power and authority of the pontiffs govern the rulers of this world; and
that Christian emperors are bound to submit their mandates to theirs.

2. “ He shall speak marvellous things against the God of gods” (ver. 36).
History relates that Antiochus commanded his statue to be erected in the temple
at Jerusalem, and that he spoke very proudly ; but it records nothing of his
speaking “ marvellous things against the God of gods.” The Roman pontiffs may
be anes have done this when they claimed in their Decretals an equality with


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIRL. CmaP, XZ


st


God, asserting that the pontiff cannot be bound or judged by the secular power,
“because it is manifest that God cannot be judged by man.” They claim also in
the mass the power of creating God out of a wafer, according to the well-known
saying, Whom they create they adore, The blasphemous title is also known, and
never repudiated, “Our Lord God the Pope.” Of the Man of Sin, the Apostle
says, “ As God he sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God.”
While enthroned on the high altar in St. Peter’s at Rome on the day of his conse-
cration, he has the words of the ninety-fifth psalm blasphemously applied to him,
Venite adoremus, “ O come, let us worship.” @)

3. “ He shall not regard the God of his fathers” (ver. 37). Antiochus, on the
contrary, commanded all his subjects to adopt the religion of the Greeks, and the
worship of his own gods, and was liberal and ostentatious in his religious rites,
On the other hand, the ground on which so many seceded from the Church of
Rome before the Reformation was, that the popes had changed the nature of
Christianity, and that the pope himself was Antichrist. The Man of Sin was to
be the outcome of a deep apostasy or falling away from the Christian faith 3 many
departing from the faith and giving heed to seducing spirits (2 Thess, ii, 3; 1 Tim.
iv. 1). It is well known that, in the papacy, the appeal in regard to religious truth
is not to the Word of God in the Scriptures, but to tradition and the Church; that
much of the worship and religion enjoined by the popes is an importation from
and imitation of paganism, of which the primitive Church knew nothing, of which
the very first act on entering a popish place of worship, the use of holy water, is
an example; and of which the pope’s own title, the Ponti‘ or Pontifex, the title
of the high priest of ancient Roman idolatry, is itself an obvious instance ; (4)
and, finally, that the image of the Virgin Mary is a most prominent object in
almost all papal churches, and that she is constantly addressed in hymns and
prayers—things entirely nnknown in the Scriptures and among the early
Christians.

4, “Nor shall he regard the desire of women” (ver. 37).@) The clause is
acknowledged to be obscure, and the meaning doubtful. Nothing is known of
Antiochus to justify its application to that person. One mark of the apostasy,
however, which was to develop the “Man of Sin,” was “forbidding to marry”
(1 Tim. iv. 3); while one of the articles of the creed of Pope Pius V. is, “It is un-
lawful for ministers to marry.” The honour also that is given in the papal system
to so-called vows of chastity, or vows of perpetual celibacy and virginity, is well
' known, Eusebius, quoted by Bishop Newton, says of Constantine, that he held in

the highest veneration those men who devoted themselves to the monastic life, and
almost adored the company of perpetual virgins. His example was followed by his
successors ; and in the fourth century clerical celibacy, like a torrent, overran the
Eastern Church, and soon after the Western too, <A writer in the “ Quarterly
Review,” quoted by Mr. Birks, says: “‘ Hildebrand (Pope Gregory VIL), a wise
man in his generation, knew that the power of the pope through the clergy and
over the clergy depended on their celibacy. We speak of the system, and we
appeal to history. Perhaps the monkish institutes may have the excuse or pallia-
tion that they were composed in hard times and for hard men, But what sentences
of unfeeling, unmitigated, remorseless cruelty do they contain ! What delight do
they seem to have in torturing the most sensitive fibres of the heart, in searing the
most blameless emotions of human nature |” a ‘

5. “ Nor (will he regard) any god: for he shall magnify himself above all (ver.
$7). This could perhaps hardly be said of one who set up the statue of Jupiter in
the temple, commanded all his subjects to acknowledge the gods of the Greeks,
and was himself prodigal and magnificent in his worship of them. Calvin, applying
the prophecy to the Romans, says they manifested a great contempt for God,
while they maintained the appearance of piety. Ifthe term “god” is here also to
be regarded as denoting civil rulers, which is probable, we have ey ie how


onaP, XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


i


strictly applicable the description is to the papacy. If the term is to be viewed
in a religious sense, the prophecy may still be regarded as having its fulfilment
in a system which sets aside the written word of God for human tradition, and
which has had the obvious effect of preparing the way for infidelity in the countries
where, as in France and Italy, it has ruled with greatest power and appeared in its
greatest glory. The worldliness and ambition of the Roman pontiffs, it is well
known, has been too generally such as to indicate a secret infidelity under all the
outward profession of piety, openly expressed by Leo X., who is reported to have
spoken of the Gospel as a profitable fable.

6. “ But in his estate he shall honour the god of forces (Marg., “ Mauzzim,” or
“ gods-protectors ”) ;() and a god whom his fathers knew not shall he honour with
gold, and silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant things. Thus shall he do
an the most strong holds with a strange god, whom he shall acknowledge and increase
with glory ; and he shall cause them to rule over many, and shall divide the land
for gain” (vers, 38, 39). The only god whom the Wilful King was really and
practically to acknowledge and honour is one here called “the god of forces,”
or, as in the Hebrew and the Margin, “the god Mauzzim,” or “the gods-pro-
tectors ;” apparently the same as the god whom his fathers knew not, a strange
god. It is well known that one of the most prominent characteristics of the
papacy is the place which it gives to the adoration and invocation of the Virgin
Mary and the saints of the calendar, as well as the honour given to and the trust
reposed in the relics of the martyrs, as so many strongholds and protectors,—
things entirely unknown in the earliest ages of the Church. History informs us
that in the fourth and fifth centuries it became common both in the East and
West to regard not only angels and departed saints, but the relics of martyrs, as
the defences and protection of the church that contained them. Basil speaks of
a church being “fortified by the great towers of the martyrs,” and of the martyrs
fortifying our country “like some thick towers against the incursions of enemies,”
Chrysostom says of the body of Paul, “‘This corpse surrounds tbe city (Rome) as
with a wall, which is safer than every tower and thousands of ramparts.” Hilary,
in the West, speaks of the munitions of angels; while both East and West invoke
the Virgin Mary as “the impregnable wall” and the “fortress of salvation.” One
of the articles in the creed of Pope Pius V. is, that “the saints reigning together
with Christ are to be invoked.” The Litany of Our Lady of Loretto begins with,
“We fly to your patronage, O holy Mother of God.” She is addressed as the
Refuge of sinners and the Help of Christians) Not only, however, was such wor-
ship, invocation, and trust unknown among the early Christians, the professed
fathers of the Roman pontiffs, but the Church was expressly guarded by the
Apostle against will-worship and the worshipping of angels; while among the
signs of the apostasy of the last days are mentioned the giving heed to seducing
spirits and to doctrines of devils or demons, a term not unfrequently employed to
designate departed spirits, That the shrines of tutelary saints, as well as the
images of the Virgin, are honoured and adorned with the most costly offerings
is known to all who have visited Roman Catholic churches on the Continent.
The ministers of the papacy have naturally been increased with glory, the pope
imparting to them the power which he professes himself to possess, of creating the
God whom the people are to worship, as well as of receiving their confessions and
forgiving their sins; one of the articles of the creed of Pius V. being that sin is to
be confessed to a priest at least once a year under pain of damnation, The
choicest lands, too, as Bishop Newton observes, have been appropriated for the
property of the Church and the use of those who minister at the altars of
these gods-protectors,

IV. Its continnance. “ He shall prosper till the indignation be accomplished ;
for that that is determined shall be done” (ver. 36). The indignation is that of God


against His people for their unfaithfulness to, and abuse of, the privileges bestowed
250


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL, CHAP. XY.
——— SSS


upon them, and, in the case of Israel more especially, their rejection and crucifixion
of their King and Saviour ; the consummation determined (chap. ix. 27) ; the wrath
that was to come upon them to the uttermost (1 Thess, ii, 16) ; an indignation that
is still experienced in the “ great captivity ” which the Jews have been suffering for
eighteen centuries, with which the indignation in the time of Antiochus was not
to be compared. It is spoken of in chap, xii. 7 as the “ scattering of the power of
the holy people,” which was to be accomplished, or completed and finished, at the
time of the end. This indignation or righteous judgment was to be accomplished
through human instrumentality ; and that instrumentality was mainly to be this
very power or “ king,” who was therefore, like Pharaoh, to be upheld and suffered,
or rather made to prosper, till that object should be accomplished.) That period
is spoken of as “a time, times, and half a time ;” the same period during which
the Gentile Church was also to suffer at the hands of the same tyrannical and
persecuting power (chap. xii. 7, vii. 25). The purposes of God must be accom.
plished—“ that that is determined must be done ;” and the time for their accom-
ylishment is fixed. Till then the instruments for that accomplishment will be
provided, preserved, and strengthened, without any consciousness on their part of
being so used, while simply acting out the inclinations of their own depraved wills,
and seeking the furtherance of their own selfish ends, for which, when the divine
purposes shall have been accomplished, they will be called to account. To every
persecuting power the voice of Omnipotence is, “ Hitherto shalt thou come, and no
further ; and here shall thy proud waves be stayed.”

The Wilful King was not only to continue but to “ prosper” during his appointed
period. This purpose of God has been the secret of the mysterious continuance
and more mysterious prosperity of the papacy during the past twelve centuries.
“Four times,” says Macaulay (Essay on Ranke’s History of the Popes), “ since the
authority of the Church of Rome was established in Western Christendom, has the
human intellect risen up against her yoke, Twice that Church remained completely
victorious, Twice she came forth from the conflict, bearing the marks of cruel
wounds, but with the principle of life strong within her. When we reflect on the
tremendous assaults which she has survived, we find it difficult to conceive in what
way she is to perish.” It was thus that while the mighty work of reformation
was proceeding in the north of Europe, and in all the countries on this side of the
Alps and the Pyrenees it seemed on the point of triumphing, a counter-reformation
took place, carried on with equal energy and success. Hence the mysterious rise
and progress of the Order of Jesus, a concentration of the spirit of the papacy, the
main instrument in the great papal reaction, Till the appointed time of his decay
and overthrow should come, the Wilful King was to be invincible. That time, how-
ever, was tocome. In May 1514, the orator of the Lateran Council proclaimed
that there was an end of resistance to papal rule, and that the whole body of
Christendom was now subjected to its head, Pope Leo X. In October 1517,
exactly three years and a half after, Luther fixed up his famous Theses at the door
of the University of Wittemberg, which were to shake the papacy to its foundations,
Three centuries and a half longer were to transpire before “the king,” divested of
all his territory, was to cease to be a temporal ruler. But the time came. That
that was determined was done. But the end is not yet.

We may pause to reflect—

1. How unsearchable are God's judgments, and His ways past finding out}
How mysterious that such a power should be permitted to arise in the Church, and
to continue and prosper for so long a period !

2. No evil or calamity but ts under God’s control, Evils in Church and state
can only exist and continue by His permission and appointment, and will be over-
ruled for His own glory.

3. Solemn responsibility connected with the possession of the Gospel. The mis-
use or non-acceptance of that Gospel, proceeding from want of love i truth,





CMaP. XL





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


the sin that gave rise to this fearful judgment upon the Church of the New
Testament, as a similar sin had done with that of the Old (2 Thess, ii, 9-12).

4. The power and malignity of Satan in contriving, preparing, and employing
agencies for etl where they might be least expected. It is our comfort, however, to
know that this power is counteracted by the still greater power of God, in controlling
these agencies and overruling them for His own glory and the good of His people.

5. The extent to which human depravity may, under Satan’s influence, be carried,


even in connection with the highest profession of religion and piety.


Hence the


constant need of the Psalmist’s prayer: ‘Search me, O God, and know my heart ;
try me, and know my thoughts ; and see if there be any wicked way in me, and


lead me in the way everlasting.”


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—©) “ The
king” (ver. 36). Dr. Pusey observes
that the characteristics of this infidel
king are self-exaltation above every god ;
contempt for all religion; blasphemy
against the true God; apostasy from
the God of his fathers; disregard of
the desire of women ; honouring a god
whom his fathers knew not; adding,
that of all these only one in the least
agrees with Antiochus, while the pro-
pheecy unmistakably corresponds with
that which in the Revelation is still
future (Rev, xiii, 11, 12). But many
believe that it also at least as unmistak-
ably corresponds with the papacy, which
is also foretold in the Revelation. “By
the name ‘ king,’” says Dr. Cox, “ Mede,
and others after him, understand the
Roman state of power, under whatever
kind of government; but it is more
especially referred to Rome-papal, of
which power the description is deemed
peculiarly graphic. His despotism, blas-
phemy, and self-exaltation are clearly
marked : and he was to prosper till the
indignation be accomplished, or the
‘time, times,’ &., the 1260 years, when
the ‘wonders,’ as afterwards named,
shall have an end.” Mr. Birks argues
against the idea of Antiochus, or a single
infidel and blasphemous king yet to
arise, being meant by this king, on the
ground that the marks of time in the
prophecy fix the close of the vision far
beyond the days of Antiochus, and the
promised period of the Jewish restora-
tion ; that there is no proof that the
Wilful King denotes one individual per-
son; that since the fall of Jerusalem
the Jews have been exiles from Pales-
tine, and the West, even more than the
East, has been the scene of their suffer-

252


ings; that the Wilful King is not an
open atheist and rejector of all religion ;
that his place in the prophetic history is
between the return of Antiochus from
Egypt, B.c. 167, and the events pre-
dicted in chap. xii, 1-3, an interval of
two thousand years, while the appli-
cation of the preceding verses to the
Romans as far as Constantine the
Great would bring the prophecy to the
time of the Vandal persecutions in
Africa ; and finally that the Wilful
King is to prosper until the anger
of God against Israel is accomplished.
Calvin, who acknowledges the passage
to be very obscure, applies it entirely to
the Roman empire, not, however, con-
sidering it to be begun in the reign
of the Cwsars; believing that the angel
passed from Antiochus to the Romans,
as God wished to support the godly
under the troubles that awaited them
till the time of the Romans, from whom,
beginning with Pompey and Crassus,
they continued to be harassed by many
and continual wars. Mede, who with
Calovius, Geier, and others, applies the
prophecy to Antichrist, connects ver. 36
with the preceding—to the time ap-
pointed, the king shall do his will,” &.
Dr. Clarke things the prophecy may
apply to Antiochus; but observes that
it is well known that an Antichristian
power did spring up in the Christian
Church, showing itself in the Greek
emperors in the East, and in the bishops
of Rome in the West. Roman Catholic
interpreters, as De Lyra, Hugo, and
others, after Jerome and the fathers,
understand by “the king” the Anti-
christ who is to appear at the end of the
world, and to reign three years and a
half. C&colampadius and Melanchthon


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIRL,
Ce ee ee eee


regarded him as both the pope and the
Turk. Others of the Reformers, as
Osiander and Pfaff, understand the
pope to be meant from here to the end
of the prophecy, Willet thinks all was
historically fulfilled in Antiochus, to
whom the prophecy specially pointed,
though it has a typical application to
the Papal Antichrist. Brightman, like
Calvin, applies the prophecy to the
Romans, and especially to the Roman
emperors, the object of the prophecy
being to show what would be the state
of the Jews to all ages, till gathered
into one fold with the Gentiles. Keil
observes, that after the example of Por-
phyry, Ephrem Syrus, and Grotius,
almost all modern interpreters, that is,
in Germany, find here only a description
of the conduct of Antiochus Epiphanes
up to the time of his destruction ; while
of believing interpreters, some, as C. B.
Michaelis, Hivernick, and others, regard
thé whole as having a typical reference
to Antichrist ; while others, as Jerome,
Theodoret, Luther, G&colampadius, Osi-
ander, Calovius, Geier, and at length
Kliefoth, interpret the section as a
direct prophecy of Antichrist, the
“king” being the little horn growing
up among the ten kingdoms of the
Fourth Empire, and described in chap.
ix. 26 as “the prince that shall come,”
and introduced here as a new subject.
He remarks that the Rabbinical inter-
preters have also adopted the idea of a
change of subject in verse 36; while
his own opinion is that the reference of
the section to Antiochus is essentially
correct, and that the supposition of a
change of subject is not established.
He admits, however, that what is said
regarding “the king” in vers. 36-39,
goes far beyond what Antiochus did,
does not harmonise with what is known
of Antiochus, and is expressly referred
in the New Testament to Antichrist;
but thinks that these circumstances
rather show that ‘‘in the prophetic
contemplation there is comprehended in
the image of one king what has been
historically fulfilled in its beginning by
Antiochus Epiphanes, but shall only
meet its complete fulfilment by the
Antichrist in the time of the end.” By





“the king,” Mr. Bosanquet also under.
stands the king of fierce countenance
mentioned in chap, viii. 23, to which
the prophecy goes back, after coming to
Alexander’s kingdom in ver. 4, in order
to relate what shall be in the latter
days, the great object of the vision ;
this king being, in his view, the per-
sonification of Mohammedanism, who
literally destroyed the mighty and the
holy people, putting an end to the
Jewish kingdom of the Homerites in
Arabia Felix, B.c. 627, after it had
existed for some seven hundred years,
the last remnant of the Jews as a nation.

@ “ Magnify himself above every
god” (ver. 36). The allusion here,
observes Mr, Birks, to 2 Thess, ii, is
so plain that it has been recognised by
every class of interpreters, from Theo
doret down to our own day. Polybius,
quoted by Bishop Newton, says that
Antiochus in his public sacrifices and
worship of the gods was more sump-
tuous and magnificent than all who
reigned before him, and that in his
solemn shows and processions he had
the images of all who were called or
reputed gods, demons, or heroes carried
before him. On the other hand, Calvin
observes that the Romans in their pride
and lawlessness surpassed other profane
nations, and did not even preserve a
superstitious fear of God, making a
laughingstock of all divinities, and
ridiculing the very name and appear-
ance of piety, which they only used for
the purpose of retaining their subjects
in obedience,

©) “Shall speak marvellous things
against the God of gods” (ver. 36). In
reference to the blasphemous claims
put forth in the bulls and decretals
of the popes, as well as the conversion
of the consecrated wafer into the divine
being, Mr. Birks asks, “If these are
not marvellous speeches against the
God of gods, how can our imagination
invent others which may deserve the
name ”

(4) Pontifex Maximus was the title of
the high priest of the pagan idolatry
of ancient Rome. It was borne by the
emperors till Gratian, being a Chris
tian, declined the honour, when it was


253


given to and adopted by the Bishop of
Rome. For further Pagan importa-
tions, see Hyslop’s Two Babylons,”

©) “ The desire of women” (ver. 37).
Keil observes that the old interpreters
understood these words of conjugal love ;
the moderns in Germany, on the con-
trary, after the example of D. Michaelis
and Gesenius, understand them of the
goddess Anaitis or Mylitta, the Assyrian
Venus, and refer them especially to the
spoiling of the temple of this goddess
in Elymais by Antiochus; while Ewald
thinks of the Syrian deity Tammuz or
Adonis. Keil’s own opinion is that
the love of women is an example
selected from the sphere of human love
and attachment, for which even the
most selfish and most savage of men
feel some sensibility. Calvin thinks it
refers to the duties of charity ; Calovius
and Geier, to conjugal love and honest
matrimony ; the former remarking that
D'Y3 (nasim) properly denotes not
harlots but wives. Grotius, applying
the words to Antiochus, thinks they
mean that he will be touched with no
pity for the sex. So Maldonatus,
Poianus understands the clause to mean
that he will not be moved from his
purpose of disturbing religion by the
prayers of his wives; and Piscator,
that he will not suffer his wives to wor-
ship any god but Jupiter Olympius.
Brightman understands it of natural
affection, the thing most desired by
women being to have their children in
most honourable positions, while the
Roman emperors cared nothing about
having children to succeed them. Willet,
applying the paxsage to Antiochus,
understands it tc mean that he will
contemn matrimony ; which he thinks
may also be applied typically to the
pope, Bullinger and Osiander apply
it to the pope historically, Some
understand the expression of Messiah,
whom it was the desire of the women
in Israel to bring forth, Dr. Pusey
remarks; “Since it was suggested
that the ‘desire of women’ might be
their Syrian goddess Mylitta, the Ger-
mans have commonly adopted the
explanation, Yet there is nothing in
the revolting and also unnatural wor-

264


HOMILBTIC COMMENTARY: DANIBL,





ship of Mylitta which should entitle
that degrading worship to be called the
desire of women, Nor can I bring
myself to think that Daniel, in a pic-
ture of the sin of Antiochus, would
mention the abstinence from such wor-
ship as a portion of that sin.”

(©) “ Nor regard any God.” Keil and
Kliefoth understand tbe clause to mean
that he set himself free from all piety
or reverence toward God, or toward that
which is divine. Calvin, applying it to
the Romans, says, they treated the
worship of their deities simply as
matters of business, being destitute of
any perception of true divinity, and
only pretenders to religion, while they
manifested a gross contempt of God
under the appearance of piety, and
thought themselves superior to their
gods, Grotius understands it to mean
that he (Antiochus) will not regard the
god of any nation, but will rob all he
can; Piscator, that he will despise all
religion. Brightman understands the
term “ god,” as in the preceding verse,
as magvstrates, but here, of domestic
ones, though anciently established. A.
Clarke says, “The mandates and decrees
of the papal Church have been often in
defiance of God and His Word, the
Papacy magnifying itself above all
power and authority in heaven and
earth.” Boothroyd understands any
superior, either magistrates or kings,
who are called gods (Ps, Ixxxvi. 6), the
papal power arrogating to itself the
right of raising or abasing, crowning or
deposing, kings at its pleasure,

© “The god of forces.” D'YYD Moy
(Eloah Ma’uzzim), “ god of fortresses,”
Sir Isaac Newton understands the term
to mean “strong guardians,” and applies
the term to the souls of the dead, saints
and angels, and especially the Virgin
Mary ; all being invoked and adored
both in the Greek and Latin Churches
as patrons, intercessors, and guardians
of mankind, their shrines and images
being adorned with the most costly
offerings. Mede seems to have been
the first to apply the term to the papacy,
as denoting demons or god-protectors,
which the Romans worship with Christ,
namely, saints and angels ; remarking


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY; DANIEL,


OHAP, Xi.


pee nreneceeeseneen NEN


that Basil, Gregory, Chrysostom, and
others call the relics of martyrs towers


and bulwarks, while Gregory of Nyssa,
Theodoret, and others call martyrs pat-
rons and protectors. He remarks: “It
is a thing not to be passed by without ad-


miration that the Fathers and others, even .


at the beginning of saint-worship, by I
know not what fatal instinct, used to
eall saints and their relics walls, bul-
warks, and fortresses, 4, Mahuzzim, in
the primary and original signification,”
Keil renders the expression, “the god
of fortresses,” and observes that, as is
now generally acknowledged, DY
(ma’uzetm) is not, with Theodotion, the
Vulgate, Luther, and others to be re-
garded as the proper name of a god.
He applies the prophecy to the future
Antichrist, who, he thinks, is here said
to regard no other god but only war;
the taking of fortresses he will make his
god, and he will worship this god above
all, as the means of his gaining the
universal power he aims at. Professor
Lee translates the phrase the “god of
forces,” and supposes it to apply to the
Roman emperors, Nero being the first of
the series, C, B. Michaelis, Gesenius,
and others, applying the prophecy to
Antiochus, suppose Mars, the god of
war, to be intended ; while Hivernick,
Ewald, and others, after Grotius, think
of Jupiter Olympius ; which, however,
as Keil observes, were not gods un-
known to his fathers, Calvin translates
the word “strengths, or fortitudes,”
observing that the god which the
Romans are said to worship, namely,
the Roman Jupiter, the prophet calls
a “god of bulwarks” or of power;


meaning that they claimed a divine
power as their own, and acknowledged
no deity but themselves. Geier and
Vatablus read, “ god of fortifications or
strengths,” like Asina or Mars, a Sy-
rian deity to whom this king would
ascribe all his dignity and power. Mr.
Birks thinks that the general feature of
the expression is that of one chief and
many subordinate objects of worship;
the god, along with whom the Mauzzim
are worshipped, being the Son of God,
or the true God, but made the object of
@ heathenish worship, with many sub-
ordinate idols, degraded into an Eloah
or chief patron-divinity, who shares his
worship with many Mauzzim ; and that
the “most strong holds” here mentioned
are buildings dedicated to these Mauzzim
or tutelary deities, The Wilful King,
he thinks, will pay honour to a multi-
tude of guardian powers, and cause
them to receive homage and costly
worship from his people.

(8) How the Jews have suffered at
the hands of the papacy is well known.
Gibbon, quoted by Mr. Birks, writes in
reference to Spain: “The intolerant
spirit, since it could find neither idolatry
nor heresies, was reduced to the perse-
cution of the Jews.” And in regard to
the Italians: “They respected the
armed heresy of the Goths; but their
rage was safely pointed against the rich
and defenceless Jews.” “Of these (the
first Crusaders) and of other bands of
enthusiasts, the first and most easy war-
fare was against the Jews, the murderers
of the Son of God ; nor had they felt a
more bloody stroke since the persecu-
tion of Hadrian,”


HOMILETICS.
Sror. XLIT.—Saracens anD Turks. (Chap, xi. 40-45.)


Considerable obscurity connected with the present section. According to some,
it is a continuation of the prophecy regarding the vile person or Antiochus Epi-
phanes, here still styled the King of the North, Thus viewed, the prophecy points
to a last expedition against Egypt made after those previously mentioned ; an expe-
dition, however, of which history gives no intimation, but the reverse, @) In the
opinion of many evangelical expositors, the passage foretells the rise and doings of
another power, of which, however, Antiochus was also a type. That power was
the Mohammedan, first under the Saracens and subsequently the Turks; a power
already noticed as an antitype of Antiochus, predicted as the little fe in the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


—_——-eEC—SoOO
vision of the Ram and He-goat, chap. viii. Historically, it was that power that in
the eastern portion of the empire succeeded the Roman, and became a sco
both to the Jews and to the Christian Church. In the prophecy also the section
appears to connect itself with the prediction regarding the Roman empire and its
representative, the Papacy. Thus viewing it, we notice—

I. The time referred toa. That the prophecy points to a time far beyond that
of Antiochus would seem to be intimated in the words with which the section
commences: “In the time of the end.” This probably the “end” already
referred to as the time when the “indignation” against Israel is to be accom-
plished (ver, 35), the latter period of the fourth and last empire, the “time,
times, and half a time” of the Little Horn. It is according to the Book of Reve.
lation the time of the three last of the seven “ trumpets,” called the three woes;
this power being the fifth and sixth, the former under the Saracens, and the latter
the Turks, followed by the seventh, which announces the end or finishing of the
mystery of God, when the kingdoms of this world become the kingdoms of the
Lord and of His Christ, and when He takes to Himself His great power and
reigns (Rev, ix., x. 7, xi, 15-18). This time of the end might, as it has done,
extend over centuries, being the duration of the last period of Israel's chastisement,
and at the same time the chastisement of the Christian Churches.(2)

Il. The parties predicted. These are twofold, designated according to the
phraseology already employed in the former part of the prophecy in relation to
two other powers, namely, the kings of the North and of the South. Formerly
these terms were applied to the kings of Syria and of Egypt, the most prominent
parties in that part of the vision, and so called from their situation in relation to
Judea, Now, in the latter part of the prophecy, in the time of the end, they
appear to mark the Saracens and the Turks, the latter rising in Scythia, to the
north, and the former in Arabia, to the south of Palestine, and hence with equal
truth designated the kings of the North and of the South.@) These powers
appear to be represented as acting against that previously predicted, namely, the
Roman empire and its representative, the Papacy or Little Horn. They are
apparently introduced as the power that was to check and weaken the Wilful King.
The Turkish armies, which chiefly consisted of cavalry, appear to be pointed out
in the prophecy, which represents the king of the North as coming “like a great
whirlwind, with chariots and with horsemen.” They are said also to have many
ships, without which, as Bishop Newton remarks, they could not have vanquished
Venice, or taken Constantinople, Rhodes, Cyprus, or Crete, The description
corresponds with that of the Euphratean horsemen, generally understood to represent
the Turkish power, “The number of the army of the horsemen was two hundred
thousand thousand ” (Rev. ix. 14~16). This Euphratean power appearing under
the sixth trumpet, or in the time of the end, is also represented as having their
appointed period of rise and duration, being ‘‘ prepared for (or, as in the margin,
at) an hour and a day, and a month and a year (R.V., for the hour and day and
month and year), to slay the third part of men.” The application of the kin
of the North to the Turkish power confirms that of the king of the South to
the Saracens, their predecessors ; that power being, according to general opinion,
predicted in the locust army or first woe, which after “ five months,” or a century
and a halt, of mischief, was to be succeeded by the second, or horsemen from the
Euphrates (Rev. ix. 3-10).

TIL The doings of the parties. Those of the Turkish pow i
North mainly described. Wind Sere Be

1. “ The king of the South shall push at him” (ver. 40). Mr. Birks remarks :
“The Saracens, however wide their other conquests, did really push, with furious
vehemence, ayainst the papal dominions, whether we interpret them ‘in a narrower
sense of St. Peter’s patrimony, or more widely of the nations in communion with


the god How violent their inreads on the Western nations at large, till


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, CHAP, XE,
ry


their defeat by Charles Martel, is known to the most cursory reader of history or
romance.” He quotes Gibbon, who says: ‘A fleet of Saracens from the African
coast presumed to enter the mouth of the Tiber, and to approach a city which even
yet, in her fallen state, was revered as the metropolis of the Christian world.” The
“‘ African coast ” marks the invaders as a power from the South.

2. “The king of the North shall come against him like a whirlwind with
chariots,” &c. History decides what the construction seems to leave uncertain,
whether the attack of the king of the North was to be directed against the same
power pushed at by the king of the South, or against the king of the South him-
self. We read of the attacks made by hordes of Turkish cavalry, first on the
provinces of the Eastern empire, and then on the papal kingdoms of the West, as
if following in the steps of the Saracens. Gibbon, speaking’ of the conquests of
Togrul and Alp Arslan, says: “The Asiatic provinces of Rome were irretrievably
sacrificed.” After overthrowing the Greek empire, by means of their horsemen
and their ships, they directed their attack on the West, more particularly predicted
in the words, “‘He shall enter into the countries, and overflow, and pass over.”
Mr, Birks remarks: ‘These words aptly describe the first passage of the Turks
into Europe. They had already entered into the countries of Asia Minor, and
established themselves there as kings of the North. But they were not restrained
within these narrow bounds, . . . The results of this first overflow of the Turks
into Europe are too well known, and too legible on the map of Europe for centuries,
to require further details.” He observes that Sismondi describes Italy and the
pope as the true objects, at that time, of the Turkish aggression ; and quotes
Gibbon, who says: “The grief and terror of the Latins revived, or seemed to
revive, the old enthusiasm of the crusades, . . . The devastation advanced towards
the West, and every year saw a new kingdom fall.” These attacks of the king of
the North, like those of his predecessor, were the divinely appointed chastisement
of the idolatry which had already found so large a place in the Christian churches,
The words of the Sultan Mahomet II., read in connection with Rev. ix. 20, at
once show this to have been the case, and to confirm the view of this power being
identical with the second woe and the king of the North: “TI will not turn my
face from the west to the east, till I overthrow and tread under the feet of my
horses the gods of the nations ; these gods of wood, of brass, of silver, and of gold,
or of painting, which the disciples of Christ have made with their hands,”—as if
he had read the passage above referred to,—‘“‘ and the rest of the men which were
not killed by these plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands, that
they should not worship devils (demons, or departed spirits), and idols of gold,
and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood.”

3. He (the king of the North) shall enter also into the glorious land, and many
countries shall be overthrown ; but these shall escape out of his hand, Edom, Moab,
and the chief of the children of Ammon” (ver. 41). No question as to what is
meant by “the glorious land” here and in ver. 16. Palestine or Syria, the tract
lying between the Mediterranean and the Euphrates, “‘ has been more favoured by
nature, and is more richly stored with the various delights of climate, of soil, and
of scenery, than any other space of equal extent on the surface of the globe. Were
one asked to point to that region of the earth which is the happiest in respect of
natural conditions, it is to this tract that he would turn.” The glory and beauty,
however, were more especially in the manifested presence and gracious goings of
Him who deigned to call it peculiarly His own land. Into that land the victorious
Turks entered in 1517, and left, as the trace of their presence and conquest, the

resent grey walls that surround Jerusalem, erected by the Sultan Suliman in
1542, the land continuing in the possession of the Turks to this day.) Those
here said to escape out of his hand are Bedouin tribes of Arabia, who, as sons of
Ishmael, still make good the prediction of Gen. xvi. 12; whom the Turks have
never been able entirely to subdue ; and to whom, ever since the time when the


z 257


OwAP, XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. DANIEL.





Sultan Selim conquered the adjoining countries, they have paid an annual pension
for the safe passage of the pilgrims to Mecca. It might seem strange, as Calvin
remarks, and not a little trying to the covenant people, to learn that while they
and their country, which God had given to Abraham and his seed, and which He
had promised to watch over, should be invaded by this hostile power, those other
countries, inhabited by their hereditary enemies, should be permitted to escape,
and to remain in peace and safety. But they might remember the words of the
prophet, ‘ You only have I known of all the nations of the earth, therefore I will
punish you for your iniquities.” Egypt, however, was not to escape (vers, 42,
43). Selim, among his other conquests, put an end to the government of the
Mamelukes, and established in its stead that of the Turks, who continue to this
day, as Bishop Newton remarks, to drain immense treasures out of that rich and
fertile but oppressed and wretched country. That it is held now by a Khedive or
viceroy, only another evidence that the reign of the Turk is drawing to its close.
With Egypt, the chief power in the south, should also fall the other nations of
Africa,—the Libyans and the Ethiopians or Cushites, still farther to the south,
who should become the obsequious followers of his march (Jud. iv. 10), but who
also nM give evidence to the drying up of “the great river Euphrates” (Rev.
xvi. 12).

4, “Tidings out of the east and out of the north shall trouble him ; therefore he
shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make away many ; and he
shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the seas in the glorious holy mountain”
(vers, 44, 45). The tidings out of the east and the north which shall disturb this
victorious power in the midst of his conquests in the Holy Land and the adjacent
countries, are such, doubtless, as would inform him of risings among the subdued
nations, or invasions from other quarters, which should endanger his acquisitions,
or perhaps his own dominions. (6) These tidings should arouse his indignation and
draw him from Africa, where he appears then to be, again to Palestine, where he
would seem to encamp at Jerusalem, the metropolis of the country, pitching his
tent on the “ glorious holy mountain, between the seas,” the Mediterranean on the
one side and the Dead Sea on the other, () his purpose being, like that of his
Syrian type, to wreak his vengeance on the people by their utter destruction. @
How the Turks took and retained possession of Jerusalem we have already seen.
It is scarcely likely that the doings of Sultan Selim in reference to that city are
here referred to; history only relating concerning him that, having been greatly
annoyed by the arrows of the wild Arabs from the hills in the south, he advanced
towards Gaza, and thence to Rama, where he revenged himself on the habitations,
wives, and children of the Arabs, and soon after turned aside with his cavalry to
visit Jerusalem. It is more than probable that, as it is there that this hostile
power is to come to his end, the prophecy has not yet received its fulfilment,
Probably another power is first to come upon the stage, (®

IV. The end of the hostile power. ‘He shall come to his end, and none
shall help him” (ver. 45), This being the first time we read of the end of the
power whose doings are described in the preceding verses, since the introduction of
the vile person in ver. 21, some have been led to think that the same power is
spoken of throughout. It is probable, however, that the end here foretold is that
of the hostile power under its last form, which is at the same time the termination
and destruction of all the world-powers that have set themselves in opposition to
God’s people whether in Old or New Testament times, and which, of course, is
still future, The blending, in the prophecy, of one Antichristian power, or of one
form of Antichrist, into another: has its parallel in the prophecy of the Saviour
Himself, in which the prediction regarding Jerusalem’s destruction blends into that
of His second appearing, when He shall take “vengeance on them that know not
God, and that obey not the Gospel of His Son,” and when the “Man of Sin” shall
be Senet “with the brightness of His coming.” It seems certain, from chap. xii.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL
cee 8 He i ee ee eee ee


1, that the end of the hostile power here predicted is connected with the great
tribulation, and the resurrection from the dead which is probably soon to follow it
The angel then adds: “ And at that time”—the time referred to in the end of the
preceding chapter—‘ shall Michael stand up, the great prince which standeth for
the children of thy people; and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never
was since there was a nation even to that same time.” This time of trouble, again,
is connected with the resurrection from the dead, which appears to follow it (chap.
xii. 2), and which we know to be the result of the Lord’s second appearing (1 Cor.
xv. 23; 1 Thess, iv. 15-17), The manner in which the end of this and, at the
same time, of every hostile power is described, corresponds with this view of the
time and circumstances in which it shall happen. It is simply said, “He shall
come to his end, and none shall help him.” As if a breath from the Lord’s mouth,
or a glance from His eye, brought him and all his chivalry in a moment to destruc-
tion. No word is spoken as to the means by which, or the manner in which, the
end should be brought about. The scene closes in sublime and mysterious silence,
For a fuller description of the solemn event we must, doubtless, look to the prophecy
of Zechariah, chap. xiv. 3, 4, and especially to the awful and magnificent picture of
the battle of the great day of God Almighty presented in Rev. xix. 11-21. May
both reader and writer be prepared for the terrors and solemnities of that infinitely
Momentous and rapidly approaching day !


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—© Bright-
man observes that this part of the pro-
phecy cannot apply to Antiochus, as he
can find no mention in any author of
a third expedition by him into Egypt.
He thinks that neither the authors of
the books of the Maccabees nor Josephus
would have been likely to omit to men-
tion it, had there been any such; the
latter, indeed, stating that nothing at
all was attempted by Antiochus against
that country after his expulsion by the
Romans till his death in Persia. Justin
relates that after the check he received
from the Roman consul Popilius, he
died as soon as he returned to his own
kingdom. Sending Lysias, his general,
into Syria, he himself went into Persia,
where he died. Keil also, with V.
Lengerke, Maurer, and Hitzig, considers
the idea of a last expedition of An-
tiochus against Egypt in this passage,
not only unsupported by history, but in
irreconcilable contradiction to the his-
torical facts regarding his last under-
takings,

@) “The time of the end.” Bright-
man thinks that, as the Romans did
nothing in particular against the Jews
after Adrian, the prophecy passes on to
the time of the weakened and decayed
empire, when the Saracens, under
Mahomet, encountered them, ag the
king of the South, a.p. 630, when they


took from the Romans, in about thirty
years, Jerusalem, all Syria, Africa, and
Asia ; the king of the North being the
Turks, whose tyranny especially lay
against the Romans from the year a.D.
1300. So Joseph Mede, who is followed
by most modern evangelical expositors,
considers the “ time of the end” to be
the last times of the Romans, and the
king of the South the Saracens under
Mahomet ; while the king of the North
is the Turksfrom Scythia inthe farnorth,
another Antichristian power who should
attack and overcome the Saracens.

@) Bishop Newton, agreeing with
Mede, observes that the terms Worth
and South are to be taken and explained
according to the times of which the
prophet is speaking. Dr. Cox observes :
“ The sovereignties of Egypt and Syria,
before called the king of the South
and the king of the North, disappeared
when they were absorbed in the Roman
empire; and the new powers, or the
Saracen and Turkish empires that
succeeded, are now brought into view.
But let it be observed that the Saracens
becaine masters of Egypt, the original
territory of the king of the South, and
the Turks possessed Syria, or the king-
dom of the North, and still retain it.”
Calvin, who considers the power pre-
viously introduced, viz., the Romans,
to be still described, thinks that the

259


OMAP, XL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





king of the South or Egypt, assisted by
the king of the North or Syria, was to
carry on war with the Romans, who are
here compared to a deluge which should
come and overflow, burying all the
forces both of Egypt and Syria, and
should also invade Judea, Junius and
Willet think that the king of the North
is still Antiochus, who should come up
against the king of the South or Egypt,
viz., Philometor, in order to aid his
brother Physcon. Bullinger, like Mede
and Brightman, understands by the
kings of the North and South the Turks
and Saracens. Pfaff and Osiander
thought the king of the North to be
Antichrist, and the king of the South
to be Christ Himself. Roman Catholic
writers after Jerome, as well the
Futurists, refer the passage to an infidel
Antichrist who is yet to arise, and to the
last conflicts in the land of Judea, Anti-
christ being here the king of the North.
Kliefoth thinks that the prophecy re-
lates to Antichrist, whom he distin-
guishes from the kings of the North
and South, both of whom will in thé
time of the end attack him. Keil con-
siders the first “him” to refer to the
hostile king, the chief subject of the
prophecy, but the second “ him,” against
whom the king of the North comes, to
be the king of the South named im-
mediately before ; the king of the North,
however, being the hostile king himself,
thought of as the ruler of the distant
North, reaching far beyond Syria, from
which in his fury he comes against the
king of the South.

() Brightman observes that the Sul-
tan Selim, about the year 1514, on his
way to Egypt, took his journey by Judea,
and carried Jerusalem by assault. Edom,
or in general, Arabia, the Turks did not
attack, being content to open themselves
a way to Egypt through Syria and Pa-
lestine, which in the following year they
brought under their subjection.

(8) “ Tidings from the east and from
the north.” Bishop Newton thinks that
Persia in the east, and Russia in the
north, of the Ottoman empire, may be
the quarters from which the tidings
referred to may come, and that these
nations may hereafter be made the

260


instruments of divine Providence in the
restoration of the Jews; quoting a cure
rent tradition among the common peo-
ple in Turkey, that their empire shall
at some period be destroyed by the
Russians, Pfaff and Osiander, under-
standing the passage of the Roman An-
tichrist, regarded the tidings as those of
the breaking out of the Reformation,
and the preaching of the Gospel in
Germany. Melanchthon understood it
of the Turks, whose rage the Lord
should stay from heaven when no
human force could resist them, Bright-
man, writing in the seventeenth century,
observes that the things hitherto pre-
dicted are already past; those which
follow, to the end of the chapter, are
still to come. No tidings from the
east troubled Antiochus, nor the Ro-
mans after the battle of Cannm: nor
did the Romans plant their tabernacles
in Judea, He thinks the tidings out
of the east and north that shall trouble
the Turk, is the conversion of the Jews.
according to Rev. xvi. 12, which prings
him in great fury to the Holy Land,
where he is to perish.

(*) “ He shall plant the tabernacles o,
hts palace between the seas in the glori-
ous holy mountain.” Mr. Birks inclines
to think, with Melanchthon, that in so
far as the Turkish power is viewed as
the subject of the present prophecy,
Constantinople is the place referrea to
as the “glorious holy mountain,” or,
as he says the words might be ren-
dered, a “mountain of holy delight ;*
the occupying of that place as the seat
of empire being the main event of the
history between the time of the con-
quest of Egypt by the Turks and their
final overthrow. Regarding the king
of the North, however, as the Antichrist
yet to arise, he thinks Palestine and
Jerusalem the places intended, whither
he will lead the confederate nations of
Europe, the power of Russia, and the
districts held long before by the king of
the North. Dr. Cox thinks the passage
intimates that the Turk will plant his
tabernacles, or fix his encampment, in
the Holy Land at Jerusalem, between
the Dead Sea and the Mediterranean;
and that there, having enjoyed a tem«


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





porary triumph, he will experience a
signal and fatal overthrow. He adds,
“Whether the Russian and Persian
‘powers are destined to inflict the pro-
vidential visitation, as many have sup-
posed, must be left to the disclosures
of futurity.” Keil thinks that the ex-
pression YO) (nata’), “plant,” probably
alludes to the great palace-like tent of
the Oriental ruler, whose -poles must be
struck very deep into the earth; these
tents being surrounded by a multitude
of smaller ones for the guards and
servants, which accounts for the use
of the plural, ‘“tabernacles” or
“tents.” He renders the words
WIp"2¥ W (har tsebhi-godhesh), “ the
holy hill of the delight,” ¢¢. of Pales-
tine; and considers it to be the hill
on which the Temple stood. He dis-
agrees with Kliefoth and others, who
think that the “seas” are the Mediter-
ranean and the Dead Sea; and regards
the word “seas” as only the poetic
plural of fulness for the great Mediter-
ranean, The term ‘758 Geil
“his palace,” as our own and Luther's
version render it, has been variously
understood. Theodotion and the Vulgate
leave it untranslated, while the Sep-
tuagint omits it altogether. Porphyry
understood it to be the name of a place,
and Junius regards it as that of the
country of Mesopotamia or Syria, the
“seas” being its fens or marshes.
Jerome renders it “his stable,” as re-
ferring to cavalry. Calvin has “his
palace,” as indicating a permanent abode
fixed by the Romans in those countries.
The word is used by the Rabbins in
the sense of a palace. Dr. Pusey
remarks that this is one of the four
Syrian words which have been singled
out by the opponents of Daniel, as
making against his Hebrew, but as
agreeing with the situation of a Jewish
writer in the time of the Maccabees.
The word, he says, survived in heathen





and Christian Syriac as well as in the
translation of the Scriptures, and was
also, in a slightly varied form, probably
introduced into Arabia from the Syriac,
and had certainly been known in Meso-
potamia, since it became the name of
a place, Apadnas, near Amida on the
Tigris ; but was wholly lost in Chaldea,
being unintelligible to all the Greek
translators, and rendered in the Syriac
version, not according to the meaning
of the actual Syriac word, but according
to the common meaning of padan, which
forms part of the name Padan-aram.

(7) “ To destroy and utterly make away
many.” png Dvn? (lehashmidh
ulehakharim), to smite and to ban, or
uproot, implying utter destruction. So
Antiochus in his wrath resolved to
make Jerusalem a grave for the whole
of the Jews,

(®) Mr. Birks, who interprets these
last verses of the Saracen and Turkish
powers, is inclined to extend their
bearing to a power that should combine
in himself all the forms of Antichris-
tian hostility that had preceded, and
believes there is a further accomplish-
ment in events which will complete
and close the Gentile dispensation.
Keil also views the latter part of this
chapter as pointing to a power, whom
he designates Antichrist, the anti-
type of Antiochus Epiphanes, and
remarks: “The placing of the over-
throw of this enemy with his host near
the Temple-mountain agrees with other
prophecies of the Old Testament, which
place the decisive destruction of the
hostile world-power by the appearance
of the Lord for the consummation of His
kingdom upon the mountains of Israel
(Ezek. xxxix. 4), or in the valley of
Jehoshaphat (Joel iv. 2, &c.), in or at
Jerusalem (Zech. xiv. 2); and confirms
the result of our exposition that the
hostile king, the last enemy or world-
power, is the Antichrist.


HOMILETICS.
Szor. XLIIL—Tae Invipen anp Finan Anticurist. (Chap. xi. 45.)


“He shall come to his end, and none shall help him.” It has been remarked
that in this last prophecy of Daniel one predicted hostile power appears to merge
261


Omar. XL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





into and blend with another that succeeds it, This prophetic blending sometimes
takes place almost insensibly ; so that the same power would almost seem still
to continue to be spoken of. Of these various successive powers Antiochus Epi-
phanes, who is introduced in ver. 21, seems to be regarded as a kind of general type.
The powers themselves may be regarded as so many Antichrists,—for, according to
the Apostle, “there are many Antichrists,’—or Antichrist under so many different
forms, The destruction of all these Antichristian powers would seem to take
place together, and to be that “end” predicted in the closing verse of the chapter,
of which the sudden and signal end of Antiochus was a type. As the papal Anti-
christ seemed to blend into the Mahometan in ver. 40, so the Mahometan would
appear to blend into the infidel and final one in the last verse of the chapter,
From what is said to take place when the power thus predicted comes to his end,
viz, the time of great tribulation, the deliverance of the Jewish remnant, and the
resurrection from the dead, there can be little doubt that this power is the last
enemy that shall appear against the people of God, till the end of the thousand
years’ reign of righteousness and peace (Rev. xx. 7-9). That last enemy is
apparently still the Little Horn of Daniel’s Fourth Beast, and Paul’s Man of Sin;
but, as may be gathered from the book of Revelation, under an openly infidel
form, as the scarlet-coloured beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit and
goeth into perdition, “full of names of blasphemy,” having seven heads and ten
horns, who with the false prophet gathers together the kings of the earth and their
armies, to make war against Christ in the “battle of the great day of God
Almighty,” and who with the same false prophet shall then be taken and “cast
alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone” (Rev. xvii. 3, xvi. 14, xix. 20).
Following Mr. Frere in his “Combined View of the Prophecies,” Mr. Irving
observes that in the book of Daniel we have four main streams of prophecy, all
commencing from the period at which the prophet lived, and running down to
the time of the end. The fourth stream is contained in this eleventh chapter,
which connects itself with the time of Daniel by the mention of certain “kings”
immediately succeeding it, and then makes large leaps to reach the description of
a third blasphemous and ungodly power, which was to arise in the form, not of an
institution, but of an individual, close to the time of the end ; these three powers
being the Papal, Mahometan, and the Infidel ; all to arise within the bounds of
the four great monarchies, which may be called the prophetic earth. The prophet,
he remarks, gives a most particular account of one king who should, at the time of
the end, exalt himself against God, and prosper in war, till he should * come to his
end, and none should help him.” This end of the infidel king, for whose manifes-
tation the whole history was given, shall also be the end or accomplishment of God’s
purposes in dispersing the Jews; which, he observes, was most important for Daniel,
and is still most important both to the dispersed Jews and the Church of the Gentiles,
whose fulness comes not in till the dispersed are gathered again ; inasmuch as the
prophecy makes this ingathering contemporaneous with the downfall of the great
infidel king. Much to the same effect, Mr. Faber, in his “ View of the Prophecies
regarding Israel,” observes that nearly every prophecy that treats of the restoration
of the Jews treats likewise of the contemporary overthrow of some great and im-
pious combination of God’s enemies; a confederacy of which an infidel power,
which should appear at the time of the end, should be so powerful as to take the
lead, and which should include the ten-horned beast or Roman empire under its
last head, the ecclesiastical power represented by Daniel’s little horn, and certain
kings of the earth, apparently in a state of vassalage to that sovereign power. All
these are said to come to their end, and to be destroyed by some divine interposi-
tion after the expiration of a certain period (a “time, times, and half a time ”); and
that in Palestine, a region between the seas, in the neighbourhood of the glorious
holy mountain, or Mount Zion, and in the more immediate vicinity of the town of
pe At the close of the same period, he observes, the prophet teaches (chap,
2


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: DANIEL, ‘ OMAP, E23,
a a


xii, 1) that the restoration of the Jews, the goal to which the angelic communica-
tion pointed, should take place. The restoration, contemporaneous with the
overthrow of the infidel power, Mr. Faber regarded as prepared for by the fall of
the Ottoman empire, or the drying up of the river Euphrates (Rev. xvi. 12), which
takes place previous to the gathering together of the great confederacy, A writer
on prophecy already quoted remarks that the manifestation of the last Antichristian
apostasy or infidelity consists, like that of the former two, the Papal and the
Mahometan, of two parts ; the latter and the chief part being the account of the
infidel person, his acts, and his destruction ; the other part being the historical
chain which connects the account with the time of the giving of the vision—a
chain of persons, remarkable kings, who were to intervene, This chain, Mr, Irving
observes, brings us to a new dynasty (ver, 18), when the Roman arms under Scipio
took the sovereignty of the parts that had constituted the Grecian monarchy ; and
then the prophecy at one stride brings us down to the immediate predecessor of the
infidel king, who is said to be in his estate a “raiser of taxes” (ver. 20). The
chain, he thinks, thus brings us to the first manifestation of the infidel power
in the “vile person” (ver. 21), whose acts the prophet describes through the
remaining part of the chapter. The countries he enters into (ver, 40) he considers
to be already prepared, by the dissemination of his infidel sentiments, to give him
a welcome ; when he will “ overflow ” and level, like a terrible inundation, ancient
thrones and establishments before him, This first manifestation of the infidel
power he, with many others, believed to have its realisation in the first Napoleon,
to be succeeded by a second like to him. He thinks that the prophet then imme-
diately carries the infidel prince over to another scene of action, quite out of
the bounds of the ten-horned papal empire, to the Holy Land (ver, 41), and gives
a narrative of his conquests there, carried on probably from a motive of mad
ambition. Perhaps, having subdued the western Roman empire, he is to be God’s
instrument to bring the Turk to his end, and may thus pass over to the Asiatic
and African states, to possess himself of Egypt and the neighbouring kingdoms,
to rally the nations of the ancient empire under his banner, the time of the
destruction of the fourth beast being nigh at hand. The tidings out of the east,
he, with Brightman, thinks refer to the event predicted in Rev. xvi. 12, regarding
the kings of the East, while those from the north refer to Russia, Thus troubled
and “moved by what natural impulse we know not, but overruled by all those
prophecies that have doomed him and all his chivalry to fall upon the mountains
of Israel, in the valley of Jehoshaphat, by the rock of Zion, he plants in Jerusalem
the ‘tabernacles of his palace,’ the insignia of his royal state, upon the ‘ glorious
holy mountain between the seas,’ and there he comes to his end by a mighty over-
throw, in a great battle of God Almighty, to which the nations have been gathered
together.” He characterises the infidelity or infidel apostasy, contemplated here
in the light not of an institution but of a person, as that which has grown like a
disease out of the body of the papacy, and been nourished by the very grossness
of that superstition, and gathering every evil and corrupt humour out of the
wicked mass, till we see it, as it now is, all over its kingdom, ready to burst out
and destroy the very organisation of the body. This impersonation of infidelity,
or infidel chief, he considers, is to conduct and guide that infidelity to its sure
purpose of dissolving that constitution of evil which has so long sat as an incubus
upon the spirit of the Church, This infidel Antichrist, having obtained the victory
over the papal constitution in order to destroy every vestige of lingering life within
it, and being then led onwards to the East where he shall find the Mahometan
superstition in its last throes ; and thus coming in time to take up the abandoned
sceptre of the Eastern empire, and having under him that power of nations and of
kingdoms, which both the apostasies of the East and West once possessed,—“ he
hath accomplished his end, and his time is come.” With his destruction, which is
accomplished at Armageddon, the three apostasies are all finished, and at last


oHAP. XI, ' HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


| eee


desperate throw is ended, and “the kingdom of Christ in good earnest spreads
with all the prosperity of the divine blessing over all the earth.”

In Mr. Faber’s view, which is similar, the person who forms the subject of the
closing verses of the chapter is the infidel king, the leader of the great Antichristian
confederacy of the last days, who will, at the time of the end, or the close of the
time, times, and half a time, be opposed by a king of the North and a king of the
South ; yet, in spite of this opposition, will succeed in overflowing many countries,
and in conquering Palestine, Egypt, Libya, and the land of Cush or Ethiopia, In
the midst of these victories, he, being in Egypt, will be disturbed by some untoward
tidings out of the North and out of the East, probably of the arrival in Palestine
of the navy of the great maritime power with the converted of Judah. Enraged
at such ungrateful news, he will hasten to Jerusalem, which he will succeed in
taking. This, however, will be his last victory. Advancing to Megiddo, a town
near the shores of the Mediterranean, in the great plain of Esdraelon, where,
according to St. John, the conflict is to be decided, he will come unexpectedly to
his end. The triumphant “ Word of God” shall break his confederacy, and super-
naturally overthrow him with a sudden destruction. The king of the North Mr.
Faber thinks to be Russia ; some terrible invasion from that quarter, symbolised
by the great hailstorm of the Apocalypse, being made upon the papal Roman
empire during the time that the infidel king is prosecuting his conquests in Pales-
tine and Egypt.

Keil also views the latter verses of the chapter as all pointing to such an infidel
power, whom he designates the Antichrist, the antitype of Antiochus Epiphanes,
He says: “ The undertaking of this king (Antiochus) to root out the worship of
the living God, and destroy the Jewish religion, shows in type the great war which
the world-power shall undertake against the kingdom of God, by exalting itself
above every god, to hasten on its own destruction and the consummation of the
kingdom of God, The description of this war, as to its origin, character, and
issue, forms the principal subject of this prophecy. . . . From the typical relation
in which Antiochus, the Old Testament enemy of God, stands to Antichrist, the
New Testament enemy, is explained the connection of the end, the final salvation
of the people of God, and the resurrection from the dead, with the description of
this enemy, without any express mention being made of the fourth world-kingdom
[the Roman erpiish one of the last enemy [the little horn] arising out of it—
already revealed to Daniel in chap. vii. . .. In chapter viii, the violent enemy
of the people of Israel, who would arise from the Diadoch-kingdoms of the
Javanic world-monarchy [the four divisions of the Grecian empire after Alex-
ander’s death], was already designated as the type of the last enemy who would
arise out of the ten kingdoms of the fourth world- [or universal] monarchy. After
these preceding revelations, the announcement of the great tribulation, that would
come upon the people of God from these two enemies, could be presented in one
comprehensive painting, wherein the assaults made by the prefigurative enemy
against the covenant people should form the foreground of the picture, for a repre-
sentation of the daring of the antitypical enemy, proceeding even to the extent of
abolishing all divine and human ordinances, which shall bring the last and severest
tribulation on the Church of God at the end of the days, for its purification and
preparation for eternity.”

We conclude our remarks on the infidel Antichrist, and on the whole of this
deeply interesting though somewhat obscure chapter, with the werds of Auberlen :
“It cannot be proved with absolute certainty that a personal Antichrist will stand
at the head of the Antichristian kingdom; for it is possible that the eighth, like
the preceding heads (of the beast in Rev, vii.), designates a kingdom, a power, and
not a person ; and the same may be said concerning the Antichristian horn described
by Daniel, when compared with the ten horns. But the type of Antiochus Epiphanes
is of decisive importance ; for this personal enemy of God’s kingdom is described

264





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL, OnAP, XI,
Se


in the eighth chapter of Daniel, as a little, gradually increasing horn, just as Anti-
christ is spoken of in the seventh. And this is corroborated by the Apostle Paul
(2 Thess, ii.), who describes Antichrist (ver. 4) with colours evidently furnished by
Daniel’s sketch of Antiochus, and who calls him, moreover, the “ Man of Sin,” the
Son of perdition, which, if explained naturally, must refer to an individual (Com-
pare John xvii, 12, where the same expression is used of Judas). In favour of the
same view may be adduced, likewise, analogies in the history of the world; the
previous world-kingdoms (or universal empires) had extraordinary persons as their
heads, as Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Alexander the Great, The spiritual and universal
character does not exclude individual, personal representations. Every spiritual
tendency has its distinguished representatives, and when it has reached its perfec-
tion, provides its representative xas’ éZoyq» (par excellence), Hence Antichristian
tendencies produce different Antichrists; and it is a sober historical view when
Christianity maintains that these separate Antichrists shall, some future day, find
their consummation in an individual far excelling them in the intensity of his evil
eharacter (Lange). In conclusion, we must not omit to mention that Paul and John
agree in speaking emphatically of the destruction of Antichrist. . . . His triumph
is but of short duration ; judgment speedily overtakes him, The man of sin is of
necessity a child of death, the son of perdition, . . . The return of the “ beast”
(Rev. xvii. 11) is represented, or at least prepared, in that principle which, since
1789, has manifested itself in beast-like outbreaks, and has since then been
developed both extensively and intensively. This principle has appeared in various
forms, in the Revolution, in Napoleon, @) despotism sanctioning revolution ; proving,
at the same time, that the beast, even in this shape, can carry the “harlot” in
Socialism and Communism. But we may yet expect other manifestations. @) At
present, it is the endeavour of churches and governments to keep down this
monster ; but it has shown its teeth more than once, and given unmistakable signs
that it is regaining life and strength. How long its development shall last,—
whether it is to grow up rapidly,—through what different phases it has yet to pass,
—at what period the seventh kingdom shall pass over into the eighth (Rev. xvii.),
is not known to man: God alone knows it. It is not for us to know the times or
the seasons (Acts i. 7); but it 7s for us to take to heart the word of our Lord,
“Can ye not discern the signs of the times $” (Matt. xvi. 3).


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—®@ Mr. The “prince of the covenant” he views


Irving and others find a remarkable
correspondence between the prophecy
concerning the “ vile person” and the
first Napoleon. The “raiser of taxes,”
who preceded him, is identified with
Louis XVL, whose death was brought
about “neither in anger nor in battle,”
but in cold blood, by the sentence of
that very power to which his raising
of taxes had given birth. The rise of
Napoleon is considered to be described
in ver. 21, “with a general compre-
hensiveness a8 wonderful as in the
former verse was the Bourbon’s fate.”
Ver. 22, Mr. Irving thinks, describes
the first act of Napoleon’s career in
Italy almost in his own words which he
addressed to his troops: ‘You have
precipitated yourselves like a torrent
from the summit of the Apennines,”


as the pope, who declared his submis-
sion in a league which terminated the
campaign. In correspondence with ver.
23, he remarks, that Napoleon, after the
league just mentioned so wrought with
men of science and letters as well as
with the common people, to induce them
to regard him as the harbinger of light,
reason, and liberty, that he was able,
with a small force, so to increase his
power as to enter the richest provinces
of Italy, and levy upon them exactions
of every kind, which he scattered among
his soldiers; at the same time plunder-
ing churches and repositories of art of
their treasures which no conqueror had
hitherto done. Verses 25~—27 were ful-
filled in the surprising victories gained
over the emperor of Austria, the king
of the South, through secret intel-
265


CHAP, XI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





ligence had with one high in the Aus-
trian counsels; the emperor concerting
the campaign with the pope or prince
of the covenant, plotting mischief to-
gether, viz., the continuance of the
mystery of iniquity,—but in vain, as its
end was determined ; the result being
that Rome became a republic, the
priests were banished, and the pope
died in exile. Ver. 28 is viewed as
giving the key to his future wars and
animosities, viz, his ‘indignation
against the holy covenant,” or that
people who continued to maintain the
cause of religion and, righteousness
against his usurpation and the con-
federacy to perpetuate the mischiefs of
the papacy, viz., the British nation.

@) Faber, Frere, Gauntlett, and othera,
expressed their conviction, previous to
1820, that a second French emperor,
exactly like the first, would arise nearer
to the end, and would constitute the
last great Antichrist. More than twenty
other writers, according to Mr. Baxter,
up to 1861, considered the late em-
peror, Napoleon IIL, to be the eighth
head of the apocalyptic beast or future
personal Antichrist, Points of resem-
blance between him and the first Na-
poleon were not wanting; enough to
show that the idea of a repetition might
easily be verified, and to strike the at-
tention of those who, according to the
Lord’a direction, seek to discern the
signs of the times, That two poten-
tates, so closely related to each other,
should arise and, after a brief interval,
succeed each other, both so unlikely in
themselves, and with such humble be-
ginnings, and bearing so strong a re-
semblance both to each other and to


watch, But the end was not yet,
* Deus habet sus horas et moras.” Not
withstanding the expressed presenti-
ment of the first Napoleon that his
nephew should be the ultimate repre-
sentative of the Napoleonic dynasty,
and the profound conviction of that
nephew, even from early life, that he
had a great mission and destiny to fulfil
in relation to France ; notwithstanding
that, singularly, after becoming presi-
dent of the French Republic in 1851, he
became emperor of France in 1852,
being crowned on the anniversary of
the battle of Austerlitz and the corona-
tion of Napoleon L, thus restoring the
Napoleonic dynasty, when the French
people inscribed on an arch erected in
his honour the remarkable words, “‘ The
uncle that was, the nephew that is,” as if
in literal fulfilment of Rev. xvii. 8, 11;
notwithstanding that from 1849 to 1870
he maintained military occupation of
Rome, and declared that the temporal
power of the pope was incompatible
with the advance of civilisation and
must be put down, being termed the
“modern Augustus, nephew and her
of Cesar ;” and finally, notwithstanding
that he succeeded in acquiring an almost
paramount influence over Spain and
Italy, while he extended his power in
Algeria and the northern coast of
Africa, and appeared determined to
possess himself of Palestine, and that,
as in the case of the first Napoleon,
Great Britain appeared to be the only
impediment to his attainment of un-
controlled dominion over the Roman
world; yet he passed away, broken
apparently in the zenith of his pros
perity and power, and left the pro


the prophecy, was certainly remarkable, _pheey still unfulfilled.
and fitted at least to keep men on the
HOMILETICS.


Szor. XLIV.—Tue Great Trisunatiox.


(Chap. xii. 1.)


The angel continues his discourse regarding the things that should befall


Daniel’s people in the last days,


He had shown him the fall of their last great


adversary in the “glorious holy mountain” where, in his pride and indignation


against the people of God, he had planted the tabernacles of his


palace, He now


describes what should be the experience of men in general at that period, but witk
a special reference to Daniel’s own people. ‘There shall be a time of trouble,


266


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL, CHAP, Xi








such as there never was since there was a nation even to that same time.” To this,
the great tribulation, we now turn our attention. The Lord the Spirit give light !

That there should be such a time of trouble previous to the period of
lasting peace and prosperity to Israel and the world, Daniel might have already
read in the sacred books which he possessed, The song of Moses in the law had
concluded with intimations of such a time (Deut. xxxii. 34-43), Isaiah had been
led more than once to enlarge upon it, when foretelling the year of the Lord’s
redeemed, It was with reference to it that the Lord exhorts His people when He
_ says: “Come, My people, enter into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about
thee, and hide thee for a little season, until the indignation be overpast. For,
behold, the Lord cometh out of His place to punish the inhabitants of the world
for their iniquity ; and the earth shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover
her slain” (Isa, xxvi. 20, 21). In reference to the same period the prophet had
asked, ‘ Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments, from Bozrah ?
This that is glorious in His apparel, travelling in the greatness of His strength?”
The answer is given by the Redeemer and Deliverer of His people, “I that speak
in righteousness, mighty to save.” The prophet asks again, “ Wherefore art thou
red in Thine apparel, and Thy garments like him that treadeth in the wine-fat?”
To which the answer is returned, “I have trodden the winepress alone; and of
the people there was none with Me: for I will tread them in Mine anger, and
trample them in My fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon My garments,
and I will stain all My raiment,”—the blood here that of his enemies, not His own,
“For the day of vengeance is in Mine heart, and the year of My redeemed is
eome ” (Isa, lxiii, 1-4). That day of vengeance was to follow “ the acceptable year
of the Lord ;” and hence His object was only to declare the latter when, reading
mm the synagogue at Nazareth from Isa. Ixi. 1-2, Jesus stopped at the words, “the
day of vengeance of our God.” Zephaniah had also predicted the same time
of trouble as ushering in the glory of the future age. ‘‘For My determination
is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them
Mine indignation, even all My fierce anger ; for all the earth shall be devoured with
the fire of My jealousy. For then will I turn to the people a pure language, that
they may call upon the name of the Lord, to serve Him with one consent ” (Zeph.
iii. 8, 9). Jeremiah had written of the same period of tribulation, adding, “It is
even the time of Jacob’s trouble ; but he shall be saved out of it” (Jer. xxx. 7),
Ezekiel, about half a century before this last vision of Daniel, had been inspired to
predict the same time of trouble in the following sublime and terrific language :~
“‘ Speak to every feathered fowl and to every beast of the field, Assemble yourselves,
and come ; gather yourselves on every side to the sacrifice that I do sacrifice for
you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh and
drink blood. Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the princes
of the earth, of rams, and of lambs, and of- goats, of bullocks, all of them fatlings
of Bashan, And ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye be drunken,
of My sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you. Thus ye shall be filled at My table
with horses and chariots, with mighty men, and with all men of war, saith the
Lord God, And I will set My glory among the nations, and the nations shall see
My judgment that I have executed, and My hand that I have laid upon them. So
the house of Israel shall know that I am the Lord their God from that day and
forward. And the nations shall know that the house of Israel went into captivity
for their iniquity ; because they trespassed against Me, therefore hid I My face from
them, and gave them into the hand of their enemies; so fell they all by the sword,
According to their uncleanness, and according to their transgressions, have I done
unto them, and hid My face from them, Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Now
will I bring again the captivity of Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole house of
Israel, and will be jealous for My holy name” (Ezek. xxxix. 17-25). This was,
doubtless, the same tribulation of which Jesus forewarned His disciples when He


267


CHAP. XII, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





said, “ There shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the
world to that time, no, nor ever shall be ;” adding, “ Immediately after the tribu-
lation of those days shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her
light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be
shaken. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven: and then
shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of Man
coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.” This time of tribu-
lation the Saviour, like the prophets before Him, connects with that of His
people’s redemption, adding, according to Luke, “When these things begin to
come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption draweth
nigh ” (Luke xxi. 28).

We may notice in connection with this time of trouble—

I. The time of it. The angel says, “At that time,”@) te, when the last
hostile power shall, as had just been mentioned, “go forth with great fury to
destroy and utterly to make away many,” and shall “ plant the tabernacles of his
palace between the seas in the glorious holy mountain,” there to meet with his end
(chap. xi. 44, 45). The last clause of the verse connects it with the time of retarn-
ing mercy to the covenant people, when “all Israel shall be saved” (Rom. xi. 26) ;
while the second verse connects it with the resurrection of the dead, both events
being elsewhere connected with the Lord’s second appearing (Zech. xii. 10; Rev.
i, 7; Matt. xxiv. 39; Acts iii 19-21, R.V.; 1 Cor. xv. 23; 1 Thess, iv. 15-17).
So Jesus, as we have seen, connects the time of tribulation with that of His own
coming ‘‘in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.” From the events
which are to follow it, however, it is obviously not to be confounded with the
time of the general judgment. The fulfilment of the promises regarding Israel is
to follow.

IL The subjects of the tribulation. These, apparently, are twofold : (1) The
nations of apostate Christendom forming the great confederacy under the leadershi
of the infidel and final Antichrist, who is then to come to his end ; and (2) Israel or
the Jews, whose great and final trouble it is to be, previous to their restoration as
God’s covenant people,—“ the time of Jacob’s trouble.” In regard to the former,
the tribulation will apparently be both immediately from the hand of God, whose
sacrifice their destruction is said to be, and who speaks of “raining upon the
infidel leader, and his bands, and the many peoples that are with him, an over-
flowing rain, and great hailstones, fire and brimstone ;” and also mediately, through
the instrumentality both of others and themselves, as God declares by the same
prophet, that He will call for a sword against the invading enemy throughout all
His mountains, while every man’s sword shall be against his fellow, and that He
will “ plead against him with pestilence and with blood ” (Ezek. xxxviii. 21, 22).
In reference to Israel, the cause or instrument of the tribulation will apparently be
the hostile power itself, whom God however brings up against them, and gives inte
his hand (Ezek. xxxviii, 16, 17, xxxix. 23,24). The procuring cause of the tribula-
tion in both cases is sin, On the part of the infidel leader and his followers and
abettors throughout the nations, it is pride, infidelity, defiance of God, covetous-
ness and rapacity, the enmity against God and His people culminating in one
grand attack upon Israel now apparently prosperous and at ease in their own
country (Ezek. xxxviii, 8-13). On the part of Israel, it is unbelief and rejection
of their Saviour-King yet unrepented of and unforgiven (Ezek. xxxix, 23, 24), the
curse called down upon themselves and their children now taking its full and
final effect, when they shall have filled up the measure of their iniquity (Matt.
xxvii. 25).

IIL The greatness of it. It is here spoken of as unparalleled, and is so
characterised by Jeremiah: “ Alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it:
it is even the day of Jacob’s trouble” (Jer. xxx. 7). The same language used by
the Saviour in reference to it. The unparalleled greatness of it seen both in the

268


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL. OMAP, XTi,





extent and intensity of it. Terrible indeed the tribulation that shall exceed that
of the Deluge, the Cities of the Plain, Jerusalem in its siege and capture by the
Chaldeans and then by the Romans, the French Revolution and the Reign of
Terror. Its greatness inferred from the exhortation of Jesus to His disciples and
people in every age: ‘‘ Watch and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy
to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of
Man” (Luke xxi. 36). The same to be inferred from the object of it. It is the
day of recompenses, both in regard to Israel and the nations of Christendom, when
the blood of God’s saints shed from the beginning shall be avenged on Jew and
Gentile, when “the earth shall disclose her blood—the blood which she has been .
caused to drink,—and shall no more cover her slain” (Isa. xxvi. 21). Its greatness
may be inferred also from its results. It is to terminate, in a general sense, not
only the sins and sufferings of Israel but of the world at large, and to usher ina
period of righteousness and peace that shall continue for at least a thousand years,
It is in reference to that period that the prophetic Psalmist writes, ‘Come, behold
the works of the Lord, what desolations He hath made in the earth, He maketh
wars to cease unto the end of the earth ; He breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear
in sunder; He burneth the (war-) chariot in the fire. Be still and know that I amGod;
I will be exalted among the heathen ; I will be exalted in the earth” (Ps. xlvi. 8-10).
It is as the result of it that God will turn upon the peoples a pure language, so that
they shall all serve Him with one consent (Zeph. iii. 8). The greatness of the tribula-
tion may also be gathered from its character and the agents in it. Proceeding, as
in great part it is to do, from the great infidel leader and his Antichristian host,
whose coming as the Man of Sin, the Son of perdition, and that Wicked or Lawless
one, is after the power and energy of Satan, it shall inaugurate a time of unbridled
wickedness, fully-developed ungodliness, and daring God-defying infidelity ; and
who, in his fury at the evil tidings that are to reach him in the midst of his
triumphant iniquity, shall “ go forth to destroy and utterly to make away many.”
Of all evil times it will be the most evil, faith being scarcely any longer to be
found in “the earth, few if any godly men left, those there are being hidden as
in a pavilion in the chambers of God’s protection provided for them, and the
restraints of His grieved and insulted Spirit being for the time withdrawn from
the earth ; a period of which the three years and a half at the commencement of
the French Revolution, during which religion was publicly and openly proscribed,
the Sabbath abolished, the Bible dragged through the streets of Paris at the tail of
an ass, and a beautiful but profligate woman worshipped in the church of Notre
Dame as the Goddess of Reason, may have been an instalment and a type.
Physical disturbances and commotions seem to be indicated both by the prophets
and the Saviour Himself, as accompanying these civil and religious ones ; signs
appearing in the heavenly bodies, and the powers of heaven being shaken, both as
symbols and accompaniments of the distress of nations ; the godly being taught to
sing in the prospect of that time of trouble; ‘The Lord of hosts is with us ; the
God of Jacob is our refuge; therefore will we not fear, although the earth be
removed, and the mountains be cast into the depths of the sea: though the waters
thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains shake with the swelling
thereof” (Ps. xlvi. 2, 8). Nothing is said in the text to indicate the duration of
this time of trouble; but we may gather from other places that its brevity will be
in proportion to its intensity. The godly are to hide themselves “for a Jtttle
moment, till the indignation be overpast.” ‘“ A short work will the Lord make
upon the earth.” For the elect’s sake ‘the days will be shortened,” for otherwise,
according to the Saviour’s declaration, “ no flesh should be saved ” (Matt, xxiv. 22).
The subject calls for solemn thought and earnest preparation. That this time of
great and unparalleled tribulation shall come cannot be questioned by any believer
in Revelation. The words of a great writer, philosopher, and divine, now passed
away, express the conclusion of a simple-minded, unbiassed reader of Ae Word :


@waP. XIz HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





“T utterly despair,” said the late Dr. Chalmers, “ of the universal prevalence of
Christianity as the result of a painful missionary process. I look for its conclu-
sive establishment through a widening passage of desolating judgments, with the
utter demolition of our present civil and ecclesiastical structures.” (2) How near we
may be to this predicted state of things, or how far off from it, it is impossible for
any one to say. Whether perceptibly or not, we are doubtless approaching to it,
Signs are not wanting to indicate that such is the case. “This gospel of the
kingdom,” said the Saviour when speaking of that future period, “shall first be
preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations ”"—preached, not believed
_in—“ and then shall the end come” (Matt. xxiv. 14). This is rapidly taking place,
Missionary operations are constantly multiplying. So also are infidelity and its
agencies. It has recently been said by a high authority, that religion seems to be
unsettled, and almost going away from various countries,@) The rapidity with
which great changes at present take place is the subject of general remark. A few
years may suffice to bring the predicted period. For ought we know, the present
living generation may see and participate in the great tribulation. It is for all to
seek earnestly to secure for themselves and others a place of security in time,
while the doors of the provided ark are open. ‘Seek righteousness ; seek meek-
ness ; it may be ye may be hid in the day of the Lord’s anger” (Zeph. ii. 3). The
present time is to be embraced by earnestly laying hold of the gracious covenant
held out to us in Christ, and persuading others also to do the same ; and thus being
prepared for the time when it will be said, in connection with predicted judg-
ments, ‘‘Gather My saints together unto Me, those that have made a covenant
with Me by sacrifice” (Ps. 1.5). “‘ Kiss the Son, lest He be angry, and ye perish
from the way, when His wrath is kindled but a little: blessed are all they that


put their trust in Him ” (Ps. ii. 12).


EXEGETICAL NOTES,—@) “ dé
that time.” Keil remarks that the ex-
pression points back to the “time of
the end” (chap, xi. 40), the time when
the final hostile and persecuting power
rises up to subdue the whole world, and
sets up his camp in the Holy Land, to
destroy many in great anger, and totally
to uproot them. He observes that the
description of this oppression seems to
be based upon Jer. xxx. 7, the time of
trouble being the climax which the hos-
tile king shall bring upon Israel, and
occurring with the expiry of the last or
seventieth week (chap. ix. 26); while,
with Kranichfeld, he identifies Israel’s
deliverance out of it with the setting
up of Messiah’s kingdom as described
in chap, vii, 22-27. He agrees with
Hiivernick in opposing those who refer
this verse to the period of persecution
under Antiochus, on the ground that
the statement regarding it is far too
strong for such a period, while the
promised deliverance of those “ written
in the book” does not accord with that
Syrian oppression, Hiivernick under-
stands the “trouble” of the sufferings

270


and oppressions which the people of
Israel should endure at the destruc-
tion of Jerusalem by the Romans, but
which should be most fully realised
only at the second coming of the Lord
(Matt. xxiv. 21, 22). Hofmann finds
in this and the two following verses
the prophecy of the final close of the
history of nations, the time of the great
tribulation at the termination of the
present course of the world, the com-
plete salvation of Israel in it, and the
resurrection of the dead at the end of
the world. Calvin interpreted the words
of the increased troubles and heavier
afflictions to be endured by the Church
after the manifestation of Christ. Chry-
sostom, Grotius, and others understand
them of the persecutions of Antiochus
while his armies were still in Judea
Junius, with Calvin, applies them to
the troubles of the Church in the times
of the Gospel. Calovius limits them
to the last times, in the “end of the
days.” Brightman remarks that the
tribulation cannot be applied to any
trouble from Antiochus or the Romans,
as after it no calamity is to be expected


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIBL,





by the Jews, the suffering inflicted on
them by those powers being insignificant
compared with this misery in which,
after sixteen, now eighteen, centuries,
the Jews still lie buried, He considers
the tribulation to have reference to the
Jews, Daniel’s own people, of whom,
however, he thinks, some will very
likely hold obstinately to their legal
rights and institutions, notwithstanding
the deliverance of their nation, and the
glory with which the truth shall then
flourish,

(@) The same writer, in his “ Sabbath
Scripture Readings” on Rev. xv. says:
“Can this sea of glass on which the
saints might stand and look on the
execution of God’s righteous sentence
on the earth at large—can it be what
my friend Edward Irving imagined it
to be,—one country in the world that
should stand exempted from the deso-
lations which are to go abroad over
the face of it, and that country to be
the evangelical and missionary Britain,
standing aloof from popery, and actu-
ated generally and throughout, or at


partially, by a pure, and scriptural,
and Protestant faith? The song of
Moses, as commemorating the destruc-
tion of the enemies of the Church, and
the Church’s safety as well as prospects,
might well harmonise with the song of
the Lamb ; and both together might har-
monise with the circumstances of that
transition period, when plagues were to
be sent down from heaven upon the earth,
and, as the fruit of God’s judgments
being made manifest, all nations were
to come and worship before Him.”

(8) * Any one,” said Cardinal New-
man lately in a sermon at Birmingham,
“ who looked into the news of the day,
would see quite enough in the state of
things at home and abroad, to under-
stand the great need of intercession.
There was certainly a very dark pro-
spect before them with regard to reli-
gion ; and without saying whether the
troubles were greater or less than those
which had previously tried the Church,
they had a depth which, to those who
only saw the present, was more serious
and more dangerous than any depth
that had been.”


least influentially, though it might be


HOMILETICS.
Szor. XLV.—Twe Detiverance or THE Jews, (Chap. xii. 1,
last clause.)


The object for which the angel was sent to Daniel was to communicate to
him what should befall his people in the latter days. He had already intimated
to him the coming of Messiah at a definite period, with the calamities which
should follow their wicked rejection of Him even to the time of the end. These
calamities, however, were to culminate, as the end approached, in a time of trouble
such as had never yet been since there was @ nation. It is now promised, how-
ever, for the comfort of Daniel and his godly countrymen, that his people should
be delivered out of that tribulation, at least a portion of them,—“ every one that
shall be found written in the book.” We notice, in connection with this pro-
mised deliverance—

L The deliverance itself. ‘Thy people shall be delivered.” Daniel’s people
were the Jews, the descendants, with himself, of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob ; those
for whom he had so earnestly prayed, and whose sins he had so penitently con-
fessed (chap. ix.) The whole twelve tribes are included. These, in consequence
of Solomon’s apostasy, had indeed been divided into two kingdoms, those of
Judah and Israel ; the former consisting of the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin,
the latter of the remaining ten (1 Kings xi. 9-13). They formed, however, but
one people, and were yet again to be united in one kingdom (Ezek, xxxvii.
16-24). Those constituting the kingdom of Israel, having been the first to
apostatise to idolatry, were the first to be led captive from their own land, which
was done by the Assyrians, who placed them in various cities of he Medea


CHAP, ZTE, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL,








(2 Kings xv. 29, xvii. 56). The two tribes forming the kingdom of Judah, having
imitated the apostasy of the kingdom of Israel, were carried captive, on three
separate occasions, by Nebuchadnezzar into Babylon. It was more especially those
two tribes who returned to Judea after the edict of Cyrus; and of these only a
portion. The whole twelve tribes, however, were regarded as existing in the days
of the apostles, though mostly scattered among the Gentiles (Acts xxvi. 6, 7;
James i. 1; John vii. 35). It is more especially those who formed the kingdom
of Judah, the tribes of Judah and Benjamin, with a sprinkling from the other
tribes, that are now known as Jews, the ten tribes being as yet comparatively
unknown, though doubtless to be found in various parts of the world. It seems
to be more especially those of the kingdom of Judah that are here indicated, as it
appears to be they who shall be found in Jerusalem and Judea at the period
referred to (Zech. xii, 2, 4, 6-10). These apparently intended to be the means of
seeking out and bringing back their scattered brethren after their own conversion
and acceptance of the Saviour (Isa, Ixvi. 19-22). Even of those, however, who,
being in Judea and Jerusalem at the time of the great tribulation under their final
adversary, only a portion will be delivered.@) Zechariah predicts that in all the
land two-thirds should be cut off and die, but the third should be left therein, to
be brought through the fire and refined as silver is refined, and be made God’s
people, not merely in name as before, but in reality and truth (Zech. xiii. 8, 9).
They are here spoken of as those “ written in the book ;” that book being doubt-
less the secret register of those whom, as an elect remnant, it was the Lord’s
sovereign purpose to spare, as the nucleus of the future Church of Abraham’s
seed ; and doubtless those who, according to the prophet’s exhortation, had truly
and in time sought righteousness and meekness, and under the outpoured Spirit of
grace and supplication had looked to Him whom they had pierced, and had mourned
because of Him, and had thus been led to the fountain opened for sin and unclean-
ness (Zech. xii. 10, xiii. 1). Such a book frequently referred to as “the book of
life,” or “of the living” (Phil. iv. 3; Rev. iii, 5, xiii. 8; Luke x. 25; Exod.
xxxii, 42; Ps. lxix. 28). The deliverance is, in the first instance, one from death
by the sword of the enemy. According to Zechariah, all nations will be gathered
at that time, doubtless under this same infidel chief, against Jerusalem ; and the ci
shall be taken, the houses rifled, and the women ravished, and half of the inhabi-
tants shall go into captivity ; but “the residue of the people shall not be cut off
from the city ” (Zech. xiv. 2), This residue doubtless the remnant in the text. This
deliverance from death, however, to be followed with a still more important and
blessed one, the deliverance from spiritual death and introduction into Messiah’s
kingdom.

IL The agency employed in effecting it. This is said to be “ Michael,” called
elsewhere “ Michael your prince,” and “the prince that standeth up for the children
of thy people.” @) In the New Testament called Michael the archangel (Jude 9).
Represented in the book of Revelation as, in conjunction with the angels under
him, fighting with the devil and his angels (Rev. xii. 7), He appears especially
charged with the defence of God’s ancient people. The ministry of angels with
their allotment to various charges already referred to under chap. x. Michael, as
the chief of the angel princes, and especial intrusted with the defence and care of
Israel, naturally introduced in this their final conflict with the powers of this world,
under the leadership of one whose coming is after the working of Satan with all
power and deceivableness (2 Thess. ii, 9), and against whom, with his mighty
force, it might seem impossible that Israel should be able to stand. Quite in
accordance with the economy of God’s providential government of the Church and
the world, to employ angelic agency for the accomplishment of His purposes,
whether of mercy or of judgment. In what particular manner Michael executes
the charge committed to him on this occasion, it is not for us to inquire An
angel nara in one night a hundred and eighty-five thousand Assyrians that lay


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL. OHAP. XIt.





encamped about Jerusalem. ‘The stars in their courses fought against Sisera.”
In a thousand ways of which we have now no conception the angelic agents fulfil
their ministry.

IIL. The results of the deliverance. The deliverance, in the first instance, was
one from the sword of Antichrist and his infidel host. It is also the deliverance
of Israel from their last oppressor, and the termination of that captivity under
which, in consequence of their unbelief and rejection of their divine King and
Saviour, they had lain for so many centuries, as the curse which their fathers who
crucified their King called down upon themselves and their children. The time of
their rejection by God, and their scattering and crushing under the hand of the
Gentiles into which they had been delivered, will now come to an end. The
“seven times” of punishment that were to pass over them for their sin will now
have expired. The time to favour Zion, even the set time, will now have come,
He that had scattered Israel is now, according to the promise, to gather him. (4)
The threatenings and the curses had in righteous judgment been executed, and now
in like manner the promises made to their fathers were in unmerited mercy to be
fulfilled also, The curse can now be removed and the blessing bestowed, because
Israel, through the Spirit of grace and supplication poured upon them, will have
penitently accepted their long-rejected King and Saviour. They will have been
brought, with the veil removed from their hearts, to say in faith, “ Blessed is He
that cometh in the name of the Lord,” and their house is to remain no longer
desolate. They are now to be betrothed in righteousness, and in judgment, and in
loving-kindness, in mercies, and in faithfulness—to be betrothed for ever (Hosea
ii, 19, 20). The blindness that in part overtook Israel as the result of their
rejection of their Messiah, was to be taken away when the fulness of the times of
the Gentiles should be come in, when all Israel should be saved. That time will
now have come. The Deliverer was to come out of Zion to them that turn from
ungodliness in Jacob, and to those who have looked on their once pierced Redeemer.
That Deliverer now comes, He comes to turn away ungodliness from Jacob, and to
graft the natural branches, broken off on account of unbelief, again into their own
olive tree. The casting away of Israel for a time was the reconciling of the world ;
the receiving back of them again was to be to that same world “life from the
dead.” ©) They are now to be restored to the high and holy position originally
intended for them, as a kingdom of priests unto God in the service of humanity.
A mere external deliverance without this spiritual one would have left Israel but as
they were, But now the new covenant is to be made with them, in virtue of which,
while their iniquities are all forgiven, God’s law is put within their hearts and
written indelibly on their minds by the Holy Ghost. That better covenant they
accept when they look by faith on Him whom they pierced and mourn for Him, a
covenant made throngh the sacrifice of the Son of God (Ps. 1. 5).

‘We may make one reflection, The deliverance in the text suggests the deliver-
ance which every individual, whether Jew or Gentile, needs, and that which, pro-
cured by the Son of God incarnate for us, is freely held out to each in the Gospel ;
that with which no external deliverance is once to be compared, but of which
Israel’s deliverance from their external enemies is a type. It is deliverance from the
curse of a broken law, from the deserved wrath of God, from the dominion of sin,
from the power of Satan, and from the pains of eternal death. It is deliverance from
a tribulation with which that of Israel under Antichrist, great as it will be, is only
as a shadow; a tribulation from which, beyond a certain period, deliverance will
be impossible. “ After death, the judgment.” It is a deliverance, too, which, like
that of Israel in the text, places the subjects of it in the glorious position of kings
and priests to God. This deliverance also, like that in the text, is experienced in
looking through the Spirit of grace and supplication, believingly and penitently, on
Him whom we too, by our sins and unbelief, have pierced, and, as penitents, wash-
ing our guilty souls in the fountain of a Redeemer’s blood, opened for pee: fos

8


OHAP. XII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





uncleanness, That deliverance is freely offered in the Gospel. A believing,


humble, hearty acceptance of it makes it our own.
‘‘ Behold, now is the accepted time ; behold, now is the day of salvation.”


now,


EXEGETICAL NOTES.-@)“ Zvery
one that shall be found written,” &e.
According to Professor Lee and others,
these are not to be the Jews at large,
but the holy remnant who embraced
Jesus as the Messiah, and escape to
carry the tidings of salvation to the
ends of the earth, Speaking of Isa
xxiv. 6, ‘“‘Few men left,” Dr. Chalmers
remarks: “a remnant, however, will be
left, and a good remnant; and this
not confined to the land of Israel, but
among all the neighbouring countries
that had been laid waste; for the voice
of praise was to arise from the sea and
from the isles, and this too to God as
the Lord God of Israel. This voice
was to arise from the midst of cruel
sufferings, even ‘in the fires’ where-
with (ver. 6) the houses were burnt by
their invaders.” He adds: “In this
prophecy is foreshown a visitation upon
the earth still future, which is to emerge
in the Millennium—how emphatically
told in this place !—when the Lord shall
seign in Jerusalem, and before His an-
sients gloriously.”

(@) “In the book.” The expression
“written in the book” probably equi-
valent to “written among the living
in Jerusalem” (Isa. iv. 3), or “ written
in the book of life” (Phil. iv. 3). This
book is the register made and kept by
God Himself of those whom He destines
to life. It is from this that the Jews
have the notion that the name of each
individual is written at the beginning
of each year in a book of life or of
death, according as he is to live or
otherwise through the course of that
year,—a recognition of the truth, “ the
number of his months is with Thee ;”
“my times are in Thy hand.” The “book
of life,” however, refers to a higher
kind of life than the present one. The
disciples were to rejoice that “their
names were written in heaven,” rather
than that the spirits were subject to
them (Luke x. 20). Hitsig, with
whom Keil agrees, remarks that “the
book of life is the record of those who

274


And it is to be accepted


shall live; the list of the citizens of
the Messianic kingdom (Phil. iv. 3) ; in
Isaiah (iv. 3) it contains the names of
those who reach it while living; in
Daniel, those also who must first be
raised from the dead.”

@) “ Michael.” Regarded by Calvin
and some others of the older commenta-
tors as Christ Himself. So Havernick
interprets the text of the first appearance
of Christ. Most understand Michael to
be the archangel. Dr. Cox thinks that
the standing up of Michael for Daniel’s
people corresponds with the going forth
of Him who is called Faithful and True
upon the white horse; the trouble here
predicted agreeing with the mighty over
throw of the Antichristian powers, who
are to be cast into the “ lake burning
with brimstone,” as there represented,
Brightman thinks Michael to be some
certain angel, whose ministry the great
Prince will employ in that battle.

() Auberlen remarks: “The predic-
tions contained in Lev. xxvi. 31-45;
Deut. xxvi. 62-68, xxix. 22, xxx. 14,
xxxii, 15-43, concerning Israel’s apos-
tasy and dispersion among the heathen,
and then concerning their conversion
and glorious re-establishment in the
Holy Land, were not exhaustively ful-
filled in the short decennia of the
Assyrian and Babylonian exile, and in
the troublous centuries of the restora-
tion that followed those captivities. On
the contrary, the curse lies even this
day on the Jewish nation ; and the pro-
mised restoration awaits yet its fulfil.
ment and realisation, For him who
believes in the fulfilment of prophecy,
it is only necessary to read the words
of Scripture in order to be persuaded
of this, The great commentary on the
history of revelation is given us in the
miraculous preservation of the Jewish
nation through all centuries to our time,
while other nationalities are either de-
stroyed or have mixed to such an extent
with other nations, that they are dis-
figured to such a degree that they can
scarcely be recognised,—a preservation


HIOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL.





which is doubly miraculous; since
Israel is dispersed in all countries of
the earth, while other nations have their
fixed stationary residence,”

(6) “The conversion of Israel stands
in a causal, and not merely temporal or
chronological connection with the com-
ing of Christ; and is succeeded by a
new state of the world in which a new
‘life,’ in a greater, more richly charac-
teristic fulness of Spirit, will spread from
the people of God to all the nations
of the earth; and in comparison with
which the life of nations, during the
preceding ages, might be called ‘ death.’
The Apostle designates this new state of
the world by the same expression which
he uses when speaking of the regenera-
tion of individuals, as ‘life from the
dead’ (Rom. vi. 13, compare Eph. ii.
5; Col. ii. 13). As there is at present
a regeneration of individuals, so in the
future the life of nations, as such, shall
Se renewed: there shall be a world-
regeneration, Quite in accordance with
this is the expression used by our Lord
when He denotes the new Aton or age
Palingenesia, or ‘the regeneration’
(Matt. xix. 28) ; and by Peter when he
designates it as ‘ the times of refreshing
from the presence of the Lord’ (Acts
fii, 19-21).”—Auberlen.

(8) “The people of Israel,” says
Auberlen, “ receives for all time the
destiny to be the recipient and mediator
of divine communications.” Referring
to Exod. xix. 5,6, he says: “ Israel
stands in thesame relation to humanity
as a priest stands to the nation; a
mediator in the relations of humanity
to God. Hereby the relations of Israel
are fixed ; not merely for the times of
the old covenant, during which Israel
did not even exercise his priestly office
as regards the heathen; but for all


times and for ever. ... From the
religious point of view, in their relation
to God and Christ, as needing mercy
and salvation, Gentiles and Jews stand
on a perfect equality ; the same right-
eousness is imputed to them; the same
glory is given to them ; they have the
same participation in Christ, and by


‘Him both have access to the Father in


one Spirit. We see this also in the
transfigured (or glorified) church, which
consists of both Jews and Gentiles.
But from the standpoint of the history
of revelation, as regards the way in
which God uses men as instruments to
bring about the objects of His kingdom,
the case is altogether different. From
this point of view, Israel is, and ever
shall be, the chosen people through
which God executes His plans concern-
ing humanity.”

@ Dr. Chalmers, in his Daily Scrip-
ture Readings, says on Ps. 1, 1-15:
“IT am far more inclined to the literal
interpretation of this psalm, than to
that which would restrict it to the
mere preaching of the Gospel in the
days of the Apostles, It looks fay
more like the descent of the Son ot
Man on the Mount of Olives, with all
the accompaniments of a Jewish con-
version, and a first resurrection, and a
destruction of the assembled hosts of
Antichrist, The saints here summoned
are those within the pale of the evan-
gelical covenant ratified by the blood
of the sacrifice of Christ. The address
here given is like that from the Son of
God, now manifested to the Jews, who
had returned, though yet unconverted,
to the Holy Land ; but who, hearing the
words as well as seeing the person of
Him whom they had pierced, are ‘* born
in a day,” by the impressive remon-
strance and overpowering spectacle.”


HOMILETICS.


Szor. XLVI.—TuHeE ResvrReEcrTION.


(Chap. xii. 2.)


We come to a most precious and important part of the angel’s communication,
Tt is that in which he declares more distinctly than had ever been done before the
doctrine of the resurrection from the dead, and that in connection with retribution,
which had not previously been done. The object for which the statement con-
cerning this great truth is now so distinctly made, is obviously to comfort: Daniel


275


CMAP. IL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,








and his faithful though suffering people, and especially to sustain and encourage
those who should be called to lay down their life in the maintenance of God’s
truth and worship. That the statement produced this effect in the case of those
who suffered under Antiochus in the Maccabeean age, we have historical evidence
in the first book of the Maccabees; and more especially in the narrative there
given of the Jewish mother and her seven sons, who chose rather to endure 8
horrible death than renounce their religion, under the assured hope of ‘‘the better
resurrection.”() The statement is made here in connection with the promise of
deliverance to an elect remnant during the last great attack upon Israel from the
hostile world-power, in which so many should miserably perish ; and it is there
made apparently with the view of assuring them that at that period of deliverance
those who had fallen in maintenance of the truth, or had died in the faith and
service of Jehovah, should also receive their reward. The comfort intended
appears similar to that designed by the Apostle when he assures believers, who
are mourning the departure of those who had fallen asleep in Jesus, that when
the Lord should come again to take His people to glory, He would not glorify
those who should then be found alive till He had first raised from the dead those
that slept in Him (1 Thess, iv. 15-17).

In connection with the passage before us, we have to notice—

IL The fact of the resurrection. ‘Many of them that sleep in the dust of the
earth shall awake.” There should be little doubt that a true physical and literal
resurrection of the body is here intended, and not a moral, spiritual, and figurative
one, such as that described in Zzek. xxxvi.@) If a resurrection of the body is not
here declared, it will be difficult to find where it is, or to imagine words in which
it can be so, Although the doctrine may be found in earlier inspired writings, yet
it is doubtless on this passage that the Jewish martyrs more especially based their
hope, and from this that the Jews in general drew their assurance that there should
be a resurrection of the dead, and that both of the just and the unjust (Acts xxiv.
15).@) It is justly believed also that to this passage the Saviour’s words had
reference when, announcing Himself to be the Lord and Giver of life, He declared,
“The hour is coming in the which all that are in their graves shall hear His voice,
and shall come forth: they that have done good unto the resurrection of life; and
they that have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation” (John v. 28, 29).
Of this resurrection Jesus Himself rose as a specimen and firstfruits, in whom, as
the second Adam and Head of redeemed humanity, those who died literally and
physically in the first Adam, should in the same sense be “ made alive.” Accord-
ingly after His resurrection, Matthew relates, that many of the bodies of the saints
which slept arose, and “ went into the holy city and appeared unto many ” (Matt.
xxvii. 52, 53). To such a resurrection Paul referred in his appeal to Agrippa and
his audience at Caesarea when he asked, ‘‘Why should it be thought a thing
incredible with you, that God should raise the dead?” (Acts xxvi. 8). It is the
resurrection of the body that sleeps in the grave, or “in the dust of the earth,”
the same, yet changed. In respect to the bodies of believers at least, “it is sown
8 natural body, it is raised a spiritual body ; it is sown in dishonour, it is raised in
glory” (1 Cor. xv. 42-44), The expression of the angel, “them that sleep in the
dust,” though a similar one had been already used by Isaiah (chap, xxvi. 19), and
even by the Psalmist (Ps, xvii. 15), and still more in the book of Job (chap. xiv.
12), that which more especially gave occasion to the practice of speaking of death
as a sleep (Acts vii. 60; 1 Cor. xv. 6, 61; 1 Thess iv. 13, 14). More than from
the mere resemblance between the state of death and sleep, which even the heathen
recognised, the expression derives its significance from the fact that out of that
sleep there is an awaking, which mere natural reason seems never to have been
able to anticipate, and still less to obtain the certainty of ; although the trans
formation of insects might well suggest the possibility, if not the probability, of a
similar change for man,

276


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL, OHAP. XI,





IL The time of it. This apparently indicated by the place which the state-
ment occupies, and its connection with the preceding one, expressed by the copula
‘‘and.”(®) The angel appears to intimate that when the Jewish remnant experience
the promised deliverance, this other deliverance shall also take place in reference to
those that shall have slept the sleep of death. These two events, Israel’s conversion
and restoration, and the resurrection of the dead, are elsewhere brought together in
the Scriptures, as taking place soon after each other. The resurrection is coincident
with the Lord’s second appearing: “ Christ the firstfruits, afterward they that are
Christ’s at His coming.” But Israel’s conversion and restoration is connected with
the same glorious advent. . Peter exhorts the Jews to repent and be converted, not
only that their sins may be blotted out, but “that the times of refreshing may
come from the presence of the Lord, and He shall send Jesus Christ, who before
was preached” unto them, and whom “the heavens must receive till the restitution
of all things” (Acts iii. 19-21, R.V.) The Jews were not to see Jesus again until
they should say, ‘‘ Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord ” (Matt. xxiii.
39). The promise that they should look on Him whom they had pierced and
mourn because of Him, is viewed by the Apostle John as pointing to the Lord’s
visible appearing: ‘‘ Behold He cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see Him,
and they also which pierced Him, and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because
of Him” (Rev. i. 7). The Apostle Paul appears to connect the conversion of
Israel with the Redeemer’s coming: ‘‘ There shall come out of Zion the Deliverer,
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob ;” or, as it stands in Isaiah, “‘ The
Redeemer shall come to Zion, and to them that turn from transgression in Jacob”
(Is. lix, 20; Rom. xi. 26), The destruction of Antichrist, too, when he has “ planted
the tabernacles of his palace between the seas on the glorious holy mountain,” in
the great gathering at Armageddon connected with Israel’s conversion, is also
apparently represented in the Apocalypse as speedily, if not immediately, followed
by the first resurrection (Rev. xix. 19, 20, xx. 4, 5). Paul also appears un-
mistakably to connect the destruction of the Man of Sin or Son of perdition,
doubtless the same Wicked or Lawless One of whom Daniel prophesied, with the
personal and glorious appearing of the Lord Jesus: ‘“ whom the Lord shall consume
with the spirit (breath) of His mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness
(manifestation) of His coming” (2 Thess. ii. 1, 2, 8, R.V.) Daniel vii. seems
also plainly to connect the destruction of the fourth beast and the little horn
with the coming of the Son of Man with the clouds of heaven.” The destruction
of Antichrist, the conversion and restoration of Israel, the resurrection of the just,
thus appear closely connected with each other, and all with the Lord’s glorious
appearing.

IIL The subjects of the resurrection. “Many of them that sleep in the dust
of the earth.” Although the Scriptures, and probably this very passage, assure
us that all the dead shall rise again, both just and unjust, yet this does not
appear to be expressly declared by the angel in the words before us. Not all that
sleep, but many of them, shall awake.) “Many” are not here equivalent to
“ all,” as in Rom. v. 15,19; both because of the absence of the article, and because
the “ of,” or from among, that follows gives what is called a partitive signification,—
indicating a part, and not the whole, The “many” who shall awake are the
godly,—the “some,” or literally “ these,” who shall awake to everlasting life, and
of whom it is the angel’s special object now to speak. That the rest of the sleepers,
or the ungodly, shall also awake, appears to be also intimated ; these being the
second “some,” or literally ‘‘ those,” who shall awake to shame and everlasting
contempt. It being the angel’s object rather to speak of the future blessedness of
the faithful, it is their resurrection which is here especially declared as taking
place in connection with the predicted deliverance. The resurrection of the rest or
the ungodly, not being here especially intended to be spoken of, though plainly
intimated, was apparently indicated as taking place at a period Lae Hf that of


OMAP, XII. -  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





the others, Such we find to be in accordance with the manner in which the
resurrection is generally spoken of in the New Testament. The “resurrection of
the just” is spoken of by the Saviour as a thing by itself. “Thou shalt be
recompensed in the resurrection of the just” (Luke xiv. 14). “ In the resurrec-
tion "—that is, the state which it introduces—“ they neither marry, nor are
given in marriage, but are as the angels of God” (Matt. xxii. 30). Still more
expressly in Luke: “ The children of this world marry, and are given in marriage ;
but they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection
from the dead, neither marry nor are given in marriage : neither can they die any
more, for they are equal unto the angels; and are the children of God, being the
children of the resurrection” (Luke xx. 34-36). The resurrection here spoken
of obviously includes only the godly,—the “resurrection of the just,” which
only some shall be accounted worthy to obtain, even the children of God, who
are therefore also called ‘the children of the resurrection.” This is that which
the Epistle to the Hebrews represents the ancient martyrs as being so eager to
obtain, called “a better,” or rather “‘ the better, resurrection ” (Heb, xi, 35). This
also apparently that which in the Apocalypse is called “the first resurrection,”—
that, namely, of the martyrs and faithful followers of Jesus; the rest of the dead
not living again till the thousand years’ reign of Christ and His saints is finished
(Rev. xx. 4,5). The Apostle also only speaks of them that are Christ’s being raised
at His coming, this being according to the appointed order: “ Every man in his
own order ; Christ the firstfruits, afterwards they that are Christ’s at His coming”
(1 Cor. xv. 23). So when Christ shall descend with a shout, the voice of the
archangel, and the trump of God, it is “ the dead in Christ” that “rise first,”—
before the living saints are changed (1 Thess. iv, 15~17). It is, however, only in
the Apocalypse, which closes the canon of Scripture, that we seem to learn any-
thing of the length of the interval elapsing between the resurrection of the just
and that of the unjust.7) It is thus that, according to the Psalmist, the upright
“have dominion ” over the ungodly “in the morning” (Ps. xlix. 14); theirs being
not merely a resurrection of the dead, but a resurrection from, or from among, the
dead (Luke xx. 35), where it is literally and emphatically “the resurrection, that
from the dead.” ‘This general mode of representing the resurrection is not really
at variance with the Saviour’s words in John v. 28, though apparently so. The
resurrection of both classes is not said to be simultaneous ; the “ hour” in which
that of both shall take place being simply the time when it shall happen, without
defining it to be either at the same moment, or with a lengthened interval between.
This was to be learned from other testimonies of Scripture. It may be added that,
in like manner, Jewish doctors generally spoke of the resurrection as peculiarly
belonging to the righteous ; though they also taught that at some period or other
the bodies also of the wicked should be restored to life. (®

IV. The results of the resurrection. “Some (or these) to everlasting life;
some (or those) to shame and everlasting contempt.” The results in the two cases
infinitely opposite to each other. In regard to the faithful, of whom the angel
particularly speaks, the result is everlasting life, Life the term employed in
the Scriptures to express happiness of experience and holiness of character, and
likeness to God in both; that happiness being especially found in the enjoyment
of His favour, friendship, and fellowship, and that holiness in the possession of
His own nature and character, ‘In His favour is life.” Sin is “alienation ” or
estrangement “ from the life of God.” The term “everlasting” life, so often used
in the New Testament, doubtless taken from this very passage, is here met with
for the first time, It is everlasting life, as enjoyed in that kingdom of Christ and
of God, which is for ever and ever (chap. vii.) It is everlasting, in contrast to
the same life enjoyed in Paradise, but which came to an end through Adam’s
transgression. Believers who have this life are “saved in the Lord with an ever-
lasting het aig It is found only in, or in vital union with, the Lord Jesus


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL CHAP, XIk


eee


Himself, who is the Life. ‘He that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath
not the Son of God hath not life” (1 John v. 12). It is obtained in believing on,
or accepting of and trusting in, the Lord Jesus as a Saviour for lost sinners, “He
that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not the Son
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him” (John iii, 36). The
“shame and contempt ” of the rest of the risen dead is that which properly belongs
to sin, the abominable thing that God hates, and which makes all those abominable
in whom it dwells. The first mark of true repentance is to see this to be the case,
and to loathe ourselves for our iniquities, ‘What fruit had ye then in those
things whereof ye are now ashamed?” (Romans vi. 21), One part of the punish
ment of sin is, to be made a loathing to others as well as ourselves, ‘ They shall
be an abhorring to all flesh ” (Isa, Ixvi, 24). That shame and abhorring also ever.
lasting. “ He that is filthy, let him be filthy still,” as true as, “ He that is holy,
let him be holy still” (Rev. xxii. 11). Continuance, and perhaps growth and
intensification, but no change.

Let us, from the subject before us, learn—

1. Zo have our minds deeply and permanently impressed with the truth and
reality of the resurrection. It was for this that the statement was made to Daniel
by the angel. It is one of the truths most plainly revealed and most frequently
referred to in the Word of God. Christ’s resurrection is to be the object of our
faith ; our own resurrection the object of our hope. It was in the hope and
expectation of the resurrection that the Apostle exercised himself to have always
@ conscience void of offence towards God and towards man, It was the source of
his joy and triumph, that this corruption should put on incorruption, and this
mortal put on immortality. In this blessed hope he cheerfully renounced the
world and died daily, ready, “ after the. manner of men,” to ‘fight with beasts at
Ephesus.” It was this hope that enabled the Jewish martyrs to dare all the rage
of their furious persecutors ; and will enable us, though not martyrs, to look not at
the things that are seen and temporal, but at those that are unseen and eternal.
It is our comfort when we part with beloved ones who fall asleep in Jesus, and
commit their bodies to the dust of the earth, to know that that body, now sown as
@ precious seed-corn in weakness and dishonour, shall be raised in power and glory,
the same voice of Jesus that comforted Martha and Mary speaking to us at the
side of that open grave, ‘‘ Thy brother shall rise again.” ‘For if we believe that
Jesus died and rose again, even so them also that sleep in Jesus will God brin
with Him, Wherefore comfort one another-with these words” (1 Thess, iv. 14, 18),

2. To regard everything tn the light of the resurrection, It is our wisdom
to view things now as they will appear on that day. Everything will then stand
forth in its true character. Things often appear quite otherwise now. “That
which is highly esteemed among men is abomination with God,” and will so appear
at the resurrection. Paul and his fellow-apostles were regarded on earth as “the
filth of the world and the offscourings of all things.” In the resurrection they will
sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Men like Herod Agrippa, who
had shed their blood and put them in prison to please the Jews, and who, while
seated on his throne in gorgeous array, and delivering his oration to the people,
was applauded as a god and not a man, will on that day be the objects of ‘shame
and everlasting contempt.” Dives and Lazarus will then change places, Lazarus,
with his ulcered body changed and transfigured into the fashion of Christ’s glorious
body, will have his place among the princes of God’s people, inheriting the throne
of glory, on which he will reign with Christ for ever and ever, in the enjoyment of
an everlasting felicity, The rich man, appearing in a body allied to his unrenewed
and sin-polluted soul, will be “an abhorring to all flesh.” The “ mighty,” who only
lived to the gratification of their own pride and passions, will be “ put down from
their seats ;” while those “of low degree,” who in their poverty trusted in God
and, possessing their blood-washed souls in thankful patience, heat the


OMAP. XIl,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





coming of His Son from heaven, shall be exalted to the position of kings and priests
unto God, in mansions of unfading joy and a kingdom of righteousness and peace,
with the Lamb for their companion and God for their everlasting light and glory.


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—®) “ It is
good,” said one of these seven sons,
when his body was lacerated by the
scourge, “ being put to death by man, to
look for hope from God to be raised up
again by Him.”

@) Grotius referred the resurrection
in the text, in the first instance, figura-
tively, to the deliverance of the Jews in
the time of Antiochus, as Porphyry had
done before him; and in the second
instance, to the literal resurrection of
the body, as rather hinted at than ex-
plicitly declared. He has had, however,
but few followers in the Christian
Church. Brightman understood the
resurrection here as pointing to the
victories of the Jewish nation, and their
being called to the faith in Christ, as
John v. 25 ; Eph. v. 15; Rom. xi. 15;
Ezek. xxxvii. 1, &c. Some, he thinks,
partaking of the deliverance predicted,
shall yet persist in their wickedness,
and shall rise indeed, but to eternal
destruction.

@) It was a saying of Rabbi Eleazar
of Capernaum: “They who are born
are to die, and the dead to live, and the
living to be judged; that we might
know, and understand, to be informed,
that He is God the Former, the Creator,
the Intelligent One, the Judge... .
Let not thine imagination persuade thee
that the grave shall be a house of refuge
for thee; for against thy will thou
wast formed, and against thy will thou
wast born, and against thy will thou
dost live, and against thy will wilt thou
die, and against thy will must thou here-


after give in thine account,” —Pirke


Abhoth, iv. 23.

() “ In the dust of the earth,” “NOS
“BY (adhmath 'aphar), the earth or ground
of dust, the dusty ground ; the expres-
sion formed after Gen, iii. 19, and de-
noting the grave, as in Ps. xxii, 30,
“the dust of death.”

©) “ And many,” &c. “ Keil remarks
that the copula (and) connects this verse
with the preceding one, and indicates
the continuance of the thought in the

280


latter half of that verse, s.¢e., the further
representation of the deliverance of
God’s people, namely, of all those who
are written in the book of life. Auber-
len and some others separate the resur-
rection from the predicted time of
tribulation, simply because they refer
that time to the persecution under
Antiochus, He believes, however, that
the resurrection will follow immediately
after the period of Antichrist, and be
contemporary with the coming of the
Messiah in glory. Calvin thinks that
the angel passes over the intermediate
state between the preaching of the Gospel
and the final resurrection, because the
salvation of the church is connected
with that event, it being till then like
a dead body. Bishop Newton connects
the resurrection with the tribulation as
taking place immediately after it. Dr.
Chalmers, on Isa. xxvi. 11-21, remarks
that “it will take a time even after
they (the Jews) are set upon enlarge-
ment, ere the deliverance can be wrought,
and their enemies have fallen. But it
will come at length, and come gloriously.
Then will there be the first resurrec-
tion.”

(8) “ Many of them that sleep,” &c.
YD ODN (verabbim mtyoshene) Keil
remarks that 0°32 (rabbim) does not
mean all, and that the partitive in-
terpretation of }P (min), “of or from
among,” is the only simple and natural
one, and therefore with most interpre-
ters he prefers it, Some,as C, B.
Michaelis, following the Masoretic ac-
centuation, separate O°D) from ‘2%"8,
“And [there shall be many]; of them
that sleep, some, or these, shall awake,”
&c. Brightman reads the word as equiva-
lent to all, meaning the Jewish nation.
Broughton understands it of the uni-
versality of them that sleep. Calvin,
also, after Augustine, understands the
word to mean all, Keil thinks that it
is not the object of the angel to give a
general statement regarding the resur-
rection of the dead, but only to give the
information that the final salvation of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





people shall not be limited to those who
shall be living at the end of the great
tribulation, but shall include also those
who have lost their lives during that
period. He thinks, however, that the
Israel of the time of the end, who are
here referred to, consist not merely
of Jews or of Jewish Christians, but
embraces all peoples who belong to
God’s kingdom of the New Covenant ;
in which respect the resurrection of all
is implied, as it is explicitly declared
by Christ when speaking in John v. 28,
with unmistakable reference to this verse,
He adds: “ As with the living (at that
time), so also with the dead, not all
attain to blessedness. Also among
those that arise there shall be a dis-
tinction, in which the reward of the
faithful and of the unfaithful shall be
made known.” He considers the word
“many” used only “with allusion to
and in contrast with the small number
of those who shall then be living, and
not with reference either to the univer-
sality of the resurrection of the dead or to
a portion only of the dead ;” the object
being merely “to add to the multitude
of the dead, who shall then have part
with the living, the small number of
those who shall experience in the flesh
the conclusion of the matter.” Osiander,
Bullinger, and Vatablus understand the
word many to be chosen instead of all,
as some believers will be alive at the
Lord’s coming.

@ On Rev. xx. 4, Bishop Newton
remarks; “The martyrs and confessors
of Jesus,—not only those who were be-
headed or who suffered death under the
heathen emperors, but also those who
refused to comply with the idolatrous
worship of ‘the beast and his image,’—
are raised from the dead, and have the
principal share in the felicities of Christ’s
kingdom upon earth... . This is the
first resurrection,—a particular resur-
rection preceding the general one at
Jeast a thou:and years,” Auberlen, on
the same passage, says: “ Among the
saints who are called to reign with
Christ, the martyrs of ancient and
modern times are mentioned first ; be-
cause, most like to the Lord Jesus in
their suffering and death, they are


CHAP, XIE


—>S = ———


therefore nearer Him in His life and
reign. ... Next to the martyrs are
mentioned all who had not worshipped
the beast, be it in more remote times or
in the last days ;—all they who refused
to take the power of this world as a
reality, and to serve it instead of looking
to the things invisible and future” (2
Cor. iv. 17). This he says is “the ‘ firat
resurrection,’ as distinguished from the
general one, which is mentioned in ver.
12.” A Jewish tradition of the school
of Elias is quoted by Bishop Newton,
which states that “the righteous whom
God shall raise up shall not again be
turned to dust, but shall live a thousand
years, in which the Holy and Blessed
One shall renew His world.” The early
fathers in general held the same view.
Justin Martyr, in the second century,
says: ‘‘A certain man among us, whose
name was John, one of the apostles of
Christ, in a revelation made to him, did
prophesy that the faithful believers in
Christ should live a thousand years in
the New Jerusalem, and afterwards
there should be a general resurrection
and judgment.” Tertullian, in the third
century, speaks of it as the belief of
himself and the general Church, that
“there shall be a resurrection for a
thousand years in the New Jerusalem,
and after that the destruction of the
world, and the general judgment.” Lac-
tantius, in the following century, speaks
to the same effect. Mosheim, treating
of the third century, says: “Long before
this period, an opinion had prevailed
that Christ was to come to reign a
thousand years among men before the
entire and final dissolution of this
world, This opinion, which had hither-
to met with no opposition, was diffe-
rently interpreted by different persons ;
nor did .all promise themselves the
same kind of enjoyments in the
future and glorious kingdom. But in
this century its credit began to decline,
principally through the influence and
authority of Origen, who opposed it with
the greatest warmth, because it was in-
compatible with some of his favourite
sentiments, Nepos, an Egyptian bishop,
endeavoured to restore this opinion to
its former credit, in a book written
281


F


OmAP. XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.


i


against the Allegorists ; for so he called,
by way of contempt, the adversaries of
the millennarian system. This work
and the hypothesis it defended was
extremely well received by great num-
bers in the canton of Arsinoé; and
among others by Colacion, a priest of
no mean influence and reputation, But
Dionysius of Alexandria, a disciple of
Origen, stopped the growing progress of
the doctrine by his private discourses,
and also by two learned and judicious
dissertations concerning the divine pro-
mises.” Mr, Miles (Lectures on Daniel)
observes, after Mede, that we have
strong evidence that so late as the
Council of Nice (a.D. 325) the current
of public opinion was in favour of
the orthodox primitive belief. ‘“ New
heavens and a new earth,” says that
Council, “we expect according to the
sacred writings, when there shall shine
forth the appearance and kingdom of
the great God and our Saviour Jesus
Christ ; and then, as saith Daniel, the
saints of the Most High shall receive a
kingdom, and the earth shall be pure
and holy, an earth of the living and not
of the dead.” After the fourth century,
as the same author observes, “the lead-
ing fundamental doctrines of the Gospel
were eclipsed by the rapid growth of
error, tradition superseding the authority
of Scripture. ‘The doctrine,’ says Bishop
Burnet in his Sacred Theory of the Earth,
‘was always uneasy, and gave offence to
the Church of Rome, because it does not
suit to that scheme of Christianity which
they have drawn. They suppose that
Christ reigns already by His Vicar the
Pope.’” Auberlen also remarks: “ Chi-
liasm—the doctrine of the thousand
years’ reign of Christ—disappeared in
the Church in proportion as Roman
papal Catholicism advanced... . . The
papacy, with its fundamental tendency
to seek power and external glory, is, in
its innermost essence, a false anticipation
of the millennial kingdom, Bengel says :
‘When Christianity became a worldly
power by Constantine, the hope of the
future was weakened by the joy over
the present success,’” The doctrine
appears, however, to have revived with
the scum John Bradford the


martyr, quoted by Mr. Miles, says:
“Methinks it is the duty of a godly
mind simply to acknowledge, and
thereof to brag in the Lord, that in our
resurrection all things shall be so repaired
to eternity, as for our sin they were made
subject to corruption.” And again:
“Now every creature travaileth and
groaneth with us ; but we being restored,
they also shall be restored ; there shall
be new heavens and new earth, and
all things new.” Auberlen observes:
‘The Reformation protested successfully
against the harlot (the papal Church)
by opposing to it the original Christian
principle of faith, which is opposed, not
only to the works of the law, but to
living by sight, and to a false ex-
ternalisation of the Church. ... The
fundamental principle of apostolical
Christianity, viz, of faith, is in-
separable from apostolical Chiliasm,
... The Reformers did not carry
out their principle far enough to
attain biblical Chiliasm. . . . Scholastic
priestly tyranny, Cesaropapism, besides
the papacy, brought Antichiliasm. . . .
The conscience of the Reformation pro-
tested against this new corruption of
the Church in the person of Spener,”
In the time of the commonwealth the
ancient doctrine seems to have revived
in England. Baillie in his Letters says:
“The most of the chief divines here (in
the Westminster Assembly), not only
Independents, but others, such as Twisse,
Marshall, Palmer, and many others,
are express Chiliasts” Peter Sterry,
one of Cromwell’s Censors, says of the
premillennial advent and the thousand
years’ reign: “ Like a rich coin, which
hath been long buried in the earth, and
lately dug up again, it begins to grow
bright with handling, and to pass cur
rent with great numbers of saints and
learned men of great authority.” Joseph
Caryl, the author of the commentary on
Job, his fellow-censor, speaks similarly
in his Recommendation of Holmes’s
book on the resurrection, in which pre
millennarian views are strongly advo-
cated, “Though I have not skill enough
in the exposition of hard prophecies,”
says the spiritually-minded Baxter,
“to make a particular determination


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DANIEL,


Omar, XE.


a


about the thousand years’ reign of Christ poraneous in 2 Tim. iv. 1.


on the earth before the final judgment,
yet I may say that I cannot confute
what such learned men as Mr. Mede,
and Dr. Twisse, and others (after the
old Fathers) have hereof asserted.”
John Bunyan expresses his views thus :
“The world therefore beginning thus,
doth show how it will end, namely, by
the reign of the Second Adam, as it
began with the reign of the first. These
long-lived men, therefore, show us the
glory that the Church shall have in the
latter day, even the seventh thousand
years of the world, the Sabbath when
Christ shall set up His kingdom upon
earth, according to that which is written,
They lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years.” Christ,” says Dr.
Gill, “ will be in His kingdom not only
by His Spirit and the effusions of His
grace, but He will personally appear in
all His glory ; hence His appearing and
kingdom are put together as contem-


This glori-
ous and visible kingdom will not take
place till after the resurrection of the
just and the renovation of the world,
As soon as He personally appears, the
dead in Christ shall rise first ; this is
the first resurrection, in which they who
have a part shall reign with Christ
a thousand years. This kingdom of
Christ will be bounded by two resurrec-
tions.” Delitzsch, quoted by Auberlen,
marks the general prevalence of the
doctrine among believers in Germany,
and traces it to the influence of Bengel
and his writings. ‘To whom also,” he
asks, ‘‘do we owe it that the orthodox
Church of the present time does not brand
the Chiliastic view of the Last Times
as a heterodoxy, as is done in almost
all old manuals of dogmatics ; but, on the
contrary, has allowed it to enter into her
innermost life, so that there is scarcely a
believing Christian now (that is, in Ger-
many) who does not take this view %”


HOMILETICS.


Sect. XLVII.—TuHeE WISE AND THE WINNERS OF SOULS, WITH THEIR»
GuLorious Rewarp. (Chap. xii. 3.)


This verse stands in close connection with the preceding one, It describes the
character and blessedness of those who, at the resurrection of the just, shall awake
out of the sleep of death to the enjoyment of eternal life. Perseverance in a life
of faith and good-doing, whatever suffering and trial it may have involved, is at
length crowned with a glorious and an everlasting reward, The verse partakes of
the nature of Hebrew poetry, consisting of two members, each of which contains
both a character and the blessedness promised to it.

I. The characters mentioned. These are given in two expressions; they are
“wise,” and “they turn many to righteousness.” The first is probably to be
regarded as the general description, embracing the whole; the second as a more
special one, applying more particularly to some. The first expresses the character
as viewed with reference to the individuals themselves; the second, the same
character, but in its relation to others, All here spoken of are ‘“‘ wise,” with the
wisdom more or less developed. One natural and necessary effect of that wisdom
is that it acts more or less beneficially upon others, leading them also to the
possession and practice of righteousness. But in some this fruit and effect of
wisdom in relation to others is more abundant and extensive than in the case of
the rest, There are those who, being wise themselves, as a fruit and effect of that
wisdom, turn not only others but many others to righteousness. The wisdom is a
thing in ourselves, but its influence and action are to be upon others, who are to
receive the benefit of it. The wisdom possessed by ourselves will evince and
manifest its existence by leading us to seek, and enabling us to promote, the wel-
fare of others, by turning them to righteousness; while to do this requires the


possession and exercise of wisdom in ourselves, ‘‘ He that winneth at wise ”


omar, XII. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,
ee
ov. xi 30). To win souls requires wisdom, while it is the evidence and
manifestation of it, Accordingly, the wisdom that is from above is described by
the Apostle as “full of mercy and of good fruits,” leading us to sow the fruit of
righteousness in peace, and so enabling us to make peace (James iii. 17, 18).
Notice—

1. The wise. “They that are wise”) Wisdom has been defined as that
which chooses the best ends and pursues them by the best means. The best ends
are (1) the glory of God our Maker, who has created all things, and for whose
pleasure all “things are and were created ;” who has made all things for Himself,
and whose glory it is both our duty and happiness, as His rational creatures, to seek
in every competent way to promote. Next to this is (2) the present and eternal
happiness of ourselves and others in the enjoyment of their Maker's favour and
friendship, the possession of His character, and obedience to His will. To confine
our aims to lower ends than these is unworthy of intelligent and immortal natures,
and marks us as unwise. The Scriptures accordingly declare wisdom to consist in
the true fear of God, and describe ungodliness and wickedness as at the same time
folly and madness. This wisdom is that which “comes from above,” and of
which God, the only Wise, is the Author; and is described as “ first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and of good fruits, without
partiality or wrangling, and without hypocrisy ” (James iii. 17), Any wisdom which
is not this is described by the same inspired writer as “earthly, sensual, devilish ;”
allying us less to the only wise God, than to him who is the prince of darkness,
though able to transform himself into what he originally was, an angel of light.

9, The soul-winners. “They that turn many to righteousness.”@) Literally,
“that make many righteous.” Righteousness has reference both to character and
standing. In its relation to character, it is conformity in heart and life to the
law of God, that law which is a transcript of His own character, and which is
summarily described as love, even as God is love, In relation to standing, it
is a state of acceptance and approval with God, as of those against whom His
law has no charges, a freedom from condemnation, or, as the Scriptures often
speak of it, a state of justification, which is simply that of one who is declared
righteous or innocent in the eye of the law. How is a man made righteous in
this sense? How can a man be just with God? or how can he that is a sinner
be righteous with his Maker? To be a sinner is to be a transgressor of the
law of God; which appears to be the opposite of righteousness both in character
and standing. For a transgressor of the law to be righteous before God seems
a contradiction in terms. It is the scheme of divine wisdom and mercy in
the provision of a Saviour that reconciles this contradiction, and shows how
the thing that appeared impossible is actually effected, while truth is strictly
maintained and justice retains its righta. It is this provision that constitutes
the Gospel, whose object it is to reveal it, It is by the substitution of a righ-
teous person, who while He is man is at the same time God, in the place of
the unrighteous, that the latter, on their acceptance of Him as their Surety, are
regarded in the eye of the law as righteous, being viewed as one person with
Him, and entitled to the same standing which He Himself occupies as righteous
before God. This divine plan of making sinners righteous before God by substi-
tution, suretyship, or representation, corresponds with the way in which the race
has become guilty. Just as in and by the first Adam, or head of the human race,
men were made sinners, so in and by the second Adam, God’s Son made flesh, as
the second Head of the race, they that accept of and trust in Him are made
righteous (Rom. v.) They stand righteous before God because He who is their
Head and Surety does so, and they are, in the eye of the law, one with Him. With
this righteousness in atate or standing, believing sinners, at the same time and by
the same means, obtain righteousness of character. A new inward spiritual life,
or SEV of righteousness and holiness, is infused in or imparted to them by


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. DANIEL, CHAP. x1.





—er =


the Spirit of God, in virtue of and in connection with that same union with the
second Adam, or divine Surety, which takes place on their acceptance of and trust
in Him ; just as a graft partakes not only of the fortunes of the tree but of its life
and sap. Accordingly the Word of God declares that “if any man be in Christ,
he is a new creature ; old things are passed away; behold, ali things are become
new” (2 Cor. v. 17). Christ is made to those who are thus in Him not only
righteousness, for their righteous standing before God, but sanctification for
their righteous, holy character. In the Lord they have both “ righteousness and
strength,”—righteousness for their accepted standing before God, and strength for
a holy character and life of new obedience. Thus actually to make persons right-
eous, as it is of God’s providing, is also of God’s effecting ; for it is He that, by
His Spirit disposing and enabling us to accept of and trust in Christ as sinners,
makes us legally one with Him. Accordingly we read: “Of Him are ye in Christ
Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption” (1 Cor. i, 30). How, then, do the persons mentioned in the
text make others righteous? Instrumentally. He that makes them one with
Christ, or grafts them into Him by giving them to accept of and trust in Him as
sinners, is the Holy Spirit. But in doing this He employs, as the means of effect-
ing it, the testimony concerning Christ, whether conveyed in the written word or
uttered by human lips. For Christ to be accepted of or trusted in, He must be
known, ‘ Who is He, Lord, that I should believe on Him?” “ How shall they
believe on Him of whom they have not heard?” (Rom. x. 14.) It is for this
especially that the Spirit employs human instrumentality. ‘ How shall they hear
without a preacher?” ‘It hath pleased God by the foolishness of preaching”—
by the preaching of the glad tidings of salvation, which appears foolishness to the
world—“ to save them that believe.” By this testimony concerning Jesus, and God’s
way of making men righteous through Him, whether brought to the eye or the ear,
the Spirit persuades and enables men to accept of and trust in Him as their Surety
and Saviour, and so be made righteous. To bear this testimony, and so instru-
mentally to turn others to righteousness, is the privilege and duty of those who
have themselves been made personally and experimentally acquainted with it.
Accordingly, this is by no means confined to those who are in an official sense
teachers or preachers, though especially incumbent on such, It is, in one way or
other, within the ability of all who know Christ themselves to tell others of Him,
and is accordingly made their duty and privilege, ‘‘The Spirit and the Bride—
all believing and renewed souls—say, Come: and let him that heareth say,
Come.” Even those who do so officially must first have approved themselves
by doing so unofficially. ‘Without doubt,” says Calvin, “the angel here
specially denotes the teachers of the truth; but in my opinion he embraces also
all the pious worshippers of God. No one of God’s children ought to confine
himself privately to himself ; but as far as possible, every one ought to interest
himself in the welfare of his brethren. God has deposited the doctrine of His
salvation with us, not for the purpose of our privately keeping it to ourselves, but
of our pointing out the way of salvation to all mankind. This therefore is the
common duty of the children of God, to promote the salvation of their brethren.”
The angel says, “ They that turn many to righteousness.” While all who know
Christ themselves are bound to aim at making Him known to others, and so
turning them to righteousness, all who do so are not equally successful, The
extent to which souls are actually won or turned to righteousness depends, under
God, on many things, This will especially depend on the measure in which the
requisite wisdom is possessed, the faithfulness and diligence with which it is
exercised, and the prayer of faith with which it is accompanied. While Paul
plants and Apollos waters, it is God that gives the increase. But there must be
the planting and the watering ; and ordinarily in proportion to the wisdom,
diligence, and prayer in doing this, will the increase be given. “ eae me spake


Our. XI. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





that many believed.” ‘In so doing thou shalt both save thyself and them that
hear thee.” To catch men with the Gospel net we require both the skill and the
diligence of successful fishermen. ‘‘ Being crafty, I caught you with guile. Iam
made all things to all men, if by any means I may save some.” Among the things
requisite for turning many to righteousness, whether in a public or private capacity,
must be mentioned—love, that both gains the ear and moves the heart; earnestness,
that shows the speaker to believe his own words, and so makes others earnest ;
perseverance, that after toiling all night and taking nothing, will yet again and
again let down the net; judgment, to speak the word in season, and to deal with
each case as occasion and circumstances require ; fatth, including both assurance
of God’s promised blessing, certainty regarding the truths stated, and the realisation
of things unseen; knowledge, so as to give clear and correct direction as to the way
of truth and peace ; singleness of aim, so as to seek the glory of God in the salvation
of men as our one object in all our labour; prayerfulness, seeking continually His
aid, blessing, and power, without which we can neither work aright nor work to any
effect,—imitating the resolve of the apostles, “ We will give ourselves to prayer
and the ministry of the word ;” finally, consistency of life, both as regards our
‘spirit and conduct, the testimony of the lips being seconded by the concurring
testimony of the life,

II. The reward. This also is exhibited in a twofold manner, a simile being
employed in each member of the verse, corresponding with the twofold description
of the character. The wise shall “shine as the brightness of the firmament ;”®
they that turn many to righteousness “shall be, or shine, as the stars for ever and
ever.” (4) The former, like the character with which it is associated, is a glory of
@ more general kind, that of the celestial expanse lighted up with the splendour of
the noonday sun. The latter is the brilliancy of the stars as they sparkle in the
nocturnal sky, especially as seen in a southern or oriental country like Syria or
Chaldea, with a radiance all the more glorious from the dark ground in which, like
diamonds, they appear to be set. The former comparison, though not to the body
of the sun but to the brightness which emanates from it, yet connects itself with
that made by the Saviour probably with reference to it: ‘‘Then shall the righteous
shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father” (Matt. xiii, 43).

The comparisons, taken together, suggest, in relation to the promised reward,—

1. An external visible glory. Christ’s glorified body, which is said to shine as
the sun as it appeared to the disciples on the mount, emitted a visible refulgence.,
But the bodies of His people when raised from the dead are to be “ fashioned like
to His glorious body” (Phil. iii. 21). As He shall appear, or be manifested, with
a visible glory, they shall appear, or be manifested, in glory with Him (Col. iii. 4).
As we have borne the image of the earthy, so even in body we who are His
members shall also “ bear the image of the heavenly ” (1 Cor. xv. 49). How poor
in comparison with such a glory will appear the most gorgeous splendour of earth’s
loftiest princes! It was probably a portion of this glory that made the face of
Moses to shine as he came down from the mount, and that made that of Stephen
appear to the Jewish council as the face of an angel.

2. Purity and moral eacellence. There is a moral and spiritual glory as well
as 8 visible external one, of which indeed the latter is but a symbol and outward
expression. Light itself the symbol of moral purity and excellence. God is light ;
and goodness is the armour of light, as contrasted with sin, which is the work of
darkness, The image of Christ’s perfect moral character believers at the resurrec-
tion shall also bear, and that in a perfect degree ; as well those who shall be alive
and remain at His coming, as those who shall be raised from the dead. For “ we
shall not all sleep (or die), but we shall all be changed, in a moment” (1 Cor. xv,
51, 52). Even here, while we behold (or reflect) as in a glass the glory of the
Lord, we are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the
Spirit s ne Lord (2 Cor. iii, 18). “It doth not yet appear what we shall be ;


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL, OHAP, Zi,





but we know that when He shall appear we shall be like Him,”—spiritually and
visibly, in spirit and in character as well as in body,—“ for we shall see Him as
He is” (1 John iii. 2).

3. Dignity and honour. Sun and stars are employed in Scripture as symbols
of dignity and lofty rank, Balaam, prophesying of Messiah, said; “‘ A star shall
come out of Jacob, and a sceptre out of Israel” (Numb. xxiv. 17). Hence stars
usually worn as decorations of princely honour. Christ redeemed His people to
make them kings and priests unto God. Like Christ Himself, they are hidden for
a time, and often appear mean and contemptible. But the time for the mani-
festation of their royal rank and princely dignity as the sons of God and brethren
of the King of kings at length arrives. ‘“ When Christ who is our life shall be
manifested, then shall ye also be manifested with Him in glory.” ‘ He that over-
cometh and keepeth My works unto the end, to him will I give power over the
nations: and I will give him the morning star” (Rev. ii. 26, 28). This dignity
and princely rank will belong to each of the persons spoken of, though, doubtless,
in different degrees, as “ one star differeth from another star in glory.”

4, Joy and felicity. Light a standing emblem of joy and gladness. “ Light is
sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart.” On the destruction
of their enemies, the Jews “had light and gladness and joy and honour ” (Esther
viii, 16). Clouds and darkness the emblems of sorrow, The future of God’s now
tried and afflicted people one of unmingled joy, as well as purity and honour.
Their experience after the resurrection like the brightness of a cloudless sky,
or like the untarnished radiance of the stars in the midnight vault of heaven. No
cloud of grief or care to bring a shadow over their happy spirits. The joy of their
future experience heightened by the sorrow through which they had passed on their
way to it, as the moon and stars appear most beautiful when the clouds that hid
them have passed away. Much of their joy the very fruit of their sorrow, as they
see around them those whom with tears and travail of soul they sought to turn to
righteousness, and on whom they now look as the mother, after her pangs, looks on
the child to whom she has given birth. ‘ For what is our hope, or joy, or crown
of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at His
coming? For ye are our glory and joy” (1 Thess, ii, 19, 20). “ Blessed are the
dead that die in the Lord from henceforth. Yea, saith the Spirit, for they do rest
from their labours, and their works do follow them,”—the fruits of their labours in
those radiant and happy beings, whom they were made the honoured instruments
of turning to righteousness, and who now, as stars in their crown, enhance their
own felicity.

5. Permanence. “As the stars for ever and ever.” The stars themselves
appear the very emblem of permanence, appearing from year to year and from
generation to generation, to occupy the same place and to shine with the same
brilliancy that they did thousands of years before. This apparent permanence and
unchangeableness pictures forth the real permanence and unchanging glory of the
wise and those who turn many unto righteousness, They shall reign for ever
and ever. Their life is an everlasting one ; their crown one that fadeth not away.
Their sun never goes down, neither does their moon withdraw itself. ‘Their glory
is necessarily abiding and unchanging, as the Lord Jehovah Himself is their ever-
lasting light, and their God their glory. As one with Him who is the same
yesterday, to-day, and for ever, their joy and felicity, their purity and dignity,
must be as permanent as His own, Even the stars may lose their lustre, and the
sun may cease to fill the firmament with brightness. It is said that during the last
three hundred years thirteen fixed stars have disappeared, one of them after present-
ing a peculiar brilliancy as if on fire, then exhibiting a reddish yellow hue, and before
ite final disappearance becoming ashy pale, the time occupied by the change being
about sixteen months, Philosophers also calculate that in the course of some seven-
teen millions of years the sun may have emitted all its rays and entirely lost its

287


Omar. XIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.








lustre. The Word of God does not teach that either sun or stars are everlasting, but,
on the contrary, that they shall one day cease to be. They will have served their
purpose of showing forth their Maker’s glory and ministering to others of His
creatures, and then, like a worn-out garment, be laid aside (Ps. cii. 25, 26). Their
Maker, however, remains the same, and so shall all who as His children partake of
His nature. ‘“‘ Whatever possible changes may take place with the glorious fabric of
the material heavens, though the sun should lose its splendour, or pale before more
glorious suns, as the stars disappear before the orb of day ; and though the stars,
which are mostly only other suns, shall attract no more by their brightness and
beauty ;” yet those glorious children of the resurrection, who fulfilled on earth their
day of labour in doing the will of their Creator and seeking to bring back to Him
His banished ones, shall still shine on with unchanged and unchanging glory, like
their glorious Head whom they are made to resemble. “In the lapse of millions
of ages hence,” says Arthur Butler, “ for aught we can tell, it may be the purpose
of God that all this universe should gradually give place to some new creation ; that
other planets should circle around other suns; that unheard-of forms of animated
existence should crowd all the chambers of the sensitive universe,—forms of life
unlike all that we can dream of; that in slow progression, the immense cycle of
our present system of nature shall at length expire ;©) but even then no decay
shall dare to touch the universe of souls.” We may add, nor yet the glorified
spiritual bodies of those who, having been “ wise” in time, shall shine at the
resurrection “as the brightness of the firmament,” and of those who, having laboured
to turn many to righteousness, shall shine “‘ as the stars for ever and ever.”
Reader, believest thou this? They are the words of Him that cannot lie. How
infinitely important then to make it our first business to secure a place among
those who are “ wise,” and then through the grace given to us to seek faithfully
to do the Master’s work in turning others to righteousness by communicating, in
every competent way and in whatever sphere we may move, the knowledge of Him
whose name is the Lord our Righteousness! The day is hastening apace when
everything else will appear as insignificant as the dust under our feet, and when
all earth’s glory will burst and vanish as the empty soap-bubble. The harvest is
approaching, when he that went forth bearing precious seed and weeping, shall
come again rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him,—when “ both he that soweth
and he that reapeth shall rejoice together.” Hold on, brother, ready to faint im
the sowing time under the burden and heat of the day. In due time you shall
reap, if you faint not. ‘‘ Harvest home” will soon be sung amid the acclamations
of angels; when, after the throes of a dissolving world, the Lord of the harvest


shall proclaim, “ Behold, I make all things new.”
to be a candidate for that glory? It is not yet too late.


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—®) “ They


that be wise,” DD DYDD (hammashkilim),
the wise or understanding. The margin
has “teachers.” The same word used
in chap. xi. 33, 35, and rendered “ they
that understand,” and “them of under-
standing.” Keil observes that the term
is here, as there, not limited to the
teachers, but denotes the intelligent,
who, by instructing their contempo-
raries by means of word and deed, have
awakened them to steadfastness and
fidelity to their confession in the times
of tribulation, and have strengthened
their faith,

288


Has the reader not yet begun
Begin now.


(3) “ They that turn many to righteous-
ness.” ODD) ‘RYO (matsdigé harab-
bim), ‘“‘they that make the many
righteous,” Brightman has, “ they that
justify others, by teaching, admonishing,
exhorting, reproving, and comforting,
which are parts and duties of the teach-
ers, and those who enjoy public office
in the church.” According to Keil, the
word here signifies to assist in obtain-
ing, or to lead to, righteousness; and
is here to be read in this general inter
pretation, and not to be identified with
the Pauline dimasoiicbas (justification).
The persons here intended, he says, are


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DANIEL.


CHAP. XII.





those who by their fidelity to the law
led others to M21} (tsidhgah, righteous-
ness),—showed them by their example
and teaching the way to righteousness,
The same word used in Isa, liii. 11 of
Christ as God’s Righteous Servant, who
by the knowledge of Himself as their
sin-bearer should “justify many.” The
only way of being made righteous is by
the same knowledge, for the communi-
cation of which His people are made
His witnesses (Acts i, 8).

(8) “As the brightness of the firma-
ment.” Keil observes that the splen-
dour of the vault of heaven (Exod.
xxiv. 10) is a figure of the glory which
Christ designates as a light like the sun,
in Matt. xiii, 43, referring to the pas-
sage before us. He refers also to Rev.
ii. 28 and 1 Cor, xv. 40, &c., as exam-
ples of the figure. Brightman remarks :
*“ The firmament itself, whither no cloud
sspireth, nor any earthly pollution as-
cendeth, to cast any aspersion or blot
thereupon: here, not as it often seemeth
to us, covered all over with thick clouds,
but as it is in itself.” He thinks, how-
ever, that this is a less reward than that
which is laid up for the righteous at the
last day, when they shall shine forth
like the sun itself.

(4) * As the stars.” Stars, says Bright-
man, wherewith the firmament shall be


beautified and adorned, themselves in
the meantime enjoying the chiefest
glory. So Rev.i. 10. More especially,
he thinks, teachers of the Jews, being
the precious stones of which the wall
of the New Jerusalem is built (Rev.
xxi, 19), Keil observes: ‘The salva-
tion of the people, which the end shall
bring in, consists in the consummation
of the people of God, by the resurrec-
tion of the dead and the judgment
dividing the pious from the godless,
according to which the pious shall be
raised to eternal life, and the godless
shall be given up to everlasting shame
and contempt. But the leaders of the
people, who, amid the wars and con-
flicts of this life, have turned many to
righteousness, shall shine in the im-
perishable glory of heaven.”

) It is well known that the stars
owe their different degrees of size and
splendour mainly to their different dis-
tances from us; and that the number
of those which are visible to the eye
even when aided by a powerful tele
scope, probably bear only a small pro-
portion to those that are scattered
through the boundless regions of space.
Even the Milky Way, which is simply an
immense cluster of countless stars to
which our solar system belongs as a unit,
is only one of innumerable such clusters.


HOMILETICS.
Szor. XLVIIL—Tue Increase oF KNOWLEDGE As A SIGN OF THE
Timg. (Chap. xii. 4.)


Daniel had already received a very full and minute account of what was to
befall his people in the latter days. The information communicated, however, was
to be “shut up and sealed,”@) as a precious treasure that was to be carefully
guarded, and as something that would be more known and appreciated hereafter


than at present.


The same order we find to have been given in relation to the


vision of the Ram and the He-goat, the reason given being that the vision was
to be “for many days,” or only to receive its fulfilment after a length of time.


So here; the words were to be shut up and the book sealed


“even to the time


of the end,” when they should be about to receive their entire accomplishment
The meaning conveyed apparently that as the end approached the prophecy would
be both more studied and better understood. There would seem to be a time
when, for wise reasons, the right understanding of prophetic scripture is withheld,


and when that part of the word is not


even studied equally with the rest. The


prophet was commanded to “bind up the testimony and seal the law among the

disciples” (Isa. viii. 16); so that when the book was handed to one to read, the

reply should be, “I cannot, for it is seaied” (xxix, 11). John in Patmos, on the
Md


289


OHAP, XIl. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,








other hand, was commanded not to seal the sayings of the Apocalypse, because
the time for their fulfilment was at hand (Rev. xxii. 10). For the same reason
a blessing is promised to those who read and those who hear the words of that
prophecy, and who keep what is written in it (Rev. i 3). A sealed book not able
to be read till the seals are broken (Rev. v. 1, &c.) The prophecies of the Old
Testament confirmed or made “ more sure” by the events of the New; so that we
are encouraged to take heed to that word of prophecy, as to a light shining in
dark place till the day of clearer knowledge dawn (2 Pet. i. 19).

The words in the second clause of the verse, from the place which they occupy,
have been thought by many to refer to what should take place toward the time of
the end, viz, that there should be a greater amount of study given, as to other
subjects of knowledge, so more especially to the written word, and to the word of
prophecy in particular, and that accordingly there should be a much better under-
standing of its contents ;(@) as well as that, from the increased facilities for
locomotion, its dissemination should be greatly increased. And it is a remarkable
fact, and one that cannot fail to be regarded as a striking feature of the time in
which we live, and a sign of an approaching state of things different from what
has hitherto existed, that these words of the prophet have received so literal and
extensive a fulfilment during the last eighty or a hundred years far beyond any
former period. That many have “run to and fro,” and that a spirit of inquiry
and awakened interest in Daniel’s prophecies, and in the teachings of the prophetic
scriptures in general, has appeared in our own time, none acquainted with the
religious literature and history of the present century can hesitate to acknowledge,
In England especially, it is well known that from the time of the first French
Revolution the attention has been in a remarkable degree drawn to the subject of
prophecy ; many thoughtful and enlightened Christians having been led to view,
in that event and those which followed, what might probably prove “the beginning
of the end.” From that time to the present numerous books have continued to be
written on the subject, a thing which had previously been exceedingly rare. The
number of those who have been led to give deep and earnest attention to the
prophetic word, and who have consequently become comparatively well acquainted
with its contents and teaching, has been largely increased. Evidences of the same
increased interest, and means tending to the same result, have been seen in the
courses of lectures delivered, and the periodicals started, in connection with the
same subject. In Germany, somewhat earlier, the attention of the Church was
awakened in a similar manner by the writings of Spener, and still more by those of
Bengel. . This increased attention to and knowledge of prophetic scripture, while
it is itself a remarkable fulfilment of such scripture, is at the same time a sign
of the approaching “end,” when all prophecy shall have its accomplishment,
“ Apocalyptic prophecy,” says Auberlen, “is approaching its fulfilment. For this
reason the Lord adds to the light of faith also the light of hope. He leads us ever
deeper into the understanding of the Apocalypse, and will give us apostolic know-
ledge for apostolic times and struggles. It is the undisputable merit of Bengel
that he prepared the way for such a knowledge.”

In relation to the diffusion of divine truth in general, and of the knowledge of
Jesus Christ, its central subject, the prediction in the text receives a fulfilment in
the present beyond any previous period of the world. Probably not even in
apostolic times was it true to an equal extent, In reference to England, pre-
eminently the country of Bibles and missions, never were earnest living witness
bearers for Christ, whether as ministers, city missionaries, evangelists, lay-preachers,
and Sabbath-school teachers, even in proportion to the increased population, nearly
80 numerous as at present; and never was the Gospel, in its purity, so widely pro-
mulgated in heathen lands, The empire of China, which with its four hundred
millions has now opened her doors to the Gospel; India, which, with its two
sae he fifty millions, is now all eur own and everywhere accessible to the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, | CHAP. EI,





truth ; Japan, Africa, and the islands of the South Seas are now visited by the
heralds of salvation as never before.(8) In India, the Zenanas, or apartments
of the women, hitherto secluded from Christian intercourse, are now open to the
female teacher and missionary of the cross. ‘The year (1881) upon which we
have entered,” says an American publication, “begins with the whole world open
to the Gospel ; with an array of nearly 3000 foreign missionaries encircling the
globe ; with one hundred and fifty millions of copies of the Holy Bible proclaiming
their message in two hundred and fifty tongues, and with a great multitude of
nearly two million converts from heathenism as the firstfruits of the Gentiles.
More than one thousand seraglios in India are open to the missionaries of our
Women’s Boards ; imperial palaces in China are open to our medical missionaries,
and imperial patronage is fostering our missionary hospitals; pagan religions are
becoming effete, and even Mahommedanism is at last beginning to yield to the
Gospel.” ‘‘Since the commencement of the nineteenth century,” says Dr. Christlieb,
‘* Protestant missions have been spreading among people of every race, and in every
possible state of civilisation; they have been growing ever vaster in extent and in
plan of operation, while they are always becoming more difficult to estimate in
their effects and fruits, in their leavening influence on the faith and life of the
heathen, as well as in their reflex action on the Church at home.” ‘We live in an
age of missions,” he says again, ‘‘ such—the mere outward extent of them shows it
—as the Church has never seen, . . . The cross of Christ is being lifted up no
longer in a few non-Christian lands, but in every one, among all races of men, the
comparatively civilised as the most degraded ; in colonies, as in independent heathen
lands ; in hundreds of languages and dialects, Those provinces of the Church, too,
once lost to her, and crushed beneath the bloody heel of Islam, by the light of the
Gospel are now being awakened to newness of life.”
The increased diffusion of Scripture as well as other knowledge by the printed
ges is as remarkable as that by the living teacher. Only during the past year
the Religious Tract Society alone has issued no less than eighty-one millions of
separate publications, no fewer than sixty millions of these being in our mother
tongue and circulated in our own country or in the colonies ; while above two
thousand millions of books, tracts, and periodicals, all containing the truth as it is
in Jesus, have been circulated since the formation of the society, At present the
British and Foreign Bible Society alone produces at the rate of two copies of the
Scriptures every minute throughout the twenty-four hours of the day, working
every day in the week ; and these copies are transmitted over the whole habitable
globe in no less than a hundred and seventy languages. “At the beginning of the
present century,” says Dr. Christlieb, “the Scriptures existed in some fifty trans-
lations, and were circulated in certainly not more than five millions of copies.
Since 1804, t.e., since the formation of the British and Foreign Bible Society, new
translations of the Bible, or of its more important parts, have been accomplished
in at least two hundred and twenty-six languages and dialects. There are trans-
lations of all the Sacred Scriptures into fifty-five, of the New Testament into eighty-
four, of particular parts into eighty-seven languages; and now the circulation of
the Scriptures, in whole or in part, has amounted to a hundred and forty-eight
millions of copies. These translations have been made chiefly by missionaries ;
and within seventy years over sixty languages have been made to possess a
literary history.” In this way the visions of Daniel have been read and searched
into as they had never been before. baer,
If we apply the text to the increase of knowledge in general, the prediction is
equally verified in the days in which we live. The present is emphatically the age
of travel, of exploration, of investigation, and discovery. In whichever of the two
senses we take the word, ‘‘many run to and fro,” and as the result, “ knowledge is
increased.” The cheap and rapid mode of printing by steam is itself a means of
the fulfilment of the prophecy. By the discovery and use of steam as a mate power,





CHAP, XI. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





the age in which we live is an age of books and cheap literature. The diffusion of
knowledge, by means of books, journals, schools, and lectures, is one of the
characteristics of the present age. The facilities for cheap and rapid travelling
and transit tend in the same direction. The productions of authors, as well as
the living teachers, are thus continually speeding over land and ocean as at no
former period of the world, By these means, as well as the advance of education,
mental activity has reached a greater height than ever before. Probably never was
the desire to acquire and to communicate knowledge so great as it is at present.
Not only do we live in the days of gas and steam, two discoveries of the present
century, but of an agent of still greater power, and one likely to produce still greater
effects than it has done already in the telegraph,—namely, electricity, At the
International Electrical Exhibition recently opened in Paris, visitors are conveyed
from the Place de la Concorde to the exhibition building by a tramcar worked by
electricity ; and when there, they find that the objects exhibited are divided into no less
than sixteen classes, and that no less than twenty-eight rooms are each lighted by a
different electric system, and contain specimens of electric railways, electric boats,
and electric balloons, with vast masses of machinery driven by electricity.
The prediction in the text may well stimulate the friends of Jesus and of their
fellowmen to greater zeal. Much has been done already in diffusing the know-
ledge of the truth, but still more remains to be done. Millions are still perish-
ing in all parts of the world for lack of knowledge. Only five thousand mission-
aries are sent to a thousand millions of heathens, or one to two hundred thousand
souls, The cry of Macedonia reaches us still from a thousand places, ‘‘ Come over
and help us.” The appeal for more men, and more means for their support, is still
addressed to the churches. Increased openings, increased facilities, and increased
prosperity, call for greatly increased operations in the field of missions. “ Friends
of Jesus,” says the author of the Telegraphic Sign, “make haste to the rescue of
those who are perishing in ignorance, because they are ‘out of the way.’ Let
there be promptness and rapidity in your movements, Everything around you is
on the wing, as if the world were running a race, and had scarcely time to take
breath, even for a moment, Let there be speed in your operations. In commerce,
literature, and the arts, all is expedition. Things are done quickly, fast, in haste.
The work of years is accomplished in as many days. The instinctive, predominant,
prevailing propensity, as if from some strange presentiment, is, to save time. For
what purpose is never seriously inquired. But that which is done is given out to be
done without delay. It is getting late. Every moment is precious. The clock is
just on the stroke. Hurry, Hurry. Let nota second be lost. Yet what is all
this for? What is all this busy, bustling hurry intended to subserve ? Merely to
relieve, and lighten, and help on the brief hours of a temporary existence. It is
vanity and vexation of spirit after all ; a scrambling for gain, a labouring only for
the meat that perisheth. And yet for this all the world is taxed, Land and water
are laid under revenue in the shortest possible time. Steam engines, steam presses,
steam ploughs, steam ships, are all charged to do their utmost, The sails of commerce
whiten every shore. Screws and paddles propel the mighty merchandise of the
seas. Railway carriages ‘run.’ The telegraph outstrips the winda Power to
overcome resistance, derived from natural forces and not from brute strength, is
summoned and put on the stretch to do the bidding of man at a word. Do we
not rejoice at the wonderful facilities and improvements of our time? We do.
We bless God for endowing His creatures with the marvellous faculty of invention,
by which various and even opposite properties are combined and utilities created, that
would have lain in the crypts and caverns of unexplored nature, had they not been
brought out and dominated by the laws of mechanical science, and rendered so
beautifully and amazingly subservient to the wants and interests of society. We
could not, we would not, go back to the Middle Ages of slow travelling, slow pro-


et slow printing, slow progress in every department of service. We are
92


. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DANIEL, OHAP, Xi,





more than satisfied with our present vantage ground, while we are almost dizzy
with our lofty, elevated, far-stretching advance, But here is our condemnation and
our shame. Our religious improvement has not gone on in the same ratio with
our commercial and political progression, The march of evangelism has not kept
pace with the march of intellect, Education is putting out the leaden eyes of
ignorance, pouring the light of knowledge on the visual ray, and kindling the spark
of intelligence in the minds of the untutored masses, while ‘darkness still covers
the earth, and gross darkness the people.’ All else with impetuous stride has
uearly reached the goal, while the chariot of the everlasting Gospel, bearing the
message of salvation to dying millions, still drags its slow length along; and
though above eighteen hundred years on the highway of the world’s amelioration,
has not yet traversed half the globe, seeing two-thirds of its population at least are
to this day unacquainted with the ‘ faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation,’
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, even the chief. On whom
does the charge of negligence in this matter rest? All religious parties are more or
less implicated. We have none of us put our shoulder to the wheel as we ought
to have done. We have not been zealous for the Lord of Hosts, We have set our
affections too much on earthly things. We have hoarded our substance instead
of giving it to Christ. We have hid our Lord’s money, instead of employing it for
the spread of the Gospel, The streams of wealth that have flowed to us from the
bountiful hand of God, we have diverted from their legitimate channels, for their
transmission into dry and thirsty lands where no spiritual water is. We have
selfishly turned them into our own reservoirs, and made them administer to our
whims, and fancies, and pride.”

May the time past suffice to have been guilty of our brother’s blood; and may we
now at length, in the self-denying spirit of the Master, rise and do our utmost to
spread the Gospel of the kingdom among all nations, that the promised end may come!


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—® “ Shut
up the words, and seal the book.” Ac-
cording to some, the prophecy was to
be only enigmatically delivered to a
few, because scarcely one in a hundred
would be worthy to receive it, or give
it any attention. Calvin thinks the
meaning of the order to be that, although
it should be universally despised and
ridiculed, it was yet to be shut up like
a precious treasure; and not to be
treated as valueless, because so few
should embrace the teaching it con-
tained; the direction being given for
the consolation and encouragement of
the prophet himself, lest he grew weary
and despondent, because it failed to
command the applause of all the world.
Jerome says the prophet was to fold up
the prophecy in dark speech, and sign
it that many might read and seek the
truth of the history. Bullinger thinks
the command meant that nothing was
to be added to the oy it being
perfect and absolute; Willet, that he
should commit it to writing, and set it
forth in obscure terms and words, to


take care of it as a treasure, and not
impart it generally to all; and that
many years should elapse before its
fulfilment. According to Brightman,
the angel would have Daniel to write
the prophecy in precisely the same
words and after the same manner in
which he had received it, and to add
nothing of his own by way of exposition,
Dr. Cox thinks the command implies
that those last events will only be un-
ravelled, in their full glory and meaning,
as the time for their accomplishment
approaches, when great inquiry should
be excited and increasing knowledge
acquired, as they should break one after
another in rapid and splendid succession
upon the view of the Church. Heng-
stenberg thinks the command only
relates to a symbolical action, to be
understood of something internal ; and
after the removal of the mere drapery,
the imperatives are to be resolved into
futures, thus,—‘ These prophecies will
be closed and sealed till the time of the
end.” Keil understands the words in
the sense of guarding, while he supposes
293


CHAP. xi


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





that the command refers to the whole
of the visions received by Daniel, all of
which he understands the prophet to
have committed to writing, The pro-
phet was to guard the entire book
containing them from disfigurement,
“till the time of the end,” because its
contents stretched out to that period.

(2) “ Many shall run to and fro.”
wHb” (yeshotetoo), “shall go up and
down,” especially with the view of
searching and investigating. So Job i.
7, ii. 2. Keil remarks that D1 (shoot)
signifies neither to ‘‘ go astray,” as J,
D. Michaelis supposed, nor to “ wander
about” as in consciousness of misery,
as Havernick thought; but only to go
to and fro, to pass through a land, in
order to seek out or search, to go
about spying. It is used of the eyes of
God in Zech. iv. 10, as well as of Satan
in Job i. 7, &c. Here the idea is that
of searching a book, not merely reading
it industriously, as Hitzig or Ewald
renders the word; but, as Gesenius says,
thoroughly searching in it, Keil, how-
ever, would not confine the passage to
the time of the end; and agrees with
Kliefoth in his interpretation of it, that
Daniel must place in security the pro-
phecies he has received until the time
of the end, so that through all times
many men may be able to read them
and gain understanding from them,
Calvin says: “ Many shall investigate ;
this prophecy shall not always be buried
in obscurity ; the Lord will at length
cause many to embrace it to their own
salvation.” He adds that this really
came to pass : “ Before Christ’s coming,
this doctrine was not esteemed according
to its value ; whereas now this divine
assistance affords us strength and en-
ables us to overcome all the attacks of
the world and the devil.” Vatablus
understands the prediction to mean that
many should go to and fro to obtain
knowledge,

(8) “ Knowledge shall be increased.”
In the year 1797, says E, Irving,
“when the two witnesses were to re-
cover life (Rev. xi.), the London Mis-
sionary Society was called into being,
or, at least, began its first active opera-
tions amongst the heathens ; for in that

294


year missionaries were landed in the
island of Otaheite, which with all that
group hath now been yielded to the
preaching of the Word, And since that
time, the society has laboured with its
chief diligence and success among the
islands of the Pacific Ocean, the tribes
of Southern Africa, the expatriated and
enslaved negroes, and the tribes of
Northern Asia. The same year the
prophecy began to be fulfilled in another
way, by the Baptist missionaries in
India addressing themselves to the first
new translation of the Scriptures which
had been undertaken since the Refor-
mation. From that time till this (1826).
the spirit of translating the Scriptures
into all languages hath never slumbered
nor slept, but been aroused in the Church
to an extent beyond all former example ;
insomuch that within the last thirty
years more versions of the Scriptures
have*been made than existed in all
languages before. . . . And when they
began to multiply beyond the means of
the various societies to print and circu.
late them, the Lord raised up that most
noble instrument, the Bible Society,
which hath taken from the hands of the
translators their works as fast as they
were finished, and brought them into
widest circulation.”

) In relation to the increase of
mere natural knowledge as predicted in
the text, the same writer, more than
half a century ago, observed: “Of all
characteristics of the present times, the
increase of our natural knowledge is
perhaps the most remarkable, except
the dissemination of it. The zeal with
which the earth hath been run over, for
facts and specimens, in all departments
of science, the numbers of travellers and
voyagers, and the apparatus for dis-
covery and observation with which they
go attended; the books which teem
from the press in that kind, and the
exactness with which they are written,
are only ee pow by the inventions of
printing and copying by which they are
circulated through the earth with the
speed of life and death: and cultivation
of the intellect in all that respects out-
ward visible things, is the great end of
education ; and hath been carried to a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


wonderful perfection; insomuch that
these intellectual tastes have rooted out
many of the sensual excesses and indul-
gences of our fathers, And education
is the rallying word of all well-disposed
men. For the perfecting of which, the
inventions which have taken place of


OHAP. X¥L


late are altogether marvellous; so that
from the swaddling-band of childhood
up to the fathers of families, you shall
find the people in some school or other,
either infantine, academical, or mechani-
cal.” If true in 1826, how much more
so now in 1881]


HOMILETICS.
Srct. XLIX.—Tue Time or THE End. (Chap. xii. 5-12.)


Daniel had just received orders from the angel to shut up the words of the
vision, and to seal the book that contained them, “even to the time of the end.”
As yet, however, there had been no distinct intimation when that time should be.
Information on this point was greatly desired by Daniel, and was not to be entirely
withheld from him. The time of Messiah’s advent had already been expressly
indicated ; after sixty-nine weeks of years He was to be cut off; and after that
event, war and desolation was determined upon the people for the terrible guilt
thus incurred. The time when the first captivity should terminate, and Israel be
restored to their own land, had also been distinctly foretold ; and the event had
verified the prediction. Daniel was, therefore, naturally wishful to be informed
as to the end of these predicted “ wonders” which had just been communicated to
him. Like the prophets in general, who “searched diligently what and what
manner of time the Spirit that was in them did signify, when he testified before-
hand the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow,” Daniel, having
already learned the time of the sufferings, wished now to learn something regarding
that of the glory that was to succeed them. This was now in part to be commu-
nicated ; but in a way that should rather lead to the exercise of faith and patience
than satisfy curiosity. The scattering and crushing of the power of the covenant
but unbelieving and guilty people must first be fully accomplished. The time
when that should be completed is indicated in the enigmatical terms with which
the prophet’s ear was already acquainted, as that during which the saints were to
be given into the hand of the little horn of the fourth universal empire. It was
the mysterious “‘ time, times, and half a time,” or three times and a half ; but what
that period exactly meant, or from what point it was precisely to take its com-
mencement, definite information was not vouchsafed. Some indication, however,
as to the length of the period was given. A thousand two hundred and ninety
days, probably understood by Daniel as indicative of so many years, were to elapse,
after a certain event yet to take place. That event is also named,—the taking
away of the daily sacrifice, and the setting up of the abomination that maketh
desolate. These terms also Daniel had already heard, and something of their
meaning he had already seen in connection with his own personal history, Another
period is mentioned, extending forty-five days beyond the preceding one; when
all the indignation shall have entirely passed away, and when Israel, visited with
Jehovah’s returning mercy, shall, according to the prophetic promise, have sung,
“© Lord, I will praise Thee ; for though Thou wast angry with me, Thine anger is
turned away, and Thou comfortedst me” (Isa. xii. 1). Further information Daniel
was not to receive. As God’s faithful and accepted servant, he was to go his way
and rest in faith and patience till the end should come, What the angel had
commanded Daniel to do, he now speaks of as done: “The words are closed up
and sealed till the time of the end.” Intimation, however, is given that, sealed as
they are, “the wise” should “ understand ” (vers. 9, 10). They were “ written
for our admonition upon whom the ends of the world are come” (1 Cor. x. 11).

The information regarding the time of the end was communicated R re in


omaP. XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





® peculiarly solemn and impressive manner. After the angel had ceased making
his communication, Daniel continued to gaze on his celestial informant ; when, as
he did so, he saw other two, one on each side of the river,@) on or over which the
chief angel, or the man clothed in linen, stood, as Lord of it and what it repre-
sented. One of these, addressing the latter, probably for Daniel’s information,
possibly for his own, asked, ‘‘ How long shall it be to the end of these wonders 7” (2)
Upon which the chief angel, solemnly lifting up both his hands to heaven, and
swearing by Him that liveth for ever and ever, as about to make some most important
statement, deeply affecting not Daniel only but the Church at large, and calling
for the most deep and devout attention to it, declares that “it shall be for a time
and times and a half ;(@) and when He shall have accomplished to scatter the
power of the holy people,“ all these things shall be finished” (vers, 5-7). Daniel,
not understanding the precise meaning of the statement, ventures, in his earnest-
ness, to ask for himself, “O my Lord, what shall be the end of these things?”
Daniel, however, is forbidden to inquire further, and is only assured that though
the troubles of his people should be many, the end should be the purification of
the wise, who should also understand the vision. Additional information, however,
is vouchsafed ; and then Daniel is bidden to go his way till the end be, as he
should rest and stand in his lot “at the end of the days” (vers. 10-13).

In indicating the time of the end, the man clothed in linen mentions, first, a
period that should elapse during which a certain purpose of Jehovah regarding the
chosen people should be accomplished (ver. 7); secondly, a period of time that
should be reckoned from the occurrence of certain events (ver. 11). We notice
both—

L The period to elapse during which a certain purpose of Jehovah should
be accomplished, The purpose referred to is the scattering or crushing of the
power of the holy people, that is, the Jews, so called as having been taken inte
covenant with Jehovah, who declared that they should be to Him a holy people
or nation (Exod. xix. 56; Lev. xx. 26; Deut. vii. 6). In case of His people’s
continued disobedience, He threatened to “break the pride of their power” and
to “scatter them among the heathen” (Lev. xxvi. 18, 19, 33); both apparently
indicated in the text, “when He shall have accomplished to scatter or crush the
power of the holy people.” We have seen how this scattering or crushing com.
menced after the rejection and cutting off of the Messiah, when, according to
the prophecy, “the people of the prince that should come—the Romans under
whose subjection they then were—should destroy the city and the sanctuary,”
and the end should be with a flood, even war and desolations determined upon
them (chap. ix. 26). Paul speaks of them as already in his day broken off and
cast away (Rom. xi. 15-20). They have been so up to the present time ; a nation
scattered and peeled, tribes of the wandering foot and weary breast. Even now
thousands of them are said to contemplate leaving Germany, from whence they
have been all but expelled, in order to return to Spain, from whence their perse
cuted fathers fled for refuge to Germany several centuries ago. The scattering
and crushing of their power is still going on, their own country being still in
the hands of the Gentiles, But this is to have an end; and when this purpose of
chastening shall have been accomplished, when Jehovah shall see that “ their
power is gone,” and they “accept the punishment of their iniquity,” and acknow-
ledge their guilt in rejecting and crucifying the Lord’s Anointed, the fulfilment
of His gracious promises regarding them shall begin (Lev. xxvi. 40-45; Deut,
xxxii, 36). “If the casting away of them be—as it has been—the reconciling of
the world, what shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead?” (Rom,
xi. 15), The period during which this scattering or crushing was to take place
is the enigmatical one already occurring in the prophecy (chap, vii. 27), “a time,
times, and a half,” or three and a half times. From chap, xi. 13 (margin) we
may gather that the term “time” was understood to indicate a year; “at the end

296


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL, CHAP, EX.





of times, even years,” was the language of the angel. A year was usually reckoned
as containing 360 days; so that the period in the text would be that which we
twice meet with in the Revelation, a thousand two hundred and sixty days (Rev.
xi. 3, xii. 6); or, according to prophetical reckoning, each day being considered
a year, 1260 years; a period also spoken of in the Revelation as a time, times, and
half a time (chap, xii. 14), The two periods thus similarly described in the two
Revelations of the Old and New Testament, as of the same length, are probably
one and the same, commencing and concluding together, as it is certain that they
possess the same character of suffering, persecution, and oppression of the people
of God. Its application to the duration of the Little Horn of the Fourth Beast
or Roman empire, we have already considered under chap. vii, 27. Although
the temporal power of the Little Horn appears since 1870 to be a thing of the
past, still its spiritual power continues; and it is certain that the scattering and
crushing of the covenant people is not yet at an end. How near, however, in
both cases the consummation may be, time alone will show. Far distant, it would
seem, it cannot well be. O Israel, return unto the Lord, from whom ye have
revolted. ‘‘ Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, in order
that the times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord, and He may
send again Jesus, who before was preached unto you; whom the heavens must
receive until the times of the restoration of all things” (Acts iii. 19-21, R.V.)

The period mentioned in ver. 11, “twelve hundred and ninety days,” is doubt-
leas the same three times and a half with the addition of thirty more; while the
third period (ver. 12), or the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days, is
a still further extension of it by forty-five; these additions or extensions having
probable reference to what should take place between the termination of the
scattering and crushing of Israel’s power in their deliverance out of the great
tribulation (ver. 1), and their full enjoyment of the blessings promised in connec-
tion with their return to their Saviour and King. ©)

IL The period of time to be reckoned from the occurrence of certain
events (ver. 11). This period is that just mentioned, twelve hundred and ninety
days, or thirty days (or years) beyond the 1260, or the “time, times, and half a
time.” The events from which this period is to be reckoned are spoken of as the.
taking away of the daily sacrifice, and the setting up of the abomination that
maketh desolate. We have to inquire when these events took place, But first
we have to consider what the expressions mean, We have had them before (chap,
viii, 11, xii 31), Literally and primarily in relation to Israel, they are under.
stood to indicate the cessation, or rather violent removal, of the Jewish worship
as prescribed in the law of Moses, and the introduction of a false and idolatrous
worship, under whatever form, in its stead, This took place first under Antiochus
Epiphanes, and afterwards again under the Romans and their successors the
Mahomedans, as it is this day. In relation to the Church, or the Israel of the
New Testament, the expressions would denote the violent removing or changing
of the Christian worship, and corrupting the great doctrine of the one sacrifice for
sin, with the substituting of an unscriptural creed and idolatrous worship in their
place; things which we have already seen were done by the Little Horn, both of
the Fourth and the Third Beast (chap. vii. 25, viii. 11). In relation to the
chosen people of the Old Covenant to whom the prophecy seems to have a special
reference, it is more difficult to point to a period when these predicted events took
place, and from which the 1290 days or years were to take their commencement.
It is remarkable, however, as was formerly noted, that the oppression of the
Church under the Little Horn of the Fourth or Roman empire, viewed as the
Papacy, commenced almost simultaneously with the oppression of Israel by the
Little Horn of the Third or Grecian Empire, viewed as Mahomedanism; namely,
soon after the beginning of the seventh century ; while it is certain that both the
Papacy and Mahomedanism have been equaily oppressive to the renee of the


GmaP. XIl. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





New Testament and that of the Old. And it appears equally certain that the
faithful in both the Old and New Covenants will be the objects of the wrath of
the Antichrist under the last or infidel form which he seems destined to assume,
when he shall “go forth in great fury to destroy, and utterly to make away
many ” (chap. xi. 45).

From the whole passage we may make the following reflections and inferences :—

1. The passage appears to teach the duty of taking a lively interest in the
future of the Church and in what God has been pleased to reveal in His word
regarding the end and the time of it. This is indicated in the very fact that such
revelations have been communicated to the Church. These have certainly been
given to be studied and inquired into. Christians might possibly give too much
attention to such subjects, but it is much easier to give too little. The passage
before us exhibits the interest which the angels take in the Church’s future, and in
the things revealed regarding it, with the time of their occurrence, It is an angel
that asks, “ How long shall it be to the end of these wonders?” (ver. 6.) The
question suggestive, whether we regard it as asked by the angel for his own
information or that of the prophet. When angels are concerned about the future
of the Church, its own intelligent members may well be so, Not only into the
sufferings of Christ, but the glory that should follow them, the angels desire to
look (1 Pet. i. 12). The manner in which the exalted personage clothed in linen,
and standing over the river, gives the information sought regarding the end,
suggestive of the same duty. The information is given by him in the form of a
most solemn attestation ; lifting up both his hands to heaven, and swearing by
Him that liveth for ever and ever (ver. 7). Finally, the same thing seems to
be taught by Daniel, who, as if not yet satisfied—such, as Brightman quaintly
observes, being the difference of perception in the heavenly and earthly schools—
inquires, “OQ my Lord, what shall be the end of these things?” (ver. 8.) This
question, so far from being discouraged, is answered by still fuller information on
the subject (ver.11). Indifference on the subject of unfulfilled prophecy in relation
to the Church and the world, in the presence of these facts, should hardly be found
in the clearer disper. .tion of the Spirit, when that divine Teacher is promised,
among other purposes, to show us “things to come” (John xvi. 13) ; still more at a
period when we may well believe that the things promised must be hastening to
their fulfilment. It is of such prophecy that the Apostle speaks as “a light shining
in a dark place,” to which we “do well to take heed until the day dawn” (2 Pet,
i, 19), It cannot, one should think, be becoming on the part of believers, nor
either pleasing or honouring to the Master, to be in any degree indifferent to that
which awakened so much interest in heaven,—the unsealing of the book which
contained the disclosures of the Church’s future and the things of the end, and
which it was the sole prerogative and glory of the Lamb slain to take and unseal
(Rev. v. 1, &.) “There is a point to which we may legitimately pursue our
inquiries, but where it becomes us to pause. Prophecy is intended to guide us
along the bright outlines of the future, but not to make us historians by anticipa-
tion ; to impart sufficient for the needful instruction and encouragement of the
people of God, amidst the tribulation of these latter days, which will precede the
ultimate triumph and glory of the Church; but not to acquaint them with the
secret intentions of God with regard to the minuter character of those events which
are written in the book of His decrees, To steer between the Scylla and Charybdia
of a desponding and neglectful indifference to prophecy, and a dogmatic interpre
tation, is an important attainment ; and is precisely that course which tends to
tranquillise the spirit amidst surprising changes, and sustain it by pleasing hopes”
(Cox). “As God revealed to the prophets who prophesied of the grace that
should come to us, ‘the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow,’ that
they might search and inquire ‘what and what manner of time the Spirit of Christ
who a re them did signify ;’ so in the times of the accomplishment, we who are


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL. omay, xi


living are not exempted from searching and inquiring, but are led by the prophetio
word to consider the ‘signs of the times’ in the light of this word ; and from that
which is already fulfilled, as well as from the nature and manner of the fulfilment,
to confirm our faith, for endurance amid the tribulations which prophecy has made
known to us ; that God, according to His eternal gracious counsel, has measured
them, according to their beginning, middle, and end, that thereby we should be
purified and guarded for the eternal life ” (Kez/).

2. It should be the comfort of the Church to know that the time of the end,
about which so much interest was felt both by the angels and the “ man greatly
beloved,” cannot now be far distant. It seems impossible but that the period
appointed and predicted for the “scattering and crushing the power of the holy
people,” should be near its expiry. ©) For eighteen centuries has that scattering
and crushing been going on; and still Jerusalem is trodden under foot of the
Gentiles, and the land, given to Abraham and his seed for an everlasting inherit-
ance, lies well-nigh desolate in the hand of their adversaries, while they themselves
are still shut up in unbelief. Israel was to be punished “seven times” for their
sins. We may well believe that these times of chastening and abandonment are
‘well nigh at an end, Everything indicates that such is the case. Signs of an
approaching crisis in the history of Israel, the Church, and the world, are far from
being wanting. ‘The great river Euphrates—the Turkish empire—is being rapidly
“dried up, that the way of the kings of the East,” whoever they may be—believed
by many to be Israel themselves—“ may be prepared” (Rev. xvi. 12). And we
know that the drying up of that river synchronises with the time of the end, when
Antichrist shall be overthrown, Israel be restored, and “the mystery of God be
finished, according to the good tidings which He declared to His servants the
prophets ” (Rev. x. 7, R.V.) Simultaneously with the drying up of the Euphrates,
the beloved disciple saw “coming out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the
mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean spirits
as it were frogs; for they are spirits of devils, working signs ; which go forth unto
the kings of the whole world, to gather them together to the battle of the great
day of God Almighty” (Rev. xvi. 13, 14, R.V.) While this was going, the voice
came forth from Him whose coming again was promised on the day He went up:
“ Behold I come as a thief; blessed is he who watcheth and keepeth his garments,
lest he walk naked and they see his shame.” The events of the last hundred years
might justly lead to the conclusion that we had fallen upon “the time of the end,”
especially when predicted chronological periods seemed to be probably drawing near
their completion, Such events as the French Revolution of 1789, with the shaking
of every Continental throne that ensued upon it; the gradual decay and diminution
of the Turkish empire, from 1820 till now when the Turkish vizier gives it as his
opinion that, if Turkey engages in a war with Cyprus, it will be the last time she
will ever fight in Europe; the entire cessation of the pope’s temporal power in
1870; the unexampled increase of knowledge in general, and diffusion of the
Gospel in particular, with the special attention given to the word of prophecy ;
and, finally, the fearful spread of infidelity at home and abroad ;—these should be
sufficient to convince us, with the Bible in our handg, that our lot is fallen in days
when the time of the end is not far distant.

3. Our duty to prepare ourselves for the changes that may speedily come, and
to help in preparing others. In connection with the casting off of the Jews, the
Gentiles would have their times of Gospel privilege. The casting away of Israel
was to be the reconciling of the world, and has been so, These times of the
Gentiles have been going on for eighteen centuries, But they were not to be for
ever. The time was to come when the Gentiles should be dealt with for their use
or abuse of the privileges of the kingdom of God, as Israel had been after their
rejection of their King and Saviour. That King was to come again, and reckon
with His servants to whom He had intrusted His talents. “The Lord — shall


CHAP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





be revealed from heaven with His mighty angels, coming in the clouds of heaven
with power and great glory,” so that “every eye shall see Him, in flaming fire
taking vengeance on them that know uot God, and that obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ” (2 Thess. i, 7, 8). Such a time of reckoning with those who
have possessed the Gospel and the privileges of the kingdom, awaits the Gentiles
as truly as it did Israel, An account must be taken of the manner in which that
Gospel has been received. What if the Spirit of grace should be withdrawn from
Christendom as He was from Israel, and, for the misuse of the Gospel, the Gentile
churches be judicially given over to a spirit of unbelief and impenitence, so as to
become the willing followers of Antichrist and partake of his doom? (2 Thess. ii,
11,12.) “When the Son of Man cometh, shall He find faith on the earth?” “Be
not highminded, but fear ; for if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest
He also spare not thee” (Rom. xi. 20, 21). “ Behold, now is the accepted time;
behold, now is the day of salvation:” although that day with the Gentiles is now
hastening to its close. “ To-day, if ye will hear His voice, harden not your hearts,”
He that shall come will eome, and will not tarry. ‘ Behold I come quickly, and
My reward is with Me, to give unto every man according as his work shall be”
(Rev. xxii. 12). To all who accept His Gospel and receive Himself as their King
and Saviour, He assigns their work till He shall come. “ Ye shall be witnesses unto
Me both in Jerusalem, and in Judea, and in Samaria, and to the uttermost part of
the earth,” “The Spirit and the Bride say, Come; and let him that heareth
say, Come” (Acts i, 8; Rev. xxii. 17). Have we received that Saviour,
and are we faithfully endeavouring to do the work He assigns us? The door
of the Ark still stands open; let us make sure of entering it ourselves, and
endeavour to persuade our kindred, and as many others as possible, to enter it


along with us,


EXEGETICAL NOTES —Q
“Upon the waters of the river.” Keil
remarks that the river, which, according
to chap, x. 4, is the Hiddekel or Tigris,
is here called "& (yeor), a name only
given in the Old Testament to the Nile ;
as if to indicate that, as the angel of
the Lord once smote the waters of the
Nile to ransom His people out of Egypt,
so in the future shall He cal... and sup-
press the waves of the river which in
Daniel’s time represented the might of
the world-kingdom ; the river Hiddekel
being thus a figure of the Persian
monarchy, through whose territory it
flowed, The other two angels who
appear on the banks of the river, he
views as standing by the side of the
Angel of the Lord, represented as the
ruler of the Hiddekel, as servants pre-
pared to execute His will, Brightman
observes that, while in the first vision,
the four winds of heaven strove on the
great sea, and four great beasts came up
out of it, the matters there treated being
in regard to all peoples, which were to
be described with their four universal
empires i the second was given at Ulai,

300


no sea nor any famous river, as it
treated only of some particular nations ;
and the last on Hiddekel, a particular
river also, but one that flowed out of
Paradise ; the matter treated pertaining
to a holy and elect people, whose origin
was the infinite grace of a merciful God,
He views the man clothed in linen as
Christ Himself, the only Priest who, as
the Spirit moved upon the waters of
chaos (Gen. i. 2), sustaining them in
that confusion by His mighty power,
watches over the affairs of His Church
to preserve and support it. He thinks
the other two on the banks of the
river are added for confirmation of the
whole matter, every word being, accord-
ing to Deut, xix. 15, established in
the mouth of two or three witnesses,
the one of these waiting in silence and
modesty, while the other speaks, these
holy beings having the Author of order
ever before their eyes, Willet observes
that the most general opinion regarding
the angel on the river is, that it was
Gabriel. So De Lyra, Pererius, Bul-
linger, &c. His own view, however, is
that it was Christ Himself, the Pal


*


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DANIEL.


OH4P. XIL





moni or Certain One, in chap. viii. 13,
who, as the “ Wonderful,” hath “ secrets
in account and number.”

@ “ How long shall tt be to the end
of these wonders?” Kranichfeld reads,
‘*When shall the end of these things be?”
Keil, however, thinks that the question
rather is, How long continues the end
of these things,—Heb.,—“ Till when is
the end?” Not, How long shall they
continue ? but, How long shall the end
of them do so ? the end being the “ time
of the end” prophesied of from chap. xi.
40~—xii. 3, with all that shall happen in
it ; the wonders being particularly the
unheard-of oppressions described in chap.
xi, 39, &c. Brightman thinks the “ end
of these wonders” shall be when the
blasphemous kingdom of the Turks
shall come to an end, God then making
an end of “ scattering the power of the
holy people.” Auberlen views this
period as referring to the time of Anti-
christ, and pointing back to chap. vii.
25, which refers to the same period, as
the time of the world-power, in which
the earthly kingdoms rule over the
heavenly ; and mentioned in the Apoca-
lypse as the times of the Gentiles, ex-
tending from the destruction of Jeru-
salem by the Romans to the second
advent of Christ.

(8) “A time, times,and a half.” Keil
thinks that the definition of time
here given leads to the conclusion that
the answer of the angel refers not to
the period of persecution under An-
tiochus, but to that under the last
enemy, the Antichrist ; as it accurately
agrees with the period of time named in
chap. vii. 25, as that of the duration of
the enemy of God who should arise
out of the fourth world-kingdom. Three
and a half times, according to the pro-
phecy of chaps. vii, 25, and ix, 26, 27,
are given, he thinks, for the fullest
unfolding of the power of the last enemy
of God till his destruction ; and when,
in this time of unparalleled oppression,
the natural strength of the holy people
shall be completely broken to pieces,
then shall these terrible things have
reached their end. As regards the
place here, and the periods named in
Rev. xiii. 5, and xi, 2, 3, where forty


months and 1260 days are used inter
changeably, he thinks it is questionable
whether the weeks and the days repre-
sent the ordinary weeks of the year and
days of the week, and whether these
periods of time are to be taken chrono-
logically. He thinks the choice of the
chronologically indefinite expression
“time ” shows that a chronological de-
termination of the period is not in view,
but that the designation of time is to
be understood symbolically. The three
and a half times, he observes, are, be
yond doubt, the half of “ seven times ;”
but, in his opinion, they only indicate a
testing period, a period of judgment,
which, according to Matt. xxiv. 22,
Prov. x. 27, will for the elect’s sake be
intercepted and shortened, He thinks,
however, they refer to a period still
future. Several modern interpreters, on
the other hand, especially in Germany,
refer the period to the duration of the
oppression of the Jews under Antiochus
Epiphanes, Mr. Habershon (Désserta-
tion on the Prophecies) writes: ‘‘ It was
the opinion of the celebrated Mr. Mede
that the time, times, and a half, of
Daniel and John, was but the bisection
of a complete number of seven times,
which he called the Sacred Calendar of
the Great Almanack of Prophecy ; and
which he thought all mention of time
in the Scriptures had reference,” The
same writer thinks the “time of the
end” to signify the same point of time
as the termination of these “ times ;” the
“ wonders” taking place not only at the
fall of the Little Horn of popery but
at the restoration of the Jews. Faber
observes: “ At the close of the self-
same period of 1260 years (the time,
times, and a half), we are taught by
Daniel that the Jews are to be restored.
.. . At the outflowing of the last vial,
the 1260 years apparently expire, and
the restoration of Judah commences,
To this period, therefore, we must
ascribe the expedition of the Wilful
King; and at the same period the
Stone begins to smite the Image upon
his feet, and the Ancient of Days to sit
in judgment upon the Roman beast and
his tyrannical little horn. . . . During
this period of unexampled trouble,
801


OWAP. XI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DANIEL,





which so awfully terminates with the
slaughter of Megiddo, we are expressly
taught by Daniel, in perfect harmony
with the other inspired prophets, that
the restoration of Judah shall take
place.” Faber, after Mede, recognises
the captivity of Israel under the four
successive hostile monarchies, as form-
ing the complete period or Great Calen-
dar of Prophecy ; and assumes as a
datum the number of “ seven times” in
Nebuchadnezzar’s dream of the tree,
which he considers to mark the dura-
tion of the four tyrannical monarchies ;
the period having a double application
to Judah and Israel, while each applica-
tion has a double commencement and
a double termination, the last of these
terminations being in the Millennium,

(4) “ To scatter the power of the holy
people.”  Y YB (nappets yadh), liter-
ally, to “shatter or crush the hand.”
Keil observes that the expression 782
(nappets) primarily denotes to beat to
pieces, to shatter, asin Ps, ii. 9, cxxxvii.
9 ; and is the meaning to be given to it
in the text, as has been done by Heng-
stenberg, Maurer, Auberlen, and others,
? (yadh), hand, is the emblem of active
power ; and the shattering of the hand
he views as the complete destruction of
power to work, and the placing in a
helpless and powerless condition, as in
Deut, xxxii. 86, referring to the crush-
ing by Antichrist of the holy people
in the last great tribulation. Jerome
understands the oppression of God’s
people under the hand of Antichrist,
this general dispersion of them being
given as a sign of the end of these
things. Calvin understands the entire
weakening of their strength through
persecution,

(°) “A thousand two hundred and
ninety days; the thousand three hun-
dred and five and thirty days.” Mr,
Faber thinks that though the restoration
of Judah takes place at the close of the
1260 years, or “a time, times, and a
half,” the “lost sheep of the house of
Israel remain still to be gathered.” He
considers the circumstance of the two-
fold restoration the reason why the
angel divides the seventy-five days or
years ee the 1260 into thirty and

2


forty-five, the former being the period
for the restoration of Judah, the latter
for that of Israel, the whole seventy-five
belonging exclusively to the period of
the last vial in the Apocalypse. Bishop
Newton considers that it is to the
three great events of the fall of Anti-
christ, the restoration of the Jews, and
the beginning of the Millennium, that
the three different dates of 1260, 1290,
and 1335 years are to be referred. Dr.
Cox observes that a further period of
thirty days or years is here added, as
perhaps marking the season during
which the predicted overthrow of the
Antichristian powers shall be accom-
plished, or, as some suppose, the restora-
tion of the Jews. ‘ We presume not
to decipher the particular events of the
third era of forty-five additional years,
producing a period of 1335, the close
of the prophetic revelations, As he is
pronounced ‘ blessed’ who attains that
age, we must conclude that it will be
the last and most glorious manifestation
of God to mankind,” Keil thinks that
vers. 1] and 12 treat of an earlier period
of oppression than ver. 7, and that thus
the 1290 and 1335 days are not reckoned
after the three and a half times, He
thinks also that they are not to be
reckoned chronologically, but interpreted
symbolically ; days being used instead
of times, to indicate that the time of the
tribulation is not one of an immeasur-
able extent, but limited to a period of
moderate duration, which is exactly
measured out by God ; the 1290 days
denoting in general the period of Israel’s
affliction on the part of Antiochus
Epiphanes, by the taking away of the
Mosaic ordinances of worship and the
setting up of the worship of idols, but


.without giving a statement of the dura-


tion of this oppression which can be
chronologically reckoned. The second
definition of time, 1335 days, by which
the period is increased by forty-five, he
thinks more strictly represents the same
idea of a limited period of duration;
the oppression wholly ceasing with the
expiry of that extended period. Several
modern interpreters reckon these two
latter periods from chap, viii, 14 ; Klie.
foth remarking that we know from the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





book of Maccabees that the consecration
of the temple took place on the 25th
day of the month Kisleu, in the 148th
year of the Seleucidan era, and that
Antiochus died in the year following,
which he thinks may be the end of the
1290 days, while the 1335, or forty-five
days longer, reach to the entire cessation
of the persecution. Junius and others
referred these forty-five days to the
time between the restoration of the
Jewish worship and the death of An-
tiochus. The Duke of Manchester
(Finished Mystery), with some others,
regards the “time of the end” as a
period probably of only 1290 or 1335
literal days, ending with the general
resurrection, Mr, Habershon thinks
that the events to take place during
those seventy-five years, about which
nothing is said in the vision, correspond
with those things which, in Rev. x., were
uttered by the seven thunders, but which
the Apostle was to seal up and not to
write; the information not concerning
the disciples of Jesus, who would be
taken out of the reach of those troubles,
as Noah was from the deluge, Lot
from Sodom, aud the Christians from
Jerusalem in the siege. Some suppose
that of these additional seventy-five
years, the first thirty were to be taken
up with the outpouring of the vials
upon apostate Christendom, after the
papal power was brought to an end,
and the remaining forty-five with the
troubles consequent on the rise and
doings of the infidel Antichrist, termi-
nating with the battle of Armageddon,
So Mr. Irving, who says: ‘‘ Knowing
as we do from the former vision that
the 1260 years bring the Little Horn’s
power to an end, and introduce the
awful scene of the judgment of the
Beast which obeyed his blasphemy, it
must necessarily be that these thirty
years should run over into that period
of judgment; but whether they con-
clude it or not, no one has a right to
declare, because it is not so declared,
nor are any grounds revealed for con-
cluding or even conjecturing so. But
on the other hand, from the wording of
the following verse, I think there was
reason for concluding or conjecturing


the contrary. ‘Blessed is he that
waiteth,’ &c. The language, waiting
and coming to, seems to me to imply the
exercise of tried patience and the escape
from imminent peril, and carrieth to
my ear a certain note of trouble, which
being safely passed, all will be well, and
the blessed time and condition of the
world attained to... . And I think
that the 1290 days doth not announce
the completion of anything; but doth
announce the woeful beginning of a long
day of trouble and desolation to the
Church, whereof the period 1335
announceth not only the complete
determination, but the beginning of
another period of universal blessedness.”
De Lyra, Pintus, and other Roman
Catholic writers apply the 1290 days to
the reign of Antichrist, which they con-
sider equivalent to the time, times, and
half a time, or three and a half years.
Jerome considers the additional forty-
five days to be between the death of
Antichrist and the coming of Christ in
glory. So Pererius and the Roman
Catholics in general, Calvin, who says
he is no conjuror in numerical calcu-
lations, thinks that the 1290 days
indicate the unlimited period of Anti-
christ’s long reign, and that the ad-
ditional forty-five is no certain definite
time, but is intended to intimate
that the godly should wait with patience,
though the time of deliverance seemed
long. Melanchthon puts both the
numbers together, making seven years
and three months, ending with the
overthrow of Nicanor, the general of
Antiochus, Osiander applies the 1290
days to the profession of religion under
the papal Antichrist from its beginning
to its end ; and thinks the 1335 years
mark the continuance of the kingdom
of Antichrist, of which the beginning is
uncertain, Bullinger refers the 1290
days to the time of the Jewish war
begun by Vespasian in the fourteenth
of Nero, and ended in the second year
of Vespasian, after continuing about
three years and a half. He thinks the
additional forty-five days began from
the taking of Jerusalem by the Romans,
multitudes of the Jews being then sold
into captivity and subjected to other


@maP. xii,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL.





miseries. Mr, Bosanquet remarks that
when the Wilful King is interpreted as
representing the personification of the
Mahomedan apostasy, these periods of
1290 and 1335 days or years necessarily
count from his time even beyond the
present days.

() “ The daily sacrifice shall be taken
away.” Irving, with many others,
views the taking away of the daily
sacrifice as equivalent to the violent
putting down of the true worship of
Jehovah, which was done by the papal
power. ‘In the interpretation of pro-
phecy, respect ought to be had continu-
ally to the form of religious truth and
religious language in which the prophet
and the peuple to whom he prophesied
were instructed, and in which they
could be intelligently addressed. That
is, we ought to put ourselves as much
as we can into their condition of know-
ledge, in order to understand what the
words spoken to them of the Lord
signify. Now to the mind of an
Israelite, trained under the dispensation
of Moses, the taking away of the daily
sacrifice from the temple on Mount
Zion, signifies no less than the violent
putting down of the worship of Jehovah ;
and the setting up of ‘the abomina-
tion that maketh desolate,’ or ‘that
astonisheth,’ signified the placing, in its
stead, of some form of blasphemous and
idolatrous worship. This language,
therefore, is applicable only to those
great invasions of the Church, whereby
the true worship is abolished, and a
false one substituted in its stead.”
Irving regards the taking away of the
daily sacrifice in the text as ascribed to
the Wilful King or infidel Antichrist
(chap. xi. 31), and understands it of his
reconstituting “the papal abomination
within the bounds of his empire after it
had been for many years abolished.”
Brightman, on the other hand, under-
stands the abolition of the ceremonial
law of sacrifices accomplished by Christ
through His death.

© “The abomination that maketh
desolate.” Bishop Newton understood
the desolation here referred to as that
of the Eastern Church by Mahomet,
“That same time, therefore, is prefixed

304


for the desolation and oppression of the
Eastern Church, as for the tyranny of
the Little Horn (chap, vii. 25) in the
Western Church ; and it is wonderfully
remarkable that the doctrine of Ma
homet was first forged in Mecca, and
the supremacy of the pope was estab
lished by virtue of a grant from the
wicked tyrant Phocas, in the very same
year of Christ, 606.” Hs adds: “ The
‘setting up of the abomination of desola-
tion ’ appears to be a general phrase, and
comprehensive of various events, It is
applied by the writer of the first book of
the Maccabees (i. 54) to the profanation of
the temple by Antiochus, and his setting
up the image of Jupiter Olympius upon
the altar of God. It is applied by our
Saviour (Matt. xxiv. 15) to the destruc
tion of the city and temple by the
Romans under the conduct of Titus in
the reign of Vespasian. It may for the
same reason be applied to the Roman
emperor Adrian’s building a temple to
Jupiter Capitolinus in the same place
where the temple of God had stood, and
to the misery of the Jews, and the
desolation of Judea that followed. It
may with equal justice be applied to
the Mahomedans invading and deso-
lating Christendom, and converting the
churches into mosques ; and this latter
event seemeth to have been particularly
intended in this passage.” Brightman,
as well as Calvin, understands by ‘the
abomination that maketh desolate’ the
adulterate and counterfeit worship set
up by the Jewish nation since they
rejected Christ, and which is a most
loathsome abomination before God.
He reads DRW (shomem) as passive,
“made desolate,” denoting the time
when Christ utterly abolished that
impious manner of sacrificing, or
the ceremonial worship; this abomina
tion standing in the holy place up to
the time of Vespasian, when the temple
was destroyed, and being especially put
an end to in the time of the emperor
Julian (about the year a.p. 360), when,
as the historian Socrates says, the tem-
ple was utterly overthrown, instead of
the new edifice being prepared; so that
nothing after that was ever attempted,
the abomination being made utterly


*


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


/


eS


desolate. Bullinger understood this
‘abomination’ of the laying waste of the
nation and city of the Jews; for exam-
ple, the destruction of Jerusalem by the
Romans. Osiander, like Irving and
others, understands it of the idolatrous
service introduced into the Church by
the Roman Antichrist, Willet again
refers all to the time of’ Antiochus
Epiphanes historically, though typically
to that of Antichrist. That the appli-
cation of the text by Osiander and
others to the papal corruptions is not
without solid grounds, will appear when
it is remembered that article 4 of the
creed of Pope Pius is that “in the mass
is offered to God a true, proper, and
propitiatory sacrifice for the living and
the dead;” that article 5 is, “I pro-
fess that in the most holy sacrifice of
the eucharist there is truly, really, and
substantially the body and blood, to-
gether with the soul and divinity, of
our Lord Jesus Christ ;” that article 7
declares that “the saints reigning to-
gether with Christ are to be venerated
and invoked ;” and that in article 8 it
is said, “I most firmly assert that the
images of Christ, of the mother of God
ever virgin, and also of other saints,
may be had and retained, and that due
honour and veneration is to be given
them.” The practice is accordingly.
The following tragical story, taken from
an American paper, is told in the New-
castle Chronicle of March 25, 1881 :—
“The Italian barque Ajace, from Ant-
werp, bound for an American port, went
ashore during a storm on the 4th inst.
(March 1881), on Cooney Island, and
was lost with all hands, except one man
named Pietro Sala) The crew con-
sisted of fourteen, composed of Italians,
Austrians, and one Greek, The sur-
vivor states that after the vessel struck,
the officers and sailors lost all self-con-
trol, The captain offered a bottle of
brandy to the crew, telling them to
drink and die like men who were not
afraid of death, The men were too
much excited to pay attention to the
captain's offer. He then took a small
image of Madonna (the Virgin Mary),
which he held aloft in both hands, and
the crew all knelt before it, shrieking,


and crying, and imploring the Madonna
to rescue them. Another man caught
the image from the steward’s hands,
and carried it into the sea, Then the
steward cried out aloud, ‘The Madonna
has deserted us; there is no hope;’
and pulling out his sheath-knife, cut
his throat, declaring that he would
rather die by his own hand than be
drowned, The sight of his blood, as it»
spurted from his neck and fell on the
deck where he had fallen, seemed to
madden some of the crew; and imme-
diately the carpenter, a Neapolitan,
and a Genoese lad, drew their knives
and followed his example.”

(8) He shall have accomplished to
scatter,” &c. It is not a little remark-
able that at the time of the French
Revolution, when many believed that
prophecy was receiving its fulfilment,
there were not wanting appearances of
the probable termination of the scatter-
ing of Israel’s power. Milman, in his
History of the Jews, writes: “In the year
1780, the avant-courier of the Revolu-
tion, Joseph II., ascended the throne
(of Austria). Among the first measures
of this restless reformer was a measure
for the amelioration of the condition of
the Jews.” In his Edict of Toleration
he “opened to the Jews the schools and
the universities of the empire, and gave
them the privilege of taking degrees as
doctors in philosophy, medicine, and
civil law. . . . It threw open the whole
circle of trade to their speculations, per-
mitting them to establish manufactures
of all sorts, excepting gunpowder, and
to attend fairs in towns where they
were not domiciliated.. . . It gave
them equal rights, and subjugated them
to the same laws as the Christians.”
Matters are now changed, however, with
the Jews in the German empire. After
nearly a century of comparative external
prosperity, though as yet, alas! far
from having returned to the Lord their
God and to the true David their King,
the popular voice is now lifted, in
Prussia especially, to demand their ex-
pulsion.—According to an article in the
British and Foreign Evangelical Review,
there are only about 21,000 Jews at
present in the Holy Land, oan mostly

Db


OmaP, XII. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DANIEL.





in the rabbinical cities—Jerusalem, Saf- found in the commercial centres, but the
fed, Tiberias, and Hebron; about1500are largest number, about 1300, in Jerusalem.


HOMILETICS.
Sect. L.—TE Contrast, (Chap. xii. 10.)


This verse stands, like many in the book of the Revelation, like a bright light
in a dark and surging sea, both for solemn warning and at the same time for sweet
consolation, in the midst of prophecies which might appear dark and unintelligible.
It is such as Dr. Chalmers was accustomed to speak of as the memorabilia of
Scripture, or passages worthy to be especially noted ana remembered. It has
special relation to the prophetic communications just delivered by the angel to
Daniel, regarding the latter days and what should befall his people in them. It is
applicable, however, to the whole contents of Revelation, and to the whole period
of the present dispensation, with those who live in it, They imply trouble and
affliction ; but this is characteristic of our present state on earth, until the happy
time arrive when “ they shall not hurt nor destroy” in all God’s holy mountain,
and when His people “ shall dwell in peaceable habitations, and in sure dwellings,
and in quiet resting-places ” (Isa, xi. 9, xxxii. 18). Till Christ, who is “ the bright
and morning star,” shall visibly and gloriously arise on the earth, as He did above
eighteen centuries ago “in great humility,” the time of believers on earth will be
one of discipline and of patient waiting, The “whole creation” will continue to
“ groan and travail together in pain,” as it has done until now, till “delivered from
the bondage of corruption unto the glorious liberty of the children of God. And
not only they, but ourselves also, who have the firstfruits of the Spirit, even we
ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption
of our body” (Rom. viii. 21, 23). The children of the bridechamber were to
mourn while the Bridegroom is away. In the salvation already experienced, and
especially in that which is to be revealed, believers “ greatly rejoice; though now
for a season if need be,” they are “in heaviness through manifold temptations,”
The effect, however, of these is a blessed one: “that the trial of your faith being
much more precious than of gold that perisheth, may be found unto praise, and
honour, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ” (1 Peter i 6,7). Such is
the cemfort held out in the text. ‘“ Many shall be purified, and made white, and
tried ; but the wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked shall under-
stand ; but the wise shall understand.” We may note—

1. The blessedness of sanctified trouble. Trouble is sanctified and blessed in
two different ways, and to two different classes. It is sanctified to the ungodly,
and to those still out of Christ ; and it is so when, accompanied by God’s quick-
ening and convicting Spirit, it leads the troubled one to a consideration of sin and
its baneful effects, and to an earnest desire to be saved from it, and to be recon-
ciled to God. Such a case was that of Manasseh, who in his captivity and afflic-
tion sought the Lord and found Him. Of such sanctified trouble the prodigal son
is a standing and divinely given picture, The conversion of Israel in the great
tribulation probably to be a distinguished example of the same thing. But trouble
is also and especially sanctified to the godly, who are already in Christ. These
probably more particularly referred to in the text, The “many” were not only
to be purified and made white, but tried,—proved and made manifest as God’s
pure gold, His faithful people, who choose rather to suffer than to sin, and who
prefer death to denial of His truth, In the case of such, trouble however severe,
and persecution however bitter, is only the fire employed by the Purifier to purge
away the dross from the precious metai, until He sees His own image perfectly
reflected in it. “This is all the fruit to take away their sin.” Persecutors are only
God’s ee polishing-stone to brighten His Church. It is the gracious office of


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL. OHAP. XIL





the Redeemer to “sit asa refiner of silver, and to purify the sons of Levi, that
they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness” (Mal, iii, 3), As
trouble and affliction is the instrument employed by Him for that purpose, the
man is pronounced blessed whom He thus “ chastens and teaches out of His law”
(Ps. xciv. 12). Such trouble and suffering is only the evidence of His fatherly
and faithful love, ‘‘ Whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every
son whom He receiveth” (Heb. xii. 6; Rev. iii. 19).

2. Persecutions and struggles endured by the godly are overruled for good.
Many shall be purified and made white, The result of the suffering predicted.
The authors of these meant them, as in the case of Joseph’s brethren, for evil, but
God overrules them for good. His people’s purification shall be promoted by them.
Instead of being losers they shall be gainers, Thus the wisdom and goodness of
God are manifested in permitting them. The wrath of men is made to praise Him
by contributing to the purification of His children. The storm is not permitted to
destroy, but employed to purify them. The furnace-fires of Babylon, kindled by
the ungodly, were made only to consume the bonds of those they were intended
by them to destroy. Believers have therefore no cause to fear the wrath and
persecution of any adversary. These, with everything else, are only made to work
together for their good.

3. Moral purification the great end intended by God in regard to Hts people.
The will of God is their sanctification, Perfect holiness their true excellence and
real happiness. Such holiness conformity to God’s own character. This the high
calling and destiny of His children. ‘“ Be ye holy, for Iam holy.” God is love,
and His children are to be perfected in love. Sin, which is opposed to this, the
only real evil. God’s purpose, therefore, to deliver them from it, The object of
Christ’s incarnation, life, and death to save His people from their sins, to “ redeem
them from all iniquity, and to purify unto Himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works,” This moral purification and perfection of His children constantly aimed
at by God in His providential dealings both with themselves and the world. Life,
with all its chequered experiences and all its varied history, God’s school for the
education of His children in order to their moral perfection in His likeness. The
Church with its ordinances designed for the same end, “ He loved the Church,
and gave Himself for it, that He might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing
of water, by the word” (Eph. v, 25, 26). That glorious end ultimately secured.
Many shall be purified, An Almighty Agent employed for its accomplishment.
Whatever may be the imstrumentality, whether events in providence or ordinances
in the Church, the Agent is the Spirit of holiness, by whose almighty grace we are
changed from glory unto glory, into the perfect image of Him whom in the Word
we are enabled by Him to contemplate (2 Cor. iii, 17), He is able to present the
subjects of His moral training “ faultless before the presence of His glory with
exceeding joy.” “Faithful is He who calleth you, who also will do it” (Jude 24;
1 Thess, v. 24).

4, Godliness the only true wisdom. “The wise shall understand.” So in ver.
8, “they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament.” Wisdom
something very different from mere knowledge or science, Knowledge is precious,
but at best is only light ; wisdom is light, with life and love combined. Knowledge
not necessarily accompanied with moral excellence, Probably @ much greater
amouut of knowledge possessed by fallen spirits than by any human being in this
life. ‘Knowledge puffeth up;” dissociated from renewing grace, is apt to make
men vain, heady, highminded. Pythagoras, conscious of the excellence of wisdom,
refused to be called by the title which others affected, a “ wise man,” claiming only
to be a “lover of wisdom,”—a philosopher. Wisdom a practical thing. Chooses
the highest and best ends, and pursues them by the best means, Such is true
godliness, The highest and best end, the glory of God the Creator of all, and the
enjoyment of His friendship, fellowship, and image. Godliness is ae


OWAP, XIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,





and the continual aiming at such by the way that God has revealed. It is “to do
justly, and love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God” (Micah vi. 8). “ Pure
and undefiled religion before God even the Father is this, to visit the fatherless
and the widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world”
(James i, 27). This is wisdom, exemplified in the life and character of Him who
was Wisdom personified, and who is made wisdom to all who receive and trust in
Him (1 Cor. i. 30).

5. Knowledge and understanding, in all things necessary to true happiness,
guaranteed to all God’s renewed children. ‘The wise shall understand.” To “ be
wise” is a character equivalent to godliness, and belonging to those who by
grace are made new creatures in Christ, who is wisdom Himself, and is made
wisdom to them that are in Him. To “understand” is something promised to
that character. The promise, though standing absolutely, is yet necessarily limited,
The limitation is to those things necessary and desirable for us to understand.
Many things which it is the province of science to explore, it is not necessary that
we should understand. The same thing true of the Word of God in general, and
the word of prophecy in particular. In this life we may well be content to remain,
as we must remain, ignorant of many things. Here at best we can but kuow in
part. Hereafter we shall, if approved, know even as we are known, But know-
ledge and understanding of what is needful is promised to the wise, The promise
has special reference to the predictions already delivered by the angel to Daniel ;
but doubtless intended to extend to the will of God in general. The exhortation is,
‘‘Be ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is.” It has
reference to revealed truth as a whole. ‘‘ Consider what I say, and the Lord give
thee understanding in all things,’—in all things about which I have written, and
whatever else is revealed and necessary to be understood. That understanding has
especial respect to God Himself, to His will concerning us, to the revelations of
His word, and to His dealings in the world. ‘He hath given us an understanding
that we should know Him that is true.” This understanding is to make us to be
no mere children, but men (1 Cor. xiv. 20). Given, however, to those who are of
a child-like, humble, and teachable spirit. ‘‘ Thou hast hidden these things from
the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes ” (Matt. xi. 26). The
author of this understanding is not man but God, through His Holy Spirit. “Ye
have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things. The anointing which
ye have received of Him abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach you;
but as the same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth and is no lie,
even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in Him” (1 John ii, 20, 27). Christ
counsels the vain, conceited Laodiceans to anoint their eyes with His eye-salve,
that they may see (Rev. iii 17). “Open Thou mine eyes, that I may behold
wondrous things out of Thy law.”

6. The inability of the ungodly to understand divine truth, and more especially
the word of prophecy, ‘The wicked shall not understand.” Ungodliness, when
continued in, incapacitates for the perception of divine truth. The love and
practice of sin associated with a moral blindness) “If any man will do the will
of God, he shall know of the doctrine.” A moral and spiritual nature necessary
to discern moral and spiritual truth. Mere intellectual light often associated with
thick moral darkness, Witness the ancient Greeks and Romans, and many of the
heathen at the present day. The ungodly destitute of a taste and relish for divine
truth, and therefore incapable of perceiving and appreciating it. Hence the counsel,
“Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before
swine.” Ungodliness generally associated with pride and self-conceit, the great
hindrance to the reception of true knowledge. ‘ Whom shall He teach knowledge,
and whom shall He cause to understand doctrine? Those that are drawn from the
breasts,” ‘The ungodly, rejecting divine knowledge, are often righteously given
over to eee incapable of discerning it—a ‘‘reprobate mind.” Such, especially,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL. CHAP, XIL,


SSS ee eee


to be the case in the time of the end, more particularly referred to in the text,
Antichrist’s false pretensions and lying wonders believed by those who received not
the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness (2 Thess, ii. 10-12).

7. A time when it may be too late for repentance. ‘The wicked shall do

wickedly.” The effect of indulged sin and practised ungodliness is to perpetuate
itself. A time when God may righteously leave ungodliness to follow its own
inclinations, “ My Spirit shall not always strive with man.” “He that is filthy,
let him be filthy still.” Confirmed ungodliness geen in its persistency both in the
time of bestowed mercy, and increased light, and manifested judgments, “Let
favour be shown to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness ; in the land of
uprightness he will deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the Lord.
When thy hand is lifted up they will not see” (Isa, xxvi. 10, 11). Such a state
of things probably indicated in the text as taking place in the last days, when
“evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived ”
(2 Tim. iii 13). The greatest blessing, when the wicked is made to turn from his
wickedness and live ; the greatest curse, when the wicked is left still to do wickedly,
“To-day, if ye will hear His voice, harden not your heart.” Sad indeed when neither
mercy nor judgment, neither goodness nor severity, leads men to repentance, and
when the more they are stricken the more they revolt,:till God ceases even to smite
Isa. i, 5). ;
8. Solemn contrast presented in the text. Scripture abounds in striking contrasts,
Here is one, in relation, first, to persons; and, second, to what ts said of them. The
persons are the wise and the wicked. The only two classes mentioned, and in God’s
eye the only two in the world. The contrast not always sharp or evident in man’s
sight, though always in the eye of God—probably to be made more manifest as the
end approaches, The wise, those who, like Mary, choose the good part that shall
not be taken from them. The wicked, those who are content to have their portion
in this life, The wise, those who seek God; the wicked, those who forget Him,
The inward language of the wise, “Lord, lift Thou upon me the light of Thy
countenance ;” that of the wicked, “ Depart from us, for we desire not the know-
ledge of Thy ways.” The wise are made such unto salvation, through the know-
ledge of the Scriptures ; the wicked neglect the great salvation, and have no relish
for the word that reveals it. The wise often poor and illiterate, with little of the
knowledge which the world so eagerly prizes and pursues.


“Just know, and know no more, their Bible true;
A truth the brilliant Frenchman never knew.”


The wicked often only such in the eye of Him who looks not on the outward
appearance, but looks upon the heart; in man’s eye, perhaps, enlightened, respect-
able, and even religious, That which is highly esteemed among men, often abomina-
tion with God, The Laodicean Christian congratulates himself that he is rich,
and increased in goods, and having need of nothing ; while, without knowing it,
he is poor, and wretched, and miserable, and blind, and naked ; satisfied and
pleased that he is neither cold nor hot, while, because he is only lukewarm, Christ
is ready to spue him out of His mouth, The contrast similar in regard to what is
said of the two classes. The wise are purified and made white by the trials and
afflictions through which they are made to pass, The wicked, notwithstanding all
they either see or experience, all the events of Providence, as well as all the
warnings of the Word, still do wickedly. The Lord’s beseeching hand remains
stretched out all day long in vain to a disobedient and gainsaying people, He
calls, but they refuse ; He stretches out His hand, but they do not regard. They
refuse to repent. Again: the wise shall understand ; shall see both the meaning
and the beauty of God’s Word, especially in what it declares concerning the last
things, both the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow, with the
perils and tribulations that shall usher im that glory, as well as the eae of


@@aP. XIt. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL.
ear Pe DSA ALE ALL AA


Giod’s providence, and the events that shall come one after another upon the
world. But the wicked shall not understand, blind alike to the truths of God’s
Word, and the character of His providential dealings with the world, saying,
Peace, peace, when there is no peace, calling good evil and evil good, putting
bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter, darkness for light and light for darkness,
It will be the misery of the wicked who refuse Him who is the Light of the world,
that, while the godly in those days of darkness that are to come, shall, like Israel,
have light in their dwellings, they shall still walk on in darkness, until their
“feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while they look for light, He turn
it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness” (Jer. xiii. 16).

How important the question, On which side of the contrast am It~Among
those who are wise unto salvation, and hearken for the time, the eternity, to come ;
or among the wicked, who, Felix-like, say, Go thy way for this time, when I have
a convenient season I will send for thee. Dying beds often bear witness to the
contrast ; and dying beds do not generally tell lies, Dying circumstances, when the
approach of eternity opens men’s eyes, usually discover the wise man and the fool.
‘My principles,” said Altamont when in those circumstances, “ have poisoned my
friend ; my extravagance has beggared my boy ; my wickedness has murdered my
wife: and is there another hell? Oh thou blasphemed, yet most indulgent Lord
God, hell itself is a refuge if it hide me from Thy frown.” “Give me more
laudanum,” said Mirabeau, “that I may not think of eternity and of what is to
come.” ‘TI would give worlds,” said Thomas Paine, “ that the Age of Reason had
never been written.” Let us hear from the other side. “Ihave pain,” said
Richard Baxter—“there is no arguing against sense—but I have peace; I havepeace.”
“The battle is fought,” said Dr. Payson, “and the victory is won for ever: I am
going to bathe in an ocean of purity, and benevolence, and happiness, to all
eternity.” ‘My soul,” said John Brown of Haddington, “hath found inexpres-
sibly more sweetness and satisfaction in a single line of the Bible, nay, in two
such words as these, Thy God and My God, than all the pleasures found in the
things of the world since the creation could equal.” ‘I desire to depart and to
be with Christ, which is far better; and though I have lived sixty years very com-
fortably in this world, yet I would gladly turn my back on you all to be with
Christ.” “I think now that I could willingly die to see Him who is white and
ruddy, the chief among ten thousand.” “ Had I ten thousand hearts, they should
all be given to Christ ; and had I ten thousand bodies, they should all be employed
in labouring for His honour.” His last words were “ My Curist.”


HOMILETICS,


Srction LI.—Warrina aND Workina. (Chap. xii. 12, 13.)


Doctrine is to be followed by practice. Knowledge brings reponsibility. Faith
evidences itself by works, Light is given, not that we may sleep, but work. The
word of prophecy, made sure by its continual fulfilment, was given that we might
take heed to it as “a light shining in a dark place till,the day dawn, and the day-
star arise in our hearts.” The communications made to Daniel closed with an
intimation as to the use to be made of them, ‘Blessed is he that waiteth,
and cometh to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days: But go thy
way till the end be; for thou shalt rest and stand in thy lot at the end of the
days.”@) The latter verse is thus paraphrased by Brightman: “ But thou, Daniel,
go thy way and rest content, till all these things shall come to pass, towards or before
the end; and although they seem to be long delayed, yet the tediousness thereof
shall not be grievous unto thee: for thou in the meantime shalt yield to nature, and
go the way of all flesh, and being freed from the miseries of this life, shalt quietly
rest, oye ted partaker of that happiness which those enjoy who die in the Lord ;


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL. OMAP. XIX,





and at length also shall thy body be raised up out of the grave, in that lot and
condition which God shall give unto thee, that thou mayest be partaker of
unspeakable joy with all the rest of the saints, and so reign with Christ for ever
and ever.” These concluding verses suggest—

1. The duty of securing with all earnestness a personal interest in the blessedness
predicted in the prophecy. We have been told, with Daniel, of the resurrection to
everlasting life that shall follow the last great tribulation, and the kingdom of
glory with and under the Messiah, when “the wise shall shine as the bright-
ness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for
ever and ever.” It was Daniel’s happiness to be assured of his interest in that
predicted blessedness ; and with that assurance quietly to wait till the time for the
full experience of it arrived, It is for us who read or hear the words of this pro-
phecy, to make sure our participation in the same blessedness, It is for us to
secure in time our place among the wise, making sure that with the lamp of an
outward possession of faith in Christ, and an intellectual knowledge of the truth,
we have the oil of saving grace and spiritual light in the vessel of our hearts,
Unless the Bridegroom come speedily, we too, like Daniel, shall lie down to rest in
the grave till the resurrection trump shall awake us out of sleep, The question is,
How shall we do so? Shall we, like the “ man greatly, beloved,” lie down renewed
in the spirit of our mind, and made accepted in the Beloved ; or as those who,
unforgiven and destitute of the holiness without which no man shall see the Lord,
awake only to shame and everlasting contempt ; like the foolish virgins who, satis-
fied with the present, delayed to secure the needful supply for the future till it
was too late? Let us make sure that we have gone to Him who has the oil of
the Spirit of life and peace to sell, or rather to give freely to those who are willing
to buy without money and without price; and let us not rest till with Simeon we
are able joyfully to say, ‘“ Now, Lord, lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace ;
for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation.

2. The duty of patient waiting for the future blessedness. The man pronounced
blessed,” who “ waiteth and cometh” to the happy period predicted in connec-
tion with Israel’s restoration, the resurrection of the dead, and the future glory.
That period was in Daniel’s day far distant, It is now two thousand four hundred
years nearer than it was then. There must be much less time to wait, That time
may be very short. But whatever it may be, it is still to be one of patient wait-
ing. It may, and doubtless will, be one of peculiar trial, temptation, and distress,
It will be one in which the enmity of Satan and the world against Christ, His
truth, His people, and His cause, will reach its utmost violence; the time in which
the great enemy will come forth with “great wrath, knowing that he hath but a
short time.” It will be the time of the last manifestation of Antichrist, in which
all that has been predicted of the two Little Horns, of the Wilful King, and of
the Man of Sin, will be fully developed, summed up, and concentrated. It will
be the time to which the Church has looked forward for eighteen centuries, as that
of the great outbreak of wickedness and of Satanic power, that will call forth and
be only terminated by the manifestation of the Lord’s coming. There will, there-
fore, be need of patient waiting, In patience believing men will need to possess
their souls. The period will probably be short, though severe. Its end will be
glorious. From the throes and birth-pangs of the period shall come forth a new
and beauteous creation, the long-looked for and prayed for ‘‘regeneration,” the
new heavens and the new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness, when the petition
long presented shall be at length fulfilled, “Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done
on earth as it is in heaven.” It is worth a long time of patient waiting for it,
Like Daniel, we who are now living and working may have to go our way and
rest in the grave till the end be, and our waiting be completed there in the dust.
But others will follow and have their waiting time on earth, it may be for another
generation or two, or perhaps more. Perhaps it may be less. camel See are


CHAP- XI HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DANIEL,








entering upon an age of scientific, as well as grosser, atheism, (2) These are the days
of rapid development. As England and the world have recentiy been reminded,
immense strides have been made in the advance of science during the last fifty
years; and the outcome seems to be an upsetting of notions hitherto entertained
regarding God and His works; so that a prelate of the Church, in @ discourse on
the occasion, could ask, Will there at last, whem the problem is solved, be any
place left for God, or Christianity, or prayer, or conscience, or free-will, or respon-
sibility, or duty, or faith in the unseen? and observed that the remarks of many
scientific men showed that these questions were not superfluous, and that conse-
quently alarm and anxiety had taken possession of many minds, and his own
among the rest. Thus evidently is the time of patient waiting not only still
existing, but intensifying, Faith and patience will doubtless yet be severely tried.
‘“‘ When the Son of Man cometh, shall He find faith on the earth?” “ Because thou
hast kept the word of My patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of tempta-
tion which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth”
(Luke xviii. 8; Rev. iii. 10). The proper attitude of the Church in these days
in which we live, as it was in those of the Apostles, is that of a “ patient waiting
for Christ.” As the Old Testament Church was found waiting for the first Advent
of Him who was the Consolation of Israel, so is it to be with the New Testament
Church in relation to the second. This waiting posture is described by the
Apostles in such language as, “ Looking for the blessed hope, the glorious appearing
of the great God, even our Saviour Jesus Christ ;” “ Our conversation is in heaven,
from whom also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ ;” “ Wasting for His
Son from heaven;” “Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of
God ;” “To them that look for Him shall He appear the second time without
sin unto salvation” (Tit. ii, 13; Phil iii 20; 2 Thess. i 10; 2 Peter iii, 12;
Heb, ix. 28).

3. The duty of working as well as waiting. Daniel was told to go his way till
the end be. It is said of him that, after his recovering from the fainting and
sickness consequent on a former vision, he “rose and attended to the king’s busi-
ness” (chap. viii. 27). Although now considerably older, he might still be able to
do the same, At the beginning of the present vision we find that he had been
engaged for three full weeks in special prayer and fasting. Whatever he might be
able to do in the business of his earthly master, he was still in a condition to serve
his heavenly one. Whatever his hand found to do in that service, he was to go
and do it with his might, before he was called to rest from his labour; whether
that work might be in comforting his brethren with the consolation wherewith he
himself was comforted of God, communicating to them the knowledge which he
himself had just received, or exhorting them to a steadfast faith themselves and
fidelity in strengthening the faith of others in the prospect of the trials that were
yet before them. Daniel was to wait, but, so long as the Lord gave him strength,
he was also to work, showing God’s strength unto that generation, and His saving
power to every one that was to come (Ps. Ixxi. 18). The “waiting” in the text
is not to be an idle, indolent one. Looking for the blessed hope and the glorious
appearing of the great God our Suviour, is associated by the Apostle with the
denying ourselves to all ungodliness and worldly lust, and living soberly, right-
eously, and godly in the present world (Titus ii. 12, 13). On the ground of the
same hope, Paul exhorts the Corinthian believers to be “steadfast, unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that our labour is not in
vain in the Lord” (1 Cor, xv. 58). While “looking for the mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ unto eternal life,” we are to “have compassion” on others, and to
seek to “save some with fear, pulling them out of the fire” (Jude 21-23). To
be waiting for the Master’s return will naturally move us to diligence in doing
the Master’s work. It is the servant who says in his heart, My lord delayeth his
maar begins to “beat his fellow-servants, and to eat and drink with the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


GaaP, xi,





drunken” (Luke xii. 45, 46). The use to be made of the study of the prophetic
word, is, with the eunuch, to go on our way rejoicing in the blessed hope that it
has set before us) That hope is one of a bright hereafter, not only for ourselves
as faithful believers, but for the Church and the world. Like Daniel, we are to
be attending diligently to “‘the king’s business,” till we also shall be called away
from the field, as so many before us have been, to hear from the Master’s lips
that blessed plaudit, “ Well done, good and faithful servant! thou hast been faith-
ful over a few things, 1 will make thee faithful over many things; enter thou


into the joy of thy Lord.” @


EXEGETICAL NOTES.—®) “Go
thy way till the end be.” Keil, with
Theodoret and most interpreters, under-
stands the words to mean, ‘Go to the
end of thy life; the angel of the Lord
thus dismissing the highly-favoured
prophet from his life’s work, with the
comforting assurance that he should
stand in his own lot in the end of the
days. Daniel was to rest, that is, in
the grave, and to rise again, to enjoy
his part in the inheritance of the saints
in light (Col. i, 12), to be possessed by
the righteous, after the resurrection of
the dead, in the heavenly Jerusalem ; in
those last days when, after the judgment
of the world, the kingdom of glory should
appear.” According to Calvin, he was to
be content with his lot, and expect no
more visions. Bullinger understands the
words as an exhortation to persevere
and continue to the end. According to
Junius, he was to set all things in order,
and make himself ready for his end,
without curiously searching further into
these things. Brightman understands
the words as intimating that what the
Lord might have further to reveal, He
would do it by other prophets, as He
did by Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi.

@) “ Fifty years ago,” said Sir John
Lubbock in the presidential address at
the late Jubilee of the British Associa-
tion, ‘it was the general opinion that
animals and plants came into existence
just as we now see them.” ‘This is
represented as the general opinion no
longer. ‘ We perceive that there is a
reason—and in many cases we know
what that reason is—for every difference
in form, in size, and in colour; for every
bone and every feather, almost for every
hair.” “We can now see precisely,”
says the Christian World, “ where the
old opinion differs from the new. The


modern biologist professes to under-
stand better than his predecessors those
forces or processes by which birds have
become different from reptiles, and
animals that suckle their young dif-
ferent from both. To put it still more
pointedly, the modern doctrine affirms
that, leaving out of consideration the
unknown beginning (of which science
takes no account), nature in the world
of life, animal and vegetable, has always
worked with the means and methods em-
ployed at this hour. Elephants and alli-
gators, sharks, kangaroos, and humming-
birds are blood relations.” Again a writer
in the same journal says: “‘ The two chief
springs of that inspiration with which
Christianity has quickened the cold,
dead heart of humanity, are, with-
out question, the love of God, and the
boundless possibilities of that future
which the Gospel opens to man, It is
an inspiration which it seems that in
these days our wise ones are doing their
very utmost to destroy. Of God they
tell us that we know nothing, and can
know nothing; while of ‘the things
which are before us’ we know as little.
God’s love, we are now taught, is no
more than the mere yearning of the sad
human heart to find a living expression
in that awful world-system which sur-
rounds us, and whose cruel sternness
drives great nations of our fellow-men
to long for annihilation, as the supreme
benediction which the universe can offer
to its intelligent child ; while the hope
of immortality, by the same rule, is the
vain effort of that faculty of our nature
which ‘looks before and after,’ to
construct a future which may soothe its
imagination, but which is baseless and
fruitless as its idlest dreams, It is
without doubt,” the writer goes on to
say, “a very dread aspect of these times,
313


OuaP, Xi,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DANIEL,


—— LT


especially for the young who are nursed,
as it were, in its atmosphere. But
instead of wild denunciations of it, it
is wiser for us to study the way in
which it comes to be; how it is
possible that this ghastly creed could
have grown up in the heart of Chris-
tendom, in the very age and region in
which the triumph of Christian truth
and civilisation ought to be most com-
plete. . .. The saddest result of this
theological abuse of the world-system—
we can call it nothing else—is to make
men believe that it has no meaning or
method that man can discover ; that all
its movements are all mechanical, and
that man is but the most highly-finished
part of the machinery ; like the rest of
it, sprung from and returning to the
dust. The idea that the universe is
guided by a living Intelligence, and that
the development of man’s life is an
object which the Intelligence that guides
the universe has ever in sight, would be
banished to the limbo of worn-out super-
stitions, effete idolatries, if some of our
keen thinkers had their way.”

(8) «Let us,” says Auberlen, “ who
love the word of prophecy, not forget
the presevt, and what has been given
us already in thinking of the things we
hope for ; lest our study of prophecy de-
generate to a mere favourite pursuit of
our infancy, and unspiritual excitement,
Let this hope of the kingdom take the
same place in our heart as is assigned
to it in the Divine Word ; and let us
not change the proportion in which Holy
Scripture has placed it to the funda-
mental truths of Christianity. Let the
apostolic word be our motto: “ For the
grace of God that bringeth salvation


314


hath appeared unto all men; teaching.
us that, denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world ; looking
for the blessed hope, the glorious appear-
ing of the great God even our Saviour
Jesus Christ” (Tit. ii, 11-13). All
Christians of the present day find it
difficult to lay to heart the werds which
apply to our days, as well as to the
days of Isaiah: “ In quietness and con-
fidence shall be your strength.” But let
us remember that we are living in a
time when judgments are preparing ;
and our only duty is to be ever watch-
ful and prayerful witnesses of the com-
ing of the Lord. We are, for this reason,
not slothful ; we do not fold our hands ;
only we do not cherish illusive hopes
and expectations from our work. Let
us be faithful in the little things in-
trusted to us; as for the great things,
we cannot take them to ourselves ; but
we wait till the Lord will bring them to
us... . What our generation wants is,
witnesses who can lift up their voice in
the spirit and power of the prophets ;
men who can stand in the breach in the
hour of temptation which is coming
over the whole earth. In that hour we
need to be “strong in the Lord and in
the power of His might,” so that we
may achieve the victory ; then we must
lift up our heads in blessed hope and
joy, knowing that “our redemption
draweth nigh.” May our merciful God
prepare us for that hour, by teaching us
to understand aright and to practise
faithfully the word of the Apocalypse:
“ Here is the patience and the faith of
the saints,”


APPENDIX.


Im relation to the prediction in Daniel vii. 11, regarding the destruction by dre
of the body of the Beast or fourth universal empire, that immediately preeeding
the kingdom of the Son of Man, and of the saints—his body being “ given to the
burning flame ”—science has recently indicated another way in which this judg-
ment might be inflicted on apostate Christendom and the Antichristian kingdoms.
The following extract from the Spectator, in relation to a recent conclusion of
astronomy, only met the writer's eye while the preceding work was in the press :—
“ We sometimes doubt whether the world’s belief in science is quite as genuine a8
it seems. Here is Mr. Proctor, whose astronomical authority and ability nobody
doubts, has told the world for some time back, we believe, that there is really a
very considerable chance of a catastrophe only fifteen years hence, which may put
an end to us and our earthly hopes and fears altogether ; and,-so far as we can see,
the world has blandly treated Mr. Proctor’s warning as it would have treated an
interesting speculation on the future of electricity——that is, has regarded it with a
certain mild, literary satisfaction, but has not made any change in its arrangementa
in consequence. . . . Yet, supposing Mr. Proctor’s facts to be correctly stated—on
which we should like to have the judgment of other astronomers—there does seem a
remarkably good chance that in 1897 the sun will suddenly break out into the same
kind of intensity of heat and light which caused the conflagration in the star of the
Northern Crown in 1866, when for a day or two the heat and light emitted by it
became suddenly many hundreds of times greater than they were before, after which
the star relapsed into its former relative insignificance, Those few days of violence,
however, must have been enough to destroy completely all vegetable and animal
life in the planets circulating round that sun, if such planets were in existence ; and
Mr. Proctor shows no little reason to believe that the same catastrophe may very
probably happen to us, doubtless from a precisely similar cause, if the astronomers
who believe that the comet of 1880 was identical with the comet of 1843 and the
comet of 1668 should be right,—which would imply that the same comet, with a
rapidly diminishing period, is likely to return and fall into the sun, with all its
meteoric appendages, in or about the year 1897. Mr. Proctor tells us that Professor
Wiunecke believes that the identity of the comets of 1843 and 1880 hardly admits
of a doubt ; while Mr, Marth thinks that both may be identical with the comet of
1668, its velocity having been reduced by its passing through the corona of the
sun ; so that on its next return, in a considerably reduced time, it may be altogether
unable to pass out of the sphere of the sun’s influence, and may precipitate itself,
with all its meteoric train, into the mass of the sun, If this event occurs—as at
some return or other Mr. Proctor believes to be nearly certain—(the next but one,
we suppose, if not the next), there will certainly be an abrupt arrest of an enor-
mous momentum as the long train of meteors enters the sun, which arrest would
show itself in the shape of enormously increased heat,—the probable result whereof
would, be the burning up of all vegetable and aniinal life existing on the planets of
the solar svstem. It is true that Mr. Proctor is not quite sure how the atsorption


APPENDIX.


nm ee





of this comet and its train into the sun would really affect us. He is by no means
certain that our sun would burst into flame, as the star in the Northern Crown did
in 1866, but he evidently thinks it much more likely than not. And he does not
seriously doubt that in the behaviour of the star in the Northern Crown, which so
suddenly broke into flame in 1866, we have the example of a real sidereal catas-
trophe which from time to time either actually destroys, or would destroy, if they
existed, such worlds as ours, if they happen to be the planets of a sun thus sud-
denly fed with a great accession of cosmic heat.”

In connection with the same subject the writer has recently met with the fol-
lowing passage in Mr, Garrat’s “ Midnight Cry,” written about twenty years ago —
“The fiery flood. So it is described in Peter’s second epistle. The destruction of
the ungodly will be by fire ; and out of that fire will issue the new heavens and the
new earth, The question is often asked, whether that event will happen at the
commencement or the close of the millennium. Perhaps, in different degrees, at
both, Isaiah says, speaking of a period prior to the thousand years, ‘ By fire and
by sword will the Lord plead with all flesh ; and the slain of the Lord shall be
many. And he seems also to place the creation of new heavens and a new earth
at the same period ; while it is after the millennium, John says in Revelation, ‘I
saw a new heaven and a new earth.’ This and many other apparent difficulties of
the same nature are easily explained. ‘One day is with the Lord asa thousand
years, and a thousand years as one day.’ The whole millennium is, in God’s eye, but
a day—the great day of the Lord God Almighty. It is the ‘ regeneration,’—the
period of earth’s new birth ; and the events at its commencement and its close are
sometimes looked upon as one. God will destroy His enemies with fire at the
beginning of these thousand years. The conflagration at their close will be still
more terrible. Both are looked upon as one event, And it is to both, regarded as
one, that the words of Peter apply: ‘The day of the Lord will come as a thief in
the night ; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein
shall be burned up.’ It will come asa thief in the night on the world, They
will be alone, because the Church will have been translated. With what bitter
remorse will men look on the fiery deluge as it comes sweeping along! They might
have eacaped, and they would not ; and now escape is impossible,”


GENERAL INDEX


sone


atta the, that maketh desolate, 246,


Abstinence, 19

Adoration, 180

Adrian, Pope, IV., 131

Alia Capitolina, 173

Ages of the world, the, 41

Ahasuerus, 182

Alexander the Great, 44, 49, 120, 163, 170, 230

Allegorists, the, 282

Altamont, his deathbed experience, 310

Alva, Duke of, 132

Ancestry, privilege of a godly, 30, 34

Ancient of Days, 136, 141

Angels, 137, 141, 187; their ministries, 221

Angel-princes, 223, 227 :

Angelology of Daniel, 229

Anger, 28

Anointing, personal, 226

—— official and spiritual, 193

Antichrist, 128; the Moslem, 177, 261; the
Man of Sin, 265

Antiochus Epiphanes, 163, 179, 236; his end,
165; a type of Antichrist, 234

Arabs, Bedouin, 257

Arnold, Dr., his views of the prophecies of
Daniel, 23

Arnulph, bishop of Orleans, 185

Artaxerxes Longimanua, 43

Assur-akh-bal. 64

Assur-bani-pal, 118

Astrologers, what, 25

Astyages, 183

Atonement, 203

Auber! n, his remark on the unity of the Book
of Daniel, 3; quotations from, 5-8, 58, 114,
128, 151-154, 160, 161; in regard to the
Antichrist, 264; to the Jews, 274, 27 ; to
the millennium, 275; to the first resurrection,
281 ; to Chiliasm, 282; to present dut , 314

Augustus Ozsar, 57


Basrton, 43, 83, 87, 118

the mystical, 142

Babylonian empire, 32, 115

Bacon, Lord, his view of miracles, 73

Baillie, quotation from his letters, 282

Balances, weighed in the, 92, 97

Barley-cakes, consecrated, 22

Baxter, Richard, quotation from, 282; his
deathbed experience, 310

Bayne, Peter, quotation from, 73

Bedouin Arabs, 257

Bel, 13, 64

Bel-Merodach, 13, 64

Belshazzar, 94 ; his feast, 88

Belus, 87

Bengel, his opinion in regard to the doctrine of
the millennium, 282; his influence on it in
Germany, 283, 290





Bickersteth, quotations from, 81, 138
Bee quotations from, 47, 49, 51, 52, 66, 88,


Bishop of Rome, 50

Bleek, his views on the unity of the Book of
Daniel, 3; on its language, 7; om the Ten
Horns, 122

Boniface, Pope, VIII., 131

Books of judgment, 137, 141

—— of Scripture, 183

Bosanquet, Mr., his views on the Book of
Daniel, 3, 8; on the time of Daniel, 121 ; om
the Little Horn, 134

Bradford, John, quotation from, 282

Brooks, Mr., quotation from, 133

Brown, John, of Haddington, his deathbed ex-
perience, 310

Bunyan, John, his views on the millennium, 283

Burnet, Bishop, quotation from, 142 ; in regard
to the millennial reign, 282

Bush, Professor, quotations from, 12], 138

Butler, Arthur, quotation from, 288


CALENDAR of Prophecy, Mede’s Sacred, 302

Caligula, 57

Calvin, quotations from, 8, 47, 48, 71, 75, 76,
85, 102, 105, 177; in regard to seeking the
salvation of others, 285

Canon of Scripture, 183

Captivity, the Jewish, 9, 13

Caryl, Joseph, 282

Caspari, quotation from, by Keil, 61

Cave, Alfred, quotation from, 212

Celestine, Pope, V., 131

Chaldeans, 17, 32

Chaldees, 17

Chalmers, Dr., quotations from, in regard to the
Last Things, 270, 271, 274, 277

Chandler, Bishop, quotation from, 59

Chardin, quotation from, by Dr. Pusey, 25

Charlemagne, or Charles the Great, 129, 134

Chiliasm, 282, 283

Chittim, 241

“Christian World,” quotation from the, 313

Christianity in the seventh Picea 178

Christlieb, Dr., quotations from, 291

Clarke, Dr. Adam, remarks of, 32

Claudius Caxsar, 57

Cleansing of the sanctuary, 165, 168, 175

Clement, bishop of Rome, 124; his Epistle to
the Church of Corinth, 130

Clothing, Babylonian, 72

Clouds of heaven, 151

Cock, a, sacrificed by the modern Jews, 218, 220

Colacion, 282

Collins, his objections to the Book of Daniel, 27

Confession of sin, 180; toa priest, 250

Constantine the Great, 50, 244; his veneration
for monks and virgins, 249

Conversion, 62

317


GENERAL INDEX.





Oouncil of the Lateran, 126 ; at Rome in 1870,
be! 3; of Nice, in relation to the millennium,


Courage, 19

Covenant, how used, 241

— confirmation of the, 216, 219

Covenants, Old and New, 216

Oox, Dr., quotations from, 22, 28-30, 51, 58,
76, 91, 101, 106, 152, 177, 178; in regard to
eae 191, 259; to the study of prophecy,


Crusades, 125, 132

Cumming, Dr., quotations from, 75, 93

Cup, forbidden to the laity by the popes, 132
Cyaxares II., 43, 96, 97, 100, 110

Cycles of seventy weeks of years, 214
Cyprian, 70

Cyril, quotation from, 135

Cyrus, 43, 48, 110, 182


aa sacrifice, 171, 174; its violent removal,


Daniel, 2, 4, 14; an example of resolution, 18,
21; his conduct, 22, 110; his elevation, 60,
97 ; his character, 109, 175, 176, 188; a man
of prayer, 189; his prayer, 179

Daniei, the Book of, 1-8

Darius the Mede, 43; Codomannus, 43; Hys-
taspis, 96, 183

D’Aubigné, quotation from, 173

Decision, 20

Delitzsch, his view of the Book of Daniel, 8 ; of
Bengel and the millennium, 283

Deliverance from sin, 203 ; of the Jews, 271

Despotism, 28

Destruction of Jerusalem, views of the, 215

De Wette, his views on the unity of the Look
of Daniel, 3

Diadochs, the, or successors of Alexander, 264

Dionysius of Alexnadria, 282

Dream, Nebuchadnezzar’s first, 38; its inter-
pretation, 41 ; his second, 77.

Dreams, 39, 41; their interpretation, 78

Dress of the Babyionians, 72

Drink, intoxicating, danger of, 92

Duke of Alva, 132

—— of Manchester, his views of the seventy
a captivity, 184; of the time of the end,


Dura, the plain of, 65


EaGuz, winged, 118

Earth, the prophetic, 42

Karthquakes in 1881, 142

Electricity, the agency of, 292

Elias, tradition of his school regarding the
seventh millennary of the world, 281

oad ay 132 ¥ 1, 42, 15
mpires, the four universa

End, time of the, 295

Enoch, Book of, 7

Eunuchs, 16

Euphratean horsemen, 255

Euphrates, drying up of the, 263, 299

Exarchate, the, 129

Executioners, 34

Ezekiel, his mention of Daniel, $1

Esra, 43


sodas th a views af ee — Antichristian
confederac ; ; Of the time, times, and
half a time, 301, 308

Faithfulness, 20


Fasting, 185
Feast, Belshassar’s, 88
318





Fidelity, 20

First resurrection, the, 261
Forgiveness of sin,

Four Beasts, the, 111

Franco-German war, 140

Frére, his views of Antichrist, 262
Friedrich, quotation from, by Keil, 88,
Furnace, tiery, 107

Futurists, the, 128


GaBRIEL, 162, 185, 187

Gambetta, 144

Gate, the King’s, 62

Gates of ancient cities and

Gaussen, quotations from,
92, 101, 105

Gavazzi, quotation from, 130

Gentiles, times of the, 299

Germanic kingdoms, the, 45, 50, 51

Gesenius, quotation from, 66

Cbbem, quotations from, 44, 4 68, 129, 178,

57

Gill, Dr., his views of the millennium, 283

Gilpin, Bernard, 167

Golden City, the, 41, 43

Golden image, the, 62

Gothic kingdoms, the, 45, 50, 51

Grecian empire, the, 44, 116

Gregory the Great, 133

Gregory VII., 124, 130, 249

Grotius, quotation from, 114

Guinness, Mr. G., quotations from, 81, 133


63
47-50, 52, 58, @,


HaBERSHON, his views of the time, times, anda
half, 301; of the additional seventy-five
years, 303

Hall, Robert, quotations from, 28, 57

Handwriting on the wall, the, 90, 95

Harrison, Archdeacon, quotations from, 114,
122, 144

ais — 99 ‘ ‘ '
iivernick, his views of the Book of Daniel,

He-goat, the, 163, 169

Hengstenberg, his views of the Book of Daniel,
1, 4; of Daniel himself, 4; quotations from,
4, 26, 32, 75, 88; his remarks on the lan-
guage of Daniel, 7; his answers to objee-
tions against the book, ll

Henry IV., emperor of Germany, 124, 130

a Cio ie 10, oa

9 40, 2d, » 65, 6 7

Heralds, 67 + ER Te

Herder, quotation from, 41

Hiddekel, the, 300

Hildebrand, 249

History, what, 45

Holmes, his book on the resurrection, 282

Holy of holies, the new, 205, 208

Horn, the Little, 122; of the Third Beast or
He-goat, 162

bee the = 121
orsemen, the Euphratean, 256

Hours, Bab: lonian. 66

Houses, Babylonian, 33


Haass greatness and glory, 46; human figure,


Hume, quotations from, 248
Hurd, Bishop, quotations from, 201


a ee great, 38, 41, 42; the gelden,


Infelitlty: poet’ doclared, 1

ty, papal, dec 40
Infidel ‘Antichrist, the, 262

Infidelity, an effect of the papacy, 290


GENERAL INDEX.





“pelle the Standard, quotations from, 13,


Ireland, Protestant massacre in, 132

Irving, Edward, quotations from, 41, 46, 59,
133, 178, 294; his views of Antichrist, 262,
263, 267 ; of the 1290 days, 303 ; of the taking
away of the daily sacrifice, 304

Islam, the religion of, 175

Italy, territory of, 142


JANISSARIES, the, 16

Jason, the high-priest, 172

Jehoiakim, 9, 11

Jerome, quotations from, 49, 51, 122, 177

Jews, who, 271; their distinction, 153; po
secution under Antiochus Epiphanes, 7
under the papacy, 255; their deliverance,
127 ; toleration under Joseph II. of Austria,
ne ; their present numbers in the Holy Land,


Johnstone’s “Israel after the Flesh,” quotation
from, 153

Josephus, his views of the destruction of Jera-
salem, 215

Judea, 45

Judgment of the Fourth Beast, 135


Julian the Apostat., 244; his attempt at re-


building the temple, 220

Jupiter Belus, 13

Justin Martyr, quotations from, 134, 138; his
views of the millennium, 281

Justinian, edict of, 134

Justinian code, the, 133


Krit, his proofs of the divine origin and
authenticity of the Book of Daniel, 3; his
view as to its place in the canon, 4; qvota-
tions from, 5, 26, 32, 58, 73, 81, 151, 169, 178,
202; his views in regard to Antichrist, 264;
of the study of prophecy, 298

Keith, Dr., quotations from, 50

King, the Wilful, 246, 252

Kingdom, the, of Christ, 53, 55, 143

Kitto, Dr., quotations from, 16, 23, 24, 41

Kliefoth, quotations from, 32

Knowledge, increase of, 289, 204

Koran, the, 174


Kranichfeld, quotation from, 8


Laaip2, the, 44

Land, the pleasant, 170

Language of Daniel, 1, 7; of the Chaldeans, 17

Lateran Council of 1514, 251

Learning, Chaldean, 17

Lee, Professor, views of, 51, 133, 250

Leo, the Emperor, 132

Lewis the Pious, 134

Life everlasting, 278

Lions’ dens, 106

nag Heme the, 122, 128; early Chureh views
of it, 1:

Labbock, Sir John, extract from his presi-
dential address, 313

**T’Univers,” the, quotation from, 144

Luther, 126; quotation from, 144; his Theses,


Lycanthropia, 88


MACAULAY, quotation from, 251
omy the, 5, 165; first Book of, 7, 51, 168,


Mackay, R. W., quotation from, 203
Macchiavelli, 51

Macedonian or Greek empire, 44
Madness, Nebuchadnezzar’s, 83, 86, 88





Masiheue 5 Beyp d Babylon, wha’ aa

agicians o t an lo

Mahomet, 174, 178, 280 Ang ner ;

Mahomet II, 257

Man of Sin, early Church views of the, 184; an

individual, 205 ;
arriage, forbidden by the to the cle
131, 249 y: papacy TEY>

Martyrs, relics of the, 250

Massacre of Protestants in Ireland, 132; i
Paris, ab.

Mattathias, 5, 165, 167, 239, 243

Ma’uzzim, what, 250, 254

ope Doering Pee i ate
ede, Joseph, 56; his views of the times,
and a half, 130, 301, a!

Medes, the, 43

Medo-Persian empire, 43, 49, 115

Mene, mene, 9

Merodach, 13, 64

Messiah, meaning of the name 192; Dantel’s
prenpers regarding Him, ib.; the time of

is appearing, 194; the objects of it, 202;

His rejection and cutting off, 209; praying
for His sake, 181; His second advent, 151;
doctrine of it, 152

Michael, 223, 227, 272, 274

Michaelis, J. D., his view of the Book of Daniel,


1, 3, 122

Miles, Mr., quotation from, 282

Mill, J. S., his view of miracles, 73

Milman, quotation from, in reference to the

Millon 0% he, 154 nies regarding i
illennium, the, 154; testimonies g it,
and history of the doctrine, 281

Milner, quotation from,

Ministers, hints to, 78

Mirabeau, his deathbed experience, 301

Miracles, views of, 73; those recorded in the
Book of Daniel, 71

Missions, present state of Christian, 290

Mosheim, quotation from, regarding the mil
lennium, 281

Moslem Antichrist, the, 173

Moslems, the, 173, 175

Muratori, quotation from, 199

Music, 63 '

Musical instruments, 66


Name, change of, 16

Napoleon I., 144; supposed by some to be the
antitype of Antiochus Epiphanes, 265

Nupoleon III., views of some regarding him, 265

Sratasticdneszaty 12, 13, 48, 64; his dream of
the image, 27; of the tree, 77; his madness,
83, 86, 88; his testimony, 73

Necklace,

Nepos, Bishop, 281

Netherlands, persecution in the, 132

New Jerusalem, the, 154

Newman, Cardinal, quotation from, 271

Newton, Sir Isaac, 52; his views of the pro-
phecies of Daniel, 1, 3, 50

Newton, Bishop, quotations from, 47, 56, 134,
142, 177 ; regarding the first resurrection, 281 ;
the abomination that maketh desolate, 304

Nitocris, 94


North and South, Kings of the, 230


OxsrcTions to the Book of Daniel, answered by
Hengstenberg and Pusey, 6

Omar, the Caliph, 174

Origen, 281


| Pauvg, Thomas, his deathbed experience, 310
319


‘


GENERAL INDEX,


e mI


Palestine, 170, 257

Papacy, the, identified with the Little Horn,
123; with the Wilful King, 247

Papal territory, the, 143

Paris, massacre of Protestants in, 132

Patrimony of St. Peter, 143

Payson, Dr., his deathbed experience, 310

Pepin, king of France, 12), 14

Persecution, 63; under Queen Mary, 132; of
the Waldensians, 2).

Persian empire, the, 43, 49

— posts, 106, 115

—— war, 120

Persians, their cruelty, 119

Pius V., creed of, 250, 305

Pius [X., 129

Polycarp, 70

Pompey the Great, 243

Pontiff, origin of the title, 249, 253

Pope Gregory VII., 124, 132; Stephen, 125;
Nicolas, 1b.; Gregory III., 165, 132 ; Gregory
IX., 127; Pius IX., 129; Adrian IV., 131;
Boniface VIII., ib.; Celestine V., 1b.; Callix-
tus II., %.; Agatho, 132; Urban IL, 7b;
Innocent III., 16.; Pius VI., 143; Paul IV.,
248

Popes, arrogant claims of, 131, 248; their
blasphemous titles and honours, 249; be-
lieved to be Antichrist, tb.

Porphyry, his views vf the prophecies of Daniel,





?

Portion from the king’s table, 22

Post, the Persian, 106

Prayer, 189; privilege of, 28; its efficacy, 30;
examples of, 99; parts of, 180; preparation
for, tb.

Pride, 85

Prideaux, his views of the captivity, 184

Priest-caste in Babylon, 61

Prince, Messiah the, 193, 197

Princes, angelic, 223, 227

Promises relating to Messiah, 193

Prophecy, 46; Daniel's great Messianic, 202;
fulfilled in Jesus of Nazareth, 205, 207

Propitiation, 207

opiate massacre in Ireland, 132; in Paris,

Protogenes, 19

Providence of God, 45

Psaltery, 67

Ptolemy the astronomer, 52

—— Philadelphus, 230


eo, 25

Punishments, Chaldean, 33, 67

Pusey, Dr., his remarks on the histories in
Daniel, 2; on the unity of the book, 3; quo-
tations from, 2, 5, 6, 32, 47, 49, 51, 59, 66,
71, 76, 109, 128, 151, 183, 201, 208; his re-
marks in relation to Daniel himself, 197

Pydna, battle of, 49


Rassr Eveazar, his saying in regard to the re-
surrection,

Ram, the, 169

Ram and He-goat, vision of the, 162

Rationalists, their views of the Book of Daniel,
202

Rawlinson, quotations from, 65, 87

Reign, the millennial, 160

Rejection of the Saviour, 209

Resolation, 18, 24

Pee the, 275; the first and second,

78, 281
Revelation, the truth of, 46
Revolution, the French, 126, 134
320





= -> y


a New Testament, quotation from the,


Roman empire, the, 44, 47, 116, 120

—— persecutions,

Romans, the, 44, 242

Rome, 138, 142

BF aac of, her conflicts and sontinuanoa,
25

Bishop of, 50

Résch, quotation from, 81

Rule, Dr., quotations from, 17, 41, 48, 50, 153,
172

Russia, 260, 264


SackBourt, 67

Sacrifices, 220; the termination of them, 217,
220, 243

Saints, 154, 160; reign of the, 148, 152, 160,
161; the kingdom given to them, 155

Sanctuary, cleansing of the, 165, 168

Saracens, 174, 255, 259

Satisfaction for sin, 203

Satraps, 65, 174

Science, its present aspect in regard to religion,
313

Scott, the commentator, quotation from, 76,
178

Scripture, books of, 183

Scriptures, present diffusion of, 291 3

Seleucids, 44, 49

Selim, Sultan, 258, 260

Septuagint, the, 7, 230

* Seven times,” 80, 84, 133, 259, 302

Seventy weeks, the, 194, 196, 197

—— years’ captivity, 184

Shinar, 12

Ships of Chittim, 241

Shushan, 162, 167

Sismondi, quotation from, 127, 132

Smith, Robertson, his views of the Book @
Daniel, 8; of the canon of Scripture, 183

Son of God, 72

Son of Man, 145, 149

Song of the Three Children, 72

Soothsayers, 37

Sophronius, patriarch of Jerusalem, 134

Sorcerers, 32

Spener of Germany, 282

Spinoza, his views of the Book of Daniel, 8

St. Bartholomew’s Day, 132

St. Sophia, mosque of, 175

Standard Inscription, the, 13, 87

Stars, 287

Sterry, Peter, quotation from, 282

Stone, the, cut out of the mountain, 39; fts
interpretation, 52, 56

Sultan Mahomet II., 257

—— Suliman, 7d.

Selim, 258, 260

Sun, the, 287

Supplication, 181

Sybilline oracles, the, 59 third book of, 7, 51

Syria, 257

Syriac, 33








‘* TELEGRAPHIC Sign,” quotation from, 292

Temple on Mount Moriah, 217

Temple, the new spiritual, 205

Temporal power of the papacy, 138

Ten Horns, the, 117

-—— kingdoms, the, 45, 51, 117

Tertullian, quotation from, 135; regarding the
millennium, 281

Testimony, Daniel’s, 36; Nebuchadnezzar’s, 73

Testimonies, deathbed, 310


Thanksgiving, 35, 81; Daniel’s, 34, 35

Third ruler of the kingdom, 91

ahomesd years’ reign of Christ and His saints,

a

Tiberius Czesar, 57

Tigris, the, 300

“Time, times, and half a time,” 80, 126, 132,
296, 301

Time of the end, 295

“Times,” the, quotations from, 129, 140

Titus, his views of the taking of J erusalem, 215

Todd, Dr., views of, in regard to prophecy, 51

Togrul Beg, 174 :

Tollentino, Treaty of, 143

Tree, dream of the, 77

Trees, 77

Tribulation, the Great, 265

Turkey, 178

Turks, the, 174, 255

Uxat, the, 162, 168

United prayer, 29

Universal bishop, title of, 133


Vioror EumanveEn, 139


Virgil, his eclogue to Pollio, 59
Virgin Mary, invoked and trusted in, 250; hes
images, 249


Wailrine and working, 310

Watchers, 79

Watson, Bishop, quotation from, 1

Wiesler, quotation from, 177

Wilful King, the, 246, 252; identified with
Paul’s Man of Sin, 248, 253

Nets: Dr., his views of the Book of Daniel,


Winners of souls, 283, 284

Wise, the, 284

Wise men of Babylon, 41, 61
Witness-bearing, 36, 314

Woman, her influence, 91

Wood, Mr., quotations from, 27, 88


XERXES, 230

YEAR-DAY theory, the, 183
ZENDAVESTA, the, 152, 328
Zoroaster, 238


HOMILETICAL INDEX.


sremenecd ferent


SUBJECTS MORE OR LESS HOMILETICALLY TREATED.


Angel Ministries . : SP PS

1. The existence of different ranks and
orders among angelic ministers.

2. Their appointment to different spheres
or poste of duty.

eir deep interest in the welfare of
good men, and the prosperity of God's
cause,

4. The variety of their ministrations,

§. Their union and mutual help.

6, The difficulties and opposition met with
in their work.

Reflections :

1, How glorious the place that forms their
abode !

2 Ample provision made for the welfare
of the Church, and the success of the
Redeemer’s cause.

& The character and conduct of these
angel-ministers to be imitated.


Belshazzar’s Feast 5 ‘ ~ >. oe
General description ;
I, Tux Feast,
1, Large; 2. Magnificent; 3. Idolatrous ;
4. Profane.
IL Tae Hanpweitina.
1, Sudden; 2. Mysterious; 3 Real; 4.
Alarming ; 5. Perplexing.
TI. Tre Rerroor.
1, Reminds of an admonitory fact.
2. Points to the sin of neglecting it.
3. Charges directly with pride, &o,
4. Declares the writing and the impend-
ing doom.
IV. Tux INTERPRETATION,
V. Tue Env.


ne
L The short-lived nature of unhallowed
leasure,

2. The certainty of divine retribution.

3. The suddenness with which punishment
often overtakes the wicked.

4. The terror of a guilty conscience.

5. The aggravated guilt of unheeded warn-


ing.
6, The sin of not glorifying God.
7. The stupidity of the human heart,
8. The destiny of men and nations in the
hand of God,
9. The beneficial influence of woman.
10, The sin of wantonly profaning sacred


things.

11. The danger of indulging in intoxicating
Arink,
$22


Contrast between the Righteous
andthe Wicked. . . . 808


1. The blessedness of sanctified trouble.

2. Persecutions and struggles endured by
the godly overruled for their good.

3. Moral purification the great end intended
Ly God in regard to His people.

4. Godliness the only true wisdom.

5. Knowledge and understanding in all
things necessary to true happiness,
guaranteed to God's renewed children.

6. The inability of the ungodly to under-
stand divine truth, and more especially
the word of prophecy.

7. A time comes when it may be too late for
repentance,

8. Solemn contrast presented in the text,
in relation :

1) To persons ;
2) To what is said of them.
Application.


Daniel as a man of prayer . - 101
As such he was—


1. Constant; 2. Regular; 3, Believing; 4
Fearless ; 5, Cheerful ; 6, Earnest,


Daniel in the lions’ den °


I. Tor Discovery,
II. Taz Inrormarion,
Ill. Tur Exrocvurton.
IV. Tur Sequxn.
seat faithful to His promises,
‘s faithfulness
2. God the hearer of prayer.
3. Believers safe in God’s keeping.
4. The happiness of the faithful.


. 184


Daniel, a “man greatly beloved.”
The testimony due to:

1. His early pel.

2. His steadfastness and perseverance im
well-doing.

& His consistency and symmetry of char
acter,

4. His conscientiousness even in the
smallest matters.

5, His trust and confidence in God.

6. His prayerfulness,

7. His amiableness of disposition and kind-
ness to others,

8. His patriotism and concern for his
country’s welfare.


HOMILETICAL INDEX,








@, His unselfishness.

Daniel's character and the testimony
borne to it attainable by all, more
especially in the present dispensation
of the Spirit.


End,timeofthe .. oer 295


I. A Prriop To Enapsg ror THE ACOCOM-
PLISHMENT OF GopD’s PURPOSES IN RE-
GARD TO ISRAEL. :

Yi. A Prsziop or Trur RECKONED FROM THE
OQOOURRENCE OF OERTAIN PREDICTED
EvENTs.

Reflections and inferences :

1. The duty of taking a lively interest in
the Church’s future, and God’s revealed
Word regarding it.

& The comfort of the Church in knowing
that the time of the end cannot be far
distant.

& Our duty to prepare ourselves for the
changes that may speedily come, and
to help in preparing others.


Government of the world by a
Supreme Being . : F ;
1, Objections against it.
2. Answers to these objections.
3. peecial sseumonte that “the heavens do
rule.


Judgment of the Fourth Beast, or
the world under its fourth uni-
versal empire at present pre-
vailing . 5 .
I. Tue Oooaston OF IT.

Il. Tue CrroumMstaNces OF IT.
L. The Judge; 2. The throne; 3. The at-
tendants; 4. The accompaniments.

QL. Tue JupGMeENT ITsE.r.

IV. Tue ConskQuENoEs OF It.

V. Tue TIME oF It.


Kingdom of Christ, the; or, the
Stone cut out of the mountain .
Its characteristics :

1. Divine in its origin.

3. Humble in its beginning.

3. Victorious over all opposition,
4. Onward in its progress.

5. Universal in its ultimate extent.
6, Everlasting in its duration.


Kingdom of the Son of Man 145


I, Its EsTaBLisHMENT, and the InsTALLa-
TION of the Son or Man as ITS
Kine.
TI. Ite Reaurry.
TIL Its Heap.
IV. The Time of it.
V. The Praoz of it.
VI. The Apministgation of ft,
VII. Its CHaractes.
VIII. Its Extent.
TX. Its Duration.
X. Its Certainty.


Lessons :
L Believers to rejoice in the prospect of
the kingdom,
%. Our duty to make sure a place in the
kingdom now,


185


158


3. Our privilege and duty to speed that
kingdom by our prayers, and to pre.
grt ourselves and others for a p
n i


Knowledge, its increase a sign
of the time . 5 : : .


1, In relation to the word of prophecy. ;
2. In relation to divine truth in general,
and to Jesus Christ its central subject.
3. In relation to knowledge in general.
Practical improvement of the fact. .


Messiah the Prince . ; 192-196


I. MzssiaH HrMsEtr.

1, Messiah. 2, The Prince.

II. Tue Time or His APPEARING.
Lessons and Reflections :

1. The ground of rejoicing afforded by this
prediction.

2. The duty of personally accepting the
Messiah whose advent was thus gré-
ciously foretold. .

3. The evidence here afforded of the truth
of Christianity and the Word of God.


- « +185


289


Preyer answered . .
The answer was;
1. Prompt and immediate.
2. Given through an angelic medium.  ~ :
$. Different from what Daniel probably ex-
pected. / j
4, Far exceeding the request,
5. A consequence of Daniel’s character. .
Lessons : ;
1. The blessedness of a truly godly life.
2.The encouragement to persevere in


prayer.
3. God’s love in giving His children more
than they ask.


Prayer, Daniel an example of its ©


efficacy . ° : Sauk ee
Prayer, in order to be effectual, to be:
1. Offered in faith, ‘
2. Earnest,
8, Importunate and persevering. — ae
4. From a right motive and for a right end.
6, Offered in uprightness of heart and life.
6. With submission to God’s will, and desire
for things according to it.
7. With entire surrender of ourselves to


8. In the name and for the sake of Jesus
Christ.


Prayer of Daniel . 5 F '
I. The Timez of it.
II. The Occasion of it.
III. The Preparation for it.
IV. The Contents of it.
1. Adoration; expressing
(2) Faith.
2. Confession of sin.
3. Thanksgiving and praise.
4. Petition and supplication ; exhibiting
( Intense earnestness 5
3


Deep humility ;
(4) Large-heartedness and uneel


189


(1) Reverence ;





The prevailing plea for ct eee ;
shness,


Lessons :
L The spirit of prayer characteristic of a
of God.
323


HOMILETICAL INDEX.





& God's Word the study and enjoyment of


His apse le.

3. The one read to be turned into prayer.

4, Prayer to be accompanied with thanks-
giving and confession of sin.

5. Believers especially to cultivate inter-
cessory prayer,


Rejection of Christ; or Messiah
OOS OF 87s lays as oe ee
L The Tie of the event.

IL. The Even itself.

IIL The Consequences of it.
Reflections:

L The remarkable fulfilment of prophecy
as an evidence of the inspiration of
the Scriptures and the truth of Chris-


tianity.
2. The guilt involved in the rejection of the
provided Saviour,


Resolution ; Daniel an example
of it ‘ 2 ° 3 : 5
Its nature, both as an ect and a habit,
Ae an act, it should be:

1. Made deliberately.
2. Directed only to what is right.
3. Made in dependence on divine assistance.


Resurrection, the . e «..» ‘976
I. The Faor of it.
II. The True of it.
. TI. The Sunsxor of it.
<V. The Resvuxts of it
Lessons from it:

1. To have our minds deeply and perma-
nently impressed with the truth and
reality of the resurrection.

2. To regard everything in the light of it.


i
Gaints, as possessors of the king-
dom e e e e . o
I. The Saints,
II. The Krnapom.
TI. The Sensz in WHICH THR SAINTS RECEIVE
AND POSSESS IT,
IV. The Surrasieness oF THE APPOINTMENT.
V. Ite Benzviorat Resorts,


a:
1, Cause of rejoicing in the rospect \-

sented in A ve » ae
consequence of a faithful adher-
ence to viour,


21


155


CLAREMONT,


3. The character of the future blessedness
of the saints.

4. The privilege of believers to be now em-
ployed in a way that affords both an
anticipation and preparation for their
future blessedness.

6. Our interest to make sure our place now
among the saints that shall hereafter
“take the kingdom.”


Thanksgiving, Daniel’s : . 84
IL. The Oxsxcr of it.
L, The ‘‘ God of heaven,” indicating :

(1) His unity ;
2) His supremacy ;
3) His majesty ;
4) His holiness ;
(5) God the source and centre of happi-


ness.
2. The ‘‘ God of his fathers.”
II. The Susuxcr of it.
L What God isin Himself :
(1) Wise ; (2) Mighty; (3) Omniscient.
2. What He has done; has heard and
answered prayer.
III. The Cuaracrer of it.
1. Prompt ; 2. Hearty ; 3, Full


Tribulation, the Great . = Es
I. The Time of it.
II, The Susszcrs of it.
II. The Greatness of it,
Practical reflections from i.


Waiting and Working : = \ S16
1. The duty of securing a personal interest
in the blessedness predicted in the
prophecy.
2. The duty of patiently waiting for the
promised blessedness.
3. Believers to be working as well as wait-
ing for the kingdom.


The Wise and the Winners of
Souls, and their glorious reward 288
I. The CHaRacter,

1, The wise,
2. The winners of souls.
Il. The Rewarp: implying—
1, An external visible glory.
2. Purity and moral ex
3. Dignity and honour,
4. Joy and felicity,
6. Permanence.


444730
Y LIBRARY
CALIF

















hapa eranin’) er
“he = ane ell sy, lees

é wiht RE oleae | ry
4. oti plete? tre A Ty deb ¢ eae


”
tas
+."


it < 4 Page

a é a A 7 = x ' 4

“te Pa we, eile np oft ante pe
ae ’ © 9 Ch ae CO en | a) ae


‘chen! ; “Fae A A TT i
im Alpe ; ‘ i ; b, & ey = ly La ~— 14 a =
» i ° 1 . ee) on ate me ~ 4 Ee


i ‘wa bes. ~








a een F
oie mer? nee y S
oF ik





—@\)s : 3 cis = FA \i'e 4 i’ SITs , a
‘ a ae Oe, |
< P i

. ae | 4 ’
* 3 ”
gs ’
% ‘za @ «i 9 - se
é hy e
‘ U :
<i, 2c 7? by *
+ ee P 7
: <
“>
‘ * j
, ‘ +
a @; .
- ee
a
J
: .
I
. ’


























BS491 .P65 / vol 19 j
The Preacher S$ complete homiletical com


1 ahs et


BS
a!


[¢
; Sagi i) G





7 / 20


THEOLOGY LIBRARY
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA
91711


lL SG
JS é
‘i Fe.
DEM


Cm
rere rye he
vere


wee
we ee
ha A tO,


Soka
‘eel Nee eM
ere vu


See ey


ern
Vevey Tey
enwey


: ee ee
SEAS A
reer a


at
A5te%


uve ee eee ee
ee eee ee ee


ey
wee “uy
. “ Vv Ve yy ove ve >
See et
Mee cervy
ene
ey


tiake
acett
estate
<.4i¢
esatiee
‘<4,
anes
tate et bes
aoa tetasates
<ge5e5eie
aeasesesaces
ees tase tn’
>! 4 htt,
eececnccesesa
etecesacaces
rth


4
ai
*
<
4
<
Se


iS,

2

<

id

'

2

7
ote8,


¢
<,
3
<.
Y
<
<.


ee
<iese
secese.
+6
apeies?
SeSencce
236,6,¢.
etetet
Fatetat,
¢


«.


<
Se
¢
ri
4


ry
¢
£,
«
es
t
=
*)


hast
akon.


“any
ott

ese
te8e:
seid

4

3
oe
7


<
¢,
45%;
4,
«
c
<
o
<,


r
#
<
Ps


#
+)


if.
S

4

4

<

te


ie
ate
2!
<


¢
<,
«
“
t.
ce
2
26
ses


658,
SeS
Ss
<


<,
4
=.


ets
ven


‘


*


<
<
<
¢
x


5
as:
aot
wage
chase
afaSs
Setsietse
aeeetee
cpretbeyes
Kekesates
A etetet
etahet esate
Ast sdseee
aleieiats:
ahxiasels
64efa3s,
ret blr ers
St ghes
aes
<.
*)


6,
Py
4
3
4,
‘<
_
)
¢
«
i
*
s,
4,


‘<
ate
cant
Sete
8
phey
o5¢
ae
nue
“oe,
eea8
434.
4884
anes
<5¢
<
be
rors


¢
age
aut
Stas,
¢
eae
ats
ia
<
bot pt
rh)
Med
Ser
ro
at
ha
Pus
+


«
ie
4
<

rs
-
«,

4
cs


<
c.f,
fas
aa4
¢
rf
“
*
<
<
<
*


<

.
4 4
ies

fe

<,
corey
sate

ese
Sageee

4) 824 ot
ASata
agezene
< 3
seSetes


¢


<
ei
<8,
a
¢


<«

5
ao
Ae
ie
<

<*
93


pf <
a8, <4
aoee asses eke:
mah gtakatety
(ee
s
‘. es
Cor Sat
05456 %
sa geataty
Msdecsases
hak skate
eeuhecede
eeSet eee
Shs
SeSetetete
4409 288,
preereror)
2oasene
ata Cpe!
7
$25,


<

it

a
of)
4

“8
Pree)

ee

<6


¢
3s
“iy
<a
«
ne
%
oe
<


7]
jt hat,
cies
aoe te,
aces
sate
ary)
chet
ees
#5¢
s,s,
Se
eee
Et
stir)


«
&,
¢,
ie
4
<,
e
4
teete
a
.
-
e
Ps


a
<4
«

<
bes
ee.
he
rie!
oe
ese
tg
none!
eoty
sane
aos
aS
esa
as,
8


¢
“st,
€
2
L3
vs

“


ts


<

Se
i
Se


-
2!
at,


4.
ey


CA es
Suite ee neat
Se he ve


ceases
Port pr btn)
goa ka ss Sahn
eastetetasese
Po Pe
Se edeeea sate
he ae Pee
saiass kek ase
ast Aa
> bs


aa.
a4
35453)
cas,
05.


oe


rs
Bo
eats
beach
28


ery r er)
436
a
S82 *osns58
4 a teteS.
=
ane


pipes
<5,
a3
sta


,;
3<.


<
s


<
5

ese
<=

SDSL.


Ags
tery
seeasete
Pals?
Rie ges
Be
Sezeisie>
Thr prp res
be phar es
Lace Pos
Sse
Sisese


>
Se
se,
Ss.

é

>
at;


a
<
<
-.


<4,
&
ae 382
eesesaseses
Pet ptor pre? o1
heat es ak oS
tesa aeescees
sesesesa8e®.
SESS $8383
Sis
ass.
438!
8


<
4
3
a
<3


<
a3
s
see,
&
«,
.
2S
J
4
.3


oe
‘3
3
>)
<
Ma
<


3,
<
<.
=


3,
ms
>


<.
*)
<
3
pee
<
>
pe
a
eR
)
<5


¢
es
$38
ieee
rs
a
a8,
ase
Pers


ers
_3
:
3
eg
<
rp)


ie
.
i
ce
See
a3
<
5
PI
is
*
see
ety
=
*
Se
no


3

ty
>}
a
s
+
i
<.
$2


z
a
)
-
si
<
3
5
Se
3
a
3s


<
<
ts
<


Se
se
ce
38
aS
rer
eae.
456
7

z
S35.
isd
S835


<
ee:
ls

=
anand
cecsece’
eeteScSe
accsace
ioe seex,
peer

Scectace
<psgasees.
esas te:
Serer ity
ee6s66

sei.

my
ates

ALS
aka

Ses

ee

°)


+3
Se
<
ses
Bs


.
se
‘.


<
ots
§
<<
Se
eased


seat
Sra
Serres
tates
st


ese
Gee
ak
Seseee
asecese
ae eee


=
*,
¢
a


5
Sa
3

z
“4


Sistasates


Sh
SatSis382
=


SS
sscacas
Pres

#53

ACA RA CAES,
De


Skee
ay4.
nasa


Ss
roy}
mses


Aus.


CASS oe
eS Seas


ee

bP be ee)
LOEAAA SIA EEL
SSS eed


a's eae te
Ne KasA ETON TASS ay
Med ait pd tet et Ey


4
a,
pes)
a8
asase
:
a8:
ts
245%.
Sthis
esata
n
a


*,
<,
4
6
se
,
ate
ts
ae


28)
aes
Soe
a 3635
pretershy
el
A ias
Satalslals!
Sere


‘as
eee
<
=.


*s,
ae pyt
S38,


tee
Csr Ft Tt EP
eG
ie eee Me eee
rere eater Me
i Ass
BA ASHI ee
SO tt A a ed a ae
Briitety ettatelatetemene reer
Beets Aide


BREE al


’ ae 0
re
ee eae Ai


wee


FOES A GP OS OTD


Cee ats


od
